THE CASE Of the Impeached LORDS, COMMONS, AND CITIZENS; Truly Stated.

PSALM. 75. 5, 6.

Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him and he shall bring it to
pass. And he shall bring forth thy Righteousness as the Light, and thy
judgment as the noon day.

ACTS 16. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.

And when it was day, the Magistrates sent the Sergeants, saying, Let those men
go. And the Keeper of the prison told this saying unto Paul, the Magistrates
have sent to let you go: now therefore depart and go in Peace. But Paul said
unto them, they have beaten us openly uncondemned, being Romans, and have cast
us into prison, and now do they thrust us out privily? nay verily, but let them
come themselves and fetch us out. And the Sergeants told these words unto the
Magistrates: and they feared when they heard that they were Romans. And they
came and besought them, and brought them out, and desired them to depart out of
the City.

The Case of the Impeached Lords, Commons and Citizens truly stated.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament, in the months of March and April, and
May last, taking into their serious Consideration, the Sea their Declaration
for disbanding the Army. 28. May 1647.
absolute necessity of disbanding the greatest part of the Army, after the
total Reducement of the Kingdom, for the present ease of the people from Taxes
and Free Quarter, and the speedier relief of Ireland, then in danger to be
irrecoverably lost; did thereupon pass some Votes and Declarations for
disbanding the Foot, and some Regiments of Horse of the Army, and sending them
into Ireland, under the Commands of two Major Generals, Skippon and Massey, and
employed Commissioners from both Houses to the Army, for that purpose, where
they The XI Accused Members Answer to the particular Charge of the Army. p. 10.
11 12: 13. A Vindication of 167 Officers come off from the Army. The Agitators
Letter to L. G. Cromwell, March 30. The Armies Engagement.
eng^ged many Officers and Soldiers for that expedition. But by the underhand
practices of Leiutenant General Cromwell, and his Confederate Officers and
Agitators, the relief of Ireland was not only obstructed, but wholly
frustrated; and the Major part of the Army animated, to enter into a solemn
Engagement, not to disband upon any terms, till they had obtained satisfaction
from both Houses, to certain high Proposals and Demands; which the Houses for
quietness sake, and Irelands better Accommodation (though with some
disparagement to their Honor and Power) condescended unto. But the concession
of all their first Demands, was so far from satisfying those restless Spirits
(who had other designs to carry on; since visible to all men) that they
encouraged them to greater Insolences, and higher Demands then ever, comprised
in their Of June 8. 10. 14. 17. 20. 23. 27. July 1.
Letters, Proposals, Remonstranses and Manifestoes in June and July following,
of purpose to pick new quarrels with the Houses and City too, and to keep
themselves in an entire body, to carry on their dangeraus Plots against all
opposition. In pursuance, whereof they first with a party of Horse commanded by
Cornet Joyce, forcibly and traitorously The Lord Mountagues Letter and
Narrative June 8 Mr Rymes his Narration to the House of Peers. June, 17. 1647.
seized on the Kings own royal person at Holdenby, upon false pretenses, and
removed him thence into the Armies quarters, contrary to his own, and the
Commissioners of both Houses Protestations; refused to resign him up, or
dispose of his Person according to the Houses Votes; removed the Guards,
appointed by both Houses from him, put new Guards of their own upon him; who
excluded the Scots Commissioners from any access to his presence against the
Law of Nations and Votes of both Houses; and yet then granted free access for
all Malignants to him, and admitted Malignant Chaplains to attend him with the
Book of Common prayer, and all Episcopal Ceremonies, which they so much decried
heretofore as Antichristian. Neither rest they here, but refusing to disband
even after all their Arrears were promised to be paid or secured by the Houses;
they mutinously and rebelliously (against the express Votes and Commands of
both Houses, and desires of the City) march up in a warlike manner toward
London, threatening to force the Houses and plunder the City if they had adhered
to them, in case they granted not their unreasonable desires by the short time
prefixed to them, approaching within few miles of the City with their whole
body, seizing the Block-houses on the River by violence, quartering their
Forces round about it, and sending their Warrants for provisions to Constables,
within the very lines of Communication. Whereupon the Houses to provide for
their own safety and the Cities, if the Army should invade them by open force;
both Houses on the 11. of June by Ordinance, appointed a Committee of Lords and
Commons, to join with the Militia of London, to consult, advise and put in
execution all ways and means, which in their judgments might be necessary for
the safety and defense of the Kingdom, Parliament and City, and to raise horse
and foot for that purpose etc, Of which Committee some of the afterwa^^^
impeached Commons, and now imprisoned and impeached Lords were Members; which
Committee after some few meetings (in hope of a final pacification) was
discontinued; and the Houses by the Armies daily approaches, enforced to repeal
sundry of their just Votes, Remanstrances and Ordinances to quiet their
distempers. After which condescension, the Army did not only publicly censure
them for it in p^int, but likewise declare their dis-satisfaction by all the
Houses had done or promised, unless the Commons would presently purge their
House from all Members disaffected to these their mutionous Practices, and
suspend no less then eleven of their Emmentest Presbyterian Members at once
from sitting in the House, before any particular proofs or impeachments against
them, upon a mere general and illegal Charge sent from St Albons (then the head
quarters) June 14. Upon which, though the House after full debate resolved June
25. That by the Laws of the Land, no judgment could be given for their
suspention upon that general Charge, before particulars produced and proofs
made; yet the Army threatened to march up to Westminster, in case they were not
removed from sitting or voting in the House; Whereupon the Members voluntarily
withdrew themselves, and afterward put in their Answers to the false and
scandalous particular Articles the Army afterward sent up against them, of
purpose to wound their Reputations, without any intention to bring them to
their Legal Trials, being never able to prove the least Title of those
Articles, of which the whole House and Kingdom know them to be guiltless. Upon
this their voluntary withdrawing, though the Army and their Instruments took
occasion to traduce them as guilty, yet they began to draw their quarters, and
disperse themselves further off from London; but with a Resolution to take the
first occasion of returning thither before they were sent for, the gaining of
the City and Tower of London into their Custody, and placing of their own
Guards upon both Houses, and mould them to their own pleasures, being the main
design of their first approaches toward it. And no occasion of returning,
being given by the Houses or City, who complied with them in all their
unreasonable desires, they thereupon projected to make one unreasonable demand
more, which might in all probability occasion it, and they divide the City and
both Houses one from another; and that was to desire the Houses to repeal the
Ordinance for the New Militia of London, (which no ways concerned the Army in
point of interest or right) and to restore the old without any exceptions to
their persons, or any cause alleged, or once acquanting the City therewith,
to whom both Houses and the Army too were most deeply engaged. Hereupon Sir See
the Let^r and Re^onstrance ^om his Ex^llency and ^e Army p. 9.
Thomas Fairfax sends a Letter to the Speaker of the House of Commons,
intimating the Officers and Armies desires, that the New Militia of London
might be altered, and the Old revived, without ever acquainting the City or
their Commissioners in the Army therewith: Upon which Letter alone (the House
being very thin, and most Members driven away by the menaces) on July 22, in
the afternoon the Ordinance for the New Militia, made by unanimous consent of
both Houses, when full and free, May 4. to continue for a full year, was
suddenly voted in the House of Commons, by some few casting voices to be
repealed, before 3 months expired; and a New Ordinance for reviving the Old
Militia, drawn up, passed, transmitted to the Lords House about 7 a clock at
night, when the House was empty, and then presently passed without out any
debate, (though moved to be put off by some, till the City to whom they were so
much obliged, and whose s^fety and privileges it so highly concerned) were
acquainted therewith, and heard what they could obj^ct against it, who never
had the least intimation of it till it was past. The pretense for this hasty
passing, was, to prevent the the Armies-speedy march to Westminster, if the
Houses refused to pass it; and the Cities opposition against it, if not passed
before their Notice of it; but the real design was to discontent the City, and
enforce them to some act or other, as might give the Army occasion to march
rather against them, then against the Houses, and engage them and their party
in the Houses against the City and their Friends. This Ordinance of Repeal
being made known to the City, the next day, being Saturday, June 24. they were
much discontented at it; and meeting at a Common Council, voted unanimonsly
against it, as a great injury and astront unto them; both, because the Houses
and Army never acquainted them therewith, but did it on a sudden in a thin
House without their privity, or any reason alleged, or just exceptions to the
New Militia in the Ordinance for such an alteration, which so highly concerned
their safety and privileges; and because the Repeal of this Ordinance, upon no
other grounds but the Armies desire, might justly shake all other Ordinances
for securing the vast sums they had lent and advanced upon the Excise and Sale
of Bishops Lands, and for their Indemnity, and make them repealable at the
Armies pleasure, as well as this, to their utter undoing. Whereupon they
resolved to Petition the Houses on Monday morning for the Repeal of this hastty
injurious Ordinance of July 23. for selling the New Militia, and drew up a
Petition then for that purpose; which the Sheri^s and Common-Counsel presented
to the Houses on Monday the 26. of July: After which about a thousand
Apprentices, and young men of the City, without any arms at all, came with
another Petition of their own to both Houses, wherein they Remonstrated, that
they were heirs apparent to the City, whose Rights and Privileges they were
sworn to defend, and the Houses had of times promised to maintain; That the
ordering of the Cities Militia was the Cities Birthright, belonging to them by
Charters confirmed in Parliaments, for defense where of they had adven^ured
their lives and fortunes as far forth as the Army; and therefore desired it
might be returned into those hands, in which it was put by the whole Cities
consent, by the Ordinance of the 4. of May; Upon reading these Petitions in the
Lords House, they were pleased to revoke the Ordinance of July 23. and resume
that of May 4. by a new Ordinance of July 26. which they sent down to the
Commons, where some Apprentices were over-earnest and urgent to get the
Ordinance passed, refusing to suffer some Members to go out of the House, till
they had passed the new Ordinance sent from the Lords, or to come out of the
House into the L^bby, when they were divided upon the Vote, about it, which at
last they passed about 3 of the clock; Whereupon most of the Apprentices
departed quietly into the City, without any further disturbance. After which
some disorderly persons, most of them Malignants, and disbanded Soldiers, not
Apprentices (by the instigation of some Masignant, Sectaries and Friends of the
Army) gathered about the Commons door, and grew very outrageous, enforcing the
Speaker to take the Chair after the House had adjourned, not suffering him or
the Members to depart the House, till they had voted: That the King should come
to London to treat with the Houses about a peace. With which violence the
Common Counsel of London being acquainted as they were sitting in the Guild
Hall, they presently sent the Sheriffs with such assistance as was ready at
hand (the Militia then being in an unsettled condition by the Houses own act,
and contradicting Ordinances) to suppress the tumult, and rescue the Members;
who thereupon hasting to Westminster, did their best endeavors to effect it;
and at last pacified the unruly rout, and conducted the Speaker in safety to
his Coach and lodging about nine of the clock at night, which was as much as
could be expected from the City, in this interval of their Militia's
unsettlement. The Lords adjourned their House till Friday morning; the Commons
only till the next morning being Tuesday; against which time the New
established Militia provided a strong Guard for the House it self: Whether the
Speaker and Members repaired about 10 of the clock safely without any
interruption, and there sat securely, till they agreed to adjourn the House
till Friday morning following, upon this ground; that the Lords had adjourned
their House till that time, and had made a peremptory Order for all their
Members then to attend the House, notwithstanding any former leave granted to
be absent. The next day being the monthly fast the Speakers and Members met at
Margarets Church in Westminster, and there kept the solemn Fast without
disturbance: Where Mr Speaker in the Church complained Publicly to Sr Ralph
Ashton, and other Members setting near him, to this effect; That there was a
great scandal raised on him in the City, which did much trouble him, as that he
had left the House, and was run away privately to the Army, or intended to do
it: Tha^ he had no such thought, and sco^ned to do such a base, unjust and
dishonorable action; and would rather die in the House and Chair, then desert
them for fear of any tumults. Which being spoken in the Church and presence of
God on the solemn Fast day, when he would not dissemble, makes most men
conclude, his secret departure to the Army the very next day, proceeded not
from his own judgment or inclination, but from some strong invitations or
menaces sent from the Army by those who contrived this desperate plot to divide
the City and Houses, and bring up the Army to inthrall them both. On Thursday
Morning early the new renewed Militia of London, to prevent all future
disturbances to the Houses, made public Proclamation throughout the City and
Suburbs, and set up printed tickets at Westminster and other usual places
within the Line, that if any person or persons should offer to disturb either
of the Houses or their Members, the Guards should apprehend them, and in case
of resistance kill or shoot them. Yet not withstanding the Speaker in the
evening stole away through Hide Park in his Coach to the Army, and went to
Windsore to the Headquarters, accompanied with Sir Ar. Hasterig and other
Members, who met him by the way. On Friday morning about 140. Members or more
met at the Commons House, expecting the Speakers coming, whither the Sergeant
coming without his Mace, being demanded where the Speaker was, answered, he
knew not very well, and that he did not see him that morning, and was told he
went a little way out of town last night, but he thought he would return, and
expected to meet him at the House. After which being somewhat strictly
interrogated by some Members about the Speaker, he suddenly withdrew himself,
and could not be found, till the House had chosen a new Speaker and Sergeant,
and procured a Mace; and then he returned with the Mace carried after him under
his man's cloak, which he said he had been seeking out all the time of his
absence. The House, after two hours attendance, sent 4 of their Members to the
Speakers house, to inquire what was become of him; who returning reported from
his servants, that he was gone forth of town the evening before, and was not
likely to return that day, and that they conceived he was gone to the Army:
whereupon they resolved to choose a new Speaker after some debate, and called
Mr. Henry Pelham to the Chair; after which they chose a new Sergeant in the
absence of the old. In the mean time the Lords assembling in their House upon
special Order and Summons, received a Letter of excuse from the Earl of
Manchester for his absence, by reason of some indisposition befallen; whereupon
they chose the Lord Willoughby of Parham their Speaker in his room, having
frequently changed their Speaker this Parliament, as they saw occasion: And
about three of the clock that day, the Commons presented their new Speaker to
the Lords sitting in their Robes after the accustomed manner, who approved to
their choice, to prevent a discontinuance and faler of the Parliament for want
of Speakers to adjourne and continue it, and prevent all scruples which might
arise thereupon. This done they proceeded to vote and act as a Parliament,
which they might lawfully do. First they voted in the eleven wrongfully
impeached Members, and others unjustly questioned by Cromwells and his
confederates practice in the Armies name, to take away their Votes, to attend
the service of the House, which they accordingly did: Next they revive and set
up the Committee for the Safety by an Ordinance of both Houses; authorizing
them to join with the Committee of the restored City Militia; and by several
Votes and Ordinances gave power to these Committees for the listing and raising
of Forces, appointing chief Commanders and Officers issuing out arms and
ammunition for the safety and defense of both Houses and the City, against all
such who should forcibly invade them: which Votes and Ordinances for their
self-defence (warranted by the very Law of nature, as the Armies Declarations
assent) were not passed nor put in execution, till the Army under Sir Tho.
Fairfax (recruited extraordinarily every day without and against the Houses
Orders) were on their march toward London, and most contemptuously disobeyed
the Votes and Letter of both Houses, inhibiting them to come within 30. miles
of the City: which Letter Sir Thomas out of his great humility refused to much
as to answer, or take notice of: whereupon the Army drawing near the Houses and
City in a warlike manner, with a resolution to force and assault them by
violence; thereupon the Committee of Safety and the Militia of London by
Ordinance and special command of both Houses, raised new Forces of Horse and
Foot, mounted some of their Cannons, manned some of their Works, and made
preparations only for their own defense, as they might lawfully do, and had
done formerly, by virtue of that supreme power of both Houses, which first
raised, and after voted down this perfidious Army, who now refused to obey
their Masters commands, and marched up against them with much rage and fury as
enemies. To countenance this their treachery and rebellion the more, they draw
the Speakers and fugitive Members of both Houses to sit in Counsel with them
in the Army in nature of a Parliament, and to sign an Engagement, to live and
die with Sir T. Fairfax and the Army in this quarrel. Whereby they were so
animated, that Sir Th. Fairfax raised the Traine-Bands of Hertfordshire and
other Counties, to join with the Army, and march up against the Houses and
City; who were so desirous of peace, that they sent Commissioners and Agents
sundry times one after another to mediate an accord, and keep off the Army from
approaching near the City; who were exceedingly slighted, and could obtain no
terms of peace or agreement from them, unless they would unworthily yield to
desert both Houses and the impeached Members, contrary to their Engagement,
Covenant and duty, renounce and call in their own Declaration then newly
published; relinquish their Militia, and deliver up all the Forts and Line on
the Westside of the City next to Westminster into the Armies hands, together
with the Tower of London and Magazines in it, disband all their Forces, put all
the Reformados out of the Line, withdraw all their Guards from the Houses, and
receive a Guard of such Horse and Foot within the Line as the Army should
appoint toward the Houses, demolish their Works, and suffer the whole Army to
march in triumph through the City, as absolute Conquerours of it and both
Houses too. To all which dishonorable and base conditions (worse then any the
King or Cavaliers would or could have put upon them, in the condition and
posture of defense they then were) the Aldermen and Common Council, to their
eternal dishonor and infamy, suddenly and unexpectedly condescended.
Whereupon a Party of the Army entered the Line, seized the Forts agreed upon,
and on the 6. of August the General brought the fugitive Speakers and Members
to the House with a strong party, (who might have returned at their pleasure
before without any Guard, had they pleased) placed the Speakers in their
Chaires out of which they were justly voted, without any Order of the Houses,
the Lords House being then adjourned during pleasure; where the General was
set in a Chair of State, and received special thanks for this service from
the Speakers in both Houses names, who made him Generalissimo of all the Forces
and Forts of the Kingdom to dispose of them at his pleasure, made him
Constable of the Tower, Voted the common Soldiers one months gratuity for
this service, besides their pay; left all their Guards to his disposing, and to
mock God, as well as men; Voted a public day of Thankesgiving to be kept both
in the City and throughout the Kingdom, for their restoring the Parliament to
its Honor and Freedom, in this forcible and dishonorable manner, not to be
patterned in any age. After which the General and his whole Army marched
through the City in greater triumph and State, then ever William the
Conqueror, or any of his successors did; takes possession of the Tower, turns
out the honest Lieutenant there, who royally entertained him, without any cause
assigned; displaceth most Governors in other Forts and Garrisons, though
settled by Ordinance and special Votes of both Houses; alters the Militia of
the City, sets up a new Militia in Westminster and Southwark divided from that
of London, contrary to several Ordinances, and the Articles of the Treaty;
causes the Line and Works about the City to be demolished, drives away most of
the Members by menacing Declarations, procures an Ordinance by mere force and
violence to pass the Houses, declaring all the Votes, Orders, and Ordinances
of one or both Houses from the 26. of July to the 6. of August, to be null and
void, which the Commons had four or five times laid aside and refused to pass
upon the question; and then by confederacy with the fugitive Members, procured
the Lord Mayor and diverse Aldermen and Citizens of London, who had showed
themselves most faithful and active for the Parliament all these Wars, and
done more service for them then any in the Army, to be impeached of High
Treason, and shut up Prisoners in the Tower; procures the Recorder, Sir John
Maynard, and Commissary Copley, without any legal hearing or examination to be
suddenly thrust out of the House, and some other Members to be suspended, and
all those questioned who fate or Voted in the Speakers absence, and no less
then seven Lords (viz. Theo^hylus Earl of Lincoln, James Earl of Suffolk,
James Earl of Middlesex, George Lord Berkly, Francis Lord Willoughby, John
Lord Hunsdon, and William Lord Maynard, who had ever adhered to the Parliament)
to be impeached of High Treason, sequestered the House, and committed to the
black Rod, who sat and Voted in the House in the Speakers absence (by color
of a special Order made before their departure, that every Member of the Lords
House should there attend) upon pretext, that they had levied War against the
King, Parliament and Kingdom. When as they acted nothing but in the House, or
at the Committee of Safety and the Militia by express Order and Authority of
both Houses, for the Parliaments and Cities just defense against a mutinous and
rebellious Army then marching up hostilely against them, contrary to both
Houses Votes and Orders without any authority but their own.

This is the true state of the case of the impeached Lords, Commons and
Citizens, who have been eagerly prosecuted by the Army and their Confederates
in the House, when those Malignant Lords who levied actual war against King,
Parliament and Kingdom, exempted from all pardon heretofore by votes and
Ordinances of both Houses, as Traitors and public Enemies to the Kingdom, are
suffered to go unprosecuted, yea pleaded for in the Houses, and permitted to
walk freely about the City, and repair to the King in the Armies Quarters,
while these faithful Lords, Members and Citizens are shut up prisoners, and
prosecuted day by day, without any proof or guilt to make good the Charge.

The sole question then will be, who are the real Traitors, and actual
endeavourers or raisers of a new War against the King, Parliament and
Kingdom, in this case, whether the impeached Lords, Members, and Citizens, or
the Army and their Confederates, and fugitive Members, who excited them to
march up thus to London against both Houses and the City, without any Authority
from the King, Parliament, Kingdom, and Contrary to both Houses express
Orders, Letters and Commands?

Certainly, if indifferent disinterested Members and Persons may be Judges, or
Umpires in this case, or the consciences of the accusers themselves may be
Judges, those Lords, Members, and Citizens listing and raising forces only for
their own just and necessary defense by express Ordinances, Votes and Orders
of both Houses of Parliament, was so far from being high Treason, or levying
of a new War in them, that it was a just, necessary and lawful in them, both
by the Law of Nature, Scripture, the Statutes of the Realm, the practice and
resolutions of both Houses, and of the Army it self in their defensive wars
against the King and his assailing forces, and a duty to which their Covenant
and public Trust engaged them unto, under the pain of Perjury and Treachery
both to the King (taken violently by a commanded party out of both Houses
custody, and detained prisoner from them in the Army against their Votes and
Commands) and to the Kingdom, Parliament, and City, to whose preservation and
defense they had so many Obligations against a mutinous and rebellious Army,
marching up thus hostilely against them without any just ground or Authority at
all, but the executing of their own treasonable plots and designs both upon
the King, Kingdom, Parliament and City, as their subsequent proceedings
manifest. And every Thief may as justly accuse each honest man of Treaand
levying a new War, if he both but provide and wear a Sword or Pistol to
resist him when he comes to take his purse, or break open his house, as the
Army and their Confederates may those Lords, Members and Citizens of Treason
and levying a new War, by this provision of Forces and Arms to defend
themselves in case the Army should violently affault the Houses or the City in
a rebellious and hostile manner, without shedding one drop of blood, or
marching out of their Lines to fight with them, though they gave them just
occasion; and therefore Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Army in their Remonstrance
of August, 18. 1647. p. 19. 20. confess ingenuously, That if those pretended
Votes, Orders and Ordinances whereby War was levied against those Members of
both Houses who fled to the Army, were then good (when as they were made) and
valid, though they should now be repealed, yet WE with the SPEAKERS and those
Members aforesaid in opposing of them while they were of force, must needs
remain Transgressors still, and yet God and we are thanked for it. To avoid
which dangerous work, they forced the Houses (by a more horried force then
that of the Apprentices, and this menacing Treasonable Remonstrance, to pass
an Ordinance, 20 August, 1647, for declaring all votes, Orders and Ordinances
passed in one or both Houses, since the force on both Houses, July 26, until
the sixth of this present August to be null and void. Of purpose to excuse
themselves from this very guilt of High Treason, in leying war against the
King, Kingdom and Parliament, which they would most injuriously fasten upon
others who are innocent to evade their own guiltiness.

But neither God nor man will be long thus mocked or deluded by them: and this
present Age and all future Generations, will conclude at last in despite of all
opposite Powers and Evasions; That the Generals and Armies refusing to disband
upon the Votes and Ordinances of both Houses; seizing the King, and rescuing
him from the Commissioners of both Houses with an armed party, marching up
forcibly to London against the Houses express commands, surprising the
Block-houses at Gravesend by force, with the slaughter of some of the Garrison
there settled by the Houses; falling violently upon Sir Robert Pyes men in
their quarters, and wounding some of them near Greenwich where they were
billetted by the Houses Order, without any provocation, impeaching and seizing
on some Members of the Houses, and carrying them Prisoners to the Headquarters,
against their wills; enforcing the Houses to null and repeal their own just
Votes and Ordinances, recruiting the Army with many thousands of new Soldiers,
raising the Train-bands of the Countries, marching up to London in a body,
seizing the Forts in Southwarke and Westminster, coming in arms to the very
Houses with the fugitive Speakers and Members, putting a Guard of Horse and
Foot of the Army upon both Houses, threatening by force to keep diverse Members
out of the House, and pull them out by head and shoulders if they presumed to
intrude into them, forcing away most of the Members from the Houses; marching
through the City in triumph throwing, down their lines and works, seizing upon
the Tower of London, and the Isle of Wight, beleagring the City and both Houses
of Parliament of purpose to enforce them at their pleasure sending strange and
treasonable Remonstrances and Papers to the Houses to pass contrary to their
Votes and judgments, and utterly ruining the Country with Taxes,
Free-quartering upon them against the Peoples wills, and listing twice the
number allowed by the Establishment, when there is no apparent Enemy in the
Kingdom, nor Order of the House for such strange recruits, their violent
impeaching of these innocent Lords, Members, and Citizens, and saying publicly
in the Army and Houses, That the longest sword must carry it, and the Army will
have this or that, whether the Houses will or not; and that we are all but
their conquered Slaves, and Vassalls, and all we have is theirs, having won
it by the sword: and the Speakers and Engaged Members Confederacy, and
Engagement to live and die with the Army in these their Treasonable
proceedings, is no less then High Treason in good earnest in them all, and an
actual Levying of War against King, Kingdom, Parliament, and City; for
which God and men will one day bring them to exemplary punishment, if they
unfainedly repent not of it, and give some Honorable public reparation to
those Innocent Faithful Lords, Members, and Citizens, they have most falsely
and injuriously impeached, and imprisoned for those very Treasons and practices
of which themselves are only culpable.

This being the true state of the impeached and imprisoned persons case, we may
justly stand amazed at the strange insolency and impudency of the Council of
the Army, in their late Humble (alias most arrogant) Representation, presented
by some of them to the Houses of Parliament, December. 7. 1647. Who though in
most of their former Remonstrances, they had pleaded this, to be the Hereditary
Freedom of all Subjects (since Voted by both Houses) freely to Petition the
Parliament without restraint; as some of their fraternity have frequently done
of late in a most seditious manner; yet they fall pel-mel upon the Common
Council of London only for Petitioning the Houses for relief of their
imprisoned fellow Citizens; and on the Commons House and Members too, in this
most saucy language: page 21. 23. And now also we must earnestly desire that
the proceedings against those Citizens, and others lately impeacht, may be
hastened, and out of their fines and confiscations, some part of reparation may
be made to the Countries adjacent for the aforesaid damages, which the crimes
of those persons and others in the City did Rather the Armies Reb^lion against
the Houses.
first bring upon them; And indeed, without something done against those
persons for example to others, we do not see (when it shall withdraw) with what
safety or freedom the Parliament can sit longer at Westminster, especially
when we find the Common Council (through the Parliaments and It seems the Army
n^ rank themselves in equip^ with the Parliament: and i^ their lenity, not
justice, t^ we enjoy our lives and est^t^
Armies lenity) to take the boldness already (in the face of both) to intercede
for the relief and acquittall (or rather justification) of those impeached
persons, (who indeed are but fellow-delinquents (we doubt) to most of that
Council) as if that so actual, immediate, and Your force upon the H^^ses and
their Members, was more horrid then the Appr^^tices; yet continued even and in
this Treasonable I presentation.
horrid a force upon both and the whole Houses of Parliament, and the levying
of War in abetment and prosecution thereof, and of that concurrent Your
Engagements no(...) disband, etc. were far m(...) Treasonable.
Treasonable engagement, were already forgotten by them to have been any crime;
the consideration whereof, and of the renewed confidence of Master Gewen, and
some other Members of Parliament (known to have been partakers, if not
principalls in the same things) who yet It is more presumption you and your
Cromwell, Ire(...) thus to tax the House Members, then for these to^ in the
House, being not ^peached: and no such T^tors, as these your Grandee^
presume, and are suffered to appear again in the House (as in those things
there had not been so much fault, as to render them less worthy of continuing
in that highest trust) makes us begin to fear, that, while so much of the same
leven (through lenity and moderation) is left behind, is may shortly spread,
till even the The worst of them is betand honester then Cromwell, Ireton, or
the best of you, Put^cy projects be true.
worst of the eleven Members (notwithstanding their double crimes) be again
called for in, unless the House (by some exclusive resolutions and
proceedings) do timely prevent the same; we hope therefore the Parliament will
weigh these things, and speedily (ere it be too late) consult (at least) their
own safety and the Kingdoms: if not ours and the Armies, their poor servants,
and something concerned with Only the Speakers and ^embers who signed the
En^^gement are concerned in (...)s aff^ire, as well as you, not (...) Houses.
them (especially) in that affair.

By this printed Passage, the whole world may plainly discover the unparalled
insolency, malice, injustice of the Saints and Council of the Army, (who ^er.
5. 28.
exceed the very deeds of the wicked) against the wrongfully impeached Citizens
and Members, whose principal Prosecutors and Accusers they are; this
Representation being sent of purpose to promote the Lords impeachment in the
Commons House just when it was there debating, though since laid aside for want
of proofs, and matter, to make up a charge against them; and yet they, with the
impeached Aldermen and Citizens must be still prosecuted, imprisoned, and not
released, nor the falsely impeached and suspended Lords and Commons readmitted
into the Houses for fear of displeasing the General and Grand Council of the
Army, who are really guilty of all the ^ee the Pu^^ projects: (...) a word to
(...) G. Cromwell; ^^ich fully de^^nstrate it.
Crimes and Treasons which they would falsely charge on these to excuse
themselves, and of Cornet Joyce his matchless Treason in plundering the King
out of the Parliaments possession, whom yet they never questioned, nor
impeached for it.

If this be the justice and charity of those Saints, the General and Council
of War (who have not yet learned that lesson and common rule of justice from
our Savior, Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do unto
them, for this is the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 7. 12. Nor that lesson of John
Baptist (a burning and shining light, but yet no new one) even to Soldiers
themselves; Do violence to no man, neither accuse any man falsely, Luke 3. 14.)
God deliver all honest and innocent Persons from such malicious prosecutors,
such unrighteous Judges, and Psalm. 140. 1.
men of violence: But let this be these restrained Innocents cordial, and
their Persecutors terror: Psalm. 140. 11. Psalm. 7. 16.
Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him: His mischief shall return
upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate.
God has spoken it in his word, and it shall most certainly come to pass in
his due time, if they can but with faith, and patience, wait upon him till its
accomplishment, without fainting or despair.

Now because the General, Council and Army are so eager in pressing for
justice upon some Members, and the imprisoned Aldermen and Citizens, pretending
them guilty of the Apprentices force upon the Houses (of which there is no
evident proof) to requite their kindnesses we shall evidently demonstrate there
is greater cause for the Houses and City to crave justice against them, as
being far more guilty of forcing the Houses in a horrid and desperate manner,
then the Apprentices, who so far they exceeded in these respects.

First, they and the Army marched up in an entire body from London to force the
Houses, against their express Votes, Orders, and the Cities desires; The
Apprentices did not so, having no command from either House, not to repair to
Westminster, nor no Members sent to them as Commissioners to stay their march,
as the Army had; whom no doubt they would have better obeyed then the Army did
the Houses Commissioners.

Secondly, the Apprentices were all unarmed, without Swords Army were all
furnished with Swords, Muskets, Pikes, pistols, Arms, Staves, and a train of
Artillery, and marched up with Banners displaied in a body of fifteen thousand
fighting men or more.

Thirdly, the Armies force and violence proceeded from their Members, and
others who crossed their private designs, without any just provocation, or
preceding president of such a force and rebellion in any other of the
Parliaments Armies. But the Apprentices force as it was successive too, so it
was encouraged and occasioned by the Armies to revive the Ordinance for the
Cities New Militia, passed by unanimous consent of both Houses when full and
free; which the General and Army had forced the Houses to repeal when thin,
and under their power and terror, against the rules of Honor and Justice
before one quarter of the time for which they settled it was expired, without
any notice given to the City or new Militia, or charge or exceptions against
them, to which they might make answer.

General, Council and Army in a forcible manner impeached diverse eminent
Members, forced their withdrawing suspention, and expulsion from the House, and
never desired till they had driven them out of the House and Kingdom: which
done, they pressed a new purging of the Houses from many other Members, under
pretense of Malignancy, and their compliance with the King and His Malignant
party, even when and whiles themselves were complying and holding Treaties with
the Apprentices, never impeached, nor pressed the suspention or exclusion of
any Members, nor kept any one Member forcibly out of the Houses, but only kept
most of them in till they had granted their Petition, and repealed the
Ordinances and Votes which the Army had forced from them some three days
before.

Army menaced and forced the Houses in and by sundry printed Treasonable
Declarations, Remonstrances, Manifestoes, Letters, and Representations;
published to withdraw the City and Country from, and animate them against the
Houses and Members, for diverse weeks and months together; and when their first
Demands, as Soldiers, were all granted; yet still they insist on new and Higher
Demands as Subjects and Statesmen. Whereas the Apprentices force was soon
ended, and they did no such thing, and desired nothing but what immediately
concerned the City and themselves.

Speakers and some Members (contrary to their trust and duty) to desert the
Houses and repair to the Head quarters, and there to enter into a strange
Engagement, to live and die with them in their quarrel against the impeached
Members, and others who deserted not, but continued in the Houses, and the
Citizens who adhered to them. And by a Treasonable Declaration August 18. they
declared all the Votes, Orders and Ordinances made in both Houses without any
force from July 26. to August 6. to be null and void; and by putting their own
two armed Guards upon the Houses, by a party of 1000 Horse drawn up to Hide
Park, and with Cromwells, Iretons, and other Officers, menacing high Speeches
in the House, they enforced the Houses against their former resolutions to
pass an Ordinance to declare them null and void; threatening to take all the
Members of both Houses that sat and voted in the Speakers absence as Prisoners
of War, to try them by Martial Law, and pull them out of the Houses by head
and shoulders if they Presumed to intrude into the Houses, etc. By which
occasion they forced away many of the remaining Members, and by force obtained
their desires. The Apprentices never did any thing half so forcible and
Treasonable, as these matchless affronts and insolences of the Army.

Seventhly, the chief Contrivers and Abetters of the Armies Members both of the
Army and Commons House, who acted and played their parts in both for their best
advantage, as Cromwell, Ireton, Rainsborough, Harrison, Fleetwood, with other
officers who received their Commissions and wages too from the Parliament, and
therefore were obliged more then others to obey, and not thus openly to force,
affront, and rebel against them. Whereas none of the Apprentices were Members,
nor any of them in Commission or pay as Mercenaries or Servants to both Houses.

Their force therefore upon the Houses in these, and many other respects being
far more horrid and treasonable then the Apprentices, and the occasion of
theirs; they ought in Law and Justice to be first, and most exemplarily
punished; the rather, because they still persist therein even in this their
last Representation of December 7. (as high and treasonable as any of their
former Papers) whereas the Apprentices ended in few hours, and was never since
revived.

In brief, their own dear friend, Mr. Oliver St. John, His Majesty's Solicitor
General, in his Argument of Law, concerning the Act of Attainder of High
Treason of Thomas Earl of Strafford, at a Conference in a Committee of both
Houses of Parliament, published by Order of the Commons, An. 1641. directly
proves the General, Lieutenant General, Council and Army, more guilty of High
Treason in levying war against the King, Kingdom, Parliament, and now listing
and quartering, and sessing Soldiers upon the people in their own Houses
against their wills since the Votes for their disbanding, then ever Strafford
was; his Argument being an express Arraignment and Attainder of them, and
these their late proceedings, ex post facto, as those who shall review it will
at first discern. And if his Argument pass such a sentence against them, the
whole Kingdom cannot but judge them guilty.

FINIS.



