THE ANTIPATHIE OF THE ENGLISH LORDLY PRELACIE, BOTH TO REGAL MONARCHY, AND
CIVIL UNITY: OR, An Historical collection of the several execrable Treasons,
Conspiracies, Rebellions, Seditions, State-schismes, Contumacies, oppressions,
and Anti-monarchicall practices, of our English, British, French, Scottish,
and Irish Lordly Prelates, against our Kings, Kingdoms, Laws, Liberties; and
of the several Wars, and Civil Dissentions occasioned by them in, or
against our Realm, in former and latter ages.

Together with the Judgment of our own ancient Writers, and most judicious
Authors, touching the pretended Divine Jurisdiction, the Calling, Lordlinesse,
Temporalties, Wealth, Secular employments, Traiterous practices,
unprofitablenesse, and mischievousnesse of Lordly Prelates, both to King State,
Church; with an Answer to the chief Objections made for the Divinity, or
continuance of their Lordly Function.

The first Part.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE, late (and now again) an Utter-Barester of Lincolnes Inn.

Beware of false Prophets, which come unto you in sheep clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves, you shall know them by their fruits. Mat.
7.15, 16 LONDON, Printed by Authority for Michael Spark senior. An. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT, NOW (Through Gods sweet
Providence) MOST HAPPILY ASSEMBLED.
Right Honorable Senators,
IT is a received principle in Law, H. 3. H. 7.10 C^r^ne. 55. S^^nford. Pl^^^
del Coro^^, f. 3.^.40.44
that there are no Accessories in Treason; whence to conceal a Notorious
Traitor, is really to be one. The consideration of the Capitalnesse of such a
Concealment in these proditorious times, and the discharge of my bounden Duty
to my Sovereign Lord the King, this Church and Kingdom, (of which I am a
true, though unworthy member;) and to this Honorable Court (to whose
impartial Justice, next under God I owe the fruition of my present Liberty, my
Native Soil, and Quondam Profession of the Law) has induced me by way of
Gratitude, to present your Honors with this large Discovery, not of one or
two, but of an whole Tribe and succession of nota^le Arch-Traytors, Rebels,
Conspirators, and des^erate Enemies to our Kings, Kingdoms, Laws, Liberties,
(to say nothing of our Church and Religion) masked under the innocent disguise
of an Episcopal while Rotchet, and the specious much abused Title of, The
Church; which our Prelates have monopolized to themselves, the better to
palliate their mischievous designs, and boulster out their vil^anies; when as
(if we believe either our learned Martyr, An answer to sir T^omas Moors
Dialogue, what the Church is in his works. p. 250.
Master William Tyndall, or The true difference between Christian Subjection
and unchristian Rebellion. p. 124.
Bishop Bilson himself) The Church is ne^e^ taken in the new nor old
Testament, for the Bishops or Priests alone, but generally for the whole
Congregation of the faithful; and often times for the Acts 14.23. c. 20 28. 1
Cor. 14.4.5.12. 1 Timothy 3.5.^5. Sed and ubitres Ecclesa ^st licet laici. Te^tul.
Exhort, ad Cast. p. 179^
people alone, without the Priest or Minister; which is worthy your
observation, and will utterly subvert one principal Pillar of our Prelates
suppo^t.

I could not but conjecture, that this Antipathy, would be very distasteful to
our Lordly Prelates; (the Malefactors) whose long-concealed Treasons,
Conspiracies and seditious practices it lays open to your public view and
justice; so that I can expect nothing but such extreme Malignity, opposition
and Calumnies from them and their confederates, as might in some sort have
deterred me from divulging it. Yet, when I considered that the detectio^ of
gross Traitors and Conspirators, has bin ever reputed, not only an
inoffensive, but acceptable and meritorious service both to Kings and States in all other persons, and that I have no cause to doubt, but that it will receive
the selfsame benign interpretation in me, especially from your Honors, (by
some of whose earn^st desires, and ^peciall approbations I committed these
Historical Colections to the Press) I could not but with all alacrity
proceed on in this service, for the Common good, to the which I have been the
more encouraged by a Divine Providence.

For being a Prisoner in the Tower of London, stripped of my Profession and all
other employments by some Prelates undemerited malice, considering with my
self, how I might there pass my solitary hours in the usefullest manner, for
the public benefit of this Church and Kingdom; it pleased God among other
subjects, to pitch my thoughts upon a Collection of the several Treasons,
Rebellions, Wars, Seditions, and Anti-monarchicall Practices of Lordly
Prelates of all Countries and ages ( especially of our own English Bishops)
which I found scattered in Histories: whereupon (taking my hint from the Title
of a now-non-extant Book, written by one Thomas Gybson a Physician in King
Edward the 6. his days, styled Proditiones Praelatorum a Conquestu, seen by
our laborious John Bale and mentioned in his C^nt^r. 9. Scr^pt. Brit. p. 719.
Centuries (which book it seems the Prelates since suppressed) I gathered
with no facil labor, the most of those Materials I here present unto your
Honors, and Marshalled them into distinct files, with an intention to make
them public, so soon as a seasonable opportunity should present it self. But
the Sea a new Discovery of the Prela^es Tyranny.
Arch Prelate of Canterbury not long after, persecuting me afresh in the
Starcham^er without any just occasion, procured me there, not only to be most
inhumanely censured, but likewise to be sent thence close prisoner, first to
Carnarvan, then to Mount-Orguile Castle in the Isle of Iersie, and there
cloystred up so narrowly that I could neither have the use of pen, ink, paper,
writings nor Books to benefit my self or others; and withal searching both
my Chamber and friends houses sundry times by his Pursevants, seized on all my
books and Papers he could meet with. But these Collections escaping his
clutches, fell into the hands of another persecuted Gentleman, who without my
privity carried them beyond the Seas, where they were preserved till after my
late return from Exile (by the justice of this Honorable House,) and not many
months since, (when I gave them over as lost) were unexpectedly returned to my
hands in safety, whiles the business of Episcopacy was in agitation before
your Eminencies; which special Providence, put me in mind of that speech of
Morde^ay to Ester, Est^r. 4.14.
Who knows whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? and
made me strongly apprehend, that God had restored me to Liberty, and these
Collections to my hands, for such a time as this, (which blessed be our good
God we now live to see,) wherein our domineering Prelates lewd practices and
Conspiracies against our Religion, Laws, Liberties, Lives, Souls, and
Estates, are not only detected, but questioned; and some of the Potentest and
pestilentest of them, charged with no less than High Treason, and other most
gross Misdemeanors, in, and by your Honorable Assembly; which have rendered
them so generally detestable to the whole Kingdom, that diverse Petitions have
been presented to your Honors, both by Ministers and People out of many
entire Countries, for their utter extirpation; which long efflagitated
difficult work, (which your Honors have now set upon) I conceive the
publishing of this Antipathy, will much facilitate and advance, being thus
specially preserved, and reserved by Gods Providence, for such a time as this.

The principal motives which originally induced me to undertake this work,
were the very same which have now persuaded me to publish it.

First, an unfeined desire to dispossess the seduced Princes, Nobles, and
others, of that over-weaning opinion they have hitherto generally embraced of
Lordly Prelates extraordinary fidelity, sincerity, Piety to Kings and Kingdoms
in Church and State affairs; and of the necessity of their Supportation and
continuan^e, both for the Security, Tranquillity and felicity of all Christian
Kings States, Churches; to all which, in verity, they have been the greatest
Plagues and Opposites. This notable mistake, proceeding, either out of a mere
nescience or inadvertency of the Prelates treacherous plots and turbulent
Actions in all Climes and times; or, from the deception of this false Paradox,
No Bishop, no King; or, from the immoderate panegyricall applauses of their
Parasites, (who almost deifie them in Press, in Pulpit, especially in Court
Sermons) and their own selfe-commendations, which are now most frequent in
their writings and discourses; or, from their own outward Pomp, Splendour, and
Superficial shows of Sanctity and Piety; backed with their sordid flattery
of, and temporizing with the greatest men, the better to effect their own
designs; will soonest and best be rectified by this bare Historical
discovery of their Trecheries and villainies in all ages; the very knowledge
whereof (as the Prophet Malachy and Christ inform us) Mal^ 2, ^.
will make them contemptible and base before all the people, and like Mat.
5.13. L^k. 14.35.
unsavory salt, fit neither for the Land nor for the Dunghill, cause them to be
cast out and trod^n under foot of men, as good for nothing.

Heb. 12^ 15.
root of bitterness whence al our ancient and present calamities have issued. To
anticipate and redress which sad events then, and secure us against the like
effects of Prelacie both now and hereafter, I could not (in my poor Judgment)
find out any readier course within the narrow sphere of my Activity, than the
publication of this History, of our Prelates practices and disloyal^y, Quorum
perfidiam exposuisse, supera^se est, as Saint ^pi^t. 54.
Hierom witnesses in a like case.

conscientious godly Ministers and people, from the importable heavy yoakes of
our Prelates tyranny, under which they have miserably groaned, and against
which they have lamentably declaimed for many hundred years, (and could never
yet be thoroughly eased thereof) as I have manifested by the Testimonies of our
own writers and Martyrs in the Sea C^ap. ^.
latter part of this Antipathy; to accomplish which long desired and now
expected work, I presume nothing can be more effectual than such an Anatomy
as this, of our Prelates villainies of this nature.

Fourthly, to further the propagation of religion,

Fifthly, to s^cure our long enjoyed, often confirmed Canterbury^ who has often
times publicly protested in a most insolent manner; that he wo^ld break both
the Neck and back of Prohibitions and so of the Common Law, or else they
should break his, which now he finds they are like to do. And to defend our
laws and liberties against Prelaticall encroachments, is one principal part
of a Lawyers Profession; so that in this regard this Antipathy is neither
without, nor besides my calling.

sin^ere professors of Religion (for I will be no Patron of Frantike
Enthusiasts, or dissembling Hypocrites) in general, and my self in particular
from the Calumnies of the Prelates and their Instruments. There is nothing more
frequent in late Prelaticall Factious discourses, See Bishop^ Whites Preface
before the Book of the Sabbath. Dr. H^ylin^ Antid^tum, Linc^linensi. And his
modera^e answer to Henry Burton, Lysimacus Nican^r and others.
Sermons, Fox Acts and Monuments. passim. 5. R. 2, c. 5.2, H. 4. c. 15.2. H. 5.
c. 7.
Writings, then to accuse the true servants of God, and most zealous
Christians, of Sedition, Treason, Rebellion, Faction, and Conspiracy against
their Sovereigns and Superiors. In this sort have they slandered our Sermon.
3.4. and 5. Before King Edward.
Martyrs, Haddon and Fox Contr. Osorium. l. 2. f. 212.
Latymer, Haddon and Fox Contr. Osorium. l. 2. f. 212.
Luther, and others heretofore, and many poor Christians now: and this
practice has been so common that the Century-writers observe. Cent. Magd. 2.
Col. 420.
Solemn est ut Christianis crimina seditionis, and laesae Majestatis a
persecutoribus affingantur, quibus tamen non sunt obnoxii. And for my own
particular, though conscious to my self of no seditious or disloyal Act, it
has been my unhappiness, to be not only slandered, but Censured by our
Prelates, as a See A New Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny.
Seditious Person, for Books authorized by their own Chaplain^s approbations,
and to be accused to his Majesty and proclaimed both in Print and Pulpit, by
Cant^rburi^s speech in Star Chamber the Epist. Dedicat. H^ylin An^id. Lin^. And
a Moderate answer to Henry Burt^n. Du^k^rs Sermon See a new Discovery of the
Prelates Tyranny^ p. 9^.
Canterbury and his Agents, for a Malevolent against State and Church, a
Traitor, Rebel, Factious Spirit, Monster, worse than any Priest or Jesuit,
one deserving to be forfeited to the Gallows, and as ^ad as Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram; only for oppugning their Arminian and Popish Innovations, their
desperate See A breviate of the Prelates intolerable usurpations both upon the
Kings prerogative Royal and the Subjects Liberties.
encroachments upon his Majesty's Royal Prerogative, the Laws and Subjects
Liberties, according to my Oath and Duty. I could do no less therefore for
the vindication of my own personal Innocence (which your Honors by your
unanimous Votes have now abundantly cleared (with the ruins of that Court
which censured me) the justification of all sincere Professors from these
Prelaticall black Calumnies, and the perpetual silencing of our Prelates
slanderous Tongues and Quils in this kind, then present your Honors and the
world with an irrefragable Catalogue of their most horrid Treasons, Rebellions,
and Seditions in all ages, which alone outvie all other men's whatsoever, both
for quality and numerosity, and so return these malicious defamations with
infinite disadvantage upon their own guilty Pates; Optatus adver. Parmin. l. r.
p. 23.
Qui ut crimina in silentium mitterent sua, vitam infamare conati sunt alienam,
and cum possent ipsi ab innocentibus argui, innocents arguere studuerint,
mittentes ubique liter as livore dictante conscriptas, as some delinquents did
of old, whose steps our Prelates trace. These were the special reasons both of
my compiling and publishing this Antipathy; wherein your Excellencies may
clearly discern; that these Exorbitances of our Prelates, are not so much the
vices of their Persons, as of their Function; which though their many late
published Pamphlets, would prove to be of Divine Right, yet the pernicious
evil fruits thereof infallibly proclaim, to be of mere humane wrong. And in
my weak judgment, there can be no such safe, short, and infallible way to
decide this controversy, Whether Episcopacy be of Divine institution or not?
then to consider the fruits thereof in all ages: that of our Savior being of
eternal verity, Mat. 7.16.20.
Ye shall know them by their fruits. Since then the fruits of our Lordly
Prelates, in this (and in other kinds too as I could abundantly manifest) have
been so desperately evil, and they generally the greatest See ^alaeus de
vitis Pontificum.
Monsters of impiety, that ever pestred the world, (as appears by the lives of
sundry foreign and Domesticke Pontifs;) I may infallibly conclude, their
calling not to be Divine, but Antichristian, or merely humane at the best, and
inconsistent with the safety, both of our Prince, Church, State; and by this
unanswerable reason dissipate into smoke all those specious flourishes and
shadows of arguments made in their defense, which I have Cap. 8.9. See the
unbishoping of Timothy and Titus. And a Catalogue, etc.
elsewhere fully answered.

There are but This is the sum of the Remonstrance newly set out by Sir
Thomas Aston, though written by some other Divines and Lawyers, who have
contributed their best assistance to it.
two chief arguments of moment, for the continuance of Episcopacy, which
stick with any judicious men. The first in point of State Polity; No Lord
Bishop, no King. The second in point of Church Polity; No Bishops, no peace, no
government, and nothing but Schisms in the Church: The first, I trust, I have
abundantly cleared by this Antipathy; The second (God willing) I intend to
dissipate in an Historical Treatise of the Schisms of our English Lordly
Prelates among themselves, enough to make a volume; and then by a larger
Remonstrance, experimentally evidencing out of Ecclesiastical Histories That
Bishops have been, if not the sole, yet at least the chief Authors of all the
Schisms that ever infested and rent the Church of God. And if this be made
good (as it easily may be against all the world) the proud Hierarchy of our
Lordly Prelates will fall to ground of it self without help of hands to pull
it down.

If any further allege; If See Sir Tho. A^tons Remonstrance.
you remove away Bishops, you take away government, and introduce an Anarchy
into the Church. The answer is very easy.

First, we shall still be under the government of 1 Eliz. c. 1.
the Supreme governors of our Church upon earth. Secondly, under the
Government of our Parliaments, Thirdly, under the regiment of our grave and
Fitz. N. Br. f. 36. Register. f. 289. b. 30^. 306.
Rectors of their several Parishes, and Rectories. Fourthly, under the
government of an Ordinary Provincial or National Synod, as there is
occasion. Fifthly, under such a religious orderly Government, Wisdoms, upon
the abolishing of Episcopacy, shall please to erect among us, as most consonant
to the Law of God, and Civil Government of our State. And can any then justly
complain of a want of Government in the Church, when it is but altered for the
better? Sixthly, the primitive Church in the purest See h^z^. Chap. ^.
was governed by a common Council of Presbyters; and the reformed Churches
beyond the Seas which want Bishops, are so regulated at this day, without any
d^nger of an Anarchy; and so may we as well as they.
There is nothing then remaining to uphold our Lordly Prelacie, but two of
their own principal vices, ambition and Qui^ obs^ero Laicorum, avidius
Clericis quaerit temporalia, and in^ptius utitur acquisitis? Bernard. ad
Clerum, and ad Pastores Serm^.
covetousness: the one arising from their Lordships, or Session in Parliament;
the other from their Lordly Seats and Revenues; neither of which are of Divine
Institution, as Archbishop Lauds speech in Starchamber, Bishop Hals
Remonstrance, and his defense thereof; and Whitgift.
themselves acknowledge. If your Honorable Assembly then will but take away
the Temporal Honors and Lands annexed to their Bishoprics, I dare swear,
not one of all our Prelates will plead or write for Episcopacie any more. Saint
Paul says, 1 Timothy 3.1.
He that desires the office of a Bishop, desires a good work: and the
Fathers generally make this observation on the place, Hieron. Com. in Soph. c.
^. and in 1 Timothy 3. S^dulius, Primasius, Theodoret, B^da, Rabanne Maurus,
Haymo, Anselmus Cantuariensis, O^cumenius, Theophylactus; and others; in 1 Timothy
3. Origin. in Mat. Hom. 31. Augustinus de civitate D^i, l. 19. c. 19. and Enar.
in Psalm. 126. Chrysostom. lib. 3. de Sace^d^^io. in Epist. ad Eph^s. Hom. 11. Opus
imperf. in Matt. Hom. 25. Isiodor. Hispal^nsis de ^ff^ciis Ecclesiast. lib. 2.
c. 5. Gratian. Cause. 8. quast. 1. Council. Aquisgr. sub Lud. pi^. ^. 9.10.13^^
and Parisi^ns. sub Lud and Loth^ri^ l. 1. c. 23.
Episcopatus nomen est operis, non honoris; non Dominium, sed Officium; non
Honos, sed Onus; Opus dixit, non Honorem, non Dignitatem; Laborem, non
Delicias; Opus, per quod per humilitatem crescat, non intumescat fastidio, etc.
If then your Wisdoms will make our Bishoprics now a Work, not an honor, or
gain, out lazy Prelates will of their own accords forgo them, without any
more dispute.

To make this most apparent, I shall instance only in one particular: it is the
general resolution of Council. Par^siens. sub Lud. and L^th^ri^, l. 1 c. 5. and
23. Surtus. Council. Tom. 3. p. 364.374.
Councels, Fathers, and Divines, yea of the lewd Conventicle of Praedicationis
munus, quod Episcoporum praecipuum est. etc. Council. Trident. Sess. 24. De
Reform. c. 4. p. 976, 977.
Trent it self: that the first and principle part of a Bishops office, is
diligently to preach Gods Word to the people: and therefore this very Council
enjoynes all Bishops to preach the Scripture and Gods Law every Lordsday, and
Holiday, and moreover in the Lent, Advent, and other Fasts; quotidie, vel
saltem tribus in hebdomade diebus Sacras Scripturas Divinamque legem
annuncient, to preach every day, or at least three times a week. Now our
Lordly Prelates have been so far from executing this principle part of their
office and work, that some of them (as Canterbury, York^, London, and Oxford)
did not so much as preach one Sermon in sundry years: others of them have
preached very rarely; yea, most of them have by themselves and their
instruments See Sh^lford and others.
written and preached against frequent preaching; suppressed all weekday
Lectures, and Sermons, on Lordsday afternoones throughout their Diocesses; and
Dr Pierce Bishop of Bath and Wells, by name, in a Letter to Canterbury, thanked
God that he had not left one Lecture, nor afternoon Sermon in his Diocese:
and suspended the Minister of Bridgwater only for preaching a Lecture in his
own parish Church, which had continued 50. years; and when this Bishop, after
much solicitation upon this Ministers promise, never to preach^ the Lecture
more, absolved him from his suspension, he then most blasphemously applied
Job. 5.14.
Christ's words used to the sick man, to this good Minister. Behold thou art
made whole: Go away, sin no more: (that is, preach no more) lest a worse
thing come unto thee: he convented another Minister, only for expounding the
Catechism on the Lordsday afternoon, saying, it was AS BAD as Preaching. So
that preaching now in this and other our Prelates judgment, is both a Sin,
and a bad thing, carefully to be suppressed. And this we may generally
observe, that those who were diligent Preachers before they became Bishops,
being once made such, became usually either See M. Latim^rs 4. Sermon of the
Plough to this purpose.
Non-preaching, or rare-preaching Prelates; doing so much the less work, by
how much they receive the greater wages: Whence Queen Elizabeth used to say,
when she made preaching Ministers Bishops; that she had made a Bishop, but
marred a preacher: it being true that the Bishop of Dunkelde once answered Deane
Thomas Farret, when he wished him to preach, Fox Act and Monum. p. 1266.
I tell thee we Bishops were not ordained to preach: it being too mean an
office for them, unless it be sometimes at the Court, or at some such solemn
meeting, to gain either more honor or preferment thereby, or for some such
private ends; not out of any great zeal of converting souls to God: Since
then our Bishops thus neglect, nay hate, condemn, suppress and persecute, the
good work of Preaching, wherein their Mat. 28.19, 20. c. 11.1. Mar. 1.38. c.
3.14 c. 16.15. Luk 4.18, 19, 31.43, 44. Act. 4.19, 20. c. 5.25.28.29.42. c.
10.42. Romans 10, 15. c. 11.20. 1 Cor. 1.17. c. 9.16. Ga. 7.16. Ephesians. 3.8. 2 Timothy
4.1, 2. Act. 20.28. Ioh. 21.16, 17.
office principally consists; it is most apparent, that the only thing they
now so zealously write and stickle for, is, only the temporal means, and
honor, not the Divine spiritual work, or office of Episcopacie; and since
these thus avocate and hinder them from preaching, I presume your excellent
wisdoms will deem it necessary, to strip them naked of these two obstacles,
which cause them thus to neglect their proper work and duty.

Neither would I have your Honors, or any else here misconceive me: as if I
advised you, to deprive Ministers of all Honor and Maintenance: God forbid.
No, my hearts desire and prayer to God and your Honors shall be, that every
painful preaching Minister may have all due Honorable respect, and such a
competent allowance, as the greatness of his pains and charge demerit. But
that Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, and others who have no particular flocks to
feed: and either preach not at all, or very seldom, should have such temporal
dignities, offices, and See Prove. 30.8, 9.
excessive revenues, as make them either proud, luxurious, ambitious, idle, or
negligent in preaching, and to forget that good work of a Bishops office,
which Saint Paul speaks of, I humbly conceive is See Chapter 8. where this is
largely proved by sundry testimonies.
neither lawful nor expedient, but such an irregularity as will be thought fit
to be redressed by your Honors, not only in point of Policy, but of piety too.

In a word; when I seriously consider, that Christ himself did Matt. 18.3^4.
c. 20.20. to 29. c. 23.8. to 13. Mar. 9.33. to 38. c. 10.35. to 46. Luke 9.46,
47, 48. c. 22.23. to 28. Job. 18.36.
frequently condemn and prohibit the ambitious desire of superiority and
praeheminencie in his Apost^es. That the Apostles themselves do the like, in
their 1 Pet. 5.1. to 6. 1 Ioh. 2.15^ 16.3 Job. 9, 10. 2 Cor. 1.24.
Epistles to others. That Quic undqu^ de^ideraverit Prim^tum in terra, inveniet
in coelo con^usionem; ut jam inrer servos Christi, non sit d^ Primatu certamen.
Opus imper^. in Matt. Hom. 35. See more to this purpose there.
Saint Chrysostom clearly determines; That whosoever desires primacy in
Earth, shall find confusion in Heaven, that now among Christ's servants and
ministers, there may be no contest for primacy, or superiority. That Saint
Bernard when he was offered to be made Bishop of Genoa, and Millaine See Vita
Bernardi before his works. Cl. Espencaus Digres. in 1 Timothy l. 3. c. 6^ p. 330.
peremptorily refused this dignity, saying upon that occasion: Erubesce O
superbe cinis, Deus se humiliat, tu t^ exaltas? Deus se hominibus subdit, tu
dominari gestiens tuo te praeponis authori, Vtinam tale me quid cogitantem
Deus, uti suum olim Apostolum increpare dignaretur, Vade post me satana, non
sapis quae Dei sunt. Quotiens hominibus praeesse defidero, totiens Deum meum
praeire contendo, and tunc quae vere Dei sunt, non sapio Bernard. Homil. 1. de
laudibus Mariae Virginis. p. 18.
Blush O proud dust and ashes; God humbles himself, do thou exalt thy self?
God made himself inferior to men, thou desirimg to domineere preferrest thy
self before thy maker. Would to God when I think any such thing, God would
vouchsafe to rebuke me, as he did his Apostle in times past, Get thee behind
me Satan, thou savourest not the things that are of God: as often as I desire
to rule over men, so often I contend to go before my God, and then I savor not
the things which are truly of God. That the eminent Father Augustine. de gestis
cum Emerita Donatist. Epis. lib. Tom. 7. pars ^. p. 782. An vero Redemptor
noster de coelis in humana mem^bra des^ endit, ut membra ejus essemus, and nos
ne ipsa ejus membra crudeli divisione lanientur, de Cathedris descendere
formidamus? Episcopi propter Christianos populos ordinamur. Quod ergo
Christianis populis ad Christianam pacem prodest, hoc de nostro Episcopatu
fac^amus. Quod sum propter te sum, si tibi prodest; non sum, si tibi obest, si
servi utiles sumus, cur Domini aeternis lucris pro nostris tem^poralibus
^ublimitatibus invidemus: Episcopalis dignitas f^uc^uosior nobis erit, si
gregem Christi deposita magis collegerit, quam retenta disperserit; fratres
mei, si Dominum cogitamus, locus ille altior specula vinitoris est, non
fastigium superbientis; si cum volo retinere Episcopatum meum dispergo gregem
Christi; quom^do est damnum gregis honor Past^ris ^ N^^ qua front in futuro
seculo promissum a Christo sperabimus hono^em, si Christianam in hoc seculo
noster honor impedit unitatem?
Saint Augustine Bishop of Hippo, and almost 300. African Bishops more in the
great schism of the Donatists, were content to lay down all their
Bishoprics for the peace and unity of the Church: thinking thereby not to
lose them, but to commit them more safely to Gods custody: and used this most
golden speech, An vero Redemptor, etc. What verily did our Redeemer descend
from Heaven into humane members, that we should be his members, and shall we,
lest his very members should be rent in pieces with a cruel division, fear to
descend out of our chairs? We are ordained Bishops for Christian people: What
therefore may profit Christian people for Christian peace, that let us do with
our Bishoprics. What I am, I am for thee, if it profit thee; I am not so, if
it hurt thee. If we be profitable servants, why do we envy the eternal
gains of our Lord for our temporal sublimities? Our Episcopal dignity will
be more fruitful to us; if being laid down, it shall more unite the flock of
Christ, then disperse it if retained. My brethren; if we mind the Lord, thi^
higher place is the wat^h Tower of a vin^dresser; not the Pinnacle of a proud
Person. If when I will retain my Bishopric I disperse the flock of Christ,
how is the damage of the flock, the honor of the shepherd? For with what
face shall we expect the honor promised by Christ in the world to come, if
our honor hinder Christian unity in this present world? And finally, that
Bishops themselves did in their very See the Book of Com^mon prayer in Public
Baptism.
Baptism seriously vow and promise to God: To forsake the Devil and all his
works, the vain pomp and glory of this world, with all the covetous desires
of the same, so that they would not follow, nor be led by them: and that Saint
Bernard hereupon gives this Item to them Ad Cl^ru^ and ad Pastores Serm^ in
Council. Rh^m^ns.
Simundum praedicas contemnendum, contemn tu prius, and ad ipsum efficacius
alios invitabis: If thou preachest the World is to be contemned, do thou
contemn it first, and then thou shall more effectually invite others thereto.
I cannot but presume our Lordly Prelates, if they have any sparks of piety, or
humility in them, will now at last for our Churches our Kingdoms future peace,
security and felicity, lay down their Bishoprics at your Honors feet; or
else that your Eminences will enforce them thereunto, it being more equal and
expedient, that a few Lord Bishops should meritoriously lose their pernicious
honors, than our King, Church, State, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Peace, be
perpetually endangered, and imbroyled by their continuance.

Now the great Moderator of the Universe, who has miraculously congregated,
preserved, directed, assisted your Honorable Assembly hitherto, and and
wrought wondrous things by your Indefatigable industries, and most prudent
consultations, for the honor and safety of his Majesty, and his Realms; the
Reformation of our Church and State; the Establishment of our undermined
Religion, Laws, and Liberties; the pacification, and prevention, of our much
feared Wars and Invasions; the relieving of our grievously oppressed ones,
and the exemplary punishment of our Arch-oppressours, to the inef^able joy of
all true English, Scottish, Irish hearts, and of true Christians; continue his
blessed assisting presence with, his Almighty protection over you; multiply all
his saving graces in, power forth all his blessings, spiritual, temporal, and
eternal abundantly on you, and Crown all your religious Consultations with
such a successful issue, that the present times, and all succeeding ages may
deservedly call your Honors, Esaias. 58.12
the raisers up of the foundations of many generations, the repairers of our
breaches, the restorers of paths to dwell in, and the Saviors (next under God
and our Sovereign) of our almost ruined Church and State.

So prays your Honors redeemed Captive, and eternally devoted servant
WILLIAM PRYNNE.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
BE pleased to take notice, that my primitive intention was, to have presented
thee with this Historical Antipathy entirely at the same instant without
fractions. But the slacknesse of the Printers, the importunity of some special
friends, and some public Negotiations in present agitation which this piece of
it may seasonably promote, have induced me to divide it into two parts, the
first whereof thou have here complete: the second (God willing) thou shall
receive with all possible expedition. In the mean season I shall desire thy
favorable acceptance of this moity, and of a perfect Table of the several
Chapters of the whole Treatise, wherein thou may behold the latter part in
Epitome, till thou enjoy it in gross.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE FIRST PART.
Chap. I. COntaining the several Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions,
Seditions, Contumacies, and Disloyalties of the Archbishops of Canterbury
against their Sovereigns, Kings of England; and the several Wars, Tumults,
and Dissentions occasioned and raised by them, in, or against our Realm. Chap.
II. Of the several Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Seditions,
State-schismes, Contempts, and Disloyalties of the Archbishops of York,
against their Sovereigns, and of the Wars, Tumults, and Civil Dissention^
caused by them. Chap. III. Comprising the several Treasons, Conspiracies,
Rebellions, Contumacies, Disloyalties, Wars, Dissentions, and State Schisms
of the Bishops of London, Winchester, Durham, Salisbury and Lincoln.
The TABLE of the Chapters of the second Part.
Chap. IV. Comprising the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Con^umacies, and
Disloyalties of the Bishops of Ely, Exeter and Hereford. Chap. V. Containing
the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Contumacies, and Disloyalties of the
Bishops of Chichester, Carlisle, Chester, and Norwich. Chap. VI. Comprising the
Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Contumacies, and Disloyalties of the Bishops
of S. David's, Landaffe, Bangor, Asaph, Bath and Wels. Chap. VII. Containing the
severa^l Treasons, Rebellions, Seditions, Schisms, Contumacies, Wars, and
disloyalties of the Bishops of France, Normandy, Scotland, and Ireland, with
reference unto England. Chap. VIII. Containing certain conclusions, deduced
from the premises, with the judgments and r^solutions of diverse of our ancient
Writers and Martyrs, and some of our learnedest Bishops and Authors in Queen
Elizabeth's reign, touching the pretended Divine Jurisdiction of Bishops, their
Treasons, Rebellions, Temporalties, large Possessions, and the uselessenesse,
unprofitablenesse, and mischievousnesse of Lordly Bishops, and their government
in our Church. Chap. IX. Comprising an answer to the principal Objections
alleged by the Prelates in defense of the Divine pretended institution, and
for the continuance of their Episcopacie^ in our Church.
ERRATA.
PAge 11. l. 40. read, The King, thinking. p. 73. l. 21. such. l. 33. a^t, au,
Royans, R^y p. 78. l. ^0 faithful. p. ^25. l. 28. granted, gr^nted. p. 132. l.
5. Edward deceasing p. 144. l. 1. D^acan^s. p. 147. l 9 Datary p. 150. ^ l 8.
Penry. p. 152. l. 24. against. p. 156. l. 16. Saxons. p. 171. l. 11.
Archiepiscopall. l. 15 un int^rrupt^d. p. 176. l. 38 oppressions. p 194, l. 13.
undefi^ed p. 212. l. 14. they, the. p. 220 l. 11. favor, fear. p. 234. l. 1.
be app^ehended. p. 2^8 l. 18. this, the p. ^3^ l. 6. dele a. p. 242. l. 1 dele
and^ l. 12. Edmond, Edward p^ 241 l 8. Bishop. p. 260. l. 13. were, where. p.
261. l. 14. excellently learned p. ^62. l 37. ripped. p. 284. l. 2^^ ^ele in.
p. 277 l. 27.35 deluded, de^ivered p. 280 l. 2. Cales l 25. forfeiting,
fortefying. p. 281 l. 31. said, laid 282 l. 23 wi^e, w^^e p 292. l. 23.
grea^ly^ p 295. l. 30. upon, this. p. 305 l. 20. left lift. l. 28. or, of. p.
312. l. 40. ever^ even. p. 315. l. 9. learned, unlearned. p. 318. l. 24.
examination, excommunication, p. 323. l. ^9. Geof^y^ Hugh. p. 327. l. 17.
gravissima l. 27. accuse, accurse. p. 331. l. 20. strangers. p. 334. l. 4. from
his. p. 336. l. 29. employed.

In the Margin p. ^35. l. 6. Beacon l. 8. vol. 3. p. ^51. l. 5. Bishop, See.

THE PROLOGVE.
THere is nothing more frequent in these latter day^s in the mouths of our
domineering Lordly Prelates, than this trivial Paradox of Archbishop Bancroft
(which some would Originally father upon our late Sovereign The Relator of the
Conference at Hampton Court, p. 36.
King James) NO BISHOP, NO KING; as if Kings could neither be, nor continue
Kings, unless Prelates were suffered both to be, and continue Lords; and
Princes Crowns irreparably lost, if Bishops Miters were but once cast down.
This absurd and groundless Assertion, as it is evidently disproved by those
many flourishing Kings and Kingdoms, which have well subsisted without Lord
Bishops, both before these Mushrome Lords ( Spiritual only in Title, but
wholly Temporal in reality) first sprouted up by insensible degrees in the
Church of Christ, so it is most infallibly convinced of notorious falsehood, by
the multitude of those most execrable Treasons, Treacheries, Conspiracies,
Rebellions, Contumacies, Insurrections, Seditions, and Anti-Monarchiall
practices of Lordly Prelates, against their Sovereigns, in all ages since they
grew rich and potent, in all Kingdoms and Churches where they have been
admitted; of which there are so many presidents, as would fully fraught many
Folio Volumes, and require another Baronius or Tostatus, to digest into
several vast Tomes. And I dare further add, to the immortal praise of this
loyal generation of Lordly Prelates, that there is no one calling or
profession of men whatsoever in the Christian World guilty of so many
traitorous, treacherous, perfidious, seditious, rebellious, contumacious
practices and conspiracies against their lawful Princes; or that have proved
such execrable firebrands of dissentions, commotions, bloody wars,
Rebellions, and detestable Schisms both in Church and State, as these
Prelaticall Lords. Yea, I supp^se I may confidently aver without any error
or calumny, that Lordly Prelates have been the Original Authors and
contrivers of more Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Schisms, Wars, and
Contentions in Christian Kingdoms, than all other ranks and callings of men
whatsoever, not severally considered, but united.

This I could at large demonstrate by an whole Volume of examples of Popes, and
Lordly Prelates in foreign parts; but I need not travel abroad, since we
have so many presidents at home, of our own English Lordly Prelates, as may
abundantly suffice to illustrate this truth; the chiefest whereof I have here
collected and faithfully transcribed out of the Marginall Authors quoted to
every of them, whose very words I only recite for the most part, but where
brevity or necessity enfo^ce me to use my own expressions for meth^d or
connection sake, when the Historians either somewhat vary, or are over-tedious
in their relations; or where one Historian relates some particulars, which
another omits: in which case, I must desire the Reader to peruse all the
Authors quoted to each example, lest examining only one or two of them, which
record but a part, and not the entire relation, he should either wrong
himself, or censure me of calumny or forgerie, without just cause.

Neither let the Reader here expect an exact enumeration of all the Treasons,
Conspiracies, Trecheries, Rebellions, Seditions, Con^umacies, Wars, or
State-schismes that our English Prelates have been guilty of since they became
potent Lords^ for many of them, no doubt, were so secretly contrived, and
carried by them, that the Historians of their ^imes could have no information
of them; others of them were so palliated and countenanced by their own
over-swaying greatness, that none durst question, nor record them, thoug^
notorious^ and some of them were questionless concealed by our Histo^ians; who
being for the most part Monks, Priests, or the Prelates own creatures,
flatterers and dependants, out of favor or affection, did labor all they
could to palliate, not to record or lay open their ghostly Fathers nakedness
in this kinde^ Neither have I collected every particular of this nature which
our Historians relate, bu^ only selected such presidents as I cursorily
observed in ow Annals, and hastily collected for the most part long since, to
which I presume, ^he diligent Reader may accumulate many more: yet these I
conceive are so many for number, so prodigious for circumstance, that they
exceed both in mult^tude and heinousness all disloyal practices of like sort
acted against our English Monarchs, by all other their subjects, of what
quality soever, the Nobles and others attainted formerly of Treason, Rebellion,
and suffering for the same, being for the most part but the Prelates
instruments, the chief Architects, Arch-plotters and inciters of all the
Conspiracies, Treasons, Rebellions, wars and dissentions that ever happened in
our Kingdom, and yet these Arch-traytors and Incendiaries commonly escaped the
hand of Justice by reason of their unholy holy Order, and appeals to Rome,
when as their underhand Instruments (though less culpable) received due
execution.

If then we consider the paucity of our Arch-Prelates, and Lord Bishops (of
England of which there is but one in each See at a time when full, and
sometimes none for diverse years in times of vacancy) in comparison of the
numerosity of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of England on the one side,
and then on the other hand compare the multitude of the Prelates notorious
Treasons, Rebellions, Seditions, and Contumacies against their Kings, with
thos^ of the Nobility, Gentry, Commons, which they far exceed in number and
notorius circumstances: Or if we observe with what an high hand these Prelates
have acted, justified, defended these their villainies, not only by protecting,
but canonizing the Authors of them for holy Saints and Martyrs (as Dunstane,
Becket, Anselme, Hugh, and others) only because they were Prelates; when as in
truth they ought so much the rather, to have branded them for notorious
Traitors and Rebels, execrable both to God and man: we must necessarily
conclude their, NO BISHOP, NO KING, to ^e a notorious Bull; and, NO KING
UNLESS NO BISHOP, to be a more probable and most true Position; and that ou^
English Lord Bps (especially those of Canterbury, Primates of all England,
^nely in evil for the most part) have been the most notorious Traitors,
Rebels, Conspirators, Incendiaries, Vipers, Pests, Grievances to the Kings and
State of England, of all ot^ers; and so by consequence, rather of Antichristian
and Diabolical, th^n Divine or Apostolical insti^ution; fit to be utterly
extirpated both by King and Kingdom; neither of which shall long flourish in
happiness, piety, or tranquillity, whiles Lordly Prelates bear the sway, and
manage the chief Temp^rall Offices or Affairs, contrary to Christ's own
express Inhibitions, Mat. 20.25, 26, 27 Luk 22.25.26. Act. 6.4. 2 Timothy 2.4. 1
Pet. 5.1, ^33. Romans 12.7, 8. 1 Joh^ 3.9, 10,

If any surmise, I write thus sharply only out of malice against our
Prelates, I shall desire but this favor from them, to suspend their censures,
till they have impartially surveyed the ensuing Particulars, (which I have
sincerely related, as I find them recorded, without flattery on the one hand,
or malignity on the other;) and then I doubt not but they will change their
minds, and readily subscribe to my Conclusions, ratified by so many ancient
Presidents of old, and so many visible experiments fresh before our eyes.

Now, because the Arch-Prelates of Canterbury ( See Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 15.
to 29.
erected by Gregory the first his Bull, then Pope of Rome, which have engaged
them ever since to be Popes sworn Vassals for the most part, and to imitate
Popes in their most execrable Treasons and Conspiracies) have been the Archest
T^aytors, Rebels, and Opposites to the Kings ^f England in all Ages, I shall
for Order and Honor sake begin first with their Contumacies, Treacheries, and
Rebellious practices, and that in a Chronologicall manner according to their
several Antiquities; and from them I shall descend to the Archbishops of
York, the greatest Arch-traytors and Rebels next to those of Canterbury; and
then pass to other of our Prelates in their order, with as much brevity and
perspicuity as the subject matter will permit me; concluding with such
material observations against our Lordly Hierarchy, as shall be infallibly
warranted by the ensuing Histories, and with such domesticke Authorities
against Episcopacy, the Lordlinesse, Secularity, wealth, and temporal
employments of our Prelates and their mischievousnesse both in Church and
state, as I trust will abundantly satisfy the most Episcopal men, whose
arguments both for the pretended Divinity, and perpetuity of Episcopacy in our
Church, I hope I shall satisfactorily answer. But not to detain you longer
with a Prologue, I shall address my self to the subject matter, surveying the
Bishops of Canterburies actions in the first place.

THE ANTIPATHIE OF THE ENGLISH LORDLY PRELACIE, BOTH TO REGAL MONARCHY, AND
CIVIL UNITY.
CHAP. I. Containing the several Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions,
Seditions, Contumacies, Disloyalties of the Archbishops of Canter^ury against
their Sovereigns, Kings of England; the several Wars, Tumults, Dissentions
occasioned and raised by them in, or against our Realm, with their manifold
practices and attempts to undermine our Laws.
IN relating these Disloyalties of our holy Ar^h-Prelates of Canterbury, I
cannot sing as the Poet once did, Virg. Ecl^g. 3. p. 8.
Ab Jove principium Musae; Iovis omnia plena.
(since there is little of God in any of their actions I am now to relate:)
unless I take Jove here, not for the true living God, but for a mere Zuidas,
H^lioke, Natal^s Comes, Diod^^us Siculus, Va^^o, and others, thus describe him.
impious, treacherous, murdering, usurping Devil incarnate, who thrust his
Father Saturn out of his Royal Throne, and injuriously possessed h^mselfe of
his Kingdom against all right and equity. And in this sense I may truly
chaunt, Ab Jove principium, etc. since I must not only begin, but proceed and
end, with Devils incarnate, masked under a P^^la^es white Rocher, rather than
with holy Fathers of the Church.

ODO.
One of the first men of this stamp that encounters me in the Sea of
Canterbury, is Odo, surnamed the Severe, possessing this Pon^^^call Chair
about the year of our Lord 940. This pragmaticall turbulent Arch-Prelate, as
he was Will. Malms. de Gestis Pontificum Angl. l. 1. p. 201. Mat. West. Flores
Hist. An. 955, 957, 958. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. Odo Sev^rus, p. 46 47.51, 52, 53.
Speeds History of Great Britain, l. 7. Monarch. 29. p. 403.404 Fox Acts and
Monuments, p. 137. Godwyns Catalogue of Bishops, p. 62, 64, 65.
thrice in Arms in the Field, after he was made a Bishop, where he ^ought like
a valiant Champion; so he caused King Edwin, wi^h whom he had very evil
agreement, to be divorced from his Queen, some say for consanguinity, others
for other reasons: Whereupon the King betaking himself ^o his Concubines, Odo
there^pon suspended the King from the Church, excommunicated his Concubines,
causing one of them, whom the King unreasonably do^ed upon, to be fetched out
of the Court with violence, branded her in the forehead with an hot Iron, and
then banished her into Ireland: After which she returning into England, Odo
apprehends her the second time, and cuts off her sinews at the ^ocke bone. The
King being therewith much exasperated, spoiled all the Monks of all their
goods, banished Dunstan, the chief of the Monks in^o Flanders; (who, together
with Cynesius, the Bishop on the day of this Kings Coronation, entered most
audaciously into his Bedchamber, and by violence dragged him both out of his
Bed, and Bedchamber, where they pretended he was sporting with his Concubine)
and threatened Odo, with severe punishments, who was taken away by death soon
after, and so delivered from all fear of the Kings displeasure. This Odo
together with his Monks, wrought so with the Subjects before his death, that
the Mercians with the Northumbrians, did utterly cast off the yoke of
obedience to Edwin, and by an unanimous consent, made choice of his Brother
Edgar for their King, Deo dictante and populo annuente, God himself (to wit,
by the mouth of Odo and the other Prelates and Monks) dictating it, and the
people thereunto consenting, writes Matthew Westminster. Archbishop Parker,
and Bishop Godwin, in the life of Dunstan, Archbishop of Canterbury after Odo,
record, That during the time of Dunstan his Banishment into France, King Edwin,
by the Rebellion of his Subjects, See Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p 52.53. Holinsh.
Hist. of England. l. 6. c. 21. p. 157.
at the instigation, as is likely, of our Monks, Prelates, and their
favorers, was deprived both of his life and Kingdom: Whereupon Edgar, that
succeeded him, warned by his Brothers example, was content to curry savor with
them and Dunstan, creating him first Bishop of Worcester, next of London, and
finally of Canterbury. A good reward for this his Treason.

Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 61.62. See part. 2. p. 227.228.
Dunstan coming to the Arch-Bishopricke in this manner, DUNSTAN.
not long after caused King Edward to be slain by his Soldiers, for refusing
to aid the Bishop of Rochester against his Brother Agelredus, who besieged
that City and the Bishop: The Monks of that time impute th^s treacherous Act to
Queen Alsdrith, his Mother in Law, and Gods Divine Judgment, to excuse their
Patron Dunstan. After his Murder, (as In vita Sanct^ Editha.
John Capgrave and History of Great Britain, l. 7 c. 42. sect. 21. p. 409. c.
43. sect. 1. p. 410. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p 61, 62. Holinshed. Hist. of
England. l. 6. c. 23 p. 59. l. 7. c. 1. p. 164.165. l. 6. c. 24. p. 161. c. 25.
p. 162. Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 201.202.
Speed record) this holy Archbishop Dunstan would have advanced Edgith his
sister to the Crown, and invested her against Etheldred the lawful Heir, had
she not by the late experience of Edwards fall, utterly refused that Title^
which neither belonged to h^^ Right, nor was safe for her Person to undertake:
Whereupon Dunstan and the Monks perceiving that Queen Elfrida, Alferus Duke
of Mercia, and many Nobles, combined for young Etheldred, the right Hei^e,
disavowing Prince Edward (surnamed the Martyr) as illegitimate, did with all
their might oppose Etheldred, holding their states dangerous, and their
new-gotten footing unsure, if in the Nonage of the King, Elfrida his Mother,
and other their Opposites, should rule all under him, as was probable: For
Elfrida hated Dunstan, because he desired to hinder King Edgar from ma^rying
her, after he was contracted to her; rushing An impudent audacious A^^.
impudently into the Kings Bedchamber the first Night he lay with her,
demanding of the King, who it was he had in Bed with him? who answering, that
it was his Queen and Consort; Dunstan replied, that he could not marry her
without offending God, and breaking the institution of the Roman Church,
because of the spiritual Kindred that was between them, he being her
Godfather, often warning the King to be divorced from her, which he refused.
Wherefore, Dunstan and the P^elates considering that Edward was altogether
wrought in their mould, they abetted his Title to the Crown (though a Bastard)
as one lawfully borne, and begot in the Nuptial Bed of Queen Ethelfleda.
Their Claims thus banded among the S^atesmen, began to be diversely affected
among the Commons, and had put the Game to the Hazard, if the wisdom of
Dunstan had not seen ^he Chase: For a Council being assembled to argue their
Rights, the Archbishop came in with his Banner and Cross, and not staying for
further debate de Iure, did de facto present King Edward for their lawful
King; and the Assembly consisting of Clergy men, persuading peace, drew the
approbation of the rest; and so was he admitted and proclaimed their
Sovereign, and after Malmsbury de Reg. Angl. l. 2. c. 10. p. 62. Speed l. 7.
c. 43, 44. p. 413, 414.
Crowned at Kingston by Dunstan, and the true Heir put by for the time by this
Arch-Traytor Dunstan, and his Clergy; till about three years after Edward was
murdered, by the procurement of Queen Elfrida, and Etheldred Crowned King by
Dunstan, much against his will. This King, Dunstan and his Monks continued to
oppose^ For Math. Westminster. An. 983. p. 379. Speed^ p. 414. Ant. Eccles. Brit. 61.
Malms. de Gestis Regum Angl. l. 2. c. 10. p. 62. Holinshed History of England
l. 7. c. 1.
Etheldred conceiving a just indignation against the Bishop of Rochester for
his obstinacy and contumacious carriage toward him, thereupon besieged his
City: Whereupon Dunstan commanded the King to desist from his purpose, lest
he should provoke Saint Andrew, the Patron of that City; which the King
refusing to do, without the Bishops submission, and unless he would likewise
pay him an hundred pounds^ Dunstan wondering thereat, sent this Message to the
King: Because thou have preferred Silver before God, Money before an Apostle,
and Covetousness before me, violent mischiefs shall come upon thee, which the
Lord ^ath spoken. Such an Arch-Traytor and proud imperious Prelate was this
Archbishop Dunstan. And if ^his Saint was such, what think you may his
Successors prove, who were not so holy as to be Canonized? This Dunstan Antiq.
Eccles. Brit. p. 52, 53. Holinshed Hist. of England, l. 6. c. 22 p. 158.
before he became Arch bishop of Canterbury, caused King Etheldred to p^eferre
him before all his Nobles, and to ^ay up all his richest Royal
Household-stuffe, Charters, Records, with all his Wealth and Treasures in his
Monastery; and finally, to commit his very Kingdom, Body and Soul, to him:
so that all things were in Dunstans power, the King not daring to do any
thing, either in public Affairs of the Kingdom, or in his own private
Negotiations, without Dunstans advice; so that he alone exercised Royal
Authority in every place. In and by which, he wholly employed his endeavors,
how to enrich those Monasteries with Lands and Revenues, which himself had
founded, or the Danes wasted, wasting the Kings Treasury, and appropriating the
Crown Lands to this purpose: Which, when King Edwyn coming to the Crown,
sought to resume, Dunstan much displeased herewith, sharply reprehended him,
then affronted him, and at last cau^ed him to be murdered, as is before
remembered. And for all this good service, he was not only made an
Arch-Prelate, but a Saint.

Siricius, SIRICIUS.
Malms. de G^st. Po^tif. l. 1. f. 203. de Gestis R^gum Ang. l. 2. c. 10. p. 62.
Henry H^^tingdon, Hist. l. 5. p. 357. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 64. Godwins Catal.
of Bishops, p. 65. H^linsh^d Hist. of Engl. l. 7. c. 2. p. 166.
his next Successor but one, consilio infausto, by an unhappie, if no^
perfidious Traytorly advice, persuaded King Etheldred, in the thirteenth year
of his Reign, to buy his Peace of the Danes at ten thousand pound annual
Rent, to the ignominy and almost utter destruction of ^he whole Kingdom:
Which evil (writes Henry Huntingdon) has continued to this very day, and will
longer endure, unless Gods mercy help us. For now we pay that to our Kings
out of Custom, which was paid to the Danes out of unspeakeable fears. (Yea,
we a^ this day have ^ared the worse for this President, it being much insisted
on, to justify the late Tax of Ship Money.) Such perfidious and pernicious
Counselors of State have these Prelates been, in teaching Princes in every
Land to lay new Exactions on, and Tyrannize more and more over their Subjects.
Woe (says M. Tindall obedience of a Christian Man, p. 116.152.
Mr. Tyndall) is to the Realms where they are of the Council; as profitable
are they to the Realms with their Counsel, as the Wolves unto the Sheep, or
the Foxes unto the Geese: As was this Arch-Prelate, who is much blamed in our
Histories for this his advice.

ROBERT.
Robert Archbishop of Canterbury laid the first foundation of the Normans
Conquest in England, persuading King Edward to make Duke William his Heir;
Will. Malms. de Gestis Ponti^icum Angl. l. 1. p. 204. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 73.
to 79. Godwyns Catalogue of Bishops, p. 68, 69, 70. Speed. l. 7. c 3. p.
203.413.414. Holinshed. Hist. of England. l. 8. c. 2.4.
Whereunto when he had condiscended, himself became the Messenger of this good
tidings unto the Duke, taking Harold with him, that he might hamper him with an
oath (as he did indeed) and so bar him from all possibility of the
Kingdom: which Oath he breaking afterward, lost both his li^e and Kingdom
together. The Archbishop now assuring himself of the favor of the King not
only present^ but him that was to succeed, could not endure that any should
bea^e so great sway as himself in Court; and therefore fell to devise, how he
might overthrow See here the Pride, malice, desperate ambition and impiety of
Arch-Prelates, thus injuriously to set the Son against the Mother.
Emma the Kings Mother, who only served to overtop him. He began therefore
to bea^e into the Kings head, how hard a hand his Mother had held upon him,
when he lived in Normandy; how likely it was, that his Brother came by his
death by the practice of her and Earl Godwyn; and that she used the company of
Alwyn, Bishop of Winchester, somewhat more familiarly then was for her honor.
The King somewhat too rashly crediting these Tales, without any further
examination of this matter, seized upon all his Mothers goods, and committed
her to Prison, in the Nunnery of Warwell, banished Earl Godwyn and his son,
and commanded Alwyn upon pain of death, not to come forth of the Gates of
Winchester. The Queen made the best friends she could, to be called to her
answer; but the Archbishop so possessed the King, as other trial of her
innocence might not be allowed then this; she must walk over nine
Plough-shares red hot in the midst of the Cathedral Church of Winchester: If
she performed not this Purgation, or were found any thing at all hurt, she and
the Bishop both should be esteemed guilty; if otherwise, the Archbishop was
content to submit himself to such punishment as they should have endured. The
Archbishops Authority was then so prevalent over the most powerful persons,
that the Queen her self, neither by her own power, nor of the King her
Son, nor of the Nobles and Bishops, nor by any other means than by her
innocence, could keep off this so notorious an injury and contumely, the Lo
how Bishops Lord and Tyrannize it over Kings themselves.
King and Bishops being forced to approve this most severe Edict of the
Archbishop, against their wills: Whereupon the Queen, led by two Bishops, in
the open sight of the people, did this hard Purgation, and ^o acquitted her
self and Alwyn of the Crimes objected- The King then greatly bewayling the
wrong done to his Mother by the Archbishops malicious false suggestions, asked
her forgiveness upon his knees, restored her and the Bishop to their goods and
places; and to make satisfaction, would needs be whipped by the hands of the
Bishops there present; and receiving three stripes of his Mother, was by her
clearly forgiven. The Archbishop, the author and plotter of all this stir
and mischief, fearing the success of this matter, held himself at Dover,
under pretense of sickness; and as soon as he heard how the world went,
knowing England to be too hot for him, got him over to the Abbey of Gemmeticum;
where overcome with shame and sorrow, he there shortly after ended his days:
the King having passed a public Sentence against him and his confederates,
Malmes. de Gest^s Regum Angl. l. 2. c. 13. p. 82.
Quod Statum Regni conturbarant, etc. That they had disturbed the State of the
King^dome, stirring up the Kings mind against his Mother and faithful
subjects, whereupon he was deprived.

Malmes. de Gest. Pont. Angl. l. 1. p. 205. de Gestis Reg. A^g. l. 3. p. 102.
Ant. Eccl. Brit. p. 89.90.91 Speeds History l. 9. c. 2. p. 435, 436, 437.
Polichron. l. 6. c. 29. l. 3. c. 1, 2, 3, 4. Mat. West. An. 1067, 1070. God^^ns
Catal. of Bishop^ p 71, 72 73. Hol^nshed Vol. 3. p. 8, 9. Hist. of Engl. l. 8.
c. ^.
Stigand, STIGAND.
placed in his Sea before his death, after William the Conqueror had slain
Harold, and vanquished his Army in Battlefield; Edwyn and Mercar endeavored
to Crown Edgar, Etheling, the right^ull Heir; to whos^ side, most of the
Nobles, the Citizens of London, with the Navall Forces, adhered; and so did
Aldred, Archbishop of York: who presently, with the other Prelates, ^ell off
to William the Conqueror, being the stronger side, (to whom the Pope had sent
a consecrated Banner, an Agnus Dei, and one of Saint Peter's hairs, in way of
good speed) refusing to side with the Lords, whereupon their designements were
all suddenly quashed. But Archbishop S^igand, and Eglesigne Abbot of Saint
Augustines, assembling all the Kentish men together, encouraged them to stand
for their Liberties, though with the loss of their lives; and marching before
them as their Generals, enclosed him and his Army by a Stratagem, with
Branches of trees, their Banners displayed, and Bows bent, and so purchased a
confirmation of their Freedoms and Customs from him, by way of composition.
Then coming to London, the Conqueror refused to be Crowned by Stigana, Aldred
Arch^Bishop of York performing this Ceremony on ^he day of Christ's Nativitie,
Anno. 1066. Stigand not long after, and Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, fled into
Scotland, where they kept themselves close for a season; and at last returning,
King William departe^ into Normandy, knowing Stigand to be of a crafty Pate,
and perfidious heart, and of great power among his Kentish men, carried him
over Sea with him, lest he should raise new stirs, and cause a Revolt from
him in England during his absence: and then returning into England, he caused
him (with other Bishops that had been ^reacherous to him) to be deposed from
his Arch-Bishopricke in a Synod at Winchester, for holding the Bishop of
Winchester in Commendam with his Arch-Bishopricke; for invading the Sea of
Canterbury, whiles Robert lived^ for using his Pa^l, left at Canterbury; for
Simonie, and to prevent him from raising any further Tumults. Mat. Paris hist
Major, p. 8. Speed hist. l. 9. c. 2. p. 441.443. Hol^nsh. p. 8, 9.
The King after his degradation, spoiling him of his goods, committed him to
perpetual Prison; where at last he was starved with hunger, refusing to reveal
those infinite Treasures which he had heaped up in store, to work some
mischie^e, which were discovered after his death. Not long after which, plures
Episcopi and Abba^es, many Bishops and Abbots joined in a Conspiracy with
Ralph de Ware, and Roger Earl of Hereford, against the Conqueror, to thrust
him out of his Kingdom: such faithful Subjects were they to their Sovereign,
to whom they had sworn allegiance.

LANFRANK.
William the Conqueror dying, Man. West. Au. 1088, 1089, 1090. Mat. Pari^ p.
13.14. Will. Mal^s. de Gest. Reg. A^gl. l. p. 4.120, 121. Antiq. Eccl. Br^t. p.
100. God^i^s Catal. of Bps, p. 74.75. Speed, l. 9. c. 3. p. 456.457. to 464.
Holinsh. Vol. 3. p. ^^.17, 18.
by the persuasion of Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury, (who had brought up
William Rufus from his Childhood) he left the Crown of England to his younger
son William, putting the eldest son Robert from the Crown, which was due
unto him. In which Action, God blessed not the Archbishop: for the King
(though thus advanced and Crowned by him, and the Prelates, against all right,
and the approbation of the Nobles and People, who stood for Robert) fell out
with him, banished him the Realm, as being overbusie and pragmaticall; till at
last, with much ado, he mediated his peace. Now, what was this but an act of
Treason, Treachery, and injustice, to thrust the right Hei^e from the Crown,
and set up an Usurper? Which, as it procured many bloody Wars between the
two Brethren, so it brought great misery on the whole Realm, as the Histories
of those times witness; and procured himself much blame. Speed, l. 5. c. 3.
Sect. 34. p. 463.
This Arch-Prelate Lanfranke, was used by Pope Gregory before this exploit of
his, for the undermining of William the Conqueror, and the subjecting both of
him and his State to the Papacy; which he endeavoring, but not effecting, his
Holiness growing angry with this Agent, Lanfrancke cleared himself of the
blame, showing him how diligently, Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 100.
(but indeed treacherously) he had bestirred himself in counselling to swear
to yield obedience and do fealty to the Pope: Suasi, sed non persuasi, says
he, I have so advised him, but I could not persuade him. O perfidious,
ungrateful counsel and swasion of this Prelate, to make his Sovereign and
his Realm mee^e Vassals to the Pope! This Lanfrancke so far offended William
Rufus, that he banished him the Land, whereupon he went to Rome, and traveled
over diverse Countries in Exile; till a writing on a certain night falling as
it were from heaven into the hands of a Clerk, wherein it was written that
William Rufus was slain (which afterward came to pass) he heard the news of
Rufus his death, and thereupon returned again to his See of Canterbury, and
there dyed of a Fever.

Eadmerus Hist. no^orum, l. 1.2.3. Speed, l. 9. c. 3. sect. 33.34, 35. p. 462,
463, 464 Malms. de gestis Pontif. An^l^ 1^ ^. 219. to 230. Antiq. E^^les. Brit.
p. 10^, etc. God^^n^ Catal. of Bishops, p. 76. etc. For Acts and Monument. p.
169, 170.171, etc. Holinsh. Vol. ^ f. 22. to 36. Wal^^^^ham, Ypodigma N^ustr.
p. 35.
Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, ANSELME.
his immediate successor, presently after his Consecration sell into
contestation with his Sovereign William Rufus, naming and accepting Urban to
be Pope, before the King had acknowledged him to be so; for which, and for his
over-sawcie speeches and carririage to the King, and his refusing to
acknowledge his fau^^, he was commanded out of the Realm, all the Prelates of
England, except only Gundalfus Bishop of Rochester, assenting to the King
against Anselme, that he was guilty of High Treason, for attempting to deprive
the Crown of sundry Prerogatives Royal belonging to it^ to wit, That no
Archbishop nor Bishop of the Kingdoms should be subject to the Pope, or Court
of Rome, with whom they had naught to do: That none ought to be received for
Pope in this Realm, but him whom the King and state had first approved: That
none should appeal to Rome in any case without the Kings license: and for
siding with the Pope, and preferring him above his Soveraigne^ Pope Urban used
Anselm as his instrument to draw the King to his beck, and to subject the
Crown and Kingdom to his will; which incredible pride and Popish encroachments
of his, attempted by the means of Anselme, and other chief Prelates of the
Kingdom, caused the King for prevention of further mischefes, to banish th^^
Rebellious Trayterly Prelate; who repairing to the Pope, where he had good
entertainment, made many complaints against his Sovereign, whose death he
both plotted and conspired; as is probable by that Vision which Anno 1091. p. 1.
Matthew Westminster records to have appeared to Anselme during his exile,
wherein he saw God, at the prayers of the Saints in England, deliver a fiery
Arrow to Martyr Saint Alban, who delivered it to an evil Spirit, an avenger of
wickedness, that cast it flying like a Comet throw the air, understanding
presently in the Spirit, that the King wounded and shot with that Arrow,
perished that night he saw this Vision. Whereupon celebrating the Mass very
early the next morning he packed up his clothes, Books, and other things which
he would have carried with him, and forthwith began his journey toward his
Church of Canterbury, to which when he came near, he heard the King was slain
about the same time; he having, in all likelihood, before that plotted with and
hired Walter Tyrell the French Knight (who shot the King in the breast with an
Arrow in stead of the S^ag he was chasing) to murder the King in this manner
about that time; which fore-plotted Treason was the occasion of this Vision:
True it is, that the Monks who favored Anselme, and writ the Histories of
those times impute this murder only to a casualty, as if the Arrow had
glanced against a Tree, and so by accident slain the King, who with one only
groan fell down and dyed: But certainly this Vision with many other of that
nature, registered by our Mat. Paris Hist. Major, p. 51, 52. Caxton Pars. 7. in
his life. Will. Ma^ms. de gestis^ R^g. Angl. l. 4. p. 125.126. Eadmerus hist.
Nov^rum. l. 2, 3. Huntingd. Hist. l. 7. p. 378. Mat. Westminster. An. 1100 p. 21.
Godwins Catal. p. 77.
Monks compared with other circumstances; as the great hatred of the Clergy,
Monks, and Prelates toward him, his premonition not to ride abroad a hunting
that day, that Tyrell and the King were alone, and all the company else
scattered from him when this was done; that most of his followers as soon as
they heard of it made away; that Tyrell so easily escaped without any
prosecution for this fact; that the Kings Corpse was laid by some few Country
Peasants only (all the rest forsaking him) into a Colliers Cart, drawn with
one silly beast, through a very foul and filthy way, where the Car^ breaking,
he lay pitifully goared, and filthily bemired, that he was obscurely buried at
Winchester the next day following, not only without any state or solemnity,
but without any tears, In cujus Sepultura lachrymae locum prae gaudio non
habe^ant (says Matthew Paris;) that there were so many predictions of his
death by Monks; that Anselme had such speedy notice of it, and provided for
his return to England the next morning after: These several circumstances, I
say, compared with Anselmes Vision, are strong arguments to me, that his death
was not casual, but plotted by this Arch-Prelate and his instruments, to end
the controversies then between them. This King being thus dispatched, Mat
West. An. 1102.1104.1107. Eadme^u^ Hist. l. 3, 4, 5. and vita Anselm. Malms. de
gestis Pontif. Angl. l. 1. in vita Anselm. Mat. Paris Hist. Major, p. 56, 57^
60. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 103. to 111. Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, p. 78, 79,
80. M. Tindals practice of the Popish Prelates, p. 374. Speeds Hist. of Great
Brit. l. 9. p. 463, 469, 472.
King Henry the first succeeded him, calls home Anselme from his Exile; who
immediately upon his return deprived diverse Bishops and Abbots in a
Convocation at London, and presently after fell out with this King also, as he
had done with William Rufus, for disposing of all Bishoprics that fell at his
pleasure, giving investiture and possession of them by the delivery of a Staff
and a Ring, according as his predecessors had done, and all Princes generally
used to do in that Age; whereupon Anselme denying this Prerogative to his
Sovereign, refused both to consecrate any of the Bishops thus elected, and
appointed, or to repute any of those, already consecrated by such election, for
lawful Bishops; alleging, that it was la^^ely prohibited by Pope Urban the
second, in a Coun^cell held under him, that any Clerk should take the
investiture of any spiritual pre^erment from the hand of any King, Prince, or
Layman: The King upon Anselmes refusal, required Gerard Archbishop of York
to give these Bishops Consecration; whereunto he readily assented; but William
Giffard nominated to Winchester, stood so in awe of Anselme, that he durst not
accept consecration at Gerards hands. This incensed the King wonderfully, so as
presently he commanded Giffards goods to be confiscate, and himself banished
the Realm: great ado there was througho^t the Realm about this matter, some
defending the Kings right, others taking part with the Bishops: The King
thinking to pacify the Controversies, sent an Ambassador to the Pope, together
with the Archbishop, to grow to some reasonable conclusion: ^ase^all the
second, who then was Pope, would not yield one jot unto the King, animated no
doubt by Anselme, a man so resolute in his quarrel: insomuch that when the
Kings Ambassador William Wartlewast said, he knew the King would rather lose
his Crown than this privilege; he answered, Yea, let him lose his head also
if he will, whilst I live, he shall never appoint Bishop, but I will resist
him what I may. So without doing any good, homeward they came. The King
understanding beforehand how the world went, sent a Messenger to forbid
Anselme to enter into the Realm, and presently seized all his goods, movables,
and immovables into his hands. After three years Exile, Anselme at the
importunate mediation of Adila Countess of Bloys the Kings Sister, was
restored, upon these conditions; that he should be content to consecrate the
Bishops already nominated by the King, and that the King should renounce all
right to such nominations and investitures for time to come: No sooner returned
he again, but he kindled a fresh combustion, by enforcing all married Priests
to forsake their wives, depriving them of their goods, Benefices, and adjudging
their wives Adulteresses. The King upon their complaint, pitying their case
(half of the Priests of England being then married, mediates for them, and
protected them a while from Anselmes severity, granting them Licenses to
retain their wives; but he (a man always most peremptory in his resolution)
would not be persuaded to yield one jot in this or any other thing he
intended: so that notwithstanding the Kings inclination to succor them, many
of them were miserably vexed; which engendered a new quarrel between him and
the King: In a word, this rebellious traytorly Prelate, did so good service for
the Pope against these two Kings (whom he caused to be in a manner
excommunicated by the Pope, and subjugate to his pleasure) that in favor of
him, he afforded to his See this honor, That whereas the Archbishop of
Canterbury was wont to sit next the Bishop of Ruffine in General Counsels,
hereafter his place should be at the Popes right Foot, and withal used these
words, Includamus hunc in Orb nostro tanquam Papa alterius orbis, Let us
include this man in our world, as the Pope of another world. In a word, King
William Rufus was so vexed with Anselme, William Bishop of Durham, and other
rebellious Prelates, that De Ge^. (...) Angl. l (...) 123.
William of Milmesbury records of him, That he animated the Jews at London to
enter into a Dispute against our Bishops, telling them (in merriment, as this
Historian conceived) that if they overcame the Christians by manifest
Arguments, that he would be of their Sect. Therefore this thing was acted with
great fear of the Bishops and Clergymen, affected with a pious solicitude of
the Christian Faith. But in this Combat, the Jews obtained nothing but
confusion; although they often boasted, that they were not overcome by
Argumentation, but by the Faction of the Prelates.

This firebrand of Contention departing this life, Ralph of Canterbury, RALPH.
his immediate Successor, an insolent choleric proud Prelate, offered two such
notable affronts to King Henry the first, his Sovereign, who advanced him to
this Sea, as no Age (I think) can parallel. For Eadmerus, hist. Novorum, l.
^. p. 137. Rogerus d^ de Costrias Antiq. Eccl. Btis. p. 111, 112. Polichron. l.
7. c. 15. Speeds History of Great Britain, p. 475.
King Henry having assembled all his Nobles to Windsor Castle; to consult with
them about his Marriage with Adelicia, his second Wife, Daughter to the Duke of
Loraine; the Bishop of Salisbury being requested both by the King and Queen to
solemnize the Marriage between them, and clad in his holy Vestments, ready to
perform this service, this decrepit resty proud Arch-Prelate commanded him to
desist, contrary to the King and Queens Precept and desire, and committed that
service to the Bishop of Winchester, who performed it. After which, Adelicia
being solemnly to be Crowned Queen at London, on the Feast of Pentecost, in
the presence of the King and Nobles, this Arch-Prelate as he was chaunting
Mass at the High Altar in his Pontificalibus, to grace this Solemnity, espied
the King sitting on his Royal Throne with his Crown upon his head: Whereupon
he grew into such choler, that intermitting his begun Mass, he goes to the
King, thus sitting in the Church on his Throne amidst his Nobles, and demands
of him in big words, Who it was that had set the Crown upon his head? (he
being Crowned by Thomas Archbishop of York, in the absence of Anselme of
Canterbury:) To which the King replied: It is no great matter to me who did it,
and it was done so long since, that I remember not who it was. But the
Archbishop enraged with choler, auswered: That whoever had done it, did it
wrongfully and unjustly; therefore thou shall either cease to wear thy Crown,
or else I will desist from saying Mass. The King nothing moved herewith,
answered with a pleasant and mild countenance: If this Crown, as thou say,
be not lawfully set on my head, you may do that which you conceive to be
agreeable to Law, I will not gainsay it. At which words, the Archbishop
approached nearer him, and lifting up his hands to pull the Kings Crown from
off his head, whiles the King was untying the Button under his Chinne, by which
his Crown was tied on his head, the Nobles admiring the Kings modesty, and
the Archbishops anger and arrogancy, cried out with one voice against the
Arch-Prelate, and earnestly ent^eated him, That in the solemn Coronation of
the Queen, he would not uncrowne the King himself. With who^e clamours Ralph
being overcome, desisted from this his insolent attempt, and standing by the
King, began the Song, Glory be to God on high; and then proceeded in his Mass.
Polich^on. l. 7. c. 15.
Higden (and Speed, p. 475.
Speed out of him) records, That this testie old man could hardly be entreated
by the Nobles to withold his hands from striking the Crown off the Kings
head; and that even in the Church; in the presence of all his Lords, his
Queen, and God himself: of such an high spirit then was this devout
Arch-Prelate. From hence (writes Antiq. Eccl^s. Brit. p. 112.
Matthew Parker) it may be discerned, how unseasonably and impudently these
kind of men abused the lenity of this Prince, who thought themselves more
worthy in holiness than others, and deemed they had an imperial command over
Princes.

WILLIAM.
This furious proud Prelate being dead, Polychron. l. 7. c. 18. Fabian. pars 7.
c. 232. page 333. etc. Malm^b. Hist. l. 1. p. 178, 179. Matthew. Paris Hist.
Major, p. 71. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 115. Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, p. 83.
Speeds Hist. l. 9. p. 484, 493, 494. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 181. Hov^d.
Annal^ pars prior, p. 481.
William Corbell his next Successor, was so good and trusty a subject to King
Henry the first, who advanced him, that upon the Kings death, he was content
to betray and dis-inherite of the Crown his Daughter Maud the Empress, and
Will^lmus Cantuariensis Archi-epi^copus qui primus Sacramentum fecerat, cum,
pro^dolor, in Regem benedixit, Hoved^n, p. 481.
contrary to his Oath, to join with Stephen Earl of Bloys, whom he Crowned
with his own hands, but with such fear and terror of Conscience, that the
consecrated Host fell out of his hands in the midst of Mass, by reason of his
trembling and fearful amazedness. In his Chronicles. Vol. 3. p. 46. in the
l^fe of King Stephen.
Raphael Holinshed his relation of this Fact, is worthy observation: Stephen
(writes he) was Crowned at Westminster on Saint Stephens day by William
Archbishop of Canterbury, the most part of the Nobility being present, and
swearing Fealty unto him, as to their true and lawful Sovereign: Howbeit,
there were diverse of the wiser sort of estates, which regarding their former
Oath (to be true unto the Empress Maude) could have been contented, that the
Empress should have governed till her Son had come to lawful age;
notwithstanding they held their peace as yet, and consented unto Stephen. But
the breach of their Oaths was worthily punished afterward, insomuch, that as
well the Bishops, as the other Nobles, either dyed an evil death, or were
afflicted with diverse kinds of calamities and mischances, and that even here in
this life. Yet there were some of them (namely the Bishop of Salisbury) which
protested, that they were free from their Oath of Allegiance made to the said
Empress, because that without the consent of the Lords of this Land, she was
married out of the Realm: Whereas they took their Oath, to receive her for
Queen upon that condition, That without their assent she should not marry with
any person out of this Realm. Moreover, (as some writers think) the Bishops
took it, they should do God good service, in providing for the wealth of the
Realm, and the advancement of the Church, by their Note this,
Perjurie. For, whereas the late deceased King ( Henry the first) used himself
not altogether for their purpose, they thought, That if they might set up and
create a King chiefly by their especial means and authority, he would follow
their counsel better, and refo^me such things as they judged to be amiss: So
He. But this treacherous Act of them, in dis-inheriting Maude, (wherein the
Bishop of Wi^^hester was a chief Actor, yet afterward joined with Maude for a
season, and then fell off again) what Civil Wars, Tumults, Battles, evil
effects, and bloodshed it occasioned here in England, to the prejudice of the
whole Realm, (...) all our Chronicles and Historians, in the life of King
Stephen, testify at large.

Theobald, THEOBALD.
Archbishop of Canterbury, his immediate Successor N^ubrigensis, l. 1. c. 10.
An^. Eccl^s. Brit. p. 117.118. Godwin Catalogue of Bishops, p. 85.86. Speedes
Hist. p. 496, 497.
being summoned by the Pope to appear at the Council of Rhemes, the King (at
the instigation of Henry Bishop of Winchester his Brother, the Popes Legate and
Archbishops opposite) prohibited him to pass beyond Sea, to stay him at home:
But he thinking it safer to offend the King then the Pope, resolved to go; and
though all the Ports were stopped, and laid for him, yet over the Seas he got.
The King thereupon seized all his goods and Temporalties, and banished him the
Realm: he like a tall fellow, thereupon interdicted the King, with the whole
Realm; and taking advantage of the time, which was very troublesome, came home
and lived in Norfolk, till by the intercession of the Bishops he was restored
to his Bishopric. After which, growing into great favor with the King, in a
Convocation summoned at London 1152. the King would have constrained the
Clergy to make Eustace his son, King: which they refusing, and delaying to
do, having a command from the Pope to the contrary, pretending that his Father
King Stephen was an Usurper, and perjured Intruder; the King and his son
cau^ed the doors to be shut upon the Clergy, where they were assembled,
thinking by force and threatening to compel them thereto, before they departed.
The greater number seemed to yield, but the Archbishop stealing secretly out
of the place, took his Barge, and rowing down the H^li^sh^d, Vol. 3. p. 57,
59.
Thames, got beyond Sea; so that by this means the Synod was dissolved. His
goods hereupon were presently once more confiscate, and his Temporalties seized
into the Kings hands. He thereupon troubled the Realm with Fire, Sword, and
bloody Wars, causing Henry Fitz-Empresse to invade the Land, whose Title the
Pope favored, of purpose to strengthen himself against King Lewis of France,
who had highly offended his Holiness, by casting his Bulls (whereby he
require^ the Fruits of Vacancies of Cathedral Churches in France) into the
fire, saying, He had r^ther the Popes Bulls should r^st in the fire, than his
own Soul should fry in Hell.

BECKEY. Antiq. Eccl^s. Brit. p. 118. to 124. Godwins Catal. 86. to 96. Fox
Acts and Monuments, p. 186. to 206.1036.1390. Speed Hist. p^ 503. to 5016.
Holinsh^d, p. 69. to 81. R^ger de H^veden. Annal. posterior, p. 491. to 534.
Matthew Paris, p. 94. to 127. Math. West. An. 1166. p. 48.49.50.
Thomas Becket succeeding Theobald, by King Henry the seconds extraordinary
favor (though against the Canons, he being both a soldier, a Courtier, and
skilled only in ^ecular affairs,) to require his Sovereigns extraordinary
favor, he first resigned his Bishopric, which he had received from the
Kings hands, into the Popes in a secret manner, receiving it back again as
from him; and then looked so narrowly into the Lands belonging to his See,
having great authority, and some skill in the Law, That under color of
defending the Rites of his Church, he took violently from every man what he
listed: and practicing Treason secretly, he required of the King the keeping of
Rochester Castle, and the custody of the Tower of London; and called Roger
Earl of Clare unto Westminster, to do his homage unto him for the Castle of
Tunbridge; which the Earl denied, through the setting on of the King; so as he
provoked many of all sorts of people every where with open mouth to exclaim
against him, and to make their complaints thick and threefold to the King;
between whom and the King there arose a great quarrel upon this occasion. The
Clergy by their flattery, policy and Canons, having exemp^ed themselves from
secular Jurisdiction, and presuming upon Beckets power, grew strangely impudent
and disorderly; insomuch, that the Neubrigensis Hist. l. 2. c. 16. Speedes
Hist. l. 9. p. 503.504. Bishop I^wel, Defense of the Apology, par. 2. c. 18.
Divis. 1. p. 295, 296.
Chief Justice declared in the Kings presence, how that Clergy men had
committed above an hundred murders since his reign; wherewith the King highly
offended, he became somewhat too vehement in punishing them; but the blame of
the Kings overmuch earnestness must lie on the Prelates, inasmuch as they
gave the cause thereof: For whereas sacred Canons ordain, that Clerks found
guilty, not only of heinous and grievous sins, but also of lesser, should be
degraded, and thousands of such were then in the Church of England, like
in^umerable chafe among a little good Corn, yet very few such for many years
had been then deprived. The Prelates, forsooth, while Lo^ the Picture of our
late times, and the cause of the in^rease of scandalou^ Ministers^
they bestirred themselves rather to uphold the liberties and dignities of
Clerks, than to chastise and cut off their vices, thought they did God and his
Church good service, in protecting from public Discipline such heinous
offenders, whom by duty of their places they ought to correct according to the
Canon censure; whereby they thr^ugh their impunity, having liberty to do what
they listed, had neither fear of God, (whose Judgment they thought to be a
far off) neither of men in authority; since on the one side their Prelates
neglected to reform them, and on the other side they were thus exempt by their
order from secular Jurisdiction. This being the state of the Church and Realm,
where in some were so injured without remedy, and others so injurious without
coertion, as if neither sort were in condition of Subjects; the king thereupon
took special care of quickening the public Discipline, and the rigor of
ancient ^awes which thus lay neglected, and thereupon would, that all such of
the Clergy as were depreh^nded in any Robbery, Murder, Felony, burning of
houses, and the like, Roger H^veden, An. 1163.
should be tried and adjuged in his temporal Courts as Lay men were: Against
which the Archbishops resolution was: That Clergymen so offending should be
tried only in the Spiritual Courts, and by men of their own Coat: who, if
they were convict, should at first be only deprived of their O^fice and
Benefice, but if they should again be guilty of the like, they should be
adjudged at the kings pleasure. In this maine controversy between the Crown
and the Mitre, the Archbishop stood so peremptory on the immunities of his
Clergy and See, as that he challenged from the^ Crown (to the Kings great
offense) the custody of Rochester Castle and other Forts, which the King for
securing his State, had resumed into his own hands. The King finding himself
to be hereby but a demi-king, deprived of all Sovereignty over one half deal
of his Kingdom, and perceiving Beckets stiffenesse in thus contesting with his
Sovereign, to be no ways mollifiable by whatsoever his old favors or fresh
persuasions, notwithstanding resolved to put nothing in execution which should
not first be ratified and strengthened with the consent of his Bishops: Who
thereupon assembling at Westminster, the King took both offense there at the
Archbishops thwarting his desires and occasions to establish sundry Articles,
which he called his Grand^athers Customs, peremptorily urging Becket to yield
thereunto, without any such reservation, (as saving in all things his order and
right of the Church) wherewith he would have limited his assent. The points in
those ordinances which he principally stuck at, as appears by his own Letter
to the Pope, were these: 1. That none should appeal to the Bishop of Rome for
any cause whatsoever, without the Kings license. 2. That it should not be
lawful for any Archbishop or Bishop to depart the Realm, or repair to the
Pope upon his summons, without the Kings license. 3. That no Bishop should
excommunicate any man holding of the King in chief, or put any other of his
Officers under interdict, without the Kings license. 4. That Clerks criminous
should be tried before secular Judges. 5. That it should not be lawful for a
Bishop to punish any one for perjury, or faith-breach. 6. That the Laity,
whether the King or other, should hold pleas of Churches and Tithes, etc.


These points so nearly touched the Papal Soveraigntie and Church-liberties,
that the resolute Metropolitan mainely opposed his whole power against them.
The King being as resolute to enforce him to subscribe to them, both to ^nlarge
his Sovereign authority, and to exempt his estate by degrees from dependancie
on any external Government, as lineally claiming from absolute Sovereign
Antecessors. At last Pope Alexander very desi^ous to keep the Kings love,
though secretly wishing well to Beckets attempts, sent one Philip his Almoner
to compose the controversy; by whom the Pope and Cardinals required the
Archbishop to promise the King to keep his said Ordinances absolutely;
without any savings or exceptions. Whereupon Becket seeing his Scrupulositie
thus disapproved by his Sovereign, by all his Brethren the Bi^hops, and the
Court of Rome it self, he rode to Woodstocke to the King, and there promised
that he would keep the said Laws B^na fide, and without male engine. The King
thereupon supposing now all contradictions would cease, called an Assembly of
the States at Cla^endon, to collect and enact those Laws; where Becket
relapsing from his former promise to the King, said, He had grievously sinned
in making that absolute Oath, and that he would not sin any more. At which
the King was so vehemently inflamed, that he threatened banishment and
destruction to him and his. But at last the Archbishop being overcome by
persuasions of diverse Nobles and Bishops swear before the King, Clergy and
people in the word of a Priest, and sincerely, that he would observe the Laws
which the King entitled, Avitae: And all the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and
whole Clergy with all the Earls, Barons, and Nobility did promise and swear
the ^ame faithfully and truly to observe and perform to the King and his
Heirs for ever. But when the King not so contented, would have him to
subscribe and fix his Seal to an instrument, in which these Customs and
Laws were comprised, as every one of the other Bishops had done before him; he
once again starting from his faith, did absolutely refuse it; alleging, that
he did promise to do the King some honor in word only, but not with an
intent to confirm these Articles, being 16. in number; neither would he
subscribe or seal them, unless the Pope by his Bull did first confirm them.
The King hereupon sent two Ambassadors to Rome to the Pope, to crave his
allowance of those Laws, and to pray that the Legantine power of England might
be committed to the Archbishop of York; Becket being so far from seeking
to pacify the Kings displeasure, as daily he provoked him more and mor^^ The
Pope knowing the cause to be his own more than Beckets, rejected both these
suites; Becket having dealt so with him be^ore-hand, that he would do nothing
to his prejudice; and withal absolved him and the other Bishops from their
Oath of Allegiance to their Prince: Whereupon the King commanded Becket to be
condemned in damages ^or a Manor which John de Marshall claimed, and in the
Parliament of Northampton demanded an accoun^ of him of 30000. pound, which
came to his hand during his Chancellorship; which he excusing, and refusing
punctually to answer, the Peers and Bishops condemned all his movables t^ the
Kings mercy: After which, the Prelates themselves by a joint consent, adjudged
him guilty of perjury, for not yielding tempo^all obedience to the King
according to his Oath, disclaiming all obedien^e to him thence forward as to
their Archbishop: Becket the next day, whiles the Bishops and Peers were
consulting of some f^rther course with him, caused to be sung before him at the
Altar: The Princes sit and speak against me, and the ungodly persecute me,
etc. And forthwith taking his silver Crosier in his own hands (a thing strange
and unheard of before) enters armed therewith into the Kings pr^sence, though
earnestly dissuaded by all that wished him well: Wherewith the King enraged,
commanded his Peers to sit in judgment upon him, as on a Traitor and perjured
person, and accordingly they adjudged him to be apprehended and cast in prison
as such a delinquent. The Earls of Cornwall and Leicester (who sat as
Judges) citing him forthwith to hear his sentence pronounced; he immediately
appealed to the Sea of Rome, as holding them no competent Judges; wh^reupon all
reviling him with the name of Traitor and perjured person, he replied; That
were it not for his function, he would enter the Duel or Combat with them in
the field, to acquit himself from Treason and perjury: and so speeding from
the Court departed into Flanders (disguised under the name of Dereman) in a
poor Fisher-boate, accompanied only with Servitors: The King thereupon seized
all his Goods and Temporalties into his hands, and sent Ambassadors to the
Earl of Flanders, the French King, and the Pope, praying them in no wise to
suffer or softer within their dominions, one that was such a notorious Traitor
to him. The French King, thinking that this disagreement between the King and
the Archbishop would breed some stir in England, dealt with the Pope, that
as he loved the Roman Church, and the aid of France, so he would support
Beckets cause against the King; with whom though he had amity before, yet at
Beckets instigation, as is probable, (whose whole life was nothing else but a
continued act of Rebellion, Treachery, and Disobedience against his Sovereign
Lord) he presently fell to invade the King of Englands Dominions, and took by
Assault certain Holds of his in Normandy. The Archbishop also about the same
time growing in great savor with the Pope, whom the King by all his friends
and Agents could not move to any thing against him, sent out particular
Excommunications against all the suff^agan Bishops of his Province, and all
such as had obeyed, defended, or occasioned the said Laws and A vital
customs, and against some of them by name; which Excommunications he published
at Vizely in France on Ascension day, when the Church was most full of people,
getting into the Pulpit the^e; and solemnly accursing them with Bell, Book
and Candle, threatening the like thunderclap against his own Royal person:
Whereupon the King receiving such a foil from the Pope, and such an affront
from the Archbishop, directs his Writs to the Sherifes of England, commanding
them to attach all such who appealed to the Court of Rome, with the Fathers,
Mothers, Brothers, Sisters, Nephews, and Neeces, of all the Clergy that were
with the Archbishop, and to put them under sureties; as also to seize the
Revenues, Goods, and Chattels of these Clergymen. And by other Letters to
Guilbert Bishop of London, he sequestered the profits and Livings, which within
his Diocese did belong to any of the Clergy who were fled to Thomas; and
signified to his Justices by a public Decree, that no man should bring any
Letters or Commandment from Pope Alexander, or Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury
into England, containing an Indiction of the Realm, upon peril to be
apprehended and punished as a Traitor to the King, and an enemy to the Realm.
And that they should safe keep whosoever did bring any Interdict into England,
till the Kings pleasure were further known; causing all the Archbishops goods
to be confiscated, and banished out of the Realm all the Archbishops kindred,
Man, Woman, Child, and sucking Babes; forbidding he should be any longer
mentioned publicly and prayed for in the Church, as Archbishop of Canterbury;
and to vex him the more, because he knew he was much delighted in the
Monastery of Pontiniac, an Abbey of Cirstercian Monks, he signified to all the
Monks of that Order in his Dominion, that he would banish them every one, if
they would not procure the Archbishop to be thrust out of that Monastery;
which for fear of so great calamity to so many men of their Order, was
effected. And because Pope Alexander, Beckets surest Card, was ferrited much in
like sort by Frederick Barbarossa the Emperor, the King therefore determined
to join in league with him, being a prosessed enemy both to the French King
and the Pope, sending Ambassadors to him for that purpose; which the Pope
having notice of, began presently to quail, promising speedily to end all
Controversies between him and Becket to the Kings liking: Whereupon at the
procurement of John of Oxford, two Legates were sent into England to reconcile
the King and Thomas; but the Pope hearing when they were gone, that they were
resolved utterly to confound the Archbishop, sent Letters after them to rebate
their absolute power, who when they came to Thomas he absolutely refused to put
their cause unto them, but upon such conditions, as neither they nor the King
would brook. The passages between the King, and the Pope and Becket, and his
Complaints to the Pope against the King, too tedious to recite at large, you
may read at leisure in Holinshed, Vol. 3. p. 70. to 75. wherein he desires the
Pope to use his rigor both against the King, and the Prelates that sided with
him, and to constrain them to amendment. After this, the Pope moved the French
King to mediate a Peace between them: For which purpose, both the Kings and
the Archbishop were brought together at Paris; where suite being made to the
King in his behalf, That he might return, be restored to his goods and
revenues arising during his absence, and likewise to the Kings favor, upon his
humble submission: The King answered, That for the rest he was contented, but
that he could not allow him the profits of his Archbishopric since his
Banishment, for that he had already given them to others; yet he would give him
such recompense for them, as the French King, or the Senate or Students of
Paris should think meet. Whereupon Becket being called for, and advised by
his frieuds to submit himself in the presence of both Kings, without any more
reservations, he falling down humbly upon his knees, used these words: My Lord
and Sovereign, I do here commit unto your own judgment the cause and
controversy between us, so far forth as I may, saving the honor of
Almighty God: The King much offended with his last exception, turned him about
unto the French King, and telling how much he had done for the Archbishop,
and how ^ee had used him, said, I am so well acquainted with the Tricks of
this Fellow, that I cannot hope for any good dealing at his hands: See you not
how he goes about to delude me with this clause, (saving the honor of God?)
for whatsoever shall displease him, he will by and by allege to be
prejudicial to the honor of Almighty God. But this I will say unto you,
whereas there have been Kings of England many before me; whereof some were
peradventure of greater Power than I, the most part far less; and again,
many Archbishops before this man, holy and no^able men; look what duty was
ever performed by the greatest Archbishop that ever was, to the weakest, and
simplest of my Predecessors, let him but yield me that, and it shall
abundantly content me. Hereunto the Archbishop answered cunningly, and
stoutly; That his Predecessors Note this policy and auswer.
who could not bring all things to pass at the first dash, were content to
bear with many things, and that as men they fell, and omitted their duty often
times; that that which the Church had gotten, was by the constancy of good
Prelates, whose example he would follow thus far forth; as though he could
not augment the privileges of the Church in his time, yet he would never
consent they should be diminished. This answer being heard, all men cried
shame of him, and generally imputed these stirs unto him; and King Lewis
offended with his Answer, asked him, Whether he thought himself to be greater
or holyer than Saint Peter? And the Peers of both Nations accused him of
arrogance, as being himself the wilful hinderer of his own and the Churches
Tranquillity. Notwithstanding, the Pope forgot not faithful Thomas; and
therefor, after he had graced him with a Confirmation of all the Privileges
and Powers which any of his Predeces^ors in that See did enjoy (to the daring
and defiance, as it were, of the Kings utmost indignation) the King sent a
Letter into Germany, declaring, That he would forsake Pope Alexander, and
join with the Emperor and Antipope. The King doubting what might become of
these broils, caused his Son Henry to be Crowned King in his own life
time, to assure him of the Succession: Afterward coming into France again,
Becket and he were upon the point of reconciliation, but the casting out some
word or other, as before, married all; At length the King and he were made
Friends, but his full restitution referred till he had behaved himself quietly
a while at Canterbury, which he promised to do: But he was so far from
performing that promise, as he sent into England before him diverse
Excommunications, which the Pope had granted out long before, and committed to
his discretion. Amongst other the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of London
and Salisbury were named in them, together with so many as were doers in the
Coronation of the young King, which the Archbishop said might not be performed
by any but by his appointment. The men thus stricken with this holy fire,
hasted them over into Normandy, to make their complaint to the King, who
infinitely grieved at this kind of dealing, cursed the time that ever he had
made him Archbishop, and restored him to his place again, adding, It was his
chance ever to do with unthankefull men, otherwise some or other would long ere
this have made this proud Priest an example to all such troublesome perturbers
of his Realm and State. It happened among other, four Knights, to wit, Reynald
Fitz-Vrse, Hugh de Mor^vill, William de Tracie, and Richard Briton, to be
present at this speech of the Kings; who gathered thereby, they should do a
deed very acceptable unto him, if they killed the Archbishop, who in the mean
time was come to Canterbury, and was received there with great joy: whence he
went to London, and so to Woodstock where the young King lay. But before he
could get to the Kings presence, word was brought him, the Kings pleasure was,
he should first go to Canterbury, and revoke those Excommunications, before
the King would talk with him; whereupon he returned to Canterbury, without
seeing the King at all: where the four Knights before mentioned arrived upon
Innocents day; who coming to the Archbishop, told him, the Kings pleasure
was, First, That he should go to his Son, and reverently make offer of doing
homage and fealty unto him for the Barony of his Archbishopric: secondly,
That he should cause all the strangers he brought into the Realm with him, to be
sworn to his obedience: thirdly, That he should revok those Excommunications
which he he had caused to be denounced against the Instruments of the young
King^ Coronation. To which demands he answered, That neither the King nor any
other mortal man should extort from him, or any of his, by his consent, any
unjust or unreasonable Oath: And as for the Bishops and others excommunicate
concerning the Coronation, it was indeed (quoth he) a thing done in my behalf,
for an injury offered to my Church, but it was the Act of the Pope. If
therefore they will swear, they shall be ready to make me amend^ at the Popes
discretion, I will absolve them, otherwise not: And whatsoever you say, it was
the Kings pleasure I should take my best course for the redress of this abuse
by Ecclesiastical authority. Many other words then passed between them, they
breathing our terrible threats, and he continuing still the same man, without
yielding one jot. At last the Knights departed, giving the Monks charge in the
Kings name, to see the Archbishop for^h-comming, and not to suffer him to
escape away. At Evening Prayer time, the same day, they came suddenly into the
Church with their Swords drawn, crying, Where Is the Traitor? Where Is the
Traitor? The Archbishop, who was then going up the steps toward the Quire,
hearing the noise, turned back unto them, and every one of the four striking
mainely at him, upon the third or fourth greice of those steps he was slain.
His body these Knights determined to have cast into the Sea, or else to have
hewn into a ^housand pieces; but the Prior and Monks doubting some such
thing, buried it immediately in the Under-Craft; whence shortly it was taken
up, and laid in a most sumptuous Shrine, in the East end of the Church. The
Pope hearing of this Massacre of this his grand Champion, Roger de H^veden
A^nal. pars. posterior, p. 529.530.531 Matthew Paris, p. ^25. Sylvester
Giraldus Cambrensis of the Conquest of I^eland. l. 1. c. 39. In H^linsh. Tom.
2. p. 25.
immediately excommunicated all that were either authors or consenters to it.
The King was ^aine to purge himself thereon by Oath, and yet could not be
absolved, before he had done certain strange Penance: as first, That he
should pray devoutly at the Tomb of this new Martyr; That he should be whipped
in the Chapter House, receiving of every Monk one Lash; That he should
maintain two hundred Soldiers for the space of one year, at Jerusalem; and
lastly, revoke the Declaration published at Clarindon, that originally gave the
occasion of this Murder, with other particulars recorded by Master Fox. All
which (such were those times) the King was feign to perform; to such slavery
were Kings and Princes then brought, under the Popish Clergy: who Fox Acts and
Monuments, p. 204, 205. Speedes Hist. p. 1042. sect. 100. Godwin, p. 99 See
Surius, Ribadeneira, and Eadmerus in his life.
pre^ently Canonize this Arch-Traytor for a Saint, write large Volumes of his
Praises and Miracles, pray unto him Morning and Evening in their solemn
public Mattins and Vespers, in elegant Rymes and Poems composed by Thomas
Aquinas, in a more elegant style, to delight and ravish the Auditors; honor
his Sh^ine with infinite Oblations, Pilgrimages, and Gifts: who was so much
honored an visited in times of Popery, that whereas in the Cathedral Church
of Canterbury, there were three principal Images; on, consecrated to Christ;
another, to the Virgin Mary; and a third, to Thomas Becket; their Annual
Oblations to Thomas Becket, were commonly 1000. pound, or more^ to the blessed
Virgin 200. pounds; but to our blessed Savior some years 6. pounds, 13.
shillings, 4. pence; some years 3. pounds, 6. shillings, 8, pence; and, Hoc
Anno Nih^l, some years just nothing: as Apolog. l. 2. c. 12. sect. 12.
Bishop Mort^n has recorded out of their own Register of Canterbury. So that
they preferred this Traitor and Rebel, in their blind devotion, at least one
thousand times more than Christ himself: and, which is yet more abominable,
advanced his blood above our Saviors; praying even to Christ himself, to save
them, no^ by his own, but by this Arch-Rebels blood (as if his own were not
sufficien^) as these two blasphemous Verses, inserted into their Psalters,
evidence.

Ho^a beatissima V^rginis Maria secundum usum Sarum, Parisiis, 15^9. fol. 12.
Bishop Jewel, Defense of the Apology, part 2. c. 18. Divis. 1. p. 295, 296.
Tu per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit,
Fac nos Christ scandere quo Thomas ascendit.
O Christ, by Thomas blood he for thee shed,
Make us ascend whither he ascended.
Had he been quartered, and then hanged up for a Traitor on some high Pinnacle,
as he deserved, I should have liked the Prayer well; thinking it just that all
who durst honor such a Traitor, or pray unto him as a Saint, deserved to have
their quarters elevated as high as his. But in that sense they took it then,
and many have used it since: yea, some at this very day: It is no le^se than
Blasphemy and High Treason against Christ himself: Especially, i^ we
consider what they there annex to these Verses, Gloria and honor^ Coronasti eum
Domine, R. Et constituisti eum super opera manuum tuaru^; attributed unto
Christ himself, Heb. 2.7, 8. 1 Cor. 15.27. Roger Walden Archbishop of
Canterbury, in a full Convocation held at Paul's in London, Anno Domini 1098.
(if Constitut. f. 149 150.
Aton mistake not) ordained, That a solemn Commemoration should be kept on
Wednesday every week throughout the year, if it were possible, for this
Arch-Traytor Thomas; in which Constit^tion there is this passage: And although
we oug^t to honor all and singular constituted in the heavenly Kingdoms with
solicitous endeavors, and to advance them with loud praises; yet we ought to
extol with highest acclamations our m^st glorious Bishop and Martyr, Saint
Thomas, both the Master and Patron of our Metropoliticall Church, who is known
to have shed his blood for the defense of the Churches liberty, by whose both
Merits and Passion our whole Province of Canterbury is illustrated, and the
universal Church adorned; and it is meet to personate him with supremest
praises, and to worship him with spiritual honors. This Traitor shortly after
became so eminent, Giraldus Cambi^n^is of the Conque^t of Ireland, l. 2. c. 33.
p. 52.
that diverse Kings Ambassadors, Bishops, and others, came on Pilgrimage from
^orraine parts, to visit his Tomb at Canterbury. And though ^he Trayterly
Prelates, Monks, and Clergy, thus Deified him for a Saint and Martyr (as many
now account him) yet the Peers and Nobles about the King, gave it out in
strict charge, upon pain of death, and confiscation of all their goods, That
^o man should be so hardy as to name Thomas Becket to be a Martyr, or to
preach of his Miracles. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 1035, 1036.
And King Henry the eight; after he had been a long time Canonized for, and
adored as an Arch-Saint, declared him in his Inju^ctions, published Anno 1539.
to have been a Rebel and Traitor to his Prince; and therefore straightly
charged and commanded, That from thenceforth he should not be esteemed, named,
reputed, or called a Saint, but Bishop Becket; That his Images and Pictures
throughout the whole Realm should be pl^ckt downe^ and avoided out of all
Churches, Chapels, and other places; and that the Days used to be Festival
in his name, should be no more observed, nor the Service, Offices, Antiphones,
Collects, and Prayers in his name read, but rased and put out of all the Books
upon pain of his Majesty's indignation, and imprisonment at his Graces
pleasure. After which, Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 1390.
Stephen Gardener, Bishop o^ Winc^ester, and Lord Ch^ncelour in Queen Mary's
days, with his other fellow Bishops (who were much in love with this Traitor,
being such themselves) caused the Image of this old Romish Traitor Becket to be
set up over the Mercers Chapel door in Cheapeside in London, in form of a
Bishop, with a Miter and Crosier; but within two days after, his two
blessing-fingers were first broken off, and on the seventeenth day of February
his head struck off: whereupon arose a great stir, and many suspected for
doing it, were committed to Prison. Which being again set up the second day of
March, at the suspected parties cost, and strictly watched with a Guard each
night, for fear it should be re-demolished; on the fourteen^h day of the same
Month, the head of this Traiterous Beast was once more broken off, but the
Agent not discovered; though there was a Proclamation made in London the next
day, That whosoever would reveal the Party, though of Counsel and privity to
the Act, should have his Pardon, and an hundred Crowns of Gold, with hearty
thanks: So zealous were our Trayterly Bi^hops for this their Brother
Arch-Traytor; whose very Crosier staff some of late adored in the Tower, and
have likewise Printed his Life.

Speeds Hist. p. 554, 555, 564, 565. Holinshed, p. 157, 158, 159^ 162, 168, 169.
Hubert the 42. Archbishop of Canterbury, HUBERT.
a man that swayed the Kingdom in King Richard the first his days; and after
that advanced King John to the Crown, p^tting by Arthur Duke of Britain,
right Heir to the Crown, being Son to Geffrey, elder Brother to John; which
occasioned many Wars, and the loss of Normandy: He finding the King not so
tractable as he supposed to his will, did underhand bolster up the Clergy,
to affront him in the election of the Bi^hop of Norwich, repenting more now
than any thing he did in all his life, that^ he had so advanced King John to
the Crown, showing such slender respect to his Sovereign, that being
prohibited by Fitz-Peter, the Kings great Justiciarie and Minister (in the
Kings absence) of Regal Command, from holding a General Council of his
Province, (never used to be held but by Sovereign perm^ttance) his pleasure
scorned to take any counte^mand: after which, he spared not to out-brave his
Sovereign himself. For having notice, the Feast of the Nativitie then
approaching, that the King intended with his Queen at Guilford to keep that
festival with great Magnificence; he, whose Palace ordinarily for splendor,
multitude of attendants, and sump^uous entertainments, did strive with the
Kings; thought this a fitting time to show forth his great State, and little
regard of his Princes discountenance, by See Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 143, 144.
Mat. Paris, An. 1201. p. 198. Matthew. West. An. 1201. p. 77.
parallelling to the Kings his own sumptuous preparations, with rich Attires
and costly Gifts for his attendants at Canterbury. The King, as Kings brook not
to be braved by their subjects (nor is it wisdom for dis-favorites to do it)
moved with great indignation, thought the man had too much Riches, and too
little discretion, (which seldom lodges in the Brain, where Pride dwells in
the Heart) and therefore to abate somewhat the one, and learn him more of the
other, he kept his Easter at Canterbury, at the Costs of Hubert the R^ch; and
not to spare him who spared not himself; he there increased that great
expense, with a greater of his and his Queens solemn Crowning again on
Easter day in the Cathedral Church: where, in lieu of his expense, Hubert had
the formal Honor to set on their Crowns, but yet not the grace to sit near
the Kings heart. Such being the first overtures of heart-burnings betwixt the
King and his Clergy; they afterwards^ by addi^ament of daily fuelling, burst
forth into a more fearful ^ame. For Hubert, bearing too much good will to the
French King, and in very deed ^^e H^l^ns^^d, p. 168.169.
repenting himself of nothing so much, as for that he had commended King John
to the Noblemen and Pee^es of the Realm, since he proved another manner of
man then he looked to have found him; the King having prepared a Royal Host
and mighty Navy to revenge his foreign losses and wrongs on the Fre^^h King,
Hubert the Archbishop (who con^ederated with the Pope and French King against
his Sove^aigne,) came with sundry others to Portesmouth to the King, and Lo^
the pride of a Prelate mixed with Treche^y.
^^^ly forbids the King to proceed in the Voyage, (in tr^th, for fear he
should hinder King Philip from ayding the Pope against Otho the Emperor.)
Whereupon the King dism^^^^d his Forces; Hubert being the instrument, that so
resolute Projects, so inestimable Charges, so necessary an Action of the Kings
fell suddenly to the ground: whereby, besides the selfe-mischiefe which
therewith fell on the King, many fresh grudgings accrued unto him, for
suffering himself to be thus violently repulsed from so behoofefull a
purpose. The King the next day checking himself, for over-prizing the command
of any man above the value of his Kingly Honor and Estate, resolved to collect
his disparkled Troops, and to put forth to Sea. To which end, taking order
with his Nobles to follow him, they gave him leave with a small company to want
up and down two days, in expectance of their attendance; till seeing them
more obsequious ^o Huber^s command than his, (the Archbishop also sending his
inhibition after them on the Sea, to stop their passage with the King) he was
forced to come again to Land. The King hereupon put many of his Earls,
Barons, Knights, and Clergymen to a grievous pecuniary Redemption, for thus
refusing to follow him, for recovering his Inheritance. Mat. Pari^ Hist. Major,
p. 264.
The Arch Bishop, though their Ringleader, might well have been exempted from
this Judgment, by his passage to an higher, dying the same week, either of
Grief, or of a Fever, which killed him in four days: But the King forthwith
in person going to Canterbury, seized upon all his Wealth and Possessions,
showing himself right joy^ull, that now he was rid of him, whom men suspected
of too familiar practicing with the French King, Mat. Paris, In. 1205. p^ 204
Antiq. E^cl^s. Brit. p. 144. H^linsh. p. 169. Speed, p. 565.
saying, He was never a King till now; by reason of Huberts too presumptuous
daring to cross his Royal Resolutions, as of late he did. This Holinshed, p.
15^, 15^. (...). An^al^ pars p^s^^ri^r. p. 767, 768.769. (...). Eccl. Brit. p.
138. ^o 144. Speeds Hist. p. 550.
Hubert, being Chief Justice and Arch^Bishop in Richard the first his tim^,
Anno 1198 the Monks of Christs^ Church in Canterbury exhibited this Complaint
against him to Pope Innocent: That their Archbishop Hubert ( contrary to his
Order and Dignity) exercised the Office of High Justice, and sa^e in Judgment
of Blood, being so encumbred in Temporal matters, that he could not ^ave time
to discharge his Office, touching Spiritual Cause^ Whereupon the Pope sent to
King Richard, admonishing him, not to suffer the said Arch Bishop to be any
longer troubled with Temporal Affairs, but to discharge him thereof, and not
to admit Note this.
any Spiritual person from thenceforth unto any Temporal administration. He
further prohibited, by virtue of their obedience, all manner of Prela^es, and
men of the Church, that they should not presume rashly to take upon them any
manner of Secular Function or Office. Whereupon the Archbishop was discharged
of his Office of Chief Justice, and Geffrey Fitz-Peter succeeded in government
of the Realm in his stead. Afterward, this Arch-Prelate being made Lord
Chancellor of England by King John, Anno. 1199. and uttering some words
unadvisedly, that showed how he inwardly rejoiced at the Kings favor toward
him in the gift of this Office, Hoveden, An. pars posterior p. 793.794.
and so gloried in the Honor whereto he was preferred, (which he would never
have done, if he had weighed of worldly pomp, as by his Profession he ought,
and as one asks the question in the same case, Dic mihi, nunquid, Corporibus
prosunt? Certe nil: dic, Animabus?
Tantundem etc.) The Lord Bardolfe said unto him, yet not so so^tly in his
ear, but that some overheard it: My Lord, to speak and not offend you:
surely, if you well consider the Honor and Dignity of your Calling, you would
not willingly yield to suffer this yoke of Bondage to be laid upon your
shoulders: For we have oftentimes heard of a C^ancellour made an Archbishop,
(as was Thomas Becket, who Mat. Paris Hist. Major. p. 94. An^. Eccles. Brit p.
122 Godwins Catal. of Bishops, p. 88
upon his instalment in the Sea of Canterbury, immediately resigned his Lord
Chancelours Office, sending his great Seal to the King then in Normandy, with
a Letter, wherein he certified him, That he could not serve the Church and the
Court both at once, and that this moved him to resign his Chancelourship, as
incompatible wi^h his Arch-Bishopricke) but we never heard of an Archbishop
made a Chancelour till now. Such an See a Breviate of the Prelates intolerable
Usurpations, the Epistl^ to the King.
unseemely and unlawful thing was it then reputed for Bishops to intermeddle
with Temporal Offices and Affairs, which are incompatible with their
Spiritual Function, and are seldom managed by them, but to the great
oppression, the ruin of the People and State.

Hubert being dead Mat. Par. Hist. Major, p. 204.205, 213. to 278. sparsim.
Antiq. Eccles. Brit and Godwins in the life of Steph. Langh. Mat. West^ An.
1207.1208. to 1214. Speed, How Holinsh^d, Hoveden, Hu^tingdon, Grafton, Caxton,
Polychronicon, Fabian, Martin, and others in the life of King John. Mr Tindalls
Practice of Popish Prelates, p. 374, 375. Doctor Barnes his Supplication to
King Henry the 8. p. 189. Mr. Fox Acts and Monu^ments, p. 226. to 234.
the Monks of Canterbury secretly at midnight elected Reginald their
Sub-prior, REGINALD.
for his Successor, taking an Oath of him, not to make his Election known to
any, till he came to the Popes presence, whither he was advised to post with
all speed. The Oath he violates as soon as ever he had crossed the Sea,
bearing himself every where as Lord Elect, showing withal the testimonial of
his Election to diverse; which so incensed his Brethren the Electors against
him, as they presently resolved to become suitors to the King ^or pardon of
their fault, in choosing him without his license, and also that he would permit
them to make a new Election, supposing the old frustrate by the Elects perjury:
They did so, and obtained their request, the rather because they made show of
readiness in satisfying the Kings desire, who wished them to elect John Gray
Bishop of Norwich: him they sent for in all haste to Canterbu^y where they
sol^mnly elected him for their Archbishop, publishing his Election in the
Church before the King and an infinite number of people, placing him in the
Bishops Chair. The King putting him in possession of his temporalties
^orth-with. These two Elections being presented to the Pope, he adjudged them
both void, and making use of the Monks debate (^he greater part being then at
Rome, some of them avouching their first Election as good, others importunately
seeking to have the latter confirmed) he secretly practiced with them, and at
last persuaded them to elect Stephen Langhton an English man, and Cardinal of
Rome, of singular gifts and Learning: which done, the Pope with his own hands
gave him Consecration at Viturbium; and well knowing how hayno^sly the King
would take the matter, he writ Letters unto him sweetened with many entreaties,
large praises of the new Archbishop, and seasoned now and then with some
touches of doubtful threatening, if he should oppose himself against that was
then done. This notwithstanding, the King in great indignation, as he had just
cause, banished and drove out all the Monks of Canterbury by force (who were
entertained in foreign Monasteries) seized upon all their goods, lands, and
forbad Stephen Langhton entrance into the Realm: The Pope hearing this, sends
his Mandates unto William Bishop of London, Eustace Bishop of Ely, and Mauger
Bishop of Worcester, wherein he willed them first to admonish and persuade the
King to restore the Monks their goods and place, and to give the Archbishop
possession of his Temporalties by a day: then if he refused so to do, to
interdict the whole Realm. They durst not but obey, and finding the King
resolute in his determination, at the time appointed, they published the Popes
Interdiction, interdicting the whole Realm: And as well foreseeing the ensuing
trouble to come, as their present danger, got them out of the Land, together
with Ioceline Bishop of Bath, and Giles of Hereford. The King immediately
seized all their Goods and Temporalties into his hands, and moreover banished
all the friends and Kinsfolks of these Bishops, that were likely to yield them
any comfort or relief. During the time of this Interdict, Oh the impiety of
Popes and Prelates, thus to prefer their wills before Gods Service and the
peoples souls.
all Divine Service ceased throughout the Realm (Gods Service giving place to
the Popes pride and malice) except only Baptism of Children, Au^icular
Confession, and the Administration of the Sacrament unto such as lay upon the
point of death. The Pope seeing this Curse prevailed not; at the instigation of
the Arch Bishop and other Prelates, proceeded to a particular Excommunication
of the King, and not long after deprived him (by a Judicial sentence) of his
Crown, Kingdom and all Regal authority; a thing till that time in no age
ever heard of. For the better executing which sentence, he writes to Philip the
French King, to expel King John out of his Kingdom, promising him remission
of all his sins, and giving the Kingdom of England to him and his successors
for this his good service; and withal sends ^orth his Bulls to the Nobles,
Knights, and Soldiers in diverse Countries, that they should sign themselves
with the sign of the Cross, to cast the King of England out of his Throne,
and revenge the injury of the Universal Church, by ayding King Philip in this
Catholic War, promising them all as large and ample indulgences in all
things as those enjoyed, who visited the Lords Sepulcher at Jerusalem:
whereupon the French King prepared a great Army both by Sea and Land, to
expulse King John; who made himself so strong by Sea and Land in a short time,
that he had far more Ships and Land-Souldiers than Philip; which Pandolfe the
Popes Legate perceiving, and doubting of the success, willingly repaires into
England, tells King John, in what danger he and his whole kingdom were, how
much Christian blood he was like to cause to be spilt^ to prevent all which
inconveniences, he counsels him to resign his Crown and Kingdom to the
Pope, and then to receive it from him again; which he yielded to at last. See
now to what extremities this poor King was brought by these rebellious and
traytorly Prelates means, Matthew. Paris, Ann. 1208.
who refused to appear before him when he sent for them; his whole Land was
under Interdiction, and so remained for 5. whole years, like an Heathenish
Nation, without the celebration of Divine Service and Sacraments. Fox Acts and
Monuments, p. 229. to 234.409.719.
John himself was by Name Excommunicated, and had so remained for diverse
years. ^dem Ann. 1209.
All his Subjects were released and freed a Regis fidelitate and subjectione,
from owing either fidelity or subjection to him, yea, they were forbidden, and
that under pain of Excommuni^ation, Idem Ann. 1212.
so much as to company or converse with him, either at Table, or a^ Council,
or in speech and conference. Further yet, Mat. Paris, Hist. Min.
John was deposed from his Kingdom, and that judicially, being in the Roman
Court deprived of all right to his Kingdom, and judicially condemned; and Mat.
West^n. Hist. 1213. and Mat. Paris, An. 1213.
that sentence of his deposition and deprivation was solemnly denounced and
promulgated before the French King, Clergy, and people of France; Mat. Paris.
loc. cit. p. 310.
Neither only was John thus deposed, but his Kingdom also given away by the
Pope, and that even to his most mortal enemy; for the Pope to bring his
sentence to execution, Mat. Westminster. loc. cit. ex part^ Dom. Papae Regi Franc^r^m
al ^isq^ inju^^^run^ and idem nit Paris. p. 311^
writ unto Philip the French King, persuading, yea, enjoining him, to undertake
that labou^ of dethr^ning John actually (as judicially he was before) and
expelling him from the Kingdom, promising him not only remission of all his
sins, but that he and his Heirs should for ever have the Kingdom of
England; withal, Paris. loc. c^t^
the Pope writ Letters to all Nobles, Soldiers, and Warriors in diverse
Countries, to sign themselves with the ^rosse, and to assist Philip for the
dejection of John. Paris. and Westminster. loc. cit.
Philip was not a little glad of such an offer, b^^ hereupon gathered Forces
and all things fit for such an expedition, expending in that preparation no
less than 60. thousand pounds: all Paris. A^n. 1213.
these things being notified to King John, did not a little daunt him, and
though he was too insensible of the impendent calamities, yet to strike a
greater terror into his amazed heart, and make a more dreadful impression in
his mind of the dangers which now were ready to fa^l on his head, Pandolph was
sent from the Pope unto him to negociate about the resigning of his Kingdom;
to which if he would consent, he should find favor, protection, and
deliverance at the Popes hands. Pandulf by a crafty kind of Romish Oratory, at
his coming to the King, expressed, yea painted out in most lively colors all
the difficulties and dangers to which the King was subject; Paris. in loco cit.
dum aut^m, etc.
the loss of his Crown, the loss of his honor, the loss of his life; that
there was no other way in the world to escape them, but by protection under the
Popes wings. Matthew. W^stm. Paris. lo^. cit. Holinshed, p. 177.178.
John seeing dangers to hang over him on every side, by the French abroad, by
the Barons at home: and being dejected and utterly dismayed and confounded with
the ponderation of them, resolved for saving his life, to lose his liberty and
honor, and to save his Kingdom from his open Adversary, to ^ose it and give
it quite away to his secret but worst enemy that he had, and to take an Oath
of sealty to the Pope, recorded in Holinshed, p. 178. doing herein as if one
for fear of being slain in the open field, should kill himself in his own
chamber. It was not piety, but extreme misery; nor devotion, but fear only
and despair, that caused and even ^orced John against his will being then
drowned in despair, to resign his Crown, and to make two several grants
thereof to the Pope. The Mat Paris, and Mat. West. An. 1217. Doctor Craking
there p^ up^on the Popes Temporal Monarchy, p. 245. to ^48.
first Charter was made to Pandulph the Popes Lega^e, on the 15. day of May in
the 14. year of King John's reign, the Copy whereof is set down in Matthew
Paris, Matthew Westminster. The second Charter was made to Nichol^s Bishop of
Tusculum the Popes Lega^e, for the Popes use, in Saint Paul's Church in London,
the 3. of October in the 15. year of King John, An. Dom. 1213. agreeing
verbatim with the former, differing only from it in this; that the first was
sealed with Wax, the second with Gold: which several Grants were so detestable
to the whole world, that it made all men exclaim against and detest King John.
How much the Barons disliked this Grant of King John, his V^rbae Epist. John ad
Innoc. ci^^n^^^ in resp. ad Apoll. Bellar. c. 3. See Holins. p. 177.178.
own words to Pope Innocentius, as also the Popes answer, do witnesse^ Our
Earls and Barons, says he, (and the Pope writes the like) were devout and
loving unto us, till we had subjected our selves to your Dominion, but since
that time, and specially even for so doing, they In illum insu^gunt postqu^m
Ecclesia satisfecit ^ui assist^bant ^^dem quando Eccl^siam off^nd^bat. in
Epist. Innoc. 3. apud Mat. Paris. An. 1217. Innoc. p. 356.
all rise up against us. The manifold D^risionibus mu^^^plicatis subsannando
dix^run^ Mat. Paris, An^ 1215. (...) p^ractis. Idem An. 1216. Ho^^nsh p. 186.
opprobrious speeches used by the Barons against King John, for subjecting
himself and his Kingdom to the Pope, do declare the same. John (say they) is
no King, but the shame of Kings; better to be no King, than such a King: behold
a King without a Kingdom, a Lord without dominion. Alas thou wretch, and
servant of lowest condition, ^o what misery of thraldom have thou brought thy
self? Thou wast a king, now thou art a Cow-heard, thou wast the highest, now
the lowest: Fie on thee John, the last of Kings, the abominaton of English
Princes, the confusion of English Nobility Alas England, that thou art made
tribu^ary and subject to the rule of base servants, of strangers; and which is
most miserable, subject to the servant of servants. Thou John whose memory will
be woeful in future time; thou of a most free King, have made thy self
tributary, a farmer, a vassal, and that to servitude it self: this thou have
done, that all might be drowned in the Hell of Romish Avarice. Yea, so
detestable was both this Fact of John, and dealing of the Pope, that Philip the
French King, though the mortal enemy of King John, hea^ing thereof, even upon
this very point, That the Barons and State did no^ consent to that Act, did
proclaim both the absolute freedom of the Kingdom of England,
no^wi^hstanding this grant of John, and declaime also against this Pope, for
seeking to enthrall Kingdoms unto him. As the King, by the Treason and
treachery of these Prelates, and especially of the I^ti commun^s conjura^^ and
confad^rati capitalem censent^n^um ha^u^runt, and juraverunt omnes in prasentia
Archi^piscopi, quod viso ^emper e^ congruo, propriis libertatibus, si necesse
fu^rit, d^c^rtabunt u^qu^ ad mort^m. Id^m.
Archbishop, was thus enforced most ignominiously to resign and prostitu^e
his Crown and Kingdom to the Pope, to the loss of his Kingly honor, and the
hearts of all his Barons and Subjects; so he was feign to receive the
Archbishop, and restore the other Bishops, Monks, and banished Rebels against
him to their Bishoprics, Goods, and Revenues; and to give them such Damages
and Recompense, as the Pope should think (...). For this King, Anno Domini
1213. intending a Voyag^ into Guien, his Realm standing as yet Holin^^ed, p.
180, 181, 182.
interdicted, his Lords refused to go with him, unless the interdicting might
be first released, and he clearly absolved of the Popes Curse, to the end that
Gods wrath and the Popes being fully pacified, he might with better speed
move and maintain the Wars: whereupon he was constrained to alter his
purpose; and coming to Winchester, dispatched a messenger with letters, signed
with the hands of twenty four Earls and Barons, to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Lincoln, and Hereford, then sojourning in
France; requiring them, with all other banished men, to return into England;
promising them by his Letters Patents, not only a sure Safe Conduct for their
coming over, but that he would also forget all passed displeasures, and
frankely restore unto every man all that by his means had been wrongfully
taken from them, and as yet by him detained. Hereupon the Archbishop, and
other Bishops, with all speed came into England, with the other exiles, and
went to Winchester, where the King then remained: Who hearing that the Bishops
were come, went forth to receive these Traitors; and at his first Oh, to what
base slavery was this King brought by these Trayterly Prelates?
meeting with the Archbishop of Canterbury, the King kneeled down at his
feet, (who should have rather kneeled to the King) and asked him forgiveness,
and that it would please him and the other Bishops also to provide for the
miserable state of the Realm: requiring of the Archbishop (having as then the
Popes power in his hands, as being his Legate) to be absolved; promising upon
his solemn received Oath, That he would before all things defend the Church,
and the Order of Priesthood, from receiving any wrong: also that he would
restore the old Laws made by the ancient Kings of England, and namely those of
S. Edward, which were almost extinguished and forgotten; and further, that he
would make recompense to all men whom he had by any means endammaged. This
done, he was absolved by the Archbishop, and shortly after sent his Orators to
Rome, to take off the Interdict. The Pope hereupon sent the Cardinal of
Tusculum into England, to compound the differences and damages between the
King and the Bishops, and then to release the Interdict. Who, after a
Convocation summoned, and sundry meetings had at London, Reading, Wallingford,
and elsewhere, and some messages to Rome ordered the King to pay 40000. Marks
damages to these rebellious Prelates; which done, the Interdict was solemnly
released by the Legate, in the Cathedral of Paul's in London, June 29. 1214.
after the term of 6. years, 3 months, and 14. days, that the Realm had
been shaken with that dreadful Dart of Correction, as it was then esteemed.
After this, King John raised an Army, intending to go against those Lords who
refused to follow him to Poictou. But the Archbishop meeting him at
Northampton, sought to appease him^ but he marching on to Notingham, there
with much ado, the Archbishop following him, and threatening to excommunicate
all those that should aid him, enforced him to desist his Enterprise. This
done, he thought all troubles at an end, but the worst were yet behind. For the
King having wound himself into the Popes favor, by this his Resignation, and
holding his Crown from him as his Feudatarie, began to curb the Archbishop
and his Faction; who finding the King stronger in the Popes favor than they,
Mat. Paris, p. 244, 230. Speed l. 9. ^. 8. s^ct. 55. p. 582, 584.
thereupon stirred up the Barons to rebel and take Arms against the King, who
had lost their hearts by his Resignation: In this Rebellion and Conspiracy,
All^gaba^t Archiepis^^pum Cant^ariensem Regis Anglia h^stem esse ^ublicum, ut
qui Bar^nibus Angliae inconti^um c^ntra Reg^m ^undem pr^buit, and consensum;
quodqu^ ^psius favore and ^^nsili^ ii^^m Bar^n^^ dictum R^g^m ^ s^l^^ d^p^ll^r^
molir^^t^r. etc: Matthew. Paris, Hist. Major, p. 261, 263.
Stephen Langthon the Archbishop was the Ringleader, yea, the principal
Abettor, Conspirer, chief Agent, and Counselor (as Matthew Paris, Wendover,
Speed, Holinshed, and other our Historians testify:) The Pope hereupon
excommunicates the Barons, and all other English or French, who impugned King
John, even in the general Council of Lateran, then held^ and the Bishop of
Winchester, and Pandulph the Popes Legate (who solemnly denounced the Popes
Curse against the Barons) did likewise suspend the Archbishop from all his
Episcopal authority: who thereupon repairing to Rome for absolution, was in
the Council of Lateran accused and convict of Conspiracy and Treason against
the King, and contempt against the Pope and Churches Censure: for which, the
Pope resolving to depose him from his Sea and dignity, by the Cardinals
intercession for him (he being their brother Cardinal) was entreated to deal
somewhat milder, but yet confirmed his suspension from his Bishopric by
publik sentence; commanding by his Letters, all his Suffragan Bishops to
withdraw their obedience from him and for a further revenge whereas Simon
Langthon, his brother, by his procurement had been elected to the Sea of
York, (a strange example, to have an whole Kingdom ruled by two Brethren, of
so turbulent humors:) the Sea here the doubling and juggling of the Pope.
Pope not only did cassate his Election, but likewise made him incapable of
any Episcopal Dignity, placing in that Sea Walter Gray (a trusty ^riend to
the King, and a professed enemy to the Langhtons) whose Pall cost him no less
than a thousand pound. King John having thus procured all his Barons to be
excommunicated, and the City of London (siding with them) to be interdicted,
and the Archbishops suspension to be confirmed; the Barons and Archbishop
held these Censures in such high contempt, that they decreed, neither
themselves nor the Citizens should observe them, nor the Prelates denounce
them; alleging, that they were procured upon false suggestions, and that the
Pope had no power in Secular matters from Christ, but only in Spiritual, and
that Prelates had nothing at all to do with Wars; and thereupon sent for
Lewis, the Dolphin of France, to receive the Crown of England: Who not so void
of Ambition, as to lose a Crown for want of fetching, was not long behind,
landing here in England, in despite of the Popes inhibition, and threats of
Excommunication to hinder him, with a great Army, and Fleet of six hundred
Boats. After which, he repaires to L^ndon, electing Simon Langhton for his
Chancellor, the Archbishops Brother, the Archbishop being the chief man in
this Rebellion and Trea^on against King John; by whose Counsel and Preaching,
the Citizens of London, and Barons, though all excommunicated by the Pope, did
celebrate Divine Service, and drew on Lewis to do the like. King John levying
a great Army, and hasting to give Battle to those Rebels and Enemies,
coming to Swinshed For Acts and Monuments, p. 719. with the Authors th^re
cited, and Speeds History of Great Britain, l. 9. c. 8. sect. 63. p. 578, 588.
Abbey, was poisoned in a Chalice, by a Monk of that House; who went to the
Abbor and shrived himself, telling him, how he intended to give the King such
a Drink, that all England should be glad and joyful thereof: at which, the
Abbot wept for joy, and praised God for the Monks constancy; who being
absolved beforehand by the Abbot, took the Cup of Poison, and therewith
poisoned both the King and himself, to do the Archbishops and Prelates a
favor; since this Holinsh. p. 196, 204, 205.
King could not abide the pride and pretended authority of the Clergy, when
they went about to wrest out of his hands the Prerogative of his Princely
Government. He dying, Henry his young Son was received to the Kingdom, Lewis
forsaken, the Barons absolved by the Pope and Clergymen too, after a
composion paid by them. After this, Stephen Langhton enshrines his Predecessor
Becket (as great a Traitor as himself) in a very sumptuous Shrine (the King
and greatest part of the Nobility of the Realm being present at the
solemnity:) which done, this Arch-Traytor, after he had endeavored to raise a
new War between the King and the Nobles, dyed himself, July 9. 1228. To
obscure whose Treasons and Rebellions, our Monks, who writ the Histories of
those times, have raised up many slanders and lies of this poisoned King John,
to his great defamation.

Mat. Paris, An. 1231. p. 355^ Mat. Parker, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 158. G^dwin
p. 110, 111. Holinsh. p. 213.
Richard Wethershed, RICHARD.
the very next Archbishop, withstood King Henry the 3. who in Parliament
demanded Escuage of those who held any Baronies of him; maintaining that the
Clergy ought not to be subject unto the judgment of Laymen, though all the
Laity and other of the Spiritualty consented to the King. After this, he had
a great controversy with Hubert de Burgo, Earl of Kent, concerning some Lands
of the Earl of Gloucester, the profits whereof the Archbishop challenged as
due unto him in the minority of the said Earl. The Archbishop complained of
the pretended wrong to the King (with whom Hubert was very gracious, for the
good service he had done him in defending Dover Castle against the French,) and
finding no remedy answerable to his mind at the Kings hands, who answered him
truly, That the Lands were held of him in capite, and so the wardship of them
belonged to himself, not to the Archbishop; he thereupon excommunicated all
the Authors of this his supposed injury, the King only excepted, and then gat
him to Rome (the common Sanctuary and receptacle for all Rebellious, Traytorly
Prelates,) this being the first Excommunication that was pronounced against any
man for invading the Temporalties of the Church. The King hereupon sends diverse
to Rome, to stop the Archbishops proceedings, and defend his Royal
Prerogative. The Pope notwithstanding delighted much with the eloquence,
gravity, and excellent behavior of the Archbishop, granted presently all his
demands, even in prejudice of the Kings Crown and Right. Little joy had he of
his Victory, for being but three days in his way homeward, he fell sick at
Saint Gemma, and dyed. See Holinsh. p. 114. Mat. Paris, Ann. 1232.
In this Bishops time, the Italians had gotten many Benefices in England, who
being much spited at, certain mad fellows took upon them to thresh out their
Corn every where, and give it unto the poor, as also to rob and spoil them
of their money and other goods, after which the Italians were not so eager upon
English Benefices.

EDMUND.
Saint Edmund Archbishop of Cante^bury had many bickerings with King Henry the
third, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 159. to 171. Godwyn, 112.113. Fox Acts and
Monuments, p. 321^ 409, 533. H^lins. p. 222^ 223, 225.
he was baptized in the same Font that Thomas Becket his Predecessor was, and
somewhat participated of his disposition: Being consecrated Archbishop, he
presently fell into the Kings displeasure, by opposing himself against the
marriage of Elianor, the Kings Sister, with Simon Moun^fort, Earl of
Leicester, because upon the death of the Earl Marshall her first Husband she
had vowed Chastity; to have which vow dispensed withal, the King procured the
Pope to send Otto his Legate into England, between whom and the Archbishop
there were many quarrels: This Arch-Prelate refused to appear upon summons
before the King, went to Rome where he made many complaints, not only against
Otto, but against the King himself, ^or certain injuries received at his
hands; yet with ill success, and was foiled in two several suites, both with
the Monks of Rochester and the Earl of Arundel, to whom he was condemned in a
thousand Marks, to his great disgrace and impoverishing. He Excommunicated
the Monks of Canterbury, for choosing a Prior without his consent. The Popes
Legate absolving them for money, h^ excommunicated them afresh, and interdicted
their Church, till Otto decided the Controversy; which Otto excommunicated
Frederick the Emperor, first in the Monastery of Saint Albanes, and then
publicly in Paul's Church, and collected infinite sums of money here in
England to maintain the Popes wars against him, which the Emperor took
very ill at the Kings hands. This Archbishop, for a great sum of money,
obtained a Grant from the Pope in derogation of the Kings Supremacy, that if
any Bishopric continued void by the space of six months, it should be
lawful for the Archbishop to confer it on whom he list, which the King
procured the Pope immediately to revoke. Lib. 7. c. 35. f. 305. F^x Acts and
Monuments, p. 254.255, 321,
Polichronicon writes, that he called a Council of the Prelates together, how
he might relieve the holy Church that was made subject and thrall. It was
consulted, that the King and all other men that were Rebels should be warned,
and if they would not amend, then the wrecke of censures of holy Church should
not sleep. The holy man ( Edmund) assented, and went to the King with the
other Bishops, who threatened to Excommunicate him, if he would not reform the
things they demanded, and put away his evil Counselors. The King asked
avisement, and he abode, but all for naught: Therefore the King was spared
alone, and all other that were Rebels were denounced accursed: But thereby
would they not be amended. This Arch-Prelate, at last, being continually vexed,
thwarted and disgraced both by the King, the Pope his Legates, and others with
whom he contested, taking his leave of the King, departed into voluntary exile,
and there bewailing the misery of his Country, spoiled and miserably wasted by
the tyranny and strange exactions of the Pope, spent the rest of his time in
continual tears, and through extreme grief, sorrow, and fasting, fell into
a Consumption and dyed, being afterward canonized for a Saint by Pope Innocent
the fourth.

Antiq. Eccles. Brit. Bonifaciu^, p. 171. etc. Godwin. p. 114. to 119.
Archbishop Boniface, BONIFACE.
his immediate successor, raised many commotions and stirs both in Church and
State, he was the Kings instrument for polling of England, and brought him
much money; he was also a great warrier, better skilled in Military than Church
affairs. Not to mention this Arch-Prelates Antiq. Eccle. Brit. p. 185. Stow,
p. 188.
combat with the Prior and Monks of Saint Bartholmewes, which put the whole
City of London into an uproate, and made much work both at the Kings Court,
and at Rome: Or how he Holinshed, p. 238.
procured a Grant from the Pope to receive one whole years profit of all
Livings and Cures that should fall void within his Province for 7. years
space, to the value of 10000. Markes^ At which the King at first was sore
offended I shall only reci^e some traytorly and Anti-monarchicall constitutions
made by him and his fellow Prelates in a Synod held at Westminster, 1270. to
the great impeachment of the Kings Prerogative, and affront of his Nobles,
Judges, and Temporal Courts of Justice. First, they decreed, Ioh. d^ Aton.
C^nstit. L^gitima Eccl^siae, t^tuisque Regionis Angliae, (styled in the Title,
Divinum opus) f. 138.139, 140, 141. Gu^l. Lindwode Provinc. l. 5. Tit. de
P^nis, f. 226.227.228. l. 2. De Fore Competenti^ f. 67. etc.
That no Archbishop, Bishop, or inferior Prelate and Clergi-man, should either
by the Kings Writ, or any other Noblemans, or secu^ar Officers warrant be
called to answer before any secular Court or Judge, for any cause which they
there determine to be merely Ecclesiastical: Or for any extravagances and
undue proceedings in their Ecclesiastical Courts: And that no Clergie-man
should presume to appear upon such Writ or summons before any temporal Judge
or Court, under pain of Excommunication; because no Lay power has any
authority to judge the Lords Anointed, whom they ought of necessity to obey.
And to take away so great abuses, and preserve the liberties of the Church, we
decree and ordain (say they) that the said Arch^bishops and Bishops, and other
Prelates shall not appear though they be called and summoned to do it as
aforesaid. Yet to preserve the Kings honor, the greatest Prelates shall go or
write to the King, and show that they cannot obey such his Royal Mandates
without the peril of their Order, and the subversion of their Ecclesiastical
Liberty. And if the King desist not, the Bp. whom it concerns, shall admonish
the King the second time, that he look to the salvation of his soul, and
altogether desist from such Mandates. And if he desist not at the denuntiation
of the Bishop, the Archbishop, or else the Bishop of London as the Deane of
the Bishops, calling to him two or three Bishops, or more, whom he shall think
meet, shall go to the King und admonish him more seriously, requiring ^im to
supersediate his Mandates. And if the King after such exhortations and
monitions shall proceed to attachments and destresses by himself or others,
then the Sheriffs and all other Baylifes who prosecute the Bishops to attach
them, shall by the Diocesans of the places be driven away in form of Law by
the sentence of Excommunication and interdiction. The like shall be done if the
Sheriffs or Bayliffes proceed to Attachments or Distresses, pretending the
foresaid monitions to be made to our Lord the King as afore-sayd: And if the
Sheriffs or Ba^liffes shall persevere in their obstinacy, the places wherein
they live, and the Lands they have within the Province of Canterbury shall be
interdicted by the Di^cesans of the places, at the denuntiation of the Bishop
in whose Diocese such Distresses shall be taken. And if such Attachers be
Clerks Beneficed, they shall be suspended from their Office; and if they
persevere in their malice, they shall be compelled to desist and give
satisfaction by substracting the profits of the^r benefices. And if they be not
Beneficed, in case they be presented to any Bene^ice, they shall not be th^reto
admitted ^or five years space. And the Clerks who shall dictate, write, or
sign such Attachments or distresses, or give any counsel or advice therein,
shall be Canonically punished, and if any Clerk be suspected of the premises,
^e shall not be admitted to any Ecclesiastical Benefice, until he shall
Canonically purge himself thereof. And if our Lord the King, or any other
secular power competently admonished concerning this, shall not revoke such
distresses or Attachments, the Bishop distrained shall put under Ecclesiastical
interdict the Lands, Villages, Towns and Castles, which the King himself, or
other secular person so distraini^g shall have within his Bishopric. And if
the King, or any other secular power contemning such penalties, shall persevere
in their obstinacy; then the Archbishop, or the Bishop of London, at the
denunciation of the Bishop complaining, calling to him two Bishops, or more,
whom he shall think meet, shall repair to the King, and diligently admonish
and require him to supersede from the foresaid Mandates. And if our Lord the Sea the Prelates insolency here against their Kings.
King having heard these admonitions and exhortations, shall proceed to
Attachments or distresses by himself or others, then the other two Bishops,
reputing this distress as a common injury to the Church, by the authority of
this present Counsel, shall put under Ecclesiastical interdict all the
Demisne Lands, Burroughes, Castles, and Towns of the King himself, or any
other great man, being within the Precincts of their Diocese. And if the King,
or other great Man, shall not within 20. days after revoke the said Distresses
or Attac^ments, but shall for this bandy against the Church, being with Pharaoh
made more obdurate amidst the strokes of punishments, then the Arch^bishop
shall put his whole Diocese under in^erdict. The same shall be done to the
Castles, Lands and Burroughes of great men, who have Royalties within the said
Province. And if any Bishop shall be found negligent or remiss in the
exe^utions of the said penalties in such cases, he shall be sharply
reprehended by the Metropolitan. After which they in the same Council, decree
the like Interdicts, Excommunications, and Proceedings against all such who
shall intrude upon the possessions of the Church; against Clerks who receive
Churches by Laymens power; against such Judges and others, who shall release
excommunicate persons ou^ of prison without the Bishops consent; against
Laymen, who shall appreh^nd Clergymen for civil crimes; against such who
obtain or grant Prohibitions to their Courts; against the King or his
Officers, who grieve or waste Churches possessions during their vacancy;
against Judges and other Officers, who by a Quo Warranto question the Liberties
which any Church or Prela^e has long time enjoyed, though without any Charter;
against secular Judges, who shall judge any Charters made to the Church void
for uncertaine^y; against Lords, who shall endeavor to enforce Clergy men to
make suit to their secular Courts, contrary to the Liberties of the Church; and
the like. In all or most of which, if the King upon notice and monition
conform not to Prelates desires, and stop not all proceedings and judgments
in his Courts against them, his Judges and Officers shall be excommunicated,
and their Lands, together with the Kings, and the whole Province of Canterbury
interdicted as aforesaid^ This Arch-Prelate and h^s con^ederates, thus
trampling upon the Kings Crown, Royalties, Judges, Courts, Nobility, Subjects,
and the Laws of the Kingdom; the King to stop their encroachments, was
enforced to send forth Writs of Ad jura Regia, and Prohibitions to inhibit
their proceedings; Wherein he thus complained, Regist. of Writs, par. 2. f. 27.
to 65. Turba^^ur, nec immerito and mov^mu^, etc See the Breviate, p. ^6, 97^
15, 16.
We a^e troubled, not without cause, and moved, while we behold those who live
under our Dominion, and are there honored with Benefices and Rents, by reason
whereof they ought to assist us in the defense and tuition of the Rights of our
Royal Crown, with necks li^^ed up against us, endeavoring to the uttermost
of their power to impugn the said Rights, to the GRIEVOVS PREIVDICE AND HVRT
OF OUR ROYAL DIGNITY AND CROWN, and in contempt of us: Wherefore we, who by
the bond of an Oath, are obliged to the unwounded Observance of the Rights of
our Crown and Dignity, prohibit you, that you presume not to attemp^ any thing
in the promises, which may any way derogate from the Right of our Crown and
Dignity, and if any thing in this kind ha^h been unduely attempted by you,
that you cause it to be revoked without any delay, left we proceed ^o apprehe^d
you in a grievous manner, as the violaters of the Rights of our Crown and
Dignity. Th^s Boniface, at last knowing himself very ill beloved, both of the
King and of all the Commons and Clergy in general, and being commanded by the
King to give over his Bishopric, he thereupon ^elled his Woods, let Leases,
forced from his Tenants and others, what moneys he could possibly, and having
gathered great sums, one way or other, carried it all with him over Sea into
Savoy, where he dyed.

John Peckam, JOHN PECKAM.
the next Archbishop of Canterbury but one, was created Bishop of that See by
the Popes mere Antiqu. Eccl. Brit. p. 201, 202 205, 206, 207. Fox Acts and
Monuments, p. 320, 321. Goodwin his Catalogue of Bishops, p. 123.
Authority, against the Monks and Kings consents; whence in his Letters to the
Pope, he usually styled himself his creature, though he made him pay four
thousand Marks for his Creation: And to show himself his creature in good
earnest, he upon the Popes most insolen^ Letter to him (recorded at large by
Matth^w Parker, in his life) to prohibit King Edward the first from collecting
the Tenths granted to him in England by the Clergy, for the recovery of the
Holy Land from the Sarazens, which the King collected by his own Officers, and
laid up in such places as he thought meet without the Popes special license,
not without great sin against the divine Majesty, and high contempt of the
Apostolic Sea^ went to the King immediately, being then in the confines of
Wales, and there publicly before all his Nobles by virtue of the Popes
command, admonished the King: First, within one months space to restore all
the Moneys collected, and to send it to the places formerly appointed for its
custody, with so great promptitude of devotion, as might expiate the former
blot of removing it thence. Secondly, that he should ^or time to come, wholly
desist from such attempts, adding, that altho^gh the Apostolical clemency did
yet embrace him as one of her dear Sons: yet if he should hereafter chance
to be found guilty of such offenses, that she neither would, nor yet could
substract the Rod of Correction from him, left by sparing man, she should
consent to those Divine injuries which she corrected not. Thirdly, that he
should neither molest nor grieve any of the Keepers or Depositaries of the said
Moneys upon this occasion. To which insolent Demands the King gave a very mild
Answer.

This Lordly Prelate, was very stately in his gesture, gate, words, and outward
show; he very often opposed himself against King Edward the first in
Parliament, in right of his Church, denying to grant him Tenths; con^esting
with him often about certain Liber^ies pertaining to the Crown, touching
Church matters. Anno 1279. he held a Ioha^ de At^n Constitut. 130.
Council at Reading; wherein he enjoined all Priests every Lords day, to
excommunicate (among others) those who impetrated Letters or Writs from any Lay
Court, to hinder the proceedings of the Ecclesiastickes in Causes pertaining to
them by the holy Canons. He held his Prebendary of Lions in France, in
Commendam, and would not part with it by any means; because he looked every
day to be driven out of England by the King (whom he stiffely opposed and
resisted to his face in many things) and then he should have no other home to
take to: He promptly obeyed the Popes commands against the King, not to pay
him any Subsidies, or give him any aid without the Popes consent, and often
admonishing the King before his Nobles, to obey ^he Popes Mandates in
derogation of his Crown, and tending to the great oppression of his Subjects.
He called another Council a^ Lambeth, Holi^s^. p. 280. b.
Anno 1280. in which he went about to annihilate certain Liberties belonging
to the Crown, as the taking knowledge of the Right of Patronages, and the
Kings Prohibitions, In placitis de catallis, and such like, which seemed
merely to touch the Spiritualty. But the King by some in that Council,
withstood the Archbishop openly, and with menaces, stayed him from concluding
any thing that might prejudice his Royal Liberties, and Prerogatives. After
which he held another Council at Reading, Anno 1290. where he and the Bishops
purposed to draw the Conusans of Advowsons and Patronages of Churches,
belonging time out of mind to the Kings Temporal Cou^ts, to the
Ecclesiastical Consistories, utterly to cut off all the Kings Prohibitions to
these Courts, in suites concerning Goods, Chattels and Debts, so that the
Ecclesiastical Judges should not from thenceforth be prohibited to proceed on
in them: But the King hearing of this their design, and encroachment on his
Royal Crown, prohibited them to proceed therein under pain of his
indignation; whereupon the Council was dissolved, and the Arch^Bishop and
other Prelates frustrated of their hopes. Who yet proceeding to encroach upon
the Kings Royalties in their Ecclesiastical Courts, He thereupon sent forth
Writs to restrain them, to this effect: Regist. of W^its par. 2. f. 61, b.
62.646.
Rex Archiepiscopis, etc. The King to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Deanes, Archdeacons, Chancellours, Praecentors, Provosts, Sacrists,
Prebends in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, and to all other
Ecclesiastical Persons, constituted in whatever Dignity or Office; as also to
public Notaries, and all others, greeting. It behooves us so much the more
carefully to do our endeavor, and more solici^ously to extend our hand to our
Royal Prerogatives, lest they should utterly perish, or by the undue
Usurpations of any, be in some ^ort subtracted, by maintaining them as far
as we lawfully may; by reducing them to their due state^ if any of them have
been subtracted and seized on; as likewise by bridling the impugners o^ our
said Royal Jurisdictions, and by punishing them as it is meet, according to
their demerits: And so much the rather, by how much we are known to be obliged
to do it by the Bond of an Oath, and behold more men from day to day to
impugn the same Rights, to their utmost power; whereas we have recovered in
our Court before us, by consideration of the said Cour^, our Collation to the
Prebend of S. in the Church of Saint Peter's in York, etc. And now we have
understood, that certain men endeavoring with all th^^r might to impugn our
Royal Right, and for^sai^ Judgment, as likewise our Collation made to our
said Clerk, have made and procured to be made certain Provocations, Appeale^,
Indictions, Inhibitions, etc. by the which if they should proceed, our Royal
Right, and foresaid Judgment, and the effect of our Collation should be
annulled, which might many ways generate prejudice and exheredation to us and
our Crown. We desiring by all means we may, to preven^ such prejudice and
exheredation, and to restrain the unlawful endeavors of all the impugners of
the Rights of our Crown, strictly prohibit you and every of you, that you do
not, by pretext of any Commission made, or hereafter to be made to you, or any
of you, presume by any Authority, without our advice, to attempt, or by others
in any so^^ cause to be attempted, any thing which may tend to the derogation
of our Royal Right, or annulling of the ^oresaid Judgment rightly given, or
the weakening of our said Collation; knowing, that if you shall do otherwise,
we will proceed to apprehend you in a grievous manner, Tanquam violatores Iuris
nostri Regii, as violaters of our Royal Right. By these Writs the Usurpations
of this Arch Prelate and the Bishops, on the Kings Royal Prerogative, and
Courts of Justice, were somewhat restrained; otherwise, they had in time made
themselves absolute Kings, and the Kings of England mere Ciphers, and only
executioners of their Papal pleasures.

ROBERT WINCHELSY.
Antiq Eccles. Brit. Robertus Winchelse, p. 209, to 223. Godwin P. 125, 126,
127. Walsingh. Hist. Angl. p. 34, 35.46.63 Math. West. An. 1294.1295, 1296,
1300.1301, 1305. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 320, 321, 337. Holinsh. p. 301,
302. See 393. a.
Robert Winchelsie, his Successor, exceedingly opposed his Sovereign King
Edward the first: Who having spent an infinite sum of Money in the Wars of
Scotland, summon^d a Parliament at Barwicke; wherein, when the Temporalty
contributed liberally toward the charge of that War, the Clergy alleging the
Canon of the late Council of Lions, wherein it was decreed, That no
Clergie-man should pay any Aid or Subsidy to any Temporal Magistrate,
without the Popes license, (which Canon the Archbishop alleged against the
Subsidy, granted by the Clergy two years before in his absence, causing them
then to set it down for a Canon, afterward to be kept inviolably) refused to
grant the King a Subsidy, without the Popes consent; and would then give no
Subsidy nor supply at all to the King, though at the same time they readily
granted three Subsidies to the Pope, toward his Wars against the French. The
King would not take this for payment; and therefore presently took order, That
all Barnes of these undutifull rebellious Clergymen should be locked up, and
by Proclamation put all the Clergy from out of his protection, so that
hereafter it should be lawful for any man to sue them for any Cause, but they
might not commence Suite against any man; holding a See Bishop Jewels defense
of his Apologe, pa. 6. c. 2. p, 521, 522 Cromptons jurisdiction of Cou^ts, f.
19.
Parliament with his Temporal Lords and Commons only, and shutting the
Bishops and Clergy out of the Parliament house. This constrained some of the
Clergy, after much contest, (though animated and solicited by the Archbishop
still to resist) to submit to the King at last, and to be content to grant him
such a proportion of their goods (though it were the fifth part of their
Revenues) as he should like of; only the Archbishop, the Head of this
^action, continued obstinate, making no other answer to the King but this: A
dutiful Answer of an Arch Prelate to his Prince.
Under God, our universal Lord, we have two other Lords, a Spiritual Lord the
Pope, and a Temporal Lord the King; and though we be to obey both, yet rather
the Spiritual Lord then the Temporal: When therefore he saw all the rest
inclining to yield, using no other words then this; Salvet unusquisque animam
suam, Let every man save his own Soul, (as if Rebellion against his Prince
were the only means to save his soul) and pronouncing all those
excommunicated that contributed any thing to the King, he rose up, and suddenly
departed out of the Convocation House. The King for this his contumacy, seized
all his Lands, and commanded all such Debts of his as were found in the Rolls
of the Exchequer, to be le^ed with all speed on his Goods and Cattle, which he
seized into his hands, and made show of great displeasure. Notwithstanding,
shortly after being to make War with the French King in France, he thought
good before his departure to receive this Arch-Rebell to favor again, who had
caused the King to be cited up to the Court of Rome, and there suspended. But
this grace endured not long: for presently upon his return, the King laid
diverse high Treasons to his charge; as, That he had dehorted his Subjects, in
his absence, from paying their Sub^idies; See Holinsh p. 313, Ann^ 1305
That he went about to trouble the quiet state of the Realm, and to defend and
succor Rebellious persons; That he had conspired with diverse of his Nobility,
to deprive him of his Kingdom, (though the best Prince that ever England had
before) to commit him to perpetual Prison, and to Crown his Son Edwa^d King
in his stead; and that he was the Ringleader and Author of this Conspiracy.
The Archbishop no^ able to deny these Treasons, and being suspended from his
Office by the Pope, till he should purge himself of these things, he See Mat.
West. An. ^ 305. p. 452 453. An. 1306. p. 457.
fell down on the ground at the Kings feet, craving pardon of his heinous
offenses with tears and howling, calling the King then his Lord, which he
never did before, neither with his month, nor in his Letters. Thus this proud
Prelate, ex^crable both to God and man, who had twice a little before
prohibited the King, in the Popes name, to make War with the rebellious and
treacherous Scots, his Enemies, who had invaded his Kingdom in his absence,
because the Pope had taken them into his protection; who had defiled and
infected the whole Priesthood and Clergy of England with his pride, exercised
an unheard of Tyranny over the people; being now deprehended by the King in his
wickedness, terrified and dejected with the guilt of his sin, and fear of
punishment, lay now prostrate on the ground before the King, offered him his
Pall, and sub^i^ted his person and goods to his mercy. To whom the King gave
this answer: I will not punish thee my self, le^t I should seem rather to
have respect to my own Revenge, though most just, then to thy Order. And
although thou art altogether unworthy of thy Order and my Grace, yet I will
refer the matter to thy fellow Bishops, and the Pope of Rome, that thou
may be tried by thy Peers, lest thou should think me an unjust Judge;
though the Conusans of Treason, the highest Crime in a S^bject, belongs without
doubt to my Tribunal, not to theirs. Moreover (added the King) I have known
thy hatred and malice toward me, not only in the greatest things, but even in
the smallest and in matters of least moment, in which by thy authority thou
have overmuch abused my patience; depriving my Clerks in thy visitation,
notwithstanding my Letters to the contrary, and their just appeals; both which
thou have contemned, together with my Royal Authority. The Archbishop
troubled and confounded in mind at these things, craved a Blessing from the
King; who replied, That his Blessing would rather become him, then his the Arch
Bishop. The King hereupon complains of him to the Pope, That he had troubled
the peaceable and safe estate of the Kingdom in his absence, and stirred up
the Nobles to a Rebellion and Conspiracy against him, etc. And notwithstanding
his submission, cited him to appear at Rome, banished him the Realm, seized
upon all his goods moveable and unmovable, forbidding all his Subjects, under
a great pain, to foster him: Yet the Monks of Canterbury secretly harbored
him for a time, furnished him with necessaries, and conveyed him beyond the
Seas. Which the King afterward understanding, seized on all their Goods and
Lands, banished them the Monastery, turning fourscore Monks a begging,
forbidding any to harbor them; and kept them in that miserable estate, till
afterward he was pleased, upon their submission, to restore them. After which,
the Bishop of Winchester interceded to the King for this Arch Traitor, calling
him his Lord: with which the King being greatly offended, put this Bishop out
of his protection, and confiscated his goods, because he acknowledged another
then the King to be his lord; even such a one, who being guilty of Treason and
manifest contempt against the King, had lost the very right of a Subject in his
Kingdom. While the Archbishop was thus in exile, before any hearing of this
Cause at Rome, the King deceaseth; who, as Page 316, 293.
Holinshed writes was an earnest enemy of the high and presumptuous insolency
of Priests, which he judged to proceed chiefly of too much Wealth and Riches;
and therefore he devised to establish the Statute of Mortmain, to be a bridle
to their inordinate lusts and riotous excess: which Statute they labored to
repeal, and purchase out, by giving large Subsidies to that end. His Son
Edward the second succeeding him, out of an over-indulgent pity, calls home
this Arch-Traytor by his Letter, writes to the Pope to discontinue his Fathers
Suite against him, and to send him over with all speed to Crown him: Who glad
with the news, and unable to make haste home, as was requisite, by reason of
his crazie body, sent a Commission to the King, with the names of three Bishops
in it, giving him liberty to elect which of the three he desired, to Crown him
in his behalf; who made choice of the Bishop of Winchester, who set the Crown
on his head. The King upon the Archbishops return, restored him all his
goods, and every penny received of his Temporalties during his two years
exile, (a good reward for a Traitor) whereby he became the richest Archbishop
of many before and after him. He was no sooner come home, but a new danger
encountered him, by his own wonted boldness. The King, by the counsel of
Piers Gaveston, had committed the Bishop of Coventry to Ward, at York: A
Convocation shortly after being assembled, the Archbishop would not suffer any
matter to be debated in the House, till the Bishop were set at liberty; which
the King was contented to bear withal at that time. This Bishop (says Antiq.
Eccl^s. Bri^. p. 219, 220^ 229.
Matthew his Successor) though he were reported to be a stout Governor of the
English Church, and a Defender of its Rites, yet he was too excessive in this,
and ever opposite to the King, attributing that to the Pope, with whom he was
most strictly linked, which he derogated from the King; seeking not so much the
Liberties of the Realm, as the increase of the Popes power, and deminishing
the Kings Authority, that he might transfer it to the Pope. He was a great
enemy to Prohibitions, laboring the advancement of the Ecclesiastical Courts
Jurisdiction, and the eclipsing of the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Kings
Courts. He was the Author of Articuli Cleri, and Walter Raynolds his
Successor, procurer of the Kings answer to them in Parliament. Which
Articles, though they be commonly taken for a Statute, yet in truth they are
M. 19. E. 3. Fitz. Iurisdicti^n, 28.
none, but a mere Answer of the King in Parliament, to Articles exhibited to
him by the Clergy, made by the advice of his Council, but not of the Commons
and whole Parliament; and a particular Grant of the King only, not of the
Parliament: as appears by the several Answers to each of those Articles, but
especially to the last. Finally, he ever sided with the Pope for the Liberties
of the Church, and with the Barons also, against the King. He opposed himself
against Piers Gaveston, the Spensers, and other Favouri^es and Corruptors of
the young King, very boldly; and enforced John Warren, Earl of Surrey, to
forswear the Company of a certain beautiful Harlot, with the love of whom
he was greatly bewitched. And afterward, when notwithstanding his Oath, he
returned to her company, and got Children upon her, he accused him to the
Convocation both of Adultery and Perjury, and a^ last made him to leave her.
He excommunicated Walter, Bishop of Coventry, for revol^ing from him and the
Clergy, and adhering to Piers Gaveston; who appealed unto the Pope, and was by
him absolved. Which last Acts of his are commendable, though they proceeded
rather from the stournesse and haughtiness of his Spirit, then the Piety of
his Heart: How ever, his former are most execrable.

WALTER RAYNOLDS.
Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 342. A^t. Ec^l^s. p. 226.227. Godwins Gatal. p.
129.130, Walsingham. Hist. Angl. p. 98.99, 101, 103, 104, 105. Speed, hist. l.
9. c. 11. p. 667, 677, 679, 680, 681, 685. H^lin. p. 335.
Walter Raynolds, his next Successor, advanced and preferred only by King
Edward the Second to that Sea; when the King, after the Barons Wars ended,
had done execution upon diverse of the Nobl^s that had reb^lled, Adam Tarlt^n
Bishop of Hereford, by the Kings direction, in a Parliament holden at London,
Anno Dom. 1324. was apprehended and brought to the Ba^^^, to be arraigned for
the like faults of Rebellion and High Treason against his Sovereign; to wit,
for ayding, succouring, and maintaining the Mor^imers and other Rebels: who
having nothing to say in defense of himself, against the Crimes objected unto
him, at first disdained to make any answer at all; and when he was in a manner
forced thereto, standing mute a long space, at length he brake out into these
words, and flatly told the King: A dutiful speech of a Prelate.
My Lord and King, saving your Reverence, I am an humble Minister and Member of
the Holy Church of God, and a consecrated Bishop, though unworthy; I neither
can nor ought to answer to such high matters, without the connivence and
consent of my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, my direct Judge next after the
Pope, and of the other Fathers, the Bishops, my Peers. At which saying, the
Archbishops and Bishops there present, rose up and interceded to the King, for
their Colleague: and when as the King, would not be entreated, the whole
Clergy challenged the Bishop as a Member of the Church, and so exempt from the
Kings Judicature (as if Lay men were not Members of the Church too, as well as
Bishops and Priests, and so, by this reason, exempt from Secular Jurisdiction.)
The King forced thereunto with their Clamours (though for a very Traitors
rescue) committed him to the Archbishops custody, to answer elsewhere for
these Crimes. But within few days after, when the King called him again
before his presence, to make answer to the matters laid against him, and there
arraigned him before his Royal Tribunal for his Treasons, all the Bishops of
England almost being then at London, the The presumptuous d^meanour of Pre^ate^.
Archbishops of Canterbury, York, and Dublin, accompanied with ten other
Bishops, and a great troop of men, hearing of Tarl^ons Arraignment, in great
haste hyed them thither; and having their Crosses borne before them, entered the
Court by violence, took the Prisoner from the Bar before he had made any
answer, chased away the Kings Officers by force, and carried him away with
them from the Bar, (the highest affront that ever was offered to public
Justice in the Kingdom; and that in open Parliament, in case of High Treason
against the King,) and withal they proclaimed, That no man should lay violent
hands on this Traitor whom they had rescued, upon pain of Excommunication. The
King being exceedingly moved with this unparalleled insolence of the Clergy,
as he had reason, commanded an Inquest to be impanelled, and a lawful inquiry
to be made of the Treasons committed by him, in his absence. The Jury, without
fear of the King, or any hatred of the Bishop, according to the truth of the
matter, finding the Bishop guilty of all the Treasons and Rebellions whereof he
was indicted: the King hereupon Hanging was too good for him and his accomplices.
banished the Bishop^ seized upon his Temporalties, Lands, and Goods; but the
Bishop himself, by the consent of all the Archbishops and Bishops, was by
strong hand kept safe in the Archbishop of Canterburies custody,
notwithstanding his proscrip^ion, who at last reconciled this Traitor to the
King. So industrious have the Bishops been, not only to plot and execute
Treasons, but likewise to defend and int^rcede for Traitors of their own Coat,
to keep them from execution, and to get them again into favor, that so they
might more boldly proceed on in their intended Trecheries and Rebellions,
being sure to escape unpunished, by means of their fellow Bishops, how ever
other Traitors speed. After this, the King demanded Subsidies of the Clergy,
toward his Wars; which they at first stiffely denied to grant, without the
Popes License first obtained; which the King was enforced to procure: and
notwithstanding it, they stood off a while, alleging, That the Pope had of
late years received so many Subsidies and Procurations from them, that they
were not able to give the King so much as one Subsidy; who could readily grant
the Pope so many: At last, upon this condition, That the King should augment
and confirm those Ecclesiastical Privileges they claymed, they granted him a
Subsidy; and he thereupon gave the Answers, to Articuli Cleri, and granted
the Clergy to be free from Purveyances. After this, the Queen, with Edward
the third, her Son, went into France, to make Peace between France and
England; where, by the French Kings persuasions, being her Brother, she
continued, refusing to return again into England: The King hereupon banisheth
her and her Son; great Wars and stirs arise hereupon: diverse of the
Nobles, together with the Bishops of Lincoln, Hereford, Dublin, and Ely, side
with the Queen, and levy a great sum of Money for her: The Archbishop,
though advanced merely by the King, who highly favored him, secretly joins
with the Queen against his Sovereign, in his greatest necessi^ies, and sent
the Queen both See Holins^ed, p. 338, 339, 340, 341.
moneys and supplies secretly, yet keeping in with the King in outward show,
the better to betray him and his secrets. And Bishop Tarlton whom he had
formerly rescued from his Arraignement, and reconciled to the King, became the
chiefest stickler and Incendiary against his Sovereign, and the Author of his
subsequent murder. The King what with wars and Papal exactions, was brought
to such penury, that he was forced to borrow 260. pounds even of the Popes
Collectors of Peter Pence. The Queens side and For^es at last prevailing
against the King, who was glad to lurk in Wales like a fugitive, the
Archbishop openly revolts from him, and the King by his and other the Bishops
means, being deposed in Parliament, Edward the third his Son was unanimously
elected King by all the people. The Archbishop of Canterbury with all the
Prelates (here all Arch-traytors) consented to the Election, and the
Archbishop taking this Theme, The voice of the People is the voice of God,
made a speech to the people, exhorting them to pray to the King of Kings for
the new Elected King; who out of his filial duty refused upon any terms to
accept the Crown, without his Fathers consent: whereupon three Bishops, with
others, were sent to the King to Kenelworth where he was imprisoned, to get his
consent; which being implyedly obtained, the Archbishop Crowns his Son King
in his stead, at Westminster (the very height of Treason.) This Archbishop
much hindered the course of Prohibitions from the Kings Court to the
Ecclesiastical. At last he was commanded by the Queen to consecrate one
James Barkely Bishop of Exeter, which he did, but for his labor was so
threatened, taunted, and revi^ed by the Pope, who had reserved the Donation of
this Bishopric to himself, that for very grief he dyed.

Antiq Eccl^s. Brit. p. 236. to 258. God^in, p. 132. to 137. Walsing. p. 136.
^s. 147. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 349, 350, 409.
John Stra^ford, JOHN STRATFORD.
his very next successor, being made Bishop of Winchester by the Popes
provision, against King Edward the seconds liking, who would have preferred
Robert Baldocke his Chancellor to that See, had no sooner set sooting into
this Bishopric, but the King caused all his Goods to be seized, and his
Livings to be sequestered to his use, besides, he caused him to be summoned to
answer^ to several Actions, so as for fear he was feign to hide himself:
Whereupon Proclamation was made, that no man should dare to harbor or give him
entertainment, by meat, drink or lodging: At last, after much ado, the
Archbishop made his peace, and brought him into favor with the King, who
dying King Edward the third advanced him to the Sea of Canterbury. The King
going into France with a great Army, and laying claim to that Crown,
committed the Government of the Realm here at home to the Archbishop. He,
besides other promises of faithful diligence in the trust committed to him,
assured the King he should want no money to expend in this exploit, whereunto
all kinds of people showed themselves so willing to yield what help they
possibly might, as he took upon him to discern, the King might command of
them what he li^t. No sooner was the King over Seas, but infinite sums of
Money were collected with the very good liking of all the people: This Money
which men thought would have maintained the Wars for two or three years, was
spent in less than one. The King wanting Money, puts the Archbishop in mind
of his promise, calling continually on him for more Moneys. The Archbishop
blames his Officers beyond the Seas for ill managing of his Treasure, advising
him to make peace with the French upon reasonable conditions, sending him no
more Money. The King grew exceeding angry with the Archbishop for this Motion
and usage, and his Soldiers calling for Money, he told them that the
Archbishop had be^rayed him to the French King, who no doubt had hired him to
detain their pay in his hands; and to satisfy his Soldiers needs, was
enforced to take up what Moneys he could at hard rates from Usurers. And though
some excuse the Archbishop in this, yet Spe^d^, hist. l. 9. c. 12. Sect. 64,
65^ p. 69^. Fox^ Acts and Monum^nts p. 350.
others think him guilty of practicing against the Kings further good ^ortunes
in France; because Pope Benedict the Twelfth was displeased much therewith, as
pretending it was pernicious to Christendom, and thereupon put Flanders under
Interdict, for leaving the French King, and adhering to King Edward; and
therefore the Archbishop to please the Pope (whom he obeyed more than the
King) who had written a Le^^er to the King and him, to desist from that War,
thus thwa^^ed the Kings de^ignes, by not sending him such supplies of Money as
he promised and in moving him to peace. Antiq. Eccels. Brit. p. 239. H^linsh.
p. 361.
The King taking it very hainously to be thus dealt with, and that his brave
beginnings and proceedings in France should be thus crossed; hereupon steps
suddenly over into England, and ca^^s the Bishop of Chichester, then Lord
Chancellor, and the Bishop of Li^h^^eld, then Lord Treasurer, prisoners into
the Tower, whither he intended to send the Archbishop. But he having some
inkling of the Kings intention, got him to Canterbury, and there stood upon his
guard, being accused by He^^y Bishop of Lincoln, and Gregory Scrope then Lord
chie^e Justice of England, of Treachery and Conspiracy with the French, and of
High Treason, the whole blame, by the general voice of all men, lying on him:
Sir Nicholas Cantilupus hereupon ^ollowed him to Canterbury, with John
Fa^ingdon a public Notary, who required him to make present payment of a great
sum of Money which the King had taken up of outlandish Merchants upon the
Archbishops credit, or else to get him over Seas immediately, and yield his
body prisoner to them till ^he debt was discharged, for that the King upon his
promise had undertaken he should so do. The Archbishop said, he could give
no present answer, but would take time to advise thereof, writing diverse
Letters to the King, not to hearken to Flatterers, and those who defamed other
men's action^, and to make choice of better Counsellour^, and not to disturb
the peace at home, whiles he made wa^^es abroad. After which he called the
Clergy and people into the Cathedral Church of Canterbury, and made an
Oration to them, taking Ecclesiasti^us 48.10. for his Theme, He feared not any
Prince, neither ^o^ld any bring him into subjection^ no word could overcome
^im, etc. In which Sermon, he highly commended and approved Th^mas Becket
Archbishop of Canterb^ry, who I wish our present s^cular Prelates would
observe this.
withdrew himself wholly from all Secular Affairs, and betook himself
only to the Government of the Church, and blamed himself much, for that he
had left the care of the Church, and wholly, yea, daily i^ployed himself in
the managing the Kings affairs; for which he now received no other reward for
his merits toward the King and Kingdom, but envy, and the danger of his
head, promising with tears, that hereafter he would be more diligent in the
Government of the Church; Which Sermon ended, to keep off all Royal violence
from him, he published certain Articles of Excommunication after the horrid
Popish manner, with Tapers burning, and Bells ringing; In which An insolent act
of a Trayterly Prelate.
Articles he Excommunicated all those who disturbed the peace of the King and
Kingdom, all Laymen who should lay violent hands on the Clergy, or invade
their Lands, Houses, Goods, or violate the Liberties of the Church, or Magna
Charta, or forge any crimes o^ any one, but especially every one that should
draw himself or any Bishop of his Province into the Kings hatred or
displeasure, or should falsely say they were guilty of Treason, or worthy of
any notable or capital punishment. Having published these Articles in the
Church of Canterbury, he commanded the Bishop of London, and all the
Suffragans of his Province, to proclaim them in their Churches and Diocese:
The King hearing of this strange insolency, writes to the Bishop of London,
acquaints him how trechero^sly the Archbishop had dealt with him, and how by
these Excommunications he thought to shift off his calling to an account; and
therefore commanded him not to publish them After which, the King sent Ralph
Ea^le of Stafford with two Notaries to the Archbishop, to summon, him in the
Kings Name without delay to appeare^ before him, to consult with his other
Nobles and Prelates concerning the affairs of England and France: The Bishop
gave no other answer but this, That he would deliberate upon it^ Soon after
there came certain Messengers from the Duke of Brabant, desiring to speak
with the Archbishop, who refusing to speak with them, they cited him by
Writings, which they hanged on the High Cross at Canterbury, to make payment
of a great sum of Money which the King of England had borrowed of him. The
King after this sends some Letters to the Prior and Covent of Canterbury, who
showing the Letters to the Archbishop, he on Ash Wednesday goes up into the
Pulpit in the Cathedral Church, and there calling the Clergy and people to
him, spoke much to them concerning his fidelity and integrity in the Kings
business: after which he commanded the Kings Letters to be read, and then
answered all the Crimes and Calumnies (as he ^earmed them) laid against him in
those Letters, and putting his Answer, which he there uttered, into Writing,
he published it throughout his whole Provinc^. The King hereupon makes a Reply
to his Answer; showing therein, how treacherously and unfaithfully the Bishop
had dealt with him: how he refused to come to his Answer, but in full
Parliament; and would not appear before him, upon general Summons, though he
offered him Safe Conduct, under his Great Seal: how he undutifully rayled
upon him and his Council, in his Excommunication, Letters, and Answers,
calling the King himself an Oppressor of his people, against Justice; and how
he endeavored by his strange practices, to stir up the People to Sedition
and Rebellion. Which Letters (at large recorded by Ant. Eccles. ^rit. p. 241.
to 255. Walsing. p. 138. ^s. 144. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 339, 350, 351.
Matthew Parker and others, with the Bishops Answers to them) the King
commanded to be published every where. The Archbishop thereupon publishes a
large Answer to them; in the beginning whereof he affirms, the Not^ this
proud in^olent Answer.
Bishops Authority to be above the Kings: and therefore, that the Kings
Highness ought to know, that he ought to be judged by the Bishops, not they
by him, nor yet to be directed at his pleasure. For who doubts, that the
Priests of Christ ought to be accounted the Fa^hers and Masters of Kings,
Princes, and all faithful people? And therefore it would be a strange
madness, if the Son should endeavor to subje^t the Father, or the Scholar
the Master, to their Censures. After which he shows, That Popes and Bishops
have excommunicated and judged diverse Emperors and Kings, and therefore they
ought not to judge Bishops; (by which kind of Logic, Bishops and Clergymen
must be Judges of all other men, yea, of Kings and Emperors, but no men else
Judges of them or their Actions^) concluding, That he had So his present
Successor and our other Prelates argued in Dr. Bast^^ckes c^se.
received no honor or advancement from the King, but only from God; and that
he would give an account in no Court, and to no person, but i^ Parliament. The
King hereupon writes (...) his predecessors, who were wont to honor and love
their Princes, and to make prayers and supplications for them, and to instruct
them with the spirit of meekness, begins against us and our Counselors in
the spirit of pride, a thread of rash faction, and perverse invention, by
prolonging his iniquity, and seeking the consolation of miserable men, namely,
to have many Consorts in punishment; And which is worse, he endeavors all he
may to precipi^ate into our ^ontempt and irreverence with lying speeches his
Suffragans in sin, with other devout people, and our loyal Subjects. And
albeit with God not the highest degree, but the best life is most approved, yet
he glorying in the altitude of his State, requires reverence to be given to
him, which yet he renders not to us, though it be due from him to us. For
whereas he and other Prelates of this Kingdom, who receive the Temporalties
of their Churches from us, out of the debt of sworn fidelity, ought to render
us fealty, honor and reverence; ^e alone, is not ashamed, Profide PERFIDIAM^
to render us perfidiousnesse in stead of Loyalty, Contumely in stead of Honor,
and Contempt in lieu of Reverence. Whereupon albeit we are and always have
been ready to reverence Spiritual Fathers us is mee^e; yet we ought not with
conniving eyes to pass by their offenses, which we behold to redound to the
peril of Us and Our Kingdom. But the same Archbishop complains, that
certain crimes in our fore-sayd Letters of excuse were objected against him
being absent, unheard, and undefended, and that he was judged guilty of
capital crimes; as if we, as he foolishly pretends, ^ad proceeded against
him criminally to the uttermost, which is not true, whereas we only acted the
part of an excuse^, compelled by necessity, lest we should seem to neglect
our Reputation. But let this calumnious Reprehender see if this complaint may
not justly be retorted on his own head, who falsely and maliciously with
assertive words has described Us his King, and our Counselors, (being
absent, unheard, undesended, not convicted) to be Oppressors and Transgressors
of the Laws; when as he is deservedly blameworthy, who incurs the crime
reprehended by himself, and condemns himself in that, wherein he judges
another, whiles himself is found guilty of the same, etc. But because it
becomes us not to contest with a contentious man, nor to consent to his
perverseness, we firmly enjoyne and command you in the Faith and Love wherein
you are obliged to us, that notwithstanding any Mandate of the Archbishop
himself, to which you ought not to yield obedience in derogation of our Royal
honor against the Oath of Allegiance made unto us, that you proceed to the
publishing of those things contained in our fore-sayd excusatory Letters
according to their order: And because we are, and ought to be principally
careful of the conservation of our Royal Rights and Prerogatives, which the
worthily to be recognized Priority of our Progenitors, Kings of England, has
magnifically defended, and the said Archbishop to stir up the Clergy and
people against us, and to hinder the Expedition of our War, which we have
principally undertaken ^y his Counsel, has made, and by others caused to be
made and published certain Denunciations and Publications of sentences of
Excommunications, and injurious Monitions, prejudicial to the Right and Royal
dignity of our Crown, and by them endeavors in many Anticles to take from us
the Jurisdiction notoriously known to be competent unto us, of which since we
are an unconquered King, we are known to be capable, and which we and our
Progenitors have peaceably used from old time, both with the knowledge and
sufferance of the chief Pontifs, and of the Prelates and Clergy of our
Kingdom, to the wounding of our Majesty, and the manifest derogation of our
Rights and Prerogatives Royal: We strictly command you under the peril that
shall ensue, that you do not at the said Archbishops command, or any others,
in any sort by you or others, make, or as much as in you is, suffer to be made
by others, these undue Denunciations, Publications, or Monitions, derogatory
and prejudicial to our Royal Rights, and Prerogatives, or any things else,
whereby our Liege people may be stirred up against us, or the Expedition of our
War by any way hindered, to the subver^ion of us and our Liege people, which
God forbid: And if any thing has been attempted by you in this kind, that
you speedily revoke it. By which we see what a loyal Subject this Arch-Prelate
was: Who to add to his former contempts, Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 409. Edit.
1610^
being required by King Edward the third to come to him at York, out of his
obstinate disloyal humor would not appear, by reason whereof, Scotland, the
same time was lost; SIMON ISLIP.
Yet was he suffered, though for this he deserved to lose his head.

The two next Archbishops, John Vfford, and Thomas Bradwardyn (swept away with
the Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 26^.^6^ Fox Acts and Monu^^^^^. p. Antiq. Eccles.
Brit. p. ^68. (...) 274.
Plague within one years space before their instalments) had neither time nor
opportunity to contest with their Sovereign; But their next Successor Simon
Islip, as he had great con^ests with the Bishop of Lincoln about the
University of Oxford, and with the Archbishop of York about Cross bearing,
which troubled the King and Kingdom much (of which more hereafter in a
peculiar Treatise of our Prelates Schisms:) So he got a grant from the Pope to
receive a Subsidy of all the Clergy of his Diocese (to wit, four pence out
of every Mark) to defray his Archie piscopall charges^ under pretext of which
by misinterpreting the Popes Bulls, he exacted from them a whole Tenth. He
endeavored to exempt Clerks from Temporal Jurisdiction and Courts in cases
of Felony; which being obtained, diverse Clerks abused their Privileges,
committed many heinous crimes, so as the Bishops at the Kings and Nobles
earnest request, were enforced to make a strict Decree for their future
punishment and restraint. Besides, he accompanied Thomas Lile Bishop of Ely to
the Bar, where he was arraigned and found guilty of Murder, yet admitted his
appeal to purge himself before him as his Metropolitan after the Jury had
found him guilty, in affront of Law and Justice: After which, Ely breaking
prison, fled to Rome, caused the Kings Judges to be Excommunicated, together
with their servants, and their Lands to be Interdicted; and such of them as
dyed Excommunicated, he caused to be unburied, and to be dug out of their
Graves in Churchyards, and cast into Mires; which caused great stirs in
England. At last this Archbishop riding to Magfield, fell into a Mire himself
with his horse; in which fall, the horse striving to recover himself, he was
plunged over head and ears and drenched in the Mire; and coming all wet into
Magfield, fell into a sleep before his clothes were put off, and so into a
Palsy, and there dyed. A just punishment for his cruelty to the dead Corpse o^
those Excommunicate persons. In his time there was a great mortality,
especially among Clergymen, 7^ Bishops dying in one year, Anno 1345. and 2.
the next.

SIMON LANGHAM.
Simon Langham, his next Successor, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 275. to 282.
Walsing. Hist. Angl. Ann. 1371. p. 181. Et Ypodigma Neust^^^, p. 132.
was successively both Chancellor and Treasurer of England, and in his time
all public Offices of the King and Kingdom were administered by Clergie^men,
for this Arch-Prelate was Chancellor; John Bishop of Bath, Treasurer^ David
Wollor, Priest, Master of the Rolls; William Wickham Archdeacon of Lincoln,
Keeper of the Privy Seal; John Troy, Priest; Treasurer of Ireland: Robert
Caldwell, Clerk, Treasurer of the Kings House; William Bug^rig, General
Receiver of the Duchy of Lancaster; William Asheby, Chancellor of the
Exchequer; John Newnham, one of the Chamberlaines of the Exchequer, and one of
the Keepers of the Treasury and Kings Jewels, and William de Mulso the other;
John Ronceby, Clerk of the Household, and Surveyor, and Comptroller of the
Kings works; Roger Barnburgh, and 7. more Clergymen, Clerks of the Chancery^
Richard Chesterfield, the Kings under Treasurer; Thomas Brantingham, the Kings
Treasurer in the parts of Guines, Mark, and Calice: All which Clerks abounded
likewise with Ecclesiastical Benefices and Dignities; some of them possessing
at least 20. Benefices and Dignities by the Popes own license, and having
further liberty to retain as many Livings as they could get: This was in the
year 1367. But not long after Anno 1371. upon a complaint of the Nobles in
Parliament, all Clergymen were thrust out of Temporal Offices, and Laymen
put into their places. See Holins^^d, p. 406. Caxton 7. part. An. 46. Ed. 3.
Holinshed out of Caxton says that the King this year in Parliament demanded
a subsidy of 50000. pound of the Laity, and as much of the Clergy. The
temporal men soon agreed to that payment, but the Clergy excused themselves
with fair words, and shi^ting answers, insomuch that the King took
displeasure with them, and deposed certain spiritual men from their office of
dignity, as the Chancelour, the Privy seal, the Treasurer, and such other, in
whose rooms he placed temporal men: where as Ca^ton in truth says, that this
subsidy was raised by the Clergy by good avisement out of their Lay Fee, and
that this their removal from Lay Offices was at the request and asking of the
Lords in hatred of men of holy Church; with which Walsingham accords. This
Arch-Prelate being very ambitious, was without the Kings privity, created by
Pope Urban Cardinal of S. Sixtus^ with which news the King being much
offended, seized on his Temporalties: At which the Archbishop nothing
troubled, did at last with much difficulty obtain leave from the King to go
to Rome destitute of his Family, and stripped of all his Archiepiscopall
Ensigns, where he shortly after dyed.

William Witlesey, WILLIAM WITLESEY.
who next enjoyed this See, had some See Antiq. Eccles. ^rit. p. 282.
differences with the King about granting Subsidies. At last he and the Clergy
condescended to grant an Annual Tenth upon condition that the King would free
them from the intolerable yoke of the Popes oppr^^^ions; But Will. Courtney the^
Bp o^ Hereford, after Arch-Bp of Cant.) standing up stoutly in the midst o^ the
Synod, said with a loud voice; That neither he nor the Clergies of his Diocese
would give any thing to the King, before the King had remedied those calamities
under which the Clergy had long time suffered: Whereupon, the King sent
Messengers to the Pope to Rome, to take away Provisions, Reservations, and
other Exactions wherewith the Clergy and people of England were grieved; and
put the Statute against Provisions in execution.

SIMON SUDBURY.
Simon Sudbury, who next succeeded him, about whose Election there was much
Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 283. to 205.
debate, was not long after his Instalment made Lord Chancellor of England,
and sundry other Clergymen formerly put from the Administration of Temporal
Offices and affairs, by his example and means were restored to them again;
those Laymen who managed them being disgracefully thrust out thereupon:
Wakefeld Bishop of Worcester, being made Lord High Treasurer. This Archbishop
in the insurrection of Jack Straw and Wat Tyler (stirred up by John Ball a
seditious Priest) was by this Vulgar rout (who purposed to destroy all Bishops
and Abbots) proclaimed an enemy both to the King and people; who were so
incensed against him as their greatest enemy, that apprehending him in the
Tower of London, where the King then was, even whiles he was saying Mass; they
drew him out thence, and with an Axe cut off his head like a Traitor. The
manner of which Execution is thus described by Walsing. Hist. Angl. An. 1381.
p. 261, 262, 263. Ypodigma Neust. p. 139. Godwins Cat. of Bi^hops, p. 102.103.
Graft^n, p. 336.
Wal^igham, Godwin, and others. These Rebels in all haste came to the Tower,
where the Court then was, requiring with great outcries the Archbishop. The
Archbishop, then Lord Chancellor, having had some inkling thereof the day
before, had spent all that night in prayer, and just when they called for him
was saying of Mass in the Chapel of the Tower. That ended, and hearing of
their coming, Let us now go (says he unto his men) surely it is better to
dye, seeing to live it can be no pleasure. With that, in came these murdering
Rebels, crying, Where is the Traitor, Where is the Traitor? He answered, I am
the Archbishop, (whom I think you seek) but no Traitor. With great violence
then they drew him out of the Chapel, and carried him to the Tower Hill^
seeing there nothing but swords and weapons; and hearing nothing but, Kill,
kill, away with the Traitor, etc. yet he was not so amazed, but with great
eloquence he could go about to persuade them, not to imbrue their hands in the
blood of their Archbishop, their chief Pastor: assuring them, that all the
Realm would be interdicted ^or it, and the fact must needs be punished first
or last by the temporal Law. And lastly, though these failed, God the just
Judge would revenge it, either in this, or in the world to come, if not both.
But these Varlots were so eagerly bent, that the very songs of the Sirens would
nothing have moved them; seeing therefore nothing but death before his face,
with comfortable words forgiving the executioner (that scarce ever requested
him so to do) with a very cheerful countenance he kneeled, and yielded
himself to their fury; once he was stricken in the neck so weakly, as that
notwithstanding, he kneeled still upright, and putting his hand up to the
wound, he used these words; A ha, it is the Hand of God. He had not remooved
his hand from the place, when a second stroke cut off his fingers ends, and
felled him to the ground: with much ado, having hacked and hewed his neck
with eight blows, they got off his head, upon Friday June 14. 1381. All which
day, and a part of the next, his body lay there headless, no man daring to
offer it burial: as for his head, they nailed his hood upon it, and so fixing
it upon a pole, set it on London Bridge. By all which it appears, that he was
very odious to the people, and no other but a Traitor in their estimation.

William Courtney, WILLIAM COURTNEY,
next Archbishop to him in succession, as he Ant. Eccles. Br^t. p. 282.284.
opposed the grant of a subsidy to the King whiles he was Bishop of Hereford,
as you heard before, in the Acts of Whitlesey; so in the year 1376. when he
was Bishop of London, when King Edward the third desired a pecuniary aid to
help to supply his wants, and defray his Wars, this proud Prelate withstood
these payments, complaining, that many injuries were done to him and to William
Wickam Bishop of Winchester, which put into writing, he tendered to the Synod,
and requested that nothing might be granted to the King before he had made
satisfaction to them for these injuries, which the Synod assented to^ and
thereupon Wickam, formerly banished by the King, was restored to his
Bishopric, and admitted into his Synod. Antiqu. Ec^l. Brit. p. 296, to 300,
etc. Holin. p. 475, 476.
He received his Arch^Bishopricke by provision from the Pope against the Law,
and made great scruple whether he might have his Crosier borne before him, or
whether he might marry the Queen of Bo^omia his Sister, to King Richard the
second, before he had received his Pall from ^he Pope; which ye^ he did at
last, interposing this wary Protestation, that he did it not in contempt o^
the Court of Rome. He excommunicated the Bailiffes o^ Canterbury, for p^nishing
adultery and other crimes, which were to be punished by the Prelates; who
neglected for to do it. After which he excommunicated one Richard Ismonger of
Ailsford in Kent, because he corrected criminals by Lay Authority, which were
to be punished by the Prelates, and so violated the privileges of the Church:
he humbly desired to be absolved, promising by oath, never hereafter to violate
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and that he would undergo any punishment for
his former contumacy and rashness that the Arch^Bishop should impose upon him;
who enjoined him this pun^shment: First, that in the Market place of
West^alling in the greatest assembly of the people, he should for three Market
days together be stripped naked, and bastinadoed with clubs; and after that he
should undergo the same punishment as often both at Maidstone and Canterbury,
and that after his last castigation at Canterbury, he should enter into the
Cathedral Church there, naked, and offer a Taper of five pound weight at
Thomas Beckets shrine: which punishment if he refused to perform, he should
relapse into his former state of excommunication: a strange punishment for the
Kings Officer to undergo, only for executing justice upon delinquents in the
Prelates defaults. This Arch-Prelate so far incensed King Richard the second,
that he commanded his goods, and temporalties to be feased, and the Bishop
himself was glad to hide his head in secret corners, with a few attendants
till he had made his peace with the King. In this Archbishops time, there were
great contests between him and his Suffraganes, who opposed him in his
Metropol^ticall visitation, and in levying the tax of four pence the pound on
the Clergy within his Province, which he to their great oppr^ssion had procured
from the pope: He had a great contestation with the Earl of Arundell, whose
servants he excommunicated for fishing in one of his Ponds in the Manor of
Southmalling in Chichester Diocese; whereupon the Earl complained to the
King, who hearing the cause, commanded the excommunication directed to the
Bishop of Chichester, to be revoked. In this Archbishops time, the Statute of
Provisions and Praemunire was enacted; which the Pope and Prelates labored
forthwith to cause the King to repeal, to which the Nobles and Commons would
by no means consent. Ann. Dom. 1387. when diverse causes of high Treason were
debated in Parliament, Ant. Eccl. Brit. p. 299, 300^
the Archbishop with his Suffraganes who by Law could not be present in the
House, in debating causes of blood, departing the House made this Protestation:
In the Name of God, Amen. Whereas of right and by the custom of the Realm of
England, it appertains to the Archbishop of Canterbury for the time being, as
also to his Suffragans, his Brethren and fellow Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and
all other Prelates whatsoever, holding of our Lord the King by Therefore they
sit there only by their Tenure, as Barons, not as Bishops.
Barony, to be personally present in all Parliaments of the King as Peers of
the said Realm, and there of the businesses of this Kingdom, and other things
there usually handled, with the ^est of the Peers of (...) said Kingdom, and
others having right to be there present, to consul^, and handle, ordain,
decree, and define, and to do other things, which are there ready to be
executed in time of Parliament, in all, and every of which, we William
Courtney, Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. for us and our Suffragans, fellow
Bishops, and Confreers, as likewise for the Abbots, Priors, and all Prelates
aforesaid, protest, and every one of them here present by himself or his
proxy, publickely and expressly protests, that we and every of us, intend and
intends, will and wills to be present in this present Parliament, and
others as Peers of the said Realm, after the usual manner, to consult,
handle, ordain, decree, and define, and to exercise other things with others
who have right to be present in the same, our state and order, and each of them
in all things always saved. But because in the present Parliament some matters
are handled, at which by the de^rees of sacred Canons it is not lawful for us,
or any to be any ways personally present, for those things we will and every
of them protest, and every of them here present protests likewise; that we
neither intend nor desire, as by Law we neither can nor ought, neither does any
of them intend or desire to be present any way in this present Parliament,
whiles such matters are or shall be in debate, but we and every of them will in
this part wholly absent our selves. And we further protest, and every of them
protests that for this our absence we neither intend, nor will, nor does any
of them intend or will, that the Process made, or to be made in this present
Parliament, as the which we neither may, nor ought to be present, as far as
it concerns us or any of them, shall in future times be any way impugned,
debilitated or infringed. Which I recite to show, that Parliaments may be held
and decree things without Bishops, and to check the pride of those Prelates
who this Parliament pleaded hard to be present at the debate of the Lord
Straffords Cause. I cannot here pretermit the treacherous and bloody practice of
William Cour^ney against the true Saints of God, and the Kings most loyal
Subjects, for he being not content solemnly to Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 404,
etc. See Walsing. Hist. Ang. p. 300, to 330. Holinsh^d, p. 482, etc.
excommunicate and persecute John Wiclife, John Ashton, Nicholas Herford, and
Philip Repingdon, both at Pauls-crosse and at Oxford, for the true profession
of the Gospel, did moreover by all means possible solicit King Henry the
fourth, to join with all the power of his Temporal Sword, for that he well
perceived, that hitherto as yet the Popis^ Clergy had not authority sufficient
by any public Law or Statute of this Land, to proceed unto death against any
person whatsoever, in case of Religion but only by the usurped tyranny and
example of the Court of Rome: Where note (gentle Reader) for thy better
understanding, the practice of the Romish Prelates, in seeking the Kings help
to further their bloody purpose against the good Saints of God. This King being
but young, and under years of ripe judgment, partly induced, or rather
seduced by importune suite of the foresaid Archbishop; party also either for
fear of the Bishops, (for Kings cannot always do in their Realms what they
will) or else perhaps enticed by some hope of a Sublidy to be gathered by the
Clergy, was content to adjoyne his private assent (such as it was) to the
setting down of an Ordinance, which was indeed the very first Law that is to
be found made against Religion and the Professors thereof, bearing the name of
an Act made in the Parliament, holden at Westminster, Ann. 5. Rich. 2. c. 5.
commonly entitled, An Act against the Lollards (the Contents whereof you may
read in the Statutes at large, and in Master Fox.) This Act, though it bears
the name of a Statute both in written and Printed Books, yet it was
fraudulently and unduly devised by the Prelates only, and a mere pernicious
forgery to advance their own Episcopal power and Jurisdiction, invade the
Subjects liberties, tread down Religion, and shed our Martyrs blood; with
which the Commons were so highly offended, as they had just cause so to be,
that in the U^as of Saint Michael next following, at a Parliament summoned and
holden at Westminster, the 6. year of the said King, among sundry petitions
made to the King by the Commons, whereunto he assented; there is one in this
form, against this spurious Act of theirs^ See Master Full^rs Argument, p. 8,
9.
Item, prayen the Commons, that whereas an Estatute was made the last
Parliament in these words: It is ordained in this present Parliament, that
Commissions from the King be directed to the Sheriffs and other Ministers of
the King, or to other sufficient persons, after, and according to the
Certificates of the Prelates thereof, to be made unto the Chancery from time to
time, to arrest all such Preachers, and their Fautors, Maintainers, and
Abettors, and them to detain in strong Prison, until they will justify
themselves according to reason, and Law of holy Church. And the King wille^h
and commands, that the Chancellor make such Commissions at all times, as
shall be by the Prelates or any of them certified, and thereof required, as is
aforesaid. The which was Note here the Prelates forgery of an Act of Parliament.
never agreed nor granted by the Commons; but whatsoever was moved therein was
without their assent. That the said Statute be therefore disannulled. For it is
not in any wise their meaning, that either themselves, or such as shall succeed
them, shall be further justified or bound by the Prelates, then were their
Ancestors in former times: whereunto is answered, Il plest an Roy. i. e. The
King is pleased. This supposed Statute, thus fraudulently devised by the
Prelates only, was in like manner most injuriously, and unorderly executed by
them; for immediately upon the publishing of this Law, without further warrant
either from the King or his Council, Commissions under the Great Seal of
Engl^nd, were made in this form, Richard, by the Grace of God, etc. Witness
my self at Westminster the 26. day of June, in the 6. year of our R^igne.
Without more words of Warrant under writ^en, such as in like cases are both
usual and ^equisite, viz. Per ipsu^ Regem, per Regem and Concilium; or Per
breve de privato Sigillo. Al, or any of which words being utterly wanting in
this place, as may be seen in the Kings Records of that time; it must
therefore be done either by warrant of this foresaid Statute, or else without
any warrant at all. And whereas the said Statute appointed the Commissions to
be directed to the Sheriff, or other Ministers of the Kings, or to other
sufficient persons, learned for the arresting of such persons: they
fraudulently procured the said Commissions to be directed to the Archbishop
and his Suf^ragans, being both Judges, Accusers, Witnesses, and Parties in the
Case, authorizing them further, without either the words, or reasonable meaning
of the said Statute, to imprison them in their own houses, or where else
pleased them: Yea, such was this Archbishops, and the other P^elates Treachery
and villainy in this particular, notwithstanding this unjust and spurious Law
was repealed upon the forementioned Petition of the Commons, and the fraud of
the framers thereof sufficiently discovered; yet such means was there made by
the Prelates, that this Act of repeal was never published, nor ever since
imprinted with the rest of the Statutes of that Parliament. Insomuch as the
said repeal being concealed, Note here the injustice, treachery, and bloody
practices of the Prelates.
like Commissions and other Process were made from time to time, by virtue of
the said Bastard Statute, as well during the Reign of this King, as since
against the Professors of Religion; as Master Fox in his Acts and Monuments,
both shows, and proves at large. Now what is this no^orious forgery, this
unjust and fraudulent execution of this pretended Act of Parliament, even after
its repeal, by this Archbishop and his Brethren, but the very height of
Treachery, Villainy, Schism, and Sedition; yea, an In^ernall policy, to advance
Episcopal Jurisdiction, erect a bloody Inquisition, and shed our Martyrs
blood, contrary both to the Laws of God and the Realm? To end with this
Prelate, Thomas Walsin. ^ist. Aug, p. 348 Anti. E^cl^. Brit. p. 300.
Amm. 1385. this King called a Parliament at London, wherein the Laity granted
the King one Quindisme and a half, upon condition that the Clergy would give
him one Disme and a half. This Archbishop stiffely opposed this condition
saying, That it ought not to be made, especially seeing the Church ought to be
free, and no ways to be taxed by Laymen; adding, that he would rather
endanger his head for this cause, then suffer the Church of England to be so
much inslaved. Which Answer so moved the company of Commons, that the Knights
of the Counties, with certain of the Nobles of the Kingdom, with great fury
petitioned, that the Temporalties of the Ecclesiastickes might be taken away,
saying, That the Clergy were grown to such excessive pride, that it would be a
work of piety and charity, by the taking away of their Temporalties, which did
puff them up, to compel them to be more humbly wise. These things they cried
out, these things they presented to the King in short writings, thinking to
bring this Petition to effect. The Archbishop to prevent the danger,
consulting with his Clergy, granted the King one Tenth very willingly; which
the King accepted of, and so for the present the unsatiable covetousness of
the Enemies of the Church (says Walsingham) was frustrated, and this Clause of
the Laity obliterated out of the Bill.

Anti. Eccle. Bri. p. 303, to 311. Godwin p. 152, etc: Fox Acts and Monuments,
p. 533^ Grafton p. 390, 391, Holin. p. 488. etc. to 514. Polychronicon, l. ult.
c: 8. Walsingham hist. An^^ p: 397, to 403.
Thomas Arundell his immediate successor, THOMAS ARVNDEL
by provision from the Pope, against the Law, as he resigned his
Chancellourship of England, so soon as ever he was made Archbishop, as
incompatible with his function (as Thomas Becket, Walter Reynalds, John
Stratford, with other his predecessors had commendably done before, witness
Matthew Parker, Godwin, and Fox, in their lives, which I wish our secular
Prelates would now imitate, though not in resuming this office again, as he
did at last:) so he was scarce warm in his Seat, when by King Richard the
seconds displeasure, he was dispossessed of the same, for not only the
Archbishops Brother the Earl of Arundell, was attainted and condemned of High
Treason against the King in full Parliament, for which he was presently
executed; but the Archbishop himself was by Sir John Bushy, in the behalf of
the Commonalty, accused of high Treason, for that he had evil counseled his
Majesty, and induced him to grant Letters of Pardon to his brother the Earl of
Arundell, being a rank Traitor. After which he was found guilty and condemned
of High Treason, adjudged unto perpetual exile (for conspiring to take the
King, the Dukes of Lancester and York, prisoners, and to hang and draw the
other Lords of the Kings Council,) and commanded within forty days to depart
the Realm, under pain of death. He thus banished got to Rome, and found such
favor with the Pope, as that he first writ earnestly to the King for his
Restitution: the King writes a sharp Letter against him to the Pope, wherein
he shows, That he plotted Treason against him, and endeavored to take away
his life; that he deserved rather to be quartered and executed as a Traitor,
then banished; that the whole Kingdom wondered and were offended, he had dealt
so mildly with him, and not executed him as he deserved; that he was a man
impatient of peace, of a Traiterous and seditious spirit, so as he could not
restore him, or re-admit him into the Realm without danger of his Life and
Kingdom; and therefore, though all the World consented to his Restitution, yet
he would never do it whiles he breathed. Upon which Letters, the Pope not
only refused to restore him, but at the Kings request, made Roger Walden Arch
Bishop in his stead.

The Pope hereupon conferred the Arch-bishopricke of St. Andrews in Scotland,
with other livings here in England, by way of provision, upon Arundel^ who
confederating afterward with Henry Duke of Lancaster, against King Richard,
they levied what forces they could, and landed with them in England so that at
last King Richard upon parley with this Arundell, whom he had banished, was
forced to resign his Crown, and to render himself prisoner to the Duke of
Lancaster, with promise of saving his life only: Hereupon the Archbishop
after the Resignation made in parliament, See Fabian, par. 7, p. 351.
Crowned the Duke King, and made a Brief Collation on these words, 1 King. 9.
A man shall Reign over the People; Tending wholly to the praise of the new
King, and disparagement of the old; Recorded at large by Holinshed: After which
he thrust Walden out of his See, and got restitution of it again, the Pope
confirming his Restoration, and declaring Walden to be an intruder; who after
a while was made Bishop of London. This Archbishop thus restored to his See,
and in high favor with the King, Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 474. to 540.
proved a bloody persecutor and butcher of Gods Saints; to which end following
the steps of his predecessor Courtney, he, with the rest of the Bishops,
fraudulently and surreptitiously procured by crafty^ means and subtle
pretenses, the cruel bloody Statute Ex Officio, as Master Fox does style it
(to wit, 2. Hen. 4. c. 15.) to pass the Upper House of Parliament as a Law,
without the Commons assent or Privity, whose assent they yet foisted into the
written and Printed See I^annes de Aton. Constit. Prove. f. 104.
Coppies of that Act, to blind the world withal, and give it the color of a
Statute, though it be not to be found in the Parliament Roll the Commons never
consenting to it, as Mr. Fox has showed at large in his Acts and Monuments, p.
539.540. and the Statute of 25. Hen. 8. c. 14. witnesses: which bastard
Statute, by color of which alone most or all our English Martyrs were
afterward imprisoned, burned, tortured, and put to death) being thus unduly
obtained, this bloody Arch-Prelate, forthwith caused many godly Martyrs to be
burnt to ashes, and the Worthy honorable Lord Cobham with sundry others to be
put to death; by reason whereof the Kingdom of the Pope, and of the Prelates
his members here in this Realm, began to be^ so strong, that none durst stir
or once mutter against them. The Bishops having the King so full on their side,
armed moreover with these two forged Laws, with imprisonments, sword, fire,
and faggot, reigned and ruled as they listed, as Kings and Princes within
themselves: So strong were they of power that no humane force was able to stand
against them, so exalted in pride and puffed up in glory, that they thought all
things to be subject to their reverend majesty's. Whatsoever they set forth and
decreed, though in their own names, rites, and by their own authorities, it
must of all m^n be received and obeyed. And it was their Superstitious
blindness, and curious vanity, that whatsoever ^oy came once in their fantacy,
it was straightway determined and established for a Law of all men to be
observed, were it never so ^rivilous or superstitious; yea such was the pride,
vainglory, and insolency of this Archbishop Arundel, (who stuffed the Church
with Ceremonies, and vain Traditions of men as his Successors does now) that
he in great snuff suspended all the Churches in London, not only with the
Steeple and Bells, but also with the Organs, (because they did not ring ^he
Bells for a triumph at his coming, when he passed by the high street of
London, with his Cross carried in pomp before him,) till the Ministers and
Officers of the said Churches should do penance, and give him competent
satisfaction for this indignity. Now what shall we think or conclude of these
two last Archbishops, Courtney and Arundel, who thus took upon them to forge
even public Acts of Parliament for the advancement of their own^
Antichristian Hierarchy, the suppressing of the Gospel, the murdering and
destroying the Kings best Subjects, and the effusion of so much Martyrs blood,
but that they were monsters of Treachery, Tyranny, inhumanity Traitors and
enemies both to the Church and Commonwealth, yea the very Devils and Popes
Arch-agents to effect their wills. But God was even with the latter of them,
Arundel, who shutting up the mouths, and silencing the tongues of many
faithful Ministers, his own Tho. Gascon. in Dict. Theol. Antiq. Eccles. Brit.
p. 311. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 276. the old Edition. Godwin, p. 110.
Tongue at last by Gods just judgment swelled so big in his mouth, as he was
able neither to ea^e, drink, no^ speak in many days, and so dyed of hunger
after he had starved so many poor Christian Souls, and burned their bodies
into ashes. In the year 1403. King Henry the fourth, intending to go into
North Wales to chasten the presumptuous doings of the unruly Welsh-men, and
wanting money to wage his Soldiers, there were some that counseled him to be
bold with the Bishops, Holinsh^d p. ^24.
and supply his wants with their superfluity. But as it fortuned, Arundel
Archbishop of Canterbury was there present, who in the name of all the rest
boldly made answer, It was spoken like a Prelate.
that none of his Province should be spoiled by any of those naughty persons;
but that first with hard stripes they should understand the price of their
harsh enterprise. But the King nevertheless used the matter so with the
Bishops for their good wills, that the Archbishop at length to pleasure him,
calling the Clergy together, got a grant of one Tenth, toward the Kings
necessary charges. And thereby secured their temporalities for that time.
Thomas Walsing. Hist. Aug. An. 1414.414.415. Holin^^^d, p. 526.
The next year following, a Parliament being called to Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p.
282. p. 308. Speed. p. 775. Walsingham Yp^dig. N^ustr. p. 166.
consult how the King might be relieved with money for defense of the Realm
against the Scots and Welshmen at home, and the Britains, Flemmins, and
Frenchmen abroad, it was thought most expedient, that the spirituality should
be deprived of their temporal possessions to relieve the Kings necessity.
Hereupon rose great alteration between the Clergy and the Laity, the Knights
affirming, that they had often times served the King, not only with their
goods, but also with their persons in very great dangers and jeopardies, whilst
the spiritualty ^it at home, and help the King nothing at all. Whereupon this
Archbishop stoutly answered, That the Clergy had always given to the King as
much as the Laity had done, considering they had oftener given their Tenthes to
him then the Laity their Fifteenes: also, that more of their Tenants went to
the Kings wars, than of the Tenants of them of the Lay fee: besides this they
prayed day and night for the Kings good success against his enemies. When the
Speaker named Sir John Cheinie, in replying by plain speech, seemed but little
to esteem such prayers of the Church, the Archbishop was set in a great
chafe, and with sharp words declaring what he thought must needs follow both
of the King and Kingdom, when Prayers and Suffrages of Churchmen came to be
so little set by, he grew to such impatiencie, that he flatly told the
Speaker, He spoke like ^ Lord.
That although he seemed little to esteem of the Religion of the Clergy, ye^
he would not have him to think that he should thus take away the possessions
of the Church, without finding such as would seek to withstand him: For if
(said he) the Archbishop of Canterbury may live, thou shall have ^o^ taking
away any manner of thing that is his. After this when the Archbishop perceived
that the King winked at these matters, he rose from his place, and coming
before the King he kneeled down, and besought him to consider, how through the
Grace and favor of Almighty God, he had obtained the Kingdom; and therefore
ought to remember his first purpose and intent, which was, to give to every man
his right, so far as in him say^ he^ willed him likewse to have in
consideration the Oath which he so willingly had received, that is, that he
should advance the Honor of the Church, and the Ministers thereof cherish and
maintain; Also to have in mind the danger and dishonor that redounded to
such as brake their oaths; so that he besought him to permit and suffer the
Church to enjoy the privileges and Liberties, which in time of his
Predecessors it had enjoyed, requesting him to stand in awe of that King by
which all Kings did ra^gne, and to sear the censures and condemnations that
those in^urred, which took or bereft from the Church any good or right
belonging to it, who most certainly (said he) are accursed. When the
Archbishop had used this or the like speech, the King commanded him to go to
his seat again, assuring him, that his intent and purpose was, to leave the
Church in as good state or better than he found it. The Archbishop herewith
turning to the Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament, said unto them, You and
such others as you be, have given counsel unto the King and his Predecessors
to confiscate and take into their hands the goods and possessions of the Cells
which the Frenchmen and Normans possessed here in England, and affirmed, that
by the same he and they should heap up great riches; and indeed those goods
and possessions were worth many thousands of gold, and yet it is most true,
that the King this day is not one half pound of silver better thereby, for you
have begged and gotten them out of his hands, and have appropriated the same to
your selves, so that we may conjecture very well, that you request to have our
Temporalties, not to advance the Kings profit, but to satisfy your own greedy
covetousness; for undoubtedly if the King (as God forbid he should) did
accomplish your wicked purposes and minds, he should not be one farthing the
richer the year next after: and truly sooner will I suffer this head of mine
to be cut off from my shoulders, then that the Church should lose the least
right that appertains to it. The Knights said little, but yet they proceeded
in their suite to have their purpose forward. Which the Archbishop perceiving,
(as another Argus^ having his eyes on every side, to mark what was done)
labored so to disappoint their doings, that he wan the favor of certain of
the Temporal Lords to assist him, who constantly avouched by their consents,
that the Church should never be spoiled of her Temporalties; and herein they
acquitted the Archbishop and Prelates, one pleasure for another, which they
had done for them before, when the Commons in this Parliament required, that
all such Lands and revenues which sometime belonged to the Crown, and had
been given away by the King, or by his predecessors King Edward or King
Richard, should be restored again to the Kings use; unto which request the
Archbishop and other the Prela^es would in no wise consent. Thus by this
Archbishop Arundel, that Petition of the Commons the ^pirituall Temporalities
came to naught. Afterward, in an Tho. Waldens^^ Hist. A^g. ^410. p. 422.
Ypodig. Neu^^. p. 174. H^lin. p. 536. Fabian, Ann. 1410. part. 7. p. 386, 387.
other Parliament Anno 1410. the Commons of the ^ower House exhibited a Bill to
the King and Lords of the Upper House, containing in effect as follows. To
the most excellent Lord our King: and to all the Nobles in this present
Parliament assembled, your faithful Commons do ^umbly signify, that our
Sovereign Lord the King might have of the Temporal possess^ons, Lands, and
Tenements which are lewdly spent, consumed and wasted by the Bishops, Abbots
and Priors within this Realm, so much in value as would suffice to find and
sustain an 150. Earls, 1500. Knights, 6200. Esquires, and 100. Hospitals more
than now be: which is more largely and particularly related in Fabian. The King
(as some write) mis-liked the motion, and therefore commanded, that from
thenceforth they should not presume to study about any such matters. Another
thing the Commons then sued to have granted to them, but could not obtain:
That Clerks convict should no^ thenceforth be delivered to Bishops Prisons:
Moreover they demanded to have the Stat^te either revoked or qualified, which
had been enacted without their consent in the Second year of this Kings
reign, against such as were reputed to be Heretics or Lollards. But the King
seemed so highly to favor the Clergy, that the Commons were answered
plainly, that they should not come by their purpose, but rather that the said
statute should be made more rigorous and sharp for the punishment of such
persons: and all this by means of this bloodly Archbishop Arundel, of whom we
have heard sufficient.

HENRY CHICH^LY.
Henry Chichely, being elected Arch Bishop by the Monks of Canterbury with the
Kings consent, immedia^ly after Arundels death, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 312.315
God^ins Catal. p. 159. Walsingh. Hist. Aug. p. 432.
he refused to accept of this their Legal election; and against the express
Statutes of the Realm, touching Provisions and Premuni^es, accepted of the Sea
only by Colla^ion from Pope John the 23. in affront both of the King and those
Laws, which the Pope endeavored in vain to get repealed, and therefore
opposed in point of practice all that he might, reserving by a Decree of the
Council of Constance all vacancie to his own dispo^all, bestowing all the
Bishoprics of England as soon as they were void at his own pleasure, by the
Archbishops connivence, in affront of the Laws and the Kings royal Edicts.
Antiq. Eccl^s. Brit. p. 317. to 322. where the ^opes B^ll and ^he Arch-Bi^hops
Lettersare ^t large recited.
This Arch-Prelate published throughout his Province Pope Martins Bulls, for
the extirpation of the Wicklevists and Hussites by force of arms, and promised
the same Indulgences to those who should take up the Crossado and war against
them, as those enjoyed who went to the holy Land to fight against the Sarecens.
For which good service the same year ( Anno 1429.) he received the Title of
the Cardinal Presbyter of S. Eusebius from Pope Martin the 5. who also created
him his Legate here in England, without the Kings privity, and contrary to Law.
Antiq. Eccl^s. Brit. p. 322.
But to color the business, lest he should seem to receive that power
Legatine without the Kings permission and License, against the Laws and
Customs of the Realm; one Richard Condray was made the Kings procurer, that
he might appeal to the next general Council from all injuries, grievances,
and prejudices offered or to be offered by the Pope or Court of Rome to the
King and the Kingdom. Therefor as soon as it was known that the Archbishop
had received this Legatin power without the Kings privity or license, Condray
made this appeal to Humfrey Duke of Gloucester Lord Protector, and others o^ the
Kings privy Council, in writing. In which he expressed, that no Legate of the
Sea Apostolic ought to come into the Kingdom of the King of England or other
his Lands or Dominions, but at the vocation, petition, requisition or entreaty
o^ the King of England for the time being, the Roman Pontifex tolerating and
consenting thereto, as well tacitly as expressly: in which appeal
notwithstanding, if the said Arch Bishop, not as a Legate but as a Cardinal
would say, open, or propound any thing from the Pope to the King, it might be
lawful for him to do it. In which the King would so far assi^t as he might
do it by the Laws and Privileges of his royal Crown, and of his famous
Kingdom of England. The appeal being read, the Archbishop in the presence of
the Prelates and Nobles there present, confessed and protested That it was not,
nor is, nor should be his intention by his entering into England, nor by any
things done or to be done by him, spoken or to be spoken, for to exercise the
Legatine power which he had undertaken, without the Kings permission, or to
derogate in any thing from the rights, privileges, liberties, or customs of
the King or Kingdom, or t^ contradict them, but to preserve, defend,
maintain, and roborate all and every of them. By this device he deluded both
the King, Counsel, and Laws: how well he kept this his protestation, his
subsequent Acts will evidence. For immediately after he made a Synodicall
Constitution, Lindwood Pr^vinc. Constable. 3. Tit. de Clericis conjugatis p. 94.95.
That no married man or Lay man should exercise any Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, or be Judge or Register in any Ecclesiastical Court in causes of
correction of the soul, under pain of incurring the greater excommunication
ipso facto, if they offered to intermeddle in any of the premises cont^a^y to
the Councels prohibition; which further makes void all citations, process and
Acts whatsoever, had and made by Laymen in the Cases aforesaid, and suspends
all Ordinaries from the exercise of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and ingresse
into the Church, who should grant any married or Lay man power to exercise any
Ecclesiastical Office or authority under them. What the true intent of this
Arch-Prelates Constitution was, and how far this Decree entrenched upon the
Kings Prerogative Royal, appears by the Statute of 37. H. 8. c. 17. (made
purposely to repeal this Constitution) which I shall here insert. 37. H. 8.
cap. 17. entitled, A^ Act that Doctor^ of Civil Law, being married, may
exercise Eccl^siasticall Jurisdiction.
In most humble wise show and declare unto your highness your most faithful,
humble, and obedient Subjects the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons of this present Parliament assembled, that whereas your Majesty is, and
has always justly been by the Word of God supreme head in Earth of the
Church of England, and has full power and authority, to correct, punish, and
repress all manner of Heresies, errors, vices, abuses, Idolatries,
hypocrisies, and Superstitions^ springen and growing within the same; and to
exercise all manner of Jurisdictions, commonly called Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. Nevertheless, the Archbishop of Rome and his Meaning our
Engli^h Prelates.
adherents minding utterly as much as in him lay, to Note this.
abolish, ob^cure, and delete such power given by God to the Princes of the
earth, whereby they might gather and get to themselves the government and rule
of the world; have in To wit, under Henry Chich^ly, forecited.
their Counsels and Synods Provincial made, ordained, and established, and
decreed diverse ordinances and constitutions, that no Lay or married man should
or might exercise or occupy any Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, nor should be
any Judge or Register^ in any Court comm^nly called Ecclesiastical Cour^, Not^
this.
lest their ^alse and usurped power, which they pretended and went about to
have in Christ's Church, should decay, wax vile, and of no reputation, as by
the said Councels and Constitutions Provincial appears: which standing and
remaining in their effect not abolished by your Graces Laws, did seem to
appear to make greatly for the said usurped power of the said Bishop of Rome,
and to be directly repugnant to your Majesty's Title of supreme head of the
Church and prerogative Royal, your Grace being a Layman: and albeit the said
Decrees, Ordinances and Constitutions by a Statute made the 25^ year of your
most noble reign be utterly abolished, frustrate and of none effect, yet
because the contrary thereunto is not used nor put in practice by ^he
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, and other Ecclesiastical persons, who have
Where then is ^ur Bishops pretend^d Superiority and Jurisdiction by Divine
right^
no manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but by, under, and from your royal
Majesty, it adds or a^ the least may give occasion to some evil disposed
persons to think and little to regard the proceeding, and censures
Ecclesiastical made by your Highness and your Vicegerent, Officialls,
Commissaries, Judges, and Visitators^ being also Lay and married men, to be of
little or none effect or force, whereby the people gathers heart and
presumption to do evil, and not to have such reverence to your most godly
injunctions and proceedings, as becomes them. But forasmuch as your Majesty
is the only and undoubtedly supreme head of the Church of England, and also
of Ireland, to whom by Scripture all authority and power is wholly given to
hear, and determine all causes Ecclesiastical, and to correct all vice and
sin whatsoever, and to all such persons as your Not the Bishops.
Majesty shall appoint thereunto; that in consideration thereof, as well for
the instruction of ignorant persons, as also to avoid the occa^ion of the
opinion aforesaid, and setting forth of your prerogative royal and supremacy,
It may therefore please your Highness, that it may be ordained and enacted by
authority of this present Parliament, that all and singular as well Lay as those
that be married now, or hereafter shall be married, being Doctors of the Civil
Law, lawfully create and made in any University which shall be made, ordained,
constituted, and deputed to be any Chancellor, Vicar General, Commissary,
Official, Scribe, or Register by your Not by Bishops.
Majesty, or any of your Heirs, or Successors to any^ Archbishop, Bishop,
Archdeacon, or other person whatsoever, having To wit, by special Pate^t
which Bishop^ ^hen had, and none have ^o^.
authority under your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, to make any
Chancellor, Vicar General, Commissary, Off^ciall, or Register, may lawf^lly
execute and exercise all mann^r of Jurisdiction commonly called Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and all Censures and Corrections appertaining o^ any wise
belonging unto the same, albeit such person or persons be Lay, married, or
unmarried, so that they be Doctors of the Civil Law, as is aforesaid, any Law,
Constitution, or Ordinance to the contrary notwi^hstanding. By this Act it is
apparent, that the end of the former Constitution was trecherously to undermine
and abolish the Kings Prerogative Royal in causes Ecclesiastical, and to make
the Pope and our Prelates absolute Monarchs, and our Kings mere Ciphers to
execute their Mandates, when by the express words of this Law, with that of 1.
Ed. 6. c. 2.26. H. 8. c. 1.1. Eliz. c. ^.5. Eliz. c. 1.8. Eliz. c. 1. and 1.
and 2. Phil. and M^ry c. 8. it is most clearly resolved, that our Archbishops
and Bishops, have no manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical over other
Ministers by any divine right, (as they now See Bishop Halls 3. late ^ookes of
Episcopacy.
vainly, if not traitorously pret^nd) but by, from, and under our Kings, in
whose name and right, and under whose Seal alone all their Ecclesiastical
process ought to issue, as has been See the Breviate of the Prelates
intolerable Usurpations, both upon the Kings Prerogative Royal, and the
Subjects Liber^ies.
elsewhere plentifully manifested, it being no less than a Praemunire, by the
Statute of 1. Edw. 6. c. 2. ^or any Bishops or Ecclesiastical Judges to issue
out processes in their own names, and under their own Seals, as now our
Prelates do. This Law of Praemunire, was such a curb to our usurping Prelates,
that this Arch Prelate Chichely, in the last Synod he held Anno. 1439. without
delay or difficulty granted King Henry the sixth a Tenth, and promised him large
supplies from the Clergy in all things, if he would abrogate those hard Laws
of Praemunire, wherewith the Clergy were very falsely accused and often taken
and ensuared as in unjust s^ares; (whereas in truth those Laws were the
principal safety both of King and people, to preserve and free them from the
unjust encroachments of Popes and Prelates, upon their Liberties, Laws, and
Estates, which made the Pope and them so frequently to solicit their
repeal.) And by his countenance Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 323. and Li^dwood his
Epistle Dedicatory before his Institutions.
William Lindwood collected and set out the Provincial Constitutions of the
Arch-Prelates of Canterbury in their Synods, in affront of the Kings
prerogative Royal and the Laws of the Realm, dedicating them to this
Arch-Prelate, and entreating him to put them in due Execution being neglected,
and quite disregarded formerly, both by Prelates, Judges, and people, as he
complains in his Epistle Dedicatory to him. In brief, when Fabian. part. 7.
p. 390.139. Hall. An. 2. H 5. f 35.36. etc^ Holins^. p. 54^.547, etc. 583.
in the Parliament held at London, Anno 1414. under King Henry the fifth, the
Commons reviewed their former Petition in Parliament made to King Henry the
fourth but four years before, to seize the Bishops and Abbots Temporalities,
showing how many Earls, Knights, and Esquires they would maintain; The
Bishops and Abbots whom it touched very near, much ^earing^ the issue^
determined to assay all ways to put by, and overthrow this Bill, and minding
rather to bow than break, they first agreed to offer the King a great sum of
money, to stay this new moven Demand. The cause of this offer seemed to some of
the wise Prelates neither decent nor convenient, for they well ^oresaw, and
perfectly knew, that if the Commons perceived, that they by rewards or by offer
of money would resist their request and petition, that they stirred and moved
with a fury, would not only rail and despise them as corrupters of Princes,
and enemies of the Publicke^Wealth, but would so cry and call on the King, and
the ^emporall Lords, that they were like to lose both work and oil, cost and
lining. Wherefore they determined to cast all chances, which might serve their
purpose, and in special, to replenish the Kings brain with some pleasant
study, so as that he should neither fantasy nor regard the serious Petition
of the importunate Commons. Wherefore on a day, when the King was present in
Parliament, this Henry Chichely Archbishop of Canterbury, after low Obeisance
made to the King, made a public Oration in Parliament before the King, and
Peers, wherein he showed the Kings undoubted Title to sundry Provinces and
the whole Realm of France; with the injustice and nullity of the Salicke Law,
the only Obstacle to his Title, stirring up the King and Nobles by force of
Arms to regaine the same: and withal declared that his loving Clergy and
subjects of the spiritualty, to show their willingness and desire to aid his
Majesty for the recovery of his ancient Right, and true Inheritance, had in
their Convocation, granted to his Highness such a Sum of money as by
Spiritual Persons, never was to any Prince thorough the whole Christian World,
before those times, given or advanced: By which device seconded by the Duke of
Exe^er, he diverted and shifted off the Petition of the Commons, and engaged
the King and Kingdom in a long, bloody, and costly War. The King himself
professing on his death Bed, that before the beginning of the same Wars, he
was fully persuaded by men both Wise, Pious, and of great holiness of life,
that in prosecuting his just Title, he might and ought both begin the same
Wars, and follow them till he brought them to an end, justly and rightly, and
that without all danger of Gods displeasure, or peril of soul. Such an
incendiary of war, was this Arch-Embassadour of peace that should be.

Antiq. Eccl^s. Brit. p. 325. to 330.
John Stafford, JOHN STAFFORD.
preferred to the Bishopric of Bath and Wells by provision from Pope Martin
the fifth, contrary to the Laws enacted against Provisions from Rome,
immediately after Chichelyes death, was in farther affront of the said Laws
promoted to the Sea of Canterbury, by Pope Eugenius; that prohibited usurpation
of Papal Provisions, de^ended by so many Laws and Statutes, being no whit
abated, through the Popes industry, and the Prelates Treachery and ambition,
who would rather incur the danger of these Laws, and dis-savour of their
Princes, then want a far Bishopric, though they paid Popes dearly for it.
This Arch-Prelate in the first Synod held under him at London, Anno. 1444.
confederating with the rest of the Clergy, when a Subsidy was demanded of
them, petitioned, that the Statutes of Provisors, and the Writs or Actions of
Praemunire, which by the crafty and malicious interpretation of the Lawyers, as
they ^alsely ^urmised, were turned to the destruction of the Clergy, and
disturbance of Ecclesiastical Discipline, might be either wholly abrogated, or
their rigor moderated^ and that Laymen for suing Clergymen falsely in
Temporal Courts, might have some severe punishment inflicted on them by a Law.
But this their motion vanishing into smoke, and the Judges restraining their
extravagant proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts by Prohibitions, and bringing
them within the compass of the Statutes against Provisions, and in the danger
of Premunire's, which did much terrify them; hereupon the Archbishop and
Prelates in their next Synod at London, An. 1446. presented a new Petition to
the King in the Name of the whole Clergy of England, wherein they grievously
complained of the Lay-Judges, who were ever very troublesome and despightfull
to Clerks; desiring that the Statutes of Provision and Praemunire might be
more equally expounded in favor of the Prelates by the Parliamen, than it was
by the Lawyers, and that they might be restrained from granting Prohibitions
to, and exercising^ any Jurisdiction over Spiritual Judges; But this Petition
proved ineffectuall; it being provided by Statute, that no spiritual Law shall
have place contrary to a Common Law or Act of Parliament. And this were not (as
the Lord St^ph^n ^ardi^^r his Letter from the Fleet to the Lord Protector,
Oct. 14. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 741. in the old Edition, quite omitted i^
the ne^.
Audley Chancellor of England, once told Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester
in the Parliament House, who thought it strange, that Bishops authorized by the
King could fall in a Praemunire) the Bishops would enter in with the King, and
by means of his Supremacy order the Lairy as they listed; but we will
provide, quoth he, that the Praemunire shall ever hang over your heads, and so
we Laymen shall be sure to enjoy our inheritance, by the Common Laws and Acts
of Parliament. After this, the Pope exacted of the Clergy of England a Tenth
of all their Revenues, and sent Nuncioes to the Archbishop with Bulls to
collect it. But the King hearing of this secret fraud, commanded the
Archbishop not to obey the Pope herein, who yet was so far a servant to the
Pope, and enemy to the King, that during all his Archiepiscopall Reign the
Pope made Bishops by Provision, against the Laws of the Realm.

Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 330.331
John Kemp, JOHN KEMP.
the next Archbishop, elected lawfully by the Monks of Canterbury with the
Kings consent, refused to take his Arch-Bishoprike from the King, but waving
his Election, received it by Provision from the Pope, who sent over six
several Bulls to this end, the first to the Archbishop himself, the second
to the Chapter of Canterbury: the third, to his Provincial Suffragans; the
fourth, to the Clergy of the City and Diocese of Canterbury; the fifth, to
the people of the same; the sixth, to the Vassals of the Archbishop; by which
Bulls the Pope increased much hi^ Revenues: And ^o obliege this Arch-Prelate
the faster to him, the Pop^ by another Bull created him Cardinal of Saint
Ruffine: But this Archbishop dying within one year and an half after his
Consecration, could do him but little service.

Antiq. Ec^les. Brit. p. 334. to 339.
Thomas Burgchier, THOMAS BOURGCHIER
immedia^ely succeeding him, by the special favor of King Henry the sixth,
this ungrateful Prelate (made a Cardinal by the Pope) some ^ew years after (
An. 1461.) crowned and consecrated Edward the fourth at Westminster to be King
in his stead, during King Henry his life, and in a full Synod procured the
Clergy to grant him a Tenth: Afterward in a Synod at London, An. 1463. he^
granted him another Subsidy, and obtained a Grant from King Edward under his
Seal, that the Prelates should bridle the malice of those by whom their rights
were violated, as well by old Ecclesiastical Laws as by those new Laws they
should make, both in all causes belonging to the Ecclesiastical Court, as also
in the Tithe of great Trees of twenty years growth or more, without the fear
or penalty of the Statutes of Provisors, or of the Writs or Actions of
Praemunire, or of any Prohibition, and that they might proceed therein without
any consultation obtained: And that if any of the Kings Judges, or other
secular Judges should by any Writs or Process hinder or deter any
Archbishop, Bishop, or Archdeacon, or their Vicars, Officialls, Commissaries,
or other Ecclesiastical Judges: That then upon the monition of the said
Archbishop, Bishop, etc. so hindered or scared, the said Judge should appear
in the Chancery at such day as the said Archbishop or Ecclesiastical Judge
should appoint, on pain of two hundred pound, to answer to the King for this
his contempt, and that his Process against the Ecclesiastical Judge, should
by Royal Authority be rescinded, and pronounced to be void and frustrate. In
his time there were many Pilgrimages made both by King Edward, the Queen, and
others to that Arch-traytor Beckets Shrine at Canterbury, where they offered
many rich gifts: Afterward, Anno. 1469. the Earl of Warwick conspiring with
others to free King Henry the Sixth from the Tower of London; King Edward
hearing of it, went in Pilgrimage to Beckets Tomb to Canterbury, and there
held a Council of five Bishops and many Peers of the Realm, from which the
Archbishop being suspected (as treacherous and unfaithful) was wholly
excluded: King Edward deceasing, this Arch-Prelate though he made a Will
sequestered all his goods as ordinary, and seized the Great Seal, the Privy
Seal, and the Royal Signer, which he detained in his custody; and whereas
Richard Duke of Gloucester had traytorously plotted to murder his Nephews,
Edward the Fifth, and his Brother, this Archbishop was employed by him to go
to the Queen, to H^lin. p. 717. to 722. Hall, in Edw. the 5. ^. 8. to 14.
Speed. p. 90^. to 912.
get the young Duke of Clarence from her out of the Sanctuary at Westminster,
who using many reasons and flattering words to her in vain, at last made this
deep protestation: That if she were content to deliver the Duke to him, and to
the other Lords present, he durst lay his own body and soul both in pledge,
not only for his surety, but also for his estate, etc. Whereupon, with much
ado, she delivered the Duke into his treacherous hands, who forthwith brought
him into the Star Chamber to his Uncle the Lord Protector^ He having both
Brothers now in his power, pretends them to be illegitimate, proclaims
himself right Heir to the Crown, procures first Pinker; and then Holinsh. p.
725. to 728. Speed, p. 918.919.
Doctor Shaw (no doubt by the Arch Bishops help and privity) in a Sermon at
Paul's Cross (by which Sermon he lost his honesty, and soon after his life,
for very shame of the World, into which he never durst after to come abroad)
to publish to the people, That Edward the fifth and his Brother were unlawfully
begotten in Adultery, not by the Duke of York, but others; That Richard of
Gloucester was right Heir to the Crown, extolling him to the skies, and
slandering King Edward the Fourth with his Queen, as never lawfully married to
her. Then proceeding treacherously to murder his poor young Nephews, and
usurping their Royal Throne; this Holinsh. p. 733.734. Hall, f. 25.26.
Archbishop readily crowns him (though a bloody and unnatural Usurper) as
lawful King of England, and his Lady likewise Queen, the other Bishops and
Abbots assisting him in this action, and accompanying him in their
Pontificalibus. This Usurper being afterward slain, the Archbishop (ever
turning with the ^yde of things) crowns Henry the 7. likewise King of England,
and shortly after departed this world, Anno 1486. I find not (writes Page 114.
Godwin in his life) that ever any English man connued so long a Bishop, or
that any Archbishop either before or after him in 800. years enjoyed that
place so long; for he continued Archbishop 32 years, and lived after the time
of his first Consecration and promotion to the Bishopric of Worcester 51.
years, and I marvel much, that in all that while he never endeavored to
leave behind him any good Deed for the perservation of his Memory. Sure I am,
that his Treachery to the young Duke of Clarence, and King Henry who advanced
him, and his Treasons in crowning two Usurpers, with his base temporising,
remain as so many survi^ing Monuments of his in^amie and disloyalty.

JOHN MORTON.
Hall, f. 30. to 40. H^linshed, p. 735. to 760. Spend, p. 931.932. to 946.
Antiq Eccles. Brit p. 339. to 344. Godwin in his life.
John Morton his Successor, whiles Bishop of Ely, was accused by Richard the
Third of many great Treasons, and committed by him to the Tower: from whence
being removed and committed to the custody of Henry Duke of Buckingham, he by
degrees stirred up the Duke to plot the deposing of King Richard the Usurper,
and se^ting up of the Earl of Richmond, for which the Duke not long after lost
his head: The Bishop in the mean time disguising himself, escaped out of the
Dukes custody, fled first to Ely, next to Flanders, after which he went to
Rome, never more intending to meddle with the world. But King Henry the seventh
having got the Crown, married King Edward the fourth his daughter, and so
united the Houses of Lancaster and York, (which marriage was first devised by
this Prelate) called him home again, made him Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Chancellor of England; whereunto the Pope annexed the honor of a Cardinal,
translating him from Ely to Canterbury, by no less than six ^everall Bulls,
(all against Law) to augment the Fees. In his Speed p. 960. See Hall,
Holin^^^d, Polyd^r^ Virgill, Stow, and Bacon in the life of Henry the seventh.
time Richard Simon, a Priest, an ambitious wretch, on hope to make himself
the principal Bishop in England, plotted the advancement of Lambert Synmell;
(being his Pupil in the University of Oxford) to the Crown of England, under
the name of Edward Earl of Warwick; and conveying this Imposter to Dublin in
Ireland, he there caused him to be proclaimed King of England; Antiq. Eccles.
Bri^. p. 342.343.344. Godwin p. 117.
after this, to land with an Army in England, where in a Battle at
Stockefield, in which many were slain, this Priest and his Co^^^erfeit were
both taken Prisoners, and attainted of High Treason, yet this Simon (or rather
Sinon) out of the extraordinary reverence to his function was not executed, but
only committed to the Archbishop, who imprisoning him some space in his own
Prison, delivering him over to the Major of London, condemned him to a Dungeon
and perpetual shackles. After which this Antiq. Eccles. Bri^. p. 342.343.344.
Godwin p. 117.
Archbishop imposed two great Subsidies on the Clergy of his Province to
their great oppression, forcing them by the Popes authority to contribute so
largely toward the charges of his tran^lation, as of his own Diocese only
(which is one of the least o^ England) he received 354. pound: sent Pope
Inno^ents Bulls to all the Suffraga^es of his Province to publi^h and execute,
in open affront of the Laws of ^he Realm, the King^ Prerogative Royal, and
the Subjects Libe^ties; for which good Service, the Pope by his Bulls appointed
him to be Visi^^r of all the Monasteries and other places exempt from
Archiepiscopall and Ordinary Jurisdiction throughout England, and made him
Cardinal of Saint Anastasia; he persuaded the King to sue to the Pope, not
only for the Popes canonization of King Henry the Sixth, but likewise for the
translation of his dead Corpse from Windsor to Westminster Abbey, and that in an
unwor^hy manner, when as the King might have done it by his own mere Royal
Authority only. He procured his Rebellio^s predecessor Anselme, with a great
sum of money, to be canonized at Rome for a Sa^nt; and had many conflicts and
contestations with the Bishops of London, and other his Suffraganes, about
Probate of Wills and Jurisdiction of their Eccl^^ia^^icall Cour^s, which caused
Appeals to Rome, whereupon ^he ^nferiour Priests, with many others of his
Province, ca^^ for^h sundry public calumnies to his disgrace; against whom
Pope Alexander sent forth a Bull, cruelly fulminating Excommunications against
them. And by this means the privileges of the Sea of Canterbury, often times
called into dou^t and controversy in former time, were at la^t e^^ablish^^. It
seems the Bishops in his days were very much hated by the inferior Clergy:
whereupon in a Synod Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 341.342.
at London under him, Anno Dom. 1487. certain Preachers were sharply reproved
and threat^ed, who in their Sermons, cum plausu populari, eloquentia canina,
latran^ immodestius in Episcopos absentes, did with popular applause, and
doggish eloquence bark immodestly against Bishops that were absent. Halls
Chron. An. 15. H. 7, f. 50.51. Holin^^^d, p. 78^.
In the latter end of this Archbishop Mortons rule, one Patricke an Augu^^ine
Friar, had a Scholar called Ralph Wilford, whom ^e in open Pulpit decla^ed to
be the Earl of Warwick, and desired all men of help: but the head of this
sedition was Summer topped, that it could have no time to spring any higher,
the Master and Scholar being both apprehended, imprisoned and attain^ed, the
Scholar was afterward hanged, but the Master (the Grand Traitor) only
condemned to perpetual Prison: For at that time (writes Hall) here in England
so much Reverence was attributed to the Holy Orders, that to a P^iest, although
he See Stam^ord his Plees of the Crown. l. 2. c. 41. to 51.
had committed High Treason against his Sovereign Lord, and to all other
offenders in murder, rape; or theft, which had received any of the three higher
Holy Orders, the life was given and the punishment of death released. The
chief cause of this favor (says he) was this, because Bishops of a long time
did not take knowledge, nor intermit themselves with the search and punishment
of such heinous and detes^able offenses, by reason whereof they did not
disgrade and deprive from holy Orders such Malefactors and wicked persons,
which without that ceremony by the Canonical Law could not be put to death.
Furthermore, what should a man say, it was also used, that he that could but
only read (though he understood not what he read) how heinous or detestable
crime soever he had committed (Treason only excepted) should likewise as
aff^nes and allies to the holy Orders, be saved, and committed to the Bishops
prison. And to the intent that if they should escape, and be again taken
committing the like offense, that their lives should be no more to them
pardoned, it was ordained, that Murthe^ers should be burnt on the brawne of
the left hand with an hot Iron, signed with this letter M, and thieves in the
same place with this letter T, so that if^ they once signed with any of these
marks, did reiterate like crime again, they should suffer the punishments
they had deserved: which devise was enacted and established in 4. H. 7. c. 13.
Parliament in the fourth year of H. the 7. and taken, as I conjecture, from
the French Nation, which are won^ if they take any such offender, to cut off
one of his ears, as a sure mark hereafter of h^s evil doing. And the charge
of keeping such offenders, because it sounds to spiritual Religion, is
committed to the Bishops and Rulers of the spiritualty, with a penalty set upon
them, if any such Prisoner do afterward escape. The which Act and privilege
did nourish and increase abundantly the Sect and swarm of Thieves and
Murderers; for after that time there were an hundred ways practiced and
invented how at one time or other to deliver or convey them out of prison, by
making their purgation (by what slight and means they care not) of such
offenses as before they were convicted and found guilty, if no man be present
to lay exceptions to the same. For if the party offended and hurt be absent at
the day of the purgation making, the thief or murderer truly found guilty
from the beginning, shall be both excused and set at liberty. And oftentimes
the sooner, because the Bishop would not lose the sum of an hundred pound for
the escape of a poor Knave, scant worth a dandy prat: so Hall; whose words I
have recited, to manifest what favorers and Protectors our Bishops have been
of Traitors and Malefactors in all ages, especially of those of their own
Tribe, who by means of their Orders, Sanctuaries, Purgations, and other
pretended exemptions and devises, were seldom brought to execution for their
most horrid Treasons, which made them the more bold and insolent to commit
them. And for my part I deem it true both in Law and conscience, that the
Patrons, Receivers, and Res^ners of Traitors and other Malefactors (as our
Prelates have ever been) are as bad, nay worse, than the Traitors and
Malefactors themselves, and worthy more severe punishment than they. But it is
time to conclude with this Archbishop.

Henry Deane who next enjoyed this See, HENRY DEANE.
was ^ormerly made Chancellor of Ireland by King Henry the seventh, Antiq.
Eccles. Brit. p. 345.346.347.348. Godwin p. 118.119.
where he played the Warrior, and drove Perkin Warberke thence, forcing him
to fly into Scotland: after this being made Bishop of Bangor, he had many great
suites and ^ontests with diverse about the Lands won or taken from his See. And
among other particulars, pretending the Island of Seals between Holy-head and
Anglesy to be unjustly detained from his Church by the possessers thereof: they
refusing to give him possession, the Bishop thereupon brings a great power of
armed men and a Navy thither, and drives out the Inhabitants thence by force,
annexing it to his See. This Prelate being afterward Translated to Salisbury,
and from thence to Canterbury, the Pope sent him a Pall by Adrian of Castello
Secretary to his holiness, upon the receite whereof he took this Solemn Oath
to the Pope (as his Predecessors and other Bishops formerly used, yet practiced
in fo^^aine parts) which made him a Traitor, or half subject only, to his
King. Are not such then like to prove faithful Counselors of State to
Princes.
I Henry Archbishop of Canterbury from this hour forward shall be faithful
and obedient to S. Peter and to the holy Church of Rome, and to my Lord the
Pope and his Successors Canonically entering, I shall not be of Council nor
consent, that they shall lose either life or member, or shall be taken or
suffer any violence or any wrong by any means. Their Council to me credi^ed
by them, their Messengers, or Letters, I shall not willingly discover to any
person. The Pope-dome of Rome, the Rules of the Holy Fathers, and the
Regalities of S. P^te^, I shall help and retain, and defend against all men.
The Legate of the Sea Apostolic going and coming I shall honorably
entreat. The Rights, Honors, Privileges, Authorities of the Church of Rome,
and of the Pope and his Successors, I shall cause to be conserved, defended,
augmented, and promoted. I shall not be in Are not such then like to prove
faithful Counselors of State to Princes.
Council, Treaty, or any Act, in the which any thing shall be imagined against
him, or the Church of Rome, their Rights, States, Honors, or powers, and if I
know any such to be moved or compassed, I shall resist it to my power, and as
soon as I can, I shall advertise him or such as may give him knowledge. The
Rules of the Holy Fathers, the De^rees, Ordinances, Sentences, Dispositions,
Rese^vations, Provisions, and Commandments Apostolic, to my power I shall
keep and cause to be kept of others, Heretics, Schismatickes, and Rebels to
our holy Father and his Successors, I shall resist and perse^ute to my power.
I shall come to the Synod when I am called, except I be let by a Canonical
impediment. The Limina or Lumina.
Lights of the Apostles on this side the Alps, I shall visit personally, or
by my Deputy once every year, and those beyond the Alps once every two
years, unless I am therefrom absolved by an Apostolical dispensation. I
shall not alien or sell the possessions belonging to my Arch-Bishopricke, nor
give, nor morgage, nor infeofe any of them afresh, or any ways alien them
without the Popes Counsel. So God me help and the holy Evangelists. This Oath
every Archbishop and Bishop not only in England, Therefore their own Kings,
if the Pope adjudge them such.
but likewise in Spain, France, Germany, and other Kingdoms, used to take to
the Popes unholinesse. No wonder therefore if they were such Traitors, Rebels,
and Conspirators against their Kings, such sticklers ^or the Pope, such
Champions ^or his unjust usurpations upon their Sovereigns Prerogatives, and
so forward to twhart and discover al those designs o^ their Princes, which
were any ways displeasing or disadvantagious to the Pope; who as long as this
Oath continued, and Bishops that took it bore sway in our Kingdom (being both
Privy Counselors of State, Lord Chancellours, Lord Privy Seals, Lord
Treasurers, or other great Officers) never lost his hold or usurped power among
us, which he still ke^pes, only by means of Bishops in other Kingdoms, where
the Prelates Mauritiu^ de Alzedo, de Praecellen^ia Epis^. dignitatis, l. 1.
sect. 8.
yet take this Oath of Alleagiance to him. But this Oath which like a mystery
of Iniquity was concealed from our Princes, being discovered to King Henry the
eighth in the twenty fourth year of his reign, For Acts and Monuments, p.
961. Halls Chronicle, A^^ 24. H^ 8. f. 205.206. D. Burns his Suppli^ation to
King Henry the 8. p. ^85. to 201.
this wise Prince considering the disloyal^ty and mischief of it, sending for
the Speaker and Commons House of Parliament spoke thus unto them, Welbeloved
Subjects, We had thought the Clergy of our Realm had been our Subjects, but
now We have well perceived that they be but half Our Subjects, yea and scarce
our Subjects. For all the Prelates at their Consecrations take an Oath to the
Pope clean contrary to the Oath they make unto Us: ( Dr. Barnes, ibid.
with which the Pope usually dispensed, but never with any Oath made to
himself, which must be observed and stand good, what ever Oath else be
violated:) so that they seem to be his Subjects, and not ours. And so
delivering them the Copy of both Oaths (of this to the Pope and the other to
himself,) required them, to invent some order that he might not be thus
deluded. The discovering and opening of these Oaths (which were read in
Parliament) both to the King and People (as both Hall and Mr. Fox record) was
the occasion that the Pope lost all h^s interest and Jurisdiction here in
England within short while after: This Oath to the Pope being thereupon
abolished and made void by the Statute, and a See 25. H. 8. c. 20.28. Hen. 8.
c. 10.35. Hen.. 8^ c. 1.
new Oath to the King prescribed and ministered to the Bishops, together with an
Oath of Alleagiance; wherein the Popes Authority stands abjured, and the King
acknowledged Supreme head on earth under Christ of the Church of England: the
form of which Oaths are recorded in Mr. Fox, Mr. Hall, and the Statute of 28.
Hen. 8. c. 10. The Prologue of which Act, with the Oath ^herein prescribed,
being pertinent to our purpose, I shall here recite. AN ACT EXTINGVISHING the
Authority of the Bishop of Rome.
28. H. 8. c. 10. See 35. H. 8. c. 1. to the like cl^use and Oath.
FOrasmuch as notwithstanding the good and wholesome Laws, Ordinances and
Statutes heretofore made, enacted and established by the Kings Highness, our
most gracious Sovereign Lord, and by the whole consent of his High Court of
Parliament, for the extirpation abolition and extinguishment out of this
Realm, and other his graces Dominions, Seigniories, and Countries, of the
pretended power and usurped authority of the Bishop of Rome, by some called the
Pope, used within the same, or elsewhere concerning the same Realm, Dominions,
Seigniories or Countries, which did obsuscate, and wrest Gods holy Word and
Testament, a long season, from the spiritual and true meaning thereof, to his
worldly and carnal affections, as Pomp, Glory, Avarice, Ambition, and
Tyranny; covering and shadowing the same with his humane and politic Devises,
Traditions and inventions, set forth to promote and stablish his only Dominion
both upon the souls and also the bodies and goods of all Christian people,
excluding Christ out of his Kingdom and rule of man's soul, as much as he may,
and all other temporal Kings and Princes out of their Dominions, which they
ought to have by Gods Law upon the bodies and goods o^ their Subjects, whereby
he did not only rob the Kings Majesty (being only the supreme head of this
his Realm of England, immediately under God,) of his honor, right, and
pre-eminence due unto him by the Law of God, but spoiled this his Realm
yearly of innumerable treasure, and with the loss o^ the same, deceived the
Kings loving and obedient Subjects, persuading to them by his Laws, Bulls, and
other his deceivable means, such dreams, vanities and fantasies, as by the
same many of them were seduced and conveyed unto superstitious and erroneous
opinions, so that the Kings Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons of this Realm being over-wearied and fatigated with the Experience
of the infinite abominations and mischie^es proceeding of his impostures and
craftily coloring of his deceits, to the great damages of souls, bodies and
goods, were forced of necessity for the public weal of this Realm, to
exclude that foreign pretended power, jurisdiction and authority, used and
usurped within this Realm, and to devise such remedies for their relief in
the same, as does not only redound to the honor of God, the high praise and
advancement of the Kings Majesty and o^ his Realm, but also to the great and
inestimable utility of the same. And notwithstanding the said wholesome Laws so
made, and hereto^ore established, yet it is commen to the knowledge of the
Kings Highness, and also to diverse and many his loving, faithful and obedient
Subjects, how that diverse seditious and contentious persons, being The Bishops
natural Pedigree.
Impes of the said Bishop of Rome and his See, and in heart members of his
pretended Monarchy, do in corners and elsewhere as they dare whisper,
inculke, preach, and persuade, and from time to time instill into the ears and
heads of the poor simple and unlettered people, the advancement and
continuance of the said Bishops fained and pretended authority, pretending the
same to have his As our Bishops in imitation of him pretend their Episcopacy to
have.
ground and original of Gods Law, whereby the opinions of many be suspended
their judgments corrupted and deceived, and diversity in opinions augmented
and increased, to the great displeasure of Almighty God, the high
discontentation of our said most Dread Sovereign Lord, and the interruption of
the unity love, Charity, concord, and agreement that ought to be in a Christian
Region and Congregation. For avoiding whereof nd repression of the follies of
such seditious persons (...) are the means and Authors of such inconveniences;
Be it enacted, ordained and established by the King our Sovereign Lord and the
Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by Authority of the same; That if any person or persons,
dwelling, demurring, inhabiting or resiant within this Realm, or within any
other the Kings Dominions, Signiories, or Countries, or the Marches of the
same, or elsewhere within or under his obeisance and power, of what Estate,
Dignity, Pre-eminence, Order, Degree or Condition soever he or they be, after
the last day of July, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, 1530^ shall
by Writing, Cyphering, Printing, Preaching, or Teaching Deed or Act,
obstinately or malicio^sly hold, or stand with, to extol, set forth, maintain
or defend, the Authority, Jurisdiction, or Power of the Bishop of Rome, or of
his See hereto^ore claimed, used, or usurped within this Realm, or in any
Dominion or County, being of, within, or under the Kings power or obeisance;
or by any pretense obstinately or maliciously invent any thing for the
extolling, advancing, setting forth maintenance or defense of the same, or any
part thereof^ or by any pretense obstinately or maliciously attribute any
manner of Jurisdiction, Authority, or P^eheminence to the said See of Rome, or
to any Bishop of the same See for the time being within this Realm or in any
of the Kings Dominions or Counties: That then every such person or persons so
doing or offending, their ayders, assistants, comforters, abettors, procurers,
maintainers, factors, Counselors concealors, and every of them, being thereof
lawfully convicted according to the Laws of this Realm, for every such
default and offense, shall incur and run into the dangers, penalties, pains,
and forfei^ures ordained and provided by the Satute of Provision and
Prae^^nire, made in the ^6. year of the Reign of the Noble and Valiant Prince
King Richard the second, against such as attempt, procure, or make provision to
the Sea of Rome, or elsewhere, for any thing or things, to the derogation or
contrary to the Prerogative Royal, or Jurisdiction of the Crown and Dignity
of this Realm.

And for stronger defense and maintenance of this Act, It is ordained and
enacted by authority aforesaid, that all and every Ecclesiastical Judge,
ordinary, chancellor, commissary, official, vicar-generall, and other
Ecclesiastical officer or minister, of what dignity, pre-eminence, or Degree
soever they shall be; and all and every Temporal judge, justicia^, Major,
bayliffe, sheriff, under-sheriffe, Escheater, Alderman, Jurat, Constable,
Head-borough, third-borough, borsholder, and every other said officer and
Minister to be made, created, elected, or admitted within this Realm, or any
other the Kings Dominions, of what state, order, degree or condition soever he
shall be, from and after the said last day of July, shall before he take upon
him the Execution of such Office, make, take and receive, a Corporal oath upon
the Evangelists, before such person or persons as have or shall have Authority
to admit him: That he from henceforth shall utterly renounce, refuse,
relinquish, or forsake the Bishop of Rome and his authority, power, and
jurisdiction; and that he shall never consent nor agree, that the Bishop of
Rome shall practice, exercise, or have any manner of authority, jurisdiction or
power within this Realm or any other the Kings Dominions, but that he shall
re^ist the same at all times to the uttermost of his power; and that from
hen^eforth he shall accept, repute and take the Kings Majesty to be the only
supreme head in earth of the Church of England, and that to his cunning, wit,
and uttermost of his power, without guile, fraud, or other undue means, he
shall observe, keep, maintain and defend the whole effects and contents of
all and singular Acts and Statutes, made, and to be made, within this Realm,
in derogation, extirpation, and extinguishment, of the Bishop of Rome and his
authority: and all other Acts and Statutes made and to be made, in reformation
and corroboration of the Kings power of supreme head in earth of the Church of
England, and this he shall do against all manner of persons of what estate,
dignity, degree, or condition they be; and in no wise do nor attempt, nor to
his power suffer to be done, or attempted, directly or indirectly, any thing or
things, privily or apertly, to the let, hinderance, damage, or derogation
thereof, or of any part thereof, by any manner of means, or for any manner of
pretense: and in case any o^th be made, or has been made by him to any person
or persons in maintenance, defense, or favor of the Bishop of Rome, or his
authority, jurisdiction, or power, he repute the same as vain and adnihilate;
So help him God, etc. I could wi^h this obsolete Oath were now again revived,
to hinder the further growth of Popery.



This forementioned Oath to the Pope, usually taken by all our Prelates, being
one maine Pillar to support the Popes usurped Monarchy both at home and
abroad; and a chief engine to undermine the royal Prerogatives of Christian
Princes; and perchance the groundworke of many of our own and foreign
Prelates Treasons, Treacheries, Rebellions, Conspiracies, and contempts against
their Sovereigns; It will not be amiss, no^ impertinent here to inser^ that
excellent discourse, which our famous Martyr, In his works p. 195. to 205.
Doctor Barnes has long since made upon it, in his Supplication to King Henry
the 8. where he thus writes. I dare boldly say that if we poor men, which be
now condemned for Heretics, and also for Traitors against our King, had not
been, the Realm of England had not stood in ^o good a condition as it is, for
men had been bound still in their Conscience, to obey this wretched Idol: who
durst have kept this innumerable sum of money, within the Realm, that
yearly was sucked out, by this Adder, if our godly learning had not instructed
their Conscience? Let all the Libraries be sought in England, and there shall
not be one Book written in 4. C. years, (and admitted by the Church of Rome,
and by our spiritualty) found, that does teach this obedience, and fidelity
toward Princes, and delivers our Realm from the bondage of this wicked
Satan the Pope, or else that is able to satisfy, and to quie^ any man's
Conscience within this Realm: and yet I dare say he is no^ in England, that
can reprove our learning by the doctrine of our Master Christ, or else of his
holy Apostles. Yea, men have studied and devised how they might bring our
mighty Prince, and his Noble Realm, under the feet of this Devil. There
could be nothing handled so secretly within this Realm, but if it were either
pleasant or profitable to the Pope to know, then were all the Bishops in
England sworn, to reveal tha^ matter to him. This may well be proved by their
shameful and traiterous oath, that they contrary to Gods Law, man's Law, and
order of nature, have made to this false man the Pope. The words of their oath,
written in their In vi. lib. 2. Tit de jurej^^and^ c. Ego Episc^pus.
own Law, be these^ Then he recites the forementioned oath, which he descants
on in this manner^ There has been wondrous packing used, and has cost many a
thousand men's lives, ere that the spiritualty brought it to pass, that all
they should be sworn to the Pope, and owe none obedience to any man, but to
him only. This matter has been wondrous craftily conveyed, for at the
beginning the Bishops were not sworn so straitely unto the Pope as now. For I
do read in the ^ime of Gregory the third, which was in the year of our Lord
759. how their oath was no more, but to swear for to keep the faith of our
Holy Church, and to abide in the unity of the same, and not to consent for any
man^ pleasure to the contrary, to promise also to seek the profits of the
Church of Rome. And if any Bishops did live against the old Statutes of Holy
Fathers, with him they should have no conversation, but rather forbid it, if
they could, or else truly to show the Pope of it. This Oath continued a great
many of years, till that a mortal hatred sprang between the Emperor, and
the Pope, for confirming of Bishops; then as many Bishops as were confirmed by
the Pope did swear the Oath that I have first written. For this Oath that
Gregory makes mention of, was not sufficient^ because that by it the Bishops
were not bound to betray their Princes, not to revela^e their Counsels to the
Pope. The which thing the Pope must needs know, or else he could not bring to
pass his purpose, that is to say, he could not be Lord over the world, and
cause Emperors and Kings, to fetch their confirmations of him, and to kneel
down, and kiss his feet. The which when he had brought to pass, he
proceeded further, adding more things to the Bishops Oath^ to the maintaining
of his worldly honor and dignity, as it shall afterward appear. But first we
will examine this Oath, how it stands with Gods Word; and with the true
obedience to our Prince: I pray you tell me out of what Scripture, or else out
of what example of our Master Christ and his Holy Apostles you have taken this
doctrine, to learn to swear to S. Peter? or else to the Church of Rome? or
else to the The same may be said of the Oath of Canonical obedience to Bishops.
Pope? What need you to swear to S. Peter? ye can neither do him good by
your fidelity, no^ yet hurt by your falsehood. Oaths be taken, that he that the
Oath is made unto, might be sure of the true help and su^cour of him that
swears, against all men that could hurt him. Now S. Peter has none enemies,
and though he had, yet is not he afraid of them, neither can you help him, nor
deliver him if he had need. But the verity is, that good S. Peter must here
stand in the forefront to make men afraid with, and to make men believe that
you are his friends, but God knows that you neither favor his person,
learning nor living. For if S. Peter's person were here with his net on his
neck, I think you would bid him walk beggar, if you called him not
Heretic. Why do you not swe^re to follow his living? and to preach and teach
his Doctrine? but that makes nothing for your purpose. Therefore you swear
all only ^o Saint Peter's name. But wherein will you be faithful to Saint
Peter? to maintain his worldly honors, dignities, or riches? you know well he
says, that he has forsaken all these things for Christ's sake, and for these
things, I think he will require none Oath of you. Wherefore if you will needs
be faithful, and sworn unto S. Peter, it must be in maintaining, and in
defending spiritual things, as preaching of Christ's Gospel purely and
sincerely, ministering truly after the institution of our Master Christ, the
blessed Sacraments of holy Church, and in virtuous living, giving example to
the Holy Church of Christ. But now if this be your Oath, truly you are
perjured, and worthy to wear Papers, for you do reckon your selves too high
and too honorable, to go about such simple things as these be. And therefore
you have applied your selves to other greater matters, as to Christening of
Bells, to hallowing of Churches, The holy works of Bishops.
to blessing of Candles, to consecrating of Holy Oil, to hallowing of
Chalices, vestments, and A^tars, and to giving 40. days of pardon to them that
receive your blessings in the street, and to some that visit Holy Saints, and
such like great matters, which pertain nothing to your Oath. Wherefore I do
reckon that after the true form of your Oath, we have but few Bishops, but
that be perjured or abjured (call it what you will) both against God, against
S. Peter, and against their Prince. It follows. And to the Holy Church of
Rome. What needs this? what good can you do to the Church of Rome, or what
profit is it to her that you swear? think you that ^he will compel you by
your Oath to be true to her? then must she needs sue you of perjury if you
break your Oath. But mark how the Church of Rome is set in your Oath, as the
better person before the Pope: wherefore it must needs follow, that the Pope
is under the Church, and less than the Church, and no head of the Church,
except you will make him a third person: ye^ neither pertains to S. Peter nor
yet to holy Church: but is a thing of himself, and as your In Pr^^^. 6. ^.
Quoniam in ^^rbo Papa.
Law says; neither God nor man, but middle between them both, that is as much
to say, after my learning, as the Devil himself. But what means it, that
you swear only to the Holy Church of Rome? will you be traitors to the Holy
Church of Constantinople? or else to the Holy Church of England? Or do you
think other Churches not holy? tell us what you mean; for it seems a
marveilous thing, and also a special thing, that you make such an Oath all
only to the Holy Church of Rome, naming none other Church. Why are you not
rather sworn to keep? and to feed? to nourish? and to be true to your own
Church of the which you have taken cure and charge? As 1 Pet. 5.2.3.
S. Peter commands you. See that you feed Christ's flock which is among you.
For of these you have taken your name, living and dignity, you are called
Bishop of Winchester, of London, and of Lincoln; and of these you are Fed, but
these be forgotten in your Oath, and these you little regard, but to maintain
the Holy Church of Rome, that gives you never a penny, but robs all other
Churches, you must be ^^raitely sworn. And why? Antichrist must have a cloak
for his Treason. For now if he be a Traitor, he is to be excused: Why? for he
is sworn to it. Bishop Fisher answered, that he was sworn to the Pope, and
and therefore would not swear to the Kings supremacy.
But shall I tell you what I do take out of it? The truth is, that you swear
to betray, to kill, and slay all members of all other Churches, saving those
that live after the whoredom, and mischief that is used in Rome. For if you
should be bound to seek out in Rome Christened men, and those that do live
after the living of the holy Church, I think you should find but few, yea and
unto those, you would think scorn to be sworn. Ergo, it must follow that you
are sworn to the worst sort of Rome, and that your holy Church of Rome is
taken for such a sort, as lives against his blessed Word, against the living
of holy Apostles, against the conditions of our holy Mother the Church. I would
say in all oppression, in all Sodomitry, in all murder, in all pomp and
pride, summa summarum in all manner of mischief, what tongue can tell, or
heart can think. But I will not say so: for men would reckon me uncharitable
and too vehement. Nevertheless all the world knows, that you do reckon your
self, by the virtue of your Oath, bound to no men, but unto such, as in very
deed, lives after this ungracious manner; and yet will you be faithful, and
true unto them against all men? yea I dare say: if that their con^cience had
not condemned them of such mischief, they would never have desired this
assistance of you. But the verity is, they are naught, and have need of
maintainers in their mischief. And also suspect you not to be t^^e, except you
made an Oath to them, yea and scarsely then, unless that you in very deed, at
time and place convenient, do betray your Princes, for that is the cause of
your Oath, and other profit has not the King by it, I will be reported by all
practice that ever came out of your Oath. It follows, And to my Lord the
Pope. I would gladly learn where the Pope has got the dignity of a Lord. This
thing is little regarded of my Lords the Bishops, to bring in such a worldly
dignity, yea they will say, it is but a trifle, and mock men for speaking
against it; but ^he truth is, i^ they durst as much now, as in times past, they
would burn for this little trifle, the best Lord in England. For I dare say,
it has cost many a man's life, or ever they brought the Pope to Lordship.
Blessed S. Peter (whose successor the Pope boasts himself to be) knew nothing
of this Lordship, for he says unto his fellows, They 1 Pet. 5.
shall not exercise any lordship over the Congregation. And likewise 2 Cor. 8.
S. Paul durst not take upon him to command as a Lord, collections to be made
for poor men, but meekely desires them without any Lordship. Also in another
place: 1 Cor. 4.
Let no man judge us, but as the Ministers of Christ; blessed S. Paul reckons
himself but a Minister and a Servant: and yet the day has been, that he was
so good, as my Lord the Pope. Our Master Christ, that came to teach both Peter
and Paul, learned his Disciples not to use themselves Mat. 20.
as Lords but as Servants. And mark the occasion of that he had said, there be
two new disciples brought unto him, and the old (being not yet perfect) thought
scorn that these two should sit above all other, the one of the right hand,
and the other of the l^ft hand: but our Master Christ reprove^h this proud
stomach of theirs, very straightly, saying, How the Princes and Rulers of the
infidels has power over their Subjects; but so shall not ye: for he that will
be greatest among you, shall be least. Here our Master Christ learneth none
Hypocrisy, that they should be called least in name, and be greatest in very
deed: but he will that this Doctrine shall be expressed in their deeds. My
Lord the Pope calls himself in words, the Servant of all servants, but in
very deed h^ will be Lord over all Lords. Yea and my Lords Bishops will be
sworn to him, as unto a Lord, and they will reckon themselves perjured if they
burn not all them that will take the Pope but for a servant. Is not this a
mavelous Hypocrisy, to be called servant of all servants; and yet desire to
be taken as Lord and King over all Kings? Yea, and unto this be our Bishops
sworn, cause they will be obedient to their Princes. But and their Note this.
consciences were ripped, you should find no man sit there as a King, but my
Losell the Pope, and we poor men must be condemned for reproving of this. And
why? verily because my Lords have sworn to him, against their Prince, and all
his true subjects. But how stands it with your Oath toward your Prince, for
to be sworn to the Pope? which is not all only another Lord, but also
contrary, yea and as the world now is, the greatest mortal enemy, that our
Prince has. For I dare say, that if this wre^ched Clement could drown our
Noble Prince with one word, it would not be long (By Cardinal Poles practice
and Instigations) undone sine clementia. The Common saying went in Hamburgh,
that this caitise has not all only excommunicated our Noble Prince, but also
given away the Kingdom to another. And this fact must you defend, for you are
sworn to ^he Pope: Yea I dare say, if you had convenient occasion, you would
declare your fidelity. I do Judge after your ^acts, that you have done to
Kings in times past, whenever that you had power and might to bring to pass
that which you have conceived against your Prince. If you think I judge
amiss, or else do you wrong, let me be put to my proose, and you shall see,
what an heap of holy facts that I will bring you out of your own Chronicles
and Books, for the which you will be lauded, and praised Highly, that you have
so faithfully stuck unto this damnable Idol of Rome: yea I dare say it had
been Heresy within this two years, to have written, or said thus much
against the l^mme of the Devil on our Princes side. This all the world can
testify, where^ore I think yo^ will put me to no ^ryall. But to your Oath.
How does it stand with your allegiance toward you^ Prince, to be sworn to the
Pope: your own In 6. lib. 2. d^sent. and ^^. judicata cap. pastoralis in verb^
Homagi^.
Law says, that a liege man can make none Oath of fidelity to none other man,
but to his ow^e King. Moreover you do remember your Oath made unto you^
Prince, wherein you do renounce all clauses, words and sentences, made unto
the Pope, which may be hur^full or prejudicial to his Highness: how agrees
these two Oaths? you may set them together as well as you can; but I know no
ways to avoid your perjury. Excuse the Bishops perjury who can.
For the very truth is, that the Kings grace, and his council, considering
your Oath made to the Pope, to be prejudicial to his regal power, causes you
in your Oath a^terward made unto him, to revoke those things that thou have
before sworn to ^he Pope: and to declare, that his grace and his council did
reckon your Oath made to the Pope to be against him: therefore he makes you
to revoke it by name, naming the same Oath, and also the same Pope. So that you
may clearly perceive, how that our Prince does suspect you, for your Oath
making. And in very deed the Popes meaning and yours was none other, but for
to betray the King, and his Realm: and therefore as soon as there was any
variance between the King and the Pope, then were you first of all assoyled of
your allegiance due unto our King, and that absolution was blazen and blown,
preached and taught throughout all the world, and all doors and posts must
be decked with papers and bulls for your discharge. But for to help your
Prince, you could never be discharged of your heretical and traiterous Oath
made unto the Pope, against your Prince. Here neither Peter nor Paul can help,
nor there is no key that can open that lock. O Lord God how have we been
blinded thus traitorously to handle our natural Prince? But how this
Caterpiller is come to be Lord and has brought Kings under his feet, I will
speak (God willing) after this in a particular treatise It follows, and to
his successors, lawfully and regularly entering in. After what Law? I read in
your own Di. 23. Qui episcopus ex concilio 4 Cartha.
Books of law, after which me thinks there be very few Bishops made, wherein
I find among all other good things, that he should be chaste of living, meek,
gentle to speak to, merciful, well learned in the new and old Testament, and
that he should not forbid marriage, nor should blame the eating of flesh, and
should also believe, that all manner of sins, as well actual as original,
be clearly forgiven in Baptism. How many of these things the Popes Holiness
is endowed withal, and how many he allows, his own books and deeds will
testify. Wherefore I reckon that your oath does not mean this Law, nor yet
the Law that blessed Tim. 3. Tit. 1.
Saint Paul writes of. For then I reckon, that by the virtue of your Oath, you
have not been bound to one Pope this 400. years, so that it must follow, that
you have other Laws, than blessed S. Paul speaks of, or the Council of
Carthaginence to choose your Pope by, the which as far as men can reckon, by
common experience and practice be these. Inprimis, He that shall be able to be
Pope, Who is lawful to be Pope.
must be a vengeable tyrant, never keeping peace but always warring for the
defense (as ye call it) of S. Peter's patrimony. To suffer no Prince to dwell in
rest by him, but to snatch his possessiones to the unholy Church of Rome. To
set Princes together by the ears, till they be both weary, and then to take
the matter in his hand, and never to make an end, till both parties has given
some possessions to his Holy Father-head: to assoyle the souls, that has been
slain through his packing: The Popes wickedness described at large.
and he that dare most boldly, and with least shame, depose Princes without a
cause, he is best able to be Pope. He that can by any train, craft, or
subtilty, bring under him any Bishop or any spiritual person, or invent any
new clause in their Oath, he is to be allowed before other. Moreover, he that
keeps fewest women, and has most of them, that you wo^ of, he is holiest,
and apt to be head of your Church. And he that can most tyrannously burn men
for preaching of the Gospel, and he himself to take no labors therein. Item,
to burn Priests that marry wives and he himself to live in all mischief, and
whoredom, yea in such abominablenesse, as no man may with honesty speak (you
know what I mean,) this man I say has a testimony, before his spiritual^y,
that he is a lawful man to that Office. Furthermore, he that is a whores
son, as our Holy Father is now, and can find the means that 12. men will
forswear themselves, that he is lawfully born^ as this holy Clement did. This
is a fit Fat^^^, for such children. Finally, he that can give most money, and
buy the greatest part or Cardinals of his side, he is best worthy to be called
Pope, and to set on Peter's stool. For it cannot be unknown to you how that
Thomas VVoulcy, an holy pillar of your Church, would have been Pope, when this
Clement was chosen, and did offer for it a reasonable penny; but Clement dashed
him out of conceit, with 2000^ pound more than he offered, and so he was
judged best worthy, and entered in lawfully and regularly, and unto him our
Bishops be sworn, and obedient. And why? because they will have such a head,
as they be members: for how could else their Kingdom stand? For if one should
be chosen after the rule of blessed S. Paul, or else after the living of these
new Heretics, which be simple and poor^, and care not for no dignities, nor
will never swear nor fight, and would rather marry a wife of their own, then
take other men's, and are always studying and preaching Gods Word, seeking
only the honor of God, and the profit of his neighbor, and will be subject
and obedient in all things (desiring none exception) to his Prince. This man, I
say, should be unlawful, and not elegible, for he were able to destroy the
whole Kingdom of the Papists, and not worthy to receive an Oath of my Lords
the Bishops, which will not gladly be prejured for such a man's sake. For he
were able to destroy the whole Church of Rome, unto the which our Bishops have
been before sworn. It follows in your Oath, I shall no^ consent in Counsel
or in deed, that they should lose either life or member, or that they should
be taken or trapped by any evil means. What need you to swear thus unto the
Pope? does not the order of Charity bind you thus to use your self toward all
men, that is to say, neither to hurt them, nor to harm them, neither to
intrappe them, nor betray them. But all men must be betrayed, and with craft
and subtletie undone, for the maintenance of this one person. The truth is,
that never man spoke against this Popet, but you destroy him, and betrayed him:
but this Popet has blasphemed, and betrayed all Protestants, and yet you were
never against him. And why, because you be sworn to him. And you will keep
your Oath be it right or wrong. But in your last Oath, which has been newly
made, is added this clause, that no man should lay violent hands upon them in
any wise, or any wrong should be done unto them by any manner of Color. This
part is newly brought in, si^^e the flesh of the Pope has been so holy, that
no man might touch it but Harlots. Christian men must patiently suffer injuries
and wrongs, but your head will forswear that point, and maintain himself
through your power against all men. How near that this is the Apostles living,
all Christian men can well judge. It follows in your Oath: Their Council
that shall be showed unto me; either by their letters, or by their messengers,
I shall open to no man to their hurt or damage. Let Princes beware when the
Pope sends couns^lls unto you, for their meaning is to betray them. For all
the world knows that the Pope and you do little regard, what the beggars of
the world does handle: But what Emperors, Kings, and Dukes does handle, that
must you let and destroy. For that is the Counsel, and you may show it to no
man, No not to your King, and why? because you are sworn to the Pope. But what
say you to your Oath made unto your Prince? wherein you swear, that you shall
be faithful and true, and bear unto him above all creatures, love and favor,
to live and to dye with him, and to open him all manner of Counsels, that may
be hurtful unto his grace. Now it is well known, that the Pope has done and
daily does handle such Counsels as be against our Princes honor, The Pope
dot^ practice Counsels against the honorable state of Princes.
and conversation. And yet you may neither tell it to your Prince, nor let it,
and why, because you be sworn to the Pope, and forsworn to your Prince. Tell
me when any thing was opened unto our Prince, by you, that the Pope had handled
in counsel against our Prince: Of this thing I will take record of his Noble
grace, whether I say true or false^ and yet must I be accused of Treason. And
why, because you are sworn to the Pope, and I am true to the King: It
follows: I will help to defend and maintain the Papistry of Rome, against
all men, saving mine order. And in your, new Oath, now in our days made is
added, The regalls of Saint Peter. What and in all men be contained your
Prince? you must needs defend him. And why, because ye be sworn to the Pope,
and forsworn to your Prince; Quest. 6. c^ Aliu^.
For your Oath to your Prince is to defend him with all your wit and reason
against all men, now must you forsake one of them; and your practice has been
always to forsake your Prince, and stick to the Pope: H^re is specially to be
noted the practice of P^^lates. For (...) are the doing^ of the Holy ^^ther of
Rome, that for Rebellion against Princes he would give absolution, but for
matter against his Popedom there was never absolution might be obtained.
for of your Oath made to your Prince, you have been oftentimes assoiled. And
as your Law says, the Church of Rome is (...) so to do. But of your Oath made
unto the Pope, there is no absolution, neither in heaven nor earth. Neither was
it ever read, heard, nor seen, that there could be any dispensation for it.
Let me be reported by all the Books that ever were written, and by all the
Bulls that ever were granted, and by all the experience that ever was used; and
if I be found false, let me be blamed; and yet I am sure many men will reckon
that I speak uncharitably; but I would feign learn of all Charitable men in
England, with what other English words I could declare this intolerable or
subtle treason, thus long and shamefully used against my Prince, which is
necessary to be known. And I am compelled by violence to declare both my
con^ession and learning in this cause. For men has not been ashamed to report
that I would (which am but a wretch and poor simple won, and not able to
kill a Cat, though I would do my utte^most) to make insurrection against my
Noble and mighty Prince, whom (as God knows) I do honor, wor^hip, love and
favor to the uttermost power of my heart, and am not satisfied because it is
no more. This I speak before God. Let him be merciful unto me as it is true:
and if I were not so true in my heart, it were not possible for me so earnestly
to write against them, whom I do reckon to handle unfaithfully, and untruely
with their Prince, yea against both Gods law and man's law. The very truth is, I
can suffer, (through Gods grace) all manner of wrongs, injuries, and slanders;
but to be called an heretic against God, or a Traitor against my Prince, he
lives not, but I will say he lies; and will be able so to prove him, if I may
be reported by my works or deeds, by my conversation or living, or by any
thing that ever I did; (and I dare say as much of my self, notwithstanding our
Prelates slanders of me.) But unto my purpose; the Bishops does swear one Oath
to the Pope, and another contrary to their Prince. And yet they will be taken
for good and faithful children: And I poor man must be condemned, The Popes
Regals.
and all my works for Heresi^, and no man to read them under the pain of
Treason. And why? because I write against their perjurie toward their Prince.
But how comes Saint Peter by these regales that you are sworn to defend?
seeing that he was never no King, but a Fisher? All the world knows, that
Regalia belongs to Kings, and to like power of Kings. Why are you no^ rather
sworn to defend Peter's net and his Fisherie? the which things he both had and
used, and never regalls. Peter was acquainted with his nets but not with Regals.
But these things will not maintain the holy Church of Rome, and therefore ye
swear not to maintain them. But what mean you by that sentence; Saving mine
order? why say you not, saving my Kings pleasure your gloss says, you may not
defend these things with weapons. But oh Lord God what unshamefulnesse is this,
In verb^s ^^lus (...).
thus to delude with words all the whole world? Men knows that when the Pope
has need of your help, there is no men sooner in Arms than you are, if you
call Arms Harneys, Bylles, and Glaves, swords and gunnes, and such other
things. Do you not remember how soon the Bishop of Norwich, Henry Spenser,
was in Arms to defend Pop^ Urban, it were but folly to recite examples. These
Articles be now granted and are no Heresy.
In the year of our Lord 1164. was there a controversy between the Kings
Grace, and the Bishops of England, for certaice Prerogatives belonging to the
King. Wherefore the King required an Oath, and a confirmation of the Bishops,
as concerning those Articles prerogatives. But answer was made of the Bishops,
that those prerogatives, cum omnibus pravitatibus in regio scrip^o contentis,
were of none effect, nor strength, because they did forbid to appeal to the
Court of Rome, unless the King gave license. And because that no Bishop might
go at the Popes^ calling out of the Realm, without the Kings assent. And
because the Clerks should be convented in criminal causes a fore a temporal
Judge. And because the King would hear matters, as concerning tithes and other
Spiritual causes. The Prelates cannot abide to use obedience to their Prince.
And because that it was against the Sea of Rome, and the dignity of the same,
that a Bishop should be convented before the King. Briefly, they would not be
under the King, but this addition should be set unto it, Salvo honor Dei, and
Ecclesiiae Romanae, and ordine nostro, We have been^ led by blind guiders.
that is, we will be under your grace, saving the honor of God, of the Church
of Rome, and of our order: the cause why they did except these things, was
this, as they themselves grant. For Kings received their authorities, and power
of the Church, The Kings power is immediately of God.
but the Church receives her authority of Christ only, wherefore they
conclude that the King cannot command over Bishops, nor absolve any of them,
nor to judge of tithes, nor of Churches, neither ye^ to forbid Bishops, the
handling of any spiritual cause. Is not here a marveilous blindness and
obstinacy against their Prince? They will make it against Gods honor, to obey
their King, and are not ashamed to say in the Kings face, that his power is of
them. But I pray you whether was Kings before Bishops, or Bishops before Kings?
you shall find, that God had long admitted Kings, or any Bishops (as you take
him) was thought of. Does not the Holy Ghost command that we should honor
King? 1. Pet. 2.
Also in another place. Let all men b^ under the higher powers, for the power
is of God, and he that res^steth, resists the power of Gods Ordinance, Romans
13.
Here Paul says that Kings power is of God, and of Bishops. Furthermore, what
reason is it to defend the Popes Prerogative against your Princes? He that
defends the Pope against his Sovereign Lord or Lady is an unnatural Subject.
Is not your Prince nearer, and more natural unto you then this wretch the
Pope? But here is a thing, that makes me to marveile. When you swear to the
Pope (saving your order) is as much to say, as you shall not use no weapons,
but else you shall be ready and obedient in all things. But when you shall
swear to your King, then (saving your order) is as much to say, Saving of
Order has two significations.
as you have authority to confirm Kings, and to be their fellows, and
neither to be obedient unto them, nor yet to answer to any Justice before
them, but clearly to be exempted, and they not to meddle with you, except they
will give you some worldly promotion. If I would use my self as uncharitably
against you, as you have handled me, doubtless I could make something of this,
that should displease you. How would you cry, and how would you handle me poor
wretch, ^f you had half so much against me as this is, but I will let you
pass, God has preserved me hitherto o^ his infinite mercy against your
insatiable malice, and no doubt but he will do the same still. I will return
to your Oath. It follows, The Pope will hold a Council when and where it
pleases him.
I shall come to the Synod when I am called, unless I shall be lawfully let.
But why do you not swear to compel the Pope to call a Council? seeing that
it has been so often, and so instantly required of him, by many and Noble
Princes of Christendom, yea seeing that al Christendom, (such was their desire
of Reformation) does require with great sighs, an order to be taken, and set
in the highest Articles of our faith: but unto this you are not sworn. And
why: because it is against your holy Pope of Rome: for it there were a general
Council, both he, and you do know, that there must needs follow, both over
him and you a straight reformation. Therefore after my Counsel say, that you
cannot come, for you be lawfully let. It follows; I shall honorably entreat
the Popes Loga^, both going and coming, and in his necessity I shall help
him. I pray you see, and provide well that he go not a begging as Peter did.
And see also that he neither preach nor teach, but pill and poll, with all
mischief and unshame fastness. And why^ because you are sworn this to
maintain. It follows: I shall visit yearly my self, or by some other
messenger, the Pope of Rome, unless I ^e dispensed with of them. I pray you
what pertains this to the Office of a Bishop, yearly to visit Rome? Christ
and the most of his Apostles were never at Rome, and yet they were meetly good
Christian men. But I read in the traditions of the Turk, Iu. 6. l. 1. de
Majoritate and obedientia: Delecti ^ili^ De Iureiu^ando c. Ego, in verbo
singulis.
that certain of them must yearly visit their Mahomet. From whom I think you
have taken this custom. Your own Law says, that unto this clause must these
Bishops all only be bound, that be immediately underneath the Pope. Now are
not you such, for you swear an oath to the King, that you will immediately
take your Bishopric of him, and hold it all only of his grace. Wherefore
then do you here swear against your own Law? And also against your Oath made
to your Prince? Moreover, you know that there was an old custom, in the days
of King Henry the second, that no Bishop should go out of the Realm, without
the Kings License. The Prelates will obey the Pope but not the Prince.
Are you not bound to keep this custom: but answer, that the Pope has
dispensed with you, and that you are not bound to keep any obedience toward
the acts that your Prince makes. Moreover, I marvel sore, that you be all so
straightly sworn of so long time, and never one of you that ever went in my
days to discharge this Oath. And why? because you are dispensed with. But were
it not as good to leave it out of your Oath at first, seeing you intend not to
keep it, as afterward to dispense with you for it. No forsooth for then the
Pope could not bind you to come to Rome at his pleasure, and betray your King,
and all his Counsels. But in your Oath that is newly made, and that you have
sworn last, is added, that if the Pope be on this side the mountains, then
you shall visit him every year: but if he be beyond the mountains, then
every three years. O^^ that knew not your practice and the circumstances of
you^ facts that has been done, would little suspect this addition: but the
very truth is, there is a mischievous and abominable treason in it against
Princes. For if it chanced the Emperor, or else any temporal Prince near
unto Rome, to fall at variance with the Pope, then did the Pope straight run
into France, that is to say on this side the Mountains, A devilish Practice of
Prelates
where you must visit him yearly. And why? because your God is in distress,
and has conceived a deadly hatred against a Prince, and cannot bring it to
pass, without your help and counsel. Where^ore you must come yearly. And
also he must know, through your betraying, how your Prince is minded, and
whether he be addicted to his contrary part or not. If he be, you must betray
his Counsel, and that yearly: and why? because the Pope is on this side the
Mountains. But and if he be in Rome, and has all Princes necks under his
girdle, yet is it sufficient that you come every third year. For you can at
once coming devise as much Treason, as Princes shall avoid in five years. But
what belongs this unto a Bishop: that the Pope is on this side the
mountains, or beyond. If he be bound by Gods Law, yearly to visit the Pope,
The Bishops swear to visit the Pope yearly.
then must you visit him wheresoever he be, though he were either with God or
the Devil: and if you be not bound by Gods Law, what a presumption is it of
him to bind you? yea what an oversight is it of you, to let your self thus to
be bound? and what a wickedness is it of you so straightly to keep this Oath:
to the which you are not bound by Scripture, against your obedience made to
your Prince, which is commanded by Gods Word? But I pray you what example has
either he, or blessed Saint Peter, to bind by virtue of an Oath, the other
Apostles yearly to visit him at Rome? All the world may perceive that this
Oath is invented of insatiable covetousness, that the Pope and you have toward
honors and dignities. And that is well declared by these words, that follow in
your Oath. The possessions of my Church, I shall not sell, give, lay to
morgage, or make any feoffement, or by any other means alienate the same
without the Counsel of the Pope. The Pope takes sure Order with his Bishops
But I pray you tell me one thing, why do you not swear that you shall
neither buy, nor yet receive any possessions to your Church, nor you shall
(...) pill nor poll, nor shave, to increase the possessions of y^^r Church? But
the truth is, all is fish that comes to the net with you. And if it come once
within your clouches it never comes out again, though the king and his
Realm should stand in never so great need: but to receive all his Land, you
are always ready, and it is not against your Oath. I do not say thus, because
I would ye should sell or alienate the Possessions of the Church, but because I
see that there is nothing maintained by them, but all only your mischievous
pomp and your pride. Your own law commands, that the fourth part of the
spiritual goods, should be distributed among poor men. And for that cause
they be called, Bona pauperum, but how little their part is, all the world can
testify. Wherefore do you swear, Quest. 2. ^. Quantu: and de Reditibus, etc.
Mos est.
not to alienate your goods, without the Popes license? The Pope gave them not
to you, but the King and his subjects. How comes he now to be so near of
your Counsel in alienating them? and the King is thrust out, the which has
deserved best to be of your Counsel. But do you not remember your own Law?
the which does forbid, that the Pope in any wise, or for any necessity, should
alienate the goods of the Church, Quest. 2. cap. Non liceat Pap^.
except it be old houses, which cannot be kept without great charges. This is
your own Law, and against this will you swear? then must you needs be
perjured: for if you alienate your goods with the Popes license, then is this
decree against you and curses you. Wherefore then put you this in your Oath,
seeing you cannot alienate your goods with his consent nor yet without it? It
follows in your new Oath, Decrees, Ordinances, Sentences, Dispositions,
Reservations, Provisions and Commandments Apostolic, with all my power, I
will observe, and shall cause other men to observe them: These things were
added, when this Idol was brought so high, that no man durst winch against
him, In 6. Tit. 4. c. Ad Apost. in verbo Co^tin^tar.
and when he might say and do what he would. And as your Law Commands, no
man so hardy to ask him why he does so. Then began Decrees, Ordinances,
Depositions, Dispositions, Reservations, Provisions with like shamefulnesse for
to spring, and there is no remedy, but they must continue: And why? Because
you are sworn to keep them your self, and to compel other men also to keep
them. And out of the keeping of this part of your Oath, springs forth another
sentence th^^ ^^^loweth, This is the clause that m^intaineth the Popes Pomp
and glory, and this is that that gives him liberty to say and do what he will.
which is this: All Heretics, Schismatickes, and (...) toward our said Lord
the Pope, to my power I shall prosecute and withstand. This is the cause that
made us poor men so great Heretics. For it can never be proved, that ever
we spoke against God, or our King, and yet we be Heretics. And why, forsooth
because the Bishops are sworn to the Popes Decrees, the which condemns all
them for. Heretics, that speaks against his holiness, though he be as holy
as my horse; for he says himself in his law, Did. 40. c. Non nos.
that he needs not to be holy himself, but it is sufficient, that he sits
in an holy seat, the^e be his words: who doubts but he is holy, the which is
exalted to so great a dignity? Glo^s^ in verbo quis.
In whom though good works of his own merits be wanting, yet are those good
works sufficient, the which were done by his predecessors: upon the which
text their gloss says, that if it be openly known, that the Pope be an
Adulterer, or a Murderer, yet ought he not to be accused, etc. Now we poor men
cannot suffer such mischievous voices, wherefore we must be Heretics. The
Preachers of the Doctrine of Christ must needs be Heretics, for the said
Doctrine is against the Pope 2 John 7. they preach against the Pope and
therefore are Heretics.
But why? because my Lords the Bishops are sworn to persecute us: but
nevertheless, I trust to Gods grace, and the Kings, that my Lords the Bishops
will not be so hard in this point of their Oath, as they have been. And why?
because men may now come to their answer; Surely, there be many clauses in his
last Oath added, that be clear injury unto P^inces, and against Gods Law, and
man's Law, and yet our Bishops will swear them, yea and that which is worst of
all, they will accuse other men of Treason and Rebellion and there is no man
sworn to treason nor Rebellion but they only. Wherefore most gracious Prince
with all meekness and lowliness that is due to so noble a Prince, and also
that does become a true subject to do, I lowly and meekely require and desire
your grace, to judge between the Bishops and me, which of us is truest and
faithfullest to God and to your Grace: The writers Petition to the Kings Grace.
I speak all only of those that has, and also would now (if they durst)
defend the Pope, and his Laws. Against them I make this supplication, and
against them have I declared the learning and Doctrine, that I have both taught
and written. And as for my facts and deeds, what I have done against God and
your grace, I require them to say (...) uttermost that they can prove, or else
by your graciou^ ^^vour, I am here present and offer my self to prove them
liars; and that under any manner of pain, that your grace shall assign: and
against them I have declared the learning and Doctrine of their Church, and
also brought examples of their facts and deeds, with the which they have put
their Doctrine in exercise. Now if they be grieved or think themselves
wrongfully handled of me, then I require no more of your grace but
indifferently and graciously to hear both them and me, the which thing no
doubt as your grace does know our heavenly Father does require of you: who
preserve your highness in all honor and dignity, Amen. Thus far Dr Barnes.

But to return again from these Trayterly disloyal Oaths to our
Archbishops: Antiquit Eccles. Brit. f. 346. to 380.436. Godwin p. 166. to 170.
Holinshed. p. 878.910. to 923.
William Warham, WILLIAM WARHAM.
the next Archbishop, as he received his confirmation, consecration, Pall,
together with a power Legatine from Pope Julius, by sundry Bulls, against the
Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and took the forenamed Oath to the Pope,
which made him no good Subject to his Prince; so the Royal Pomp at his
instalment and inthronization was merely Antichristian. The day before his
coming to Canterbury, went thither the Duke of Buckingham who was his For
which Office of Execution he had an annual Fee from the Archbishop worthy so
great an Archbishop, and so great a man. Antiqu. Eccl. Bri^. p. 436.
Steward [a goodly Office ^or the grea^est Peer of the Realme] attended with
140. horse, to see all things in a readiness. This Duke had also the Office of
Chief Butler; and being unable to execute both duties, he deputed Sir George
Bourchier unto the Butlership. The Duke himself took great pains to see that
nothing requisite, for the performance of this Solemnity in the most
magnificent manner, might be wanting. The next day [being Sunday] he me^ the
Archbishop over against S. Andrews Church, and doing low obeisance unto him^
went before him bareheaded to Christ Church: from which Church he was attended
by the Duke in like ^ort as he was thither ward. The Cheer at dinner was as
great as for money it might be made, with several Verses, Pageants, Theaters,
Sceans, and Player-like representations, in nature o^ a Puppet-play, (made in
puffe-past or March-pane) before every Course, de^cribed more largely by
Antiquit. Eccles. Brit. p. 350.351.352.436.
Matthew Parker, fitter for a Mask than a Bishops Consecration; and savoring
of more than Asian Luxury, as this his Suc^essor confesses. Before the first
Mess, the Duke himself came riding into the Hall upon a great Horse, bare
headed, with his white staff in his han^^ and when the first dish was set on
the Table, made obey ^an^^^^^y bowing his body to the Archbishop. Holinshed,
p. 812.
Such Vassals did ^ho^e proud Popes of Canterbury make the very greatest
Nobles, as thus to become their Servants, and wait upon their Roche^s. In this
Archbishops time, there fell out great contestations and s^ites at Rome
between him, and the Bishops of Winchester, London, Lincoln, Exeter, and
other his Suffragans, touching the Jurisdictions of the Prerogative Court of
Canterbury; which cost much money. After this he, and Cardinal Wolsi^, who by
his power Legatine invaded and swallowed up all the Jurisdiction and Rightes of
the other Pr^^a^es and of the Sea of Canterbury) had diverse contests, and
bickerings. Anno 1512. This Arch-Prelate by an Oration in Parliament against
the French King, raised up a bloody war between England and France, toward
which two fifteenes were granted by the temporalty and two tenths by the
Clergy: after which, Anno. 152^. Holinshed. p. 911.912. Hall. 22. H. 8. fol.
188.189. whose words are here but transcribed.
When the Commons were assembled in the nether house, they began to Commune of
their grie^es, wherewith the Spiritualty had before time grievously oppressed
them, both contrary to the Law of the Realm, and contrary to all right, and in
special they were sore moved with six great causes.

Henry Guildford Knight of the Garter, and Controller of the Kings house,
declared in the open Parliament on his fidelity, that he and others being
Executors to sir William Crompton Knight, paid for the Probate of his Will to
the Cardinal and the Bishop of Canterbury a thousand Marks sterling. After
this Declaration where showed so many extortions done by Ordinaries for
Probates of Wills, that it were too much to rehearse. Instruction of Gods Word,
to the great perrill of their Souls. The sixth cause was, to see one Priest
little learned to have Note the mischief of Prelates being great temporal
Officers.
Bishops were Chancellors, and had all the rule about the King, so that no man
durst once presume to attempt any thing contrary to their profit or commodity.
But now, when God had illuminated the eyes of the King, and that their subtle
doings were once espied; then men began charitably to desire a Reformation; and
so at this Parliament men began to show their grudges. Whereupon the Burgesses
of the Parliament, appointed ^uch as were learned in the Law, being of the
Commons house, to draw one Bill of the Probates of Testaments, another for
Mortuaries, and the third for Non-residence, Pluralities, and taking of farme^
by spiritual men. The learned men took much pains, and first set forth the
Bill of Mortuaries, which passed the Commons house, and was sent up to the
Lords. To this Bill the Spiritual Lords made a fair face, saying, that surely
Priests and Curats took more than they should, and therefore it were well done
to take some reasonable order: thus they spoke, because it touched them little.
But within two days after was sent up the Bill concerning Probate of
Testaments; at the which the Archbishop of Canterbury in especial, and all
other Bishops in general both frowned and gra^nted, for that touched their
profit. Insomuch as D. John Fisher Bishop of Rochester said openly in the
Parliament Chamber these words: My Lords, you see daily what Bills come hither
from the Commons house, and all is to the What ever makes against the Bishops
gains, be they never so unjust, must be said to tend to the Churches
destruction.
destruction of the Church. For Gods sake see what a Realm the Kingdom of
Bohemia was, and when the Church went down, then fell the glory of the
Kingdom: now with the Commons is nothing but down with the Church, and all
this me seems is for lack of faith only. When these words were reported to
the Commons of the nether House, that the Bishop should say, that all their
doings were for lack of faith, they took the matter grievously, for they
imagined, that the Bishop esteemed them as Heretics, and so by his slanderous
words would have persuaded the Temporal Lords, to have restrained their
consent from the said two Bills, which they before had passed. Wherefore the
Commons after long debate, determined to send the Speaker of the Parliament to
the Kings highness, with a grievous complaint against the Bishop of Rochester;
and so on a day, when the King was at leisure, Thomas Audley speaker for the
Commons, and thirty of the chief of the Commons House, came to the Kings
presence in his Palace at Westminster, which before was called Yorke-place, and
there very eloquently declared, What a dishonor to the King, and the Realm it
was, to say, that they which were elected for the wisest men of all the Shires,
Cities, and Boroughs, within the Realm of England, should be declared in so
Noble and open a presence, to lack faith; which was equivalent to say, that
they were infidels, and no Christians, as ill as Turks or Sarazens, so that
what pain or study soever they took for the Common wealth, or what Acts or
Laws soever they made or stablished, should be taken as Laws made by Painims
and Hea^hen People, and not worthy to be kept by Christian men. Wherefore he
most humbly beso^ght the Kings Highness, to call the said Bishop before him,
and to cause him to speak more discreetly of such a number as was in the
Commons-house. The King was not well contented with the saying of the Bishop,
yet he gently answered the Speaker, that he would send for the Bishop, and send
them word what answer he made; and so they departed again. After this the
King sent for the Archbishop of Canterbury and six other Bishops, and for the
Bishop of Rochester also, and there declared to him the grudge of the Commons:
to the which the Bishop answe^ed, A silly and false evasion of a Prelate.
that he meant the doings of the Bohemians, was for lack of Faith, and not the
doings of them that were in the Commons House. Which saying was confirmed by
the Bishops being present, who had him in great reputation: and so by that
only saying, the King accepted his excuse, and thereof sent word to the
Commons by Sir VVilliam-Fitz-VVilliams Knight, Treasurer of his Household,
which blind excuse pleased the Commons nothing at all. After, diverse assemblies
were kept between certain of the Lords, and certain of the Commons, for the
Bills of Probates of Testaments, and the Mortuaries; the Temporalty laid to the
Spiritualty their own Laws and Constitutions, and the Spiritualty sore
defended them by prescription and usage; to whom this answer was made by a
Gentleman of Grayes-Inne, The usage has ever been of thieves to Rob on
Shooters-hill, Ergo, is it Lawful With this answer the Spiritual men were
sore offended, because their doings were called robberies. But the Temporal
men stood still by their sayings, insomuch that the said Gentleman said to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, that both the exaction of Probates of Testaments,
and the taking of Mortuaries as they were used, were open Robbery and theft.
After long disputation, the Temporal Lords began to lean to the Commons, but
for all that the Bills remained unconcluded for a while. The King like a good
and discreet Prince, not long after aided them for the redress of their
griefs against the Spiritualty, and caused two new Bills to be made
indifferently, both for the Sea these 2 Acts yet in force, viz. 21. H. 8. c.
4.5.
Probates of Testaments and Mortuaries; which Bills were so reasonable, that
the Spiritual Lords assented to them all; though they were sore against their
minds, and in especial the Probates of Testaments sore displeased the Bishops,
and the Mortuaries sore displ^ased^ the Parsons and Vicars. After these acts
thus agreed, the Commons made another 21. H. 8. c. 13.
Act for Pluralities of benefices, Non-Residence, buying, selling, and taking
of Farms by Spiritual Persons; which Act so displeased the Spiritually, that
the It is no new thing for Priests to rail against Parliaments for making good
Laws to order them.
Priests railed on the Commons of the Common house, and called them Heretics
and Schismatickes; ^or the which diverse Priests were punished. This Act was
sore deba^ed above in the Parliament Chamber, and the Lords Spiritual would in
no wise consent. Wherefore the King perceiving the grudge of his Commons,
c^used ^i^ht Lords and eight of his Commons to mee^e in the S^a^^^h^^^er a^ an
afternoon; and there was sore debating of the cause, insomuch that the
Temporal Lords of the Upper house which were there, ^ooke part with the
Commons against the Spiritual Lords, and by force of reason caused them to
assent to the ^ill with a little qualifying. Which Bill the^ next day was
wholly agreed to in the Lords house, to the great rejoycing^ of the Lay people,
and to the great displeasure of the Spiritual persons^ Immediately after this,
not only Cardinal VVol^e himself, but the Archbishop and whole Cle^gi^ of
^^gland were brought into a Pr^ by this Parliamen^ the Cardinal for accepting
of a power Legati^e from the Pope, contrary to the Laws of the Realm, and the
(...) of the Cl^^^i^ for consenting and submitted thereunto, and holding a
Synod by virtue of i^: to avoid this danger, and purchase a pardon, the
Clergy of the Province of Canterbury pro^fered to give the King one h^ndred
thousand pounds, and the Clergy of the Province of York 18000 ^ounds more;
but the King would not accept of this sum, unless they would declare him in
the Act by which they granted him this subsidy, to be supreme head of the
Church of England here on earth, next under Christ: but proceeded to take the
forfeiture of the Praemunire against them. This put the Prelates, the Popes
sworn vassals, to a great Dilemma; for either they must plainly renounce the
Popes usurped supremacy, or the Kings mercy, and fall under the lash of a
Praemunire, whereby all their Bishoprics, goods, livings were for^eited to his
Majesty; and their lives and liberties at his devotion. Loath were the Bishops
to forsake their old Lord the Pope, whose servants they had been so long, and
therefore they used all delays and adjournments to spin out the time, and
delude the King, but he would not be mocked by them. At last therefore they
agreed upon this recognition. We acknowledge the Kings Majesty to be the
singular Protector, the supreme Lord, and likewise supreme head of the Church
and Clergy of England so far forth as it is lawful for him to be by the
Laws of Christ. But the King much offended with this ambiguous dubious, and
equivocating acknowledgement (which in truth was no concession of what he
demanded) required them to make a full and plain acknowledgement of his
supremacy in direct and positive terms, without ambiguity or shifts, or else
to deny and conclude against it, and incur^e the penalty of the Praemunire.
Being thus put to it the Archbishop and Bishops hereupon made many adjournments
of the Convocation, and at last put it over from April, to the fifth of
October, to ^hunne the rock on which they were like to split themselves, or
their holy Father the Pope, in which space the Archbishop died: At last they
agreed to give the King the Title he desired, and inserted it into a public
instrument: Whereupon the King at last granted them a general pardon, in
Parliament, which begins thus: 22. H. ^. c. 15.
The King our Sovereign Lord, calling to his blessed and most gracious
remembrance, that his good and loving sub^ects, the most Reverend Father in God
the Archbishop of Can^erbury, and other Bishops, Suffragans, Prelates, and
other spiritual persons of the Province of the Archbishopricke of Canterbury,
of this his Realm of England, and the Ministers underwritten, which have
exercised, practiced, or executed in spiritual Courts, and other jurisdictions
within the said Province, have fallen, and incurred into diverse dangers of his
Laws by things done, perpetrated, and committed contrary to the order of his
Laws, and sp^^ially, contrary to the form of the Statutes of Provisours,
Provisions, and Praemunire: and his Highness having always a tender eye, with
mercy, pity, and compassion ^owards his spiritual subjects, minding of his
high goodness and great benignity, so always to impart the same unto them, as
justice being duly administered, all rigor being excluded, and the great and
benevolent minds of his said subjects, largely, and many times approved toward
his highness, and specially in their Convocation, and Synod now presently
being in the Chapter house of the Monastery of Westminster, by correspondence
of gratitude to them to be requi^ed: of his mere motion, benignity, and
liberality, by authority of this his Parliament, has given and granted his
liberal and free pardon to his said good and loving spiritual subjects, and
the said Ministers, and to every of them to be had, taken and enjoyed to and by
them and every of them by virtue of this present Act, in manner and form
ensuing: that is, to wit; The Kings Highness of his said benignity, and high
liberality, in consideration that the sad Archbishop, Bishops, and Clergy of
the said Province of Canterbury in their said Convocation, now being, have
given and granted to him a subsidy of one hundred thousand pounds of
lawful^mony current in this Realm, to be levied and collected by the said
Clergy at their proper costs and charges, and to be paid in certain form
specified in their said grant thereof, is fully and resolutely contended and
pleased, that it be ordained, established, and enacted by authority of this his
said Parliament, that the most Reverend Father in God William Archbishop of
Canterbury, Metropolitan and Primate of all England, and all other Bishops, and
Suffragans, Prelates, etc, shall be by authority of this present pardon,
acquired, pardoned, released, and discharged against his Highness, his heirs,
successors, and executors, and every of them, of all and all manner offenses,
contempts, and trespasses committed or done, against all and singular Statute
and Statutes of Provisours, Provisions, and Praemunire, and every of them, and
of all forfeitures, and titles, that may grow to the Kings Highness by reason
of any of the same Statutes, and of all and singular trespasses, wrongs,
deceits, misdemeanors, for^eitures, penalties and profits, sums of money,
pains of death, pains co^porall and pecuniar, as generally of all other
things, causes, quarrels, suits, judgments and exactions in this present Act
hereafter no^ excepted, nor soreprised, which may be or can be by his Highness
in any wise, or by any means pardoned, before and to the ten^h day of the
month of March, in the 22. year of his most Noble Reign to every of his said
loving subjects. Provided always that this Act of free pardon shall not in any
wise extend or be beneficial to the Reverend Father in God John Archbishop of
Dublin, now being in the Kings Dominions of Ireland, nor shall in any wise
extend to pardon, discharge, or acquit the Bishop Hereford, Peter Ligham, John
Baker, Adam Travers, Robert Cliffe; Rouland Philips, and Thomas Pelles Clerks:
who it seems were guilty of some notorious crimes against the King, and
therefore excepted out of this general pardon: But to return again to
Warham. This See Fox Acts and Monuments: p. 952. and in the pages before.
Archbishop persecuted, and shed the blood of some of our Martyrs, and caused
the corpse of William Tracy Esquire. for some orthodoxe passages in his Will, to
be taken out of the grave, and burn^ for an Heretic by an Order made in
Convocation: sending a Commission to Doctor Parker Chancellor of Worcester to
execute this wicked sentence, who accomplished the same. King Henry the eighth
hearing his Subject to be taken ou^ of the ground, and burnt without his
knowledge or due order of Law, sent for the Chancellor, laid this to his
charge as an high offense, who excused himself by this Archbishops command
then newly dead, but in conclusion it cost the Chancellor 300^ to pu^chase his
pardon, and would have cost the Archbishop more, had not his death prevented
this danger: In fine, this H^lins^ed, p. 936, 937. Hall An. 25. H. 8. f. 218.
b. Speed, p. 1029.
Archbishop Warham, and Fisher B. of Rochester, gave credit and countenance to
the forged visions and revelations of Elizabeth Barton, afterward condemned of
high Treason for the same, as ^^nding to the reproach, peril, and destruction
of the Kings pers^n, honor, fame, and dignity; and Thomas Laurence Register to
the Archbishop (it is likely by his Masters privity) proceeded so far, as to
write a book of her counterfeit miracles, revelations and holiness: for which
she and her complyces were afterward execu^ed as Tiburne as they had justly
deserved, being attainted of treason by Parliament: among which cursed c^ue,
Richard Master Priest, Edward Bocking Doctor of Divinity, and Henry Deering
Munkes of Canterbury, Henry Gold Bachelor of Divinity, Thomas Laurence Register
to the Archbishop o^ Canterbury Warham, and Hugh Ric. a Friar observant (who
seduced this silly girl to effect their own, and the Prelates designs the
better thereby) suffered death as Traitors, by hanging, drawing, and quartering
at Tiburne: The act of their attainder, treasons and execution is at large
related by M. Hall in his Chronicle, 25. H. 8. f. 218, 221, 222, 223, 224. to
which I shall refer the Reader.
Thomas Cranmer next to him in succession, was made Archbishop by King Henry
the 8. much against his will: THOMAS CRANMER.
for in his Discourse with Fox Acts and Monuments page 1703.
D. Martyn, a little before his Martyrdom, being charged by him, that he had
aspired to the Archbishopricke of Canterbury; he replied, I protest before you
all, there was never man came more unwillingly to a Bishopric than I did to
that, insomuch that when King Henry did send for me in Post that I should come
over, I prolonged my journey by seven weeks at the least, ^hinking that ^ee
would be forgetful of me in the mean time. He coming to the Antiq. Eccl^s.
Brit. p. 381. to 405. Fox Act^ and Monuments. p. 1690. to 17^^.
See, took the like Oath to the Pope as his predec^ss^^rs had done, and
therefore was deeply charged of perju^y by Martyn, for renouncing and swearing
against the Popes Supremacy afterward, though he answered, that the first oath
was against the Laws of God, of the Realm, the Kings Prerogative, and made
void by Parliament, and so not binding. After the nullifying of which oath,
partly by his means, but principally by the Lord Cro^wels (whom the King made
his 31. H. 8. c. 10.37. H. 8. c. 17 (...) Acts and monuments, p. 1074. to 1089,
99^.1000, 1001.
Vicegerent General in all Ecclesiastical affairs and causes, and superior
to the Archbishop of Canterbury in place and Ecclesiastical power) the Popes
Supremacy, and usurped jurisdiction was by several Acts of Parliament quite
abolished out of England, as prejudicial, and directly opposite to the Kings
Prerogative Royal: King Henry dying, the Archbishop swore to his will, by
which Queen Mary was to succeed to the Crown as next heir, in case King
Edward died without issue. King Edward seeing the obstinacy of Q^^en^ Mary in
matters of Religion, what a pillar she was like to prove to the Church of Rome,
and persecutor of the true Professors of the Gospel Fox Acts and Monuments,
page School. Antiquit. Eccles. Brit. page 401.
ordaines by his last Will, that Queen Mary should be put by the Crown, and
the Lady Jane succeed him as next Heir; to which Testament all the Council
swore, and the Archbishop too at last, after much ado: Whereupon King Edward,
and Queen Mary getting the Crown, and putting by the Lady ^ane; Cranmer
Holinshed, p. 1090.1093.
who also aided the Duke of Northumberland with horse and men against the
Queen, was thereupon committed prisoner to the Tower, and soon after
condemned of high treason, and that by an Cr^mptons Jurisdic. of Courts. f. 12.
b.
ordinary Jury, for seeking thus to disinherit the Queen: who pardoning all the
rest that were guilty of this crime, released likewise the Treason against him,
Holinshed. p. 1091.
(though she excepted him out of her general pardon, and some other Bishops,)
and accused him only of heresy as those times deemed it, for which he was
deprived, degraded, and burnt at last for a Martyr, repenting of that
Recantation, which he had over-cowardly made before, out of fear, and humane
frailty. And here, not to detract any thing from the due praise of this our
glorious Martyr, give me leave only to observe.

condemnation, and execution of See Fox Acts and Monuments in their histories
Lambert, Frith, and some other of our godly Marryrs, before he was thoroughly
instructed in the points of our Religion. Henry the 8, and Queen Katharine,
which occasioned much trouble, dissension, war; and a furtherer of this Kings
subsequent lustful, if lawful marriages. Lincolne-shire rebels in the sixth
Article of their grievances presented to King Henry the 8. complain thus
against this Archbishop, and other Prelates. Speed history, p. 1033.
That we your true Subjects find them grieved, that there be diverse Bishops of
England of your Graces late promotion, that have subverted the faith of Christ,
as we think, which is the Thomas Cranmer.
Archbishop of Canterbury, the John Fisher.
Bishop of Rochester, the Bishop of Salisbury, the Bishop of S. Daveyes, and
the Bishop of Develin, And in special, as we think, the beginning of all the
trouble of this Realm, and the great exactions that has been taken of your
poor Communalty, have risen by the occasion of the John Long^and.
Bishop of Lincoln, by whose Officers, and by other of the Lord Cromwells
servants, a great rumor and noise is risen, and the common voice is, that such
jewels, plate, and other ornaments of our Parish Churches, which we occupy in
the service and honor of God, should be taken from us, and spoiled in like
manner and fashion, as the houses of Religion have been. Add to this.
Fourthly, that though the Popes Supremacy were abolished H^ 8. c. 14. the two
notable Statutes of 37. H. 8. c. 17. and 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. worthy consideration.
And likewise by M. Tindall, in his obedience of a Christian man, and practice
of Popish Prelates, by Rodoricke Mors his complaint to the Parliament, c. 19,
20, 21. by William VVraghtons hunting and finding ou^ of the Romish Fox among
the English Bishops, and his rescuing of the Fox, by Henry Stalbridge his
exhortatory Epistle, D. Barnes his supplication to King Henry the 8. Acts and
monuments, p. 1472 old edition.
M. Fox, and other Treatises written in those days even by Protestants, which
prove the Bishops of those times to be Traitors to the King; close enemies to
the Kings Prerogative, and fast friends to the Popes unjust us^rpation, as
Bonner, Stephen Gardener, with other of them showed themselves in Queen Mary's
days. By which it appears, that the Bishops in those times were generally
disliked and complained against on all hands. Fifthly, that the bloody Statute
of 31. H. 8. c. 14. called by Halls Chronicle. 31. H. 8. f. 234. Holinshed. p.
946. Speed. p. 1044, 1045.
some the six Articles, by others the whip with six strings, and by the most
part the bloody statute, was made and devised in this Archbishops time, by the
cruelty and policy of the Bishops, especially of Stephen Gardener Bishop of
Winchester: which Statute for the miserable and pernicious tyranny and rigid
execution, of the same is worthy of no memory among Christian men, but rather
to be buried in perpetual silence of oblivion, as Acts and Monuments, p.^ 586,
587.589.1289.1472. old edition.
M. Fox determines. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 389, 390.396.
Ma^thew Parker indeed records that Cranmer opposed this Act at first, then
caused it to be 32. H. 8. c. 10.35. H. 8. c. 5.6.
moderated, and at last to be repealed in King Edwards days, but others seem
to imply that he gave consent thereto at first. Sixthly, that he is the only
Martyr of all the Archbishops of Matthew Parker his Successor, writes thus; ^
Antiq: Eccles. Brit. p. 403^ 404.^
Cranmerus fide integra, non Pontificia censura in libro vitae scriptus
coelestem h^^reditatatem cum Christo consecutus est, ut si in hominibus
gloriari fas esset, non ab Augustino, Dunstano, Elphego, Anselmo, Thoma Becket,
Edmundo, and reliqua pontificia ^urba, sed ab hoc uno, qui solus in Christi
causa contra Antichristum Flammarum incredibili dolore^ ad coelos subla^us est,
Cantuariensis seeds nobilitata esse videatur. and that Fox Acts and Monuments,
vol. 3. p. 666, 667. in the last edition. Antiq. Eccles: Brit. p. 403.
through promises and hopes of life and restitution to his former dignity and
Archbishopricke, the chief motives inducing him to this shameful recantation.
Ninthly, that though he suffered Martyrdom for Religion only as a private
Christian, after he was put from his Bishopric, Traitor for-high treason, and
that justly, as he confessed, whiles he was an Archbishop, for an Act done by
him as an Archbishop, and Counselor of State, for which he professed both his
sorrow, and repentance; And this Archprelate, and Holinshed, p. 1089.
Bishop Ridley (committed likewise for Treason) were very importunate suitors
to King Edward the 6. to tolerate the use of Mass in his Sister Mary's
family; Fox Acts and monuments, old Edition. p. 881.884, 885. Speed. p. 1223.
pressing him with diverse politic reasons to condescend to this their
importunate suite, which the infant King, not only rejected with strong pious
reasons, but tears, to these Bishops great reproach: who thereupon said to M.
Cheek the Kings Tutor: Ah M. Cheek, you may be glad all the days of your
life, that you may have such a Scholar, for he has more Divin^^y in his
little finger, than all we have in all our bodies.
CARDINAL POOLE.
But to pass from this Martyr to Cardinal Poole, his immediate successor.
Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 405. to 424. Godwin. p. 171, 172. Speed, p. 1143, 1144.
This Archprelate though almost, if not quite a Protestant in the point of
justification, was yet a notori-Traytor, and so procliamed by King Henry the 8.
who thereupon gave his D^anery of Exeter to another, and that no^ without just
cause: for he refused to come out of Italy to the King his Sovereign when he
sent for him: he was sent twice by the Pope as his Legate, both to the French
King, and the Germans, to stir them up to make war against King Henry the
8. and to invade England, though with ill success; The King thereupon
requested them to send him over into England, that he might proceed against him
as a Traitor. He was intimate with the Pope, studied to advance his power, and
suppress his Sovereigns, stirred up his friends in England against the King
by his letters, whereupon the King banished both him and his mother the
Countess of Salisbury by Act of Parliament, proclaimed him a Traitor (whence
Father Latimer in his 5. Sermon before King Edward calls him Cardinal Poole
the Kings Traitor, etc.) and after that be headed his mother and elder brother
Vicount Mountacute for high treason. What manner of person, fol. 60, 61.
and Traitor this Cardinal was to his Sovereign, will appear by a Recorded
in M. Fox Acts and monumens, page 972. and Thomas Bacons reports of certain
men, vol^ f. 266.267. The manifold ingratitude of P^^le.
Letter written to him being at Rome by Cutbert Tonsiall Bishop of Duresme, and
John Stokerley, Bishop of London, which begins thus: For the good will that we
have borne unto you in times past, as long as you continued the Kings true
subject, we cannot a little lament and mourn that you neither regarding the
inestimable kindness of the Kings highness, heretofore showed unto you, in
your bringing up, nor the honor of the house that you be come of, nor the
wealth of the Country that you are borne in, should so decline from your duty
to your Prince, that you should be seduced by fair words, and vain promises
of the Bishop of Rome, to wind with him, going about by all means possible to
pull down, and put under foot your natural Prince and Master, to the
destruction of the Country that has brought you up; and for the vainglory of
a Red Ha^, to make your self an instrument to set forth his malice, who has
stirred up by all means that he could, all such Christian princes as would
give ears unto him, to depose the Kings highness from his Kingdom and to
offer it as a prey to them that should execute his malice, and to stir if he
could his subjects against him in stirring, and nourishing rebellions in his
Realm: where the office and duty of all good Christians, and namely of us that
be Priests, should be to bring all commotion to tranquillity, and trouble to
quietness, all discord to concord, and in doing the contrary, we show our
selves to be but the Ministers of Satan, and no^ of Christ, who ordained all
us that be Priests to use in all places the legation of peace, and not of
discord. But since that cannot be undone, that is done, the second is, to make
amends, and to ^ollow the doing of the Prodigal Son spoken of in the
Gospel, who returned home to his father, and was well accepted, as no doub^
you might be, if you will say as he said, in acknowledging your folly, and do
as he did, in returning home again from your wandering abroad in service of
them who little care what come of you, so that their purpose by you be served.

This Cardinals Treason, ingratitude, and perfidiousnesse, is yet further
exemplified by the same Cutbert Tonstall, in his Sermon which he preached
before King Henry the 8. upon Palm Sunday, in the year of of our Lord, 1538.
Printed anciently by i^ self, in part recited by Holinshed p. 1164, 1165. and
more largely by In his reports of certain men: vol. 3. f. 279, 280.
Thomas Becon, where he thus blazons both the Pope and him in their native
colors.

The Bishop of Rome, because he can not longer in this Realm wrongfully use his
usurped power in all things as he was wont to do, and suck out of this
Realm by avarice insatiable, innumerable sums of money yearly to the great
exhausting of the same; he therefore moved and repleat with furious ire, and
pestilent malice, goes about to stir all Christian Nations that will give
ear to his Devilish enchantments, to move war against this Realm of
England, The madness of the Pope against England.
giving it in prey to all those that by his instigation will invade it. And the
Bishop of Rome now of late to set forth his pestilent malice the more, has
allured to his purpose a subject of this Realm Reginald Pole, coming of a
noble blood, and thereby the more arrant Traitor, to go about from Prince to
Prince, and from Country to Country, to stir them to war against this
Realm, and to destroy the same being his native country; Reginald Pole, and
his unnaturalness to the Realm of England.
whose pestilent purpose, the Princes that he breaks it unto, have in much
abomination, both for that the Bishop of Rome (who being a Bishop should
procure peace) is a stirrer of war, and because this most arrant and unkind
Traitor is his minister to so devilish a purpose, to destroy the Country that
he was borne in, which any heathen man would abhor to do. But for all that
without shame he still goes on, exhorting thereunto all Princes that will
hear him, who do abhor to see such unna^uralnesse in any man as he
shameless does set forwards; whose pernicious treasons late secretly wrought
against this Realm, have been by the work of Almighty God, so marvellously
detected, and by his own brother without looking therefore so diclosed, and
condign punis^ment ensued, that hereafter (God willing) they shall not take
any more such root to ^he noysance of this Realm. And where all Nations of
Gentiles, by reasons and by law of nature, do prefer their Country before
their Parents, so that for their Country they will dye against their Parents
being traitors; this pestilent man, worse than a Pagan, is not ashamed to
destroy (if he could) his native Country. And whereas Curtius an Heathen man
was content for saving of the City of Rome where he was borne, to leap into a
gaping of the earth, which by the illusions of the devil was answered should
not be shut, but that it must first have one: this pernicious man is contented
to ru^ne headlong into hell, so that he may destroy thereby his native country
of England, being in that behalf incomparably worse than any Pagan. And
besides his pestilent treason, his unkindnesse against the Kings Majesty, who
brought him up of a very child, and promoted both him, and likewise restored
his blood being tainted, to be of the Peers of this Realm, and gave him money
yearly out of his coffers to maintain him honorably at study, makes his
Treason much more detestable to all the world, and him to be repured more wild
and cruel than Tiger. But for all this thou English man take courage unto
thee, and be nothing afraid, thou have God on thy side, who has given this
Realm to the generation of Englishmen, to every man in his degree after the
laws of the same: thou have a Noble, Victorious and Virtuous King, hardy as a
Lion, who will not suffer thee to be so devoured by such wild beasts. Only
take an English heart unto thee, and mistrust not God, but trust firmly in him,
and surely the ruin intended against thee shall fall on their own necks that
intend it, and ^eare not though the devil and his disciples be against thee,
for God thy protector is stronger than he, or any other, and shall by his
grace give him and them a fall; and so show unto thee, that God is on thy side.
Consider, that it is written in Prove. 6. that amongst many crimes there
rehearsed, that God hates chiefly, he does detest those persons that sow
discord among their brethren (as all we Christians are brethren under our
heavenly Father) Also it is written in John 8. that those that do stir men to
murder are children of the Devil, which was from the beginning a murderer,
and brought Adam to sin, and thereby to death; as the Jews (his children)
stirred the people to put Christ to death. Saint Paul also in Romans 16. warns
them to beware of those that make dissension and debate among them, against the
Doctrine that he had taught them, and bids them eschew their company;
wherein the Holy Ghost wrought in Paul, for these many years past little war
has been in these parts of Christendom, The Pope mover of wa^res.
but the Bishop of Rome either has been a stirrer of it, or a nourisher of
it, and seldom any compounder of it, unless it was for his ambition and
profit. Where^ore since as S. Paul says in 1 Cor. 14. that God is not the God
of dissension, but of peace, who commands by his Word peace always to be kept;
we are sure that all those that go about to break peace between Realms, and
to bring them to war, are the children of the devil, Breakers of peace, and
sowers of discord, are the children of the devil.
what holy names soever they pretend to cloak their pestilent malice withal,
which cloaking under hypocrisy is double devillishnesse, and of Christ most
de^ested; because under his blessed name they do play the Devils part. And
therefore seeing Christ is on ourside against them, let us not fear them at
all, but putting our confidence in Almighty God, and cleaving fast to the Kings
Majesty, our supreme head on earth next under Christ of this Church of England,
as ^aithfull subjects by Godslaw ought to do; though they go about to stir
Gog and Magog, and all the ravenners of the world against us, we trust in God
verily, and doubt not but they shall have such a ruin as is prophesied by
Ezekiel in C. 39. against Gog and Magog going about to destroy the people of
God, whom the people of God shall so vanquish and overthrow on the mountains
of Israel, that none of them shall escape, but their carcasses there to lie to
be devoured by ki^es, and crows, and birds of the air; and if they shall
persist in their pestilent malice, to make invasion into this Realm: then let
us wish that their great Captain Gog, (I mean the Bishop of Rome) may come to
them to drink with them of the same cup that he maliciously goes about to
prepare for us, that the people of God might surely live in peace. Thus
Tonstall, concerning the Pope and the Cardinal, though a Papist. It is an
Italian proverb of our English men Ant^q. Eccles. Brit. p. 408.
That an Italianated English man, is a devil incarnate: such a one was this
Cardinal; qui Italis pontificiisque adulationibus, con^iliis, atque technis in
Regis atque Patriae discrimine sic se (...) passus ^st, ^^ non modo (...)
PRODITOR, writes his immedia^e successor of him^ (...)
In the 31. year of King Henry the 8^ he put the King and Kingdom to
extraordinary trouble and expense ^or the King being then informed by his
^rusty and faithful friends, that the cankered and cruel Serpent the Bishop
of Rome, by that Arch-tr^ytor Reginald Poole, enemy to Gods Words, and his
natural country, had moved and stirred diverse great Princes and Potentates of
Christendom to invade the Realm of England, and utterly to destroy the whole
Nation of the same; Wherefore his Majesty in his own person, without any
delay, took very laborious and pain^ull journeys ^owards the Sea coasts; also
he sent diverse of his Nobles and Counselors to view and search all the Ports
and dangers of the Coasts where any mee^e and convenient landing place might be
supposed, as well on the borders of England, as also of Wales, and in all such
doubtful places his highness caused diverse and many Bulwarks and
^ortifications to be made: And further, his Highness caused the Lord Admiral,
Earl of Southhampton, to prepare in readiness ships for the Sea, to his great
cost and charges: And beside this, to have all people in a readiness, he
directed his commissions throughout the Realm to have his people mustered, and
the harness and weapons seen and viewed, to the intent that all things should
be in readiness if his enemies should make any attempt into this Realm, and
likewise caused a general muster to be made of all the Citizens of London
between the age of 60. and 16. This Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. qua supr^^
Arch-traytor after the Pope had employed him to move the Emperor and King of
Spain to break their league with King Henry, and to proclaim war against
him, kept a continual guard about him, lest the King should send some to
murder him. And retiring to Viterbium, where he lived some space near a
Nunnery, he began two bastards (a son and a daughter) on the Abbe^se, who often
repaired to his lodging; which was afterward objected to him, when he was
God^^^, page 124. to 129. See Speed, p. 1143, 1144. Martin^ Hist: p. 397, to
401.
elected Pope by the major part of Cardinals, and yet lost that Antichristian
See by his own negligence and delays King Edward the 6. deceasing and Queen
Mary coming to the Crown, she presently sent for this Traitor home; the Pope
upon this occasion makes him his Legate, to reduce England under his
vassallage, and tyranny. The Cardinal hereupon sore longed homeward, not
doubting but if things stood, as he thought, to get a dispensation to lay off
the Hat, and put on a Crown. But the Emperor mistrusting what the Prelate
intended, found devises to hold him beyond the seas, until the match was
concluded between Queen Ma^y and his son. Anno 1554. he arrived in England,
and the same day he landed, an Act passed in the Parliament house (through the
Queens, and VVinchesiers means) for his restitution in blood, and the utter
repealing of the Act of at^ainder against him in King Henry the 8. his reign.
The Cardinal soon after caused Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury to be
deprived and degraded, seating himself in his See; and making a long Oration
in Parliament, declaring the offense and schism of the Kingdom in casting off
the Pope, and his willingness to receive them into the bosom of the Church
again upon their submission; he caused the Parliament to make an Act,
repealing all Statutes, Articles, and Provisions made against the Sea of Rome
since the 20. year of Henry the 8. reviving the Popes supremacy, and denying
the Queens, wherein the whole Realm submitted it self to the Pope: some parts
of which Act, pertinent to my purpose, I shall crave leave to recite,

1. and 2. Phil. and Mary, chapter 8. See Holinshed, p. ^1^2, 1123.
Whereas since the 20. year of K. Henry the 8. of famous memory, Father unto
your Majesty, our most natural Sovereign, and gracious Lady and Queen, much
false and erroneous Doctrine has been taught, preached, and written, partly
by diverse natural borne subjects of this Realm, and partly being brought in
hither from sundry other foreign Countries, has been sown and spread a
broad within the same, by reason whereof, as well the spirituali^y as the
temporality of your Highness Realms and Dominions have swerved from the
obedience of the Sea Apostolic, and declined from the unity of Christ's
Church, and so have continued, until such time as your Majesty being first
raised up by God, and set in the seat royal over us, and then by his divine
and gracious providence knit in marriage with the most Noble and Virtuous
Prince the King our Sovereign Lord your husband, the Popes holiness, and the Sea Apostolic sent hither unto your Majesty's, as unto persons undefiled, and
by Gods goodness preserved from the common infection aforesaid, and to the
whole Realm the most reverend father in God the Lord Cardinal Poole, Legate de
Latere, to call us home again into the right way, from whence we have all this
long while wandered, and strayed abroad; and we a^^er sundry long and grievous
plagues, and calamities, seeing by the goodness of God^ our own errors, have
acknowledged the same unto the said most reverend Father, and by him have been
and are the rather at the contemplation of your Majesty's, received and
embraced into the unity and bosom of Christ's Church, and upon our humble
submission, and promise made for a declaration of our repentance, to repeal
and abrogate such Acts and Statures as had been made in Parliament since the
said 20. year of the said King Henry the 8. against the supremacy of the Sea
Apo^stolike, as in our submission exhibited to the said most reverend Father in
God by your Majesty's appears. The tenor whereof ensues. We the Lords
spiritual and temporal, and the Commons assembled in this present Parliament,
representing the whole body of the Realm of England, The submission of the
whole Realm to the Pope.
and the Dominions of the same, in the name of our selves particularly, and
also of the said body universally, in this our supplication directed to your
Majesty's, with most humble suit, that it may by your graces intercession and
means be exhibited, to the most reverend Father in God, the Lord Cardinal
Poole Legate, sent specially hither from our most holy Father Pope Julius the
third, and the Sea Apostolic of Rome, do declare our selves very sorry and
repentant of the Schism and disobedience committed in this Realm and
dominions aforesaid, against the said See Apostolic, Schism and disobedience
against the Se^ Apostolic.
either by making agreeing, or executing any Laws ordinances, or Commandments
against the supremacy of the said See, or otherwise doing or speaking that
might impugn the same, offering our selves, and promising by this our
supplication, that for a token and knowledge of our said repentance, we are and
shall be always ready under, and with the Authorities of your Majesty's, to
the uttermost of our powers to do what shall lie in us for the abrogation and
repealing of the said Laws and Ordinances in this present Parliament, as well
for our selves as for the whole body whom we represent: whereupon we most
humbly desire your Majesty's, as personages undefiled, in the offense of this
body toward the said See, which nevertheless God by his providence has made
subject to you, so to set forth this our most humble suit, that we may obtain
from the Sea Apostolic, by the said most reverend Father, as well particularly
as generally, absolution, release, and discharge from all danger of such
censures and sen^en^^s, as by the Laws of the Church we are fallen into; and
that we may a^ children repentant be received into the bosom, and unity of
Christ's Church, so as this noble Realm, with all^ the members thereof may in
this unity and perfect obedience to the Sea Apostolic, and Popes for the time
being, serve God and your Majesty's to the furtherance and advancement of his
honor and glory: we are at the intercession of your Majesty's, by the
authority of our holy Father Pope Julius the third, and of the Sea Apostolic,
assoyled, discharged and delivered from excommunication, interdictions, and
other censures Ecclesiastical, which have hanged over our heads for our said
defaults since the time of the said schism mentioned in our said supplication.
The which time the said Lord Legate, and we do all declare, recognize, and
mean by this Act to be only since the 20. year o^ the reign of your most
Noble Father King Henry the 8. It may now like your Majesty's, that for the
accomplishment of our promise, made in the said supplication, that is, to
repeal all Laws and Statutes made contrary to the said supremacy and See
Apostolic, during the said schism, which is to be understood, since the 20.
year of the reign of the said late King Henry the 8. and so the Lord Legate
does accept, and recognize the same. After which they repeal in this Act also,
the Statutes against the Popes supremacy, and profit: And declare, that the
title or style of supemacie, or supreme head of the Church of England, and of
Ireland, or either of them, never was, nor could be justly or lawfully
attributed, or acknowledged to any King or Sovereign Governor of this Realm,
nor in any wise could or might rightfully, justly, or lawfully by any King or
Sovereign Governor of this Realm, be claymed, challenged, or used. And
withal they commend Queen Mary for omitting this style, though s^^^led by 25.
H. 8. c. 19.21.26. H. 8. c. 1.3.27. H. 8. c. 15.28. H. 8. c. 7.10.31. H. 8. c.
10.14.32. H. 8. c. 22, 24, 26.33. H. 8. c. 29.34. and 35. H. 8. c. 17.19.35. H.
8. c. 1.3.37. H. 8. ^. 17.
Act of Parliament. And to color this disloyalty and prejudice to the Crown,
they add this srivolous clause to the end of this Act, And forasmuch as we
your Majesty's humble and obedient subjects the Lords spiritual and temporal,
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, neither by the making or
delivering of either the supplications afor^said, nor by any clause, Articles
or Sentence thereof, or of any other Clause, A^ticle, or Sentence of this or
any other Statu^e, or the preambles of the same, made or agreed upon in this
Session of this pr^s^nt Parliament, by any manner of interpretation,
construction, implication, or otherwise intend to derogate, impair, or
diminish any of the prerogatives, liber^ies, franchesies, preheminences, or
jurisdictions of your Crown imperial of this Realm, and other the Dominions
to the same belonging; We do most humbly beseech your Majesty's that it may be
declared and ordained, and be it ^nac^ed and declared by authority of this
present Parliament, that neither the making exhibiting or inferring in this
present Statute, or in the preambles of the same, of the supplica^ions or
promise aforesaid, or either of them, nor any other things, words, sentences,
clauses, Articles in the preambles, or body of the Acts aforesaid, shall be
construed, understood, or expounded to derogate, diminish or take away any the
liberties, privileges, prerogatives, preheminences, authorities, or
jurisdictions, or any part or parcel thereof, which were in your Imperial
Crown of this Realm, or did belong to your said Imperial Crown, the 20.
year of the reign of your the Queens Majesty's, most noble Father, ( Henry
the 8.) or any other your most noble Progenitors before the said 20: year. And
the More care is here taken for the Popes, than Queens supremacy.
Popes holiness, and See Apostolic to be restored, and have and enjoy such
authority, pre-eminence and jurisdiction, as his Holiness used and exercised,
or might lawfully have used and exercised by authority of his supremacy, the
said 20. year of the reign of the King your Father within this your Realm of
England, and other your Dominions without diminution or enlargement of the
same, and none other, and the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Restored here
to their jurisdiction, together with the Pope, as members of his body.
Archbishops, Bishops, and Ordinanaries to be in the same Sta^e for process of
sui^s, punishment of crimes, and execution of censures of the Church, with
knowledge of causes belonging to the same, and as large in these points as the
said jurisdiction was the said 20. year.

Where observe, that the Prelates usurped Jurisdiction over the Kings
prerogative was much eclipsed, if not quite abolished by several statutes made
in King Henry the 8. and Edward the 6. his reign, and expired together with
the Popes, as appears by these words of the Clergies supplication recited in
the body of this Act. Nos Episcopi and Clerus, etc. cum omni debita humilitate
and reverentia, exponimus Majestatibus vestris, quod licet Ecclesiarum, quibus
in Episcopos, Decanos, Archidiaconos etc. constituti sumus bona, Iurisdictiones
and jura in pernicioso hujus Regni praeterito schismate DEPERDITA ET AMISSA,
omni studio and totis nostris v^ribus, recuperare, and ad pristinum ecclesiarum
jus revocare, juris remediis niti deberemus, etc. Insuper Majestatibus vestris
supplicamus, ut pro sua pietate efficere dignentur, ut ea quae ad
jurisdictionem nostram and libertatem Ecclesiasticam pertinent, sine quibus
debitum nostri pastoralis officii and curae animarum nobis commissae exercere
non possumus, nobis superiorum temporum injuria ablata, restituantur, and ea
nobis and ecclesiis perpetuo illaesa and salva permaneant; and ut omnes leges,
quae hanc nostram jurisdictionem and libertatem Ecclesiasticam tollunt, seu
quovis modo impediunt, abrogentur, ad honorem dei, and majestatum vestrarum,
etc.

As therefore the Bishops and Popes Jurisdiction were suppressed together
before, so it is worth the observation, that they are both revived together by
this Act, upon the restoration of Popery; And good reason, for Nicholas le
Maistre in his Instauration of the Ancient Principality of Bishops, Dedicated
to the great French Cardinal Richeleiu, Printed at Paris 1633. in his
Dedicatory Epistle to this Cardinal informs us; That verily the Majesty of
the Pontifical and Episcopal jurisdiction is so conjoined and confederated
together, that the enemies cannot so guide their hands, but with the same
audacity wherewith they assaulted the Popes Crown, they likewise shaked the
Bishops Miters, and as it were with one bloody wound pierced both their sides.
Whence it came to pass, that the atrocity of the Bishops sorrows increased so
far, that their patience sufficient to digest their own domesticke injuries,
was let loose to the dangers of the chief Pontise, the Pope, and brake forth
into the most sharp indignation and hatred^ that thence it might appear, that
the glory of their own name could never be more secure, than when and where
the Popes greatness shall be adorned with greatest honors: which being
violated, all the splendour of the Episcopal Order must necessarily dye and
grow contemptible. Hence we see it comes to pass by a certain Divine assent
and Counsel, that the Authority of Bishops should be expelled out of the same
Provinces, out of which unhappy lust had thrust out the Papal Majesty. So
this Author of late, by which we may discern what a near and indissoluble
connection there is between the Papacy and the Prelacie, and how the Pope and
Prelates ever mutually strive to support and advance one another authority.
Cardinal Poole thus reviving the Popes and Prelates Jurisdiction, and
suppressing and eclipsing the Royal Prerogative, as you have heard, hereupon
the Queens name and Title See the Br^viate of the Prelates Encroachments, etc.
p. 106.107^ 114.115.125.1^6.127.91. to 100^
formerly used in all Ecclesiastical Process, with this clause, Suprema
Autoritate Regia legitime fulcitus and the like, was wholly omitted out of
them; and whereas all such processes were sealed with her seal, and all
Probates of Wills and Letters of Administration granted in her name, and under
her seal only, not the Bishops, like Writs at the Common Law, according to
the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. the Bishops thenceforth used only their own
seals and names, excluding hers, and so set themselves in her Royal Throne.
To effect this, the Fox Acts and monuments, in the old Edition. p.
684.689.924^690. In that of 1610. p. 1294.1495.
Cardinal and Prelates caused Queen Mary to send Articles to the Ordinaries
to be put in Execution, whereof this was one; Fox Acts and Monuments old
Edition. p. p. 9^4
that no Bishop or his O^ficer, or any other Person hereafter in any of their
Ecclesiastical writings, in process or other extrajudiciall Acts, do use to put
in this clause or sentence, Regia autoritate fulcitus, or do demand any Oath
touching the Primacy: to which Master Fox annexeth this Marginall annotation,
The Kings Authority gives place to the Popes Authority, the supremacy of the
King repealed; and hereupon in the Fox Acts and Monuments p. 927.
Queens writ to Bonner, ^or the sommoning of a Convocation, her style of
Supremum caput was taken away; where note (good Reader, writes Master Fox)
concerning the altering and changing of the Queens style, the later part
hereof to be le^t out of her Title which is, Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Hibernae
supremum caput, because in the Parliament last past, the supremacy being given
away from the Crown of England to the Pope, thereupon this parcel of the
Title was also taken away: likewise the said Bonner giving his Certificate upon
the same, left out, Autoritate illustrissimae, etc. legitime fulcitus; which
parcel also in the said Parliament was reprived and taken away the same time.
See the Hi^^ory the Council, of Trent. p 339. to 3^5. Sir John Davis Irish
Reports. f. 97.98. See the Br^via^^ p. 91. to 100. and Cook Ca^dries Case f. ^.
Which notable usurpation upon the Crown, though abolished by 1. E l. c. 1.8.
E l. c. 1.1. ^ac. c. 25. and other Acts which revive the statute 1. E l. 6. c.
2. being nothing but the Common Law, our Prelates (in imitation of these and
other their undutifull Popish Predecessors) have not only continued, but
likewise upon the now Archbishop of Canterburies motion in Star Chamber,
procured a Resolution and Certificate of all the Judges of England against the
Laws and Kings prerogative royal, to justify this their usurpation, of
issuing out process under their own names and seals, and keeping Visitations
and Courts in their own names, without any Patent or Commission from his
Majesty, to be legal; as appears by See I new discovery of the Prelates
tyranny. p. 34. etc.
two Orders of Star Chamber, 12. Maii, and 4. Iunii. 13. Caroli. This
Arch-prelate Cardinal, having thus re-established the Popes and Prelates
jurisdiction here by Act of Parliament, Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 422. Fox Acts
and Monuments p. 1537. in the old Edition.
caused diverse of our Martyrs to be burnt, of which his Predecessor Cranmer was
one; and in his Visitation at Oxford and Cambridge, caused the dead rotten
Corpse of learned Martin Bucer, Paulus Fagius, Peter Martyrs wise to be dug
out of their graves, and burnt to ashes for Heretics: yea Antiq. Ecclesiae
Brit. p. 420.421.
the common talk was, that he purposed to have taken up King Henry the 8. his
body at Windsor, and to have burnt it, yea and King Edward the 6. his Corpse
too, as many thought. I cannot here omit what his immediate suc^essor Holins^ed
p. 1134. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 422.
Matthew Parker, records of him, that this Cardinal being out of hope to get
the Crown of England to himself, to which he aspired, endeavored to
transfer all his right therein to King Philip, le^t Queen Mary dying without
issue, Queen Elizabeth (who differed from him and the Papists in matters of
Religion, whose life he and they had laid in wait for, keeping her in long and
strict imprisonment) should of right enjoy it: to which purpose they very
secretly entered into most wicked consultations concerning this matter, to this
effect; that Mary not only by the Common Law should be proclaimed Queen, but
likewise a conqueror of the Kingdom by right of war; so as by this pretext
she might change all public and private rights and interests, and give the
Kingdom to whom soever she pleased. But this coun^ell, though liked of at
first, yet because it was doubtful and dangerous, was not long approved of.
Wherefore rejecting it they thought it best and most expedient for the
establishment of the Popes affairs, that the Lady Elizabeth should be either
dispatched out of the way, or married to some Noble Spaniard. But God providing
for her and our safety, dissipated all these wicked consultations, and brought
them to nothing. And Cardinal Poole persuading Queen Mary to join with King
Philip her husband in a war against the French King, with whom Pope Paul the
fourth had confederated against the Emperor seeking to betray the Kingdom o^
Naples to him; the Pope was ^arre exasperated hereby against the Cardinal, See
Martins Chronicle p. 415.416. G^dwin p. 125.126.12^
that he revoked his power Legatine, imprisoned Cardinal Moron Protector of
the English at Rome, and Pooles special friend, cited Poole to appear at Rome
as suspected of Heresy, and created William Peter a Franciscan to be his
Legate in his place. The Queen hereupon intercedes for the Cardinal, who
having intelligence of this matter refused to have his silver Cross (the badge
of his authority) carried before him, till by the intercession o^ Ormanet the
Popes D^tary here in England, and the Queens mediation, he was at last
restored to his Office. In (...), Speedes History p. 1145.
the flames of persecution consumed 5. Bishops, 2^. Divines, 8. Gentlemen, 84.
Artificers, 100. Husbandmen, Servants, and Laborers, 26. Wives, 20. Widows,
9. Virgins, a^ Boys, and 2. Infants. To close up all concerning him in
Holmsheds words, Hollinshed p. 1165.
A Trayter he lived, and a Traitor he dyed: Speed p. 1153. Godwin, p. 128.
the same day on which Queen Mary expired, the Tidings of whose depar^ure
struck him quite dead, being sick before of a quartane Fever Antiq. Eccles.
Brit. p. 423.
Illud autem (says his Successor) ad aternam ^mmanitatis Pontificiae
memoriam, infamiamque contra Polum valebit, quod eo Legato ac accelerante,
integerrimus, Doctissimusque Archiepiscopus Cra^nerus igne crematus est, quod
Archiepiscopo praeterea (quod legimus) accidit nemini (sew or none of them
having zeal enough to make them Martyrs) pluresque in ill^ sue legationis
triennio ferro, sta^maque crudeliter macta^^ sun^, qu^m in ^uiusquam regis
eorum, qui post Lucium huic insulae imperabant, longissimo regno. Ita Cranmerum
Martyren^, Polum tyram^um ^antuaria celebrat: hic plumbo depressus, ille
cineribus atque flamma ad coelos elatus est.

Matthew Parker his immediate successor, MATTHEW PARKER.
though a man of better temper, a learned Antiquary, Antiq^ Eccles. Brit. p.
427. etc. 436.437. Martin^ History. p. 508.^^^.
a frequent Preacher of Gods Word, not only in his Cathedral at Canterbury,
but in sundry Parish Churches; was yet over-Pontificall and Princely in his
buildings, feasts, household stuff, and apparel, if not an over^stiffe
maintainer of his Jurisdiction and Ecclesiastical Courts, which grew so odious
among the people, that they offered violence to the Ministers and Promoters of
those Courts (Anno. 1566.) ^eating and vexing them with clamors and outcries,
as they went along the streets; which insolency the Queen by her opportun^
severity repressed: Two years after (Anno^ 1568.) C^lem^n, Burton, Hallingham,
Benson, and others, making profession of the purer Religion more zealously than
was known before, would allow of nothing but what was taken out of the
Scriptnres, and out of a desire of reformation, not only openly questioned but
condemned the received Discipline of the Church of England, with the Church
Liturgy, and the very calling o^ Bishop, as favoring too much of the Popish
Religion; protesting in the Pulpits, that it was an impious thing to hold any
thing Common with the Church of Rome, using all diligence to have the Church of
England reformed in every point, according to the Rule of the Church of Geneva.
These the Queen (by this Archbishops instigation) commanded to be laid by the
heels: yet it is almost incredible how upon a sudden their followers increased
every where (known by the envious name of Puritanes) through a kind of
obstinate perverseness of their own, stopping their ears against all advise;
(so Martyn, though I think rather out of solid judgment and the
inconveniences they saw and found in the Lordly Prelacie in thos^ best times)
which ^saith he) might seem to be helped forward also by the sloathfull
connivency of the Bishops (some of whom then misliked their own calling and
government, and could have been content with its dissolution and change to a
better) and the secret favor of some Noble men at Court; whom Martyn
slanders, to have gaped after the goods of the Church; when as they rather did
it out of the mischiefs and dislike of the Prelaticall government. In his time
the Marti^s History, p. 548.549.550.552.
Earls of Northumberland, and Westmerland, the Lord Dacres and others^ Anno
1569. being pressed forward by one Nicholas Martin a Romish Priest, sen^ from
the Bishop of Rome to pronounce Queen Elizabeth an Heretic, and therefore to
have lost all Dominion and Sovereignty, raised a Rebellion in the North to set
up Popery and restore the Romish Religion, the 5. wounds of Christ being
painted in their Banners: Murrey, then Regent of Scotland, informed the Queen,
that the Bishop of Rosse, then in England, was the Author of that Rebellion^
whereupon he was committed to the Bishop of London and remained his prisoner.
And the same year Sp^^d. p. 1170. to 1176. Martins Chron. p. 557. to 560.
Pope Pius the fifth by his Bull excommunicated and deprived Queen Elizabeth
from her Crown, and absolved all her Nobles, Subjects, and people of the
Realm from their Oath of allegiance or any other duty to her, which Bull John
Felton setting up at the Bishop of Londons Palace gate, was executed for his
pains: yet I read of no re^utation of it made by this Archprelate.

Edmund Grindall next enjoying this See, EDMUND GRINDALL.
a grave and pious man, and a fugitive in Queen Mary's reign, stood highly in
Queen Elizabeth's ^avour for a long time: till by the cunning devises of some,
who accused him as a favourer of the Puritans, Martyns History. p. 662.654,
655. Continuation of Holinsh^d. page 1322. to 1329.
Conventicles, and prophesying (which he justified in a particular treatise
which I have seen, dedicated to the Queen, and subscribed by all his
suffragans) he utterly lost the same; being thereupon suspended from his
Bishopric and so dyed suspended. Martin records, that the true cause of his
suspension was, for disallowing the matrimony of Julio, an Italian Physician,
with another man's wife, therein thwarting the Earl of Leicesters pleasure. In
his days M. John (or rather Philip) Stubs of Lincolnes Inn, lost his hand,
for writing a book against the Queens intended match with the Duke of Anjou,
with this Title, The gulf wherein England will be swallowed up by the French
marriage, with which the Queen was sorely vexed and displeased. Sentence was
pronounced against him by virtue of a Law made in the reign of Philip and
Mary, then expired, and personal to them; whereupon the Judges and chief
Lawyers were at variance concerning the force of that Statute: JOHN WHITEGIFT.
but might prevailed therein against right. And about the same time Edward
Campian, Ralph Sherwin, Luke Kerby, Alexander Briant Priests, were indicted,
condemned, and executed for high Treason, for plotting the ruin of the Queen
and Kingdom, as adhering to the Pope, the Queens enemy, and coming into
England to raise forces against her.

John VVhitegift, next to him in succession, a stately Pontifical Bishop, See
Sr G^orge Paul in the life of Whitegift. Martyns Hist. p. 663.676.761, 762.780,
781, 782, 783. John Penry his supplication to the Parliament: the Petition to
Qu. Elizabeth. The Register^. The Abstract of certain Acts of Parliamen^. The
Demonstration of Discipline. M. Cart^rights reply, Mar^in Marpr^lat^, and
others.
contested much for the authority and Lordly jurisdiction of Prelates, in
defense whereof he then writ, though he durst not aver our Archbishops to
be of divine institution. He had some contestations with the Judges, whom he
much troubled about Prohibitions, ex officio oaths, and proceedings, the power
of the high Commission and other Exclesiasticall Courts, (...) he endeavored
to enlarge to the prejudice of the Queens prerogative, and the Subjects
liberties; whereupon, in the Parliament Anno 1585. diverse Bills and complaints
were exhibited against the oath ex officio, the granting of faculties by
Bishops, Non-residencie, and other abuses, which this Prelate by his power, to
prevent a reformation^ crossed and frustrated, to the great disturbance of the
Church and State, and the increase o^ schisms and divisions in both. After
this Anno 1588. he procured these reverend Ministers and Gentlemen, M. Vdall,
M. Penry,, M. Cartwright, King, Prudlar, Pain, M. Knightly, M. Wigstone, and
others, to be questioned, and fined in Starchamber, for writing against the
English Hierarchy, and caused M. Penry, Vdall, and others against all Law, and
Justice to be condemned, and executed for this cause, whereupon the Judge,
before whom they were arraigned, much troubled in conscience, fell into
desperation, and died miserably. These his violent proceedings stirred up
VVigginton, Coppinger, and frantic Hacket (whom the Prelates oppression made
stark mad) to accuse the, Archbishops of Canterbury and York of high Treason,
and to run into extravagant actions and opinions, which they afterward
recanted. And not these alone, but others likewise, opposing the government of
the Church of England, disallowed the calling of Bishops, and got some eminent
Lawyers (as M. Maurice Attorney of the Court of Wards, and others) to write
against the government of Bishops, and the Oath ex of^icio, which troubled much
the whole Church, State, Judges, Parliament and Kingdom, and fired them almost
into an uproare; this Archprelate straining his Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
beyond its bounds, far higher than any of his predecessors since the
reformation. Whereupon multitudes of books were written against the calling,
Lordlinesse, and extravagances of the Prelates, and their Courts, some in
serious, others in more light and jesting manner, wherewith the Prelates were
much nettled, and their government rendered very odious among the people, which
certainly had then been subverted, had not the power of this Archprelate made
a privy Counselor, and of Chancellor Hat^on (a man popishly affected, as was
generally then reported) kept it from ruin. This Archprelates train of
servants was extraordinary great, to the number of above 60 menservants) who
were all trained up to martia^^ ^^^ires, and mustred almost every week, his
stable being sti^l well furnished with good store of great horses; a
commendable thing in a warlike Prelate, though scarce allowable in a pious
Apostolical Bishop, who should rather train up scholars for the pulpit, than
soldiers for the field.

Richard Bancroft his great creature, RICHARD BANCROFT.
and immediate successor, had many conflicts with the Judges, concerning
prohibitions, ex officio, Oaths, and the power of the High Commissioners,
before the King and Council, to the great disquiet of the Realm, and
oppression of the people: he In his Sermon at Paul's Cross, by D. Reynolds in
his letter to Sr. Francis Knoles.
defended the Bishops Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to be jure Divino, and not
derived immediately by Letters Patents from the King, like an ungrateful
wretch; contrary to the express Acts of 26. H. 8. c. 1.31. H. 8 c. 9, 10.37.
H. 8. c. 17. 1. Edw. 6. c.. 1. Eliz. c. 1.1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. c. 8. 8.
Eliz. c. 1. and the whole stream of the Fathers, foreign Protestants, and our
English writers, to the great affront of the Kings prerogative royal: And if
some men yet alive may be credited (who accused him to the Council of these
crimes, and offered to prove them) he had a hand in the compiling of Dolmans
the Jesuits Book concerning the succession of the Crown of England; the
maine scope of which book (written, as Martyns Chron. p. 793.
some say, by Cardinal Allen, and Fr. Ingelfield, Dolmans enemies) was to
exclude all persons, how near soever allied to the Crown, unless they were
Roman Catholics, contending further for the right of Isabel Infanta of Spain,
and seeking to disprove King James his most rightful title thereunto; which
Dolman with other old Priests and Jesuits he harbored in his house; where
they affirm this book was Printed: and some thought he was privy to that
devilish plot of the Gunpowder-treason, most of the traitors lying at Lambeth
whiles they were about that hellish work. This Relation I had from others, who
averred it for truth, and offered to prove it in his lifetime, could they have
been heard. And it seems for the point of Dolmans book, and conniving at
such other seditious, traiterly, popish pamphlets of that nature, this Prelate
was not altogether clear: for in the p. 48, 49.
Conference at Hampton Court before King James, when D. Reynolds moved the
King, that such unlawful and seditious books might be suppressed, at least
restrained, which unsettled and corrupted the minds of many young Scholars in
both Universities, instancing in Ficlerus a Papist, De jure Magistratus in
subditos, for one: Bancroft (then Bishop of London) supposing himself
principally aimed (and why should he have such a suspicion, unless conscious
of some guilt, upon such a general motion and information?) answered, first in
the General: that there was no such licentious divulging of those Books as
he imagined, or complained off. And secondly, to the particular instance of
Ficlerus, that he detested both the Author and applyer alike. But for the first
my Lord Cecill justified the complaint true; taxing also the unlimited liberty
of dispersing and divulging these Popish and seditious Pamplets both in Paul's
Churchyard, and the Universities; instancing in one then lately set forth, and
published, namely, Speculum Tragicum; which both his Majesty, and the Lord
Henry Howard Earl of North-Hampton, termed a dangerous book both for matter
and intention. Yea Lewis Hughes, an ancient Minister In his certain grievances
well worthy the consideration of the right honorable Court of Parliament. p.
14, 15.
writes thus of this Arch-Prelate; In the later end of Queen Elizabeth's
reign, when she began to be sickly, and not like to live long; D. Bancroft
(then Bishop of London) knowing that King James was to succeed her, and fearing
that his Majesty would reform things amiss in the worship and service of
God, and in the government of the Church, did license a book written by a
Jesuit that he kept in his house, wherein was written, That it was in the
Popes power as a gift appropriate to Saint Peter's Chair, to depose the Kings
of England, and to give authority to the people to elect and set up another.
Fifteen hundred of those books were printed, and dispersed, and being
questioned for it, his answer was, that he did set the Jesuits to write one
against another, that he might out of their writings pick matter against
them. It was thought by many, he had no good meaning in licensing, and
suffering so many dangerous Books to be dispersed. So he. Which sufficiently
discovers this Arch-Prelates traiterly heart to his Sovereign, his affection
to the Popes supremacy, and disaffection to our Religion; he being a great
Persecutor and Silencer of hundreds of our most conscionable preaching
Ministers; and, if I may credit other men's reports, his life was ill, and his
death fearful.

GEORGE ABBOT.
George Abbot, his successor in this See, though a man of a better temper, and
worthy praise for his frequent preaching; was yet taxed by some, for being
over-stately to his fellow brethren, and for his overmuch delight in shooting
at dear, which he exercised so long, till at last by the unhappy glance of his
arrow, he killed his keeper instead of the Bucke he let loose at. He incurred
his Majesty's displeasure so far (by whose means I know nor, unless by his
successors,) that he was debarred acc^sse to the Kings Court, yea and
suspended from his o^fice of Archbishop for a season, which was executed in
the interim by Commissioners. He was a means of some good men's troubles in the
High Commission, AUGUSTINE.
where he caused M. Huntly a Kentish Minister to be most unjustly fined, See
Antiq. Eccles, Brit. p. 15. to 45. and 1. to 7. Fox Acts and monuments, p. 149.
to 156. Malmesde gestis Pontif. l. 1. William Harrisons Description of England.
l. 2. c. 1.2.
and imprisoned, for denying to preach a Visitation Sermon, when he was sick
and unable to do it, and therefore sent the Archdeacon 20s to procure
another, which was refused; and which is ^arre more inju^ious, when this poor
Minister after many motions was released by the Judges of the Kings Bench by an
Habeas Corpus, from his unjust imprisonment, he, and the other Prelates caused
him for this very Act of seeking his just relief in a legal way, to be
apprehended by their pursevant immediately after the Judges had bayled him, See
Greg. Epist. l. 11. epist. 36.44. and Morney his mystery of iniquity Sect. 22.
p. 116, 117.
even in the face of the Court, and for this very cause deprived and degraded
him in the High Commission, and committed him a fresh, and gave his living to
his Chaplain, to the great affron^ of justice; for which act he might have
smar^ed in a high degree, had he been but questioned.

I should now descend to the present Archbishop, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 4, 5,
6, 7. Matthew. Westminster. An. 603. p. 204, 205, 206. Beda Eccles. hist. l. 2. c. 21,
22. Fox Ac^^ and Monuments, p. 153, 154. Polichron. l. 5. c. 19. f. 194, 195.
Fabian, part. 5. c. 109, 110. Malmesb. l. 5. de Regibus H^^ric^ Spelman^^
concilia tom. 1. p. 104. to 112. Godwin^ catalogue of Bi^hops, p. 5, 6. Jacob.
Vsserius de Britannicarum Ecclesiarprim^rdiis, page 133.9^2.1157. Malmes. de
gestis, regum A^gli^. l. 1. c. 3.
William Laud, the last of this See, but that I must first ascend to Au^tin the
first Archbishop of Canterbury, whom I have purposely reserved to this place
the better to parallel them together.

The Archbishopricke of Canterbury, had its original creation from Pope
Gregory the first, (a very traitor to his Sovereign Mauritius, and flatterer
of the usurper Phocas) about the year of our Lord. 600. This its unhappy
derivation from ^uch a treacherous, and rebellious parentage, has tainted the
whole line of our Canterburian Arch-Prelates, and infused such an occult
pernicious quality into this See, as has made it a very chair of Pestilence,
which has infected all, or most of those, who have sat therein, and made them
as great Traitors, and rebels to their Sovereigns of England, as their Holy
Fathers of Rome have proved to their liege Lord, the Roman Emperors, and to
plague our ^and with civil dissentions, wars, and bloodshed, almost as much
as the Popes have molested Italy and Germany in this kind.

Augustine the first Archbishop of Canterbury, sent from Rome by Gregory the
first, rather to pervert, that convert our Nation to the Christian faith, about
600. years after Christ, was consecrated Bishop of the English Nation (for no
less Diocese or title would content him) by Etherius Archbishop of Arelat,
electing Canterbury for his Archiepiscopall See. After which by the assistance
of King Ethelbert in the year 602. he caused the British Bishops, and
learned men to meet together in a Synod at a place called Augustines Ok^, to
dispute with them, concerning the observation of Easter day, and the Ceremonies
of Baptism; wherein they differed from the Church of Rome, to whom he would
have them conform, not only in doctrine, but even in rites and ceremonies,
using both persuasions, prayers, and threatenings to bring them under his yoke
and discipline. But the Britains refusing to conform to his demands at this
Synod: Augustine, not long after caused another Synod to be sommoned:
Whereunto 7. British Bishops, and a great number of Monks, especially of the
famous Monastery of Bangor, repaired; who inquired of an holy Anchorite living
among them, whether they should submit to Austins preaching, and ceremonies, or
no? who answered, If he be a man of God, then obey him: They replying, How
shall we know him to be such a one? he subjoyned, If he be meek and humble,
it is credible that he bears the yoke of Christ, and will offer it to you to
bear; but if he be haughty and proud, he is not of God, and therefore not to
be lis^ned to by you. But how, said ^hey, shall we know this? Observe, quoth
he, how he carries himself when he first enters into the Synod, and if he
shall rise up to y^u, know that he is Christ's servant, and obey him in all
things: bnt if he shall do contrary, and whereas you are many, shall proudly
despise you, do ye neglect and contemn him again. Augustine en^ers first into
the Synod with pride and pomp, with the banner of his Apostleship, a silver
Cross, a Letany, Procession, Pageants, painted Images, Relics, Anthems, and
such like rituall trifles: The British Bishops approaching near him, sitting
ambitiously in his chair, he did not only not rise up to salute them, but
also no^ so much as daigne to show them any sign of love, or benevolence with
his countenance or gesture. The Britons observing this arrogance of the man,
contradicted what ever he propounded to them: and whereas he commanded them to
observe the manners and customs of the Church of Rome in all things: they not
only stoutly repugned them, but likewise affirmed their own rites and
ceremenies to be far ancienter and better than those he prescribed them,
which having received from their ancesters who were followers of the Apostles,
and having so long observed, they ought not to change propter no vos
dogmatistas, for new dogmatists pleasures. They further added, that they would
not account him for their Archbishop; s^eing they had an Archbishop of their
own already resident at Leicester, to whom they ought to and would obey, and
that they would not subject themselves to a foreign Bishop. With which answer
Augustine ^eing enraged, fiercely threatened future wars, and revenge of death
unto them, which followed soon after. For Augustine requesting the Britons in
this Synod, that they would receive him for their Archbishop, and join in
common labor with him to preach the Gospel to the English Saxons; The Britons
who were driven out of their own country by them refused to do it, adding,
that they had worthily hated the English and their religion, which were
esteemed by them but as dogs, and therefore unworthily contemned. This answer
of the Britons Augustine gladly said hold on, imagining that he had gained an
occasion from them, whence he might revenge their neglect and contempt of him.
Therefore he greedily carries the news of this contumely to King Ethelbert,
which this King not unwillingly laid hold on, and thereupon instigated Edelfred
King of the Northumbrians, his kinsman, although a Pagan, against the Britons:
who thereupon, Anno Dom. 613. comes with a numerous, and almost ^tupendious
army to Leicester, called by the Britons Ca^^legan (now Chester) where
Brochinal the Captain of the Britans expected his coming, and whether Abbot
Dinoth-with a great number of Priests, Hermites, and Monks, ^specially such as
were of Bangor monastery, had fled. These keeping a fast for three days space,
prayed to God to protect his people from the swords of the Barbarians. The King
commanded them to turn their armies first of all upon those who fought against
him, though not with arms, yet with their prayers which was more, whom
Brochinal their General also, (terrified with the first coming of the
enemies, flying most shamefully) exposed weaponlesse and naked to the swords of
the enemies; 50. men only of them escaped by flight, the residue to the number
of 1200 were slain with the sword of ^delfred. Beda relates, that Augustine
taught by divine Oracle, foretold this war to the British Bishops, and
Clerks in the Augustinian Council; when as it is more likely, that he having
communicated counsel with King Ethelbert, was not only cons^ious to the
inferring of that war, but also the cause thereof. For he was familiar with
the King, by whose persuasion and instigation Edelfred inflicted this calamity
on the Britons. And verily it is Epitom. Chron.
reported, that Augustine in his first conference concerning these Rites, when
he could not persuade them by entreaties, threatened them. Moreover, Amandus
Xi^^ixiensis.
Amandus Xierixiensis, a man of the order of the Friars Minorites, seems to
suffragate to this conjecture, whose very words I will subjoyne. Whereas the
^ritains, says he, were Catholics, the Saxons were Gentiles, to convert whom
S. Gregory sent Augustine and Mellitus, who converted the Saxons. But when as
Augustine with his Apostolical authority would persuade the British Bishops
and Abbots to receive him for their Legate, and to preach with him to the
English, discord was moved for their disobedience to Saint Augustine, so a
war was raised between the King of the Britons, and the King of the Sa^ons,
who now being converted would make the Britons subject to Augustine: by whom
(writes Matthew Parker) we are able to prove out of historians, that Religion
was overturned and rooted out, or at least depraved and corrupted. And this
they say was predicted by Merlin in these words^ Religion shall be blotted out
again, and there shall be a transmutation of the chief Sees: The dignity of
London shall adorn Canterbury; which was fulfilled by Augustine, who caused
1200. of the Monks of Bangor in Wales to be slain, because they obeyed him
not in the council, as Alexander Essebiensis plainly teaches. It is
mavelous that Merlin in one prophecy and in coherent words should thus
foretell the deletion of religion, the transmutation of the Principal Sees and
the transferring of the dignity of London to Canterbury. This slaughter of
these Monks of Bangor by Edelfred, the avenger of Augustines wrath, was
avenged soon after by God, who hated his cruelty: for whiles the King hastened
to ^oote out the remainder of them, and burn their famous Monastery; three
Dukes of the Britains met him, slew ten thousand and sixty of his soldiers,
routed his whole army, wounded the King himself, and put him to a shameful
flight. This was the fruit of this first Archbishop of Canterbury, to raise up
such a bloody war within the bowels of our Kingdoms, to the ruin of both
parties, and all to advance his own jurisdiction, and introduce his Roman
ceremonies. And verily (writes Antiq. Eccles. ^rit. p. 4, 5. where he notably
inveighs against ceremomonies, and the ^igorous pres^^ng of them.
Matthew Parker his successor) that first contention raised by Augustine about
the introducing of Roman Rites, which could not be appeased but with the
overthrow and blood of the innocent Britains, ad nos^ra recentiora tempora,
cum simili pernicie, coedeque Christianorum pervenit, is desceuded to our
latter times, with the like destruction of Christians.

And had he lived to have seen and heard the violent actions and practices of
his present successor William Laud; WILIAM LAUD.
whose min^on Sunday no Sabbath, p. 2.43, 44. Altar Christianum.
D. John Pocklinton, in two several pernicious Pamphlets (adjudged solemnly
to be burnt in both Universities by the Lords House of Parliament, though
licensed for the Press by D. Bray this Canterburies own domesticke Chaplain,
who by like order fron the Lords House has publicly recanted his licensing of
these Pamphlets in a Sermon at Saint Margarets in Westminster, before sundry
of the Commons House) has proclaimed to the World, that this present Prelate
of Canterbury derived his lineall succession from this Augustine; first Prelate
of this See, and so through his loins from Pope Gregory the first founder of
it, and through his predecessors, from S. Peter's Chair at Rome; though I
doubt See D. R^^nald^ conference with Ha^^. c. 6. Divil. 3. p. 210. to 218.
Christopher C^rlil^, his St Peter's life and peregrination, proving that Peter
was never at Rome^ M. B^rnard his fabulous foundation of the Popedom.
Peter never sat Bishop, nor ever had any chair there: I say, had he but
survived to have seen Bishop Lauds strange violent acts, and tyranno^s
proceedings to advance his Archiepiscopall authority, and erect Romes
superstitions, rites, and ceremonies in the Churches of England, Scotland, and
Ireland; and that even by war, by blood shed rather than sail in his
designs; by cutting of Ministers, Lawyers, Physicians and Mechanics ears,
searing their che^kes, slitting their noses, whipping them openly through the
streets at carts tails; banishing them their Country, shutting them up close
Prisoners in remote Islands, where neither their kindred, friends, wives, nor
children must have any access to them, no nor yet once set footing in those
Islands to enq^ire how their husbands did, under pain of like imprisonment, no^
they have pen, ink, or paper once allowed them to write to their friends for
necessaries; and by a bloody cruel war between England and Scotland, which
Bishop Pierce truly termed Bellum Episcopale, the Bishops war: See M. R^us^
his speech to the Lords at the Transmission of M. Smarts cause.
he would have thought himself a Prophet, and this saying of his more
experimentally verefied by this Arch-prelate, than by any of his Predecessors;
all whose tyranny, malice, fury, violence, injustice, lawlesnesse, oppression,
inhumanity, treachery, pride, ambition, extravagances, treasons, and prelaticall
vices seem to mere and lodge together in him, as in their prop^r center, as I
could largely manifest by particulars, did not his unjust and rigorous
proceedings against my self, and all who had relation to me, without any just
cause or provocation on my part or theirs, command me silence, lest I might
seem malicious or revengefull. Since therefore these his practices are so
notorious unto all, I shall forbear to rip up particulars, and close up all
concerning him, with the whole house of Commons, Articles, and Charges of high
Treason against him, as they were transmitted to the Lords by that worthy
Gentleman (my much honored friend) M. John Pymme, which being a public charge
of all the Commons by way of justice, in the supremest Court of Judicature,
published already to the world in Print: I hope it will neither be reputed a
scandalum magnatum, nor matter of revenge in me, if I here insert them, since
most pertinent to the Subject matter of this Treatise, which I had in part
digested many years bypast, before his last information in Starchamber
exhibited against me.

A true Copy of the Articles of the Commons assembled in Parliament, against
WILLIAM LAUD Archbishop of Canterbury, in maintenance of their accusation,
whereby he stands charged with high Treason: and of the Speech or Declaration
of JOHN PYMME, Esquire, upon the same: upon their transmission to the Lord.
My Lords,
Mr. Pimmes Speech.
I Am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses now assembled for the
Commons in Parliament; to deliver to your Lordships these Articles, in
maintenance of their Charge against the Archbishop of Canterbury. Their desire
is, that first your Lordships would be pleased to hear the Articles read, and
then I shall endeavor to present to you the sense of the Commons, concerning
the nature of the Charge, and the order of their proceedings.

Articles of the Commons assembled in Parliament, in maintenance of their
accusation against WILLIAM LAUD, Archbishop of Canterbury: whereby he stands
charged with high Treason.
1. That he has traitorously endeavored to subvert the fundamental Laws,
and Government of this Kingdom of England, and instead thereof to introduce an
Arbit^ary, and tyrannical Government against Law; and to that end, has
wickedly and traitorously advised his Majesty, that he might at his own will
and pleasure, leavie, and take money of his Subjects, without their consent in
Parliament; and this he affirmed was warrantable by the Law of God.

2. He has for the better accomplishment of that his traitorous design,
advised, and procured Sermons, and other discourses to be Preached, Printed,
and published, in which the Authority of Parliaments, and the force of the
Laws of this Kingdom, have bin denied; and absolute and unlimited power over
the persons and estates of his Majesty's subjects maintained and defended, not
only in the King, but in himself, and other Bishops, against the Law: And he
has been a great protector, favourer, and promoter of the publishers of such
false and pernicious opinions.

3. He has by Letters, Messages, Threa^s, and Promises, and by diverse other
ways to Judges, and other Ministers of Justice, interrupted and perverted, and
at other times by means aforesaid, has endeavored to interrupt, and pervert
the course of Justice in his Majesty's Courts at Westminster, and other Courts,
to the subversion of the Laws of this Kingdom, whereby sundry of his
Majesty's Subjects have been stopped in their just suits, deprived of their
lawful rights, and subjected to his tyrannical will, to their ruin, and
destruction.

4. That the said Archbishop, has traitorously, and corruptly sold Justice to
those, who have had causes depending before him, by color of his
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as Archbishop, High Commissioner, Referree, or
otherwise, and has taken unlawful gifts, and bribes of his Majesty's Su^^^^
(and has as much as in him lies) endeavored to corrupt the other Courts of
Justice, by advising, and procuring his Majesty to ^ell places of Judicature,
and other Offices contrary to the Laws and Statutes in that behalf.

5. He has traitorously caused a book of Canons to be composed, and published
without any lawful warrant, and authority in that behalf; in which pretended
Canons, many matters are contained contrary to the Kings Prerogative, to the
fundamental Laws, and Statutes of this Realm, to the right of Parliament, to
the propriety, and liberty of the subject, and matters tending to sedition, and
of dangerous consequence, and to the establishment of a vast, unlawful, and
presumptuous power in himself, and his successors: many of which Canons, by
the practice of the said Archbishop, were surrepti^iously passed in the late
Convoc^tion, without due consideration and debate: others by fear and
compulsion, were subscribed by the Prelates, and Clerks there assembled, which
h^d never been voted, and passed in the Convocation, as they ought to have
been. And the said Archbishop has contrive^, and endeavored to assure, and
confirm the unlawful and exorbitant power, which he has usurped and
exercised over his Majesty's Subjects, by a wicked and ungodly oath in one of
the said pretended Canons, enjoined to be taken by all the Clergy, and many
of the Laity of this Kingdom.

6. He has traitorously assumed to himself a Papal and tyrannical power,
both in Ecclesiastical, and Temporal matters, over his Majesty's Subjects in
this Realm of England, and in other places, to the disherison of the Crown,
dishonor of his Majesty, and derogation of his supreme authority in
Ecclesiastical matters; And the said Archbishop claims the Kings
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as incident to his Episcopal, and
Archiepiscopall office, in this Kingdom, and does deny the ^ame to be derived
from the Crown of England, which he has accordingly exercised, to the hig^
contempt of his royal Majesty, and to the destruction of diverse of the Kings
liege people, in their persons, and estates.

7. That he has traitorously endeavored to alter and subvert Gods true
Religion, by Law established in this Realm, and in stead thereof to set up
Popish superstition, and Idolatry. And to that end, has declared and
maintained in Speeches, and Printed Book, diverse popish doctrines, and
opinions contrary to the Articles of Religion established by Law. He has
urged and enjoined diverse Popish, and superstitious Ceremonies without any
warrant of Law, and has cruelly persecuted those who have opposed the same, by
corporal punishments, and Imprisonments; and most unjustly vexed others, who
refused to conform thereunto, by Ecclesiastical censures of Excommunication,
Suspension, Deprivation, and Degradation, contrary to the Laws of this
Kingdom.

8. That for the better advancing of his traiterous purpose and de^igne, he did
abuse the great power, and trust his Majesty reposed in him, and did intrude
upon the place^ of diverse great officers, and upon the rig^t of other his
Majesty's Subjects, whereby he did procure to himself the nomination of
sundry persons to Ecclesiastical Dignities, Promotions, and Benefices,
belonging to his Majesty, and diverse of the Nobility, Clergy, and others; and
has taken upon him the commendadation of Chaplains to the King; by which
means he has preferred to his Majesty's service, and to other great
promotions in the Church^ such as have been Popishly affected, or otherwise
un^ound, and corrupt both in doctrine and manner^.

9. He has for the same traiterous, and wicked intent, chosen and employed,
such men to be his own Domestical Chaplains, whom he knew to be notoriously
disaffected to the reformed religion, grossly addicted to popish superstition,
and erroneous, and unsound both in Judgment and practice, and to them or some
of them has he committed the Licensing of Books to be Printed, by which
meane^ diverse false and superstitious books have been published, to the great
scandal of Religion, and to the seducing of many his Majesty's Subjects.

10. He has traitorously and wickedly endeavored to reconcile the Church of
England with the Church Rome; and for the effecting thereof, has consorted,
and confederated with diverse popish Priests, and Jesuits; and has kept secret
intelligence with the Pope of Rome, and by himself, his Agents and
Instruments, treated with such as have from thence received^ Authority, and
instruction; he has permitted, and countenanced a popish Hierarchy, or
Ecclesiastical government to be^ established in this Kingdom: by all which
traiterous and malicious practices this Church and Kingdom has been
exceedingly endangered, and like to fall under the Tyranny of the Roman See.

11. He in his own person, and his suffragans, Visitors, Sutrogates,
Chancellors, and other Officers, by his command, have caused diverse learned,
pious, and Orthodox Ministers of Gods word to be silenced, suspended, deprived,
degraded, excommunicated, and otherwise grieved, without any just and lawful
cause: and by diverse other means he has hindered the preaching of Gods word,
caused diverse of his Majesty's loyal Subjects to forsake the Kingdom, and
increased, and cherished Ignorance, and profaneness amongst the people, that
so he might the better facilitate the way to the effecting of his own wicked
and traiterous design, of altering, and corrupting the true religion here
established.

12. He has traitorously endeavored to cause division, and discord betwixt
the Church of England, and other Re^ormed Churches, and to that end has
suppressed, and abrogated the Privileges, and Immunities, which have been by
his Majesty, and his royal Ancestors granted to the Dutch, and French
Churches in this Kingdom: and diverse other ways has expressed his malice,
and disaffection to these Churches, that so by such disunion, the Papists might
have more advantage ^or the overthrow, and extirpation of both.

See the Charge of the Sc^ttish Commissioners against Canterbury.
13. He has maliciously and traitorously plotted, and endeavored to stir up
war and enmity betwixt his Majesty's two Kingdoms of England, and Scotland,
and to that purpose has labored to introduce into the Kingdom of Scotland,
diverse Innovations both in Religion, and Government, all or the most part of
them tending to popery, and superstition, to the great grievance, and
discontent of his Majesty's Subjects of that Nation: and for their refusing to
submit to such Innovations, he did traitorously advise his Majesty to subdue
them by force of Arms, and by his own Authority and Power contrary ^o Law,
did procure sundry of his Majesty's subjects, and enforced the Clergy of this
Kingdom to contribute toward the maintenance of Which Doctor Pierce Bishop of
Bath and Wel^ in his speech to hi^ Clergy to set on this contribution, styled
Bellum Episcopale, adding, that what^^ver his Majesty had expressed in his
Declaration^ t^ be the cause of this warr^, yet in truth this war is FOR US,
Bishops^
that war, and when his Majesty with much wisdom and Justice had made a
Pacification betwixt the two Kingdoms, the said A^chbishop did presumptuously
censure that pacification, as dishonorable to his Majesty, and by his
counsels and endeavors, so incensed his Majesty against his said subjects of
Scotland, that he did thereupon (by advice of the said Archbishop) ^nter into
an offensive war against them, to the great hazard of his Majesty's person,
and his subjects of both Kingdoms.

14. That to preserve himself from being questioned for these, and other his
traiterous courses, he labored to subver^s the rights of Parliament, and the
ancient course of Parliamentary proceeding, and by false and malicious slanders
to incense his Majesty against Parliaments.

By which words, counsel^, and actions, he has traitorously, and contrary to
his allegiance labored to alienate the hearts of the Kings liege people from
his Majesty, and to set a division between them, and to ruin and destroy his
Majesty's Kingdoms; for which they do impeach him of High Treason, against our
Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity.

The said Commons do further aver, that the said William Archbishop of
Caterbury, during the times that the crimes aforementioned were done, and
committed, has been a Bishop, or Archbishop of this Realm of England, one of
the Kings Commissioners for Ecclesiastical matters^ and one of his Majesty's
most honorable Privy Council, and has taken an Oath for his faithful
discharge of the said Office of Councellor, and has likewise taken an oath of
supremacy and Allegean^e.

And the said Commons by protestation saving to themselves the liberty of
exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other accusation or impeachment against
the said Archbishop, and also of replying to the Answers, that the said
Archbishop shall make unto the said Articles, or to any of them, and of
offering further proof also of the Premises, or any of them, or of any other
impeachment, or accusation that shall be exhibited by them, as the cause shall
according to the cours^ of Parliament require, do pray that the said Archbishop
may be put to answer to all and every the Premises, and that such proceedings,
examination, trial, and Judgment may be upon every of them had and used, as
is agreeable to Law and Justice.

The Articles being read, M. PYMME proceeded in his Speech as follows.
My Lords,

There is an expression in the Scripture, which I will not presume either to
understand, or to interpret; yet to a vulgar eye it seems to have an aspect
something surable to the Person and Cause before you: It is a description of
the evil Spirits, wherein they are said to be spiritual wickedness in high
places. Crimes acted by the spiritual faculties of the Soul, the Will and the
Understanding, exercised about spiritual matters, concerning Gods Wordship,
and the Salvation of Man; seconded with power, authority, learning, and many
other advantages, do make the party who commits them, very suitable to that
description, Spiritual wickednesses in high places.

These crimes (My Lords) are various in their Nature, heinous in their quality,
and universal in their extent. If you examine them Theologically, as they
stand in opposition to the truth of God, they will be found to be against the
rule of Faith, against the power of godliness, against the means of Salvation.

If you examine them Morally, as they stand in opposition to the light of
Nature, to right reason, and the principles of humane society, you will then
perceive pride without any moderation^ such a Pride as that is which exalts it
self above all that is called God. Malice without any provocation; Malice
against virtue, against innocence, against piety, injustice without any means
of restitution, even such injustice as does rob the present times of their
possessions; the future, of their possibilities.

I^ they be examined (My Lords) by Legal Rules in a Civil way, as they stand
in opposition to the Publiqu^ Good, and to the Laws of the Land. He will be
found to be a Traitor a^gainst his Majesty's Crown, an incendiary against the
Peace of the State; he will be found to be the highest, the boldest, the most
i^pudent oppressor, that ever was an oppressor both of King and People^

This Charge (my Lords) is distributed and conveyed into ^o^^teene several
Articles, as you have heard; and those articles are only general: I^ being
the intention of the House of Commons (which they have commanded me to
declare) to make them more certain and particular by preparatory Examinations
to be taken with the help of your Lordships house, as in the Case of my Lord
of Strafford.

I shall now run thorough them with a light touch, only marking in every of
them some special point of venom, virulency, and malignity.

1 The first Article (my Lords) does contain his ^ndeavour to introduce into
this Kingdom an Arbitrary power of Government, without any limitations or
Rules of Law. This (my Lords) is against the safety of the Kings Person, the
honor of his Crown, and most destructive to his people.

Those Causss which are most perfect have not only a power to produce effects,
but to conserve and cheri^h them. The Seminary virtue, and the nutritive virtue
in vegetables, do produce from the same principles. It was the defect of
justice, the restraining of oppression and violence that first brought
government into the World, and set up Kings, the most excellent way of
Government. And by the maint^nance of Justice all kinds of government receive a
sure foundation and establishment. It is this that has in it an ability to
preserve, and secure the royal power of Kings, yea, to adorn and increase it.

2 In the second Article, your Lordships may observe, absolute and unlimited
power, defended by Preaching, by Sermons, and other discourses, printed and
published upon that subject. And truly (my Lords) it seems to be a prodigious
crime, that the truth of God, and his holy Law should be perverted to defend
the lawlesnesse of men. That the holy and sacred function of the Ministry,
which was ordained for instruction of men's souls in the ways of God, should
be so abused, that the Ministers are become the trumpets of sedition, the
promoters and defenders of violence and oppression.

3 In the third Article (my Lords) you have the Judges, who under his Majesty
are the dispersers and distributers of Justice, frequently corrupted by fear,
and solicitation; you have the course of Justice in the execution of it^
shamefully obstructed. And if a wilful Act of injustice in a Judge be so high
a crime in the estimate of the Law, as to deserve death, under what burden of
guilt does this man lie, who has been the cause of great numbers of such
voluntary and wilful acts of injustice?

4 In the fourth Article, he will be found in his own person to have sold
justice in Causes depending before him. And by his wicked couns^ll endeavoring
to make his Majesty a Merchant of the same commodity, only with this
difference, that the King by taking money for places of judicature, should sell
it in gross; whereas the Archbishop sold it by retaile.

5 In the fi^t Article, there appears a power usurped of making Canons; of
laying obligations on the Subjects in the nature of Laws: and this power
abused to the making of such Canons as are in the matter of them very
pernicious, being directly contrary to the prerogative of the King, and the
liberty of the people. In the manner of pressing of them, may be found fraud
and shuf^ling: in the conclusion, violence and constaint; men being forced by
terror and threatening to subscribe to all: which power thus wickedly gotten,
they labored to establish by perjury, injoyning such an Oath for the
maintenance of it, as can neither be taken nor kept with a good conscience.

6. In the sixth Article, you have the King robbed of his Supremacy: you have a
Papal power exercised over his Majesty's Subjects in their consciences, and in
their persons: You have Ecclesiastical jurisdiction claimed by an Incident
right, which the Law declares to proceed from the Crown.

And herein your Lordships may observe that those who labor in civil matters
to set up ^he King above the Laws of the Kingdom, do^e yet in Ecclesiastical
matters endeavor to set up themselves above the King. This was first procured
by the Archbishop to be extrajudicially declared by the Judges, and then to be
published in a Proclamation. In doing whereof he has made the Kings Throne but
a footstool for his own and their pride.

7. You have (my Lords) in the seventh Article, Religion undermined and
s^bverted: you have Popery cherished and de^ended: you have this seconded with
power and violence, by severe punishment upon those which have opposed this
mischievous intention: and by the subtle and eager prosecution of these men,
has the power of Ecclesiastical Commissioners, of the Star Chamber and
Council Table been often made subservient to his wicked design.

My Lords,

8. You may observe in the eighth Article, great care taken to get into his
own hand the power of nominating to Ecclesiastical Livings and promotions:
you have as much mischievous, as much wicked care taken in the disposing of
these preferments, to the hinderance and corruption of Religion. And by this
means (my Lords) the Kings sacred Majesty, instead of Sermons, fit for
spiritual instructours, has often had invectives against his people,
encouragement to injustice, or to the overthrow of the Laws. Such Chaplains
have been brough into his service, as have as much as may be, labored to
corrupt his own Household, and been eminent examples of corruption to others;
which has so far prevailed, as that it has exceedingly tainted the
Universities, and been generally disper^t to all the chiese Cities, the
greatest Towns and Auditories of the Kingdom. The grievous Effects whereof is
most manifest to the Commons House, there being diverse h^ndred complaints
there depending in the House against scandalous ministers; and yet (I believe)
the hundred part of them is not yet brought in.

9. The ninth Article sets out the like care to have Chaplains of his own,
that might be promoters of this wicked and traiterous design: Men of corrupt
judgments, of corrupt practice, extremely addicted to superstition: and to
such men's cares has been committed the Licensing of Books to the Press; by
means whereof many have been published that are full of falsehood, of
scandals; such as have been more worthy to be burnt by the hand of the Hangman
in Smit^field (as I think one of them was) than to be admitted to come into
the hands of the Kings people.

10. In the tenth Article it will appear, how he having made these aproaches
to Popery, comes now to close and join more nearly with it; he confederates
with Priests and Jesuits: He, by his instruments negotiates with the Pope at
Rome, and has correspondence with them that ^e authorized from Rome here. He
has permitted a Roman Hierarchy to be set up in this Kin^dome. And though he
has been so care^ull that a poor man could not go to the neighbor Parish
to hear a Sermon, when he had none at home, could not have a Sermon repeated,
nor Prayer used in his own Family, but he was a ^it subject for the High
Commission Court; yet the other has been done in all parts of the Realm and
no notice taken of it, by any Ecclesiastical Judges or Courts.

My Lords,

11. You may perceive Preaching suppressed in the eleventh, diverse godly and
Orthodox Ministers oppressed in their persons and Estates; you have the Kings
loyal subjects banished out of the Kingdom, not as ^lime^ecke to seek for
bread in foreign Countries, by reason of the great scarcity which was in
Israel; but traveling abroad for the bread of life, because they could not
have i^ at home, by reason of the spiritual ^amine of Gods Word, caused by
this man and his partakers. And by this means you have had the trade, the
Manufactury, the industry of many thousands of his Majesty's subjects carried
out of the Land.

It is a miserable abuse of the spiritual Keys to shut up the doors of
heaven, and to open the gates of hell, to let in profaneness, ignorance,
superstition, and error. I shall need say no more: These things are evident,
and abundantly known to all.

12. In the twelfth Article (my Lords) you have a division endeavored between
this and the foreign reformed Chur-Churches. The Church of Christ is one body,
and the Members of Christ have a mutual relation, as members of the same body,
Unity with Gods true Church every where is not only the beauty, but the
strength of Religion: of which beauty and strength he has sought to deprive
this Church by his manifold attempts to break this union. To which purpose he
has suppressed the privileges granted to the Dutch and French Churches. He
has denied them to be of the same Faith and Religion with us; and many other
ways has he declared his malice to those Churches.

13. In the thirteenth Article, as he has sought to make an Ecclesiastical
division, or religious difference between us and foreign Nations, so he has
sought to make a Civil diffeence between us and his Majesty's subjects of the
Kingdom of S^otland. And this he has promoted by many innovations, there
pressed by himself and his own authority, when they were incapable of such
altera^ions. He advised his Majesty to use violence. He has made private and
public Collections toward the maintenance of the war, which he might
justly call his own wa^re. And with an impudent boldness, has struck Tallies
in the Exchequer for diverse sums of money, procured by himself, Pro
defensione Regni; when by his Counsels the King was drawn to undertake not a
Defensive, but an Offnsive War.

14. He has lastly, thought to secure himself and his party by seeking to
undermine Parliaments, and thereby has labored to bereave this Kingdom of
the Legisla^ive power, which can only be used in Parliaments: and that we
should be left a Kingdom without that which indeed makes and constitutes a
Kingdom; and is the only Mean to preserve and restore it from distempers and
decays. He has hereby endeavored to bereave us of the highest Judicatory,
such a Judicatory, as is necessary and essential to our government. Some Cases
of Treason, and others concerning the Prerogative of the Crown, and liberty of
the People. It is the supreme Judicatory to which all difficult Cases resort
from other Courts. He has sought to deprive the King of the Love and Counsel
of his People, of that assistance which he might have from them, and likewise
to deprive the People of that relief of grievance^ which they most humbly
^xpect from his Majesty.

My Lords, The Parliament is the Cabbinet wherein the chiefest Jewels both of
the Crown and Kingdom are deposited. The great Prerogative of the King, and
the liberty of the People are most effectually exercised and maintained by
Parliaments. Here (my Lords) you cannot pass by this occasion of great thanks
to God and his Majesty for passing the Bill whereby the frequent course of
Parliaments is established; which I assure my self, he will by experience
find to be a strong foundation both of his honor, and of his Crown.

This is all (my Lords) I have to say to the particulars of the Charge. The
Commons desire your Lordships that they may have the same way of Examination
that they had in the Case of the Earl of Strafford: That is, to examine
members of all kinds, of your Lordships House and their own, and others, as
they shall see cause. And those Examinations to be kept secret and private,
that they may with more advantage be made use of when the matter comes to
trial.

They have declared that they reserve to themselves the power of making
Additionall Articles, by which they intend to reduce his Charge to be more
particular and certain, in respect of the several times, occasion, and other
circumstances of the Offenses therein Charged. And that your Lordships would
be pleased to put this Cause in such a quick way of proceeding, that these
great and dangerous Crimes together with the offenders may be brought to a just
Judgment.

To these Articles of the Commons house, I might here annex those of the
Scottish Commissioners against this Arch-Prelate; but I reserve them to a
Chapt^^ 7.
fitter place; and shall only for a Corollary, add Mr. Grymstons Printed
speech in Parliament, against this Archbishop, to Mr. Pymmes, pretermitting
all others of this Nature for brevitie sake.

Mr. Grymstones Speech in Parliament, upon the accusation and impeachment of
WILLIAM LAVD Archbishop of Canterbury, of High Treason.
Mr Speaker,
THere has been presented to ^he House, a most faithful and exact report of
the conference we had with the Lords yesterday, together with the opinion of
the Committees, that were employed in that service.

That they conceived it fit, the Archbishop of Canterbury should be sequestered.

I must second ^he motion, and with the favor of the House, I shall be bold to
offer my reasons, why I conceive it more necessary, we should proceed a little
further, than the desire of a bare sequestration only.

Mr. Speaker, long introductions are not sutabl^ to weighty business, we are
fallen upon the great man, the Archbishop of Canterbury: look upon him as he
is in his Highness, and he is the s^ye of all pesti^ent filth, that has
infected the State and government of the Church and Commonwealth: look upon
him in his dependancies, and he is the man, the only man that has raised and
advanced all those (that together with himself) have been the Authors and
causers of all the ruins, miseries, and calamities, we now groan under.

Who is it but he only, that has brought the Earl of Strafford to all his
great places and employments, a fit instrument and spirit, to act and execute
all his wicked and bloody designs in these Kingdoms?

Who is it, but he only that brought in Secretary Winde^anke into the place of
Secretary and trust, the very Broker and P^nder to the Whore of Babylon?

Who is it, Mr. Speaker, but he only that has advanced all Popish Bishops? I
shall name some of them; Bishop Manwaring, the Bishop of Bathe and Wells, the
Bishop of Oxford, and Bishop Wren, (the least o^ all, but the most unclean
one.)

These are men that should have sed Christ's Flock, but they are the Wolves
that devoured them; the Sheep should have fed upon the Mountains, but the
Mountains have eaten up the Sheep. It was the happiness of the Church, when
the zeal of Gods house did eat up the Bishops: glorious and brave Martyrs
that went to the stake, in defense of the Protestants religion; but the zeal
of these Bishops have been to eat up and persecute the Church.

Who is it, Mr. Speaker, but the great Archbishop of Canterbury, that has sit
at the Helm to guide and steer them to all the managing of their Projects,
that have been set on foot in this Kingdom these ten years last past? and
rather than he would stand out, he has most unworthily trucked and chaffered
in the meanest of them. As for instance, that of Tobacco, wherein thousands of
poor people have been stripped and turned out of their trade^, for which they
have served as Apprentises; we all know he was the Compounder and Contractor
with them for the Licenses, putting them to pay Fines, and Fee-Farme-rents to
use their Trades.

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, he might have spent his time better (and more for his
grace) in the Pulpit; then thus sharking and taking in the Tobacco shop.

Mr. Speaker, we all know what he has been charged withal here in this
House, Crim^s of a dangerous consequence, and of transcendent nature, no less
than the subversion of the Government of this Kingdom, and the alteration of
the Protestant Religion, and this not upon bare information only, but much of
it comes before us already, upon clear and manifest poofes, and there is
scarce any business, Grievances, or Complaints, come before us in this place,
wherein we do not find him intermingled, and as it were twisted into it, like
a busy and angry Waspe, his sting in the tail of everything.

We have this day heard the report of the Conference yesterday; and in it the
Accusations which the Scottish Nation has charged him withal; And we do all
know he is guilty of the same (if not more) in this Kingdom.

Mr. Speaker, he has been, and is the common enemy to all goodness and good
men, and it is not safe, that such a viper should be near to his Majesty's
person, to distill his poison into his Sacred ears, nor is it safe for the
Common wealth that he should sit in so eminent a place of Government, being
thus accused; we know what we did in the Earl of Straf^ords case. This man is
the corrupt Fountain that has in^ected all the streams, and till the
fountain be purged, we cannot expect to have any clear Channels. I shall be
bold therefore to offer my opinion, and if I err it is the error of my
judgment, and not my want of zeal and affection to the public good.

I conceive it most necessary and fit, that we should now take up a Resolution
to do somewhat, to strike whilst the Iron is hot; And go up to the Lords in
the name of the Commons of this House, and in the name of the Commons of
England; and to accuse him of High Treason, and to desire their Lordships, his
person may be sequestered, and that in convenient time they may bring up the
Charge.

Which soon after was accordingly executed, as you have already seen.

By these speeches and Articles of High Treason against this Arch-Prelate it is
apparent, that his Treasons equal, if not far exceed, the Treasons of any of
his Predecessors in the darkest mists of Popery; and that he, like his
Predecessor Austin has, endeavored to raise a bloody civil war between
England, Ireland, and Scotland, only for opposing his all-subduing
Archiepiscopall Jurisdiction, extended by him over all his Majesty's three
Kingdoms, and for refusing to receive those Superstitious Romish Ceremonies
and Innovations, which he would have violently thrust upon them: yea it is
evident by these Articles that he is the primum mobile, whence all our late
wars, tumults, uproares, and divisions proceeded^ and the spring whence all
our insupportable grievances both in our Church and State have originally
flowed. And so by his own late published maxim ( The Relation of his
Conf^rence with Fisher p. 132.142.296 ^^8.301.
A schism must needs be theirs whose the cause of it is, and he makes the
separation that gives the first just cause thereof:) the blame of all these
late schisms, wars, and intolerable grievances, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical, must rest entirely on his head; who, as he is like to leave no
heirs of his body law^ully begotten to inherit his virtues, so it is pity he
should leave any successor behind him in his See, to perpetuate his, and his
Predecessors Treasons, with other their Archiepiscopall vices. It is his own
late resolution: Relation of his Conferenc^ with Fi^^er p. 270.
The condition of the Church were most miserable, if it should be constrained
to acknowledge a Wolf manifestly raging for her shepherd: and it is likewise
his observation, Ibidem p. 384.385.
A man may become of a Pastor a Wolf; and since Judas changed from an Apostle
to a Devil, Joh 6. It is no wonder to see others change from shepherds into
Wolves^ I doubt the Church is not empty of such changlings at this day. Whether
himself and his forementioned Predecessors have not proved such Wolves and
changlings, by reason of the Venom of their Archiepisco^all Chair: and
whether the condition of our Church were not most miserable, if she should be
still constrained to acknowledge these Arch-Wolves of Canterbury, manifestly
raging, to be her Shepherds, and still to maintain an interrupted succession
of them to devour the poor sheep of Christ both soul and body, and to be
perpetual pests, Traitors and incendiaries to our Church and State, as their
Predecessors have ever been, I shall submit to those whom it most concerns,
who have now sufficient power and opportunity in their hands to redress all
incumbent, and prevent all future mischiefs in this kind.

I could now gladly wade out of this dangerous See of Canterbury wherein I have
so long roved, did not the Acts of some other ancient Prelates of it, next
successors to Augustine, detain me in it a little longer.

Not to mention the Sea Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 8. Godwin. p. 8.
forwardness and activity of Laurentius the second Archbishop of this See, to
settle the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome among us, and to obtrude
the^ on the Britains, who withstood them; or his contests with King Eadbaldus,
from whose tyranny and displeasure he purposed to flee into foreign parts, had
no^ S. Peter in a dream reproved, and whipped him with whip-cord for this his
cowardice so terribly (if it be true) that all his body was gore blood.

Malmesbur. d^ Gestis Pontif. lib. 1. p. 196. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p.
14.15.17. Godwin. p. 11.
Theodorus the seventh Prelate who possessed this Chair, THEODORUS.
by birth a Greek, was so far from doing any thing contrary to or different
from the Church of Rome, that he over-contentiously propugned her Authority and
Ceremonies, depriving some Bishops upon his mere pleasure for this cause
only, that they were consecrated after a different manner from the Romans, and
compelling them to be canonically ordained. He exercised the right and
authority o^ his See in such sort, that he seemed not so much to govern by
judgment and Counsel, as to be violently hurried with the impetuousnesse and
perturbation of his mind: so that he did not a little obscure those other
virtues which were not vulgar, with this overmuch pertinacity of asserting his
own dignity. His unjust deprivation of Bishops without cause (whom he thrust
in and out at his pleasure, as his late successors have deprived, silenced, and
suspended our best preaching Ministers) detracted much from his glory:
especially his unjust dealing with Wilfrid Archbishop of York, whom he most
unworthily expelled from his See, though every way equal, if not superior to
himself in holiness of life, learning and industry: by persecuting whom
immoderately and unjustly, mulium n^ ^uit Ecclesiae paci, and male consuluit
famae suae; he much prejudiced the Churches peace^ and his own reputation: he
stirred up King Egfrid against Wilfrid, and by that means kept him off from
being restored to his Bishopric. And when as Wilfrid appearing before the
Kings tribunal expostulated the cause of his injuries, Theodor answered,
Malmesbur. de Gestis Pontif. Angl. l. 3. p, 261.262.
We lay no guilt to your charge; sed quod constituimus ratum esse volumus: but
what we have decreed that we will shall be ratified. Than which speech what can
be more absurd? as if he should say, So I will have it, so I command, my will
shall stand for a reason. Such a wilful and headstrong Prelate was he, to the
great disturbance both of Church and state; for which some say^ he repented on
his deathbed, though this vice dyed not with him but descended to his
successors.

BIRHTUALDUS.
Birhtubaldus an English man, his next successor, not Malmes. de Gestis Pontif.
l. 3. p. 263. to 266. Antiq. Eccl. Bri^. p. 17.18.19.
only assisted but caused Alfricke King of Northumberland, to thrust Wilfrid
out of his See at York, 5. years after his restitution to it, and to spoil
him of all his lands and goods, and banish him the Kingdom. And then
afterward endeavored to justify and make good this deprivation, though
unjust, in a Council which he summoned for this purpose; which when he could
not effect, he endeavored by fair speeches to persuade Wilfrid to renounce
his Bishopric rather than violate the peace of the Church: but he refusing,
appealed to Rome, whereupon his complaint to the Pope Birhtuald is sent for,
Wilfrid acquitted, and this turbulent malicious Arch-Prelate overthrown, and
forced to restore Wilfrid to York again, after a long contestation between
them, to the great Disturbance of Church and State.

Tatwin the 9. Archbishop of Canterbury, TATWIN.
Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 21. Godwin Page 13.
two years after his consecration, ^ad a great controversy with the
Archbishop of York concerning primacy, for which cause he posted to Rome, and
t^ere received his pall and confirmation from the Pope; but these controversies
for primacie I shall reserve for another Treatise.

Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 22.24.
Cutbert his successor (as Thomas Sprot describes him) was a deceitful man
full of fox^like craft, CUTBERT.
a viper, eating out the bowels of his own mother. In his days both Prince
and people, Priests, Nuns, and Monks were extremely addicted to
uncleanness, whoredom, adultery, and costly apparel; the Bishops themselves
being as bad, reproved them not for these sins, lived wickedly, rixas and
arma inter se gerebant, brawled and warred among themselves, addicted not
themselves to read the Scriptures, but to luxury, and preached not^ or very
rarely, by means whereof people were so ignorant that they could scarce say
the Articles of the Creed, or the Lords prayer in their mother tongue. To
reform these abuses a Synod was called, but these sins still reigning, the
Kingdom was soon over-runne and conquered by the bloody Danes.

Lambert the 13. Archbishop of Canterbury, LAMBERT.
about the year of Christ 76^. so highly Matthew. Westminster. An. 765. p. ^76.
Malmesburiensi^, De gestis Pontif. l. 1. p. 198, 199. Ant. Eccl^s. Brit. p.
26.29. Godwin p. ^5.
offended Offa King of Mercia, that out of his enmity against him, and the
Kentish men, he obtained a Bull from Pope Adrian to erect a new
Archbishopricke at Lichfield: obtaining an Archbishops Pall for Eadulphus
Bishop of that See, to whom the Diocesses of Worcester, Leicester. Legecester,
Hereford, Helenham, and Du^wich were annexed and subjected; so as Canterbury
had left unto him for his Province only the Bishoprics of London,
Winchester, Rochester, and Sherburne, which much abated his pride.

Athelardus his next successor, ATHELARDUS
and Eanbaldus Archbishop of York, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 27, to 34. Malmes.
de Gestis Pontif l. 1. p. 199. Matthew. West. An. 1267. p. 292. Godwin p. 16.
about the year 79^. procuring letters from Kenulph King of Mercia, written in
his, and his Bishops, Dukes, and peoples names to Pope Leo, for the reuniting
of the former disjoined Bishoprics to the Sea of Canterbury, poasted with
them to Rome; where after they had solicited, and bribed the Pope, they
obtained their suit without much difficulty, and so these Bishoprics were
reannexed to Canterbury, lest the seamelesse coat of Christ should sustain
some rent or schism between the two Archbish^prickes; and withal, Ethelard
obtained such a large grant from the Pope, that if any of his Diocese, as well
Kings and Princes, as ordinary people, should transgress his Lordly Mandates,
he should excommunicate them till they repented, and if they continued
impenitent, all should esteem them as Ethnickes and publicans. In his time the
English grew such Apostates from virtue, ut gentes quascunque proditione
superarent, that they exceeded all Nations in treason and treachery. No doubt
they learned it from their traitorous Prelates, and Priests, whom the Danes in
his days ^lew, together with Monks, Nuns, and Levites, without any
commiseration: Et fude^unt sanguinem sanctorum etiam IN CIRCUITU ALTARIS, as
Epistola ad Hegibaldum, Episc. Ant. Eccles. Brit. p. 31.
Alcuinus writes: by which it appears, that altars in those days stood not
close against the East wall of the Chancell, as now some place them, but in
such sort, thas they might be COMPASSED ROUND; the Alter of Augustine in his
collegiate Church at Canterbury, standing before those days, in ejus Porticus
Beda E^el. Hist. l. 2. c. 3. Antiqu. Eccl^s. Brit. p. 7.
MEDIO, in the MIDST of the Porch there; and the Altar of the old Church in
Saint Edmonds Bury, built ovall, standing likewise AS IT WERE IN THE MIDST of
the Church, as Camde^s Britannia, p. 460.
Camden out of Everden, a Monk of that house, relates: but of this in the by.

ELNOTHVS.
Speed Hist. l. 8. ^. 4. p. 484.496. Holinshed. History of England. l. 7. c.
13. p. 182
Elnothus Archbishop of Canterbury, about the year of our Lord 1036. against
his Alleagiance and Oath crowned Harold (a bastard, having no right to the
Crown) King of England, Hardi-Canute the right heir being put by his right.
At first this Prelate seemed unwilling to perform that service, for it is
reported, that he having the Regal Scepter, and Crown in his custody, with
an oath refused to consecrate any other for King, so long as the Queens
Children were living, for (said he) Canutus committed them to my trust and
assurance, and to them will I give my faith and allegiance. This Scepter and
Crown therefore I here lay down upon this Altar: neither do I deny or deliver
them to you, but I require by the Apostolic authority, all Bishops, that none
of them presume to take the same away, neither therewith that they consecrate
you for King, as for your self if you dare, you may usurp that which I have
committed to God on this his Table. Notwithstanding that great thunderclap was
allayd with the showers of golden promises of his just and religious Government
intend^d (though present experience manifested the contrary) and he persuaded
without much entreaty to crown this usurper King.

And now having thus long sailed in this troublesome See of Canterbury, I shall
only trouble you with a passage out of William Harrison, touching the
Archbishops of Canterbury in general, and Robert the Norman in particular; and
then hoise up my sails, and steare my course into the Northern^ See of York.

William H^^rison Description of England. ^. 132.133.
The Archbishop of Canterbury (writes he) is commonly called Primate of all
England, and in the Coronations of the Kings of this Land, and all other times,
wherein it shall please the Prince to wear and put on his Crown, his office
is to set it upon their heads. They bear also the name of their high Chaplins
continually, although not a few of them have presumed (in time past) to be
their equals, and void of subjection unto them. That this is true, it may
easily appear by their own acts yet kept in record, besides their Epistles
and Answers written, or in Print, wherein they have sought, not only to match,
but also to ma^e them with great rigor and more than open tyranny. Our
adversaries will peradventure deny this absolutely, as they do many other
things apparent, though not without shameless impudency, or at leastwise
de^end it as just, and not swerving from common equity, because they imagine
every Archbishop to be the Kings equal in his own Province. But how well
their doing herein agrees with the saying of Peter, and examples of the
Primitive Church, it may easily appear: some examples also of their demeanor
I will not let to remember, lest they should say I speak of malice, and
without all ground of likelihood, of their practices with mean persons: I
speak nor, neither will I begin at Dun^tane, the author of all their pride
and presumption here in England: but for so much as the dealing of Robert the
Norman, against Earl Goodwine, is a rare History, and deserve^h to be
remembered, I will touch it in this place, protesting to deal with all in more
faithful manner, than it has heretofore been delivered unto us by the Norman
Writers, or French English, who (offer purpose) have so defaced Earl Goodwine,
that were it no^ for the testimony of one or two mere English men living in
those days, it should be impossible for me (or any other) at this present to
declare the truth of that matter according to the circumstances: mark
therefore what I say; for the truth is, that such Norman^ as came in with Emma,
in the time of Ethelred, and Canutus, and the Confessor, did fall by sundry
means into such favor with those Princes, that the Gentlemen did grow to
bear great rule in the Court, and their Clerks to be possessors of the best
benefices in the Land. Hereupon therefore one Robert, a jolly ambitious Priest,
got first to be Bishop of London, and after the death of Eadsius, to be
Archbishop of Canterbury, by the gift of King Edward, leaving his former See to
William his Countriman: Vlfo also a Norman was preferred to Lincoln, and
other to other places, as the King did think convenient. These Norman Clerks,
and their friends being thus exalted, it was not long ere they began to mock,
abuse, and despise the English, and so much the more as they daily saw
themselves to increase in ^avour with King Edward, who also called diverse of
them to be of his secret Council, which did not a little incense the hearts of
the English against them. A ^^ay also was made at Dover between the servants
of Earl Goodwine, and the French, whose Masters came over to see and salute
the King: which so inflamed the minds of the French Clergy and Courtiers
against the English Nobility, that each part sought for opportunity of revenge,
which ere long took hold between them: for the said Robert being called to be
Arc^bishop of Canterbury, was no sooner in possession of his See, than he
began to quarrel with Earl Goodwine (the Kings Father in Law by the marriage
of his daughter) who also was ready to acquit his demeanor with like malice;
and so the mischief began. Hereupon therefore the Archbishop charged the Earl
with the murder of Alfred the Kings brother, whom not he, but Harald the son
of Canutus, and the Danes, had cruelly made away; for Alfred and his brother
coming into the Land with five and twenty ^aile, upon the death of Canutus
being landed, the Normans that arrived with them, giving out how they came to
recover their right, to wit, the Crown of England, and thereunto the
unskilful young Gentlemen showing themselves to like of the ^umor that was
spread in this behalfe^ the report of their demeanor was quickly brought to
Harald, who caused a company ^orthwith of Danes privily to lay in wait for them
as they rod^ toward Gilford, where Alfred was slain, and whence Edward with
much difficulty escaped to his ships, and so returned into Normandy. But this
affirmation of the Archbishop being greatly soothed out with his crafty
utterance (for he was learned) confirmed by his French friends (for they had
all conspired against the Earl) and thereunto the King being desirous to
revenge the death of his Brother, bred such a grudge in his mind against
Goodwine, that he banished him and his Sons clean out of the Land^ he sent
also his wife the Earls daughter prisoner to Wilton, with one only maiden
attending upon her, where she lay almost a year before she was released: in
the mean season, the rest of the Peers, as Siward Earl of Northumberland,
surnamed Digara, or ^ortis, Leofrick Earl of Chester, and other went to the
King, before the departure of Goodwine, endeavoring to persuade him unto the
revocation of his sentence, and desiring that his cause might be heard and
discussed by Order of Law; But the King incensed by the Archbishop and his
Normans, would not hear on that side, saying plainly and swearing by Saint
John the Evangelist, (for that was his common Oath) that Earl Goodwine should
not have his Peace till he restored his brother Alfred alive again unto his
presence; with which answer the Peers departed in choler from Court, and
Goodwine toward the Coast.

Coming also unto the shore and ready to take shipping, he kneeled down in
presence of his conduct (to wit at Bosenham in the month of September, from
whence he intended to sail into Flanders unto Baldwine the Earl) and there
wished openly before them all, that if ever he attempted any thing against the
Kings person of England or his Royal estate, that he might never come safe
unto his Cousin nor see his Country any more, but perish in this voyage; and
herewith he went aboard the ship that was provided for him, and so from the
Coast into the open Sea. But see what followed, he was not yet gone a mile
away from the Land, before he saw the shore full of armed Soldiers sent after
by the Archbishop and his friends to kill him ere he should depart, and go out
of the Country, which yet more incensed the hearts of the English against them.
Being come also to Flanders he caused the Earl, the French King, and others,
of his friends among whom also the Emperor was one, to write unto the King in
his hehalfe, but all in vain, for nothing could be obtained from him of which
the Norman^ had no liking; whereupon the Earl and his Sons changed their
minds, obtained aid, and invaded the Land in sundry places. Finally joining
their powers, they came by the Thames into Southwarke near London, where they
lodged, and looked for the King to encounter with them in the field: the King
seeing what was done, commanded the Londoner^ not to aid nor victual them:
but the Citizens made answer, how the quarrel of Goodwine was the cause of the
who^e Realm, which he had in a manner given over unto the spoil of the
French, and thereupon they not only victualled them abundantly, but also
received the Earl and his chief friends into the City, where they lodged them
at their ease, till the Kings power was ready to join with them in battle:
great resort also was made unto them from all places of the Realm; so that the
Earls Army was wonderfully increased, and the day and place chosen wherein the
Battle should be fought. But when the Armies met, the Kings side began some to
flee to the Earl, other to lay down their weapons, and not a few to ^unne
away outright: the rest telling him plainly, that they would never fight
against their own Count^y men, to mainaine Frenchmens quarrel^: We have seen
the like of late i^ ^ like prela^icall quarrel.
the Normans also seeing the sequel, fled away so fast as they might gallop,
leaving the King in the field to shift for himself (as h^ best might) whilst
they did save themselves elsewhere. In the mean season the Earls Power would
have set upon the King, either to his slaughter or apprehension; but he stayed
them, saying after this manner. The King is my Son (as you all know) and it
is not for a father to deal so hardly with his child, neither a subject with
his Sovereign. It is not he tha^ has hurt or done me this injury, but the
proud Normans that are about him; wherefore to gain a Kingdom I will do him
no violence: and therewithal casting aside his battle axe, he ran to the
King that stood altogether amazed, and falling at his feet he craved his
peace, accused the Archbishop, required that his cause might be heard in open
assembly of his Peers, and finally determined as truth and equity should
deserve. The King (after he had paused a pretty while) seeing his old
Father-in-Law to lie grovelling at his feet, and conceiving with himself that
his suite was not unreasonable; seeing also his children, and the rest of the
greatest Barons of the Land to kneel before him, and make the like request:
he listed up the Earl by the hand, bad him be of good comfort, pardoned all
that was past, and friendly having kissed him and his sons upon the cheeks,
he lead them to his palace, called home the Queen, and Summonned all his
Lords unto a Council; wherein it is much to read how many ^ils were presented
against the Bishop and his Normans, some containing matter of rapes, other of
robbery, extortion, murder, manslaughter, high t^eason, adultery, and not a few
of battery: wherewith the King (as a man now awaked out of sleep) was so
offended, that upon consultation had of these things he banished all the
Normans out of the Land, only three or four excepted, whom he retained for
sundry necessary causes, albeit they never came more so near him afterward as
to be of his Privy Council: after this also the Earl lived almost two
years, and then falling into an apoplexy, as he sat with the King at the
table, he was taken up and carried into the Kings bedchamber, where (after a
few days) he made an end of his life; and thus much of our first broyle
raised by the Clergy, and practice of the Archbishop. I would entreat of all
the like examples of Tyranny, practiced by the Prelates of this See against
their Lords and Sovereigns; but then I should rather write an History, than a
Description of this Island. Wherefore I refer you to those reports of Anselme
and Becket, sufficiently penned by other, the which Anselme also making a show,
as if he had been very unwilling to be placed in the Sea of Canterbury, gave
this answer to the Letters of such his friends, as did make request unto him to
take the charge upon him: I would o^^ secular Lordly Prelates would consider
this.
Secularia negotia nescio, quia scire nolo, etc. Of secular affairs I have no
skill, becuase I will not know them: for I even abhor the troubles that rise
about them, as one that desires to have his mind at Liberty: I apply my whole
endeavor to the rule of the Scriptures, you lead me to the contrary; and it
is to be feared lest the plough of holy Church, which two strong men of equal
force, and both like earnest to contend unto that which is good (that is the
King and the Archbishop) ought to draw, should thereby now swarve from the
right furrow, by matching of an old sheep with a wild untamed Bull. I am that
old sheep, who if I might be quie^, could peradventure show my self not
altogether ungrateful to some, by feeding them with the milk of the word of
God, and covering them with wool; but if you match me with this Bull, yo^
shall see that through want of equality in draught the plough will not go too
right, etc. as follows in the process of his Letters. The said Thomas Becket
was so proud, that he wrote to King Henry the second, as to his Lord, to his
King, and to his Son, offering him his Counsel, his reverence and due
correction, etc. Others in like sort have protested, that they oug't nothing to
the Kings of this Land, but their council only, reserving all obedience unto
the Sea of Rome. William Harrison Description of England, page 134, 135.
Neither did this pride stay at Archbishops and Bishops, but descended lower,
even to the rake-hels of the Clergy, and puddles of all ungodliness; for
beside the injury received of their superiors, how was King John dealt withal
by the vile Cistertians at Lincoln in the second of his reign? Certes when
he had (upon just occasion) conceived some grudge against them for their
ambitious demeanor; and upon denial to pay such sums of money as were
allotted unto them, he had caused seizure to be made of such horses, swine,
neat, and other things of theirs, as were maintained in his forests. They
denounced him as fast amongst themselves, with Bell, Book and Candle, to be
accursed and excomcommunicated. Thereunto they so handled the matter with the
Pope and their friends: that the King was feign to yield to their good graces,
insomuch that a meeting for pacification was appointed between them at
Lincoln, by means of the present Archbishop of Canterbury; who went often
between him and the Cistertian Commissioners, before the matter could be
finished. In the end the King himself came also unto the said Commissioners,
as they sat in their Chapter house, and there with tears fell down at their
feet, craving pardon for his trespasses against them, and heartily requiring
that they would (from thenceforth) commend him and his Realm in their prayers
unto the protection of the Almighty, and receive him into their fraternity,
promising moreover full satisfaction of their damages sust^ined, and to build
an house of their order in whatsoever place of England^ it should please them
to assign. And this he confirmed by Charter, bearing date the 27 of November,
after the Scottish King was returned into Scotland, and departed from the King.
Whereby (and by other the like, as between John Strafford and Edward the
third, etc.) a man may easily conceive how proud the Clergy men have been in
former times, as wholly presuming upon the primacy of the Pope More matter
could I allege of these and the like broils, not to be found among our Common
Historiographer^, howbeit reserving the same unto places more convenient, I
will cease to speak of them at this time. So Harrison. And thus have I now at
last concl^ded my Canterbury voyage, and sailed through this most dangerous
See; wherein so many Pontiffes have suffered shipwreck both of their loyalty,
charity, faith, and honesty. And many godly Christians through their cruelty,
and tyranny made shipwreck, not only of their goods, liberties, estates,
cares, and other members, but also of their lives; it being both in Augustines
time, and almost ever since, a very A^eldama, and See of blood. So as I may
well conclude of these Primates, and Metropolitans of all England, in Saint
Sermo 1. in convers. S. Pauli, and super Cant. Serm^ 77.
Bernards words: Heu, heu Domine Deus, ipsi sunt in persecutione tua PRIMI, qui
videntur in Ecclesia tua PRIMATUM DILIGERE, GERERE PRINCIPATUM. Misera eorum
conversatio, plebis tuae miserabilis subversio est: Atque utinam sola hac part
nocerent: But alas, Iusta omnino querimonia, nec ad ullam jus^ius, quam ad
nostram referenda aetatem; Parum est nostris vigilibus quod non servant nos,
nisi and perdant. Alto quippe demersi oblivionis somno ad nullum Dominicae
comminationis tonitruum expergiscuntur, ut vel suum ipsorum periculum
expavescant. Inde est, ut not parcant suis, qui non parcant sibi, He writes it
principally of the Popes of Rome, but it is as true o^ the Popes of Canterbury,
PERIMENTES PARITER ET PEREUNTES. What then remains but that King, Parliament
and people (having such just cause and fair opportunity) should all join
cordially together, utterly to subvert this chair of pestilence, and with Rev.
18.19.21.
great violence to throw down this our English Babylon, and in one hour to
make her so desolate, as she may be found no more at all; that so the people
beholding her long expected and much desired overthrow, may ^ry mightily with a
strong and joyful voice, with the Angel in the Rev. 1^.^.
Apocalypse; Babylon (Canterbury) the great is fallen, is fallen; which has
been the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage
of every unclean and hateful bird, and in her was found the blood of
Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth. From this
overflowing boundless See (which has still outswolne the banks of divine,
and humane Laws which would confine it) have all those perilous inundations of
treachery, rebellion, foreign and in^estine wars, seditions, tyrannyes,
oppessions, grievances, innovations, and mischiefs commonly issued which have
miserably torn and perplexed our Kingdom: vexed if not almost ruined our
Kings, Church, State, People in ancient and modern times. This great
Archiepiscopal prime chair, has bin the Metropolitical nest wherein all the
eggs of all ou^ mischiefs, and grievances have commonly been laid and hatched
by our Canterburian Harpies. I can therefore prescribe no better advise for our
future security against those and other our mischievous Prelates and birds of
prey, than that which Syl^^s^^r ^^raldu^.
Turghesie (a prudent man) once gave to the King of Meth, when he demanded of
him, how he might destroy certain noisome birds then lately come into
Ireland, where they did much mischief to the Country, Nidos eorum ubique
destruendos, that their nests, and Sees (like the Abbeys and Priories of old,)
are every where to be destroyed, and converted to better uses; then we need not
fear a succession of these pernicious birds, and mischievous vermin; the very
Turbans and Acans of our English Israel; which must never look for tranquillity
or felicity, whiles these continue or domineer amongst us. Till these Ionasses
be cast overboard, and quite abandoned, we can neither hope for, nor enjoy a
calm.

CHAP. II. OF THE SEVERAL Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Seditions,
State-schismes, Contempts, and Disloyalties of the Archbishops of YORK,
against their Sovereigns, and of the Wars, Tumults, and Civil Dissentions
caused by them
I Have thus as briefly as I could with convenience, given you an Epitome of
the Archbishops of Canterburtes Arch-Treasons, Rebellions, Trecheries,
Seditions, Disloyalties, State-Schismes, Disturbances and oppositions to our
Laws, more at large related in our Historians; I shall now proceed in order,
to those of the Archbishops of York, which will almost equal them, as well
in heinousness, as in number; both of them being Primates and Metropolitanes
in all these prodigious villainies and crimes, as well as in Episcopal
Jurisdiction.

WILFRID.
Will: Mal^sb. de Gest^s Pontif. l. 3. p. 260. to 266. Antiqu^t. Ecc^^s: Brit.
p. 14. to 19. Godwin. p 560, 561, 562. Math, Westminster. Anno 672. Florentius
Wigorniensis, An. 677.6^5. Holinshed hist. of Brit. l. 5. c 34.35, 36. l 6 c.
2. Henrici Spelm. Council Tom. 1. p. 146, 147, 149, 157.161, 162, 163, 178, 179,
200, to 206.
Wilfrid the third Archbishop of York, about the year of our Lord 678. went
about to p^rswade King Egfr^dus Queen to forsake her husband, and betake her
self to a Monastery, without the Kings privitie or consent; the King much
displeased with him for it (by the advice of Theodore Archbishop of
Canterbury, who maligned the greatness of his Diocese) first sought to
diminish his Authority by dividing his Diocese into 3. Bishoprickes^ and then
exhibited diverse complaints against him to the Pope to have him deprived,
causing him to be condemned in two several Councels; and thereupon thrust him
from his Bishopric, which Theodore divided into four Diocesses. After ten
years exile, Egfrid dying, Alfrid his Successor restored Wilfrid; but five
years after, this King likewise fell out with him, and forced him to Rome,
where though the Pope restored him, yet the King would never admit him to his
See during his life: What the true cause of these displeasures was, the
Historians of those times (who favored Wilfrid) are sparing to relate: belike
it was some notorious offenses against these Kings, else they would not be so
unjust, as without cause to keep him from his Bishopric, and to imprison him
in chains, as one of them did. Antiqu Ecc^es. Brit p 47.
Some record, that it was because he favored and aided the Rebellious Danes,
which is most probable. Malmesbury, and others out of him, say, it was only
the malice of Queen Ermenburga, who envied him, for that he had many Abbots
and Abbeys under him, was served with Gold and Silver plate, had a great train
of followers, and was very gorgeous in his Pontifical Robes, and because he
would never yield to have his Diocese divided into three mote Bishoprics,
though it were sufficient to maintain four Bishops beside himself, of which
there was need. And some impute it to the envy and malice of Theodore
Archbishop of Canterbury. The first of these could not be the sole cause for
that ended upon VVilfrids exile and the Kings death. The second is as unlikely,
since VVilf^id himself, Matthew Wes^m. Anno 673. Henri^i Spelm. Council. Tom. 1.
p. 153.
with all the Bishops of that time, and the Council of Hertford, Can. 9. Anno
677. decreed, that the number of ^eleevers increasing, more Bishops and
Bishoprics should be made and erected. Whereupon Acca and Bo^win were made
Bishops instead of Bosa, and his Bishopric divided into four parts, to which
partition VVilf^id had good reason to consent, it being the Kings express
pleasure, and the Councels decree, to which himself subscribed. The envy of
Theodore was in likelihood a partial, but not principal cause of his first
Troubles only. He was therefore, in all likelihood, an aider and assister of
the Rebellious Danes, and a great opposite and Rebel against these two Kings;
yea, and against Edulfus their successor, who all three successively refused
to restore him, notwithstanding the Popes Letters and Command; which then it
seems were of little force. Many Councels were assembled about this Wilfrid,
and the whole Church and Kingdom much disquietted and vexed with the many
Schisms and contentions concerning him, too tedious to relate.

Anno 872. Matb. Westminster. An 872. Godwin. p. 566.
Vlferus, VLFERUS.
Archbishop of York, was by his Diocesans driven out of the Country: for
what cause is not expressed, and therefore likely for some notorious offense,
because the Monks conceal it out of favor to him.

Anno 952. Malmsb. de Gestis Pontif. l. 3. p 269. Godwin, p 567. Holin^hed
Hist. of England. l. 6. c. 23. p. 158. Math. W^stm. Ann. 951.953.
VVolstan Archbishop of York, WOLSTAN.
was convict of an heinous crime, who forgetting that dutiful affection he
ought to bear unto Edred his King, if for no other cause, yet for Athelstane
his Brothers sake, who preferred him; forgetting his Oath and Allegiance unto
the same King being his natural Prince, yea forgetting that he was either an
English man or a Christian, was not ashamed to revolt from King Edred, and
cleave to the Danes and favor them, an Heathen people, and such as sought not
only to destroy his Country, but also to root out Christian Religion. For
which Treason, and for setting up E^ric^us King in Edreds stead, though he
deserved a thousand deaths he was only deprived, committed to Prison and one
year after enlarged again, because he was a Bishop; whereas for this cause as
his Treason was the more heinous and execrable, so h^s punishment should have
been the greater: But he being released upon his repentance, grew so angry
with himself that he was thus pardoned against right and justice^ that v^t^m
e^ve^tigio exuit, he presently made away himself, being his own executioner.
Math. Westminster. Hov^den and Florentius Wigorni^sis, An. 951, 952, 953.
Some say, that he was thus imprisoned, for killing diverse Citizens of
Thetford in revenge of the death of one Anselme an Abbot, whom they had slain
without cause; belike he was guilty of both those crimes, and punished for
both in this mild manner, after diverse complaints.

Anno 975. Holinshed hist. of England, l. 6. c. 25. p. 162.
Oswald Archbishop of York assisted Dunstan of Canterb^ry, OSVVALD.
and the other Bishops, to put Egelred the right Heir from the Crown, and to
set up Edward an Usurper, whom they crowned as more fit for their behoof and
ends.

Elfricke Archbishop of York, ELFRICK.
surnamed Puttoc, was reputed detestable for two barbarous Acts: He caused
Harde^nute the King^ Malmsb. de Gestis Pontif. p 270, 271. Godwin, p 570.
Florentius Wigo^niensis, An. 1040, 1041. Math Westminster. An 1040 Holinsheds Hist.
of England. l. 7. c 15. p. 185. Speed, p. 407^
to command the dead body of his Brother King Harold to be dug up out of his
Grave, after that to be beheaded and cast into the Thames, as an infamous
example to men. And not content with this cruelty toward the dead he
persuaded the same King by way of revenge on Worcester men (because they would
not suffer him to hold that See in commendam with York, as three of his
predecessors had done before him) to fire that goodly City, and seize on all
the Citizens goods, pretending that they had stubbornely resisted those who
collected the Kings tributes: And as if this were not sufficient revenge to
kill all the men and waste the whole Country, which was most^ cruelly
executed^ he likewise caused this King to thrust the living Bishop of
VVorceter out of his See and to bestow it on himself; and incensed this King
so far against Earl Godwin, that he was enforced to buy his peace of the
King with the gift of the richest and costliest Ship that we read of in
that Age.

Aldredus his Successor, ALDREDUS
(who gat that See by Symonie, and held Worcester in commendam with it, and
was one of the first who distinguished the Clergy from the Laity in their
external habits) Will: Malmsb. de Gest^s Pontif. l. 3. p. 271. Godwin. p. 571.
to 574. Speed, p. 419. Polichro^. l. 7. c. 27, 28. l. 7. c. 1. Math. W^stm.
Ann. 1071. Wig^rniensis, An. 106^. Holinshed, ^ist. of England, l 8. c. 8. p.
196.
crowned Harold, invading the Dignity Royal, no way due unto him. After
which, though he purposed ^o Crown Edgar the right Heir King, to whom he and
the Nobility had first adhered, yet like a wily Bishop siding with the
strongest, he altered his purpose and crowned William the Conqueror King,
requiring first an Oath of him to d^fend the Church, to minister justice, and
te use Englishmen as favorable as Normans. This Oath it seemed to Aldred, that
the King had broken by laying heavy taxes on the people, of which he
admonished the King, who was very angry at it. He therefore (like a courageous
Prelate but like a disloyal Subject) thundered out an Excommunication against
him, saying^ That now worthily he had cursed, whom once unworthily he had
blessed. This bold pranke being reported to the King, incensed him very much at
first, but thinking better of it, he determined to give him good words a
while, and so sent some to entreat for his absolution. The Messengers came too
late, for the Bishop being troubled much in mind after the performance of that
Action, and either amazed with fear of what might happen after it, or overcome
with grief and repentance for what he had done, never could be merry after,
but dyed of grief before they came. In his time Vrsus Earl of Worceter had
built a Castle at Worceter to some prejudice of the Monks, the Ditch of which
Castle trenched somewhat upon the Churchyard, and adjoined too near to the
Monastery. Aldred went unto the Earl, and having demanded of him whether it
were done by his appointment, which h^e could not deny, looking steadfastly on
him, used these insolent and uncharitable words, Hightest thou Vrse? Have thou
Gods curse, adding, yea and mine too, and the curse of all hollowed heads,
unless thou take away this Castle, and know thou assuredly that thy posterity
shall not inherit the Lands of Saint Mary: which curse the Monks say was
shortly after accomplished, Vrsus dying soon after, and Roger his son flying
the Realm.

THURSTAN
Polichron. l. 7. c. 15. Malmsb^ de Gestis Ponti. l. 3. p. 274, 275. Antiqu.
Eccles. Brit. p. 112, 113. Eadmerus hist. Novorum, l 5, 6. p. 117. to 138.
Godwin p. 579.580.981. Walfingh. and Holtnshed, p. 41, 42, 49.
Thurstan Archbishop of ^orke, about the year of our Lord, 1100. contrary to
the Kings express command, and his own faithful Oath and promise to Henry
the first, received his Consecration from the Pope at the Council of Rheemes;
whereupon the King banished him the Realm, neither could he in five years
space be entreated to restore him. At last the Pope, by his procurement, writ a
very sharp Letter to the King, signifying, that he would Excommunicate both
him, and the Archbishop of Canterbury also, if Thurstan were any longer kept
from his See, and some say, he actually Excommunicated them both, and
interdicted as well the Province of York, as of Canterbury from the use of all
manner of Sacraments, and from the Baptism of Infants. Upon which the King, to
be out of trouble, contrary to his solemn vow, yielded that he should be
called home, and soon after he was reconciled unto the King. This Archbishop,
Anno 1148. when as David, King of Scots, entered our borders, and spoiled the
Country as far as the River of Teyse, gathered together such a power as he
was able to raise on a sudden, met them at Alverton, slew 1200. of them; after
which he cast off his Rochet, and turned Monk at Pontfrast, where he dyed,

Henry Murdac Archbishop of York, MURDAC:
thrust into that See by the Pope, against King Stephens good liking,
Nenbrig^nsis hist. l. 1. c. 17. Godw. p. 582.
who commended his Kinsman, William thereto; refused to swear fealty to the
King; who thereupon was so displeased with him, that the Townsmen of ^ork, by
his good liking, shut Murdac out of the City, and refused to receive him.
Murdac suspended them for this affront, Eustace the Kings Son commanded
Divine Service to be said notwithstanding, as at other times; hereupon diverse
tumults and seditions were raised in the City, wherein an Archdeacon, a great
Friend of the Archbishops, was slain: two or three years these stirs
continued, till at last the Archbishop submitted and reconciled himself to
the King.

Geffrey Plantagenet, PLANTAGINET
Henry the second his base Son, after the Arch-Bishopricke of York had been
ten years void, and kept so long in the Kings hands, was commended to that
See by Richard the first, and consecrated by the Archbishop of Towers. Godw.
p. 587, 588 Neubrig. l. 4. c. 17. Mat^ Paris hist Mayor, p. 146.157, 134, 212,
222, Holinshed, p. 143, 147, 163 170.
He took an oath to king Richard his Brother, then going to the Holy Land, not
to set foot in England within 3. years space; yet presently after he hied him
over into England; but upon his arrival, he was there arrested and imprisoned
in a barbarous manner by William Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellor of England,
being drawn by the heels from the very Altar of Saint Martins Church in
Dover. All the time of king Richard he had many contests with the Commons of
York, who often complained of him both to the king and Pope. Richard dying, king
John and this Bishop had many contentions one with the other. Anno 1194. by the
kings permission, many grievous complaints were exhibited in Parliament against
this Archbishop, for extortion and unjust vexations he had practiced, but he
passed so little thereof, that he made no answer to their Bills. Moreover, in
the second year of his reign, he commanded the Sheriff of Yorkshire to
seize upon all the Archbishops goods and Lands, and to return them into the
Exchequer, for hindering the kings Officers in gathering a kind of tax
throughout his Diocese, and refusing to sail into No^mandy with him, to make
a marriage for his Niece, and to conclude a league with the French king; which
command the Sheriff executing, the Archbishop thereupon Matthew. Westminster. Anno
1207.
excommunicated, not only the Sheriff that had done him this violence, but
all those in general, who were the Authors of the same, and that had been any
means to stir up the kings indignation against him. The King hereupon
suspends him from his Bishopric, to whom at last he was glad to pay 1000.
pound for his restitution. Holinshed, p 147.
Holinsh^^ writes that whereas this Archbishop of York had offended king
Richard, he pardoned and received him again into favor: Whereupon the
Archbishop waxed so proud, that using the king reproachfully, he lost his
Arch-Bishopricke, the rule of Yorkshire, which he had in government as
Sheriff, the favor of his Sovereign, and which was the greatest loss of
all, the love of God. Anno 1207. this fire of contention raked up in ashes,
brake out again. King John being at Winchester required such of the Nobility
and Clergy as were there present, that payment should be made unto him of the
third part of all the moveable goods in England; this motion no man gaine-sa^d
but Geffrey the Archbishop, who openly contradicted it. After this, whether it
were, he were guilty of some greater attempt, or that he understood his
Brother was grievously offended with him, secretly he avoided the Realme^
excommunicating before his departure, such of his Jurisdiction, as either had
already paid, or should hereafter presume to pay the said tax; whereupon he
was banished the Realm, and lived five years in exile till his death.

Godfrey de Kinton his Successor, GODFREY DE KINTON.
though he had no bickerings with the king, that I read of, yet he fell out
with the whole City of York, Godwin p. 594.
interdicting it in the beginning of Lent, and not restoring it till the third
of May following.

Godw p. 596. See 21. Ed. 1. ^n the Fleas of the Parliament, plac. 17. and
Dors^clauso, p. 21. E. 1. m. 3.
John Roman Archbishop of York, JOHN ROMAN.
Anno 1294. excommunicated Anthony Beak Bishop of Durham (or rather two of the
Bishops servants) being one of the kings Council, and at that time beyond the
Seas in the kings Service. Whereat the king being highly displeased, the
Archbishop thought it best to put himself to his Mercy, he did so, and was
fain to redeem the kings favor with 4000. Marks (being fined so much by the
whole Parliament for this his offense;) the grief whereof struck him into an
incurable disease, whereof he dyed.

Godw. p. 597.598.
Thomas de Corbridge, THOMAS DE CORBRIDGE.
his Successor, Anno 1299. upon the Popes Commendatory Letters, bestowed his
Canons place of York and Custoseship of the Parish of Saint Sepulcher on one
Gilbert Segrave, notwithstanding the King had formerly written earnestly to him
in the behalf of one John Bush his Secretary; which affront in preferring the
Popes Clerk before him and his Secretary, the King took so hainously, that
he seized on three Manors or Barronies belonging to his See, and retained
them during the Archbishops life, which was not long, he either out of
grief, or Gods just J^dgement, being soon taken away. It falling out for the
most part (as Bishop Godwin observes in his life) that those Bishops which have
presumed most in opposing themselves against their Princes, have least time
endured, and ever quickly been taken away.

Anno Dom. 1329. Walsing^ hist. Angliae p^ 110, 111. Holinsh. 348.
William de Melton WILLIAM DE MELTON
Archbishop of York (successively Treasurer and Chancellor of England) upon
the Examination of Edmund, Earl of Ken^, (whom this Prelate and the Bishop of
London had drawn into a conspiracy and rebellion against King Edward the
third) was accused of High Treason, for reporting that King Edward the second
was still alive after his death, (and that upon the credit of a preaching Friar
of London, who had raised up a Devil, which certainly informed him thereof as
a truth:) For writing a Letter of Fidelity to this Earle^ which he sent by
his own Chaplain Acyn, for sending him 500. men in Arms, and ptomising to
send him as many more as he could possibly raise; and sending Richard de
Pomfret to him both to Reusington and Arundle, to further the said Rebellion.
The Poor Earl was found guilty of high Treason, and beheaded: The Bishop of
London, and Archbishop, the chief plotters of this Treason and Conspirac^e,
were suffered to go at liberty under fureties, taken of them for their good
demeanor and forth-comming; and the Friar who had raised the Spirit, to know
whether the Kings Father were living or not, was only committed to prison,
where he dyed. An. 1319. Holinsh^d hist. of Scot. p. 222.
this William Melton Archbishop of York and the Bishop of Ely, with the
Citizens of York, not making them of the Country once privy to their
designs, having in their company a great company of Priests and men of
Religion, gave battle unto the Scots near Melton upon Swale. But for as much
as most of the English were unexpert in the feats of War (the Bishops being
their Captains) and came not in any orderly way of Battle, they were easily
put to flight by the Scots, who slew about 4000. of them, sparing neither
Religious person nor other. So ill is it for Prelates to turn Warriers, and
that rashly without taking good advice.

ALEXANDER NEVEL.
Godwin. p. 601, 602, Grafton, p. 375. Holi^shed, p. 458, 460, 463, 464.
Walsingh. hist Ang p 354, 368. Speeds p. 748, 749.
Alexander Nevell Archbishop of York, in great favor with King Richard the
second, was amongst others convicted by Parliament, for abusing the Kings youth
by flattery and exciting and stirring him against the Nobility and Lords, whom
he falsely accused of Treason to the King (to the great prejudice of the King
and Realm) by whispering tales day and night against them, and for anulling
Acts of Parliament: for which causes he was condemned in Parliament of high
Treason, and then adjudged to perpetual imprisonment in the Castle of
Roches^er. He foreseeing the Temp^st that grew toward him, fled out of the
Realm. Vrbane the Fifth for his security translated him (being both a Alexan.
Nevel ^roditor^ and ^usur^one translato ad^ Episcopatum S. Andr^ae in Scotia,
Hist. Ang. p. 368.
Traitor and whisperer, writes Walsingham) from York to Saint Andrews in
Scotland, which Kingdom at that time refused to acknowledge Vrbane for Pope,
yielding obedience to the Antipope, by mean^s whereof, Vrbanes gift was
insufficient to invest him in Saint Andrews; yet good to void him quite from
York; whereby he being stripped of both Arch-Bishoprickes, and enjoying the
benefit of neither, for very want was forced to become a Parish Priest at
Lovaine, and so lived three years till his death.

Thomas Arundel his Successor, THOMAS ARUNDEL.
to prejudice the Londoners and benefit those of York, Godwin, p. 603^
Gra^ton, p. 382. Wals^^gh. hist. Ang. p 386, 392, 393. Y^^dig. Na^st. p. 151.
removed all the Kings Courts from Westminster to York, to the great prejudice
and grievance of the Lond^ners and Subjects in the West and South parts of
England, and the no little disturbance of the Realm. His pretense was, that
he did it only to punish the pride and presumption of the Londoners, who were
then in great disgrace with the King^ by reason of a fray made upon the Bishop
of Salisburyes Man^ who abused a Baker, and brake his head with a Dagger,
without any just cause; for which the Citizens assaulted the Bishops House to
have Justice done upon his Man, who had done the wrong; but the Bishops
bolstering him out^ no Justice could be had, and instead thereof, their
Liberties were seized on, and the Term removed to York, to vex them the more:
The Archbishop not long after, was attainted of Treason in Parliament
immediately upon his Translati^n from York to Canterbury. And good reason: for
he conspired Holinshed, p 488.
with the Duke of Gloucester, the Abbot of Saint Albanes, and the Prior of
Westminster (both which Religious persons declared to the Duke, that they had
several Visions, That the Kingdom should be destroyed through the
misgovernment of Richard the second; by which they animated the Duke to
conspire with them and others, against their Sovereign; who meeting together
at drundel Castle, about the 20. year of King Richards Reign, they swear each
to other^ to be assistant one to another in all such matters as they should
determine, and therewith received the Sacrament from this Archbishop, who
celebrated Mass before them the morrow after; which done, they withdrew
themselves into a chamber, and concluded, to take King Richard, the Dukes of
Lancaster and York, and to commit them to Prison; and to hang and draw all the
other Lords of the Kings Council; all which they intended to accomplish in
August following, had not their plot been discovered and prevented by Earl
Marshall. This Prelate after his attainder for this Treason, was the chief
Holinshed, p. 503.
Actor in effecting King Richards involuntary Resignation, in the instrument
whereof he is first named. I shall say no more of this Arundel, but what
William Harrison has recorded of him in his Description of England, l. 2. ^ c.
1. p. 134. And even no less unquietness had another of our Princes with
Thomas Arundel (than King Stephen had with his Predecessors, and Robert de
S^gillo Bishop of London) who fled to Rome for fear of his head, and caused
the Pope to write an ambitious and contumelious Letter unto his Sovereign
about his restitution. But when by the Kings Letters yet extant and beginning
thus, Thomas PRODITIONIS non expers, nostrae Regiae Majestati insidias
fabricavit; the Pope understood the bottom of the matter, he was contented
that Thomas should be deprived, and another Archbishop chosen in his stead.
But of this and him you may read more before, page 75, 76, etc.

Godwin, p. 604, 605, 606. Polychron, lib 8. c. 10. f 326. Walsingh. Ypodigm,
N^ust. A^. 1405^ f. 168.170. Caxton, pars 7. H^n 4. p. 430. Stow, Martin,
Fabian An. 6. Hen. 4. Speeds Hist. l 9. c. 14. p. 775. sect. 43. Halls Chron.
par. 1. An. 6. H. 4. f. 25. Walsingh. hist. Angliae, p. 416, 417. Holinshed, p.
522.529, 530.
Richard Scroope Archbishop of ^orke, RICHARD SCROOPE.
Brother to William Scroope Earl of Wil^shire, Ann. 1403. and 1405. joined
with the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl Marshall, the Lord Bardolp^ and
others, in a Conspiracy and Rebellion against King Henry the fourth, gathering
what forces he could against him. The Percies to make their part seem good,
devised certain Articles by the devise of this Archbishop, which they showed
to diverse Noblemen and other States of the Realm, and moved them so far to
promote their purpose by this means, that they did not only promise them aid
and succor by words, but also by their writings and seals confirmed the same.
After this, Anno 1405. This Archbishop conspiring with the Earl of
Northumberland and others aforesaid, devised like Articles as before, of such
matters as was supposed not only the Commonaltie of the Realm, but the
Nobility found themselves grieved with; which Articles he and his Confederates
first showed to such of their adherents as were near about them, and after
sent them abroad to their friends further off; assuring them, that for redress
of such oppressions they would shed the last drop of blood in their bodies, if
need were: Whereupon great multitudes flocking to the Archbishop to York, to
take his part in this quarrel, he not meaning to stay, after he saw himself
so well accompanied with so great number of men, forthwith discovered his
enterprise, causing the Articles aforsaid to be set up in the public streets
of the City of York, and upon the gates of the Monasteries, that each man
might understand the causes that moved him to rise in Arms against the King,
the reforcing whereof did not yet appertain unto him. Hereupon the Knights,
Esqui^es, Gentlemen, Yeomen, and others of the the Commons as well of the
City, as of the Towns and Countries about, being allured for desire to see a
Reformation of the things mentioned in the Articles, assembled in great number,
and the Archbishop coming forth amongst them clad in armor, encouraged^
exhorted, and (by all means he could) pricked them forth to take the
enterprise in hand, and manfully to continue in their begun purpose; promising
forgiveness of sins to all them whose hap it was to dye in the quarrel. And
indeed the respect men had of the Archbishop caused them to like better of the
cause, since the gravitie of his age, integrity of his life^ incomperable
learning^ and reverent aspect of his personage, moved all men to have him in no
small estimation. The Earl of Westmerland and Duke of Lan^aster, the Kings
son, being in those parts with the Kings Forces, inquired of them in a
peaceable manner, What their intent should be in taking Arms? The Archbishop
answered, That he meant nothing but the good of the Realm, as he would
gladly certify them if he might have secure and safe conduct to them, and
thereupon showed a writing containing certain Articles which he had devised;
wherein he charged King Henry with treason against his Sovereign King Richard;
oppression of the Church and Commonweal, whose Liberties he had sworn to
defend, Tyranny and cruelty, in putting to death the said King, many of the
Nobility, and great numbers of the Commons: with impiety and sacrilege, in
defrauding the Church of Rome of her Rights; and lastly, with ^vill government,
perfidiousnesse, perjury, and diverse other like heinous crimes, for which he
pronounced the King excommunicate, requiring all men to join with that
company, whose endeavor should be, but to reform what was amiss, to seat
and settle in the kingdome^ the right Heir, to establish peace in Wales and
Ireland, and to free the whole Realm from the great and intolerable burden
of exactions, no longer to be endured. The Earl of Westmerland having read
this writing (containing sundry treasons and conlumelies with a witness, and
fit for an Archbishop to publish) professed to allow of the Enterprise, and
praised it for honest and reasonable; insomuch as meeting with the traiterous
Archbishop at a parley, after a very few speeches they seemed to become
friends, shaking hands together, and drinking to each other in the sight of
both their Armies. The Archbishop now doubting of nothing, suffered his men to
disperse them for a time: But the Earl contrary-wise waxing stronger and
stronger, and seeing him self able to deal with the Bishop, came upon him
suddenly and arrested him, little thinking of any such matter. The King by this
time was come North, and as far as Pomfret: Thither the Archbishop with
other prisoners, arrested with him, were brought, and carried with the King to
York; or as some say, to Thorpe; where Sir William Fulford, a Knight learned
in the Law, and another Justice called Gascoine sitting on an high Stage in the
Hall, condemned the Archbishop to be beheaded, without being judged by his
Peers; Bishops being (as Stamford Plecs of the Crown, l. 3. c. 1. f. 153. a
Cromptons I^risdiction of Courts^ f. 12. b.
some say) properly no Peers of the Realm, and so not to be judged by their
Peers; who certainly would have acquitted, or saved his life had they been
Bishops, they ever using to boulster out their fellow Bishops, in their
treasons, and to save them from the Gibbet. Presently after this judgment
given, the Archbishop was set upon an ill favored Jade, his face toward the
Horse tail, and carried with great scorn and shame to a Field hard by, where
his head at last was chopped off by a fellow that did his office very ill, not
being able to dispatch him with less then five strokes. Page 430.
Grafton writes, that Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury (as great a
Traitor as he) came to the King and said, Sir if the Bishop of York have
offended you so greatly as it is said, yet I pray you consider, that I am your
Ghostly Father, and the second Peer in your Realm, and that you ought not to
hearken to any man's voice before me, wherefore I counsel to reserve the pain
and punishment of the said Bishop to the Popes judgment, and he will take
such order as ye shall be pleased. And if ye will not so do, yet let him be
ref^rred to the Parliament, and keep your hands defiled from his blood; (a
sweet Counselor.) Then the King answered, I may not stay him, for the rumor
of the people; whereupon the Archbishop called for a Notary, to make an
instrument of the Kings answer, that if need were it might be showed to the
Pope^ but the King would not stay, but caused execution to be done. Though many
of our Archbishops and Bishops before him, had been desperate Traitors, yet
he is the first Bishop (the more the pity, for that made them so presumptuous
in their Treasons) that was put to death by order of Law. This just execution
on such a Traytorly Rebel, so unwontedly and extraordinarily performed on an
Arch-Prelate, in this contumelious (though deserved) manner, without any
preceding degradation, was so distastefull to his fellow Prelates (none of the
best Subjects,) and so dangerous a president for the future, that they
accounted this Arch-Traytor, no less then a Martyr, ascribing many miracles to
have been done by virtue of his holiness both at his Tomb, and at the place
where he was beheaded: (pity that more of them had not been so served, that
we might have had more such Holy Saints and wondrous Miracles of this kind.)
They reported abroad, That the Bishop at the time of his Execution, desired the
Executioner to have five strokes, in remembrance of the five wounds of Christ,
that the King at the same time, sitting at dinner, had five strok^s in his
neck by a person invisible, and that the King himself, presently after his
death, was stricken with a Leprosy, a manifest lie. They likewise reported,
That a strange judgment happened upon the Judges who gave sentence against him:
Which fabulous lying Legends, must not only be generally bruited abroad (to
cheat the people, justify the Traitor, disparage this honorable Act of
Justice slander the King and Judges, and all to secure the Bishops in their
Treasons and Rebellions, that this Act might never be made a president to
punish them capitally for such like offenses in future times;) but likewise
chronicled, to delude posterity, and animate all succeeding Prelates, under
hopes of impunitie to attempt any Treasons, Trecheries or insurrections against
their Sovereigns without fear. And to make the thing more odious, and the
Prelates more presumptuous in this kind, the Walsingh hist. and Ypodigm. An.
1406. p. 170.
Pope himself excommunicates tbe Authors of his death, and those that had any
hand in his condemnation or execution, who must all earnestly entreat for
absolution before it would be granted. Lo here the quintessence of all
Traitorous, Rebellious spirits, and disloyal practices combined, and infused
into our Prelates, in canonizing this Arch-Traytor, scandalizing the very
sentence of Justice pronounced and executed upon him, with the King and Judges
that were the Authors of it, and making it a matter worthy an Anathema, to
condemn and execute a Traitor, a Rebel too in the Suparlative degree. What
confidence can any Princes repose, or what fidelity can they expect from such
a desperate generation of Vipers as these, who cannot be content to plot, to
execute Treasons and Conspiracies, but thus boldly to justify them and the
Traitors to, when they are committed? I shall therefore close this story with
the words of An 6. H^^. 4. f. 25.
Edward Hall, our Chronicler: What shall a man say of such foolish and
fantastical persons, who have written, of such erroneous Hypocrites and
seditious Asses who have indicted, of such superstitious Friars and malicious
Monks, who have declared and divulged both contrary to Gods Doctrine, the
honor of their Prince and common known verity^ such manifest lies as the
forecited miracles and reports concerning this Archbishops death? What shall
men think of such beastly persons which regarding not their bounden d^tie and
^be^sance to their Prince and Sovereign Lord env^ed the punishment of Traitors
and torment of offenders? But what shall all men conjecture of such which
favoring their own worldly Dignity, their own private authority, and their
own peculiar profit, will thus juggle, rail, and imagine fantasies against
their Sovereign Lord and Prince, and put them in memory as a miracle to his
dishonor and perpetual infamy^ well, let just men judge what I have said. So
^all.

JOHN KEMP.
John Kemp Archbishop of York, was Holinsh^d, p. 620^ to 627.
a great opposer of the good Duke of Gloucester, a Traitor and evil instrument
to King Henry the Sixth and the Kingdom, and the means of the Duke of
Gloucesters murder, whose death was a most incomparable loss to the Realm;
of which more at large in Henry Beaufort, Bishop of Winchester, with whom he
confederated against the Duke.

GEORGE NEVILL.
George Nevill Archbishop of York Godwin, p. 609, 610, 611, Halls Chron. An.
8 and 12. Ed. 4. f. 201, 202, 223, 224. Grafton, 8. and 12. Ed. 4. f. 678.714.
Speeds Hist. l. 9. c. 17. p. 887. sect 88. Holinshed, p. 683.693.
conspired with his Brother Henry Nevill Earl of Warwick, against King Edward
the Fourth, after he had reigned almost nine yeares^ to pull him from his
Throne; and being his hap to take King Edward Prisoner at Ownely in
Northamptonshire, he carried the King with him Prisoner, first to Warwick
Castle, then to Midleham Castle in Yorkshire; from whence the King at last,
having liberty to ride abroad an hunting escaped, being rescued by his Friends:
and within half a year after so handled the matter, as coming to London
suddenly, and entering this Archbishops Palace by a Posterne Gate, he
surprised at once King H^nry and the Archbishop, that had not long before
taken him. Holinshed and some others relate, that the Archbishop being l^ft by
his Brother the Earl of Warwick to keep the City of London for King Henry
against Edward the Fourth; he perceiving the affections of the people to
incline to King Edward, and how the most part of the City were much addicted
to him, sent forth secretly a Messenger to him, beseeching King Edward to
receive him again into his former favor, promising to be to him in time to
come, and to acquit this good turn^ hereafter with some singular benefit and
service. That the King upon good considerations was hereupon content to receive
him again into his favor; of which the Archbishop being assured^ greatly
rejoiced, and well and truly acquitting him of his promise in that behalf
made^ admitted him into the City; where the king coming to the Archbishops
Palace, he^ pr^sented himself unto him, and having king Henry by the hand,
delivered him treacherously to king Edw^rd^ custody; who being seized of his
pe^s^n, went to Paul's from Westminster, where he gave God hearty thanks for
his safe return and good success. Thereupon they were both sent to the Tower^
where king Henry was pitifully murthered^ but the Archbishop the fourth of
June ^ollowing^ was set at Liberty. About a year after his Enlargement, he
chanced to be hunting at ^^^^^ore with the king, and upon occasion of some
spo^t th^^ ^ad seen there, he made relation to ^^e king of some extraordinary
kind of G^me, wherewith he was wont to solace himse^^^ at (...) house he had
built and furnished very sumptuously, called the Moore, in Hartfordshire: The
King seeming desirous to be partaker of this sport, appointed a day, when he
would come thither to hunt and make merry with him: Hereupon the Archbishop
taking his leave, got him home; and thinking to entertain the King in the best
manner it was possible, sent for much Plate that he had hid during the Wars
between his Brethren and the King, and borrowed also much of his Friends. The
Dea^e which the King hunted being thus brought into the toil, the day before
his appointed time, he sent for the Archbishop, commanding him, all excuses
set apart, to repair presently to him, being at Windsore. As soon as he came
he was arrested of High Treason, all his Plate, money and other moveable goods
(to the value of 20000. l.) were seized on for the King, and himself a long
space after kept prisoner at Calis and Guisues; during which time the King
took to himself the profits and temporalties of his Bishopric. Amongst
other things that were taken from him, was a Miter of inestimable value, by
reason of many rich stones wherewith it was adorned: that, the King brake and
made thereof a Crown for himself: This calamity happened to him, Anno 1472.
Four years after, with much entreatie, he obtained his Liberty, but dyed of
grief shortly after. This proud Pontifician made so great a feast at his
installment, that neither our age, nor any other before it ever heard or saw
the like; the particulars whereof you may read in Godwin, too tedious here to
recite.

THOMAS ROTHERAM.
Thomas Rotheram Archbishop of York being Lord Chancellor in Edward the
fourth his Reign, upon his death Godwin. p. 616. Speeds hist. l 9. c 19. p
929.946.
resigned his place, and delivered up his Seal to the Queen without the
Councels consent, from whom he received it not, she having no right to require
it: For which cause he was committed to the Tower by the Lord Protector,
Richard Duke of York; who afterward usurping the Crown, released the
Archbishop out of prison; who thereupon sided and was very inward with this
Usurper, and at last dyed of the Plague, May 29. 1500.

I read nothing of Thomas Savage^ THOMAS SAVAGE.
his next successor, but this, Godwin, p. 617.
That he was not preferred to this See for any extraordinary great learning:
that he spent his time in a manner altogether (as our Prelates do now) either
in Temporal affaires^ being a great Courtier, or else in hunting; wherewith
he was unreasonably delighted, keeping a great number of tall Fellows about
him to attend his person: But of his preaching, or maintaining Ministers to
instruct the people, I read not one word. It is likely his tall fellows
occasioned many a quarrel, and sometimes would take a purse for a need.

Christopher Bambridge his Successor, CHRISTOPHER BAMBRIDGE.
being Ambassador from King Henry the 8. to the Pope and Lewis the 12. of
France, Godwin, p. 617.618, Holinsh^d p. 835.
persuaded King Henry to take the Popes part, and proclaim War against
Lewis, ingageing his Sovereign in a needless War, only to pleasure his Lord
and Master the Pope: who for this good service, made him a Cardinal; he was at
last poisoned by Raynaldo de Modena an Italian Priest, his Steward, upon malice
and displeasure conceived for a blow this Bishop gave him (when as a Bishop
should be no striker, 1 Timothy 3.3.) as Goodwin relates out of Paulus Iovius.

Thomas Wolsie (or Wolfesie, THOMAS WOLSIE.
as Mr. Tyndall often times styles him) an Arch-Traytor, and most insolent
domineering Prelate, succeeded him in that See, Antiqu Eccles. Brit. p 355^ to
374. Godw. p. 620. to 623. Mr. Tyndalls Practice of Popish Prelates, p. 369. to
377. Hall, Graf^on, Holinshed, Stow How in the life of Henry the 8. Speed hist.
p. 1004, 1005. to 1027. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 899. to 9^9. See Holinshed,
p. 835. to 930.
holding likewise the Bishopric of Bath and Wells first, and after that of
Ely, Winchester, Worcester and Hereford, together with the Abbey of Saint
Albanes, and diverse other Ecclesiastical Livings besides his Temporal
Offices, in Commenda^ with it. This proud imperious Prelate, when he was once
Archbishop, studied day and night how to be a Cardinal, and caused King Henry
the Eighth and the French King to write to Rome for him, and at their request
he obtained his purpose: He grew so into exceeding pride, that he thought
himself equal with the King; and when he said Mass (which he did oftener to
show his pride then devotion) he made Dukes and Earls to serve him with Wine,
with He was afraid of poisoning, it should seem.
assay taken, and to hold to him the Basin and the Lavatory. His pride and
excess in diet, apparel, furniture and attendance^ and his pomp in going to
Westminster Hall were intolerable, and more then Royal or Papal: He was
much offended with the Archbishop of Canterbury, because he styled him
Brother, in a Letter, as though he had done him great injury by that Title. He
quite altered the state of the Kings house, putting out and in what Officers he
pleased. He oppressed and vexed the Citizens of London, causing diverse of them
to be executed; siding with strangers (both Merchants and Artificers) against
them. Confederating with the French King, he procured King Henry to permit him
to redeem Tornaye, on his own Terms: He procured a meeting of the King of
England and France to their infinite expense, only that he might be seen in
his own vain pomp, and show of Dignity, himself drawing up the instrument
and terms of their meeting in his own name, which began thus: Thomas
Arch-Bispop of York, etc. He committed the Earl of Northumberland, and
wrought the Duke of Buckingham out of the Kings favor, and at last cut off the
Dukes head, for opposing his pride and unjust proceedings. He began his
Letters to foreign Princes and the Pope, for the most part, in this manner^
^go and Rex meus, I, and my King, putting himself before his Sovereign,
making him but his underling and Pupil, swaying him like a Schoole-boy at his
pleasure. He set his Arms likewise above the Kings over Christ-Church
Colledge-gate in Oxford, which he founded: He stamped his Cardinals Cap on
the kings Coin (as our Bishops do now their Arms and Miters on their Proces^
See 1. ^. 6 c. 2, and the Brevia^e of the ^relates Encroachments.
instead of the Kings Seal and Arms:) He set up a Legan^^ne Court here in
England by Commission from the Pope, to which he drew the Conusans of all
Ecclesiastical Causes; and when the king had summoned a Convocation at Paul's
in London by virtue of his Writ, he came most insolently into the Convocation
House, and by his power Legantine, dissolved the Convocation, summoning them
all to appear before him at Saint Peter^ in Westminster the Monday following,
there to celebrate the Synod under him; which power Legantine brought him and
all the Clergi^ into a Praemunire, to his overthrow and their cost, they being
enforced to grant the king an hundred thousand pounds, to acknowledge him on
earth supreme Head of the Church of England, and to renounce the Popes
Supremacy, to buy their peace. He dissolved 40. Monasteries of good worth,
converting all their goods and movables into his own Coffers, which were so
stuffed with Treasure, that 12. Barrels^ full o^ Gold and Silver, were laid
aside to serve the Pope in his Wars, emptying the Land also of twelve score
thousand pounds which he forced from the king; all which he sent to relieve and
ransom the Pope then in prison, to the great impoverishing of his Majesty's
Coffers and the Realm: His revenues one way or other^ were equal to the kings;
he had no less then 1200. Hor^e for his retinue, 80. wagons for his carriage,
and 60. Mules for sumpter horses when he went into France. He carried the
Great Seal of England with him in his Embassy without the kings consent, so
that no Writs nor Patents could be sealed, nor business of the kingdom
dispatched in the interim. He proclaimed wars against the Emperor without the
kings consent, stirred up the French king to war against him, ayding him with
Moneys without the Kings privity, and contrary to his likeing, he demanded ^he
5. part of the true value of every man's goods, by way of loan, toward the
maintenance of the Wars in France, putting men to confess upon their Oaths,
the true estimate of their Estates, without the Kings privitie, which caused
many insurrections and mutinies in the Kingdom, the people rising up and
denying to pay it: at which the King being very angry, released the loan as an
intolerable oppression, sore against this Prelates will^ yet the Cardinal,
the sole cause and urger thereof, would needs lay the odium of it on the King,
to alienate the hearts of his Subjects from him^ and take the sole praise of
the release of it to himself, as if he with much suite and danger had
obtained it. Richard Stanihurst his Continuation of the Chronicles of Ireland,
in Holinshed, Vol. 2. p. 85. to ^8.
He falsely prosecuted and imprisoned the Earl of Kildare, accusing him
before the Counsel to take away his life, where he pressed him so deeply with
disloyalty, that the presumption (as the Cardinal did force it) being
vehement, the Treason odious, the King suspicious, the enemies eager, the
friends saint (which were sufficient grounds to overthrow an innocent person)
the Earl was reprived to the Tower, whither on a night suddenly came a Mandate
to the Lieutenant from the Cardinal, to execute Kildare on the morrow, before
any judgment given, and without the kings privitie: who being acquainted by
the Lieutenant therewith at midnight, the king controlling the sauciness of
the Priest, delivered the Lieutenant his Signet in token of countermand; which
when the Cardinal had seen, he began to breath out unseasonable Language,
which the Lieutenant was loath to hear, and so left him pattering and chanting
the Devils Pater noster. He oppressed and and disquietted the whole Realm and
Christian world all his time, endeavored to set up the Popes power, all he
might, with prejudice to the kings, aspiring to the Papacy himself, and
sending much money to Rome to bribe the Cardinals to elect him, though he
failed in that project: He was so proud, that he had diverse Lords, Earls and
Knights attending on him^ and was served on the knee when he went Ambassador
into Germany: He was exceeding treacherous, false, and perfidious to the King,
who trusted him with the government of the Realm, seeking only his own ends
and advancements: He caused him to break off his firm League with the
Emperor, and to make w^rre upon him and side with France; stirring up likewise
the French King against the Emperor, only to wrecke his private spleen upon
him, denouncing wars against him by an Herald without the Kings knowledge;
He set England, France, Germany, Flanders and Italy together by the ears; He
bare such a hand upon the controversies which ran between the King, the
Emperor, the King of France, and other Princes, as all the world might
acknowledge the resolution and expectation of all affairs to depend on him and
his authority: He exceedingly abused and deluded the King about the matter of
his Divorce, which himself first put him upon to spite the Emperor, delaying
him from time to time, to his no small cost and vexation, and writing likewise
secret Letters to Pope Clement to hinder the Divorce all he might, which
Letters an English Gentleman then at Rome got into his hands, by means of one
of the Popes Concubines. Holinshed, p. 908.
The Queen most grievously accused Cardinal Wolsie in the presence of the
whole Court of untruth, deceit, wickedness, and malice, which had sown
dissension betwixt her and her husband the King; and therefore openly
protested, that she did utterly abhor, refuse, and forsake such a Judge, as
was not only a most malicious enemy to her, but also a manifest adversary to
all Right and Justice. He did many things when he was Ambassador without the
Kings privitie, and held correspondencie with his enemies. Practice of Popish
Prelates, p. 368. to 373.
Mr. Tyndall (who notably descries and lays open his treacheries) writes That
he calculated the Kings Nativitie (which is a common Practice of Prelates in
all Lands) whereby he saw whereunto the Kings Grace should be inclined all his
Life, and what should be like to chance him at all times; and (as he then
heard ^t spoken of diverse) he made by craft of Necromancie graven imagery to
bear upon him, wherewith he bewitched the Kings mind, and the King to dote
upon him^ more then ever he did on any Lady or Gentlewoman (a trick of the
Devils suggestion usual among Court Prelates and Priests) so that now the
Kings Grace followed him as he followed the King. And then what he said, that
was wisdom, what he praised, that was honorable only. Moreover, in the mean
time he Note this ensuing Policy which our Prelates now practice.
spied out the natures and dispositions of the Kings play-fellowes, and of all
that were great, and whom he spied meet for his purpose, him he flattered,
and him he made faithful with great promises, and to him he swear, and of
him he took an oath again, that the one should help the other, for without
a secret Oath he admitted no man unto any part of his privities. And ever as
he grew in promotions and dignity, so gathered he unto him of the most subtle
witted, and of them that were drunk in the desire of honor, most like unto
himself. And after they were sworn he promoted them and with great promises
made them in falsehood faithful, and of them ever presented unto the kings
Grace and put them into his service; saying^ this is a man meet for your Grace.
And by these spies, if any thing were spoken or done in Court against the
Cardinal, of that he had word within an hour or two. And then came the
Cardinal to Court with all his Magic to plead to the contrary. If any in
the Court had spoken against the Cardinal, and the same not great in the kings
favor, the Cardinal bade him walk a Villain, and thrust him out of the
Court headlong: If he were in conceit with the kings Grace, then he
flattered, and persuaded, and corrupted some with gifts, and sent some
Ambassadors, and some he made Captain at Calice, Hammes, Gynes, Iarnsie and
Gernsie, or sent them to Ireland, or into the North, and so occupied them till
the king had forgot them, or other were in their rooms, or he sped what he
intended. And in like manner played h^e with the Ladies and Gentlewoman,
whosoever of them was great, with her was he familiar, and to her gave he
gifts. Yea, and where Saint Thomas of Canterbury was wont to come after, Thomas
Cardinal went often before preventing his Prince, and perverted the order of
that holy man. If any were subtle witted and meet for his purpose, her made he
sworn (O treachery) to betray the Queen likewise, and to tell what she said or
did. I knew one that departed the Court for no other cause, then that she
would no longer betray her Mistress. And after the same example he furnished
the Court Note this policy which Cant^rbury of late imitated.
with Chaplains of his own sworn Disciples and Children of his own bringing
up, to be always present, and to dispute of vanities, and to water whatsoever
the Cardinal had planted. If among those Cormorants any yet began to be much
in favor with the King, and to be somewhat busy in the Court, and to draw
any other way then as my Lord Cardinal had appointed, that the Plough should
go, anon he was sent to Italy or to Spain, or some quarrel was picked
against him, and so was thrust out of the Court as Stokesley was. He promoted
the Bishop of Lincoln that now is, his most faithful^ Friend and Old
Companion, and made him Confessor: to whom of whatsoever the Kings Grace
shrove himself, think ye not that he spoke so loud that the Cardinal heard
it? and not unright, for as Gods Creatures ought to obey God and serve his
honor, so ought the Popes creatures to obey the Pope and serve his Majesty.
Finally, Thomas Wolsie became what he would, even partner of Heaven, so that
no man could enter into promotion but through him. Being thus advanced he
begins to act his part like a sworn Vassal to the Pope, and a Traitor to his
Prince, which Practice of Popish Prelates, p. 369. to 373.
Mr. Tyndall, who lived at that time, thus relates. About the beginning of the
Kings Grace that now in France was mighty, so that I suppose it was not
mightier this five hundred years. King Lewis of France had won Naples and had
taken Bonony from Saint Peter's See^ wherefore Pope July was wroth, and cast how
to bring the French men down; yet soberly, lest while he brought him lower, he
should give an occasion to lift up the Emperor higher. Our first Voyage into
Spain was to bring the French men lower; for our meynye were set in the
Forefront and borders of Spain toward Gascoine; partly to keep those
parties, and partly to fear the Gascoynes, and to keep them at home, while in
the mean time the Spaniards wan Naverne. When Naverns was wan, our men came to
lose as many as dyed not there, and brought all their money with them home
again, save that they spent there. Howbeit, for all the loss of Naverne, the
French men were yet able enough to match Spain, the Venetians, and the Pope,
with all the Souchenars that he could make; so that there was yet no remedy
but we must set on the French men also, if they should be brought out of
Italy. Then Pope July wrote unto his dear Son Thomas Wolsie, that he would
be as good, as loving, and as helping to Holy Church, as ever any Thomas was,
seeing he was as able; then the new Thomas as glorious as the old, took the
matter in hand, and persuaded the Kings Grace. And then the Kings Grace took a
Dispensation for his Oath made upon the appointment of peace between him and
the French King, and promised to help the Holy Seat, wherein Pope Peter never
^ate. But the Emperor Maximilian might in no wi^e stand still, le^t the French
men should money him, and get aid of him, since the Almaines refuse not money
whenever it be proffered; then quoth Thomas Wolsie, O ho, and like your
Grace, what an honor should it be unto your Grace, if the Emperor were your
Soldier; so great honor never chanced any King christened; it should be
spoken of while the World stood; the glory and honor shall hide and darken the
cost that it shall never be seen, though it should cost your Realm. Dixit,
and factum est. It was even so. And then a Parliament, and then pay, and then
upon the French Dogs, with clean remission of all his sins, that slew one of
them; or if he be slain (for the pardons have no strength to save in this
life, but in the life to come only) then to Heaven straight, without feeling of
the pains of Purgatory. Then came our King with all his might by Sea and by
Land, and the Emperor with a strong, Army, and the Spaniards, and the Pope,
and the Venetians all at once against King Lewis of France. As soon as the Pope
had that he desired in Italy, then peace immediately; and French men were
christen men^ and pity, yea and great sin also were it to shed their blood,
and the French king was the most Christian king again. And thus was peace
concluded, our Englishmen, or rather Sheep, came home against Winter, and left
their Fleeces behind them: wherefore no ^mall number of them while they sought
them better raiment at home, were hanged for their labor. When this peace was
made, our holy Cardinals^ and Bishops (as their old guise is to calke and cast
40. yea an hundred year before, what is like to chance unto their kingdom)
considered how the Emperor that now is, was most like to be chosen Emperor
after his Grandfather Maximilian; for Maximilian had already obtained of diverse
of the Electours that it should so be. They considered also how mighty he
should be: First, King of Spain, with all that pertains thereto, which was
wont to be 6. or 7. Kingdomes^ then Duke of Burgaine, Earl of Flanders, of
Holland, Zeland, and Braband, with all that pertain thereto, then Emperor,
and his Brother Duke of Austria, and his sister Queen of Hungary; wherefore
thought our Prelates, if we take not heed betimes, our Kingdom is like to be
troubled, and we to be brought under the feet; for this man shall be so
mighty, that he shall with power take out of the French Kings hands, out of the
hands of the Venetians, and from the Pope also, whatsoever pertains unto the
Empire, and whatsoever belongs unto his other kingdoms and Dominions
thereto, and then will he come to Rome, and be crowned there; and so shall he
overlooke our Holy Father, and see what he does, and then shall the old
Heretics rise up again and say, that the Pope is Antichrist, and stir up
again and bring to light that we have hid and brought asleep with much cost,
pain, and bloud-shedding more than this hundred years long. Considered also
that his Aunt is Queen of England, and his wife the King of Englands Si^ter;
considered the old amity between the House of Burgaine, and the old Kings of
England, so that they could never do ought in France without their help; and
last of all, considered the course of Merchandise that England has in those
parts, and also the natural hate that Englishmen bear to Frenchmen: wherefore
if we will use our old practice, and set the French King against him; then he
shall lightly obtain the favor of the King of England, by the means of his
Ant and his wife, and aid-with men and money: wherefore we must take heed
betimes and break this amity: which thing we may by this our old cra^^ easily
bring to pass: Let us take a Dispensation, and break this Marriage, and turn
the Kings Sister unto the French King: If the French King get a Male of her,
then we shall lightly make our King protector of France; and so shall England
and France be coupled together: and as for the Queen of England, we shall
trim her well enough, and occupy the king with strange love, and keep her
that she shall bear no rule. And as the Gods had spoken so it came to pass.
Our fair young Daughter was sent to the old pockie king of France^ that year
before our mortal enemy, and a Miscreant worse then a Turk, and disobedient
unto our Holy Father, and no more obedient then he was compelled to be
against his will. In short space thereafter Thomas Wolsie now Cardinal and
Legate a latere, and greatly desirous to be Pope also, thought it exceeding
expedient for his many secret purposes to bring our king, and the king of
France that now is, together; both to make a perpetual peace and amity
between them, and that while the two kings and their Lords dalied together,
the great Cardinals and Bishops of both parties might betray them both, and
the Emperor and all Christian kings thereto. Then he made a journey of
Gentlemen arrayed altogether in silk, so much as their very shoes, and lining
of their Boots, more like their Mothers then men of war; yea, I am sure that
many of their Mothers would have been ashamed of so nice and wanton array.
Howbeit they went not to make wars, but peace for ever and a day longer. But
to speak of the pompous apparells of my Lord himself, and of his Chaplains,
it passes the Twelve Apostles. I dare swear that if Peter and Paul had seen
them suddenly and at a blush, they would have been harder in belief that they
or any such should be their successors, then Thomas Didimus was to believe
that Christ was risen again from death. When all was concluded between the
king of France and ours, that Thomas Wolsie had devised, and when the Prelates
of both parties had cast their penny-worths against all chances, and devised
remedies for all mischiefs; then the right Reverend Father in God Thomas
Cardinal and Legate, would go see the young Emperor newly chosen to the
room, and have a certain secret communication with some of his Prelates also:
And gat him to Bridges in Flanders, where he was received with great
solemnity as might belong to so great a pillar of Christ's Church, and was
saluted at the entering into the Town of a merry Fellow, which said, Salve Rex
Regis tui, atque Regni sui; Hayle both King of thy King, and of his Realm.
Nota.
And though there were never so great strife between the Emperor and the
French king, yet my Lord Cardinal jugled him favor of them both, and finally
brought the Emperor to Cales to the kings Grace, where was great triumph and
great love and amity showed on both parties; insomuch, that a certain man
marvelling at it, asked the old Bishop of Durham, How it might be that we were
so great with the Emperor so shortly, upon so strong and everlasting a peace
made between us and the French men, the Emperor and the king of France being
so mortal enemies? My Lord answered, That it might be well enough if he wist
all; but there was a certain secret (said he) whereof all men knew not: yea
verily, they have had Note this.
secrets this 800. years, which though all the Laymen have felt them, yet few
have spied them, save a few Judases, which for lucre have been confederate
with them to betray their own kings and all other. Then were we indifferent,
and stood still, and the Emperor and the French king wrastled together; and
Ferdinandus the Emperors Brother wan Millaine of the Frenchmen; and the
Emperor Turnay our great Conquest, which yet after so great cost in buil^^^^ a
Castle we delivered up again unto the Frenchmen, in earnest and hope o a
marriage between the Dolphine and our Princess. After that ^^e Emperor would
into Spain, and came through England, where he was received with great
honor, and with all that pertains to love and amity. The Kings Grace lent
him Money, and promised him more; and the Emperor should tarry a certain time
and marry our Princess; not that the Card^nall intended; that, thou may be
sure; for it was not profitable for their Kingdom; but his mind was to dally
with the Emperor, and to keep him without a wife (insomuch as he was young
and lusty) he might have been nozeled and entangled with Whores, (which is
their nurturing of Kings) and made so effeminate and beastly, that he should
never have been able to lift up his heart to any goodness or virtue; that
Cardinals and Bishops might have administered his Dominions in the mean time,
unto our Holy Fathers profit. The King of France hearing the favor that was
showed unto the Emperor sent immediately a Defiance unto our King, not without
our Cardinals and Bishops counsel thou may well wit. For Frenchmen are not
so foolish to have done it so unadvisedly and so rashly, seeing they had too
many in their tops already. Then our King spoke many great words, that he would
drive the French King out of his Realm, or else the French King should drive
him out of his: But had he added as the Legate Pandulph taught King Io^n, with
the Popes License, his words had sounded much better: For there can no vow
stand in effect, except the Holy Father confirmed it. We sent out our
Soldiers two Summers against the French men, Note this
unto whose chief Captains the Cardinal had appointed how far they should
go, and what they should do; and therefore the French king was nothing
a^raid, but brought all his power against the Emperor in other places; and so
he was ever betrayed: And thus the Cardinal was the Empero^rs Friend openly
and the French Kings secretly. For at the meeting with the French King beside
Ca^es he utterly betrayed the Emperor, yet for no love that h^e had to
France, but to help the Pope, and to have been Pope happily, and to save their
Kingdom; which treason, though all the World smelled it, y^^^ brake not out
openly to the eye, till the ^^^ge of (...). And the Cardinal lent the Emperor
much money openly, and gave the French King more secretly. He played with both
hands to serve their secret that all men know not as the Bish. of Durham said.
But whatsoever the Frenchmen did they had ever the worse notwithstanding the
secret working of our holy Prelates on their side. Finally, unto the siege of
Pavia, came the French king personally with 60. thousand men of war, of which
12. thousand were horsemen, and with money enough. And the Emperors host was
under 20. thousand, of which were but 3. thousand Horsemen, with no money at
all: For he trusted unto the Pope for aid of men, and unto our Cardinal for
Money. But the Pope kept back his men till the Frenchmen had given them a
field; and our Cardinal kept back his money for the same purpose. And thus
was the silly Emperor betrayed, as all his predecessors have been this 8.
hundred years. Howbeit there be that say, that the Emperors Soldiers so
threatened Stace the kings Graces Ambassador, that he was feign to make
chevisance with Merchants for money in the kings name, to pay the Soldiers
withal; Wherefore the Cardinal took from him all his promotions, and played
the Tormentor with him, when he came home, because he presumed to do one jot
more then was in his Commission. But howsoever it was, the Emperors men in
tarrying for help had spent all their Victuals: Whereupon Burbon the chief
Captain of the Emperor, said unto his under Captains; Ye see, help comes
not, and that our victuals are spent: wherefore there is no remedy but to
fight, though we be unequally matched. If we win, we shall find meat
enough; if we lose, we shall lose no more then we must lose with hunger,
though we fight not. And so they concluded to set upon the Frenchmen by night.
The King of France and his Lords supposing that the Moon would sooner have
fallen out of the sky, then that the Emperors host durst have fought with
them, were somewhat negligent, and went the same night a mumming that Burbon
set upon them. The Emperors Host therefore, with their sudden coming upon
them, amazed the Frenchmen, and drove them upon heaps together, one on
another, so that they never could come in array again, and took the King,
Note this
and diverse of his Lords, and slew many, and wanne the field. And there came
out all the Cardinals privy treason. For in the French-Kings Tent (say men)
were Letters found, and beside that in the French-kings Treasure, and in all
the Host among the Soldiers were English Ships found innumerable, which had
come sailing a thousand miles by Land. But what wonder? Ships be made to
sail over the Sea, and wings to fly into far Countries, and to mount to the
top of High hills. When the French King was taken, we sang, Te Deum. But for
all that singing, we made peace with Frenchmen. And the Pope, the Venetians,
France and England were knit together, least the Emperors Army should do any
hurt in France: whereby you may conjecture of what mind the Pope and the
Cardinal were toward the Emperor, and with what heart our spiritualty with
their invisible secrets, sang Te Deum. And from that time hitherto, the
Emperor and our Cardinal have been twain, After that, when the King of
France was delivered home again, and his Sons left in pledge, many ways
were sought to bring home the sons also; but in vain except the French King
would make good that which he had promised the Emperor. For the bringing home
of these children no man more busied his wits then the Cardinal: He would in
any wise the Emperor should have sent them home, and it had been but for our
Kings pleasure for the great kindness that he showed him in times past. He
would have married the Kings Daughter our Princess unto the Dolphine again,
or as the voice went among many, unto the second Brother, and he should have
been Prince in England, and King in time to come; so that he sought always to
pluck us from the Emperor, and join us unto France, to make France strong
enough to match the Emperor, and to keep him down that the Pope might reign
a God alone and do what pleases him, without controlling of any over-seer.
And for the same purpose he left nothing unprovided to bring the Mart from
Anwerpe to Cales. But at that time, the Pope taking part with the French King
had war with the Emperor: And at the last the Pope was taken, which when the
Cardinal heard, he wrote unto the Emperor, that he should make him Pope: And
when he had gotten an answer that pleased him not, but according unto his
deservings toward the Emperor, then he waxed furious mad, and sough all
means to displease the Emperor, and imagined the divorcement between the
King and the Queen, and wrote sharply unto the Emperor with manacing Letters,
that if he would not make him Pope, he would make such ruffling between
Christian Princes as was not this hundred years, to make the Emperor repent;
yea, though it should cost the whole Realm of England, The Lord Jesus be our
shield, what a fierce wrath of God is this upon us, that a misshapen Monster
should spring out of a Dunghill into such an height, that the dread of God and
man laid apart, he should be so malepert not only to defy utterly the
Majesty of so mighty an Emperor, whose Authority both Christ and all his
Apostles obeyed^ and taught all other to obey, threatening damnation to them
that would not: But should also set so little by the whole Realm of England
which has bestowed so great cost and shed so much blood to exalt and
mainetaine such proud, churlish, and unthankful Hypocrites that he should not
care to destroy it utterly, for satisfying of his villainous lusts. Godly Master
Tyndall was so far affected with the treacherous practices of this Cardinal,
that he laid them open in two several Discourses; the one entitled, The
Ohedience of a Christian man; the other, The Practice of Popish Prelates. In
the last whereof after the recital of these his perfidious actions, he breaks
out into this Patheticke Supplication: Page 375. Note this.
I beseech the Kings most Noble Grace therefore, to consider all the ways by
which the Cardinal and our holy Bishops have led him, since he was first
King, and to see whereunto all the pride, pomp, and vain boast of the
Cardinal is come, and how God has resisted him and our Prelates in all their
wiles; we who have nothing to do at all have meddled yet in all matters, and
have spent for our Prelates causes more then al Christendom, even unto the utter
beggering of our selves, and have gotten nothing but rebuke, and shame, and
hate among all Nations, and a mock and a scorn thereto, of them whom we have
most helped. For the French men (as the saying is) of late days made a play or
a disguising at Paris, in which the Emperor danced with the Pope and the
French king, and wearied them, the king of England sitting on a high bench and
looking on. And when it was asked, why he danced not, it was answered, that he
^ate there, but to pay the Minstrels their wages only. As who shoald say, we
paid for all men's dancing, we monyed the Emperor only, and gave the Frenchmen
double, and treble secretly, and to the Pope also. Yea and though Fardinandu^
had money sent him openly to blind the world withal, yet the saying is
throughout all Duchland, that we sent money to the King of Pole, and to the
Turk also, and that by help of our money Fardinandus was driven out of
Hungary: which thing, though it were not true, yet it will breed us a scab at
the last, and get us with our meddling more hate than we shall be able to bear,
if a chance come, unl^sse that we wax wiser betime. And I beseech his Grace
also to have mercy of his own soul, and not to suffer Christ and his holy
Testament to be persecuted under his name any longer, that the sword of the
wrath of God may be put up again, which for that cause no doubt is most
chiefly drawn. And I beseech his Grace to have compassion on his poor
subjects, which have ever b^ene unto his Grace, both obedient, loving and
kind, that the Realm utterly perish not with the wicked Counsel of our
pestilent Prelates. So Tyndall. After this the Cardinal was attainted in a
Halls Chron. 21. H. 8. f. 184, 185, 189, 190.
praemunire, whereupon the King seized on all his goods, took away the great
Seal of England from him, thrust him from the Court, yet left him the
Arch-Bishopricke of York and the Bishopric of Winchester. The Parliament
exhibited sundry Articles of High Treason against him. As, that he had
exercised a Legantine power here in England, derived from the Pope without the
Kings License, contrary to the Laws of the Realm, that in all his Letters to
the Pope and other ^orragne Princes he put himself before the King in these
words, I, and my King: that he carried the Great Seal of England over into the
Low Countries with him, when he went Ambassador to the Emperor: That he
proclaimed open war by an Herald against the Emperor without the Kings
privitie; that he had sent Gregory of Cassido a Knight, into Italy, to make a
new League between the King and the Duke of Farrar without the kings knowledge;
That being almost rotten with the French Pox he pre^umed to breathe with his
stinking and rotten mouth in the kings face; That he set his Cardinals Hat on
the kings Coin; and that he exported an infinite Mass of Money out of the
kingdom into Italy, that he might most impudently compass the Papacy, with
other particulars forecited.. All which, together with the Cardinals
attainder in the Praemunire (Mr. Practice of Popish Prelates, p. 373.
Tyndall) says, were done only in policy by the Cardinal, to bleare the eyes
of the World withal, because naught worthy a Traitor was done unto him, it
being seldom heard or read, that so great a Traitor was so easily put to death
or punished; because Sir Thomas Moore his chiefest Secretary, one nothing
inferior to his Master in lying, faining, and bearing two faces in one hood,
and the chiefest stale wherewith the Cardinal caught the kings Grace, whom he
called to the confirmation of all that he intended to persuade, was made
Chancellor in his place; because his Bishopric of Durham was bestowed on one
of his old Chaplains and chief Secretaries his fast friends; and because as
soon as the Parliament brake up, the Cardinal had his Charter of pardon and
got him home, and all Bishops got them every Fox to his hole, leaving their
Attournies yet behind them, thinking to come again themselves as soon as the
constellation was some what overrun, whereof they were afraid. But however it
were either in policy only or earnest, it turned to reality at last: For the
Cardinal thus put from the Court, and his Chancellorship, nothing abating his
pride or spirit to beard the king and flater the people, appointed to be
installed at York in great pomp, inviting all the lords and Gentlemen in the
country, to accompany him from Cawood to York; complaining likewise by
degrees to many of the great injuries the king had done him to stir up the
people to sedition; inveighing likewise very bitterly in his Letters to the
Pope and other Forraigners against the king; which railing Letters and
reproaches of his, coming to the kings Ambassadors ears they acquainted the
king therewith: Holinshed, p. 915, 916.
The king acquaint^d with these his Seditious and disloyal practices, and
understanding of his intended pompous installment at York, commanded the Earl
of Northumberland to arrest him at Cawood of High Treason, which he did about
the beginning of November, 1536. The Cardinal wondering at this sudden arrest,
stood first upon his terms of contest with the Earl, telling him that he was
a Cardinal, a Member of the Court of Rome, and the Popes Legate, not subject
to any man's or Princes arrest, on whom to lay violent hands was a great
wickedness; but at last, fearing the success and the Earls power, submitted
himself against his will. The Earl hereupon removed his followers^ seized on
all his plate and goods, brought him to Sheffield Castle, where he delivered
him to the High Sheriff of Shropshire to be conveyed to London. Thither the
Captain of the Guard, and Lieutenant of the Tower with certain Yeomen of the
Guard, were sent to fetch him to the Tower, at which the Cardinal was sore
astonished, and fearing the worst grew sick upon it, whereupon he willingly
took so much quantity of a strong purgation that his nature was not able to
bear it, and thereof dyed at Leicester Abbey the 27. day of November, his body
lying dead was black as pitch, and so heavy that six could scarce bear it;
Furthermore, it did so stink above the ground, that they were constrained to
hasten the burial of it in the night season, before it was day. At the which
burial, such a tempest, with such a stink there arose, that all the Torches
went out, and so he was thrown into the Tomb, and there left. By the
ambitious pride and excessive worldly wealth of this one Cardinal (writes
Master Fox) all men may easily understand and judge what the state and
condition of all the rest of the same Order (whom we call Spiritual men) was
in those days, as well in all other places of Christendom as specially here
in England; whereas the Princely possessions and great pride of the Clergy,
did not only far surpass and exceed the common measure and order of
Subjects, but also surmounted over kings and Princes, and all other Estates, as
may well appear by h^s doings and order of his Story above described, In which
I have been the more prolix, because it notably paints out unto us the
ambitious, treacherous, ^lye practices and designs of our Prelates, with the
ordinary ways whereby they creep into Princes favors; as likewise their
insolent behavior and strange perfidiousnesse when they are grown great; and
is a lively pattern of the Bishops practices in our age, who tread in these
his footsteps, and follow them to an hairs breadth: I would therefore advise
them to remember his last words (as well as imitate his Actions) with which I
shall close up his Story, Holinshed, p. 917. Godwin, p. 621.
If I had served God as diligently as I have done the King, he would not have
given me over in my gray hairs. But this is the just reward that I must
receive for the pains and study that I have had, to do him service, not
regarding my service to God, so much as the satisfying of his pleasure.

Speed hist. l. 9. c. 21. p. 1034. to 1043. Grafton, An 27. H. 8. p. 1233. to
1237.
Edward Lee, EDWARD LEE.
who succeeded him in his Arch Bishopric, in the great Rebellion of the
North, An. 1535. and 1536. joined with the Rebels against his Prince; some say,
it was against his will, but certain it is, that the Abbots, priests, and
Clergi-men were the chief cause and ringleaders in this Rebellion, the
principal pretense whereof, was the reformation of religion, the abolishing of
the heresies of Luther, Zuinglius, Wicklif, and other Protestant Writers the
removing of Cranmer and other heretical Bishops and Privy Counselors, the
restoring of and Priori^s^ and all points of Popery formerly maintained^ with
the confirmation of the privileges of this in special, that Priests might not
suffer for any treason or felony, unless they were first degraded. Now the
Abbots, Priests, Monks and Clergy, being the stirrers up and chief Captains
of this Rebellion upon these points of Religion and privilege of the Church,
which mainely concerned the Clergy, it is likely the Archbishop was as
forward as any of the rest in this Insurrection, and that he accompanied and
encouraged the Rebels not out of (...) or constraint, as he afterward
pretended, but willingly, though ^he King pardoned him, as he did all the other
wilful Rebels. Some of them making a new insurrection, were af^erwards taken
and executed as Traitors to the Crown; among which number, Pa^law Abbot of
Whaley in Lincolnshire, John Castlegate and William Haydocke Monks of the same
house, Robert Hobs Abbot of Woborne in Bedfordshire, Adam Sudbury Abbot of
Germany with Astbeed a Monk of that House, the Abbot of Sawly in Lan^ash^re,
and the Prior of the same, William W^ld Prior of Birlingto^, the Parson of
Padington, 5. priests of Lincolnshire, Doctor Markerell, who styled himself
Captain Cobbler, and John Allen Priests (the chief firebrarnds in this
Rebellion) were hanged for Rebellion, as they well deserved, though they named
their enterprise an holy blessed Pilgrimage, and had certain Banners in the
field, wherein was planted Christ hanging on the Cross on the one side, and a
Chalice with a painted Cake in it, on the other side.

ROBERT HOLGATE.
For other Archbishops since, I find not much concerning them; only I read,
that Godwin, p. 624.
Robert Holgate his next Successor, was committed prisoner to the Tower in the
first year of Queen Mary, where he lay an year and half; and that Edwin
Sands another of his Successors, was long impri^oned by Queen Mary: Fox Acts
and Monuments, p. 1891. to 1894. Godwin. p. 625.
he being Vice Chancellor of Cambridge when the Lady Jane was proclaimed
Queene^ preached a Sermon upon that oc^^sion, which was like to cost him his
life.

Samuel Harsnet HARSN^T^
the last Archbish. but one being made a Privy Counselor by our present
Sover^igne King Charles, was such a furious Hildebrand, that like Davus in the
Comedy, he perturbed all things where ever he came; insomuch, that the Lords
and Court growing weary of him and his domineering outrage, caused him to be
sent from Court to his Arch-Bishopricke, and there to keep residence till he
should be sent for: Where having no other employment, he falls by the ears
with Doctor Howson Bishop of Durham, whom he excommunicated, for refusing to
admit him to visit in his Diocese as his Metropolitan, he being a Count
Palatine in his Bishopric; and withal falling to persecute the godly
Ministers of his Diocese, he was smitten mortally with a dangerous disease,
whereof he died the very night before he resolved to suspend and silence some
good men summoned to appear before him the next morning. This furious
Arch-Prelate was such an enemy to the Laws and Liberties of the subject, that
in the case of Mr. Walter Long, censured in Star Chamber about 4. Caroli, for
coming up to the Parliament House, whereof he was a member, whil^s he was
Sheriff of Wiltshire, contrary to his Oath, (as was pretended) when as his
Counsel produced diverse ancient Records and Presidents touching the
Privileges of Parliaments and the members of it, to exempt him from the
Jurisdiction and sentence of that Court; this Archbishop checked his counsel
for troubling them with Moth-Eaten Records, saying, That they sat there not to
be guided by Presidents, but to make Presidents; and so proceeded to censure in
the cause. In a word, I may conclud of him^ as Saint Epist. 237. f. 233.
Bernard long before, did of one of his predecessors: Nonne Eboracensis ipse
est cui te praes^nte, fratres tui restiterunt in faciem, eo quod
reprehensibilis erat? sed speravit in multitudine divitiarum suarum, and
praevalu^t in vanitate sua: Cert^m est tamen quod non intravit per ostium in
ouile ovium, sed ascendit aliunde. Si Paston fui^set, diligendus erat; si
mercenarius, tolerandus; Nunc autem cavendus et repellendus utpote fur and
latro.

RICHARD NEALE.
Richard Neale the last Archbishop of York, before his coming to that See,
about the 13 year of King James not long after he was created a Bishop, was
highly questioned in Parliment for seditious speeches against the Commons
House, for which he had suffered condign punishment, had he not been an
active instrument to dissolve that Parliament, to avoid the censure of it.
Since that he had a hand in dissolving other Parliaments, to the prejudice of
the King and Kingdom. In the Remonstrance of the Commons House of Parliament,
presented to King Charles our Sovereign in the 3. year of his Reign; he was
by name complained against as one of the chief heads of the popish and
Arminian Factions, which disquietted both our Church and State; and as a
persecuter of good Ministers, and suppressour of Lectures. How many godly
Ministers he prosecuted, silenced, suspended, deprived, both in the High
Commission, and all the Diocese under his Jurisdiction, whiles he continued
in favor at the Court, is so well known to all, that I need not relate it:
And his disfavour at Court (as most conjecture) was the cause of his unexpected
Clemency to the Ministers of the province of York some few years before his
death. He was the first advancer of William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, of
Doctor Cousins, with sundry other Incendiaries and Innovators both in Church
and State, who were entertained by him for his Chaplaines^ and then promoted by
his meanes^ to the ruin almost of our Religion and Kingdom. He was a great
enemy to Parliaments. Prohibitions, the Liberties of the Subject, and Laws of
the Land: He seldom or never preached himself, and therefore could not
endure frequent preaching in others: He was a great furtherer of the Book for
sports on the Lords day, and an enemy to purity, Puritans, and the sincere
practice of piety. He had a hand in ratifying the late Canons and Oath, in
affront of his Majesty's Prerogative, the Parliament, Laws, and Liberties of
the Subject; And no doubt he had a finger in the late Scottish Wars and
Combustions; whereupon he burnt all his Letters concerning Church and
State-affaires, as soon as he heard the Scots had entered into England, for
fear they should have been surprised and his fellow-Prelates machinations
against the Scots by their surprisall discovered. He had a chief hand and
influence in the unjust and bloody sentences against Dr. Layton and Mr. Pryn in
the Star Chamber; against Mr. Smart^ Dr. Bastwicke, Mr. Huntly, and sundry
others in the High Commission; in the vexatious and most exorbitant proceedings
against Calvin Bruen, Peter Lee, Mr. Inch, and sundry others of Chester, See a
new discovery of the Prelates Tyranny, p. 92. to 108.
for visiting M. Pryn in his passage through that City toward Carnarvan
Castle^ and by 2. Orders under the high Commission Seal of York, signed with
his own and other Commissioners hands, bearing date the 10. Novem. and 4.
December. 1637. commanded 5. Pictures of the Portraiture of M. Pryn to be defaced,
and then burnt at the high Cross in Chester, before the Mayor, Alderman, and
Citizens^ out of an hatred to Mr. Prynnes person (which no doubt he would have
burned to, as well as his picture, had it bin in his power.) This Arch-Prelate
by the aid of his quondam Chaplain Canterbury, incroached much on the
liberties of the Lord Mayor and Citizens of York, with whom he had many
contests; and procured a Mandate to the Lord Mayor, not to carry his sword
before him within the Close and Cathedral at York, though his Predecessors
had ever used to do it from K. Richard the 2. his days, who gave them this
privilege by a Charter, and yet the Deane and Prebends of York in the mean
have intruded themselves (contrary to diverse Charters) into the civil
Government of the City of York, which no ways appertain unto them. The
Mayor of York is the Kings Lieutenant there, and his Sword of Justice the
Kings, not his own. Therefore the Archbishops putting down of his Sword
within the Precincts of the Close, is a direct incroachment upon his Majesty's
Prerogative Royal, and a denying of his Supremacy and Jurisdiction over him,
or his Cathedral at York. This Prelate being scarce Parliament proof, to
prevent all questioning; at the approach of this present Parliamentary Assembly
fell sick and dyed, being now gone to answer all his Episcopal extravagancies
before a greater Tribunal. For my part, I meddle not with him as he was a man^
but only as he was a Prelate; not to defame his person, or posterity, but to
discover the evil effects of his Prelacie: His See continues yet void since
his death^ And for ever may it so remain, unless his Successors prove more
loyal to their Sovereigns, more profitable to our Church and State, then he
and his forementioned Predecessors have been.

CHAP. III. Comprising the several Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions,
Contumacies, Disloyalties, Wars, Dissentions, and State-Schismes of the
Bishops of London, Winchester, Durham, Salisbury, and Lincoln.
HAving thus presented you with the History of the Treasons, Conspiracies, etc.
of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, I shall now proceed to those of
our inferior Prelates of London, Winchester, Durham, Salisbury and Lincoln;
who, as the old Cocks of Canterbury and York did crow in this behalf, so the
young Cockrels of these and other Sees did imitate their demeanor, (as In his
Description of England, l. 2 c. 1. p. 133.
William Harrison well observes) which may appear by these ensuing Examples
and Histories of their lives.

Bishops of London.
VODINUS
Vodinus Archbishop of London, Speeds hist l 7. c 4. p. 207. Godw. p. 182.
reprehended Vor^igern the Brit^ish king for marrying with Rowen, Hengists
Daughter, being an Infidel, telling him, That he had endangered both his Soul
and Crown; which words were so ill digested by Vortigern, that shortly after
it cost the Archbishop his life, who was slain by Hengist his procurement,
the first Saxon king. This king Vortigern, An. 450. was Math. West An. 450.
Henricus Huntindon, h^st l. 2. p. 310. Polychron. l. 5. c. 1.
excommunicated by St. German Bishop of Auxerre, and an whole Synod of
British Bishops, for marrying his own daughter; and afterward was deposed by
Saint German from his Crown, upon this occasion. ^olychron l. ^, c. 1. f.
^84. Iacobus Vsserius de Brit. ^ccles. Primordiis, p. 334. Ant nini Chron Tit.
11. c 18. sect. 3 f. 51. B. Vincent^i spec. hist. l. 20. c. 11.
Vortigerus denied Saint Germain lodging in a cold frosty night, and an Heard
that kept the kings beasts, seeing that Gods servants were grieved, lodged
Saint Germain, and slew a Calfe for his Supper: But after supper Saint German
causing them to gather all the bones of the Calfe together after they had eaten
the flesh, raised the Calfe again from death to life, so that standing by his
Dam alive he began to eat Hay before them. The next day by commandment of God
Germain put down Vortigern from his kingdome^ and took the foresaid Heard,
and made him king. Then all men were astonished for wonder. And from that time
forth the kings of Britains came of the Herds kind. But Gyldas in his story
says, That this befell by the king of Powsie called Buly, and not of
Vortigerus; and says that Bulies Successors came of this Herds kind, that
were kings in that side of Wales. Thus was Vortigerus (an ill king I confess)
vexed by these proud and insolent Prelates, and at last deposed.

ROBERT DE SIGILLO.
After William Harrisons Description of England, l 2. c 1. p. 133.134.
the death of Bishop Gilbert, 1133. one Anselme Abbot of Bury, Nephew to Saint
Anselme, was elected Bishop of LONDON, and had his his election confirmed at
Rome: but presently such exceptions were taken against him, as thereupon he
was not only stayed from cons^cration, but deprived also of his Abbotship. His
Electors were William Deane of Paul's, Ralph Langford and Richard ^eauveys, (the
same I believe) that afterward was Bishop. The King who very much misliked
this Election (having made request for some other) amongst other effects of his
displeasure, caused the wives of these Canons (as Bale reports) to be
imprisoned, and otherwise shamefully entreated. By reason of the stirs that
were about this Election, the Sea continued void a long time. Anno 1140. Mawde
the Empress having taken King Stephen Prisoner, came to London, and finding
the Bishoppricke void, caused one, Robert de Sigillo a Monk of Reading (or as
others say Archdeacon of London) to be elected and consecrated Bishop. Within a
year or two after, this Bishop was taken prisoner at ^ulham, by Geofry de
Mandevill, a Captain of King S^ephens, who ye may be sure could ill brook any
man that the Empress favored. This Bishop of London would not so much as
swear to be true subject to King Stephen; wherein he was maintained by the
Pope, as appears by these Letters. Eugenius Episcopus servus Servorum Dei,
dilecto in Christo filio Stephano illustri Regi Anglorum salut^m, and
Apostolicam benedictionem. Ad haec superna providentia in Ecclesia Ponfices
ordinavit, ut Christianus populus ab eis pascua vitae reciperet, and tam
principes seculares, quam inferioris conditionis homines, ipsis Pontificibus
tanqua^ Christi vicariis reverentiam exhiberent. Venerabilis siquidem frater
noster Robertus London Episcopus, tanquam vir sapiens and honestus and
religionis amator, a nobili^ate tua benign tractandus est, and pr^ collata a
Deo prudentia propensius honorandus. Quia ergo sicut in veritate comperimus cum
animae suae salute, ac suae ordinis periculo, fideli^ate qu^ ab eo requeritur
astringi non potest, volumus, and ex pater^o ^ibi affect^ consulimus, q^a^enus
praedictum fratrem no^trum super hoc nullatenus inquietatis, imm^ pro bea^i
Petri and nostra reverentia, eum in amorem and gratiam tuam recipias. Cum autem
illud jur^mentum praestare non possit, sufficiat discretioni tuae, ut simplici
and veraci verbo promittat, quod lae^ionem tibi, vel terrae tuae non inferat.
Vale^ Dat. Meldis 6. Call Iulii.

Thus we see that Kings were to rule no further than it pleased the Pope to
like of, neither to challenge more obedience of their subjects^ than stood also
with their good will and pleasure. He wrote in like sort unto Queen Maud about
the same matter, making her Sampsons Calfe (the better to bring his purpose to
pass) as appears by the same Letter here ensuing.

Solomone attestante didicimus, quoth mulier sapiens aedificat domum, insipiens
autem constructam destruet manibus. Gaudemus prote and devotionis studium in
Domino collaudamus, quoniam sicutreligiosorum relatione acceptmus timorem Dei
praeoculis habens operibus pietatis intendis, and personas ecclesiasticas and
diligis and honoras, ut ergo de bono in melius (inspirante Domino) proficere
valeas, nobilitatem tuam in Domino rogamus and rogando monemus and exhortamur
in Domino, quatenus initi^s exitus meliores injungas, and venerabilem fratrem
nostrum Robertum London Episcop^m pro illius reverentia, qui cum olim Dives
esset, pro The Bishop refused to swear fealty to the King, only to please the
Pope.
nobis pauper fieri volu^t, attentius diligas and honores apud virum tuum, and
dilectum filium nostrum Stephanum, insignem Regem Anglorum efficere studeas, ut
monit^s, hortatu, and consilio tuo ipsum in benignitatem and dilectionem suam
suscipiat, and pro beati Petri and nostra reverentia propensius habeat
commendatum. Et quia sicut (veritate test) attendimus eum sine salutis, and
sui ordinis periculo, praefato filio nostro astringi non posse, volumus, and
paterno sibi and tibi affectu consulumus, ut vobis sufficiat, veraci, and
simplici verbo promisstonem ab eo suscipere, quod laesionem vel detrimentum ei
vel terrae suae non inferat. Dat. ut supra.

Is it not strange that a peevish order of Religion (devised by a man) should
break the express Law of God, who commands all men to honor and obey their
Kings and Princes, in whom some part of the power of God is manifest, and laid
open to us? And even uuto this end the Cardinal of Hos^ia also wrote to the
Canons of Paul's after this manner, covertly encouraging them to stand to their
election of the said Robert, who was no more willing to give over his new
Bishopric, than they careful to offend the King, but rather imagined which
way to keep it still maugre his displeasure, and yet not to swear obedience
unto him, for all that he should be able to do or perform unto the contrary.

Humilis, Dei gratia Hostiensis Episcopus, Londinen sis Ecclesiae canonicis
spiritum consilii in Domino. Sicut rationi contraria prorsus est abiicienda
petitio, ita in hi^s quae just desiderantur, effectum negare omnino non
convenit. Sane nuper accepimus, quod Londinensis Ecclesia, diu proprio
destituta Pastore, communi voto, and pari assensu cleri and populi, venerabilem
^ilium nostrum Robertum, ejusdem Ecclesiae Archidiaconum^in Pastorem and
Episcopum animarum suarum susceperet and elegerit. Novimus quidem eum esse
personam quam sapientia desuper ei attributa, and honestas conversationis, and
morum reverentia plurimum commendabilem reddidit. Inde est quod fraternitati
vestroe mandando consulimus, ut proposito vestro bono (quod ut credimus ex Deo
est) and ut ex literis Domini Papae cognoscetis, non lent dehitum finem
imponatis, ne tam nobilis Ecclesia sub occasion hujusmodi spiritualium, quod
absit, and temporalium detrimentum patiatur. Ipsius namque industria credimus,
quod antiqua religio, and forma disciplinae, and gravitas habitus, in Ecclesia
vestra reparari, and si quae fuerint ipsius contentiones, ex Pastoris absentia,
Dei gratia cooperante, and eodem praesente, poterint reformari Dat. etc.

Hereby you see how King Stephen was dealt withal. And albeit that Canterbury
is not openly to be touched herewith, yet it is not to be doubted but he was a
doer in it, so far as might tend to the maintenance of the right and
prerogative of the holy Church. Thus far verbatim out of Harrison.

William de Sancta Maria.
William de Sancta Maria^ Bishop of London, was Matthew W^stm. Ann 1208. Matthew.
Paris An. 1208 p. 217.218 224. Godwin p. 194. Fabians Chron. part 1. Anno 1205.
p. 28. Polichron. l. 7. c. 33 Holinshed p. 171.172. Martins History. p.
46.47.48.
one of those undutifull Bishops, who about the year of our Lord 1208.
interdicted the whole Realm, and excommunicated King John by the Popes
Commandment: they all endured five years banishment for this their treachery
and con^umacy, together with confiscation of their goods, and the King being
specially incensed against this man, in token of his great displeasure, Anno
1211. threw down to the ground his Castle of Stortford, which William the
Conqueror had given to his Church. Besides he joined in the publication of the
Popes sentence for deposing the King, and stirred up the French King, and all
other Christians to invade England in an hostile manner, and to depose King
John from the Crown, and promised them remission of all their sins for this
good Service. After which he voluntarily resigned his Bishoppricke, Anno. 1221.

Roger Niger.
Roger Niger Bishop of London Matthew Paris p 374 375. Godwin p. 194.195.
Matthew Westminster. An 1235 p. 140.
excommunicated the Kings Officers, Ano 1233. for that they, ac^ording to their
duty, had la^d hands upon, and hindered Walter Mauclerke Bishop of Carlisle to
pass over the Seas, he having no license to depart the Realm; and riding
flreight unto the Court, he certified the King what he had done, and there
renewed the same sentence again: the King himself not a little murmuring at
this his insolent act as he had cause, and prohibiting him to do it: the
Bishops then at Court, notwithstanding the inhibition, excommunicated these his
Officers likewise for doing their duty. Matthew. Paris. p. 365.366. Matthew. Westminster.
An^ 1232. p. 132.133.134. Speed. p. 606.
About the same time King Henry the third gave commandment for the appehending
of Hubert de Burge Earl of Kent, upon some pretense of Treason: who having
sudden notice thereof at midnight, fled into a Chapple in Essex belonging to
the Bishop of Norwich. The King hearing this was exceeding angry, and fearing
least he should raise some tumults in his Realm, if he escaped thus, sent Sir
Godfrey de Cranecomb^ with 300. armed men, to apprehend, and bring him to the
Tower of London, under pain of death: who hasting to the Chapple, found the
Earl (who had some notice of their coming) kneeling there upon his knees
before the high Altar, with a Crucifix in one hand, and the Hostia in the
other. Godfrey and his associates entering into the Chapple, commanded him in
the Kings name, and by his direction, to come out of the Chapple, and repair
to him to London, which he refusing, saying, that he would upon no terms
depart from thence, they taking the Cross and Lords body out of his hands,
bound him in chains, carried him to the Tower, and acquainted the King
therewith^ who was glad of the news. Roger hearing this, and taking it to be a
great infringment of the Churches liberties, goes in post have to the King,
and boldly reproves him for violating the peace of the Church, and threatens to
excommunicate all those that apprehended him, unless the King would immediately
restore him to the Chapel whence he was extracted and thereupon enforces the
King, sore against his will to remit him o the Chapel. The King hereupon
commanded the Chapple to be strictly guarded by the Shrieffe of Essex, till
Hubert should be starved or forced out thence. Matthew. Paris p 374.375. Matthew.
Westminster. An. 1233 p. 141. Speed p. 608.
About a year or two after, this Hubert being imprisoned in the Castle of the
Devises, within the Diocese of Salisbury, escaped and fled to the Church
there; his keepers missing him, ran out to seek him with lanternes, clubbes,
and weapons, and finding him in the Church, carrying the Lords cross in his
hands before the Altar, they bastinadoed and dragged him thence into the
Castle, where they imprisoned him more strictly than before. Hereupon the
Bishop of Salisbury excommunicated them because they refused to bring the Earl
back again to the Church, saying, they would rather the Earl should be
hanged, than they for suffering him to escape; whereupon the Bishop of
Salisbury, and this Robert Niger Bishop of London with other Bishops went to
the King, and never left till they had by persuasions and threats against his
will, procured the Earl to be sent back to the Church.

FVLCO BSSET.
Matthew. Paris p 944.957.886.887 and Godwin p. 194.195.
Fulco Basset his next successor a man of a haughty and stout spirit, as he
opposed the Popes exactions and Rustands his Legate, so he had many cont^sts
with King H^nry the third, and was the maine pillar of the Barons, who reposed
all his hope in him (before such time he grew cold and remiss, in standing for
the public liberties whereby he much blemished his fame, and incensed the
Barons and people against him) in so much that the King reviled him in these
words, that neither he, nor any of his name were ever true unto him, threatening
to find means to correct him for his obstinacy. In the presence of some whom
he knew would tell the King of it, he sticked not to use this bold and
courageous speech unfitting a P^elate. My Bishopric, my Myter, and Crosier,
the King and the Pope may take from me, but my helmet and sword. I hope they
will not: yet neither of these two could secure him from Gods stroke, for he
died of the Plague at London, Anno 1258.

HENRY SANDWICH.
Henry Matthew. W^st. Anno. 1259. p. 182. Matthew. Westminster. Anno. 1265. 1266. p.
330.332.336.337.342.343. Matthew. Paris p. 961.970. Godwin p. 196. Speed p. 641.
Holinshed. p. 271.
Sandwich Bishop of London took part with the Barons, who rebelled against
King Henry the third, for which cause he was excommunicated by Ottobon the
Popes Legate, with other, Bishops being the chief incendiaries in these
wars; of whom Matthew Westminster writes thus, The high Priests, that I say
not the Pharisees gathered a counsel together against the Lord, and against his
anointed, saying, Ye see that we have profitted nothing, if we let the King
escape thus. The Romans will come and take away our purses with the money; let
us therefore ordain 24 Elders round about his Throne, who excluding the
Parthians, Meedes, Elamites, and strangers of Rome, and freeing Jerusalem from
Egyptian bondage, may govern and order all and singular the affairs of the
Realm. The Knights, Barons, and Prelates, therefore meeting together at
Oxford, in the 42. year of King Henry the third his reign; the King, and
Edward his eldest son being present, ordained by common consent, that twelve
men nominated by the King, and twelve by the Barons and Prelates should govern
the Realm, to which order the King and his son, for fear of perpetual
imprisonment, assented: all and singular the Prelates, except Ethelma^ Bishop
elect only of Winchester the Kings brother, took a corporal oath faithfully
to observe this infidelity, and a sentence of excommunication was denounced by
all the Archbishops and Bishops of the Kingdom against the transgressors of
it. Moreover (says he) it is not without admiration with what face these
Senators, that aged Bishop of Worcester, and other Prelates, the Fathers and
Judges of men's consciences should give such free assent to take away the Kings
royal power, when as they had taken a corporal Oath of giving terrene honor
to the said King and his Lords: which they very ill observed in ordaining, that
they should never governe^ but ever be governed by others. After which the
Lords and Knights perceiving the general inconvenience of this Ordinance, in
setting up so many Kings in stead of one, the Bishop of Worceter would by no
means yield to alter it, saying, that this ordinance was ratefied by an Oath,
and that the Pope could not dispense with the Oath, making conscience of this
unjust Oath like Herod, and of Schism and error, contrary to the Laws and
Cannons, drawing many false Prophets to him to foment this his error. After
this the King commanded the Bishop of Hereford, (a great stickler against him
in these rebellious courses and an oppressor of his subjects) apprehended,
imprisoned, and his goods confiscated^ Not long after the Prelates, Earls, and
Barons, who so sediciously held their King captivated, meet at London, where
they ordained, that two Earls, and one Bishop on the behalf of the Comonalty
should elect nine persons, whereof three should always be assisting to the
King, and that by the advice of those three, and the other nine, all things in
the Kings house, as well as in the Kingdom should be ordered, and that the
King should do nothing without their advise, at least without the consent of
these three. Whereupon the Earls of Lecester, Worcester, Gloucester, and the
Bishop of Chechister, (who the day before the battle of Jews absolved all
those who fought against his Sovereign Lord the King from all their sins)
were chosen out to be the chief Councellers and Captains, who ele^ted other
nine. The King for fear of perpetual imprisonment, and that they would choose
another King, consented to the ordinance; OMNIBVS EPISCOPIS, all the Bishops,
Earls, and Barons consenting thereunto, and sealing it with their Seals. The
Bishops of London, Winchester, Worcester, and other Bishops were sent to the
Popes Legate, Cardinal of Sabine, (whom they would not suffer to come into the
Realm) to confirm this agreement, who sharply reprehended the Bishops,
because they consented to so great a depression of the Kings power, citing them
three days after to appear before him at Bo^on^e about the affairs of the
Kingdom: who neither appearing by themselves nor their Proctors; the Legate
thereupon suspended them, and excommunicated the Barons, the Cinque ports, the
city of London, and the Bishops to, for hindering him from coming into England,
and for their default. But the said Bishops, and the rest, not regarding this
thunderbolt, appealed from it, to the Pope and the next general Council, and
to the Church as well Triumphant as Militant, and trusting to the defense of
the Martial sword, little esteemed the spiritual, the Bishops presuming to be
present at, and to exercise divine offices, notwithstanding this suspention and
excommunication, till Otho his coming into England; who calling a Council at
Wi^^minster^ suspended this Henry Bishop of London^ John Bishop of Winchester,
and Stephen Bishop of Chichester^ both from their office and Benefice, who
^ostered and encouraged the part of the Kings enemies; excommunicating the
Bishop of Lincoln for the same cause; who at last supplicated for mercy not
judgment; with Walter Bishop of Worcester, who lying at the point of death
confessed he had erred, fovend^, in fomenting and fostering the part of Simon
Montford and thereupon sent Letters to the Legate, desiring the benefit of
absolution, which he obtained and so died. By which relation of Matthew
Westminister, seconded by the continuer of Matthew Paris, and other of our
Chroniclers, it is most apparent, that this Bishop of London, and the other
Prelates were the chief fomenters of all the wars and rebellions against the
King, and those that stirred up, and encouraged the Barons in their unnatural
bloody wars against their Sovereign Henry the third, as Stephen Langton
Archbishop of Canterbury was the principal author and contriver of those
against King John.

Anno. 1329. and 1330. Richard Wentworth Bishop of London, RICHARD WENWORTH
was Holinshed, p. 348. Yh^ Walsingham. Hist. Angl. page 110.111.
accused by Edmond Woodstocke, Earl of Kent, for conspiring with him to help
set up a new King Edward the second after his death, whom Thoraas Dunhead a
Friar, WILLIAM COVRTNEY.
affirmed for cetaine, by a spirit of divination, to be alive. The Bishop was
permitted to go at liberty under sureties for his good behavior, and forth
coming; but the Earl was condemned of high treason, and beheaded, though set
on by the Bishop, the greatest delinquent.

In the year 1378. Holinshed p. 420.421. Walsingham. Hist. Angl. p.
216.217.218.
Robert Hall, and John Shakell Esquires, were committed Prisoners to the Tower,
whence they both escaped to Westminster, and there kept sanctuary. Sir Alane
Boxhul, Constable of the Tower^ grieved not a little that these Prisoners were
broken from him, and sheltered in that Sanctuary, taking with him Sir Ralph
^errers with other men in armor, to the number of fif^ie, and some of the
Kings servants, on the fifth of August, entered into Westrainister Church,
whilst Mass was saying^ at which the said two Esquires were present. And first
laying hands upon John Shakell, they used the matter so, that they drew him
forth of the Church, and led him straight to the Tower; but Robert Hall drawing
his short sword, resisted them along time, traversing twice round about the
Monks Quire, so as they could do him no hurt till they had beset him on each
side, and then one of them cleaft his head to the very brains, and another
thrust him through with a sword, and so they murdered him among them, and one
of the Monks who would have had them save his life. Much ado was made about
this matter, for this breach of the Sanctuary, insomuch, that the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Simon Sudbury, and five other Bishops his Suffragans, openly
pronounced all them that were present at this murder accursed, and likewise all
such as aided and counseled them to it, chiefly the said Sir Alane, and Sir
Ralph: The King, Queen, and Duke of Lancaster were yet excepted by special
names. The Bishop of London (William Courtney) along time after every Sunday,
Wednesday, and Friday, pronounced this Excommunication in Paul's Church in
London. The Duke of Lancaster, though excepted in the same, yet in the behalf
of his friends, was not a little offended with the Bishops doings for
justifying these leude persons, and making the Church a sanctuary for Rebels
and Traitors, and his excommunications, a scourge to punish the Kings Officers
for doing their duties in reapprehending these fugitives; insomuch that in a
Council held at Windsore (to the which the Bishop of London was called, but
would not come, such was his pride and disdain nor yet cease the pronouncing
of the curse, albeit the King had requested him by his Letters) the Duke said
openly, That the Bishops forward dealings were not to to be borne with; but
says he, if the King would command me, I would gladly go to London, and
fetch this disobedient P^elate in despite of those Ribauds (so he then termed
the Londoners,) which procured the Duke much evil will, who caused the next
Parliament hereupon to be held at Gloucester.

Anno. 1388. Walsingham. Hi. Angl. p 217.218. Holinshed p. 457, 458.
King Richard the second, by the advice of the Archbishop of York, ROBERT
BRAYBROOKE
and others, retained men, of war against his faithful and Loyal Lords, who
were stricken with great heaviness at the news. The Duke of Gloucester meaning
to mitigate his displeasure, received a solemn Oath before Robert Braybrooke
Bishop of London, and diverse other Lords, that he never imagined, nor went
about any thing to the Kings hinderance, etc. and besought this Bishop to
declare his words unto the King. The Bishop coming hereupon to the King, made
report of the Dukes protestation confirmed with his Oath, in such wise, that
the King began to be persuaded it was true: which when the Earl of Suffolk
perceived, he began to speak against the Duke, till the Bishop bad him hold
his peace, and told him, that it nothing became him to speak at all. And when
the Earl asked why so? Because, said the Bishop, Stout Words of the Bishop of
London.
Thou wast in the last Parliament condemned for an evil person, and one not
worthy to live, but only it pleases the King to show thee favor. The King
offended with the Bishops presumptuous words, commanded him to depart and get
him home to his Church, who forthwith departed, and declared to the Duke of
Gloucester what he had heard and seen. Hereupon the great misliking that had
been before time betwixt the King and the Lords was now more vehemently
increased, the Duke of Ireland, the Earl of Suffolk, the Archbishop of York,
and the Lord chief Justice Robert Trisilian still procuring stirring and
confirming the Kings heavy displeasure against the Lords. Walsingham Hist.
Angl.. p. 188.189.
The year before this, John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, giving some ill words
to this Bishop, the Londoners thereupon rose up in a tumultuous manner in
arms, purposing to kill the Duke, and to burn his house at the Savoy, which
they furiously assaulted, reversing the Dukes arms: whereupon the Duke
complaining to the King, the Major and Aldermen of London were put out of
office, and others Surrogated in their places.

NICHOLAS RIDLY.
Nicholas Ridley a Martyr, after his deprivation from his Bishopric, and one
of the best Bishops that ever sat^ in this See, in the year 1553. (being the
first of Queen Mary's reign) was Holinshed. p. 1089.
hastily displaced, deprived of the Sea of London, and committed Prisoner to
the Tower. The cause of which extremity used toward him, was, for that in the
time of Lady Jane, he preached a Sermon at Paul's Cross by commandment of King
Edwards Council, wherein he dissuaded the people for sundry causes, from
receiving the Lady Mary, as Queen, though lawful heir to the Crown.

EDMOND BONNER.
Holinshed. p. 159.1160.
Anno. 1558. One Robert Farrier said of the Lady Elizabeth, (afterward Queen)
That this Gill has been one of the chief doers of this rebellion of Wiat,
and before all be done, she, and all Heretics her partakers shall well
understand it. Some of them hope, that she shall have the Crown, but she, and
they, I trust, that so hope, shall be headless, or be fried with fagots before
she corae to it. Laurence Sherieffe, the Lady Elizabeth sworn servant
complaining of these contumelious words to Bonner the Bishop of London, and the
commissioners sitting in Boners house: Bonner excused Farrer, saying, that he
meant nothing against the Lady Elizebeth, and that they took him worse than he
raeant. And so Sherieffe came away, and Farrer had a flap with a Fox tail.
This Edmond Bonner an hypocritical zealous Protestant at first, after an
Apostate, whiles the Bishop of London, was a Fox Acts and Monuments, Ediit. ult
vol. 2. p. 215. l. 378.379.38 350.554.672. to 699. vol. 3 p.
105.106.107.251.254. to 384 759.879, 898 974. Martins History p. 453. Godwin.
p. 144.
most bloody persecuter and murderer of Gods Saints all Queen Mary's days, a
chief reviver and advancer of the Popes Supremacy, which he had abjured, to
the great eclipse and diminution of the prerogative royal, yea a most furious
Bedlam^ and most unnatural beast, sparing none of any condition, age, or sex,
and burning hundreds of good subjects into ashes. He was a great enemy to
Queen Elizabeth, and the first Author of Bishops Visitation Oaths, and
Articles, that I have met with. He commanded the Scriptures written on Church
walls to be blotted out, (as Bishop Wren, and Bishop Pierce have since done in
some plaees by his example.) In a word, he was the worst persecuting Bishop in
his age, and was twice deposed from his Bishopric for his misdemeanors; first
in King Edwards days, and after in the beginning of Queen E^izabeths reign
by authority of Parliament at which time he was committed to the Marshashey
among Rogues and murderers, where he died, and was buried at midnight in
obscurity.

Richard Fletcher the 42. Bishop of London, RICHARD FLETCHER.
incurred Queen Elizabeth's just displeasure for his misdemeanors; Martins
Hist. p. 810. Godwin. p. 156.
whereupon he fell to cure his cares by immoderate drinking of Tobacco, and
June the fifteenth, 1596. died suddenly at his house in London, being (to see)
well, sick and dead in one quarter of an hour.

Richard Bancroft RICHARD BANCROFT.
Bishop of London consecrated the eleventh of May, 1597. O^ whom see more
before in Cante.
was a great persecuter of godly Ministers, See Lew^s Hughes his grievances, p.
14.15.
a favourer and harbourer of Priests and Jesuits, and caused Dolmons Book of
Succession against See p. 151.152.
King James his tittle to the Crown, to be Printed in his house, and
published: he was the chief Author of the Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, set forth in the first year of King James, which afterward
did breed much trouble and disturbance in our Church, and are now voted in
Parliament, to be made without any lawful authority, and to be repugnant to
the Laws of the Realm, and liberty of the subject.

WIL^IAM LAVD.
William Laud, the last Bishop of London but one, whilst he continued in that
See, was very like to his predecessors Bonner and Bancroft in his practices and
proceedings; for some of which, and others since, he now stands charged of high
treason by the Parliaament. Of which more before, p. 157. etc.

WILLIAM IVXON.
The present Bishop of London William Iuxon was Bishop Lauds creature, advanced
by him, and the first Prelate in our memory, who relinquished the cure of
souls and preaching of Gods Word to become a Lord Treasurer, and sit as a
Publican at the receipt of Custom. His disposition and carriage as a man, have
been amiable and commendable; but how far forth he has concurred with
Canterbury in his evil counsels and designs as he is a Prelate, time will
discover. How ever in the interim, his forwardness in compiling and pressing
the late new Canons, Loan and etc. Oath, and his last Visitation Articles,
wherein these new Canons and Oath are enforced upon the Subjects, against the
Laws and their Liberties, with some censures of his in the Starrechamber and
high Commission (resolved by Parliament to be against the Law and liberty of
the Subject) See the Articles of the Scottish Commissioners against Canterbury.
and his Innovations in Scotland are inexcusable.

Winchester.
From the Prelates of London, I now pass to those of Winchester; of whom
William Harrison^ his De. scrip. Engl. lib. 2. c. 2. p. 141
William Harrison, in the description of England, has made this true
observation; If the old Catalogue of the Bishops be well considered of, and the
Acts of the greatest part of them weighed, as they are to be read in our
Histories, ye shall find the most egregious hypocrites, the stoutest
warriors, the cruellest tyrants, the richest mony-mongers, and politic
Councillors in temporal affairs, to have (I wot not by what secret working
of the divine providence) been placed here in Winchester, since the foundation
of that See; which was erected by Birinus An. 639. (whom Pope Honorius sent
hither out of Italy) and first planted at Dorcester, in the time of Kimgils,
then translated to Winchester where it does yet continue.

Wina the third (or rather the first Bishop of Winchester, WINA.
from whence some write this city took its name) Matthew Wes^m. An. 666 p. 234.
Godwin p. 132.160.
about the year of our Lord, 666. I know not for what misdemeanour, so highly
offended Kenwalchus, King of the West Saxons, who advanced him to this See,
that the King fell into great mislike of him and drove him out of his Country;
who thereupon flying to Wulfher King of Mercia bought of him for a great sum
of money the Bishopric of London; being the first Symonist that is mentioned
in our Historyes, whence after his death, he was deservedly omitted out of the
Catalogue of the Bishops of London.

Matthew West. An. 834. p. 301. Godwin. p 162.
Herefridus the fifteen Bishop of Winchester, HERREFIRDVS.
and Sigelmus Bishop of Sherborne, An. 834. accompanied King Egbert to the
wars against the Danes, and were both slain in a battle against them.

About the year of our Lord, 1016. Edmond Ironside succeeding his father in
the Kingdom, EDSINVS.
was crowned at London by the Archbishop of York; Matthew. Westminster. An. 1016. p.
397.398 Polichron l. 6. c. 7. Holinshed. Hist. of England. l. 7. c. 9, 10. p.
175.176. Speed p. 425.426.
but the rest of the Bishops, Abbots, and spiritualty (among whom Edsinus the
32. Bishop of Winchester was one) favoring Cnute a Dane) who had no right nor
title to the Crown, assembling together at Southampton (within Winchester
Diocese) (...) proclaimed^ and ordained ^nu^e for their King, and submitted
themselves to him as their Sovereign; which occasioned many bloody battles
and intestine wars almost to the utter ruin of the Kingdom; of which you
may read at large in our Historians. ^nute not long after his inauguration
being put to the worst at Durham by Edm^^d, immedia^ly took into Winches^er to
secure himself; a good proof this Bishop sided with him against his
Sovereign E^mond, though a most heroicke Prince.

ALWYN.
Antiq. Eccl. Brit p 73 to 79. Speed, p. 203.413.41^ Godwin p 168. Holinshed
Hist. of Engl l. 8. c. 1, 2 4.
Alwyn the 33. Bishop of Winchester was imprisoned by Edmond the Confessor for
the suspicion of incontinency with Emma the Kings mother, and that upon the
accusation of Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, who likewise accused Queen
Egitha of adultery more out of envy to her father, than truth of so foul a
fact in her: whereupon the King expulsed her his Court and bed, and that with
no little disgrace: for taking all her Jewels from her, even to the uttermost
farthing, he committed her prisoner to the Monastery of Wilton, attended only
with one Maid, while she for a whole years space almost, in tears and
prayers, expected the day of her release and comfort. The Clergy at this time
were altogether unlearned, wanton, and vicious: for the Prelates neglecting the
office of their Episcopal function, which was to tender the affairs of the
Church, and to feed the flock of Christ, lived themselves idle and covetous,
addicted wholely to the pomp of the world, and voluptuous life, little caring
for the Churches, and souls committed to their charge: and if any told them
(faith Polichr^n. l 6. ^. 24^
Higden) that their lives ought to be holy, and their conversation without
coveteousnesse, according to the sacred prescript and virtuous examples of
their Elders, they would scoffingly put them off. Nunc aliud tempus, alii pro
tempore mores, Times have mutations; So must men's fashions; and thus (says he)
they plained the roughness of their doings, with smoothness of their answers.

Stigand, Stigand.
Anno 1047. was translated to Winchester; from whence also he was removed to
Canterbury in the year 1052. Godwin p 168 169.
But whether he mistru^ted his Title to Canterbury, Robert the former
Archbishop being yet alive, or whether infatiable covetousness provoked him
thereunto, I cannot tell; he retained still Winches^er, notwithstanding his
preferment to Canterbury, which was the cause of his undoing at last: For the
Conqueror who came into this Realm while he was Archbishop being desirous to
place his own Contrymen in all rooms of special Authority; and besides,
having a private grudge at Stigand for forcing him to yield Kentish men their
ancient Liberties (whereof see more in Canterbury) procured him to be deprived
of both his Bishoprics upon this point, that he had contrary to the Law, held
them both together. He was deprived, An. 1069. and dyed a prisoner in the
Castle of Winchester soon after.

About the year 1107. Holinshed p. 30 Godwin p. 169, 170. Math. West A.^ 102.
p. 23. and An. 1107. p. 25, 29.
King Henry the first taking upon him to bestow Bishoprics, William Giffard.
giving investiture and possession of them, by delivering the Ring and the
Crosier, placed diverse of his Chaplains in Bishoprics (without election)
commanding the Archbishop to consecrate them. Among diverse others he
appointed William Giffard, Bishop of Winchester, and required Anselme the
Archbishop to consecrate him: Anselme utterly denied to afford consecration
either to him or any other in the like case. The King then sent unto Girard
Archbishop of York whom he found nothing strange: but G^ffard (says Matthew
Westminster) timens rigorem sancti Anselmi spernit consecrationem ejus, stood
so much in awe of Saint Anselme, as he durst not but reject the offer of the
others consecration. The King angry hitherto with the Archbishop only, was
now much more incensed against this Giffard, and in great displeasure banished
him the Realm. In the end, the King and the Archbishop grew to this
agreement, that the gifts of the King already passed should be ratified, and
his Clerks nominated to Bishoprics, have consecration, upon promise, that
hereafter he should not disturb Canonical Elections, and utterly renounce his
pretended privilege. So after much ado he was consecrated, togegether with
diverse others, An. 1107.

HENRY DE BLOYS.
Henry de Bloys, being Bishop of Winchester when King Henry the first dyed,
Malms^ Novel. l. 1. and 2. p. 178 to 194. Matthew. Paris p. 71. to 76. Matthew
Westminster. An. 1135. to 1150. Speed l. 9 c. 5. p. 483, 484, 493, 494, Godwin, p.
221, 222, 223, Neuhrig. Hist. l. 1.2 4 to 21. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 181.
Hoveden An. pars prior, p. 481, 482. Holinshed, p. 54.
although he with the other Bishops of the Land had sworn fealty unto Maud
the Empress, yet she being absent in Normandy, this Bishop doubting left some
other stepping up before her arrivall^ the Kingdom might be rent away quite
from his kindred and pass to some stranger^ by virtue of his power Legantine
called a Council of the Clergy (who swayed all in those days) and drawing
Roger Bishop of Sali^bury to his party, easily procured his Brother Stephen
Earl of Boloigne, to be elected King, whom they crowned, and submitted to as
their Sovereign, disinhereting Maud the right Heir. The King not long after
falling out with these two Bishops, seized upon their Castles, and imprisoned
the Bishop of Salisbury, who dyed for grief. The Bishop of Winchester summons
a Counsel there, to which the Bishop was cited; the Case of the Bishops
concerning their Castles, was there long debated between the Pope the Bishops,
and those on the Kings side; he would yield to nothing; whereupon they moved
the Legate to Excommunicate him; who replied, he durst not do it without the
Popes privitie. The Kings unthankefulnesse to the Bishops who only had set him
up, did so alienate them from him, that thereupon they joined with Maud the
Empress against him, who by their means became able to make her part good
with Stephen, and took him prisoner; the Bishop of Winchester and a great part
of the Realm too, receiving her for their Queen; Hereupon this Prelate
accurseth and excommuncates all the opposites of Maud the Empress, who denying
him a suite in the behalf of his Brother Eustace; He thereupon revokes h^s
Excommunication, secretly falls from her, stirs up the discontented Londoners
against her, man's diverse Castles to resist her, equivocates in his words and
actions with her to work her ruin, fires Winchester upon her, and at last
entraps her. Thus this turne-coat treacherous Prelate with the rest, were
Traitors and Rebels on both sides; of which see more in William Corbell
Archbishop of Cante^bury, and Roger of Salisbury, and in the Historians
hereunto quoted. The Pope sent a Pall to this Bishop, desirous to constitu^e a
new Archbishopric at Winchester, and to assign 7. Bishops to him.

Peter de la Roche, Peter de la Roche.
or de Rupibus, Bishop of Winchester, who Math Paris p. 370.372, 373, 393. to
397. Mat. West^ An. 1233. p. 134, 135 etc. Speed, p. 607 to 612. Holinshed. p.
1075.
was Protector, and had greatest sway in the Government of the Realm, in the
beginning of King Henry the 3. his Reign, by his evil Counsel to the King,
became the chief Incendiary and occasion of the Barons wars: For having by
his false accusations and policies wrought Hubert Earl of Kent out of the
Kings favor, and plotted his death, that he might solely reign and
predominate over the gentle young King: The better to effect this his design,
he procures him to displace the English Officers, and in their rooms to
surrogate Poictovines and Britons; who coming over to the number of about
2000. he stuffed his Castles with them, and did as it were wholly entrust
himself, his Treasures, strength, and the Realm to them; So that Judgments
were committed to the unjust, Laws to the out-lawes^ peace to wranglers, and
Justice to wrong-doers. Such as would have prayed redress for these abuses,
were interrupted and put off by this Bishop of Winchester. Among them who were
removed from their places in Court, was one Sir William de Redune, The King by
advancing Strangers discont^nts his Nobles
a Knight, and Deputy Marshall to Richard Earl of Pembroke. This was to the
Earl very displeasant, which joined with a consideration of the public cause
and danger, he associates to him certain of the great Lords (as was the
fashion of those Lording times upon every discontent) and in the company of
them advances confidently to the King^ whom in the hearing of many he
reproves, for that he had through finister advice, called in the ^oictovins
to the oppression of the Realm and of his natural Subjects of their Laws and
Liberties; humbly therefore he beseeches him that he would speedily reform
such abuses, which threatened the imminent subversion both of the Crown and
Kingdom; which if he did not, himself and other Lords would so long withdraw
their attendance, as he entertained strangers. The Bishop hereunto makes
answer, That the King might well and lawfully call in what strangers himself
thought good for the defense of the Crown and Realm, and such and so many of
them, as might be able to compel his proud and rebellious people to due
obedience. The English Peers confederate against the strangers.
When the Oracle would speak no otherwise, they departed from Court, greatly
discontented, firmly promising one to the other, that in such a cause which did
so touch them all, they would like men stand together while any breath was in
their bodies. Those who were now most potent about the King, nothing sorry for
the coffeehouse of so great a Peer as the Earl Marshall, but counting it a
part of their strengths to use the Regal power toward the weakening of the
English; nourish in the King his aversion. The Poictovins and other strangers
thus bearing the sway^ so as the Kings person went guarded with troops of
such, the Earls and Barons being by the Kings command summoned to antoher
Parliament at Oxford, The ^arons contemn the Kings Summons.
refused to come. While the King was there, one Paris calls him^ Bacum.
Robert Bacon, who used there to preach before the King and Prelates, f^eely
told him, That if he did not remove from him Peter Bishop of Winchester, and
Peter de Rivallis, he could never be in quiet. The frank speech of a Preacher.
The King did hereupon a little come to himself, and Roger Bacon, a
Clergie-man also of a pleasant wit, did second Roberts advise, telling the
King, that That is Rocks and Stones.
Petrae and Rupes were most dangerous things at Sea, alluding to the Bishops
name Petrus de Rupibus. The King therefore (as he had the happiness in his
mutabilitie to change for his more security) taking that good advise of
Scholars, which he would not of his Peers, summons a Parliament to be holden
at In July.
Westminster, giving the World to know withal, that his purpo^e was, to amend
by their advise whatsoever ought to be amended. But the Barons considering that
still there arrived sundry strangers, men of war, with Horse and Armour^ and
not trusting the Poi^^ovine faith came not, The Barons second contempt to the
Kings command.
but presumed to send this message to the King; that if out of hand he removed
not Peter Bishop of Winchester, and the Poictovines out of his Court^ they all
of them by the common consent of the Kingdom, would drive him and his wicked
Counselors together out of it, and consult about creating a new Sovereign.
The traitorous errand to the King.
The King (whom his Fathers example made more timorous) could easily have been
drawn to have redeemed the love of his natural Liege-men with the disgrace of
a few strangers; but the Bishop of Winchester and his Friends, infused more
spirit into him: Whereon, to all those whom he suspected, the King sets down
a In August nex^. Rog. de Wend. M. S.
day, within which they should deliver sufficient pledges to secure him of
their loyalty. Against that day the Lords in great numbers make repair to
London; but the Earl Marshall (admonished of danger by his Sister the
Countess of Cornwall) ^lyes back to Wales, and chiefly for want of his In
August new. Rog. de Wend. M. S.
presence, nothing was concluded. The King not long after is at Gloucester with an
Army, whither the Earl and his Adherents required to come, refused; the King
therefore burns their Manors, The Earl Marshall in Arms.
and gives away their inheritances to the Poictovines. This Rebellion had not
many great Names in it, but took strength rather by weight then number; the
known Actors were the Earl Marshall, the Lord Gilbert Basset, and many of the
inferior Nobles. The Bishops arts had plucked from him the Kings brother, and
the two Earls of Chester and Lincoln, who dishonourably sold their love
Matthew. Paris.
for a thousand Marks, and otherwise, as it seemed, secured the rest;
Nevertheless, they may well be thought, not to have borne any evil will to
their now forsaken confederate the Earl Marshall, who took himself to handle
the common cause; certainly he handled his own safety but ill, as the event
shall demonstrate: The Earl hearing these things contracts strict amity with
Lewelin Prince of Wales, Confederates himself with Lewelin Prince of Wales.
whose powers thus knit together, by advantages of the Mountains, were able to
counterpoise any ordinary invasion. To the kings aid Balwin de Gisnes with
many Soldiers came out of Flanders: The king now at Hereford in the midst of
his Forces, sends from thence (by VVinchesters counsel) the Bishop of Saint
David's to defy the Earl Marshall; How far soever the word defy extends it
self; sure it seems that the Earl hereupon understood himself discharged of
that obligation, by which he was tied to the king, and freed to make his
defense; the king notwithstanding, Rog. Wend, M. S. Math. Pa^is.
after some small attempts and better considerations, did promise and assume,
that by advise of counsel, all that was amiss should at a The Sunday after
Michaelmas.
day appointed be rectified and amended; About which time Hubert de Burgo
having intelligence that the Bishop of Winchester who was a Poictovine Math
Westminster. Roger Wend. Math^ Paris.
plotted his death, escaped out of the Castle of Devises where he was
prisoner, to a Neighbor Church, but was haled from thence by the
Castle-keepers. The Bishop of Sarisbury (in whose Diocese it happened) caused
him to be safe restored to the same place, from whence by the Earl Marshall
and a troop of armed men his friends, Hubert de B^rgo escapes into Wales,
Ypod. Neust.
he was rescued and carried into Wales. The king at the day and place
appointed holds his great Counsel or Conference with the Lords, but nothing
followed for the peace of the Realm; it was not an ordinary passage of speech
which happened there between the Lords and Bishop of Winchester; For when the
English Bishops and Barons humbly besought the king for the honor of Almighty
God to take into grace his natural Subjects whom (without any trial by their
Peers) he called Traitors; the Bishop offended it seems at Peers) takes the
words out of the kings mouth and answers, That there are no Peers in England
as in the Realm of France, and that therefore the king of England by such
Justiciars as himself pleases to ordain, may banish offenders out of the
Realme^ and by judicial process condemn them. The English Bishops relished
his speech so sharply, that with one voice they threatened to excommunicate and
accurse by name the kings principal wicked Councillors; but Winchester
appealed: Then they accursed all such as alienated the heart of the king from
his Natural Subjects, and all others that per^urbed the peace of the Realm.
An. 1205 p. 134, 135 See Godwin, p 172. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit p. 160, 16^
Matthew Westminster writes of this Peter de la Roche, that he was more
expert in Military than Scholasticall affairs. That the king by his Counsel
removed all English Officers out of his Court, and precipitately cast away all
his Counselors, as well Bishops as Earls, Barons, and other Nobles of his
kingdom, so as he would believe none but this Bishop (whom he adored as his
God) and his Darling Peter de Rivales. Whence it came to pass, that expelling
all Gardians of Castles almost through all England^ the King committed all
things under the custody of this Peter. Then this Prelate drew into his
confederacy Stephen de Segrave, too much an enemy both to the kingdom and
Church (who had given most detestable counsel formerly to Stephen the Popes
Chaplain, to the inestimable damage of the Church many ways) and Robert de
Passelewe, who with all his might, and with effusion of no small sum of
money, had plotted treason and grievances at Rome against the king and
kingdom. This man kept the kings treasure under Peter de Rivalis; and so it
came to pass, that the Reins of the whole kingdom were committed to
Strangers and base persons, others being rejected. Yet Godwin (for the honor
of his Rochet) magnifies this Prelate for his notable Wisdom; so as the
Counsel of England received a great wound by his death, though it and the
whole Realm received such prejudice by his life. The Earl Marshall (writes
Speed) increasing in strength and hatred against such as were the kings reputed
Seducers, makes spoil and booty on their possessions, and after joining with
the power of Leoline, Prince of Wales, Roger Wendever.
puts all to fire and sword, as far as Shrewesbury, part whereof they burnt
to Ashes, and sacked the Residue. The king then at Gloucester, for want of
sufficient forces, departed thence (sorely grieved) to Winchester, abandoning
those other parts as it were to waste and ruin. The King gives way to the fury
of the rebellious.
It therefore seems, that he was not grown stronger, or richer, by the
displacing of Hubert Earl of Kent, and the rest, and by taking new into their
rooms, who commonly bite and suck hard till they have glutted themselves, (if
at leastwise there be any satietie in Avarice;) whereas the old and ancient
Officers, (having provided in a manner for the maine chance,) have the less
reason to be grievous. Therefore the Lions skin not being large enough for
the Bishop of Winchester, and his factious purposes, they piece them out with
the Foxes case, an inevitable stratageme is devised. The Earl Marshall had in
Ireland all the ample Patrimonies of his Grandfather the famous Strongbow. To
make that member of his strengths improfitable, if not also pernicious, they
devise certain Letters directed to Maurice Fitzgerald (Deputy Justice of
Ireland) and other principal men, who held of the Earl. A practice to ruin
the Earl Ma^shall.
In them they signify; that Richard once marshall to the King of EngIand, was
for manifest Treason, The Pestilent tenor of the Letters.
by the judgment of the Kings Court, banished the Realm, his Lands, Towns,
and Tenements consumed by fire; other his Hereditaments destroyed, and himself
for ever disinherited: that if upon his coming thither they did take him,
either alive or dead, the King did give them all the Earls Lands there, which
now were forfeited by virtue of his attainture, and for assurance that the said
gift should continue firm and good, they by whose advise the King and Kingdom
were governed faithfully undertook. To these letters (which the Monks call
bloody) they caused the King to set his Seal, as they themselves also did
theirs. Upon receipt of which lines, the parties signify back under the Seal
of secrecy, that if the contents of those letters were confirmed by the Kings
Letters Patents, they would perform that which they desired. The Letters
Patents be made accordingly, Rog. Wend. M. S. Matthew. Pari^.
and having fraudulently gotten the great Seal from Hugh, Bishop of Chichester
Lord Chancellor, who knew not thereof, they make them authenticke with the
impression. The Kings mind therefore being still exulterated toward the Earl
Marshall, he grievously charged Alexander Bishop of Chester, that he had too
much familiarity with the Earl, affirming, that they sought to thrust him from
his Throne; the Bishop to clear himself from so haynos a s^andall, Alexander
Bishop of Chester clears himself from disloyalty.
put on his Episcopal habit, and solemnly pronounces all those accursed who
did but imagine a wickedness of so foul a nature, against the Majesty or
person of the King; and thereupon by the intercession of other Prelates, he was
received into grace: The King was then at Westminster, where Edmond the
Archbishop of Canterbury elect, The Eng^ish Bishops d^ale with the King about
red^esse of the the common evils.
with other his Suffragan Bishops bewayling the estate of the Kingdom, present
themselves before him, telling him as his loyal leigemen, that the counsel of
Peter Bishop of Winchester and his accomplices, which now he had and used, was
not sound nor safe, but cruel and perilous to himself and his Realm. First,
for that they hated and despised the English, Objections against the Bishop of
Winton and the Poictouines.
calling them Traitors, turning the Kings heart from the love of his people,
and the hearts of the people from him; as in the Earl Marshall, whom being
(one of the worthiest men of the Land) by sowing false tales they drove into
coffeehouse. 2. That by the council of the same Peter, his father King John
first lost the hearts of, his people, then Normandy, then other lands, and
finally wasted all his Treasures, and almost England it self, and never after
had quiet. 3. That if the Subjects had now been handled according to Justice
and Law, and not by their ungodly counsels, those present troubles had not
happened, but the Kings lands had remained undestroyed, his treasures
unexhausted. 4. That the Kings Council is not the Council of peace but of
perturbation, because they who cannot rise by peace, will raise themselves by
the trouble and disinherison of others. 5. That they had the treasure, Castles,
Wardships, and strengths of the Kingdom in their hands, which they insolently
abused, to the great hazard of the whole estate, for that they made no
conscience of an Oath^ Law, Justice, or the Churches Censures. Therefore we, O
King (said they) speak these things faithfully unto you, and in the presence
both of God and man, do counsel, beseech, and admonish yo^ to remove such a
Council from about you; and as it is the usage in other Realms govern yours
by the faithful and sworn Children thereof. The King in brief answered
hereunto, that he could not suddenly put off his Council, and therefore
prayed a short respite, till their accomps were audited; Mean while the
behahaviours of the Marshalline faction (having this backing at Court) grew
more and more intolerable, The outrages of ^he Ma^shalline faction.
for while the King was at Huntingdon, the Lord Gilbert Basset and others, set
fire upon Alckmundbury, a Town belonging to Stephen de Segrave, the flames
whereof were seen of the Owner, being then with the King at Huntingdon: they
also took Prisoners upon the Welsh Marches, and according to the Law of war
(which says one, is lawless) did put them to their ransomes. Nothing had
hitherto preserved the King more than that he could without great grief forgo
any Favorites, if he were merely pressed; Note th^s.
the contrary quality whereof has been the cause of final desolation to so
many Princes; for albeit the choice of Counselors ought to be free, yet by
common intendment, they should be good, or howsoever they are, or are not, it
is madness to hazard a Crown, or lose the love of a whole Nation, rather than
to relinquish or diminish a particular dependant; the rights of amity ought
nevertheless to remain inviolable, but in such distance, that the public be
not perverted, or interverted for a private: The King therefore in this point
not unfortunate, commanded Bishop Peter to betake himself to his residence at
Winton, without once meddling in affairs of State: but against Rivalis his
Treasurer, he was so vehement, that he swear, he would pluck out his eyes,
were it not for reverence of holy Orders, commanding also the Proictouines to
depart the Realm, never to see his face. Then are the Archbishop of
Canterbury, with the Bishops of Chester and Rochester sent into VValls to
pacify things there: but the Earl Marshall had now crossed the Seas into
Ireland to take revenge for the spoils and displeasures which his hired
enemies had made in his Lands there, by whose plots, according to that secret
agreement, he was finally taken, and died of a wound given him in the back, as
he with admirable manhood defended himself. The Edmond afterward canonized
Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 160.161.
Archbishop of Canterbury with the other Bishops repaired to the King at
Gloucester, upon their return from Leoline Prince of Wales, who pretended he
could not conclude, till the King had received into grace such of the banished
Nobility, with whom himself had been confederate during the late
displeasures. The King hereupon moved with pity, sends forth his
Proclamations, That all such as were outlawed or proscribed should be at
Gloucester upon a certain day, there to be received into the Kings favor
again, and to have restitution of their inheritances^ but least they might
suspect any evil measure; it was ordered that they should be in the Churches
protection, and come under the safe conduct of the Archbishop and the other
Prelates^ Thither at the time and place limited does Hubert de Burgo Earl of
Kent, and lately chief Justicier of England repair, upon whom, by mediation
of the Bishop, the compassionate King looks graciously, receiving him in his
armes^ with the kiss of peace. In like sort was the Lord Gilbert Basset, and
all others of that fellowship received into favor, their several livings, and
rights fully restored, and both Hubert and Basset admitted to be of his
Council. Upon this reconcilement, the practice by which the late great
Marshall was destroyed, and his possessions dismembered, came to light; the
copy of the Letters which had been sent into Ireland being by commandment of
the Archbishop of Canterbury openly read in the presence of the King, the
Prelates, Earls, and Barons. It moved tears in all of them; the King with an
Oath, affirming, that he knew not the Contents of the said Letters, though by
the urging of the Bishop of Winchester. Rivallis, Segrave, Passeletu with other
of his Council, he had caused his Seal to be put unto them. At the sound of
Summons to make their several appearances, the Malefactors take Sanctuary; the
Bishop, and Peter de Rivallis in Winchester Church, Segrave in Leicester Abbey,
Passeleiu in the new Temple, and others otherwhere. And Antiqu. Eccl. Brit p.
171.163^
some write that the King commanded Winchester utterly to depart the Court, and
to repair to his Bishopric, and there to give himself entirely to the cure
of souls. If such a precept were now given by his Majesty to all our Court
Prelates it would be but just. In the end, upon the intercession of Edraond,
Archbishop of Canterbury, who piously endeavored to extinguish all occasions
of further dissension in the Kingdom, and undertook they should have a
lawful trial, the delinquents appeared at Westminster before the King, who
sat Rog. de Wend. M.S. Matthew. Maris.
in person with his Justiciers upon the Bench, Peter de Rivallis was first
called (for the Bishop came not;) whom the King shot through with an angry eye,
saying, O thou Traitor, by thy wicked advise I was drawn to set my Seal to
these treacherous Letters for the destruction of the Earl Marshall, the
contents whereof were to me unknown, and by thine, and such like council I
banished my natural Subjects, and turned their rainds and hearts from me. By
thy bad council, and thy accomplices, I was moved to make war upon them to my
irreparable loss, and the dishonor of ray Realm: In which enterprise I
wasted my treasure, and lost many worthy persons, together with much of my
royal respect; therefore I exact of thee an account; as well of my treasure,
as of the custodies of wards, together with many other profits and escheats
belonging to my Crown. Peter denying none of the accusations, but falling to
the ground thus besought him. My Sovereign Lord and King, I have been
nourished by you, and made rich in worldly substance, confound not you own
creature, but at least wise grant me a time of deliberation, that I may render
a competent reason for such points as I am charged with. Thou shall (said the
King) be carried to the Tower of London, there to deliberate till I am
satisfied; he was so. Step^en de Segrave, the Lord chief Justice (whom the
King also called most wicked Traitor) had time till Michaelmas to make his
accounts at the Archbishops and other Bishops humble entreaty; and for other
matters, he shifted them of from himself, by laying the blame upon such as
were higher in place than he; into whose office of chief Justice Hugh de
Pateshull is advanced: The like evasion Robert Passeleu had^ by leaving the
fault upon Walter Bishop of Carleil, who was above him in the Exchequer; And
thus were these civil enormities reformed, not without reducing store of coin
to the King: this Bishop of Winchester, being the chief Author of all these
wars and mischiefs, which thus molested King, State, and People at that time.

Anno. Matthew. West. An. 1238. p. 147. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 169.
1238. Otho the Popes Legate lodging at Osnie Abbey, some of his servants
abusing the Scholars of Oxford that came thither to see him, they thereupon
falling together by the ears slew the Legates Cook, and hurt other of his
servants reviling the Legate, and stiling him a wicked wretch, a Robber of
England, the gulf of Roman avarice, etc. Hereupon the Legate fled up into the
Town for fear, and sent to the King to Abindon to rescue him; the next day he
publicly excommunicated all who had assaulted him, depriving them both from
their office and benefice, and pronouncing them irregular, interdicted all the
Churches in Oxford, and suspended the Scholars from studying there; the which
Sentence was by this Bishop of Winchester, solemnly denounced, and executed
before all the Clergy and people assembled together for that purpose at S.
Frideswids in Oxford; and so all that Summer the Scholars were dissipated, and
their study at Oxford was suspended. At length the Abbot and Canons of Osnie,
and regent Masters of Oxford coming bare foot to the Legate, with their heads
uncovered, and their upper garments put off and rent, often times humbly craved
pardon of him^ and so at last going through the midst of the City of London to
the Bishop of Durhams house, they with much ado obtained pardon, whereupon the
Scholars were restored to their Study at Oxford, and released from their said
sentences.

An. 1246. Antiqu. Eccle^ Brit. p. 181.182 Mat. Paris. An. 1246. p. 672. to 689.
The Pope writ to William, WILLIAM de RALEY.
Bishop of Winchester, and the Bishop of Lincoln, that they should levy 6000.
marks of the Clergy to his use. They thereupon began to execute this mandate
of the Pope, but are prohibited by the King to proceed under pain of
proscription. The Clergy now interposed between the King and Pope, and
terrified with both their threats^ were uncertain what to do: but perceiving
the Kings inconstancy, and fearing least his courage failing he should at last
(as he often had done before) yield to the Pope^ many of them paying their
money secretly, avoided both the Kings and Popes indignation. To prevent these
exactions, messengers were sent to the Pope from the King, Peers, Prelates,
and Commons of England; these the Pope reviles and repels as Schismatics,
saying; The King of England, who now turns his heels against me, and
Frederizeth, has his Council, but I have mine. With which scornful words
the King was so moved, that he proclaimed through England, That no man should
pay any thing to the Pope. But the Pope growing more angry hereat, threatened
the Prelates with all kind of punishment, that they should pay the foresaid
sum to his Nuncio in the new Temple very spedily. The King terrified with the
threats of his brother Richard, and of the Bishops conspiring with him to draw
the King hither and thither, to make him odious both to the Pope and people,
among whom the Bishop of Winchester was chief, (to whom power was given by the
Pope to interdict the Kingdom;) yielded at last to this tax being overcome
and debilitated with fear. The passages whereof are more largely related by
Matthew Paris, together with the Popes intolerable exactions upon England.

William Raley the 41. Bishop of Winchester, WILLIAM RALEY.
employed in this former service for the Pope, Anno. 1243. being unduly elected
by the Monks of Winchester contrary to King Henry the third his command;
Matthew. Wes^m. Anno. 143. p. 174^175. An. 1244. p. 178.179. Matthew. Paris p.
588.597.616.619. Godwin p. 227.228. Holinshed. p. 231.232.
the King hereupon commanded, that no man should give him or his any victual
or lodging, charging the Major and Citizens of Winchester to forbid him
entrance into that city; which they did; the Bishop thereupon excommunicated
the Major, Monks, and whole city, and interdi^ted the Cathedral: for which he
felt the burden of the Kings displeasure so heavy upon him in England, as he
thought good to fly the Realm, till at last by Boniface the Archbishops
intercession, and the Popes earnest Letters to the King and Queen, he was
restored to the Kings favor, and obtained License to return. The Bishop
hereupon in thankfulness, bestowed upon the Pope 6000. marks for his
fatherly care of him, which he in good nature, because he would not be reputed
disdainful, took every penny. It is recorded of this Bishop, that a little
before his death he had the Sacrament brought unto him, and perceiving the
Priest to enter his Chamber with it, he cried out, Stay good friend, let the
Lord come no nearer unto me, it is more fit that I be drawn to hira as a
Traitor, that in many things have been a Traitor unto him: His servants
therefore by his commandment drew him out of his bed, unto the place where the
Priest was, and there with tears he received the Sacrament, and spent much
time in prayer, and soon after died at Turon, the 20th. of September, 1249.

Matthew. ^aris p. 774.775.780.788.789.794.824.830. to
834.847.890.900.994.995.946.959, Godwin. p. 176.177.
Ethel^arns half brother unto the King, ETHELMARVS:
a man (says Matthew. Paris) in respect of his orders, years, and learning,
utterly unsufficient, was at the Kings special request, elected next Bishop of
this See; he had at that time other spiritual livings equivalent in revenue to
the Archbishopricke of Canterbury; which that he might keep, and yet receive
all the profits likewise of the Bishopric of Winchester, he determined not to
be consecrated at all^ but to hold it by his election, and so did indeed for
the space of nine years; In the mean time he and the rest of his countrymen
(with whom the Realm was much pestered) were grown very odious, as well with
the Nobility, as the Commons, not only for their infinite wealth, and
immoderate preferment, much envied but much more for their pride and insolency
which a man can hardly bear in his own friend, much less in an alien and
^tranger, whom men naturally dislike much sooner then their own countrymen.
Amongst the rest, this Ethelmarus bare himself so bold upon the King his
brother, as he gave commandment to his servants to force a Clergy man out of
the possession of a Benefice, whereunto he pretended some right; and if he
withstood them, to draw him out of his possession in contumelious manner; the
poor man loath to loose his living, defended it so long, till by my Lord
Elects men, he was slain himself, and his people so soar beaten and wounded,
as within few days one or two of them died. This fact and other like
complained of by the Barons to the Pope and King brought all the Poictavins
into such hatred, as the Realm was ready to rise against them and the rather
upon this occasion.

Anno. Dom. 1252. a certain^ Priest intruded himself by authority of this
Prelate into the Hospital in Southwerke within this Diocese, founded by
Thomas Becket. Eustathius de Len. Official to the Archbishop of Canterbury
conceiving himself injured hereby, because by reason of the patronage his
consent ought to have intervened, which was omitted through contempt^ and
thrice admonished the said Priest to depart, because his entranee was injurious
and presumptuous: the Priest (styled commonly the Prior of this Hospital)
refuses to do it, keeping possession: The ^fficiall hereupon excommunicates
him for his contumacy; under which excommunication the Prior continued forty
days multiplying threats and revilings. The Official not brooking such pride,
at last commanded this contumacious Prior to be apprehended: who hearing of it^
enters into the Church in his Priestly Vestments, were he fortifieth himself;
the officers purposely sent to apprehend him, spared him not because he had
contemned the keys of the Church. The Official therefore commanded him to be
carried to Maydstone^ a manner of the Archbishops, until it were determined
what should be done hereupon, thinking to keep him there, because the
Archbishop was said to be near that place. But the Bishop of Winchester
hearing of it, was more angry than became him, as if he had suffer^d a great
injury with disgrace, presented a grievous complaint to his brethren: with
whose aid and council being puffed up, he calling a band of Soldiers
together, with no small company following them, sent them to seek and
apprehend the authors of this violence. They therefore with great ^orce and
tumult as in a hostile war came to Suwerke, thinking to have found them there;
where searching all places, and finding none of them they went hastily with a
swift pace to Maydstone to free the Captive Prior there detained, with a
powerful hand, and breaking down all that stood in the way, searching all
secret corners, when they found not him they sought for, because he was hid,
they called for fire, that they might burn all to ashes. And after many
injuries there committed when they found not him they sought for, certified by
some whisperers where the Official was they sought for^ to wit at Lambeth
near London, they all ran thither in a troop; where heaving up the doors
from their hinges and breaking them running in altogether in a confused troop,
suddenly before the hour of dinner, they took the Official (premeditating
no such thing) in a hostile and unseemely manner, and haling him away, they set
him on a horse like a vile slave, deprehended in the act of stealing, to be
carried whether they pleased, he being not suffered so much as to touch the
re^nes of the horses bridle that carried him. O rash presumption^ O unexcusable
^rreverence (says Matthew. Paris) which so ignominiously handled, and worried
such an authentical man, so excellent learned, so perspicuosly famous, and
representing the Archbishops person. Moreover they inhumanly handled the
Chaplain serving in his Chapel, and flying to the horns of the Altar,
railing upon him. The Official, after they had done all things which anger,
yea fury had persuaded, they drew by the Bridle to F^rnehold, till they were
certified of the Priors restitution, detaining him violently against his will.
At last being parmited to depart^ he was basely and vily thrust away^ who
rejoicing for the present that he had escaped their hands, ran away as fast
as he might upon his feet, though aged^ to Walerle, not daring to look back
le^t he should be turned into a pillar of Salt. The Archbishops Official
having received so great an injury, makes a most grievous complaint to the
Archbishop Boniface with sighs and tears, aggravating great things with
greater, and grievous things with greater grievances. The Archbishop hereupon
moved with unexpressible anger, taking with him the Bishops of Chester and
Heriford, goes to London, where he and those two Bishops clad in their
Pontifical Robes, before an innumerable company of people (summoned to appear
before them with the voice of a Crier for this purpose, and granting thirty
days pardon to all comers) at S. Mary de arcubus, even horribly and solemnly
excommunicated all the actors and fauters of this rash action, excepting only
the King, Queen, and their children, and Count Richard, with his Countess and
children. Moreover he writ to all his suffgragan Bishops by virtue of the bond
of obedience, whereby they stood obliged to the Church of Canterbury, to do
the like in their Churches on all Lords days and holy days, by his express
command. The Bishop of Winchester, on the contrary, speedily commanded the
Deane of Seuwarke, and other his subjects, that they contradicting the
Archbishop^ should openly denounce to his face, that this his sentence of
excommunication was a mere nullity, yea, a vain, frivilous and wily excuse to
bolster him out in his sins. The Archbishops creatures for this injury, and
the scandal arising thereupon appeal to the Pope. There were some who
favoring neither side, affirmed the Archbishop had done Winchester wrong;
because there was a composition formely made, that notwithstanding the right of
patronage; yet to prevent controversies, this Hospital should be subject to
the disposal of the Bishop of Winchester, paying thereout three shillings by
the year; and so both of them being defamed, incurred the brand of unjust
violence, while the citizens mindful of the peremptorinesse, which the
Archbishop had showed in his first violent coming to London, of his infinite
exactions of money which he had procured, of the Kings violence in his creation,
and of the enormious collation of his benefices, did now again revive the
same. On the other ^ide the royallists and Poictavins gained the note of imbred
treason, with other reproaches, as the manner is of those that brawle. There
were not a few citizens who hearing these things, wished that these parties had
dashed out one another brains, and rip^^d up one another bowels; And as it
was written, Woe unto them by whom scandal comes, both parties were
endangered with the great reproaches and scandalls arising hereupon. Thus was
the Kings party divided against the Queens, the Poictovines against the
Provincials, whose great possessions made them mad, playing rex one with the
other (whiles the miserable English were asleep) as if they contested which of
them having banished the Natives, should deserve more excellently to rule the
Kingdone: but the ventilation of fame more condemned the Provinctalls, because
Winchester, rising up against his Superior, had so proudly exceeded measure,
confiding on the King, his brother, who God knows had created him. The
Archbishop Boniface raking up the fire of his conceived anger under ashes, and
worthily persisting in it, as Eustace stirred him up more or less to revenge
this enormious transgression, goes after this toward Oxford, that summoning a
Convocation of the Scollers there assembled out of diverse parts of the world,
he mightt publish to them in order this notorious fact, that so by their
relations, so great an offense might be made known to foreign Nations^
Coming therefore to Oxford the morrow after S. Nicholas day before all the
Clearkes and Scholars there assembled for this purpose, being an innumerable
multitude, he openly declares before them the presumptuous temerity and
temerarious presumption of the Bishop of Winchester, taking boldness from his
confidence and dependence on the King, his brethren, and accomplices; and
expressly published the names of the trespassers, and their former sentences of
excommunication, which the Bishop caused to be transcribed and sent to all his
suffr^gans. The Christmas following the King and Queen being at Winchester,
reconciled these Prelates, and took off these excommunications, and ended
these contentions, which much troubled both Church and Kingdom. This Prelates
by bribes given to the Pope, obtruded a Prior on the Monks of Winchester,
which caused great Schisms and distractions among them. Anno. Dom. 1260. Simon
Montfort Earl of Leicester, Richard de Clare, Earl of Gloucester, with sundry
other Nobles adhering to them, assembled at Oxford, sufficiently furnished with
horses and arms, finally resolving in their minds, either to die for the
peace of their country, or to thrust out of the Realm the desturbers of the
peace. Whereupon the Bishop of Winchester, William de Valentia, and other
Poic^ouines assembled together at the foresaid place, guarded with a great
troop of their soldiers and followers, But because the Lords^ determined to
bring them into question for their wicked deeds, and make them take a common
oath with them, to observe the provisions made for the benefit of the Kingdom;
they discerning their forces to be weaker than the Lords, and fearing to
undergo their judgment, fled in the night to the Castle of Vlnesey, whom the
Barons pursuing, caused them to yield up the Castle, and compelled them
forthwith to depart the Kingdom. Ethelmar coming to the King to take his
farewell of mhim^ used these words, I commend you to the Lord God; to whom the
King replied, Et ego te Diabolo vivo; and I commend thee to the living devil,
for dese^ting him in his necessities, and occasioning such uproares in the
Realm. The Nobles fearing least the Bishop departing the Realm should resort
to Rome, and for a sum of money given should procure his promotion again, and
so be more powerful to do harms, sent four eloquent Knights, to exhibit a
letter, ratified with all their seals, to the Pope and Cardinals; wherein
were contained the wickednesses of the said Bishop and his brethren, and those
homicides, rapines, injuries and various oppressions wherewith they had
afflicted and undone the people of the King darae; and withal they commanded
all the religious men, who farmed any livings of the Romans to detain their
rents, till they should receive further order from them, and pay them to such
receivers as they should appoint, under pain of having their houses burnt; by
which means the Kingdom was free from Roman exactors for three years space.
This Ethelmare foreseeing the danger that was like to befall him sent over his
Treasure (whereof he had great store) beyond the seas, before his departure;
but much of it came short^ being intercepted at Dover, and taken away from
those to whom it was committed, and distributed to four Knights, who were sent
to Rome, by the King and his Barons, to complain against the blanke Bulls
found in the chests of Be^ard de Nympha (the Popes agent) after his death, and
of the many machinations, of the Romans to disquiet the Realm.

John Ger^sey GERNSEY.
next Bishop of W^nchester Matthew. West. and Matthew. Paris An. 1265.1266
Holinshed p 271. Godw^n, p. 177. See Mat. Paris p. 970.972.
(consecrated at Rome, where ^e paid 6000. marks to the Pope, and so much more
to his Chancellor for his consecration) was a great stickler in the Barons
wars against King Henry the third, as appears by the forecited passages of
Matthew Westminister, and was excommunicated by Octobon the Popes Legate, for
taking part against the King in the Barons wars, and forced to go to Rome
for his absolution, where he died.

Henry Woodlocke HENRY WOODLOCK.
Bishop of Winchester made request to King Edward the first for Robert
Winchelsey, Antiqu. Eccles. Brit p. 218. Godwin p. 231.
Archbishop of Canterbury, whom the King had banished for high Treason, in
which request, he called the Archbishop (an arch-Traytor) his good Lord, which
the King (as he had cause) took so hainously, that he confiscated all his
goods, and renounced all protection of him.

Adam Tarleton, ADAM TARLETON.
or de Arleton, Bishop of Winchester about the year 1327. was arrested and
accused of high Treason for aiding the Mortimers against King Edward the
second, both with men and armor: Walsingham Hist. Angliae p. 98.99. Antiq.
Eccles. Brit 227. Godwin p. 232.233. Speeds Histo. l. 9 c. 11.12. p. 679
680.686. Walsingh. Ypodigma Neustriae, Anno. 1326. 1327. Hist. Angl p. 10^.104.
Holinshed p. 329.339.340.1245 p. 970.972.
when he was brought to the bar to be arraigned for this Treason, the
Archbishops of Canterbury, York, and Dublin with their suffragans, came with
their Crosses^ and rescued him by force, carrying him with them from the bar
in such manner, as I have formerly related more at large, in the Acts of Wal^er
Rainolds, page 55.56.) Notwithstanding, the indictment and accusation being
found true, his temporalities wereseized into the Kings hands, until such time
as the King (much deal by his imagination and devise) was deposed of his
Kingdom. If he which had been a traitor unto his Prince before, after
deserved punishment for the same, would soon be entreated to join with other
in the like attempt, it is no marvel. No man so forward as he in taking part
with Isabell the Queen, against her husband, King Edward the second. She wi^h
her sons, and army being at Oxford, this good Bishop steps up into the
pulpit, and there taking for his Text these words (My head grieved me) he made
a long Discourse, to prove, that an evil head, not otherwise to be cured, must
be taken away, applying it to the King, that he ought to be deposed. A
Bishoplike application. Hereupon they having gotten the King into their power,
the Bishop fearing least if at any time recovering his liberty and crown
again, they might receive condign punishment, councelled the Queen to make
him away, (good ghostly advice of a Prelate;) whereupon she being as ready and
willing as he to have it done; they writ certain letters unto the keepers of
the old King, signifiing in covert terms what they desired; they, either not
perfectly understanding their meaning, or desirous of some good warrant to show
for their discharge, pray them to declare in express words, whether they would
have them put the King to death or no. To which question, this subtle Fox
framed this answer, Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum^est, without any
point at all. If you set the point between nolite, and t^aere, it forbids:
if between nolite and bonum, it ^xhorteth them to the committinng of the fact.
This ambiguous sentence unpointed, they take for a sufficient warrant and most
pitifully murdered the innocent King, by thrusting an hot spit into his
fundament; and who then so earnest a persecuter of those murthere^s as this
Bishop that set them a work? who when diverse of his Letters were produced and
showed to him warranting this most trayterly inhumane Act, eluded and avoided
them by Sophistical interpretations and utterly denied, that he was any way
consenting to this heinous fact, of which in truth he was the chief occasion.
How clearly he excused himself I ^now not. But s^re I am, he (like many
Arch-trayterly Prelates before him^ who were oftener rewarded than punished for
their Treasons) was so far, from receiving punishment, as within two months
after, he was preferred unto Hereford, than to the Bishoppricke of Worce^er,
and six years after that translated to Winchester by the Pope^ at the request
of the French King, whose secret friend he was: which King Edward the third
taking in very ill part, because the French King and he were enemies, detained
his temporalties from him, till that in Parliament, at the suite of the whole
Clergy, he was content to yield them unto him; after which he became blind
in body, as he was before in mind, and so died, deserving to have lost his
head for these his notorious Treasons, and conspiracies long before, he being
the Archplotter of all the Treacheries against King Edward the second.

Holinshed. p^ 452.453. See the Statut^ of 10^ R. 2. c. 1.
Anno. 10. Richard the third, 1366. thirteen Lords were appointed by
Parliament to have the government of the Realm under the King, in diminution
of his Prerogative; among these Williara Edingdon Bishop of Winchester, WILLIAM
EDINGDON.
John Gilbert Bishop of Hereford, Lord Treasurer of England, Thomas Arundle,
Bishop of Ely, and Chancellor. Nicholas Abbat of Waltham, Lord Keeper of the
privy Seal, William, Archbishop of Canterbury, Alexander Archbishop of York,
and Thomas Bishop of Exeter were chief, and the principal contrivers of this
new project, which fell out to be inconvenient and pernicious both to the King
and Realm, Holinshed. p. 456. to 468.
the very procurers of this Act (as some of the J^dges afterward resolved)
deserving death; which resolution afterward cost some of them their lives^ as
the Stories of those times declare. It seems this Bishop made great havocke of
the goods of his Church, Godwins Cat. p. 182.
for his successor V^illiam VVicham sued his Executors for dilapidations, and
recovered of them 1672. pound ten shillings^ besides 1566. head of neat,
386. Weathers, 417. Ewes. 3521. Lambs and 127. Swine; all which stock it
seems belonged unto the Bishoppricke of Winchester at that time.

WILLIAM WICHAM.
William Wicham his next successor was a great Godwins Cat p. 184.185.
Antiquit, Eccles. Br. 286 p. 287. Holinshed p. 526.527.
Pluralist, the yearly revenues of his spiritual promotions^ according as
they were then rated in the Kings books, beside his Bishoppricke, amounting to
876. pound^ thirteen shillings and four pence; besides these Ecclesiastical
preferments, he held many temporal offices, at the Secretariship, the
Keepership of the Privy Seal, the Mastership of Wards, the Treasurership of
the Kings revenues in France, and diverse others. Being consecrated Bishop of
Winchester, in the year 1367. he was made soon after, first Treasurer then
Chancellor of England. It seems that he was a better Treasurer for himself
than the King, who though he received hugh sums of money by the ransom of
two Kings, and spoil of diverse large Countries abroad, and by unusual
subsedyes and taxations at home (much grudged at by the Commons,) was yet so
bare, as for the payment of his debts, he was constrained to find new devices
to raise money: whereupon a solemn complaint was framed against this Bishop for
vainly wasting, or falsely imbezelling the Kings Treasure; for that otherwise
it was impossible the King should be fallen so far behind hand: whereupon he
was charged with the receipt of 1109600. pound (which amounted to more than a
million of pounds) besides a hundred thousand frankes paid unto him by Galeace
Duke of Millaine; for all which a sudden account is demanded of him: diverse
other accusations and misdemeanors were likewise charged against him, and by
means hereof, John a Gaun^ Duke of Lancaster questioning him in the Kings
Courts for these misdemeanors, William Skipwith, Lord chief Justice,
condemned him as guilty of these accusations; procured his temporalties to be
taken from him, and to be bestowed upon the young Prince of Wales; and lastly
commanded him in the Kings name not to come within twenty miles of the Court.
This happened in the year 1376. The next year the Parliament being assembled,
and Subsidies demanded of the Clergy, the Bishops utterly rufused to debate of
any matter whatsoever, till the Bishop of Winchester, a principal member of
that assembly, might be present with him. By this means License was obtained
for his repair thither: and thither he came, glad he might be near to the
means of his re^titution. But whether it were, that he wanted money to bear
the charge, or to the intent to move commiseration, or that he thought it
safest to pass obscurely; he that was wont to ride with the greatest train of
any Prelate in England came then very slenderly attended; traveling through
by-ways, as standing in doubt of snares his enemies might lay for him. After
two years trouble, and the loss of ten thousand marks sustain^d by reason of
the same; with much ado he obtain^^ restitution of his temporalties, by the
mediation of Ali^^ Piers, a gentlewoman that in the last times of King Ed^^rd
altogether possessed him. Returning then unto Winchester, he was received into
the city with solemn proc^^sion, and many signs of great joy. Soon after his
return King Edward died^ and the Duke hoping b^ reason of ^h^ ^oung Kings
nonage to work^ some m^s^hi^fe unto this Bishop, whom of all mortal men he
most hated (perhaps not without just reason) began to rub up some of the old
accusations^ with addi^ions of new complaints. But the King thought good to be
a means of reconciling these two personages, and then was easily entreated
under the broad Seal of England to pardon all those supposed offenses,
wherewith the Bishop had heretofore been charged. This Bishop earnestly
desiring to be made Bishop of Winchester, the King himself exp^obrated to him
the exilitie and smalenesse of his learning (he being no Scholar at all^ but
a surveyer of his buildings at first, though laden with multitudes of
pluralities) to whom Wickham answered; That albeit he were unlearned, yet he
was ab^ut to bring forth a f^uitfull issue which should procreate very great
store of learned men; which was understood of those most ample Colleges he
afterward bu^lt, both at Oxford and VVincheste^ for: which good works alone
his name has since been famous, and himself extolled above his deserts in
other things, which were but ill at best. This Prelate having obtained diverse
goodly promotions, which he acknowledged to have received, rather as reward of
service, then in regard of any extraordinary desert otherwise^ he caused to be
engraven in Winchester Tower at VVinsor these words, This made VVickham^
whereof when some complained to the King as a thing derogating from his honor,
that another should ^eeme to bear the charge of his buildings; and the King in
great displeasure reprehended him for it. He answered, that his meaning was not
to ascribe the honor of that building to himself, but his own honor of
preferments unto that bu^lding; not importing that VVicham made the Tower, but,
that the Tower was the means of making Wickham, and raising him from base
estate, unto those great places of honor he then enjoyed.

The Godwin. p. 188.
Pope was now grown to that height of tyranny, that he not only placed, but
displaced Bishops at his pleasure. And his means to do it, was by translating
them to some other Bishoppricke, peradventure nothing worth at all He
translated Henry Beauford HENRY BEAVFORT^
from Lincoln to Winchester, June 23. 1426. and made him Cardinal of S.
Eusebius. This Bishop was valiant and very wise. Pope Martin the fift^
determining to make war upon the Bo^emians, that had renounced all obedience
unto the sea of Rome, made this Cardinal his Legate into that Country, and
appointed such forces as he could make to be at his commandment. Toward the
charges of this voyage, the Clergy of England gave a tenth of all their
promotions, and furnished out four thousand men and more: with this power, he
passed by France (doing there some service for his Prince and Country) into
Bohemia, the year, 1429. There he remained certain months, behaving himself
very valiantly, till by the Pope he was discharged, In his youth he was
wantonly given and begat a base daughter named Jane upon Alice, the daughter
of Richard, Earl of Arundell. Holinshed. p. 590 etc Hal 4. H. 6 f 94. to 100^
Fox. vel. 3^ p. 922 to 925.
About the year of our Lord, 1425. there fell out a great devision in the
Realm of England, which of a sparkle, was like to have grown to a great
flame, by means of this Henry Beauford Bishop of Winchester, Son to John Duke
of Lancaster by his third wife; for whether this Bishop envied the authority of
Humphry Duke of Gloster^ Protector of the Realm, or whether the Duke disdained
at the riches and pompous estate of the said Bishop; sure it is, that the whole
Realm was troubled with them, and their partakers; so that the citizens of
London were feign to keep daily and nightly watches and to shut up their shops
for fear of that which was doubted to have insued of their assembling of
people about them. The Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Duke of Quimbre,
called the Prince of Portingale, rode eight times in one day between the two
parties, and so the matter was staid for a time: but the Bishop of Winchester
to clear himself of blame so far as he might, and to charge his Nephew,
the Lord Protector with all the fault, wrote a Letter to the Regent of France.
The 25. day of March, a Parliament began at the Town of Leicester, where the
Duke of Bedford openly rebuked the Lords in general, because that they in the
time of war, through their privy malice and inward grudges, had almost moved
the people to war and commotion, in which time all men ought or should be of
one mind, heart and consent, requiring them to defend, serve, and to dread
their sovereign Lord King Henry in performing his conquest in France, which
was in manner brought to conclusion. In this Parliament, the Duke of Gloucester
laid certain Articles to the Bishop of Winchesters charge.

First, Whereas he being Protector and Defendor of this Land desired the Tower
to be opened to him therein, Richard VVoodvile Esquire (having at that time the
charge of the keeping of the Tower) refused his desire, and kept the same Tower
against him^ unduly and against reason, by the commandment of the said Lord of
Winchester; and afterward in approving of the said refusal he received the
said VVoodvile, and cherished him against the State and worship of the King,
and of the said Lord of Gloucester.

Secondly, The said Lord of Winchester, without the advice and assent of the
said Lord of Gloucester, or of the Kings Council purposed and disposed him to
set hand on the Kings person, and to have removed him from Eltham, the place
that he was in, to Windsor, to the intent to put him in governance as he list.

Thirdly, that where the said Lord of Gloucester (to whom of all persons tha^
should be in the Land by the way of Nature and birth, it belongs to see the
governance of the Kings person) informed of the said undue purpose of the said
Lord of Winchester declared in the Article next above said and in setting
thereof, determining to have gone to Eltham unto the King, to have provided as
the cause required, and the said Lord of Winchester untruely and against the
Kings peace, to the intent to trouble the said Lord of Gloucester going to the
King^ purposing his death in case that he had gone that way, set men of arms,
and Archers at the end of London bridge next Southw^rke, and in forbearing of
the Kings high way, let draw the chain of the stoopes there, and set up pipes
and hurdles in manner and former of Bulworkes, and set m^n in cellers and
windows, with Bows and Arrowes^ and other weapons, to the intent to bring
final destruction to the said Lord of Glocesters person, as well as of those
that then should come with him.

Fourthly, The said Lord of Gloucester saith^ and affirms, that our sovereign
Lord his Brother, that was King Henry the fifth, told him on a time when our
Sovereign Lord being Prince, was lodged in the Palace of Westminster in the
great Chamber, by the noise of a Spaniell, there was on a night a man spied and
taken behind a carpet of the said Chamber, the which man was delivered to the
Earl of Arundell to be examined upon the cause of his being there at that
time; the which so examined at that time, confessed, that he was there by the
stirring and procuring of the said Lord of Winchester, ordained to have slain
the said Prince there in his bed: wherefore the said Earl of Arundell let
sack him forthwith and drownes him in the Thames.

Fifthly, Our Sovereign Lord, that was King Henry the fifth, said unto the said
Lord of Gloucester, that his Father, King Henry the fourth living^ and visited
then greatly with sickness by the hand of God, the said Lord of Winchester,
said unto the King ( Henry the fifth being then Prince) that the King his
Father so visited with sickness was not personable, and therefore not disposed
to come in conversation and governance of the people, and for so much
councelled him to take the governance and Crown of this Land upon him. Such a
loyal Prelate was he. To these Articles the Archbishop gave in his See
Holi^shed p. 594 595.596.692 Hall 4. H. 6.5.96.97 98.99.
answer in writing too tedious to recite; whereupon the Lords in Parliament
took an Oath to be indifferent umpiers between the Bishop and Duke, and at
last^ with much ado, made a final accord and decree between them, recorded
at large by Hall and Holinshed, wher^by they both were reconciled for a season.
But in the year 1427. the Bishop passing the sea into France, received the
habit, hat and dignity of a Cardinal, with all ceremonies to it appertaining;
which promotion the late King right deeply piercing into the unrestrainable
ambitions mind of the man, which even from his youth was ever wont to check
for the highest) and also right well ascertained with what intolerable pride
his head should soon be swoll^n under such a hat, did therefore all his life
long keep this Prelate back from that presumptuous estate. But now the King
being young, and the Regent his friend, he obtained his purpose, to the
impoverishi^g of the spiritualitie of this Realm. For by a Bull Legantine,
which he purchased from Rome, he gathered so much treasure, that no man in
manner had money but he, so that he was called, the rich Cardinal of
Wincester. Afterward An. 1429. the Pope unleagated him, and set another in his
place to his great discontent Holinshed. p. 620. to 629. Hall, An. 10. H. 6. f.
143. to 250. Fox. vol 1. p. 922. to 925.
Anno. 1441. the flames of contention brake out afresh between the said Duke
and the Cardinal; for after his former reconciliation to the Duke, he and the
Archbishop of York ( John Kerap) ceased not to do many things without the
consent of the King or Duke, being (during the minority of the King) Governor
and Protector of the Realm, whereat the Duke (as good cause he had) was
greatly offended: and there upon declared to King Henry the ^ixth in writing,
wherein the Cardinal and the Archbishop had offended both his Majesty, and the
Laws of the Realm. This complaint of the Duke was contained in twenty four
Articles, which chiefly rested, in that the Cardinal had from time to time,
through his ambitious desire to surmount all other, in high degree of honor,
sought to enrich himself, to the great and notorious hinderance of the King, as
in defrauding him, not only of his treasure, but also in doing and practicing
things prejudicial to his affairs in France, and namely by setting at liberty
the King of Scots, upon so easy conditions as the Kings Majesty greatly lost
therehy, as in particulars thus followeth^ and out of the Dukes own coppie,
regestred by An. 19. H. 6. f. 143. to 146.
Hall and Holinshed.

1. These be in part the points and Articles which I Humphrey Duke of Gloucester,
for my truth and acquitall said late, I would give in writing (my right doubted
Lord) unto your Highness, advertising your Excellence, of such things as in part
have bin done in your tender age in derogation of your noble estate, and hurt
of both your Realms, and yet be done and used daily. 2. First, the Cardinal
then being Bishop of Winchester, him took upon the state of Cardinal, which
was naied and denaied him by the King of most noble memory, my Lord your
Father, saying, that he had as lefe set his Crown beside him, as to see him
wear a Cardinals Hat, he being a Cardinal; for he knew full well the pride
and ambition that was in his person, then being but a Bishop, should have so
greatly extolled him into more intolerable pride, when that he were a
Cardinal; and also he though it against his freedom of the chief Church of
this Realm, which that he worshipped as duly as ever did Prince, that blessed
be his soul. And howbeit that my said Lord your Father would have had certain
Clerks of this Land Cardinals, and to have no Bishoprics in England, yet his
intent was never to do so great d^rogation to the Church of Canterbury, as to
make them that were his suffragans to sit above their Ordinary and
Metropolitan. But the cause was, that in general and in all matters which
might concern the weal of him and of his Realm he should have Proctors of
his Nation, as other Christian Kings had in the Court of Rome, and not to abide
in this Land, nor to be in any part of his Counsels as been all the
spiritual and temporal at Parliament, and other great Counsels, when you
list to call them: And therefore though it please you to do him that worship,
to set him in your privy Council, after your pleasure, yet in every
Parliament, where every Lord, both spiritual and temporal has his place, he
ought to occupy but his place as a Bishop. 3. Item. The said Bishop now being
Cardinal, was assoyled of his Bishoppricke of Winchester, whereupon he sued
unto our holy Father to have a Bull declarative, notwithstanding he was assumpt
to the state of Cardinal, that the Sea was not void, where indeed it stood
void for a certain time, yet the said Bull were granted and so he was exempt
from his ordinary by the taking on him the state of Cardinal, and the Church
Bishopric of Winchester, so standing void, he took again of the Pope (you
not learned thereof, nor knowing, whereby he was fallen into the case of
provision) so that all his goods was lawfully and clearly forfeited to you my
right doubted Lord, with more, as the Statute declares plainly for your
advantage. I^em. It is not unknown to you (doubted Lord) how through your
lands it is noysed, that the said Cardinal and the Archbishop of York, had,
and have the governance of you, and all you^ land, the which none of your true
liege men ought to usurp to take upon them, and have also estranged me your
sole uncle, my cousin of York, my consin of Huntington, and many other Lords of
your Kin to have any knowledge of any great mat^er that might touch your high
estate, or either of your Realms: and of Lords spiritual of right, the
Archbishop of Canterbury should be your chief Counselor, the which is also
estranged and set aside, and so be many other right sadd Lords, and well
advised, as well spiritual as temporal, to the great hurt of you my right
doubted Lord, and of your Realms, like as the experience and works shown,
clearly and evidently more harm it is. 5. Item. In the tender age of^ you my
right doubted Lord, for the necessity of a Army, the said Cardinal lent you
4000 pound upon certain Jewels, prised at two and twenty 1000-marks with a
letter of sale that if they were not quited at a certain day you should leese
them. The said Cardinal seeing your money ready to have quitted your Jewels,
caused your Treasurer of England, at that day being, to pay the same money in
part of another army, in defrauding you my right doubted Lord of your said
Jewels, keeping them yet always to his own use, to your right great loss, and
his singular profit and avail. 6. Item, the said Cardinal then being Bishop
of Winchester, and Chancellor of England, delu^^ed the King of Scots upon
certain appointments (as may be showed) presumptuously, and of his own
authority, contrary to the Act of Parliament. I have heard notable men of Law
say, that they never heard the like thing done among them which was too great a
defamation to your highness, and also to^wed his Niece to the said King, whom
that my Lord of notable memory your Father would never have so delu^^ed; and
there as he should have paid for his cos^s^ forty thousand pounds, the said
Cardinal Ch^^cellor of England, caused you to pardon him thereof ten thousand
marks, whereof the greater sum he paid you right a little, what, I report me
to your highness. 7. It^, where the said Cardinal lent you (my redoubted
Lord) great and notable Sommes, he has had, and his assigns the rule and
profit of the port of Hampton, where the Customers bin his servants, where (by
likelihood and as it is to be supposed) he standing the chief Merchant of the
wools of your land^ that you be greatly defrauded, and under that rule, what
woolls and other Merchantdizes have been shipped, and may be from time to time,
hard is to esteem, to the great hurt and prejudice of you my right doubted
Lord, and of all your people. 8. Item, Howbeit that the said Cardinal has
diverse times lent you great sommes of money, since the time of your reign, yet
this loan has been so deferred and delayed, that for the most part the
convenable season of the employing of the good lent was passed, so that little
fruit or none came thereof^ as by experience both your Realms have
sufficiently in knowledge. 9. Item, Where there was Jewels and Plate, prised
at eleven thousand pound in weight of the said Cardinal forfeited to you, my
right redoubted Lord, he gate him a restorement thereof for a loan of a
little percell of the same^ and so defrauded you wholly of them, to your great
hurt and his avayle; the which good might greatly have eased your highness in
sparing as much of the poor Commons. 10. Item, The Cardinal being feoft of my
said Lord your Father against his intent, gave Elizabeth Beauchampe three
hundred marks of livelihood, where that his will was, that and she were
wedded, within a year, then to have ^^, or else not, where indeed it was two
or three years after, to your great hurt, and diminishing of your inheritance.
11. Item, Notwithstanding that the said Cardinal has no manner of authority,
nor interest into the Crown, nor none may have by any possibility, yet he
presumes and takes upon him in party your estate royal, in calling before
him into great abusion of all your land, and derogation of your highness, which
has not been seen, nor used in no days heretofore, in greater estate then he
is, without your express ordenance and commandment. 12. Item, the said
Cardinal nothing considering the necesity of you my right redoubted Lord, has
sued a pardon of dismes, that he should pay for the Church of Winchester, for
term of his life, giving thereby occasion to all other Lords spiritual, to
draw their good will for any necessity, to grant any disme, and so to lay all
the charge upon the temporalty, and the poor people. 13. Item, by the
governance and labor of the said Cardinal and Archbishop of York, there has
been lost and dispended much notable and great good by diverse ambassadors sent
out of this Realm. First^ to Arras for a feigned colorable peace, whereas by
likelinesse it was thought and supposed, that it should never turn to the
effectual avail of you, my right doubted Lord, nor to your said Realms, but
under color thereof, was made the peace of your adversary, and the Duke of
Burgoyn; for else your party adverse, and the said Duke might not well have
found means nor ways to have communed together, nor to have concluded with
other their confederations, and conspirations made and wrought there then, at
that time against your highness, whereby you might have (right doubted Lord)
the greater party of your obisance, as well in your Realm of France, as in
your Duchy of Normandy, and much other thing gone greatly, as through the
said colorable treaty, and otherwise, since the death of my brother of
Bedford. 14. Ite. Now of late was sent another Ambassador to Cale^ by the
labor and council of the said Cardinal and Archbishop of York; the cause
why of the beginning, is to me your sole Uncle, and other Lords of your kin and
Council unknown, to your great charge, and against the public good of your
Realm, as it openly appears; the which good if it be employed for the
defense of your Lands, the marchandizes of the same might, have had other
course^ and your said lands not to have stood in so great mischief as they
do. 15. Item, after that, to your great charge and hurt of both your Realms,
the said Cardinal and Archbishop of York went to your said town of Calis,
and diverse Lords of your kin, and of your Council in their fellowship, and
there, as there was natural war between the Duke of Orliance, and the Duke
of Burgonie, for murder of their Fathers, a capital enmity, like to have
endured for ever; the said Cardinal and Archbishop of York licen^ed and
suffered the said Duke of Orleance to entreat and commune apart, with Council
of your said adversaries, as well as with the Douchies of Burgond^e, by which
means the peace and alliance was made between the two Dukes, to the greatest
for^e^^ing of your said capital adversaries that could be thought; and
consequently (my dear redoubted Lord) to your greatest charge, and hurt to
both your Realms; under color of which treaty, your said adversaries in
mean time won your city of Meaux, and the country thereabout, and many
diverse roades made into your Duchy of Normandy, to the great noysance and
destruction of your people, as it shows openly. 16. Item, The said Archbishop
of York, sent with others into this your Realm from the said Cardinal, had
with your advers party at your said Town of Calis, made at his coming into
your notable presence at Winsor, all the swasions and color, all motions in
the most app^rent wise that he could, to induee your Highness to your
agreement to the desires of your capital Adversaries, as I saw there in your
noble presence of his writing, at which time (as I understood) it was his
singular opinion, that is to say; that you should leave your right, your title,
and your honor of your crown, and your nomination of King of France, during
certain years, and that you should utterly abstain, and be content only in
writing, with Rex ^ngliae, etc. to the greatest note of infamy that ever fell
to you, or any of your noble Progenitors since the taking of them first, the
said title and right of your Realm, and Crown of France, to which matter in
your presence, there, after that it had like your said Highness to ask mine
advise thereupon, with other of your blood and Counsel; I answered and said,
that I would never agree thereto, to die therefore; and of the same disposition
I am yet, and will be while I live in conservation of your honor, and of your
oath made unto your said Crown in time of your coronation there. 17. Item, The
said Cardinal, and Archbishop of York have so labored unto your Highness,
that you should intend to a new day of convention in March or April next
coming, where it is noised to be more against your worship, then with it; and
where it was evident to all the world, that the rupture and breaking of the
said peace should have fallen heretofore, of your adverse party, because of
the great untruths; now by that means it is like peradventure to be said unto
very great slander of you my doubted Lord, like to come to none other purpose
nor effect than other conventions have done aforetime, and so by subtilties and
counsel of your said enemies your land (they in hope and trust of the said
treaty not mightily nor puissantly purveyed for) shall be like under the
cullor of the same treaty to be burnt up and destroyed, lost, and utterly
turned from your obeisance. 18. Itera, It is said, that the deliverance of the
Duke of Orleance is utterly appointed by the mediation, counsel and stirring
of the said Cardinall^ and Archbishor of York; and for that cause diverse
persons been come from your adversaries into this your Realm; and the said
Duke also brought to your city of London, whereas my Lord your Father poysing
so greatly the inconveniences and harm that might fall only by his
deliverance concluded, ordained, and determined in his last Will utterly in his
wisdom, his conquest in his Realm of France: And yet then it is to be done by
as great deliberation solemnity and surety, as may be devised or thought: and
seeing now the disposition of your Realm of France, the puissance and might of
your enemies, and what aid they have gotten against you there, as well under
the color of the said treaty, as otherwise, what might or ought to be thought
or said for that laboring the said Duke (all things considered) by such
particular parsons, the Lords of your blood not called thereunto; I report me
unro your noble grace and excellency, and unto the said wi^e true men of this
your Realm. 19. Item, Where that every true counselor, specially unto any
King or Prince, ought of truth and of duty to counsel, promote, in^rease,
perferre and advance the weal and prosperity of his Lord; The said Cardinal
being of your counsel (my right doubted Lord) has late purchased of your
Highness certain great Lands, and livelihood; as the Castle and Lordship of
Chirke in Wales, and other lands in this your Realm: unto which I was called
suddenly, and so in eschewing the breaking and loss of your armies, then
again, seeing none other remedy, gave thereunto mine assent, thinking that who
that ever labored, moved or stirred, the matter first unto your Lordship,
counseled you^ neither for your worship nor profit. 20. More the said
Cardinal has you bound apart, to make him a sure estate of all the said
Lands, by Easter next coming, as could be devised by any learned counsel, or
else that surety not made, the said Cardinal to have and enjoy to him and his
heirs, forever the lands of the Duchy of Lancaster in Norfolk, to the value
of seven or eight hundred marks by the year; which thing seems right
strange, and unseene and unheard ways of any liege man, to seek upon his
sovereign Lord, both in his inheritance, and in his Jewels and goods; for it
is thought, but that right and extreme necessity caused it, there should, nor
ought no such things to be done from which necessity (God for his mercy) ever
preserve your noble person. Wherefore (my redoubted Lord) seeing that you
should be so counseled, or stirred to leave your Crown and inheritance in
England, and also by fraud and subtle means, as is before rehearsed, so to
loose your Jewels, in my truth and in mine acquitall (as it seems to me) I may
not, nor ought not counsel so great an hurt to you, and to all your Land. 21.
Item, It is not unknown to you (my right doubted Lord) how oftentimes I have
offered my service, to and for the defense of your Realm of France, and Duchy
o^ Normandy, where I have been put there from by the labor of the Lord
Cardinal, in preferring others after his singular affection, which has caused
a great part of the said Duchy of Normandy, as well as of the Realm of France
to be lost, as it is well known; and what good (my right doubted Lord) was
lost on that army that was last sent thither which the Earl of Mortaigne, your
Counsel of France has well and clearly declared to your Highness here
before. 22. Item, My right doubted Lord, it is not unknowne^, that it had not
been possible to the said Cardinal to have come to his great riches but by
such means, for of his Church it might not rise, and inheritance he had none.
Wherefore, my right doubted Lord, since there is great good behoof at this time
for the weal and safeguard of your Realms, the poverty, necessity, and
indigence of your liege people, in highness understand, like it unto your
noble grace to consider the said lucre of the said Cardinal, and the great
deceipts that you be deceived in by the labor of him, and of the Archbishop,
as well in this your Realm, as in the Realm of France, and Duchy of
Normandy, where neither office, livelihood, nor Captain may be had without too
great good given unto him, whereby a great part of all the loss that is lost,
they have been the causers of, for who that would give most, his was the
prise, not considering the merrits, service nor sufficiency of persons.
Furthermore, it is greatly to be considered, how when the said Cardinal had
forfeited all his goods, because of provision, as the Statute thereupon more
plainly declares, by having the rule of you my right doubted Lord purchased
himself in great defraudation of your Highness, a Charter of pardon, the
which good, and it had been well governed might many years have sustained
your wars without any t^lage of your poor people. 23. I^em, my redoubted
Lord, whereas I wrote many things for the weal of you, and of your Realmes^
peradventure some will say, and understand^ that I would or have written by way
of accusement of all your Counsel, which God knows I do not; for your
Highness may well see, that I name them, that be caus^rs of the s^id
inordinate rule. Wherefore considering that the said Cardinal and Archbishop
of York are they that pretend the governance of you and of your Realms and
Lordships^ please i^ unto your Highn^sse, of your right wisenesse to estr^nge
them of your Counsel, to that intent that men may be at their freedom, to say
what they think of truth. 24. For truth, I dare speak of my truth, the poor
dare not do so. And if the Cardinal and the Archbishop of York, may
afterward declare themselves of that is and shall be said of them, (you my most
doubted Lord) may then restore them again to your Counsel at your noble
pleasure.
When the King had heard the accusations thus laid by the Duke of Gloucester
against the Cardinal, he committed the examination thereof to his Counsel,
whereof the more part were spiritual persons; so that what for fear, and what
for favor, the matter was winked at, and nothing said to it; only fair
countenance was made to the Duke, as though no malice had been conceived
against him; but venom will break out, and inward grudge will soon appear,
which was this year to all men apparent; for diverse secret attempts were
advanced forward this season against this Noble man, Humfry Duke of Gloucester a
far off; which in conclusion came so near, that they bereft him both of life
and land. For this proud covetous Prelate See Holinshed p. 622. to 628.
setting the Queen against this good Duke, at a Parliament at Berry caused him
there to be arrested, and murdered: by means of whose death all France was
shortly after lost, and the Kingdom involved in a bloody civil war. I shall
close up the History of this proud Prelate with old Father Latimers words
concerning him, in a Sermon before King Edward the sixth. The second Sermon
before King Edward. f. 36.
There was a Bishop of Winchester in King Henry the sixth days, which King was
but a child, but yet were there many good Acts made in his childhood: and I do
not read that they were broken. This Bishop was a great man borne, and did
bear such a stroke, that he was able to shoulder the Lord Protector. Well, it
chanced that the Lord Protector and he fell out, and the Bishop would bear
nothing at all with him, but played the Sacrapha; so the Regent of France was
feign to be sent for from beyond the seas, to set them at one; and go between
them, for the Bishop was as able and ready to buckle with the Lord Protector,
as he was with him. Was not this a good Prelate? he should have been at home
Preaching at his Diocese with a wannion. This Protector was so noble and godly
a man that he was called of every man, the good Duke Humfry; he kept such a
house as was never since kept in England, without any inhaunsing, of rents (I
warrant you) or any such matter. And the Bishop for standing so stiffely by the
matter, and bearing up the order of our Mother the holy Church was made a
Cardinal at Calis, and thither the Bishop of Rome sent him a Cardinals Hat: he
should have had a Tiburne Tippit, a half penny halter, and all such proud
Prelates. These Romish Hats never brought good into England. Upon this the
Bishop goes to the Queen Katherine, the Kings wife, a proud woman and a
stout, and persuaded her, that if the Duke were in such authority still, and
lived, the people would honor him more than the King, and the King should not
be set by; and so between them, I cannot tell how, it came to pass, but at S.
Edmundsberry in a Parliament, the good Duke Humfry was smothered.

STEPHEN GARDENER.
To leave this Cardinal, Ste. Gardener, both Chancellor of England, Hall 31. H.
8. f. 234. Fox Acts Monuments, vol. 2. Edit ult. p. 380.
384.426.585.646.647.441.442.443.531. Antiqu. Eccles Brit. p. 386.
and B. of Winchester was the chief author of making and reviving the bloody
Act, entitled the 6. Articles by which many of our godly Martyrs suffered; the
chief plotter and contriver of the noble Lord Cromwells death. Who could not
abide the pride of the Prelates, and was attainted by Parliament, and never
came to his answer: He was a great opposer of the reformation of Religion, and
abuses of the Clergy, both in King Henry the eights, and King Edwards days,
and stirred up under hand diverse Priests, Abbots, and Monks to oppose the
Kings Supremacy, and to raise up open rebellion in Lincolneshire, in the
North, Cornwall, and other places, in maintenance of Popery; for which
Treasons and Rebellions Hall H. 8. f. 226.228.229.230^231.232^233.234.
Holinsh^d. p. 1001.1002.1006.939.941. to 945 946.947.950.951^952.961.
Exmew, Middlemore and Nudigate, three Monks of the Charterhouse, a Priest
near Winsor; the Abbots of Ierney, and Rivers Freer, Forest, Crofts, and
Collines Priests, Thomas Epsara Monk; five Priests of Yorkshire, and Robert
Bockham, John Tomson, Roger Barret, John Wolcocke, William Alse, James Morton,
John Barrow; Richard Brune^ Priests, chief stirrers in the Devonshire
rebellions^ and principal doers therein; and one Welsh a Priest. Vicar of St.
Thomas near Exbridge (hanged on the Tower there in his Priests apparel, with
a holy water bucket and sacring Bell, a pair of Bedes, and such other Popish
Trinkets about him, for his rebellion,) were all executed^ Fox Acts and
Monuments, the old Edition p. 816.82^.823.824.815.863. and vol. 2. Edit. vlt.
p. 646.647.
This Bishop imploed by King Henry the eight, with Sir Henry Knevet, as his
Ambassador, at the Di^t at Ratisbond, he held private intelligence, and
received and sent letters under hand to the Pope, whose authority the King had
utterly abolished, and had then mortal enmity with: for which false and
tray^erly practice of which the King had certain intelligence, he caused in
all Pardons afterward, all Treasons committed beyond the seas to be excepted,
which was most meant for the Bishops cause; whom he exempted out of his
Testament as being wilful and contentious, and one that would trouble them
all; and exempted also out of his said Testament the Bishop of Westmins^er, for
that he was Schooled in Winchesters School, Fox Acts and Monuments Ed^t. ult
vol. 2. p. 71^ to 740. vol. 3. p 16.40.123.527. old ^dit^ p. 903.1389.1695. a.
1^73. b.
whom this King before his death was certainly believed to abhor more than
any English man in his Realm. He was found to be the secret worker^ that three
years before the Kings death diverse of the Privy Chamber were indicted of
heresy, for the which the said King was much offended.

Anno. 1548. he was committed Prisoner to the Fleet, and after to the Tower,
for a Sermon preached before King Edward, and disobeying the Kings Injunctions;
when he had there continued two years and an half, he was by authority
deprived of his Bishoppricke, and sent to prison again, where he continued,
till Queen Mary's time; when he was not only restored unto his Bishoppricke,
but likewise made Lord Chancellor of England. For the extreme malice he bare
to our Religion, he not only cruelly burnt many poor men, but likewise
wrought all the means his cunning head could devise to make away our late
famous Quueene Elizabeth, saying often, it was in vain to strike off a few
leaves or branches, when the root remained: he not only caused this innocent
Princess to be imprisoned, and barbarously handled, both in the Tower, and
after, at Woodstocke, being the Queens own Sister, and heir apparent to to
the Crown, procuring to her so great vexation by his rigorous usage, that she
wished her self borne a Milkemaide; but proceeded so far in his treacherous
plots against her, that in all probabilities, his cursed policy must have
prevailed, had not God moved the heart of Queen Mary her Sister, with a very
kind and natural affection toward her, and in mercy taken him the more
speedily out of the way by death, till which time she had no security,
release, or hope of life. The whole Story of his treachery and Gods mercy
toward this blessed Queen, is at large related by Master Fox. He was a
bitter opposite and enemy to Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, refusing to eat his
dinner, that day, the two last of them were burnt at Oxford before he heard
from thence of their death. He was the bane of Fox Acts and Monuments, old
Edition, p. 603. and. 1031.
Queen Anne, (the Lady Anne of Cleave,) the Lord Cromwell, Dr. Barnes, and
others. And though in King Henry's days, he proved Queen Mary a Bastard and
the Bishop of Rome to be an usurper; yet afterward when Queen Mary came to
the Crown, he was her chiefest instrument, the forwardest man to advance the
Popes Supremacy, and the sorest Persecutor.

Holinshed p. 1121.
Anno. 1554. On the Cunduit in Gracious street, King Henry the eight, was
painted in harness, having in one hand a sword, and in the other hand a Book
whereon was written Verbum Dei, delivering the same as it were to King Edward
his Son, who was painted in a corner by him; hereupon was no small matter
made; for Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester sent for the Painter, and not
only called him Knave, for painting a Book in King Henr^es hand, and
specially for writing thereon Verbum Dei, but also Traitor and villain,
commanding him to wipe out the Book, and Verbum Dei too. Whereupon the Painter
fearing that he should leave some part of the Book, or of Verbum Dei, in King
Henry's hand, wiped away a piece of his finger withal. Holinshed. p. 1130.1157.
England had great cause to bless God for his death, which happened so
opportunity; not so much for the great hurt he had done in times past in
perverting his Princess, bringing in ^ixe Articles, in murdering Gods Saints,
in defacing Christ's sincere Religion, as especially for that he had thought to
have brought to pass in murdering also Queen Eliz^beth: for whatsoever
danger of death, it was she was in, it did no doubt proceed from this Bloody
Bishop, who was the cause thereof; and if it be certain, which we heard, that
her Highness being in the Tower, a writ came down from certain of the
Counsel for her execution, it is out of controver^ie, that wily Winchester was
the only Dedalus and framer of that Engine. Holinshed. p.
1154.1154.1157.1158.1160.
He was an enemy to this Queen, and with diverse of the Lords^ strictly
examined her at the Tower. And when she recovered from her dangerous
sickness, he and other Bishops repined, looked blacked in the mouth, and told
this Queen they marvelled, that she submitted not her self to her Majesty's
mercy, considering that she had offended her highness: Winchester, after
talking with her, persuaded her to submit her self; which she refusing, he
replied, that she must tell another tale, ere that she should he set at
liberty, least she should have advantage against him for her long, and wrong
imprisonment: more English blood by his means was spilled in Queen Mary's
time, by hanging, heading, burning, and prisoning, than ever was in any Kings
reign before her. This treacherous Prelate, who called King Edward his
Sovereign, usurper Fox Acts and Monuments Edi. ult vol. 3. p. 524 527.
being hated of God, and all good men, had a miserable death suitable to his
life: for the old Duke of Norfolk coming so visit him, the same day that
Ridly and Latimer were burnt at Oxford, the Bishop would not sit down to
dinner, till one of his servants about four of the clock coming post from
Oxford, brought most certain intelligence that fire was set to these Martyrs;
whereupon coming out rejoicing to the Duke, Now (says he) let us go to
Dinner. They being set down, meat immediately was brought, and the Bishop began
merrily to eat; but what followed? The bloody Tyrant had not eaten a few bits,
but the sudden stroke of Gods terrible hand fell upon him in such sort, as
immediately he was taken from the Table, and so brought to his bed, where he
continued the space of fifteen days in such intolerable anguish and torments
within (rotting even above ground) that all that while during these fifteen
days, he could not avoid by order of vrine^ or otherwise, any thing that he
received, whereby his body being miserably inflamed within (who had inflamed so
many good Martyrs before) was brought to a wretched end. And thereof no doubt,
as most like it is, came the thrusting out of his tongue from his mouth so
swollen and black with the inflammation of his body. A Spectacle worthy to be
noted and beholden of such bloody burning Persecutors. When Doctor Day^ Bishop
of Chichester came to him, and began to comfort him with words of Gods Promise,
and with the free justification in the blood of Christ our Savior, repeating
the Scriptures to him: Winchester hearing that, What my Lord (quoth he) will
you open that gappe now? Than farewell all together. To me, and such other in
my case you may speak it, but open this window to the people, than farewell
all together. And thus this wretch died, blaspheming. He that list may read
more of him in John Bales Scriptorum. Brit. cent. 8. sect. 88. p. 486. etc.

John White his successor in that See, was little better, and would have
defaced Queen Elizabeth gladly, if he durst, in his Funeral Sermon of Queen
Mary, whom he immoderately extolled. He to obtain this Bishoppricke, promised
to John white
give the Pope 1600. l. per annum, for it during his life: which gross Symony
the Pope disliking, and threatening to punish him for it, he was forced to pay
much dearer, ere he could obtain it. William Harrison Description of England.
l. 2. c^ 1. p. 138. Martins Hi^^. p. 452.453.454
This Bishop, and others, being appointed to confer with the Protestant
Ministers in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, instead of disputing, he, and
Thomas Watson Bishop of Lincoln, two malepate Prelates, threatening to
excommunicate the Queen, were committed to prison, and there detained, and
after that for refusing to take the oath of allegiance to the Queen; he, with
thirteen Bishops more, who denied to take the Oath of Supremacy, which the
greatest number of them had sworn unto formerly during the reign of King
Henry the eight, were deprived of their Bishopprickes, and others placed in
their room. John Bale in his Cent. 9. Scrip. Brit. sect. 97. p. 736.737.
Centuries gives this description of this Prelate: Johannes Whitus,
Wintoniensis sch^lae olim Praeses, nunc EIVS PESTILENTISSIMAE SEDIS Episcopus,
and Antichristi Romani terrificus minister, rostris and unguibus in Angliae
regno restituere conatur, omnes ejus tyra^nides, idolomanias, faeditates, and
omni^ dogmata universa. Principum illusor, and animarum carnifex, duplex and
perjurus hypocrita ambitiosus que haereticus, deum suum Mauzim, mutum, mortuum
and aridum idolum, omnium perniciosissimum, adversus Denm verum, viuum and
sanctum erexit. And John Parkhust for his sake, wrote this Disticke to England,
to take heed of all Prelates, and not to trust them. Anglia furcatis nimium ne
fidito mitris:
Dic rogo, number serus sum tibi praemonitor?


With this other Disticke upon the Bishop himself. Candidus es certe, nec
candidus es, Rogitas cur?
Nomine candidus es, moribus at niger es.


I find little recorded of any of the Bishops of this See since this days;
and what the Prelates of that See, in our memories have been (as Bilson,
Mountague, Andrews, Neale, and Curle now living,) is sufficiently known: For
Bilson, Andrews, and Neale, we know, they were great sticklers^ for See Bilson
of Church Govenement Andr^wes; for Ex Officio Oaths, etc.
Episcopacy, Lordly Prelacy, the High Commission Inquisition, and Ex Officio
Oaths; great enemies to Prohibitions and the Common Law; and no good friends
to Parliaments: for Mountague and Neale, they were the original Authors and
publishers of the Book for Sports on the Lords Day^ published in King James
his name and days, which occasioned must disorder then, and more since; and
for the present Bishop, Curle, he was the most violent enforcer of this Book
on the Clergy of all other Bishops ( Pierce and Wren only excepted,) and the
first that ever suspended any Ministers for refusing parsonally to read it in
their Churches; he suspending no less than five eminent Ministers at St. Mary
Overies in one day, for refusing to publish it, though not enjoined nor
authorized by the King to do it; whereupon other Bishops following his example,
and proceedings in this kind, both in their Consistories, high Commissions,
and Visitations, (wherein they made it one Article of Inquiry upon oath for
Churchwardens to present on, whether their Minister had read to them the
Declaration for Sports? a suparlative and shameless prophanes, not paraleld in
any age since Adam till now) Silenced, Suspended, persecuted; excommunicated,
and drove out of the Realm, many of our best and painfullest preaching
Ministers, and put both our Church and State into a miserable combustion, and
most sad perplexed condition, making such breaches in both, which will not be,
repaired again in many years. O that men who profess themselves Fathers of
the Church, Pillars of Religion, and Pastors of men's souls, should be such
Step-fathers to their own Diocese and Country, such patrons of profaneness,
and licenciousnesse, and such desperate murderers of poor peoples souls, to
vex persecute, and stop their godly Ministers mouths, because they durst not
out of conscience open them, to seduce and spur them on to hell and prophanes
with a full currere.

I shall only check the impudency, and shame the profaneness of these our
monstrou Prelates, with words of Cardinal Bellarmine (no Puritan, Cincio.
6.3.19.20.21.
I am certain) touching the unlawfulness of Dancing and Pastimes upon Lords
days, in sundry Sermons. I cannot verily, good hearers (says he) explicate by
words, with how great grief of mind, I behold, in what a perverse and
Diabolical manner Holi-dayes are celebrated in this our age. How far pevish
men have obscured and defiled their pious institution, with their most corrupt
manners, may be understood by this, that to strangers, and those who are
ignorant what manner of feasts, these are, from those things, which they see
every where to be done, they may seem to be, not the feasts of God, but the
Festivals of the Devil, and so the very Bacchanalia themselves. Yea verily,
when I pray you, are there more sins committed then on Holidayes? When are
there more sumptuous feasts kept? When more lascivious songs heard? When are
bowling-allies and Tavernes more frequented? when are there more execrable
kinds of Plays Fooleries, and scurrilities? When are there more Dances in most
places to the sound of the Harp and Lute, then on these days? But
peradventure it is no evil. or a small evil, for men to dance with women. Yea
verily nothing is more pernicious. If strawes can come to the fire, and not be
burnt, than a young man may dance with women. Alas, what will dances and
Galliards profit thee at the last? when thou shall have danced long, what shall
thou gain at length^ but weariness of body and sickness of mind? know
thou not the danger of Dances? How many think thou, have entered Virgins into
dances, and returned Harlots? Know thou not what happened to the daughter of
Herodias, who with her dances was the cause that the light of the world, who
had baptized the Lord, was quite extinguished? even she her self afterward,
as Eccl^siasticae. Histor. l 1. c. 19.20 Where this Historian notably
inveigheth against Dancing.
Nicephorus records, when she once passed over a river congealed with Ice, the
Ice breaking, fell into the water up to the neck; and little after her head
was congealed with frost and cold, and afterward cut off, not with a sword,
but with Ice, and then made a deadly dance upon the Ice. Know thou not what
St. De virgini^us l. 3. Tom. 4. Operum p. 236.227.
Ambrose, says for her sake, One (says he) may dance, but the daughter of an
adulteress: but she who is chaste, let her learn her daughters Prayers not
Dances. Of Dances, I will only speak one word, and for this cause
principally, that I understand how dancing seems not a true evil to some, and
I know that at Lovan, there are public Schools, where the Art of dancing is
taught. But I verily, if adultery and fornication be evil, cannot see how it
is not evil for men to dance with women, since it most of all provokes
thereunto. Nota.
Hear holy Job Job 31.
I have made (says he) a covenant with mine eyes, that I would not so much as
think of a maid; and shall thou go and dance with a maid, and provoke thy
self to lust by dancing, and yet no danger hang over thy head? To what end
then does the Wise man give this admonition Ecclesiasticus. 9.4.
Keep not company with a woman that is a dancer, least happily thou perish in
her allurements; but because if chafe can come to the fire and not be burnt,
than a young man may dance with women and not burne^ What? holy men, St.
Anthony, St. Hilar^on, dwelt in the wilderness, they perpetually gave
themselves to fastings and prayers, and yet Hi^ronimus Epist. ^2 c. 3.
scarce def^^ded themselves from the spirit of fornicatio^^ and from evil
de^ires and thoughts: and will thou ^dde ^o the heat of youth^ the heat of
drinking, and then go and laugh and sing, and dance with beautiful maidens,
and shall I suspect no harm? Who of all you shall dwell with everlasting
burning? Esaias 33.14.
If you cannot now abstain from drunkenness, from dancing, from toyes^ how
shall ye be able to endure those living flames^ and most bitter gnashing of
teeth? But concerning the madness of dancing; hear ye what the ancients as
well profane as sacred, have left written: Oration pro Muraena.
Marcus Tulli^s did so detest the filthiness of Dances, that in the defense of
Muraena, he said, No sober man almost danceth, unless perchance he be besides
himself, and extreme dancing is the Companion of many delights. And Oration pro
Cn. Plaucio and Post r^ditum in Senatum.
in another place he objecteth dancing to Antonius, as a most dishonest crime.
Blush therefore, O Christian, blush, thou art overcome by an Ethnicke, and
without doubt thou shall be condemned in judgment by an Ethneike. He by the
light of Nature only without the light of faith, could teach, that dancing was
not the practice of any, but either of drunkards or mad men: and thou the Son
of Cod, illuminated with a celestial light, with whom such vanities ought not
so much as to be Eph^s. 5 3.
named, art most mad, in the very most famous and most sacred solemnities. Let
us relinquish profane Authors, and come to Christians. Tell thou us, O most
blessed Ambrose, thou most reverend old man, the light of the Christian Church,
what think thou of dances and morrisses De vi^ginibus^ l. 3. Tom 4. p.
226.227.
Worthily, says he, from thence we proceed to the injury of the Divinity; for
what modesty can be there where they dance, shreeke, and make a noise
together? Tell thou us also, O blessed Hierom, what thou deemest of dancing:
Moreover (says he) in his Book against See. E^ist 10 4
Heluidius, where the Tymbrils sound, the Pipes make a noise, the Harp
chatters, the Cymballs strike together, what fear of God can there be? Let us
pass over into the East, and let us also advise with two of the Greek
Fathers. Tell thou us, O great Chrysostom the ornament of Greece, tell thou us
I pray thee thy opinion of banquets and dances; See Hom. 56. Genesis 8.74. in
Matthew.
Hear (says he) in the 49 Homily upon Matthew, hear these things, O men who
follow magnificent feasts, full of drunkenness, hear I say, and tremble at
the gulf of the devil: where wanton dancing is there the devil is certainly
present. For God has not given us our legs to dance, but that we should
walk modestly, not that we should impudently skippe like Camels. But if the
body be polluted, by dancing impudently, how much more may the soul be thought
to be defiled? The devil danceth in these dances: with these, men are deceived
by the ministers of the Devil. Last of all, hear with what words, De
Ebrietate and Luxu Sermo. Tam. 1. p. 332.336.
St. Basil the great, a most holy man, and most learned, deplores this
madness, in his Oration against drunkards: Men (says he) and women together
entering into Common dances, having delivered their souls to the drunken
devil, wound one another with the pricks of unchaste affections: profuse
laughter, is practiced and filthy songs, meretritious habits inviting unto
petulancy are there used: Laughest, and delighest thou thy self with an
arrogant delight, when as thou ought to power out tears, and sighs for
what is past? Singest thou whorish Songs, casting away the Psalms, and Hyranes
thou have learned? Do thou stir thy feet and caper furiously, and dance
unhappily, when as thou ought to bend thy knees to prayer. Thus great Basil.
Now if the holy Fathers have spoken these things of dances in genarall, Nota.
how I pray had they exclaimed, if they had known them to have been used in
the very Festivals of Christ's Nativitie? But let us leave men, and hear what
the Lord himself, who cannot err, what the holy Ghost, and the Spirit of
Truth, says by the Prophet Esaias 5.11.12.13.
Esaias: the Harp, says he, and the Violl, the Taber and pipe, and wine are in
your Feasts, but ye regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the
operation of his hands. Ah wretched and miserable persons, the Lord has done
an admirable work in these days: The Lord has created Ier. 31.22.
a new thing upon the earth: A maid has brought forth a Son: God has come
unto men, a new star has appeared, the heavens are made mellifluous Matthew.
2.2.10.
the Angels have left those blessed mansions that they might behold the little
one who is given to us, and ye only for whom these things are done, busied in
wickedness, buried in sleep and wine, regard not the work of the Lord, Luke
2.9.13.
and consider not the operations of his hands. What therefore shall be done
unto you? 14^13.14.15.
Hear the sentence of your Judge, Therefore says he, Hell has enlarged its
^oule, and has opened its mouth without all bounds Nota. See vincentii
speculum. Morale l. 3. par 9^ Distinct.
Peradadventure ye are ignorant how great a sacrilege it is to profane days
consecrated to God. Why, I beseech you, do we not every where use Churches,
Chalices, and Priestly vestments? what are these walls more than others? What
are Priests Garments more than others? As to their matter nothing at all. But
therefore it is a wickedness, therefore a sacrilege therefore a most horrible
villainy to convert them to profane uses because they are consecrated and
dedicated to God, But who knows not that Holidayes are after the same manner
consecrated and dedicated unto God, and to be spent in no other but in holy
works? which of you if he should see any one enter into the Church with
encredible audacity, and use the consecrated vestments, in steed of profane
garments, Temples for a Tavern, the Altar for a Table, the Corporals, or
Alterclothes for Mappes, eating in sacred Patens drinking in the Holy Chalices?
which of us would not tremble, who would not exclaim? And now we behold the
most solemn, the most famous, the most sacred Holy Days, dedicated to God,
that they might be spent in Prayers, Meditations, reading of holy things,
Hymns and Psalm^s, and spiritual Songs, to be profaned with sacrilegious
Dances, Morrisses, Caperings, Feasts, Drinking-matches, uncleanness,
scurrilities, and yet no man trembles, no man is moved, no man wonders; O
immortal God! 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16.
What part has righteousness with unrighteousness? what fellowship has
light with darkness? what agreement has Christ with Belial? what has the
merriment of the flesh to do with the gladness of the spirit? what the
solemnities of God, with the feasts of Bacchus and his crew? What now? those
days wherein we ought to please God most, shall we in them more provoke him
unto anger with our wickedness? on those days, in which the spirit is to be
fed and recreated; in them shall we more overwhelme him with wine and
uncleanness? etc. What a madness is this? what infirnall furies scare us out
of our wits? Thus, and much more, this Romish Cardinal Bellarmin, to the
eternal infamy of our profane English Prelates; to whom this Cardinal in
point of Dancing and Pastimes, especially on sacred Days, is not only a
Puritan, but a Saint. And thus much for the Prelates of Winchester: I shall
next survey the Bishops of Durham, and see whether they have been better
qualified than these their Brethren.

Durham.
Mat^. W^st. An 750. p. 273. Hoveden. Annal. pars prior. An. 750. p. 402.
Kenulph the tenth Bishop of Durham, KENVLPHVS.
Anno. 750. was taken by Edbert King of the Northumbrians (belike ^or some
great Treason or misdemeanour, for the Monks conceal the reason) and
committed prisoner to the Castle of Bebba, which King commanded the Church of
Saint Peter in Lindisfarne to be besieged; which shows that the Bishop and his
Church stood out then in rebellion against their Sovereign.

Malmesb. d^ g^st. Pont. Angl. l. 3. p. 277. Godwin, p. 636. Mat. Paris p. 5.
An. 1069. Godwin. p. 632.
Egelricke the 16. Bishop of Durham, ^GELRIC.
was charged with Treason, and conspiracy against William the Conqueror, and
that he had disturbed the Kings peace, and practiced pyracie on the Seas:
whereupon he was committed perpetual prisoner to Westminster, where, by
continual fasting and abundance of tears washing away the guilt of his former
misdeeds, he wan unto himself such a reputation of holiness, as the place of
his burial was much frequented after his death.

Matthew. Par^^ Hist. Major. An. 1070.1071. p. ^.6. Mat. Westminster, and Fl^rentius
Wigor^i^nsis, Ann. 1070, 1071. H^veden. An. 1069.1070. p. 451, 452.454. Godwin,
p. 636.637.
Egelwyn, EGELWYN.
his next successor in this See, much opposed himself against William the
Conqueror, to whom afterward he was in show reconciled for a time; at last the
ancient hatred he bore unto the King, boiling in his stomach, he joined winh
certain Noble men in a flat rebellion against the Conqueror: he and they
alleging at first, that they feared imprisonment, and hard measure, but indeed
proposing to apprehend and depose the King, to set up an English man in his
room, and commit him to perpetual imprisonment. When things succeeded not
according to expectation, William the Conqueror getting the victory, Egelwyn
^lyes into Scotland; the King having banished him the Realm before, where out
of his zeal, he ^^communicates the King, and all his followers, as invaders
and robbers of the Church. The year following he comes into England where he
and the Nobles combining with him, with many thousands of the Laity and Clergy
were feign to hide themselves in woods and secret places, being unable to
encounter with the Kings forces; when they had done many harms and mischiefs
in diverse places to the wrong of the King, they came at last ^o the Isle of
Ely, which they fortified^ and seized on as the place of their residence and
refuge: and o^t times issuing out thence, much wasted and spoiled the bordering
countries, building a wooden Castle in the Iland^ whereupon the Conqueror comes
with all his forces, both by sea and land, and besieges the Island, m^king
ways and passages over bogges and fennes, formerly unpassable, building a
strong Castle at Wi^bitch. Egelwyn perceiving the danger took ship and
departed into voluntary exile, committing some pyracies by the way he set his
course for Colen, but was forced by contrary winds to land in Scotland, thence
returning again to Ely, he was at last there taken prisoner by the
Conqueror, and committed close prisoner to Abingdon, where An. 1071. refusing
to take any sustenance, for mere grief and anger he died.

Walcher.
Malmesbur. l. 3. Hist. Angl. p. 110. H^v^den. Annal. pars prior. An.
1071.1078.1080. p. 454.455.457. Mat^. Paris, An. 1075. p. 9. Godwin page 637,
638, 639, 640.
Before his death the Conqueror having deprived him of his Bishopric, caused
one Walcher to be consecrated in his place: he attending more worldly affairs
than the charge of his flock (as many of our Prelates do now) gave himself
altogeher to temporal business; wherein he wholly occupied himself, contra
dignitatem Pontificalem: writes Matthew Paris. He bought of the King the
Earldom of Northumberland, being by this means both a Spiritual and a
Temporal Lo^d, and engrossing both jurisdictions into his hands, and then
making himself a secular Judge, took upon him to sit in the Court, and to
determine all causes at his pleasure, dealing with all very corruptly, and
taking that course as might be most for his own gain: hereupon he geatly
enriched his coffers, but purchased to himself extreme hatred among the Common
people whom he much impoverished with his extortions, which was his
destruction in the end. There was a Gentleman of great account called Leulfus,
who had married the Earl of Northumberlands daugh^er, that for very devotion,
to the end he might live near the Church in his latter time, came to Durham
to dwell; he keeping company very much with the Bishop, who loved him much for
his wisdom, equity, and virtues: Leofwin the Bishops Chaplain, whom he
trusted with all his household matters, and Gilbert the Bishops kinsman that
dealt in his Temporal affairs, very corrupt men, envying the credit that
Leulfus had gotten with the Bishop, every where opposed and traduced him and
his actions, both in words and deed, and at last conspired to murder him,
which they did in a barbarous manner, assaulti^g him in his house with armed
men, and murdering not only the innocent Gentleman himself, but also his
servants and who^e household: the news of this horrible outrageous cruelty
coming to the ears of the Bishop amazed him; so as turning about to Leofwin
he said to him: Thou have already slain me with thy tongue: and doubting the
danger got him into his Castle, and dispatched messengers to the friends and
kindred of Leulfus, protesting, that the fact was committed without his
knowledge, and that he was heartily sorry for it, and if any suspect him, he
could be reddy to submit himself to any order of Law, whereby he might clear
himself: herewith they seemed to be satisfied, and appointed to meet and
confer of the matter at a place called Goats-head. The Bishop for his better
safety betook himself to the Church with his company: at which time all the
people of the province came to demand justice from the Bishop, for some wrongs
done them. The Bishop answered them over roughly, that he would do them
justice for no injury or complaint, unless they would first give him 400l. of
good money. Whereupon one of them in the name of all the rest, desired leave of
the Bishops that he might confer with the rest about this exaction, that so
they might give him an advised answer; which granted, the people consulted
together without the Church concerning this business: in mean time diverse
messages passed between the friends of Leulfus and the Bishop about this
murder, but the more the matter was debated (being very odious in it self)
the more his friends, and the people too, were incensed: at last it was told
them that the Bishop had harbored Leofwyn and Gilbert too in his house, and
afforded them countenance since this murder, which being once heard and ^ound
true, they all cried out, it was manifest, that the Bishop was the Author of
this fact: While the company stood in a mummering doubting what to do, both
concerning this money and murder too, one of some special regard among them,
stepped up and used these words: Short read, good read, slay the Bishop.
Hereupon without more ado they ^anall unto the Church, killed as many of the
Bishops retinue as they found without doors, and with horrible noise and
outcryes bid him and his company come out unto them. The Bishop to make the
best of a bad match, and to rid himself from danger, persuaded his kinsman
Gilber^ there present to go out unto them, if happily his death (which he well
deserved) might satisfy their fury, and purchase their safety. Gilbert was
content, and issuing our with diverse of the Bishops company, were all slain,
except two Englishmen servants to the Bishop, the rest being Normans. They not
yet pacified, the Bishop besought Leofwyn (whose li^e he knew was principally
sought) to go out likewise, but he utterly re^used: The Bishop therefore going
to the Church door himself, intrea^ed them not to take his life from him,
protesting himself altogethe^ innocent of Leulfus his blood, showing them at
large how inconvenient it would be to themselves, and the whole Country to shed
his blood, an unarmed Priest, and sacred consecrate Bishop, their Ruler,
Governor, Magistrate. Lastly, hoping that his very countenance, gravity, age,
white comely head and beard, and the Majes^y of his person might something move
them to compassion, he went out among them, carrying a green branch in his
hands to testify his desire of peace: when he saw all this availed not, the
people running furiously upon him, he cast his gown over his own head, and
committing him self to their fury, with innumerable wounds was pitifully
massacred, together with all his retinue to the number of one hundred persons,
only Leofwyn yet r^mained in the Church, and being often called would not come
forth. So they set the Church on fire; he not enduring the fire leapt out at a
window, and was immediately hewne in a thousand pieces. This barbarous
slaughter was committed May the 4. 1080. as some Historians, or 1075. as others
record. The King hearing of this tumult, sent his brother Odo Bishop of Bayon,
with many of his Nobles; and a great army to take punishment of this murder,
which while they sought to revenge, they brought the whole Country to
desolation; those that were guilty prevented the danger by ^light, so as few of
them were apprehended; of the rest that stayed at h^me, some we^e unjustly
executed, and the rest compelled to ransom themselves to their utter
impoverishing, and undoing. This was the life and death of the first Lord
Bishop of this See; who joined both the temporal and spiritual Ju^isdiction
and honor together in his own person, being both a Bishop, and an Earl.

M^^. Paris, Hist. Major An. 1074. p. 8.
Anno 1074. during this Bishops domination, Plu^es Episcopi and Abbates, many
Bishops and Abbots, with 3. Earls, and many Soldiers conspired together at
No^wich, to thrust the Conqueror ou^ of his Kingdom, sending messages ^o ^he
King of Denmark for aid, and confederating themselves with the Welchmen:
whereupon ^hey burnt and spoiled many towns and villages belonging to the
Conqueror; but at last they were defeated by him, some of them being banished
the Realm, others hanged, others deprived of their eyes. Who these Bishops
were in particular that joined in this conspiracy and rebellion, is not
expressed; but they were many in number; whether this Bishop might not be one
of the company I know not.

Malmes. de gest. Reg. Angl. l. 4. p. 120, 121^ de gest. Pont. Ang. l. 3. p.
^77. Mat. Paris, An. 1088. p. 13, 14. Wig^r^. Matthew. We^^m, Hoved. An. 1087,
1088. Walsingh^ ypodigma N^ustri^ An. 1088. p. 33. Holinshed. p. 17, 18.
William Kairlipho, WILLIAM KAIRLIPHO.
Abbo^ of Saint Vincent, his next successor, who got so far into the favor
of King William Rufus, that he made him his household Chaplain, and one of his
Privy Council, and did what he list under him, in the year of our Lord
1088. joined himself with Odo Bishop of Bayon, and Ea^le of Kent, Geffry
Bishop of Constantia, and other great men in a rebellious conspiracy against
King William, who much favored and trusted him, to deprive him of his Crown,
as an effemina^e person, both in mind and countenance, and of a fearful
heart, who would do all things rashly, both against right and justice; which
revolt and treachery of his the King took very grievously. Whereupon they take
up arms against the King, wasting the Country in sundry parts, intending to
set up his Brother Robert in his place as King, giving out diverse words, and
sending abroad many Letters to incite men to take arms for this purpose. The
bishop of Durham held out Durham, by strong hand against the King, who coming
thither in person with his army besieged it, so as the Bishop was at length
forced to surrender the City, and yield himselfe^ whereupon he was exiled the
Land, with diverse of his accomplices; and for his former pre^^nded friendship to
the King, was suffered to go Scotfree (though worthy a thousand quarterings)
upon ^hi^ he presently passed over Sea into Normandy, there he continued near
three years in a voluntary exile, until Sept^mber 11. 1190. at what time the
King coming to Durham, received him into his ^ull favor, and restored him to
his former dignities. After which he sided with the Kin^ against Anselme to
thrust him out of his Bishopric, that himself might succeed him: b^t he
failed in that projec^. Falling again into the Kings displeasure, he was
summoned to appear before him at Gloucester, by a certain day, before which
tim^ he fell sick (of grief as was ^hought:) when he appeared not, and it
was told the King he^ was sick, he swore by S. Lukes face (which was his
usual Oath) he lied and did but counterfeit; and he would ^ave him fetched
with a vengeance. But it appears his excuse was true enough, for he died
soon after. Holinshed says, he died ^or sorrow, because he could not clear
himsel^e of his offense in the said rebellion, albeit that he labored most
earnestly so to do, that he might thereby have obtained the King^ favor
again.

Matt. Paris p. 51.54. Malmes. de gest. Pontif. Angl. l. 3. p. 277, 278.
Godwin. p. 645, 646, 647.
Ranulph Flambard his very next successor, Ranulph Flambard.
a very wicked man, nothing scrupulous, but ready to do any thing for
preferment, was by King William Rufus (who ^ound him a fit man for his purpose
to bring great sums of money into his coffers, by any unlaw^ull means) made
chief Governor of all his Realm under him, so as he had all tha^ authority
which now the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, and diverse other offices have
divided among^t them this au^hority he abused very impudently, not caring whom
he offended, so as he might enrich either the King or himself. Many times when
the King gave commandment for the levying of a certain sum of moneys
amongst his Subjects, he would require of the Commons twice as much, whereat
the King being very well content, would laugh, and say, that Ranulph was the
only man for his turn, who cared not whom he displeased, so he might please
his Master. It was impossible but he should be very odious, both unto the
Common people and Nobility also; and no marvel if many complaints were made
unto the King of him, against all which he shut his ears obstina^ely. When
therefore that way succeeded not, some of his discontented adversaries
determined to wrecke their malice on him by killing him; They feign a message
from the Bishop of London his old Master, that he was very sick and ready to
depart the world, that he was wonderful desirous to speak with him, and to
the end he might make the better speed, had sent him a Barge to convey him to
his house, being then by the waterside; He suspecting no fraud, went with
them in great haste, attended only by his Secretary, and some one or two
other. They having him thus in their clutches, carried him not to the appoi^ted
Stairs, but unto ^ Ship provided for him, ready to set sail. As soon as he
perceived how he was entrapped, he cast away his Ring, or manuell Seal, and
after his great S^ale into the river lest they might give opportunity of
forging false grants, and conveyances. Then he falls to entreating and
persuading, but all to no purpose, for they were determined he should die. They
had appointed two Marin^rs to dispatch him either by knocking out his brains,
or heaving him alive overboard, for doing whereof they were promised to have
his clothes. These executioners could not agree upon the division of the
reward, ^or his gown was better worth than all the rest of his apparel: while
they were reasoning upon that point, it pleased God to raise a terrible
tempest, so as they looked every minute to die th^mselves, and therefore had no
very good leisure of thinking to put another man to death. Ranulph then
omitting no opportunity of his deliverance, like another Orion, by the music
of his eloquence, seeks to dissuade them from the bloody execution of their
determination^ laying before them the danger that was like to ensue them upon
the execu^ion of so cruel a murder, which could not be hid; and lastly,
wishing them to consider, how God by raising this tempest had threatened to
revenge his death, and had as it were set the Image of vengeance before their
eyes: promising them mountains of gold if they saved his life; By which he so
far prevailed, that one of them offered to defend him, and Girald the author
of this conspiracy, was content to set him aland, and to conduct him to his
own house. But so soon as he had done, not trusting a reconciled foe, he
got him out of the Land: After this notable voyage he was consecrated Bishop
of Durham: He was scarce warm in his See, but King William Rufus was slain,
and his brother Henry succeeded him. This Prince not able to withstand the
importunity of his Nobles, and the innumerable complaints made against this
Bishop, by the vote of the whole Parliament, clapped him up in the Tower. But he
so enchaunted his keepers, as they were content to let him go, and run away
with themselves. William of Malmesbury says, that he procured a waterbea^er in
his Tank^rd to bring him a rope, by which he slid down from the wall to the
ground, and so (although he hurt his arm, and galled his leg to the bone)
away he escaped, getting himself into Normandy, where he arri^ed in the
beginning of February, Ann. 1101. There he never left buzzing into the ears
of Robert, Duke of Normandy, that the Kingdom of England was his by right,
till he procured him to a^tempt the invasion of the Realm, to his own great
loss, the effusion of much Christian blood, and the great disturbance and
damage of the whole Realm: How long he continued in his exile is not
recorded by our Historians, who brand him for a notable extortioner, oppressor,
rebel, and desperate wicked wretch, and ad omne scelus paratum, (as too many
of his coat since him have been) who set the whole Realm into an uproare and
combustion. Holinshed. Hist. of Scotl. page 181.
About the year 1100. King Edgar gave to the Monks of Durham the lands of
Coldingham. And to this Bishop of Durham he gave the town of Barwicke, but for
that the said Bishop afterward wrought treason against him, he lost that gift,
and the King resumed that Town into his hands again.

HVGH PVSAR.
Hugh Pusar his successor, the 33. Bishop of that See, nephew to King Stephen,
a man very wise in ordering temporal matters, not spir^tuall, Nu^rigens. Hist.
l. 1. c. 26. l. 4. c. 4. Godwin. p. 648, 649, 650. Holins. p. 119.121.
exceeding covetous, and as cunning in getting money, as covetous in desiring
it, was refused to be consecrated Bishop by Murdack Archbishop of York, for
want of yea^es, and lightness in behavior, whereupon he obtained his
consecration at Rome. King Richard the first ^or a great mass of money he had
prepared for his voyage into the holy Land, dispensed with his vow of
pilgrimage thither, and likewise made him Earl of Northumberland. The King
having created him an Earl, turned him about unto the company, and laughing
said, I have performed a wonderful exploit, for (quoth he) of an old Bishop I
have made a young Earl. He likewise gave the King one thousand Marks to make
him chief Justice of England: Nubrigensis. l. 4. c. 4. l. 5. c. 8.
qui nimirum consultius proprio contentus officio divini juris multo decentius
quam humani minister extitisset, cum nemo possit utrique, prout dignum est
deservire, atque illud domini^um ad Apostolos, maxim Successores Apostolorum
respiciat. Non potestis Deo servire and mammonae. Si enim velit Episcopus ut
coelesti pariter and terreno Regi placeat, ad utrumque se officium dividere:
certe. Rex coelestis, qui sibi vult ex toto cord, tota anima, tota virtute
serviri, ministerium dimidium non approbat, non diligit, non acceptat. Quid si
Episcopus nec saltem dimidius, quae Dei sunt, and decent Episcopum, exequatur,
sed vices suas indignis et remissis executoribus committat ut terreno vel foro,
vel palatio totus serviat? nam nec terreni Principis ratiocinia quisquam
dimidius sufficienter administrat. Quamobrem memoratus Pontifex cum jam esset
grandaevus, officio seculari suscepto in Australibus Angliae partibus ad
publica totus negot^a recidebat, mundo non crucifixus, sed infixus, writes
Nubrigensis of him. Holinsh p. 105. Roger de H^veden. Annal. pars pos^^^ius. p.
615.
Roger Archbishop of York deceasing A. 1181. delivered great sums of money
to certain Bishops to be distributed among poor people. King Henry the second
after his death called for the money and seized it to his use, alleging a
sentence given by the same Archbishop in his li^etime, that no Ecclesiastical
person might give any thing by will except he devised the the same whilst he
was in perfect health. Yet this Bishop of Durham would not depart with 400
Marks, which he had received to distribute among the poor, alleging, that
he dealt the same away before the Archbishops death, and therefore he that
would have it again, must go gather it up of them to whom he had distributed
it, which himself would in no wise do. But the King took no small
displeasure with this indiscreet answer, in so much that he seized the Castle
of Durham into his hands; and sought means to disquiet the said Bishop by
diverse manner of ways Hoveden A^n^l. p^rs posterior. page 663.665, 666.
King Richard going into the holy Land, made this Bishop chief Justice from
Trent Northwards, and the Bishop of Ely Lord Chancellor and chief Justice of
England, between whom strife and discord immediately ar^se, which of them
should be the greater, for that which pleased the one displeased the other; for
all power is impatient of a consort. The Bishop of Ely soon after imprisoned
him till he had surrendered Winsor Castle, and others to him, and put in
pledges to be faithful to the King and Kingdom, of which more in Ely. At the
return of King Richard from Jerusalem, he found him not so favorable as he
expected, and thinking that he grudged him his Earldom, resigned the same
into his hands. For the redemption of which he afterward offered the King great
sums of money; whereupon the King knowing how to use him in his kind, writ
letters to him full of reverend and gracious speeches, wishing him to bring up
his money to London, and there to receive the Government of the whole Realm,
which he would commit to him, and the Archbishop of Canterbury. Being very
joyful of this ^avour, he comes about Shrovetide toward London, and
surfeiting of flesh by the way died. This Prelate (who much troubled and
oppressed the Commons, and whole Realm) had no less than three bastard
sons, H^v^d^n. A^nal. pars posterior page 725, 736, 665, 666, 685, 738.
whom he endeavored to advance, but they all dyed before him. He was often in
arms in the field, and besieged the Castle of Thifehill belonging to Earl
John: he took up the Crossado and went beyond Sea with King Richard the first
to the wars in the holy Land; but considering the danger, got a dispensation
and returned speeding better than Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury, and ten
Archbishops and Bishops more, who di^d at the siege before Acon; and like
warlike Prelates stirred up King Richard with sundry other Christian Princes to
that bloody, chargeable, and un^ortunate war, wherein many thousands of
Christians spent both their lives, and estates, and whereby Christians lost the
verity of Christian Religion, and Christ himself in a great measure, whiles
thus they war to secure the place of his sepulcher, which proved a sepulcher
both to their bodies and souls. * William K. of Scotland coming to visit King
Richard the first afte^ his release; this Prelate, and Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury, went to Brackley, where the Bishop had an Inn. The King of Scots
servants coming thither, would have taken up the Bishops Inn for their King:
but the Bishops servants withstood them; whereupon they bought provision for
the King and dressed it in another house in that same Court: When the Bishop
came thither, and his servants had informed him what had passed, he would not
retire, but went on boldly unto his Inn, and commanded his meat to be set on
the table; whiles he was at dinner, the Archbishop of Canterbury comes to him,
and offers him his lodging, and counsels him to remove and leave the Inn. The
King of Scots coming late from hunting, when he was told what had happened,
took it very grievously, and would not go thither, but commanded all his
provision to be given to the poor, and goes forthwith to the King to
Selnestone, and complains to him of the injury the Bishop of Durham had offered
to him; for which the King sharply rebuked him.

Richard de Marisco.
Richard de Marisco, Lord Chancellor of England, and Archdeacon of
Notthumberland, an old Courtier, was thrust into this See by Gualo the Popes
Legate, Godwin Cat. p. 515
and consecrated by the Archbishop of York in the year 1217. during the time
of the vacancy. This Richard was a very prodigal man, and spent so liberally
the goods of his Church, as the Monks doubting he would undo them, and
himself also, went about by course of Law to stay him, and force him to a
moderation of expense. But it fell out quite contrary to their expectation, for
he being wilfully set, continued Law with them, appealing to Rome, etc. and
continued his old course even until his death. The year 1226. in the
beginning of Easter term, he rid up to London with a troop of Lawyers
attend^ng on him. At Peterborough he was entertained in the Ab^ey very
^ono^rably, and going to bed there in very good health, was found in the
morning by his Chamberlain stark dead. He deceased May the first, leaving
his Church 40000. marks indeb^ed, though his contention, and pr^digall
factious humor.

Anthony Beak the 41. Bishop of this See, Anthony B^ak^. Godwin. p. 521.522.
a very wealthy man, contented not himself with ordinary Titles. Therefore he
procured the Pope to make him Patriarc^ of ^erusalem, and obtained of the King
the Principality of ^he Isle of Man, during his life. Anno 1294. being
Ambassador to the Emperor John Ro^an the Archbishop of York excommunicated
him, which cost him ^000. Marks fine to the King, and his life to boot, he
dying for grief. There was great stir between him and the Prior and Covent
of Durham. He informed the Pope that the Prior was a very simple and
insufficient man to rule that house, and thereupon procured the government
thereof both spiritual and temporal to be committed to him. The Monks
appealed both the Pope and King, who required the hearing of these
controversies between the Prior and Bishop. This notwithstanding the Bishops
officers, made no more ado, but excommunicated the Prior, Monks and all for
not obeying their authority immediately. Herewith ^he King greatly offended,
caused those Officers to be fined, and summoned the Bishop himself to appear
before him at a day appointed, before which day he got to Rome, never
acquainting the King with his determination. The King thereupon seized into his
hands the Bishops liberties, and appointed a new Chancellor, new Justices, and
other officers of Durham, He writ also to the Pope in favor of the Prior, who
delivering the Kings Letters himself, the Pope adjudged him a sober and
discreet man, what ever the Bishop had reported of him, and restored him to his
place; during the Bishops disgrace for this contempt, the King took ^hree
Manors with the Church of Symondbury from the Bishopric, with diverse Castles
and Lands forfeited to him by John Bayliol King of Scots, and others. The
Bishop at last submitted himself, and bought his peace. Holins^. p. 305^.
Anno Dom. 1298. in the battle of Foukirke, between the English and Scots,
this Bishop of Durham ( Anthony Beak) led the second battle of the Englishmen
con^isting of 39. standards: who hasting forth to be the first that should give
the on ^et, when his men approached near the enemies the Bishop commanded them
to stay till the third battle which the King ( Edward the first) led, might
approach. But that valiant Knight the Lord Ralph Basset of Draiton said to him;
My Lord, you may go and say Mass, which better becomes you, than to teach
us what we have to do; for we will do that which belongs to the order and
custom of war.

LEW^S BEAVMONT.
About the year 1318. at the importunate suite of the Kings of England and
France, the Pope gave the Bishopric of Du^ham unto one Jews Beaumont, a
Frenchman borne, and of the blood Royal there; he was lame of both his
legs, and so unlearned, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 262, 263. Godwin, p. 522, 523.
that he could not read the Bulls and other instruments of his consecration.
When he should have pronounced this word ( Metropoliticae) not knowing what to
make of it (though he had studied upon it and labored his Lesson long before)
after a little pause, Soyt pur dit (says he) let it go for read, and so
passed it over. In like sort he stumbled at ( In aenigmate) when he had
fumbled about it a while, Par Saint Lewis (quoth he) il n'est pas curtois qui
ceste parolle ici escrit, that is, by Saint Jews he is to blame that writ this
word here. Not without great cause therefore the Pope was somewhat strait laced
in admitting him. He obtained con^ecration so hardly, as in fourteen years
he could scarce creep o^t of debt. Riding to Durham to be installed there,
he was robbed (together with two Cardinals, that were then in his company)
upon Wiglesden More near Derlington. The Captains of this rour were named
Gilbert Middleton, and Walter Selby. Not content to take all the treasure of
the Cardinals, the Bishop, and their train; they carried the Bishop prisoner
to Morpeth, where they constrained him to pay a great ransom. Gilbert
Middleton was soon after taken at his own Castle of Nitford, carried to
London, and there drawn and hanged in the presence of the Cardinals. After
this, one Sir Iosceline Deinvill, and his brother Robert, came with a great
company to diverse of this B. of Durhams houses in the habits of Friars, and
spoiled them, leaving nothing, but bare walls, and did many other notable
robberies^ for which they and diverse of their company were soon after hanged
at York. This B. stood very stoutly in defense of the Liberties of his See,
recovered diverse lands taken away from Anthony Beak his prede^essor, and
procured this sentence to be given in the behalf of his Church; quod Episc^pus
Dunelmensi^ debet habere forisfacturas guerrarum intra libertates, sicut Rex
extra: that the Bishop of Durham is to have the forfeitures of war in as
ample sort within his own Liberties as the King without.

I^mediately after this Bishops death in great have (but with RICHARDDE BVRY.
no great good speed) the Covent of Dur^am proceeded unto the Election of a new
Bishop (the old being yet scarcely buried) Godwin. p. 524.
and they made choice of one of their own company a Monk of Durham. This
election the Archbishop of York confirmed, yea the matter grew so forward, as
the same Archbishop was content to give him consecration also. All this while
the Kings good will was not sought, no nor (which was a greater oversight as
the world then went) the Popes neither. The King therefore not only refused to
deliver possession of the Temporalties unto this elect, but also labored the
Pope, ex plenitudine potestatis, to confer the Bishopric upon a Chaplain
of his named Richard de Bury, the Deane of Wells. Partly to pleasure the one
that requested, partly to displeasure the other for not requesting, he did so,
and commanded the Bishop of Winchester to consecrate him; which being performed
at Chertsey soon after Christmasse, the King presently invested him in the
temporalties belonging to that See. Now was the Monk a Bishop without a
Bishopric; having no other home, he was feign to return to his Cloister, and
there for very grief (as it is supposed) within a few days after dyed. This
Richard de Bury, at what time Edward of Windsor Prince of Wales fled into
France with his Mother, was principal receiver of the Kings Revenewes in
Gascoigne. Their money failing, he aided them secretly with a great sum of
that he had received for the King. It had almost cost him his life, he was so
narrowly pursued by some of the Kings friends that got understanding of it, as
he was glad to hide himself in a steeple in Paris the space of seven days.
The Queen we know was then contriving an open rebellion and plotting a
mischeivous treason against her husband King Edward the second, whom she
shortly after seized upon in an hostile manner, and afterward caused to be
deprived and murdered, so that this Prelates furnishing of her thus with the
Kings own moneys to further this her design, was high Treason at the least.

Not to mention how the Pope upon King Edward the third his request consecrated
Godwin. p. 526.
Thomas Hatfield his Secretary Bishop of this See without any regard or
examination of his worthiness being a man altogether illiterate, and that when
some of the Cardinals took exceptions against him, saying, that he was not
only a mere lay man, but a fell^w of light behavior, and no way fit for that
place, how the Pope answered, that if the King of England had requested him for
an Ass at that time he would not have denied him, and thereupon made this A^se
a Bishop.

JOHN FORHAM.
John Fordham Bishop of Durham, Anno 1388. was by Parliament banished the
Court, Walsingham Hist. Angl. An. 1388. p. 365. Speedes History p. 748. Godwin.
p. 664.
as a pernicious instrument and corrupter of King Richard the second, a
Traitor, a flatterer, a whisperer, a slanderer and wicked person.

JOHN SHERWOOD.
John Sherwood the 52 Bishop of Durham Solliciter of all King Edward the
fourths causes in the Court of Rome, fell off from his Masters Son King
Edward the fifth, to that bloody usurper Richard the third, at whose Antiq.
Eccles. Brit. p. 262. Godwin p. 526.
Coronation this Bishop of Durham went on the one side of him, Holinshed, p.
733.734.
and the Bishop of Bath on the other, the Archbishop of Canterbury with the
rest of the Bishops and Abbots mitred and in rich Copes, every one of them
carrying Censers in their hands, going in great solemnity before him, and
afterward crowning both him and his Queen, according to the custom of the
Realm: so officious were they to this usurper.

CVTBERT TONSTALL.
Cutbert Tonstall the 58. Bishop of Durham, December 20. 1551. was committed to
the Tower for his disobedience to King Edward the sixth, where he continued all
his Reign. The King was so far offended with him that 7. Edward. 6. the
Bishopric of Durham was dissolved by Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 1180. Godwin
p. 670.
Act of Parliament and all the Lands and hereditaments thereof given to the
King: Rastall Abridg. Stat. f. 149. Durham, Cambdens Brit. p. 736.741. Godwin.
p. 533. Martin hist. p. 452.453.454. Holinshed p. 1184.
but he dying this Bishopric was again revived and erected. 1. Mar.
Parliament. 2. cap. 3. and this Bishop thereunto restored. Who in the first
year of Queen Elizabeth for his contumacy and disobedience in maintaining the
Popes Supremacy which he oppugned formerly, and for refusing the oath of
Supremacy which he had sworn unto in the reign of King Henry the eight, he
was justly deprived and committed prisoner to Lambeth House, where he dyed. I
find this Tonstall highly applauded by some who lived since his days, but
Practice of Popish Prelates. p. 374.
M. Tyndall who knew him far better than they, writes thus of him. And as for
the Bishopric of Durham, to say the very truth, he (to wit Cardinal Wolsie)
could not but of good cougruity reward his old Chaplain, and one of the chief
of all his Secretaries withal, still Saturn, that so seldom speaks, but
walks up and down all day musing and imagining mischief, a doubling
hypocrite made to dissemble. Which for what service done in Christ's Gospel
came he to the Bishopric of Lond^n? Or what such service did he therein? he
burnt the New Testament, calling it, Tunstall Bishop of Durham burnt the New
Testament.
Doctrinam peregrinam, strange learning: (The story of whose buying and burning
of M. Tyndals New Testaments, who with the money set forth a new and better
Edition, is related And out of him by M. Fex Acts and Monuments Edit. ult vol.
2. p. 284.
by M. Hall, at large, in his Chronicle 21. H. 8. f. 186.) Yea Verily, look
how strange his living in whose blood that Testament was made, was from the
living of the Pope; even so strange is that Doctrine from the Popes Law, in
which only, and in the Practice thereof is Tunstall learned. Which also for
what cause left he the Bishopric of London? Even for the same cause he took
it after that he had long served for it, covetousness and ambition. Neither is
it possible naturally (pray mark this passage) that there should be any good
Bishop, so long as the Bishoprics be nothing save worldly Pomp, and honor,
A Bishopric is superfluous honor, and a lewd liberty.
superfluous abundance of all manner of riches, and liberty to do what a man
left unpunished; things which only the evil desire, and good men abhor.

For the late Bishops of this See of Durham, Neale, and Howson, their
dispositions and actions against goodness and good men, and their turbulencie
both in Church and State, are so well known to most, that I need not mention
it. And as for the present Bishop Dr Morton, whom I honor for his learning and
works against the Papists, how far he has degenerated of late years from
his Pristine zeal and hatred of Romish Superstitions and Innovations, See a
late Pamhlet wherein this is expressed.
and how far he has engaged himself in the late Wars and differences between
England and Scotland, I leave to others to determine. Only this I cannot
pre^ermit in silence; that as the first Popish Innovations and superstitions,
which lately overspread our whole Church, had their Original from Bishop
Neale and his Chaplain Dr. Cosens at Durham; so God has made that City and
Bishopric of Durham (the only County of England styled by the name of a
Bishopric) the seat of our late wars wherein the Scottish Army now resides;
to manifest to all the world, that these unhappie civil wars sprung from the
Bishops, since the seat of them is no where but in this Bishopric, the
Scottish General for the most part has kept his residence in the Bishop of
Durhams own Palaces, who for fear has left them vacant, and fled that Country
which he has much oppressed. From Durham I proceed to Salisbury.

Salisbury.
ALSTANE or ADELSTANE.
Alstane or Adelstane, Bishop of Sherburne (which See was not long after
translated to Salisbury) Mat. West. An. 854. page 307.308. Holins. Hist. of
England, l. 6. c. 9. p. 138. c. 10. p. 140. c. 11. p. 143. Malms. de Gestis
Regum Angl. l. 1. c. 2. p. 40. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 36. Speed. Hist. l. 7.
c. 32. Sect. 7. p. 377. Godw. p. 333.
turned warrior, and led an Army into Kent against Ethelwolfe King o^ that
County, and chased away both the King, and all other that would not submit
themselves to Egbert, over the Thames out of their Country. He fought often
against the Danes, provided money, and furnished out men to withstand them, and
took upon him to order all matters of the State under King Ethelwolfe. When
King Ethelwolfe returned from Rome, Adelstane who bare no small rule in the
Kingdom of the West Saxons, would not suffer him to be admitted King, because
he had done in certain points contrary to the Laws and Ordinances of the
Kingdom, as he conceived; whereupon by this Bishops means Ethelbald this
Kings son was established King in his Fathers steed, and so continued, till
at last by agreement the Kingdom was divided betwixt them. This Bishop was
fervently set on covetousness, and greatly enriched his See of Sherburne,
where he continued Bishop 50. years.

ROGER.
Roger, the great rich Bishop of Salisbury, advanced and specially trusted by
King Henry the first, for all the benefits that he and his friends received
from him, proved not so thankful or faithful to his Majesty as was to be
expected. Neubrigensis Hist. l. 1. c. 6. Mat. Paris, Hoveden, Higden, Fabian
Coxton, Speed, Stow, Grafton, Martin in the life of King Steph^n. Godwin. p.
319.320 321.322. Fox Acts and Monuments p. 181. Holinshed p. 50.51^ Will. Mal.
Hist. Novel. l. 2^ p. 181.182.183. to 190.
For King Henry the first having lost his only son and Heir apparent Prince
William, by misfortune upon the Sea, and having no issue lawfully begotten to
inherit the Kingdom, but only Mawd the Empress, thought good to take an Oath
of all the Nobility; wherein they promised, to yield obedience to her as their
Sovereign, and to none other. This Oath Roger not only took himself, but
likewise administered to all the other, being then Chancellor of England: yet
notwithstanding forgetting all duties of Religion toward God, of thankfulness
toward his patron, and Loyalty toward his Prince, he was the first man who
upon the death of the King fell to plotting for the advancement of Stephen unto
the Kingdom (who likewise had taken the former Oath and swore homage and
fealty unto Mawde) which by his persuasion he first attempted, and much deal
by his ungracious counsel at last obtained. At the time of King Henry his
death, it happened that Mawde was in Normandy with her Father, wherefore Stephen
Earl of Bologne taking this advantage, wrought so with this Bishop, and the
Bishop of Winchester, and they with him, as they were content to set the Crown
upon his head, who otherwise than by a kind of election which they procured,
had no color of right unto the same. For if they regarded nearenesse of blood,
not only Mawde and her son were nearer, but Theobald also Earl of Bloyes,
Stephens elder brother. Howbeit these Clergy men that bare all the sway in
those times, desirous to continue their own greatness, would needs make
choice of him, thinking by this means they should so far obleige Stephen to
them, as in all likelihood it must be a means not only to continue, but
likewise much to increase their swaying power, greatness and authority. As for
the Oath they had taken, this Bishop devised an excuse; that King Henry after
the time they had sworn to his daughter, marrying her out of the Realm
without her consent, had therein discharged them of that Oath. However, this
allegation might bleare the eyes of men, it could not deceive God, that out of
his justice turned this device to the destruction of many, and the infinite
trouble of all them that had any finger in the same, especially of this Bishop.
King Stephen in the beginning of his reign, to secure himself the better
against foreign invasions, as he thought, granted license unto all that would
to build Castles in any part of the Realm; by virtue of which grant in a short
time after, there were erected no less than 1117. new Castles. This Bishop
hereupon ( cujus opera nunquam Episcopali a fuere, writes Neubrigensis) built a
Castle, at the Devises (the goodliest, stateliest building in all Europe) with
the Castles of Shirborne and Malmesbury, and new walled and repaired the Castle
of Salisbury: Et quoniam hujusmodi extructio Episcopalem honestatem minus
decere videbatur, ad tollendam illius structionis invidiam and quasi expiandam
maculam, totidem monasteria construens, collegis religiosis implevit, says the
same Neubrigensis. These antidotes were of so small force, as there wanted not
many to buzze daily into the Kings ears, that these Castles no doubt were
intended to entertain the party of the Empress his adversary, and that it
much behooved him to take them from the Bishop, in whose hands to leave them
was neither safe nor seemly. Wherefore partly out of fear and jealousy of
the Bishops fidelity, and partly out of a desire of the Bishops wealth, as some
conjecture, he summons a council at Oxford, whither all the Bishops, and
specially Roger of Salisbury are summoned. Roger would feign excuse himsel^e by
his age and indisposition of body; whereunto the King answered that he could by
no means spare him, nor want his advice, whereon he meant principally to
rely. Whereupon the Bishop presuming on the Kings ^avour (who had made one of
his Nephews Chancellor, another Treasurer of England, bestowed on himself
the Borough of Malmesbury, saying sometimes, Let this man beg while he will,
for a while, I will grant him half the Kingdom rather than say him nay, and
sooner shall he be weary of craving than I of granting) repaired to Oxford,
where there grew a fray between some of the Kings Officers and the Bishops men
about lodgings, wherein two of his men were slain and diverse wounded. Hereupon
his men and he fled, as also his son and Nephews, but they were all persued and
taken, except the Bishop of Ely, who fled to the Castle of the Devises, which
was very well manned and provided, determining to hold it out against the King,
who presently repaired thither with all speed, carrying his Prisoners along
with him, whom he caused to be very hardly used, shutting up the one Bishop in
an Oxestall, the other in a filthy black room, more loathsome than the other.
At his first coming he summoned the Castle, entending to prove all means to
get in rather than let this occasion slip. Trying therefore many practices,
when no other would take success, he caused a pair of gallows to be set up,
and swore he would hang Roger the Bishop, if the Castle were not presently
yielded up to him. The Bishop of Ely continuing obstinate in his denial,
though his Uncle of Salisbury had entreated him earnestly to yield, the halter
was now about the young man's neck, and he ready to be executed, when his
Father humbly besought the king to accept his best endeavor for the effecting
of his desire, and to save his Sons life, was content, to swear he would
neither eat nor drink before the Castle were delivered to the King. Hereupon
the execution of the Son was stayed, but it cost the Father his Life. For the
Bishop of Ely his Nephew, notwithstanding what entreaty would be made, suffered
his Uncle to ^ast three whole days before he would give over^ by means
whereof the Old Bishop, partly for grief, partly by so long abstinence ^ell
sick of a quartaine Ague, whereof he languished and at last dyed, raving and
taking on like a man distract of his wits certain days before his departure,
which death and usage of his is by our Historians reputed a just judgment of
God upon him for his perjury and Treason against Mawde in dis-inheriting her of
the Crown contrary to his Oath. There was found in this Castle of his 4000.
Marks of silver ready coined, besides gold, plate, jewels and household stuff
of inestimable price, all which the King laid hands on; The Bishops son was
kept in Prison, and dealt earnestly withal to renounce the Empress against
whom he had formerly sided, and devote himself to the Kings party; which he
constantly refused, and with long suite obtained at last, that he might be
banished the Realm.

Will. Malm^sb. Hist. Novella. l. 2. p. 182.183.
This Act of the King in seizing the Bishops Castles, was variously spoken of
many. Some said, the Bishops were lawfully deprived of them, because they had
built them without any warrant from the Canons, that they ought to be
Evangelists of peace, not Architects of Castles, which might prove a refuge to
Malefactors. Hugh Archbishop of Rhoan, alleged these things with more ample
reasons and speeches, being the Kings greatest advocate, and maintaining his
side with all his eloquence. Others held the contrary, with whom Henry Bishop
of Winchester sided, being the Popes Legate, and the Kings own Brother; whom
neither his brotherly alliance, nor fear of danger compelled to exorbitate
from the truth, who alleged, that if the Bishops had transgressed the rule of
Justice in any thing, that the judgment hereof belonged not to the King, but
to the Canons, and that they ought not to be deprived of any possession without
a publik Ecclesiastical Council; That the King had done this, not out of a
zeal of rectitude, but for his own profit, who rendered not the Castles to the
Churches, by whose cost, and on whose lands they were built, but contrarily
gave them to lay men, and that to such who had little Religion in them:
speaking these things privately, and also publicly before the King, and
calling upon him to free and restore the Bishops, he lost his labor, no man
listening to him. Wherefore determining to try the vigor of the Canons, he
commanded the king ^his brother immediately to appear before him at the
Council which he was about to celebrate at Winchester, where most of the
Bishops of England assembling, the Cardinals Commission for his power
Legatine^ from Pope Innocent being first read, he made a speech in Latin,
wherein he complained of the unworthy apprehending of the Bishops of Salisbury
and Lincoln, both detained Prisoners, affirming that it was a miserable
wickedness that the king was so far seduced by incendiaries, that he should
command hands to be laid on his own people, especially on his Bishops in the
peace of his Court. That a Celestial injury was hereby added to the kings
dishonor, that under pretense of the defaults of the Bishops, Churches should
be spoiled of their possessions. That the kings excess against the Law of God
did so far grieve him, that he would rather suffer much loss both in his
body and, estate than the Episcopal celsitude should be cast down with so
great indignity; that he of^ admonished^ the king to amend this same, who even
then refused not the calling of the Council; that therefore the Archbishop
and the rest should consult together what was needful to be done, and he
would not be wanting to the execution of their advise, neither for love of the
king who was his brother, nor for the loss of his possessions, no nor yet for
the peril of his head. The King not distrusting his cause, sent some Earls
unto the Council, demanding why he was summoned thither? The Legate answered
them in brief; that he who remembered that he had subjected himself to the
faith of Christ, ought not to be angry if he were called by Christ's Ministers
to make satisfaction, being conscious of so great guilt as these ages had never
seen. For it was the act of secular Gentiles to imprison Bishops and strip
them of their possessions. Therefore they should tell his Brother, that if he
would give a willing assent to his Council, he would by Gods direction give
him ^uch as neither the Church of Rome, nor the Court of the king of France,
nor Count Theobald, brother to them both, should contradict, but ought
favorably to embrace; that the king for the present should do advisedly, if
either he would give an account of his fact, or undergo the judgment of the
Canons: for he ought of duty to favor the Church, by reception into whose
bosom, and not by a ^and of Soldiers he was promoted to the kingdom.
Whereupon the Earls departing, returned not long after with Albin De^er, an
experienced Lawyer: Who pleaded, that Roger the Bishop had many ways in^ured
king Stephen; that he came very seldom to his Court; tha^ his men presuming on
his power had raised seditions, that as often in other places, so of late at
Oxford they had made assaults on men, and that upon Earl Alans own Nephew,
and upon the Servants of Henry de Lions, a man of so great Nobility, and so
haughty a brow, that he would never upon king Henry's request condescend to
come into England; That this injury redounded to king Stephen, for whose loves
sake h^e came, that so great violence was offered to him: that the Bishop of
Lincoln out of his inveterate hatred against Alan had by his Servants been
the Author of Sedition: that the Bishop of Salisbury secretly favored the
kings enemies dissembling his double dealing in the interim till a fi^
occasion: that the king had undoubtedly discovered this by many things, and by
this especially, that he would not suffer Roger Mortimer with the kings
Soldiers, which he led in great ^eare of the Bristow men, so much as to stay
one night at Malmesbury; that it was in every man's mouth, that as soon as ever
the Empress should arrive, that he with his N^phewes and Castles, would revolt
to her: that Roger was thus taken, not as a Bishop but as the Kings Servant,
who both administered his affairs, and received his wages: that the King had
not taken away the Castles from them by violence, but that both the Bishops
thankefully rendered them, that they might excuse the calumny of the tumult
which they had raised in the Court; that the King found some money in the
Castles, which were law^ully his own, because the Bishop had collected it out
of the Rents of the Royal Exchequer in the time of King Henry his Uncle and
antecessor; that the Bishop for fear of his offenses against the King,
willingly parted from them, as he did from his Castles, of which ^he King
wanted not witnesses; that therefore he desired the agreements between him and
the Bishops should remain firm. Roger on the other side alleged, that he was
never a Servant to the King nor received his wages; moreover some threatenings
were uttered by this generous Prelate (who scorned to be dejected with
misfortunes) that if he found not justice in that Council for the things
taken from him, that he would complain thereof in the audience of a greater
Court. The Legate answered mildly^ That they ought first to inquire as of other
things, so of all things which are spoken against Bishops in an Ecclesiastical
Council, by way of accusation, whether they be true or not? rather then to
pronounce sentence, against men uncondemned contrary to the decrees of the
Canons: let the King therefore do that is lawful to be done in secular
judgments, revest the Bishop of the things taken away by the Law of the
Nations, disseised men shall not plead. Many things being spoken on both sides
after this manner, the cause at the Kings request was deferred 3. days longer,
till the Archbishop of Rhoan came; Who said, he granted that Bishops might have
Castles if they could prove by the Canons, that by law they ought to have them;
Which because they could not, that it was extreme dishonesty to contend
against the Canons; And grant (says he) that they may enjoy them, yet verily
because it is a suspicious time, all the great men according to the custom of
other Nations ought to deliver up the Keys of their Fortresses to the Kings
pleasure, who ought to wage war for the peace of all men. Thus all the
controversy of the Bishops was weakened: For either according to the Decrees of
the Canons it is unjust they should have Castles; or if this be tolerated by
the Kings indulgence, they ought to yield up the keys t^ the necessity of the
time. To this Albric the Kings Lawyer added, that the King was informed, that
the Bishops threatened among themselves, and provided to send some of them to
Rome against him. And this (says he) the King commends to you, that none of
you presume to do it, for if any one against his will, and the dignity of the
Kingdom of England, shall go any where from England, peradventure his return
shall be difficult. Moreover he, because he sees himself grieved, of his own
accord appeals you to Rome. After the King, partly by commending, partly by
way of threatening had commanded these things, it was understood whither it
tended^ Wherefore they so departed, that neither he would suffer the censure of
the Canons (nor be judged by them) neither did the Bishops think fit to
exercise it, and that for a double reason: Either because it would be
temerarious to excommunicate the King without the Popes privity; Or else
because they heard, and some also saw, that there were swords drawn round
about them, for words were no jests, but there was a contention almost about
life and blood. Yet the Legate and Archbishop gave not over, but prosecuted the
tenor of their office: for casting themselves humbly down at the Kings feet
in his Bedchamber, they beseeched him to compassionate the Church, to
compassionate his own s^ule and fame, that he would not suffer a dissension to
be made between the Kingdom and Priesthood: He rising up courteously,
although he removed the envy of the things done from himself, yet he made no
effectual performance of his good promises. And so this great suite (wherein
the Prelates presumed to convent the king himself before them to try his title
to Castles, being temporal possessions) ceased, and the pretended execution of
their own Canons, (never pressed before that I read of) vanished into nothing.
These bickerings between the Bishop his Nephews, and the king (to whom he
owed even the Crown he wore) caused all the Bishops to fall off from him
again, and join with Maude. This their treachery to King Stephen is most
fully recorded by William Malmesbury, who relates, Hist. Novellae l. 2. p.
187.188.189.
that the Bishop of Winchester, brother to king Stephen, and the Popes Legate,
taking some offense against the king, came to a Parley with Maude in the fields
near Winchester, where Maude the Empress swore and vowed to him, that all the
greatest businesses in England and especially the Donations of Bishoprics and
Abbeys should be at his disposal, if he with the holy Church would receive her
for their Sovereign, and be continually loyal to her; some of the greatest
Nobles of her party making the same oath: Whereupon the Bishop made no scruple
to receive the Empress as Lady of England, and to swear to her by himself
and some others, that as long as she brake not this agreement, that he would be
faithful to her: which done, the next day she was received by the Bishop in
the Cathedral Church of Winchester with an honorable Procession, the Bishop
of Winchester going on her right hand, and Barnard Bishop of Saint David's on
her left: there were other Bishops present beside these, as, Alexander Bishop
of Lincoln, Robert of Hereford, Nigellus of Ely, Robert of Bath, with sundry
Abbots^ a few days after Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury came to the
Empress at Winchester being invited by the Legate, but de^erred to swear
fealty to the Empress without the kings privity, being (as he thought) a
dishonor to his fame and person; but after some conference had with the king
by the Cardinal, and most of the Prelates who entreated leave of him to yield
to the necessity of the time, they condescended to the Legates motion and fell
off to the Empress. Whereupon about a fortnight after Easter, Theobald
Archbishop of Canterbury held a Council of all the Bishops of England, and of
many Abbots in great state at Winchester, wherein the Bishop of Winchester made
this speech; That by virtue of his Legatine power which he derived from the
Pope, he had summoned the Clergy of England to this Council, that they might
consult in Common of the peace of the Country, which was in great danger of
Shipwreck; that in the time of King Henry his Uncle, England was a singular
household of peace, etc. Which King some years before his death caused all the
Bishops and Barons to swear to the Empress his Daughter and only Child,
that the whole kingdom of England, with the Duchy of Normandy, should descend
to her if he had no issue male by the Duke of Loraines daughter. That dismal
fortune envied his most excellent Uncle, so as he dyed in Normandy without
issue male. Therefore because it seemed long to expect the Lady who resided in
Normandy and delayed to come into England to provide for the peace of the
Country, my Brother was permitted to reign. And although I became a surety
between God and him, that he should honor and exalt the holy Church,
maintain good Laws and abrogate evil, yet it grieves me to remember, it
shames me to relate what a one he has showed himself in his kingdom, how no
justice has been exercised upon the presumptuous, how all peace was presently
abolished almost the same year, the Bishops apprehended and compelled to a
reddition of their possessions, Abbeys sold, the Churches robbed of their
treasures: the Counsels of wicked men heard, of good men either suspended, or
altogether contemned. You know how often I have convented him both by my self,
and by the Bishops, especially in the Council the last year summoned to that
purpose, and that I got nothing but hatred thereby. Neither can it be unknown
to any who will rightly consider it, that I ought to love my mortal brother,
but ought much more to esteem the cause of my immortal Father. Therefore
because God has exercised his judgment touching my brother, that he might
permit him without my knowledge to fall into the power of the Mighty, left the
kingdom should ^ottet if it wanted a king, I have invited you all by the right
of my Legation to assemble together at this place. Yesterday the cause was
secretly ventilated before the greater part of the Clergy of England, to whose
right especially it belongs both to elect and ordain a king. Therefore having
first invocated as it is meet Gods assistance, we have ^lected the Daughter of
a peacemaking king, a glorio^s king, a rich king, a good king, and in our time
incomparable, to be Queen of England and Normandy, and we promise fidelity and
maintenance to her. When the Bishop of Winchester had thus spoken all the
Bishops and Clergy present, (as William of Malmsbury (then present at the
Council relates) did either modestly give their acclamation to the sentence
(of Mauds election and Stephens rejection) or keeping silence, did not
contradict it. In this Council many who took king Stephens part, were
excommunicated, and by name William Martell, who had intercepted some of the
Legates goods: after this Council the City of London formerly addicted to king
Stephen, and the greatest part of England willingly submitted to the dominion
of Maude, who was principally counseled by Robert her brother, and by the
Legate of Winchester, who pretended that he sought her welfare; but within few
days after there fell out a difference between the Legate and Maude, which
occasioned a great alteration, and was the cause of many new mischiefs in
Engl^nd. Whereupon the Bishop Legate departed from the Court, absolved all
those whom he ^ormerly excommunicated in the Council without the consent of
the Bishops, raised up a complaint against the Empress that she intended to
apprehend him, and made no account of any thing she had sworn to: Which report
was spread over all England. Whereupon he stirred up the Londoners and Barons
against the Empress, whom he beseiged and restored S^ephen not only to his
liberty, but to the Crown. In the mean time ^his Roger Bishop of Salisbury
dies of a Quar^aine Fever, which he fell into out of grief of mind. Will.
Malms. Hist. N^v^lla. l. ^. p. 184.185.
This Prelate was so high in king Henry's favor that he denied little or
nothing to him that he demanded: he gave him Lands, Churches, Prebends of
Clerks, whole Abbeys of Monks, and committed the kingdom to his trust,
making him Chancellor of England. Roger therefore pleaded causes, he moderated
expenses, he kept the kings treasure, and that without a companion and
witness, both while the king was present in England, and absent in Normandy:
and not only by the king, but likewise by the Nobles: and even by those who
secretly envied his felicity; and especially by the kings Servants and debto^s,
all things almost that he could think of were conferred on him: if any thing
was contiguous to his possessions which might conduce to his utility, that he
either begged or bought, if not, he extorted it by violence, he alone was in
greatest honor, abounding in wealth, pomp, ^riends, authority, stately houses
and Castles, and seemed the only happy man on earth. Yet at last in a moment,
fortune cruelly stung him with her Scorpions tail, so as he saw many of his
friends wounded, and his most familiar Soldiers beheaded before his face,
himself captivated, two of his Nephews most potent Prelates, to be put to
flight, and taken prisoners; and a third a young man whom he most loved to be
bound in chains, his Castles to be rendered up, his treasures spoiled, himself
afterward in a Council torn with most foul reproaches, the residue of his
money and plate which he had laid upon the Altar to finish a Church to be^
carried away against his will, and which is the extremity of calamity, Cum
multis miser videretur^ paucissimis miserabilis erat. So much envy and hatred
had he contracted out of his over great power, and that undeservedly with some
whom he had advanced to honors. So Malmesbury writes of him, of whom you have
heard sufficient.

ROBERT BINGHAM
Anno Dom. 1223. Huber^ de Burgo Earl of Kent being taken and proclaimed a
traitor, Matthew Pari^ p. 374.375. Holinshed. p. 217.
escaped out of the Castle of Ve^^ or Devises, and took sanctuary in the next
Church; those who kept the Castle hearing of it, sent and took him (with those
that helped him to make his escape) out of the Church and imprisoned him again
in the Castle. Robert Bingham the Bishop of Salisbury hereupon came to the
Castle and threatened to curse them, if they would not deliver the Earl and
restore him to sanctury again. They made answer they had rather the Earl
should hang for them than they for him: and so because they would not deliver
him the Bishop excommunicated them; and after riding to the Cour^, and taking
with him the Bishop of London, and other Bishops, prevailed so much by
complaint to the King, that the Earl (though a traitor) was restored to the
Church again, but so as the Sheriff of the Shire had commandment to compass
the Church about with men, to watch that no relief came unto him, whereby he
might be constrained through famishment to submit himself, but he shortly
armed, was there rescued by a power of armed men, who conveyed him armed, and
o^ horseback into Wales, where he joined with other of King Henry the thirds
enemies. And all through the pride, and practice of this Prelate, to whose
pretended jurisdiction even in case of Treason, the King himself must submit.

W^lliam of York
William of York the ninth Bishop of Salisbury about the year 1247. was a
Courtier from his childhood, Mat. Paris^ Hist. Angl. p. 892.893^ Godwin. Car.
p. 277.278.
and better seen the in Laws of the Realm (which he chiefly studied) than
in the Law of God a great deal. Matthew Paris reports that he fir^^ brought
in the custom that tenants should be suitors unto the Courts of their
Landlords. This Matthew Paris styles a very bad custom, in magnum subditorum
damnum and detrimentum and superiorum parvum vel nullum emolumentum, unde qui
nunquam hoc fecerant mirabantur se ad hoc fuisse coactos. And speaking of this
Bishops death he says, This Bishop passed from these worldly cares and
employments to the dangers which secular men and Courtiers are believed to
undergo; for their works follow them.

Anno 1392. King Richard the second, JOHN WALTHAM.
picked a quarrel against the Major and Sheriffs of London upon this
occasion. Holinsh^d. p. 478.479. Fox Act^ and Monumen^^, ^dit. ult. vol. 1. p^
669.670. Walsin^ Hist. Angl. A^^ 1392. page 3^4.385, 386. Yp^dig. Neu^^r. 146.
Walter Romay one of John Walthams servants then Bishop of Salisbury and high
Treasurer of England, took a horseloafe from a Bakers man as he passed by in
Fleetstreet, and would not deliver it again, but broke the bakers man's head,
when he was earnest to recover his loaf, the cohabitants of the street
hereupon rose and would have had the Bishops man to prison for breaking the
Kings peace, but he was rescued by his fellows, and escaped to the Bishops
house in an Allie close by; The people set in a rage for this rescue, gathered
in great multitudes about the Bishops Palace gate, and would have fetched out
the offender by force, assaulting the house to break it open; but the Major
and Sheriffs coming thither, after some persuasions used, appeased the
people, who retired quietly to their houses. The Bishop being then at Windsor,
where the Court lay, being informed of this riot, took such indignation
therewith, that taking with him Thomas Arundell Archbishop of York, then Lord
Chancellor of England, he went to the King, and made an heinous complaint
against the Citizens for their misdemeanour: whereupon the Major, Sheriffs,
and great sort more of the Citizens were sent for to the Court, and charged
with diverse misdemeanors; and notwithstanding their excuses they were all
arrested, and imprisoned; the Major in the Castle of Windsor, the rest in other
places to be safely kept, till the King by the advice of his Counsel should
further determine, what should be done with them; Moreover the liberties of the
City were seized into the Kings hands, the authority of the Major utterly
ceased, and the King appointed Sir Edward Darlingrug to govern the City by the
name of Lord Warding, and to see that every man had justice ministered as the
case required; who because he was thought to be overfavourable to the
Citizens, was removed, and Sir Baldwin Radington put in his room. At length
the King through suit, and instant labor of certain Noblemen, especially of
the Duke of Gloucester, began somewhat to relent and pacify his rigorous
displeasures against the Londoners: and releasing them out of prison, and
confirming some of their privileges, and abrogating others, he was at last
reconciled to them after they had purchased his pardon with many rich presents
to him and his Queen whom they royally entertained, and the payment of ten
thousand pounds, which they were compelled to give the King, and to collect of
the Commons of the City, not without great offense and grudging in their minds.
And a^l this came through the pride and malice of this Prelate of Salisbu^y,
whose servant had occasioned this riot, and yet went Scotfree, when the
innocent Major and Citizens were thus rigorously dealt withal. M. Fox observes
truly, ^olinsh. p. 485:
that this unjust oppression of the Londoners, was a great preparative to King
Richards deposing, and lost him the hearts of his true subjects. This proud
Prelate when he died, by King Richards appointment had the honor to have his
body interred among the Kings at Westminster.

RICHARD MILFORD.
Richard Milford B. of this Diocese, about the year 1388. was by an order of
the Barons made in Parliament imprisoned a long time in the Castle of Bristoll,
Godwin. p. 281. Walsingham, Hist. Angl. p. 365. etc. and Ypodigma Naustr. A.
1388. p. 142.
as a pernicious whisperer, flatterer, evil counselor, and Traitor to King
Richard the second, and the State: yet afterward being enlarged, he was
advanced by this King, and continued one of his evil counselors and
instruments.

WILLIAM AYSCOTH.
William Ayscoth, Bishop of Salisbury Confessor to King Henry the 6. by his
oppressions and ill dealings so far discontented his Tenants and the people,
Fabian. part. 7, An. 1450. page 453. Caxton. pars 6. An. 1450. Graft. An. 1450,
p. 614. Godwin. p. 351. Holinsh. p. 636:
that in the year 1450. June 29. when that notable Rebel Jack Cade was set up
against his Sovereign, some tenants of the Bishops and others came to Edendon,
where he was then saying Mass, drew him from the Altar in his Albe with his
stole about his neck, to the top of an hill not far off, and there as he
kneeled on his knees praying, they cleft his head, spoiled him to the skin,
and renting his bloody shirt into a number of pieces, took every man a ragge
to keep it for a monument of their worthy exploit. A barbarous murder, yet
occasioned by his own ill carriage, violence, oppressions, and for consenting
to the giving up of the Duchy of Anjou, and Main into the hands of the French
King, as some report: since this man's murder, I find little or nothing
recorded of any Bishops of this See: Wherefore I shall now steare my course
toward Lincoln Diocese.

Lincoln.
ANNO 573. Aldred ALDRED.
Bishop of Leicester (afterward translated to Lincoln) was deprived of his
Bishopric, for his seditious misdemeanors; Matthew. West. An. 873. Godw. p. 229.
it is very like he sided with the cruel Pagan Danes, though his crimes be
not expressed in particular.

Eadnoth Bishop of this See, EADNOTH
turned Math. West. An. 1016. p. 499. Godwin. p. 229.
warrior, and was slain by the Danes in battle, in the year 1016^

Vlfe a man Matthew. West. An. 1052. p. 420. Godwin. p. 230.
very learned, ULFE.
in the year 1052. together with Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, and William
Bishop of London, who had given King Edward the Confessor wicked counsel
against the English, were banished into Normandy, their native Country, for
this offense, vix evadentes, hardly escaping with their lives; they having
been instruments to cause the King to infringe his good Laws, and not to
administer right justice, which he promised to reform upon these Prelates
dimission; who miscounselled him. This Bishop among the rest, going to the
Council of Vercels, to complain to the Pope of his wrongful banishment, so
far forth bewrayed his own weakness and insufficiency, as the Pope was
determined to have displaced him from his Bishopric, until with gifts and
golden eloquence, he persuaded him to wink at his imperfections.

Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, ALEXANDER
Anno 1070. Matthew. Paris. Hist. Angl. An. 1070. p. 6. Holinshed. p. 18. Matthew.
Westminster. An. 1070 p. 4.
opposed William the Conqueror, who appointed how many soldiers every
Bishopric and Abbey that held of him by Barony should find in time of war,
from which they were formerly freed: hereupon he and Stigand Archbishop of
Canterbury, fled into Scotland, where they kept themselves close for a time
(being banished by the Conqueror) and at last joined with the Scots against
him: Egelwin Bishop of Durham being an exile at the same time, having only the
zeal of God, excommunicated all the invaders of the Church, and ravishers of
Ecclesiastical things. This Alexander is omitted by Godwin in his Catalogue of
the Bishops of this see; and it seems he was deprived among other Bishops in
the Council of Winchester, Anno 1070. for opposing the Conqueror.

REMIGIVS.
Remigius (who translated his see from Dorchester to Lincoln, and built the
Cathedral there, to whose consecration by the Kings command, Hen. Huntin.
hist. l. 6. p. 371. l. 7. p. 373. Matthew. West. An. 1085.1091. Godwin. p.
230.231.232. Will. Malm^s^ de Gestis Pontif. l. 4 p. 290.291.
all the Bishops of England were summoned, himself dying two days before the
time appointed for its consecration) was impeached of high treason against King
William Rufus, but his servant purging his master by the judgment of an hot
iron (or Ordalium) then in use, restored him to the Kings favor, and wiped off
this blot to his pontifical honor, as Huntindon writes. He was preferred
first to this Bishopric by William the Conqueror, for diverse good services
done unto him, for which he long before promised him a Bishopric in England.
The consideration of this gift coming to the Popes ear, he would needs
adiudge it Simony, and as a symonist actually deprived him of his Bishopric:
but at the request of Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury, he restored him to
his Ring and Crosier again. The Archbishop of York labored to hinder the
translation of his See to Lincoln, laying challenge to the jurisdiction of that
County, as anciently belonging to his Archbishopric, whereupon the Bishop was
forced to crave in aid of the King to make good the Title, and his successor
Robert Bloet, was glad to give William Rufus 5000 pound to clear the Title,
that the Archbishop of York laid unto the jurisdiction of this See and
County; which was reputed Symony in the King, but justice in the Bishop.

ALEXANDER.
Alexander, nephew to Roger the great rich Bishop of Salisbury, consecrated
Bishop of Lincoln July 22. An. 1123. placed his chief delight in building of
Castles, wherein he imitated his uncle Roger, hereupon he built a stately
Castle at Banbury, another at Newarke, a third at Sleford, which says
Nubrigensis hist. l. 1. c. 6. Huntindon. hist. l. 8. p. 389.390. Hoveden.
Annal. pars. prior. p. 484. to 495 Matthew. Par. p. 74. to 76. Matthew. Westminster. An.
1139. to 1146. Holinshed. p. 50. Fox Acts and Monuments. p. 181. Speed. p.
488.492.494. etc. Godwin. p. 233.
Nubrigensis, did ill beseem a Bishops honesty, much less his function. These
Castles were such eye-sores to King Stephen, as they provoked him to pick a
quarrel with the Bishop, to clap him up in prison (together with his uncle
Roger of Salisbury, and to bereave them at once, both of their munition and
treasure, of which they had heaped up great store. For King Stephen fearing
that this great rich Prelate and his uncle of Salisbury (who had built two
strong Castles, the one at Salisbury the other at the Devises) would side with
Maud the Empress, against him, sends for both these Bishops, and demands those
Castles of them, which they refusing to deliver up to his possession; the King
thereupon claps them up in prison, besieges their Castles, which their
Creatures held out and kept by force against him, til at the last with much a
do he possessed himself of them, in such manner as is before more largely
related in the story of Roger of Salisbury. The King not long after releasing
this Bishop, he and some others secretly conspired against him, procured Maud
the Empress to come over with an army, with whom he joined. And by this and
the other confederates assistance Stephen was afterward taken prisoner,
deprived of his Crown in a Synod at Winch^ster; Maud received and acknowledged
as Queen by the Prelates and Kingdom, till Stephen being again released by
the Bishops practices, and putting Maud to the worst, after many battles and
great effusion of English Christian Blood, (occasioned only by the Prelates
practices,) Stephen and Maud came to a mutual agreement. Of which you may read
more largely in Roger of Salisbury.

The Sea of Lincoln continuing void almost seven years after the death of
Robert de Chisney, Geoffry Plantagenet Archdeacon of Lincoln, GEOFFRY
PLANTAGENET. Hoveden. Annal. part. posterior. p. 611. Godwin, p. 235.
base son to King Henry the second was elected Bishop thereto; who contenting
himself with the large revenues of the Bishopric, never sought consecration;
well knowing that he might so fleece the sheep though he listed not to take
the charge of feeding the sheep. Seven years he reaped the fruits of that See
by color of his election, and then by the Popes commandment to Richard
Archbishop of Canterbury to compel Geoffry either to resign his ^ishopricke,
or immediately to enter into orders, and to take the office of a Bishop on him,
he resigned all his interest in the same, the copy of which resignation you may
read in Roger Hoveden Annal. pars poster. p. 611.
. After which he turned Couttier for eight years space, and at last returning
to the Church again, became Archbishop of Yorke^ How he carried himself in
that See I have before in part expressed (page 185, 186.) and now shall give
you some further account (t^ough somewhat out of course) out of Ann^lium pars
posterior, p. 655^ 656, 659, to 666, 681, 689, 712, 713, 714, 718, 725, 730, to
740, 743, 747, 749, 751, 752, 754, 755, 756, 759, to 768. Matthew. Paris: Hist.
Angl. p. 186.195.
Roger Hoveden and others. He was no sooner settled in York, but there fell out
a great contestation between him and Henry deane of York, and Buchard the
Treasurer, whom he excommunicated for refusing to give over singing, and to
begin their Service afresh upon his entering into the Church; whereby the
Church that day ceased from Divine Service. This difference being composed
Buchard and Geoffry soon after fell ou^ again; whereupon Ge^ffry
excommunicating him the second time, he goes to the Pope for absolution, and so
far prevailed with the Pope, that he would neither confirm Geoffries
election nor suffer him to be consecrated. And withal the Pope exempted Hugh
Bishop of Durham from making any profession of subjection to Geoffry elect of
York during his life, though he were consecrated, because he h^d formerly once
made his profession to the Church of York, and to S. William the Archbishop of
York, and to his successors. Queen Elenor, K. Richards mother, hereupon
passes from Messana through Rome to entreat and humbly beseech the Pope in the
Kings behalf, to confirm his brothers election to York, and either to
consecrate him Archbishop thereof by himself or some other: which the Pope
doing, Geoffry shortly after cites Hugh Bishop of Durham peremptorly to appear
before him at a Synod in the Cathedral Church at York, thereto profess his
obedience to him, which he endeavored to substract, and to exempt himself by
all means from his jurisdiction. Hugh refuses to come thither, or to make his
profession or obedience to him (being, as he said, not bound by Law to do it:
and thereupon appeals the first, second, and third time to the Pope, and
submits his cause to him. The Archbishop hearing of it, in great fury
excommunicates him notwithstanding this appeal, threatening to compel him to
make profession and obedience by Ecclesiastical censures notwithstanding this
appeal. The Bishop of Durham on the other side would not obey the (...), but
in contempt thereof, boldly celebrated, and caused to be celebrated Divine
offices as before. The Archbishop hereupon overturnes all the Altars where the
Bishop of Durham had celebrated, Note his fury.
and breaks the Chalices within his Diocese wherein any other had celebr^ted
in the Bishops presence; and held his brother John Earl of Morton for an
excommunicate person, because he had ea^en with the Bishop of Du^ham after that
sentence, and would not communicate with him until he gave him satisfaction
and came to be absolved. When the Bishop of Durham saw that many refused to
speak, eat or drink with him, he sent messengers to the Pope, who relating
to him first in secret, then before all the Cardinals, how indiscreetly and
Archbishop had excommunicated him, slighting his appeal; the Pope and all the
Cardinals adjudged that sentence a mere nullity, and that it ought not to be
observed; and thereupon the Pope writ a letter to the Bishops of Lincoln,
Rochester, and others to declare this sentence of excommunication void, in
their Churches, by virtue of the Popes Apostolical authority, and to command
the people to communicate with the Bishop of Durham notwithstanding it, as they
did before; and to declare, that the Bishop for the injuries done unto him by
the Archbishop in overturning the Altars, and breaking the Chalices, should be
exempted from all subjection to him during life. Whereupon these Bishops and
delegates met at Northampton, and after much debate, departed without any final
agreement. In Lent following this Archbishop being summoned to appear at
London by the Kings Justices, came to Westminster with his Cross carried
before him; whereupon the Bishop of London and the other Prelates prohibited
him to presume to carry his Cross within the Province of Canturbury: who
contemptuously answered them, that he would not let it down^ for them; yet by
the advice of his followers he hid it from the face of the people, left a
tumult should arise among the Clergy. The Bishop of London accounting him
excommunicate for this transgression, suspended the new Temple, where the
Archbishop lodged, both from Divine Service, and the tolling and ringing of
Bells, so as he was forced to go out of the City. After this the Archbishop
levied a great Army, fortified Doncastre, and would have besieged Thifehill
Castle belonging to Earl Morton, which Hugh Bardalfe and William St^^ville
refusing to do, he departed with his men in a (...) from them, calling them
traitors to the King and Kingdom. Soon after the Deanery of York being void,
the Archbishop first gave the Deanery to Simon Apull, and after that to one
Philip, whom the King recommended. The Canons of York pretending the right of
electing the Deane to appertain to them, elected Apul against the Bishops
will. The Archbishop hereupon appeals to Rome, the Canons notwithstanding
proceed in their election of Apul; the Archbishops messengers and Apul meeting
with the King in Germany in their passage toward Rome, he inhibited all their
appeals to Rome; saying, that if any attempted the contrary, he should not
return into the Realm again. In the mean time, the Canons of York
suspended the Cathedral Church from all their accustomed Divine service, and
their Bells likewise from their usual office of ringing, for which the whole
City was in an uproare: they likewise uncloathed their Altars, locked up the
Archbishops stall in the Quire, barred up the door by which he used to enter
into the Church out of his Palace and Chapel, and did many other things in
contempt of him; which the Archbishop hearing of, being ready to take ship to
pass the seas, returned to the Church, admonishing and commanding the
Ministers of this Church to minister therein after the ancient manner; who
contemning his admonition and precept, left the Church void, and destitute of
Divine service. Hereupon shortly after the Archbishop by the advice of his
wisest friends, puts new Ministers and Officers into the Cathedral Church
which he found void, to officiate there; which they did till the Canons and
Chaplains were restored again thereto by lay power and violence: he likewise
excommunicates four of the chief officers of the Church for suspending it;
who thereupon complain to the King, and appeal to Rome; where the Pope
hearing both parties, settled the Deanery upon Simon Apul for that time, saving
the rights of the Archbishop and Chapter, thereto for the future, which he left
undecided. As soon as ever the Deane was thus settled and invested by a golden
ring, he and the Chapter defame and accuse the Archbishop, alleging; that he
was a violent spoyler of his own and other men's Clerks; a wicked extortioner,
that he brake open Church doors by violence and force of arms, symoniacally
divided and retained Ecclesiastical benefices, gave no respect to appeals,
that vilipending all his Episcopal office, he was (...) to hauking, hunting
and other military cares! for which things they intended to depose him,
especially those who^ he himself had advanced to great honors, and enriched
with great wealth and revences in the Church of York, beyond that he ought. Of
such the Lord says, I have nourished and exalted children, but they have
rebelled against me. Let them therefore beware lest with Judas the traitor they
be condemned in Hell. Hereupon the Pope writ to Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, and
his cojudges, that if any would accuse the Archbishop of these things, they
should diligently hear what both sides propounded, and certify him the truth
in writing under their Seals: And if no accuser appeared, and there were a
public fame of them, that then the Archbishop should be enjoined to make his
purgation with three Bishops and three Abbots. The Archbishop had appealed
before the citation of the Judges, and had taken his journey to prosecute his
appeal; but being hindered by the Kings prohibition and the distemper of the
air, he appeared not at Rome on the day prefixed, nor yet at a further day
given him: whereupon he was suspended from all his Episcopal administration.
Soon after this Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury comes to Nottingham to King
Richard the first, causing his Cross to be carried before him: Geoffry of
York carried not his Cross, but complained to the King of Canturbury, for
carrying his Cross up in the Province of York; which when the Archbishop had
heard, and seen that Gef^ry carried no cross before him at all; he answered; I
carry my Cross throughout all England, and ought to bear it, as Primate of
all England; but thou bear not thy Cross, and perchance thou ought not
to carry it. And therefore things standing thu^, I appeal to my Lord the Pope.
After this, Geffrey bought the Sherivalty of Yorkshire of the King for 3000.
marks, and an 100. marks annual rent; and within few months after the King
calling a Counsel, all the Laymen and Clergy that would, had the liberty to
complain against this Archbishop, who made many complaints of his rapines and
unjust exactions, to which he gave no answer. Not long after King Richard being
to be crowned a new at Winchester, commanded this Archbishop of York not to
come to his Coronation the next day with his Cross borne up before him, lest
peradventure some tumult might arise between^ him and the Archbishop of
Canterbury: Whereupon being thus prohibited to bear his cross, he refused to
be present at the Kings Coronation. Some three weeks after, the King being at
Waltham, Geoffry come^ to him with his cross carried before him; of which
Canterbury complained very much to the King, who answered, that this
controversy belonged not to him, but to the Pope to decide; and the next day
the King made a final accord between William Longchamp Bishop of Ely, and
Geoffry, touching all controversies about his apprehension and injuries
sustained at Dover upon his arivall; Ely with an hundred Priests more swearing,
that he neither commanded nor willed, that Geoffry should be apprehended in
such sort. Not long after the King being in France, the Canons of York
complained to Hubert of Canterbury against Geoffry their Archbishop; who
thereupon sends commissioners to York to hear and determine their complaints;
these imprison the Archbishops men, accused of robery, so that the Archbishop
could not b^yle them, restore the Canons to the Church, and induct them into
their stals out of which th^^ were expelled; and because the Archbishop
appeared not before them upon summons, seized on all his lands except the
manor of Ripun where he resided, and sequestered his Shrievalty of Yorkshire
into the hands of others. About the same time the Canons of York
excommunicated formerly by the Bishop, procure an absolution from the Pope,
which was published openly in the Church, and they thereupon were restored. The
Archbishop appeals hereupon, and going over to Normandy to the King, for 2000.
marks procures a restitution of all his Lands and goods formerly sequestered
and seized; and a precept to put the Deane and Canons out of their new gaind
possession. Not long after the Pope sends Commissioners to York to enquire of
the Bishops excesses whereof the Canons accused him, mentioned at large in Pope
Caelestines letter and commission recorded by Hoveden. The Deane coming to
York from Rome while the commissioners were there, some of the Archbishops
creatures meeting him, persuaded him not to go to the mother Church, which he
not yielding to, they laid violent hands on him, for which the commissioners
excommunicated them; whereupon he went to the Church where the canons joyfully
received him. The Bishop notwithstanding expulseth him and the Canons again,
who thereupon procure a letter from Pope Coelestine to the Deane of Lincoln
and others, to inquire of their damages, and to cause the Bishop to satisfy
them to the full without any appeal: whereupon they proved their damages
before them to amount to one thousand marks. Soon after the Bishop of
Whiterne the Archbishops Suffragan, and Official, comes to York against the
time of receiving the Lords Supper, to consecrate chrisme, and oil, as he had
accustomed. The Deane and chapter of York would not receive him; whereupon he
went to Suelle and there consecrated chrisme and oil, and delivered them to
the Archbishops Officials, to distribute them throughout the Churches of the
Archbishopicke. Geoffry de Muschamp Archdeacon of Cliveland received the
chrisme and oil, but presently cast them into a dunghill, and the other Canons
of S. Peter's would receive none of him, but sent to Hugh Bishop of Lincoln to
receive oil and chrisme from him: whereupon Peter Archdeacon of Lincoln, the
Archbishops brother prohibited the Bishop to give them any oil or chrisme from
him: upon which he appealed to Rome thereabout. The Archbishop the same time,
who had offended the King his brother, was reconciled to him, and received into
his favor with a kiss of peace, whereupon he grew so excessively proud, that
he exasperated the King himself with his reproachful speeches, so as he
commanded him to be disseised of his Archbishopricke, and Vis^ountship of
York. In the mean time Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury procured himself to
be the Popes Legate, with a special clause in his Bulls, and a mandate to the
Archbishop of York, and all other, to submit to his jurisdiction, as Legate to
the Apostolic S^e; whereupon he summoned the Deane and Chapter of York to
appear before him, and yield subjection to him in their own Cathedral, as
Popes Legate; who thereupon received and submitted to him, not as he was
Archbishop of Canterbury, but Legate only: which done, he summons and holds a
council in the Cathedral Church of York, wherein he made diverse canons for
the government of the Church and Clergy; and heard the controversy between
the Archbishop and the Deane and chapter of York touching the Archdeaconry of
Westring, which they contended for; but they appealed to Rome about it, Anno
1195. The Canons of York solicited (...) Bishop of Lincoln by virtue of the
Popes Commission directed to him, to p^onounce sentence of interdict and
suspention against Geoffry their Bishop: who answered, That he would rather be
suspended himself, then suspend him; whereupon the canons sent messengers to
Rome to complain to Pope Caelestine of the Bishop of Lincoln, and the other
Judges Delegates, that they proceeded not according to the Popes injunction.
Who thereupon sends three letters into England; one, to Simon the Deane,
wherein he suspends the Archbishop from his Episcopal function, as a man every
way unworthy of it, and gives Simon power to execute the same during this
suspension. Another to all the Abbots, Clergy, and people of the Diocese of
York, to notify this suspention to them, and to command them, not to obey the
Archbishop or answer before him in any case, but only before the Deane Simon,
to whom he had delegated his Arch-Episcopall authority. A third to the Bishop
of Lincoln and others, expressing all the complaints against the Archbishop
and his excesses, and commanding them to publish this his suspension from his
Bishopric, and to absolve those of his Diocese from any subjection or
obedience to him as Archbishop. And in all these letters, this is one great
cause which they allege for this his suspension. Quod pastoralis officii
debito praetermisso, secularibus negotiis implicari, and non divinis obs^quiis,
sed venatione, aucupio, and aliis militaribus curis animi sui studium
applicare, and exercere alia, quae commisso sibi Officio Pontificali, and
honori non modicum derogant, etc. Hereupon the Archbishop goes to Rome, where
after a long delay the Pope acquits him from all the Deanes and Canons
accusations, takes off his suspensions, and restores him to his Archiepiscopall
authority; the rather because the King being angry with him, had long before
spoiled him of his temporal^ies and sought to deprive him. The Archbishop
hereupon by reason of this Kings indignation goes into France not daring to
come into England, and seeing he could not find grace in the Kings eyes, to
obtain either his temporalties or his spiritualties, he returns back again
toward Rome. In the mean time the Deane and Chapter of York confer the
Archdeaconry of Westrising upon Peter Imant during life, by the Kings consent;
which the Archbishop hearing of, excommunicated and suspended him for intruding
thereunto without right, and declared his institution thereunto a nullity:
which excommunication he sends over into England. Soon after Ralph Wigstof
Clerk, the Archbishops agent at Rome, falling desperately ^icke there,
consessed before the Pope and all his Cardinals, that he had gotten many false
letters in the Court of Rome touching the Archbishops affairs; whereupon the
Pope writ to Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury to intercept these letters, which
were found hid in the hands of Roger Ripunt clerk, together with poisoned
rings, girdles, and other poisons which the Archbishop sent to destroy the
Deane and Canons of York, all which were publicly burnt at Totehill before a
great multitude of men and women; the bringer of them was imprisoned, and the
Archbishop had the blame of all imputed to him. After this the King sent for
the Deane and Canons of York, and Geoffry the Archbishop to meet him in
Normandy, to reconcile them; Geoffry coming before them was reconciled to the
King his brother, who restored him to his temporalties and spiritualties; which
done he departed to Rome: but the Deane and Canons coming three days after,
hindered his restitution till the Archbishop and they were accorded, of which
they much vaunted. Not long after there arose many new contestations and
schisms between this Archbishop and the Deane and Canons of York about Roger
and Honorius Archdeacons of Richmond; which Annal. part poster. p. 780.781,
785, 793, 7^4, 796, 805, 811, 817, 818, 819, 823, 824, 825, 826, 827.
Ho^^den relates at large: of which (God willing) I shall give a larger account
in my History of the Schisms of English Prelates between themselves; which
how many, great and violent they have been, you may in part conjecture by this
one Prelates story. After this the Pope writ earnestly to King Richard, to
desire him to be reconciled to this Archbishop his brother, and to embrace him
with peac^, least he should be forced in his behalf to punish him and his
Kingdom by an Ecclesiastical censure: hereupon the King sent the Bishops of
Durham, Ely, Winchester, Worcester and Bath to the Archbishop, desiring him in
the spirit of humility to confirm all the Kings grants, upon which the King
would entirely restore him to his Archbishopricke. This he proffered to do, if
these Bishops by a writing under their hands and seals would warrant this
counsel before the Pope. Which they refusing, telling him he was of age to
answer for himself, departed without any accord: whereupon the Archbishop went
to Rome, whither the King sent messengers against him, who writ to the King
from Rome, that the Pope earnestly desired him to restore the Archbishop
entirely into his Bishopric, so as he satisfy him the money he owed: which
if he refused, he would first by an interdict of the whole Province of York,
after that by an interdict of the whole Kingdom, without any appeal enforce
him to it, and compel his Clerks to resign their rents which they have
received, and the Deane and Canons of York to make an agreement with the
Bishop, unless some new cause should arise. King Richard dying, and King John
succeeding, while Geoffry of York was beyond sea; when John was to be crowned,
Philip Bishop of Durham was so presumptuous, as to appeal against the Kings
own Coronation, that it should not be accomplished in the absence of Geoffry
Archbishop of York and Primate of England. After this the King commanded the
Lands of the Archbishop which had been sequestered almost two years into the
hands of Stephen Turnham, to be delivered to three others for this Archbishops
use; yet afterward he retained them in his own hands, promising to restore
them when as the Archbishop and he met; who meeting together soon after in
Normandy, the King and he were reconciled, and he received him honorably. Not
long after, King John displeased with this Archbishop seized all his
temporalties into his hands by James de Petorne Sheriff of Yorkshire, who
violently entered into his manners, and wasted his goods. This Archbishop
hereupon excommunicates the Sheriff, and all authors and counselors of this
violence, with candles lighted, and Bells rung: he likewise excommunicated all
who had stirred up his brother John to anger against him without his default:
he also excomunicated the Burgesses of Beverly, and suspended the Town it
self, from the celebration of Divine service, and the sound of Bells, for
breaking his Park, and troubling and diminishing the goods which his
Predecessor and he had for a time peaceably enjoyed. King John by the advice of
his counsel restored him afterward to his Bishopric, but gave him a day in
Court to answer his contempt in not going beyond the Seas with him when
summoned to do it; in not suffering the Kings Officers to leavy money of his
plowlands, as they did in all other parts of the Kingdom; in beating the
Sheriff of Yorkes servants, and in not paying him 3000. marks due to King
Richard: soon after, the King coming to Beverly, was neither received with
pro^ession nor sound of Bells by reason of the Archbishops interdict, whose
servant Henry Chapel denied to let the King have any of the Archbishops wine;
for which affront the King commanded him and all the Archbishops servants to be
imprisoned, wherever they should be found: whereupon the King coming to
York, the Archbishop for a round sum of money (through the Queens
mediation) bought his peace of the King; but yet instantly fell out with the
Deane and Chapter about the election of a singing man; the Archbishop made
choice of one, the Deane and chapter of another as belonging to their election:
the like contention fell between them about the Archdeaconry of Cleveland: the
Archbishop elected Ralph Kyme, the Deane and canons, Hugh Murdac for
Archdeacon, against the Archbishops will, and hinder the instalment of Ra^ph;
whereupon the Archbishop excommunicated Murdac; And at the same time Honorius
Archdeacon of Richmond complained against the Archbishop to the Pope for taking
away the institutions to Churches and Synodals belonging to him: the Pope
hereupon writ diverse letters in his favor. Geoffry thus perplexed, and in the
Kings disfavour, purchases his grace and a confirmation of the rights of his
Bishopric from the King for a thousand marks sterling to be paid within one
year, for payment whereof he pawned his Barony to the King: After which he
falling into the Kings displea^ure again, was forced to fly the Kingdom and
Math. Westminster. An. 1213. p. 92.
died in exile, as you may read before, p. 186.

St. Hugh the ninth Bishop of Lincoln, S. HVG^^
Anno 1108. when King Richard the first by Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, his
chief Justice, required an aid of 300. Matth^ Paris. hist. Angl. p. 193, 195,
196. Roger Hoveden, Annal. pars posterior, p. 776, 777. Holinshed, p 173
Knights to remain with him in his service for one whole year, or so much
money as might serve to maintain that number, after the rate of three
shillings a day English money for every Knight; whereas all others were
contented to be contributers herein, only this S. Hugh Bishop of Lincoln
refused, and spoke sore against Hubert that moved the ma^ter, wishing him to
do nothing whereof he might be ashamed; Vnde pudor frontem signet, mentemque
reatus
Torqueat, aut famae titulos infamia laedat.
He was noted to be of a perfect life, because, Potestatis secularis in rebus
Ecclesiae saevientis impetus, adeo constanter elidere consuevit, ut rerum and
corporis sui periculum contemnere vid^retur: in quo and adeo profecit quod and
jura revocavit amissa, and Ecclesiam suam a servitute gravissim^ liberavit, as
Matthew Paris writes: and because he would not ^ticke to reprove men of their
faults plainly and f^ankly, not regarding the favor or dis-favour of any man;
in so much that he would not fear to pronounce them accursed, which being the
King Officers would take upon them the punishment of any person within Orders
of the Church, for hunting and killing the Kings game within his Parkes,
Forests, and Chases: A presumptuous part in a Bishop.
yea (and that which is more) he would deny payment of such Subsidies and taxes
as he was assessed to pay to the uses of King Richard and King John, toward
the maintenance of their wars, and did oftentimes accu^e by Ecclesiastical
autho^ity such Sheriffs, collectors, and officers, as did distreine upon his
lands and goods to satisfy those Kings of their demands; alleging openly,
that he would not pay any money toward the maintenance of wars with one
ch^istian Prince, upon private displeasure and grudge made against another
Prince of the same religion. This was his reason. And when he came before the
King to answer to his disobedience showed herein, he would so handle the
matter, partly with gentle admo^nishments, partly with sharp reproves, and
sometimes mixing merry and pleasant speech among his serious arguments, that
oftentimes he would so qualify the Kings mind, that being diverted from anger,
he could not but laugh and smile at the Bishops pleasant talk and merry
conceits. This manner he used not only with King John alone, but with King
Henry the second, and Richard the first in whose time he governed the Sea of
Lincoln. And for these See Willets Synop. Papis. contr. 5. qu. 3. p. 280.
virtues principally was he canonized for a Roman Saint by Pope Honorius the
third. Peter Suter and ^leurs des vies des Saints part 2. p. 428, 429.
Ribadeneira, in his life record, that this Bishop had many contests with King
Richard the first, that he resisted the King to his face when he demanded aid
and subsidies of his Subjects, so that by his means only and another Bishops
who joined with him, the King could obtain nothing at all; whereupon in great
rage and fury he banished both the Bishops, and confiscated all their goods;
the other Bishops goods were seized, who thereupon afterward submitted and
craved pardon of the King: but the Kings Offi^ers proceeding against S. Hugh,
he presently excommunicated them, so as none of them for fear of this
thunderbolt of his durst touch one thread of his garment, our Lord having
horribly punished diverse whom he had excommunicated, some of them being never
seen nor heard of afterward. One thing this Hugh did which is memorable:
going to visit the religious houses within his Diocese, he came to Godstow a
house of Nuns near Oxford; Roger Hoveden. Annal. pars posterior. p. 712.
Godwin, p. 237, 238.
seeing a hearse in the middle of the Quire covered with silk, and tapers
burning, round about it, he demanded who was buried there; and being informed,
that it was fair Rosamonds Tomb, concubine to King Henry the second, who at
her entreaty had done much for that house, and in regard of those favors was
afforded that honor: he commanded her body to be dug up immediately, and
buried in the Churchyard, least Christian religion should wax vile: saying, it
was a place a great deal too good for an harlot, and it should be an example
to other women to terrify them from such a wicked and filthy kind of life
Godwin ibid. Matthew. Paris hist. Ang. p. 197. Hoveden. Anna. pars posterior, p.
812, 813.
. This Prelate dying, when he was brought to Lincoln to be interred, John King
of England, and William King of Scots were met there with an infinite company
of Nobility of both Realms. The two Kings for the great reverence they bare to
his holiness (who yet gave no ^everence at all to Kings, as you have formerly
heard) would needs set their shoulders to the bear, and helped to carry his
course from the gates of the City, until it came to the Church door, where
the Prelates themselves received and carried it into the Quire and bu^yed him
in the body of the East end of the Church ABOVE THE HIGH ALTAR: (which
therefore stood not close to the East wall in those times, but some good
distance from it) near the Altar of Saint John.

Hugh Walis, HVGH WALLIS.
or de Wills, his next successor in this See but one, Anno 1209.
notwithstanding King John refused to receive Stephen Langhton, that
arch-traytor, for Archbishop of Canterbury, Matthew Paris Hist. Angl. p. 220,
288. Fox Acts and Monuments, vo. 1. p. 335. c. 1. Willets Synopsis Papism.
contr. 5. quaest. 3 p. 280. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 149.
and commanded this Bishop to repair to the Archbishop of Rhoan for
consecration from him, and not to receive it from Langhton, in contempt of this
his Sovereigns command got him to Langhton and received consecration from him:
whereupon the King seized on all his temporalties, and kept him fasting from
them four years, and then restored them. After this he joined both with the
Barons, and Lewis the French King (who came to conquer the Realm) against his
natural Sovereign: For which treasons he was only excommunicated by the
Pope, and not absolved till he had paid the Pope one thousand marks, and a
hundred marks to his Legate. Diverse other of our Prelates were fined for the
same cause, and that so deeply, as they were compelled to sell all they had to
purchase the Kings favor.

Anno Dom. 1252. Holinshed, p. 246, 255.
King Henry the third in a Parliament held at London, GROSTHEAD.
getting a grant from the Pope of the tenths due to the Church to be received
of him for three years, toward the charges of his journey into the holy Land
to rescue it from the Saracens, demanded these tenths of the spirituality: But
the Bishops, and especially Robert Gros^head Bishop of Lin^olne utterly refused
to be contributary to this grant; They alleged sundry reasons for their
excuse, as the poverty of the English Church being already made bare with
continual exactions and oppressions; but chiefly they excused themselves by
the absence of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, of whom, the one was
beyond the Sea; and the other at home in the North parts: All the other Bishops
were there except Here^ord and Chester, who was sick: and therefore without
the consent of those that were absent, and namely their Primate of Canterbury,
they could not conclude any general point touching the Kings demand. And
although the King fretted and stormed against them, yet could he not bring them
to his purpose, so as the Parliament was for that time dissolved: Yet before
their departure from London, the King communed with them apart, to see if he
could get some money toward his charges, but they had tuned their strings all
after one not^, discording all from his Tenor, so that not a penny could be got
of them: wherefore he took high displeasure against them, reviling them in
most reproachful manne^; and amongst other he reviled his half brother the
elect of Winchester, taxing him of great unthankfulness, who also among the
residue stood against him. Anno 1257. they denied the King a Subsidy again,
there being (says Holinshed) a great untoward disposition in the Subjects of
that time for the helping of their King, with a necessary aid of money toward
such great charges as he had bin by diverse ways occasioned to be at. Before
this Holinshed, p. 242
Anno 1250. this Bishop excommunicated a Priest for incontinency, who
continuing for some days without seeking to be reconciled, the Bishop sent to
the Sheriff of Rutland within whose Bayliwicke the Priest dwelt, to apprehend
him as a disodient and rebellious person, who not executing the Bishops
commandment, the Bishop thereupon excommunicates the Sheriff: whereof the
King being informed took displeasure, and sending to the Pope, procured an
inhibition, that no Archbishop or Bishop should compel any Officer of the King
to follow any suit before them for those things that appertain to the Kings
jurisdiction, or give sentence against them for the same. This Matthew. Paris,
hist. major, p. 693 694.
Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, Anno 1246. upon the suggestion of the Friars
Predicants and Minorites, raged more then was meet or expedient against those
of his D^ocesse, making strict inquisition in his Bishopric by his
Archdeacons and Deanes, concerning the chastity and manners as well of Noble as
ignoble (upon oath) to the enormious hurt and scandal of the reputations of
many Quod nunquam antea fieri consueverat (says the Author.)
Which had never been accustomed to be done before. The King hearing the
grievous complaints of his people against these Innovations, did thereupon by
the advice of his Counsel and Courts of Justice, send a Writ to the Sheriff
of Hertford in these words. Henry by the grace of God, King of England, etc. We
command thee, that as thou love thy self, and all things that are thine,
that thou from henceforth suffer not any Laymen of ^hy Baylywicke to assemble
together in any place, at the will of the Bishop of Lincoln, or of his
Archdeacons, Officials, or rural Deanes, to make any acknowledgments or
attestations upon their oath, unless in cases of Matrimony and testament.
Matthew. Paris, hist. major, p. 705
And the very next year following, in pursurance thereof, the King (by
Parliament) enacted, and commanded these things ensuing to be inviolably
observed; That if any Lay men were convented before an Ecclesiastical Judge,
for breach of faith and perjury that they should be prohibited by the King. And
that the Ecclesiastical Judge should be prohibited to hold plea of all causes
against Laymen, unless they were of Matrimony and Testament. All which Matthew
Paris precisely relates. Which prohibition and statute nullified the
constitution of O^ho, and hindered this Bishops innovation; whereupon, that
insolent traytorly Martial Archbishop of Canterbury, Boniface ( Antiquit.
Eccles. Brit. Bonifacius, p. 185.
better skilled in affairs of a Camp then of the Church) Anno 1256. (but nine
years after this prohibition and forenamed statute) published this peremptory
audacious constitution in affront of them both: Statuimus quod Laici ubi de
subditorum pec^^tis and excessibus corrigendis per Praelatos and Ecclesiasticos
judices inquiritur ad praestandum de veritate dicenda juramentum per
excommunicationis sententias, si opus fu^rit, compellantur; impedientes vero ne
hujusmodi juramentum praestetur: (for the Judges with many othe^s then
generally oppugned and hindered the ushering in of this Innovation) per
interdicti and excommunicationis sententiam arceant^^. To evacuate which
exorbitant illegal constitution (meant only of witnesses, not of
Churchwardens, Sidemen, or Stangers oaths as the Lindew. Prove. Constit. l. 2.
De jurejurando, ^. 80.
Gloss of Lindwood (who records it) resolves in express terms, trenching
both upon the peoples liberties and the Courts of Justice too; the Judges
frequently granted out sundry general prohibitions to all, or most of the
Sheriffs of England; as is evident by Pars 2. fol. 36. b. 43.50.
the R^gister of Writs. Not. Bre. fol. 41.4.
Fitz herberts natura Brevium. Rastall, and others; commanding the Sheriff to
inhibite Bishops and their Officers, to cite Laymen before them, to take an
oath in any case whatsoever, except of Matrimony or Testament only; Abrid. of
Statutes. Tit. Prohibition 5.
and not to suffer the people to appear before them to take such oaths. The
continuer of Matthew Paris his History of England, p. 966, 967. writes of this
Bishop of Lincoln, That Simon Earl of Leicester (who most opposed Henry the
third, and warred against him) adhered to him, and delivered his children to
him to be educated. That by his counsel tractabat ardua, tentabat dubia,
finivit inchoata, ea maxim, per quae meritum sibi succrescere aestimabat. And
this Bishop is said to have enjoined the Earl in remis^ion of his sins, that
he should undertake this cause of the Barons against the King, for which he
contended even unto death, affirming, that the peace of the Church of England
could not be established, but by the material Sword; and that all who died for
it, should be crowned with martyrdom. And some say, that this Bishop laying
his hand sometimes on the head of this Earls ^ldest son, said unto him; Oh
my dear son, both thou and thy father shall both die in one day, and with
one kind of death, yet for justice and v^rity. Such an animater was he both of
rebellion and wars.

HENRY LEXINTON
Henry Lexinton the next Bishop of this See, Anno 1257. offered some kind of
hard measure unto the University of Oxford, by infringing certain liberties
that of old belonged unto it. Matthew Paris Hist. Ang^. p. 915, 916. Godwin, p.
241, 242.
For redress hereof, they were forced to make their complaint unto the King,
lying then at S. Albons, and sent nine Masters of Art to the Court for that
purpose; Matthew Paris a Monk^ of S. Albons was present at the delivery of the
petition, and (as himself writes) was bold to s^ep unto the King, using these
speeches to him in private. I beseech your Grace, even for Gods sake, to have
compassion upon the Church now tottering, and in great danger of utter
subversion: The University of Paris, the nurse of ^o many excellent and famous
Pr^lates, is now greatly troubled: If the University of Oxford be disquieted
and mole^ted also, (especially at this time) being the second University of
Christendom, and even another foundation of the Church, it is much to be
feared, lea^^ it cause a general confusion and u^^^r ruin of the whole
Church. God forbid (said the King) that that should happen, especially in my
time; I will endeavor to prevent it. I doubt not he was as good as his word,
for I find no more mention of any further stirs. This I have thought good,
the rather to set down, to show, what was the reputation of our University of
Oxford in those days, and what indignities this Bishop offered to it, to cause
a public combustion.

HENRY BVRVVASH
Henry Burwash the 15. Bishop of Lincoln, though advanced to that See by King
Edward the second his special favor, within two years after his
consecration, Godwin, p. 303.
for some contempts and misdemeanors he fell so fair into the Kings
displeasure, that his temporalties were seized upon into the Kings hands for
two years space. Anno 1324. they were restored to him again, and he to the
Kings favor, Hist. Angliae, Anno 1326, 1327. p. 101, 104 105. Speeds history
of Great Brit. l. 9. c. 11. p. 678, 680, 681.
but the grudge thereof so st^cke in his stomach, as the Queen rising against
her husband seeking to depose him, (as afterward she did) no man was so
forward to take her part, no man was so eager against the King, his undoubted
true and natural Prince, as this Bishop. Thomas Walfingham writes, that almost
all the Prelates joined with the Queen against the King, and precipue, etc.
but especially the Bishop of Lincoln, H^reford, Dublin and Ely who raised a
great Army for her^ others (and principally the Archbishop o^ Canterbury)
^urnished her with money, and when the Queen had taken the King prisoner Anno
1327. keeping her Ch^istmas a^ Wal^ingford, the Archbishop of Canterbury and
Y^rke, the Bishop of Winch^ster (whom she m^de Lord Tre^surer) the Bi^h^p of
Norwich her Lord Cha^cellour, this good Bishop of Lincoln, the Bishops of Ely,
Coventry, and other Prelates k^pt their Christmas with her, with great honor,
joy, and triumph; whence coming to Westminster, pr^sently after Twelftide they
assembled in Parliament, deposed the King from his Crown, and elected his
son in his steed; to which election the Archbishop of Canterbury there
present consented, ET OMNES PRAELATI, and all the Prelates: the Archbishop
making an oration to them to confirm and justify this election, taking for
his text, Vox Populi, vox Dei: Such good Subjects were all the Archbishops and
Bishops at that time; and this Prelate one of the ringleaders; who not content
thus to spoil his Sovereign of his Crown, Kingdom and life too; not long
after making a new Pa^ke at Tyinghurst, he enclosed in the same, ground
belonging to diverse poor men his tenants, for which he had many a bitter curse
of them: Wa^singham hist. Angl. Anno, 1343. p. 150.
whereupon it is reported, that after his death he appeared to one of his
Gentlemen in the likeness of a Keeper, with a Bow and Arrows in his hand, a
horn by his side, and a green jerkin on his back; telling him, that for the
injurious enclosing of that Park, he was appointed to the keeping of the same,
there to be tormented till it were disparked again, desiring him to entreat
the Canons of Lincoln, his brethren, that this wrong done by him, by their
good means might be righted; who upon this information, sent one William
Batchellour of their Company to see it utterly disparked: which was effected.

Anno 1351. the Unive^sity of Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p 269. Godwin, cat. p. 95.
Oxford presented unto John Synwall JOHN SYNVVALL.
Bishop of Lincoln (unto whose jurisdiction Oxford then appertained) one
William Palmarin for their Chancellor, and prayed him to admit him. The Bishop
(I know not for what cause) delayed h^s admission from time to time, and
enforced the University to complain of this hard dealing unto the Archbishop.
He presently set down a day wherein he enjoined the Bishop to admit this
Chancellor, or else to render a reason of his refusal. At the time appointed
the Proctours of the University were ready together with this William Palmorie
to demand admission. And when the Bishop of Lincoln came not (trusting belike
to this privilege procured from Rome to exemp^ himself his authority and
jurisdiction) the Archbishop causes his Chancellor John Car^ton Deane of Wels
to admit him, writ to the Uniuersity to receive him, and cited the Bishop to
answer before him for his contempt. He appealed to the Pope, would not come,
and for his contumacy was convicted. Much money was spent in this suite
afterward at Rome. The event was, that the Archbishop prevailed, and the
others privilege was by special order of the Pope revoked, who also granted
unto the University at the same time, that the Chancellor hereafter should
only be elected by the Scholars themselves, and so presently authorized to
govern them without the admission of any other.

THOMAS WATSON.
Thomas Watson Bishop of Lincoln in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, was
deprived of hs Bishopric, and imprisoned, for refusing to take the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy, Martin hist. p. 453. Godwin, p. 249.
and counselling the other Bishops to excommunicate the Queen, for altering
religion. Of which see more before in Tonstall Bishop of London.

JOHN WILLIAMS.
Of other Bishops of this See since his time, I find little in History; As for
the present Prelate of that Diocese, as he deserves due praise for his
magnificent Structures of Libraries, Hospitals and the like; So on the other
side, his excessive pride and miscarriages in his Chancellor-ship, for which he
lost that office; and especially his advancing of the now Archbishop of
Canterbury (who proved a scourge to him, as well as others,) with his procuring
Mountagues Appeal to be printed, which See the Kings Proclamation for calling
in his Appe^lo Caesarem: And his Majesty's declaration concerning the
dissolution of the last Parliament but one, p. 20, 21.
kindled a great Combustion in our Church and State, and laid the foundation of
all those Popish Innovations both in doctrine and discipline, which have since,
like a filthy leprosy, overspread our Church, and bred such sad effects and
distractions among us) deserve just blame. Yea, his late extraordinary
stickling (much spoken against) to maintain the Lordly jurisdiction, and
secular authority of our Prelates, without the least diminution or reformation
of their excesses, has much ecclipsed all the honor and reputation he had
gained by his former sufferings, which should have made him (as the vulgar
truly say) more Matthew. 11.29.
meek and lowly in heart, like Christ his Master, of whom he, and all other
Pontifs, should learn Humility, not lofty and pontifical domineering like
Diotrephes, who loved to have the preheminen^e, for which St. 3 John 9.
John condemns him, or like the ambitious Apostles, who contended, Math. 20.25.
to 29. Luke 22.24, 25, 26.
which of them should be greatest; for which Christ sharply rebuked them
sundry times, saying, Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise
dominion ov^r them, and they that are great, exercise authority upon them, But
it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be great among you, let him be
your minister, and whosoever will be chi^fe among you, let him be your s^rvant:
even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to
give his life a ransom for many. Which texts, (together with that of Peter, 1
Pet. 5.2.3.5.
Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither
as being Lords over Gods Heritage, but being ensamples to the flock etc. Yea
all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility; for God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble) it seems this Prelate and
his Brethren have forgotten, or at least believe not to be canonical; since
they now poynt-blancke oppugn them: yet me thinks, he should in this case,
have remembered, what himself had but lately published in print ( The very
words of the License of John Lincoln Deane of Westminster before that Book.
as most Orthodox in doctrine, and consonant in Discipline to the Church of
England, and very fit to be printed and published in any place or places, where
h^ as Ordinary was enabled and licenced so to do: (and so at Westminster.) In
the holy Table Name and Thing, page 82. against Clergy men's intermedling with
secular affairs, where thus he writes. Regul. fusior. Reg. 20. page 454.
O foolish St. Basil, that bids h^s Clergy take special heed, that their
Martha be not troubled with many things. O dull Synesius, that held it fitter
for an Synes. ep. 52.
Egyptian then a Christian Priest to be over-troubled with matters of
wrangling. Well Doctor, God help the poor people committed to thy Cure; they
are like to find but a sorry Shepherd: One that will be in the vestry, when
he should be in the Pulpit; and by his much nimblenesse in the one, is like to
show a proportionable heavynesse in the other: which he thus seconds, p.
166.167. St. Cyprian was angry with one Geminius Victor, for making (against
the Canon) one Faustinus a Priest, Overseer of his Will, and by that means
withdrawing him from his calling and mini^^ry. And enlarging himself in that
discourse, how careful God had been in providing Tith^s and Oblations for the
Priest under the Law, giving him not Lands and Husbandries amongst the other
Tribes, ut in nulla re avocar^^ur, that he might have no occasion to be
withdrawn from the Altar; He aggravates the offense of these Testators, that
by making Churchmen, Executors and Overseers of their last Wills, ab altari
Sacerdotes and Ministros volunt avocare, will needs withdraw Ministers from
their Ecclesiastical functions, with no less offense, then if, under the Law,
they had withdrawn the Priests from the holy Altar. So that this pl^ce takes
my Doctor a little by the nose, that cannot endure to be a looker on, and a
dull Sp^ctator, confined only to his ministerial meditations. So this Prelate.
And do not th^se p^ssages of this Bishop take himself a little by the Nose
^oo, as w^ll as the Doctor, who cannot endure to be a looker on, and a dull
Spectator, confined only to his ministerial Meditations, unless he may
likewise sit as a Peer in Parliament, and intermeddle with secular affairs?
If not, as some conceive they do, yet sure I am, the words of Synesius and
Cyprian in their places which he quo^t^s, will round him in the ear, and give
him no little check. For Synesius in his 52. Epistle to Andronicus, writes
thus against Bishops sitting as Judges, and intermedling with public secular
affairs, to which Andronicus would have persuaded him. To join the power of
administering the republique, with the Priesthood, is all one as to knit those
things together which cannot be coupled by any conjunction. Ancient times
permitted the same persons to be Priests and Judges. For the Egyptians and
Hebrews for a long time used the government of Priests; Afterward when, as it
seems to me, that the divine work began to be done in a humane manner, Deus
ambo vitae genera separavit, God separated both kinds of life, and one of
these was appointed to sacred things, the other to government and empire; for
He designeth some to the dregs of the lowest things, others he has associated
unto himself. Those are employed in secular affairs, not in Prayer^ But yet
in both, God requires what is honest and consentaneous. Why do thou therefore
again revoke them? Why will thou conioyne these things which God has
separated? Who requirest us not to administer, but to deprave us in
administering: than which, what can be more unhappy? Have thou need of a Patron?
Go to him who is President in the Laws of the Republike, (or Lord chief
Justice.) Have thou need of God in any thing? Go to the Bishop of the City.
Contemplation is the end of Priesthood, if a man not falsely usurp that name to
himself. Now Contemplation and Action do no way^s accord: for the force of
the Will is moved into action, which cannot be without some affection; But the
Soul which is to become the receptacle of God, ought to be free from all
affection^: he had need of vacation from secular employments, who with the
s^udy of Philosophy is imploy^d in sacr^d things. After this he there
professe^h. He neither would nor could undertake and manage both secular and
spiritual affairs; and therefore desires, that either another Bishop might be
^lected in his place, which would discharge both, or else another joined to
him, to dispatch those worldly af^ai^es which he neither would, nor could
administer. And because this might seem a novelty, he gives ^his excellent
answer to it, necessary for our present time, and answering one grand objection
against the alteration of Episcopal government, now found by long experience
to be very pernicious to our Church and State. Quid exclamastis? number quia
nondum factum illud est, ficri idcircone nunc non convenit? multa quae
necessaria erant, invenit tempus, and emendavit. Non ad exemplum fieri omnia
solent, and vnumquodque eorum quae facta sunt initium habuit, and antequam
fieret, nondum erat factum. Consuetudini vtilitatem anteponere praestabilius
est. Demus and nos meliori consuetudini initium. Thus far Synesius the
Bishops first Author. And as for St. Cyprian his second Author, he was so angry
with Geminius Victor for making one Faustinus a Priest overseer of his Will,
that he Epist. 9. lib. 1. but Epist 69. (...) Pamelius his Edition.
decreed this dishonorable punishment to him even after his decease. Non est
quod pro dormitione eius apud vos fiat oblatio, aut deprecatio nomine eius in
Ecclesia frequentetur, ut Sacerdotum decretum religiose and necessario factum,
servetur a nobis: simul and caeteris fratribus detur exemplum, ne quid
Sacerdotes and Ministros Dei Altari eius and Ecclesi^ vacantes, ad saeculares
molestias devocet; which if the now Bishop of Lincoln had well considered, I
dare presume, it would have struck him dumb, and made him ashamed, so much as
once to open his mouth in defense of our Prelates usurping or exercising
temporal jurisdiction, and intermedling in temporal affairs, in which
himself heretofore has been overmuch conversant, far more then this
Clerk, who was but a bare overseer of another man's will. But for him and his
Predecessors this may suffice. I shall now hasten to the Bishops of some other
Sees.

The End of the first Part.
THE SECOND PART OF THE ANTIPATHIE OF THE ENGLISH LORDLY PRELACIE, BOTH TO
REGAL MONARCHY, AND CIVIL UNITY: OR, An Historical collection of the
several execrable Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Seditions,
State-schismes, Contumacies, oppressions, and Anti-monarchicall practices, of
our English, British, French, Scottish, and Irish Lordly Prelates, against our
Kings, Kingdoms, Laws, Liberties; and of the several Wars, and Civil
Dissentions occasioned by them in, or against our Realm, in former and latter
ages.

Together with the Judgment of our own ancient Writers, Martyrs, and most
judicious Authors, touching the pretended Divine Jurisdiction, Lordlinesse,
Temporalties, Wealth, Secular employments, Traiterous practices,
unprofitablenesse, and mischievousnesse of Lordly Prelates, both to King,
State, Church; with an Answer to the chief Objections made for the Divinity,
or continuance of their Lordly Function

By WILLIAM PRYNNE, late (and now again) an Utter-Barrester of Lincolnes Inn.

Woe to thee that spoylest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest
treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee; when thou shall
cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled, and when thou shall make an end to
deal treachercusly, they shall deal treacherously with thee. O Lord be
gracious to us, we have waited for thee; Isaiah 33.1, 2. LONDON, Printed by
Authority, for Michael Spark senior. An. 1641.

TO THE HIGH AND HONORABLE COURT OF PARLIAMENT NOW ASSEMBLED.
RIght Honorable Worthies, what the Prince of Latin Poets long since observed
in general -- Virg. Georg. l. 2.
Ali^ur vitium crescitque tegendo; That maladies are nourished and augmented by
concealing them; is in a more especial manner verified in our Lordly Prelates,
(one of the greatest maladies in our Church and State) who have been fostered
and suffered to grow great among us, only through the conc^alement,
palliating, or ignorance of their disloyalties, and other Episcopal vices.

The consideration whereof has induced me to compile and publish, The second
Part of this Antipathie; wherein I have (according to my weak abilities)
anatomized some of their Traitorous, Seditious, Rebellious Contumacious,
Oppressive, extravagant Practices, in ancient and modern times, laying them
open unto public view: and withal discovered the frivolousnes of those
grounds, the insufficiency of those Reasons alleged for the pretended
Divinity, Antiquity, and perpetuating of their Lordly Prelacy among us; Mat.
15.3.
A Plant (I dare say) which our Heavenly Father never planted in our Church;
and therefore certain to be rooted out in his due time; which in all
probability is now near at hand. If these my endeavors (which I humbly
prostrate at your Honors Feet, recommending them to your Noble Patronage, as
I did the former part) may contribute any thing to this much desired, long
expected good work, I shall think my labor happily bestowed. In the mean
time, I shall be a daily Orator to the Throne of Grace, for a superabundant
blessing upon your Honorable Persons and public Consultations, till you have
cleansed both our Church and State from all Corruptions which infest them, and
Psal^ 100.8.
Cut off all wicked doers from the City of our God.

Your Honors devoted, and eternally obliged Redeemed one, WILL. PRYNNE.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
HAving now according to promise (kind Reader) with all convenient expedition
finished this Second Part of the Antipathy of the English Lordly Prelacy to
Regal Monarchy and Civil Unity, I humbly submit it to thy favorable Censure,
and charitable Interpretation, which I must implore.

The rather, because some uncharitable Lordly Prelates, and their malicious
Instruments, have not spared to traduce my loyal intentions, and to
mis-conster my innocent words even to the King my Sovereign, endeavoring to
make me and others guilty of no less than High Treason, for discovering our
Prelates notorious Treasons, Conspiracies, and Rebellions to the world. For
finding this passage in my Prologue to the first Part: If then we consider the
paucity of our Archbishops, and Lord Bishops, etc. on the one side, and then
on the other hand, compare the multitude of the Prelates no^orious Treasons,
etc. we must necessarily conclude, their NO BISHOP, NO KING, to be a notorious
Bull, and NO KING UNLESS NO BISHOP, to be a more probable and Some Coppies
have most for more, through the Printer^ mistake.
more true position. They contrary to the whole design and scope of my
Antipathy, yea, of this very passage, (as he that Reads it at large may at
first discern) most injuriously su^^ected to his Majesty, that the meaning of
my, No King unless no Bishop, was, that I and the Commons intended to depose
his Majesty, and to have no King at all unless his Majesty would put down
Bishops. Hereupon his Majesty to satisfy himsel^e in a point of such high and
near concernment, calling for the book, perused the passage, and concluded,
there was no such meaning couched in it as was suggested, but the quite
contrary; namely, That he could not be an absolute King unless the Bishops
(who had still been Rebellious, d^sloyall and opposite to their Sovereigns,
so far as to uncrowne or make them no Kings in a manner) were suppressed;
which was all I intended in this passage, as is evident by its opposition to
their no Bishop, no King, by the speech of King John, who hearing of Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury his death, said See Part. 1. p. 31.
I was never a King till now; by reason of Huberts presumptuous daring to
cross and frustrate his royal resolutions; from whence I borrowed this
mis-interpreted clause; by Mr William Tyndals passages here cited to the same
effect, Part. 2. p. 366.369. which I alluded to, and by the whole scope of the
Antipathy to this effect.

By this malicious false suggestion, with others of like nature heretofore,
(the sole cause of al my former sufferings) the world may easily judge what
malicious calumniators, what impudent false informers our Lordly Prelates are,
and how much I have been beholding to them for their malicious
misinterpretations of my words, and misrepresentations of my sincere intentions
to his Majesty, whom they ever labored to incense against me by these most
sinister means; and not content therewith, since his Majesty has been
satisfied touching this forecited passage, some of them have not spared to
report abroad to others; That there were such passages in my Prologue, for
which my life might be questioned; and I believe it true, were they to be both
my accusers and Judges: but blessed be God, this ever has been and shall be
my consolation, that they can only slander, not convict me of any disloyalty
or misdemeanor. And if they will still calumniate me for well doing (as
hitherto they have done) that golden Apothegme of Alexander the great, will be
a sufficien^ Antidote against the poison of their tongues and pens; Plutarchi
Apoph.
Regium est male audire, cum been facias.

Now lest they should chance to slander me for any false quotations by reason
of the variety of the Impressions and Pages of some of our Historians, I have
frequently quoted; to prevent this inconvenience, I shall advertise them and
thee (kind Reader) what Editions I have used. Malmesbury, Huntindon and Hoveden
here quoted, were Printed at Francfort by Wich^lus, Anno, 1601. Matthew Paris,
Tiguri. 1589. Matthew Westminster. Londini. 1570. Walsingham, Londini, 1574. by John
Day. Speed, London. 1623. Holinshed, the last Edition. Of Godwins Catalogue of
Bishops there are two Editions; the first Printed by Geo^ge Bishop 1600. the
latter with a Discou^se of the Conversion of Britain, and some Additions,
Printed for Thomas Adams. London 1615. both these Editions I have quoted for
the most part promiscuously, and sometimes with distinction; if the pages vary
in one Edition, peruse the other, and these Editions of the Historians which I
follow, and then every page and quotation will prove true and punctual, if
examined.

And now (Reader) having given thee this advertisement, I shall desire God to
Sanctify this Treatise to thy private information, and the public Reformation
of all corruption in our Church. Farewell.

A COMPLETE TABLE OF THE SEVERAL CHAPTERS of this Second Part of the
Antipathy, which may serve in steed of an Index.
Chap. IV. COmprising the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Contumacies,
Disloyalties, etc. of the Bishops of Ely, Exeter, Worcester and Hereford. Chap.
V. Containing the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Contumacies, Disloyalties,
etc. of the Bishops of Chichester, Carlisle, Norwich, Chester, Coventry and
Lichfield. Chap. VI. Comprising the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions,
Contumacies, Disloyalties, etc. of the Bishops of Rochester, S. David's,
Landaffe, Bangor, Asaph, Bath and Wels; with a short touch of the Bishop of
Oxford, Bristow, Peterborough, and Gloucester; and of our Bishops in general.
Chap. VII. Containing the several Treasons, Rebellions, Seditions, Schisms,
Contumacies, Wars, and disloyalties of the Bishops of France, Normandy,
Scotland, and Ireland, in reference to our Kingdom and Kings of England. Chap.
VIII. Containing certain Conclusions, deduced from the Premises, with the
judgments and resolutions of diverse of our ancient Writers, Martyrs, and some
of our learnedest Bishops and Authors in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, touching the
pretended Divine Institution and Jurisdiction of Bishops, their Treasons,
Rebellions, Temporalties, large possessions, intermedling with secular
affairs; the taking away of their Temporalties not to be sacrilege; and the
uselessenesse, unprofitablenesse, and mischievousnesse, of Lordly Bishops, and
their government in our Church. Chap. IX. Comprising an answer to the
principal Objections alleged by the Prelates in defense of the pretended
divine Institution, and for the continuance of their Episcopacy in our Church.
Kind Reader I pray correct these subsequent Errors which have escaped the
Press in some Coppies, in my absence.
ERRATA.
IN the book p. 200. l. 18. or read for. p. 203. l. 12. insolently, 207. l. 2.
him to ^ him. To. p. 235. l. 12. money. p. 238. Manwaring, p. 242. l. 2. than.
l. 6. henry's, Stephens. p. 250, l. 10. forced. p. 251. l. 36.11000. p. 255. l.
1^. Eiic^rent. p. 322. l. 2. not. p. 328. l. 1. after, aver. p. 322. l. 34.
Churches, Churchmen. p. 342. l, 7. our, your. p. 356. l. 10. Cefenas. p. 393.
l. 11. It is. p. 404. l. 11. and destruction. p. 405. l. 18. that p. 411. l. 8.
perceive. p. 417. l. 19^ Fisher, Fish. p. 419. l. 11. be, both. p. 424 l. 3.
dele in. p. 430. l. 21. can, cannot, l. 22. In Master. p. 434. l. 23. fol. l.
24.32.22. l. 37. or spiritual. p. 435. l. 6. dele great p. 446. l. 5.
Pastures. p. 440. l. 3. he thus writes; And l. 10. where, which, p. 453. l. 5.
understand, l. 15. Erasmus. p. 481. l. 31. Angelorum l. 33. this book. p. 482.
l. 16. never, ever l. 31. of, and. p. 484. l. 32. men. p. 486. l. 6. by Paul.
p. 490. l. 27. deny, deem l. 35. it, them. p. 499. l. 23. habetur. p. 501. l.
13. dele, together. p. 503. l. 11. dele other. p. 510. l. 6. dele ad. l. 31.
whole.

In the Margin. p. 208. l. 2. Fordham. p. 357. Joan Baleus. Scrip. Brit. Cent.
3. c. 61. omitted, p. 253.254. are omitted p. 365. l. 9, Common, Canon. p. 487.
l. 2. Timotheum. l. 5. Romanorum. p. 499, l. 12. H. 8. p. 500, l. 14. Finan. p.
513. l. 25. Ingulph.

THE SECOND PART OF THE Antipathy of the English Lordly Prelacy, both to Regal
Monarchy and civil Unity.
CHAP. IV. Containing the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Contumacies, and
disloyalties of the Bishops of Ely, Exeter, Worcester, and Hereford.
THe Bishopric of Ely was Godwin Cat. p. 200 Holinshed. p. 36. Rog^re de
Hoveden Anna^lium pars prior p. 472. Matthew. Paris Hist. Ang. p. 61. Matthew.
West. An. 1109. p 26. Eadmerus. Hist. Novorum. l. 4. p. 95.96. and Johannes
Se^deni spici^egium, ibid. p. 209. ^o 213^ and 165^ to 169.
first erected by the pride of Richard Abbot of Ely, who in respect of his
great wealth disdained to live under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Lincoln, to whose Diocese Cambridge-shire at that time appertained. But he
had reasonable pretenses or his ambition. He caused the King to be told, that
the Diocese of Lincoln was too large for one man's government, that Ely were a
fit place for an Episcopal See, etc. These Reasons amplified with golden
Rhetoric, so persuaded the King, as he not only consented himself, that
this Monastery should be converted into a Cathedral Church, and the Abbot made
a Bishop; but also procured the Pope to confirm and allow of the same; but
Richard dying before his enstalement, Henry the first, Anno 1109. appointed
this Bishopric unto one Hervaeus, HERVAEVS.
that had been Bishop of Bangor, and agreeing ill with the Welchmen, was feign
to leave his Bishoppricke ther^, and seek abroad for somewhat elsewhere.

Nigellus, NIG^LLVS^
the second Bishop of this See, by reason of his employment in matters of State
and Council, could not attend his Pastoral charge, and therefore committed
the managing and government of his Bishoppricke unto one Ranulphus, Godwin.
Ca^. p. 201.
sometime a Monk of Glastonbury, that had new cast away his Cowle, a covetous
and wicked man. Matthew West. Anno. 1139. p. 36.
King Stephen and he had many bickerings, and as Hist. Ang. p. 74.
Matthew Paris writes, he banished him the Realm; he was Nephew to Roger
Bishop of Salisbury, from whom, in ejus pern^^iem traxerat inc^ntiuum, he had
drawn an incentive to his destruction; but of him, and his contests with this
King, you may read more in Roger of Salisbury his Uncle.

This Matthew. Paris Hist. Ang p. ^47. Godwin. ca^ p. 202.
See, continuing void five years, without a Bishop after Nigellus death,
Geoffery Rydell, GEOFFRY RYDEL.
Anno. 1174. succeeded him, a very lofty and high minded man, called commonly,
The Proud Bishop of Ely. King Richard the first, and he accorded so ill, that
he dying intestate, and leaving in his coffers great store of ready money,
namely, 3060. marks of silver, and 205. pound of gold, the King confiscated
and converted it to his own use.

William Longchamp, WILLIAM LON^CHAMP.
next Bishop of this See, being made Lord Chancellor of England, chief
Justice of the South part of England, and Protector of the Realmeby Richard the
first, when he went his voyage to the Holy Land, H^veden. Annal. pars ^esterior
p. 687.700 to 708.718.719 720.735.663 680. etc. Nubrigen. Hist. l. 4 c.
14.15.16 17.18. Matthew. Paris Hist. Major. p. 151.155.156.157.160^ 161 Fox Acts
and Monum^n^^. p: 114: 2^3.224. Godw. Cat p. 247. to 261 Holinshed. p.
21.129.130.131.132. Speed. p. 531: etc.
set the whole Kingdom in a combustion, through his strange insolence,
oppression, pride, violence: For having all temporal, and spiritual
Jurisdiction in his hands, the Pope making him his Legate here in England, at
the Kings request, (which cost him a thousand pounds in money, to the great
offense of the King,) infatuated with too much prosperity, and the brightness
of his own good fortune, he began presently to play both King and Priest, nay
Pope in the Realm; and to do many things, not only untowardly, and
undiscreetly, but very arrogantly and insolen^ly, savoring as well of
inconscionable covetousness and cruelty, as lack of wisdom and policy in so
great a government requisite. He calling a Convocation by virtue of his power
Legantine, at the entreaty of Hugh Novant Bishop of Chester, displaced the
Monks of Coventree, and put in secular Priests in their rooms; Officers
appointed by the King himself, he discharged, and removed, putting others in
their steeds. He utterly rejected his fellow Justices whom the King joined with
him in Commission for government of the Realm, refusing to hear their
Counsel, or to be advised by them. He kept a guard of Flemmings and French
about him. At his Table, all Noblemens children did serve and wait upon him.
John the Kings brother, and afterward King himself, he sought to keep under,
and disgrace by all means possible, opposing him all he could that he might
put him from the Crown; He tyrannized exceedingly over the Nobility and
Commons, whom he grieved with intolerable exactions, oppressions,
extraordinary outward pomp, and intolerable behavior. He was extreme
burdensome one way or other to all the Cathedral Churches of England. His
Offices were such prolling companions (bearing themselves bold upon their
Masters absolute authority) as there was no sort of peaple whom they grieved,
not by some kind of extortion, all the wealth of the Kingdom came into their
hands insomuch that scarce any ordinary person had left him a silver belt to
gird him withal, any woman any brooch or bracelet, or any gentleman a ring to
wear upon his finger. He purchased every where apase, bestowed all Temporal
and Ecclesiastical Offices and places that fell where he pleased. He never
rode with less than 1500. horse, and commanded all the Nobility and Gentry
when he went abroad to attend him, lodging for the most part at some Monastery
or other, to their great expense: having both Regal and Papal authority in
his hands: he most arrogantly domineered, both over the Clergy, and Layety;
and as it is written of a certain man, The fruit of Clergy men's, having both
temporal and spiritual jurisdiction.
That he used both hands for a right hand; so likewise he for the more easy
effecting of his designs (as our Lordly Prelates do now) used both his powers
one to assist the other; for to compel and curb potent Laymen, if
peradventure he could do less than he desired by his secular power, he
supplied what was wanting with the censures of his Apostolical power. But if
perchance any Clergy man resisted his will, (him without doubt alleging the
Canons for himself in vain) he oppressed and curbed by his secular power.
There was no man who might hide himself from his heat, when as he might
justly fear, both the rod of his Secular, and the sword of his spiritual
jurisdiction to be inflicted on him; and no Ecclesiastical Person, could by
any means or authority be able to defend himself against his royal
pre-eminence: Finally glorying of his immense power, that the Metropolitan
Churches, which as yet did seem to contemn his excellency, might have
experience of his authority, he went in a terrible manner to both. And first of
all to York, to the Bishop elect whereof he was most maliciously dispitefull.
And sending before him a mandate to the Clergy of the said Church, that they
should meet him in a solemn manner, as the Legate of the Aposticke See; when
as they had thought to appeal against him, he regarded not the appeal made to
the higher power, but gave the appellants their choice, that they should either
fulfill his commands, or be committed to prison, as guilty of high It was
treason then to resist this proud Prelates will.
Treason^ Being therefore thus affrighted, they obeyed, and not daring so much
as to mutter any further against him, as to one triumphing, they with a
counterfeit sorrow bestowed as much honor and glory on him as he would himself.
The chief Chanter of that Church had gone out of the way a little before, that
he might not see that which he could not behold without torment of mind, which
the Bishop undestanding, raging against this absent person as a rebel with an
implacable motion by his own Sergeants spoiled him of all his goods. Having
preyed upon the Archbishoppricke, and pursed all up into his Treasury, this
famous tryumpher departed. And not long after he triumphed in like manner over
those of Canterbury, when as no man now durst to resist him. Having therefore
both Metropolitan Sees, thus prostrate to him, he used both as he pleased. In
a word, Note the m^schiefe of Prelates temporal and secular Iurisd^ction
combined.
the Laymen in England at that time (writes Neubrigensis) found him more than a
King, and the Clergy men more than a Pope, but both of them an intolerable
tyrant. For by occasion of his double power, he put on a double tyrants
person, being only innoxious to his accomplices and co-operators, but equally
grievous to all others, not only in his greedy desire of moneys, but likewise
in his pleasure of domineering, his pride being more than Kingly^ almost in all
things. Matthew. West. An. 1191 p. 6^.
He carrying himself above himself, consumed much Treasure in walling about
the Tower of London, which he thought to have compassed with the Thames, Et
regem de magna part pecuniae multipliciter damnificauit, and many ways
damnified the King in mispending a great part of his money. Therefore in the
end he was precipitated from the top to the bottom of confusion. He set over
every Province, rather to be destroyed than governed, most wicked executioners
of his covetousnes, who would neither spare Clergy man, nor Lay man, nor Monk,
whereby they might the more advance the profit of the Chancellor; for so was
he called, when as he was a Bishop; the name verily of a Bishop being nothing
at all, or Lukewarm in him, but the name of a Chancellor was famous and
terrible throughout all England. He appointed the Governors of every county,
under pretense of suppressing thieves, to have great troops of cruel and
barbarous armed persons to ride with them, every where, to terrify the people;
who going abroad in every place without punishment, committed both many
enormities and cruelties.

Hoveden (...) and Holinshed note, that the King confirming this Bishop
Chancellor, and Lord chief Justice of all England, and the Bishop of Durham to
be Lord chief Justice from Trent Northwards; when they were thus advanced to
these dignities, howsoever they came by them, directly, or indirectly: that
immediately, thereupon strife and discord did arise betwixt them; for waxing
proud and insolent, they disdained each other, contending which of them should
bear most rule and authority: insomuch that whatsoever seemed good to the one,
the other misliked. The like hereof is noted before, between the Archbishops
of Canterbury and York. For the nature of ambition is, to delight in
singularity, to admit no Peer, to give plac^ to no superior, to acknowledge
no equal, as appears by this proud Prelate. Who afterward depriving Hugh of
Durham of all his honor and dignity; and putting the Bishop of Winchester to
great trouble; and doubting least the Nobles of the Realm should put him out
of his place, who detested him for his pride and insolency, he thereupon
matched diverse of his Kinswomen to them, to make them true unto him, promising
them great preferments; the rest of the Nobility he either crushed, or
otherwise appeased: fearing none but John the Kings brother, who was like to
succeed him to curb him, he sent his two brothers to the King of Scots, to
join in a firm league with him to crown Arthur King, and not John, in Case
the King died without issue. These ^everall particulars, insolences, and
oppressions, being related to the King Wintring in Sicily, he thereupon sent
Wal^er, Archbishop of Rhoan, a prudent and modest man, with a Commission to be
joined with this Bishop in the government of the Kingdom, and that nothing
should be done without his consent, sending Hugh Bardulfe Bishop of Durham with
him to govern the Province of York, (where the Bishops brother played Rex in
a barbarous manner) granting him likewise the custody of the Castle of Windsor:
Hugh meeting with the Bishop at the town of Ely, showed him the Kings Letters
to this purpose, to which he answered, that the Kings commandment should be
done, and so brought him with him to Euwell, where he took him and kept him
fast, till he was forced to surrender to him the Castle of Windsor, and what
else the King had committed to his custody, and moreover was constrained to
leave Henry de Put^nco his own^ son, and Gilbert Lege, for hostages of his
fidelity to be true to the King and the Realm. The Bishop hereupon contemned
this command of the King, pretending that he knew his mind very well, and
that this Commission was fraudulently procured; and when the Archbishop of
Rhoan, according to the Kings direction went to Canterbury to order that See,
being void, this proud Chancellor, aspiring to the prerogative of this See.
prohibited him to do it; threatening, that he should dearly pay for this his
presumption if he attempted to go thither, or do any thing in that business:
so that this Archbishop continued idle in England. But the Chancellor impatient
of any colleague in the Kingdoms government, like a ^inguler wild beast preyed
upon the Kingdom. Whereupon he sends for a power from beyond the sea, puts
Gerardus de Cammilla, from the government of Lincoln Castle his wives
inheritance^ and commands him to resign it into his hands: he refusing to do
it, repai^es to John the Kings brother for aid, and assistance; whereupon the
Bishop in a rage presently goes and besieges the Cas^le; and seeks to force
it: John in the mean time takes Notingham and Tikehill, and sends to the
Bishop, to give over his siege, who losing one of his horns or hands (his
spiritual Legantine power by the Popes death, and a little affrighted
therewith) by the advice of his friends, he comes to a parley with John, and
made his peace with him for the present upon the best terms and conditions he
could. But hearing shortly after that the foreign forces he had sent for to
aid him were arrived, he takes courage, and falls off from his Covenants,
protesting, that he would drive John, or John should drive him out of the
Kingdom; intimateing, that one Kingdom was to little to contain two such
great and swelling persons. At last they come to new Articles of agreement;
soon after, which Geoffery Plantagenet Archbishop of York, the Kings and
John's base brother, procured his consecration from the Archbishop of Towers,
which the Chancellor hindered and delayed all he might. The Chancellor, his
bitter enemy and prosecutor hearing of it, presently ^ends his own Officers to
York, invades and spoils all the possessions of the Bishopprick^, and what
ever belonged thereto, and commands all the Ports to be stopped, to hinder his
landing and access to his Church, writing this Letter to the Sheriff of Kent.
We command you, that if the Elect of York shall arrive in any Port or Haven
within your Baylywicke, or any Messenger of his, that you cause him to be
arrested, and kept till you have commandment from us therein. And we command
you likewise to stay, attach, and keep all Letters that come from the Pope, or
any other great man. He notwithstanding arrives at Dover, but found a greater
storm on shore, than at sea, for the Captain of Dover Castle, who had married
a Kinswoman of the Chancellors, hindered his progress, and certified the
Chancellor of his landing withal speed, who no ways dissembling the rage of
his fierce mind, commanded him to be stripped of all his goods, and to be thrust
prisoner into the Monastery of Dover. The Officers hereupon sent from this most
cruel tyrant seize upon all his carriage and goods, and strip him and his of
all they had, and finding him in the Church of S. Martyn in Dover, neither
respecting the greatness of his person, nor the holiness of the place,
dragging him by force from the very sacred Altar, and violently halling him out
of the Church in a most contumelious manner, thrust him prisoner into the
Castle. The same of this enormity flying, as it were upon the wings of the
wind, presently filled all England. The Nobility storm at it, the inferior
sort curse him for it, and all with common votes detest the tyrant. John most
of all grieved at the captivity and abuse of his brother, earnestly seeks, not
only to free him from prison, but to revenge his wrong. Wherefore he speedily
gathers together a great army: many Bishops and Nobles that formerly sided with
the Chancellor joining their forces with him, being justly offended with his
tyrannical proceedings, and immoderate pride, as well as others, and raged
against him more than others, both with their tongues and minds. The
Chancellor hereupon releaseth the Archbishop; who coming to London, allayed
and recompensed the grief of the injury sustained, with the more abundant
affections and offices of many. But John with the other Nobles, and Prelates,
not satisfied with his release, though stirred up with his imprisonment,
proceeded on to break the horns of this Unicorn, who with his friends and
foreign soldiers encamped about Winchester; but finding himself too weak,
and most of his friends and his soldiers to fall off from him, flees first to
Windsor, and from thence to London; where finding the Citizens, who formerly
feared him for his pride and cruelty, to incline to John, flies with all his
company into the Tower; which being oppressed with the multitude, was more
likely to betray than defend them; whereupon he seeing his danger, ^oes forth
and submits himself to John, craves leave for th^se included in the Tower to
depart^ resignes up the Tower, and all the other royal forts to him, and
flies privately in an inglorious manner to Dover to his Sisters husband,
thinking to steal secretly beyond the seas to the King: and knowing that his
enemies, if they should have any inkling of his intent, would assuredly hinder
the same, or work him some mischief by the way, he disguised himself in
woman's apparel, and so went unto the Sea side at Dover mufled, with a met-yard
in his hand, and a web of cloth under his arm. There he sat upon a rock
ready to take ship; where a certain leude mariner thinking him to be some
strumper, began to dally wantonly with him; whereby it came to pass, that
being a stranger borne, and not able to speak good English, nor give the
mariner an answer either in words or deeds, he suspected him to be a man, and
called a company of women; who pulling off his kerchiefe and muffler, found his
crown and beard shaven, and quickly knew him to be that hat^full Chancellor
whom so many had so long cursed and feared; whereupon in great dispite, they
threw him to the ground, spit upon him, beat him sore, and drew him by the
heels alo^^ the ^ands, the people flocking out of the Town, deriding and
abusing him, both in words and deeds. The Burg^sses of the Town, hea^i^g of
this tumult, came and took him from the people his servants being not able to
rescue him, and (...) him into a seller, there to keep him prisoner, till
notice had been given of his departure. It is a world to see he that was a few
months before honored^ and reverenced of all men like a petty god, attended
by Noblemens sons, and Gentlemen of quality, This is the common fate of ill
Officers when in disgrace.
whom he matched with his Neeces and Kindswomen, every man accounting himself
happy whom he favored, yea to be acquainted well with his Porters and
Officers, being thus once down, and standing in need of his friends help,
had no man that moved a finger to rid him out of the present calamity and
trouble. Whereupon he lay prisoner in this pickle a good space. The Earl John
was desirous to have done him some further notable disgrace and contumely;
neither was there any one almost, that for his own sake withstood it; But the
Bishops, though most of them his enemies, regarding notwithstanding his calling
and place, would not suffer it, but caused him to be released. So not long
after being deposed of his Office of Chancellor by direction of the King,
deprived of authority, and banished the Land by the Lords, Barons, and Prelates
of the Realm, he gat him over Sea into Normandy, where he was borne, and
complained of these proceedings against him to the Pope, whose Legate he was,
who thereupon writ Letters in his favor to all the Archbishops and Bishops of
England, commanding them to excommunicate John Earl of Morton, and interdict
the Realm, till the Bishop was restored unto his former estate; which the
Bishops neglecting to do, notwithstanding this Bishops own Letter to the
Bishop of Lincoln, touching this matter, he there rested himself after this
turmoile till the return of King Richard from the holy Land, See Fox, vol. 1.
p. 319.320.321.
the Archbishop of Roan governing the Kingdom the mean while, whom he caused
the Pope to excommnnicate.

Hoveden, Annal pars p^stirior. p. 735^
Anno. 1194. Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Bishops of Lincoln,
London, Rochester, Winchester, Worceter, Hereford, the Elect of Exeter, and
many Abbots and Clergy men of the Province of Canterbury, after they had
excommunicated Earl John with all his Fauters and Councillors, in an Assembly
at Westminster, in the Chapel of the infirm Monks, on ^he 4th. of February,
appealed to the presence of the Pope, against this Bishop of Ely, that he
should not from thenceforth enjoy the office of a Legate in England, which
appeal they ratified with their seals, and sent it first to the King, and
afterward to the Pope to be confirmed. Upon the Kings return, this Bishop
excused himself the best he might, reconciled himself to Geoffery Archbishop
of York, purging himself with an hundred Clerks his compurgators, from the
guilt of his wrongful imprisonment and misusage at Dover, and being after sent
Ambassador to the Pope with the Bishop of Durham and others fell sick by the
way at Poyters, and so died. From this and other forcited presidents we may
see, how dangerous and pernicious a thing it is for any one man to have the
exercise of spiritual and temporal Jurisdiction vested in him, since it makes
him a double tyrant and oppressor.

EVSTACHIVS.
Eustachius, this turbulent Prelates successor Matthew West. Anno. 1208. p. 86.
Matthew. Paris Anno. 1208. p. 217.318. God. ^at. p. 261. Holinsh p. 171 172. etc.
was one of those Bishops, that pronounced the Popes excommunication against
King John, and interdicted the whole Realm; for which he was glad to flee the
Realm, continuing in exile for many years: his temporalties and goods being
seized on by the King in the interim: yea, the King for this Act warned all the
Prelates and Clergy of England, that they should presently depart the Realm,
that all their Lands and goods should be confiscated, which was done, and they
all put out of the Kings protection. The Bishops and Abbots hereupon stood on
their guard, sending the King word, that they would not depart out of their
Bishopprickes and Monasteries, unless they were thrust out perforce, whereupon
all their possessions, barnes, corn, and goods were seized on by the Kin^s
Officers, and the Parents of those Bishops who interdicted the Realm,
apprehended, spoiled of all their goods, and thrust into prison.

In the year 1266. whiles Matth^ Paris Hist. Aug. page 969.906.921. Godw. Cat.
p. 209.
King Henry the third besieged Kenelworth Castle, HVGH BALSAM.
some rebels whom the King had disinherited, entered the Isle of Ely, and
wasted the Country thereabouts. Whereupon Hugh Balsam (about whose election
there was great contention) coming to the King to complain, being then Bishop
of this See, was unworthily received, and ei casus iste apluribus imputatur:
This accident being imputed unto him by many, he being suspected to favor and
side with these Rebels. Matthew. Paris p. 600.
In William Kilkenny, his next predecessors time, there was a great suit
between this Bishop and the Abbot of Ramsey about the Fennes, and the bounding
of them; which Fennes having been formerly unhabitable, and unpassable by men,
beasts, or carts^ overgrowne with Reeds, and inhabited only by birds, that I
say not devils, about that time were miraculously converted into delectable
meadows, and arable ground. Et quae ibidem pars ^egetes vel faena non
producit, gladiolum, cespites, and alia ignis pabula, cohabitantibus utilia,
germinando abundanter subministrat. Vnde lis, and gravis contentio, de termin^s
locorum talium and terrarum inter eos qui ab initio Mariscum inhabitabant
exorta, lites and praelta suscitabat; writes Matthew Paris, and among others,
between the Bishop of Ely, and this Abbot of Ram^ey. King Edward the third was
so highly offended with the Monks election of this Bishop Balseam contrary to
his direction that he caused the woods of the Bishopric to be cut down and
sold, the Parkes to be spoiled, the Ponds to be fished and wasted, and havocke
to be made of all things: whereupon the Bishop got him over sea to Rome to
seek relief: against whom Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, to gratify the
King, writ diverse Letters to his friends of Rome, and set up one Adam de
Marisco, to be a counterfeiter to the Pope against him. Matthew. Paris p. 921.
In this Bishops time, the King standing in need of money, the Prelates granted
him 42. thousand marks, to the great hurt, and irreparable damnage of the
Church and Kingdom, upon condition, that the King should speedily redress the
oppressures of the Church, and reduce it to the State of due liberty:
whereupon the Bishops framed about fifty Articles, and put them in writing,
that being read before the King, Nobles, and Prelates, they might be confirmed
in due time; which Articles, writes my author, were like to those which Thomas,
Archbishop of Canterbury the Martyr contended for, and became a glorious
conqueror, (and therefore directly against the Kings Prerogative, and the
Laws of the Realm).

THOMAS LILDE.
Thomas Lilde Bishop of Ely, a furious and undiscreet Prelate, in King Edward
the third his Godw^ Cat p. 269.270.271.272.
days had many quarrels with the Lady Blanch Lake, a near Kinswoman of the
Kings about certain bounds of Lands and trespasses in burning of a house by
the Bishops command or privity^ belonging to this Lady who recovered 900. pound
damages against him, which he was enforced to pay down presently. After this
he had diverse contestations with the King himself, one about Robert Stretton
Bishop of Lichfield, he reprehending the King for making him a Bishop, which
the King took so tenderly, that he commanded him in great displeasure to avoid
his presence. Another about his suits with the forenamed Lady, and some harsh
speeches used by him of the King concerning them for which words and other
matters, the King accused him to the Parliament then assembled, and there
testifying these objected wrongs upon his Honor: the Bishop thereupon was
condemned, and this punishment laid upon him, that hereafter he should never
presume to come in the Kings presence. Which History William Harison Hist. l.
2. c. 1. p. 143.144. Godw. Cat. p. 269.270.271.272. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p.
271.272.273.274. Holinsh. p. 391.392. whom. Walsing^. Anno. 1358. Hist. A^gl.
p. 165. Ypodigma Ne^^triae. p. 125.
William Harrison thus relates, and others quoted in the Margin. There was
sometime a grievous contention between Thomas Lilde Bishop of Ely, and the
King of England, about the year of grace. 1355. which I will here deliver out
of an old Record, because the matter is so partially penned by some of the
brethren of that house in favor of the Bishop; and for that I was also abused
with the same in the entrance thereof at the first into my Chronology. The
black Prince favoring one Robert Stratton his Chaplain, a man unlearned^ and
not worthy the name of a Clearke, the matter went on so far, that what for
love, and somewhat else, of a Canon of Lichfield, he was chosen Bishop of that
See. Hereupon the Pope understanding what he was by his Nuncio here in England,
stayed his consecration by his letters for a time; and in the mean season
committed his examination to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of
Rochester, who felt, and dealt so favorably with him in golden reasoning, that
his worthiness was commended to the Popes Holiness, and to Rome he goes.
Being come to Rome, the Pope himself opposed him, and after secret conference
utterly disableth his Election, till he had proved by substantial Argument,
and of great weight before him also, that he was not so lightly to be rejected.
Which kind of reasoning, so well pleased his Holiness; that, ex mera
plenitudine potestatis, he was made capable of the Benefice, and so turns
into England; when he came home, this Bishop being in the Kings presence told
him, how he had done he wist not what, in preferring so unmeete a man unto so
high a calling; with which speech the King was offended^ that he commanded him
out of hand to avoid out of his presence. In like sort the Lady Wake, then
Duchess of Lancaster, standing by, and hearing the King her cozen to gather
upon the Bishop so roundly, and thereto bearing an old grudge against him for
some other matter, does presently pick a quarrel against him, about certain
Lands then in his possession, which he defended, and in the end obtained
against her by Plea and course of Law, yet long also before happened in a part of
her house, for which she accused the Bishop, and in the end, by verdict of
twelve men found that he was privy unto the fact of his men in the said fact;
wherefore he was condemned in 900 pound damages, which he paid every penny.
Nevertheless being sore grieved, that she had (as he said) wrested out such a
verdict against him, and therein packed up a Quest at his own choice; he
takes his horse, goes to the Court, and there complains to the King of his
great injury received at her hands; but in the delivery of his tale his, speech
was soblocki^h and terms so evil favoredly (though maliciously) placed, that
the King took yet more offense with him than before; insomuch, that he led him
with him into the Parliament house (for then was that Court holden) and there
before the Lords, accused him of no small misdemeanor toward his person, by
his rude and threatening speeches; but the Bishop eagerly denies the Kings
Objections, which he still avoucheth upon his Honor, and in the end confirms
his Allegations by Witnesses; whereupon he was banished from the Kings presence
during his natural life by verdict of that House. In the mean time the
Duchess hearing what was done, begins anew to be dealing with him, and in
a brabling fray between their servants, one of her men were slain; for which
the Bishop was called before the Magistrate, as chief accessory unto the fact;
but he fearing the sequel of his third cause, by his success had in the two
first, hides himself; after he had sold all his movables, and committed his
money unto his trusty friends; and being found guilty by the Inquest, the King
seizes upon his possessions, and calls up the Bishop to answer unto the
trespass. To be short, upon safe conduct, the Bishop comes to the Kings
presence, where he denie^h that he was accessory to the fact, either before,
at, orafter the deed committed, and thereupon craveth to be tried by his
Peers. But this Petition is in vain; for sentence passes against him also by
the Kings own mouth; whereupon he craveth help of the Archbishop of
Canterbury and privileges of the Church, hoping by such means to be solemnly
rescued. But they fearing the Kings displeasure, who bare small favor to the
Clergy of his time, gave over to use any such means, but rather willed him
to submit himself to the Kings mercy, which he refused, standing upon his
innocence, from the first unto the last. Finally, growing into chollor, that
the malice of a woman should so prevail against him; he writes to Rome,
requiring that his Case might be heard there, as a place wherein greater
Justice (says he) is to be looked for, than is to be found in England: upon
the perusal of these his Letters also, his accusers were called thither; but
for so much as they appeared not at their peremptory times, they were
excommunicated; Such of them also as died before their reconciliations, were
taken out of the Churchyards, and buried in the Fields and Dunghills, Vnde
timor and turba (says my Note) in Anglia. For the King inhibited the bringing
in, and receipt of all Processes, Bulls, and whatsoever instruments should come
from Rome; Such also as adventured contrary to this Prohibition to bring them
in, were either dismembered of some joint, or hanged by the necks: which rage
so incensed the Pope, that he wrote in very vehement manner to the King of
England, threatening far greater curses, except he did the sooner stay the
fury of the Lady, reconcile himself unto the Bishop, and finally, make him
amends for all his losses sustained in these b^oyles. Long it was ye^ that the
King would be brought to peace: nevertheless in the end he wrote to Rome about
a reconciliation to be had between them; but ye^ all things were concluded,
God himself did end the quarrel by taking away the Bishop.

JOHN HORDHAM
Anno 1388. the Nobles being assembled at Westminster said to King Richard the
second, that for his honor and the weal of the Kingdom, Th^mas Wa^si. Hist.
^ngl. p. 365. Ypodigma. N^ustriae, p. 142
it behoved that Traitors, Whisperers, Flatterers, Malefactors^ Backbiters^ and
unprofitable persons should be banished out of his Palace and company, and
others substituted in their places, who knew and were willing to serve him more
honorably and faithfully; which when the King had granted ( Licet merens) they
determined that Alexander Nevell Archbishop of Yorke^ John Fordham then Bishop
of Durham, and afterward of this See of Ely, Thomas Rushoke the Kings
Confessor Bishop of Chichester (who being conscious to himself fled away and
hid in Yorkshire) Richard Clifford, and Nicholas Lake, Deane of the Kings
Chapel, all Clergy men, whose words did many things in the Court, should be
removed; all these they sent to diverse prisons to be strictly garded^ till they
should come to their answers the next Parliament.

NICHOLAS WEST. God. p. 284.
Nicholas West Bishop of Ely, in Henry the eig^h his days (who kept daily an
hundred servants in his house to attend him and gave them great wages) fell
into the Kings displeasure, for some matters concerning his first marriage, who
for grief thereof fell sick and died.

Thomas Thirlby was advanced by Queen Mary, THOMAS THIRLBY.
not only to the Bishoppricke of Ely, but also made of her privy Council.
Godwin. p. 225.226. Martius Hist. p. 453.
After her death for resisting obstinatly the reformation intended by our
gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, he was committed to the Tower, and
displaced from his Bishoppricke by Act of Parliament^ Having endured a time of
imprisonment, neither very sharp nor very long, his friends easily obtained
license for him, and the late Secretary Roxall to live in the Archbishops
house, where they had also the company of Bishop Tunstall, till such time he
died.

To these I might add Bishop Buckeridge, Bishop White, and Bishop Wren, late
Prelates of this Sea, who occasioned much mischief and distraction in our
Church and State; but I shall refer them to another place^ and pass on to
the Prelates of Exeter.

Exeter.
About the year 1257. Walter Bronscome. 12. B of Exeter, WALTER BRONESCOME.
had a Friar to his Chaplain and Confessor, which died in his house of Bishops
Clift, and should have been buried at the Parish Church of Farringdon, Godw
^at. p. 325.327. Holinsh. p. 1303.1304.
because the said house was, and is in that Parish, but because the Parish
Church was somewhat far off, the ways foule^ and the weather rainy, or for
some other causes, the Bishop commanded the corpse to be carried to the Parish
Church of Sowton, then called Clift Fomeson, which is very near, and bordereth
upon the Bishops Lordship, the two Parishes there being divided by a little
Lake called Clift. At this time, one Fomeson a Gentleman was Lord and Patron of
Clift Fomeson, and he being advertized of such a burial toward his Parish,
and a leach way to be made over his Land without his leave or consent requited
therein, calls his Tenants together, goes to the bridge over the Lake,
between the Bishops Land and his; there meets the Bishops men bringing the
said corps^ and forbids them to come over the water. The Bishops men nothing
regarding this Prohibition, do press forwards to come over the water, and the
others do withstand so long, that in the end, my Lords Friar is fallen into
the water. The Bishop takes this matter in such grief, that a holy Friar, a
religious man, his own Chaplain and Confessor, should so unreverently be cast
into the water, that he falls out with the Gentleman, and upon what occasion
I know not, he sueth him in the Law, and so vexes and tormenteth him, that in
the end he was feign to yield himself to the Bishops devotion, and seek all
the ways he could to curry the Bishops good will; which he could not obtain,
until for redemption he had given and surrendered up his Patronage of Sowton
with a piece of Land; all which the said Bishop annexeth to his now Lordship.
Thus by policy he purchases the Manor of Bishops-Clift, by a devise gains
Cornish-wood, and by power wresteth the patronagne uf Sowton from the true
owner, to the great vexation and disturbance of the Country.

PETER QVIVILL.
Pet^r Quiuill, his next successor had great contests with the Citizens of
Exeter; in so much that in his time. 1285. Godwin. p. 327.328.329.
Walter Li^hlade the first Chaunter, was slain in a morning, as he came from
the morning Service, then called the Mattens, which was wont to be said shortly
after midnight; upon which occasion the King came unto this city, and kept his
Christmas in the same, and thereupon a compo^ition was made between the Bishop
and the City, for enclosing of the Churchyard, and building of certain gates
there, as appears by the said composition bearing date, in festo
Annunciationis beatae Mariae. 1286. The King at the suit of the Earl of
Hereford (who at his being here, way lodged in the house of the Gray-Fryers,
which then was near the house of S. Nicholas) obtained of the Bishop, that
they should be removed from thence to a more wholesome place without
South-gate; whereof after the Kings departure grew some controversy, because
the Bishop refused to perform his promise made to the King, being dissuaded by
Peter Kenefield a Dominicane or a Blacke-Fryer, and confessor unto the said
Bishop: for he envying the good success of the Franciscans, advises the
Bishop, that in no wise he would permit them to enjoy the place which they had
gotten, for (says he) as under color of simplicity they creep into the
hearts of the people, and hinder us poor Preachers from our gains and
livings; so be ye sure that if they put foot within your Liberties, they will
in time find means to be exempted from out of your Liberty and jurisdiction.
The Bishop being soon dissuaded, utterly forbids them to build, or to do
any thing within his See or Liberty: About two years after, the Bishop kept a
great feast upon the Sunday next before S. Francis day; and among others, was
present with him one Walter Wilborne, one of the Kings chief Justices of the
Bench, who was present when the Bishop at the request of the King made promise
to further and help the Franciscans. He now in their behalf, did put the
Bishop in mind thereof, and requested him to have consideration both of his
own promise, and their distress. The Bishop misliking this motion, waxed
angry, and did not only deny to yield thereunto^ but wished himself to be
choked what day soever he did consent unto it. It fortuned that the same week,
and upon the day of S. Frances Eve, The Bishop took a certain Sirope to
drink, and in too hastily swallowing thereof, his breath was stopped, so as
he forthwith died. The Franciscans hearing thereof made no little ado about
this matter, but blazed it abroad that S. Francis wrought this miracle upon the
Bishop, ^^cause he was so hard against them

Anno. 1326. Holinshed p. 338.1305. Fabian part. 7. p. 181.182. Walsingh. Hist.
Ang p 104.105 Godwin. p: 330^
Walter Stapleton Bishop of Exeter, WALTER STAPLETON.
to whom King Edward the second left the charge of the city of London, was
assaulted by the people at the Northdoore of Paul's Church, who threw him down,
and drew him most outragiously into Cheape-side, where they proclaimed him an
open Traitor, a Seducer of the King^ and a destroyer and subverter of their
Liberties; the putting off his Aketon, or coat of defense, with the rest of
his garments, they shore his head from his shoulders, with the heads of two of
his servants. The Bishops head was set on a pole for a spectacle^ that the
remembrance of his death, and the cause thereof might continue; his body was
buried in an old Church yard of the^ Pied Friars, without any manner of
Exequies or Funeral service done for him. Belike he was a wicked instrument,
that he became so odious to the people, who thus cruelly handled him.

JOHN GRANDISON
Simon Mephara Archbishop of Canterbury began his Metropoliticall Visitation,
in the year 1332. and coming to Exeter, John Grandison Bishop of that See,
Antiquit. Eccles. Brit p. 231.235. Walsingham Hist Angl. p. 313. Godw. Cat. p.
333. Holinsh p 1306.
either scorning or fearing his jurisdiction, appealed against it to the Pope;
and when the ArchBishop came to visit his Diocese, he resisted him, and kept
him from entering into it with Johannes Exoniensis cum mi^itari, ^anu prohibu^s;
cumque Archie^is^opus armis ^um Exoniensi cong^edi Statuit, re regi nunciata
literis regiis revocatus, infectovisitation^s negotio ^x illa diocaesi turpiter
and ignominiose recessit.
a Military band of Soldiers, and when as the Archbishop resolved to encounter
him and his forces in the field with arms, and raised an army in Wiltshire for
that purpose; the King being there with acquainted, recalled him by his royal
Letters; so as he returned shamefully and ignominiously out of that Diocese
without visiting it, and falling sick for grief of this his repulse, he died
at Macfield in his return thence, of a deadly fever. This Bishop built a
fair house at Bishops Taington which he left full furnished unto his
successors, and did impropriate unto the same the Parsonage of Radway, to the
end (as he sets down in his Testament) ut haberent Episcopilocum ubi caput
suum reclinarent, si forte in manu^ regis eorum temporalia caperentur.
Presuming no doubt, that many of them would prove contemptuous to their
Sovereigns, and have their temporalties seized for it.

THOMAS BRENTINGHAM.
Thomas Brentingham the 18th. Bishop of Exet^r, at the Godw. p. 334. Ant.
Eccles Brit. p. 301.302. Walsingham. Hi. Angl. p. 373.374.
Parliament holden at Westminester, in the tenth year of King Edward the
second, was chosen to be one of the twelve Peers for the government of the
Realm under the King. In this man's time, Anno. 1388. William Courtney,
Archbishop of Canterbury intending to keep a Metropoliticall Visitation in his
Province; and having formerly visited the Diocese of Rochester, Chichester,
Worcester, Bath and Wells, without any resistance or contradiction, came into
the Diocese of Exeter; and having begun his Visitation there often times
proroged the same from day to day, and from place to place, and suspended the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop and other Prelates in that Diocese during his
Metropoliticall Visitation; Herupon the Bishop of Ex^ter commanded all within
his Diocese, that they should not obey the Archbishop in his Visitation, and
that they should receive their Institutions, Collations, and Admissions to
Benefices Commissions of Administrations, Confirmations of Elections,
Conusances, and Decisions of all causes, Corrections of crimes and ordinary
rights, from no other but himself and his Officers, excommunicating all who
di^obeyed this his Edict. The Archbishop abolished and repealed this
Prohibitory and Mandatory Edict of his by a contrary one, and made void his
sentence of Excommunication. After which he appealed four several times to
the Pope, and fixed his appeal in writing on the doors of the Cathedral
Church of Exeter. The Archbishop rejected, and refuted them all, and proceeded
in his Visitation notwithstanding; citing the Bishop himself by diverse Edicts
to answer to certain Articles objected to him in his Visitation. But some of
the Bishops adherents, caught Peter Hill, the Archbishops Somner in a Town
called Tapsham, and punishing him grieviously, compelled him to eat with his
teeth and swallow down a Parchment Citation, wax and all^ written and sealed
with the Archbishops seal^, which he carried in his bosom wherewith to cite
the Bishop. Of which misdemeanor the Archbishop complaining to the King; he
commanded William Courtney Earl of Devonshire to curb these Rebels, and to
apprehend and carry them to the Archbishop, who enjoined them penance, and
withal removed William Bid (a Dr. of Law, and Advocate of the Court of Arches)
from his Order and place, because he had given counsel to the Bishop of
Exeter against the dignity of the Sea of Canterbury; and thereupon prescribed a
set form of Oath to all the Advocates of that Court, not to give any advice to
any person against that See. The Bishop of Exeter after much contention,
finding the Archbishop too potent for him, and that his appeals were like to
succeed but ill, by reason the King favored the Archbishop, submitted
himself to the Archbishops Jurisdiction, and craved pardon for what was past.

EDMUND LACY.
In Edmund Lacyes time, the 21. Bishop of this See, there arose Godw. Cat. p.
335. Holinshed p 637.
great contentions between him and the city for Liberties, which by
arbitrament were compounded. After which, Anno. 1451. King Henry the sixth,
came in progress to the city of Exeter; where after great entertainment, there
was a Sessions kept before the Duke of Sommerset, and certain men condemned to
die for Treason, and had judgment to be executed to death. Edmond Lacy and his
Clergy understanding hereof, with open mouth^ complained to the King, that he
caused a Sessions to be kept within his Sanctuary contrary to the privilege of
his Church, and that therefore all their doings (being done against Law) were
of no effect. And notwithstanding the King and his Council had discoursed to
them the just and orderly proceeding, the heinousness of the offenses, and of
the offenders, and the necessity of their condign punishment, yet all could
not avail, for holy Church; for neither holy Church, nor the Sanctuary might
be profaned (as they said) with the deciding of temporal matters; whereupon
the King in the end yielding to their exclaimes, released a coupple of arrant
Tray^ors, reversed all his former lawful proceedings, and so departed and
returned to London, his Laws and Justice being thus captivated to this
Prelates will, and trayterly encrochments upon his Prerogative so far as even
to exempe and rescuee notorious condemned Traitors from his Justice and
condemnation, even after judgment of death pronounced against them.

George Nevill GEORGE NEVILL.
the 23. Bishop of Exeter (afterward Archbishop of York) March the 4. 1460.
after a solemn procession preached at Paul's Cross, Grafton 38. H. 7. p. 641.
God^. p. 335.
where he took upon him by manifold evidence to prove the Title of Prince
Edward (afterward Edward the fourth) to the Crown to be just and lawful,
answering all obje^tions that might be made to the contrary: whereupon, the
said Prince accompanied with the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and a great
number of the common people, rode the same day to Westminister Hall, and there,
by the consent and approbation of them all, took possession of the Kingdom
against King Henry the sixth, who made him Bishop. See more of him in York.
part. 1. p. 196.197.

The Rebellion in Cornwall and Devonshire in Edward the six his reign, was
Speeds Histo. p. 1111. Godw. Cat. p. ^37. Holinshed. p. 1306.
imputed to John Voysey JOHN VOYSEI.
Bishop of Exeter, and other Priests; who thereupon resigned his Bishoppricke
into King Edwards hands, having much wasted and impoverished it before. Godwin
writes of him, That he was Lord President of Wales, and had the government of
the Kings only daughter, the Lady Mary (who afterward proved a bloody
persecuter by the Prelates cruel instigation tutership, and evil counsel,
when she came to the Crown.) Of all the Bishops of the Land, he was accounted
the best Courtier; being better liked for his Courtly behavior than his
learning, which in the end turned not so much to his credit, as to the utter
ruin and spoil of the Church; For of 22. Lordships and Manors which his
Predecessors had left unto him, of a goodly yearly revenew, he left but three
and them also leased out, and where he found thirteen houses well furnished
(too much for one Prelate) he left only one house bare, and without furniture,
and yet charged with sundry fees and anuities. So as by these means, this
Bishoppricke^ which sometime was counted one of the best, is now become in
temporal lands one of the meanest.

JAMES TVRBEVILL.
James Turbevill the 32. Bishop of this See, was deprived in the first year of
Queen Elizabeh for denying the Queens Supremacy and refusing to take the Oa^h
of Allegiance. Martyns Hist p. 453.454. Godw p 339.


WILLIAM COTT^N.
William Cotton the 37th Bishop of Exeter, was a great persecuter and silencer
of godly Ministers in his Diocese; and so was Bishop Carry after him for a
season, but at last, both of them being mollified with gifts and gratuities
became more mild, selling that liberty of preaching for money, which they
formerly restrained gratis, of purpose to advance this sale to an higher price,
so as may apply that of Sermo 77. in Cant Ad Clerum conci^ in Concil^ Rhemensi.
Bernard to them. Episcopi hujus temporis Christi approbria, sputa, flagella,
claues, lancem crucem, and mortem, haec omnia in furnace avaritiae conflant,
and profligant in acquisitionem turpis quaestus, Et praecium vniversitatis suo
marsupio includere festinant hoc solo san^ a Judah Ischariota differentes; quod
ille horura omnium denariorum emolumentum denariorum numero co^pensavit; isti
vora^iori ingluvie lucrorum infinitas exigunt ^p^cunias; his insatiabili
desiderio inhiant; pro his ne amittant timent, and cura amittunt dolent,
Animarum nec casus reputatur, nec salus.

Bishop. HALL.
For the present Bishop of this See, a man formerly much honored and deservedly
respected, both for his Writing and Preaching before he became a Bishop, he
has much degenerated and lost himself of late, not only by his too much
worldliness, but by his over-confident defense of Episcopacy to be Iure
Divino, in some late Books he has published, and that upon such See
Smectymnius; and a vindication to the Answer to the humble Remonstrance.
weak sandy grounds as vanish into smoke, when seriously examined. I read
that Godw. Cat. p. 322.
Osbertus the second, and William Warewest the third Bishop of this See, became
blind in their latter days. I wish this reverent Prelate may not do the
like, who does already Caecutire, through the splendour of that Episcopal
Lordly pomp and honor, which some fear has dazzled his eyesight. I come now
to Worceter.

The Bishops of Worceter.
Dunstan DVNSTAN.
the sixteenth Bishop of Worceter (afterward of Canterbury) put King Edgar to
seven years penance for ravishing Wildfrid, Holinshed. Hist. of England l. 6.
c. 24. p. 436^
and kept him some twelve or fourteen years from the Crown. Which fact of
Dunstans Acts and Monuments vol. 1. p. 201.202.
Mr. Fox thus expresses; you heard before how King Edgar is noted in all
Stories to be an incontinent liver in deflouring Maids and Virgins, three
notoriously are expressed in Authors, to wit, Vlstride, or Vlfride; the second
was the Dukes maid at Andever, near to Winchester; the third was Elfrid
mother of Edward, for the which Elfrid he was stayed and kept back from his
Coronation, by Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury, the space of seven years, and
so the said King begins his reign in the sixteen year of his age, being
the year of the Lord, 959. was crowned at his age, One and thirty, Anno. Dom.
974. as is in the Saxon Chronicl^ of Worceter Church to be proved. For the more
evident declaration of which matter, Ex chronic^ Sax^nico Ecclesiae
Wigorniensis.
concerning the Coronation of the King restrained, and the presumptuous
behavior of Dunstan against the King, and his penance by the said Dunstan
enjoined; ye shall hear both Osburne, Malmesh. and other Authors speak in
their own words, as follows. Perpetrato itaque in virginera velatam peccato,
etc. After that Dunstan had under^tanding of the Kings offense perpetrated with
the professed Nun, he comes to the King, Ex Orb^rno in vita Dunst^n.
who seeing the Archbishop coming, eftsoons of gentleness arose from his
regal seat toward him, to take him by the hand, to give him place. But
Dunstan refusing to take him by the hand and with stern countenance bending
his brows, Dunstan refuses to take the King by the hand.
spak after this effect of words (as Stories import) unto the King, The words
of Dunstan to King Edgar.
You that have not feared to corrupt a Virgin maid hand fast to Christ,
presume you to touch the consecrated hand of a Bishop? you have defiled the
Spouse of the Maker, and think you by flattering service to pacify the friend
of the Bridegroom? No Sir, his friend will not I be, which has Christ to his
enemy, etc. The King terrified with these thundering words of Dunstan, and
compuncted with inward repentance of his sin perpetrated, fell down with
weeping at the feet of Dunstane, who after he had raised him up from the ground
again, began to utter to him the horriblenesse of his fact, and finding the
King ready to receive whatsoever satisfaction he would lay upon him, enjoined
him this Penance for seven years space, as follows. Penance enjoined to
King Edgar to Dunstan.
That he should wear no Crown all this space, that he should distribute his
Treasure left to him of his Ancestors liberally unto the poor, he should build
a Monastery of Nuns at Shafts-bury, that as be had robbed God of one Virgin
through his transgression, so should he restore to him many again in times to
come. Moreover he should expel Clerks of evil life (meaning such Priests as
had wives and children) out of Churches, and place covents of Monks in their
room, etc. It follows then in the Story of Osberne, that when the seven
years of the Kings penance were expired; Dunstan calling together all the
Peers of the Realm, with Bishops, Abbots, and other Ecclesiastical degrees
of the Clergy, in the public sight of all, set the Crown upon the Kings head
at Bath, King Edward reigned but three years crowned King.
which was the one and thirtieth year of his age, and thirtenth year of his
reign, so that he reigned only but three years crowned King. All the other
years besides, Dunstan belike ruled the land as he listed. As touching the Son
of the said Elfled, thus the Story writeth^ Puerum quoque ex peccatrice quadam
progenitum, sacro font regeneratum lavavit, and aptato illi nomine Edwardo, in
filium sibi adoptavit, i.e. ^lfled proved a Nun, and Edward her son proved a
bastard,
The child also which was gotten of the harlot he baptized in the holy
Fountain of regeneration, and so giving his name to be called Edward^ did
adopt him to be his son, Ex Osberno. But of this Dunstan, See more in
Cante^bury. p. 3, 4.5.

Living the 23. Bishop of Worceter, LIVING.
Anno. 1040. was accused for procuring the death of Alfred, Matthew West. Anno
1040. Malmesbury de Gestis Regum Angl. l. 2. c 12. p^ 77 Godw p. 436.
the eldest son of King Elthelred and King Hardeknutes brother^ his accusers
were Elfricke Archbishop of York, with many others. Whereupon the King being
very angry degraded him, and gave his Bishoppricke to Elfricke^ he died at
Tauestocke, March 2^.1046. At which time, just as he gave up the ghost, there
was such an horrible tempest of thunder and lightning, as men thought that the
day of Doom had been come.

Alfred Bishop of Worceter, ALFRED.
was Speeds Hist. p. 405.411. Holinshed. l 7. c. 15. p. 1851.
expulsed that See by King Hardicanute for his misdemeanor and oppositions
against him, till his money had purchased his peace. This Bishops hands (as was
said) was deep in the murder of Alfred the Kings half Brother, who had his
eyes inhumanely put out, his belley opened, and one end of his bowels drawn
out, and fastened to a stake^ his body pricked with sharp needles, forced
about, till all his entralls were extracted: in which most savage torture he
ended his innocent life: for which barbarous act this Bishop was for a time
deprived, after which being restored, he went and fought with Griffith King of
South Wales, but with such success that many of his Soldiers were slain, and
the rest put to flight^ which made the Welchmen far more bold, and Rese the
brother of Griffith to make incursions to fetch preyes out of England, till at
length he was slain at Bulenden, and his head presented to King Edward at
Gloucester.

Not to mention Wulstan, WVLSTAN
the 19. Bishop of this See, surnamed God p. 358.359.360. Malms. de Gest.
Pontif. Angl. l. 4. p. 279.280.281^
Reprobus, the reprobate, belike for his leude reprobate actions; S. Wulstan
the 24. Bishop, refused obstinatly to yield consent to his election a long
time, protesting he had rather lay his head upon a block to be chopped off, then
to take so great a charge as a Bishopprick upon him. At last, undertaking it by
the persuasion of one Wullsius an Anchorite; he permitted public drinking in
his Hall after dinner for whole hours together, and made as if he drank in
his turn, but in a lesser cup to make the guests the merrier, pompam ra^litum
secum ducens, leading still a stately train of Soldiers with him, who with
their annual stipends, and daily provision wasted a hugh mass of money.
Matthew. West. Anno. 1066 p. 431.
In his time Edward the Confessor falling sick, and continuing speechless for
two days space, on the third day rising as it were, from the dead, and
groaning exceedingly, he began to speak thus. O Almighty God, if it be not a
fantastical illusion which I have seen, give me leave to relate it to those
that stand by: or if on the contrary it be false, I beseech thee substract from
me the power of uttering it. As soon as he had ended his speech, speaking
expeditely enough, and very articulately, he said, I beheld two Monks standing
by me, whom when I was young, I saw live very religiou^lly in Normandy, and I
knew that they died most Christianly. These affirming themselves to be Gods
Messengers sent unto me, added; because the chief men of England, Duces,
EPISCOPI and Abbates, non sunt Ministri Dei sed DIABOLI, the Dukes, Bishops,
and Abbots, are not the Ministers of God but of the Devil; God has delivered
this Kingdom in one year, and in one day into the hand of the enemy, and
Devils shall wander over this whole Land. And when I answered, I would show
this unto the people, that so sinners having made confession and condign
satisfaction might repent, and obtain mercy like the Ninivites: they replied,
neither of these shall be; because neither shall they repent, neither shall God
have mercy on them. And I demanding, when remission, of so great calamities
might be expected? To this, they answered, concerning this it shall be so, as
in case of a green tree, if it be cut in the midest, and the part (...) off be
carried far from the Trunk, when that without any help shall be reannexed
to the Trunk, and begin to flourish, and bring forth fruit, then a remission
of such evils may be hoped for. The truth of which prophecy (writes Matthew
Wstminster) the English soon after had experience of, in this, that England
became the habitation of strangers, and the dominion of forreiners; for a
little after no English man was either a Duke, Bishop, or Abbot (upon the
coming in of the Conqueror,) neither was there any hope of ending this misery.
The Conqueror coming to the Crown, had some contests with this Bishop, whom he
would have removed from his Bishoppricke for insufficiency in point of
learning; but being found more able than he was reputed, he held his
Bishoppricke, and recovered some Lands from the Archbishop of York, taken by
the Archbishops from this See, which some three or four Archbishops before had
held in Commendam with York. The Cathedral of Worceter being stately built a
new from the ground in his time, the Monks thereupon forsaking their old
habitation built by Oswald, which they pulled down, betook themselves to this
new stately building. Which Wulstan seeing, burst out into tears, and being
demanded a reason thereof, by some that told him, he had rather cause to
rejoice; our predecessors (says he) whose Monuments we deface, rather (I
doubt) to set up the banners of our vainglory, than to glorify God, they
indeed (quoth he) were not acquainted with such stately buildings, but every
place was a Church sufficient for them to offer themselves a reasonable, holy,
Note this Speech.
and lively sacrifice unto God: we contrariwise are double diligent in laying
heaps of stones, so to frame a material Temple, but are too too negligent in
setting forward the building of that lively Temple the Church o^ God. In King
William Rufus time, this Bishop arming such an number of people, as the city of
Worceter could afford, caused to sally out, and set upon Roger, Earl of
Mountgomery and others, who attempted to take it, whom they discomfited,
killing and taking a number of them prisoners.

MAVGERE.
Maugere, the 36. Bishop of Worceter, was one of those four Bishops, who Anno.
1208. upon the Popes command excommunicated King John, and put the whole
Kingdom under interdict: whereupon his goods and temporalities were seized,
and he enforced to fly the Realm, dying at last in exile at Pontiniac in
^rance: during the time of this interdict, the King (writes Matth^ West^ Anno.
1208^ Godw. p. 362. Matthew. Paris Hist. Ang. p. 217.232. Walsing Ypodig. Neust.
Anno. 1208. p. 53. Page 222. Matthew West. Anno. 1211. 1212. p. 90.91.
Matthew Parts) had most wicked Counselors, Qui Regi in omnibns placere
cupientes, cousiliura non pro ratione, sed pro voluntare dederunt; who d^sirous
to please the King in all things, gave counsel not according to reason, but
will: among these he reckons up Tres Episcopi curiales, three Court Bishops, to
wit, Philip Bishop of Durham, Peter, Bishop of Wincester, and John Bishop of
Norwhich.

WALTER de CANTELVPO.
Walter de Cantelupo the 40. Bishop of Worceter, as he stoutly opposed the
Popes exactions in England, so in the year 1264. he G^dw. Cat p. 363.364.
Matthew Paris p. 961.962.963. Holinshed. p. 265.271.
took great pains, to work a peace between the King and the Barons: in
whose behalf when he had offered the King conditions (as he thought most
reasonable) which might not be accepted, he addicted himself unto their party,
exhorted them to fight valiantly in the cause, and promised heaven very
confidently to them that should die in defense of the same. For this he was
after justly excommunicated by the Popes Legate, and being sick unto death,
repenting much this fault of disobedience unto his Prince, he humbly craved and
received absolution from that excommunication: whereupon ensued bloody wars
and rapines so^ as Pag^ 965.
Matthew Paris writes, Nec Episcopi, nec ahbates, nec ulli religiosi de villa
in villam progred^ potuerunt, quin a vespilionibus praeda^ontur. And concludes
this year thus. Trans^it annus iste frugifer, been temperatus, and sanus^ sed
in cunctis eventibus Angliae dispendiosus, propter bellum commune, propter
rerum coramunium and privatarum flebilem direptionem.

Most of the succeeding Bishops of Worceter (as Adam de Orleton that
Arch-traytor and such like) were translated to other Sees, where I shall meet
with them, and therefore pretermiting them here, I pass to those of Hereford.

The Bishops of Hereford.
June 16. An. 1056. Griffin King of Wales having overthrown the forces of the
Engishmen about two miles from Hereford, LEOVEGAR
immediately assaulting the city took it, Matthew. Westminster. Ann. 1056. p. 423.
Godw. Cat p. 371.
slew Leovegar the Bishop, and seven of the Canons there, who denied him
entrance into the Church and held it against him, spoiled it of all the
relics and ornaments that were portable; and lastly, fired both Church, City,
and all.

This See continued void four years after the death of Leofuegar, WALTER. 2.
after which Godw. Cat. p. 371.372. Mal. de G^stis Pont^ l. 4. p. 286.
Polychron. l. 7. c. 2. ^. 263 An. 1071
Walter Chaplain to Queen Edith was consecrate at Rome by the Pope, in the
year 1060. his end was much more unhappy than his Predecessors. He chanced to
fall in love with a certain comely woman that he met in the street. A long
time he contended with this vile and unseemely affection, and he thought he
had quenched the same; when a small occasion renewed it to his destruction;
having certain linen to cut out, this woman was commended to him for a very
cunning Seamster. He sent for her, and his old flame of filthy desire easily
kindling by this little spark, he found errands to send his men out of the
way, while he set upon her first with words, and they not prevailing by force:
she resisted what she might, but finding him too strong for her, thrust her
Sheeres into his belly, and gave him his deaths wound. The King being desirous
it should be esteemed false, forbid the report of it by a Proclamation, which
afterward came to be Chronicled.

RAYNELMVS.
Raynelmus the 30 Bishop of this Diocese, received that Bishoppricke at the
hands of King Henry the first, who bestowed it freely on him, Malmbs. de
Ge^stis Ponti^. l 4. p. 287 Godw^ p^ 373.
and was invested into it (as the manner of those times was) by the delivery of
the Ring and the Crosier. Anselme then Archbishop refused to consecrate him and
diverse others, who received their investitures in this manner from the King: he
was so far from importuning him in this matter as being now persuaded this
his election to be insufficient, he renounced the same, delivering again unto
the Kings hands the Ring and Crosier that he had received. Herewith the King
was so offended (as he had cause) that presently he banished him the Realm:
after much ado between the King and Anselme, a reconciliation was wrought and
this man consecrated.

GYLES de BRVSE.
Matthew. Westminster. Anno. 1208. 1215 Godw. p. 375.
Gyles de Bruise the 30. Bishop of Hereford in the Barons wars, was a great
stickler wjth them against King John, and at last was glad to fly the Realm
with other Prelates, the King seizing on his and their goods and banishing him
the Kingdom.

PETER de Egueblancke.
Matthew. Paris^ p 881.882.885.886.887.903,: 907.916 917.924.934.960.961. Godw p
375. Holinsh. p. 251.252. Ann 1255 1256.
Peter de Egueblancke the 42. Bishop of that See ( Cujus Memoria sulphureum
faetorem exhalat ac deterrimum, writes Matthew Paris) An. 1255. put King Henry
the 3. upon a strange and intolerable kind of exaction, such, and so great, as
even beggered all the Clergy of that time: he got certain authenticke seals
of the Bishops of England, wherewith he sealed Indentures, Instruments, and
Writings, wherein was expressed that he had received diverse sums of money for
dispatch of businesses for them and their Churches of this or that Merchant of
Florence or Spain, whereby they stood bound for payment thereof by the same
Instruments and Writings so made by him their agent in their name. This shift
was devised by the said Bishop, with license of the King and Pope, into whose
ears he distilled this poisonous council; the manner whereof Matthew Paris
relates at large. These debts being afterward demanded the Prelates denied
them to be true, and said, there was a greater occasion for them to suffer
Martyrdom in this cause than of that of Thomas Becket of Canterbury; whereupon
the Bishops of London and Worceter, protested they would rather lose their
lives and Bishopprickes than consent to such an injury, servitude, and
oppression. Haec and alta detestabilia a sulphurto font Romanae Ecclesiae,
proh pudor, imo and proh dolor tunc temporis emanarunt, Writes Matthew Paris of
this and such like cheating projects to get money An. 1263. the Barons arrested
this Bishop (who plotted much mischief against them) in his own Cathedral
Church, seized upon his goods, divided his Treasure unto their soldiers before
his face, imprisoned him a long time in the Castle of Ordley, as a mere pest
and Traitor both to Church and State. He was accursed of so many for his
strange Oppressions, Treacheries^ and Extravagances, that it was impossible
many calamities should not light upon him. Long before his captivity, his face
was horribly deformed with a kind of Leprosy Morphea, or Polypus, which could
by no means be cured till his dying day; this disease made him hide his head,
so that none within his Diocese knew where he lurked. Some reported that he
went to Mount Pessula to be cured of this his infirmity: Tot in caput suum
congessit imprecationes multipliciter a Doraino meruit flagellari, ad sui, ut
sperandum est, correctionem, Hist. p. Angl. p. 924.934^
Writes Matthew Paris, who further adds, Episcopus Herefordensis turpissimo
morbo, videlice^ Morphea, Domino percutiente, merito de^ormatur, qui totum
Regnum Angliae PRODITIOSE damnificauit. About the year of our Lord, 1256. the
Archbishop of Bordeaux being old and decrepit, began to be deadly sick, and
being thought to be dead, who was but half alive, this Bishop of Hereford, who
most earnestly gaped after this Archbishoppricke thinking to obtain it^
procured the Kings Letters, who was very favorable to him, because he was his
Tax-gatherer, and went with them beyond the Seas, but when the truth appeared,
that the Archbi^hop was still alive^ he lost both his journey, labor,
travel, and expenses and received many scoffs, as one Mr. Lambin did in the
like case, of whom these two Verses were composed, Aere dato multo, nondum
pastore sepult^,
Lambi^ ad optatum Lambinus Pontificatura.
He to reimburse his expenses not regarding the public good, but his own
priva^e benefit, by license from the King and Pope, collected a tith for
himself in the borders of Ireland^ and the places adjoining, which amounted to
no small quantity of money; this he reputed the price of his pains, and the
reward of his treason; and he caused it to be so strictly exacted^ that shame
prohibites the relation of the manner of the extortion. And because fraud is
not accustomed to want fear; meticulosus armatus, armatus vallatus incessit;
being fearful, he went armed, and being armed he went with a guard about him.

ADAM de ORLETON.
Adara Walsingh. Hist Angl. p: 98.99 101.104. Holinshed. p. 329.339.340.1245.
Camd. Brit p. 375.
de Orleton, the 46. Bishop of Hereford, was a notable wicked Traitor and
Rebel against his Sovereign, King Edward the second, who advanced him, and
was the chief cause both of his deprivation and murder: Of whom you may read
more at large in Winchester, p. 265.266.

JOHN BRVTON.
John Bruton or Briton was the 43. Bishop of Hereford, on him the King bestowed
the keeping of his wardrobes which he held long time with great honor, as his
Regester says. A wonderful preferment that Bishops should be preferred from
the Pulpit, to the custody of Wardrobes^ Harrison^ l. 2 c. 2. p^ 142.
but such was the time, nevertheless his humble custody of that charge is more
solemnly remembered then any good Sermon, that ever he made, which function
peradventure he committed to his Suffragane, since Bishops in those days had
so much business at Court, that they could not attend to Doctrine and
Exhortation. This Bishop was Godw. p. 376. Sir Edwards Cooks Epistle to the 8.
Report.
Doctor of both Laws, and very well seen in the common Laws of the Land and
writ a great volume De juribus Anglicanis, yet extant: but that he ever
Preached, or writ any thing of, or had any skill at all in the Law of God, I
find nothing at all in story.

John Trevenant the 51. Bishop of Hereford, JOHN ^REVENANT.
sided with King Henry the 4th. against Richard the second, who advanced him,
and was sent to Rome, Walsing. Hist. Angl. Henricus 4th. Anno 1439. p. 401.
Holinsh. p. 503.504 505.506.507.508. Speed Hist. p. 763. Godw. p. 378.
to inform the Pope, what good Title King Henry the 4th. had unto the Crown
of England, which he usurped. So the Bishop of Duresme was then sent unto
France, the Bishop of Saint Asaph to Spain, the Bishop of Bangor to Germany,
armed with all ^orts of instructions for the justification of their new
advanced King his Title too, and usurpation of the Crown. So ready have
Prelates been not only to act, but to justify, defend^ and boulster out
Treasons, and Rebellions of the highest nature, with the depositions and
murders of their lawful Princes^ Anno. 1499. this Bishop of Hereford had a
chief hand in deposing King Richard the second, and was the second
commissioner sent from the States in Parliament, named in the Instrument
wherein they declare his voluntary resignation; and he, with the Archbishop of
York made report to the Parliament^ of the Kings voluntary resignation of his
Crown and Kingdom, the instrument whereof subscribed in their presence, was
delivered unto Thomas Arundels hands then Archbishop of Canterbury, an
Arch-traytor, as I have formerly manifested.

The most of the succeeding Bishops of this See were translated to other
bishopprickes, CHARLES BOOTH.
where you may meet with them who were most obnoxious, only I observe, that
in the general pardon of 22. H. 8. c. 15. the Bishop of Hereford (then Charles
Booth) is specially excepted out of the pardon of the Praemunire. It seems his
crime was very great.

And for the present Bishop of Hereford, George Cook, GEORGE COOK.
he stands now impeached by the Commons in Parliament for the late Canons,
Oath, and benevolence in the pretended Synod, in which he had a finger; which
proceeding of our Prelates, may justly induce us to pass the same censure on
them now, as famous Henry Bullenger did of old on the Bishops then, in his
Book De Episcoporum Functione and Iurisdic^ione Tiguri, 1538. ^.
112.113.143.1150.159. to 163. and 172. and as Mr. Calvin after him did, in his
notable Book De Necessitate Reformandae Ecclesiae. Edi. 1543 p. p.
24.25.26.104.105.106. to which I shall refer the reader.

As for Dr. Manwaring who had some relation to this church, we all know that he
received a Censure in the Parliament House 3. Caroli. for two seditious
Sermons, Preached at the Court before his Majesty, and then published in Print
by the now Archbishop of Canterburies means; wherein he endeavored to
undermine the Subjects liberties, and the propriety of their goods (^etled in
them by our Laws) by false divinity^ and to give the King an absolute power
against Law, to impose what taxes he pleased and to take away such a proportion
of goods and treasure from his people as himself should think meet, upon any
occasion. For which Sermons, though he were censured by both Houses to be never
more capable of any future preferment in Church or Commonwealth, yet
immediately after the dissolution of the Parliament, he was by Canterburies
means, in affront of that Sentence^ advanced, first to a great living granted
formerly to another, then to a Deanery, and soon after to the Bishopric of
St. David's, where he so demeaned himself in advancing of superstition,
profaneness, and idolatry, that now he dares not show his face in Parliament,
and lies lurking, in obscure Places (and Ale ho^ses as some report) fearing a
deprivation from this usurped^ dignity^ given him in contempt of his former
sentence in Parliament. And thus much for the Bishops of these Sees, I now
proceed to others.

CHAP. V. Containing the Treasons, Conspiracies, Contumacies and disloyalties
of the Bishops of Chichester, Carlisle, Norwich, Chester, Coventry, and
Litchfield.
NOt to mention how Wigorniensis, Matth^ Westminster. Matthew. Paris Malmes. Huntindon
and Hoveden. Anno. 1070. Godw. p. 383.
Agilricke Bishop of the South Saxons, AGELRICK.
with diverse other Bishops and Abots, were deprived by William the Conqueror,
Anno 1076. (...) in the Councels of Winchester and Windsor, and after that
committed to perpetual Prison upon suspicion of Treason, and Rebellion against
the Conqueror, to deprive him of the Crown.

Ralph the third Bishop of Chichester, RALPH.
a man of high Stature, and no less Malmes. de Gestis Pontificum. l. 2. p.
257.25^. Eadmerus Hist. Nov^rum. l. 1.2, 3, 4. Godw. p. 384.385.
high of mind^ stood very stoutly in defense of Bishop Anselme, in so much that
when King William Rufus threatened him for the same, he offered him his Ring and
Crosier, saying, It should better become him to loose his place^ than his duty
to the Archbishop, whom he could never be induced to forsake, until he seemed
to forsake his own cause, by flying the Country. After this when King Henry
the first, was content to dispense with the marriage of Priests, to which
Anselme was an heavy enemy, notwithstanding the Canons lately made in the
Council of London to the contrary, the Priests granting him an yearly sum
of money to defend them against Anselme, this Bishop resisted the collection of
that money in his Diocese, calling it, the tribute of Fornication; and when
notwithstanding his resistance it was paid, he interdicted his own Diocese,
commanding the Church doors to be every where stopped up with thorns. The
King whether not vouchsafing to contend with him, or taking his well meaning in
good part, was not only content to pardon this his contemptuous disobedience,
but also bestowed the money so gathered in his Diocese upon him, saving, It
was a poor Bishoppricke and needed such helps. This Bishop went every year
thrice about his Diocese, Causa praedicandi, only to Preach the Gospel to
the people, exacting nothing from his Provincialls by his Episcopal power, but
receiving only what they willingly presented to him as a free gift, rebuking
those who offended, which was the sole kind of Visitation in those days,
without any such Visitation Articles, Procurations, presentiments, Fees, etc, as
are this day practiced, imposed, exacted, both against Law and See Summa
Angelica. Tit. Visita^io.
Canon too.

HILARY:
Hilary the fifth Bishop of this See, though he was Godw. p. 385.
content absolutely to allow of the Declaration after published at Claridon,
without mention of that odious clause ( saluo ordine suo) being shreudly baited
of his brethren for his labor, yet afterward he had some contests with the
King, and sought to impeach his prerogative royal, as appear^s by this notable
passage, of the Author of the Holy Table, name and Thing p. 30.31. Sure I am,
that [according to this advice of Eleuthe^ius] the B^ittish, Saxon, Danish^ and
first Norman Kings have governed their Churches and Churchmen by Capitula^s and
mixed Digests, composed (as it were) of Common and Canon Law, and promulged
with the advice of the Counsel of the King, as w^e may see in those
particulars set forth by In his excellent Book called Archaionomia p^r totum
Mr. Lambard, In ^is Analect. Anglo-Brit l. 2. c. 3.6.7.
Mr. Seldom History of Cambria p. 59. Howell. Dsha.
Dr. Powell, and others. And I do not believe there can be showed any
Ecclesiastical Canons for the government of the Church of England, until long
after the conquest, which were not either originally promulged^ or afterward
approved and allowed by either the Monarch, or some King of the Heptarchy,
sitting and directing in the National or Provincial Synod. For all the
Collections that Lindwood Comments upon, are (as Theophrastus speaks) (...)
but rough and rugged money of a more fresh and later coining: Theophra^t. (...).
and yet in those usurping times I have seen a Transcript of a Record, An.
1157.3o. Henry the 2. wherein when the Bishop of Chichister opposed some late
Canons against the Kings exemption of the Abbey of Battles from the Episcopal
Jurisdiction; In M S. Chron. Abbatiae de Bell^^
it is said, That the King being angry and much moved therewith, should reply.
Tu pro Papae authoritate ab hominibus concessa, contra dignitatum Regalium
authoritates mihi a Deo concessas, calliditate arguta niti praecogitas,? Do
you Sir go about by subtilties of wit to oppose the Popes authority, which is
but the favor or connivence of men against the authority of my Regal
Dignities, being the Charters and Donations of God himself? and thereupon
requires Reason, and Justice against the Bishop for this soul insolency. A
good evidence, that the Canon Law, had little esteem or fo^ce among us in that
age; and not long after it was prohibited by special Writ to be read among us,
as appears by the Writ of 19. Hen. 3. directed to the Major and Sheriefes of
London, commanding them, Claus. 19. H 3 memb. 22.
Quod per totara Civitatem London Clamari faciant and firmiter prohiberi, ne
aliquis Scolas regens de Legibus in eadem Civitate de caetero ibidem Leges
doceat. M. Seldens Review of Tiths p. 491.
Et si aliquis ibidem fuerit hujusmodi Scolas regens, ipsum sine dilatione
cessare faciat. T. Rege apud Basing XI. die Decembris^ This was five years
after the Decretalls published, and it seems most probable, that these Leges
were Canon Laws, perhaps mixed (as usually they were in the profession also,)
with the Imperialls (for both of them were it seems, studied here under
Videsis 3^. H. ^ a^^d Matthew. Paris Hist M^jori. an 12^5.
Henry the third by the Clergy, more ^han any other part of learning,) and
therefore were forbidden, as being b^th in regard of their own authority,
against the supreme majesty, and independency of the Crown of England. Seldom
Ibid. p. 489
And before this, in King (...) reign, in that great controversy in the Synod
of Winchester touching the Castles of Newarke, Sales^ury, and the Vies, the
King denied utterly Censuram Canonum pati, G. Mal^es Hist. Novell. l. 2. p. 103
b.
that is, to have it determined by them whether or no^ the two Bishops Roger
of Salisbury and Alexander of Lincoln might lawfully keep their Castles that
they had fortified. But while the rest of the Bishops stood so much upon their
Canons, and even in the face of majesty, professed a rebellion, the King, and
the Lay subjects, it seems grew so exasperated against them, that by public
command for the preservation of the Liberty of the Crown and Laity, they were
forbidden to be of any more use in the Kingdom: for so perhaps is that to be
understood in De Nugis ^urialium. l. 8. c. 21.
John of Chartres, where he says; that, Tempore Regis Stephani a regno jussae
sunt Leges Romanae quas in Brittanniam domus venerabilis Patris T^eobaldi
Bri^tanniarum Primatis asciverat. Ne quis etiam libros retineret, edicto Regio
prohibitum est. The Canon Law made by Popes and Prelates being inconsistent
with the Kings Supremacy, and Subjects Liberty.

STEPHEN BERKSTEED.
Matthew. Paris p, 970. Godw p. 387. Holinsh. p. 271.
Stephen Berksteed the 14th. Bishop of Chichester, Anno. 1265. was
excommunicated by O^tobon the Popes Legate, for rebelling and taking part with
the Barons against King Henry the third, who thereupon repaired to Rome for
absolution.

JOHN de LANGHTON.
John de Langhton, the 16th. Bishop of Chichister, Anno. 1315. excommunicated
Warren, Earl of Kent, for adultery: Godw. p. 387.
whereupon the Earl came unto him with armed men, making some show to lay
violent hands upon him, unless he would absolve him. The Bishops men
perceiving it, by their Masters command set upon them, and put both the Earl,
and his men in prison, whereupon ensued great combustions.

Walsing Hist. Ang^. ^n. 1388^ p. 365. Grafton 11 R. 2 ^. 37^. Godw. p. 388.
Thomas Rushocke the 20th Bishop of Chichester, THOMAS RVSHOCK.
a lewd pernicious Prelate. Anno. 1388. was driven away from the Court by the
Barons, as a Traitor, for his ill Counsels to Richard the second, his Lands
and goods confiscated, he banished and deprived of his Bishoppricke by 11 R 2 c
6^
Act of Parliament, himself had suffered as a Traitor, but that his guiltiness
made him fly before he could be apprehended.

Adam Molins the 31. Bishop of that See, ADAM MOLINS.
falling at variance with Richard Duke of York was slain at Portsmouth by
certain Mariners, June 9. 1449. Godw^n. p. 389.


Holinsh. p. 951.
Richard Sampson the 37th. of Chichester. RICHARD SAMPSON.
Anno 21. Hen. 8. was committed to the T^^^^^r for relieving certain
Traiterous persons, who denied the Kings Supremacy.

George Day the 21. Bishop of this See, GEORGE DAY.
October 10. 1551. Godw^ p 390.
was deprived from his Bishoppricke, for denying the Kings Supremacy, and
maintaining the Popes, and other misdemeanors, but was afterward restored by
Queen Mary, at whose Coronation he preached.

Godw p 390. Martyns Hist. p. 452, 453, 454.
John Christopherson the 40. Bishop of this Diocese, JOHN CHRISTOPH^RSON.
was deprived by Act of Parliament in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's happy
reign, for denying her supremacy, and refusing to take the oath of alegiance.

To pass by the subsequent Bishops of this See, Richard Mountague the last
Bishop thereof but one, RICHARD MOVNTAGVE.
was the principal abetter and reviver of those late Arminian and Popish
Doctrines, Ceremonies, Innovations which for sundry years have disquieted^
both our Church and State; and that not only in his Book, entitled Appello
Caesarem, published in the year 1625. complained against in three several
Parliaments, and called in by his Majesty's special Proclamation, S^e the
Declaration for the Dissolution of the Parliam^nt. p 20.21.
as a Book that opened the way to those Schisms and Divisions which have
since ensued in our Church; (though for this very Booke^ he was advanced to
this See, by the practice and confederacy of some swaying Prelates;) and in his
Gagge; but likewise in his Visitation Articles, his Antidiatribae, his Aparatus
ad Historiam Eccles^asticam, and other Works, as you may rea^ more largely in
Mr. Bailey his Canterburians se^fe-Conviction, the last Edition: which Books of
his have given great scandal to our Church, much advantage to our Popish
Adversaries, and much distracted^ not only our Church, but State; for which no
doubt he should have received his just demerits in the high Court of
Parliament, had not he died suddenly out of fear, (being sent for to answer
his old and new offenses upon some fresh complaints) to ease the Parliament,
and prevent a censure. Of his successor in this See, I need say nothing he is
so well known: wherefore I shall next visit Carlisle Diocese, and give you but
a touch of some special Acts of the Bishops of that See.

The Bishops of Carlisle.
WALTER MALCLERKE^
Godw. p. 538.539. Matthew West. An. 1233. p. 134.
Walter Malclerke, in the year 1223. was consecrated unto the Bishoppricke of
Carlisle, which he acknowledged to have obtained by evil and corrupt means,
and therefore resigned the same (moved in conscience so to do as he alleged)
June 29. 1246. and took on him the habit of a Friar Preacher at Oxford, in
which he continued till his death. Being Treasurer of England under King Henry
the third; the King upon a sudden, at the instigation of Peter, Bishop of
W^nchester, not only displaced him from that office, but revoked certain
Grants made unto him heretofore, and charged him with the debt of 100. pound.
which he acknowledged not. For redress of these wrongs (as he took them) he
determined to travel to Rome, but was stayed at the waters-side by the Kings
Officers; whom Roger, Bishop of London excommunicated for the same; and riding
presently to Worceter, where the Court lay, renewed that Excommunication in the
Kings presence^ How he thrived with these businesses afterward I find not. But
likely enough it is, that these troubles rather made him weary of the world,
than any such scruple induce him to leave his Bishoppricke.

Sylvester de Everdon, Sylvester de Everdon.
the 5th. Bishop of this See, was elected in the year, ^^46. but not
consecrated till February 5th. 1247. because he refused to accept of the
election, Matthew. Westminster. Anno. 1246. 1247. p 216. Godw. p. 539.
alleging his own unworthiness; but at last upon better deliberation,
yielded: he was one of them that joined with Boniface the Archbishop, and
Ethelma^re the Elect of Winchester in their request to the King that remembering
his promise often made, hereafter he would not impeach the Liberty of
Elections by interposing his armed requests, etc. The King acknowledged he had
indeed offended that way, and that especially (quoth he) in making means for
you your selves, that thererefore of all other should least find fault with it.
To this man particularly he used these words. I remember how I exalted thee
Sylvester of Carlisle unto a Bishoppricke, having hankered a long time about the
Chancery, and being a petty Chaplain to my Chaplains, preferring thee before
many grave and reverend Divines, etc. His conclusion was that if they would
give over their places which they had obtained by so undue means, he would
hereafter forbear to commend any so unworthy. This was the year 1253. The
year following, May the 13th This Bishop riding a horse somewhat too lusty for
him, was cast, and so bruised with the fall, as he died by and by, to wit, May
13^ 1254.

THOMAS MERKES.
Godw. p. 540^541.542. Walsing. Hist. Ang. An 1490. p. 404. Gra^ton. Chron. p.
407.408.409. Speeds Histo. p. 764.765.766. Halls Chron. 1. H. 4.. F. 11. to 15.
Holinsh. p 514.516.512
Thomas Merkes the Fiftenth Bishop of this See, amongst many unworthy preferred
to Bishopprickes in those days, was undoubtedly a man well-deserving that
honor; for he was both learned and wise, but principally to be commended;
first, for his constant and unmovable fidelity unto his Patron and preferrer
King Richard, then for his excellent courage in professing the same, when he
might safely, yea, and honestly also, have concealed his affection. Some other
there were of the Nobility that remembering their duty and allegiance, when all
the world b^s^de forsook this unfortunate Prince, followed him with their best
assistance, even till the time of his captivity. This man nothing regarding the
danger might ensue, not only refused to forsake him when he had forsaken
himself, but defended him and his cause the best he could, when he might well
perceive, his endeavor might hurt himse^fe much, without any possibility of
helping the other, when the furious and unstable multitude, not contented that
King Richard had resigned his Crown to save the head that wore it, and their
darling Henry the fourth. seated himself in his royal throne, importuned the
Parliament assembled to proceed yet farther against him, desiring no doubt that
to make all sure, his life might be taken from him. This worthy and memorable
Prelate stepping forth, doubted not to tell them, that there was none amongst
them meet to give judgment upon so noble a Prince as King Richard was^ whom
they had taken for their Sovereign and Liege Lord, by the space of twenty two
years and more, And proceeding further, I assure you, quoth he (I report his
words as I find them in our Chronicles) there is not so rank a Trayter, nor so
arrant a thief, nor yet so cruel a murderer, apprehended or detained in
prison for his offense, but he shall be brought before the justice to hear
Judgment; and will you proceed to the judgment of an anointed King, hearing
neither his answer nor excuse? I say and will avow, that the Duke of Lancaster
(whom ye call king) has more trespassed to King Richard and his Realm; the
King Richard has done either to him or us: for it is manifest and well known,
that the Duke was banished the Realm by King Richard and his Council, and by
the judgment of his own Father^ for the space of ten years, for what cause
ye remember well enough^ This notwithstanding, without License of King Richard,
he is returned again into the Realm, and (that is worse) has taken upon him
the name, title, and pre-eminence of King: and therefore I say that you have
done manifest wrong to proceed against King Richard in any sort without
calling him openly to his answer and defense. This Speech scarcely ended, he
was att^ched by the Earl Marshall, and for a time committed to ward in the
Abbey of St. Albanes. Continuing yet his loyal affection unto his distressed
Master, soon after his enlargement, he traitorously joined with the Hollands,
and others in a conspiracy against King Henry the 4th. which being bewrayed to
the destruction of all the rest, he only was pardoned, peradventure in regard
of his calling (for it had seldom or never been seen hitherto, that any
Bishop was put to death by order of Law;) peradventure in some kind of favor
and admiration of his faithful constancy (for virtue will be honored, even of
her enemies;) peradventure also to this end, that by forcing him to live
miserably, they might lay a punishment upon him more grevious than death, which
they well saw he despised. The Pope (who seldom denied the King any request
that he might afford good cheepe) was easily entreated, to translate forsooth,
this good Bishop from the Sea of Carlisle, that yielded him honorable
maintenance, unto Samos in Greece, whereof he knew he should never receive one
penny profit: he was so happy, as neither to take benefit of the gift of his
enemy, nor to be hurt by the masked malice of his counterfeit friend,
disdaining (as it were) to take his life by his gift, that took away from his
Master, both life and Kingdom, he died shortly after his deliverance, so
deluding also the mockery of his Translation, whereby (things so falling out)
he was nothing damnified. Hall reports, that he died for fear, more than
sickness, as one rather desirous to die by deaths dart, than the temporal
Sword, which this his Treason deserved, being a great blemish to his former
fidelity.

OWEN OGLETHORP
Godw. p. 543. Martyns Hist. p. 452.453.454.
Owen Oglethorpe the 31. B. of this See, was deprived with diverse other Bishops
for withstanding Q. Eliza. proceedings, and refusing to take the Oath of
Allegiance, in the year 1559. Of other Bishops of this See, since his days, I
find little mention, most of them being translated to other Sees; I shall
therefore proceed to the Bishops of Norwich.

The Bishops of Norwich.
JOHN de GRAY.
John de Gray, the fifth Bishop of Norwich (if we believe Hist. Angl. p.
221.222.
Matthew Paris,) was one of those three Court Bishops who were consiliarios
iniquissimos most wicked counselors to King John, during the time of the
inderdict of the Realm: who desiring to please the King in all things,
consilium non pro ratione, sed pro voluntate dederunt, gave the King counsel,
not according to Reason, but Will, and thereby wrought much trouble both to the
King and Kingdom.

See Matthew Paris Hist. Angl. p. 204. to 278. Matthew. West An. 1207. to 1224:
Fox Acts and Monu. p 2^6 to 234.
Pandulphus the next Bishop of this See, PANDVLPHVS.
consecrated by the Pope at Rome, Anno. 1222. was the Popes Legate, and the
chief instument, who persuaded King John, most ignominiously, and shamefully
to resign up his Crown and Kingdom to the Pope, to become his Vassal, to
his eternal infamy, and to submit himself to S^ephen Langhton, and those
other Trayterly Prelates who intardicted the Realm, excommunicated this King,
published the Popes deprivation of him from his Crown, and instigated the
French King to invade the Realm of England, and usurp the Crown, which the
Pope had conferred on him upon King John's deprivation from it, of which you may
read more at large before in Stephen Langhton, Archbishop of Canterbury, p. 33.
to 41. Only let me inform you, that during the time of this inderdict (above
six years space) all Ecclesiastical Sacraments ceased in England, except
Confession, and the viaticum in extreme necessity, and the Baptism of
Infants; so as the bodies of dead men were carried out of Towns and Villages,
and burried like dogs in Highwayes and Ditches without prayers, and the
ministry of Priests, as Matthew Paris and others testify. Such was the
Prelates piety and charity.

About the year of our Lord, 1271. In the time of Roger de Skerwing, ROGER de
SKERWYNG.
12. Bishop of Norwich, there was raised a dangerous sedition between the
Citizens of Norwich and the Monks of the Cathedral Church; Matthew. Paris Hist.
Angl^ p. 976.977. Matthew. West^ Anno. 1271. p. 351. Holish p. 275.276. Godwin p.
346.347.
the History whereof is briefly this. At a Fair that was kept before the
gates of the Priory, there happened a fray, in which some servants of the Covent,
^lew certain citizens: A Jury being empaneled hereupon, found them guilty, and
the Officers took order for the apprehending of the murderers if they might
be met withal. The Monks greatly offended herewith, first, excommunicated the
Citizens, then shutting the gates, not only prepared themselves to defense.
but also began to offend the other, shooting at the passengers first, and
afterward issuing out of their gates, killing diverse persons, and spoiling many
houses: The Citizens greatly incensed herewith, fired the gates, entered the
Monastery. and after a long conflict (a great number being slain on both
sides) prevailed, rifled the Priory, and set fire on the same in diverse places
at once. This fire consumed not only the Cells and Offices of the Monks, but
the Alms house also, the steeple, and greatest part of the Cathedral Church.
The King hearing of this tumult, with all speed posted thither, with the Bishop
of Rochester, and others. The Bishop of Rochester, excommunicated all those who
had consented to this wickedness, and the King caused diverse Citizens to be
hanged^ drawn, and quartered; amongst the rest that were executed^ a woman
that carried fire to the gates was burned. The Monks for their part appealed
to Rome, and so handled the matter, that they not only escaped punishment but
also forced the Citizens to pay them 3000. marks after 500. marks a year,
toward the reparation of their Church, and to present them with a Pix or Cup of
gold of seven pound weight. This end was made by King Edward the first (his
Father being now dead) at the request and solicitation of the Bishop. But the
Prior (says Holinshed) was well enough borne out and defended by the Bishop of
Norwich named Roger, who (as it is likely) was the Master of the mischief,
though hands were not laid upon him, nor upon his adherents, perhaps for
fear, peradventure for favor; and no marvel, though the less faulty lost
their lives, as most guilty; for -- Rarus venator ad ursos
Accedit, tutos conservat Sylva Leones;
Debilibus robusta nocent, and grandia paruis.
Ales fulminiger timidos infestat olores;
Accipiter laniat Turdos, mollesque Columbas.
Verficoler Coluber ranas miserasque lacertas;
Irretit muscas, transraittit aranea vespes.
So Holinshed.

ANTHONY de BECK.
After him Anthony de Beck, the 17th. Bishop of this See attaining this dignity
at the Popes hands. behaved himself so imperiously in the place, Godw. p. 348.
that he bereaved the Monks of diverse ancient and long enjoyed privileges
suffering them to do nothing in their house but what seemed good unto him,
plucking down and preferring amongst them whom he listed. Neither could he
only be content thus to tyrannize over them, but scorning to have his actions
reformed or called in question by any other, he openly withstood Robert
Winchelsey, Bishop of Canterbury in his Visitation; affirming, that he would
not answer to those things which were objected against him, unless it were at
the Court of Rome. This boisterous and unruly dealing purchased him such hatred
of all men, that at the last he was poisoned by some of his own servants.

William Bateman the 18th. Bishop of Norwich^ WILLIAM BATEMAN.
forced the Lord Morley for killing certain Dear in one of his Parkes, and
abusing his Keepers, Godw. p. 349.
to carry a burning Taper in his hand, through the streets of Norwich unto the
High-Altar by way of Penance. And although King Edward the third became an
earnest intercessor for him to the Bishop, mingling sometimes threats with
requests, yet nothing could move the Bishop following his determinate course;
such arrogant, malicious, dispitefull froward creatures are Prelates for the
most part, both toward Kings and Nobles. In his time there happened a great
Pestilence, so that in many Monasteries and religious Houses, there were scarce
two of twenty left alive, there died only in Norwich in one year, besides
religious men 57104 persons.

Henry Spencer, HENRY SPENCER.
a Gentleman of great valor and skill in martial affairs, Walsingh. Hist.
Angl p. 278.279.315.316 319. to 334.348. Speed. Hist. p. 735.537 Polichro. l. 7
c 5. f 320. Antiquit. Eccl. Brit p. 298. Holinsh p. 442.443.444.445. Godw. p.
350.351.352.
serving the Pope as General in his, wars, in the year 1370. was made
Bishop of Norwich. And being a better Butcher and Soldier than a Shepherd, he
(notwithstanding the Kings Commandment to the contrary) procured the Popes
authority for levying of an army here in England, which he transported about
the year 1385. into the Low Countries for the Popes service in his war^es,
where after he had slain above 1100. men, in a set batt^ll (wherein the
Priests and religious men that were with the Bishop fought valiantly and most
eagerly, some of them slaying sixteen men apeece in one battle against the
^lemmings: vanquished an army of 30000. and burnt the Towns of Graveling,
Dunkirke, Newport and others, returned again into England, the King seizing
his Temporalties into his hands and detaining them two years space for his
contempt, in raising an army without, and against his express command. This
Martial Prelate, had forgotten what answer all the Bishops, Abbots, and Clergy
of England gave to King Henry the third, Anno. 1267. in a Parliament at St.
Edmonds Berry, where the King demanding, that all Clergy men holding Baronies,
or Lay Fee, should go armed in person against the Kings enemies, or should
find so many men to serve the King in his Expidition, as pertained to so much
land or tenement. To this they answered, Matthew Paris Hist. Angl. p. 970.971.
Quod non debent pugnare cum gladio raateriali; That they ought not to fight
with the material sword, but with the spiritual, naraely with tears, and
sighs, and devout Prayers; and that for their Benefices they were bound to
maintain peace not war: and that their Baronies were founded in pure
Franck-Almoigne, where they owed no Knights Service but what was certain;
neither would they begin any new: and when it was replied, that the Prelates
were obliged to grant all the Kings requests (there specified and contradicted
by them) whether they would or no, by reason of the Oath they had taken at
Coventrie, where they swore, that they would aid their Lord the King by all
means that they could. To this they gave this equivocating answer; that when
they made this Oath, they understood it not of any other aid, but spiritual
and wholesome council, denying to grant the King any money at all. But it
seems that this was then the Bishops received distinction, that they might
lawfully bear arms, and fight with the material sword, and grant Subsedias
to aid the Pope against his enemies, as this Bishop and the Clergy in his time
did; but not to assist the King against his enemies^ This Martial Act of his
warlike Prelate is thus censured by Fox Acts, and Monuments, vol. 1. p 613.
William Swinderby, one of our Martyrs in Richard the seconds reign. Further I
say, if the Pope hold men of arms, in maintaining his Temporalties and
Lordship to venge him on them that gilten and offend him, and gives remission
to fight and to sley them that contrary him^ as men say he did by the Bishop of
Norwich, not putting his sword into his sheath, as God commanded Peter Mitte,
etc. he is Antichrist, for he does contrary to the Commandments of Jesus,
that bade Peter forgive to his brother seventy times seventy. Si peccaverit in
me frater meus, quotiens dimittam ei? Septies? etc and Christus; non dieo tibi
septi^s, sed septuagesies sepcies. Which Walter Brute another martyr in that
time thus seconds, Ibid. Fox. vol. 1. p^ 633.
Again, Christ says, You have heard that it is said, an eye for an eye, a
tooth for a tooth, but I say unto you, see that you resist not evil. But if
any man shall strike you upon the right cheek, give him the other too; and to
him that will strive with thee for thy caate in judgment, let him have thy
cloak also, and whosoever shall constrain thee one mile, go with him also
two other. He that asks of thee give him, and he that will borrow of thee,
turn not thy self from him. By these things it may plainly appear how that
Christ the King of peace, the Savior of mankind, who came to save, and not to
destroy, who gave a Law of Charity to be observed of his faithful people, has
taught us not to be angry, not to hate our enemies, nor to render evil for
evil, nor to resist evil. For all these things do foster and nourish peace
and charity, and do proceed and come forth of charity, and when they be not
kept charity is loosed, and peace is broken. But the Bishop of Rome approves
and allows wars and slaughters of men in war, as well against our
enemies, that is, the Infidells, as also against the Christians for temporal
goods. Now these things are quite contrary to Christ's Doctrine, and to charity;
and to peace, etc. And indeed if we consider Pope Vrbanes Commission and
privileges granted to this martial Prelate against Clement the Antipope and
his accomplices, we shall see how far the Popes practices are opposite to
Christ's practi^e and precepts, and what merciful, peaceable men Lordly
prelates are, I shall give you a taste hereof out of Walsing. Hist. Angliae p
312.313.314. etc.
Walsingham. In the year of our Lord 1382. Henry Spencer Bishop of Norwich,
received Bulls from the Pope his Lord directed to him, to sign with the Cross
all those who were willing to go with him into France, to the destruction of
the Antipope, who called himself Clement, and to sanctify a war against all
who adhered to him. Which Bulls, because they conferred great power to him, he
caused to be published in Parliament, and sent abroad Coppies of them round
about into every place, which he caused to be fixed on the doors of Churches
and Monasteries in open view. These Bulls relate at large the injuries that
Clement the Antipope, and the Cardinals confederating with him, had offered to
Urban, and that Pope Urban, being unable without great offense of Christ, and
remorse of conscience any longer to endure so many great excesses, thought meet
to rise up against those wicked ones in the power of the most high, and
proceeding judicicially against them by a definitive sentence denounced and
declared them to be scismatickes, and conspirators against the Pope, and
blasphemers, and that they should be punished like Heretics, and persons
guilty of high Treason, and did thereupon excommunicate and accurse them, and
withal deprived them from all their Benefices and O^fices whatsoever, making
them incapable to retain or receive them, or any other, both for the present
and future; withal, he degraded all the Nobl^s and Knights who adhered to him
from all their honors, dignities, and Knightships, decreed all their goods,
movables and immoveables, rights, and jurisdictions to be confiscated, and
their persons to be detestable, and so to be esteemed, and exposed them to be
apprehended by all Christians, and so apprehended to be kept in such sort, that
they should not escape, and either be sent immediately to the said Pope, or else
detained close prisoners in safe custody, till he should give further order
therein: Moreover he excommunicated all those who should either believe,
receive, defend, or favor any of them, so as they should not be absolved from
this sentence without his privity, unless it were at the very point of death;
he further decreed, that whosoever should wittingly presume to admit any of
them to Ecclesiastical burial, should be subject to the sentence of
Excommunication, from which he should not be absolved, unless at the very
point of death; except (O barbarous cruelty) they would first with their own
hands dig them out of their graves, Et procul e^^ecrent ab Ecclesiastica
sepultura corpora eorundem; and cast out their bodies far from the Churchyard
or Ecclesiastical burying place. Moreover, he inhibited all Christians
wittingly to harbor any of them, or to presume to bring, send^ or suffer to be
brought or sent, any corn, wine, flesh^ clothes, wood^ victuals, or any other
thing profitable for their use, to any place where any of them should dwell or
abide, if it lay in their power to prohibit it; he commanded likewise, that no
man should presume in any wise to hinder the apprehention and detention of the
said Antipope and his adherents and their transmission to him, and commanded
every man to be assisting to their apprehention. And if any did contrary to the
premises, or wittingly name, believe in, or preach Clement to be Pope, if he
were a single person he should be excommunicated, if a Commonwealth or
Corporation, they should be interdicted, and their cities and Lands, deprived
of all commerce with other cities, places, and countries, and that the cities
themselves should be deprived of their pontifical dignity, and that none but
the Pope himself should have power to absolve them from this interdict, or
excommunication, unless it were at the very point of death, he further
granted to all persons truly penitent, and confessed who would fight against the
said Antipope, and his confederates in their proper persons, or by others for
one whole years space, from the day this Bishop of Norwhich should appoint,
either continually, or by times if they were lawfully hindered, to all, as well
Clergy men as Lay men who should follow the standard of the Church, and
likewise to all such that should contribute toward the expenses of this war
according to their ability, either to the Bishop or to his Deputy, or should
hire fit soldiers to war and continue with him for the said space, the same
indulgence that was usually granted to those who went to aid the holy Land.
Moreover this Pope grants these Privileges to this his General the Bishop of
Norwich, for the better promoting of this war. First, that the said Bishop
might execute capital punishments against the Antipope, his adherers, factors,
and councillors in any place, with strong hand. Item that he should have
power to publish process against the Antipope and his adherents and any other,
to be fulminated out by the said Lord the Pope himself, against them and
every of them. Item, that he should have power summarily, and plainly to
enquire of all and singular Schismatics, and to imprison them, and to
confiscate all their goods, movables, and immoveables. Item, that he should
have power to deprive Lay Schismatiques of all secular Offices whatsoever, and
to confer their Offices upon fit persons. Item, That he should have power of
depriving and declaring to be deprived all Schismatic Clergy men, and of
conferring their Benefices with Cure, or without Cure, their dignities,
Personages, or Offices to other idoneous persons. Item, That he should have
power over all exempt persons, Clerks or Laics, Seculars or Regulars, though
they were brethren of the Order of the Mendicants, or Professors, or Professed
of other Houses, or of the Hospital of St. John's of Jerusalem, or of St. Mary
of the Teutonicks, or professors of any other Orders. Item, That he should have
power of dispensing with any Beneficed secular Clerks, with Cure, or without
Cure, or such who had any dignities, parsonages, or Offices, and with regulars
exempt or not exempt, that every of them might be absent with him from their
benefices, dignities, offices, and houses under the sign of the Cross,
without any license of their Prelates obtained, with the notice and reception
of the fruits of their benefices, as if they personally had resided. Item, It
is granted to all, who go oversea with him at their own cost and expenses, or
at the charges of any other plenary remission of all sins, and so many
privileges, as are granted to those who go to the aid of the holy Land.
Item, They who out of their proper goods and means shall minister sufficient
wages to fit soldiers, according to the discretion of the said Bishop, or of
any deputed by him, albeit he himself shall not be personally present in the
execution of the said business, shall have like remission of sins and
indulgence as aforesaid, as they had been personally present with him. Item,
All shall be partakers of this remission who shall congruously minister of
their goods to the said Bishop toward the expugnation of the said Heretics.
Item, if any in following the same Standard shall chance to die in the journey
undertaken, or if the business it self shall chance to be finished in the
interim with a convenient end, he shall entirely receive the same grace, who
shall be partaker of the forenamed indulgence and remission. Item, he has
power of excommunicating, suspending, interdicting all rebellious persons; or
those who hinder him to execute the power granted to him, of what dignity,
state, degree, pre-eminence, order, place, or condition soever they shall be,
allthough Regal, Queenely, Note this.
or Imperial, Note this.
or of what other Ecclesiastical or worldly dignity soever they excel in.
Item, He has power of compelling all religious persons whatsoever, even the
professors of the Order of the Mendicants, if it shall seem expedient to him,
to destinate or transmit them where he please for the execution of the
premises. This Bishop armed with this large Commission, sends out his Mandates,
every where for the advancement of this holy papal war; and among other his
precepts, directs this ensuing mandate to the Clergy of the Province of York.
Henry, by Divine permission, Bishop of Norwich, Nuncio of the Sea Apostolic,
to our beloved in Christ, all and singular the Rectors, Vicars, and Chaplains
Parochial within the City and Diocese of York, greeting in the Lord; Albeit
we have exhorted all, and every of you by Apostolical authority in the Lord,
and strictly commanded you, that you should publish the cross committed to us
and its virtue to your parishioners in the most opportune time and places,
whose sustainers, fauters, and aiders according to Ours, or Our Deputies
discretion have plenary remission of sins granted, and besides this, have
augmentation of eternal salvation permitted, as is more fully contained in the
Apostolical Bulls lawfully published throughout all England. And because we
understand by the relation of credible men, that our exhortation and command
has taken none, or small effect, especially (as is believed) by reason of the
negligence of Curates, to the diminution of the Catholic faith, and danger of
souls, who easily by your council and exhortation might obtain the foresaid
privileges and sempiternall grace. Therefore we much affecting the salvation
and pofit of souls, lest the precious gift of this spiritual universal grace
or our power, should not as much as in us lies be unknown to any of your
parishoners, for time to come; do you cause the names of all your Parishioners
to be written, setting down the sum and donations of those that pay upon
their names, and those that pay not, from day to day, as often, and when it
shall be most expedient, not only the rich, but also the poor, according to
the similitude of the poor widow, the healthy, and those that are sick,
especially in confession, do you prudently handle, and persuade to put their
helping hands to this holy voyage, to the destruction and extermination of
modern Heretics, that so they may be partakers of the merit and reward
granted in this behalf, and your selves hereby very much eased from the
burden of your Cure. Moreover, the desturbers of this holy Voyage, or Rebels
to our Commands, or rather to the Apostles, and fauters of the modern Schism,
you, or some of you shall peremptorily cite, that they personally appear
before us, or our Commissioners by a certain day perfixed by you, or some one
of you in the Cathedral of St. Paul in London, to show cause, at a precise and
peremptory time, wherefore they ought not to be pronounced to have fallen into
the censures thundered out against those who perpetrate such things. And further
to do and receive what Justice shall persuade. You or some one of you shall
distinstly and wisely certify us or our Commissioners of the nam^^^ and
quantity of the alms conferred in this kinde^ and also of the days of your
citations, and of the manner and form thereof: Of all, and every of which we
burden every of your consciences, firmly injoyning you by virtue of that
obedience you stand obliged to the Sea Apostolicke^ that you publish these our
present Letters among your Parishioners, reteining the Coppies of them with
your selves, and that ye speedily transmit them to the next Curate in the
foresaid Diocese: In witness whereof we have to these presents set to our
usual S^^le in this behalf: Given at Our Lodging ^t Charing near Westmi^ster
the 9th. day of the Monesh of February, Anno. Dom. 1382. and the 13th. of Our
Consecration. And withal he granted this form of Absolution to all ayders and
Assistants to this holy war. By the Apostolical authority committed to me in
this behalf, we absolve thee, A. B. from all sins confessed with the mouth
and sorrowed for with the heart, and which thou would confess if they came
to thy memory, and we grant thee plenary remission of all thy sins, and
promise thee retribution of just men, and augmentation of eternal salvation;
and we grant to thee so many privileges as are granted to those who go to the
aid of the holy Land, and we impart to thee the suffrages of the prayers and
benefits of the Synod of the Universal Church, Bulls.
and of the holy Catholic Church. By these recited Letters and Absolutions,
you may clearly discern, 1. The extraordinary insatiable malice,
uncharitableness, cruelty, rage of Popes and Lordly Prelates against their
opposites. 2. Their earnest desire and promotion of bloody wars by all manner
of instigations and enforcements. 3. Their exorbitant encroachments and
usurpations upon Emperors, Kings, Princes, Subjects, and all sorts of men, who
must be subject to their Censures, Excommunications, and Deprivations, if they
resist their wills and bloody designs. 4. Their notable abuse of
Excommunications, and other Ecclesiastical censures to avenge their own mere
personal wrongs^ and execute their own malicious designs. 5. Their politic
inventions to raise moneys, and men to maintain their wars. 6. The impiety
and strange abuse of their pretended indulgences wherewith they grossly cheat
poor silly people. 7. The industry of this Martial Prelate of Norwi^h to
promote this holy war, as he termed it, only in maintenance of Pope Vrbans
inurbanity. This Bull and large Commission of the Pope to the Bishop^ was many
days debated in Parliament, and so his Voyage: During which time the Bishops
foresaid Letters and Popes Bull being published throughout the Realm, the
silly people, hearing the sweetness of so great a benediction to have arrived
to the English, would neither reject nor receive in vain so great grace, but
inflamed with the heat of devotion and faith, those who thought themselves fit
for war, prepared themselves with all speed, and those who seemed unable for
the Expedition, according to the council of their Confessors liberally
contributed out of their goods toward the use of those who wentt, ^^t they
might deserve to be partakers of so great remission and indulgence. And the
hearts of all men were so generally inflamed with devotion, that there was
almost no man found in so great a Kingdom, who did not either offer himself
to the said business or contribute something toward it, out of his estate: So
that in a short space, diverse great sums of money were brought to the Bishop
out of many parts of the Kingdom, and multitudes of soldiers resorted to him:
whereupon the Bishop takes his journey with part of his army toward the
Seaside, and comes to Northborne in Kent; where making some small stay, he
received the Kings writ, commanding him to return to speak with the King^ and
to know his pleasure. The Bishop thinking that if he returned, the King would
command him to stay his Voyage, and so all his pains and provision should be
lost, and himself exposed to derision, gathering together those soldiers he
had present by the help of John Philpot, transported both himself and them to
Chalis, from whence he went and besieged Graveling; where in a set battle he
vanquished the Flemmins and Schismatics, and obtained a glorious victory,
slaying at least 12. thousand of them in the battle and flight. The news
whereof coming over into England, so affected the people moved with the hope
of the prey they should gain, that many Apprentices in London, and many
servants took the Cross upon them without their Masters consent, and against
their wills, whose example others following throughout the Kingdom, leaving
their parents, kind red, and dear consorts, being unarmed, having only
swords, bows, and arrows went out to this war; and many religious persons of
all Orders, (who craved license to go but could not obtain it) presumed to
undertake that Voyage, In magnum personarum suarum dedecus and detrimentum,
quia non propter Iesnm tantum peregrinare decreverunt sed ut patriam mundumque
viderent. John Philpot pro^^^^ng all these with necessaries, transported them
to the Bishop: whose temporalties the King seized and detained many years in
his hands for undertaking this war, and passing the sea with his subjects,
contrary to his inhibition. A little before this war, this Martial Prelate
had occasion given him of employing his valor at home to better purpose. In
the year 1381 the Commons of Suffolk, and Norfolk made one John Lister their
Leader, a Dyer of Norwich, called the King of the Commons, endeavoring to
join their forces with those notable Rebels Wat ^yler, and Jack Straw. The
Bishop hereupon armed from top to toe, marches with such forces as he could
raise against these Rebels: meeting with some of them at Ickingham, he
presently laid hold of the three chief of them, and without more ado, cut off
their heads, which he caused to be set upon poles at Newmark^t: Thence he
marched toward Norwich, where he understood the Rebels had determined to make
some stay. By the way diverse Gentlemen that had hid themselves^ Videntes
Episcopum militem induisse, and galeam assumps^sse raetalicam, and lor^cam
duram quam non possent penetrare sagittae, nec non gladium ma^ertalem ancipitem
arr^puisse (as Walsingham writes) joined with him; so as by that time he came
to Norwich he had a reasonable company about him. With that troop (such as it
was) he set upon the Rebels, who had fortified themselves with trenches, and
barracadoes very strongly, having their carriages, and wagons behind them. The
Martial Bishop without delay, about to give them open battle, moved with
their audacity, commands the Trumpets to blow, and the Drums to beat; and
taking a Lance in his right hand, puts spurs to his horse, and is carried
with so great animosity and impetuous boldness against them, that with a most
speedy course he pre-ocupies their trenches, before his Archers could come up
to him, neither was there need of Archers, they being come to fight hand to
hand. The warlike Prelate therefore, like a wild Boore gnashing his teeth,
sparing neither himself nor his enemies, where he perceives most danger
thither he directs his strength, running through this man, casting down that
man, wounding another, and cease not to hurt the enemy most vehemently,
until all the troop which followed him^ had gotten the Trench, and were
prepared to the conflict: the Bishops party then fought valiantly, and so did
the Commons, Donec infirmior conscientia partem terreret injustams and animum
ab audacia and voluntate subtraheret moriendi. Wal^ing. Hist. Anglicae p
278.279.
Hereupon the fearful vulgar betake themselves to flight, and because they
had no way left besides their Carts and Carriages which they had placed behind
them, they strove to leap over them, and so to escape. But the Bishop,
exercising every where the Office of a circumspect Generall^ dashed these
endeavors, and hindered those who thought to flee by killing them, and in
hindering slayes them, till he had taken their Ringleaders, and John Litcestere
their King, whom he caused to be drawn, quartered, and beheaded. Which done,
this Bishop rested not, until having searched out the malefactors throughout
the country, he caused Justice to be executed on them, Sicque pacem peperit
regioni, and indicibile toto regno commodum, laudanda probitas, and audac^a
commendanda Pontificis bellicosi. This Act was very commendable, I confess yet
unsuitable to his calling. There wa^ great contention between him and the
Monks of Norwhich for fifteen years, concerning their privileges and
jurisdictions; at last they gave him 400. Marks to enjoy their privileges.

ALEXANDER.
Godw. p 35^.
Alexander P^yor of Norwich was next elected B. by the Monks, but the King so
misliked their choice, as he not only kept him from his dignity, but also
imprisoned him at Winsor almost a whole year after his election, yet
afterward at the request of Thomas Arrundell Archbishop of Canterbury, and
diverse other of the Nobility, he was released, set at liberty, and afforded
Consecration, Anno. 1408.

Richard Nyx. 29. Bishop of this Sea, RICHARD NYX.
had a report of a vicious and dissolute liver, and was blind long before his
death. Hilary 25 H. 8. Coram Rege Rot. 15. he was attainted in a praemun^re,
Godw p. 354. See a Brief of the Prelates Incr^c^ments. etc. p. 246.247.
put out of the Kings protection, his person imprisoned, Lands, Goods, and
Chattles forfeited to the King, for citing Richard Cockerall, Major of
Thetford, and others into his Spiritual Court, and enjoining them under pain
of Excommunication, to call a Jury of the said town before them, and cause
them to revoke and cancel a Presentment they had found upon Oath touching
their Liberties, to wit, that none of the said Town ought to be cited into any
Spiritual Consistory, but only into the Deane of Thetfords Court; and that if
any one cited any of that Town into another Spiritual Court, he should
forfeit six shillings eight pence for the same, The Glasse-windowes of
Kings-Colledge Chapel in Cambridge were bought and set up with part of this
Bishops Fine and Forfeiture upon this his attainder, as the Author. of the
Catalogue of the Chancellors and Colleges of Cambridge Record^, in his
Collegi^m Regis.

JOHN HOPTON.
Godw. p. 355.
John Hopton the 32th Bishop of this Sea, was a great persecuter, and a cause
of putting many of our Martyrs to death; as you may read in Mr. Fox his Acts
and Monuments.

Samuel Harsnet Bishop of this Diocese, SAMVEL HARSNET.
a turbulent Prelate and great opposer of Godly Ministers in the latter end of
King James, and the beginning of King Charles reign was questioned and
proceeded against in Parliament for diverse oppressions, Extortions, and
Superstitious innovations introduced in that Dioces^e. Of whom, See more in
York, to which he was translated.

Dr. White, D. WHITE.
and Dr. Corbet his immediate successors, Dr. CORBET.
were men of the same strain with Harsnet, and whereas Dr. White had gained
great fame and reputation in our Church for his learning and Books against the
Papists whilst he continued an ordinary Minister, his carriage and change was
such, that he soon lost all his honor and reputation after he became a
Bishop, and when as other men grow commonly white in their old age, he
contrariwise like the Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7 c. 2. Herodotus l. 2.
Albanes (who do in senectute nigrescere) waxed black in his declining days,
and as some say, deserved the title of that Popish Treatise which he answered
in his Orthodox, White dyed black. A strange effect of a white Rochet.

But his Successor in this See, Matthew Wren, MATTHEW WREN.
a man of a more active spirit, thinking it a disparagement to him, not to
transcend his predecessors in superstitious Popish Innovations, and extravagant
oppressions, both of the Ministers and people of that Diocese, has been so
exorbitantly outrageous in his proceedings, that upon the hearing of sundry
Petition^ and complaints against him in Parliament, the whole House of Commons
have transmitted to the Lords these subsequent Articles of impeachment against
him (already Printed) wherein the malicious venom of his spirit against piety
and our Religion, with his seditious, oppressive practices are Anatomized to
the full, and most elegantly displaied in their proper colors by Sir Thomas
Widdrington in his Speech at their transmission, which Articles and Speech here
I insert.

ARTICLES of Impeachment, of the COMMONS A^sembled in Parliament in the name of
themselves, and of all the Commons of England, against Matthew Wren, Dr. in
Divinity, late Bishop of Norwich, and now Bishop of Ely, for several Crimes,
and Misdemeanors committed by him.
THat the said Matthew Wren, being Popishly and superstitiously affected, did
at his first coming to be Bishop of Norwich, which was in the year 1635.
endeavor by sundry ways, and means, to suppress the powerful and painful
Preaching of the Word of God; did introduce diverse Orders, and Injunctions,
tending to Superstition and Idolatry; did disturb, and disquiet the orderly,
and settled estate of the Ministers, and people, and Churches of that Diocese,
to the great prejudice of His Majesty, the great grief and disquiet, and
hazard of the estates, consciences, and lives of many of his Majesty's Loyal
Subjects there, to the manifest bringing in, and increasing of profaneness,
ignorance, and disobedience in the Common people, (as by the particulars
ensuing may appear.)

I. Whereas many Chancels of Churches, during all the time of Queen Elizabeth,
King James, and of his Majesty that now is, had laid and been continued, even
and flat, without any steps ascending toward the East End of the same, and are
ordered to continue as they were, and so ought to have continued; He of his own
mind and will, without any lawful warrant of authority, in the year 1636.
being then Bishop of Norwich, ordered and enjoined, that the same should be
raised toward the East End, some two, some three, some four steps, that so
the Communion Table there placed Altarwise, might be the better seen of the
people.

II. He in the same year 1636. ordered, That the Communion Table which is
appointed by the said Rubric, at the time of the celebration of the holy
Communion, to be placed in the Body of the Church or Chancell, where Divine
Prayers are usually read, and where the people might best hear, should be set
up close under the Wall at the East End of the Chancell Altarwise, and not to
be removed from thence; whereby the Minister, who is by the Law to Officiate at
the North-side of the Table, must either stand and officiate at the North-end
of the Table so standing Altarwise, or else after the Popish and Idolatrous
manner, stand and officiate at the Westside of the Table with his back toward
the people.

III. He in the same year 1636. enjoined that there should be a Rail set on
the top of the new raised steps before the Communion Table so set Altarwise as
aforesaid, which Rayl should raise from the Southside of the Chancell to the
North within, which the Minister only should enter, as a place too holy for
the people; and some of the people were punished for stepping into it, as
namely Daniel Wayman, and others.

IV. The more to advance blind Superstition, he in the same year 1636.
ordered that all the Pewes in the Church should be so altered, that the people
might kneel with their faces Eastward, toward the Communion Table so set
Altarwise as aforesaid; And that there should be no seats in the Chancell
above, or on either side even up with the said Table.

V. He in the same year 1636. enjoined that every Minister after he had
finished the reading of some part of the Morning Prayer, at the Deske, should
go out from the same to the holy Table set Altarwise, as to a more holy place,
and there, when no Communion was to be administered, read at the said Table a
part of the Communion Service, now commonly called the second Service, whereby
the consciences both of the Minister, and people, have been not only very
much offended, and grieved, but also the Service it self was made very
unprofitable to the people^ who could not hear what was said, or prayed in
that place.

VI. That both he in his own person, his Chaplains, and others of the Clergy
as namely, Master John Novell, Master William Guest, Master John Dunckon, and
others following his example, did ever after the Table was so set Altarwise,
use and perform such, so many, and so frequent bowings and adorations before,
and toward the said Table as have been dangerous examples to draw others to
the like superstitious gestures, and have given great scandall^ and offense to
the sound, and sincere, and well affected Christians.

VII. He in the said year 1636, enjoined all the people to come up to the
Rail to receive the holy Communion, and there kneel, and do reverence before
the holy Table placed Altarwise and gave directions to the Ministers not to
administer the Communion to such people as should not so come up, and do such
reverence as aforesaid, And that the Minister should within the Rail deliver
the Bread to such people only as should so come up and kneel before the said
Table as aforesaid. This was to the offense of the consciences of many good
people, who for fear of Idolatry and Superstition, durst not come to kneel at
the said Rayl before the Table so placed Altarwise; and many people not coming
up thither, though presenting themselves upon their knees in the Chancell, have
not had the Communion delivered unto them, and afterward for not receiving have
bin excommunicated, as namely, John Shyming, Samuel Dunckon, Peter Fisher,
Thomas Neuton, Edward Bedwell, Edmund Day, John Frowar, and many others.

VIII. He did in the said year, 1636. enjoin and command, that there should be
no Sermons on the Lords Days in the afternoon or on the week days at all,
without his License. And also enjoined that there should be no Catechizing, but
only such questions, and answers^ as are contained in the Book of the Common
prayer. Not allowing the Ministers to expound or open the points of the same to
the poople. He and his under Officers affirming in public places, that such an
exposition might be as ill as a Sermon. And the more to hearten, and confirm
the people in profaning the Lords Day, He enjoined the Ministers to read
publicly in their Churches, a Book published touching Sports on the Lords Day.
For not reading whereof, some Ministers were by the command and directions of
the said Bishop suspended, viz. Master William Leigh, Mr. Richard Proud, Mr.
Jonathan Burr, Mr. Matthew Brumwrigg, Mr. Mott, and diverse others, some deprived
Master Powell, Mr. Richard Raymond, Mr. Jeremy Borrowes, and some otherwise
troubled. By all which, knowledge was suppressed, and ignorance and
profaneness introduced in that Diocese.

IX. There having been formerly two kinds of ringing of Bells, and calling
people to the Church in that Diocese ( viz.) one kind, when there were only
Prayers to be read, and another kind, when there were both Prayers to be read,
and a Sermon preached, whereby the people did apply themselves to the Service
of God in those places, where both Prayers, and Preaching was to be; He to
hinder the people in their good desires of serving of God, and edifying their
souls, did in the same year 1636. command, and enjoyne that there should be
no difference in ringing of Bells to Church when there was a Sermon, and when
there was none.

X. Whereas many godly Ministers for the preventing of the great sin in the
people of unworthy receiving the holy Communion of the Lords Supper^ did use to
Preach two or three days before every Communion, a preparation Sermon to
prepare, and instruct the people in the right and worthy receiving of the
Communion, He the said Bishop did in the said year, 1636. forbid Ministers, to
preach any such prepa^ation Sermon in that Diocese, as namely, Master
Devereux, Master Swayn, and other Ministers.

XI. Whereas all Gods Ordinances are sanctified, and made fruitful by the
blessing of God upon them by Prayer; He endeavoring to suppress the power,
and benefit of Prayer in the year 1636. enjoined that no Minister should use
any prayer before his Sermon, but move the people to pray only in the words of
the fifty fifth Canon made Anno Dom. 1603. which Canon was not warranted by the
Law. And that no prayer should be used before or after the Sermon. And he in
his own person having been at the Sermon in the Town of Ipswich when the
Preacher did use or make any other prayer, did sit upon his seat without using,
or giving any reverence of kneeling, or otherwise, thereby to discountenance
such prayer. And he in the said year 1636. enjoined that no prayer should be
made in the Pulpit for the sick, and that such as were prayed for in the
reading Deske, should be prayed for only in the two Collects prescribed for
the Visitation of the sick in private houses.

XII. He the more to alienate the peoples heart from hearing of Sermons in the
said year 1636. commanded, and enjoined all Ministers to preach constantly in
their Hood, and Surplice, a thing not used before in that Diocese, and much
offensive to the people as a scandalous innovation. And the Parishioners of
Knattshall wanting a Surplice^ he did by his Officers in the year 1637. enjoin
the Churchwardens there, that no prayers should be read in that Church till
they had got a Surplice, which they not getting for the space of two Lords
days after, had no prayers during that time there.

XIII. That during the time of his being Bishop of Norwich, which was about two
years, and four months, There were for not reading the Service, at the
Communion Table set^ Altarwise, for not reading the Book of Sports^ for using
conceived prayers before and after Sermons, and for not observing some other
illegal innovations by him, and his underofficers, by and upon his
directions, and Injunctions, sundry godly painful Preaching Ministers, that
is to say, Master William Powell, Mr. John Carter, Mr. Robert Pe^k^ Mr. William
Bridge, Mr. William Green, Mr. Mott, Mr. Richard Raymond, Mr. Thomas Scot, Mr.
Greenehill, Mr. Nicholas Beard, Mr. Hudson, Robert Kent, Jeremy Burrow, Mr.
Thomas Allen, and others to the number of fifty, were excommunicated,
suspended, or deprived and otherwise censured, and silenced, to the undoing of
many of them, their wives, and children, and they could not be absolved without
giving promise to conform to his directions editis and edendis, by means
whereof some Ministers were enforced to depart this Realm into Holland, and
other parts beyond Sea, viz. the said Mr. William Bridge, Mr. Jeremy Burrowes,
Mr. Thomas Allen^ Mr. John Ward, and others of Norwich, to remove into other
more peaceable Diocesses, as namely, Mr. Edmund Calamy, Mr. Broom, Mr. Beard
and others, and some of them so pros^cuted, as has bin suspected to be the
cause of their deaths, as namely, Mr. Th^mas Scot and others; the terror of
which proceedings, has caused other Ministers to leave their Cures, and go
away, viz. Mr. William Kirington, M. Thomas Warren, Mr. John Allen and others;
and if a stranger preached at the Cure of such person suspended, the
Churchwardens permitting such person so to preach, were enjoined penance, and
otherwise troubled, as namely, the Churchwardens of Snaile-well, and the
stranger for preaching, was also therefore molested, viz. Mr. Ash, Mr. Eades,
Mr. Manning, and other Ministers.

XIV. That during the time he was Bishop of the said See of Norwich, he did
unlawfully compel the inhabitants of the several parishes within that
Dio^esse, to raise the floors of the Chancells, of their respective Churches,
to rail in their Communion Tables, to remove the Pewes and Seats, and to make
other alterations in the respective Churches; in the doing whereof the said
Inhabitan^s, were put to great, excessive, and unnecessary charges and
expenses, amounting in the whole, to the sum of five thousand pounds, and
upwards, which said charges and expenses, he did by unlawful means and
courses, enforce the said Inhabitants to undergo; And such of the said
Inhabitants, as did not obey the same, he did vex, trouble, and molest by
presentiments, Citations, Excommunications, tedious, and frequent Journeyes, and
by attendances at the Court of his Chancellor, and other his Officialls, viz.
the Churchwardens of Lin, Ipswich, S. Edmunds Bury, and others.

XV. That for not coming up to the Rail, to receive the holy Communion,
kneeling there before the Table Altarwise, for not standing up at the Gospel,
and for not observing and performing of his unlawful Innovations, and
Injunctions, many other of his Majesty's subjects, viz. Peter Fisher, Samuel
Duncon, James Percivall, John Armiger, Thomas King and others, have been by
him, his Chancellors, Visitors, Commissaries, and Officialls by his command and
Injunctions, much molested, disquieted, and vexed in their estates and
consciences by Citations to the Courts, long attendance there, Dismission,
Fees, Excommunications, Penances, and other Censures.

XVI. That by reason of the rigorous prosecutions, and dealings in the last
precedent Articles mentioned, and by reason of the continual superstitious
bowing to, and before the Table set Altarwise, the suspending, silencing,
driving away of the painful preaching Ministers, the suppressing, and
forbidding of Sermons, and Prayer, the putting down of Lecturer, the
suppressing means of knowledge, and salvation, and introducing ignorance,
Superstition, and profaneness, many of his Majesty's subjects, to the number
of three thousand, many of which used trades of Spinning, W^aving, Knitting,
and making of Cloth, and Stuff, Stockings, and other manufactures of Woolls,
that is to say, Daniel Sunning, Michael Metcalfe, John Berant, Nicholas
Metcalfe, John Derant, Busby, widow Mapes, Richard Cock, John Dicks, Francis
Laws, John Senty, and many others, some of them setting an hundred poor
people on work, have removed themselves, their families, and estates into
Holland, and other parts beyond the Seas, and there set up and taught the
Natives there, the said manufactures, to the great hinderance of trade in this
kingdom, and to the impoverishing, and bringing to extreme want, very many
who were by those parties formerly set on work, to the great prejudice of his
Majesty and his people.

XVII. That he the said Bishop, finding the people to distaste his innovations,
has often in public, and private speeches declared in the said year, 1636.
That what he did in the same, was by his Majesty's command, whereby he
contrary to the duty of his place, which he held under his Majesty, being
Deane of his Majesty's Royal Chapel, and contrary to the duty of a good and
loyal subject, endeavored, to free himself of blame, and to raise an ill
opinion of his Royal Majesty, in the hearts of his loving subjects.

XVIII. That he the said Matthew Wren, being Bishop of Norwich in the said
year, 1636. in the Tower Church in Ipswich, and other places, did in his own
person, use superstitious and idolatrous actions, and gestures in the
administration of the Lords Supper, consecrating the bread and wine, standing
at the West Side of the Table with his face to the East, and ^is back toward
the people, elevating the Bread and Wine, to be seen over his shoulders bowing
low, either to o^ before them when he after the Elevation, and Consecration,
had set them down on the Table.

XIX. That he the more to manifest his Popish affection in the said year 1636.
caused a Crucifix, that is to say, the figure of Christ upon the Cross to be
engraven upon the Episcopal Seal besides the Arms of the Sea.

XX. That he has chosen and employed such men to be his Commissioners, Rural
Deanes, and to be his household Chaplains, whom he knew to be, and stand
affected to his innovated courses, and to popish superstition, and to be
erroneous, and unsound in judgment and practice, as namely M. John Novel. M.
E^mond Maple^of^, M. John Dunkin. M. Bo^ek, M. Dun, and others.

XXI. That he has very much oppressed diverse Patrons of Churches by admitting
without any color of title his own Chaplains and others whom he affected
into Livings, which became void within his Dioces^ unjustly enforcing the true
and right Patrons to long and chargeable suits to evict such Incumbents, and to
recover their own right, some of which he did against his Priestly word given
to the said Patrons or their friends in verbo Sac^rdotis not to do the same.
This he did in the case of one M. Rivet.

XXII. That he and others in the year 1635, sold, granted away the profits of
his Primary Visitation for five hundred pounds over and above the charges of
the Visitation^ and for the better benefit of the Farmer, s^t forth a book in
the year 1636 entitled, Articles to be inquired of within the Dioces of
Norwich, in the first Visitation of Matthew Lord Bishop of Norwich, consisting
of 139 Articles, and wherein are contained the number of eight hundred ninety
seven questions, according to all which, the Churchwardens were enforced to
present upon pain of perjury. And some Churchwardens, that is to say, Robert
Langly, Charles Newton, Richard Heart, William Bull, and Zephany Ford, and
others not making presentiments accordingly, were cited, molested, and troubled,
and enjoined pennance^ notwithstanding many of the said Articles were
ridiculous and impossible.

XXIII. That the Churchwardens, and other men sworn at the Visitation, were
enforced to have their presentiments written by Clerks specially appointed by
such as bought the said Visitation^ to whom they paid excessive sums of money
for the same, some two and twenty shillings, as namely, Richard Hurrell, John
Punchard, and others, some more, some less, for writing one Presentment, to
the grievous oppression of his Majesty's poor subjects in his Diocese.

XXIV. Whereas by the Laws of this Realm no tithes ought to be paid out of
the rents of houses, nor is there any custom or usage in the City of Norwich
for such payment, yet the said Bishop endeavored to draw the Citizens, and
other inhabitants within the said City against their wills and consents to pay
two shillings in the pound in liew of the tithes of houses within the several
Parishes of the said City, unto the Ministers there, of the said respective
parishes. And the better to effect this his unjust resolution, he did by false
and undue suggestions, in the fourteenth year of his Majesty's reign that now
is, procure his Majesty to declare under his Highness great Seal of England
his royal pleasure, That if any person, within the said City shall refuse to
pay according to the said rat^ of two shillings the pound unto the Minister of
any Parish with in the said city, That the same be heard in the Court of
Chancery, or in the Consistory of the Bishop of Norwich. And that in such case
no prohibition against the said Bishop of Norwich, their Chancellors, or
Commissaries in the s^^d Courts of Consistory be g^anting the same upon ^ight
of his Highness said Order, shall forthwith grant a consultation to the
Minister, desiring the same with his reasonable costs and charges for the same,
which said Order and Decree under the great Seal of England tended to the
violation of the Oaths of the Judges^ and was devised, contrived, and made by
the said Bishop. And afterward by his evil counsels and false surmises he did
obtain his Majesty's royal consent thereunto, and by color of the order
aforesaid; and other the doings of the said Bishop, the Citizens and
inhabitants of Norwich aforesaid, viz. John Collar, Judith Perkeford, and
others, have been enforced to pay the said two shillings in the pound in liew
of tithes, or else by suits and other undue means been much molested, and put
to great charges and expenses, contrary to the Law and Justice.

XXV. That he assumed to himself an arbitrary power to compel the respective
parishioners in the said Diocese to pay great and excessive wages to Parish
Clarks^ viz. the Parishioners of Yarmouth, Congham, Tostocke, and others,
commanding his officers, that if any parishioner did refuse to pay such wages,
they should certify him their names, and he would set them into the High
Commission Court for example of them. And that one or two out of Ipswich might
be taken for that purpose.

And the said Commons by Protestation saving to themselves the libertie^ of
exhibiting at any time hereafter any other accusation or impeachment against
the said Matthew Wren late Bishop of Norwich, and now Bishop of Ely, and also
of replying to the answer to the said Articles, or any of them, or of offering
proof of the premises or any other impeachments or accusations that shall be
exhibited by them as the case shall (according to the course of Parlia^ents)
require, do pray that the said Matthew ^ren may be called to answer the said
several crimes, and misde^eanours, and receive such condign punishment as the
same shall deserve, and that such further proceedings may be upon every of them
had, and used against him, as is agreeable to Law and Justice.

Sir THOMAS WIDDRINGTONS SPEECH, At a Conference between both Houses, on
Tuesday the 20^ of July, 1641. At the transmission of the impeachment against
Matthew Wren Doctor of Divinity, late Bishop of Norwich, and now Bishop of Ely.
My Lords, I am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses now assembled
for the Commons in Parliament, to deliver to your Lordships these Articles
against the Bishop of Ely. May it please your Lordships first to hear them
read.
MY Lords, These Articles are dipped in those Colors, in which this Bishop
rendered himself to the Diocese of Norwich, they need no Gloss, nor Varnish.
In them you may behold the spirit and disposition of this Bishop, hear the
groans and cries of the people, see a shepherd scattering, (I had almost
said) devouring his own flock; He that was desired to paint Hercules, thought
he had done enough, when he had made a resemblance of the Lions skin, which he
was wont to carry about him as a Trophee of his honor.

I will not say that in these you will find a resemblance of the Lions skin, I
am sure you will find the resemblance of the skins (that is to say,) the
tottered and ruined fortunes, of poor innocent Lambs, who have extremely
suffered by the violence of this Bishop.

In the year 1635. this man was created Bishop of Norwich: he is no sooner
there, but he marches furiously.

In the creation of the world light was one of the first productions, the first
visible action of this Bishop after his creation into this See was to put out
many burning and shining lights, to suspend diverse able learned and
conscientious Ministers^ he that should have been the Golden ^nuffer of these
lights, became the extinguisher, and when these are taken away, where shall
poor men light their Candles?

My Lords, this was not all.

He put out lights, and sets up firebrands in their places, suspends painful
Ministers, and sets up idle factious and superstitious Priests, (to use their
own language) in their places, yet it is the fortune of these men at this
time, like Rivers in the Ocean, to be buried the in extreme activity of their
Diocesan.

He made a scourge, not of small cords, but of new Injunctions and numerous
Articles tied about with a strong twist of a most dangerous oath; and with this
he whips not out buyers and sellers, but the faithful dispensers of the word
out of their Churches, out of their estates, out of their dear Country.

This Noah (if I may so call him without offense) as soon as he entered into the
Arc of this Diocese, he sends, nay forces Doves to fly out of this Arc, and
when they return unto him, with Olive branches in their mouths of peaceable
and humble submissions, he will not receive them into this Arc again, unless
like Ravens they would feed upon the Carrion of his new Inventions, they must
not have any footing there^ he stands as a flaming sword to keep such out of
his Diocese.

My Lords, unless he had done this, he could never have hoped to have brought
that great work he undoubtedly aimed at to any perfection.

Whilst the Palladium of Troy stood, that City was impregnable, The Greeks
had no sooner stolen that away but they instantly won the Citie^ So then he
first put out the Candles, then was the opportunity to shuffle in his works of
darkness: h^ first bea^s off the Watchmen and seers, then was likely to follow
that which the impiety of some was pleased to style, the piety of the times.

This being done, he then begins to dress out Gods Worship according to his
own fancy, this he expresses in Injunctions and directions, the Minerva's of
his own brain; we find them styled Regales Injunctiones Domini Episcopi: a
style too sacred to Baptize his brats withal; I shall be bold to ca^l them
Tyrannicas injunctiones Do^ Episcopi; stories afford not a more barbarous
cruelty then to join a dead and a living body together, the one is miserable,
killed with the stinch of the other.

This By. who like Aaron should have stood between the living and the dead has
joined to lively ordinances many dead and venomous ceremonies, which have no
other life, than what they received from the breath of his Injunctions^ and
these are pressed upon the Consciences^ even these must be observed as moral
laws.

An arbitrary government in the Church is more dangerous, more grievous than
that in the state; this is exercised upon men^ conscien^es the most tender
parts, and is the very pinnacle of ^yranny, and of all other most intolerable;
tha^ blow which will hardly be felt by the arm, will put out the eye.

(My Lords) in the time of King Ri^h. 1. one of this man's predecessors, a
valiant Bishop went into the holy war, this Bishop has raised a war at
home in his own Diocese; a war not against Sa^azen^, Barbarians, Turks or
Infidels, but against good and well disposed people. I know not what style to
give this war: without doubt (my Lords) this was no holy war.

The weapons of this warfare were 28. Injunctions, ^^9. Articles containing
87^. questions.

The soldiers were Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials, Commissioners, Rural
Deanes, etc.

Himself commanded in chief.

The ways of assault and killing were by excommunications, suspensions,
deprivations, -- I stay here, Mill modis mori^ur mortales.

The Magazin wherein all these were originally hatched and lodged, was the
superstitious and malicious breast of this Bishop.

This Dioces was the stage where the direful tragedies of this war were
acted by the space of two years and upwards.

Thus did he trouble Israel in the time of peace, nay by these he put some of
the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel to flight, out of these he raises a farm
of 500. pounds for his primary Visitation: if it be considered cum
pertinentiis, it was not dear, yet well improved; for formerly but 40. pound
in the time of some of his predecessors.

Will it please your Lordships with patience to cast your eyes upon the model
of this Bishops zeal, piety, and Religion: Let his affection to prayer and
preaching speak for all the rest.

First, for prayer. It was his hap to find a prayer which is no prayer,
pretended to be prescribed by a Canon which is no Canon, I mean the 55. Canon
set forth in the year 1603. and no other prayer must be used in his Dioces
before Sermons. That monster of conceived prayer (pardon the expression, its
not my own) seemed as bad to him as a spell or charm. It must not be used
upon any occasion, without doubt he would never have been so strait-laced, and
severe in this particular, if he had but dreamed of that strait which a
minister a friend of his was put unto by this means; the story is short. A
Butcher was gored in the belly by an Ox, the wound was cured, the party
desired public thanksgiving in the Congregation, the Minister finding no form
for that purpose, reads the Collects for Churching of women.

Next for preaching. That he is most able in this kind is agreed by all. But
that he ever preached himself in this Diocese saving once, I never heard
affirmed by any.

His next care was that others should not preach too often; if they did, they
must be put into his black Bill: He changed that golden sentence of ( vae mihi
si non praedicavero) into vae aliis si praedicaverint; he was so far from the
practice of Saint Paul the great Preacher of the Gentiles, who (we read)
preached till midnight, that there must be no Sermons in the afternoon; there
may be, nay there must be sports and pastimes then. And as if he had stood in
fear of inarticulate language bells which might foretell a Sermon, he cannot
endure to hear the noise of a Sermon in the toll of a Bell.

In a word; he adorned Churches at the charge of other men, and spoiled
Pulpits, which ought to have been the greatest part of his own charge.

(My Lords) you have now presented to your Lordships a brother, nay, one whose
place engaged him to be a father of the Clergy, yet one who like Joseph's
brethren has taken the coat from Joseph, nay they were forced to fly from him
as Joseph from his Mistress, or else they must taste of his forbidden waters,
but in their going away he rents their skirts, nay their whole garments and
livelihoods from them, he has taken the locks from many Sampsons, and done
what he could to put out their eyes, and to make them grind in the mill of his
pernicious and dangerous innovations.

He should like Moses have led his flock. Moses led the children of Israel
through the red Sea, this man drives part of his flock over the Sea, but went
not himself.

Like Nimrod he has invaded the laws and liberties of the subject, he has
been as great a robber as ever was presented to your Lordships: He has robbed
the King of his Subjects, the greatest glory of Kings; the Kingdom of trade,
of tradesmen, the supporters of it.

He that deprives the King of one subject, you know his punishment^ and what
shall be the punishment of him who has robbed the King of so many subjects?

26. H. 3 Wast. ^28.
In the time of King Henry the third^ we find a tenant in Dower punished in
action of waste, because she had destroyed two rich villeynes, and made them
beggars.

I appeal to your Lordships, what is his offense who has committed so much
wilful waste and spoil, beggered hundreds, not villains, but free borne
subjects.

He robbed the souls of that sweet Manna, which is pabulum animarum, the Word
of God.

(My Lords) I have not yet recounted all his robberies; he has robbed God of
part of his day^ makes part of that a day of sports; he has robbed the
subjects of their indubitable birthright, the Laws of the Kingdom.

The citizens of Norwich must pay tithes for the rents of houses; there is no
Law in England, nor Custom in Norwich for it: Nay and that they may be sure to
be robbed of justice too, the suite for these tithes must be in his own
Consistory, from whence there must be no appeal, no prohibition.

The true^ Patrons of Churches, they are robbed of their presentations^ others
who had none or small pretense of right are admitted upon this unhallowed
maxim, That if he should institute those who had right, the pretender was
without remedy; by this he inverted a fundamental Law of this Nation, to
invest remediless rights with unjust possessions.

(My Lords) I cannot tell you all, but you can measure a Lion by the paw.

I am commanded to lay this great malefactor at your doors, one who has
been a great oppugner o^ the life and liberty of Religion, and who set a brand
of infamy (to use his own words) upon Ipswich education.

In sum, one who is a complete mirror of innovation, superstition, and
oppression^ he is now in the snare of those Articles, which were the works of
his own hands.

The rod of Moses at a distance was a serpent, it was a rod again when it was
taken into his hands: this Bishop was a serpent, a devouring serpent in the
Diocese of Norwich; your Lordships peradventure will by handling of him make
him a rod againe^ or if not, I doubt not but your Lordships will chastise him
with such rods as his crimes shall deserve.

(My Lords) I am commanded by the House of Commons to desire your Lordships
that this Bishop may be required to make answer to these Articles, and that
there may be such proceedings against him as the Course and Justice of
Parliament does admit.

You see by this Parlamentary impeachment what a Regulus, Tyrant, and Serpent
this Wren has been, I shall say no more of him, but leave him to his legal
trial.

Richard Mountague who next succeeded Bishop Wren, in this Sea, proceeded on in
his extravagant courses, and Popish innovations; witness his strange
Visitation Articles printed for the Diocese of Norwich; many whereof are
directly Popish, others unjust, absurd and strangely ridiculous; as, of what
Assise is ^our Surplesse? What is your Surplesse or Lords Table worth if it
were to be sold? Is your Communion Table rayled in, so as Cats and Dogs (he
might as well have added, Rats and Mice) cannot get through unto it? etc. This
Bishop conscious to himself of his own guiltiness came not up to this last
Parliament for fear of questioning, and being complained of for suspending a
Lecturer in Norwich without any just cause, even sitting this Parliament, the
House thereupon made an Order, that a special Committee should be appointed to
examine all his offenses old and new; the news whereof so affrighted him, that
within few days after he died, to ease the Parliament of that labor, of whom
see more in Chichester: Since his decease this See has continued vacant; and
the whole Diocese earnestly desire it may so remain till Doomesday, having
been almost ruined, and infinitely vexed by their late monstrous Prelates; of
whom I shall now take my farewell, and shape my course to Chester Diocese.

The Bishops of Chester.
The Bishopric of Godw. Cata p. 256.
Coventry and Lichfield in former times, had three Episcopal Sees, Chester,
Coventry, and Lichfield, whence some of the Bishops in our Chronicles, were
formerly called the Bishops of Chester, because they there resided, of some of
whose Acts I shall give you a taste:

HVGH NOVANT.
Hugh Novant Bishop of Chester (whom In his Cata. p. 256.
Godwin reckons among the Bishops of Coventry and Lichfield) about the year
1188. when King Richard the first was taken prisoner by the Archduke of
Austria, Roger Hoved. Annal. pars post p. 734.737.752.776. Speed Hist^ l 9. p.
541. Matthew. Paris Hist p 185^ Matthew. West. Anno 1198. p. 73. Holi^sh. p.
142.147. Godw. Cat. p. 356.256.
joined with John Earl of Morton the Kings Brother against the King, to
dispossess him of his Kingdom; his brother went from this Earl and the
French King to the Emperor with Letters, and a message, promising him a great
sum of money in their names to detain the King still in Prison, after the
Articles for his release and ransom were concluded; for which treason and
conspiracy after the Kings enlargement, this Bishop was indicted in a
Parliament at Nottingham, that he being privy to the Kings secrets had revolted
from him to the King of France and Earl John, his enemies; and adhered to them
plotting all mischief for the destruction of the King and of the Kingdom,
whereupon he was peremptorily cited to appear and answer this indictment
within 40. days, which he failing to do, was adjudged to be punished by
Ecclesiastical censures as he was a Bishop, and as an Officer to the King, he
was also by the Laity banished the Realm, and at last enforced to purchase his
peace with a Fine of 5000 marks to the King. ^alaeus Cent. 13. c 31. p^ 134^
Anno 211 90. he having purchased the Monastery of Coventry from the King, came
thither with a power of armed men to place in secular Priests in stead of the
Monks, who making resistance against him, he invaded them with forces, chased
away some, lamed others of them spoiled their house, burnt their Charters and
Evidences, himself being wounded (and that in the Church before the High
Altar) in this conflict, to the effusion of his blood.

Matthew Paris Hist. Angl. Anno. 1234. p. 381.382.383. Speeds Hist. ^. 609.610.
Godw. Cat. Edit. 2. p. 321.
ALEXAN^DER de SAVENSBY.
In the year of our Lord, 1234. in the Purification of St. Mary, King Henry
the third came to a conference at Westminster, wherein he sharply rebuked
certain Bishops, Et maxim Alexandru^ Cestrensem Epis^opum; and especially
Alexander de Savensby Bishop of Chester, that they were over-familiar with the
Earl Marshall; Et quod ipsum de regni solio depellere nitebantur; that they
indevoured to depose him from his royal throne. But this Bishop clad in his
Pontificalibus, when he knew such things were objected to him, and also that
some had suggested to the King by way of exasperating, that the Bishops
favoring the party of the Marshall would create another King, was exceedingly
moved, especially against Roger de Catelu; whereupon he incontinently
excommunicated all those, who imagined any such wickedness against the King,
or maliciously imposed such things upon the Bishops, who were altogether
folicitous of the Kings honors and safety. The innocence of the Bishops being
thus manifested and proved, and the sowers of dissension confounded, Catelu
held his peace being not free, as it seemed^ from the Anathema. So the other
Bishops who were present intervening, Alexander B^. of Chester was pacified,
and his spirit quieted, Nimis ante amaricatus, being overmuch imbittered
before. Edmond Elect Archbishop of Canterbury with many of his suffragans, were
present at this conference, who all condoling at the desolation of the King and
Kingdom, came to the King, and as it were with one heart, mind and mouth said.
O our Lord the King, let us tell you in the Lord, as your faithful subjects,
that the counsel which you now have and use^ is neither wholesome nor safe, but
cruel and dangerous to your self, and to the Kingdom of England, to wit, the
counsel of Peter Bishop of Winchester (of whom before) Peter de Rivallis and
their accomplices. First of all, because they hate and contemn the English
Nation calling them Traitors, and causing them all to be so called, and turning
your mind away from the love of your own Nation, and ^h^ hearts of your
people from you, as appears in the Marshall, who is the best man of your Land,
whom they have perverted and estranged from you by lies they have scattered
abroad of him. And through this very counsel, to wit, by the said Bishop, your
Father King John first lost the hearts of his people, after that Normandy,
afterward other lands, and in the end exhausted all his treasure, and almost
lost the dominion of England, and had never peace afterward. By the same
counsel in our times, the Kingdom was troubled, and the interdict came, and
finally, the Kingdom was made tributary, and the Prince of Provinces (alas for
grief) is brought under tribute to ignoble persons, and wars begun, and long
protracted, your father died like a banished man, neither in peace of the
Kingdom, nor of mind, and so by them he incurred a very perilous death. By
the same counsel the Castle of Bedford was detained against you, where you
lost much treasure, and many valiant men; by means whereof in the interim you
lost Rochell, to the ignominy of the whole Realm. Item, the now imminent
perturbation, perilous to the whole Kingdom, comes to pass through their
wicked counsel, because if your people had been handled according to Justice
and the right Judgment (or Law) of the Land^ this perturbation had not happened,
and you should have had your lands undestroyed and your treasure unexhausted.
Likewise we tell you in that allegiance whereby we are obliged to you, that your
counsel is not of peace^ but of trouble to the Land, because they that seek
to thrive by the trouble of the Kingdom, and the disinherison of others,
cannot do it by its peace. Item, because they have your Ca^tles and your
forces in their hand^ as if you ought to distrust your own people. Item,
because they have your Exchequor, and all the grea^est Wards, and Escheates in
their power, such an expectation pleases, and how they will answer you in the
end, we believe you shall prove. Item, because by your Seal or Precept
without the Seal of Peter de Rivallis, scarce any great business is done in
the Realm, as if they accounted you not to be King. Item, because by the same
counsel the natural borne subjects of your Kingdom are expelled out of your
Court; whence we have cause to be fearful both of you and the Kingdom, when
as we see you to be more in their power, than they in yours, as appears by
very many examples. Item, because they have a maid out of Brittany, and your
sister under their power, with many other noble girls, and women who are
marriageable, with Wards and marriages, which they give to their own creatures
and disparage. Item, because they confound and pervert the Law of the Land
sworn and confirmed, and ratified, by Excommunication, and Justice likewise;
whence it is to be feared least they be Excommunicated, and you also by
communicating with them. Item, because they keep to no man, either their
promise, faith, or oath, or writing, neither fear they Excommunication: whence
they who have receded, from the truth are desperate^ as remaining diffident in
fear. Now these things we faithfully relate to you, and we counsel, beseech,
and admonish you before God and man, that you would remove such counsel from
you, and as it is the custom in other Kingdoms, that you govern your
Kingdoms, by your faithful and sworn men of your Realm. We denounce to you
in verity, that unless you correct these things, within a short time we will
proceed against you, and all other contradictors by Ecclesiastical Censure^
expecting nothing but the Consecration of our venerable Father, the Elect of
Canterbury. These things being thus spoken, the King humbly desired a short
time of truce, saying, that he could not so suddenly remove his counsel
until he had received an account of the treasure committed to him; and so the
conference was dissolved, all men departing, with confidence of a concord
speedily to be obtained; soon after the Archbishop being consecrated upon the
fifth of April, the King with his Nobles being at Westminster; the Archbishop
taking all the Bishops and other Prelates that were present with him, whereof
this Bishop of Chester was one, went to the King, and showed him their counsel
touching the imminent desolation and danger of the Kingdom, repeating the
former inconveniences mentioned in the conference; and denounced to the King
expressly, that unless he would speedily reform his error, and make a
peaceable composition with the faithful men of his Kingdom, he with all the
Bishops who were present, would incontinently in ipsum Regem sententiam far
excommunicationis, pronounce a sentence of Excommunication against the King
himself, and against all others contradictors of this peace, and perverters of
concord. The King hearing this, humbly answered, that he would obey their
counsels in all things. Whereupon a few days after understanding his error,
moved with repentance, he commanded Peter, Bishop of Winchester, to go to his
Bishopric, to intend the cure of souls, and that from thenceforth Regiis
negotii^ nequaquam interesset; he should by no means intermeddle with the
Kings affairs.

Holins^. p. 313. G^dw. p. 260. 261 Matthew. West. Anno. 1301. p. 419. Walsingh.
Hist. Angl. p. 68. Speeds Hist. l. 9. p. 667.
Walter de Langton Bishop of Chester lived in great authority, WALTER de LANGTON
under King Edward the first, who favored him much; but his son Edward the
second molested and disgraced him all that eyer he might. His Fatherdying in
the North country, he ^ommanded this Bishop to conduct his corpse up to London:
and when he had done so, for reward of his pains, he caused Sir John Felton
Constable of the Tower to arrest him, seized upon all his goods, and imprisoned
him first, in the Tower, then in the Castle of Wallingford, of which
imprisonment he was not released in two years after. In his fathers life time,
he had often reprehended the young Prince for his insolent and dissolute
behavior, which good admonitions he taking in evil part, wronged and
disgraced him many ways, namely one time, he brak^ down his Parkes, spoiled
and drove away his dear, etc. The Bishop complained of this outrage unto the
King his Father, who being greatly displeased therewith, committed the Prince
his son for certain days. And this was the cause of the grudge between the
young King and him, for which he sent him from Castle to Castle as Prisoner,
seized his Lands and Tenements into his own hands, gave his movables to Pierce
Gaviston, and his Lord Treasurership to Walter Reignold. About the same time
(or I think a little sooner, to wit, in the year 1^01.) he was accused of
certain heinous crimes before the Pope, and compelled to answer the accusation
at Rome in his own person. Though the proofs brought against him, were either
none, or very slender, yet well knowing whom they had in hand ( Noverant ipsum
prae multis bovem valde pinguem, says Matthew. Westminster) they were content to
detain him there so long, as it forced him to spend an infinite deal of money
and yet was never a whit the nearer atlast: for the Pope remitted the hearing
of the cause to the Archbishop o^ Canterbury and yet reserved the determination
of the ^ame unto himself at last. The tempests of these troubles being
over-blowne, the rest of his time he lived (for ought I find) quietly, and
being happily dismissed from the Court, attended only the government of his
charge. This Bishop settling his See toward his later end at Litchfield, I
find no mention at all of any Bishops of Chester after him, till toward the
later end of King Henry the eight his reign, Godwin. p. 545.
who erected a new Bishops See at Chester, distinct from that of Coventry and
Leichfield, and subjected it to the province of York, by Act of Parliament, to
wit, 33. Hen. 8. c. 30.

JOHN BIRD.
See Godw. Catalog. p. 545.
John Byrd, the first Bishop of this new erected See, was deprived in Queen
Mary's days, for being married.

CVTBERT SCOT.
Cutbert Scot the third Bishop of this Diocese in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's days was Godw. Cat. p. 545.
displaced, and for his disobedience committed to the Fleet: whence escaping he
fled into Loraine, and there died.

To pass by the other Prelates of this See, I shall give you only a touch of
John Brigdman the present Bishop of it. JOHN BRIDGMAN.
This man in his wives life time, seemed to be a favowrer of godly Ministers,
but since her decease, he has turned a prosecutor, if not a persecutor of
them, ^uspending and driving many of them out of his Diocese, especially in
Lancashire amidst the Papists where was greates^ need of them, to pleasure the
now Archbishop of Canterbury, whose great creature and intelligencer he has
been of late years: he See a new Discovery of the Prelates Tyrany, p. 93. to.
109.218^ to 226.
caused diverse of the city of Chester to be Pursevanted and Articled against in
the High Commission Court at York, and there fined, censured, and almost
ruined in their estates, only for visiting Mr. Prynne at Chester in his
passage to Carnarvan, whose Pictures he caused to be publicly defaced, and the
frames of them to be openly burnt at the high Cross in Chester before the
Major and his brethren, in a most disgraceful manner; and caused diverse of
Chester to make a public impious Recantation both in the Cathedral Church and
Town Hall, at Chester, only for visiting Mr. Prynne at his being there, with
the license of his Keepers, who had no warrant, nor authority to keep any from
him: in all which proceedings (as appears by his own letters) this Bishop was
both the Informer, Accuser, Director, and Judge in some sort. To comply with
the times, he erected diverse stone Altars in his Diocese, one in the
Cathedral at Chester used in times of Popery, which he caused to be dug up
out of the ground where it was formerly buried, which Altar since this
Parliament for fear of questioning he has caused to be taken down and
re-enterred: He ordered all the Ministers in Chester, not only to read prayers
but likewise to prea^h in their Hoods and Surplesses, for which there is
neither Law nor Canon, but his Lordly pleasure: he commanded all Sermons there,
to end before nine of the clock in the morning, because the Major and Alderman
should dance attendance on his Highness at the Cathedral, to which end he
emplored the aid of the Archbishop of York, causing some to be troubled for
not coming to the Cathedral, after they had been at their own parish
Churches. He was a great stickler in the late war against the Scots, a
vehement presser of the loan on the Clergy to maintain it, threatening to
impose arms on those who refused it. He greatly promoted the new Canons, and
late etc. Oath^ which he both took, and enforced eagerly on his Clergy. He
has diverse great impropriations of good value, where he allows little or no
maintenance at all to find either a reading Curate or Preaching Minister; he
has caused diverse to be excommunicated and vexed in his Consistory, for going
to hear Sermons abroad when they had none at home. If any desire to know more
of his Episcopal virtues, I shall refer them, to a Book entitled, P. 93.
to 109.^18. to 226.
A New Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny, and to the Petitions of the
inhabitants of Cheshire, Chester, Lancashire, Wiggon, and others, already
exhibited or ready to be preferred to the High Court of Parliament against him,
and so pass to the Bishops of Coventry and Lichfield, out of which this
Bishoppricke of Chester was derived.

The Bishops of Coventry and Lichfield.
Of the first Bishops of this See, there is little extant in our stories, but
only their names, with the time of their Con^ecrations and deaths; and the
Acts of some others of them, I have formerly related in Chester, so as I shall
be very brief in those who remain.

ROGER de CLINTON.
Roger de Clinton the 36. Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, about the year
1147^ took upon him the Cross, went to Jerusalem to fight against the
Saracens, Godw. p. 255.
and died at Antioch April 16. 1148.

RICHARD P^CHE.
Richard Peche, son unto Rober Peche, Archdea^on of Coventry in the year,
Godw. p. 255.
1162. succeeded him in this Bishoppricke: of this Archdeacon and Bishop
perchance it was that I read this merry passage in Itiner. l. 2. c. 13.
Giraldus Cambrensis and in Camdens Brittannia p. 604. who relates it out of
him. It happened that a certain Jew traveling toward Shrewsbury with the
Archdeacon of Malpas (in Cheshire) whose surname was Peche, that is, Sin, and
a Deane named Devil; when he heard by chance the Archdeacon telling, that his
Archdeaconry began at a place called Ill-street, and reached as far as to
Malpas toward Chester, he considering and understanding with all, as well the
Archdeacons surname as the Deanes, came out with this merry and pleasant
conceit: would it not be a wonder (quot^ he) and my fortune very good, if ever
I get safe again out of this country, where Sin is the Archdeacon, and the
Devil is the Deane, where the entry into the Archdeaconry is Ill-streete, and
the going forth of it Malpas?

GEOFFRY BLITHE.
Geoffery Blithe Bishop of this See, Anno Dom. 1523. was attached for high
Treason.

Godw. p. 265.
And to mention no more, Robert Wright the present Bishop of this Diocese set
up a goodly Crucifix in a frame, ROBERT WRIGHT.
with the pictures of men and women devoutly praying to it, in the Cathedral
at Litchfield, over the Altar there: for oppo^ing whereof he caused the Lady
Davis to be laid in ^edlam; promoted the late Innovations, and had a great hand
^n composing and imposing the late^ Canons, Oath, Benevolence and Lone, for
which he stands now impeached by the Commons in Parliament, to whose Censure I
remit him.

CHAP. VI. Comprising the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Contumacies, and
Disloyalties, of the Bishops of Rochester, St. David's, Landaffe, Bangor, Asaph,
Bath and Wells: With a short touch of the Bishops of Oxford, Bristol,
Peterburgh, and Gloucester.
Rochester.
PVTTA the sixth Bishop of Rochester, Putta.
waxing weary of his Bishopric, Godw. p. 392.393. Malmesbur. de Gestis
Pontif. Angliae. c. 1. p. 231.
was half determined to leave it, when Edilred King of Mercia, upon some
displeasure conceived against him, burning his Church and City, resolved and
settled him in that determination. So he went into Mercia, where he accepted
the Charge of a Parish Church under Saxulf Bishop there, mending his living by
teaching a singing School, (for he was a great and cunning Musician.) In that
kind of life he spent the rest of his time, and could never abide to hear of
returning to his Bishopric. Malmesbury gives this verdict of him, Quantum
idoneus oti^ Eccle^iastico, tant^m hebes and segnis, forensi negotio: Anno 983.
(As Matthew. Westminster, Matthew. Westminster. Ann. 983. page 379. Speed. page 414.
Antiq. Eccles. Brit. ^1. Malmesb. de Gestis Regum Angl. l. 2. c. 10. p. 62.
Godwin. p. 394.
and others report) King Ethelrede be^ieged Godwin Godwin.
the 27. Bishop of Rochester in his own City a long time, and being warned by
Saint Dunstane, he should take heed least he provoked against him Saint Andrew,
Patron of that Church, yet he would not depart thence till he had wrung from
the Bishop 100. l. Dunstan wondering thereat, sent this message to the King:
Because thou have preferred silver before God, money before an Apostle, and
covetousness before me, violent mischiefs shall come upon thee, which the
Lord has spoken: Yet for all this he continued his siege, and would not depart
thence without the Bishops submission, and unless he would likewise pay him an
hundred pounds.

Gilbert de Glanuyll.
Gilbert de Glanuyll was consecrated Bishop of this See Septem. 29. 1185.
Godwin. Cat. p. 397.398.
Between this man and his Monks of Ro^hester was long and continual debate,
by occasion whereof, he took away from them all their moveable goods, all the
ornaments of their Church, their writings and evidences; yea, and a great part
of their Lands, Possessions, and Privileges: wanting money to follow their
suits against him, they were forced to coin the silver of Saint Paulines
shryne into money. These controversies were ended no otherwise then by his
death, which happened June 24. 1214. But their hatred against him was so far
from dying with him, as they would afford him no manner of obsequies, but
buried him most obscurely, or rather basely, without either ringing, singing,
or any other manner of solemnity.

Laurentius de Sancto Martino.
Laurentius de Sancto Martino, the 41. Bishop of this See, got a dispensat^on
from the Pope to hold all his for^er ^i^^ings, in ^ommendam with this
Bishopric. Matthew. Pa^^^. Hist. Angl. page 893.917. Godwin. page 399.
And yet alleging that his Bishopricke^ was the poorest of E^gland, much
meaner then Carlisle, and therefore his living yet unable to maintain the po^t
of a Bishop; he never ceased till he had extorted from the Clergy of his
Dio^es, a grant of a f^ft part of all their Spiritual livings for five years,
and appropriated unto his See for ever the Parsonage of ^riendsbury. ^oniface
the Archbishop of Canterbury used this man hardly, invading his possessions,
and violen^ly taking from him without all right, diverse things of old belonging
^o his Bishopric. He complained unto the King, unto whose Q^eene Boniface
was Uncle. The King answered him in plain (...), ^e ^new ^e should offend his
wife much, if ^e should become a flickler between them, wishing him to seek
some other remedy; and if by importunity he enforced him to interpose his
authority, he should do him more hurt then good; which Matthew. ^aris thus
expresses. Diebus sab ^isdem, A^chi^piscopus Cantuariensis Boni^acius,
Ecclesiam Roffensem pr^gr^v^n^, ejusque invadens possessiones, t^ntam de facto
suo ^o^am incurri^ vitupe^i, u^ Ecclesia, c^^^^ esse debet defens^v, per eum
dicatur v^xari. Epis^opus autem Roffensis, cum Domino Regi ^u^us ^ltori
lachrymabili^^r super tanta injuria conquerere^ur, Rex demisso vultur^ spondit,
Non possum eum ^^ectere ad ju^titiam vel humilitatem, ^e ipsum tam generosum
and genus suum ^am magnific^m, praecipue Reginam, offen^a^ vel contristem.
Hereupon he sought unto the Pope, but he was so near a neighbo^r to the Duke
of Sav^y the Archbishops Brother, as perceiving quickly little good was to be
done there, he was feign to take patience for an amends, and so sit him down;
yet at last he obtained a citation from the Pope against the Archbishop, which
Matthew Paris thus expresses. Interim Episcopus Roffensis, qui int^llerabil^s
ab Archi^piscopo Cantuarien^i injurias sustinuerat, querimonias lach^y^abiles
coram tota curia Romana reposuit, and repositas continu^vit, Cumque causa sua
cond g^am expostul^ss^t ultionem, culpa enim gravis extitit, post mult^s
admonitiones tandem ad Regem factas, qui dicto Archiepiscopo cornua praestitit,
and au^aci^^ delinquendi, mer^itidem Archiepiscopus citari, ut pe^sonaliter
^ompareret coram Papa, de ^ibi ^b^iciendis responsurus^ and de illatis injuriis
and damnis s^tisfact^r^s.

John Fisher, John Fisher.
the 65. Bishop of Rochester was grievously questioned in Parliament in King
Henry 8. his days by the house of Commons for saying, Hol^nsh. p. 936.937.
Hall. An. 25. H. 8. F. 218. b. Speed p. 1029.1046. Godwin. p. 402. Bal^^^ Cent.
8. c. 68.100. Fox Acts and Mo^uments Edit. 1610. p. 975.976^
that all their doings were for lack of faith; Of which you may see more in
Canterbury Part. 1. p. 12^.126. after which he gave credit, and countenance to
the forg^d visions and Revelations of ^lizabeth Barton, tending to the
reproach, peril and destruction of the Kings person, honor, fame and dignity,
for whicsh he with others was afterward condemned of high treason, and
executed^ Not long after, this Bishop for denying to acknowledge the Kings
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters, was arraigned and condemned for high
Treason, and executed on Tower Hill June 22. 1535. being made Cardinal about a
month before. His head was set on London Bridge, and his body buried in Barking
Churchyard^ He was a great per^ecutor of Gods faithful ministers, servants,
Gospel, and had this deserved reward of his disloyalty both to God and his
Sovereign.

Not to mention all the late Bishops of this See, many of whom were notorious
in their generations; Doctor Bols, Dr. ^ol^.
the last but one, was a very active talkative man in the high Commission, till
he wearied most of his Colleagues there, who commanded him to his Bishopric;
where he was very i^dustrious in setting up popish ceremonies, Innovations, and
in promoting the Book of ^ports in the Lords day, breathing out nothing but
threats and suspensions against those ministers, who out of conscience refused
to publish ^t in proper person in their Churches; whom he intending to suspend
and silence in his visitation, it pleased God, as he was riding toward it, to
silence them, that himself was suddenly surprised with a dead palsy, which
made him speechles for a long season; by means whereof the ministers escaped
for that season; and he (never able to recover his pri^tine health) dyed no
^ong after, leaving a successor behind him, who follows his footsteps, had a
vote in compiling of the New Canons, and Oath, which he enforced; and has
been a great fomenter of the late Scottish wars, and differences, being now
one of those Prelates impeached in Parliament by the Commons. But of those
Prelates enough. I must now turn about my rudder, and take a short survey of
our W^lch Bishops, beginning with those of Saint David's, once the Sea Godwins
Catalogue. p. 416
Metropoli^anes of all that Country, and of some of our English Bishops too.

Saint David's.
Guido de Mona.
Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 419. Ypodigma Neustriae. An. 1407. p: 172. Godw. p.
512.
GVido de Mona, the 62 Bishop of Saint David's, appointed Treasurer by Richard
the 2. in the 21. year of his reign, revolting to Henry the fourth from his
old Master, was made his Treasurer likewise in the 4. year of his reign, but
continued fo a very short time. This Bishop (says Walsingham) while he lived
was a cause of much mischief to the Realm; as others of his successors have
been whom I pretermit.

Landaffe.
Oudotius.
Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. p. 62. See Godwins. Catalogue Edit. 2. p. 517.518.519.
OVdotius the third Bishop of Landaffe Anno 560. assembled a Synod of a great
part of his Clergy and three Abbots, and in full Synod excommunicated his
Sovereign Mou^ice King of Glamorgan for ^laying Cynetu, and breaking the
Cov^nant, which he had made in his presence upon the Altar of Peter the
Apost^e, and of Saint Dubricius, and Telianus, and then laid their Crosses to
the earth, and likewise intermitted Baptism throughout his Country. (...)
Communio Christia^a, and the Christian Communalty accursed the King and his
progeny, the Synod confirming it, and saying; Let his days be few, and le^ his
child^en be Orph^n^s, and his wife a w^ddow. Whereupon the King with all his
Country remained for two years space and more, under the said excommunication:
after which this King unable any longer to sustain such a long lasting great
excommunication, seeing the perdition of his own soul, and damnation of his
kingdom, went to Landaffe, and craved pardon of Saint Oudotius, and pouring
out tears, with his head bowed down, in the presence of three Abbots, this
Bishop imposed the yoke of penance upon him, according to the quality and
quantity of his offense, commending to him, that he should three manner of
ways amend his fault with God, and the Church of Landaffe; to wit, with
fasting, Prayer, and Alms; whereupon this King for the redemption of his own
Soul, and for the Soul of Synetu, gave four Villages to the Church of
Land^ffe, the names whereof are mentioned in that Synod. Not long after another
Synod was assembled by the same Bishop for the penance and absolution of
Spelm. ^oncil. Tom. 1^ p. 63.
King Mor^ant, who slew Frioc his Uncle, contrary to his oath, they two having
solemnly vowed that if one them should either kill or deceive the other, that
he would not redeem himself, either with Lands or money, but would relinquish
his Kingdom, and spen^ his whole life in pilgrimage. This K. confessing his
fault before the Bishop and his Synod, and craving pardon both for his perjury
and Homicide^ the whole Synod decreed, (least the Kingdom should be destitute
of a King, and of the p^otecting buckler of their natural Lord) that he should
redeem his Pilgrimage, and ^xpi^te his homicide, and perjury with fastings
prayers and Alms: which he swearing to do, they enjoined penance to him,
according to his offense, and his quality greatness and power; whereupon he
was restored to Christian Communion, of which he was formerly deprived by the
Bish^p, and gave three Churches with other particulars to the Church of
L^nd^ffe. After this, a Spaelmann^ Council. Tom. 1. p. 63.64. Godwins Catalogue.
Edit. 2. p. 521.
third Synod was held under the same Bishop at Land^ff^, wherein Guidneth who
slew his brother Merc^ion in a contestation for the kingdom, was
excommunicated by this Bishop and Synod, with crosses laid down to the ground,
and Cymbals overturned^ under which excommunication he remained three whole
years without any Communion of Christians. After three years expired, he
asked pardon of the Bish^^; who granting him remission, sent him in Pilgrimage
to the Archbishop of Dole in Britany, where he promised to continue a years
space in exile; but returning thence within the year this Bishop refused to
absolve him, and put him under the first excommunication, because he performed
not his first penance. But this Bishop dying within a year after, and
Berthguin succeeding him, king Morcant and Guadnor^h with many elders, went to
Landaffe, and requested this new Bishop with one mou^h, (seeing ^he crosses yet
laid down upon the ground, together with the relics and Cymbals) that he
would absolve Gu^dnorth from his excommunication, by lifting up the Cros^es,
and Saints relics from the earth. After which Guednorth promising yet more to
amend his life with fasting, prayer, and Alms, and shedding tears with great
devotion, was thereupon absolved by the Bishop, who enjoined him plenary
penance, according to the manner of his fault: he afterward mindful of the
divine saying, as water extinguisheth fire, so alms does sin, gave three
Manors with all their liberties and appurtenances to the Church of Landaffe. By
this kind of indirect means, this Church got so much lands, that had it now
but the tenth part thereof, Catalogue Edit. 2. p. 517.518.519.520
Godwin assures us, it would be one of the wealthiest Churches in Christendom.

Gurcan.
T^ud^ur King of Brechiniau^ (or Breckn^ck) son of Rese slew Elgistill,
Godwins Catalogue Edit. 2 p. 320. Spelmanni Council. Tom. 1. p, 381.382.
another King of that Country treacherously, after ^ league solemnly sworn
between them not to lie in wait one for another, and to maintain a firm
peace without deceit: hereupon Gurcan the tenth Bishop of Landaffe, with his
Clergy excommunicated him for his perjury and murder, by uncovering the
Altars of God, casting the crosses and relics to the ground, and depriving
him of all Christian communion: whereupon Te^dur unable to undergo this
malediction and rigor of justice, with a contrite heart, and tears powered out
craved pardon, and submitted himself to the penance imposed on him according
to his quality and greatness, recompencing his wickedness with Alms, prayer,
and fasting, and for his absolution he gave this Bishop Lan. Mich^^l, with all
its lands, lib^rties and Commons.

Berthgwin. Sp^lmann^ Con. Tom. 1. p. 382.383.
King Clo^ri and L^ndguallaun made a solemn league, before Berthgwin the 14.
Bishop of Landaffe, and swear to main^aine fi^me peace between them in all
things, without fraud or damm^ge. And if either of them violated it, he was to
leave his kingdom, and to go on P^lgrimage all his life^ neither should he
redeem himself, nor his kingdom with gold, nor silver; After which King
Clotri breaking the league, slew the other treacherously, committing both
homicide and p^rjury. Which ^his Bishop hearing of, assembled a Synod of his
Clergy at Landaff^, and in a full Synod, excommunicated the King with al^ his
progeny and kingdom, by uncovering Gods Altars, and casting down the crosses
to the earth, and left the Country without B^ptisme and the communion.
Whereupon the K. unable to endure so great an excommunication, with great
devotion submitted himself to the Bishop, left his Kingdom, went on
Pilgrimage into foreign parts; from whence returning into his Count^y, after
a long ^pace, by ^he intercession of King Morcant he obtained absolution from
the Bishop, to whose enjoined penance he submitted; and thereupon he gave
Helic, with other lands to the Bishop and his successors in the Church of
Landaffe. In this Bishops time Spelman. Ibid. and Godwins C^t. Edit. 2. p. 521.
Gurcan the son of Guin^n kept his own Stepmother; for which the Bishop
excommunicated him, in such manner a^ he did Clo^ri, and upon his penance and
absolution, the Bishop wr^sted from him a pe^^e of land called Marchinis.

In the days of Godwin. Edit. 2. p. 523. Spelmanni Con. Tom. 1. p. 383.384.
Cercenhir Cercenhir
the 18. Bish^p of Land^ff^ Houel King of Glevissig contrary to his solemn
oath, circumvented, and slew Gallun the son of Cidrich, whereupon the Bishop
summoning a Synod excommunicated him (in such sort, as the former Kings were)
almost a years space; at which time he coming bare foot to the Bishop,
implored absolution with many tears, which he obtaining after public penance
enjoined, gave three Manors to the Bishop and his Church. After which this
Bishop excommunicated Coubius for murdering C^mauc contrary to his solemn
oath, and that in a public Synod; who upon his penance and absolution gave
Guliple to his Church. Aquod the son of ^ou^f falling out with this Bishop,
drove him and his men into the Church of Landaffe: For which he was
excommunicated by him, and to be absolved was glad to give Pennoun, with the
Church of Lantil^l and certain other Lands.

Gulfridus.
Godwin. Edit. 2. p. 523. Spelmanni Council. p. 385.
Loumarch the son of Carguocaun was excommunicated by Gulfridus the 20 Bishop
of this See in a full Synod, for violating certain privileges, and invading
the goods of his Church; but upon his humble submission on his knees to the
Bishop with many tears, and his offer to acknowledge his offense, and to
suffer any punishment the Bishop would impose upon him: The Bishop upon
restitution of all the goods he had taken, and the gift of Treficarn pont,
absolved him. Assac the son of M^rchiud having treacherously slain one
Gulayguni, being excommunicated for it by this Bishop, gave Segan to his
Church, to expiate the murder, and for the soul of the slain.

Nudde.
S^^lferth, Hegoi, and Arguistil, the sons of Belli, fell at variance in
words with Nudd the 21 Bishop of this See, Godwin. Edit. 2. p. 523.
and proceeding at last from words to blows, committed diverse outrages upon
his Land and Family; but quickly remembering themselves, fearing
excommunication, they asked pardon, and submitted themselves to penance. After
which performed, they gave unto the Church for further confirmation of their
unfeigned repentance, the territory of Julius and Aaron.

Civeilliauc.
King Brochvaile the son of Mouric, and his Family fell at variance with
Civeilliauc the 22 Bishop of Landaffe and his Family, Spel. Council. Tom. 1. p.
385.386.
to whom they offered some injury, wherewith the Bishop being moved, assembled
all his Clergy together, even to the inferior degrees, intending to
excommunicate Brochvaile and all his family (as forfeited to him, and execrable
to God) before all the people in a full Synod, for this injury: which
Brochvaile hearing of, sought for pardon and remission, which he could not
obtain from the Bishop upon any terms, unless he would suffer a Canonical
judgment. The cause being discussed, the Bishop was adjudged to receive from
him an Image of his face both in length and breadth in pure gold, and that
amends should be made by him to the condign honor of his Family and Nobility
of his parentage^ which sentence Borchvaile was forced to redeem, by giving
the Town of Tref-Peren, with six other pieces of Land to the Bishop and his
Church.

Pater.
One Pater being the 25 Bishop of this See, Anno 955. Godwin. Edit. 2. p.
524.525.
A certain Country fellow meeting a Deacon with a sword by his side, asked
him, what a Coward should do with Weapons, and striving to take away the
sword, cut the Deacons finger, whereupon the Deacon killed him; and when he had
done, took Sanctuary in the Church of Saint Iarman and Saint Febrie. Thereby
six of King Gurialls household (although there wanted not many that sought to
defend the man, in regard of the place) he was slain even at the very Altar of
the Church. These six men were delivered at the City of Gwentonia (now
Caerwent) into the hands of Pater the Bishop, who kept them in straight prison
six months, and then forced them to give all their Lands and Livings to
Landaffe, besides seven pound of silver to the Church, which they had polluted.

Mouric King of Glamorgan was excommunicated by Joseph the 28 Bishop of this
Diocese, Joseph.
for putting out the eyes of Etgum in a time of truce; Godwin. Edit. 2. page
527.
to have his absolution he gave to the Bishop Paniprise. Another time he was
feign to give Gulich Fabrus and four pound of silver unto the Bishop, beside
other great gifts to the Canons upon this occasion: He had broken the
Sanctuary of the Church of Landaffe, by taking away thence violently the wife
of his enemy, and hurting some of the Bishops servants: For so doing he was
publicly excommunicated by the Bishop in a Synod, and by these gifts made way
to obtain his absolution.

Caratuc one of his company in the last recited action, was forced to give
Henriu in Wencia.

Riugallan the son of Rum being excommunicate for an assault made upon the
Bishop and his men, gave Riu Drein and the third part of the Wood of
Yuisperthan, to be absolved.

Cutguallam the son of Guriat struck one in the Consistory in the presence
of Joseph the Bishop, who kept him the said Catguallam in prison till he had
made amends for that fault, by giving the Church of Saint Brides.

Calgucam the King of Morganuc and his family was solemnly excommunicated by
Herewald the 29 Bishop of Landaffe, Herewald.
in a Synod of all his Clergy; Spelmanni Council. Tom. 1. page 625.626. Godwin.
Edit. 2. page 528.
who thereupon cast down all the Crosses and Relics to the ground,
overturned their Bells, and stopped up all the doors of the Churches with
thorns, so as they continued for a long time without divine service, and
pastors day and night; the King and his Family in the mean time being
sequestered from the society of all the faithful, and all, because one of the
Kings followers being drunk, had laid violent hands upon Bathutis the Bishops
Physician and Kinsman on Christmas day, Anno 1056. Whereupon the King, though
innocent, upon his submission to the Bishop, to obtain his absolution, was
enf^rced to give Henringumna, in the presence of all the Clergy and people, to
this Bishop and his successors, free from all secular and regal services. After
which one Gistni excommunicated for a rape committed by a Nephew and follower
of his upon a Virgin, whom he took violently out of the Church of Landaffe,
was forced to give Milne to the Bishop and his Successors to obtain
absolution. By these instances we may partly discern by what undue means
Bishops at first obtained their large Temporalties and Revenues, even by
enforcing Kings and great persons to buy out and expiate their offenses by
endowing their Sees with Lands and Manors, without which they could not
purchase their absolution: and we likewise learn hence that Bishops in those
days excommunicated none but in a Synod, with the suffrage of all their Clergy.

Edmund de Bromfeild.
Godwin. Edit. 2. p. 539.
Edmund de Bromfeild the 48. Bishop of Landaffe, for procuring and bringing in
the Popes Bulls of Provision to make him Abbot of Bury, contrary to his own
express Oath, and the Statutes of the Realm, was for this his contempt and
disobedience committed to the Tower by King Richard the second, where he lay
prisoner a long time; neither durst the Pope yield him any assistance, to
justify his own Bull.

The late Bishops of this See (as Field and others) have been so notoriously
peccant, that I need not mention them, wherefore I shall pass on to the
Bishops of Bangor.

Bishops of Bangor.
Mauritius.
Godwin. Edit. 2. p. 536.
MAuritius the third Bishop of Bangor most undutifully refused a long time to
do homage to the King of England for his Bishopric held of him, but at last
was persuaded to do it.

Robert Shrewsbury.
Robert of Shrewsbury joining with Leolin Prince of Wales, against King John
his Sovereign, was taken prisoner by the King in his own Cathedral Church,
Godw. Edit. 2. page 536.
and ransomed for 200. hawks; after this dying, he was buried, not in the
Churchyard, but in the market place of Shrewsbury, by his own appointment.

Richard Richard.
the 10. Bishop of Bangor excommunicated David ap Lhewelin, Matthew. Paris. p.
551.715. Godwin. Edit. 2. p. 537.547.
Prince of Wales, for that contrary to his O^th he took his Brother Gryffith
prisoner, who was content upon the Bishops word to go to his Brother: and when
he saw that course would not reform him, he never lin complaining, first to
the King of England, then to the Pope, that he so incensed them, as the one
excommunicated him, the other made war upon him until he delivered his said
Brother into the Kings hands, who caused him to be kept in the Tower of London,
till he endeavoring there to escape, by misfortune brake his neck. The Prince
hereupon so wasted the Bishopric, that in the year 1248. this Bishop and the
Bishop of Saint Asaph were forced to beg their bread. Whereupon this Bishop
came to the Abbot of Saint Albanes, desiring that the Bosom of Mercy might be
opened unto his poverty, and he abiding there until his Bishopric wasted and
spoiled with continual war, should recover some better estate, might
together with his Chaplain there breath and rest themselves from those
calamities wherewith they had been long afflicted, in like sort as heretofore
the Bishop of Hereford had done, who was honorably entertained there almost the
space of twenty years.

Godwin. Edit. 2. page 538.539.
Richard Young the 22. Bishop of Bangor, Richard Young.
for some contempt and disobedience against the King, and confederating (as is
likely) with that Rebel Owen Glendor, was imprisoned two or three years, till
the Pope, Anno 1404. translated him to Rochester by his Bull.

Lewis Lewis.
the 23. Bishop of Bangor Anno. 1408. joined with the Earl of Northumberland,
Walsingham. Hist. Angl. Ann. 1408. page 419. Ypodigma Neust. Anno 1408. p. 172.
Godw. Edit. 2. p. 539. Holinsh. page 1408.
the Lord Bardolfe and others, in open Rebellion against King Henry the fourth.
The Earl was slain in battle in the field, the Lord Bardolfe mortally
wounded, and their heads set upon London Bridge. The Bishop was likewise taken
prisoner in the battle, but obtained pardon from the King, because he had no
Arms upon him when he was taken, though the incendiary of the other two, and
as great a Traitor as they; but the Abbot of Hayles was hanged, because he had
borne Arms in that Rebellion. So happy are Traytorly and Rebellious Bishops,
as to escape scot free in their Treasons and Rebellions, when all other sorts of
men have execution done upon them.

Arthur Bulkly Bishop of Bangor, Arthur Bulkly.
and John Lewis Vicar of Llain-geynwina, Trinity. 36. H. 8. R^t. 9. Godwin.
Edit. 2. p. 540.
were attainted in a Praemunire at the prosecution of William Whorewood the
Kings Attorney, for suing for the right of Patronage and Tithes of the said
Church, and for several sums of money due on bond for Tithes, in this
Bishops Ecclesiastical Court, which had no cognizance of them being temporal,
and belonging only to the Kings Civil Courts, to the derogation of the
imperial Jurisdiction of the King and his Crown, and subversion of the Laws
and Statutes of the Realm. And hereupon judgment was given against them
according to the Statute. This Bishop sold away five fair Bells out of the
Steeple of his Cathedral Church, which ma^d the Music there.

Should I rip up the scandalous lives and Actions of some of the late Pilates
of this See, one of whom published The Practice of Piety, (which some say he
never writ) though neither he nor any of his successors, did ever much practice
it in their lives, or should I recite the vile complaints of late against one
of them in 2 or 3 late Parliaments, I should be over tedious, and pollute my
paper with such beastly actions, as would cause chaste eyes to blush, and turn
their aspect from them: Wherefore I shall pass them over in silence, (he being
gone to answer them before the supreme tribunal) informing you only, that he
imposed Armies upon his Clergy, and provided an Armory for them to be kept in
within his Cathedral at Bango^: And so I post on to Assaph Diocese.

Saint Assaph.
^ohn Trevaur.
Walls. Hist. Angl. Anno 1399. 1404. p. 398.399.412.413. Ypodig. Neustriae Anno.
1404. p. 164. Godwin. Edit 2^ page 554. Speed. Hist. page 758.763. Holinsh. p.
503.504.505.506.507.508.
John Trevaur Bishop of Saint Assaph pronounced the sentence for deposing King
Richard the second, in which instrument he is first named, as appears by this
ensuing Copy of it. In the Name of God, Amen. We John Bishop of Saint Assaph,
chosen and deputed special Commissaries by the three states of this present
Parliament representing the whole body of the Realm, for all such matters^ by
the said estates to us committed; We understanding and considering the
manifold crimes, hurts, and harms done by Richard King of England, and
misgovernance of the same by a long time, to the great decay of the said Land,
and utter ruin of the same shortly to have been, had not the special grace
of our God thereto put the sooner remedy; And also further more adverting, that
the said King Richard by acknowledging his own insufficiency, has of his own
mere volunta^y and free will, renounced and given over the rule and governance
of this Land, with all rights and h^nours unto the same belonging, and utterly
for his merits has judged himself not unworthily to be deposed of all Kingly
Majesty and Estate Royal: We, the Premises well considering by good and
diligent deliberation, by the power, name, and authority, to us (as aforesaid)
committed, pronounce, decer^e, and declare the same King Richard, before this
to have been, and so to be unprofitable, u^a^le, unsuffi^ient, and unwor^hy of
the Rule and Government of the foresaid Realms and Lor^ships, and of all
rights and other the appurtenances thereto belonging. And f^r the same causes
we de^rive him of all Kingly dignity and worship, and of all Kingly worship in
himself. And we depose him by our sentence definitive: forbidding expressly to
all Archbishops and Bishops, and all other Prelates, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Barons, and Knights, and all other men of the foresaid Kingdom and Lordships,
Subjects and Leiges whatsoever they be, that none of them from this day
forward, to the foresaid Richard, as King and Lord of the foresaid Realms and
Lordships, be neither obedient nor attendant. Immediately as this sentence was
in this wise passed, and that by reason thereof the Realm stood void without
head or governor for the same, The Duke of Lancaster rising from the place
where before he sat, and standing where all the house might behold him, laid
claim to the Crown, to which the Lords assented.

After which the Archbishop of Canterbury ( Arundel) having notice of the minds
of the Lords, stood up and asked of the Commons, if they would assent to the
Lords, which in their minds thought the claim of the Duke made to be rightful
and necessary for the wealth of the Realm and them all. Whereto the Commons
with one voice cried, Yea, yea, yea: After which answer, the said Archbishop
going to the Duke, and kneeling down before him on his knees, addressed to him
all his purpose in a few words: which ended, he rose, and taking the Duke by
the right hand, led him unto the Kings Seat, the Archbishop of York assisting
him; and with great reverence set him therein. When he was thus placed in his
Throne, the Arch^. of Canturbury began a brief Collation, taking for his
Theme these words written in the first Book of Kings, the ninth Chapter, Vir
dominabitur in p^pulo, etc. handling the same, and the whole tenor of his tale
to the praise of the King. Thus was this King deprived by the Bishops means,
who were chief actors in deposing him, and setting up King Henry; yet some of
them (especially York) were the authors of that evil counsel, which was the
cause of his deprivation. And no wonder, since in his reign (as Holinshed
writes) such were preferred to Holinshed. page 508.
Bishoprics; and other Ecclesiastical livings, as neither did, nor could
teach, nor preach, nor know any thing of the Scripture of God, but only to
call for their tithes and duties; so as they were most unworthy of the name of
Bishops, being lewd and most vain persons disguised in Bishops apparel.
Furthermore, there reigned abundantly the filthy sin of Leche^y and
Fornication, with abominable adultery in the King, but chiefly in the Prelacy;
whereby the whole Realm, by such their evil example, was so infected, that
the wrath of God was daily provoked to vengeance for the sins of the Prince
and people, and took so sharp an edge, that it shred the King off from the
Scepter of his Kingdom, and gave him a full cup of affliction to drink. After
which, this Bishop was sent Ambassador into Spain, to show the King the
rightfulnesse of Henry the fourth his Ti^le to the Crown of England; and soon
after his return thence, Anno 1404. (as Th^mas Walsing^am reports) perceiving
Owen Glendor, that Welsh R^bell, to prosper in his wa^res against King Henry
the fourth; Conversus est in virum pravum factus transfuga ad Owenum, he
turned a lewd Traitor and Rebel, flying away from the King to Owen. What
became of him upon Owens defeat, I find not. Thus this Bishop was a Traitor
and Rebel to two several Kings; and which was worst of all, to him whose
title he thus took upon him publicly to defend but a little before. Such
faith and loyalty is there in lordly Prelates.

I shall not trouble you any more with our Welsh Bishops; only let me acquaint
you for a farewell; that the present Bishops of Asaph, Bangor, and Landaffe,
are now complained against in Parliament, and impeached by the Commons House
for the late Canons, Oath, malevole^t benevolence, and other crimes; for which
I suppose they will ere long receive their doom.

The Bishops of Bath and Wels.
Giso.
Godwin. Edit. page 360, 361.
GISO the fifteenth Bishop of Bath and Wels, had many conflicts with Harold,
before and after he came to the Crown; so that he was forced to fly the Land
all his time.

Math. Paris, page 217. Matthew. West. Anno 1208. Godwi^. Edit. 2. page 107.366.
Ioseline the one and twentieth Bishop of this See, Joceline.
joined with Stephen Langhton, that Arch-rebell against King John, and had an
hand in interdicting the Realm, and excommunicating the King; for which he was
glad to fly the Land for five years, the King seizing upon his goods and
temporalties; whereupon the Monks and Prelates raised many vile reports of the
King, which you may read in Anno 1208. page 86, 87.
Matthew. Westminster.

Robert Stillington, Robert Stillington.
the nine and thirtieth Bishop of Bath and Wells, though highly advanced by
King Edward the fourth, Speeds Hist. page 933. H^lls Chron. 2. R. 3. fol. 25.
Godwin. Edit. 2. page 377, 378.
sided with that Usurper Richard the third, and was a man specially employed in
his Coronation; he was a great enemy to King Henry the seventh, being sent
Ambassador to the Duke of Britain for apprehending him, whiles he was Earl
of Richmond, Anno 1487. H^e was accused of high Treason, for yielding
assistance to Lambert the counterfeit Earl of Warwick, and some such other
treacheries; whereupon, having a guilty conscience, he fled to the University
of Oxford, hoping that the privileges of the same might be some shelter and
defense unto him; whereof the King having advertisement, sent one Edward
Willoughby, his Chaplain, to the Chancellor of the University, to require the
Bishop to be delivered to his Officers, as being one to whom the Privileges
of the University could not extend (being at the time no Student there) so
far at least as to protect him in a matter of Treason, unto which no
privilege ought to yield any patrociny. After two or three refusals, at last
by the connivence and permission of the Chancellor, he was there arrested and
committed prisoner to the Castle of Windsor, where he lay prisoner four
years space, till his decease, 1491.

Balaeus de vitis Pontificum. Leo 10. Godwin. Edit 2. page 381, 382.
Hadrian de Castello the two and fortieth Bishop of this See, Hadrian de
Castello.
though he conspired not against the King, yet being at Rome, and there made a
Cardinal he entered into a conspiracy with Cardinal Alfonso Petruccio, and
others to murder Pope Leo the tenth, out of an ambitious conceit that surely
he should be elected Pope i^ Leo were once dead; a Witch having foretold him
that a certain old man named Adrian, borne of mean parentage, as he was,
should be advanced to the Papacy: This conspiracy coming to the Popes ears,
Petruccio was thereupon apprehended and executed: The Pope coming into the
Consistory, promised pardon to all the other Cardinals, who should then and
there immediately confess their faults: Hadrian hereupon, and some other,
falling down on their knees before him, acknowledged what they had done, and
humbly besought him of mercy. He promised to be as good as his word. Howbeit,
Hadrian ^earing the worst, shortly after stole secretly away, and was neither
seen or heard of ever afterward, and thereupon deprived of his Bi^hopricke.

William Barlow.
William Barlow, the six and fortieth Bishop of Bath and Wells, incurred a
Praemunire, for presuming to visit the Deane and Chap^er of Wells being a
Donative, for which he was glad to buy his peace, as appears by Brook,
Praemunire. Sect. 21.

Guilbert Bourne.
Guilbert Bourne the seven and fortieth Bishop of Bath and Wells, in the first
year of Queen Elizabeth, Godwins Catalogue, page 311. Martins History, page
452, etc.
was deprived of his Bishopric for refusing to subscribe and take the Oath of
Allegiance, and then committed to the custody of Master Carry, Deane of the
Queens Chapel.

The Bishops since his time, I shall pretermit for brevity, and descend to
William Pierce the present Bishop of this Diocese. William Pierce.
This man having been Vicechancellor in the University of Oxford, wherein he
was over-busie and turbulent in persecuting good men, and in causing Pareus his
Commentary on the Romans to be publicly burnt in an ignominious manner; was
for his good service made Bishop of Peterborough, and from thence translated to
Bath and Wells; where his tyranny, oppression, impiety, and practices have been
so excessive, that the whole County of Somerset, with sundry particular
persons, both Ministers and people there, weary of his insupportable government
and vexatious oppressions, have exhibited diverse Petitions against him to the
high Court of Parliament now assembled, upon the full hearing whereof before a
special Committee for that purpose; the Committees have drawn up this
following Impeachment against him, reported to the Commons House, and now ready
for a transmission to the Lords; by perusal whereof you may in part discern
what a good Prelate and careful Bishop he has been, or rather a Wolf in a
Bishops Rochet.

Articles of Accusation and impeachment by the Commons House of Parliament
against William Pierce, Doctor of Divinity, and Bishop of Bath and Wells.
THat he has by his own arbitrary power, against Law, since he was Bishop of
Bath and Wells (being about ten Among these he has suppressed the Ancient
weekly Lecture at the City of Bath, whither many Nobles, and other strangers
resort, especially, in the spring and fall, who by reason of their sickness,
both desire and need preaching for the consolation and instruction of their
souls, of which now they are there de^titute, to their great discomfort.
Lectures had continued for 50.40.30. and 20. years, without interruption, and
were countenanced by his predecessors, who used to preach at some of them in
their turns.

That insteade of encouraging, he has suspended, excommunicated and otherwise
vexed the said Lecturers; glorying in his so doing, and thanking God, that he
had not a Lecture left in his Diocese; the very name whereof he said he
disliked, and affirmed unto Master Cunnant a minister who desired the
continuance o^ a Lecture, that he would not leave one within his Diocese; the
Bishop alleging, that though there was need of preaching in the infancy of
the Church in the Apostles time, yet now there was no such need; and thereupon
required the said minister upon his Canonical obedience, not to preach: and in
like manner he dealt with many other Godly Ministers within his Diocese.
Master Devenish the Minister of Bridgewater, for preaching a Lecture in his
own Church on the market day there, (which Lecture had continued from Queen
Elizabeth's time till then;) and refused to absolve him, till he had promised
never to preach it more; upon which promise, the said Bishop absolved him with
this admonition of our Savior, most profanely applied, Joh. 5.14. I dare say
no Commentator whatsoever, ever made so ill an application of this Text.
Go thy way, sin no more, l^st a worse thing happen to thee. And not content
to put down Lectures in his own Diocese, he has endeavored the suppression
of them in others, by conventing some ministers of his Dioces^e before him (as
namely one Master Cunnant and Mr. Strickla^d) and threat^ing to suspend them,
for preaching their turns at Lectures in other Diocesses near them.

That in opposition to preaching, and the Spirit^all good o^ the peoples
Souls, he has in and about the years aforesaid most impiously, and against
Law, put down all afternoon Sermons on ^he Lords day, throughout his
Diocese, and charged the Ministers both publicly in his visitations, and
privately, It appears by Act. 20.20.31. Act. 2.46. c. 3. and 4^ and 5. Luke
21.37.38. Joh. 8.22.19.47. 2 Timothy 4.2. by Basil. Magnus. Hexaemeron. Hom.
2.7.8.9. and Hom. in Psalm. 114. by S. Chrysostom. Hom. 10.22. and 34. in Genesis ad
Pop. Antioch. Hom. 19.13. and 5. De sacerdotio. l. 6. Hom. de Lazaro. by
Augustine Concio. 2 in Psalm. 68. Tract. 16.18. and 21. in Joan. and other
Fathers, that Christ, his Apostles and the Fathers preached every day, and
forenoone and afternoon on the Lords day^ how dare then this Prelate thus to
affront their practice?
no^ to preach at all on the Lords day on the afternoon, upon any occasion
under pain of suspension: O Profane impiety and injustice, to punish
Ministers for preaching, Catechizing, and doing that which God injoynes them!
after which charge he suspended one Mr. Cornish a Minister, only for preaching
a fun^rall Sermon on a Lords day Evening.

That diverse godly Ministers of his Diocese, being restrained from preaching,
did thereupon take great pains, to Catechis^^ the people in the principles of
Religion, on the Lords day in the afternoon, in larging themselves upon the
questions and answers of the Catechism in the Common prayer Book, for the
peoples better instruction, using some short prayers before or after that
exercise: of which the said Bishop having intelligence, in and about the years
aforesaid, convented the said ministers before him, reproving them sharply for
the same, threatn^ng to punish them if they persisted in that way, which he
said, was a Catechizing Sermon-wise, and AS BAD as if they preached; charging
them, that they should ask no questions, nor receive any other answers from
the people, but such as were contained in the Catechism in the Service book:
which some not observing, were convented thereupon before the said Bish^p, and
punished, as namely Master Barret Rector of Barmicke, who was enjoined penanc^
for transgressing the Bishop^ said order^ and likewise Humphry Blake,
Churchwarden of Bridg^water, was enjoined penance by the Bishop, for not
presenting Master Devenish Minister there, for that he expounded upon the
Church Catechism on the Lords day in the afternoon^, and made a short prayer
before he began the same^ the Bishop alleging, that it was against his order,
and command, as is above said.

That he has in the years aforesaid both by precept and example, most
profanely opposed the due sanctification of the Lords day, by approving and
allowing of profane Wakes, and Revels on that day, contrary to the Laws and
Statu^es of this Realm: for which purpose he An Impiety and profaneness,
which no age can pattern, many Ministers have been suspended and censured for
shortning the Service, that they might preach the longer, and yet they are
commanded to curtall it by this Bishop, that the people might have more time to
play in Gods own day.
Commanded afternoone-Service on the Lords day not to be long, that so the
people might not be hindered from their Recreations; pressed and enjoined all the
Ministers in his Diocese in their proper persons, to read the book of sports,
in their several Parish Churches, in the midst of divine Service at morning
prayer on the Lords day, contrary to the words, and purport of the said book,
which some ministers (as Master H^mphry Chambers, and Master Thomas) refusing
to do, he thereupon suspended them both from their office and Benefice, and
kept them excommunicated for diverse years, notwithstanding the said book was
by the Bishops Order published in their Churches by others, he convented the
minister of Beerecrockeham before him, for having two Sermons on the said
Parish Revell day, alleging A pious Episcopal reason, fitter for an Alewife,
than a Bishop; an Athest than a Prelate.
that it was a hinderance to the said Revell, and to the utterance of the
Church Ale, provided to be spent on that day. He convented and punished one
Master Thomas Elford a Minister, for preaching at the Parish of Mountague, upon
the Revell day, upon the Prophet Ioels exhortation, to f^sting, weeping, and
mourning^ charging him, that not only his Sermon, but his very Text was^ O
blasphemy! why was not the Revell rather scandalous to the text?
scandalous to the Revell, and gave offense to the meeting. And for the same
reason, the said Bishop commanded the Church-warde^^ of the Parish of
Barecom^e, to blo^ out of the Church wall, this Text of Scripture therein
written, taken out of Esaias 58.13.14. O the desperate impie^y and profaneness
of this Bishop, who might as well obliterate this Scripture out of the Bible,
as out of the Church Wall!
If thou turn away thy ^oo^ from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my
Holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the Holy of the Lord Honorable, and
shall honor him, not doing thy own ways, nor finding thine own pleas^re^ nor
speaking thine own words, then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord and I
will ^ause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed th^e with
the heritage of Jacob thy Father, for the m^^th of the Lord has spoken it. And
he likewise cau^ed this clause in Doctor Bisse his monument in that Church,
formerly Pastor there, to be rased out; He was an enemy to heeathenish Revels.
To conntenance which Revels, the said Bishop (in opposition ^o the orders of
the Judges of Assi^e, and Justices of Peace of Somersetshire, for the
suppressing of Sports and Revels, and their Petition to the King, to that
purpose) did call before him diverse Ministers of his Diocese, and presented
unto them a writing Canterbury, who after the receipt thereof suppressed the
Justices Petition. And shortly after the book for sports and Revels on the
Lords day was published.

That he has within the years forementioned both by his example and command,
contrary to the Laws of the Land, introduced into all or most Churches in his
Diocese sundry Innovations in the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, and
other new inventions of his own, tending to Popery and Superstition: as
namely, setting up of Altars, and injoyning the seats about them to be taken
away, saying, This speech he borrowed from Canterbury; who might do well to
prove, that God Almighty sits actually on the Lords Table, and that as well
when there is no Communion there, as when there is.
none shall sit equal with or above God Almighty: bowing and cringing to the
Altars, and reading the second and third service at the Altar) and enjoined the
strict observation of them under the heaviest Censures of the Church; in so
much that the Communion Table of Stretton in his Diocese, which he had caused
to be rayled in Altarwise, being ^rought down again to its former place, and
not turned to the East, thereupon no Communion was there permitted to the
Parishioners on Palme-Sunday and Easter day 1637. the Minister having received
an Order from the said Bishop, O monstrous superstition, Sacrilege, and
impiety, to deprive the people of the Sacrament, because the Table stood not
after his new fancy! No age I am certain yields such a president.
not to administer the Communion until the Table was again set up Altarwise:
and caused diverse to be punished for not standing up at the Gospel and Gloria
Patri. And he has likewise forced diverse Parishes, as Taunton, Shepton Mallet,
and others, to their intolerable cost, to set up It seems his Lordship
delighted more in piping than preaching, and will have men go merrily dancing
not mourning to heaven.
Organs, where there were none at all, or not a long time before; causing the
Churchwardens to levy money toward the buying of them, upon the Parishioners,
against their wills, and punishing them in his Ecclesiastical Court, that
would not pay toward them, and that he has put the Country of Sommerset to
excessive expenses, by reason of such Innovations as aforesaid.

That he has within the time fore-specified contrary to Law vexed and molested
in his Ecclesiastical Courts diverse of the Clergy and Laity of his Diocese
for trivial and small matters; excommunicated and vexed diverse Churchwardens,
for not the East wall of the Chancell; and by name, the Churchwardens of
Beckington; whom he not only excommunicated, but likewise caused them and
others to be unjustly indicted at the open Assizes held in the Country in Lent,
1636. as for a Riot in hindering the removing of the Table in that Church,
putting the said Parish to the expense of 180^. pounds or more, and not
absolving the Churchwardens from their excommunication, till they had done such
open and ignominious penance, as the said Bishop enjoined them, in three
eminen^ Parish Churches within his Diocese, as likewise at the Market Cross
at Wells. The performance of which penance wrought so far upon James Wheeler
one of the said Churchwardens, that thereupon he fell into a Consumption
through grief, and so dyed, saying often before his death, that the
performance of the said penance being so ignominious, and against his
Conscience, was the cause of his death; and by his vexatious suits in his
Ecclesiastical Courts, he has raised his Registers office, in former Bishops
time not worth above ^0. pound per annum, to the value of 3. or 400. pounds or
more by the year.

That the said Bishop has within the forenamed years unduely Ex officio upon
diverse inhabitants of Wells without complaint or accusation, and likewise the
Oath of Deanes Rural, with other unlawful Oaths, both upon the Clergy and
Laity within his Diocese, and other places; and suspended and excommunicated
diverse of them that refused to take the said Oaths: and that not only in his
Consistory Court, but in his own private Chambe^, there being none but a
Register with him.

That he has in or about the times fore-recited for his own Fort, one of the
Churchwardens of South-Pederton 20. pound. And also of one Mr. Franklyn the sum
of 3. pound (besides the sum of 10. pounds given in Fees, and rewards to the
Bishops servants) for instituting him into the Parsonage of Standerweeke. And
has likewise in the years aforesaid, and in the year 1639. exacted the sum
of 6. shillings 8. pence or more, of diverse Churchwardens and Parishes within
his Diocese, and namely of the Churchwardens of Dunkerton, only for not
ringring the Bells when he passed through the bounds of their seveall Parishes,
in his Visitation, though privately without giving them any notice of his
coming that way. One Long his Surrogate openly averring in Court, that by the
16. Decre^all, they might justly take 10. pound for this offense.

interim under hand to confer the same upon his Son, Servants or other
dependants, and to deprive the Patrons of their Rights; and has even by force,
against all Law and equity, con^erred some of the Benefices upon his Son,
Servants and dependants, viz. upon his Son, the Parsonage of Buckland, and
endeavored by the like for^e to confer the Parsonage of Standerweeke upon his
said son, and other Parsonages upon his Servants and allies, and did against
Law and by force confer the Vica^idge of Hynstridge upon his servant Flamsteed.

Beckington, and in that of Mr. Ieanes Minister of Beercrocombe.

Chambers, Mr. Thomas, Mr. Croake, Mr. Newton, Mr. Barnard, Mr. Cunnant, Mr.
Roswell, with many other godly and painful Ministers of the Diocese, and
countenanced his Chaplain Mr. Eglesfield, ^awler, Mr. Long, with other very
vicious Ministers, and Mr. Huish and others superstitiously affected.

that he was glad in his heart that this Oath was imposed upon all the Clergy
of England, for now the true Children of the Church would be known from the
spurious and bastards. And further he has de^yed to confer Orders upon such
who refused to take the said Oath, as namely, upon one Mr. Gibbon^. And has
enforced the said Oath upon diverse he has ordained Ministers since the making
thereof.

That the said Bishop has been a great fomentor and incourager England and
Scotland, conventing and urging the Clergy of his Diocese in the years of
our Lord 1638. and 1639. to contribute a liberal benevolence toward the
maintenance of the said wars, using this speech as one motive to induce them to
this contribution; that it was Bishop Hall labors to excuse it, in his Answer
to the Vindication. p. 14.15. as if the Bishop meant it only in a less evil
construction, as referring to the Northern rise of that quarrel, not to our
prosecution, when as it is most clear^ by the words and ^ircumstances, that he
meant quite contrary.
Bellum Episcopale, and saying, that what ever cause the King had expressed in
hi^ Declaration, yet in truth this war was for Us, meaning Us the Bishops. And
whereas some of the Clergy denied the payment of so large a Benevolence ^s the
said Bishop demanded, in regard of their poverty, and because they were still
in their first fruits, when they were free from Subsidies, the said Bishop
threatened by his power to put more Arms and horses upon them, saying, that if
they would not serve the King with their purses, they should serve him with
their Arms. And thereupon compelled them to pay the sums he demanded of
them against all Law: as namely, Mr. Roswell, Mr. Ioanes, Mr. Abbot, and
others. And not contented herewith, the said Bishop pretending that there were
diverse poor Vicars and Ministers in his Diocese that were no^ able to pay the
Benevolence, ^o as he could not raise the sum he expected, thereupon
directed his Letters to diverse of his wealthier Cle^gie causing some of them to
pay a Which some of the County conceive he has pursed up or discharged his
own share in this contribution therewith.
second contribution.

13. That the said Bishop not content with this first Benevolence, has since
that in the year of our Lord 1642. compelled diverse of his Clergy to pay all
or part of the six illegal subsidies or Benevolences imposed by the late
pretended Synod, without confirmation of Parliament, threatening to
excommunica^e and deprive them ipso^ facto who failed paymen^ of it at the
days prefixed by the Synod, and sent out a process to Master Newton Minister
of Tau^ton (even whiles the said) Town^ was much visited by the Pestilence)
long before the said Subsidy; or Benevolence was due, to enjoyne him to pay it
punctually at the day, or else he would inflict on him the penalties prescribed
by this Synod; and used these speeches, that if they did not pay the said
Subsidy or Benevolence, they should be ground to powder.

And the said Commons by pro^esta^ion s^^ing to themselves the liberty of
exhibiting at any time hereafter any other accusation or impeachment against
the said Bishop; And also of replying to the answers that he the said Bishop
shall make unto the said Articles, or to any of them, and of offering proofs
also of the premises or any of them, or any other impeachment or accusation
that shall be exhibited by them (as the cause shall according to the course of
Parliaments require) do pray that the said Bishop may be put to answer to all
and every the premises. And that such proceedings, examinations, trials, and
judgments may be upon every of them had and used, as is agreeable to Law and
Justice.

By these Articles of impeachment you may easily discover what a profane,
impious, turbulent Prelate this Bishop is, even such a one, whom no age (I
think) in many particulars is able to parallel; whose prodigiously profane
speeches and actions proclaim to all the world, that our present Prelates
impieties have made them fit for judgment; yea to be castout and trampled
under feere of men, as the very excrements and offscouring of all things.

I have now run through all our ancient Bishoprics, with that of Chester
lately revived, and given you a brief account of the extravagant actions of
some of those Lordly Prelates who possessed them; I shall now in the close of
this Chapter give you but a touch of some of the late Bishops of Oxford,
Bristoll, Peterborough and Gloucester (which Bishoprics were erected out of
dissolved Monasteries by King See 31. H. 8. c. 8.34. and 35. H. 8. c. 7.
Godwins Catalogue, p. 403. to 413.
Henry the eight toward the end of his Reign) and so conclude.

Oxford.
TO pass by the first Bishops of this See, none of the best, there have been
three successions of Bishops in Oxford, since I left the University; Houson,
Corbet, and Bancroft; all of them Patriots of Innovations, Erroneous, Popish,
Arminian Doctrines, superstitious Ceremonies, profane Sports, Revels, and
Bacchanals on the Lords day, scandalous in their lives, notoriously given to
the flesh, enemies to frequent preaching, and the true Practice of Piety. Of
the two first of them I have given a touch in Durham, and Norwich, page 519. to
which I shall refer you, and for the last of them, a Non-preaching Prelate,
who (for ought I can learn) never preached above one or two Sermons (if so
many) all his life time; he had a finger in the late Canons, Oath, lone, in
pressing whereof he was not negligent; and had not death arrested him (with the
other two) I doubt not but the Parliament had bin troubled with many complaints
against them all, which now being buried together with them, I will not revive.

Bristoll.
THE Bishopric of Bristoll was first possessed by Paul Bush, who was deprived
in Queen Mary's days for being married. Godwin. Cat. p. 411.412^
John Holy-man a Papist succeeded him, after whose death the Sea continued void
some four years, Anno 1562. Richard Cheyny Bishop of Gloucester, and John
Bullingham his successor, held Bristoll in Commendam, so as it stood void o^ a
Bishop (otherwise than as it was held by Commendam^ one and thirty years.
Richard Fletcher next enjoyed it till he was translated to Worcester, Anno.
1593. After which it stood vacant ten years to 1603. and then John
Thorneborough Bishop of Limbrick in Ireland and Commendatory Deane of York was
translated to it. This Bishop and some of his successors had great contests
with the Major, Aldermen, and Citizens of B^istoll, whom he would force to come
every Lords day morning, and solemn Holiday, to the Cathedral Sermon, to
dance attendance, and do their homage to their Lordships; which they for some
years refused, till at last after sundry complaints to the King and Council,
the Bishops and they according, the Major and Citizens yielded to come to the
College, now and then on solemn days, if the weather were fair, and
sometimes in the Summer season.

Robert Wright, Robert Wright.
one of the late Bishops of this See, had a great contestation with the Deane
and Chapter of Bristoll, and Master George Salterne, Steward of the City, for
opposing him in setting up Images in the Cathedral and other Churches, which
gave great offense to the people: he was a great Innovator and maintainer of
Superstitious Ceremonies at Bristoll to humor Canterbury, by whose means he
was translated to Coventry and Litchfield, where you may read more of him.

Bishop Cook who succeeded him, Cook.
was a more moderate and ingenuous man at first, but became too obsequious to
Canterburies ways and Innovations afterward.

Robert Skinner, Robert Skinner.
the present Bp of this See, promoted to it by Can^^rburies means, (whose
great creature he is) has bin very violent in railing in, and turning
Communion Tables Altar-wise, (himself with his own hands, and his men turning
some:) in magnifying the book for sports on the Lord's Day (which he has See a
Looking glass for all Lordly Prelates, p. 23, 24.
used to give others good example) in bowing to Altars, to the Of which ^o shed
any on^ ^rum or drop, he holds is damnable and Sacrilegious.
bread and wine at the administration, and at the naming of Jesus; he
threatened to punish a Churchwarden for perjury in not presenting the Minister
for Preaching twice on the Lords day, commanding some able ministers to Preach
but once a fortnight, and not to preach on holy days. He affirmed in his last
Visitation, That conceived prayers before and after Sermons were never used
till Cartwright, that factious firebrand brought them up. He has been a
great Patriot of Arminianisme, and styled the Doctrine of the Saints ^inall
perseverance in grace, A Doctrine of Devils; enjoining a minister to recant
it, else he would vex him in the high Commission, and running violently at
him, said, He would have no such Vipers preach such Doctrine in his Diocese:
upon which ground he prohibited a Schoolmaster to teach children Mr. Perkins
his Chatechisme; and said of his book entitled, A golden Chain, that he
might style it as one had done, A chain of damnation. He has reviled diverse
ministers calling them Vipers, Dunces, Devils, Traitors, Dogs,
Scottish-hearted-Raskals, and the like, for teaching Orthodox Doctrine, and
preaching out of their Cures in his own Diocese; and commanded the ministers
of Bristoll not to suffer any strangers to preach in their Churches, unless
they first asked his leave, and showed him the Notes of their Sermons. He
caused the Kings Arms to be taken down in a Church in Bristoll, only because
it stood over the Altar. He took the late etc. Oath at his Visitation upon his
knees, and imposed it upon others, assuring them, that if they did not take it,
the Church would not suffer her self to be at a loss. He has forced
ministers to pay in the Benevolence money granted by the late pretended Synod,
and constrain^d them to pay for their very acquitances. He caused a minister to
be brought up by a Pursevant before the Council Table, for omitting some words
of the prayer against the Scots, and praying God to discover more and more the
Kings enemies in this Kingdom; he has excommunicated diverse for denying to
take an Ex Officio Oath; threatened to pull down a house built by a Tenant of the
Dean and Chapter, near his Palace, in such furious manner, that the Tenants
wife soon after with the fear fell distracted and dyed: Neither will he
permit another of their Tenants who has an house at the West end of the
Cathedral to place a Tenant in it, saying, He will not suffer so great a
Profanation; threatening to put the Deane and Chapter into the High Commission,
and there to fine them more than they had for the house, if they admitted of a
Tenant; alleging he could not look the Archbishop in the face as long as
that house stood: he was an active instrument in compiling the late Canons,
Oath and Benevolence, for which he now stands impeached by the Commons. He
has much disaffected, and censured late Parliaments, See the Bistoll men's
Petition to the Parliament against him, where much more is expressed.
and after the dissolution of the last Parliament, was so confident we should
never see another, as he openly said, We should go whoop when he saw another
and should say the King was brought to a very low ebb. He threatened to
interdict a Fair kept in the Parish of S. James in Bristoll, if they would not
set up a pair of de^ayed Organs in that Church. But of him enough.

Peterborough.
John Chambers, John Chambers.
a Doctor of Physic, and last Abbot of Peterborough, became the first Bishop
of it. It seems the office was not then thought very spiritual, Godw. Cat.
Edit. 2. page 499.
that a Doctor of Physic and an Abbot could supply it.

Godw. ibid.
David Poole, David Poole.
a Doctor of Law and Deane of the Arches, succeeded him, and was deprived the
first year of Queen Elizabeth for Popery, and denying her Supremacy.

Will^am Pierce, William P^erce^
one of the late Bishops of this Diocese, was a very turbulent man both to
Ministers and people, playing the same prankes there, as he has since more
plentifully exercised in his Diocese of Bath and Wells, whither he was
translated; of his misdemeanors and impeachment for them by the Parliament, you
have already heard.

Doctor Lyndsie, Lyndsey.
who succ^eded him (a great creature and servant of La^d and Neale) was an
earnest promoter of the book of pastimes on the Lords day, a great champion
for the Arminians, and all the late Innovations in doctrine, ceremony or
worship introduced among us, a bitter enemy to preaching, Lecturers, Lectures
and godly people, whom he opposed all he might: Being translated to Hereford,
he would there needs visit the Cathedral, Deane and Chapter (being a
donative) by his own Episcopal power, and would turn the Communion Table
there Altarwise; the Deane and Chapter in defense of their privileges
with-stood him, and would neither turn their Table, nor suffer him to visit:
whereupon he fell into such a raging choler and passion as presently put him
into a fit of the stone, whereof he dyed within few days after.

John the present Bishop of this S^e stands now impeached by the House of
Commons, John.
for the last Canons, Oath, and Benevolences made and granted in the late
pretended Synod.

Gloucester.
THe Bishopric of Godwin. Cat. Edit. 2. page 495, 496.
Gloucester erected in King Henry the eight his reign, wa^ first possessed by
John Wakeman, Abbot of T^ukesbury, and by others since, some popish
persecutors, as James Brooks in Queen Mary's days, the Popes Commissioner
who passed sentence of condemnation against Cranmer, Ridley and Latymer at
Oxford, See Fox Acts and Monuments. vol. 3. p. 649. to 663.
and represented the Popes person there; in which regard these eminent M^rtyrs
would neither bend their knees, nor once move their caps unto him, whereat he
was much offended. Cranmer taxes this Bishop, for being perjured both to the
King and Pope, and violating his oath to both. The succeeding Bishops of this
See, I shall wholly pretermit, and give you only a short account of Godfrey
Goodman, Godfry Goodman.
the present Bishop of this Diocese.

This Prelate has been ever ^eputed a Papist in opinion, if not in practice.
In his book entitled, The fall of man, he maintains some Popish Errors, and
in Parliament ti^e 3. Ca^oli, broached no less then five several points of
flat Popery in one Sermon preached at White-^all before his Majesty, and that
impertinently, neither of them falling within the compass of his text: of
which complaint being made in Parliament, the King enjoined him publicly to
recant those Errors in a Sermon at White Hall; but he instead of recanting,
defended them again; whereupon the King threatened to make him recant in
another manner, and to turn him out of his Bishopric: but the then Duke of
Buckingham, and the other Prelates procured his peace, and translated him from
Rochester (where he then sat Bishop) to Gloucester. In which Diocese
proceeding in his former courses, he turned Communion Tables, rayled them
Altarwise, set up an Altar or two in his own private Chapel with Tapers on
them, (one of which Altars, many say, he dedicated to the Virgin Mary) besides
he set up diverse Crucifixes and Images in the Cathedral at Gloucester and
elsewhere; and after the Popish manner, consecrated diverse Altar-cloathes,
pulpit Clothes, which other vestments for the Cathedral, whereon Crucifixes
were embroydred, to the great scandal of the people. And as if this were not
sufficient to proclaim his Popery to the world; he has bestowed much cost in
repairing the High-crosse at Windsor, where he was a Prebend: On one side
whereof there is a large statue of Christ in colors (after the Popish Garbs in
foreign parts^ hanging on the Cross, with this Latin inscription over it,
Jesus Nazarenus Rex Iudaeorum, in great gilded Letters; On the other side, the
picture of Christ rising out of the Sepulcher, with his body half in, and
half out of it. And to manifest that he is not ashamed of this scandalous
work, it is thereupon engraven, That this was done at the cost of Godfry
Bishop of Gloucester, one of the P^^bends there. Besides he suspended one Master
Ridler minister of Little Deane, some 8 miles from Gloucester, upon the
complaint of some Papists (whom he favou^s) of which there are many in that
parish, for preaching, Th^^ a P^pist living and dying a papist in all points,
could not be saved; enj^y^ing him to make a public Recantation of this his
scandalous and erroneous doctrine (as he termed it, though caught by all
Orthodox Protestant Divines) in the Cathedral Church of Gl^cest^r in a Sermon
there to be preached Febr. 2. 1636. which this minister not retracti^g in his
Sermon, according to the Bishops expectation, he thereupon dre^ up a
Recantation himself, enjoining Master Ridler to p^blish it in the open
Ca^hed^^ll on Mat^hias day following^ which he refusing, was thereupon
suspended, and his suspension openly read in the Cathedral, March the 5. 1636.
This strange Recantation was marked in the front with the Jesuits badge (^HS^)
and began thus. In the name of God Amen. In which he styles the Church of Rome,
the Catholic Church: avers, that we did separate from her only in point of
policy (for which he cites a Sta^ute in King Henry the 8. his reign, as if
there had been no further separation from her sin^e) not in point of
D^ctrines, and in substance determines, that the Church of Rome and our Church
are both one, for we have both the sam^ Hierarchy and government, the same
Liturgy, Holy days, Fasts, Ceremonies, Sacraments, etc. So as those who
affi^m^ that Papists are damned, do but through the sides of the Church of Rome
give a deadly blow to the Church of England, and deny that we are saved. More
such good Romish stuff is expressed in this R^can^ation, over-tedio^s to
recite. Since this, when the New Canons were compiled in the late pretended
Synod, this Bishop at first ref^sed to subscribe them only (as most conceive)
because some of them made literally against Popery, whereupon he was suspended
from his Bishopric for a season; Since this, some Citizens and a Minister of
Gloucester have exhibited a Petition against him in Parliament to prove him
(among other things) to be a Papist or popishly affected, he has been a great
encou^ager of Revells, M^ygames, Morrices, and dancing meetings on the Lords
day, both by his presence at, exhortations to, and rewards for them, causing
one Master Workman, a Reverend minister of Gloucester to be questioned,
suspended and censured in the high Commission, only for preaching against those
profane Sports, and Images, in the very words of our Homilies. Lord's Day.
He has been a great setter forwards of all late Popish Innovations and an
open favourer of Papists; so that when the Petitions against him come to be
fully heard, as they have been in part, I doubt his name and person will but
ill accord: However, if he prove himself a G^od man, at the best he will fall
out to be like his brethren, an [ Ill-B^shop:] I have now run cu^^orily over
our Bishops disloyal seditions, extravagant actions in particular, I shall
give you but two instances more of their Acts in their Convoca^ion, in
general, in affront of our Parliaments and Laws, the one ancient, the other
modern, and so conclude with our English Prelates. The first is this.

In King 1 Ed. 3. c. 1. Holins. p. 328.338. to 340. Walsingham. Hist. Angl. p.
91.92.95.106. Speed. p. 674.
Edward the second his reign Hugh Spencer the Father and Son, who seduced and
abused the King and Kingdom, were banished the Realm by Act of Parliament for
ever, as Traitors and enemies of the King, and of his Realm: the Bishops
consenting and pe^swading the K. to condescend thereunto. Yet after this An.
1319. Hugh S^enc^r the Younger and his Father, Petitioned the King against the
award in Parliament, whereby they were formerly banished and disinherited
without consent of the Prelates, desiring it might be reversed; the King
delivered this Petition to the then Archbishop of Canterbury, (Walter Raynolds)
and his Suffragans, assembled in their Provincial Council, requi^ing to have
their advise and opinion ^herein. The Prelates upon deliberation had (to humor
the King) declared; that in their opinion the said award as touching the
disinheriting and ban^sh^ng ^he Spensers, Fa^h^r and Son, was erroneous, and
not rightly decreed; and for themselves they deemed that they neither did or
could think it reason to consent thereto (though Walsingham writes expressly,
that they perswad^d the King to consent to this banishment) and therefore they
required, that it might be repealed: whereupon the King disanulled the same,
which afterward occasioned much bloodshed, civil wars, and cost Hugh
Spencer the Elder his head, and the King his Crown and Life, in Conclusion.

The later is yet F^esh in memory, to wit, the Canons, etc. Oath, and Subsidies
lately made and granted by our Present Prelates An. 1640. in their pretended
Synod, held and continued against Law, in affront of the Parliament then
dissolved. What strange kind of me^^^ll these Canons and Oath etc. were
compounded of, appears by the perusal of them in the printed Book; and how
culpable our Prelates were in casting, mounting, and discharging them upon the
inferior ministers and people in contempt of our Laws and Liberties, their
late impeachment at the Bar in the Lords house, by the house of Commons will
best demonstrate, the true Copy whereof here ensues.

August the 4. 1641. The Impeachment against the Bishops, sent up by Sergeant
Wild, and delivered at the Bar in the Lords house verbally, by Order of the
House.
MY Lords, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons house of
Parliament, being sensible of the great Infelicities and Troubles which the
Commonwealth h^th sustained by the exorbitant courses of the Bishops, and
knowing well what the wiseman says, Eccles. 8.11. Tha^ i^ sen^^nce be not
speedily executed against ^n evil w^rke, the h^arts ^f the son^e of men are
set upon further mischief: Eccles. 8 11.
(^he timely r^dr^sse whe^eof does better become the wisdom of Parliament^
then a too-late woeful r^pentance;) have commanded me to represent unto your
Lordships, That Walter Bishop of Winchester, Robert Bishop of Coventry and
Litchfield. Godfry Bishop of Gloucester. Joseph Bishop of Ex^ester. John Bishop
of Asaph. William Bishop of Bath and Wells. Geo^ge Bishop of Hereford. Matthew
Bishop of Ely. William Bishop of Bangor. Robert Bishop of Bris^oll. John Bishop
of Roch^ster. John Bish^p of Peterborough. Morgan Bishop of Landaffe.


Together with Willi^m Archbishop of Canterbury, and others of the Clergy of
that Province, at a Convocation or Synod for the same Province begun at London,
in the year 1640. did contrive, make, and promulg^ several Constitutions and
Canons Ecclesiastical, containing in them diverse matters contrary to the Kings
Prerogative, to the fundamental L^wes and Statutes of the Realm, to the
Rights of Parliament, to the Propriety and Liberty of the Subjects, and matters
tending to sedition, and of dangerous consequence.

And to add the more weigh^ and efficacy to this their monstrous design,
They did at the same Synod under a specious and fair Title, grant a
Ben^vol^nce or Contribution to his Majesty, to be paid by the Clergy of that
Province, contrary to Law: It rested not there, for though this had been
enough to have affrighted and terr^fied the Kings people with strange
apprehensions and fears, yet that these might not seem to be contrivancies of
their brain or Fancies o^ly^ they were put in Execution and were executed upon
diverse with animosity and rigor, to the great oppression of the Clergy of this
Realm, and other his Majesty's subjects, and in contempt of the King, and of
the Law.

Whether these persons, my Lords, that are culpable of these Offenses, shall be
thought fit to have an Interest in the Legislative power, your Lordships
Wisdom and Justice is able to judge.

But for these matters and things, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the
Commons House in Parliament, in the name of themselves, and of all the Commons
of England, do impeach the said Bishops before-named of the Crimes and
Misdemeanors before expressed, and do therefore pray that they may be
forthwith put to their Answers in the Presence of the Commons, and that such
further Proceedings may be had against them, as to Law and Justice shall
appertain.

Now that the world may take notice what Power the Clergy in their Con^ocation
have to make Canons and Constitutions to bind the subjects, and of what
validity their late Canons are; I shall avouch the Votes of the Commons House
concerning them, as I find them printed at the end of this Impeachme^t of
Bishops.

The Votes concerning the Bishops late Book of Canons, in the House of Commons.
THat the Clergy of England convented in any Convocation or Synod, or
otherwise, have no power to make any Constitutions, Canons, or Acts whatsoever,
in matter of doctrine, or otherwise, to bind the Clergy or Laity of this Land
without the common consent of Parliament.

That the several Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, treated upon by
the Archbishops of Canturbury and York, Presidents of the Convocation, for the
respective Provinces of Canterbury and York, and the rest of the Bishops and
Clergy of these Provinces, and agreed upon by the Kings Majesty's license, in
their ^everall Synods, begun at London and York, 1640. do not bind the Clergy
or Laity of this Land, or either of them.

And thus I have done with our English Lordly Prelates, whose only study is and
has been to support their Lordly dignity, not true religion, devotion and
piety^ I shall conclude with them in Saint De consider. ad Eugenium, lib. 4.
Bernards words. Vides omnem Ecclesiasticum zelum fervere sola pro dignita^e
tuenda: Honori totum datur, sanctitati nihil, aut parum. Nisi quod sublime est,
hoc salutare dicamus; and quod gloriam redolet, id justum. Ita omne humile
probro ducitur inter Palatinatos. Et tunc potissimum volunt dominari, cum
professi fuerint servitutem. Fideles se spondent, ut opportunius fidentibus
noceant. Ante omnia sapientes sunt ut facia^t mala, b^num autem facere
nesciunt. Hi invisi terrae and coe^o, utrique injecere manus; impii in Deum,
temerarii in sancta, seditiosi in invicem, aemuli in vicinos, inhumani in
extraneos, quos neminem amantes, amat nemo. Hi sunt, qui subesse non sustinent,
praeesse non norunt, superioribus infideles, inferioribus importabiles.
Docuerunt linguam suam grandia loqui, cum operentur exigua, Blandissimi
adulatores, and mordacissimi detractores, simplicissimi dissimulatores, and
malignissimi Proditores. O miserandam Sponsam talibus creditam Paranymphis, qui
assignata cultui ejus, proprio retinere quaestui non verentur. Non amici
profecto Sponsi, sed aemuli sunt. Erunt inquam hujusmodi maximo studio
corrigendi, ne pereant; aut ne perimant, coercendi.

CHAP. VII. Containing the several Treasons, Rebellions, Seditions, Schisms,
Contumacies, Wars, and disloyalties of the Bishops of France, Normandy,
Scotland, and Ireland, with reference unto the Kings of England.
HAving thus passed through the Treasons, Rebellions, Seditions, Wars, and
disloyal practices of our English Lordly Prelates, I shall here in the next
place give you a taste of the like crimes and practices of some French, Norman
Prelates against our Kings, their Sovereigns, either here or in Normandy; and
likewise of the Bishops of Scotland, and Ireland; which I thought meet to
couple with our English Prelates, these Kingdoms being now happily united
under the Government of our gracious Sovereign, and his deceased Father.

French and Norman Bishops Acts of this kind.
I shall begin with Saint German Bishop of A^xerre in France, St. GERMAN.
of whom it is storyed, Poly^h^^^. l. 5. c. 1. Ribaden^ira l^s fl^urs des vie^
des Saints. part 2 p. 71.72. Vincentii speculum hist. l. 20. c. 11. Ant^ni^i
chron. Tit. 11. c. 18. sect. 3. f. 51. b. See part 1. before p. 224.
that coming into England in King Vortigerns time, and repairing to his Court
with his Companions in a cold frosty night, the King shut him out and would
give him no lodging; which the Kings Herdsman seeing, taking pity upon them,
and commiserating their affliction, lodged them in his house, and killed a
calfe, which they did eat at supper: whose bones Saint German commanded to be
brought to him when supper was ended, and putting them all into the Calves
skin, he miraculously rais^d up the Cal^e again from the dead, (whereas Christ
and his Apostles never raised any dead beast, but dead men only) and put him
to his damme, where he sell a eating hay. And on the next day by command from
God (as some writers affirm) German deposed Vortigerne from his Kingdom, and
made the Herdsman King in his place, to the great admiration of all men: and
from thence forth the King^ of the Britains descended from the race of this
Herdsman. But Gildas in his History says, that this happened not to
Vortigerne, but to King Powes, named Beuly, whose successors in that part of
Wales issued from this Herdsmans race. Our learned Martyr See his supplication
to King Henry the 8. p. 190.
Doctor Barnes reciting this story and Legend out of Petrus de Natalibus
concludes thus. I think no man will bind me to prove this thing (of the
Calfe) a lie, and yet it must be preached and taught in each Church, it must be
written in holy Saints lives, and he ^ust be a Saint that did it, and why?
because he deposed a King, and set in a Nea^esherd.

ODO Bishop of Bayeux.
Odo W^llie^mus Malmesb. De Gestis Regum Angl. l. 4. p, 120 121. Holinsherd. p.
17, 18, Henry Huntindon Hist. l. 7. p, 372, 373, etc.
Bishop of Bayeux, was at first in great estimation with his Brother William
the Conqueror, and bare great rule under him; till at last for envy that
Lanfranke was preferred before him, he conspired against him: who understanding
thereof committed him to Prison, where he remained, till the said Prince then
lying on his death bed, released and restored him to his former liberty. When
the King was dead, William Rufus took him back into England, supposing no
less than to have had a special friend, and a trusty Counselor of him in
all his affairs. But ere long after his coming thither, he fell again into
the same offense of ingratitude, whereof he became culpable in the Conquerours
days. For perceiving that Lanfranke Arch Bishop of Canterbury was so highly
esteemed with the King, that he could bear no rule, and partly suspecting that
Lanfrancke had been chief cause of his former imprisonment, he suffered Duke
Robert to bereave his Brother King William Rufus of the dominion of England all
he might, and conspired with the rest, against his Nephew: and thereupon writ
sundry Letters unto Duke Robert, counselling him to come over with an army in
all h^ste, to take the rule upon him, which by his practice should easily be
compassed; Duke Robert, thus animated, pawnes the County of Constance to his
younger Brother Henry for a great sum of gold; and therewith returned answer
to the said Bishop, that he should provide and look for him upon the South
coast of England, at a certa^ne ^ime appointed. Hereupon Odo fortified the
Castle of Rochester, and began to make sore wars against ^he Kings friends in
Kent, and procured his other accomplices also to do the like in other parts of
the Realm. And first on the West part of England, Geoffrey Bishop of Constans,
with his Nephew Robert de Mowbray Earl of Northumberland, setting forth from
Bristow, took and sacked Bath and Be^kley, with a great part of Wiltshire, and
brought the spoil to Bristow, where they fortified the Castle for their
greater safety. Robert de Bygod over-rode and robbed all the Countries about
Norwich, and Hugh de Grandwesuit spoiled and wasted all the Coun^ries about
Leicester; And Robert Mountgomery Earl of Shrew^bury, with William Bishop of
Durham, and others, wasted the Country with fire and sword, killing, and taking
great numbers of people where they came. Afterward coming to Worcester they
assaulted the City, and burnt the Suburbs: But Bishop Wolstan being in the
Town, encouraged the Citizens to resist; who by his exhortation sallying out
of the City, when the enemies waxed negligent, they slew and took above 5000.
men of them in one day. Archbishop Lanfranke in the mean^ time, whilst the
Realm was thus troubled by Odoes means on each side, writes to, and
admonishes all the Kings friends, to make themselves ready to defend their
Prince. And when they were assembled with their forces, he counseled the King
to march into the ^ield speedily with them, to repress his enemies The King
following his counsel, commanding first all unjust Imposts, Taxes and Tallages
to be laid down, and promising to restore such favorable Laws as the people
should desire, to ingratiate himse^fe with h^s Subjects; marches with a mighty
army into Kent, where the sedition began^ takes Tunbridge and Horne-Castle, and
afterward b^seigeth Bishop Odo in the Castle of Pemsey^ which the Bishop had
strongly fortified. Robert landing with a great Army in England during this
siege, Odo through want of victual was glad to submit himself, and promised
to cause the Castle of Rocheste^, to be delivered, but at his coming thi^her,
they within the City suffered him to enter, and straightwayes laid him fast in
P^^son. Some judge that this was done under a color by his own consent. But
the King besieging the City, they within were glad ^o deliver i^ up into his
hand^. Thus lost Bishop Odo all his Livings and dignities in England, and so
returned into Nor^andy; where under Duke Robert, he had the chief government
of the Country committed to him.

Anno Roger^^ de H^veden Annal. pars posterior, p. 768. to 778.795 Holinshed p.
150, 151. Neubrig. hist. l. 5. c. 22. Antiqu. ^ccles. Bri. p. 140. Mat. Westminster.
An. 1196 p. 71.
Dom. 1196. Earl John, King Richard the first his Brother, with his forces
riding forth into the Country about Beauvois, made havocke in robbing and
spoiling all a^ore him. Anon as Phillip the Bishop of Beauvois (a man more
given to the Camp then to the Church) had knowledge hereof, thinking them to
be a mee^e prize for him, with Sir William de Merlow and his Son, and a great
number of other valiant men of war, came forth into the fields, and
encoun^ring with the enemies, fought very stoutly; But yet in the end the
Bishop, the Archdeacon and all the chief Captains were taken, the residue
slain and chased; After this Earl John and Marchades presented the two
Prelates with great triumph unto King Richard early in the morning, The Bishop
of Beau^^is taken Prisoner^
lying yet in his bed, as those that were known to be his great enemies,
saying to him in French, Rise Richard, rise, we have gotten the great Chantor
of Beauvois, and a good Quire man (as we take it) to answer him in the same
note, and here we deliver them unto you to use at your discretion. The King
seeing them smiled, and was very glad for the taking of this Bishop, for that
he had ever found him his great adversary; And therefore being thus taken
fighting in the field with armor on his back, thought he might be bold in
temporal wise to chastise him, since he (not regarding his calling) practiced
to molest him with temporal weapons. Whereupon he committed him to close
Prison, all armed as he was. It chanced soon after, that two of his Chaplains
came unto the King to Roven where this Bishop was detained, beseeching the King
of License to attend upon their Master now in captivity; unto whom (as it is of
some reported) the King made this answer: I am c^ntent to make you Iudge^ in
the cause betwixt me and your Master; as for the evils which he has either
done, or else gone about to do unto me, let the same be forgotten. This is
true, that I being taken as I returned from my journey made into the holy Land,
and delivered into the Emperors hands, was in respect of my Kingly state, used
according thereunto very friendly, and honorably, till your Master coming
thither (for what purpose he himself best knows) had long conference with
the Emperor. After which, I for my part, in the next morning tasted the fruit
of their over-nights talk, being then laden with as many Irons as a good Ass
might not very easily have borne. Judge you therefore what manner of
imprisonment your Master deserved at my hands, that procured such ease for me
at the Emperors hands. These two Chaplains had their mouths stopped with
these words thus by the King uttered, and so departed their ways. The Bishop
being still detained in Prison, procured suite to be made to the Pope for his
deliverance, writing a Letter to the Pope against the King for this hard usage,
recorded by Hoveden; whereupon the Pope writ a Letter to the King in his
behalf, to importune his release. But the Pope being truly informed of the
matter, and wisely considering, that the King had not taken the Bishop
Preaching but fighting, and kept him prisoner rather as a rough enemy, then as
a peaceable Prelate, would not be earnest with the King for his deliverance,
but rather reproved the Bishop, In that he had preferred secular warfare
before the spiritual, and had taken upon him the use of a Spear, instead of a
Crosier, an Helmet, instead of a Miter, an Herbergean, instead of a white
Rocket, a Targe^ for a Stoale, and an iron Sword, in lieu of the spiritual
Sword; and therefore he re^used to use any Commandment to King Ric^ard for the
setting o^ him at Liberty: But yet he promised to do what he could, by way of
entreating, that he might be released. It is reported by some Writers, that the
Pope at first not understanding the truth of the whole circumstance, should
send to King Richard, commanding him by force of the Canons of the Church, to
deliver his Sons, the Bishop and Archdeacon, out of their captivity. To whom
the King sent their Armor, with this message written in Latin, Vide an tunica
filii tui si^, an non: that is, See whether these are the garments of thy
Sons or not: alluding to the saying of those that carried Joseph's coa^e to
Jacob: Which when the Pope saw, he said, Nay by Saint Peter, it is neither the
apparel of my Sons, nor yet of my Brethren, but rather they are the vestures
of the children of Mars; and so he left them still to be ransomed at the Kings
pleasure. The Bishop thus seeing no hope to be delivered without some agreement
had betwixt the two Kings, became now, through irkesomnesse of his bonds an
earnest mediator for peace, whereas he had been before an extreme stirrer up
of war. Such a Schoolmaster, is imprisonment, and plucker down of lofty
courages. But not prevailing, he plots how to make an escape. When Queen
Elionor ^ing Richards Mother came to Rhoane, she sent for this Bishops keep^rs,
to permi the Bishop to come to her lodging to sp^ake with her; which although
it were dangerous, yet they unwill^ng to resist the Queens sui^e, pe^mit^ed
him to go out of the Towe ga^es fe^^e^ed, with themselves accompanying him: As
they passed b^ a Church, the Bishop ran to the door th^ugh (...), as well as
he could, and laying hold on the Ring of the Chur^h^ cried out with a loud
vo^ce saying, I demand the peace of God and the Church. At which speech his
Keepers much troubled, laid hands on him, pul^ed him from the Church door, and
brought him back aga^ne to the Tower, where they kept him more stricktly then
before. Which ^he King hearing of, sent him to Chine, to be kept close
Prisoner. After this he offered King Richard 10000 marks for his enlargement,
which he refused. But King John coming to the Crown, at the Popes request
rel^ased him ^or 2000. He taking a solemn Oath before the Cardinal and other
Ecclesiastickes, that he would never all his life after, bear arms against
Christians, as he had cause^ now no^ to do.

Walter Archbishop of Rhoan Normandy interdicted by the Ar^hbishop of R^ven An
Reg. 8. Hoveden Annal. pars. posterio, ^. 765; 76^. Matthew Paris, An. 1196. p.
175. Matthew Westminster, An. 1196. p. 70, 71.
About the same time Walter, Arch bishop of Roven, at the instigation of the
French King, pu^ all the Country of Normandy under sen^ence of in^erdiction,
because King Richard had begun to sort ^he a Ca^^le at Lisse Dandely upon a
piece of ground which the Archbishop c^aim^d to appertain unto hi^ See. The
Archbishop would ^y no meane^ release the interdict, So as the bodies ^f dead
men lay unbu^yed through all the Villages and streets of the C^ties of
Normandy. Hereupon, the King much troubled at the A^chb^shops dealing, whom he
had advanced and much employed, s^nds ^o Rome to the Pope to hear the cause
between them; The matter being brought before the Pope, he perceiving the
intent of King Richard, was not otherwise grounded upon an^ covetous purpose,
to defraud the Church o^ her right, but one^y to bu^ld a fortress in such
place as was most expedient for defense of the Country about, to preserve it
from invasion of the enemies, counseled the Archbishop, no^ to s^and against
the King in it, but to exchange with him for some other Lands, which was done,
and the interdiction by the Pope released. This Archbishop was a great
warrior, bore great sway in England, during King Richards absence and
captivity, and troubled the Realm very much with taxes and wars.

Before I come to the Prelates of Scotland, I shall insert one story of a
Patriarch of Jerusalem, who affronted our King Henry the second to his face,
in a shameful manner. The story is this.

Heraclius Fabian^ Chron. part 7. p. 353, 354. c. 239. Polychron l. 7. c. 24.
Matth^w Paris, Hist. Ang. p. 137 Hoved. fol. 358. Speeds H^^t. p. 52^. sect. 88.
Patriarch of Jerusalem came into England in the thirtyeth year of King Henry
the second, and made busy request to him against the Saracens, proffering him
the keys of Jerusalem, and of our Lords grave, with Letters of Pope Lucius the
third, charging him, that he should take upon him the Kingdom of Jerusalem,
with the royal Standard of the Kingdom as due unto him, and likewise make a
royal voyage thither in proper person with an army for the security thereof,
and to have mind of the Oath that he before time had made. The King deferred
his answer, and Baldwin the Arch bishop Preached, and exhorted men to take the
Cross, by whose means many there were that avowed that journey. The King at
last, by the advice of his whole Council and Parliament, gave this answer,
that he might not leave his Land without keeping, nor yet leave it to the prey
and robbery of the French men; but he would give largely of his own to such as
would take upon them that voyage. With this answer Hera^lius was discontented,
and said, we seek a man and not money, well near every Christian Region
sends to us money, but no Land sends to us a Prince. But the King laid for
him such excuses, that the Patriarch departed from him discontented and
comfortless. Whereof the King being advertised, entending somewhat to
recomfort him with pleasant words followed him to the Sea side. But the more
the King thought to satisfy him with his fair speech, the more the Patriarch
was discontented, in so much, that at last he said unto him. Hitherto thou have
reigned gloriously, but hereafter thou shall be forsaken of him that thou at
this time forsakest; think on him what he has given to thee, and what thou
have yielded to him again; How first thou were false to the King of France,
and after slew Thomas Becket, and last of all, thou forsakest the Protection of
Christ's Faith. The King was moved with these word^ and said unto the
Patriarch. Though all the men of the Land were one body, and spoke with one
mouth, they durst not speak ^o me such words. No wonder (said the Patriarch)
for they love thine and not thee, That is to mean, they love thy goods
temporal, and fear the loss of promotion, but they love not thy soul. And
when he had so said, he offered his head to the King, saying; Do by me right
as thou did by Thomas Becket, for I had rather be slain of thee, then of the
Sarasens, for thou art worse then any Sarasen, and they follow a prey and not a
man. But the King kept his patience and said, I may not wend out of my Land,
for my own Sons will arise against me when I am absent. No wonder (said the
Patriarch) for of the devil they came, and to the devil they shall, and so
departed from the King in great ire. So rudely have Prelates dealt with the
greatest Princes, as thus both in words and deeds, to revile and contemn them,
as if they were their slaves to be at their command, though with the hazard of
their lives, Crowns and Kingdoms, upon every humor. I now pass on to the
Scottish Prelates.

The Bishops of Scotlands acts in this kind.
TO pass from Normandy to Scotland; before I enter into a Relation of any of
the Scottish Prelates actions; I shall inform you what Holinshed his History of
Scotland. p. 183.
Holinshed writes of King David's erection of Bishoprics in Scotland, and his
endowing of them with large temporal possessions. This Church in the original
plantation of the Gospel having been governed only by Presbyters, and
wanting Bishops for some hundred of years, following herein the custom of the
Primitive Church, as Scot. chron. l. 3, c. 8.
John Fordon, De Gestis Scot. l. 2. c. 3.
John Major, De Brit. Eccle. primordiis p. 800
Bishop Usher, and Council p. 342.
Spelman testify; David King of Scots erected four Bishoprics, within this
Realm, Rosse, Brochin, Dunkeld and Dublaine, indowing them with rich Rents,
fair Lands, and sundry right commodious possessions. Moreover, he translated
the Bishops See of Murthlake unto Aberden, for sundry advised considerations,
augmenting it with certain revenues, as he thought expedient. He was
admonished (as the report goes) in his sleep, that he should build an Abbey
for a religious Order, to live in together; Holyrood house builded.
Whereupon he sent for workmen into France, and Flanders, and set them in hand
to build this Abbey of Canons regular, as he was admonished, dedicating it in
the honor of a Cross (whereunto he bare special devotion) for that very
strangely it slipped into his hands on a time, as he was pursuing and following
of a Heart in the Chase: But enough of these Monkish devises. Many prudent men
blame greatly the unmeasurable liberality of King David; Liberality in King
David toward the Church reproved.
which he used toward the Church, in diminishing so hugely the revenues of the
Crown, being the cause that many Noble Princes his Successors, have come to
their final ends, for that they have been constrained through want of
treasure to maintain their royal estates, to procure the fall of sundry great
Houses, to possess their Lands and livings; also, to raise payments and
exactions of the Common people, to the utter impoverishment of the Realm. And
sometime they have been constrained to invade England by wars, as desperate
men not caring what came of their lives. Other whiles they have been enforced
to stamp naughty money to the great prejudice of the Common wealth. All which
mischiefs have followed since the time that the Church has been thus
enriched, and the Crown impoverished. The Church enriched, and the Crown
impoverished.
Therefore King James the first, when he came to King David's Sepulcher at
Dunfirmling, he said; The saying of King James the first.
that he was a sore Saint for the Crown. A sore Saint. John Major.
Meaning that he left the Church over-rich, and the Crown too poor. For he
took from the Crown (as John Major writes in his Chronicles) 60000. pound
Scottish of yearly revenues; 60000. pound in Lands given to the Church.
Wherewith he endowed those Abbyes. But if King David had considered how to
nourish true Religion, he had neither endowed Churches with such riches, nor
built them with such royalty, for the superfluous possessions of the Church (as
they are now used) are not only occasion to evil Prelates to live in most
insolent pomp and corrupt life, Superfluous possessions of the Church.
but an assured Net to draw gold and silver out of Realms. Thus Holinshed of
the Bishops and Bishoprics of Scotland in general.

In a Will. Harinson descrip. Eng. l. 2. c. 2. p. 140.
Convocation at Fairefax under King Gregory, Anno, 875. It was decreed by the
Bishops of Scotland, that Ordinaries and Bishops should have authority to order
all men, both public and private (yea Kings themselves) as well for the
keeping of Faith given, as to constrain them to confirm the same, and to
punish such as should be found in the contrary. This was a high strain of
insolency and treachery against the Prerogative of the King and Nobles
privileges, whom these Prelates endeavored to enthrall to their Lordly
pleasures; and perchance it was in affront of King David's Law who ordained Anno
860. (but 15. years before) that Priests should attend their Cures, and not
intermeddle with secular businesses, or keep Horses, Hawks, or Hounds. A very
good Law, had it been as well executed.

Anno Walsi^gham hist. Angl. p. 28. Annals of Ireland in Master Cambden. p.
160, 161.
1294. the Scots conspiring together against their Sovereign Lord and King,
John Bailiol, rose up in arms against him, and enclosing him in a Castle, they
elected to themselves twelve Peers after the manner of France; whereof the
four first were Bishops, by whose will and direction all the affairs of the
Kingdom should be managed. And this was done in despite to disgrace the King
of England, who set the said John over them against their wills. Whereupon the
King of England brought an Army toward Scotland, in Lent following, to
repress the rash arrogance and presumption of the Scots^ against their own
Father and King; and miserably wasted the Country, overrunning it quite, and
making both them and their King whom he took Prisoner, to do homage, and
swear feal^y, and give pledges to him as Hist. Anglic p. 31, 32, 33, 34, 36
Walsingham reci^es more at large. Among these Bishops it seems that the
Bishop of ^lascow was one of the chief opposites against the King of Scotland
and England, for Anno 1298. I find this Bishop one of the chief Captains of
the Rebellious Scots, and leading an Army in the field; which being disbanded
for fear of the English forces, upon promise of pardon, this Bishop Ne
proditionis notam incurreret, lest he should incur the brand of treason,
rendered himself to Earl Warren sent into Scotland with an Army, who committed
him prisoner to the Castle of Rok^burrow, for a Rebel, where he was detained.

Wimundus Bishop of the Isles
William of Hist. l. 1. c. 23, 24.
Neubery records; Tha^ David King of Scots was divinely chastised by one
Wimundus, an English man of obscure parents, made Bishop of the Scottish
Islands; who waxing proud of his Bishopric, began to attempt great matters:
Not content with the dignity of his Episcopal Office, he did now in his mind
walk in great and wonderful matters above himself, having a mouth speaking
great things, with a most vain heart. In conclusion, gathering together Poor
and bold men, no^ fearing the judgment of verity, he gave out himself to be
the Son of Count Murrey, spoiled of the inheritance of his Fathers, by the
King of Scots; that he had an intention no^ only to prosecute his right, but
likewise ^o revenge his wrongs; that he desired to have them, the Consorts both
of his danger and fortune^ that i^ was a business verily of some labor and
danger, but of great reputation, and much emolument. All of them therefore
being animated by, and sworn to his words, he began cruelly to play Rex
through the Neighbor Islands, and he was now like Nemroth, A mighty hunter
before the Lord, disdaining according to the duty of his Episcopal Office, to
be a Fisher of Men, like Peter, his Millitary troops increasing daily, amongst
whom, he being taller than the rest, almost by the head and shoulders, like a
great General, inflamed the minds of all the rest. He made excursions into
the Provinces of Scotland, exterminating all things with rapines and murders;
and when as a royal Army was sent against him, retyring himself into remote
Forests, or ^lying back into the Ocean, he eluded all their warlike
preparations; and the Army retyring, he brake out again out of his lurking
places, to infest the Provinces. When therefore he prospered in all things, and
became now terrible, even to the King himself; a certain Bishop a most simple
man, mi^aculously repressed his violence for a time; to whom, when he
denouncing war, threatened utter devastation, unless he would pay him a
tribute; He answered, The will of the Lord be done, for by my example, never
shall any Bishop be made the tributary to another Bishop. Therefore, having
exhorted his people, he meets him coming with fury, only greater than he in
Faith, but far unlike him in other things, and for the encouragement of his
Soldiers, he himself giving the first stroke of the battle, casting a small
Axe at him, by Gods good pleasure prostrated the enemy marching in the front:
With whose fall the people being encouraged, rann^ violently upon the Robbers,
and slaying a great part of them, compelled the most fierce captain unmanfully
to fly. This, he himself was wont afterward to relate among his friends with
mirth, as glorying, That only God could over come him by the Faith of a simple
Bishop. After this, resuming his Forces, he wasted the I^lands and Provinces of
Scotland, as at first: Whereupon the King was compelled to appease this Robber;
to which end using better counsel than formerly, he ^esolved, to deal wisely
with a proud and cra^ty enemy, with whom he could not deal valiantly:
Therefore granting to him a certain Province, with the monastery of Furnace,
he suspended his excursions for a time. But when as he gloriously passed
through the subdued Province like a King, with a powerful army, and became
exceeding troublesome to the Monastery it self of which he had been a Monk;
by the consent of the Nobles (who hated either his power, or his insolence)
some Inhabitants of the said Province laid wait for him: and having gotten a
convenient time, when as he followed the multitude he had sent before him to
his lodging, with a slow pace, and a small guard, they apprehending him, bound
him and put out both his eyes, because both were wicked: and cutting off the
cause of a virulent race, they gelt him (writes my Author) for the peace of the
Kingdom of Scotland, not for the Kingdom of Heaven: This Bishop, thus
emasculated, afterward came to Belleland, and there continued quiet many
years till his death; Yet he is reported then to have said, that if he had the
eye but of a Sparrow, his Enemies should no way insult off their Acts against
him. So Neubrigens^s. If all our Lordly Bishops were gelt like this, for the
peace of the Kingdom, both of Scotland and England, that we might be no more
troubled with this their Lordly virulent generation in ^uture ages, I presume
it would be as great a blessing, as could befall both Kingdoms and Churches.

Holinshed Hist. of Scot. p. 196. Adam Bishop of Cathnes slain by the people
of that Country.
About the year 1230. Adam Bishop of Cathnes.
the men of Cathnes, sore offended with their Bishop, named Adam, for that upon
refusal to pay their Tithes, he had accursed and excommunicated them, fell upon
him within his own house; And first scourging him with Rods, at length set
fire upon him, and burnt him within his own kitchen: Which Act being reported
to the Sco^tish King Alexander, as then sojourning at Edinburgh, he hasted
forth with all speed to punish the offenders, Straight execution.
not ceasing till he had taken 400^. of them all which number he caused to be
hanged; and for that he would have no succession to come of such a wicked seed,
he appointed all their Sons to lose their stones. The place where they were so
gelded, is called even to this day the Stony-hill. The Stony-hill.
The Ea^le of Cathnes, for that he neither succored the Bishop in time of
need, nor yet sought to punish the offenders that did this cruel deed, was
deprived of his Earldom, The Earl of Cathnes loses his Lands.
and the Lands belonging to the same. The Pope highly commended King Alexander,
King Alexander commended of the Pop^^
for this punishment taken of them that had so cruelly murdered their Bishop.
Thus was one small cruelty occasioned by this Bishops covetousness, and
perverseness, punished with a far greater; yea, such a one as is hardly
parralleld in story; and that by the instigation of the Prelates and Pope, who
applauded this barbarous cruelty. Had all Lordly, Traytorly, Rebellious, and
Seditious Prelates been thus gelded, that no succession might spring from
their wicked seed, to infest both Church and State, it had been a more
profitable and commendable action, than the gelding of these poor Laymen.

King Holinsh. History of Scotland, p. 291.
James the fourth, Will. Elfing^tone Bishop of Aberdin^.
Anno 1504. when he had formerly ministered justice so amongst his Subjects,
that they lived in great peace and quietness, William Elfinstone Bishop of
Aberdene, one of his Counsel, devised ways to win the King great profit and
gain, by calling his Barons, and all those that held any Lands within this
Realm, to show their evidences by way of recognition; and if they had not
sufficient writings to show, warrantabl^ by the antecedent Laws of the
Kingdom, the Lands should remain at the Kings pleasure. But when the King
perceived his people to grudge herewith, and not without ca^se, as with a thing
devised to disquiet his people and the whole Country; of his own courteous
nature he easily agreed with the possessors of such Lands: For the which he
purchased great love amongst his people, and the Bishop, the deviser of this
Ordinance, wanne passing great hatred and malice. Gawin Bishop of Dunkeld.


Anno. 1521. Holish. History of Scotland, p. 307.
A Parliament was summoned to be kept at Edinburgh, the 26. of January, and a
general Sommons of for^eiture proclaimed at the Market Cross in Edinburgh,
wherein diverse were sommoned to make their appearance in the said Parliament,
to be tried for sundry great offenses by them committed: Whereupon Gawin
Dowglasse Bishop of Dunkeld hearing of this Proclamation (though not named in
it) conscious to himself of great offenses, fled into England, and remained a^
London in the Savoy, where he dyed.

Anno 1569. Martyns History, p. 552.
There was a great rebellion in the North by the Earls of Westmorland and
Northumberland and others: Bishop of Rosse.
Murray then Regent of Scotland, informed Queen Elizabeth, that the Bishop of
Rosse, then in England was the Author of that Rebellion, whereupon he was
committed to the Bishop of London, to remain his Prisoner.

As the Archbishops of Canterbury Primates of all England, have been the
greatest Traitors and Incendiaries of all other our Prelates; so have the
Bishops and Archbishops of Saint Andrews, Primates of all Scotland, been the
like in that Realm, of which I shall give you a taste.

John Scot. Roger de Hoveden Annalium pars posterior, p. 597, ^98, 599^ 614, to
617, 621.646, to 649.
In the year of our Lord 1180. Richard Bishop of Saint Andrews deceasing,
there arose a great Schism about the election of a new Bishop; for the canons
of the Church of S. Andrews, elected John Scot for their Bishop, and William
King of Scots, made choice of Hugh his Chaplain, and caused him to be
consecrated by the Bishops of his Kingdom, notwithstanding the said John's
appeal to the Pope. Whereupon Pope Alexander sent Alexis a Subdeacon of the
Church of Rome into Scotland, to hear and determine the controversy between
these two competitors: Who after a long debate, finding, that the said John was
Canonically elected, and that Hugh after the appeal to the Pope, was violently
intruded by the King into the Bishopric of Saint Andrews, immediately
deposed him from his Bishopric, and by his authority imposed perpetual
silence on him; confirmed the election of John, and caused him to be
consecrated Bishop of Saint Andrews, by the Bishops of Scotland, the King
neither prohibiting nor contradicting it, yea, permitting it by the Counsel of
the Bishops of his Realm. But immediately after his consecration, the King
prohibited him to stay within his kingdom: and Hugh carried himself as
Bishop, no less than he did before his deprivation; and taking with him the
Episcopal Chaplet, Staff, and Ring, with other things, he unlawfully
detaining them, and beginning his journey toward Rome, departed. And because
he would not restore the things he carried away, Allexis excommunicated him,
interdicted his Bishopric, and the Pope confirmed that sentence. Hereupon the
Pope writes three Letters; one to the Bishops, Abbots, and Prelates of all
Scotland, the Prior of Saint Andrews, and the Clergy and people of that
Diocese, honorably to receive John as their Bishop, within 8 days after the
receipt of this Letter, and to submit unto him as their Bishop; and putting on
the spirit of fortitude to labor wisely and manfully for the preservation of
Ecclesiastical Justice, and to endeavor to appease the Kings displeasure; But
if the King were averse, or inclining to the Counsel of wicked men, then they
ought to obey God and the holy Church of Rome more than men; otherwise he must
and would ratify the sentence which Hugh Bishop of Durham had pronounced
against the contumacious and rebellious. Another Letter to all the Bishops and
Prelates of Scotland, to denounce Hugh excommunicated, and to avoid his company
as an excommunicate Person, till he restored to John, the goods of the Church
he had taken away, and given him competent satisfaction for the things he had
destroyed. Moreover, the Pope granted to Roger Archbishop of York, a power
Legatine in Scotland, and commanded him that he, together wi^h Hugh, Bishop of
Durham, should denounce a ^entence of excommunication against the King of
Scotland, and interdict his Kingdom, unless he would permit the said John to
hold his Bishopric in peace, and give security to him to keep the peace; And
the same Pope strictly commanded John, by virtue of his canonical obedience,
that neither act of love, nor fear o^ any man, nor through any man's suggestion
or will, he should rashly presume to relinquish the Church of Saint Andrews,
to which he was consecrated, and in which he was confirmed by Apostolical
authority, nor presume to receive another Bishopric; adding, that if he
should attempt it, he would take away both Bishoprics from him without
exception. After which, Pope Alexander writ a Letter to King William himself,
enjoining him thereby within twenty days after the receipt thereof, to give
peace and security to the Bishop: and to receive him unto his favor, so that
he ought not to doubt the Kings indignation; Alioquin noveritis, etc. Else he
should know, that he had commanded Roger Archbishop of York, Legate of the
Apostolic See in Scotland, to put his Kingdom under interdict, and to
excommunicate his person notwithstanding any appeal. And that he should know
for certain, that if he persisted in his violence, as he had formerly labored
that his kingdom might have liberty, so he would thenceforth do his
endeavor, Vt in pristinam subjectionem revertatur, that it should revert unto
its Priestine subjection: (He meant, I take it, not to himself but to
England;) But the King obeying in nothing, his Apostolical mandates, expelled
John, Bishop of Saint Andrews, and Matthew, Bishop of Aberden, his Uncle, o^t
of his kingdom; Whereupon Roger Archbishop of York, Hugh Bishop of Durham,
and Alexis prosecuting the Popes command, Pronounced a Sentence of
Excommunication against the Kings person, and a sentence of Interdict against
his Kingdom. And John on the other side, fulminated a sentence of
excommunication against Richard de M^rtue Constable of Scotland, and other of
the Kings familiars, who disturbed the peace between the King and him; And
Roger of York, and Hugh of Durham, likewise enjoined the Prior of Saint
Andrews, and all Ecclesiastical persons within the Diocese, to come to John
their Bishop, and yield due subjection to him; else they would pronounce a
sentence of suspention against them, as contumacious and rebellious. And when
as certain Ecclesiastickes of the Diocese, for fear of the said suspension,
came to the said John, the King cast them all out of his kingdom, with their
children and kindred, and with their very sucking children, yet lying in their
swathing cloutes and hanging on their Mothers breasts; Whose miserable
proscription and exile, the foresaid Roger of York, and Hugh of Durham
beholding, Reiterated their former excommunication and interdiction; Commanding
all Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and Ecclesiastical persons, firmly, and
unmoveably to observe the same, and very warily to shun the King himself, as
an excommunicate Person. Not long after Roger of York fell sick and dyed,
which the King of Scot^ hearing, rejoiced exceedingly thereat. And taking
advise with the Bishops, Earls, and other wise men of his kingdom, he sent
Ioceline Bishop of Glascow, Arnulfe Abbot of Melros, and others to Pope Lucius
to absolve him from the foresaid Excommunication and interdict; and if they
might by any means, to procure John to be deprived: By whose solicitation the
Pope released the Excommunication and interdict, as appears by his Letter to
the King, recorded at large by Hoveden. After which the Pope sent one Rolland
Elect Bishop of Dole into Scotland, to make peace between the King and John;
who after long debate made this accord; that Hugh should abjure the Bishopric
of Saint Andrewe^; and that John should also release all his claims thereto,
and in leiu thereof should have the Bishopric of Dunkelden, and all the rents
he had before the election, and the Chancery of the King, and forty marks rent
out of the Bishopric of Saint Andrews. But Hugh, when the King required him
to renounce his Bishopric, answered, That he would rather receive his
judgment in the Court of Rome, than thus abjure his Bishopric, to which he
had been consecrated. And forthwith he reproved the Letters which John had
impetrated from Rome against him of falsehood, and appealed to the Pope:
Whereupon Rolland not able to proceed, certified the Pope at large of the
agreement and proceedings. After this John and Hugh appearing before the Pope
and Cardinals at Velletris, their cause was fully heard and debated in their
audience; whereupon, by the common Counsel of his Brethren, he deprived both
of them, and caused them to resign the Bishopric into his hands, freely and
absolutely; And within ^ew days after, by the advice of all the Cardinals,
the Pope restored and confirmed the Bishopric of Saint Andrews to Hugh, and
gave the Bishopric of Dunkelden, with what ever the King formerly offered, to
John. Both the Bishops returning home, received these several Bishoprics;
but because the King would not restore to John the things taken from him; he
questioned Hugh again for the Bishopric of Saint Andrews: For which purpose
he went to Rome, where he procured Hugh to be deposed, (though but newly settled
there before) and brought with him five several Letters from Pope Clement,
touching this business: The first to Iocelin Bishop of Glascow, Matthew Bishop
of Aberden, and others, declaring the deposition of Hugh, and absolving all
within his Diocese from his subjection and obedience; and enjoining them to
elect John, and receive him for their Bishop: The second to William King of
Scots, to receive John into favor, to remove Hugh, and invest John in this
Bishopric: The third to Henry the second, King of England, beseeching,
admonishing, and enjoining him as he tendered the remission of his sins, and
out of his reverence of Saint Peter, and him, diligently to admonish and
persuade the King of Scots, Et si necesse fuerit, districtione regali, qua ei
praemines, and concessa tuae regiae celsitudini potestate compellas, etc. And
if need were, To compel him by his royal distress, whereby he was above him,
and by the power granted to his royal Highness, to lay aside all his rancor
against this Bishop, conceived by the malice of some whisperers, and removing
all excuses to pardon him, and to permit him quietly to enjoy the Diocese of
Saint Andrews, without any further trouble or suite, seeing he was ready, and
prepared to be obedient to the King in all things: The fourth to all the
Clergy, and of the Diocese of Saint Andrews, enjoining them humbly and
devoutly to receive John as their proper Father and Pastor, and fromthenceforth
to give all due reverence and obedience to his wholesome admonitions, and
mandates without any di^^imulation: declaring all elections of any other to the
Bishopric, void, and threatening to put all the Diocese under interdict, if
they presumed to conspire against John, until they should acknowledge their
offense, and submit unto him. The fifth to three Scottish Bishops, and sundry
Abbots, reciting how great persecutions, calamities, and pressures the Church
of Saint Andrews had suffered under the shadow of the Kings indignation; and
what great dangers and labors John had sustained ^or the preservation of the
liberties of the Church committed to him, confirmed by two Popes his
predecessors; and requiring them after the receipt of this Letter, to meet
together like wise and provident men, and to go to the Kings presence, and
diligently to admonish, and induce him to remit the rancor of his indignation
against the said Bishop, and not to contemn the Church of Rome herein, but
without delay wholesomely to obey, and humbly to submit to her, and to their
admonitions, as it was agreeable to his Kingly glory and salvation, and quietly
to permit the Bishop to enjoy the Bishopric of Saint Andrews. And that i^
(which God forbid) he should resist these Apostolical monitions to the peril
of his own salvation, then they should promulgate an i^terdict against his
highness Kingdom, his Person, and all his Favorites and Abettors, within
twenty days, notwithstanding any appeal, by his Apostolical authority: And
should strike those with the like sentence, who were obedient to Hugh, and
fomented him in his obstinacy (seeing the Sea Apostolic had perpetually
removed from Saint Andrews, and excommunicated him) and should publickely
pronounce them to be excommunicated as long as they did thus; and should be
carefully avoided by others, until they should return to the Churches
obedience, and demand the benefit of absolution from John as their Bishop.
Enjoining them farther, to purify and sanctify according to the custom of
the Church, all the Altars, and Chalices, in which Hugh had celebrated, during
his excommunication; and to suspend all the Clerks of Saint Andrews, both
from their office and benefice, and knit them fast in the bond of
excommunication, who should be contumacious and rebellious against John, until
they submitted to him. The King hearing these things, being at last overcome by
the persuasion and entreaty of his friends, received Io^n into his favor; and
granted him peaceably to enjoy the B^shopricke of Dunkelden, and all the Rents
he formerly had before his consecration; upon condition, that John should quite
claim from all suite the Bishopric of Saint Andrews; which notwithstanding
the Popes Letters wherewith he was furnished, he was content to do, and to
submit to the Kings mercy; knowing, That a morsel of bread is better with joy,
than an house full of sacrifice with contention. Hugh being degraded from Saint
Andrews, and excommunicated goes to Rome, and giving caution to stand to the
judgment of the Church, he was mercifully absolved by the Pope, and within few
days after dyed at Rome of the plague with most of his family; Whereupon the
King of Scotland gave the Bishopric of Saint Andrews to Roger the Earl of
Leicestors Son, then his Chancellor, John being present, and not
contradicting it. The same H^^ed^n Annalium pars posteri^^, p. 6512 714.
year 1188. King William sent Messengers to Pope Clement, and obtained of him
Letters of Protection in this form, touching the exemption of the Churches of
his Kingdom. Clemens Episcopus, servus servorum Dei, charissimo in Christo
filio, Willielmo illustri Scotorum Regi, salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem.
Cum universi Christi jugo subjecti ad sedem Apostolicam patrocinium invenire
debeant and favorem, illos tamen specialius conv^nit munim^ne protectionis
confoveri, quorum fidem ac devotionem in pluribus est experta, ut ad ipsius
electionis favorem tanto amplius provocetur, and ejus reverentiae devotiori
affectione subdantur, quanto benevolentiae ipsius and gratiae pignus se
noverint certius assecutos. E^ propter (O charissime in Christo fili)
reverentiam, ac devotionem, quam ad Romanam te habuisse a longis retro
temporibus Ecclesiam novimus, attendentes, praesentis scripti pagina duximus
statuendum, ut Scoticana Ecclesia Apostolicae sedi, cujus filia specialis
existit, nullo mediante debeat subjacere. In qua hae seeds Episcopales esse
noscuntur, Ecclesiae videlicet, S. Andreae, Glascuensis, Dunkeldensis,
Dumblinensis, Brehinensis, Aberdonensis, Moraviensis, Rosensensis, Katinensis,
and nemini liceat nisi Romano Pontifici, vel legato ab ipsius latere destinato,
in regnum Scotiae interdicti, vel excommunicationis sententiam promulgare, and
si promulgata fuerit, decernimus non valere, adjicimus, ut nulli de caetero,
qui de regno Sco^iae non fuerit, nisi quem Apostolica seeds propter hoc de
corpore suo specialiter destinaverit, licitum sit in eo ligationis officium
exercere. Prohibemus autem ut controversiae, quae fuerint in regno illo de
possessionibus ejus exortae, ad examen extra regnum positorum judicum non
trabantur, nisi ad Romanam Ecclesiam fuerit appellatum. Si qua vero scripta
contra hujus libertatis statuta apparuerint impetrata, vel in posterum, istius
concessionis mentione non habita, contigerit impetrari, nullum tibi, vel ipsi
regno circa hujus praerogativae concessionem, praejudicium generetur^ praeterea
libertates, and immunitates tibi, vel eidem regno, vel Ecclesiis in eo
constitutis a praedecessoribus nostris Romany pontificibus indultas, and
hactenus observatas, ratas habemus, and illibatas futuris temporibus statuimus
permanere. Nulli ergo hominum liceat paginam nostrae constitutionis, and
prohibitionis infringere, vel ei aliquatenus contraire. Si quis autem hoc
attentare praesumpserit, indignationem omnipotentis Dei, and beatorum Petri and
Pauli Apostolorum ejus se noverit incursurum. Datum Laterani tertia Idus Martii
pontificatus nostri anno primo. Not long after the same King procured the same
Letter verbatim from Pope Coelestine, H^veden ibid. p. 714.
in the first year of his Papacy. But to return to our Bishops of this See.

Robert de Bruise.
In the year of Grace 1306. Robert de Bruise, invader of another kingdom,
Math. Westminster. An. 1306. p. 456, etc.
and a paricide, like Adonias, caused himself to be Crowned King of Scotland,
in the Abbey of Schone, after the manner of his Country, by the Bishops of
Saint Andrews, and Glascow, the Abbot of Schone, and other conspirators,
contrary to the Oath they and he had taken to King Edward the first: Which was
the occasion of a bloody war, as you may read more at large in our Historians.

Anno 1445. The Earl of H^linshed Hist. of Scot. p. 271.276, 277, 279. James
K^^edie.
Douglas who ruled wholly about King James the second, set the Earl of
Crawford against the Bishop of Saint Andrews called James Kenedy, Sisters
son to King James the first, who took a great prey out of the Bishops Lands
in Fiffe. Whereupon the Earl of Crawford on the one part, and the Earl of
Huntly with the Ogilinde on the other, met at Arbroth in set battle, where the
Earl of Crawford, and 600. more on both sides were slain: King James the
second, Anno 1454. by the advice of this Bishop, dispatched out of the way,
such as he any ways mistrusted, of which number was the Dowglasses, whose
puissance and authority, not without cause, he evermore suspected; he turned
the Earl of Angus, and diverse of the Dowglasses blood that were of their
faction from them, and made them to revolt from the other confederates, so as
in the end he had them all at his pleasure^ Anno 1462. All things at that
season were ordered by the advice and Counsel of this Bishop, who governed the
Realm of Scotland, as well during the minority of James the third, as also in
the days of his Father, King James the second. And was the occasion of many
tumults and wars therein. Graham.


The Francis Thi^. his continuation of H^linsheds history of Scotland, p. 454,
455
Scots ^eeking means to rid th^mselves from subjection of the Bishop of York,
who was anciently the Metropolitan of Scotland, did in the year of Christ
1474. obtain of the Pope, that they might have a Metropolitan See within
themselves, by reason of the continual wars which were between the two
Nations, H^linsh. History of Scotland, London, 1585. p. 282. Mr. Cambdens
Scotia. p. 32, 33.
during which they could neither use appellations to their Metropolitan, nor
have other Bishops consecra^ed. Whereupon the Pope erected the Church of Saint
Andrews into an Arch-Bishopricke in the time of King James the third, touching
which, thus writes Lesleus, li. 8. p. 317. Hoc anno (which was the year of
Christ 1474) Patricius Grahamus sedis Andreapolitanae Ecclesiae Episcopus
crebris literis ac nuntiis a Papa efflagitavit, ut Metropolitana potestas in
divi Andreae civitate figeretur; iniquum esse enim contendit, ut Scoti ab
Eboracensi Episcopo tanquam primate penderent, cum propter crebra bella (
quibus se Scoti and Angli mutuo lacessunt) Scotis ad illum non pateretur tutus
accessus, nec liberum jus, praesertim in appellationibus. Annuit summus
Pontifex, ut Andreapolitano deinceps Episcopo potestas Metropolitana incumbat;
dies indulto Pontifici promulgandi mense Septembri dicta est, atque maxima
populi nobiliumque laetitia celebrata. Episcopi reliqui Grahami odio flagrantes
illius authoritatem repudiant, Regisque animum ingenti pecunia (which was as
other Authors say eleven thousand Marks) occupant, ne Grahami partibus
studeret. Interea praesules Romam mittunt qui sui defensionem contra Grahamum
suscipiunt. But in the end they did not prevail. Graham was made Arch bishop.
Patricke Graham being Bishop of Saint Andrews, and the first Archbishop of
that See, Thin. ibidem.
was after his advancement to that title deprived in this sort. H^lin. History
of Scotland, p. 282, 283. Le^^^us lib. 8. p. 3.18.
In the year of Christ 1477^ Pope Xistus, the fourth of that name, sent a
Legate called Husman, into Scotland, which should displace this Patricke the
Archbishop of Saint Andrews, condemned by the sentence of the Pope and the
Cardinals, for an Heretic, Schismaticke, Simonicke; Whereupon he was deprived
of all Ecclesiastical dignity, and commanded to perpetual Prison. In whose
place was William Schewes chosen, to whose custody and disposition this
Patricke was committed, after which Graham being removed for his safe
imprisonment first to Saint Colmes Isle, then to Dumfermling, and lastly to
Lochelevine, there in the end he dyed, and was buried in Saint Sarffis, or
Servimanus Isle in Lochelevine, after that he had been three years Arch
Bishop.

William Schewes
William Francis Thin. Ibid.
Schewes being created Archbishop of Saint Andrews, in the year of Christ,
1478. as some have, or 1479^ as others have it, in the Holy-Rood House in
Edinburgh, in the presence of King James, and many of the Nobility received the
Pall, as the ensign of his Metropolitan power, being declared Legate and
Primate of Sco^land; at what time he was not withstood by any of the other
Bishops, who being estranged from showing any favor to Graham, did often
in^ringe his authority, and in the end expelled the same Graham from his
Archiepiscopall See. After which in the year of Christ 1482. This Archbishop
Schewes, fled into his own Country, and after at the request of the King,
resigned his Archbishopricke, contenting himself with the Bishopric of Murry.

Andrew Steward.
Andrew Francis Thin. Ibid.
Steward Uncle to King James the third, was upon the resignation of William
Schews made Archbishop of Saint Andrews; after which in the year of Christ
1484. the King sent this Archbishop Ambassador to Rome for the obtaining of
certain privileges, which he brought to effect.

In the Holinshed Hi^story of Scotland, p. 288.
year of Christ 1491. in the time of King James the fourth, about the third
year of his Reign was great contention between the Archbishops of Saint
Andrews and Glascow touching both their Authorities^ Which when it had drawn
many of the Nobility into diverse factions, it was ceased by the King for a
certain time, until all doubt thereof might be taken away by deciding the
same by the Canon Law, before Ecclesiastical Judges. Then in the year of
Christ 1507. being about the nineteenth year of James the fourth, the Bishop
of Saint Andrews with the Earl of Arrane were sent Ambassadors into France.

Alexa. Steward,
Alexander Francis^ Thin. ibid.
Steward, Bastard Son to King James the fourth was made Archbishop of Saint
Andrews in the year of Christ 1510. About the 22. year of the Reign of the
same James the fourth. This man having long studied with Erasmus in Germany,
and in the Low Countries, was advanced to this See of the Arch bishopric,
when he was yet in Flaunders; who having intelligence thereof by his friends,
came forthwith into Scotland, where he was joyfully received by the King, the
Nobility and his kindred: He was slain together with his Father King James the
fourth, and a Scottish Bishop more, at Ploden field in the year of Christ
1513. Speeds history^ p. 1002. Hall^ chron. 36, H. 8. f. 255.
The Cardinal of Scotland promised the Scots Heaven, for the destruction of
England^ Perhaps they might obtain it by their deaths, but they got no more
English earth then would interre their slain bodies. After which John Hepburne
Prior of Saint Andrews strongly besieged the Castle of Saint Andrews, and
forced the same to be yielded unto him; the cause of which besiege grew, that
Hepburne being chosen Bishop of Saint Andrews, by his Canons of that Church
(whereunto the whole Nobility were helpers) was hindered to possess that
Archbishopricke by such stipendary people of Gawine Dowglasse, as kept the
Castle, Less. page 375. Holinsh. history of Scot. p. 303, 304.
whereupon the Queen, and the Earl of Angus, after that they understood how
the Castle was by force come into the hands of Hepburne, did take in evil
part, that he who was so troublesome unto them, should ascend to so high a
dignity, and that G^wine Dowglasse, so dearly to them beloved, and to whom
they had given that Bishopric, should be helpless of the recovery thereof.
Whereupon the Queen, and the Duke of Albany, diligently labored by
Ambassadors sent to Rome, that a third person (since Gawin Dowglasse could not
obtain it) might be advanced thereunto; which third man was Andrew Forman
Bishop of Murry, further requiring therewithal; that he might be Abbot of
Dumfermling and Aberbroth, which in the end with much entreaty they obtained of
the Pope.

Fran. Thin Ibid.
Andrew Forman Bishop of Murry, Andr. Formam^
was at Edinburgh by the Popes Bulls on the eighth of the Kalends of January in
the year of Christ 1515. being about the second year of the Reign of James
the fifth, declared Archbishop of Saint Andrews, and Abbot of Dumfermeling,
and Aberbroth. Whereupon the Prior of Saint Andrews before named, still
contending that he was Archbishop, both in respect of the election of the
Coven, and the consent of the Nobility, did labor all he could against Forman,
appealing him to Rome; for which cause he with the Lord Hales and other his
friends come to Edinburgh to defend the matter, at what time the Lord Hume
Chamberlain of Scotland, and such others as openly assisted Forman, did oppose
themselves against the Prior; which Nobility because they were great in the
Court, did the more molest and hinder Hepburne; shortly after by public Edict,
and Proclamation of the King, banishing the Prior and his followers,
proclaiming them Rebels, and putting them to the home. Hepburne being stricken
with the sharpness of that Precept, did privily depart the Town, and the
Prior went to Rome, hoping by the Popes authority to wrest from Forman the
Archbishopricke, which he could not obtain by violence. But how he sped at
Rome I do not know, for I only find this, that in the year following, being
the year of Christ, 1516. about the third year of the same James the fifth,
that the Governor perceiving, that all these contentions, hatreds and
divisions of the Nobility did arise by these bralls, which were between Forman
and Hepburne for the Sea of Saint Andrews to the great di^quieting of the
Realm, by such part-takings as chanced thereabouts among the Lords, desired to
cure this grievous wound made in the Commonwealth. Wherefore he persuaded
Andrew Forman, that he should resign all his Ecclesiastical Benefices into
his hands in an open assembly at Edinburgh, for by that means, the Governor
thought that he might pacify the minds of the Nobility, and utterly rout out
those branches of dissension. Whereupon there was a day appointed to the
Nobility to assemble, at what time Andrew Forman freely resigned to the
Governor the Duke of Albanie, all his Ecclesiastical promotions to be
disposed at the Dukes pleasure. In consideration thereof the Duke bestowed the
Archbishopricke of Saint Andrews, and the Abbey of Dumfermling upon the same
Andrew Forman, and gave the Bishopric of Murry to James Hepburne, (greatly
favored of the Earl Bothwell, and the Competitor of Forman) being thereunto
substitute by John Hepburne P^ior of Saint Andrews in the place of the said
John, to whom moreover the Duke appointed a yearly pension of 1000. marks to
be paid by the same Forman out of the Abbey of Dumfermling; After which about
six years or somewhat le^^e, this Forman departed this Life, being in the
year of Christ 1522. and the ninth year of King James the fifth, to whom
succeeded James Beton.

James Francis Thin his continuation o^ Holin. history of Scot. p. 451.
Beton Archbishop of Glascow, James Beton.
was Chancellor in the year of Christ, 1513. being the first year of King
James the fifth. This man being of great wisdom was appointed amongst others
to assist the Queen in the government of the Realm, whereunto she was for a
time advanced; Holinshed Hi^story of Scotland, p. 302.308
but the woman not enduring to be directed by others, taking quarrel against
the Bishop, did immediately after the marriage performed, the sixth of August,
in the year of Christ 1514. between her and Archibald Dowglasse Earl of
Angus (which this Bishop incountred as much as he could) take the great Seal^
from the said Bishop of Glascow, at Saint John's Town; whereupon the Bishop got
him to Edinburgh, and assisted with many Lords, kept the Queen and her husband
out of that Town; whereby great dissension and part-taking was raised amongst
the Nobility of the Realm. But as I gather, peace being made between them, he
was again made Chancellor. After this, in the year of Christ, 1515. he
comes with the Earl of Arrane, who submits himself to the Governor;
Shortly following, the Governor gave to this Archbishop of Glascow, the Abbey
of Arbroth, assigning to the Earl of Murrey, a large pension out of the same;
which Bishop being thus in favor with the Governor, was (in the year of
Christ 1517. in May, when the Governor went into France) appointed amongst
others, to have the Rule of the Realm, until his return. Two years after
which, the Nobility being divided about the quarrel of the Earl of Angus and
Arrane, this Bishop in the year of Christ 1519. being then also Chancellor,
with other Noblemen of the Realm, kept the Town of Glascow; but after that,
this Chancellor, who would not come to Edinburgh, the King of England and of
France, their Ambassadors came to Sterling, where a peace was proclaimed
amongst the Nobility. But what can long continue in one stay, or what peace
will be long embraced amongst ambitious minds, since in the year following,
being the year of Christ 1^20. the Noblemen ^ell again to factions; For when
diverse of the Peers were come to Edinburgh to aid the Earl of Angus against
the Earl of Arrane (this Chancellor remaining then in the Town) they pursued
the Earl and Chancellor so hotly, that they were both constrained to forsake
the Town and to fly through the North lock, about the thirteenth day of
April. But as the events of quarrels be doubtful, now up, now down, so this
Archbishop, not long after this disgrace, recovered breath, and in November
following, did accompany the Regent come out of France to Edinburgh, where was
a Parliament holden to summon the Earl of Angus to appear; but he refusing,
it was agreed, that the Earl should pass into England, there to remain. The
Bishop thus having the better of his enemies, Andrew Forman Bishop of Saint
Andrews dyed in the year 1522 being about the ninth year of James the first,
by occasion whereof this Chancellor James Beton Bishop of Glascow, was advanced
to that See, and ^urther made Abbot of Dumfermling. Upon which new honor in
the year of Christ 1524. He was appointed one of the Governors of the Realm
by Parliament, but he not possessing this honor any long time, the Earl of
Angus (who had gotten the King into his usurped government, and denied the
delivery of the King: being sent for by this Bishop, and the other Nobility)
sent to the Chancellor for the great Seal, which was delivered to the
Messengers; upon which this Bishop not forgetting the same, hastened the
sentence of divorce, sued before him between the Queen and the Earl of Angus.
Whereof the Earl to revenge the same, did with the King, in the year of
Christ 1526. seek for the Queen and the Bishop of Saint Andrews; but because
they were kept secretly in their friends houses, so that they could not be
heard of; He spoiled the Abbey of Dumfermling, and the Castle of Saint
Andrews, taking away all that the Archbishop had. Notwithstanding which, the
Archbishop keeping in favor with the old Queen, and the young King, did in
the year of Christ 1529, and in the sixteenth year o^ James the fifth,
Christen James the King^ Son bo^ne at Saint Andrews, and not long after
surrendered his Soul to God.

David B^t^n.
Anno 1542. Holinsheds history of Scotland, p. 330. to 340. Francis Thin his
continuation of the History of Scotland p. 452.
Immediately after the death of James the fif^h of Scotland, David Beton
Cardinal, and Archbishop of Saint Andrews, the special Minister and factor
of the French causes to the advancement and continuance th^reof, ^orged a Will
of the late King departed, in which, amongst other things, he established
himself chief Regent. The Protestants to whom this Cardinal was ever a
cruel enemy and sharp^ scourge, espied forth his unjust dealing in this
behalf, and thereupon set the Earl of Arran against him, who by the help of
his own and their friends he removed the Cardinal and his adherents from
their usurped room and Authority; and therewith was the said Earl proclaimed
Protector and Governor of the Realm. The next year at a Convention of the
Lords at Edinburgh, Bishop of R^^^e author of the Northern, rebellion. an.
1569 Martin p. 552. H^linsh. p. 959.
this Archbishop was put in ward in the Castle of Dalkish, lest he should go
about to persuade the Nobility, not to consent to the Governors desires, and
the King of Englands match propounded to the Scottish Queen: Which match of
Prince Edward, with Queen Mary of Scotland, though concluded on by a
Parliament in Scotland, this Arch^ishop Beton hindered, f^aring lest Scotland
should change the Church Orders, and reform Religion, as England had begun to
do. Whereupon ensued diverse Commotions in Scotland, and a bloody War^e, King
Henry the eighth sending an Army into Scotland upon this breach and occasion on
the one side, and the Pope and French King sending aid to this Cardinal
Archbishop and his faction on the other side. After this, this Archbishop he
was removed to his own Castle of Saint Andrews, with Warders about him, to
see him safely kept.

Anno 1^44. Speed 1049, etc.
The Patriarch of Jerusalem arriving in Scotland, he was honorably received by
this Cardinal Arch Prelate, and the Bishops of Scotland, into the City of
Glascow, during whose abode there, great contentions arose between this Arch
Prelate, and the Archbishop of Glascow, who should in that City be of greatest
authority and honor? Which in the end came to this issue, that both families
fell together by the ^ares, which of them should go before, with his Cross
borne upright. For the Cardinal Archbishop of Saint Andrews, and Primate of
the Kingdom, did affirm, that the Archbishop of Glascow should not have his
Cross borne in his own Church so long as he was present: Which the servants
of the Archbishop of Glascow took so in disdain, that they plucked down the
Cardinals Cross, and threw it to the ground, Whereupon the Governor
(understanding the whole matter, and that it was now come from words to swords)
made haste to appease the factious commotion, and caused the Patriarch
therewith to be brought to Edinburgh, accompanied with the Clergy, and so
appeased the controversy. That done; the Patriarch, the Popes Legate coming
to Rome, procured the ^egantine power to be granted to the Cardinal, which he
long enjoyed not; For being greatly envyed by reason of these honors and some
grievous facts, by means whereof there fell continual dissentions between
the Nobility, which ended not till this Cardinal was slain, who corrupting
his Keepers, whiles he was imprisoned in Saint Andrews Castle, he found means
to escape thence; and in the year 1543. he came to the Coronation of the young
Queen, and shortly after persuaded the Earl of Arrane the Governor to leave
the part of ^he King of England, and wholly to become French. At the
Coronation, the Cardinal ordered all things, appointed every Officer, and
growing into credit, did in like sort at other times dispose of the Common
wealth, and Bishoprics, as seemed best liking unto him. Whereupon the Earl
of Leneux, taking part with the English, opposed himself against the
Cardinal, whereby ensued sharp wars, the Cardinal still supporting and
counselling the Governor. Which troubles somewhat abated, when the Earl of
Leneux went into England. The Cardinal led the Governor to Saint Andrews, to
the end (if it were possible) to bind the Governor more firmly to him;
During the time they were there, the Cardinal caused in the Lent season all
the Bishops and Prelates of the Realm, to assemble at Saint Andrews where a
learned man named Master George Wisc^art, George Wischart, a learned man burnt.
that had been in the Schools of Germany, was accused of Heresy, which he
had (as was alleged against him) publicly Preached, and privately taught in
Dundee, Brechin, and diverse other parts of Scotland since his return home.
This matter was so urged against him, that he was convict, and burnt there in
the Town of Saint Andrews during the time of that convention or assembly.
When these things were thus done, the Cardinal, although he greatly trusted to
his riches, yet because he was not ignorant what were the minds of men, and
what speeches the Common people had of him, determined to increase his power
with new devices; Wherefore he goes into Angus, and marryeth his eldest
Daughter (as says Buc^anan) to the Earl of Crawfords Son; Which marriage
was solemnized with great preparation, almost answerable to Kingly
magnificence; During which time the Cardinal understanding by his Spies, that
the English did prepare to invade the Scottish borders on the Sea (and
specially did threaten those of Fife therewith) returned to Saint Andrews, and
appointed a day to the Nobility, and such as dwelled about the Sea Coasts, to
assemble together to provide in common for the defense thereof, and to prepare
remedy for that hastened evil; for the easier and better performance whereof
he had determined, together with the Lords of that Country, to have sailed
himself about the Coasts and to have defended such places as were most
convenient: Amongst others, that came unto him, there was a noble young
Gentleman called Norman Lesle, Son to the Earl of Rothseie. This man (after
that he had many times employed his valiant and faithful diligence in the
behalf of the Cardinal) grew to some contention with the said Cardinal for a
private cause, which for a time did estrange both their minds the one from the
other; this same contention did Norman (being thereto induced with many fair
promises) afterward let fall; But certain months afterward when he returned
to demand the performance of such liberal promises, they began to grow from
common speech to bra^lings, and from thence to bitter ta^nts and reproaches,
not fit to be used by any of them both; Whereupon they departed with the
grieved minds of every of them; for the Cardinal being intrea^ed more
unreverently than he would or looked for; and the other threatening that being
ove^taken by deceit, he would revenge it, they both returned discontented to
their own people.

Whereupon Norman, declaring to his partakers the intolerable arrogance of the
Cardinal, they easily agreed all to conspire his death^ wherefore to the end
that the same might be less suspected, they departed in sunder afterward.
This No^man accompanied only with five of his own train, entered the town of
Saint Andrews, and went into his acc^stomed Inn and lodging, trusting that by
such a small train he might cunningly dissemble the determination of the
Cardinals death; but there were in that town, ten of those which had
consented to his conspiracy, which closed in secret corners, some in one place,
and some in another, did only expect the sign which was to be given un^o them
to execute this devise, with which small company this Norman fea^ed not to
adventure the death of the Cardinal in the same town, furnished in every
place with the servants and friends of the Cardinal. Whereupon the 13. of May
the Cardinal being within his Castle of Saint Andrews, certain of his own
friends (as he took them) that is to say, the said Norman, Lord Lesleie,
William Kirkandie^ the young Lord of Grange, and Kirkmichell with sixteen
chosen men, entered the Castle very secretly in the morning, took the Porter
and all the Cardinals Servants, thrusting them out of the place by a Posterne
gate, and that done passing to his Chamber where he lay in bed, as he got up,
and was opening his Chamber door, they slew him, and seized upon the Artillery
and Munition, where with that Fortress was plentifully furnished, and likewise
with rich hangings, household stuff of all sorts, Apparel, Copes, Jewels,
Ornaments of Churches, great store of gold and silver plate, besides no small
quantity of treasure in ready coin. Sir James Leirmouth Provost of Saint
Andrews assembled all the people of that Town for the rescue of the Cardinal
after he had heard that the Conspirators were entered the Ca^^le; but they
showed the dead body of the Cardinal over the walls as a spectacle to the
people, and so they made no further attempt, since they saw no means how to
remedy or revenge the matter at that present. The cause that moved the
Conspirators thus to kill the Cardinal, was thought to be partly in revenge of
the burning of Mr. George Wischart, ^^aring to be served with the same sauce,
and in the end to be made to drink of the same Cup. Partly it was thought
they attempted it through counsel of some great men of the Realm that had
conceived some deadly hatred against him. His body after he was slain, was
buried in the Castle in a dunghill. The governor considering that his dear
Coze^ the Cardinal was thus made away, assembled the great Lords of the
Realme^ by whose advice he called a Parliament, and ^orfeited them who had
slain the Cardinal and kept the Castle of Saint Andrews: And withal he
beseiged those that murdered him in the said Castle three months space; but
it was so strongly furnished with all manner of Artillery and Munition by the
Cardinal in his life time, that they within cared little for all the
inforcements that their Adversaries without could enforce against them.

John Hamilton.
After his death the Governor, Anno. 1546. promoted Holinshed Hist. of Scot. d.
340.355. Leslaus l. 10. p. 513.
John Hamilton the Abbot of Parslew his Brother to the Bishopric of Saint
Andrewe^, and gave the Abbey of Arbroth (granted before to James Beton the
slain Cardinals Kinsman) to George Dowglasse bastard son to the Earl of
Angus, which things were afterward occasions of great troubles in the Realm.
To appease which Anno 1550. the Queen by the advice of her Counsel to stop
all occasion of public dissension, ended the controversies moved about the
Archbishoprickes of Saint Andrews and Glascow, and the Bishoprics of Dunkeld
and Brechine, by bestowing them upon Noblemens children, and upon such persons
as worthily deserved them. This Archbishop 1543. coming out of France passed
through England, and having other learned men in his company, did visit the
King of England, of whom he was most honorably and courteously received: from
whence going into Scotland, he was made Treas^rer; which Office he kept as
long as his Brother was Governor, whom he did further in all good Counsels at
home, and save and defend in the war^es abroad.

Anno 1598. Holinshed Hist. of Scotland. p. 366.367. Leslaeus, l. 10. p. 538.
In July, August, and March, there was an assembly of the Prelates and Clergy
of Scotland held at Edinburgh, in which certain men and women of Edinburgh,
were accused of Heresy, and burned at the town cross with ^aggots on their
backs, whereupon great tumults were raised there: for appeasing whereof, the
Lord Seton was made Governor of the Town. In this Council of all the
Prelates and Clergy of Scotland, the Temporalty proponed diverse Articles of
re^ormation; as to have the Prayers, and administration of the Sacrament in the
Scottish tongue, the Election of Bishops and all beneficed men to pass by the
voices of the Temporal Lords and people and Parishes, etc. All which the
Bishops refused to grant, where through there arose shortly after great
troubles in Scotland. For they persuading the Queen Regent to sommon Master
John Knox and others to appear before them at Striveling; for lack of
appearance they were denounced Rebels, and put to the home: Whereupon they and
the Burgesses of Perth, with others, pulled down the Images and Altars in all
Churches, and suppressed the houses of Priors, and other Religious places and
Abbeys, both in Perth, S. Andrews, Edinburgh, and other places: whereupon the
Queene-Regent, with the Archbishops of Saint Andrews and Glascow, the Bishops
of Dulkenden, Dublane, with many other chief of the Clergy, came to Perth,
and raised an Army against the Reformers; who thereupon gathered an Army to
resist them; which being ready to mee^e on Couper More in battle, by the labor
of some Noble men the battle was stayed, and Articles of agreement drawn
between the Regent and the Lords of the reformed Religion, the contents
whereof you may read in Lib. 10. p. 553.574.
Les^e, Lib. 16.
Buchanan, and Hist. of Scotland. 567.368.376.
Holinshed.

Anno 1559. A Parliament was holden, and a disputation appointed between the
Protestant Divines, and Popish Prelates, at what time the Roman Prelates
behaved themselves so well, that they were commanded not to depart the Town,
but to be present at the Sermons of the Ministers. In the winter the Lords of
the Counsel gave faculties of Benefices to diverse of their friends, who put
forth the Prelates and received the fruits; The Earl of Argile disposed
Dunkeld and Dublane; The Earl of Arran had the ordering of the Bishoprics of
Saint Andrews, and diverse Abbeys: the like was used by other Noblemen through
all parts of the Kingdom. In the same year, being the 17. of Queen Mary, he
was with the Queen beseiged in Leith.

Anno 1560. superintendents serving for the election of other Ministers were
chosen at Edinburgh, whereof John Spursword was one, chosen by the suffrage of
all the people.

Holinshed 380 6.410.511. See
Anno 1562. this Archbishop of Saint Andrews, because after an Edict made
thereof, he did no^ abstain from hearing and saying Mass, was commit^ed
prisoner to Edinburgh Castle, This Archbishop still following the Queens
part, he with others meets her in the year of Christ 1566. at Muskleburow,
and so attends on her, who no^ long after in the year of Christ 1571. being
about the fourth year of James the sixth, was taken in the Castle of
Dunbritaine, and sent Prisoner into Sterling, where being examined by the
Regent, Matthew Earl of Lenox, about the mur^her of Henry King of Scot^, son
to the said Matthew, (...) Re^^m Scot. l. 17 and 18.
he was there drawn, hanged, and quartered^ being the first Archbishop that I
have yet heard of (writes Thin) that suffered so ignominous a death; the manner
whereof Holinshed and Chytraeus does thus more largely relate. Holinshed Hist.
of Scot. p. 402. Chytraus Chr^n. Sax^ni^. l. 21.641.
The Regent coming to Striveling, caused the Archbishop of S. Andrews, to be
examined upon certain Articles, as well ^ouching the murder of the la^e King
Henry, as also for the death of the Earl of Murrey the late Regent, at what
time there came in a Priest without compulsion of any, and before the Regent
declared, that one John Hamilton being in extreme sickness, under confession
told him, that the Bishop did send him with three others to the murder of the
King: and as touching the murder of the Earl of Murrey, the Bishops flat
answer was, He might have let it, if he would. Therewith the people that
heard him cried, Away with him, hang him: And so for these and other offenses
for the which he had been foresalted before that time, he was now executed on a
Gibbet set up in the Market place of Striveling.

Patricke Adamson Francis Thin his continuation of Holinshed Hist. of Scot. p.
434.435.282 London, 1585.
alias Constance next succeeded in the Archbishopricke of Saint Andrews;
Patricke Adamson.
in his time Anno 1573. there was a Parliament in Edinburgh, wherein diverse
were made, and Articles agreed upon touching Religion and against Popery: ^he
third whereof was, That none of the adversaries and enemies of Gods truth,
shall enjoy the patrimony of the Kirk. Afterward Anno. 1578. the question
touching the Bishops power was disputed in many assemblies, and a^ length,
Anno. 1580. in an Assembly holden at Du^die, their office was found to be
unlawful, not grounded on Gods Word, but introduced by the folly and
corruptions of men's inventions, and thereupon una voce condemned, and abjured.
Anno 1581. and 1582. there were many contentions between the Prelates and
Presbyters of Scotland touching the Jurisdiction of Bishops, Holinshed and
Thin, Hist. of Scotland p. 438. to 44^.455.456.
which the assembly condemned, and the settling and confirming of Religion, to
the great disturbance of the Realm, which I pretermit for brevity sake. The
next year 1583. the Presbytery (as they had many times done before) did
excommunicate their Metropolitan the Archbishop of Saint Andrews and the rest
of the Bishops also, because they would not in all their actions support and
confirm the Doctrine which the Presbytery had established, and maintain the
use of their Episcopacy, which they had ordered to be simply abjured and
relinquished, as an office to which they were not called by God; which
Excommunication the Presbytery did the more boldly pronounce, because they were
supported by the assistance of Master Lindseie, a great enemy to this Patrick
Adamson Bishop of Saint Andrews. But the King in the beginning did assist him
against them, and the Archbishop did in like sort thunder an Excomunication
against them, which division (writes Thin) not being meet to be in the
Clergy, who ought to be as the Apostles were, Of one heart and of one mind,
will in the end (as Christ says) bring that Realm to confusion; for, Omne
regnum in se divisum desolabitur. At last this Bishop excommunicated by the
Assembly at Edinburgh, was enforced to renounce his Archiepiscopall
jurisdiction, and to make this public recantation (which quite subverts the
pretended Ius Divinum of the Prelacy) in the Synod of Fiffe, April the 8.
1591. See Andrew Melvin his Patric^i Adamsoni Palinodia p. 49.55 And Celsae
Commissionis Ana^omia.
I confess with a sincere mind without color or fraud, that I have formerly
erred in this, that I thought the government of the Church to be like the
regiment of terrene Kingdoms, expressly against the precept of Christ our Lord;
and that the Monarchy whereby the Church is governed did not rest in the person
of Christ our Savior alone (as it does in truth) but likewise in the
Ministers, who yet are nothing else but vassalls and Clarks under Christ, Et
aequales inter se, and equal among themselves, etc. Lastly, I confess that
the Office of a Bishop, ( as now it is used and claimed) omni authoritate verbi
Dei destituitur, and solo politico hominum commento fundatur, is destitute
(...) all authority from Gods Word, and founded only upon the politic device
of men; out of which the Primacy of the Pope or Antichrist has sprung. Et
merito damnandum est, and it is deservedly to be condemned; because the
assembly of the Presbytery, who have the power of Jurisdiction and Inspection,
both in Visitations and in Ordinations performs all these things with greater
authority, piety, and zeal than any one Bishop, whose care for the most part
is intent, not upon God, or their function, but the world, which he principally
orders. Consider after what sort it has been usurped these 506. years last
past, Note this.
with how great cruelty and tyranny they have exercised it, and thou shall
find, that it has been the Principal Original of suppressing the Word of
God in every kingdom, which will evidently appear to any one who shall survey
the Ecclesiastical History. This Arch-Prelate held correspondency with our
English Bishops from whom (asking leave of the general Assembly to go into
England about his Civil affairs only, as he pretented) he received his
consecration to this Arch-bishopricke in a secret manner, Anno. 1589. and then
returned into Scotland where he durst nor exercise his Archiepiscopall
authority openly for a space. King James after he was made Archbishop brought
him from Saint Andrews to Edinburgh, that he might preach there openly in the
great Church; the King himself accompanying him with his Guard to secure him
from the people brought him into the Church, sending half of his Guard to
convey the Bishop to the Pulpit door, which Master John Cooper (one of the
ordinary Ministers of Edinburgh) had prepossessed, who standing up to say
prayer and preach as soon as he perceived the King in his seat, the King
perceiving it said, Master John Cooper, I will not have you preach this day, I
command you to go down out of the Pulpit, and let the Bishop of Saint
Andrews come up and preach to me: to the which the ordinary Minister replied,
Please your Majesty this is the day appointed to me to preach, and if it were
your Majesty's pleasure, I would feign supply the place my self. But the King
replied again, I will not hear you at this time, I command you to go down,
and let Master Patricke Adamson come up and Preach this day; and beside, the
King had remembered that he should not have styled him a Bishop by reason there
were so strait Acts against them; Then Master John Cooper said, I shall obey
Sir, and came down from the Pulpit, yet the rest of the Ministers that were
there sitting with him at the entry of the Pulpit did not open the door to the
Bishop, while the King commanded him, and then so soon as the Bishop was
entered into the Pulpit and began with low beck to do reverence to the King
and to other inferior Magistrates, the whole people rose out of their places
with a great outcry and lamentation, and ran out of the Church, especially
the women, and when the Guard thought to have kept them in, they ran over the
Guard, and Master John Cooper going also out of the Church went to Mr. Robert
Bruce his house, the women all going with him, and many men, and there heard
his Sermon, which he should have Preached in the Church; the fearful noise
yet continuing in the Church many running out of the Church and some coming in
again to see whereto the matter would return, made the King to cry out and
say, What a devil ails the people that they may not hear a man Preach? but
cry what he would cry for the space of a long time, not any audience could be
given; so with what fear the Bishop Preached that day, and with how little
audience, they can best tell that considered the matter rightly: always the
King set the Bishop in the midst of the Guard, and so took him down to the
Abbey with him; but so soon as he came to Saint Andrews again, the
Presbytery entered in Process against him, for taking upon him to be a Bishop,
which they proved by many reasons; but chiefly for that the King called him
so; and albeit they had many hindrances, and the King caused a great delay to
be made, devising means to save him from excommunication; yet in the end he
was excommunicated by the Provincial Assembly, albeit by the Kings earnest
dealing his excommunication was not published in all Churches, as it should
have been, upon some promises which he made, and yet never performed them.
This Archbishop by the instigation of our English Prelates writ and Preached
in defense of Episcopacy, as he afterward confessed in the Synod of Fiffe,
where he retracted this his Doctrine as erroneous, and being put from his
Bishopric, excommunicated and hated of the people, who put him to the horn
for his debts, he fell into a great sickness, called a Dogs appetite, and
wanting meat to satisfy his hunger he was in manner starved to death,
confessing in his sickness, that his sentence of excommunication was justly
pronounced, and desired the Assembly to release him from it for Christ's sake;
whereupon he was afterward absolved, after his forementioned recantation.
After this the very calling of Bishops having been condemned and abjured in
the Assembly at Dundy as unlawful, Anno. 1580. the Church of Scotland, upon
this Adamsons death continued free from the government and tyranny of Bishops
till King James was possessed of the Crown of England, and some years after:
at which time some ambitious Scottish Ministers stealing secretly into England,
procured themselves to be consecrated Bishops by our English Prelates, and by
certain insensible degrees, by the help of our English Bishops, by perjury,
forgery, and other indirect means, with much difficulty and opposition, set up
Episcopacy again in the Church of Scotland, to the great disturbance of that
Church and State: whereupon, after the assembly at Glascow An. 1610. (where
Episcopacy was again revived, by admitting Ministers to have Vote in
Parliament, though with many a limitation, which they afterward frustrated and
eluded by degrees) one Gladstaine was ordained Archbishop of Saint Andrews,
who is credibly reported to have made a solemn recantation at his death for
his acceptance of such an unlawful office, which recantation was suppressed.
After him one Sprotswood succeeded, a very vicious, false and crafty
Machiavilian, who confederating with Laud, now Archbishop of Canterbury, by
his means procured himself to be made Chancellor of Scotland, who by reason
of this great temporal office, was the better able to introduce all
Canterburies Innovations into that Church with more facility. This Arch-Prelate
with the other Prelates of Scotland con^ederating with Canterbury, who had
usurped a kind of general and Papal Superintendency over all his Majesty's
three Kingdoms, in the year 1636. framed a book of Canons and Constitutions
for the government of ^he Scotland, tending to the utter subversion of the
established Discipline of that Church, and opening a door for many doctrinall
and disciplinary errors, and Innovations. And to prevent all obloquy against
them, they enjoyne none to speak either against these Canons, or the book of
Common prayer which was to be set forth, under heavy censures. The next year
following in June 1637. the said Archbishop and Bishops by Canterburies
direction caused a New book of Common prayer to be Prin^ed for the use of the
Church of Scotland, which was appointed by his Majesty's letters to be received
as the only form of Gods Worship; whereunto all subjects of that Realm
civil or Ecclesiastical ought to conform, and the contraveners to be
condignely punished. To set on this design the better, every Minister was by
Proclamation enjoined, and some charged with letters of horning to buy two of
the said Books for the use of the Parish; and to scare all men from opposing
it, Canterbury in the very same month of June caused Doctor Bastwicke, Mr.
Burton, and Mr. Prynne to be severely censured in the Starchamber, for opposing
his Innovations here in England, which he then intended to introduce into the
Church of Scotland, and to be set in the Pillory at Westminster, where all o^
them had their ears close cut off; one of them his cheeks ^eared; and this
barbarous execution finished, even before their wounds were cured he then sent
them away close Prisoners to three remote Castles, Dr. Bastwick to Lanceston
Castle in Co^newall; Mr. Burton to Lancaster; and Mr. Prynne to Carnarvan
Castle in North Wales, where they were shut up close Prisoners, so that neither
their Wives, Children, nor any of their friends, could have access to speak
with them; nor they so much as enjoy the liberty of Pen, Ink, or Paper to
write for necessaries, or the liberty of any licensed Books, except the Bible,
and some few other Books for private devotion. And not content herewith by an
extrajudiciall order o^ the Lords, he soon after caused them to be conveyed
close Prisoners into the Isle of Iersie, Garnsey, and Silly, there to be close
imprisoned in three Castles, giving strict order that no man should be admitted
to speak with them there; nor Dr. Bastwickes, and Mr. Burtons wives, permitted
so much as once to come into the Islands where they were, and that all letters
to them should be intercepted, and no pen, ink, or Paper allowed them to write
upon any occasion. This transcendent new kind of Prelaticall tyranny wherewith
Canterbury imagined to terrify and appale the Scots, coming to their ears,
wrought quite contrary effects, stirring them up with greater animosity to
resist the Prelates encroachments both upon their consciences, Laws,
liberties, and established Discipline. Whereupon when the Bishop of Edinburgh
accompanied with the two Archbishops and some other Prelates of Scotland,
began the use of their new service book in the chief Church of Edinburgh the
23. of July next after this sentence and execution, the most part of the people
(much discontented with such a great and sudden alteration, as imported a
change, both of the external form and nature of the former public wor^hip)
did at one instant rise and hinder the new Service, calling it superstitious
and Idolatrous, and the same was also stopped in another Church of Edinburgh,
where it was to be read by the Bishop of Arguile. This notwithstanding, the
Prelates procured by Act of Council, the pain of death without all favor or
mercy to be denounced against all those who should any ways rai^e or speak
against the Bishops, or any of the inferior Clergy, or against the service
Book. They discharged the ministers and Readers of Edinburgh (who refused the
Book) their wonted service, and interdicted the public Evening and Morning
Prayer, reading of Scriptures, singing of Psalms, for a long time, still
pressing the buying and practicing of the said book by all Ministers; which
moved the Ministers first to petition, and next many of the Nobility, Gentry,
Burgesses, and Ministers to meet and to supplicate the Lords of the Privy
Counsel against the said Books of Canons and Common Prayers, and the illegal
way of introducing the same; till at last the Bishops violence and practices
forced the whole kingdom into a combustion against them, and caused them in
their general assembly at Ed^nburgh, Anno 1639. not only to abjure, but to
extirpate Episcopacy and banish all their Bishops as Incendiaries out of their
Realm, except the Bishops of Dunkeld and of Orcanies, who recanted and abjured
their Episcopacy. Canterbury and the Prelates of Scotland and England storming
at these proceedings, take occasion from thence to raise up a civil war
between England, Ireland, and Scotland, thinking to restore Episcopacy again
in that Kingdom by force of Arms. And when as this war was happily pacified
and all differences fully accorded, Canterbury with his agents caused the
former pacification ^o be annulled, new Arms to be raised, and a fresh war
to be undertaken to the unsupportable expense and great danger of all his
Majesty's three Kingdoms, which by the Prelates practices are at this day
still enforced to maintain three Armies in the field; and had the Prelates bu^
their wish, we had long ere this embrued our hands deeply in one another
blood, and made our Kingdoms so many Aceldamaes to maintain their
Antichristian pomp and Lordlinesse. But blessed and for ever honored and
praised be our gracious God, who has miraculously continued and preserved our
peace in the midst of war, and ^rustrated the designs of our blood-thirsty
Prelates; turning their Bellum Episcopale (as themselves termed it) into a
war not for, but against themselves, to a probable extirpation of them for
ever out of all three Kingdoms, which have a long time groaned under their
tyranny; England, and Ireland now desiring and petitioning earnestly to the
Parliament to be eased of their in^olerable yoke of bondage, as Scotland has
already exonerated themselves thereof.

Now to manifest that this present war Originally sprung from the Scottish
Prelates, and from Canterbury, (the very fountain of all late mischiefs in
all three Kingdoms) I shall need no further evidence than the charge of the
Scottish Commissioners against Canterbury, presented to our present Parliament,
the Coppie whereof (though already in Print) I shall here insert as pertinent
to my inten^^d Theme.

The Charge of the Scottish Commissioners against the Prelate of Canterbury.
NOvations in Religion, which are Universally acknowledged to be the maine
cause of commotions in Kingdoms and states, and are known to be the true
cause of our present troubles, were many and great, beside the books of
Ordination, and Homili^s, 1. Some particular alterations in matters of
Religion, pressed upon us without order and against Law, contrary to the form
established in our Kirk. 2. A new book of Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical. 3. A Liturgy or book of Common^prayer, which did also carry
with them many dangerous errors in matte^s of Doctrine. Of all which we
challenge the ^relate of Canterbury, as the prime cause on earth.

And first, that this Prelate was the Author and urger of some particular
changes, which made great disturbance amongst us, we make manifest^ 1^ by
fourteen letters subscribed, W. Cant. in the space of two years, to one of
our pretended Bishops, Bannatine, wherein he often enjoyneth him, and other
pretended Bishops, to appear in the Chapel in their whi^es, connary to the
custom of our Kirk, and to his promise made to the pretended Bishop of
Edinburgh, at the Corona^^on, that none of them after that time, should be
pressed to wear these garments, thereby moving him against his will to put
them on for that time, wherein he directs him to give order for saying the
English Service in the Chapel twice a day, for his neglect showing him that
he was disappointed o^ the Bishopric o^ Edinburgh, promising him upon the
greater care of these novations, advancement to a better Bishopric, taxing
him for his boldness in pr^aching the sound Doctrine of the reformed Kirkes,
against Master Mitchell, who had taught the errors of Arminius in the point of
the extent of the merit of Christ, bidding him send up a list of the names of
Counselors and Senators of the College of Justice, who did not communicate
in the Chapel in a form which was not received in our Kirk, commending him
when he found him obsequious to these his commands, telling him that he had
moved the King the second time for the punishment of such as had not received
in the Chapel: and wherein he upbraideth him bitterly, that in his first
Synod at Aberdein, he had only disputed against our custom of Scotland, of
fasting sometimes on the Lords day, and presumptuously censuring our Kirk,
that in this we were opposite to Christianity it self; and that amongst us
^here were no Canons at all. More of this stuff may be seen in the letters
themselves.

Secondly, by two papers of memoirs and instructions from the pretended Bishop
of Saint Androis, to the pretended Bishop of Rosse, coming to this Prelate,
for ordering the affairs of the Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland, as not only
to obtain warrants, to order the Exchequer, the Privy Counsel, the great
Commission of Surrenders, the matter of Balmerino's process, as might please
our Prelates, but warrants also for sitting of the High Commission Court once a
week in Edinburgh, and to gain from the Noblemen, for the benefit of
Prelates, and their adherents, the Abbacies of Kelso, Arbroith, S. Androis, and
Lindors, and in the smallest matters to receive his commands, as for taking
down Galleries, and stone-walls, in the Kirkes of Edinburgh, and Saint
Androis, for no other end but to make way for Altars, and adoration toward the
East: which besides other evils, made no small noise, and disturbance amongst
the people, deprived hereby, of their ordinary accommodation for public
worship.

The second Novation which troubled our peace, was a Book of Canons, and
constitutions Ecclesiastical, obtruded upon our Kirk, found by our general
Assembly to be devised ^or establishing a tyrannical power, in the persons of
our Prelates, over the worship of God, over the consciences, liberties, and
goods of the people, and for abolishing the whole discipline and government of
our Kirk, by general and provincial assemblies, Presbyteries, and Kirk
sessions, which was settled by Law, and in continual practice since the time of
Reformation; that Canterbury was Master of this Work is manifest.

By a Book of Canons sent to him, written upon the one side only, with the
other side blank, for corrections, additions, and putting all in better Order,
at his pleasure, which accordingly was done, as may appear by interlinings,
marginalls, and filling up of ^he blanke page with directions sent to our
Prelates; and that it was done by no other than Canterbury, is evident by his
Magisteriall way of prescribing, and by a new copy of these Canons, all written
with Saint Androis own hand, precisely to a Letter, according to the former
castigations, sent back for procuring the Kings warrant unto it, which
accordingly was obtained; but with an addition of some other Canons, and a
Paper of some other corrections: According to which the Book of Canons ^hus
composed, was published in Print, the inspection of the Books, Instructions,
and his Letters of joy, for the success of the work, and of others Letters of
the Prelate of London, and the Lord Sterling, to the same purpose, all which we
are ready to exhibit, will put the matter out of all debate.

Besides this general, there be some things more special worthy to be
adverted unto, for discovering his Spirit. 1. The fourth Canon of Cap. 8.
forasmuch as no Reformation in Doctrine or Discipline can be made perfect at
once in any Church; therefore it shall, and may be lawful for the Church of
Scotland at any time to make remonstrance to his Majesty, or his successors,
etc. Because this Canon holds the door open to more Innovations, he writes
to the Prelate of Rosse his privy Agent in all this Work, of his great
gladness, that this Canon did stand behind the Curtain, and his great desire
that this Canon may be Printed fully, as one that was to be most useful.
Secondly, the title prefixed to these Canons by our Prelates. Canons agreed
upon to be proponed to the several Synods of the Kirk of Scotland, is thus
changed by Canterbury; Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, etc. Ordained
to be observed by the Clergy. He will not have Canons come from the Authority
of Synods, but from the power of Prelates, or from the Kings Prerogative.
Thirdly, the formidable Canon, Cap. 1.3. threatening no less than
Excommunication against all such persons whosoever shall open their mouths
against any of these Books, proceeded not from our Prelates, nor is to be
found in the Copy sent from them, but is a thunderbolt forged in Canterburies
own fire. 4. Our Prelates in diverse places witness their dislike of Papists.
A Minister sall be deposed if he be found negligent to convert Papists. Chap.
18.15. The adoration ^f the bread is a superstition to be condemned, Cap. 6.6.
They call the absolute necessity of Baptism an error of Popery. Cap. 6.2. But
in Canterburies Edition, the name of Papists and Popery is not so much as
mentioned. 5. Our Prelates have not the boldness to trouble us in their
Canons, with Altars, Fonts, Chancels, reading of a long Liturgy before Sermon,
etc. But Canterbury is punctual, and peremptory in all these. Although the
words of the tenth Canon Cap. 3. be fair, yet the wicked intentions of
Canterbury and Rosse, may be seen in the point of justification of a sinner
before God, by comparing the Canon as it came from our Prelates, and as it was
returned from Canterbury, and Printed; our Prelates say thus; It is manifest
that the superstition of former ages, has turned into a great profaneness,
and that people are grown cold for the most part in doing any good, thinking
there is no place to good works, because they are excluded from justification.
Therefore shall all Ministers, as their Text gives occasion, urge the
necessity of good works, as they would be saved, and remember that they are
Via Regni, the way to the kingdom of Heaven, though not causa regnandi,
howbeit they be not the cause of Salvation. Here Rosse gives his judgment,
That he would have this Canon simply commanding good works to be ^reached, and
no mention made what place they have or have not in justification. Upon this
motion, so agreeable to Canterburies mind, the Canon is set down as it
stands, without the distinction of via regni, or causa regnandi, or any word
sounding that way, urging only the necessity of good works. 7. By comparing
Can. 9. Cap. 18. As it was sent in writing from our Prelates, and as it is
Printed at Canterburies command, may be also manifest, that he went about to
establish auricular confession, and Popish absolution. 8. Our Prelates were not
acquainted with Canons for afflicting of arbitrary penalties: But in
Canterburies Book, wheresoever there is no penalty expressly set down, it is
provided that it shall be arbitrary, as the Ordinary shall think f^ttest. By
these and many other the like, it is apparent, what tyrannical power he went
about to establish in the hands of our Prelates, over the worship, and the
souls and goods of men, overturning from the foundation, the whole order of
our Kirk, what seeds of Popery he did sow in our Kirk, and how large an
entry he did make for the grossest novations afterward, which has been a
maine cause of all their combustion.

The third and great novation was the Book of Common Prayer, Administration of
the Sacraments, and other parts of Divine Service, brought in without warrant
from our Kirk, to be universally received as the only form of divine
Service, under all highest pains both civil and Ecclesiastical; which is
found by our national assembly, besides the Popish frame, and forms in divine
worship, to contain many Popish errors, and ceremonies, and ^he seeds of
manifold and gross superstitions, and idolatries and to be repugnant to the
Doctrine, Discipline, and order of our Reformation, to the confession of Faith,
constitutions of general Assemblies, and Acts of Parliament, establishing the
true Religion: that this also was Canterburies work we make manifest.

By the memoirs, and instructions sent unto him from our Prelates; wherein they
gave a special account of the diligence they had used, to do all which herein
they were enjoined, by the approbation of the Service Book sent to them; and
of all the marginall corrections, wherein it varyeth from the English Book,
showing their desire to have some few things changed in it, which
notwithstanding was not granted: This we find written by Saint Androis own
hand, and subscribed by him, and nine other of our Prelates.

By Canterburies own Letters, witnesses of his joy, when the Book was ready
for the press, of his prayers that God would speed the work, of the hope to
see that service set up in Scotland, of his diligence to send for the Printer,
and di^ecting him to prepare a black letter, and to send it to his servants a^
Edinburgh, for Printing this book. Of his approbation of his proofs sent from
the Press. Of his fear of delay, in bringing the work speedily to an end,
for the great good, (not of that Church, but) of the Church. Of his encouraging
Rosse, who was entrusted with the Press, to go on in this piece of Service
without fear of enemies. All which may be seen in the Autographs and by
Letters sent from the Prelate of London, to Rosse, wherein, as he rejoices at
the sight of the Scottish Canons; which although they should make some noise at
the beginning, yet they would be more for the good of the Kirk, than the
Canons of Edinburgh, for the good of the Kingdom. So concerning the Leiturgy
he shows, that Rosse had sent to him, to have an explanation from Canterbury,
of some passage of the Service Book, and that the Press behoved to stand till
the explanation come to Edinburgh, which therefore he had in haste obtained
from his Grace, and sent the dispatch away by Canterburies own conveyance.

But the Book it self, as it stands interlined, margined, and patcht up, is
much more than all that is expressed in his Letters, and the change^ and
supplements themselves, taken from the Mass Book, and other Romish Ritualls,
by which he makes it to vary from the Book of England, are more pregnant
testimonies of his Popish spirit, and wicked inten^ions which he would have put
in execution upon us, then can be denied. The large declaration professes,
that all the variation of our Book, from the Book of England, that ever the
King understood, was in such things as the Scottish humor would better comply
with, than with that which stood in the English service. These Popish
innovations therefore have been surreptitiously inserted by him, without the
Kings knowledge, and against his purpose. Our Scottish Prelates do petition
that something may be abated of the English ceremonies, as the Cross in
Baptism, the Ring in marriage, and some other things. But Canterbury will not
only have these kept, but a great many more, and worse superadded, which was
nothing else, but the adding of ^ewell to the fire. To express and discover
all, would require a whole book, we sall only touch some few in the matter of
the Communion.

This Book inverteth the order of the Communion in the Book of England, as
may be seen by the numbers, setting down the orders of this new Communion,
1.5.2.6.7.3.4.8.9.10.15. Of the diverse secret reasons of this change, we
mention one only; In joining the spiritual praise and thanksgiving, which is
in the Book of England, pertinently after the Communion, with the Prayer of
Consecration before the Communion, and that under the name of Memorial, or
Oblation, for no other end, but that the memorial and Sacrifice of Praise,
mentioned in it, may be understood according to the Popish meaning. Bellar. de
Missa, lib. 2. cap. 21. Not of the spiritual sacrifice, but of the oblation of
the body of the Lord.

It seems to be no great matter, that without warrant of the Book of
England, the Presbyter going from the North end of the Table, shall stand
during the time of consecration, at such a part of the Table, where he may with
the more ease and decency use both hands; yet being ^ryed, it imports much,
as, that he must stand with his hinder parts to the People, representing (says
Durand) that which the Lord said of Moses, Tho^ shall see my hinder parts. He
must have the use of both his hands, not for any thing he has to do about the
Bread and Wine, for that may be done at the North end of the Table, and be
better seen of the people: but (as we are taught by the Rationalists) that he
may be stretching forth his arms, to represent the extension of Christ on the
Cross, and that he may the more conveniently lift up the Bread and Wine above
his head to be seen and adored of the people, who in the Rubricke of the
general Confession, a little before, are directed to kneel humbly on their
knees, that the Priests elevation so magnified in the Mass, and the peoples
adoration may go together. That in this posture, speaking with a low voice,
and muttering (for sometimes he is commanded to speak with a loud voice, and
distinctly) he be no^ heard by the people, which is no less a mocking of God,
and his people, then if the words were spoken in an unknown language. As there
is no word of all this in the English Service; so does the Book in King
Edwards time, give to every Presbyter his liberty of gesture, which yet gave
such offense to Bucer, (the censurer of the Book: and even in Cassanders own
judgment, a man of great moderation in matters of this kind) that he calls
them, Nunquam satis ex^^randos Miss^ gestus, and would have them to be
abhorred, because they confirm to the simple and superstitious ter impiam and
exitialem Missae fiduciam.

The corporal presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, is also to be found
here: for the words of the Masse-booke serving to this purpose, which are
sharply censured by Bucer, in King Edwards Liturgy, and are not to be ^ound in
the Book of England, are taken in here; Almighty God is in called, that of his
Almighty Goodness he may vouchsafe so to bless and sanctify with his Word
and Spirit, these gifts of Bread and Wine, that they may be unto us the body
and blood of Christ.

The change here is made a work of Gods Omnipotency: the words of the Mass,
ut fiant nobis, are translated in King Edwards Book, That they be unto us,
which are again turned into Latin by Alesius, Vt fiant nobis. On the other
part, the expressions of the Book of England, at the delivery of the Elements
of feeding on Christ by Faith, and of Eating and drinking in remembrance that
Christ dyed for thee, are utterly deleated. Many evidences there be in this
part of the Communion, of the bodily Presence of Christ, very agreeable to the
Doctrines taught by his Secretaries, which this paper cannot contain. They
teach us that Christ is received in the Sacrament, Corporali^er, both objective
and subjective. Corpus Christi est objectum quod recipitur, and corpus nostrum
subjectum quo recipitur.

The Book of England abolishe^h all that may import the oblation of any
unbloody Sacrifice, but here we have besides the Preparatory oblation of the
Elements, which is neither to be found in the Book of England now, nor in King
Edwards Book of old, the oblation of the body and blood of Christ, which
Bellarmine calls, Sacrificium Laudis, quia Deus per illud magnopere laudatur.
This also agrees well with their late doctrine. We are ready when it shall be
judged convenient, and we shall be desired, to discover much more matters of
this kind, as grounds laid for missa sicca, or the half Mess, the private
Mess without the people, of communicating in one kind, of the consumption by
the Priest, and consummation of the Sacrifice, of receiving the Sacrament in
the mouth, and not in the hand, etc.

Our supplications were many against these Books, but Canterbury procured them
to be answered with terrible Proclamations. We were constrained to use the
remedy of Protestation; but for our Pro^estations, and other lawful means,
which we used for our deliverance, Canterbury procured us to be declared Rebels
and Traitors, in all the Parish Kirkes of England: when we were seeking to
possess our Religion in peace, against these devices, and novations,
Canterbury kindles war against us. In all these it is known that he was,
although not the sole, yet the principal Agent and adviser.

When by the Pacification at Berwicke, both Kingdoms looked for peace and
quietness, he spared not openly in the hearring of many, often before the
King, and privately at the Counsell-Table, and the privy Iointo, to speak of
us as Rebels and Traitors, and to speak against the Pacification as
dishonorable, and mee^e to be broken. Neither did his malignancy and
bitter^e^^e ever suffer him to rest, till a new war was entered upon, and all
things prepared for our destruction.

By him was it that our Covenant, approven by National Assemblies, subscribed
by his Majesty's Commissioner, and by the Lords of his Majesty's Counsel, and
by them commanded to be subscribed by all the Subjects of the Kingdom, as a
Testimony of our duty to God, and the King, by him was it still called ungodly,
damnable, Treasonable; by him were Oaths invented, and pressed upon diverse of
our poor Country men, upon the pain of imprisonment, and many miseries,
which were unwarrantable by Law, and contrary to their National Oath.

When our Commissioners did appear to render the reasons of our demands, he
spared not in the presence of the King, and Committee, to rail against our
National Assembly, as not daring to appear before the World, and Kirkes
abroad; where himself and his Actions were able to endure trial, and against
our just and necessary defense, as the most malicious and Treasonable Contempt
of Monarchical Government that any bygone age has heard of: His hand also was
at the Warrant for the restraint and imprisonment of our Commissioners, sent
from the Parliament, warranted by the King, and seeking the peace of the
Kingdoms.

When we had by our Declarations, Remonstrances, and Representations,
manifested the truth of our inten^ions, and lawfulness of our Actions, to all
the good subjects of the Kingdom of England, when the late Parliament could
not be moved to ass^st, or enter in war against us, maintaining our Religion,
and Liberties, Canterbury did not only advise the breaking up of that high and
honorable Court, to the great grie^e and hazard of the Kingdom, but (which is
without example) did sit still in the Convocation, and make Canons and
constitutions against us, and our just and necessary defense, ordaining under
all highest pains, that hereafter the Clergy shall Preach four times in the
year, such doctrine as is contrary not only to our proceedings, but to the
doctrine and proceedings of other Reformed Kirkes, to the judgment of all
sound Divines, and politiques, and tending to the utter slavery and ruining of
all Estates and Kingdoms, and to the dishonor of Kings and Monarchs. And as
if this had not been sufficient, he procured six Subsidies to be lifted of the
Clergy, under pain of deprivation to all that should refuse. And which is yet
worse, and above which Malice it self cannot ascend, by his means a Prayer is
framed, Printed, and sent through all the Paroches of England, to be said in
all Churches in time of Divine Service, next after the Prayer for the Queen,
and Royal Progeny, against our Nation by name of Traiterous Subjects, having
cast off all obedience to our anointed Sovereign, and coming in a rebellious
manner to invade England, that shame may cover our faces, as Enemies to God and
the King.

Whosoever shall impartially examine what has proceeded from himself, in
these two Books of Canons and Common Prayer, what Doctrine has been
published and Printed these years bypast in England, by his Disciples and
Emissaries, what gross Popery in the most material points we have found, and
are ready to show in the posthume writings of the Prelate of Edinburgh, and
Dumblane, his own creatures, his nearest familiars, and most willing
instruments to advance his counsels, and projects, ^all perceive that his
intentions were deep and large against all the reformed Kirkes, and
Reformation of Religion, which in his Majesty's dominions was panting, and by
this time had rendered up the Ghost, if God had not in a wonderful way of mercy
prevented us; And that if the Pope himself had been in his place, he could
not have been more Popish, nor could he more zealously have negotiated for
Rome, against the Reformed Kirkes, to reduce them to the Heresies in Doctrine;
the Superstitions and Idolatry in worship, and the Tyranny in Government, which
are in that See, and for which the Reformed Kirkes did separate from it, and
come forth of Babell. From him certainly has issued all this deluge, which
almost ha^h overturned all. We are therefore confident that your Lordships will
by your means deal effectually wi^h the Parliament, that this great firebrand
be presently removed from his Majesty's presence, and that he may be put to
trial, and put to his deserved censure, according to the Laws of the
Kingdom; which fall be good service to God, honor to the King and Parliament,
terror to the wicked, and comfort to all good men, and to us in special, who
by his means principally have been put to so many and grievous afflictions,
wherein we had perished, if God had not been with us.

We do indeed confess that the Prelates of England have been of very
different humors, some of them of a more hot, and others of them, men of a
more moderate temper, some of them more, and some of them less inclinable to
Popery, yet what known truth, and constant experience has made undeniable, we
must at this opportunity profess, that from the first time of Reformation of
the Kirk of Scotland, not only after the coming of King James of happy
memory into England, but before, the Prelates of England have been by all
means uncessantly working the overthrow of our discipline and government. And
it has come to pass of late, that the Prelates of England having prevailed,
and brought us to subjection in the point of Government, and finding their
long waited for opportunity, and a rare congruity of many spirits and powers,
ready to cooperate for their ends, have made a strong assault upon the whole
external worship, and doctrine of our Kirk. By which their doing they did not
aim to make us conform to England, but to make Scotland first (whose
weak^nesse in r^sisting they had before experienced, in the Novations of
government, and of some points of Worship) and thereafter England conform to
Rome, even in these matters, wherein England had separated from Rome, ever
since the time of Reformation. And evil therefore which has issued, not so
much from the personal disposition of the Prelates themselves, as from the
innate quality and nature of their office, and Prelaticall Hierarchy, which did
bring forth the Pope in ancient times, and never cease till it brings forth
Popish Doctrine and worship, where it is once roo^ed, and the Principles
thereof fomented and constantly followed. And from that antipathy and
inconsistency of the two forms of Ecclesiastical Government, which they
conceived, and not without cause, that one Island united also under one head,
and Monarch, was no^ able to bear: the one being the same in all the parts and
powers, which it was in the times of Popery, and now is in the Roman Church:
The other being the form of Government, received, maintained, and practiced by
all the Reformed Kirks, wherein by their own testimonies, and confessions, the
Kirk of Scotland had amongst them no small eminency. This also we represent to
your Lordships most serious consideration, that not only the firebrands may be
removed, but that the fire may be provided against, that there be no more
combustion after this.

I shall close up all touching the Prelates of Scotland, with the late Act of
their general Assembly at Edinburgh, for their utter extirpation out of that
Church; and the Recantation, and abjuration of two of their late Bishops, to
wit, the Bishop of Dunkelden, and of the Orcanies.

The General Act for abolishing of Episcopacy, and all Innovation^ lately
intended in the Church of Scotland.
THe Kings Majesty having graciously declared, that it is his Royal will and
pleasure that all questions about Religion, and matters Ecclesiastical, be
determined by Assemblies of the Kirk, having also by public Proclamation
indicted this fr^e National Assembly, for settling the present distraction of
this Kirk; and for establishing a perfect peace against such divisions and
disorders as has been sore displeasing to his Majesty, and grievous to all
his good Subjects; and now his Majes^ies Commissioner John, Earl of Traquaire,
instructed and authorized with a full Commission, being present, and sitting in
this Assembly, now fully conveened and orderly constitute in all the members
thereof, according to the Order of this Kirk, having at large declared his
Majesty's good will to the reformed Religion, and his Royal care and tender
affection to this Kirk where his Majesty had both his birth and Baptism, his
great displeasure at the manifold distractions and division of this Kirk and
Kingdom, and his desires to have all our wounds perfectly cured with a free
and fatherly hand: And although in the way approved by the Kirk trial has
been taken in former assemblies before, from the Kirk Registers to our full
satisfaction, yet the Commissioners grace making particular enquiry from the
members of the Assembly, now solemnly conveened, concerning the real, and
true causes of so many and great evils at this time past, had so fore troubled
the peace of this Kirk and Kingdom, it was presented to his Majesty's
Commissioner by this Assembly, that beside many other, the maine and most
material causes was: Perth, viz. Observation of festival days, kneeling at
the Communion, Confirmation, Administration of the Sacraments in private
places, which was brought in by a Civil Assembly, and are contrary to the
confession of Faith, as it was meant and subscribed Anno. 1580. And diverse
times since to the order and constitution of this Kirk. Linlithgrow, 1606. and
1608. and at Glascow. 1610. at Aberdin 1616 at Saint Andrews. 1617. at Perth,
^618. which are null and unlawful, as being called and constitu^e quite
contrary to the Order and constitutions of this kirk, received and practiced
ever since the reformation o^ Religion, and withal laboring to introduce
Novation within this Ki^ke against the Order and Religion established. A sixth
cause is the want of the lawful and free general Assemblies pro re nata,
according to the liberty of this Kirk, expressed in the Book of Policy, and
acknowledged in the Act of Parliament, 1592. After which his Majesty's
Commissioner having heard patiently and examined particularly, and all
objections to the contrary, being answered to the full: The whole Assembly with
express consent of his Majesty's Commissioner in one heart and voice did
declare, that these and such other, proceeding from the neglect and breach of
the National Covenant of this Kirk and kingdom, made in Anno 1588. have
been indeed the true and maine Cause of all our evils and distractions. And
therefore ordaines, according to the Constitutions of general A^semblies of
this Kirk, and upon the grounds respective above specified, That the foresaid
Service Book, Books of Canon and Ord^nation, and the High Commission be still
rejected. That the Articles of Perth, be no more practiced. That Episcopal
government, and the Civil places and power of Kirkemen, be holden still as
unlaw^ull in this Kirk. That the above named pretended Assemblies at
Linlithgrow, 1606. and 1608. at Glascow, 1610. at Aberdene, 1616. at Saint
Andrews, 1617, at Perth 1618. be hereafter accounted of, as null, and of none
effect. And that for preservation of Religion, and preven^^ng of all such evils
in time coming, General Assemblies rightly Constitute, as the perfect and
competent Judge of all matters Ecclesiastical, hereafter be kept yearly, and
oftener, as occasion and necessity shall require. The necessity being first
remonstrate to his Majesty by humble supplication, as also of these occasional
Assemblies. That Kirk Sessions, Presbyteries, and Synodall Assemblies be
constitute, and observed according to the Book of Policy, and Order o^ this
Kirk.


The Bishop of Dunkell his Recantation.
BE it known to all men, me Master Alexander Lindsay, Minister of Sinadois;
for so much as I, by my missive Letter sent by me to the General Assembly of
the Kirk of Scotland, holden at Glascow the 21. of November last past, did
freely submit my self, demit and lay down at the foot of the Assembly, my
pretended Office of Episcopacy, as pretended Bishop of Dunkell, and by my
Letter promised to subscribe what ample form of Commission, there anent the
said Assembly should prescribe, and now the said reverent Assembly has found,
and declared the said office of Episcopacy, as it has been te^med and used
within the said Kirk of Scotland, to be abjured by the comession of Faith,
1580. and 1581, and 1590. And therefore has decerner the said Office to be
removed out of the said Kirk of Scotland, as also seeing the said reverent
Assembly has decernet me according to my said Letter, to subscribe a more
ample form of demission, of the said pretended office in presence of Sir John
Montcrieff, of that Ilke Knight Baronet, Master Robert Murrey, Minister at
Methuen, Master John Roberton, Minister at Perth, Master Alexander Petrie,
Minister at Rind, and Thomas Durham, Burgess of Perth, Commissioners
appointed by them for that effect. Therefore, and for performance of my said
Letter, and in obedience to the Ordinance of the said reverent. Assembly; Wit
ye me to have demitted quite, claimed and simpliciter overgeven, like as I now
in presence of the said Commissioners, freely demits, quite claims and
simpliciter overgists the ^oresaid pretended Office of Episcopacy of Dunkell,
with the whole Title, style, name, and dignity thereof, power of Ordination,
Jurisdiction thereof, voice in Parliament, and all usurpation of the same in
time coming, and faithfully promises, and by these presents binds and obliges
me never to exercise nor use the said pretended Office in the said kirk of
Scotland, nor no power of Ordination, Jurisdiction, voice in Parliament,
neither any other power Ecclesiastical belonging, usurped, and acclaimed to
belong to the said pretended Office, like as according to the Act of the said
reverent Assembly, I acknowledge the said Office of Episcopacy to be abjured in
the foresaid confession of Faith, and therefore most justly ought to be removed
out of this said kirk of Scotland, and the whole premises, I heartily
acknowledge, as I will answer to God: in testimony hereof, I have subscribed
these presents with my hand. Like as for further security hereof, I am content,
and consent, that these presents be insert and Registrate in the general
Books of Assembly, therein to remain Ad futuram rei memoriam. And to that
effect constitute -- my lawful procutors, promittendo de rato. In witness
whereof, written by Robert Readhench serviteur to Patricke Rosse, Notaire in
Perth. I have subscribed the same with my hand, as said is, at Saint Andrews,
the 24. of January, 1639. before these witnesses, Master John Paterson, Master
Alexander Dundie, Student in Perth, and George Boswell serviteur to the said
Sir George Mont^rieff.

The Bishop of Orkneyes Recantation.
TO all and sundry whom it concerns, to whose knowledge these presents shall
come, especially to the Reverent and Honorable Members of the future Assembly,
to be holden at Edinburgh, the 12. day of August, 1639. I Master George Gryame,
sometime pretended Bishop of Orkney, being sorry, and grieved at my heart, that
I should ever for my worldly respect embraced the Order of Episcopacy, the same
having no warrant from the Word of God, and being such an Order as has had
sensibly many fearful and evil consequences in many parts of Christendom,
and particularly, within the Kirk of Scotland, (as by doleful and deplorable
experience this day is manifest) to have disclaimed, like as I by the tenor
hereof, do altogether disclaim and abjure all Episcopal power and
Jurisdiction with the whole corruptions thereof, condemned by lawful
Assemblies, within the said Kirk of Scotland, in regard the same is such an
Order, as is also abjured within the said Kirk, by virtue of that National
Oath, which was made in the year 1580, and 1581. Promising, and swearing by
the great name of the Lord our God, that I shall never while I live, directly,
nor undirectly exercise any such power within the Kirk, neither yet shall I
ever approve or allow the same, not so much as in my private or public
discourse. But on the contrary shall stand and adhere to all the Acts and
Constitutions of the late Assembly holden at Glascow, the 21. of November, last
bypast in Anno 1638; And shall concur to the uttermost of my power
sincerely, and faithfully, as occasion shall offer, in executing the said Acts,
and in advancing the work of Reformation within this Land to the glory of God,
the peace of the Country, and the comfort and contentment of all good
Christians, as God shall be my help. In testimony of the which premises, I
have subscribed these presents with my hand, in Bricknes in Strains, the
second of February, Anno Dom. 1639. Before these witnesses: Master ^^^ter
Stewart, Minister at Sou^ randsley, Master James Cheynie Minister at Buckwall.
Master Robert Pee^sone, Minister at First, and Master Patricke Gryame Minister
a^ Holme My Son.

Before I pass to the Irish Prelates, I shall close up this of the Scottish
Prelates, with this merry story out of the Book of Martyrs.

Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 2. p. 614.
Not long after the burning of David Stratton, and Master Gurlay, in the days
of David Beaton, Bishop, and Cardinal of Saint Andrews, and George Tre^chton,
Bishop of Dunkelden, a Canon of Saint Colmes Inche, and Vicar of Delene, called
Deane Thomas Forret, Preached every Sunday to his Parishioners out of the
Epistle or Gospel, as it fell for the time, which then was a great novelty in
Scotland, to see any man Preach, except a black Friar, or a gray Friar; and
therefore ^he Friars envyed him, and accused him to the Bishop of Dunkelden,
(in whose Diocese he remained) as an Heretic, and one that showed the
mysteries of the Scriptu^es to ^he vulgar people in English, to make the Clergy
detestable in the sight of the people. The Bishop of Dunkelden, moved by the
Friars instigation, called the said Deane T^omas, and said to him. My Joy Deane
Thomas, I love you well, (and therefore I must give you my counsel, how you
shall rule and guide your self. To whom Thomas said, I thank your Lordship
heartily. Then the Bishop began his Counsel on this manner. My Joy Deane
Thomas, I am informed that you Preach ^he Epistle or Gospel every Sunday to
your Parishioners, and that you take not the Cow, nor the uppermost cloth from
your Parishioners, which thing is very prejudicial to the Church men, and
therefore my Joy Deane Thomas, I would you took your Cow, and your uppermost
cloth, as other Church men do, or else it is too much to Preach every Sunday;
for in so doing you may make the people think that we should Preach likewise.
But it is enough for you, when you find any good Epistle, or any good Gospel,
that sets forth the Liberty of the holy Church, to Preach that, and let the
rest be. Thomas answered, my Lord, I think that none of my Parishioners will
complain that I take not the Cow, nor the uppermost cloth, but will gladly
give me the same, together with any other thing that they have, and I will give
and communicate with them any thing that I have, and so my Lord we agree right
well, and there is no discord among us. And where your Lordship says, It is
too much to preach every Sunday; indeed I think it is too little, and also
would wish that your lordship did the like. Nay, nay, Dean Thomas (says my
Lord) let that be, for we are not ordained to preach. Then said Thomas, where
your Lordship bids me preach, when I find any good Epistle, or any good
Gospel, truly my Lord I have read the New Testament and the old, and all the
Epistles and Gospells, and among them all I could never find any evil
Epistle, or any evil Gospel, but if your Lordship will show me the good
Epistle, and the good Gospel, and the evil Epistle, and the evil Gospel,
then I shall preach the good, and omit the evil. Then spoke my Lord stoutly
and said, I thank God that I never knew what the old and New Testament was,
(and of these words rose a Proverb which is common in Scotland, ye are like
the Bishop of Dunkelden^ that knew neither new nor old Law) therefore Deane
Thomas, I will know nothing but my Portuise and my Pontifical. Go your way,
and let be all these fantasies, for if you persevere in these erroneous
opinions ye will repent it, when you may not mend it^ Thomas said, I trust my
cause be just in the presence of God, and therefore I pass not much what does
follow thereupon: and so my Lord and he departed at that time. And soon after
a Summons was directed from the Cardinal of Saint Andrews, and the said
Bishop of Dunkelden upon the said Deane Thomas Forret, upon two black Friars,
called Friar John Kelow, and another called Benarage, and upon one Priest of
Striveling called Duncane Sympson, and one Gentleman called Robert Foster in
Striveling, with other three or four with them of the town of Striveling, who
at the day of their appearance after their summoning were condemned to the
death, without any place for recantation, because (as was alleged) they were
Heresiarches, or chief Heretics and reachers of heresies, and especially
because many of them were at the bridal and marriage of a Priest, who was
Vicar of Twybody beside St^iveling, and did eat flesh in Lent at the said
Bridal, and so they were all together burnt upon the Castle hill at Edinburgh,
where they that were first bound to the stake, godly and marvellously did
comfort them which came behind. This Bishop of Dunkeld and David Beton
Archbishop of Saint Andrews, were very great persecutors of the true
professors of the Gospel whom they burnt and put to death; the story of whose
persecutions he that list may read in Master Fox his Act^ and Monuments, Edit.
ult. vol. 2. p. 605. to 626. to which I shall refer the Reader.

And thus much briefly touching the disloyal, seditio^s and Schismatic
acts of the Scottish Prelates, I now proceed to those of Ireland, in whom I
shall be brief.

The Irish Bishops.
JOHN CVMIN Archbishop of Dublin.
IN the year of Grace 1197. Hoveden Annal. pars poster^or p. 773.
Hamo de Wa^is, with the other Gardians of Ireland, and Earl John's men,
offered some injury to John Cumin, Archbishop of Dublin, whereupon the
Archbishop willing rather to be banished, then to suffer such great injuries to
himself and his Church to go unpunished, excommunicated the foresaid
presumers and passed a sentence of interdict against his Arch-bishopricke and
departed, commanding the Crosses and images of the Cathed^all Church to be
taken down and hedged about with thorns, that so those malefactors might be
terrified, and recalled from their will of preying upon the goods of the
Church. But they still persisting in their malign purpose, there happened a
miracle not hea^d of in our times. There was a Crucifix in the Cathedral
Church of Dublin, wherein the image of Christ was more exactly carved, than in
all others in Ireland or elsewhere, which they had in most veneration. Anno.
1313.
This Image being laid prostrate on the ground and hedged about with thorns,
on the sixth week fell into a trance, and his face (I doubt if true by the
Archbishops or Priests Legerdemaine) appeared overspread with a vehement
redness, as if it had been in a fiery furnace, and a great sweat issued out
of its face, and little drops fell down from its eyes, as if it wept, and on
the sixth hour of that day blood and water issued out of its left side, and on
the right side of its breast, which the ministers of that Church diligently
gathering up, sent an Ambassie after their Archbishop John C^min commanding
him to certify the Pope the event hereof, under the Testimony and Seals of
venerable men. Yet the other Bishops of Ireland albeit they had often read En
tua res agitur paries cum proximus arde^,
notwithstanding passed by the damages and injuries which the servants of John
Earl of Morton had done to their fellow Bishop, with closed eyes, and become
like rams not having horns, they retired from the face of the pursuer. But
John Bishop of Dublin, being in Exile came to Richard the first, King of
England, and John Earl of Morton his brother, but could have no justice, nor
restitution of the things taken from him. It seems his cause therefore was not
good. After which he continued long in England, leaving both his Church and
Diocese still under interdiction, and the others under the sentence of
Excommunication. O what impiety and malice is there in Prelates who for a mere
supposed injury from one or two, will interdict an whole Kingdom or Dioces^e,
and will rob God of his public service (as they account it) and men's souls of
all spiritual food and exercises of Religion, to wrecke their malice upon an
enemy or two? But this has been their common Atheistical practice: God and
men m^st suffer in the highest degree, rather than they lose their wills or the
smallest punctilio of their usurped Antichristian honor.

Anno. 1212. this Archbishop dying, Henry Condies succeeded him, HENRY SCORCH
VILLEIN.
who was called The Annals of Ireland, in Mr. Cambden, p. 154.155.
Scorch Villeyn, by occasion of a certain treacherous act of his; for one day
calling his Tenants before him to answer by what tenure they held of him,
those Tenants showing him their Deeds and Charters, he commanded their Deeds
and Charters to be burned (of purpose to disinherit them of their rights) for
which most unjust act, the Freeholders ever called him Henry Scorch-Villein: he
was Justice of Ireland, and built Dublin Castle, bu^ of his preaching to build
men up in grace, I find not one syllable.

Anno 1313. The Annals of Ireland. p. 168.
Friar Roland Ioce Primate of Armach arrived at the Isle of Houth the morrow
after the Annunciation of the ble^sed Virgin Mary, John Leekes.
and rising in the night by stealth, took up his Crosier, and advanced it as
^arre as the Priory of Grace Dieu; whom there encountered certain of the Arch
bishop of Dublins servants ( John Leekes was then Archbishop of this See)
debasing and putting down that Crosier; and the Primate himself o^ Armach
they chased with disgrace and confusion out of Lem^ter.

Anno. 1324. Alexander de Bickner, Archbishop of Dublin being in England,
joined with the Archbishops and Bishops of England in Alexander de Bickner
Archbishop of Dublin.
rescuing Adam de Arlton Bishop of Hereford even when he was openly arraigned
for high Treason against King Edward the second at the Parliament bar: the
highest affront that ever I read offered to public Justice; the story whereof
is formerly recited at large, p. 54.55. and Anno^ 1326. he W^lsingham Hi^t.
Angl. p. 98.99. Holins. p. 335. Ant. Eccles. Brit. p. 227.
sided with the Queen and other Prelates against King Edward the second his
Sovereign, to his deposall and destruction, in which he was very active. Anno.
1331. on the Walsingh. Hist. Angl. p. 101.
vigill of Saint Mark the Evangelist, the O-Tothely came to Tavelagh, and
robbed this Alexander Archbishop of Dublin, The Annals of Ireland. fol. 184.
took away three hundred sheep, and slew Bichard White, and other men of his
company, the retinue of the Lord Archbishop of Dublin, were by a train or
ambush slain by David O-Tothill in Culiagh.

David O-Hirraghey.
Anno. 1337. whiles John Charlton was Lord Justice and held a Parliament at
Dublin, Annals of Ireland. fol 187.
Doctor David O-Hirraghey Archbishop of Armach being called to the Parliament
made his provision for housekeeping in the Monastery of Saint Mary near unto
Dublin; but because he would have had his Crosier carried before him, he was
impeached by Alexander Archbishop of Dublin and his Clerks, and permit him
they would not.

Archbi^hop of Ca^sels.
Anno. 1379. The Walsingh. Hist. Ang. p. 224.255.
Archbishop of Cassel^ in Ireland, came from Rome, sent thither for certain
urgent causes, bringing back with him a great power of binding and loosing
from the Pope; when he came to London, preaching to the People, he denounced
the King of France, and as many as adhered to the Antipope, to be involved in
the sentence of Excommunication, affirming that even now it would be an
acceptable time to England, as well in the cause of the King of England as of
the Pope, to invade the Kingdom of France, especially since it was probable,
that a King Excommunicated would not have any confidence of resisting. Thus
this Messenger of Peace proves a public Herald to proclaim war. The King
of France on the other side, makes Proclamation through all his Kingdom, that
none should obey Pope Urban, and if any did ^ee should be beheaded, and all his
goods should be confiscated to the Kings use: after which the confederates of
Pope Clement and Urban, meeting in the field, above 5000. were slain on
Clements part in one battle, with Bernard Decksale their General, and many
more afterward.

Anno. 1420. there was a Parliament, held at Dublin, at which time An^als of
Ireland p. 200. in Mr. Cambden. Chron. of Ireland in Holinshed p. 77^
Richard O-Hedian Richard O-bedian.
Bishop of Cassell was accused by John Gese Bishop of Lismore and Waterford,
upon 30. Articles laid to his charge. After all that, he charged him that he
made very much of the Irish, and loved none of the English; that he bestowed no
benefice upon any English man, and gave order likewise unto other Bishops that
they should not confer the least living tha^ was upon them. That he
counterfeited the King of Englands seal, and the Kings Letters Patents, that
he went about to make himself king of Mounster; also that he took a Ring away
from the Image of Saint Patricke, which the Earl of Desmund had offered, and
bestowed it upon an Harlot of his, beside many other enormities, which he
exhibited in writing: And the Lords and Commons were much troubled between
these twain. Now in the same Parliament there was debate between Adam Pay
Bishop of Clon, and another Prelate, ^or that he said Adam went about to unite
the others Church unto his, but the other would not; and so they were ^ent and
referred unto the Court of Rome, and this Parliament lasted 18. days.

Anno^ 1532. John Allen Archbishop of Dublin, John Allen^
Chaplain to Cardinal Wolsie and his Creature, put the Earl of Stain^urst his
continuation of the Chronicles of Ireland p. 88.92.
Kildare to great trouble wrongfully, to take away his life, and that out of
affection to his Lord and Master the Cardinal. This Archbishop, Anno. 22. H.
8^ was specially and by name excepted out of the Kings general pardon of the
Praemunire and other offenses, granted to all the Clergy that year, as
appears by the Act it self. 22. H. 8. c. 15. No doubt it was because the King
took special notice of some great injuries and mis-demeanors by him
committed, which he meant to question him for. After this, meaning to sail
into England, Anno. 1534. and that secretly lurking^ as Tartajus, Thomas
Fitzgerald and others apprehended and haled him out of his Bed, brought him
naked in his ^hirt, bare footed and bare headed to their Captain, whom when
the Archbishop espied, incontinently he kneeled, and with a pitiful
countenance and lamentable voice he besought him for the love of God, not to
remember former injuries, but to weigh his present calamity, and what malice so
ever he bare his person, yet to respect his calling and vocation, in that his
enemy was a Christian, and he among Christians an Archbishop. As he spoke
thus, bequeathing his soul to God, his body to his enemies merc^, Thomas
Stibon without compassion, and withal inflamed wi^h desire of revenge, turned
his horse aside, saying in Irish, Away with the Churl, meaning the Archbishop
should be detained as Prisoner^ But the Caitifes present, mis^onstring his
words, murdered the Archbishop without further delay, brained and hackt him
in gobbets, his blood withal crying to God for revenge; the place ever since
has been hedged and imbarred on every side, ungrowne and unfrequented for the
de^estation of the fact; rough and ^igorous Justice, deadly hatred of the
Giraldins for his Masters Wolsies sake, and his own, as he had much crossed
and bridled them in their governments, promoted their accusations, and forged a
Letter against them to their prejudice and danger as was likely, was the cause
of his ruin.

Anno. 1567. Marice a run gate Priest going to Rome was consecrated
Archbishop of Cashell by the Pope: Stainhurst, Ibid p. 118.
arriving in Ireland, he made challenge to the same See; which being denied to
him by the Archbishop placed there by the Queen, the said supposed Bishop
sudainely with an Irish scaine, wounded the Bishop, and put him in danger of
his life.

S^ain^urst, Ibid. p. 166.
Anno^ 1579. The Lord chief Justice of Ireland upon suspicion of Treason,
committed the Chauncellor of Liviricke to Prison, for which he was indicted and
found guilty; and the Bishop likewise upon the same su^pition was committed
Prisoner to his own hou^e.

Anno. 1600. Mr. Cambden in his description of Ireland. p. 135.
The Rebels of Mounster by their Agents, a certain Spaniard elect Archbishop
of Dublin, the Bishop of Clonfort, the Bishop of Killaloe, and Archer a
Jesuit, had obtained at leng^h with praying, entreating and earnest beseeching
at the King of Spaines hands, that succor should be sent into Mounster to the
Rebels, under the conduct of Don John D' Aquila, upon assured hope conceived,
that all Mounster would shortly revolt, and the titular Earl of Desmond, and
Floren^ Mac-Carti join great aids unto them; but Sir George Carew the Lord
President of Mounster, had providently before intercepted them, and sent them
over into England. Whereupon D' Aquila arrived at Kinsale in Mounster with two
thousand Spaniards, old Soldiers, and certain Irish Fugitives, the last day
of October, and straight ways having published a writing wherein he gloriously
styled himself with this Title (Master General and Captain of the Catholic
King in the war of God, for holding and keeping the faith in Ireland)
endeavors to make the world believe, that Queen Elizabeth by the definitive
sentences of the Pope, was deprived of her Kingdoms, and her Subjects absolved
and freed from their Oath of Allegiance, and that he and his men were come to
deliver them out of the Devils claws and the English tyranny. And verily with
the goodly pretense, he drew a number of lewd and wicked persons to band and
side with him through these Prelates means.

I have now given a short account of some of ^he Irish Prelates disloyal and
seditious Actions in ^ormer ages; which I shall close up with the accusations
and proceedings against some of them within the limits of this last year.

On the fourth of March last the whole house of Commons in Ireland, sent up
these Articles of High Treason against John Bramham Bishop of Derry and others,
to the Upper House of Parliament there, which I find Printed with Captain
Aud^ey Mermin his speech, who presented them, at the time of their transmission.

Articles of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in the Parliament Assembled,
against Sir Richard Bolton Knight, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, John Lord
Bishop of Derry, and Sir Gerard Lowther Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, and Sir George Ratcliffe Knight in maintenance of the accusation,
whereby they and every of them stand charged with High Treason.
FIrst, that they the said John Lord Bishop of Derry, etc. intending the
destruction of the Commonwealth of this Realm, have traitorously confederated
and conspired together, to subvert the fundamental Laws and government of this
Kingdom, and in pursuance thereof, they and every of them, have traitorously
contrived, introduced, and exercised an arbitrary and tyrannical government
against Law, throughout this Kingdom by the countenance and assistance of
T^omas Earl of Strafford, then chief Governor of this Kingdom.

John Lord Bishop of Derry, etc. have traitorously assumed to themselves, and
every of them regal power over the goods, persons, Lands, and liberties of his
Majesty's subjects of this Realm, and likewise have maliciously, perfidiously
and traitorously given, declared, pronounced, and published many false, unjust,
and erroneous opinions, Judgments, Sen^ences, and Decrees, in extra judicial
manner against Law, and have perpetrated, practiced, and done many other
traiterous and unlawful acts and things, whereby as well diverse mutinies,
seditions and rebellions have been raised, as also many thousands of his
Majesty's Liege people of this Kingdom, have been ruined in their goods,
Lands, Liberties, and Lives, and many of them being of good quality and
reputation have been utterly defamed by Pillory, mutilation of members and
other infamous punishments: By means whereof his Majesty and the Kingdom have
been deprived of their service in Juries, and other public employments, and
the general trade and traffic of this Island for the most part destroyed,
and his Majesty highly damnified in his customs and other Revenues.

That they the said John Lord Bishop of Derry, etc. and every Strafford, in
these and other traiterous courses, have labored to subvort the rights of
Parliament and the ancient course of Parliamentary proceedings: all which
offenses were contrived, committed, perpetrated, and done at such time as the
said Sir Richard Bolton, Sir Gerard Lowther, and Sir George Radcliffe Knights,
were Privy Counselors of State within this Kingdom, and against their and
every of their Oaths of the same, at such times as the said Sir Richard Bolton
Knight, was Lord Chancellor of Ireland, or chief Baron of his Majesty's
Exchequer within this kingdom, and Sir Gerard Lowther Knight, was Lord chief
Justice of the said Court of Common Pleas, and against their Oaths of the
same, and at ^uch time as the said John Lord Bishop of Derry, was actual
Bishop of Derry within this Kingdom, and were done and speciated contrary to
their and every of their allegiance, several and respective Oaths taken in
that behalf.

For which the said Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses do impeach ^he sa^d John
Lord Bishop of Der^y, etc. and every of them of high Treason against our
Sovereign Lord the King his Crown and dignity^

What proceedings will ensue upon this accusation against this Prela^e, time
will discover.

Not to mention ^he lewd, beastly, Sodomiticall life and most detestable
Actions of Aderton Bishop of Wa^e^ford ^n Ireland, for which he was lately
a^^aigned, condemned and hanged as a Bishop without any preceding degradation,
to the great dishonor of his Rochet; I shall close up this Historical Epitome
of the Irish Bishops, with a Petition and Remonstrance of many thousand
Protestan^ Inhabitants in several Counties of Ireland, against Episcopacy,
presented lately to the High Court of Parliament here in England; whe^ein the
evil ^ruites, and seditious, oppressive ungodly practices of the present Irish
Prelates, are fully anatomized.

To the Honorable Assembly of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in this
present Parliament.
The Humble Petition of some of the Protestant Inhabitants of the Counties of
Antrim, Down, Tyrone, etc. part of the Province of Ulster, in the Kingdom of
Ireland;
Humbly

Represents unto your grave Wisdoms, and judicious considerations, That
your Petitioners having translated themselves out of the several parts of his
Majesty's Kingdoms of England and Scotland to promote the Infant Plantation of
Ireland, wherein your Petitioners by their great labor and industry so much
contributed to the settlement of that Kingdom, as they were in a most hopeful
way of a comfortable abode, and when they expected to reap the ^^uite of their
great and long labor, partly by the cruel severity and a^bit^ary proceedings
of the Civil Magistrate, but principally through the ^nblest way of the
Prelacy with their faction, ou^ Souls are starved, our estates undone, out
famil^es impoverished, and many lives among us, cut off and destro^ed.

The Prelates (whose pretended Authority, though by some pub^^shed to be by
divine Right, as we humbly conceive is directly against the same) have by their
Canons of late, their Fines, Fees, and imprisonments at their pleasure, their
silencing, suspending, banishing and excommunicating of our learned and
conscionable Ministers, their obtruding upon us ignorant, erroneous and
profane persons to be our teachers, their censuring of many hundreds even to
excommunication, for matters acknowledged by all, to be indifferent, and not
necessary, their favoring Popery, (in this Kingdom a double ^ault) their
persecuting purity, and endeavoring to bring all to a livelesse formality,
diverse of them being notorious incendiaries of the unquietness and unsettled
estate between these Kingdoms with many the like too tedious to relate, as
more fully in our ensuing grievances does appear. These our cruel
Taske-masters have made of us who were once a people, to become as it were no
people, an astonishment to our selves, the object of piety and amazement to
others, and hopeless of remedy, unless he with whom are bowels of
compassion, work in you an heart to interpose for your Petitioners relief.

They therefore most humbly pray that this unlawful Hierarchicall government
with all their appendices may be utterly extirpated, such course laid down, as
to your great wisdoms shall ^eeme meet for reparation in some measure of our
un-utterable damages, ^ustained by the parties thus injuriously grieved, your
Petitioners settled in a way whereby their persecuted Ministers may have leave
to return from exile, and be freed from the unjust censures imposed on them,
^^d an open door continued unto us for provision of a powerful and able
ministry, the only best way to promote Plantation, and settle the Kingdom in
the profession and practice of true Religion. Which as it is the earnest
expectation, so it shall be the daily prayer of many thousands besides your
Petitioners who will ever ent^eate the Lord for your direction herein, and in
all other your weighty, and important affairs, as becomes your poor
Petitioners, etc.

A Particular of manifold evils and heavy pressures, caused and occasioned by
the Prelacy, and their dependants.
BEfore they had so much as a pretended Canon for their

In the year ^634. they made such Canons and Constitutions

Our most painful, godly and learned Ministers were by the

In their places others were obtruded, not only ignorant

Many, though sufficiently furnished, were not admitted to the

Good and painful Ministers are not suffered to exercise Commendam many
livings, besides those proper to their Bisho^rickes, and do confer^e livings
upon ^^^ir Child^en (...) studendi gratia (as is pre^ended) and diver^ (...)
five, six, or more upon their Favorites.

non-resident, and by each one of the many benefices he enjoys and has a
competent allowance for a moderate minded man to maintain himself and family
upon.







Titular Bishops are by them winked at, in the exercise of

places, yea diverse of them suffered to remain in the very places where some
of the Bishops have their special residence.

In many places of the Land where Protestants are forbidden

They set forth and suffer to be published wicked Libells Examen conjurationis
Scoticae, Lysimachus Nicanor, etc. And in their Sermons, prayer and ordinary
Table talk, diverse of the Bishops, in matters quite besides their calling have
not desisted to rail, curse and most bitterly inveigh against the Kingdom of
Scotland, and all their proceedings, laboring to make them odious, thereby
proving themselves firebrarnds of Sedition, between the two Nations, yea
proclaiming their prophanity by drinking healths to the confusion of that
Nation.

The most learned and seemingly moderate and pious of the Dublin, exclaimed
against, and condemned the Scottish Covenant, and Religion professed in that
Kingdom with most invective terms. And in the Starchamber in Dublin, at the
censure of Henry Stewa^d Esquire, his Wife and two Daughters, and James G^ay,
for refusing to take an Oath, for which there was no other ground than the
Earl of Straffords command, which was against the Covenant of Scotland,
uttered these words, viz. These people with Cora^ Dathan and Abiram do
withstand the Ordinance of God; and therefore I leave them to the judgment of
Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and agree to their censure though deeper.

They have frequently made Symonicall pactions and bargains

The Prelates have usually appointed such men to be their look only to their
own game. Hence,





Peter's sword as well as his Keys, have some of them procured that most
unlawful writ of Assistance, whereby his Majesty's Officers and Ministers, are
required to yield assistance unto the Bishop, his Official, or any deputed by
him; which Writ is by their Officers most notoriously abused, and many times
put into the hands of their Apparitors, who under color thereof, apprehend
honest men and women, casting them into prison, until they be forced to free
themselves by an heavy composition.





other pious uses, comes either to the Prelates Kitchen, the Commissaries
purse, or both.

The Prelates and their faction as they inherit the Superstition Mary-Gallons,
Mortuaries, Portions, etc. which as they were given by Superstition and used to
Idolatry, so now they are taken by oppression, and applied to riotousnesse.

They have also constantly practiced and suffered, the buying

In the High Commission Court, against all Law and equity

In the said Court they usurp with an high hand the judicature

They proceed in the said Court by way of most cruel and Ex Officio, to force
to accuse not only others, but likewise their own selves, contrary to Law,
and the very Maxims of Nature. And if any refuse to take this Oath, then are
they imprisoned and fined beyond measure, to the ruin of all that fall under
the weight of their indignation.

Diverse of the Prelates did jointly frame and wickedly Earl of Strafford, that
most Lawless and scandalous Oath, imposed upon the Scottish-Brittish among us
who were Protestants, for receiving all commands indefinitely. And some of the
Prelates were the occasion, that women and maids should be forced thereunto.
Hence, Commissions issuing to all places, for the exacting of it, they were
prosecuted with so much rigor, that very many, as if they had been Traitors
in the highest degree, were searched for, apprehended, examined, reviled,
threatened, imprisoned, fettered by threes and foures in Iron yoakes, some in
chains carried up to Dublin in Starchamber fined in thousands beyond ability,
and condemned to perpetual imprisonment, diverse poor women but two days
before delivery of Children were apprehended threatened and terrified, others of
them 2. or 3. days after Childbirth, so narrowly searched ^or, that they were
feign to fly out of all harbor into Wood^, Mountains, Caves, and Cornefields,
and man^ da^es and nights together absent themselves to the impairing of the
heal^h of very many, and death of diverse, and loss of their goods, which the
enemy at their pleasure made havocke of. These with many more unexpressible,
have been the woeful effects of the Oath drawn up by advice of the Prelates,
and so unjustly pressed by authority of the Earl of Strafford.





Thus they publishing and proclaiming themselves children of Ishmael and Esau,
we most humbly beseech you as the true sons of Israel, to take order with them,
as God shall direct, whom we shall ever pray to be ayding, and assisting unto
you, in this great and glorious work of Reformation.

And thus much in brief for the Norman, Scottish, and Irish Prelates, which I
thought convenient to annex to our English, being all Birds of the same
feather, that I say not Wolves of the same litter.

CHAP. VIII. Containing certain Conclusions deduced from the Premises; with
the judgments and resolutions of diverse of our ancient Writers and Martyrs,
and some of our learned Bishops and Authors in Queen Elizabeth's reign,
touching the pretended divine Jurisdiction of Bishops, their Treasons,
Rebellions, Temporalities, large possessions; and the uselesnesse,
unprofitablenesse, and mischeivousnesse of Lorldy Bishops, and their government
in our Church.
YOu have now seen a large black Catalogue of the Treasons, Rebellions,
Conspiracies, seditions, contumacies, State-schismes, Wars, Vproares, and
Antimonarchicall practices of our Prelates against their Sovereigns, with
their several stratagems to undermine the Laws and liberties of the Subjects,
and work the ru^ine and disturbance of our State in all ages; give me leave
now in the close of this Relation, to draw some useful undeniable con^lusions
from the premises, worthy his Majesty's, and the Parliaments most serious
considerations.

The first is this, That our lordly Prelates in all ages since

Secondly, That the Prelates Lordly jurisdiction over their fellow-brethren,
contrary to Christ's institution: the greatness of their wealth and temporal
possessions; their admission to temporal Offices of greatest authority and
trust: their sitting as Peers in Parliament, and Judges in some tempo^all
Courts; their residence in or about the Court, and advancement to be
Counselors of State; their near relation to^ and privy intelligence with the
Pope, whose sworn vassals they were of old: the Antichristianity of their
calling, which depends wholly upon the selfsame grounds and principles as the
Romish Heirarchy does; and the secret curse of God upon those Princes and
Kingdoms who have erected, supported, and countenanced these Antichristian
Lords, and employed them in the greatest State-offices, against the express
inhibition of Christ; wi^h the pride, avarice, malice and ambition, which
insep^rably accompany their Lordly Chaires of pestilence, are the chief
grounds of our Prelates forementioned Treasons and extravagances; and that as
long as they and these grounds continue, we must ever expect the selfsame
examples, fruits and effects from this generation of Vipers, what politic
courses soever shall be excogitated to prevent them.

No Bishop, no King, is a false and idle Paradox, refuted by the premised
histories, and the experience of all ages.

Matthew. 7.15. to 20. Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheeps
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves; ye shall know them by their
^ruits. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tr^e
bring forth good fruit: wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

Fifthly, That it can neither be safe for King nor State,

Sixthly, That those who have been so perfidious and Licet sit expediens quod
uni Populo partiali futeli, praesit unus Episcopus, no^ tamen quod toti populo
fideli praesit unus solus. Tum quia minus malum est ut populus partialis and
parvus inficiatur ab uno Episcopo, quam ut totus, vel fer^ totus populus
Christianus inficiatur ab uno capite, qui omnibus praesit. Ockam. Dialog. l. 2.
Tract. 1. p. 3. c. 30. ad 8.
Occham Who writing against the Pop^s Monarchy, alleges this reason among
others against it; that there is greater danger of poisoning ^he people and
whole Church by one supreme head, then by many. We know all the Bishops of
England are to be consecrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury for the time
being, and are subject to him, as Primate and Metropolitan of all E^gland,
taking an See Antiquitates Ecclesiae Brit. throughout.
Oath of Canonical obedience to him; so as they all, in a manner, depend on
him: Again, we know that no Minister can be ordained, or admitted to Preach,
or instituted to any living as an Incumbent, or Curate, but by these Bishops;
who take upon them to visit^ silence and suspend them at their pleasure; yea,
and to dispose of most Patrons benefices to whom they please: as we see by late
woeful experience. Suppose then (which I trust shall never happen) that any to
whom the Crown of England shall descend should be ill affected to our
Religion; if he should make choice of such an Archbishop (and he of other
inferior Prelates) suitable to his disaffecti^on, who must ordain all other
Bishops, Ministers, and may suspend and silence them, or deny to admit those
that are Orthodox at his pleasure; how easily might our Church and Religion by
one over-potent Archbishop, or Prelate, backed by his Sovereign, be
undermined, suppressed, and eradicated in a short space? Whereas if this
jurisdiction were divested from the Bishops, (which are but 26. and depend on
one Arch-Prelate) and settled in the Ministers which are many, and more
independent on the Prince then they, our Religion would be far more secure,
and the Ministers and people less subject to be infected with Romish
Innovations, which one Archbishop of Canterbury is now able suddenly to poison
our Church and people with.

Hence most Papists n^w live near Bishops Cathedrals.
and to revive them again, when diminished or extinguished; the Pope and popery
still reigning among us, till the Prelates attainted by King Henry the eight in
a Praemunire, were enforced, sore against their wills, to renounce the Popes
authority, to acknowledge him the supreme head on earth of our English Church;
and by special Letters patents and 37. H. 8. r. 17.1. E. 1. r. 2.
Acts of Parliament, to confess all their Episcopal jurisdiction to be
derived not from God, or the Pope, but ONLY from, by and under him their
Sovereign. And I dare further aver (for ratification of this Conclusion)
that the Prelates of Italy, Germany, France, Spain, Hungary, and Poland, are
the maine pillars, which support the Popes Monarchy, false Doctrines,
Ceremonies, and Superstitions in those Countries and Kingdoms; which would
soon turn Protestants, were but the Bishops suppressed, and their great
temporal revenues taken away; the enjoyment of which Antichristian dignities
and possessions, engages them to maintain and uphold the Pope, and popery
against their consciences. The truth of which will appear by most of the
transmarine reformed Churches, who could never utterly abandon the Pope with
his Doctrines and superstitions, till they had extirpated their Lordly Bishops.

^. That as long as our Lordly Prelates continue, there will not only be a
possibility, but a probability of bringing in popery and the Pope again among
us; since their Lordly Hierarchy is supported only by popish Doctrines,
Canons, Ceremonies, and Principles, which they are engaged to maintain, to
preserve their tottering thrones from ruin. How far the Pope his Doctrines
and Superstitions had of late in a little time served themselves into our
Church, almost to the utter ruin of our Religion, and of the Ministers and
professors of it (persecuted and driven out into foreign Countries,) and that
only by the Bishops and their instruments machinations, is so well known to
all, and so abundantly discovered to and by this present Parliament, that I
need not relate it^ Only this I dare say, that if ever they get head and life
among us again (as they did in Queen Mary's days, and that principally by
the Prelates means) it will be by our Lordly Bishops activity; who if once
totally suppressed, both Pope and papists would utterly despair of ever
reducing England to their vassallage.

Eighthly, That Bishops have done a world of mischief Augustine, the first
Archbishop of Canterbury (and first introducer of the Popes authority, errors
and superstitions among us^) till Cranmers time, which is above 800 years, I
think there was not one Archbishop guilty of it; The like I may say of other
Seas; and I presume I may justify, that some two poor Country Curats or
Lecturers in our days, have converted more souls to God by their diligent
zealous preaching, then all the Archb^shops of Canterbury put together, most of
whom I read to have been Rebels, Traitors, State-officers, and persecutors of
Religion; but very few of them soule-converting Preachers. Why then should
^hese Malmesbury, de Ge^tis Pontificum, in the life o^ A^sel^e, with others
forecited. p. 12.13.
Popes of another World (as the Pope of Rome once styled them) be still
tolerated, when they have done so much mischief, and so little good to our
State and Church?

Ninthly, That the endowing of the Prelates, with great Treasons, and
exorbitances forementioned; And therefore they may both with good conscience
and reason be subtracted from them and put to better us^s; and they like other
Ministers, be confined to one comp^tent living with cure, there con^^antly to
reside and instruct the people, like Bishops in the primitive times.





See Bishop White^ Epistle before his Doctrine of the Sabbath: Heylyn in his
Antidotum Lincolniense; and moderate answer to H. Burton.
that if this form should be introduced, the King and Nobles must submit
ther^to, and be liable to their excommunications. But this is a foolish
Bugbear, which recoyles and lights heavily on their own heads. For the
Archbishops and Bishops of England (and those of foreign Countries too) have
many times, not only excommunicated their Sovereigns, but also interdicted
their Kingdoms, enjoined hard penances to them, absolved their Subjects from
their allegiance, and oaths, armed their people and strangers against them,
and deprived them of their Crowns; offering them more and greater affronts,
and requiring more submission from them, then all other their Subjects
whatsoever. Did ever any Presbytery do the like, or take so much upon them? or
did they ever deal so with their Princes, as our Prelates did with King John,
or with Edward, and Richard the second? If yea, then prove it: If no, then this
is no solid objection, but a malicious suggestion against the Presbyteriall and
Synodall Government. In a word, I would demand this question of the Objectors,
whether Kings, and great men, when they scandalously offend, be subject to the
censures of Excommunication by the law of God? If so, then why may not the
Presbytery and Synod of Ministers anathematize them, as well as Lord Bishops
and Popes? If not, then there is no fear of such a censure, to which they are
not liable by Gods Law or man's.

These twelve conclusions are sufficiently warranted by the premises; yet for
the Readers better satisfaction, I shall back them with some passages and
Authorities of our own approved ancient and Modern Writers, Martyrs,
Prelates, and Authors of special note, and so conclude.

Caelius Sedulius Scotus, Sedulius.
one of the ancientest of our own Writers, flourishing about the year of our
Lord 390. determines thus of the parity of Bishops and Presbyters by divine
right, against our Lordly Prelates doctrine in these days, in his Exposition
on Titus, Chap. 1. For a Bishop must be blameless, etc. He calls him a
Bishop, whom before he named a Presbyter. Before by the Devils instinct parties
were made in Religion, and it was said among the people, I am of Paul, but I am
of Apollo, and I am of Cephas, the Churches were governed with the common
Council of the Presbyters: But after that every one thought those whom he
baptized to be hi^^ not Christ's, it was decreed throughout the World, that one
chosen (...) of the Presbyters should be set over the rest, to whom all the
care of the Church should appertain, and that the seeds of schisms should be
taken away. In the Acts of the Apostl^s it is written, Acts 20.17, 28.
tha^ when the Apostle Paul^ came to Miletus, he sent to Ephesus and called the
Elders of that Church, unto whom among other things he spoke thus: Take heed to
your selves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you
Bishops, to feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood.
And here observe more diligently, how that he calling the Elders of but one
City Ephesus, does afterward style them Bishops; These things I have alleged
that we might show how that among the Anc^^^ts, fuisse Presbyteros quos
Episcopos, Pr^sbyters to h^ve been THE SAME THAT BISHOPS WERE: But by little
and little, that the seeds of dissension might be utterly extirpated, the whole
cure was tra^sferred to one. And on the 1 Timothy 5.^^. It is demanded (writes
he) why Paul here makes no mention of Presbyters, but only of Bishops and
Deacons? Sed etiam ipsos in Episcoporum nomine comprehendit: But truly he also
compreh^ndeth them in ^he name of Bishops.

Anselme.
To him I might annex our famous Gildas, in his Acris Correptio Cleri Angliae;
our Venerable In quo vos Spiritus sanctus posuit Episcopos. Dixerat enim supra
Presbyteros Ephesi Miletum vocatos, quos nunc Episcopos, id est, superin
^pectores nominat. Non enim una civitas plures Episcopos habere potuit, sed
eosdem Presbyteros, ut vere Sacerdot^s sub nomine Episcoporum significat.
Conjunctus est enim gradus and in multis pene similis.
Beda, in Acta Apostolorum, cap. 20. Tom. 5. Col. 657. and Alcuinus, de D^vinis
Officijs cap. 35.36, Epistola. 108. ad Sparatum: and Comment. in Evang.
Ioannis, l. 5. to. 25. Col. 547, 548, 549. Who maintain the self same
Doctrine of the Parity of Bishops and Presbyters, declaime much against the
pride, Lordlin^sse, ambition, domineering power, and other vices of Prelates;
and conclude, that a Bi^hopricke is Nomen Operis, non honoris; A name of
Labor, not of honor; A work, not a dignity; A toil, not a del^ght. But I
rather pass to Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, a man without exception, and
the greatest Scholar in his age; who near 600 years since, in his Enarration
on the Epistle to the Phillippians. cap. 1. verse. 1. resolves thus. With the
Bishops, that is, with the Presbyters and Deac^ns: for he has put Bishops for
Elders, after his custom. For there were not many Bishops in one City, neither
would he intermit Presbyters, that he might desc^nd to Deacons: But he declares
the dignity and excellency of the Presbyters, whil^s he manifests the same men
who are Presbyters to be Bishops. But that AFTERWARD one was elected, who might
be preferred before the rest, it was done to prevent schism, le^t every one
drawing to himself the Gospel of Christ, should divide it: Constat ergo
Apostolica institutione omnes Presbyteros esse Episcopos. It is therefore
MANIFEST BY APOSTOLICAL INSTITVTION, THAT ALL PRESBYTERS ARE BISHOPS, albeit
NOW those greater ones have obtained that Title. For a Bishop is called an
Overseer; and every Presbyter ought to attend the cure over the flock committed
to him. In his Commentary on the first Chapter of Titus v. 5, 7. he has the
selfsame words that Hierom and Sedulius used before him, concluding from Acts
20.17, 28. and Phil. 1.1. Apud veteres cosdem fuisse Presbyteros quos
Episcopos. That AMONG THE ANCIENTS PRESBYTERS WERE THE VERY SAME THAT BISHOPS
WERE; and that the Churches were then governed by a common Council of the
Presbyters. As therefore Presbyters know, that they out of the custom of the
Church, are subject to him who shall be set over them; so Bishops must know; SE
MAGIS CONSVETVDINE, Quam DISPOSITIONIS DOMINICAE VERITATE PRESBYTERIS ESSE
MAJORES, ET IN COMMVNE DEBERE ECCLESIAM REGERE: that they by CUSTOM, rather
then by truth of Divine Disposition are greater then Presbyters, and Therefore
it is of right and duty.
OUGHT TO RVLE THE CHVRCH IN COMMON with them. From which pregnant Authority,
even of an old Archbishop of Canterbury. I observe: First, That by Apostolical
institution, Bishops and Presbyters are both one and the same; and originally
continued so for a season. Secondly, That the imparity now between them ^s
only by custom, not by divine institution, and crept in by little and little
by degrees, after the Apostles time. Thirdly, That every Presbyter is still
truly and properly a Bishop over his own flock. Fourthly, That the Church of
God at first was governed only by a common Council or Synod of Presbyters,
not by Bishops. Fifthly, That Presbyters even at this day not only may, but
ought to govern the Church in common with the Bishops; as they did both in
Epist. 5.6^ 10.
Ignatius, Apologia. adu. Gentes. c. 39.
Tertullians, Epist. 6.18.28.39.45.
Cyprians, and Adv. Her. l. 4.43, 44. c. 4.
Irenaeus time, as others have proved at large. See the Answer to Bishop Hals
Remonstrance. Sect. 8, 9. Sixthly, That Bishops were first Cypr. Epist. 33.58.
Hierom ad ^uagr.
elected, created, and instituted by the Presbyters; Flacius Illericus in the
end of his Caral. Test. veritatis.
therefore by their own maxim, ( Ordinans est major ordinato) are greater and
better then Bishops; the rather, because Presbyters Quatenus such are of
Divine, and Bishops quatenus Bishops but of humane institution: and Presbyters
as such, by Anselmes own resolution in his Commentary on 1 Timothy 4.14. may of
right ordain Elders, as well as Bishops.


Neither is Anselme singular in his opinion, in avouching the parity and
identity of Presbyters and Bishops, since Athanasius, In Ephesians. 4. Tom. 3.239.
Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Primasius, Remigius, Rabanus Maurus,
Haym^, Theophylact, Bruno, in their Commentaries on Phil. 1.1. Acts 20.17, 28.
1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.5, 7. and on Ephesians. 4.11, 12. with sundry See A Catalogue Se.
p. 1.2, 3.
other Fathers delivered the same opinion in their writings before his time. A
truth so clear, that learned Consultatio. Artic. 14. Oper. Parisiis. 16.6. p.
952.
Cassander, though a Papist, confesses, Convenit autem inter OMNES, olim
Apostolicorum aetate, INTER EPISCOPOS ET PRESBYTEROS, DISCRIMEN NVLLVM FVISSE,
SED POSTMODVM ordinis servandi, and sch^smatis vitandi causa Episcopum
Presbyteris fuisse praepositum, cui soli Chyrotomi^, id est, ordinandi potestas
servata sit. That then this truth which is granted on all hands by ALL (both
Theologues and Canonists) among the Papists, should now be questioned, nay
contradicted and and damned for Heresy by our Prelates, seems strange and
monstrous unto me. But to proceed on in our own Writers.

Aelfrick Canons.
In the Henr. Spilmanni Council. Tom. 1. p. 576.586. Episcopi and Presbyteri
Ordo VNVS.
Canons of Aelfrick to Wulfinus a Bishop, about the year of Christ, 990. Sect.
17. There is no more difference between a Mass Priest, and a Bishop, then that
a Bishop is constituted to confer Orders, and to visit, or oversee, and to take
care of those things which belong to God, which should be committed to too
great a multitude, if every Presbyter should do it. For both VNVM TENENT
EVNDEMQVE ORDINEM have one and the selfsame Order; although that part of the
Bishop be the worthier. And in certain old Saxon Chapters of incertaine
Edition about the same time. Know that your degree is next to ours, and pene
CONIVNCTVM esse, and to be almost the same or conjoined to it. For as Bishops
supply the place of Apostles in the Church, so do Presbyters of the other
Disciples of the Lord: whence we ought to be mindful of so great a dignity.

John Salisbury our famous Countryman flourishing about the year of Christ,
John Salis.
1140. De Nugis Curialium. li. 8. c. 17. and 23. writes thus of the pride and
sedition of Bishops. Thou must admire to see the various household stuff and
riches, as they say, of Croesus among them that preach poor Christ: They live
of the Gospel without preaching the Gospel, and it is well if they live
only, so, as they do not also riot. They so gape after gain, that they
contemn the things that are Jesus Christ's; and are neither worthy the honor
nor name either of a Pastor or hireling. They d^^ that which makes them to be
feared of all, to be beloved of none; they preac^ peace, yet make division;
they show and counterfeit humility, that they may challenge pride. In fullness
they dispute of fastings; and what they build up with words, they pull down
with deeds. The works they do, bear witness of them; you may know them by
their fruits. It is not sufficient for them to sheare and devour the flock by
liberty of a divine Law, unless they also implore the aid of secular Laws:
and being made Officers to Prince^, they fear not to commit those things,
which any other Publican would easily be ashamed of. In the mean time they are
servants to pleasure or avarice; and those who have chosen and admitted them to
their custody, they spoil and oppress; and desire the death of those whom
they ought to foster both in flesh and spirit: Truly they bear in mind that of
the Prophet. Behold I have set thee over the Nations and over Kingdoms, to
pull up and to destroy, to pull down and to scatter, etc. Nor they do not
only contend but fight for a Bishopric. The Ancients heretofore were dragged
against their wills to a Bishopric, and went willingly to Martyrdom: they
feared the chief Chair, worse then a prison or cross. But now the Prelates
sp^^ke quite contrary; we will not, say they, be Martyrs, but the glory of our
Sees we will not give to another. Yet there is something in which they seem to
imitate the constancy of Martyrs, to wit, if they are to contest for a
Bishopric. It is reported by some, and it is true, that ambitious men have
sometimes, yea often contended for the Bishopric of Rome, and not without
brotherly blood, has the High Priest entered into the holy of holies. This
verily is to succeed Romulus in paricide, not Peter in feeding the flock
committed to him. More then civil Wars are again stirred up between Caesar
and Pompey, and whatsoever was presumed, wha^ever was impiously done at
Philippi, Lucade, Murina, in Egypt, or in Spain, a prelaticall War
accomplisheth. Do they therefore procure the effusion of Christian blood, that
it may be lawful for them above other men, according to their pastoral duty,
to lay down their lives for the Flock? Do they therefore pull down the
Churches, profane holy things, that there may be some thing for them to build
up and sanctify? Perchance they dash Nations one against another, disquiet
Kingdoms, violently take away the goods of Churches, that they may make matter
of promeriting to themselves; that they may compose al things, that other
things concu^ring they may lay hold on a necessity of commiserating and
providing for the poor. But if they do it, that they may safely do any thing
without punishment, that they may collect money; that they may foster, dilate,
and corrupt flesh and blood; trouble their Family, or seek their own glory,
domineering over the Lords heritage, and not being exanimo, an example to the
flock, although with their lips and in simulation of office they put on a
Pastor, yet they are more like to Tyrants then Princes. Philophers say, nothing
is more pernicious to man then man; and among men a secular, or Ecclesiastical
Tyrant is most pernicious, Yet verily in both kinds the Ecclesiastical is
worse then the secular. For if Salt has lost its savor, it is good for
nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under feet of men. So he long since
determined.

Petrus Blesensis
Petrus Blesensis, Archdeacon of Bath, flourishing about the year of our Lord
1160. writes thus to the Bishop of Bangor, concerning the wealth and State of
Bishops: Epist. 147^
The Title of poverty is glorious with Christ; and that which has becomed the
Son of God, ought not to misbeseeme you: The Prince of the Apostles and
Prelates says. Acts 3.6.
Gold and Silver have I none. Yea, that great famous Possidon^us in vita.
Augustine (Bishop of Hippo) therefore made no will, because the poor servant
of Christ had nothing at all, whereof to make any bequest. It is your duty to
live of the Gospel, as the Lord has appointed, not to go pompously in the
ornament of Clothes, in the pride of Horses, in the multitude of Attendants.
It becomes you as a professor of Priestly and Episcopal holiness, to ^ut of
all footsteps of your ancient conversation: Bibl. Patrum Tom. 12. pr. ^. p 947,
943.
And in his Treatise of the Institution of a Bishop, dedicated to John Bishop
of Worcester, He thus declaimes against the Lordlinesse, Cour^ship, and secular
employments of Bishops, especially those, which concern the Exchequer.
Certain Bishops abusively, call the liberty and alms of ancient Kings
bestowed on them, Baronies and Royalties, and themselves Barons, it being an
occasion of most sham^^full servitude. I am afraid, least the Lord complain of
them and say, Hosea 8.4^
They have reigned, but not by me, they have made themselves Princes, but I
knew it not. Thou must know, that thou have taken upon thee the Office of a
Shepherd, not of a Baron: Certainly Genesis 46.34^
Ios^ph being in Egypt, instructed his Father and Brethren to say to Pharaoh,
We are Shepherds: He would rather have them profess the office of a
Shepherd, then of a Prince or Baron. Christ says, John 10.11.
I am the good Shepherd: But thou art made by him a shepherd or a steward: a
stewardship is committed to thee; and know, that thou must give an accoun^ of
thy stewardship. The husbandry of God is committed to thee, thou have need of a
Weeding-hooke, as an Husbandman; of a sta^^e as a Shepherd; of a
Weeding-hooke, that as the Son of a Prophet, Ier. 1.101.
thou may pull up and destroy, build up and plant; use thy staff by driving
the Wolves from the sheepfold, by sustaining the weak sheep, by raising up
those ^ha^ are fallen, by reducing those that have st^ayed. But among the
fruits of thy Episcopal office, let eternal things be ever preferred before
temporal. Let another guide and dispatch thy temporal cares and affairs for
thee; but do thou diligently attend the salvation of souls. The mind
consecrated to the discharge of Divine service, ought to be free from worldly
employments. Thou art addicted to great things, be not taken up with the
smallest. These things what ever they are, which ^end to the gain of the
World, and pertain not to the gaining of souls, are small and vile. 1 Cor.
6.4.
If you shall have secular business, says the Apostle, appoint those who are
most contemptible among you to be Judges. Thou therefore, O good Prelate, set
all things after the salvation of souls; for souls are as far more worthy
then bodies, and all things else that humane ambition causes, as Heaven it
self excels Earth in dignity. Yet at this day, with many, Episcopal
authority consists only in this, that their plowlands are fatted with chalk
and dung, that their Fishponds be multiplied, that their Parkes and the Ground
of their possessions be enlarged; In building Palaces, Mils and Ovens. All the
care of Prelates is in increasing their rents: What? is it the voice of our
Savior to the Prince of the Apostles and Prelates, if thou love me, till thy
Lands, build high Houses; we read that he said to Peter: John 21.17.
If thou love me, feed my sheep. Thou art the heir and Vicar of Peter, feed
my sheep by Preaching; do the work of an Evangelist and Shepherd: thou must
not be ashamed of the Gospel; if thou beleevest, thou ought not to be
ashamed of thy Pastoral office. 2 Timothy 4.2.
Be instant therefore in season, out of season, fulfill thy Ministry: Thy
ministry has more burden, then honor. If thou affectest the honor of it,
thou art an hireling; if thou imbracest the burden of it, the Lord is able to
increase his grace, that thou may receive gain out of gain, and profit out
of profit. A good note for Bishops that meddle with Court and Exchequer offices.
If thou shall drown thy self in the Labyrinthes of Court affairs,
especially of the Exchequer, thou shall suffer great losses of spiritual
exercise. Matthew. 6.24.
No man can serve two Masters, God and Mammon. Let it not slip out of thy mind,
how in the tonsure of thy head, when as thou wast elected into the Lords
portion, how thou have renounced, the ignominy of Lay-imployments. Yea, in the
day of thy consecration, thou have made solemn vows to renounce all secular
things and employments ( as our See the Book of ordination and consecration of
Bishops.
Bishops and Ministers yet do in the presence of God, and the whole
Congregation) which have bound up thy lips; thou art obliged with the words of
thy own mouth, when upon the interrogation of him that consecrated thee, thou
have published without any exception, that from hence forth thou would wholly
discharge and sequester thy self from all worldly businesses, and dishonest
gains, and would always bend thy whole study and care upon divine affairs.
What have thou to do with the revennues of the Exchequer, that thou should
neglect the cure of souls, but ^or one short hour? Note this.
What, has Christ elected thee to the receipt of custom? Matthew being once
taken from thence, never returned thither again. Be not therefore in the number
of those, who prefer worldly employments before spiritual, swallowing a
Camel, and straining at a Gnat. We read that in the days of Ruffinus Hist. l.
10. c. 2.
Constantine, there were certain Bishops, flattering the Prince, who gave
greater reverence and heed to royal Edicts, then to Evangelicall precepts. And
there are some Bishops now a days, to whom the dispensation of Gods word is
committed, who are silent from good things, dumb dogs, neither able, nor yet
willing to bark; they are turned into an evil bow, giving themselves up as
weapons of iniquity unto sin. This exasperates Gods wrath, and accumulates
the danger of eternal damnation on many, that certain of the chief Priests
and Eld^rs of the people, although they pronounce not judgment in cases of
blood, yet they handle the same things by disputing and debating of them, and
think themselves therefore free from blame, that in decreeing judgment of
death, or Let those Prelates who have had their voices in such sent^nces,
conside^ this.
truncation of members ( which some of them of late have judicially given
sentence of) they absent themselves only from the pronunciation and execution
of this penal sentence. But what is more pernicious then this dissimulation?
Is it lawful to discuss^ and determine that, which it is not lawful to
pronounce? Verily Saul did many ways handle and plot the death of David, and
that he might palliate his malice under the shadow of innocence, he said, 1
Kings 18.12.
Let not my hand be upon him; but the hand of the Philistims be upon him.
Truly as much as this dissimulation did excuse him with men, so much did it
the more damnably accuse him with God. We have an express form of similitude
in that Consistory wherein Christ was condemned to death: the Scribes and
Pharisees said, John 18 31.
It is not lawful for us to put any man to death; And yet when they cried,
saying, Crucify him; they pronounced a sentence of death against him with
bloody malignity, whom they slew with the sword of the tongue, they protested
it was not lawful for them to slay, and their iniquity was in this very thing
so much the more detestable, because that they might escape the censure of men,
they covered it with a simulation of innocence. Thou art set over the souls of
men, not over their bodies; The Prelate has nothing that is common with
Pilate. Thou art Christ's Steward and the Vicar of Peter, neither ought thou
to give an account of the jurisdiction committed to thee, to Caesar, but to
Christ: yet some Bishops by usurped offices and administrations of the world,
make themselves obnoxious to the bent of the Court, and as if they had
renounced the privilege of their dignity, expect the sentence of an harder
event. He adds this more against the Lordlinesse and Dominion of Prelates in
the same Treatise. There are some who repute honors, Virtues and ascribe the
glory of their eminency to their merits, which peradventure they have obtained
in Gods wrath. The assumption of honor, becomes a temptation, and an occasion
of subvertion unto many. Therefore thou must so preside, as thou may profit.
Woe to those who rule over men, if God set not president over them. Paul
glories not of his Dominion, but of his Ministration. 2 Cor. 11.23.
In labors more abundant, in prisons more frequent, in stripes above measure,
in deaths often. In these things a form of glorying is prefixed thee, not in
precious array, not in much household stuff, not in heaping up money, not in
Edefices or Cultures, not in enlarging possessions, not in multitudes of
Horses, not in pompous raiment, not in a numerous train: For after all these
things do the Gentiles seek: But as the Doctor of the Gentiles glories, in
Gal. 6.142
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the World was crucified to him,
and he unto the World. Repute thy self an humble and abject Servant: Let not
humility be a disgrace to thee, which adorned the Son of God. Of Prelacy thou
may have glory, but not with God, but if thou gloriest of humility, thou
shall not be unwise. Mat. 10.25, 26.
The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them; but ye shall not do
so^ Therefore thou may not make thy self a Lord, but a Servant. The Apostle
Peter says; 1 Pet. 5.2, 3.
Not Lording over the Clergy, but being examples to the people. It is
pernicious to a Prelate, gladly to hear of himself, above that he discernes
to be within him. It is frequent to find one among the Bishops who may chance
to dedicate the first year of his promotion to sanctity; and when in his
novelty he became a Lamb, inveterated for some days, he is made a most
ravenous Wolf. The same Author in his 15.18.22, 23.25. and 64. ^pistles has
sundry notable Passages against the Lordlinesse, Pride, and other vices of the
Prelates in his age, and of the danger of Episcopacy. A Lord Prelate ( writes
h^e there) Observes not the face, but hand of him who repaires to him, as being
always ready to receive gifts: I wish this Charcter did not suit too well with
some of our Lordly Prelates now.
he is of a shameless brow in demanding, ungrateful when he has received,
inhumane if he receive not something; he is unmercifull to the afflicted; meek
to the most cruel; unstable, untractable; tolerable to none, hateful to all,
an enemy of peace, a contemner of faith, an adversary of unity; unfaithful in
his councels, negligent in his actions, furious in anger, remiss in mercy,
dissolute in words, gluttonous in banquets, haughty in prosperity, fearful in
adversity. He does nothing according to reason, but all things according to
will; and as if he were degenerated into a beastiall sense, casting away from
him the counsel and judgment of reason, he follows his own appetite. For
man being in honor understands not, but is compared unto the brute beasts,
and became like to them: His ascent is pleasing neither to God nor man: his
whole study, whole honor, whole glory, is the whole and sol^ authority of his
usurped Episcopal dignity, the stretching out of his breast; elevation of his
neck, stateliness of his going, distorsion of his eyes, Vultuosity, and
thundering of his threatening countenance; and that I may include many things in
few words, t^tum datur elationi, nibil sanctitati, etc. All is addicted to
pride, nothing to sanctity, nothing to chastity^ nothing to amity; and finally,
nothing at all is left to h^nesty. Behold him speaking, behold him walking Quas
gerit ^re min^s? quanto premit omnia fas^u?
What threatenings bears he in his mouth, with how
Great pride treads he upon all things below?
O curas hominum! O quantum est in rebus i^ane!
O cares of men! O how much emptiness
And vanity Lord Prelates Minds possess?
O vain glory! O bloody ambition! O the unsatiable desire of terrene honor! O
the canker of hearts, the subversion of souls, the desire of dignities! Whence
has this plagu^ crept up? Whence has this execrable presumption prevailed;
that unworthy men, should covet dignities? and by how much the less they
deserve to ascend to honors, by so much the more importunately they thrust
themselves into them. At this day by right and wrong, at this day to the hazard
of soul and body unhappy men run to the Pastoral chair: and do not
consider that it is a The true Title of a Prelates Chair.
Chair of pestilence to them, whiles they are the cause of ruin to themselves
and others. In flocks and herds, witness Hierome, the Ram and Bull which
excels in corpulency and animosity, goes before the rest. But a man more
beastiall then all bea^ts, presumes so much more indiscreetly and audaciously
to be above his betters, by how mnch less he confides to the titles of
virtues, or sincerity of conscience; he who has learned nothing is made the
teacher of others, and like sounding brass and a ^inkling Cymball, usurpes the
office of Preaching, when as he is an unprofitable ^tock, and a dumb Idol.
This is it which Ecclesiastes deploringly complains of; ^ccles. 10.6^
I have seen (says he) an evil under the Sun, a fool placed in high
dignity, and wise men sitting in low places. An illiterate Bishop is a dumb
preacher. It is a Prelates duty to instruct the people under him, to render a
people acceptable to God, by opening the mystery of the Scriptures. But at this
day, such as the people are, such is the Priest; as hi^ darkness is, so also is
light. Blush O Sidon at the Sea; a Prela^e may blush and grieve, to rule over
people, not to profit them; to have taken upon him the office of a Teacher, and
to be mute in instructing the people. It is the word of the lamenting Prophet:
Isay 50^^^
My people is become a lost flock; their Pastors have seduced them, they are
dumb^ dogs not able to barke^ They ought to drive the Wolves from the flocks,
but they themselves are wolves to their own; taking care neither of their own
nor theirs salvation, they preci^itate themselves with their flocks, into the
pit of eternal death. Thus and much more he.

Not to mention See Ba^^us. Cent^riae ^cri^. Brit.
Grostheads book de Ignavia Praelatorum; Or Halredus de Praelatorum moribus;
Nigellus Wireker de Abusu rerum Ecclesiae. Gualther Mapes his Complaint against
the Pr^l^tes; Ad mal^s Pastores, and ad ^mpios Praelatos^ Robert Baston, de
sacerdotum Luxuriis, or ^ohn Purvey de obliquo cleri statu, all declaiming
against the Lordlinesse, pomp, pride, wealth, and v^^es of Prelates; the most
of which books the Prelates have suppressed, their titles only being left
upon record: Nor yet to mention the passages of Robert Holkot our famous
Clerk, In lib. Sapientiae. lect. 77.163. and lect. 1. in Proverbia Solomonis,
to like purpose.

Richardus Armachanus Archbishop of Armagh, Rich^ Armacha^nus.
flourishi^g in the beginning of Wicklif^ time, about the year of Christ 1350.
De Questionibus Armenorum. l. 11. ^. 1. determines thus. Li. 11. De
questionibus A^nenoru^ ^. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.


That neither the Dominion nor Ministry of temporal things belongs to
Ecclesiastical dignity, but rather deminishes i^. For the Lord prohibited the
Dominion of temporal things to his Apostles and Disciples, saying; Possess
neither gold nor moneys in your purses; Mat. 10.19. If thou will be perfect,
go^ and sell all thou have; and give to the poor. Now it cannot be of
Ecclesiastical dignity, which the Head of the Church has prohibited to his
members: or at least would not have them to po^sess^^ Whence it appears, that
the dominion or possession of temporal things does in no wise essentially
appertain to Ecclesiastical dignity, but rather diminishes it. In the second
Chapter he averres, that these states and degrees of Patri^rch, Archbishop,
Bishop, etc. were invented only out of the devotion of men, not instituted by
Christ and his Apostles. That no Prelate of the Church, how great soever; has
any greater degree of the power of order, then a simple Priest. In the fourth
Chapter, he proves, that the power of confirmation and imposition of hands
that the Holy Ghost may be given thereby, appertains to the jurisdiction of the
Presbytery, Which he manifests by Acts 7. and 14. 1 Timothy 4. and by the
practice of the Primitive Church after the Apostles time. In the fourth and
fifth Chapters he demonstrates, That Priests are called Bishops by the Apostle.
Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3. Titus 1. and Acts 20.28. Et quod ordine succedant
Apostolis, and that they succeed the Apostles in order. In the sixth Chapter he
proves, That all Priests and Bishops are equal as to the power of Order: And
in the fourth Chapter he punctually determines, That there is no distinction
found in the Evangelicall, or Apostolical Scriptures, between Bishops and
simple Priests called Presbyters; Whence it follow^s, Quod in omnibus est una
potestas and aequalis ex ordin^; that in all of them there is one and equal
power by reason of Order: And that for ought he can find, the Apostle Paul does
not in any of his Epistles distinguish between the Order of Presbyters (that
is) of Apostles, and Bishops. That every one who has the cure of others, is a
Bishop. Which the name of a Bishop imports and manifests. For a Bishop is
nothing else, but a superintendent, or watchman: From whence it is evident^
that besides the power of Order, he has nothing but a Cure.

John Wiclif^e.
Our famous English Apostle John VVicklife, ( as Master Fox often styles him)
delivers the selfsame doctrine of the Identity of Presbyters and Bishops,
Dialogorum. l. 4. c. 14. De Sacramento ordinis. f. 124, 125. Some men ( says
he) multiply the character in Orders: But I consider whether their foundation
or fruit be in the Scripture. But one thing I confidently aver; That in the
Primitive Church and in Paul's time, two Orders sufficed: The Presbyter, and the
Deacon. Likewise I say, that in Paul's time a Presbyter and Bishop suit idem,
was the same. This appears by the first of Timothy, chap 3. and T^tus chap. 1.

And herein that profound Divine Hierome justifies the same, as appears
Distinct. 74. Cap. Olim. For then was not invented that distinction of Pope and
Cardinals, Patriarchs and Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Officials, and
Deanes, with other Officers and private Religions, of which there is neither
number nor Order. Concerning the contentions about these things, that every one
of these is an Order, and that in the reception thereof, the grace of God and a
character is imprinted, with other difficulties, which ours babble about, it
seeme^ good to me to be silent, because they neither establish, nor prove what
they affirm But out of the faith of Scripture, it seeme^h to me to suffice, if
there be Presbyters, and Deacons, keeping the sta^e and office which Christ
has imposed on them. Quia certum videtur, quod superbia Caesar^a hos gradu^
and ordines adinvenit.
Because it seems certain, that Caesarian Pride invented these other degrees
and Orders. For if they had been necessary to the Church, Christ and his
Apostles had not been silent in the expression of them, and description of
their office, as those blaspheme who magnify the Popes Laws above Christ. But
a Catholic ought to receive the office of these Clergymen out of the
Scriptures authority, out of the Epistles to Timothy and Titus; Neither ought
he under pain of sin to admit these new Caesarian inventions. Thomas
Waldensis, Wickliffes professed Antagonist. Tom. 1. l. 3. Artic. 3. c.
29.30.31, 32. Tom. 2. c. 117, 118. and Tom. 3. c. 60.61, 62, 63. brings in
Wickliff^, proving by many arguments, That Bishops and Presbyters are all one
and the same by divine institution and Gods Law. That the Ordination of
Presbyters belongs not only to Bishops, sed etiam ad simplic^m Sacerdotem, But
even to a mere Priest as well as to them; That one ordained a Minister, by a
mere Priest alone, ought not to doubt of his Priesthood, or to seek
Ordination elsewhere, if he rightly discharge his ministerial office; That a
bare Priest may supply the place of a Bishop in conferring Orders, etc. And
Histor. Angliae p. 474. Ypodigma Neustriae. An. 13^9. p. 144^
Thomas Walsingh^m with others testify: That in his time one Lollard, that was
a Priest, did commonly ordain and create another. And o^^er that every Priest
had as great power to confer the Sacraments of the Church, as the Bishops
had. In a word, Wickliffe affirmed, Dialog. li. 4. c. 26. Fox Acts and
Monuments. p. 414.
That there were twelve Disciples of Antichrist which plot against the Church of
Christ; to wit, Popes, Cardinal^, Patriarchs^ Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons, Officials, Deanes, Monks, Canons, Friars, Pardoners: All these
twelve (writes he) Et specialiter Praelagi Caesarij, and specially Caesarean
Prelates, are the mani^est Disciples of Ant^christ, Because they take away the
liberty of Christ, and burden and hinder the holy Church, that the Law of the
Gospel should not have free passage as in former times it had, So that he
d^emed the calling of Bishops, Antichristian: And as for their Temporalties and
s^cular offices, He posit^vely maintained, Thomas Walsingham Hist. Angl. p.
205.302. to 307. Fox Acts and Monum^nts. p. 398, 399.414. Holi^shed^ p. 411.
That Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, and other Priests, might not civiliter
dominari, rule like Temporal Lords, or bear any civil office, without
mortal sin; That it is a sin to endow them with temporal possessions:
That no Prelates ought to have any Prison to punish or restrain offenders, nor
yet to purchase large temporal possessions or riches: And that no King ought
to impose any secular office upon any Bishop or Curate: For then both the King
and Clerk should be, Proditor Jesus Christi; a betrayer of Jesus Christ. Which
he manifests at large. Dialog. l. 4. c. 15, 16, 17, 18.26, 27. Where he proves,
That the temporal Lords, have grievously sinned in endowing the Bishops and
Church with large temporal possessions; That wars and contention have risen
thence: that this endowment has reversed Christ's Ordination and procreated
Antichrist, to the manifold deturbation of Christ's Spouse. Whence Chronicles
note, that in the dotation of the Church, an Angels voice was then heard in the
air, This day is poison powered into the whole Church of God. And from
Constantines time, who thus endowed the Churches, the Roman Empire and secular
Dominion in it has still decreased. Therefore if Kings would preserve their
Dominions entire, and not have them diabolically torn; if they would reform
and preserve the peace of the Church, and keep their Subjects ^oyall, and not
have them Rebels, Let them study to reform the Church according to Christ's
Ordinance^ under whose government it will be most prosperously regulated, an^
all wars, symony, with other misch^ifes will cease. Concluding, that it is
not only lawful for them to take away these temporalities from the Church
which abuses them, but that they ought to do it under pain of eternal
damnation in Hell, seeing they ought to repent of this their folly, and to
satisfy for the same, wherewith they have defiled the Church of Christ.
Finally, Dialog. l. 3. c. 3^. f. 72.
he styles the Bishops, lesser Antichrists, who following the great
Antichrist, forsake and banish the office of Preaching which Christ has
designed to them, and bring in the office of spoiling those that are under
them, feeding upon the sheep of Christ.

William Swinderby, William Swinderby
a Martyr under Richard the second, had thi^ Article obje^^ed to him, that he
held. Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 431.434. Edit. 1610. and Edit. ult. vol. 1. p.
609 619.113.615.616.617.
That all Priests are of like power in all things, notwithstanding that some of
them in this World are of higher and greater honor, degree, or pre-eminence.
And concerning the wealth, possessions, and Lordships of Prelates he thus
affirmed before the Bishops who convented and examined him. As anen^t the
taking away of temporalities, I say that it is lawful for Kings, Princes,
Dukes and Lords of the World to ta^^ away from Popes, Cardinals, fro Bishops
and Prelates possessions of the Church, their temporalities, and their alms
they have given them, upon condition they should serve God the better, when
they verily seen, that their giving and their taking, been contrary to the Law
of God, to Christ's living and his Apostles; and namely in that they take upon
them (that shoulden be next followers of Christ and his Apostles in poorness
and meekness) to be secular Lords, against the teaching of Christ and Saint
Peter, Luke 22 Reges gentium: Et 1. Pet. 5. Neque Dominantes in Cle^^; and
namely when such temporalities makes them the more proud both in heart and
array, then they shoulden been else, more in strife and debate against peace
and charity, and in ^vill ensample to the world, more to be occupied in worldly
business; Omnem solicitudinem pro ijcient^s in ^um: and draws them from the
service of God, from edifying of Christ's Church, in impoverishing and in making
less the state and power of Kings, Princes, Dukes, and Lords that God has set
them in, in wrongful oppression of Commons for unmightfulnesse of Realms. For
Paul says to men of the Church (whose lore Prelates shoulden so^veraignely
follow.) Habentes victum and vestitum hii^ contenti simus. If men speaken of
wordly power and Lordships, and worships, with other vices that reign therein,
what Priest that insues and has most hereof (in what degree so he be) he is
most Antichrist of all the Priests that been in earth. This he thus ^urther
backs and seconds. Truly me seems that all Christian men, and namely
Priests, shoulden take keep, that their doing were according with the Law of
God, either the old Law, either the new. The Priests of the old Law weren
forbidden to have Lordships among their Brethren; for God said, that he would
be their part and their heritage. And Christ that was the highest Priest of the
new Testament forsook worldly Lordship, and was here in form of a servant, and
forbade his Priests such Lordships, and said, Reges g^ntium dominantur eorum,
etc. Vos autem non sic, that is, The Kings of the Heathen bear dominion and
rule, etc. But you shall not do so. And as Saint Peter says, Neque dominantes
in clero, etc. Not bearing rule and dominion of the clergy, etc. So it seems
me, that it is against both Laws of God, that they have such Lordships, and
that their title to such Lordships is not full good. And so it seems me, that
if they have been thereto of evil living, it is no gre^^ peril to take away
from them such Lordships, but rather needful, if the taking away were in
charity, and not for singular covetousness ne wrath^ And I suppose that if
Friars, that been bound to their founders to live in poverty, would break
their rule, and take worldly Lordships, might not men lawfully take from them
such Lordships, and make them to live in p^verty as their rule would? And
forsooth it seeme^h me, that Priests oughten all so well to keep Christ's rule,
as Friars owen to keep the rul^ of their founder. Jeremy witnesses how God
commends Rechabs Children, ^^remy 35.
for that they would not break their Faders bidding in drinking of Wine; And
yet Jeremy proffered them wine to drink. And so I trow, that God would commend
his Priests if they woulden forsake worldly Lordships, and holden them apayd
with lifelot, and with clothing, and busy them fast about their heritage of
Heaven. And God says, Numer. 18. That is, You shall have no inheritance in
their Land, nor have no part amongst them; I will be your part and inheritance
amongst the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 18. The Priests and Levites, and all that
be of the same Tribe, shall have no part nor inheritance with the rest of
Israel, because they shall eat the Sacrifices of the Lord and his oblations,
and they shall take nothing of the possession of their Brethren: The Lord
himself ^s their possession, as he spoke unto them. And the fourteenth chap^er
of Luke: Even so every one of you which forsakes not all that he possesses,
cannot be my Disciple. And Jerome in his 14 Epistle. has the like words: And
Bernard in his 20 Book to Eugenius the Pope. And also Hugo in his book De
Sacramentis, the second part of his second book the 7 chapter. And also in the
12. q. first chapter, Duo sunt. and in the chapter Clericus. And again,
Bernard in sermon de Apostolis upon this place; Ecce nos reliquimus omnia;
Behold we leave all, etc. Chrysostom upon the Gospel of Saint Matthew, etc.

Walter Brute.
Walter Brute, this Swinderbyes Disciple, was Fox Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1^ p.
622.642^653.
Articled against before the Prelates, for maintaining the same positions his
Master did; namely, That all Priests are of like power in all points,
notwithstanding that some of them are in this world of higher dignity, degree,
or pre-eminence. And touching the wealth and Temporalties of Prelates and
Clergy men, and the taking away of tbem; he thus concludes in his Examination
before the Bishop of Hereford. As touching the taking away of temporal goods
from those that are Ecclesiastical persons offending habitualiter, by such as
^re temporal Lords, I will not affirm any thing to be lawful in this matter
(as in other matters before) that is not agreeable to charity; And that because
it is a hard matter for a man to take another man's goods from him without
breaking of charity; because peradventure he that takes away is the more
moved to such manner of taking away, by reason of the desire he has to those
goods, which he endures to take away; or else because of some displeasure or
hatred to the person from whom he goes about to take away those goods, more
then that he from whom those goods be taken should be amended. Therefore
unl^sse he that takes away be only moved of charity to the taking away of
such goods, ^ dare not affirm that such taking is lawful: And if such taking
away proceed of charity, I dare not judge it unlawful; because that the Bishop
of Rome which received his temporal dominion of the Empe^our, when the
Emperor rebelled and was not obedient unto him, deprived him from his
t^mporall jurisdiction: How much more then may temporal Lords do the same,
which have bestowed upon them many temporal Dominions and Lordships, only to
the intent that they might the better intend to serve God and ke^p^ his
Command^ments? Now if they perceive, that they be against the Laws of God, and
that they be ove^ busily occupied about wordly matters, I cannot see but that
they may well enough take from them those temporal goods which to a good
purpose they gav^ them. But if in time to come after this, those that be^
temporal Lords shall take from Ecclesiastical persons such temporalties, let
him that desires to understand this, read the Prophet Ez^kiel, in the chapter
of the shepherds of Israel, which fed themselves in stead of their flock; and
so let him read the Apocalypse of the fall of Babylon: Let him also read the
Popes Decretal^ against Heretics; and in those he shall find, that the taking
away of the temporalties from the Clergy shall come to pas^e for the multitude
of their sins. This opinion, That the temporal Lords might t^ke away the
temporal goods from Church^^, offending habitually; was likewise maintained
about the same time by Fox Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1. p. 572.
Nicholas Hereford, Philip R^^^ington, John As^^on, and generally by all the
Wicklivists of that age; and that without any danger at all of sacrilege or
sin, with Walter Brute his limitations; which opinion the Lordly Prelates of
England (...) very importunate to cause them to recant by force, and flattery.

William Thorpe a Martyr in Henry the fourth his reign: William Thorpe
averred: Fox Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1. p. 700, 701.707. The viciousnes and
pride of Priests, infecte^h all the world.
That the covetousness of Priests and pride, and the boast that they have and
make of their dignity and power, destroys no^ only the virtues of Priesthood
in Priests themselves, but also over this, it stirs God to take great
vengeance both upon the Lords, and upon the Commons which suffer these Priests
charitably. Whereupon Arundel the Archbishop said to him; Thou judge every
Priest proud that will not go arrayed as thou do, It is pity Bishops cannot
swear.
by God I deem him to be more meek that goes every day in a Scarlet gown,
then thou in thy thredbare blew gown: Whereby know thou a proud man? And
he said, Sir, a proud Priest may be known when he denies to follow Christ
and his Apostles in wilful poverty and other virtues, and cove^eth worldly
worship, and takes it gladly, and gathers together with pleading, menacing
or with flattering, or with Simony any-worldly goods, and most, if a Priest
^usy him not chiefly in himself, and after in all other men and women after
his cunning and power to withstand sin. And finally he adds, that the
viciousness of these foresaid named Priests and Prelates has been long time,
and yet is, and shall be cause of wars both within the Realm and without; and
in the same wise these unable Priests have been, and yet are, and shall ^e
chief cause of pestilence of men, and murren of beasts, and the barrenness of
the earth, and of all other mischiefs, to the time that Lords and Commons able
them through grace to know and to keep the Commandments of God, enforcing them
then faithfully and charitably by one assent, to redress and make one this
foresaid Priesthood, to the wilful, poor, meek, and innocent living and
teaching, specially of Christ and his Apostles. So he.

John Purvey a Martyr about the same time, John Purvey^
in a Treatise of his declared, how the King, the Lords, Fox Acts and
Monuments. Vol. 1. p. 711.
and Commons may without any charge at all keep fifteen Garrisons, and find
15900 Soldiers (having sufficient Lands and revenues to live upon) out of the
temporalties gotten into the hand^ of the Clergy, and ^ained religious men,
which never do tha^ which pertains to the office of Curats to do, nor yet
to secular Lords. And moreover the King may have every year 20000 pound to
come freely into his coffers and above; also he may find or sustain fifteen
Colleges more, and 15000. Priests and Clarks with sufficient living, and an
hundred Hospitals for the sick, and every house to have a hundred Marks in
Lands: And all this may they take of the foresaid temporalities, without any
charge to the Realm^ whereunto the King, the Lords, and the Commons are to be
invited. For otherwise there seems to hang over our heads a great and
mavelous alteration of this Relme, unless the same be put in execution: And
if the secular Priests and fained religious, which be Simoniacks and Heretics,
which feign themselves to say Mass, and yet say none at all according to the
Canons, which to their purpose they bring and allege, 1. q. 3. Audivimus, and
Cap. Pudenda, and Cap. Schisma: by which Chapter such Priests and religious do
not make the Sacrament of the Altar, that then all Christians, especially all
the founders of such Abbeys, and endowers of Bishoprics, Priories, and
Chaunte^ies, ought to amend this fault and treason committed against their
Predecessors, by taking from them such secular dominions which are the
maintenance of all their sins. And also that Christian Lords and Princes are
bound to take away from the Clergy such secular Dominion as nous^eth and
nourishes them in Here^ies, and ought to reduce them unto the simple and poor
life of Christ Jesus and his Apostles. And further that all Christian Princes
(if they will amend the malediction and blasphemy of the name of God) ought to
take away their temporalities from that shaven generation which most of all
does nourish them in such malediction. And so in like wise the fat tithes from
Churches appropriate to rich Monks, and other religious, fained by manifest
lying and other unlawful means, likewise ought to debar their gold to the
proud Priest of Rome which does poison all Christendom with Simony and
Heresy. Further, that it is a great abomination, that Bishops, Monks, and
other Prelates be so great Lords in this World, whereas Christ with his
Apostles and Disciples never took upon them secular dominion, neither did they
appropriate unto them Churches, as these men do, but lead a poor life, and
gave a good testimony of their Priesthood. And therefore all Christians ought
to the uttermost of their power and strength, to swear that they will reduce
such shavelings to the humility and poverty of Christ and his Apostles; and
whosoever does not thus, consents to their Heresy. Also that these two
Chapters of the immunity of Churches are to be condemned, that is, Cap. Non
minus. and Cap. Adversus. Because they do decree, that temporal Lords may
neither require tallages nor tenths by any ecclesiastical persons. He writes
much more to the same effect.

The noble Martyr, Sir Fox Ac^s and Monuments. p. 514.517, 518.522. Walsingham
Hist. Angliae. An. 1413. p. 429.
John Old Castle, Lord Cobham professed, Lord Cobham.
That the will of God is, That Priests being secluded from all worldliness,
should conform themselves utterly to the examples of Christ and his Apostles,
be evermore occupied in Preaching and teaching the Scriptures purely, and
giving wholesome examples of good living to others; being more modest, loving,
gentle, and lowly in spirit then any other sorts of people. Where do ye find
(said he to the Prelates) in all Gods Law, that ye should thus sit in
judgment of any Christian man, or yet give sentence of any other man unto
death, as ye do her^ daily? No ground have ye in all the Scriptures, so Lordly
to take it upon you, but in Annas and Caiphas, which sat thus upon Christ, and
upon his Apostles after his ascension: Of them only have y^ taken it to judge
Christ's members as ye do, and neither of Peter nor John: Since the venom^ of
Iu^as was shed into the Church, Ye never followed Christ, nor yet stood in the
perfection of Gods Law: ^y venom, I mean your possessions and Lordships: For
then cried an Angel in the air (as your own Chronicles mention) Woe, woe,
woe, This day is venom shed into the Church of God: Before that time all the
Bishops of Rome were Martyrs in a manner: and since that time we read of very
few: But indeed one has put down another, one has cursed another, ^n^ has
poisoned another, one has slain another, and done much more mischief
besides, as all Chronicles tell. And let all men consider this well, that
Christ was meek and merciful; the Pope (and his Prelates) is proud and a
Tyrant: Christ was poor and forgave; the Pope is rich and a malicious
manslayer, as his daily acts do prove him. Rome is the very nest of Antichrist,
and out of that nest comes all the Disciples of him; of whom Archbishops,
Bishop^, Prelates, Priests, and Monks be the body, members; and these pild
Friars the tail. Though Priests and De^cons for preaching Gods word,
ministering the Sacraments, with provision for the poor, be grounded on Gods
Law, yet have these Sects no manner of ground thereof. He that follows Peter
most nighest in pure living, is next unto him in succession. But your Lordly
Order esteemed not greatly the behavior of poor Peter, what ever ye prate of
him.

Pierce Plowman
Pierce Plowman, Passus. 15.2, 4, 8.
an anci^nt ^nglish Poet writes to the same effect. If Knighthood and kinduite
and commons by conscience,
Together love lelly, leeveth it well ye Bishops,
The Lordship of Lands for ever ^all ye lose
And live as Levitici, as our Lord ye teaches.
Deuteronomy. 8. Numb. 5. per primitias and Decimas, etc.

And the Author of the same Treatise, in his Fox Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1. p.
528.529, 53^.532. Edit. ult.
Plowmans complaint of the abuses of the World: writes thus against the
Lordlinesse and wealth of Bishops and Priests. Lord thou saydst Kings of the
Heathen men be Lords ^ver their subjects, and they that usen their power be
clepen well doers. But Lord thou saydst, it should not be so among thy
servants, but he that were most, should be as a servant. And Lord thy Priests
in the old Law had no Lordship among their brethren, but houses and pastures
for their beasts: but Lord our Priests now have great Lordships, and put their
brethr^n in greater thraldom, than Lewdmen that be Lords: Thus in meekness
forsaken. The deed sh^weth well of th^se Masters, that they desiren more
maistery for their own worship, then for profit of the people. For when they
be Masters, they n^ pre^che^ not so often as they did before. And gif they
preachen, commonly it is before rich men, there as they mowen bear worship and
also profit of their preaching. But before poor men they preachen but seldom
when they b^ Masters: and so by their works we may seen that they are but
false glossers. O Lord deliver the sheep out of the ward of these Shepherds,
and these hired men, that stond^n more to keep their riches that they robben of
thy sheep, than they stonden in keeping of thy sheep. And Lord geve our King
and his Lords heart to defenden thy true shepherds and sheep from out of the
Wolves mouths, and grace to know thee that art the true Christ, the Son of
the heavenly Father, from the Antichrist, that is, the Son of perdition, etc.

Sir Geoffry The Plowmans Tale.
Chaucer our renowned Poet, writ^s much the same effect. The Emperor ga^e the
Poet sometime,
So high Lordship him about,
That at last the sely Kyme,
The proud Pope put him out;
So of his Realm is in doubt:
But Lords b^ware and them defend
For now these folk been wondrous stout.
Moses Law forbade i^ the,
That Priests should no Lordships weld:
Christ's Gospel bids also
That they should no Lordship^ held,
Ne Christ's Apostles were never so bold
No such Lordships to them embrace,
But ^^neren her ^^eep and keep her fold:
God amend hem for his grace, etc.


This Book of Chaucer was authorized to be printed by Act of Parliament, in
the 34. and 3^. Hen. 8. C. 2. When the Prelates by the same Act prohibited both
the printing and reading of the Bible in English, such was their piety.

About the same time there was a device or counterfeit letter fained under the
n^^e of Lu^ifer Prince of darkness, Lucifers Letter.
written to the pers^cuting Pr^l^tes of England in those times, and transcribed
by Master Fox out of the Register of the Bishop of Hereford and written (as
some think) by William Swinderby or some other Lollard; The copy whereof I
shall here insert, because it lively sets sorth the use and benefit that the
Devil makes of our Lordly Prelates, and the ill effects of their great wealth
and power, to the great prejudice both of our Church and State.

Fox Acts and Monuments. Edit. 1610. p. 462.4^3.
I LVCIFER Prince of Darkness and profound heaviness, Emperor of the high
Mysteries of the King of Acharo^t, Captain of the Dungeon, King of Hell, and
controuler of the infernal fire; To all our children of pride, and companions
of our Kingdom, and especially to our Princes of the Church of this later age
and time (of which our adversary Jesus Christ, according to the Prophet says,
I hate the Church or Congregation of the wicked) send greeting, and wish
prosperity to all that obey our commandments, as also to all those that be
obedient to the Laws of Satan already enacted, and are diligent observers of
our behests and the precepts of our decree. Know ye that in times past certain
Vicars or Vicegerents of Christ, following his steps in miracles and virtues,
living and continuing in a beggarly life, converted in a manner the whole World
from the yoke of our tyranny unto their Doctrine and manner of life, to the
great derision and contempt of our Prisonhouse and kingdom, and also to the
no little prejudice and hurt of our jurisdiction and authority, not fearing to
hurt our fortified power, and to offend the Majesty of our estate: For then
received we no tribute of the World, neither did the miserable sort of common
people rush at the gates of our deep dungeon as they were wont to do with
continual pealing and rapping, but then the easy, pleasant, and broad way
which leads to death, lay still without great noise of trampling travelers,
neither yet was trod with feet of miserable men: And when all our Courts were
without Suitors, Hell then began to howl: And thus continuing in great
heaviness and anguish, was robbed and spoiled. Which thing considered, the
impatient rage of our stomach could no longer suffer, neither the ugly
rechlesse negligence of our great Captain^ general could any longer endure it.
But we se^king remedy for the time that should come after, have provided us of
a very trim shift; For in stead of these Apostles and other their adherents
which draw by the same line of theirs, as well in manners as doctrine, and are
odious enemies to us; Placing of all mischeife.
We have caused you to be their Successors, and put you in their place, which
be Prelates of the Church in these later times by our great might and subtilty,
The Church never well governed since the Devils were taken of the Church men
as Christ has said of you; They have reigned but not by me. Once we promised
unto him all the Kingdoms of the World, if he would fall down and worship us;
but he would not, saying, My Kingdom is not of this World; and went his way
when the multitude would have made him a temporal King. But to you truly
which are fallen from the state of grace, and that serve us in the earth, is
that my promise fulfilled, and all terrene things by our means which we
bestowed upon you, are under government. For he has said of us ye know, The
Prince of this World comes, etc. And has made us to reign over all children
of unbeleife. Therefore our adversaries before recited did patiently submit
themselves unto the Princes of the World, and did teach, that men should do
so; saying, Be ye subject to every creature for Gods cause, whether it be to
the King as most chiefest. And again. Obey ye them that are made rulers over
you, and^. For so their Master commanded them; saying, The Kings of the Heathen
have dominion over them, etc. But I think it long till we have powered our
poison upon the earth, and therefore fill your selves full. And now be ye not
unlike those Fathers, but also contrary unto them in your life and conditions,
and extol your selves above all other men: Pride in Prelat^^ ntoed.
Neither do ye give unto God that which belongs to him, nor yet to Caesar
that which is his; Popish Prelates neither give to God nor Caesar that which
belongs to God and Caesar.
but exercise you the power of both the Swords^ according to our decrees,
making your selves doers in worldly matters, fight^ng in our quarrel,
entangled with secular labors and business: And clime ye by little and little
from the miserable state of poverty unto the highest Seats of all Honors, and
the most Princely places of dignity by your devised practices, and false and
deceitful wiles and subtilty, that is, The double jurisdiction of the Popes
two swords comes of Lucifer.
by Hypocrisy, Flattery, Lying, Perjury, Treasons, Decei^s, Simony, and other
grea^er wickedness, then which our internal furies may devise. For after that
ye have been by us advanced thither where ye would be, yet that does not
suffice you, but as greedy starvelings more hungry then ye were before, ye
suppress the poor, scratch and rake together all that comes to hand,
perverting and turning every thing topsie ^urvey; so swollen, that ready ye are
to burst for pride, living like Lechers in all corporal delicateness, and by
fraud directing all your doings. Do^inus sanctus Sanctissimus.
You challenge to your selves names of honor in the earth, calling your selves
Lords, Holy, yea, and most holy Fathers. Thus, either by violence ye raven, or
else by ambition, subtly ye pilfer away and wrongfully wrest, and by false
title possess those goods which for the sustentation of the poor members of
Christ (whom from our first fall we have hated) were bestowed and given,
consuming them as ye your selves list, and wherewith ye cherish and maintain
an innumerable sort of Whores, Strumpets, and Bawdes, The lascivious and
Whorish life of the Romish Clergy.
with whom ye ride pompously like mighty Princes, far otherwise going, then
those poor beggarly Priests of the primitive Church. For I would ye should
build your selves rich and gorgeous Palaces; Ye fare like Princes, eating and
drinking the most daintiest meats, and pleasantest wines that may be gotten;
Ye hoard and heap together an infinite deal of treasure, not like to him that
said, Gold and silver have I none; Ye serve and fight for us according to your
wages. O most acceptable society or fellowship, promised unto us of the
Prophet, and of those Fathers long ago reproved; Whilst that Christ called
thee the Synagogue of Satan, and likened thee to the mighty Whore, The whorish
latter Church of ^ome.
which committed fornication with the Kings of the earth, the adulterous Spouse
of Christ, and of a chaste person, made a Strumpet. Thou have left thy first
Love and cleaved unto us, O our beloved Babylon, O our Citizens, which from the
transmigration of Jerusalem come hither; We love you for your deserts, we
rejoice over you, which contemn^ the Laws of Simon Peter, and embrace the
Laws of Simon M^gus our friend, Pope successor not of Simon Peter but of Simon
Magus.
and have them at your fingers ends, and exercise the same publicly, buying
and selling spiritual things in the Church of God, and against the
Commandment of God: Ye give Benefices and Honors by Petition, or else for
money, for favor, or else for filthy service: Wicked and unworthy Mini^^ers
admitted in the Popes church unworthy bestowing of benefices.
And refusing to admit those that be worthy, to E^clesiasticall dignity; you
call unto the inheritance of Gods Sanctuary, Bauds, Liers, Flatterers, your
Nephews, and your own Children; and to a childish Boy ye give many Prebends,
the least whereof ye d^ny to bestow upon a poor good man: Ye esteem the
person of a man and receive gifts; Ye regard money, and have no regard of
Souls. Ye have made the house of God a den of Thieves. All abuse, extortion,
Extortion.
is more exercised an hundred fold in your judgment seats then with any
secular Tyrant. Perverting of Justice.
Ye make Laws and keep not the same, and dispense with your dispensations, as
it pleases you, Acception of person.
you justify the wicked for reward, and take away the just man's desert from
him. And briefly, Bribery.
ye perpetrate or commit all kind of mischief, even as it is our will ye
should. And ye take much pains for Lucres sake in our Service, Love of Lucre^
and especially to destroy the Christian faith. Destruction of true faith.
For now the Lay people are almost in doubt what they may believe, because if
ye preach any such to them, at sometimes (although it be but seldom seen,
and that negligently enough, even as we would have it (yet notwithstanding they
believe you not, because they see manifestly, that ye do clean contrary to that
ye say; Whereupon the common people d^ing as ye do which have the government
of them and should be an example unto them of well doing; The life of P^pists
contrary (...) their teaching^
now many of them lea^^ing to your rules, do run headlong into a whole s^a
of vices, and continually a very great ^ultitude flocketh at the strong and
well fenced gates of our dungeon. And doubtlesse^ ye send us so many day by
day of every sort and kind of people, that we should not be able to entertain
them, but that our insatiable Ch^os with her thousand ravening jaws, is
sufficient to devour an infinite numbe^ of souls. And thus the sovereignty of
our Empire by you has been reformed, and out intolerable loss restored. The
pope increases hel^.
Wherefore, most specially we commend you and give most hearty thanks,
exhorting all you, that in any wise ye persevere and continue as hitherto ye
have done; neither that you slack henceforward your enterprise. For why? by
^our helps we purpose to bring the whole world under our power and dominion.
Over and besides this, we commit unto you no small authority to supply our
places in the betraying of your brethren; and we make and ordain you our
Vicars, and the Ministers of Antichrist our Son, Antichrist.
now hard at hand; for whom ye have made a very trim way and passage.
Furthermore, we counsel you which occupy the highest rooms of all other, that
you work subtly, and that ye faignedly procure peace between the Princes
of the world, The pope a feigned procu^er of peace between princes.
and that ye cherish and procure secret causes of discord. And like as
craftily ye have destroyed and subverted the Roman Empire, so suffer ye no
kingome to be overmuch enlarged or enriched by tranquillity and peace, lest
perhaps, in so great tranquillity (all desire of peace set aside) they dispose
themselves to view and consider your most wicked works, suppressing on every
side your estate; and from your treasures take away such s^bstance as we have
caused to be reserved and kept in your hands, until the coming of our
welbeloved son Antichrist. We would you should do our commendations to our
entirly beloved daughters, Pride, Deceit, Wrath, Avarice, Belli-cheere and
Lechery, and to all other my daughters, and especially to Lady Simony, ^^mony
the popes nu^se.
which has made you men, and enriched you, and has given you suck with her
own breasts, and weaned you; and therefore in no wise-see that ye call her
sin. And also be ye lofty and proud, because that the most high dignity of
your estate does require suck magnificence. And also be ye covetous; for
whatsover ye get and gather into your fardell, it is for Saint Peter, for the
peace of the Church, and for the defense of your patrimony and the Crucifix;
and therefore ye may lawfully do it; Promoting of proud and rich Cardinals.
you may promote Cardinals to the highest seat of dignities without any ^et in
the world, in stopping the mouth of our adversary Jesus Christ, and a^leaging
again, that he preferred his kinsfolks (being but of poor and base degree)
unto the Apostle^hip; but do not you so, but rather call as ye do, those
that live in arrogance, in haughtiness of mind, and fil^hy lechery, unto the
sta^e of wealthy riches and pride; and those rewa^ds and promotions which the
followers of Christ forsook, do ye distribute unto your friends. Therefore,
as you shall have better understanding, prepare ye vices cloaked under the
similitude of virtues; allege for your selves the glosses of the holy
Scripture, Wresting of Scripture.
and wrest them directly for to serve for your purpose. And if any man preach
or teach otherwise than ye will, oppress ye them violently; with the
sentence of excommunication, and by your censures heaped one upon another by
the consent of your brethren, let him be condemnned as an heretic, and let
him be kept in most strait prison, and there tormented till he die, Tyranny and
cruelty by the Pope.
for a terrible example to all such as confess Christ. And setting all favor
apart, cast him out of your Temple, lest peradventure the ingrafted word may
save your souls, which word I abhorr^ as I do the souls of other faithful
men. And do your endeavor, that ye may deserve to have the place which we
have prepared for you, under the most wicked foundation of our dwelling place:
fare ye well with such felicity, as we desire and intend finally to reward and
recompense you with. Given at the Center of the earth in that dark place where
all the rablement of Devils were present, specially for this purpose called
unto our most dolorous Consistory, under the Character of our terrible Seal,
for the confirmation of the premises.

Diverse other writings of like argument (says Master Fox) both before and
since, have been devised: Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1. p. 656.657.
As one bearing the Title, Luciferi ad malos principes Ecclesiasticos;
^mprinted first at Paris in Latin; And under the writing thereof, bearing this
date, Anno a P^latij nostri fractione, consortiumque nostrorum substractione,
1351. Which if ye count from the Passion of the Lord, reaches well to the time
of Wickliffe, 1385. which was above six years before the examination of this
Walter Brute. There is also another Epistle of Luci^er Prince o^ darkness, ad
Praelatos, mentioned in the Epistle of the School of Prague to the University
of Oxford, set forth by Huldericus Huttenus, about the year of our Lord (as is
there dated) 1370. Which seems to be written before this Epistle. Also
Vincentius in Speculo, H^stor. lib. 25. Cap. 89. infers like mention of a
Letter of the Fiends infernal to the Clergymen, as in a vision represented,
before four Hundred years. In which the Devils gave thanks to the spiritual
men, for that by their silence and not preaching the Gospel, they send
infinite souls to Hell, etc. Diverse other Letters also of like device have
been written, and also recorded in Authors. Whereunto may be added, that one
Iacobus Carthusiensis, writing to the Bishop of W^rmac^, alleges out of the
Prophecy of Hildegard^^, in these words; Therefore, says he, the Devil may
say of you Priests in himself; The meats of banqueting dishes, and feasts of
all kind of pleasure, I find in these men: Yea also mine eyes, mine ears, my
belly, and all my ^^ines be full of their frothing, and my breasts be full
stuffed with their riches, etc. Furthermor^, says he, they labor every day to
rise up higher with Lucifer, but every day they f^ll with him more deep^ly.

Hereunto also appertains a story, written, and commonly found in many old
written Books: In the year of our Lord, 1228. at Paris in a Synod of the
Clergy, there was one appointed to make a Sermon; Who being much careful in
his mind and solicitous what to say, the Devil came to him, and asking him
why he was so careful for his matter what he should Preach to the Clergy; Say
thus (quoth he) The Princes of Hell salute you (O ye Princes of the Church)
and gladly give you thanks, because through your default and negligence it
comes to pass, that all souls go down to Hell. Adding moreover, that he
was also enforced by the Commandment of God to declare the same: Yea, and that
a certain token moreover was given to the said Clarke for a sign, whereby the
Synod might evidently see that he did not lie. Ex Catal. Illyr. Fol. 546.

A^exander Fabritius a Popish English writer, Alexander Fabritius.
flourishing about the year, 1420. in his Destructorium vit^rum, part 6. cap.
79. prosecutes the same argument thus, Who are more horribly inthralled to the
Devils servitude then those who are constituted in the sublimity of honor?
Ecclesiastical men ought to be the light of the Wo^ld, yet where is more
abundant darkness of vices, where more abundant gaping after earthly things
then in modern Prelates who are fatted in both powers, as well temporal as
spiritual? where is greater Pomp in all appendicles? Yea, and that so much,
that having left the poverty of the Primitive Church, they are now rather to be
termed Princes of Provinces, then Pastors of Souls: In part 5. ^. 4. he
adds, These negligent Prelates, though they be remiss in correcting
delinquents against God, yet about their own proper and personal injury, or
derogation of their proper honor, they are found most sharp and rigid, and
willing to remit nothing unpunished; but if any thing be done touching injury
offered to God, or touching the diminution of divine honor, there are they
most remiss, and take no care at all. Chrysostom speaks well against these.
A Bishop (says he) if he receive not due honor from a Presbyter, is angry and
troubled. But if a Bishop behold a Presbyter, negligent of his duty to the
Church, or finning in any other wise, against God, he is neither angry nor
hears it; because all are solicitous of their own honor, but have no care at
all of Gods honor. And part 6. cap. 26. A Bishopric is a Title of Work, not
of Honor; whence a Bishop is called as it were an Overseer, and one taking the
care of his flock, and seeing such intention is a good work, it appears the
Apostles words speaking thus are true, He that desires a Bishopric, desires a
good work. 1 Timothy 3.1.
But from hence it follows not, that this desire, or the work of the desire
is good, as ambitious men commonly object, desiring to be pompously exalted in
worldly dignity, and it rather follows, the thief who would steal a good
Cap desires a good thing, therefore his desire unto this is good; but the
contrary rather follows, for he who desires the state of a Pastoral office
ambitiously, by this disables himself to take it, witness Saint Gregory: And
it is found in Cap. 8. qu. 1. As the place of government, says he, is to be
denied to those who desire it, so it is to be offered to those who fly from
it. Many Bishops enter not into the sheepfold by the door which is Christ; but
by the Devil who is a liar: and if man placed by God in Paradise could not
there stand long by himself, but fell grievously; what wonder is it if our
modern Pastors placed in the Church not by God, but Symoniacally by the
Devil, fall horribly. So this English Author though a Papist.

Thomas Gascoigne in Dict. Theolog part. 3. Joan. Balaeus. Cent. 8. c. 19. Fox
Acts and Monuments. Edit. ult. Vol. 1. p. 929, 930. Hall. 36. H. 8. fo. 171.
Holinshed. p. 946.
About the year 1457. Reynold Peacocke Bishop of Chichester Preached at Paul's
Cross, Reynold Peacocke.
That the Office of a Christian Prelate chiefly above all other things, is to
preach the word of God: That the riches of Bishops by inheritance are the goods
of the poor: That spiritual persons by Gods Law ought to have no temporal
possessions. And moreover he writ a Book, DE MINISTRORVM AEQVALITATE, wherein
he maintained Wickliffs opinion of the Equality of Ministers and Bishops: For
which and other Articles he was accused and convicted of Heresy, forced to
abjure at Paul's Cross, had his Books burnt by his brethren the Prelates, and
was then imprisoned in his own house during life. So dangerous is it even for
Bishops themselves to write or preach any thing against the wealth, pomp,
pride and jurisdiction of their ambitious Lordly brethren.

Anno 1537. Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, All the Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons and convocation, with King H. the eight.
Edward Archbishop of York, John bishop of London, Cuthbert bishop of Durham,
Stephen bishop of Winchester, Robert bishop of Carleile, John bishop of Exeter,
John bishop of Lincoln, John bishop of Bath, Rowland bishop of Coventry and
Lichfeild, Thomas bishop of Ely, Nicholas bishop of Salisbury, John bishop of
Bangor, Edward bishop of Hereford, Hugh bishop of Worcester, John bishop of
Rochester, Richard bishop of Chichester, William bishop of Norwich, William
bishop of St. David's, Robert bishop of Assaph, Robert bishop of Landaffe,
Richard Wolman Archdeacon of Sudbury, William Knight Archdeacon of Richmond,
John Bell, Archdeacon of Gloucester, Edmond Bonner Archdeacon of Leicester,
William Skip Archdeacon of Dorcet, Nicholas Heath Archdeacon of Stafford,
Cuthbert Marshall Archdeacon of Nottingham, Richard Curren Arch Deacon of
Oxford, William Cliffe, Geoffry Dowes, Robert Oking, Ralph Bradford, Richard
Smith, Simon Matthew, John Pryn, William Buckmaster, William May, Nicholas
Wotton, Richard Cox, John Edmunds, Thomas Robertson, John Baker, Thomas Barret,
John Hase, John Tyson, Doctors and Professors in Divinity, and of the civil
and Canon Law, with the whole Convocation House and Clergy of Enland in their
Book entitled, The Institution of a Christian man, dedicated by them to King
Henry the eight; Printed Cum Privilegio, subscribed with all their names, and
ratified by the Statute of 32. Henry the eight, cap. 26. chap. Of the Sacrament
of Order. fol. 48. etc. And King Henry 8. himself, in his Book inscribed, A
necessary erudition for any Christian man, published with the advice and
approbation of all the Prelates and Clergy of England in their Convocation, and
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and nether House of Parliament; with the
Kings own royal Epistle to all his loving Subjects before it, Anno 1545. by
virtue of the Satute of 32 Henry the eight. c. 26. Chap. of the Sacrament of
Order: Do all thus jointly determine of the calling, jurisdiction,
Lordlinesse, and secular employments of Bishops. The truth is, that in the New
Testament, there is no mention made of any degrees or distinctions in Orders,
but only of Deacons and Ministers, and of Priests or Bishop^. And of these two
Orders only, that is to say, Priests and Deacons, Scripture makes express
mention, and how they were conferred of the Apostles by Prayer and imposition
of their hands: And to these two the Primitive Church did add and conjoyne
certain other inferior and lower degrees. And as concerning the office and
duty of the said Ecclesiastical Ministers, the same consists in true
preaching and teaching the word of God unto the people i^ dispensing and
ministering the Sacraments of Christ, in consecrating^ and offering the blessed
body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar, in loosing and
assoyling from sin such persons as be sorry and truly penitent for the same,
and excommunicating such as b^ guilty in manifest crimes, and will not be
reformed otherwise; and finally in praying for the whole Church of Christ^ and
specially for the flock committed unto them: And although the office and
ministry of Priests and Bishops stand c^iefly in these things before rehearsed
ye^ neither they, nor any of them may exercise and execute any of the same
offices, but with such sort and such limitation as the Ordinances and Laws of
every Christian Realm do permit and ^uffer. It is out of all doubt that there
is no mention made neither in Scripture, neither in the writings of any
authentical Doct^r or Author of the Church, being within the time of the
^postles, that Christ did ever make or institute any distinction or difference
to be in the pre-eminence of power, order, or jurisdiction between the Apostle^
themselves, or between the Bishops themselves, but that they were all ^quall in
power, author^ty, and jurisd^ct^on. And that there is now and since the time of
the Apostles any such diversity or difference among the Bishops. It was devised
by the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church for the conservation of good
order and unity of the Catholic Church, and that either by the consent and
authority, or else at least, by the perm^ssion and suff^rance of the Pr^nces
and civil powers, for the time ruling: For the said Fathers considering the
great and infinite multitude of Christian men, so l^rgely increased through the
world, and taking examples of the Old Testam^nt, thought it expedient to make
an order of degrees to be among Bishops, and spiritual Governors of the
Church, and so ordained some to be Patriarks, some to be Metropolitans^ some to
be Archbishops, some to be Bishops; and to them did limit severally, not only
their certain Diocese and Provinces, wherein they should exercise their
power, and not exceed the same; but also certain bounds and limits of their
jurisdiction and power, etc. And lest peradventure it might be thought to some
persons, that such authorities, powers and jurisdictions, as Patriarks,
Primates, Archbishops and Metropolitans, now have or heretofore at any time
have had justy and lawfully over any other Bishops, were given them by God in
holy Scripture; We think it expedient and necessary that all men should be
advertised and taught, that all such lawful powers and authority of one Bishop
over another, were and be given to them by the consent, ordinance and positive
laws of men only, and not by any ordinance of God in holy Scripture: Nota.
and all other power and authority which any Bishop has used or exercised over
another which has not been given to him by such consent and ordinance of men
(as is aforesaid) is in very deed no lawful power, but plain usurpation and
tyranny. And therefore whereas the Bishop of Rome has heretofore claimed and
usurped to be head and governor over all Priests and Bishops of the holy
catholic Church of Christ by the laws of God; It is evident that the same
power is utterly fained and untrue. We think it convenient, that all Bishops
and Pastors shall instruct and teach the people committed to their spiritual
charge; that Christ did by express words prohibit, that none of his Apostles,
nor any of their successors should under the pretense of authority of the
sword, that is to say, the authority of Kings, or any civil power in this
world, yea, or any authority to make Laws or Ordinances in causes appertaining
^^to civil powers: If any Bishop of what estate or dignity so^ver he be, be he
Bishop of Rome, or of any other City, Province or Diocese, do presume to take
upon him authority or jurisdiction in causes of matters which appertain unto
Kings and the civil pow^rs and their Courts, and will maintain or think that
he may so do by the authority of Christ and his Gospel, although the Kings and
Princes would not permit and suffer him so to do, no doubt, that Bishop is not
worthy to be called a Bishop, but rather a Tyrant, and a usurper of other men's
rights, contrary to the Laws of God, and is worthy to be reputed none
otherwise than he that goes about to subvert the Kingdom of Christ; for the
Kingdom of Christ in his Church is spiritual, and not a carnal kingdom of
the world, that is to say, the very Kingdom that Christ by himself, or by his
Apostles and Disciples, sought here in this world, was to bring all Nations
from the carnal kingdom of the Prince of darkness unto the light of his
spiritual Kingdom, and so himself reign in the hearts of the people by
grace, faith, hope and charity: And therefore, since Christ did never seek nor
exercise any worldly kingdom or dominion in this world, but rather refusing
and flying the same, did leave the said worldly governance of kingdoms,
Realms and Nations to be governed by Princes and Potentates (in like manner as
he did find them) and commanded also his Apostles and Disciples to do the
semblance, whatsoever Priest or Bishop will arrogate or presume upon him any
such authority, and will pretend the authority of the Gospel for his defen^e
therein; he does nothing else (but as in a manner as you would say) crown
Christ again with a crown of thorns, and traduceth and brings him forth
again with his Mantle of Purple upon his back, to be mocked and scorned of the
World, as the Jews did to their own damnation, etc. The truth is, that God
constituted and ordained the authority of Christian Kings and Princes, to be
the most high and supreme above all other powers and Officers in this World,
in the regiment and government of their people, etc. But specially and
principally to defend the faith of Christ and his Religion, to conserve and
maintain the true Doctrine of Christ, and all such as be true Preachers and
setters forth thereof, and to abolish abuses, heresies and Idolatries, and to
punish with corporal payne^ such as of malice be the occasion of the fame: And
finally, to over-see and cause that the said Bishops and Priests do execut^
their Pastoral office truly and faithfully, and specially in those points
which by Christ and his Apostles was given and committed unto them; and in case
they shall be negligent in any part thereof, or would not diligently execute
the same, or cause them to redouble and supply their lack; and if they
obstinately withstand their Princes kind motion, and will not amend their
faults, then and in such case, to put others in their rooms and places. And
God has also commanded the said Bishops and Priests, to obey with all
humbleness and reverence, both Kings and Princes, and Governors, and all
their Laws, not b^ing contrary to the Laws of God whatsoever they be, and
that not only Propter iram, but also Propter conscientiam, that is to say; not
only for fear of punishment, but also for discharge of conscience. Whereby it
appears well, that this pretended Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome, is not
founded upon the Gospel, but it is repugnant thereto. And therefore it
appertains to Christian Kings and Princes for the discharge of their office
and duty toward God, to endeavor themselves to reform and reduce the same
again unto the old limits and pristine estate of that power which was given to
them by Christ, and used in the Primitive Church. For it is out of doubt, that
Christ's faith was then most firm and pure, and the Scriptures were then best
understood, Note.
and virtue did then most abound and excel; and thererefore it must needs
follow, that the customs and ordinances then used and made, be more conform
and agreeable unto the true doctrine of Christ, and more conducing unto the
edifying and benefit of the Church of Christ, than any custom or laws used
and made by the Bishop of Rome, or any other addic^ed to that See and usurped
power since that time. Thus all the Prelates, Clergy, King and Parliament in
king Henry the eighth his days.

Cuthbert Tonstall Bishop of Duresme, and John Stokerley Bishop of London,
Cuthbert Tonstall and John Stokerley.
in a certain letter sent unto Reginald Poole Cardinal, then being at Rome,
concer^ing the superiority of Bishops over other Min^sters, Thom. Beacon ^is
Reports of certa^ne men, vol. 3. f. 267. Fox Acts and Monuments. p. 972.973.
resolve thus: Saint Cyprian says, undoubtedly all the rest of the Apostles
were the same that Peter was, endued with like equality of of honor and power.
And Saint Jerome says thus All the Apostles received the keys o^ the kingdom
of Heaven, and upon them as indifferently and equally is the strength of the
Church grounded and established. Which Saint Jerome also as well in his
Comentaries upon the Epistle unto Titus, as in his Epistle to Evagrius,
shows, that these primacies long after Christ's assention, were made by the
device of men, where before, by the common agreement of the Clergy, every one
of the Churches were governed, yea, the Patriarchall Churches. The words of
Saint Jerome be these: Let the Bishops understand, that they be greater than
other Priests, rather of custom, than by the virtue and verity of the Lords
Ordinances. And in his Epistle to Evagrius, he has like sentence, and adds
thereunto: Whereso^ver a Bishop either at Rome or at Eugubinis, or at
Constantinople, etc. He is of all one worthiness, and o^ all one Priesthood;
And that one was elected which should be pr^ferred before other, it was devised
to the redress of Schisms, left any one challenging too much to themselves
should rent the Church of Christ. These words only of Saint Jerome be
sufficient to prove, that Christ by none of these three Texts which be all that
you and other do allege for your opinion (the three texts are these, Thou art
Peter; and upon this Rock I will build my Church. Peter, I have prayed for
thee, that ^hy faith should not fail: And thou being once converted, confirm
thy brothers, feed my Sheep) Gave not to Peter any such superiority, as the
bishop of Rome by them usurpeth; and that Peter, nor no other of ths chief
Apostles did vind^cate or challenge such primacy or superiority, but utterly
refused it. So these two popish Prelates. Why then shoulld our Bishops
challenge any such primary or superiority over their fellow Ministers?

Miles and Clericus.
There is a notable Dialogue entitled A disputation between a Clerk and a
Knight (or a Soldier) concerning the power committed to the Prela^es of the
Church and to the Princes of the Earth; Written by our famous Schooleman
Wil^i^m Ocham about the year of our Lord, 1330. as Centur. scri^. Brit. l. 5.
sect^ 18. p. 396.
John Bale records; printed at London in Latin by Thomas B^rthlet, Cum
Privileg^o, in King Henry the eight h^s reign.

Wherein the Clerk complaining, that the Church which in his age was had in
great honor with Kings, Princes, and all Nobles, was now on the contrary made
a prey to them a^l: many things being exacted from them, many things given by
them; and that if they gave not their goods (by way of subsidy or supply to
the^r Princes) they were violently taken from them; that the^r Laws were
trampled under feet, their Liberties infringed, etc. The Knight proves first;
that Clergy men can make no Laws nor Canons touching temporal things, but
Princes only, because they have no Dominion of temporal things: and that the
Pope is chief Vicar, not to those things which Christ now does in glory, but
to imitate those things which Christ did in his state of humility here on
earth, because those things are necessary to us. That he committed to his Vicar
that power which he exercised on Earth as a mortal man, not that he received
being glorified^ For Christ said to Pilate, that his K^ngdome was not of th^s
World; and that he came not to be ministered to, but to minister: This testimony
is so manifest, that it may confound the man who resists it, and make the
stiffest ^ecke to submit. And when one of the multitude spoke thus to Christ,
Master, command my brother to divide the inheritance with me: he said, unto
him, O man, who made me a divider or judge over you? Luke 12. You hear
therefore manifestly, that Christ was made neither a Judge nor a divider in
temporal things. Therefore in that state of his received dispensation, he
neither had a temporal Kingd^me, nor yet affected it; Yea, He fled from ^t,
when multiplyin the ^read, the people would have made him a King. And in the
Commission g^ven to Peter, he delivered him, not the keys of the kingdom of
earth, but the keys of the kingdom of Heaven^ And it is apparent, that the
High Priest of the Hebrews were subject to their Kings, and deposed by them
(which be far from you) And that thou may know that Christ's Vicar is
assumed to a spiritual regiment, not to a temporal dominion, receive from
Paul himself no less clear a testimony. For he says thus, Every High Priest
assumed from among men, is ordained for men in those things which appertain
unto God; Hebr. 5.1.
not to govern a terrene Dominion, but to offer gifts and sacrifices for
sins. Thou see therefore, that the high Priest is set over those things,
which appertain to God; whence Panl writes to Timothy. No man that goes a
warfare to God, intangleth h^mselfe in the affairs of this world. It is
manifest then, that Christ exercised no earthly Kingdom, nor committed any
such to Peter, For Peter himself says. Acts 6. It is not meet for us to leave
the Word of God, and to serve Tables, that is, to dispense temporal things.
And although some temporal things may be dispensed by high Priests
themselves; yet it appears sufficiently, that they ought not to be occupied in
governing earthly Kingdoms and Principalities, and in managing secular
affairs. After which he proves at large; That Clergymen are liable to pay
tribute to Princes; and that Princes may take away their Lands and possessions
when they abuse them to luxury, pomp, and their own private ends, and employ
them for the defense and peace of their Realmee, which he proves by several
testimonies of Scripture. First, by the example of King Ioas, 1 Kings 12. Who
prohibited the Priests to take money of the people, and converted the money
which they were to receive from the people toward their maintenance, to the
repairing of the Temple. Which act of his God himself commends, that he might
show, he was not offended thereat, because he did it not out of covetousness,
but piety, not out of ambition but Religion. Secondly, By the example of the
same Ioas, 2 Kings 12.13. Who took all the hallowed things that Iehosaphat,
and Iehoram, and Azariah his Fathers, Kings of Judah, had dedicated, and his
own hallowed things, and all the gold that was found in the treasures of the
house of the Lord and in the kings house, and sent it to Haza^el king of
Assyria, to divert him from Jerusalem. Thirdly, By the like example of king
Hezikiah, 2 Kings 18.15, 16. who to preserve his people from the king of
Assyria his invasion, gave him all the Silver that was found in the house of
the Lord and in the treasures of the Kings house; And at that time did
Hezechiah cut off the gold from the doors of the Temple of the Lord and from
the Pillars which Hezekiah king of Judah had over-layd, and gave it to the king
of Assyria. Now if any say, Hezechiah did ill in this; he answers, that it is
said in the 2 Chronicles. 32. That Hezekiah was blameless in all things but only
in the Embassy of the Princes of Babylon. Fourthly, of David, who in case of
necessity, did eat the Priests Shewbread, which was lawful for them only to
eat, and yet offended not therein. 1 Samuel 21.6, 7. Matthew. 12.4. Then he adds,
that all the Revenews of Clergy men, but that which is sufficient to provide
them food and raiment, with which they ought to be content, as Paul says,
ought to be spent in pious uses, and in feeding the poor, Which if they be not
employed in this sort, kings ought to take care of them, Ne animas mortuorum
salut emque vivorum defraud^tis: And he concl^des thus, Nee est parcendum
materiali templo, ne^ his quae dedicata sun^ templo, ut salus reddatur, and pax
periclitanti populo Christiano. Nec est blandiendum Ecclesiarum superfluitati,
imo succurrendum ^anta^ gentis necess^^ati. Hoc non est, quae Deo data sunt
revocare, sed illis usibus (q^^bus fuerunt data) applicare. Quae enim sunt De^
data ea ipsa sunt piis usibus dedicata^ Quid enim pot^rit sanctius esse quam
Christiani populi sal^s? Es qiud prec^^^lus Domino, quam hosts, rapto^es, and
intersect^res arce^e a popul^ Christiano? Et p^cem subjecti^ and fidelibus
emere? Cum ergo in his bona. Ecclesiae expendanur, veris usibus (quibus suerunt
dedicat^) redduntur. Thus and much more Oc^am against the secular Jurisdiction,
employment, and great^ temporal revenues of Prelates, which he thought might
lawfully be taken away, and put to other good publik^ uses without any danger
of sacrilege.

What this our learned Ockam thought of the parity of Bishops and Presbyters,
you may easily guess by this his determination. Quod Sacerdotes oma^s, etc.
That all Priests of whatsoever degree they be, are of EQVAL AVTHORITY, POWER
AND IVRISDICTION BY CHRIST'S INSTITVTION; but that the Pope is superior by the
Emperors institution, who may likewise revoke this. Which opinion was about
the same time justified for truth by Michael Ceenas, Petrus de Corbaria,
Ioannes d^ Castilione, Franciscus de Arcatara and others; some whereof were
excommunicated, others slain and burnt by the Pope for this verity, as Fox
Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1. p. 510, 511. Catalog. Testium veritatis, p.
512.524, 525, 529. Antoninus m. 4. part. Extra^ag^ Joan. 22.
Master Fox and others relate. But what Ockam thought of this position; of the
power and errability of the Pope, of the temporal possessions of Clergy men,
and of the incompatibility of secular jurisdiction with Bishops and spiritual
men; the learned may read at large in his own Compendium Errorum Ioannis. 22.
In his Opus 90, Dierum, and Super potestate summi Pontificis octo quaestionum
Decisiones, Printed by John Treschsel in Civitate Lugdunen: Anno, 1496. to
which I shall refer you, for brevities sake. Only I shall observe this
memorable passage out of his Opus. 90. Dierum Cap. 12^. We read in Chronicles
that since the Church of Rome was endowed with temporal riches, about twenty
seven called Bishops of Rome have been ensnared in most great, public and
notorious wickednesses, after they were assumed to the Papacy, or in the very
assumption to the Papacy; as the crime of Heresy, Idolatry, intru^ion,
fostering of heretical pravity, blasphemy, fornication: and in many other
crimes and enormities have they been involved. These were the fruits of their
Lordly power, great possessions, and temporal riches heretofore.

I read in our rare Historian English Waldenses, Hist. Angl. p. 101.
Matthew Paris, Thomas Walsingham Ypodigma Neustriae, Anno 1166. page 36. And
John Bale, Centur. 2. Script. Britan. Sect. 96.97. page 206.207. That in the
year of our Lord, 1166. certain sowers abroad of wicked Doctrine at Oxford,
were brought into judgment before the King and the Bishops of the kingdom,
who being devious from the catholic Faith, and overcome in trial: Facies
cauteriata notabiles cunctis exposuit, qui expulsi sunt aregno; they were
stigmatized in the face which made them notable to all, and then banished out
of the kingdom: What this pravum dogma, or wicked opinion was for which these
men were thus stigmatized and exiled, I find not specified in Paris and
Walsingham; but John Bale out of Gu^do Perpin^anus de Haeresibus, relates, that
those men were certain Waldenses who taught; That the Church of Rome was the
whore of Babylon, and the barren Fig Tree whom Christ himself had long ago
accursed; and moreover said, Non obediendum esse Pap^ ET EPISCOPIS. Ordinesque
Characteres esse magnae bestiae; That men are not to obey the Pope AND BISHOPS,
and that Orders (to wit, Popish Orders) are the characters of the great beast.
Had these Waldenses lived in our days, they should not have been branded
only in the face by our Lordly Prelates procurement, but set ^n the Pillory,
and had both their ears cut off, then banished into foreign Islands, and
there been shut up close prisoners so strictly, that neither their wives,
children, friends should have any access unto them, nor they enjoy so much as
the use of books, Pen, Ink, or Paper, only for opposing Episcopacy, as we
know some others have lately been for this very cause. Expertus loquor. So
dangerous, so fatal is it for any to oppose our Lordly Prelacy, as these men
did in their generation, though ^hey smarted for it: Yet this could not deter
our most learned ^ Gualter Mapes Archdeacon of Oxford, flourishing in king
John's reign, about the year of our Lord, 1210. from following their
footsteps; who in his Satyrs, doubted not to style Prelates, Animalia bruta and
stercora, Bruit beasts and dung: and in his books Ad impios Praelat^s, and Ad
malos Pastores, complains; that Alegis doctoribus Lex evacuatur, Dilatatur
impii regnum Pharaonis; comparing the Bishops to wicked Pharaoh for their
tyranny and oppression. But of him before.

This Doctrine of his and other our Martyrs, was this seconded by Sir John
Borthwike knight, Sir John Borthwick, Fox, Acts and monuments vol. 2. edit.
ult. p. 609, 610.
martyred in Scotland, Anno, 1540. as appears by his answers in the sixth and
seventh Articles objected against him by the Prelates.

The sixth Article.
The sixth Article.
Agreeable to the ancient Errors of John Wickliffe and John Hus,
Arch-Heretiques, condemned in the Council of Constance, he has affirmed and
preached; That the Clergy ought not to possess or have any temporal
possessions, neither to have any jurisdiction or authority in temporalties,
even over their own subjects, but that all things ought to be taken from
them, as it is at this present in England.

Borthwicke.
The Lord in the eighteenth Chapter of the Book of Numbers said thus unto
Aaron, Thou shall possess nothing in their Land, neither shall thou have any
portion amongst them, I am thy portion and inheritance amongst the Children of
Israel: for unto the sons of Levi I have given all the Tithes of Israel, that
they should possess them for their Ministry which they do execute in the
Tabernacle of the Congregation. Albeit I do not doubt, but that the Order of
the Levites and of the Clergy is far different and variable. For the
administration of their sacred and holy things, after their death, passed unto
their posterity, as it were by right of inheritance, which happens not unto
the posterity of our Clergy in these days.

Furthermore, if any heritage be provided or gotten for them, I do not
gain^-say, but that they shall possess it, but still I do affirm, That all
temporal jurisdiction should be taken from them: For when as twice there arose
a contention amongst the Disciples, which of them should be thought the
greatest, Christ answered, The kings of Nations have dominion over them, Civil
domion differing from Ecclesiastical.
and such which have power over them are called beneficial; you shall not do
so, for he which is greatest amongst you, shall be made equal unto the
youngest or least, and he which is the Prince, or Ruler amongst you, shall be
made equal unto him that does minister; minding thereby, and willing utterly
to debar the Ministers of his Word from all terrene and civil dominion and
Empire: For by these points he does not only declare, that the office of a
Pastor is distinct, and divided from the office of a Prince and Ruler; but they
are in effect, so much different and separate, that they cannot agree or join
together in one man. Neither is it to be thought that Christ did set or ordain
an harder Law then he himself did take upon him: For so much as in the
twelfth of Luke, certain of the company said unto him, Master, command my
brother that he divide his inheritance with me. He answered, Man, who made me
a Judge, or a divider amongst you? We see therefore, that Christ even simply
did reject and refuse the office of a Judge, Christ refuses the office of a
Civil Judge.
the which thing he would not have done, if it had been agreeable unto his
office or duty. The like thing also he did in the eighth Chapter of John, when
as he refused to give judgment upon the woman taken in adultery, which was
brought before him^ Whereas they do allege that Moses did supply both offices
at once. An objection made by the example of Mo^es supplying both the offices
answered unto.
I answer, that it was done by a rare miracle. Furthermore, that it continued
but for a time, until things were brought unto a better state; besides that,
there was a certain form and rule prescribed him of the Lord, then took he
upon him the civil governance, and the Priesthood, he was commanded to resign
unto his b^other; and that not without good cause, for it is against nature,
that one man should suffice both charges, wherefore it was diligently
foreseen and provided for in all ages. Neither was there any Bishop so long
as any true face or show of the Church did continue, who once thought to usurp
the right and title of the sword: whereupon in the time of Saint Ambrose, this
proverb took his original, That Emperors did rather wish or desire the
office of Priesthood, then Priests any Empire. For it was all men's opinions at
that time, that sumptuous palaces did pertain unto Emperors, and Churches
unto Priests. Saint Bernard also writes many things which are agreeable unto
this our opinion, as is this his saying, Peter could not give that which he
had not, Palaces to Princes, Churches pertain to priests; Peter could not give
that he had not, Peter had no Lordly dominion. Ergo Peter could not give Lordly
dominion to his successors.
but he gave unto his succes^ours that which he had, that is to say,
carfulness over the Congregation; for when as the Lord and Master says, That
he is not constituted or ordained Judge between two, the servant or Disciple
ought not to take it scornfully, if that he may not judge all men. And lest
that he might seem in that place to speak of the spiritual judgment, he
straightway annexeth, therefore, says he, your power and authority shall be
in offense and transgression, not in possessions. For this purpose, and not for
the other, have you received the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, why then do
you invade other men's bounds or borders? The rest I will pass over for
brevities cause.

The seventh Article.
The seventh Article.
Falsely and against the Honor, State, and reverence of the sacred Majesty of
the King of Scots, he has said, holden, and affirmed, that our most noble
King of Scots, defender of the Christian faith, would appropriate unto himself
all the possessions, lands and rents of the Church, given and granted by his
predecessors, and also by himself, and convert them unto his own private use.
And for this end, and purpose, as he has many times written unto him, so has
he with his whole endeavor persuaded our said noble Lord and King thereunto.

Borthwicke.
It is no marvel though these mad dogs do so bark against me, whom they
think to have counseled the Kings Majesty (I would to God I had also
thoroughly persuaded him) that he should take away from these unjust
sacrilegious possessors, the riches wherewith all they are fatted and ^ngreased
like Swine. For this is the nature of dogs; if any man go about to take away
the bone out of their mouth, by and by to snatch at him, and tear him with
their teeth. It is out of all controversy, unto such as have any wit at all,
that such men were very childish, that is to say, ignorant of all learning and
judgment, which did so fat and feed with their possessions, these belly
beasts; For who would not judge it more then childish, to bestow the Kings
victuals or meat upon the bellies of the prophets of Baal and Iesabel? But all
they which at this present do endowe such filthy sinks (I will not call them
dens of thieves) with such revenues, they do follow the steps of Iesabel; for
what other thing do they, when as daily they are bleating and lowing before
their Images, burning of Incense, and fall flat down before their Altars, but
that which in times past the prophets of Baal did, when as they transported the
worship of God unto an Idol? Wherefore, if Daniel and Elias were spotted with
heresy, when they would have destroyed the Priests of Baal, I grant that I
also must be an Heretic. But for so much as then he did nothing but which
was commanded him of the Lord, that was able to kill the prophet which had
allured the people to follow strange gods, he could not truly and justly be
accused of heresy; so neither can my adversaries spot me therewithal,
except, peradventure, they will condemn me, that (whereas Elias dealt more
rigorously with the prophets of Baal, for he cast them into the brook Kidron)
I required or desired no more, but that the riches which was wickedly bestowed
upon them, and their possessions might be taken from them.

The ninth Article.
He has openly holden, said, and affirmed, preached, and taught, that the
Laws of the Church, that is to say, the sacred Canons, approved and allowed by
the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, are of no force, strength, or
effect; alleging therefore and affirming, that they are made and intended
contrary to the Law of God.

God forbid that I should say, that those things which are approved by the holy
Catholic Church, should be of no effect or value. For well I know, that the
holy Apostolic Church has never been allowed, ordained or taught any thing
which she has not learned of the Lord: the Apostles are witnesses thereof,
Peter and Paul, whereof the one of them dared not freely utter or speak of any
of those things which Christ has not wrought by himself for the obedience of
the Gentiles.

The other exhorts, That if any man speak, he should speak the praises of
God: but I condemn those laws which the Bishops of Rome have made according
to their own will and mind, and say that they are spiritual, pertaining unto
the salvation of the soul, and necessary unto everlasting life; for so much
as the writings of the Apostles do evidently declare, that there was no
authority known amongst them to make or ordain any ordinances or laws.

Furthermore, the Scriptures do manife^tly show the same, how oftentimes, even
by the Lords own mouth, this foresaid authority is taken from the Ministers of
the Church, so that no excuse for them remains, but that they be plain
rebels against the Word of God, how many soever do presume or take upon them
to appoint or set any new laws upon the people of God. Which thing is more
manifest and evident, than the light it self, in many places of the Scripture.
For in the three and twentieth chapter of Joshua, it is written; You shall
observe and do all that is written in the Law of Moses, neither shall you
swarve from that, either to the right hand or to the left hand. But that which
is written in the ^welfth chapter of Deuteronomy ought to move them somewhat
the more. What soever I command, says the Lord, that shall you observe and
do; thereunto you shall add nothing, neither shall you take any thing from
it, etc. This point he there excellently prosecutes at large; where yo^ may
read more at your leisure.

M. William Tyndall, our famous Martyr, M William Tyndall Martyr.
in his obedience of a Christian man, Printed C^m Privilegio at London, 1573.
p. 98. writes thus of Bishops and their practices. God promised David a
Kingdome^ David.
and immediately stirred up King Saul against him, to persecute him, to hunt
him as men do Hares with Greyhounds, and to ferret him out of every hole, and
that for the space of many years to tame him, to mere his lusts, to make him
feel other men's diseases, to make him merciful, to make him understand, that
he was made King, to minister, and to serve his brethren, and that he should
not think that his Subjects were made to minister unto his Lusts, and that it
were lawful for him to take away from them life and goods at hi^ pleasure.

Oh that our Kings were so nurtured nowadayes, How Bishops instru^^ Kings.
which our holy Bishops teach of a far other manner, saying; your Grace shall
take your pleasure; yea, take what pleasure you list, spare nothing: we shall
dispense with you, we have power, we are Gods Vicars, and let us alone with
the Realm, we shall take pain for them, and see that nothing be well: your
Grace shall but defend the faith only.

After which he proceeded thus Page 114, 115. Kings defend the false authority^
of the Pope their office punishing of sin laid apart. Bishops ministe^ the
Kings duty, their own laid apart: yea they persecute their own office.
: Kings were ordained then, as I before said, and the sword put in their hands
to take vengeance of evil doers, that others might fear, and were not
ordained to fight one against another, or to rise against the Emperor to
defend the false authority of the Pope that very Antichrist: Bishops they only
can minister the temporal sword; their office, the preaching of Gods Word laid
apart, which they will neither do, nor suffer any man to do, but slay with the
temporal sword (which they have gotten out of the hand of all Princes) them
that would. The preaching of Gods Word is hateful and contrary unto them: why?
for it is impossible to preach Christ except they preach against Antichrist,
that is to say, them which with their false doctrine and violence of sword
enforce to quench the true doctrine of Christ. And as thou can heal no
disease except thou begin at the root: even so can thou preach against no
mischief except thou begin at the Bishops. Kings they are but shadows, Kings
do but wait on the Popes Pleas^r^. The juggling of the Pope.
vain names, and things idle, having nothing to do in the world, but when our
holy Father needs their help. The Pope contrary to all conscience, and
against all the Doctrine of Christ, which says, My Kingdom is not of this
world ( Ioh. 18.) has usurped the right of the Emperor. And by policy of the
Bishops of Almany, Bishops of Almany.
and with corrupting the electours or choosers of the Emperor with money,
brings to pass, that such a one is ever chosen Emperor that is not able to
make his party good with the Pope. To stop the Emperor that he come not at
Rome, he br^ngeth the French King up to Milane, Milaine.
and on the other side, brings he the Venetians. If the Venetians come too
nigh, the Bishop of France must bring the French King. Bishops of France.
And the Socheners (that is, the Switzers) are called and sent for to come and
succor. And for their labor he gives to some a Rose, to another a Cap of
Maintenance. A Cap of Maintenance. Most Christian King^ Defender of the Popes
Faith.
One is called most Christian King, another, Defender of the Faith, another,
The eldest son of the most holy Seat. The eldest son of the holy seat.
He blazeth als^ the arms of other, and puts in the holy cross, the Crown^
of thorns, or the nails and so forth. If the French King go too high, and
creep up either to ^ononie or Naples, then must our English Bishops bring in
our King. Blasing of arms. The English Bishops.
The craft of the Bishops is to entitle one King with another Realm. He is
called King of Denmark, and of England: The falsehood of Bi^hops.
he, King of England, and of France. Then to blind the Lords, and the Commons,
the King must challenge his right. Then must the Land be taxed, and every man
pay, and the Treasure borne out of the Realm, and the Land beggered. How many
a thousand men's lives has it cost? And how many an hundred thousand pounds
has it carried out of the Realm in our remembrance? Besides, how abominable
an example of gathering was there? A cruel, and an abominable example of
^yranranny, judge them by their ^leeds says Christ.
such verily as never tyrant since the world began did, yea such as was never
before heard or thought on, neither among Jews, Saracens, Turks or Heathen,
since God created the sun to shine; that a He means Cardinal W^lsey in
case of the La^tie.
beast should break up into the Temple of God, that is to say, into the heart
and consciences of men, and compel them to swear every man what he was worth,
to lend that should never be paid again. How many tho^sands See Latymers
Sermons, at S^^mford, f. 97.
^orsware themselves? How many thousands set themselves above their abilities,
partly for fear lest they should be forsworn, and partly to save their
credit? When the Pope has his purpose, then is peace made, no man wo^teth how,
and our most enemy is our most friend. Now because the Emperor is able to
obtain his right, French, English, Venetians, and all must upon him^ O great
whore of Babylon, The Whore of Babylon.
how abuses she the Princes of the world? How drunk has she made them with
her wine? He further adds, p. 124. They that are sworn to ^e true unto
Cardinals and Bishops, that is to say, false unto God, the King, and the
Realm, may break their oaths lawfully without grudge of conscience by the
authority of Gods word. In making them they sinned, but in repenting and
breaking them they please God highly, and receive forgiveness in Christ. Let
Kings take their duty of their Subjects, and that is necessary unto the defense
of the Realm. Let them rule their Realm, themselves, with the help of Lay
men that are sage, wise, learned, and expert. Is it not a shame above all
shame^, and a monstrous thing, that no man should be found able to govern a
worldly Kingdom save Bishops and Prelates, that have forsaken the world, and
are taken our of the World, and appointed to preach the Kingdom of God? Christ
says, that his Kingdom is not of this world, Ioh. 18. and Luke 12. unto the
young man that desired him to bid his brother to give him part of the
inheritance, Note this.
He answered, Who made thee a Judge, or a divider among you? No man that
lays his hand to the plough and looks back, is apt for the Kingdom of
heaven. Luke 9. No man can serve two masters, but he must despise the one. Mat.
6. To preach Gods word is too much for half a man. Bishops.
And to minister a temporal Kingdom is too much for half a man also. Either
other requi^eth an whole man. One therefore ca^^ot well do bot^. He that
avengeth himself on every (...) is not mee^ to preach the patience of Christ,
Behold the face of the Pope, and of the Bishops in this glass.
how that a man ought to forgive and to suffer all things. He that is
overwhelmed with all manner riches, and does but seek more daily, is not mere
to preach poverty. He that will obey no man, is not meet to preach, how we
ought to obey all men. Pe^e^ says, Act. ^ It is not mee^e that we should leave
the Word of God and serve at the Table. Paul says in the 9. Chapter of the
^^rst Corinth; W^^ i^ m^^ if I preach not: a ^errible saying verily, for Popes,
Cardinals, and Bishop^. If he had said, Peter's patrimony.
Woe be unto me, i^ I fight no^, and move^ Princes unto war, or if I
increase nor Saint Pe^ers Pa^rimony (as they call it) it had been a more (...)
saying for them, The Popes authority is improved.
Christ forbids his Disciples, and that often (as thou may (...), Matthew. 1
and and also 20. Mark 9. and also 10. Luke 9. and also ^^^ even at his last
Supper) no^ only to clime above ^ords, Kings, and Emperors in worldly rule,
but also to exalt themselves one above another in the Kingdom^ of God: B^t in
vain, for the Pope, would not hear it, though he had commanded it ten
thousand times. Gods Word should rule only, and not Bishops decrees, Bishops
have captived Gods Word with their own decr^es.
or the Popes pleasure. That ought they to preach purely and spiritually, and
to fashion their lives after, and with all ensample of godly living and long
suffering, to draw all to Christ, and not to expound the Scriptures carnally
and worldly, saying, God spoke this to Peter, and I am his successor, therefore
this authority is mine only: and then bring in the tyranny of their fleshly
wisdom, in Praesentia majoris, cessat potestas m^noris, that is, in the
presence of the greater, the less has no power. There is no brotherhood where
such Philosophy is taught.

After which, speaking of Kings, the Prelates Canon Law, and the Bishops
treacheries, he proceeds thus. page 137.138, Alas, Kings be Captives to the
Prelates ere ever they be Kings, Kings are in cap^ivity.
yea, almost ere they be borne. No man may be suffered about him but
flatterers, and such as are first sworn true unto our most holy Fathers the
Bishops, that is to say, false to God and man. If any of the Nobles of the
Re^lme be true to the King, and so bold that he dare counsel him, that which
should be to his honor, and for the wealth of the Realm; They will wait a
season for him (as men say) they will provide a ghostly Father for him. God
bring this wickedness to light. There is no mischief whereof they are not the
root, nor bloodshed, but thorough their cause, either by their counsel, or in
that they preach not true obedience, and teach not the people to fear God. The
duty of Kings.
If any faithful servant be in all the Court, he shall have twenty spies
waiting upon him; he shall ^e cast out of the Court, or, (as the saying is)
conveyed to Calice, and made a Captain, or an Ambassador, he shall be kept
far enough from the Kings presence. The Kings ought, I say, to remember, that
they are in Gods stead, and ordained of God, nor for themselves, but for the
wealth of their Subjects. Let them remember that their Subjects are their
brethren, their flesh and blood, members of their own body and even their own
selves in Christ. Therefore ought they to pity them,, Vnlaw^ull Oaths ought to
be broken and may without dispensation.
and to rid them from such wily tyranny, which increases more and more daily.
And though that the Kings by the falsehood of the Bishops and Abbots be sworn
to defend such liberties: yet ought they not to keep their Oaths, but to
break them; For as much as they are unright, and clean against Gods
Ordinance, and even, but cruel oppression, contrary unto brotherly love and
charity. Moreover the spiritual Officer ought to punish no sin, The King
only ought to punish sin: I mean that is broken forth, the h^^rt must
remain to God.
but if any sin break out, the King is ordained to punish it, and they not,
but to Preach and exhort them to fear God, and that they sin not. And let
the Kings put down some of their tyranny, and ^urne some unto a Common wealth.
If the tenth part of such tyranny were given the King yearly, and laid up in
the shire towns against the Realm had need, what would it grow to in
certain years?

Moreover, One King, one Law; is Gods Ordinance in every Realm. Against the
Co^^on Law.
Therefore ought not the King to suffer them to have a several Law by
themselves, and to draw his subjects thither. It is not meet will they say,
that a spiritual man should be judged of a worldly or a temporal man: O
abomination! the King is in the room of God, and his Law is Gods Law, The
Kings Law is Gods Law.
and nothing but the Law of nature and natural equity, which God graved in the
hearts of men; Yet Antichrist is too good to be judged by the Law of God, he
must have a new of his own making. It were meet verily that they went to no
Law at all. No more needed they, if they would study to Preach Gods Word
truly, and be contented with sufficient, and to be like one of their Brethren.
Moreover when the spiritual officers have excommunicate any man, or have
condemned any opinion for heresy, let not the King nor temporal officers
punish and slay by and by at their Commandment; Kings ought to see what they
do, and not to believe the Bishops, namely seeing their living is so sore
suspect.
but let them look on Gods Word, and compare their judgment unto the
Scripture, and see whether it be right or no, and not believe them at the first
chop, whatsoever they say, namely in things that pertain unto their own
authorities and power. For no man is a right judge in his own cause. The
Emperor and Kings are nothing now adays but even hangmen unto the Pope and
Bishops, The Kings are become Antichrists hangmen.
to kill whatsoever they condemn, without any more ado, as Pilate was unto
the Scribes and Pharisees and the High Bishop, to Hang Christ. For as those
Prelates answered Pilate ( when he asked what he had done) If he were not an
evil doer we would not have brought him unto thee. As who should say, we are
too holy to do any thing amiss^^ thou may believe us well enough: yea and
his blood on our heads said they, kill him hardily, we will bear the charge,
our Souls for thine; we have also a Law by which he ought to dye, for he
calls himself Gods Son. Even so say our Prelates, he ought to dye by our
Laws, he speaks against the Church. And your Grace is sworn to defend the
Liberties and Ordinances of the Church, and to maintain our most holy Fathers
Authority^ our souls for yours, ye shall do^ a meritorious deed therein.
Nevertheless a^ Pilate escaped not the judgment of God, even so is it to be
feared lest our Temporal powers shall not. Wherefore be learned ye that judge
the Earth, Be learned ye that judge the ^arth.
lest the Lord be angry with you, and ye perish from the right way. Who slew
the Prophets? Who slew the Prophets.
Who slew Christ? Who slew his Apostles? who the Martyrs, and all the righteous
that ever were slain? The Kings and the Temporal sword at the request of the
false Prophets. Page. 140. He goes on thus. Behold the monsters how they are
disguised with Miters, Croses, and Hats, with Crosses, Pillars and Pollaxes,
and with three Crowns? What names have they? Glorious Names.
My Lord Prior, my Lord Abb^t, my Lord Bishop, my Lord Archbishop, Cardin^ll
and Legate: if it please your Father-hood, if it pleas your lordship, if it
please your Grace, if it please your Holiness, and innumerable such like^
Behold how they are esteemed, How are they esteemed.
and how high they be crept up above al, not into worldly seats only, but
into the seat of God, the hearts of men, where they sit above God himself.
For both they and whatsoever they make of their own heads is more feared and
dread than God and his Commandments. In them and their deservings put we more
trust than in Christ and his merits. To their promises give we more ^aith, than
to the promises which God has sworn in Christ's blood. The Hypocrites say unto
the Kings and Lords, Kings ar^ down they cannot go lower.
These Heretics would have us down first, and then you, to make of all
Common. Nay, ye Hypocrites and right heretics approved by open Scripture, the
Kings and Lords are down^ already, and that so low that they cannot go lower,
ye tread them under your feet, and lead them captive, and have made them your
bond Servants to wait on your filthy Lusts, Note this.
and to avenge your malice on every man, contrary unto the right of Gods Word;
ye have not only robbed them o^ their land, authority, honor, and due
obedience, which ye owe unto them, but also of their wits, so that they are not
without understanding in Gods Word only, but even in worldly matters that
pertain unto their offices, they are more than Children; ye bear them in hand
what ye will, and have brought them even in case like unto them, which when
they dance naked in nets, believe they are invisible. We would have them up
again, and restored unto the room^ and authority which God has given them,
and whereof ye have robbed them. And your inward falsehood we do but utter
only wi^h the Light of God^ Word, that your hypocrisy might be seen. Be
learned therefore ye that Judge the world, lest God be angry with you, and ye
perish from the right way, Page. 141. He proceeds thus? When all men lose their
Lands, they remain always sure and in safety, They win somewhat always.
and ever win somewhat For whosoever conquereth other men's Lands unrightfully,
ever gives them part with them: To them is all things Lawfull^ In all Councels
and Parliaments are they the chief, without them may no King be Crowned, Note
this.
neither until he be sworn to their Liberties. All secrets know they, even
the very thoughts of men's hearts. By them all things are ministered. No King nor
Realm may thorough their falsehood live in peace. To believe they teach not in
Christ, but in them and their disguised hypocrisy And of them compel they all
men to buy, redemption and forgiven^sse of sins. The peoples sin, they
eat, and thereof wax fat. The more wicked the people are, the more prosperous
is their common wealth. If Kings and great men do amiss, they must build
Abbeys and Colleges, mean men build Chauntries, poor find Trentalls and
Brotherhoods and begging Friars. Their own heirs do men dis-herit to endote
them. All Kings are compelled to submit themselves to them. Read the Story of
King John, and of other Kings. They will have their causes avenged, though
whole Realms should therefore perish. Page 142.143. He Adds. What signifies
that the Prelates are so bloody, and clothed in Red? The Prelates a^e clothed
in red.
that they may be ready every hour to suffer Martyrdom for the testimony of
Gods Word. Is that also not a false sign? when no man dare for them once to
open his mouth to ask a question of Gods Word, because they are ready to burn
him. What signifies the Pollaxes that are borne before high Legates A Latere?
Pollaxes.
whatsoever false sign they make of them, I care not^ but of this I am sure,
that as the old hypocrites when they had slain Christ, ^et Pollaxes to keep
him in his Sepulcher, that he should not rise again: even so have our
hypocrites buried the Testament that God made unto us in Christ's blood, and to
keep it down, that it rise not again, is all their study, whereof these
Pollaxes are the very sign. Is not that Shepherds hook the Bishops cross, a
false sign? Is not that White Rotchet that the Bishop and Channons wear so
like a Nun, and so effeminately, a false sign? what other things are their
Sandals, Gloves, Miters, and all the whole pomp of their disguising, then
false signs, in which Paul prophesied that they should come? And as Christ
warned us, to beware of Wolves in Lambs skins, and bad us, look rather unto
their fruits and deeds, Judge the tree by his fruit, and not by his leaves
than to wonder at their disguisings; Run throughout all our holy religious,
and thou shall find them likewise all clothed in falsehood.

Again, Page 145. He writes thus; But Christ says, Mat. 7. By their fruits
shall thou know them, that is by their filthy covetousness and shameless
ambition, and drunken desire of honor, contrary unto the example and doctrine
of Christ and of his Apostles. Compare their deeds to the Doctrine and deeds
of Christ and of his Apostles, and judge their fruits.
Christ said to Peter, the last chapter of John, Feed my sheep, and not
sheare thy flock. And Peter says, 1 Pet. 5. Not being Lords over the
Parishes, but these sheare, and are become Lords. Paul says, 2 Cor. 2. Not
that we be Lords over your faith: but these will be Lords and compel us to
believe whatsoever they lust, without any witness of Scripture, yea clean
contrary to the Scripture, when the open text rebukes it. And Page 146. (says
he) as for that solemn doubt, as they call it, whether Judas was a Priest or
no: What Judas is now.
I care not what he was then, but of this I am sure, that he is now not only
Priest, but also Bishop Cardinal and Pope. Page 155. he adds. Confession is
there held, thereby know they all secrets, thereby mock they all men, and all
men's wives, and beguile Knights and Esquires, Lord and King, and betray all
Realms. The Bishops with the Pope have a ce^taine conspiration and secret
Treason against the whole world. Bishops w^rke Treason through Con^ession.
And by Confession know they what Kings and Emperors think. If ought be
against them, do they never so evil, then move they their Captives to war
and to fight, and give them pardons to s^ay whom they will have taken out of
the way. They have with falsehood taken from all Kings and Emperors their
right and duties, which now they call their Freedoms, Liberties, and
privileges, and have pe^verted the Ordinances that God left in the world, and
have made every King swear to defend their falsehood against their own selves.
Kings be sworn to the Bishops, and not the Bishops unto the Kings.
So that now if any man preach Gods Word truly, and show the freedom and
Liberty of the Soul which we have in Christ, or entend to restore the kings
again unto their duties and right, and to the room and authority which they
have of God, and of shadows to make them Kings indeed, and to put the world in
his order again, then the Kings deliver their swords and authority unto the
Hypocrite^ to slay him. So drunken are they with the wine of the whore.

Page 180.181.182.183. He there thus farther proceeds. On the other side I
have also uttered the w^ckednesse of the Spiritualty, the falsehood of the
Bishops an^ juggling of the Pope, and how they have disguised themselves,
borrowing some of their pomp of the Jews, and some of the Gentiles, and have
with subtle wiles turned the obedience that should be given to Gods Ordinance
unto themselves. And how they have put our Gods Testament and Gods truth, and
set up their own traditions and lies, in which they have taught the people to
believe, and thereby sit in their Consciences as God, and have by that means
robbed the world of Lands and goods, The (...) reap by having Bishops.
of peace and unity, and of all temporal authority, and have brought the
people into the ignorance of God, and have heaped the wrath of God upon all
Realms, and namely upon the Kings, whom they have robbed (I speak not of
worldly things only) but ^ven of their very natural wits. They make them
believe that they are most Christian, when they live most abominably, and will
suffer no man in their Realms that believes on Christ, and that they are
defenders of the ^aith, when they burn the Gospel and promises of God, out of
which all faith springeth^ I ^^^wed how they have ministered Christ, King and
Emperor ou^ of their rooms, and how they have made them a several kingdom,
which they got at the first in deceiving of Princes, and now pervert the whole
Scripture to prove that they have such authority of God. And l^st the L^y-men
should see how falsely they allege the places of the ^^ripture, is the
greatest, c^use of this per^ec^t^on. They have (...) Confession for the same
p^^pose to ^^^^blish t^eir Kingdom withal. Confession^ Note this P^licie.
All secrets know they thereby^ The Bishop knows the Confession of whom he
^usteth throughout all his Diocese. Yea, and his C^^ncellour comm^^deth the
Ghostly Father to deliver it writt^^^ The Pop^, his Ca^dinal^ and Bishop^ know
the confession (...) Kings, and (...) all Lords, The manifold ^^ormities which
their Auric^la^ Confession (...) br^^d^
and by confession ^hey know all (...) cap^^^e^. ^f any ^^leeve in Christ by
co^f^ssion, ^hey know him. (...) where thou will: Whither at Sion,
Charter House or at the Observants, thy con^ession is known well enough. And
thou, if thou believe in Christ, art waited upon. Wonderful are the things
that thereby are wrought. No wonder then our Prelates and Priests of late were
so eager to bring in Confession again.
The wife is fear^d and compelled to utter not her own only, but also the
Secrets of her husband, and the Servant the Secrets of his Master. Besides
that, through confession they quench the faith of all the promises of God, and
take away the effect and virtue of all the Sacraments of Christ. They have also
corrupted the Saints lives, with lies and fained miracles, and have put many
things out of the sentence or great curse, as raising of Rents and Fines, and
hiring men out of their hou^es, and whatsoever wickedness they themselves do;
and have put a great part of the stories and Chronic^es out of the way, lest
their falsehood should be seen. For there is no mischiefs or disorder, whether
it be in the temporal regiment, The Pope and his Chaplains are the Fountains
of all evils in spiritual regiment or temporal.
or else in the Spiritual, whereof they are not the chief causes, and even
the very Fountain^ and Springs, and as we say, the Well head so that it is
impossible to Preach against any mischief except thou begin at them, or to set
any reformation in the world, except thou reform them first. Now are they
indurate and tough as Pharaoh, and will not bow unto any right way or order.
And therefore persecute they Gods Word and the Preachers thereof; and on the
other side, lie awaite unto all Princes, and stir up all mischief in the
world, and send them to war, and occupy their minds therewith or with other
voluptuousness, lest they should have leisure to hear the Word of God, and to
set an order in their Realms. By them is all things ministered, and by them are
all Kings ruled: (mark that which ^olloweth) yea in every Kings Conscience ^it
they ere he be King, and persuade every King what they lust, and make them both
to believe what they will, and to do what they will. Neither c^^ any King or
any Realm have ^est for their businesses. Behold King Hen^y the 5. whom they
sen^ ou^, for such a purpose, as they sent ^ur King that now i^. See how the
Realm is inhabited. A^ke where the goodly Towns, and their walls, and the
people that was wont to be in them a^^ become, and where the blood Royal of
the Realm is become also. Turn thine eyes whither thou will, and thou shall
see nothing pro^perous but their subtle polling, with th^^ it is flowing water,
yea and I trust it will be shortly a full Sea. In all their doings, though they
pretend outwardly the honor of God or the Common wealth, Under an o^tward
pretense of Gods honor the Popes Clergy procured their own dignity.
their int^nt and secret Counsel is only to bring all under their power, and
to take out of the way whosoever lets them, or is too mighty for them. As
when they send their Princes to Jerusalem to conquer the Holy Land, and to
fight against the Turks, whatsoever they pretend outwardly, their secret
intent is, while the Princes there Conquer them more Bishopricke^, to conquer
their Land in the mean season with their false Hypocrisy, and to bring all
under them; Which, thou may easily perceive by that they will not let us know
the faith of Christ. And when they are once on high, then are they tyrants
above all tyrants, whether they be Turk^ or Saracens. How minister they proving
of Testaments? How causes of Wedlock? or if any man dye intestate? If a poor
man dye and leave half a dozen young children, and but one Cow to find them,
that they will have for a merciless Mort^^ry, let come of wi^e and children
what will. Yea, let any thing be done against their pleasure, and they will
interdict the whole Realm, sparing no person. Read the Chronicles of England [
out of which yet they have put a great part of their wickednesse] and thou
shall find them always both Rebellious and disobedient to the Kings, Note
this.
and also Churlish and unthankefull, so that when all the Realm gave the King
somewhat to maintain him in his right, they would not give a mi^e. Consider
the story of King John, where I doubt not but they have put the best and
fairest for themselves, and the worst for King John. For I suppose they make
the Chronicles themselves. Compare the doings of their holy Church (as they
ever call it) unt^ the learning o^ Christ and of his Apostles. Did not the
Legate of Rome assoyle all the Lords of the Realm of their due obedience,
which they ought to their king by the Ordinance of God? would he not have
cursed the king with his solemn pomp, because he would have done that office
which God commands every king to do, and wherefore Go^ has put the sword in
every kings han^^ that is to wit, because king John would have p^^ished a
wicked Clarke that had coined false money. The Lay men that had not done half
so great faults must dye, but the Clarke must go and escape free. Sent not the
Pope also unto the king of France remission of his sins to go and Conquer
king John's Re^lme? So ^ow ^emission of sins comes not by faith in the
Testament that God has made in Christ's blood, but by fighting and murmering
for the Popes pleasure. Last of all, was not king John feign to deliver his
Crown unto the Legate, and to yield up his Realm unto the Pope, wherefore we
pay Peter Pence? They might be called the Polling-Pence of false Prophets well
enough. They care not by what mischief they come by their purpose^ War and
conquering of Lands is their harvest. The wickeder the people are, the more
they have the Hypocrites in Reverence, Not^.
the more they fear them, and the more they believe in them. And they that
conquer other men's Lands, when they dye, make them their heirs, to be prayed
for, for ever. Let there come one conque^t more in the Realm, and thou shall
see them get yet as much more as they have [if they can keep down Gods Word,
The keeping down of Gods Wo^d promoted the Popes spiri^ualties, honor.
that their juggling come not to light.] Yea, thou shall see them take the
Realm whole into their hands, and Crown one of themselves King thereof. And
verily I see no other likelihood, but that the Land shall be shortly conquered.
The Stars of the Scripture promise us none other fortune, in as much as we
deny Christ with the wicked Jews, and will not have him reign over us: but
will be still children of darkness under Antichrist, and Antichrists
possession, burning the Gospel of Christ, and defending a faith that may not
stand with his holy Testament. If any man shed blood in the Church, it shall be
interdicted, till he have paid for the hallowing. If he be not able, the Parish
must pay, or else shall it stand always, interdicted. They will be avenged on
them that never offended. Full well prophesied of them Paul in the second
Epistle to Timothy 3. Some men will say, would thou that men should fight in
the (...) unpunished? Nay, but let the King ordain a punish^^^^ ^or them, as
he does for them that fight in his Palace, and le^ not all the Parish be
troubled for ones fault. And as for their hallowing, it is the juggling of
Antichrist. A christian man is the Temple of God and of the Holy Ghost, and
hallowed in Christ's blo^d. A Christian man is holy in himself by reason of the
Spirit that dwells in him, and the place wherein he is, is holy by reason of
him, whether he be in the field or town. A Christian husband sanctifies an
unchristian wife, and a Christian wife an unchristian husband, [as concerning
the use of Matrimony] says Paul to the Corinthians. I^ now while we seek to
be hallowed in Christ, we are found unholy and must be hallowed by the ground,
or place, or walls, then dyed Christ in vain. Howbeit Antichrist must have
wher^with to fit in m^ns Consciences, and to make them fear where there is no
^eare, and to rob them of their faith, and to make them trust in that that
cannot help them, and to seek holiness of that which is not holy in it
self. After that the old King of France was brought down out of Italy, mark
what pageants have ^e^ne played, and what are yet a playing to separate us from
the Emp^rour, (least by the help or aid o^ us he should be able to recover
his right of the Pope) and to couple us to the French men, whose might the Pope
ever abuses to keep the Emperor from Italy. What prevails it for any King
to marry his daughter or his Son, or to make any peace or good ordinance for
the wealth o^ his Realm? For it shall no longer l^st than it is profitable to
them: Their Treason is so secret that the world cannot perceive it. They
dissimule those things which they are only cause of, and simule discord among
themselves when they are most agr^ed. One shall hold this, and another shall
dispute the contrary: but the conclusion shall be that most maintains their
falsehood, though Gods Word be never so contrary. What have they wrought in our
days, yea and what work they yet to the perpetual dishonor of the King, and
rebuke of the Realm, and shame of all the nation in whatsoever Realms they
go? I uttered unto you partly the malicious blindness of the Bishop of
Rochester, The Bishop of Rocheste^ is a fit pattern to judge all the rest of
affinity by.
his juggling, his conveying, his Fox wilenesse, his ^opeepe, his wresting,
renting and shamfull abusing of the Scripture, his Oratory and alleging of
Heretics, and how he would make the Apostles Authors of blind Ceremonies
without signification, cont^ary to their own doctrine, and have set him for an
ensample to judge all other by. The cause why Laymen cannot rule Temporal
Offices, is the falsehood of the Bishops. Their polling i^ like a consumption
wherein a man complains of fe^^l^ne^se and of faintness, and worteth not
whence his disease comes it is like a pocke that fretteth inward and
consumes the very marrow of the bones. There see thou the cause why it is
impossible for Kings to come to the knowledge of the truth. The cau^^ why Kings
could not come to the knowledge of the truth.
For these spirits lay awaite for them, and serve their appetites at all
points, and through con^ession buy and sell and betray both them and all their
true friends, and lay ^aites for them and never leave them till they have
blinded them with their sophistry and have brought them into their nets. And
then when the King is captive, they compel all the rest with violence of his
sword. For if any man will not obey, be it right or wrong, they cite him,
suspend him, and curse or excommunicate him: if he then obey not, they deliver
him to ^ilate, that is to say, unto the temporal Officers to destroy him. All
this and much more he ^ully proves and more largely prosecutes in his Book
entitled The Practice of Popish Prelates. Concerning Bishops interm^dling with
temporal matters he thus writes. Our Savior Jesus Christ answered Pilate,
Ioh. 18. that his Kingdom was not of this world. And Mat. 10. he says: The
Disciple is not greater than his Master^ but it ought to suffice the Disciple
that he be a^ his Master is. Wherefore if Christ's Kingdom be not of this
world, nor any of his Disciples may be otherwise than he was, then Christ's
Vicars which minister his Kingdom here in his bodily absence, The ministers of
Christ's Doctrine may not have ^n^ temporal offices.
and h^ve the oversight o^ his flock may be none Emperors, Kings, Dukes,
Lords, Knight^, Temporal Judges, or any temporal Officer, or under false
names have any such Dominion, or minister any such Office as requires
violence. And Mat. 6. No man can serve two Masters; Mat. 6.
where Christ concludes saying, Ye cannot serve God and Mammon; that is,
riches, cove^ousne^se, ambition and temporal dignities. And Christ called his
Disciples unto him, and sayd^ Mat. 20.
Ye know that the Lords of the Heathen people have dominion over them, and they
that be great do exercise power over them: Howbeit, it shall not be so among
you, but whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister, and he that
will be chief, shall be your servant; even as the Son of man came not that men
should minister unto him, but for to minister and give his life for the
redemption of many: Wherefore the Officers in Christ^ Kingdom may have no
temporal dominion or jurisdiction, no^ execute any temporal authori^y or Law
of violence, nor may have any like manner among them. The Officers in Christ's
Kingdom may have no temporal dominion.
But clean contrary they must cast themselves down under all and become
servants unto all, suffer o^ all, and bear the burden of every man's
infirmities, and go before them, and ^ight for them against the world with the
^word of Gods Word, even unto the death, after the example of Christ. And Mat.
18. when the Disciples asked, Mat. 1^.
Who should be greatest in the Kingdom of heaven, Christ called a young Child
unto him, and set him in the midst among them, saying: Except ye turn back
and become as children ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Now
young children bear no rule one over another, but all is fellowship among
them; and he said moreover, Whosoever humbles himself, after the ensample of
this Child, he is greatest in the Kingdom of heaven, that is, to be (as
concerning ambition and worldly desire) so childish that thou could not heave
thy self above thy Brother, is the very bearing of rule, and to be great in
Christ's Kingdom. And to describe the very fashion of the greatness of his
Kingdom, he said: He that receives one such child in my name receives me.
What is that to receive a child in Christ's name? To receive a child in Christ's
name what it is.
verily to submit, to meek and to humble thy self under all men, and to
consider all men's infirmities and weaknesses, and to help to heal their
diseases with ^he word of truth, and to live purely, that they see no contrary
ensample in thee to whatsoever tho^ teach them in Christ, that tho^ put no
stumbling block before them to make them ^aile while they be yet young and
weak in the faith: But that thou abstain as Paul teaches, 1 These. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Ab omni specie mala, from all that might seem evil, or whereof a man might
^urmise amiss; and that thou so love them, that whatsoever gift of God in them
is, thou think the same theirs, and their food, and for their sakes given unto
thee, as the truth is; and that all their infirmit^es be thine, and that thou
feel them, and that with all thy power to help to amend them, and cease not
to cry to God for them neither day nor night: and that thou let nothing be
found in thee that any man may rebuke, but whatsoever thou teach them, that
be thou; and that thou be not a Wolf in a Lambs skin, as our Holy Father the
Pope is, which comes unto us in a name of hypocrisy, and in the Title of
cursed Cham o^ Ham, calling himself Serv^s servo^um, the Servant of all
^ervants, The Pope i^ ^ Wolf in a Lamb^ Ski^^
and is yet found tyrannus ^yrannorum, of all tyrants the most cruel. This is
to receive young Children in Christ's name, and to receive young Children in
Christ's name is to bear rule in the Kingdom of Christ. Thu^ ye see that
Christ's Kingdom is altogether spiritual, and the bearing of rule in it is
clear contrary unto the bearing of rule temporally: Wherefore none that
be^reth rul^ in it may have any temp^rall jurisdiction, or minister any
temporal Office that requires violence to compel withal. Thus and ^arre
more Mr. Tyndall. All whose passages are very remarkable, and worthy serious
consideration.

John Fri^h our learned English Martyr, JOHN ^RIT^.
in his Bound up wit^ M. Ty^^^lls worke^^
Answer to the Prefac^ of Mr. Moors Book. page 116 writes thus of Bishops an^
their great possessions; This Canker then began to spread in the Congregation,
and did full sore annoy the body, insomuch that within four hundred years,
there were very many Sects scattered in every coast. Notwithstanding there were
faithful Fathers that diligently subdued them with the sword of Gods Word. But
surely since Silvester received such possessions, Silve^^er.
has the Canker so crept in the Church, that it has almost left never a sound
member. And as Cistercensis writes in the eighth book, that day that he
received revenues was a voice heard in the air, crying over the Court, which
said, This day is venom shed into the Church of God. When corruption entered
into the Church.
Before that time there was no Bishop greedy to take a Cure. For it is no
honor and profit as it is now, but only a careful charge which was like to
cost him his life at one time or other. Bishoprics were not greedily sought
after in the Primitive Church, for then it was a charge and not a Lordship.
And therefore no man would take it, but he that bare such a love and zeal to
God and his ^locke, that he could be content to shed his blood for them. But
after that it was made so honorable and profitable, they that were worst both
in learning and living, most labored for it. For they that were virtuous would
not entangle themselves with the vain pride of this world, and wear three
Crowns of gold, where Christ did wear one of thorn. Mat. 27.
And in conclusion it came so farre^ Mark. 25.
that whosoever would give most money for it, Joh. 1^.
or best could flatter the Prince (which he knew well all good men to abhor)
had the pre-eminence and got the best Bishopric, and then instead of Gods
Word, they published their own Commandments, and made Laws to have all under
them, and made men believe they could not err whatsoever they did or said, and
even as in the Rooms and stead of Moses, Aaron, Eliazer, Iosue, Caleb, and
other Faithful folk, came Herod, Annas, Caiphas, Pilate and Judas, which put
Christ to death^ A great alteration in the Church since the time of Christ and
his Apostles.
So now in the stead of Christ, Peter, Paul, James, and John and the faithful
followers of Christ, we have the Pope, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and
proud Prelates with their Proctors^ the malicious Ministers of their Master the
Devil, which notwithstanding transform^^ themselves into a likeness, ^ Cor.
11^
as though they were the Ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be
according to their works. So that the body is cankered long agone, and now are
left but certain small members which God of his puissant power has rese^ved
uncorrupted^ A little fl^cke is left that are not corrupted.
and because they see that they cannot be cankered as their own ^lesh is, for
pure anger they bu^^e them lest if they continued there might seem some
deformity in their own cankered carcasses, by the comparing of these whole
members to their scabbed body.

Our godly Martyr, D. Barnes, D. Barnes.
in his Articles, page 210, 211, 212, 213. writes thus of Bishops; I will never
believe, nor yet I can never believe that one man may be by the Law of God a
Bishop of two or three Cities, yea of an whole Country: The sixth Article.
for it is contrary to Saint Paul, which says, I have left thee behind, to set
in every City a Bishop. Tit. 1.
And if you find in one place of Scripture, that they be called Episcopi, you
shall find in diverse other places, that they be called Presbyteri. I was
brought before my Lord Cardinal into his Gallery, The Cardinal and D. Barn^s
r^^s^n^d togeth^r.
and there he read all my Articles till he came to this, and there he stopped,
and said, that this touched him, and therefore he asked me if I thought it
wrong, that one Bishop should have so many Cities underneath him? unto whom I
answered, that I could no farther go, than to Saint Paul's text, which set in
every City a Bishop. Then asked he me, B^t therefore was I am heretic.
if I thought it now unright (seeing the Ordinance of the Church) that one
Bishop should have so many Cities? I answered, that I knew none Ordinance of
the Church (as concerning this thing) but Saint Paul's saying only:
nevertheless I did see a contrary custom and practice in the world, but I
know not the Original thereof. Then said he, that in the Apostles ^ime there
were diverse Citie^, some seven miles, O figmentum.
some six mile^ long, and over them was there set but one Bishop, and of their
Suburbs also. So likewise now, ^ bishop has but one City to his Cathedral
Church, and the country about, is as Suburbs unto it. Me thought this was
far fetched, but I durst not deny it, because it was great Authority, and of
so holy a Father, and of so great a Divine. If I fained such a thing I should
be an heretic.
But this date I say, tha^ his Hollinesse could never prove it by Scripture,
nor yet by any authority of Doctors, not yet by any practice of the Apostles,
and yet it must be tr^e, because a pillar of the Church has spoken it^ But let
us see what the Doctors say to my Article: Athanasius does declare this text of
the Apostle. I have left thee behind; etc. Athanius, com. in T^t^m^ c. 1.
He would not commit unto one Bishop a whole Isle, but he did enjoyne, that
every City^ should have his proper Pastor, supposing that by this means they
should more diligently oversee the people, and also that the labor should be
more easy to bear, etc. Chrysostom in Titum.
Also Chrysostom on that same text. He would not that a whole Country should
be permitted unto one man, but he enjoined unto every man his Cure; by that
means he knew, that the labor should be more easy, and the subjects should
be with more diligence governed, if the teachers were not distracted with the
governing of many Churches, but had cure and charge of one Church only, etc.
Me thinks these be plain words, and able to move a man ^o speak as much as
I did. But grant that you may have all these C^^ies, yet can you make it no
heresy. For my Lord Cardinal granted, that it was but against him, and
against you, who be no gods. The eighth Ar^i^le.
But I poor man must be an heretic, there is no remedy, you will have it so,
and who is able to say nay? Not all Scripture, no^ yet God himself. Sure I am,
that they cannot by the Law of God have any jurisdiction secular, and yet they
challenge both powers, which if they have why do ^hey not put them both in use?
for they must say, as the Jews said, We may kill no man. This is the Article
that did bite you: for you cannot be content with the office of a Bishop, but
you will be also Kings. How that stands with Gods Law, and with your Oat^, I
have declared it to our Noble Prince. I doubt not, but he will put you to the
trial of it. Officers be but Bishops hangmen, God amend it.
Have you not this many years condemned many a poor man, and then delivered
him to the Temporal power to be put to death, which knew nothing of his cause?
And if he would, that ye should put him to death your selves, ^hen answered
ye, how you might kill no man. So that they were always your hangmen. They say
they b^ ^he Successors of Christ and of his Apostles, The ninth Ar^^^l^.
but I can see them follow none but Judas. For they bear the purse, and have
all the money. And if they had not so great possessions, I am sure an hundred
would speak against them, where now dare not one, for loss of promotion. And
for this Article, I will overcome you with the witness of all the world, you
may well condemn it for here^ie, but it is as true as your Pa^er Noster, Judas
sold our Master but once, and you ^ell him as often as he^ comes in your
hands. But I would it were that ye could prove me a lye^, and that you
followed any of the Apostles ^aving Judas only, yet I would that ye were in
certain points as good ^s Judas was. The tenth Ar^icle.
These ordinary Bishops and Prelates do follow that ^^lse Prophet Ba^a^m, For
they would curse the people, but by the provision of Go^ they were compelled to
bless them, that is to say, to ^each them to live well, though they themselves
live most mischievously. And so the Asses which they ride upon, that is, the
common people, have their lives in abominat^on. This is the heinous here^ie.
For it speaks against the holy Fathers, which be almost as holy as Balaams
Ass, that did once speak the Word of God to a good purpose. And so do they
never. But I grant that I did offend in calling you Ordinary Bishops, for I
should have called you inordinate butchers. And as ^or that that I compared you
to Balaam, it is your own Law. 2. quest: 7. Secuti sunt. And cap. Nos si. 2.
qu. 7. Secuti sun^^ and ^ap. No^ si.
And as for your living, all the world knows it. I could tell here many holy
points of Bishops living, as keeping of men's wives, and daughters, but I will
not, for I should be reckoned uncharitable. But you may do them breaking not
your holy charity. So he.

The namelesse Author of a Supplication to King Henry the eight, A supplication
to King He^r^ the eight.
printed 1544. writes thus of Bishops, their calling, practices, and great
revenues; How cruelly do the Bishops punish all them which pretend to have
learning, and especially in Gods Word? such ^hey call heretics, and persecute
with putting them to open shame, with imprisonment, and in conclusion with
death most fea^efull and painful. All this they do to discourage all men from
the study of Gods word, fearing lest that by such studious brains which learn
Gods Word and publish the same, their iniquity should be made manifest. What
study and pains do they take to keep the light from the people^ But no man
which knows the Scriptures will marvel of ^his their policy and cruelty.
For Saint John declares their practice plainly, Ioh. 3.
saying. He that does evil hates the light, and why? because his works
which be evil should not be reproved by the light. And for as much as our
Bishops coun^enance of living their great possessions, and Lordly Dominions in
them agrees with Gods Word, ^s death with life, God with the Devil, light
with darkness, therefore they hate the light which declares the same, and
study (...) ^uppresse the same by all ^ra^t and poli^y. Also they be enemies
(...) all men which can and do preach Gods Word sincerely and truly, because
they live ^ontrary to the same. And ^his i^ the original ground, and ca^se of
the ab^ndance of and i^cr^^se of darkness, and of sin, (...) ^lso of the long
contin^^nce o^ Popish blindness, which has ^aigned in this Realm so l^^g.
After which he proceeds thus, Most dread Sovereign Lord, I see two foul
deformities^ and great lamentable mischiefs annexed to the vocation and office
of Bishops, which not reformed will poison and utterly corrupt the godly
vocation and election of the said Bishops. The only infection, and pestilent
poison is their great Lordships and dominions with the yearly provents of the
same, which has so fashioned them in proud countenances, and worldly
behavior, that now they be most like the Heathen Princes, and most unlike unto
Christ, although they would be esteemed of all men to be his true successors:
yet poor Christ says, The f^xes have holes, the birds have nests, but the
Son of man has not wherein to lay his head. But our Bishops have gorgeous
and sumptuous builded houses, manors, and castles pleasantly set about with
Parkes well replenished with Dear, warrens swarming full of conyes, and pooles
well stored with diverse kinds of fishes. And not only these commodities and
pleasures, but also diverse other pleasures. How does this Lordly and worldly
Bishoplike estate agree with Christ's words? I think a man cannot reasonably
conjecture or imagine by their countenance and living that they be Christ's true
Disciples. The other mischief, and evil is, that they have too many worldly
cares and businesses. For to these Manors and Lordships belong many Tenants,
for whose leases to be made fines and haryots to be appointed and taken,
amerciaments to be assessed, taxed and also forgiven and dispensed, there be no
few suits made to my Lord Bishop: also the hearing of Testamentary causes,
divorces, causes of Matrimony, causes of slanders, of lechery, adultery and
punishment o^ bawdery, and such other bumme Court matters (whereof not one
belong to his office and vocation appointed by Gods Word) My Lord Bishop is so
occupied and unquieted, that he has no leisure to study, nor to preach Gods
word. But such affairs and worldly businesses, nothing pertaining to his
vocation, be very great hinderance and let to my Lord Bishop that he can not
apply him to exercise his own office. Matthew. 5.
For no man can serve two masters, says Christ. The Apostles thought it not
just and equal to provide for the necessary living of the poor, Act^ 6.
leaving Gods word untaught. But my Lord Bishop doing these things nothing
pertaining to his office thinks that he has exactly done his office. From
these great Manors comes yearly great rents, pleasures, and profits, which
although they be the good creatures ^f God, yet the abundance of them (being
where they be more impediment than help) be a great occasion of corruption in
the user of them. And peradventure they would allure and entice a Bishops heart
to trust in them, and so corrupt him, as the Scripture says: Blessed is the
rich which is found without blemish, has not gone after gold nor hoped in money
and treasures; Where is ^here such a one, and we shall commend him and call
him blessed, for great things does he among his people. And if my Lord Bishop
should give the superfluity of his goods to the poor (whose goods justly they
be) as the Proph^t Esaias says; Isay 3.
then my Lord should lack them to furnish his Lordly countenance, and so my
Lord should lose his Lordly honor and praise of the world. Wherefore as these
superfluous possessions be annexed to estates of Bishops by man's vain
fantasy, and not by Gods word, so my Lord Bishop will either keep them to
make him more friends (remembering that riches makes many friends; Prove. 14.20.
but the poor is forsaken of his neighbor,) or devise the expense of them
contrary to Gods Word, either to make sure friends in the Court about the King
to obtain more promotions and benefices, or in curious building, sumptuous and
delicate fare, well apparelled servants, trim decked horses to ride
pompeously like a Lord. Although there were no authority to prove this, yet the
Lordly countenance, and fashion of Bishops, yea their common exercise, and
practice can well prove and testify this plainly before the face of all men,
which knows the Lordlinesse of Bishops, as the Prophet Esaias says. Isay. 11.
The changing of their countenance bewrays them; yea they declare their own
sins themselves at Sodomites, and hide them not. Do no^ these things faintly
agree with the saying of their predecessor Paul the Apostle, which says, When
we have food and raiment, we must be contented. 1 Timothy 6.
Is not this Lordly honor directly against Christ's words, which says, Luke 22.
The Kings of Nations reign over them, and they that have authority over them
are called gracious Lords: but you shall not be so. Also Peter speaks to his
true successors, saying, 1 Pet. 5.
Feed you Christ's flock as much as lies in you, taking the oversight of them,
not as compelled thereunto, but willingly after a good sort, nor for the desire
of filthy lucre, but of a good mind, not as though you were Lords over the
parishes, but that you be an example to the flock and that with good will. But
our Lordly Bishops estate and proud countenance of living (as it is now used)
is contrary to Gods Word, as it appears by these words, But you shall not be
so. And also by these sayings. Not at though you were Lords over the Parishes.
And Christ says, He that is not with me is against me. Wherefore so long as
they reign so Lordly in the Clergy contrary to Gods Word, so long be they
against God and so long as they be against God, they be not sent from God, and
then can they not preach truly and si^cerely his Word: For, how can they Preach
except they be sent? Romans 10.
says Paul. Christ was s^nt to preach, as it appears, Mar. 1. Luke 4. and
Isay 61. And Christ says to all his true Disciples. Joh. 2.
As my Father sent me, so do I send you. And commands also all his Apostles
and true Successors of the Apostles, to preach the Gospel to the whole world,
and not Lordly to reign in the Clergy. Whom Paul teaches to be as Ministers,
saying^ Let a man this wise esteem us even as the Ministers of Christ, and the
stewards of the secrets of God. 1 Cor. 4.
To preach the Gospel therefore (most gracious and prudent Lord) is the true
vocation and office of all godly Bishops, Parsons, Vicars and of other
Shepherds, and not to be Ambassadors to Princes, not to be judges to hear
matters of contention, Testamentary causes, divorces, slanders, baudery, and
such other. Your Grace has of your Lay see sufficient both in Learning and
wisdom, and of good conscience to hear, and judge such causes and variances,
remitting Bishops to attend their office and vocation by God (and not by man)
appointed. And therefore they should not exercise any other office than God
has appointed to them: for no man can serve two masters. Mat. 6.
And if Bishops and other Pastors would diligently execute their vocation and
office, much ^ewer of those matters of contention shall be in ure, and
experience either to be heard or judged. Seeing the Scriptures commands so
earnestly every man to walk as he is called. Many Christian men marvel
greatly why the Bishops desire and procure so greedily to exercise the office
pertaining to another vocation, and to leave their vocation and office
(appointed by God to them, to be exercised) not executed, nor performed and
done: Ioh. 9.
Verily because they love the glory of men, more than the glory of God. And
surely, even as Caiphas and Annas being Bishops and exercising the office of
secular and temporal Judges did judge Christ to be crucified, so our Bishops
so long as they contrary to their calling, do exercise the office of temporal
judges, so long shall they persecute Christ and his members, and study to
suppress his Word, and not to preach the same. Have not they business
sufficient wherewith to occupy them in their own office? If they would look
well thereunto, do not they see on every side detestable sin to reign
throughout all this your Realm? Detestable vices reign in this your Realm,
against the which our Bishops and other Pastors should continually cry out, as
the Prophet says; Isay 5.
Cry now as loud as thou can, leave not off, lift up thy voice like a
trumpet, and show my people their offenses, and the ^ouse of Jacob their sins.
But alas they be become both blind and dumb, as the Prophet says. Isay 66.
His watchmen are all blind, they have altogether no understanding, they are
all dumb dogs, not able to bark, they ^re s^^epy, foolish are they, and lie
snor^ing, they are shameless dogs that ^e never satisfied. The shepherds
also in like manner h^ve no u^derstanding ^ut every man turns to his own
way, every out after his own covetousness withal his power. What is the
cause that they do not execute this their office? Other beca^se they cannot, or
because they have so much worldly business, that they will not apply
themselves to perform both. Or else they be afraid to spe^ke the truth lest
they should displease men, whom Paul reproves saying: Gal. 1.
If I should please men, I should not be the servant of Christ. Also the
Prophet says, Psalm. 53.
God breaks the bones of them which study to please men^ they be confounded
because the Lord (...) them. Our Bishops love so well their great dominions^
whereby they maintain their Lordly honor, that they will ^ot disple^se men
with pre^ching the truth lest they should ^h^n loose their great po^^essions,
and consequently their Lordly glory. But surely, as long as they possess their
great Dominions, so long they will continue and maintain their pride: And so
long as they continue in pride, so long they shall not receive the holy Ghost,
which shall reach them to speak the truth. For upon whom shall my spirit rest
(says the Prophet Esaias) but upon the m^^ke and lowly, and upon him which
fears my sayings? Isay ^.
Also the Prophet says, God res^steth the proud, and unto the m^^ke and lowly
h^e giv^th ^is grace. Wherefore so long as the Bishops conti^^e in this worldly
wealth and honor, so long will they (...) their du^y and office, but rather
pers^cute the word of Go^, which declares and shows what is their office and
their duty. And so long as they do not e^ercise their off^^e and voc^^ion, but
^o pe^secu^e ^he Word, and such as sinc^^ely p^each the same so long shall
sin incr^ase. For if the eye be wicked, all the body shall be ^ull of
darkness. For even as at such time, when the Bishop of Rome was first endowed
with great possessions, a voice was heard, saying, Now venom and poison is
cast and shed forth into the Church of God. In like wise no doubt, most godly
Governor, semblable voice and saying may be verified in, and upon all the
Church of England, since your Bishops were endowed with so great possessions and
Lordly Dominions. Note this.
No doubt, gracious Lord, so long as great Lordly Dominions, worldly honors,
and wealth be annexed and knit to the vocation and offices of Bishops and other
pastors, these mischiefs and inconveniences shall ever ensue and follow.
First the most proud and ambitious, the most covetous and wicked which other by
money, friendships, or flattery can obtain the benefice, will labor with all
study and policy to get the benefice, only for the worldly honor, and not
for the zeal and love which he should have to instruct and teach the people
committed to his cure and charge. And for the Profit which belongs and
appertains to the same benefice, they will dissemble humility, and
despection, of all worldly profits and pleasures so colourably and subtly,
that it shall be very hard for your Majesty, or any other having authority to
give benefices to perceive them. And when they have obtained the benefice, then
every Christian man shall well perceive, that he has not entered in by the
door; that is, for the zeal and love to do and execute the office, but has
climed up and ascended by another way, that is, for the lucre and honor
annexed to the office. And then certainly, whosoever ascends and enters in
by another way, cannot be but a thief by day, and by night, whose study and
labor must be to steal, kill and destroy, as Christ (whose words must ever be
true) says. Ioh. 1^.
The thief comes not but to steal, to kill, and to destroy. So that so long
as so much worldly profit and honor belongs to the benefice, so long will
he that for want and lack of learning cannot do the office, and also the
most covetous and proud will labor to have the ^^fice, whereby the people
committed to his cure shall not on^^ be untaught, and not learned in Gods Word,
but also all they which can preach and teach Gods Word, and love the same, by
such a worldly wolf shall be extremely persecnted and tormented. For he
cannot but steal, kill, and destroy, and utterly abhor and hate the godly,
as Christ says, John 15.19.
If you were of the world, the world would love his own. But because you be
not of the world, but I have chosen you from the world, therefore the world
does hate you. No doubt a man shall much rather upon thorns gather grapes, and
upon brambles, and briars gather figs than of such greedy thieves to have any
Christian religion, either set forth, preached, or stablished. Wherefore (most
redoubted Prince) seeing that their great possessions, riches, wordly offices,
cures and business be the impediment, and let that they do not execute their
vocation and office, which is so godly, profitable and necessary for this your
Commonwealth; You, being our Sovereign Lord and King (whom God has called to
govern this your Realm, and to redress the enormities, and abuses of the
same) by all justice, and equity are bounden to take away from Bishops, and
other spiritual shepherds such superfluity of possessions and riches, and
other secular cures, business, and worldly offices which be the cause of much
sin in them, and no less occasion whereby they be let to execute their
office to the great loss and hindrance of much faith, virtue, and goodness,
which might be administered to your subjects through the true preaching of Gods
Word. And that done, then circumspectly to take heed that none be admitted to
be Pastors, but such as can preach and have preached sincerely Gods Word: And
all such as will not, to remove them from their cures. This godly order
observed in the election of spiritual Pastors, and the pestilent poison
removed, and taken away from their vocation; faith shall increase, and sin
shall decrease, true obedience shall be observed, with all humility to your
Majesty, and to the higher powers by your grace appointed in office: civil
quietness, rest, and peace shall be established. God shall be feared,
honored, and loved, which is the effect of all Christian living.

O Lord, save our most Sovereign Lord King Henry the eight, and grant that he
may once thoroughly feel and perceive what miserable calamity sorrow and
wretchedness we suffer now in these days abroad in the Country by these
unlearned, Popish, and most cruel tyrants, even the very enemies of Christ's
Cross, whose pain shall be without end, when we shall live in joy for ever:
Grant yet once again, I say, good Lord, and most merciful Father, through thy
Son Jesus Christ, that when his Grace shall know and perceive (by thy gift
and goodness) their most detestable ways in misusing thy heritage, that he
will earnestly go about to see a redress among them, and to the penitent and
contrite in heart, to show his accustomed goodness, and to the other his
justice according to Saint Paul's Doctrine, and his Graces Laws. And most dread
Sovereign (with all humility, and humbleness of heart) I beseech your grace
(according to your accustomed goodness) to take this my rude Supplication to
the best as a fruit of my obedience, wherein I have not dissembled, but have
opened fully unto your Grace the ground and very bottom of my heart, not of
any grudge, evil will or malice that I bear to any spiritual Shepherd (God
I take to record) but only for the glory of God, the honor of your Grace, and
the wealth and profit of your most natural and loving subjects. Thus this
namelesse Supplicant.

Our learned Martyr John Lambert.
John Lambert, alias, Nicholson, Anno 1538. in his answer to his 9. and 22.
Articles, thus determins of the parity and identity of Bishops and Ministers.
As touching Priesthood in the Primitive Church, Fox Acts and Monument, old
edition. p. 541. 553.
when virtue bare (as ancient Doctors do deem, and Scripture in mine opinion
records the same) most room, there were no more officers in the Church of
God than Bishops and Deacons: that is to say, Ministers, as witnesses, besides
Scripture, full apertly Jerome in his Commentaries upon the Epistles of Paul,
whereas he says, That those whom we call Priests, The order and state of
Priests
were all one and none other but Bishops, and the Bishops none other but
Priests; men ancient both in age and learning so near as could be chosen.
Neither were they instituted and chosen as they be now adays, with small
regard of a Bishop, or his officer only, opposing them if they can construe a
Collect; but they were chosen not only by the Bishop, but also with the
consent of the people among whom they should have their living, as shows
Saint Cyprian. And the people (as he says) ought to have power to choose
Priests, that be men of good learning, of good and honest report. Election of
Ministers in the old time, not without the assent of the people.
But, alack for pity, such elections are now banished, and new fashions
brought in; which if we should confer with the form of the election showed
of Christ by his Apostle Paul, we should find no small diversity, but all
turned upside down.

In the 2^. where you demand, Whether I believe that it is lawful for all
Priests freely to preach the Word of God or no: and that in all places, at all
seasons, and to all persons to whom they shall please, although they be not
sent? I say, that Priests are called in Scripture by two distinct words, that
is to wit, Presbyteri and Sacerdotes. The first is to say, ancient men, Seniors
and Elders: and by that word or vocable are the secular Judges, or such like
head officers sometimes also signified; as we read in Daniel, of these that
defamed and wrongfully accused Susanna; but this is seldom, and nothing so
customeablely, as those be called Presbyteri, which are set to be Prelates in
the Church, to guide the same by the word of God and his blessed Doctrine, that
is the rod of direction, and the foundation of Christ's faith. And Priests thus
called Presbyteri in the Primitive Church (what time we^e but few traditions
and ordinances to let us from the straight trade or institution made by Christ,
and his Apostles) WERE THE SAME AND NONE OTHER BUT BISHOPS, as I have showed
you in the first part of mine answer, by authority of Saint Hierome, and Paul
records the same right evidently, and Tit. 1. in this form. I left thee
Titus (said blessed Paul) behind me in Crete, that thou should correct, or
set in a due order such things as lack, or be not else perfectly framed, and
that thou should set Priests in every Town, like as I did appoint thee,
such as are without reproach or blameless, the husband of one wife, having
faithful children, not subject to the vice of riot, or that he be not unruly:
for so ought a Bishop to be, etc. These are not my words, but of Saint Paul in
the Epistle to Titus; where you may see, that a Priest called Presbyter, should
be that same that a Bishop, whom he requires a little after, to be able by
wholesome Doctrine of Gods Scripture to exhort the good to follow the same
doctrine; and those that shall speak against it, to reprove them thereby. And
mark you how he would have a Bishop, otherwise called an ancient man, and a
Priest, to make exhortation by holy Scripture, and thereby to reprove them that
shall speak against the truth, and not to condemn them by might or authority
only, or else by traditions of men made in general Councels. And as many as
are these wise Priests which are called commonly Presbyteri, otherwise Bishops,
such as in the Church are set to take cure of souls, and to be spiritual
Pastors, ought to Preach freely the Word of God, in all places and times
convenient, and to whomsoever it shall please them, if they suppose, and see
that their preaching should edify and profit. And whereas you add this
particle, though they were not sent. I say, that all such are chosen to be
Preachers, and therefore sent, for of this speaks S. Gregory in his
Pastorals, in this wise^ Praedicationis, quippe officium suscepit, quisquis ad
sacerdotium accedit, etc. So he, who much condemned Ex Officio Oaths and
proceedings; the Canon Law; and inequality of Bishops and Ministers, as
contrary to Christ's institution, who made all his Apostles of equal authority,
in his answers to the 29.30.41. and 43. Articles, too large and too common to
transcribe.

The Image of a very Christian Bishop, etc.
The book entitled: The Image of a very Christian Bishop, and of a counterfeit
Bishop, (written and printed cum privilegio regali, in Henry the eight his
reign, though by the Bishops practice called in by this See Fox Acts and
monuments. old edition, p. 574.
Kings injunctions, An. 1539. with sundry other orthodoxe books,) determins
thus both of the Bishops callings, and practices in those times. The book
being very rare, I shall transcribe more of it than otherwise I would do.

The preachers ought much rather to rebuke the spiritual heads, than the
temporal, for diverse just causes
Over and besides this, the Ministers of the Word of God are principally bound
hereunto, that they shall more sharply rebuke the Bishops and the Primates of
the Church, than the worldly Princes and Rulers, and that for many causes;
first, because that Ecclesiastical highness and dignity, as it is now, is not
of God; for God does not acknowledge, not elect this disguised, and painted
deceitful people, and these childish, and in a manner counterfeit, and
Nicholaicall Bishops, forasmuch as they do neither teach, no^ yet do execute
any point belonging to the office of a Bishop. Secondly, Nicholaicall Bishops,
I wene he means the Bishops made of children at Saint Nicholas time.
these shadows of Bishops have not been constituted by men, but they have
exalted their own selves, and they have catched unto themselves Empire,
Dominion, and Lordships, against both God and men, against reason, common sense
or judgment; after the nature and property of Tyrants, which do rule only by
the wrath, and great indignation of God. The Temporal, or Worldly Governors,
and Officers are constituted by the gracious favor, and merciful ordinance of
God, to the chastisement, and punishment of evil men, and to the protection,
defense, and maintenance of good men. Tyrants. Temporal Princes and Governors.
Besides this, the worldly Governors, although they do injury and wrong never
so much, and do unjustly and wickedly, Romans 13.
yet for all that, they do but only hurt the temporal goods, and the body.
But these great estates, and Prelates of the Church, if they be not good and
virtuous, and do not promote, and ^e^ forwards the course of the word of God
unfainedly, and with their hearts, they are mere wolves, and most cruel
murderers of souls. And it is much like in evil and wicked Bishops as if
Satan having a Miter on his head, and rings on his fingers, did ^i^ in a chair
and did rule the people. Wherefore even the Bishops also which do not teach
the pure Word of God, are no less to be eschewed than the Devil himself. For
wheresoever the Word of God is not, The Word of God.
there without doubt is nothing else but humane error, mere doctrine of
Devils, and butchery and slaughter of souls; for the consciences or souls
without the Word of God can neither live no^ be delivered from the Devil.

But here I know well enough they will object and say; Object.
that it is jeopardy, lest sedition might be raised up against those Bishops
and Prelates of the Church.

Lo I make answer, Answ.
Shall the Word of God (I beseech you) for this your fained objection be
neglected, and shall therefore the whole people perish? And is it (I pray you)
right and convenient, that all souls should perpetually perish and be slain,
Note this.
that the temporal and most vain pomp of such men might be preserved and
maintained, and might endure and continue in her peace and quietness? Nay, it
were better (for spiritual harms are most to be weighed) that six hundred
times all the Bishops should perish for ever in their pride and dignity, and
that all the Churches collegiate, and al Monasteries were plucked up by the
roots, were overthrown and utterly destroyed, (so it were done by the
authority of the higher powers) th^n that one soul should perish: Because I
will not in the mean season say, that infinite souls; yea, that all souls
shall perish for any thing that such as they do. I pray you tell me, what
profit comes of many of the Bishops that now are, or wherefore serve they,
but only to live in voluptuousness and pleasures, and to play the rioters and
wantons of other men's labor and sweat, and in the mean season with much
grievo^s threatenings, and with dreadful fears to condemn, to hiss out, to
cast out and to war against the Word of God? Good men, they take exceeding
great thought and care for themselves, The profit that comes of our Bishops.
and with mavelous great unquietness of mind, fear and dread seditions in
the temporal commonwealth; but as for the death of souls, being thereof all
careless and without any manner of fea^e, or unquietness of mind, they do
neglect and pass nothing upon it, I beseech thee good Reader, are not these
goodly, wise and exceeding bold and manly heardsmen of the Church? If they did
receive the Word of God and of truth, and did principally search for the life
and safeguard of souls, then the God^ (as the Apostle says) of patience and
of Comfort and hope would be with them, 2 Cor. 1.
that they should not need to fear any seditions or risings of the people,
which is but their crafty cloaked excuse to blind the eyes of the Princes;
Psalm. 57. Deaf Serpents.
But in as much as they like deaf Serpents stopping their ears will not hear
the Word of God, but (such is their fury and madness) do rage against it with
excommunications, cursings, imprisonments, with the sword, and finally with
fire; I beseech you what other thing do they, as concerning their part, with
this their extreme woodnesse, then (which God defend) even willingly provoke
that there should rise up a very great sedition, and that some certain tempest
and storm should violently and suddenly come upon them which should rid them
at once out of the world: And surely if any such thing did chance unto them,
yet were they naught else but to be laughed and scorned, as Wisdom says in
Proverbs 1. Because I have called and you have refused to come, I have
stretched forth my hand and there was none of you that would look to me, and
you have despised all my counsel, and have set at naught my rebukings, I also
will laugh in your destruction, and I will mock and scorn when that thing
which you did fear shall be chanced and come unto you.

They that resist the Word of God be sedi^ious persons.
The Word of God does not stir or raise up seditions and strifes, but the
stubborn and obstinate disobedience of them which do rage against it, is the
cause that trouble and sedition is stirred up among the people, and that then
by such seditions that thing should happen unto them which they had deserved
through their own unbeleefe and frowardness and wicked blindness; for
whosoever receives the Word of God, that man raises up no manner of seditions
at all, albeit that he does no longer fear those vain ^ugges, neither does
worship those Episcopal Puppets, now since that he does know the Word of God,
and because that men do not fear and reverence their vain imaginations, as
heretofore they have done, that same is the thing (if I be not beguiled) which
they do call seditions; What the Bishops call ^edition.
and this is the thing that those persons do so greatly fear, which have
hitherto suffered themselves to be worshipped and feared like Gods, as though
they had been true Bishops or true Hear^smen of the Church. After which he
adds; S. Pe^er says of these, The Lord knows how to keep the unrighteous
persons unto to the day of judgment for to be punished; Namely, such as
following the flesh, do walk in the concupiscence and lust of uncleanness,
and do despise the Governors, and Rulers; being presump^uous, stubborn, and
which do no^ fear to raise and speak evil words on them which are in high
authority. Our delicate Bishops do ^ot believe that this was spoken of them.
But I beseech thee good Read^r mark here, how well the words of Peter do
agree with Paul, when he describes their filthy and unclean life: For where
he says presumptious, stubborn; there are scantly any men to whom those words
do sooner agree. For it is they which of all men do most set by themselves,
insomuch that they do despise all worldly Rulers and Officers, and whatsoever
other person is of high dignity and authority in the world in comparison of
themselves, and do also rail upon them and speak opprobrious words against
them: For the Pope has many years ago taken this monstrous tyranny unto
himself, The tyranny of the Pope.
that he has not been afraid to tread Kings and Princes under his feet, to
depose them, to excommunicate them, to curse them unto the 4.5. and 6.
Generation, and after their own pleasure to exercise all things which any
manner of way whatsoever it may belong and help unto extreme and wonderful
tyranny, none otherwise than if the Princes and Governors were Swine or else
Dogs, notwithstanding that the Scripture wills all men, to ^e subject and
obedient unto the Princes and Governors of the public peace and tranquillity
of this life^ Namely, forasmuch a^ they (...) and ordained to serve the divine
Ordinance as Ministers of the sword: And yet nevertheless there are found some
Kings and Princes so faint-hearted, and of so little manfulnesse, and courage,
that they do fear these harmless thunders, and vain^ curs^^g, and do
humbly beseech and obtain the ex^reame and ^^termost foolishness and
insen^ibility, that they may be blessed again (for so they call it) of the
Pope I wo^ not with what charms or conjurations and words appointed for the
same purpose only, that is to wit, to the end that that cruel p^^sumption,
and that wonderful tyranny of his (a^ though he were not m^d enough of his
own Swing) might by the reason hereof the sooner gather power and strength,
and with those most vain decei^es of cursings might deceive all the whole
world.

Besides this, the Bishops d^e stoutly and man^^lly help the Pope, and so all
the great L^rds belonging to the Pope, and they be in very deed the dispisers
of all Rulers and Potestates which will in no wise be subject to any manner of
high power, neither in body nor in goods, but only they being presumptuous and
stubborn and more than Wood do on every side make business, and rage to
excommunicate and curse all Kings and Princes and others which are in
authority. Tell me I beseech you, has not our Peter here largely and plainly
touched our most delicate and tender Bishops? I pray you of what other persons
may these words be understood, that they are not subject nor obedient unto the
Rulers, that they speak evil of Kings and Princes; briefly, that being
presumptuous and stubborn they do fear no man? The sloathfulnesse and
reachlesnesse of Bishops.
Is it not known openly to the world who they be that commit these lewd
deeds? Why then should I be afraid to touch and rebuke these colored and
painted Bishops, which by the tyranny of the Pope, by the favors of men, and
by holy gold have invaded Bishoprics, without the Commandment either of God
or men? But for as much as these delicate and tender Bishops have foreheads of
Iron, and necks of brass, as it is said in the Prophets, and will not fear,
they cannot be persuaded, and they run forth on according to their own
madness, their own course, and their own swing; and whereas they ought to
spend their blood and their life (I mean not in any worldly fight) for the
maintenance of the Word of God against the doctrines of men; They sleep all
careless, and give their minds altogether to pleasures and to fare well, and
the souls of which they boast themselves to be the Pastors and feeders, they
do most sloathfully neglect, and nothing care for. But such is their
negligence: they do only think and study how they may bring in the dreadful
wrath of God upon men, and draw souls unto the deep pit of hell, and that
they may at the last carry the Consciences of men clean overthwart from the
Word of God into lies and devilish Errors, and the doctrines of men;
wherefore we ought here so much the more diligently to take good heed and to
look well about, that we may show and utter unto the world these so cruel and
so bloody wolves, which do lie hid under forked Miters, set with pearls and
precious ^tones: I do therefore exhort all Christian men in our Lord, that
they will here con^ider and ponder the wrath of God. And therefore likewise as
you would do with a visible Idol, even so do now with the Bulls of these
Romish Balaam, the tormentor and slayer o^ souls. Consider, how pleasant a
thing you shall do unto God, if you do break and dash in pieces (with the
Word of God, and not with the sword) these Idols, and do sanctify his
glorious name, and do deliver it from the filthy abomination of Idolatry.
After which he adds, That a Bishop ought to abhor and to be far a way from
filthy Lucre, but the Bishop of Rome and his Clients, and other Bishops of
their complexion, have infinite crafts, and most shameful means of getting
money. And here it is not unknown to me what they do object. Object^


I^ i^ not enough, not sufficient for a Prince (say they) to have meat,
drink, and clothing, except he have also sufficiently whereof he may keep
and maintain a guard, or band of men, according to the condition and estate of
a Prince?

What Princes do in this place object and allege for themselves of the
Princely state, Answ.
and of Princes Courts advise them, the Apostle speaks not of Princes, but of
Bishops, As for these Princely Bishops and Bishoply Princes he utterly knows
nothing of, which do beguile the world with the name of Bishop, and with the
most vain colors of Ceremonies and gloves and Miters. But therefore Paul and
the Spirit of God which spoke in him, shall not change their words, neither
attemper themselves un^o these Princes, but these Princelike Bishops shall be
feign to attemper and apply themselves in their living according to the mind
of S. Paul, and his word^^ or else they shall not be Bishops, nor Pastors, but
mere puppets and v^surs. I cannot here refrain (although I list not now
greatly to bourd in the rehearsal of these things) but I must rehearse a
pleasant and merry History. It happened upon a time that a certain Princely
Bishop, (of Colen in Germany, An History (...) Narration.
) did ride with a Royal Pomp and goodly company of horsemen (as commonly such
Bishops are wont to show themselves set forth gayly and gorgeously, Fulg^sus
Collect. lib. ^.
even above any worldly or temporal Princes) through the fields that lay near
unto a certain Village, whom when a certain shepherd had happily espied, as he
rode over the fields, he left his flock, and did run unto him, and staring and
gazing upon him, as it had been one amazed, he marvelled greatly at the
riches, pomp, and gorgeousness which he saw about him. The Bishop seeing him
so gazing, said unto him; What do thou see here, that thou do marvel so
greatly? Then he, as he was an homely rusticall fellow, made to him this plain
answer. I mervaile (said he) whether The Patron of Col^n.
S. Martin did use this same Pomp or like gorgeousness and superfluity. To
whom the Bishop said, Forsooth, thou art a stark fool, and take thy mark
amiss, for S. Martin was scarcely one of the vile and rascal people: but I am
also a Prince of high and Noble birth. Then said the shepherd again, I
beseech you my Lord, will you give me leave to speak a word? yea marry said
the Bishop^ I give thee good leave, demand what thou will. Then said the
Shepherd, what if the Devil should take and bear away the Prince shall there
remain any thing of the Bishop? At these words that good Princely Bishop being
confounded and ashamed, depar^ed from the man, and rode his way. So the Apostle
Paul in comparison of those Dukes and Nimrods, was a plain simple craftsman,
living by the work of his own hands. And therefore he went sometime on his
feet and preached the Gospel all abroad, he could play the Apostle; but such
a poor and lewd person as he was, could never have played the royal and
Princely Bishop after this fashion. Let no man think it is to be said or done
against the heads and governors of Christ's Church: whatsoever is said or done
against these sloathfull, idle and sluggish beasts, given all to the belly. For
they are not Bishops, but plain Idols and dumb Images, idle Puppets, visurs,
blocks, shadows, disguised game players, which do not so much as know what
this word Episcopus, that is to say, Bishop does signify: so far off they be
from knowing what is the Office or duty of a Bishop. Wilt thou^ that I tell
thee at one word what they are? A true Character of Lordly Prel^t^^.
Wolves they are, tyrants, traitors, manquellers, monsters of the world,
burdens of the earth, the Apostles of Antichrist, graven and made to corrupt
and destroy the Gospel. And to utter at once what I think. Lo I will here
play the Bedell or common Crier. Be it known to all men, that the Bishops of
Rome with their clients Bishops, which do now exercise tyranny upon so many
Cities in most ample and large dominion, are not Bishops by the Ordination of
God, but by Error and by ^he seduction of the Devil, and by the traditions of
men, wherefore without doubt they are the messengers and Vicars of Satan. If I
do not show and prove this, by so evident testimonies, that mine enemies shall
be constrained to confess this verity, and that even themselves (so that they
do meanly repent and wax wise) cannot deny it, then let them be Bishops,
then let me be thought to do injury unto them. First, Paul writes unto Titus
1.5.7.
Titus, That he should constitute and ordain Presbyters in every Town. Here I
suppose that no man can deny, that all one thing is signified by this word
Preshyter, Presbyter.
and by this word Episcopus, in Saint Paul's writings; for as much as he does
bid Titus, that he should in every City constitute Presbyters. And because a
Bishop ought to be unreproveable, therefore he calls him Presbyterum. It is
evident therefore what Paul does signify and mean by this word Episcopus,
Episcopus.
Bishop; that is to say, A man excellently good and virtuous, of ripe age,
which also has a chaste wife and children, obedient in the fear of the Lord.
And the Apostle will that he should have the oversight and government of the
Congregation, in the Ministry of the Word and the Administration of the
Sacraments. All men whosoever they be, which by all honest and lawful means,
do spend and bestow their goods, honor, blood and life, to the end that these
Bishoprics so pompous and Courtly, so far unlike and contrary to all the
office and duty of an Apostle, namely to the ministration of the Word, and that
all this devilish Kingdom of the Bishop of Rome may be overthrown and
destroyed, or if they cannot in very deed destroy it^ do cry against it, do
dispraise and condemn it, and do avoyde it as abhomination^ all those persons
that so do, are the sons of God, and true Christian men fighting and helping
the Faith of the Gospel in spiritual barraile against the gates of Hell;
Contrariwise whosoever do favor the Kingdom of the Popes Bishops so wicked,
and that so tyrannous and devilish cruelty, and do willingly and gladly
submit themselves and obey unto it, those persons are the ministers of the
Devil, fighting as enemies against the Words, the Laws, and Ordinances of
God. This sentence of mine, nay rather of Gods Judgment, I prove with strong
effectual arguments in this wise. The Apostle Paul commands Titus, Titu^
1.^.^^
That he should Ordain and constitute a Bishop in every City, such one as was
the husband of one wife, a man virtuous and unreproveable, etc. This is the
Word, this is the will and sentence of God. Against this said Will of God these
men do now strive, which have taken quite away all true Bishops ou^ of all
Cities, and instead of true Bishops have constituted shops or worke-houses of
most cold Ceremonies, Monasteries and Churches Collegiate, and have brought in
themselves in their steed, that by this means they might be made Bishops or
Overseers of many Cities, and also of many Provinces. Now the sentence of
Paul, or rather the Words of the Holy Ghost does continue firm, stable, and
not able to be moved or stirred of the gates of hell, and does stand as stiff
as a brazen wall, which says plainly and evidently, That in every City there
ought to be constituted and Ordained one Bishop, and these then shall be every
one of them of equal power with the other. For Paul speaks plainly of every
City, and he gives to every Bishop full power and authority in his own City.
Go to therforenow ye worldly Bishops. Why do ye not here rise? Why do ye not
boldly and manfully resist? Why do ye not break forth all of you together? Here
you have to do not with me, but with the Apostle Paul. Here you resist (that I
may say with the holy Martyr Stephen) not me, Acts 7.
but the Holy Ghost, which likewise again of his part does mightily resist
you. ^oe to then, what will you say here, I beseech you? Will you all hold your
peace, and say nothing at all? Lo your sentence is given and pronounced
against you, you have the matter judged, that is to wit, that unto all
Christian men it belongs of their part (with the Word of God) again to
destroy, to pluck up by the roots, and utterly to extinct both you and your
Kingdom, which you do tyrannously exercise, to extinct and destroy the
Gospel; you have heard now that they be in the indignation of God, whosoever
favors you, and on the otherside that they are in the favor of God,
whosoever overthrows and destroys you. But I will not in any wise these
words which I do speak of the destruction and utter subversion of the
Kingdom of false Bishops, so to be understood or taken, as though it ought to
be done with the hand, or with sword, or with violence, or bodily invasion of
them, for with this destruction of the men, we shall be nothing further in this
so great a matter, Ye se^ here that the Preachers of the Gospel t^ach no
sedition, shedding of blood, or fighting with the hand.
that is to wit, Gods cause or business: But as Daniel prophesied in the 8.
chapter, The Kingdom of Antichrist is to be broken all to pieces without any
hand of man. Saint Peter's words, you are a regal Priesthood and a Priestly
Kingdom, are meant of Spiritual Bishops, who are all the Preachers of the
Word of God in Cities, Towns, and Villages, although they do neither buy Pall
nor Gown, nor yet any other Garment of those bawdes the Romanists: the
Corporal Bishops are you which bearing ^orked Miters on your heads under the
apparel of Aaron, do in very deed play the very Tyrants, and are fellows
unto Nero and Caligula, riding upon fat and well fed Pal^ries and sleeke Mules,
and afterward with your rings only, and your Gloves, and your silver
Sheephooke (if God be pleased) you do play the Bishops. And here again I
guess what they will object. Object.
For all that (say they) oftentimes many Saints have been Bishops, not only
of one City, but of many Cities. I make answer, Answ.
As many as have been ^oly Bishops in very deed, and called Pastors by the
calling of God, all those for the most part were the Bishops of one City alone,
as Cyprian, Note this.
Hilary, Ambrose, Augustine, Ireneus, and these observed the tradition of the
Apostles; it is found in deed in His^oriographers, that there have been
certain (such was holy Boniface, Boniface.
and such also Tite Tit^.
unto Paul) which did after their own judgment constitute other Bishops in the
Cities, as Titus did, but yet were they not therefore the Bishops of many
Cities; Note this.
and albeit that such manner of example could be showed of the Saints, The
Examples of holy men may not be perjudiciall to Gods holy Word.
shall the examples of holy men be prejudicial to the Word of God? Is not God
greater than all Saints? how oftentimes do we find that holy men have sinned
and erred? For all men may err.
God saved Daniel in a Dungeon of Lions, God saved Daniel in the Dungeon of
Lions. Dan. 6. Dan. 3.
and he saved Ananias, Azarias and Misael in the flaming Furnance of Babylon.
Is the hand or power of God now shortened and minished? Is it any doubt but that
be might preserve and keep his elect and chosen persons, if it should happen
them by any means to be seduced, and led out of the right way (as Christ
prophesied) even in the midst of men's Ordinations and traditions, and of the
errors of the Devil? Note.
we ought not to put confidence in any ensample, deed, or word of Saints, but
our Consciences ought to lean, and to be grounded only upon the Word of God,
which only is he (as Paul says) that cannot lie. But let us furthermore hear
Paul, what he says of this Ordinance of God, for in this wise Luke writes of
him in the 20. Chap. of the Acts, And sending messengers from Miletum to
Ephesus, he sent for Priests of the Church, which when they were come to him,
he said unto them, Take heed to your selves and to all the flock in which the
holy Ghost has set or ordained you Bishops to govern the Church of God, which
he has purchased and gotten with his own blood. Go to now, is here any new
thing? Is Paul a fool, and does he not know what he does? Ephesus was but one
City alone, and Paul calls openly all the Priests or Elders by one common
name Episcopos, Bishops. But peradventure Paul had not read those books, and
those Apologies wretchedly patched together of Papists, nor the holy Decretals.
For how would he have bin bold else to make many Bishops overseers to one City,
and to call all the Priests of one City Bishops, All the Priests of one City be
called of Paul, Bishops.
in as much as they were not all Princes, neither kept a guard of men, and
goodly Palfries, but were certain rascal persons, and of the most abject and
vile sort of men, after the worldly estimation. For Paul peradventure was
ignorant of that, which is grown in use now in our time, that no man can be a
great Bishop in very deed, unless he do (as the Poet says) keep an hundred
Horses in goodly stables, unless he have a gorgeous house full of royal
Pomp, unless he have many royal titles of Lordships. For this alone is
sufficient now in our time, to that that Knights and Princes (be they never so
much unlearned and foolish, yea and though their minds other whiles do stand
nothing toward it) may by the commendations of their parents and kinsfolks,
and otherwhiles by gifts and rewards be suddenly made Bishops. But in good
sadness thou see plainly that the Apostle Paul does call these only
Bishops, which do Preach the Gospel unto the people, and do minister unto
them the Sacraments, as now in our time be the Parish Priests and the
Preachers. All true Preachers been Bi^hops.
Wherefore I do not doubt but these, although they do Preach the Gospel, but
to very little Villages and Granges, and if they be the faithful and true
ministers of the Word: I do not doubt (I say) that they have by good right the
Title and name of a Bishop. Contrariwise, those valiant horsemen and tyrannous
Bishops have no point of the Office of a Bishop, saving only those bare goodly
titles, and certain disguised apparel, in like manner as those Bishops which
are painted on a Wall, have indeed the shape and likeness of Bishops, but they
are without life and speech: For even such dead and idle stocks and blocks
are the Popes Bishops in every point: albeit that then they are evermore strong
and quick when they do exercise tyrannous cruelty against the very Pastors,
which do busily govern Cities in the ministration of the Word of God, and by
more than devilish tyranny do forbid them holy Wedlock, and to the open
slander of the Church do wink at the keeping of Whores, do blaspheme the
Gospel, do extinct the Word of God, and under the pretense and color of
virtue and godliness, do with incredible woodnesse exercise continually
extreme tyranny upon the silly poor people. By the reason whereof we do see
in the Courts and Palaces of some Bishops, likewise as in the fountain of all
vice and mischief in the Court of Rome, The Court of Rome.
not so much as one crum, not so much as the least shadow to be found of
Christian manners: we see also all the Cities of Priests, and namely those
Noble ^eates of Priests to be nothing else but schools of uncleanelinesse and
bodily plesures, Warehouses of vices, so much that in comparison of their
houses the Courts of their secular Princes may be accounted Monasteries and
holy schools of virtue and godliness, yea and Sodom and Gomorrah in
comparison of them, may seem temperate, measurable and thrifty. Note.
For out of their Courts or houses comes forth neither the Gospel, nor any
other holy Doctrine, but only Citations, Excommunications, Exactions,
Interdictions, Citations (I say) in very deed peremptory, that is to say,
slayers both of goods and of souls. For such as the Bishops are themselves,
such also is their Doctrine. Proverbs.
And though thou do never so much cloth an Ass with a Lions skin, yet he
continues still an Ass; and an Ape is still an Ape although he be clad in
purple. Besides this, S. Paul writes to the Philippians in this wise: Philippi.
Paul and Timothy the Servants of Jesus Christ, to all the Saints in Christ
Jesus which are in the City of Philippi, and to the Bishops also and the
Deacons, etc. Lo^ Philippi was but only one City, and yet S. Paul saluteth all
them that believes, together with the Bishops^ undoubtedly the Bishops whom he
means there, were the Priests, likewise as he was wont to constitute and
ordain in all the other Cities. This is now the third place of Paul, in which
we do see, what God and the holy Ghost has constituted and ordained, that is
to wit, that they only are called Bishops in very deed, and by right, which
do take and bear the charge of the people in the Administration of Gods Word,
in caring for the poor ^locke in the Administration of the Sacraments; as are
now in our days the Christian Cu^ates or Parish Priests, ^ura^es or Parish
Priests.
if they might be suffered for those Mi^red Horsemen. And that this belongs
to the Office of a Bishop, the very Word it self does very well declare; for
this Word Episcopu^^, Episcopus.
is derived of two Gre^ke words, Epi, and Scopin, which signify, to give
attendance, to Oversee, to give diligence, to play the Keeper or watchmen over
the people, in like manner as watchmen do keep watch upon the walls of a
City, or as Shepherds do keep watch upon their sheep. And Episcopos in
Greek does properly signify in English an Overseer, and in the Hebrew it
signifies a Visi^our, that is to say, one which visits men at their own
house, and does diligently enquire and search the condition of them, and the
state of their life, being readily and indifferently to help and comfort all
men. So Christ says in the nineteenth Chapter of Matthew, Because thou have
not known the time of thy visitation. That which is there called time of
Visitation, we call the time of thy Bishopric. But ou^ Papisticall Bishops
have found and devised a certain new proof and declaration of that Episcopal
Office, seemly for such as they are, that is, to set themselves a high in a
chair gilded, clad in purple, with Cushions of cloth of ^issue under their
buttockes and their el^owes, having abundance and plenty of all manner of
delights and pleasures, as much as any King can have, and in the mean season
to offer and set forth the men belonging to their governance, to be pilled,
tormented and slain of their officials, to whom they make their flocks
subjects; men for the most part wicked, ungodly, and which do think that
there is no God, Bishops Officials what kind of men.
which then may also with their Commandments at their own pleasure by
compulsion cause to appear at those their holy Consistories, persons that
dwell very far off, not without damage and hurt both in goods, and in their
souls, and may exercise and use all manner of extreme tyranny upon them. For
as much then as now it is evident and open of these three places of the
Apostle, that those Bishops, which are so far away from ministration of Gods
Word, and be negligent about their duty, are not only no true Bishops, but
rather the people of malediction before God, as the men which have settled their
minds against the Statutes and Ordinances of God to extinct the gospel, and
do exalt themselves to destroy souls. It is every Christian man's duty by all
lawful and honest means that he may, to procure that their tyrannous and
sinful traditions may once be utterly contemned and come to confusion: It
belongs (I say) to every Christian man's duty manfully, and with great
confidence, and boldness, where charity will suffer, without offending the
weak, to endeavor himself to do all things which are contrary to their
traditions, none otherwise than he would do against the Devil himself. And
also to tread under the feet and utterly despise the obedience of them by
which they desire to have their own traditions greatly regarded and observed,
the Word of God neglected and nothing set by, even as they would tread under
their feet the very Devil himself. Note.
All we therefore (if it be so that we have pity of so many souls which do
perish for ever; if we be earnestly moved and stirred with the Word of God) owe
(pray ma^ke this passage well) with our uttermost diligence to go about and
with very great contentation and strayning of our selves to labor about this,
that there may again according to the institution of the Apostle, very Bishops
and Shepherds be constituted every where in Cities, which be men pure and
virtuous, and well learned in holy Scripture, and in spiritual things, which
have chaste wives, and children obedient (as the Apostle says) in the fear of
the Lord. Wherefore seeing that the Bishops and Pastors every where in the
Cities, which are now adays, have hitherto rather obeyed the Devil than God,
Bishops were in those days deemed intolerable greevances fit to be removed.
banded themselves against the Scripture, to this wicked vow of living single,
or sole, (if there be any point of Christian breast or mind in us) we ought to
give diligence and bestow labors, for a reformation of the same to be had by
the King our only supreme head of the Church, in whom only the reformation
lies, so that once such a reformation had, the poor captive souls may
boldly, to contempt of the Devil and his Papisticall ^^aditions, revoke those
vows, as being through error made with the Devil, and with the very gates of
hell, and that they may according to the Word of God wed wives, or rather to be
willing (according to the institution of S. Paul) to be good married men in the
sight of God, then for the pleasure of those bauds the Romanists to be
Adulterers and whore-keepers. For the very time it self does now in so great
revelation of the Gospel require that once at the last the holy ordination of
the Spirit of God, which can^not be but very good, should be restored and set
up against those profane and abominable traditions of men. The Decree of the
Author.
Lo this is my decree against those proud puffed Bulls of the Devil, and of
the Devilish Romanists and their factors. Neither do they hear and obey me,
but they hear and obey God, and the Spirit of God, whosoever do hear and
obey this. And therefore I can also in very deed promise both everlasting
life, and also the favor of God to all those, whatsoever they be, that do in
faith observe and keep it. And because this shall not be judged the
ordination of Paul alone (for it is reported that the Deane and Canons of a
certain Cathedral Church, did say after a blasphemous manner and fashion,
openly to a Preacher, whom they did expulse for the Gospel sake, What of Paul,
what of Paul? The Pope has received more power of Christ than ever Paul did:
and for the pleasure of those so swee^e and gentle men, and excellently
devilish Priests, let us see what Peter and what Christ himself did say
concerning this matter. In the fifth Chapter of ^he first Epistle of Peter it
is thus written, P^esbyters.
The Priests that are among you I beseech (which am also my self a Priest, and
a record of the afflictions of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory, which
shall be showed) feed, as much as lies in you to do, the flock of Christ,
taking the charge and oversight of them not by compulsion, but willingly, not
for the desire of filthy lucre, but of a good favorable and loving mind,
neither as men exercising dominion in their inheritances, but that you may be
your selves ensamples to the flock, and when the head shepherd shall appear,
you shall receive an incorruptible crown of glory. Here thou see that Peter
even likewise as Paul did, does use these two words Presbyter and Episcopus,
both for one thing, that is to wit, that they are Episcopi, which do teach the
people, and do preach the Word of God^ and he makes them all of equal power
one with another, and he fo^biddeth them to behave themselves so, as if they
were Lo^ds or had dominions over those whom they have charge of. He calls
himself a fellow Priest, (that I may so say) by these words evidently
declaring and proving, that all Parish Priests and Bishops of Cities are of
equal power among themselves; Note.
and as touching the Authority of a Bishop, that one is nothing superior to
another, and that he himself also is fellow Priest with them, and has no more
power and authority in his own City, then have the other or every one of them
in their own Congregation^ Lo Peter makes himself equal and not superior
to the Bishops, what I beseech you will those beasts allege here against
these things, which do not cease nor only to be Lords and have dominion, but
also to exercise most cruel tyranny upon our souls and our goods; which also
do never cease with exceeding mad brawlings and suites to contend and strive
among themselves about the difference, and degrees of power and authority. And
that I may once make an end, Christ himself in the 22. chapter Luke says, The
Princes of the Paynims are Lords over them, and they which have power and
authority over them, are called beneficial and gracious; Note.
but it shall not be so among you, but he that is eldest among you, let him be
made as youngest. Hereunto hearken and give good attendance you pompous and
Lordly Bishops; Lo all the holy Christian people require of you a reason and
cause of your domination and Lordship, which you have hitherto with so many
titles, and also with so many tyrannous deeds taken, violently usurped, and
challenged unto your selves: Lo, I say, the Christian world requires a cause
of this your doing, for this you cannot deny which is so open and evident before
the eyes of all men, that your Kingdom is an outward and a worldly Kingdom,
yea and that more worldly, than the Kingdom of any worldly Prince. For you
play the Lords openly both upon the bodies, and also the minds, and that not by
the Word of God, but by exterior pomp, by exterior and worldly tyranny, as
other Princes and Rulers of the heathen people do: I say, go to therefore now
and tell me, how those Words of Christ, vos autem non sic, that is, Vos non sic.
but so shall not you do, how do they agree with that your Kingdom? Go to
now, because you shall not (as you are very slippery) slip from me, let us
ensearch and ponder well the signification of the words. What is the meaning of
these words: But you not so? for here undoubtedly is rebuked your Kingdome^ and
your condition and state, for this ought not to be such a one as it is, if it
were a Christian state. Now let it be whatsoever manner one you will, yet for
all that Christ speaking of the domination of those worldly Princes says
plainly unto you (for you will seem to be Bishops) But ye shall not do so.
Which words he largely prosecutes, and afterward proceeds thus. You do
^eede and nourish your selves most delicately and ^enderly in riot and
pleasures with the blood and sweat of poor men^ besides impoverishing and
beggering the world with your gu^^es and deceipts; you do with your
Excommunications and Interdictions vex and toss all things up and down, Not^
this old and new practice of Prelates.
afflicting and tormenting poor men both in soul, in body, and in their
goods; you do extinct and destroy the Gospel, and not only your selves do
no manner of work belonging to the Office of a Bishop, but also you will not
suffer any other men to preach the Word of God; you do pursue the Preachers
from City to City, as it was prophesied in Matthew. 24. and you do expulse them
as knaves, and vild wretches out of all your dominions, and yet in the mean
season your selves are nothing else in comparison, but vipers, whom as
unprofitable burdens of the earth the world can no longer bear nor suffer,
unless you do wax wise and amend. Wherefore here labor and apply your selves
lustily and stoutly, that you do not please the people overmuch, increase your
benefits and good deeds, give diligence lustily, that there may not need any
great business to destroy your tyranny, whiles you do shake out your own
selves, and do your own selves wilfully run forth to your own confusion and
dest^^ction^ I verily (to give you good and faithful counsel) would advertise
you, that you should purchase and get unto your selves the favor and love of
the people with mildness, with mercifulness, with softness, with patience
and Apostolical sincerity, that is to wit, with those virtues, with those holy
means, which S Paul did use; go forth and hold on as you have begun, this is
even the right and next way to undoubted destruction, whereunto you do so
greatly make haste; for even so did your Fathers the Jews, into whose
hypocrisy you are succeeded, who when they had slain the Lord and author of
life Jesus Christ, and had by degrees promulged, and published the Gospel to
be for bidden, yet could they not rest until they had provoked the Romans, and
so had sought their own undoubted mischief, which said Romans at the last
setting violently upon them, slew them, and utterly destroyed them; for how
could you better observe and fulfill that which becomes your personages to
do, than if you do go about and endeavor to prove, and show your selves the
very right and true sons and heirs of such manner of Parents; But here (I
see) they will put upon them all the whole Episcopal armor, that is to say, a
purple pall, and a forked Miter upon their heads, their gloves and their rings
with precious stones to fence both their hands withal, they s^all also have
their feet shod, not with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, but of the
sandall of vanity, and a silver Cross, hanging down to the midst of their
breast, and if I be not deceived, a Roman Pall also covering their shoulders,
and a shepherds staff to measure their pace, and so then having this armor
upon them, with a stately and solemn gate, they shall come forth, etc. Who
has commanded that Bishops should so play the gallants, and use such pomp and
gorgeousness of the Court? Christ did openly forbid them to be as the Kings
and Princes of the Gentiles, where ^ee dot^ by express and open words separate
and divide t^em from Princes of the World, and says, The Kings and R^lers of
the Gentiles are Lords over them, but you shall not do so: These words, that
Prince of Princes, and King of Kings, and that Lord of Majesty will not revoke;
he will not abolish them, nor suffer them to be thrust out of place and made
void for thy peevish excuses wherewith thou do in thy conscience coldly and
faintly comfort thy self, Why do thou not rather forsake thy Lordly Port be
it never so pleasant? if thou can not e^ecute and fulfill the offi^e of a
Bishop, why do thou for transitory and most vild honor forget thine own
health and salvation? yea moreover wittingly, and willingly do cast away
thine own soul for the most deceitful pleasure of this life? Why do thou
(I say) wittingly and wilfully perish? Even those men are scantly saved at the
last, which with courageous faith continually wrestling and fighting with their
flesh and the Devil do live in a good and a virtuous kind of life: why do
thou then hope in vain, that thou shall be saved among so many je^pardies,
among so many voluptuous plaasures? What does it profit ( says Christ
himself) if he do possess all the World, and all the Kingdoms, and do cast
away his own soul?

But whereof, or which way (will some say) should Kings, Object.
Princes, Earls, Barons, Knights, briefly all the Nobles of the world provide
for their younger children, if these Bishoprics, if those Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches were not?

And therein first we may openly see the exceedinge foolishness and blindness
of all Christendom, Answer.
which hitherto have bought commonly of the Romanists, the Benefices and
Prebends founded by themselves with the blood of their Children. Lo here I do
speak unto thee whosoever thou art, who do wittingly so cast away thy
children, If any Ploughman or Smith did wound or kill thy Son or did defile
thy daughter, or thy Sister, thou would for anger go about to do the
uttermost mischief that thou could to overthrow and destroy even whole
Cities, whole Provinces, for the revenging thereof would seem but a small
matter unto thee, thou would think in thy mind it to be so high and so
heinous an offense that was done unto thee: Note.
but I beseech thee here open the eyes of thy mind, and look whether there
can be a more sure Homicide and murderer of thy children, any more grievous
and more cruel enemy unto them than thou art thine own self, advancing and
promoting them to a Bishopric, or thrusting them down into such a Church (as
they do call it) for thou make thy son a Bishop, Note.
which state, as it is now far away from the ministration of the word and from
all godliness, thou know undoubtedly to be a devilish state, in which thy
son can in no wise be saved. Since it is so, that thou do know this, tell me
I beseech thee whether thou do not more sore rage and use more cruelty
against him than if thou cut him into gobbets and did throw his flesh unto
dogs to be devoured; if thy son through his own misunderstanding, ignorance
or error had stumbled, and fallen into such a certain kind and manner of
living, thou oughtst with all diligence, and with all thy power to labor and
go about (if there were any wisdom, or any point of a Christian mind in
thee) to rid him out of it, although thou had but only one loaf of bread to
live on thy self, whereof thou should be feign to give him the one half:
but here I beseech thee look upon thy self somewhat more near, and more
narrowly, whosoever thou art which do cast down thy children headlong into
these kinds and manners of living, and consider what manner of father thou
art, only to keep thy Dominion, and thy riches upright, and from decay, only
lest thy gold and silver should be diminished if it were divided among many
heirs: thou do thrust down, and willingly cast headlong thy Sons, and
kinsmen into the deep dungeon of hell; neither does it move or stir thee any
whit to see thine own blood supped and swallowed up in the throat of the
Devil, and perpetually to perish, so that thou be not compelled to diminish or
debate any thing of thy superfluity, or any parcel of thy pomp and royalty.
Lo this most ungracious opinion, this custom is crept in and used in many
places, that as oftentimes as any great man's Son, being meet rather for any
other thing than for a Bishopric, is chosen and ^lected Bishop, or is brought
into the Temple; then with solemn pomp, and a solemn company set in their
array, are mad cries and loud shouts, as it were in a triumph; then all the
Halls and Courts do sound and ring with the noise of trumps, with trumpets,
with ^^bre^s^ then are in every place lighted tapers and torches; then that
solemn Song, Te Dewn laudamus is thundered out, so that these triumphs do
plainly represent unto us the image of those foolish Kings of Israel which did
burn up their sons and daugh^ers for a Sacrifice in the honor of the Idol
Molo^^, and with the diverse loud sounds of trumps did bring to pass, that the
lamentable crying ou^ and wayling of them, that were in the midst of the fire,
could not be heard. The author of this book has many such like passages
against Bishops. And as for Cathedral Churches, he styles them: Stews, and
the Gates of hell, a certain unsatiable bottomless whirle poole which
swallows up the riches of Kings, of Princes, of Dukes, of Earls, of the
Common people, and of all the world. But I pass from this old Treatise.

About the same time there was a Treatise expressing the causes of the
Divisions between the Spiritualty, The causes of the Division between the
Spiritualty and the Commonalty.
and the Temporalty. Printed, Londini in aedibus Thom^ Bartheleti, prope
aquagium sitis sub intersignio Lucretiae Romanae, excus. Cum Privilegio. I
shall transcribe no passages out of this Treatise, but only the Table of the
Chapters at the end thereof, wherein the causes of the division between the
Spiritualty and the Temporalty are summarily expressed.

Chap. 1. That the Division among spiritual men themselves, has been one
cause of the Division that is now between the spiritualty and temporalty in
this Realm. Chap. 2. That the omitting of diverse good laws, with certain
defalts and disorders in men of the Church, which among others be recited, and
declared by John Gerson, have been another occasion of this division. Among
these he numbers the neglect of these two Canons. That Bishops should have
poor apparel, lodging, and table, and should not strive for transitory
things: And the Clerks shall not take upon them the acts or procurations of
spiritual men. Chap. 3. That certain Laws made by the Church, wherein it is
recited, Quod Laici sunt Clericis infesti: That is to say, That Lay men be
cruel to Clerks, has been another cause of this division. Chap. 4. That the
extreme Laws made by the Church for laying violent hands upon Clerks have
been another cause of this Division. Chap. 5. That the disordering of the
general sentence of excommunication, has been another occasion of the said
division; which (says he) will never be appe^sed, till the heads spiritual
will reform themselves, and show a fatherly affection to the people, and not
extend the sentence o^ the Church upon so light causes, and upon such
partiality, as they have done in times past. Chap. 6. That another occasion of
this division has partly risen by temporal men through disordering of their
Chaplains and Chauntry Priests. Chap. 7. That suits taken in the Spiritual
Courts (Ex officio) have been another occasion of this Division: which suits
together with Oaths Ex officio, whereby a man shall be condemned, and not know
the names of them that be causes thereof; he terms a sore law, and much
declaimes against them. Chap. 8. Though after the determination of Doctors, a
man is not an heretic, for that only that he erreth, but for that he
opinatively defends his error: and that nevertheless the spiritualty as a
common voice goes among the people, have in time past punished many for
heresy upon light causes and offenses, whereupon many people have grudged, and
that grudge has been another occasion of this Division. Chap. 9. That the
partiality that has been showed upon suits taken in the Spiritual Court by
spiritual men, has been another cause of this Division. Chap. 10. That the
extreme and covetous demeanor of some Curates with their Parishioners, has
been another cause of this Division. Chap. 11. That the granting of pardons
for money, as it were to some Charitable use, that has not after followed,
has raised another grudge among the people, which has been another occasion
of this Division. Chap. 12. That making of Laws by the Church which they had
no authority to make, has been another occasion of this Division. In which
Chapter he cites diverse Laws made by the Clergy, and executed contrary to the
Laws of the Realm, touching Tithes of wood, exemption of Clerks from secular
jurisdiction, and the like: which laws while spiritual men, stick fast to,
and stiffly maintain, temporal men by reason of common use and custom that
they have seen to the contrary, have resisted them, whereupon have risen great
strife, and variances, and expenses in the spiritual Law. Chap. 13. The lack
of good visitations has been another occasion of this Division: wherein he
shows that Bishops keep their visitations only to gain money, and
procurations, not to refrain vices. Chap. 14. That the great multitude of
Licenses, and dispensations made by the spiritualty for money, upon light
suggestions, has been another cause of this division. Chap. 15. That the
great laxenesse and worldly pleasures of religious persons, whereby the people
has been greatly offended, has been another occasion of this Division.
Chap. 16. Then for a conclusion of this Treatise, it is somewhat touched, how
good it is to have a zeal of Souls, and how perilous it is to do any thing
whereby they might be hurt: And that if zeal of Souls, pity, good doctrine,
and devout prayer were abundantly in this world, mist specially in Prelates and
spiritual Rulers, that then a new light of grace, and tractability would
shortly show and shine among the people.
The sum of the whole Treatise is to prove; that the Bishops and Prelates,
are the authors of much division, trouble and dissension both in Church and
State, and that by their Episcopal practices and unjust usurpations, laws and
proceedings.

William Wraughton, William Wraughton, alias Turne^.
who wrote about the same time, In his Rescuing of the Romish Fox, Dedicated to
King Henry the 8. writes thus: We have put down some of your orders of the
world, there remain yet two orders of the world in England: That is, the order
of pompous and Popish bishops: and Gray Friars. Which if they were put down as
well as the other put down before, I reckon that there should be no Kingdom
wherein Christ should more reign than in England. And there he proves at
large, the Canon Law to be the Popes law, and that as long as the Bishops
maintain it in England, they maintain the Pope in his sovereignty and
Legislative power in England, and that the reading of this Law makes men
papists.

Roderick^ ^ors, Rodericke^ Mors.
sometimes a Gray Friar, in his Complaint to the Parliament house of England,
about the 37. year of King Henry the eight Chap. 23, 24. writes thus of our
Prelates. No doubt one Bishop, one Deane, one College, or House of Canons,
has ever done more mischief against Gods Word, and sought more the hinderance
of the same, than ten houses of Monks, Friars, Canons, or Nuns. The Kings
Grace began well to weed the Garden of England: but yet has he lest standing
(the more pity) the most fowlest, and stinking weeds, which had most need to
be first plucked up by the roots, that is to say, the pricking thistles, and
stinging nettles; which still standing, what helps the deposing of the petty
members of the Pope, and to leave his whole body behind, which are the pompous
Bishops, Canons o^ Colleges, Deanes, and such other? Surely it helps as much
as to say, I will go kill all the Foxes in Saint John's wood, because I would
have no more Foxes breed in England Which well pondered, we may say and lie
not, that the Pope remains wholly still in England, save only that his name
is banished. For why his body (which be Bishops and other shavellings) does not
only remain, but also his tail, which be his fil^hy Traditions, wicked
Laws, and beggarly ceremonies (as Saint Paul calls them) yea and the whole
body of his pestiferous Canon Law, according to which judgment is given
throughout the Realme^ So that we be still in Eg^pt, and remain in cap^ivity,
most grievously laden by observing and walking in his most ^ilhy dross
aforesaid, which is a mistie and endless maze. And so long as ye walk in
those wicked laws of Antichrist the Pope, and maintain his Knights the
Bishops in such inordinate riches, and unlawful authority: so long say I, Note
well what ^nsueth.
ye shall never bani^^ that monstrous beast the Pope out of England^ yea and
it shall be a means, in process of time to bring us into temporal bondage
also again, to have him reign as he hat^ done, like a God, and that know our
forked caps right well, which thing makes them so boldly, and shamelesly to
right in their gods quarrel against Christ and his Word, etc. The Bishops by
their subtil^es, and most crafty wiles make the people to abhor^e the name of
the Pope of Rome for a face, and compel them to walk in all his wicked laws;
and the Word of God which we say we have received, is not, nor cannot be
suffered to be preached a^^ ^aught purely and sincerely, without mixing it with
their inv^nted traditions and service. Wherefore to open the conclusion o^ this
little lamentation: ^f ^ee will banish for ever the Antichrist, the Pope out of
this Realm; ye must fell down to the ground those rotten poasts the Bishops,
which be clouds without moysture^ and utterly abandon all and every of his
ungodly Laws, traditions and ceremonies. Now will I speak no further against
the particular Pope, for as much as every Bishop is now a Pope, and ye may
plainly see by all the premises, that the proud Prelates (the Bishops I mean)
be very Antichrists, as is their Father of Rome. So he, and much more.

Henry Stalbridg.
Henry Stalbridge, in his Exho^tatory Epistle to his deerly beloved Country of
England, against the pompous Popish Bishops thereof, as yet the true members of
their filthy Father the great Antichrist of Rome. Printed at Basil in King
Henry the eighth his days, thus seconds him. I say yet once again, and that
in the seal of the Lord, as he is my Judge, I wish (if his gracious pleasure
so were) that first the Kings Majesty, and so forth all those to whom God has
given power and authority upon earth under him, may thoroughly see and perceive^
how that no^ only the bloody Beare-Wolfe of Rome, but also the most part of
the other Bishops, and stout sturdy Canons of Cathedral Churches^ with other
petty pronlers and prestigious Priests of Baal^ his malignant members, in all
Realms of Christendom (especialle here in England) does yet roar abroad like
hungry Lyons^ fre^ like angry Bears, and bite as they dare like cruel wolves,
clustering together in corners, like a swarm of Adders in a dunghill, or most
wily subtle serpents; to uphold and preserve their filthy Father of Rome, the
head of their bawdy brood^ if it may be. No less do I judge it, than a bounden
duty of all faithful ministers to manifest their mischiefs to the universal
world^ every man according to his Talent given of God, some with pen, and some
with tongue; so bringing them out of their old estimation, lest they should
still reign in the peoples consciences to their souls destruction: An evident
example have they of Christ thus to do, which openly rebuked their filthy
forefathers, the Scribes, Lawyers, Phari^ees, Doctors, Priests, Bishops, and
Hypocrites, for making Gods commandments of no effec^^ to support their own
traditions. Mark^ 8. Luke 12. Paul also admonishes us, that after his
departure should enter in among us such ravenuing wolves as should no^ spare
the flock. These spiritual manhunters are the very offspring of Cain,
children of Caiphas^ and successors of Simon Magus, as their doctrine and
living declares, needing no f^rther probation: most cruel enemies have they
been in a lages to the verity of God, ever since the Law was first given, and
most fierce persecutours of Christ and his Church (which he there proves at
large by several examples^)^ No where could the verity be taught, but these
glorious gluttons were ever at hand to resist it. Marvel not ye Bishop^ and
Prelates, th^ugh I thus in the zeal of Helias and P^ineas stomach against
your ^^urdie storms of stubbornenesse, for never was any tyranny ministered
upon Christ^ and his mystical members, but by your procurements, and now in
our days, where are any of the Lords true Servants burned, or otherwise
murdered for true preaching, writing, glossing, or interpretting the Gospel,
but it is by your cruel calling upon etc. If you be not most wicked workers
against God and his verity, and most spiteful Traitors to the King, and his
Realm, I cannot think there be any living upon the earth. Be this only
spoken to you that maintain such mysteries of madness; never sent Christ such
bloody Apostles, nor two horned warriors, but the Devils Vicar Antichrist,
which is the deadly destroyer of faithful Believers. What Christian blood has
been shed between Empire and Empire, Kingdom and Kingdom, as between
Constantinople and Almaine, England and France, Italy and Spain ^or the
Bishops of Rome? and how many cruel watres of their Priests calling on, were
too much either to write, or to speak: Always have they been working
mischief in their idle Generation to obscure the verity of God. I say yet once
again, that it were very necessary for the Kings worthy Majesty with earnest
eyes to mark how God has graciously vouchsa^ed to deliver both him and his
people from your troublesome Termagaunt of Rome, which before made all Christian
Kings his common slaves, and to beware of you hollow hearted Traitors, his
spiritual promoters, considering that your proud predecessors have always so
wickedly used his Graces noble Progenitors, the worthy Kings of this Realm,
since the Conquest, and a^ore. Who overthrew King Herald, subduing all his land
to the Normans? Who procured the death of King William Rufus, and caused King
Stephen to be thrown in prison? Who troubled King Henry the First, and most
cruelly vexed King Henry the second? Who subdued and poisoned Kings John? Who
murdered King Edward the second, and famished King Richard the second most
unseemingly? Besides that has been wrought against the other Kings also To him
that shall read, and thoroughly mark the religious acts of Robert the
Archbishop of Canterbury of old, Egelwinus, Anselmus, Randolfe of Durham, Ralfe
of Chichester, Alexander of Lincoln, Nigelus of Ely, Roger of Salisbury,
Thomas Becket, Stephen Langhton, Walter Stapleton, Robert Baldocke, Richard
Scrope, Henry Spencer, Thomas Arundell, and a great sort more of your anointed
Antecessors, Pontificiall Prelates, mit^ed mummers, mad mastry workers, ringed
ru^^lers, rocheted rutters, shorn saucy swilbols, it will evidently appear,
that your wicked generation has done all that, and many other mischiefs more.
By these your filthy ^orefathers, and such other, has this Realm been
always in most miserable captivity, either of the Romans or Danes, Saxons or
Normans, and now last of all, under the most blasphemous Behemoth, your Romish
Pop^, the great Antichrist of Europe, and most mighty maintainer of Sodom and
Gomorrah: How unchristianly your said Predecessors have used the Rulers of all
other Christian Realms, it were too long to write. I reckon it therefore high
time for all those Christian Princes, which pretend to receive the Gospel of
salvation, and accordingly after that to live in mutual peace and
tranquillity, for ever to cast you out of their privy councels, and utterly to
seclude you from all administrations, till such time as they find you no longer
wolves, but faithful feeders; no destroyers, but gentle teachers. For as Saint
Peter does say, 1 Pet. 5. Ye ought to be no Lords over the people of your
Diocese, but examples of Christian meekness. Who sees not that in these
days your bloody Bishops of England, Italy, Cycell, France, Spain, Portugal,
Scotland, and Ireland, See the 5, and 6. part of the Hom. against wilful
rebellion. And the 2. part of the Homely on Whitsunday.
be the ground and original foundation of all controversies, schisms,
variances and wars betwixt Realm and Realm at this present etc. Consider your
beginning^ never came ye in with your Miters, Robes, and Rings by the door,
as did the poor Apostles, but by the window unrequired, like Robbers, Thieves,
and manquellers, with Simon Magus, Marcion, and Menander, never was your proud
Pontifical power of the heavenly Fathers planting, and therefore it must at
the last up by the roots, ye must in the end be destroyed without hands Dan.
8. etc. Ibid. fol. 18. and 22. to 31.
I think ^he devils in hell are not of a more perverse mind, nor seek no more
ways to the souls destruction than you. Ye play Pharaoh, Caiphas, Nero,
Trajanus, with all tyrants parts besides: Oh abominable scorners and thieves,
which practice nothing else but the utter destruction of souls. If any thing
under the Heavens has need of Reformation, let them think this to be one
which minded any godliness for never did cruel Pharaoh hold the people of
Israel in so wicked captivity, as does ^his superstitious sort idle Sodomites,
the most deerly redeemed heritage of the Lord. If they be no spiritual
thieves, soul murderers, heretics of and schismatickes^ Church-robbers,
rebels, and traitors to God, and to man, where are any to be looked for in all
the world? Another thing yet there is, which causes me sore to lament, the
inconveniences thereupon considered: And that is this, although the Scriptures,
Chronicles, Canons, Constitutions, Councels, and private hystories, with your
manifest acts in our time, Note.
does declare your Fore^athers, and you such Heretics, Thee^es, and Traitors
to the Christian Commonwealth, as has not been upon the earth, but you, yet
you are still taken into the privy councels both of Emperor and King.

But what a plague it is, or miserable yoke to that Christian Realm, whereas
ye bear the swinge, I think it truly unspeakable, though it be not seen.

O eternal Father, for thy infinite mercy sake grant thy most faithful
servant the Kings Majesty, our most worthy Sovereign Lord and Governor under
thee, clearly to cast out of his privy Coun^ell House these ^echerous Locusts
of Egypt, and daily upholders of Sodom and Gomorrah, the Popes cruel cattle,
tokened with his own proper mark, to the universal health of his people, as
thou have now constituted him an whole complete King, and the first since the
Conquest. For never shall he have of them, but deceitful workmen, and hollow
hearted Gentlemen, and not only that (good Lord) but also deprive them of
their usurped authority and power, restoring again hereunto his temporal
Majestra^es, whom their proud Pope has hitherto most tyrannously thereof
deprived. Finally, to take from them their inordinate pomp and See a
supplication to King Henry the 8. An. 1544. accordingly.
riches, and more godly to bestow them, that is to say, to the aid of his
pove^ty, as for an example the noble the noble Germans have graciously done
before him. After a far other sort defended the Apostles, the spiritual
Kingdom of Christ then they: their armor was righteousness, poverty,
patience, m^eknesse, tribulation, contempt of the world and continual
suffering of wrongs; their strong shield was faith; and their sword the Word o^
God, Ephesians. 6. Wi^h the Gospel preaching drove they down all superstitions, as
you by your Lordlinesse have raised up again in the glorious Church of
Antichrist. The Kingdom that he ^orlooke Ioh. 6. and the Lord^hip, that he
so straightly forbad you, Luke 22. have ^ou received of the devil, with that
ambitious reign of covetousness which he left behind him on the high
Mountain, Matthew. 4. What ruinous deca^es has chanced to all Christian
Region^, and their Babylonish b^ood, it we^e much to written It shall be
therefore necessary for our most wor^h^ King to look upon in time, and both to
diminish you authority and riches, lest ye hereafter put all his godly
enterp^ises in hazard. For nothing else can ye do of your spiritual nature,
but work da^ly mischief. As well may ye be spared in the Commonwealth, as
may Kites, Crows, and Buzzards, P^l^ats, Wesels, and Rats, O^ters, Wolves, and
Foxes, Bodilice, Fleas, and Fleshflies, with other devouring and noisome
verm^ne; for a^ unprofitable are ye unto it as they, and as li^^le have ye in
the word of God to uphold you in these vain offices of Papistry as they. This
uncommodious commodity has En^land had of you always, when ye have been of
the Kings privy Council, and I think has now at this present hour, that
whatsoever godly enterprise is there in doing, be ^hey never so privily
handled, yet shall the Popish Prelates of I^aly, Spain, France, Flanders, and
Scotland have sure knowledgde thereof by your secret Messengers, and you again
their crafty compassings to deface it if may be. M. Tindals practice of
Prelates accordingly.
Neither shall th^se ^ealmes con^inue long after without wa^^e, special^y if an
earnest reformation of your s^^ainefull abuses be sought there, and never shall
the original grounds of that war be known but other causes shall be laid to
^olour it with; as that the King seeks his rig^^, his Princely honor, the
maintenance of his titles, or the Realms Commonwealth, ^e^^g nothing less in
the end, but an upholding of you in your mischiefs. So long as you bear rule
in Parliament Horse, ^^e Gospel shall be kept under, and Christ persecuted in
his ^aith^ull members. So that no godly Acts shall come out from ^hen^e to the
glory o^ God, and Christian Commonwealth, but you will so sauce them with your
Romish Sorceries; that they be ready to serve your turn. Although the Kings
Majesty ha^h pe^mitted us the Scriptures, yet must the true Ministers thereof
at your most cruel appointment either suffer most tyrannous death, or else
with open mouth deny Christ's veri^y, which is worse than death Thus give ye
strength to his lawe^, and nourish up his Kingdom, whom ye say with your lips
ye have refused, your pestilent Pope of Rome. Ye play altogether Hick-s^o^ne^
under the figure of Ironia. That ye say, ye hate, ye lov^, and that ye say,
ye love, ye hate. Late all faithful men beware of such double day dreamers,
and hollow hearted Traitors, and think, whereas they bear the rule, nothing
shall come rightly forward either in faith or Commonwealth. What other works
can come from the Devils working tools than comes from the hands of his
own malignant mischief? who can deny the Bishops to be the instruments of
satan, understanding the Scriptures, and beholding their daily doings? Think
ye ^here can be a greater plague to a Christian Realm than to have such
Ghostly Fathers of the Kings Privy council? If wise men do judge it any other
than a just plague for our sins, and a yoke laid upon us for our unreverent
receiving of that heavenly treasure, the eternal Testament of Christ, to have
such hypocrites, thieves, and traitors to reign over us, truly they judge not
aright. If we would earnestly therefore repent of our former being, and
un^ainedly turn to our everliving God, as we find in the Testament, I would
not doubt it, to jeopard both my body and soul, that we should in short space
be delivered of this Popish vermin rising out of this bottomless pit; Apoc.
9. which eats up all that is green upon earth, or has taken any strength of
the living word of the Lord: for the heart of a King is always in the hands of
God, and at (...) his pleasure he may evermore turn it, Prove. 21. Take me
not here that I condemn any Bishop or Priest that is godly, doing those holy
offices that the Scripture has commanded them, as preaching the Gospel,
providing for the poor, and ministering the Sacraments right; but against the
bloody butchers, that murder up Gods People, and daily make havocke of Christ's
congregation to maintain the Jews Ceremonies, and the Pagans Superstititions
in the Christian Church. Those are not Bishops, but Bite-sheepes, Tyrants,
Tormenters, Termagaunts, and the Devils slaughter men. Christ left no such
Disciples behind him to sit with cruel Caiphas at the Sessions upon life and
death, of his innocent members, but such as in poverty preached the Gospel,
rebuking the wicked world for Idolatry, hypocri^ie, and false doctrine.
Episcopus is as much to say, as an overseer, or Superintendent, whose office
was in the Primitive Church, purely to instruct the multitude in the ways of
God, and to see that they were not beastly ignorant in the holy Scripture, as
the most part of them are now adays. Presbyter is as much to say, as a Senior
or Elder, whose office was also in godly Doctrine and examples of living to
guide the Christian Congregation, and to suffer no manner of superstition of
Jew nor Gentile to reign among them. And these two offices were alone in those
days, and commonly executed of one several person. They which were thus
appointed to these spiritual offices did Buce^us de Regn^ Christi, l. 2. c. 12.
nothing else but preach and teach the Gospel, having assistants unto them,
inferior officers called Deacons, Act. 6. 1 Cor. 1. Romans 3. No godly man can
despise these offices, neither yet condemn those that truly execute them: not
only are they worthy to have a competent living, 1 Cor. 9. but also double
honor after the doctrine of Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 5. Note. See the Supplication
to King Henry the eight. An. 1544.
But from inordinate excess of riches, ought they of all men to be sequestered,
considering that the most wicked nature of Mammon is always to corrupt, yea
the very Elect, if God were not the more merciful, Matthew. 6. which might be an
admonition to our Lordly Bishops when they be in their worldly pomp, that they
are not Gods servants believed they his sayings, as they do nothing less.

Master Fish^^ in his Supplication of Beggars, Mr FISH.
thus complains to King Henry the Eight of the inconveniency of the Prelates
greatness and sway, Fox Acts and Monum. p. 926.927.
both to himself, and his subjects, worthy his Majesty's most serious
consideration; Oh the grievous shipw^acke of the Commonwealth, which in
ancient time before the coming of these ravenous wolves, were so prosperous,
etc. What remedy? Make Laws against them? I am in doubt whether ye be able.
Are they not stronger in your own Parliament house than your self, what a
number of Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, are Lords of your Parliament? The fruits
of Prelates greatness sitting in Parliament.
Are not all the learned men of your Realm in see with them, to speak in the
Parliament house for them, against your Crown, dignity and Commonwealth of
your Realm, a few of your own learned Counsel only excepted? What Law can
be made against them that they may be availeable? Who is he (though he be
grieved never so sore) that for the murder of his ancester, ravishment of his
wife, of his daughter, robbery, trespass, maihme, debt, or any other offense,
dare lay it to their charge by way of Action? and if he do, then is he by and
by, by their Now they bring such into the High Commission, and there ruin
them, or force them to give over their actions
wiliness accused of heresy, yea they will so handle him ere he pass, that
except he will bear a faggot at their pleasure, he shall be excommunicated,
and then be all his Actions dashed. So captive are your Laws unto them, that
no man whom they list to excommunicate may be admitted to sue any action in any
of your Courts. If any man in your Sessions dare be so hardy to indite a Priest
of any such crime, he has ere the year go about such a yoke of heresy
laid in his neck, that it mak^th him wish he had not done it. Your Grace may
see what a work there is in London, how the Bishop rages for indi^ing
certain Curates of extortion, and incontinency the last year in the Ward-mote
Quest. Had not Richard Hunne Commenced action of Praemunire against a Priest,
he had yet been alive^ and no heretic a^ all, but an honest man. Note the
danger that accrews by making Clergymen chief Temporal officers.
And ^his is by reason that the chief instrument of your Law, yea the chief
of your Counsel, and he which has your sword in his hand, to whom also all
the other instruments are obedient, is always a spiritual man, which has
ever such an inordinate love unto his own kingdom, that he will maintain
that, though all the temporal Kingdoms and Commonwealths of the world should
therefore utterly be undone: After which he s^^wes the intolerable exacti^ns of
the Prelates on the people, and how much wealth and money they extort from
their post^rity.

You have heard now the opinion of our Martyrs, Prelates, and godly Writers
touching Episcopacie, Lordly Prelates, their trayterly practices, T^mporalties,
and perniciousnesse to our Church and State both before and in K. Henry the
eighth his reign, in the very in^ancie of reformation, many then desiring and
earnestly writing for their utter exterpation, as most pernicious instruments
of mischief both to King, Church and Kingdom: I shall now proceed to give you
some brief account, what has been though of these particulars by our
Writers, and Martyrs in King Edward the sixth, Queen Mary's, and Queen
Elizabeth's subsequent reigns.

MARTYN BUCER.
Learned Martyn Bucer, Professor of Divinity in the University o^ Cambridge, in
King Edward the sixth his raigne^ in his book Lib. 2. c. 1.2.12. In his
Scripoa Anglicana Basilea. 1577. p. 65.69.70.71.580.
De Regno Christi (dedicated to this King) and Devi and usu sancti Ministerii,
determines thus of Lordly Prelates, and their temporal offices: First, I doubt
not, Most noble King, that your Majesty discernes, that this reformation of
Christ's Kingdom which we require, yea which the salvation o^ us all requires,
Ab Episcopis nullo modo expectandum, is by no means to be exspected from the
Bishops, since there are so few among them (even in this Kings reign when they
were best, which is worthy noting) which do clearly know the power of this
Kingdom, and the proper offices thereof; yea, most of them by all means they
may and dare, do either oppugn it, defer or hinder it: and thereupon he
advises the King not to make use of Doctors Bishops, who had the greatest
Titles, and largest revenues in this reformation, but of other godly Ministers,
and Laymen, wherein the knowledge and zeal of God did most abound; and to
choose them for his Counselors in this great work who b^ knew the power of
Christ Kingdom, and desired with all their hearts that it might prevail and
reign first in themselves, and then in all others. And because (writes he) it
is the duty of Bishop to govern the Churches, not by their own sole pleasure,
but with ^he counsel of Presbiters, and Ministry of Deacons, there will be a
nececessity, as all the offices of Churches are now dissipated, and perverted,
to adjoyne to every one of the Bishops, though never so approved, a council of
Presbyters, and ministry of Deacons, who also ought to be most holily examined
and tried, whether they have received of the Lord, both ability and will to be
assistant to their Bishop in the administration and procuration of the
Churches: the Presbyters in council, and assistance, the Deacons in
observance, and ministration, etc. But now there are some of the Bishops, whose
service your sacred Majesty uses in the administration of the Kingdom. But
since nothing in this world is commended to the care of men by the most high;
which ought more solicitously and religiously to be looked to and managed, then
the procuration of religion, that is, of the eternal salvation o^ the elect of
God; summum est nefas, it is the highest impiety to prefer any other
Business before this care, or for any cause whatsoever to hinder them, so as
their ministeries be less ^ully adhibited to their Churches. Moses was most
amply endued with the spirit of God, and excelled with incredible wisdom, and
he altogether burned with a most ardent study of planting and preserving the
true religion; yet seeing he ought to govern the whole Commonwealth of
I^rael, he by Gods command set Aaron his brother with his sons over matters
of religion, that they might WHOLLY bestow themselves in them. The Maccabees
truly joined the Civil administration to the Ecclesiastical, but with what
success their histories testify, wherefore it is to be wished that Bishops
according to Gods Law, religionibu^ solis vacent procurandis, should only
addict themselves to matters of Religion, and lay aside all other businesses
from them, though beneficial to mankind, and leave them to those who should
wholly bestow themselves on them, being chosen thereto by God. There is no
office that requires more study and care ^han the procuration of souls. It is
the Devil then, not God that calls Bishops to be Courtiers and temporal
officers.
Satan knowing this very well, has brought to pass, that Bishops and chief
Ecclesiastical Prelates should be sent for by Kings and Emperors unto their
Courts to manage public affairs, both of war and pe^ce. Hence these
mischiefs have ensued; first, a neglect of the whole sacred ministry, the
corruption of doctrine, the destruction of discipline. After as soon as
Prelates began to usurp the place of Lords, they challenged their luxury and
pomp to themselves to which end since the wealth of Princ^s was requisite, that
which they ought to bestow out of their Ecclesiastical revenues, upon the
faithful Ministers of Churches, upon Schools, upon the poor of Christ, all
these things being taken from them by horrible sacrilege, they spent them upon
riot, and princely pomp. And when as the goods of the Church were not
sufficient to maintain this luxury and pomp, they flattered away, and begged,
and by various frauds took from Kings goodly rich po^sessions, and great
Lordships: How Prelates came by their great Lordly possessions.
by which accessions their luxury and pride was thenceforth not only fostered
and sustained, but likewise infinitely increased: which afterward so far
prevailed, that the spoils of single Churches would not suffice each of them,
but they brought the matter to this pass, that one at this day may fleece or
spoil three or four Bishoprics, Abbeys, and other Prelacies, and such a
multitude of parish Churches as is horrible to name; for they say there is one
lately dead in this Kingdom who fleaed above 20. Parishes. So Bucer, See his
Scripta Anglicana. page 254.255.259.291, 292, 293. and Comment. in Matthew. 16.
And ^he unbishoping of Timothy and Titus. p. 106, 107, 108.
who held Bishops and Ministers to be all one, and that the power of ordination
(resting originally in Christ, derivatively in the whole Church, and
ministerially only in Bishops, and Presbyters as servants to the Church)
belonged as well to Presbyters as to Bishops; with whom Peter Martyr his fellow
Regius professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford fully concur^es, in
his Commonplaces, printed at London cum privilegio: Ann. 1576. Class. 4. Loc.
1. Sect. 23. p. 849. to which I shall refer you for brevity sake.

To these I might add; The image of both Pastors, written by Huldricke
Zwinglius, Zwinglius.
translated into English by John Veron, dedicated to the Duke of Somerset, Lord
Protector, and Printed at London, Cum privilegio, An. 1550. Wherein he proves
the parity and identity of Bishops and Presbyters: condemns the Lordly and
sec^lar dominion, Wealth, Pomp, Pride, Tyranny, Nonpreach, and rare preaching
of Prelates; and manifests Lord Bishops, as then they stood (and now) to be
false Pastors, and mere papal and antichristian officers, not warranted by
Gods word; but because Zwinglius was a forraigner, I shall pass it by without
transcribing any passage thereof.

Mr. John Hooper, Bishop Hooper.
both a Bishop, and martyr of our Church, a great Fox vol. 3. page 46.137.
opposer of Ceremonies, Episcopal Rochets, and Vestments in which he would
not b^ consecrated, Upon the 8. Commandment p. 78.
writes thus of the secular employments, wealth, and calling of Bishops. For
the space of 400. years after Christ, the Bishops applied all their wit only
to their own vocation, to the glory of God, and the honor of the Realms they
dwelt in: though they had not so much upon their heads as our Bishops have, yet
had they more within their heads, as the Scripture and Histories testify. For
they applied all the wit they had unto the vocation, and ministry of the
Church, whereunto they were called. But our Bishops have so much wit that they
can rule and serve (as they say) in both States, in the Church, and also in the
Civil policy, when one of them is more then any man is able to satisfy, let
him do always his best diligence. If he be so necessary for the Court, that
in Civil causes he cannot be spared, let him use that vocation, and spare the
other: It is not possible he should do both well. See Rucerus d^ r^gn^
Christi, l. 2. c. 12.
It is a great oversight in Princes thus to charge them with two burdens: the
Primitive Church had no such Bishops as we, they had such Bishops, as did
preach many godly Sermons in less time, than our Bishops horses be a bridling.
Their house was a School, or treasure house of Gods Ministers, if it be so now
let every man judge. The Magistrates that suffer the abuse of these goods be
culpable of the ^ault; if the fourth part of the Bishopric remained to the
Bishop, it were sufficient; the third part to Schoolemasters: Note.
the second to poor, and soldiers were better bestowed; If any be offended
with me for this my saying, he loves not his own souls health nor Gods Laws,
nor man's; out of which I am always ready to prove the thing I have said to be
true. Further, I speak of love, not of hatred. And in his Apology he says,
It is both against Gods Laws and man's, that Bishops and clergy men should be
judges over any subjects within this Realm, for it is no part of their office,
they can do no more but preach Gods Word, and minister Gods Sacraments, and
excommunicate such as God^ Laws do pronounce to be excommunicated; who would
put a sword into a madmans hand? And in his exposition on Psalm. 23.1580. f. 40.
Although Bishops ( says he) in the reign of Constantine the Great obtained,
that among Bishops some should be called Archbishops, and Metropolitans, etc.
Yet this preheminencie was at the pleasure and discretion of Princes, and not
always tied to one sor^ of Prelates, as the impiety of our time believes, as
we may see in the Council of Calcedon and Afric. So that it is manifest,
that this Superior preheminency is not of Divine, but of humane right,
instituted out of civil policy. So Hooper.

The Book of ordination of Ministers, The Book of Ordination.
and Consecraation of Bishops, compiled by the Bishops in King Edwards days,
ratified by 3 Edw^ 6. c. 12.8. Eliz. c. 1.
two Acts of Parliament, and subscribed to by all our Canon. 36.
Ministers, has this notable passage, and charge against the Lordlinesse, and
secular employments of Prelates and Ministers, prescribing all Bishops, when
they ordain Ministers, Archbishops, or Bishops, to use this exhortation to
them. Have always printed in your remembrance, how great a treasure is
committed to your charge, for they be the sheep of Christ which he bought
with his death, and for whom he shed his blood^ the Church and Congregation,
whom you must serve, is his spouse and body; And if it shall chance the same
Church, or any member thereof to take any hurt or hinderance by reason of your
negligence, ye know the greatness of the fault, and also of the horrible
punishment which will ensue. Where^ore consider with your selves the end of
your Ministry toward the children of God, toward the spouse and body of
Christ; and see that you never cease your labor, your care, and diligence,
until you have done all that lies in you, according to your bounden duty to
bring all such as are or shall be committed to your charge, unto that ripeness
or perfectness of age in Christ, that there be no place left among them either
for error in religion, or for vitiousnesse of life. ( And what Prelate or
Minister has done this?) And for this self same cause, ye see how ye ought
to forsake, and se^ aside (as much as you may) all worldly cares and studies.
We have good hope, that you have well weighed, and pondered these things with
your selves long before this time, and that you have clearly determined by Gods
grace to give your selves wholly to this vocation, whereunto it has pleased
God to call you; see that (as much as lies in you) you apply your selves
who^ly to this one thing, and draw all your care and study this way, and to
this end; And that you will continually pray for the heavenly assistance of the
Holy Ghost, that by daily reading and weighing of the Scriptures, you may so
wax riper, and stronger in your Ministry. And that this your promise shall
more move you to do your d^ties, ye shall answer plainly to these things
which we in the name of the Congregation shall demand of you touching the same.

Will you give your faithful diligence always to ^inister the Doctrine and
Sacraments, The Bishop.
and the Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as this Realm
has received the same, according to the Commandments of God; so that yo^ may
teach the people committed to your cure and charge, with all diligence to
keep, and observe the same?

I will so do by the help of God. Answer.


Will you be diligent in Prayers, The Bishop.
and in reading of the holy Scriptures, and in such studies as help to the
knowledge of the same, laying aside the study of the World, and the Flesh?

I will endeavor my self so to do, Answer.
the Lord being my helper. And at the consecration of every Archbishop and
Bishop, this charge by the direction of the said book is given to him.

Be thou to thy flock a shepherd, not a wolf; feed them, but devour them
not. And it is worthy observation, that the same Chapters and Epistles are read
at the ordination of Ministers, and consecration of Bishops; which proves their
office and function both one and the same by divine institution.

The third part of the Homily, of the peril of Idolatry, ratified by the 35.
Article of our Church; subscribed unto by all our Prelates and Ministers, The
Book of Homilies.
published in King Edward ^he 6. his days, and reprinted by King James his
special command. determines thus against the Courtship, and secular employment
of Prelates. That Bishops in the Primitive Church did most diligently, and
sincerely teach and preach, for they were then preaching Bishops, and more
often seen in Pulpits than in Princes Palaces; more often occupied in his
Legacy, who said, Go ye unto the whole world and preach the Gospel unto all
men; than in Ambassages and affairs of Princes of this world. And in the 5.
and 6. part of the Homily against wilful rebellion, and the second part of the
Homily for Whitsunday, notably paints forth at large the treasons,
conspiracies, practices, and rebellions of Popes, and our Prelates against the
Emperors and our Kings in former ages, which he that will may there read at
his leisure, being too common and large to recite.

Father Latimer
M. Hugh Latimer (who gave over his Bishopric out of conscience, in K. Hen^y
the 8. his reign, and never resumed it again; skipping for joy, h^e was rid
of that heavy burden,) In his in his Sermons, f. 17, 18, etc.
Sermon of the Plough preached thus, God says by the Prophet Jeremy,
Maledictus qui facit opus Dei fraudulenter, guilefully, and deceitfully: some
books have, negligenter, negligently, or slackly. How many such Prelates, how
many such Bishops (Lord for thy mercy) are there now in England? And what shall
we in this case do? shall we company with them? O Lord, for thy mercy shall
we not company with them? O Lord, whither shall we flee from them? But cursed
be he that does the work of the Lord negligently or guilefully: A sore word
for them that are negligent in discharging their office ill; Ye that be
Prelates look well to your office: for right Prelating is busy laboring, and
not Lording, therefore preach and teach, and let your plough be doing. Ye Lords
(I say) that live like loyterers, look well to your office, the Plough is your
office and charge; if ye live idle, and loyter, you do not your duty, etc.
They have to say for themselves long customs, ceremonies, and authority,
placing in Parliament, and many things more And I fear me this Land is not
ripe to be ploughed, for as the saying is, it lacks withering. This Land
lacks withering, at least it is not for me to plough. For what shall I look
for among thorns, but pricking and scratching? What among stones, but
stumbling? Note this.
what (I had almost said) among Scorpions, but stinging? But thus much I dare
say, that since Lording, and loytering has come up, preaching has gone down,
contrary to the Apostles times; for they preached and Lorded not, and now they
Lord and preach not; for they that be Lords will ill go to the Plough, it is
no meet o^fice to them, it is not seeming for their estate: Thus came up
Lording loyterers: thus crept up unpreaching P^elates: for how many unlearned
Prelates have we now at this day? And no marvel, for if the ploughmen that
now be, were made Lords, they would clean give over ploughing, Note this wel^.
they would leave their labor and fall to Lording outright, and let the plough
stand; and then both ploughs not walking, nothing should be in the
Commonwealth but hunger: For ever since the Prelates were made Lords and
Nobles, their plough stands, there is no work done, the people starve: they
hawke, they hunt, they card, they dice, they pastime in their Prelacies with
gallant Gentlemen, with their dancing Minions, and with their fresh
companions, so that ploughing is set aside, and by their Lording, and
loytering, preaching and ploughing is clean gone. And thus if the ploughmen in
the Country were as negligent in their office, as Prelates be, we should not
long live for lack of sustenance. And as it is neces^ary to have this
ploughing for the sustenta^ion of the body, so must we have also the other for
the ^atisfaction of the soul, or else we cannot live long ghostly: for as the
body wastes and consumes away for lack of bodily meat, so does the soul
pine away for want of ghostly meat; And as diligently as the Husband man
plougheth for the sustentation of the Body, so diligently must the Prelates and
Ministers labor for the feeding of the soul: Both the Ploughs must still be
going, as most necessary for man: they have great labors and therefore they
ought to have good livings, that they may commodiously feed their flock; for
the preaching of the Word of God is called meat: Scripture calls it meat,
not strawburies that come but once a year: and tarry not long, but are soon
gone: but it is meat, it is no dainties: the people must have meat that must
be familiar, and continual and daily given unto them to feed on, etc. And
wherefore are Magistrates ordained, but that the tranquillity of the
Commonwealth may be confirmed, limiting both Ploughes? But now for the fault
of unpreaching Prelates, me thinks I could guess what might be said for
excusing of them: they are so troubled with Lordly living; they be so placed in
Palaces, couched in Courts, ruffling in their rents, dancing in their
Dominions, burdened with Embassages, pampering of their paunches like a Monk
that makes his Iubilee, mounching in their maungers, and moyling in their gay
Manors and Mansions, and so troubled with loytering in their Lordships, that
they cannot attend it: they are othe^wise occupied, some in Kings matters, some
are Ambassadors, some of the Privy Counsel, some furnish the Court, some are
Father La^ymer would not have Bishops Lords of the Parliament, or to sit
therein.
Lords of Parliament, some aree Presidents, and controllers of Mints. Well,
well, Is this their duty? is this their calling? is this a mere office for a
Priest, to be controllers of Mints? is this a meet office for a Priest that
has cure of souls? is this his charge? I would here ask a question, Who
controlleth the Devil at home at his Parish whiles he controlleth the Mint?
If the Apostles might not leave the office of preaching to be Deacons, shall
one leave it for minting? I cannot tell you; the saying is, that since Priests
have been Minters, money has been worse than it was before. And they say,
that the evilnesse of money has made all things dear. And in this behalf I
must speak to England: Hear my Country England, as Saint Paul said in 1 Cor.
6. (for Paul was no sitting Bishop, but a walking and a preaching Bishop) Is
there (says he) utterly among you, no wise man to be an arbitrator in matters
of judgment? What? not one of all that can judge between brother and brother,
but one brother goes to Law with another, and that under Heathen Iudges^
Appoint those judges that are most abject and vile in the Congregation^ Which
he speaks in rebuking them, ^or says he, ad e^ubescentiam vestram dico; I
speak it to your shame. So England I speak it to thy shame, is there never a
Nobleman to be a Lord President, but it must be a Prelate? Is there never a
wise man in the Realm to be a Controller of the Mint? I speak it to your
shame, I speak it to your shame: If there be never a wise man, make a
water-bearer, a tinker, a cobbler, a slave, a page controller of the Mint: Make
a mean Gentleman, a Groom, a Yeoman, make a poor Beggar Lord President. Thus
I speak, not that I would have it so; but to your shame. Is there never a
Gentleman meet nor able to be Lord President? For why are no^ the Noble men,
and young Gentlemen of England so brought up in the knowledge of God, and in
learning, that they be able to execute offices in the Commonwealth? the King
has a great many Wards, Note this.
and I hear there is a Court of Wards; Why is there not a School of Wards, as
well as there is a Court for their Lands? Why are they not set to the Schools
where they may learn? or why are they not sent to Universities, that they may
be able to serve the King when they come to age? The only cause why Noble men
be not made Lord Presidents is, because they have not been brought up in
learning, yet there be already Noblemen enough, though not so many as I could
wish, able to be Lord Presidents; and wise men enough for the Mint: and as
unmeet a thing it is for Bishops to be Lord Presidents, or Priests to be
minters, as it was for the Corinthians to plead matters of variance before
hea^hen Judges: It is also a slander to the Noblemen, as though they lacked
wisdom, and learning to be able for such offices: A prelate has a charge and
cure otherwise, and therefore he cannot discharge his duty^ and be a Lord
President too, for a Presidentship requires a whole man, and a Bishop cannot
be two men; A Bishoop has his office; a flock to teach, to look unto, and
therefore he cannot meddle with another office which requires an whole man^
he should therefore give it over to whom it is meet, and labor in his own
business, as Paul writes to the Thessalonians, Let every man do his own
business, and follow his calling: Let the Priest preach, and the Noblemen
handle Temporal matters. Well, I would all men would look to their duty as
God has called them, and then we should have a flourishing Christian
Commonweal, etc. You may read all the Sermon to this purpose. In the close
whereof he proves the devil to be the best Bishop in England, because he
always follows his plough night and day, is never a Non-resident: and
manifests our Bishops, even in King Edward^ days when they were best, to be as
bad or worse than the Devil, and charge the King in many of his Sermons to
out with them, and make them all Quondam^.

In his fifth Sermon before King Edward, f. 61, 62. he thus prosecutes the same
argument. Though, I say, that I would wish more Lord Presidents, I mean not,
that I would have Prelates Lord Presidents, no^ that Lord Bishops should be
Lord Presidents. As touching that, I said my mind and cons^ience the last
year. And although it is said, Praesint, it is not meant that they should be
Lord Presidents, the office of a President^hip is a Civil office, and it
cannot be that one man shall discharge both well, etc. In his Sermon at
Stanford. p. 96. Christ was not the Emperors Treasurer, therefore he meddled
not with that point, but left it to the Treasurer to define and determine. He
went about another vocation to preach unto the people their duty, and to obey
their Princes, Kings, Emperors, and Magistrates, and to bid them give that the
King requires of them, not to appoint a King, what he shall require of them.
It is meet for every man to keep his own vocation, and diligently walk in
it, and with faithfulness to study to be occupied in that God has called him
unto, and not to be busy in that God has not called him unto, etc. In his
Sermon on S. John Evangelists day. f. 284. But it is a thing to be lamented
that the Prelates and other spiritual persons will not attend upon their
Offices, they will not be amongst their flocks, but rather will run hither,
and thither, here, and there, where they are not called, and in the mean
season leave them at adventure of whom they take their living; yea and
furthermore, some will rather be Clerks of Kitchins, or take other offices
upon them, besides that which they have already: but with what conscience these
same do so I cannot tell, The Spiritual Pastors have a great charge.
I fear they shall not be able to make answe^e at the last day for their
follies, as concerning that matter: for this office is such a heavy and mighty
office that it requires a whole man, yea and let every Curate or Parson keep
his Cure to which God has appointed him, and let him do the ^est that he can,
yet I tell you he cannot choose but the Devil will have some, for he sleeps
not, he goes about day and night to seek whom he may devour. Therefore it is
need for every Godly Minister, to abide by his sheep, seeing that the Wolf
is so near, and to keep them, and wit^stand the Wolf. Indeed there be some
ministers here in England which do no good at al, and therefore it were better
for them to leave their benefices, and give room unto others. Finally, in his
Sermon Preached before the Convocation June 9. in the 28. of Henry 8. he thus
speaks to the Clergy of England, In his Sermons fol. 10.11.
and Lordly Prelates touching the utilitie of their Councels and assemblies for
the Churches good: The end of your Convocation shall show what ye have done,
the fruit that shall come of your consultation, shall show what generation ye
be of. For what have ye done hitherto I pray you these 7. years and more? What
have ye engendered? What have ye brought ^orth? What fruit is come of your
long and great assembly? what one thing that the people of England has been
the better of an hair? Or you your selves, either accepted before God, or
better discharged toward the people, committed unto your cure? Or that the
people is better learned and taught now, then they were in time past, to
whether of these ought we to attribute it, to your industry, or to the
providence of God, and the foreseeing of the Kings Grace? Ought we to thank
you, or the Kings highness? whether stirred other first, you the King that ye
might preach, or he you by his Letters, that ye should preach oftener? Is it
unknown think you, how both ye and your Curates were in manner by violence
enforced to let books to be made not by you, but by profane and lay persons,
to let them I say, be sold abroad and read for the instruction of the people? I
am bold with you, but I speak Latin and not English to the Clergy, no^ to
the Laity: I speak to you being pre^ent and not behind your backs. God is my
witness, I speak whatsoever is spoken of the good will that I bear you, God
is my witness which knows my heart, and compelle^h me to say, that I say.
Now I pray you in God his name what did you, so great Fathers, so many, so long
a season, so often assembled together? what went you about? what would ye have
brought to pass? two things taken away, the one, that ye (which I heard)
burned a dead man: the other, that ye (which I le^t) went about to burn one
being alive. Him because he did, I cannot tell how, in his Testament withstand
your profit, in other points, as I have heard, a very good man reported to ^e
of an honest life, while he lived, full of good works, both good to the
Clergy, and also to the Laity; this other, which truly never hurt any of you,
ye would have ^aked in the Coals, because he would not subs^ribe to cer^aine
Articles, that took away the Supremacy of the King. Take away these two Noble
Acts, and there is nothing else left, that ye went about, that I know, saving
that I now remember, that somewhat ye attempted against Erasmus, albeit as yet
nothing is come to light. Ye have often sit in consultation, but what have ye
done? ye have had many things in deliberation, but what one put forth, whereby
either Christ is more glorified, or else Christ's people made more holy? I
appeal to your own conscience. How chances this? How came this thus? Because
there were no Children of light, no Children of God among you, which setting
the world at naught, would study to illustrate the glory of God, and thereby
show themselves Children of light. So this godly Martyr, who has sundry such
like passage in his Sermons.

In the Conference, Dr. Harpesfield and John Bradford. Fox Acts and Monuments
v. 3. p. 293.
Anno. 1555. between our Religious Martyr John Bradford and Doctor Harpesfield
Arch Deacon of London. Master Bradford complains, that the Pillars of the
Church were persecuters of the Church, and tells him you shall no^ ^^nde in all
the Scripture this your essential part of succession of Bishops: whereupon
Harpesfield said, Tell me, were not the Apostles Bishops? To which Bradford
replied: No, except you will make a new definition of a Bishop, that is, give
him no certain place. Harpesfield, Indeed the Apostles Office, was not the
Bishops office: for it was universal, but yet Christ instituted Bishops in his
Church as Paul says: he has given Pastors, Prophets, etc. So that I trow it
be proved by the Scriptures the succession of Bishops to be an essential
point. Brad. The Ministry of Gods Word and Ministers be an essential point.
But to translate this to the Bishops and their succession is a plain subtilty.
And therefore, that it may be plain I will ask you a question; Tell me,
WHETHER THAT THE SCRIPTVRE KNEW ANY DIFFERENCE BETWEEN BISHOPS AND MINISTERS,
which ye called Priests? Harps. No. (So that by the joint confession of Papists
and Protestants in Queen Mary's time Bishops and Ministers by the Scripture
are both one.) Brad. Well, then go on forwards, and let us see what ye shall
get now by the succession of Bishops, that is of Ministers, which can be
understood of such Bishops as minister not, but Lord it. Edmund All^n.
Lord Bishops than are none of Christ's institution, nor of the Apostles
succession. Master Fox his Acts and Monuments of our Martyrs Land. 1610. p.
1796. I find this Dialogue between Dr. John Baker, Collins his Chaplain, and
Edmund Allin a Martyr. Baker, I heard say, that you spoke against Priests and
Bishops. Allin, I speak for them, for now they have so much living and
especially Bishops, Archdeacons, and Deanes, that they neither can nor will
teach Gods Word. If they had a hundred pounds a piece, This is the present
objection for the continuance of Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters.
then would they apply their study, now they cannot for other affairs.
Collins, who will then set his children to school? Allin, Where there is now
one set to school for that end, there would be 40. because that one Bishops
living divided into 30. or 40, parts, would find so many as well learned men
as the Bishops be now, who have all this living; neithe^ had Peter nor Paul any
such revenue. Not^.
Baker, Let us dispatch him, he will mar all. Collins, If every man had a
hundred pounds, as he says, it would make more learned men. Baker, But our
Bishops would be angry if that they knew it. Allin. It were for a Commonwealth
to have such Bishoprics divided, for the further increase of learning.

Infinite are the declamations and complaints of our godly Martyrs in Queen
Mary's and King Henry ^he 8. his reign against the Antichristian calling,
Wealth, Temporalties, Tyranny, Pride, Pomp, Lordlinesse, and secular
employments of our Prelates^ which because they are ordinary, and every man may
read them in Master F^x his Acts and Monuments, I shall therefore pass them
by in silence, and proce^de to some other Authorities.

Our learned Io^n Bale JOHN BALE.
determins thus of our Lordly Bishops. His Image of both Churches on. Apoc. 19.
and 20. part. 3. f. 195.208.
The Bishops compass every where about with tyranny and malice possible, the
holds, the dwelling houses and places of resort pe^taining to the ^aith^ull
brethren: they vex their bodies on every side with rebukes, sco^nes,
blasphemies, lies, scourgings, imprisonments, open shames of the world, and all
manner of kinds of death: seldom escape any from the terrible hands of the
Prelates and Priests, that sincerely ^avour the truth: every where have they
their spies, their Judasses, their false accusers, their Sommoners, their
Bayliffes, and their pick-thankes, with other Officers to bring them in. In all
places are they diligently watched, fiercely examined when they are taken, and
cruelly enforced to accuse so many as they know of that belief. Every where
have they spiritual prisons and Bishops Dungeons, with plenty of ropes,
stocks, and irons, and as little charity else as the Devil has in hell. This
has been their order from the time of Satan's Liberty, and this have they
taken for an high point of Christian Religion. For this is the hour that
Christ prophesied of, wherein men should think to do God great service when
they put one of his unto death. None other caused Herod and Pilate to put
Christ to death, but Ann^s and Caiaphas. None other moved Felix the President
of Jury to imprison Paul, but the puffed up Prelate Ananias. Trajanus the
Emperor would never so extremely have persecuted the Christian Church, nor
yet other cruel tyrants ever since, had they not been propped forward by such
pampred Palfryes of the Devil, the beastly Bishops. Whose calling and
trayterly Practices he much declaimes against both there, and in his Centuries,
to which I shall refer you.

Matthew ^ar^er Archbishop of Canterbury in the life of Hubert his predecessor,
MATTHEW PARKER.
writes thus of Bishops intermedling with secular offices and affairs:
Antiquit. Ec^l. Brit. p. 139.140.141.142.143.
that about the year of our Lord ^197. there was nothing ^ound and sincere in
the Christian republike, that the whole Clergy under a feigned and counterfeit
show of Religion, did wallow without punishment in wickedness, in bribes, in
honors and rapinesse, neglecting utterly the preaching of Gods Word. The
Original (says he) of this evil sprung from this, that the Clergy did too
much intermeddle with worldly affairs, contrary to the Decrees of the Orthodox
Fathers. For at that time the Deane of Paul's was made Lord Treasurer; who
carrying that Office, quickly hourded up a great treasure; at last falling into
a deadly disease past recovery, he was exhorted by the Bishops and great men to
receive the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, which he trembling at refused
to do: whereupon the King admonished and commanded him to do it, A strange
evil death of a Clergy Lord Treasurer, who like Judas Christ's Treasurer and
bag-bearer dyed in despair.
he promised him thereupon to do it the next day: being admonished to make his
Will, he commanded all to void the room but one Scribe. Who beginning to write
his Will in the accustomed form; In the Name of the Father, of the Son, etc.
The Deane perceiving it, commanded him in a rage to blot it out, and these
words only to be written; Lego omnia bona m^a Domin^ Regi, corpus sepultur^,
Anim^m Diabolo. Qu^ dict^ expiravit, etc.
I bequeath all my goods to my Lord the King, my body to the grave, and my
soul to the Devil; which being uttered, he gave up the Ghost. The king
hereupon commanded his carcass to be carried in a cart, and drowned in the
River. This kind of examples (writes he) are therefore to be produced, that
Clergy men may be de^erred from being Lord Treasurers, Note.
Collectors of the kings customs, and from civil and public employments. In
Huberts time all secular offices almost were in Clergy men's hands, for some of
them were Chauncellours, some Justices, some Treasurers of the kingdom, others
had other O^fices in all the kings Courts and Pluralities of many great livings
besides: which wealth, honors, offices, and dignities, as it made them like to
kings in State and magnificence, so it puffed them up with such pride and
arrogance, that in the 36. year of king Henry the third, they were removed
from all Civil Offices and honors, at the instant request and desire of the
greatest Noblemen to whom the same Offices were committed. Hence some of all
orders in our present times have most See Nicholas de Clemangiis, De Corrupto
Ecclesia statu. c. 17.18.19. an excellent Discourse against Bishops
intermedling in temporal affairs, and bearing civil of^^ces.
sharply reprehended the Clergy for this very thing, that being advanced to
the degree of Divinity, than which nothing in humane life ought to be deemed
more holy, they should be hindered therefrom with secular businesses, as with
servile works, and being with^drawne from divine things, should give
themselves to pecuniary and Exchequer affairs which are most estranged from
the dignity of their life, by which some (as appears by the example of that
Deane of Paul's) have made shipwreck both of Conscience and soul to.
Willielmus Nubrigensis speaking of Hugh Bishop of Duresine, for intermedling
with the procuration of temporal affairs, has these words. That Office (to
wit of Lord Chauncellor or chief Justice) was committed by the King to the
Bishop of Duresine, who did not so much as refuse, but cheerfully embrace it,
who verily contenting himself with his proper office, had much more decently
been a minister of Gods Law, than of man's; since no man can serve both, as he
ought. And that saying of our Lord to the Apostles, Ye cannot serve God and
Mammon, did principally respect the Apostles Successors. For if a Bishop that
he may please both the heavenly and earthly king, at once will devide himself to
both Offices; Verily the heavenly King, who wills that men should serve him with
all the heart, with all the soul, and with all the strength, does neither
approve, nor love, nor accept his divine ministry. What then will he do, if a
Bishop does not give peradventure not so much as half of himself, to execute
the things which are of God, and become a Bishop, but commits his cures to
unworthy and remiss Executioners, that he may wholly serve an earthly Court or
Palace? For no half man can sufficiently administer the Offices of an earthly
Prince. By which sentences and examples we verily are admonished, that
assiduous care and study of Clergy men, in worldly and Civil affairs, which
makes them prove slow and unfit to divine things, is by all means to be
reproved, and that the complaint of those is very unjust, who tax them for not
intermeddling with temporal affairs, and study to call them back from
divine things, to which they ought with all their might to apply themselves. He
further adds out of Roger Hoveden and others, H^ved^n A^^^l. pars post^^i^r.
p. 779. Speed. p, 550
that the Pope enjoined Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, without delay to lay
down all his Temporal Offices, as being contrary to the Canons ^o enjoy them,
and against his honor and dignity; and further diligently admonished King
Richard the 1. with a ^atherly admonition, that as he tendered the Salvation of
his soul, he should not permit the said Archbishop any longer to enjoy his
secular office under him, and that he would neither admit him nor any other
Bishop or Clerk to any other secular administration: and he likewise
commanded all Prelates of Churches, by virtue of their Canonical Obedience; Ne
ipsi ausu temerario seculares administrationes susciperent; that they should
not rashly attempt the managing of any worldly employments; because being
entangled in secular affairs, they could nor sufficiently attend their
Ecclesiastical cures, seeing the wise man says, Pluribus intentus, minor est
ad singula sensus.


And hence Annal. pars posterior. p. 767.768.
Roger de Hoveden, thus exclaimes against Huber^ for resuming his temporal
offices again, after he had seemingl^ informed the King that he would give
them over; seeing ^h^ charge of his Church (as he said) was work enough ^or
one man, whereunto only he would gladly dedicate himself. O in^^licem
Praesulem! licet saepius legisset, Neminem posse doubus Deminis se ruire, aut
enim umun odio habebit, and alterum diliget, au^ unumsustinebit, and alterum
contemnet; praeelegit tamen officium sacerdotale postp^nere, quam regi terreno
non adhaerere: and si^ accepta regn^ regiminis potestate officii
administrationem ecclesias^ici, cui professionis voto ast rictus fuerat, parvi
pendens, pro castris Regis Angliae stare non recusavit. So this Historian. Thus
this Bishop.

THOMAS BEACON.
Thomas Beacon a Prebend of Canterbury and a fugitive ^or Religion in Queen
Mary's days in his Catechism in the first volume of his works Printed at
London, Cum privilegio, Anno, 1560. Dedicated to both Archbishops and all the
Bishops of England, F^^. 499.500 And in his Supplication (written in Queen
Mary's time) Vol. 3. fol. 14.^^ 23. resolves thus of the parity of Bishops and
Ministers, and the Antichristianity, cruelty, wealth, and secular employments
of our Lordly Prelates.

Father. What difference is there between a Bishop and Spiritual Minister, or
Presbyter?

Son. None at all, their Office is the same, their authority and power is
One; therefore S. Paul calls Spiritual Ministers sometimes Bishops, sometimes
Presbyters, sometimes Pastors, sometimes Doctors, etc.

Father. What is a Bishop in English?

Son. A Watchman, or superintendent, as Paul says to the Presbyters or
Bishops of Ephesus, Acts 20.28. etc. Then he adds that the first and
principal point of a Bishops Spiritual Ministers Office is to teach and
preach the Word of God. And concludes, that such a Bishop as either does not,
or cannot preach, is a Nicholas Bishop and an Idol, and indeed no better than
a painted Bishop on a Wall: yea, he is as the Prophet says, Isay. 36.10.
a dumb dog, and as our Savior Christ says, unsavory salt, worth nothing
but to be cast out, Mat. 5.13.
and to be trodden under foot of men. Woe be to such Rulers that set such
Idols and white daubed walls over the ^^ocke of Christ, whom he has purchased
with his precious blood. Horrible and great is their great damnation. Our
Savior Christ says to his Disciples, As my Father sent me, so send I you.
Joh. 20.21.
Now who knows not, that Christ was sent of his Father to preach the Gospel?
If they preach not (the case of many of our Lord Prelates) it is an evident
token that Christ sent them no^, but Antichrist and the Devil. After which he
thus proceeds in his supplication; Thou call thy self a jealous God, why
then do thou suffer thy people, thy Congregation, thy flock, thine heritage,
to be thus seduced and led away from thee unto all kind of spiritual
fornication and abominable whoredom by that Antichrist of Rome, that great
Baal, that stout Nemroth, that false Prophet, that beast, that whore of
Babylon, that son of perdition, and by his abominable adherents, Cardinals,
Archbishops, Bishops, Suffragans, Archdeacons, Deanes, Provosts,
Prebendaries, Commissaries, Parsons, Vicars, Purgatorie-rakers, Priests,
Monks, Friars, Channons, Nuns, Anckers, Anc^eresses, Pardoners Proctors,
Scribes, Officialls, Somners, etc. with all the ^able of beastly hypocrites
that have received the beasts Mark, which do nothing else than seek how they
may establish their An^ichristian Kingdom by suppressing thy holy Word, and
leading the people into all kind of blindness, errors and lies, etc. But now
the Shepherds, Wolvish Sheepheards.
yea rather the Wolves, which are burst into thy sheepefold; and with violence
have unjustly thrust out the faithful and fatherly Pastors out of their cures,
are Lordly, cruel, bloodthirsty, malicious and spiteful against thy sheep.
They are such Wolves as spare not the flock, but scatter and destroy the
flock. They are thieves, robbers, murderers and soul slayers. They feed
themselves with the fattest, and cloth themselves with the finest wool, but
thy flock they nourish not. The food wherewith they Pasture thy sheep, is
the drowsy dreams and idle imaginations of Antichrist. In steed of the
preaching of thy lively Word, they feed thy flock with Latin mumblings, with
dumb Images, with Heathenish Ceremonies, with vain sightes, and such other
apish ^oyes. In steed of the ministration of the holy and blessed Communion,
they feed thy sheep with vile stinking, abominable, devilish, blasphemous
and Idolatrous Masses. And unto these unwholesome, pestilent, and poysonfull
Pasturs, they drive the sheep will they, nill they; and if any of thy flock
refuse to come and to taste of those their pestilent poisons, and poisons full
of Pestilences, him they accite to appear before the great Wolf, The
description of a certain head Wolf, clathed in a Bishops rotchet.
whose face is like unto the face of a she Bear that is robbed of her young
ones, whose eyes continually burn with the unquenchable flames of the deadly
Cockatrice, whose teeth are like to the venomous tushes of the ramping Lion,
whose mouth is full of cursed speaking and bitterness, whose tongue speaks
extreme blasphemies against thee and thy holy Anointed, whose lips are full
of deadly poison, whose throat is an open Sepulcher, whose breath foameth and
blows out threatening and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord, whose
heart without ceasing imagines wickedness, whose hands have a delight to be
embrued with the blood of the Saints, whose feet are swift to shed blood,
whose whole man both body and soul go always up and down musing of
mischief. This Wolf O Lord is so arrogant, haughty, and proud, seeing the
government of the whole Realm is committed unto him, that he has cast away
all fear of thee. He makes boast of his own wit, learning, and policy; his
ways are always filthy, thy judgments are far out of his sight, he defieth
all his enemies. For he says in his heart, Tush, I shall never be cast down,
there shall no harm happen unto me. He sits lurking like a Lion in his den;
that he may privily murder the innocent and suck his blood. When such, O Lord
God, as will not obey their Popish and devilish proceedings, are brought
before that grievous Wolf, they are miserably taunted, mocked, scorned,
blasphemed, as thy dearly beloved son was in Bishop Caiphas house, and
afterward cruelly committed to prison, to the Tower, to the Fleet, to the
Marshalseys, to the Kings Bench, to the Counters, to Lollardes Tower, to
Newgate, etc. where they are kept as sheep in a pinfold appointed to be
slain. And as this cruel and bloody Wolf deals with the poor Lambs, even
so do the residue of that lecherous litter. He with all other of that Wolvish
kind, hunger and thirst nothing so greatly as the devouring of the bodies, and
the sucking of the blood of thy poor and innocent Lambs. Ah Lord God, under
that most wicked Queen Iezabel, A comparison between Queen Isabels time and
ours.
were not the Prophets, more cruelly handled, than thy faithful Ministers be
now? for as in the days of the wicked Queen Iezabel the Priests of Baal were
had in great honor, and were chiefest and of highest authority about the
Queen, none bearing so much rule in the Court as they, none having so much
reverence done unto them, as they had; even so now is it with the idolatrous
Priests of England; Priests chief in the Country, and through out England.
they alone be chiefest and of much estimation with the Queen. They alone
^uffle and reign; they alone bear the swing in the Court; they alone have all
things going forward as they desire; they alone be capped, kneeled, and
crowched to; they alone have the keys of the English Kingdom hanging at their
girdles: whatsoever they bind or loose, whispering and traitorously conspiring
among themselves, that same is both bound and loosed in the star Chamber, in
Westminster Hall, in the Parliament house, yea in the Queens privy Chamber,
and throughout the Realm of England. The very Nobility of England are in a
manner brought to such slavery, Awake Nobility.
that they dare not displease the least of these spiteful spiritual limbs of
Antichrist. It is writ, that certain men gave their judgments, what thing was
most mighty and strongest upon earth. The first said wine is a strong thing.
The second said the King is strongest. The third said, women yet have more
strength, but above all things the truth bears away the victory. But we may
now say (unto such an height is the tyranny of the Spiritual Sorcerers grown)
that Priests in England are mightier, than either Wine, King, Queen, Lords,
Women, and all that is there besides. But how agrees this with the example of
Christ, which fled away, when the people would have made him a King or a
temporal governor? Christ refused to meddle with any worldly matters, as the
History of dividing the inheritance between the two brethren does declare.
Christ willed his Disciples to refuse all worldly dominion and temporal rule.
When they strove among them, who of them should be taken for the greatest:
Christ said unto them, The Kings of the Gentiles reign over them, and they
that bear rule over them are called gracious Lords, but ye shall not be so,
for he that is greatest among you, shall be as the least, and he that is
chief, shall be as the minister. Christ sent not his Disciples to be Lords of
the Council, Lords of the Parliament, Lord President, Lord Chancellor, Lord
Bishop, Lord Suffragan, Lord Deane, Master Queens Amner, Mr. Comptroller, Mr.
Steward, Mr. Receiver, Sr. John Massemonger, etc. but to be Ministers and
disposers of the Mysteries of God, to be Preachers of the Gospel, to be
laborers in the Lords harvest, to be Pastors and feeders of the Lords flock,
to be the salt of the earth, and the light of the world, to be an example to
the faithful in word and conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith and in
pureness, to feed Christ's flock so much as lies in their power, taking the
oversight of them, not as though they were compelled, but willingly, not for
the desire of filthy lucre, but of a good mind, not as though they were Lord
over the Parishes, but that they be an ensample to the flock, that when the
chief shepherd shall appear they may receive an uncorruptible crown of
glory. The ambition and security of the Papists.
But these things O Lord, have they all forgotten. These ambitious Antichrists
are so drowned in vain glory, and in the desire of filthy lucre and worldly
promotions, that they neither regard God, nor the higher powers, that they
neither esteem their office, nor any one point of godliness and honesty, that
they neither think upon the dreadful day of judgment, nor yet remember
themselves to be mortal. Their whole study in the time of this their Lucifer^
like pride is nothing else but to suppress thy holy truth, and to advance and
set up their Antichristan Kingdom, that they as Gods may sit alone in the
Consciences of men. But O Lord God, though thou suffer these Priests of Baal
for our unthankefulnesse a while to prosper, to reign, to rule^ to ruffle, to
flourish, to triumph, and to tread down thy holy Word under their ^eete, yet
are we certain, that thou will at the last arise, defend thine own cause
against these Antichrists, bring thine enemies unto confusion, and set thy
people (after they have unfainedly repented) in a quiet and blessed State. So
he, and blessed be God that he after, and we now, live to see this verified in
part.

Miles Coverdale once Bishop of Exeter in King Edward the sixth his reign,
MILES COVERDALE.
being deprived of it in Queen Mary's, would Godwins Cat. p. 338.
not return thereto again in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, but
led a private life in London, where he writ a book entitled an Apology in
defense of the Church of England Printed at London 1564. wherein he writes thus
of Bishops intermedling with secular affairs, and of their Treasons against
our Kings, by the Popes instigation. The Old Canons of the Apostles command
that Bishop to be removed from his Office, which will both supply the place of
a civil Magistrate, and also of an Ecclesiastical person. These men for all
that both do and will needs serve both places; Nay rather the one office
which they ought chiefly to execute, they once touch not, and yet no body
commands them to be displaced, etc. And as ^o^u^, we of all others most
justly have left him. For our Kings, yea even they which with greatest
reverence did follow and obey the authority and faith of the Bishops of Rome,
have long since found and felt well enough the yoke and tyranny of the Popes
Kingdom. For the Bishops of Rome took the Crown off from the head of our King
Henry the second, and compelled him to put aside all Majesty, and like a mere
private man to come unto their Legate with great submission and humility, so as
all his Subjects might laugh him to scorn: more than this, they caused Bishops
and Monks and some part of the Nobility to be in the field against our King
John, and set all the People at liberty from their Oath whereby they owed
allegiance to their King, and at last wickedly and most abominably they
bereaved the King not only of his Kingdom, but also of his life. Besides
this, they excommunicated and cursed King Henry the eight the most famous
Prince, and stirred up against him sometime the Emperor, sometime the French
King, and as much as in them was, put in adventure our Realm to have been a
very prey and spoil, yet were they but ^ooles and mad, to think that either
so mighty a Prince could be scared with bugges and rattles, or else that so
Noble and great a Kingdom, might so easily even at one morsel be devoured and
swallowed up. And yet as though all this were too little, they would needs
make all the Realm tributary to them, and exacted thence yearly most unjust
and wrongful taxes. So dear cost us the friendship of the City of Rome.

John Ponet sometimes Bishop of Winchester, JOHN PONET
which he afterward deserted, in his Apology against Doctor Martin, in
defense of Priests marriage, c. 4.5. p. 44.52.53.54. expressly reckons up
Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Monks, Cannons, Friars, etc. to be the
Orders of Antichrist, taxing them likewise severely, and comparing them with
the Eustathian he^etickes for refusing to wear usual garments, and putting
upon them garments of strange fashions, to vary from the Common sort of people
in apparel: likewise of the name Bishop and Superintendent. And ^urther
whereas it pleases Martin not only in this place, but also hereafter to jest
at the name of Superintendent, he shows himself bent to condemn all things
that be good, though in so doing he cannot avoyde his open shame. Who knows
no^ that the name Bishop has so been abused, that when it was spoken, the
people understood nothing else but a great Lord, that went in a white Rotche^,
with a wide shaven crown, and that carries an Oil box with him, wh^^^ he
used once in 7. years riding about to confirm children, etc. Now to bring the
people from this abuse, what better means can be devised than to teach the
people their error by another word out of the Scriptures of the same
signification? which thing by the term Superintendent would in time have been
well brought to pass. For the ordinary pains of such as were called
Superintendents, should have taught the people to understand the duty of their
Bishop, which your Papist^ would feign have hidden from them. And the word
Superintendent being a very Latin word made English by use; should in time
have taught the people by the very Etymology and proper signification, what
things were meant, when they heard that name which by this term Bishop, could
not so well be done, by reason that Bishops in the time of Popery were
Overseers in name, but not indeed. So that their doings could not ^each the
people their names, neither what they should look for at their Bishops hands.
For the name Bishop, spoken amongst the unlearned, signified to them nothing
less than a preacher of Gods Word, because there was not, nor is any thing
more rare in any order of Ecclesiastical persons, than to see a Bishop preach,
whereof the doings of the Popish Bishops of England can this day witness; but
the name Superintendent should make him ashamed of his negligence, and afraid
of his idleness, knowing that S. Paul does call upon him, to attend to
himself and to his whole flock: of the which sentence our Bishops mark the
first piece right well, that is, to take heed to themselves, but they be so
deaf, they cannot hearken to the second, that is, to look to their flock. I
deny not but that the name Bishop may be well taken; but because the evilnesse
of the abuse has marred the goodness of the word, it cannot be denied, but
that it was not amiss to join for a time another word with it in his place,
whereby to restore that abused word to his right signification. And the name
Superintendent is such a name, that the Papists themselves (saving such as
lack both learning and wit) cannot find fault withal. For Peresius the
Spaniard and an Arch-papist (out of whom Martin has stolen a great part of
his book) speaking of a Bishop says; Primum Episcopi munus nomen ipsum prae
se fert, quod est superintendere, Episcopus enim Superintendens interpretant,
visitans aut supervidens, etc. that is to say: the chief Office of a Bishop by
interpretation signifies a Superintendent, a visitor, or an Over-seer. Why did
not Martin as well steal this piece out of Peresius, as he did steal all the
Common places that he has for the proof of the Canons of the Apostles, and of
traditions in his second and third Chapters? Martin in the 88. leaf is not
ashamed in his book to divide the significations of the terms (Bishop and
Super-intendent) as though the one were not signified by the other. But it may
be that Martin, as the rest of the Popish Sect, would not have the name of
(Superintendent) or minister used, least that name which did put the people in
remembrance of Sacrificing and blood sapping, should be forgotten. Thus, and
much more he.

Walter Haddon, WALTER HADDON.
Vice Chancellor of the University of Cambridge for sundry years in King
Edward the 6. and Deane of the Arches in Queen Elizabeth reign, in his Book
against Hierome Osorius, l. 3. fol. 251, writes short but sharp, of the
Treasons of our English Prelates against our Kings. There have been few
Princes in this our Britain for the space of 5 hundred years to whom most
sordid Monks, but especially those who have possessed the Sea of Canterbury,
have not procured some troubles. Anselme, how insolently opposed he himself to
William Rufus and Henry the first? Theobald how proud was he against King
Stephen? how great Tragedies did Thomas of Canterbury, whom you have canonized
for a Saint for Sedition, raise up against Henry the second? William of Ely,
and also Thomas Arundell of Canterbury, a nefarious Traitor, what wonderful
troubles procured he, not only to King Richard the second, but to all estates
of the Kingdom? What King John suffered from Langton and other Bishops, (who
procured him to be judicially deprived of his Crown and Kingdom by the Pope)
is unknown to none: neither was Edmund of Canterbury less opposite to King
Henry the third: Edward the first succeeded Henry his Father in the government,
whom John Peckham of Canterbury resisted with incredible boldness, leaving
Winchelsie his Successor, who nothing degenerating from his footsteps, had
wonderful contentions with the King: Both of them an Archbishop, each of them
an arch-contemner of Majesty. What shall I say of Archbishop Walter, to whom
it was not sufficient by force to rescue Adrian (or Alton) Bishop of Hereford
in despite of King and Parliament from his legal trial in open Court, and to
send him away uncondemned, unless he likewise conspired with Queen Izabel
against King Richard the second. That I may in the interim omit the furies and
bitter concertations of others with their Princes. So he.

Bishop ALLEY Bishop PILKINGTON. Mr. Nowel.
Will. Alley Bishop of Exeter in his poor man's library: par. 1. Miscellanea.
Praelect. 3. p. 95.96. Printed Cum Privilegio. James Pilkington Bishop of
Durham, in his Treatise of burning of the Paul's Church: and in his exposition
on Agge. chapter 1. v. 1.2.3.4.9^12.13. c. 2. v. 1.2.3.4.9.10. and on Abdyas. v.
7.8. and Mr. Alexander Nowel Deane of Paul's in his Reproof of Dormans proof
London. 1565. f 43.44.45. Conclude, that Bishops and Presbyters by Gods Word,
are one and the same, citing S. Hieromes words on Titus, 1. and to Euagrius,
and declaime much against the Pomp, wealth, and secular employments of
Bishops: their words for brevity I shall pretermit.

BISHOP ELMER.
Mr. Elmer, afterward Bishop of London, in his Harborow for faithful subjects,
Printed at Strasborough, writes thus against Bishops Civil Authority,
Lordlinesse, and wealth. Christ says Luke 12. Who made me a Judge between
you? as though he would say, it belongs not to my Office to determine
matters of Policy and inheritance, that belongs to the Civil Magistrate. If
he had thought it had been within the Compass of his function, why and with
what Conscience refused he to set them at one, who were at strife, and to put
that out of doubt which was in suite? If he might do it, and would not, he
lacked Charity, and did not his duty. If it belonged not to him, how belongs
it to any of his Disciples or Successors? had he not as large a Commission as
he gave? or could he give that he had not? But he knowing his Office, as the
Prophet Esaias had foretold; to preach the Gospel, would do nothing without
warrant. And therefore being asked if he were a King, answered simply and by a
plain negative, My Kingdom is not of this world. If his Kingdom was not
here, neither the ordering of Policies; yea when they would have taken him up
to have made him a King, as one that refused that belonged not to him, Few of
our Prelates would now refuse such a proffer.
he conveyed himself from among them. If imperial jurisdiction belonged to
him, why refused he his calling? If it did not, where had Paul, Peter, or any
other, any authority to meddle with that which he refused: seeing he says, As
my Father sent me, so send I you. In another place, Christ knowing the bounds
of his calling, would not meddle with externe policy. Hence Bishops me thinks
by his example, should not give themselves too much the bridle, and too large a
scope to meddle too far with matters of policy. If these two Offices, I mean
Ecclesiastical and Civil be so jumbled in both functions, there can be no
quiet or well ordered Commonwealth. Christ says to his Disciples: Princes of
the Nations do bear rule like Lords, it shall not be so with you. It falls
not into an Apostles or Church-mans Office, to meddle with such matters. For
none going to war, intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, it is
enough for them to attend upon one Office; to attend as sole Priests nor as
errant Bayliffes. (And elsewhere in that Book he proceeds thus.) Come off ye
Bishops, away with your superfluities, yield up your thousands, be content with
hundreds, as they be in other reformed Churches, where there be as great
learned men as you are. LET YOUR PORTION BE PRIEST-LIKE, NOT PRINCE-LIKE. Let
the Queen have the rest of your temporalties, to maintain wars, and to
build Schools throughout the Realm, that every Parish Church may have its
Preacher, every City her superintendent to live not pompously, which will never
be unless your Lands be disposed and bestowed upon many, which now feed and
fat but one. Remember that Abimelech, when David in his banishment would have
dined with him, kept such Hospitality, that he had no bread to give him but the
Shewbread. Where was all his Superfluity to keep your pretended hospitality?
for that is the cause that you allege, you must have thousand thousands; as
though you were commanded to keep Hospitality, rather with a thousand than
with an hundred: Remember the Apostles were so poor, that when the lame man
who lay at the Temple gate called beautiful^ Act. 3.^ to 7.
asked an Alms of Peter and John as they went about to go, into the Temple;
Peter answered him in this manner, Silver and gold have I none; and Paul was so
far from having Lordships, that his own hands ministered often times to his
necessities. If the Apostles of our Savior had so small possessions and
revenues, Cor. 4.12.
why should our Prelates, who boast themselves to be their proper Successors
enjoy or covet so great: when as Paul, enjoynes them, if they have but food and
raiment, 1 Timothy 6.8.
therewith to be content, godliness alone with contentment being great gain,
and a sufficient portion.

Nicholas Bullingham after Bishop of Lincoln, NICHOLAS BULLINGHAM.
in his Printed Letter to Master Bull December. 5. 1564. writes thus from Embden,
where he arrived after many storms: Would God Master Bull, that all the
Prelates of England had been with me, when we fell to cutting of Cables, and
riding at Anchor in the raging Seas. There would have been tearing of square
Caps, renting of Rotchets, defying of Bishoprics, despising of pomp,
promising of new life; crying for mercy; O what a Tragedy would there have
been! Well, well, though now they walk dry shod in their Palaces, there is a
God that will try them and all his people by fire or by water, unless we
heartily repent. Grace to repent, grant us, O Lord, without delay, Amen, Amen.

John Bridges Deane of Salisbury afterward Bishop of Oxford and a great
stickler for Episcopacy, JOHN BRIDGES.
in his Book entitled, The Supremacy of Christian Princes, ^ver all persons
throughout their Dominions, in all cases so well Ecclesiastical at Temporal.
Printed at London, 1573. p. 359. to 364^ writes thus of the parity and identity
of Bishops and Presbyters, and of clearing Aeriaus from Heresy in this point^
First, that Aerius said, there was no difference between a Priest and Bishop,
Difference between Priests and Bishops.
and ye ask (Mr. Stapleton) how say we to him. Whatsoever we say to him, we
have first to say to you, that saving the reverence of your Priesthood, there
is no difference between you and a liar, to object Aerius herein to us,
whereas (ye know well enough) our Church does acknowledge in the ministry, a
differen^e of Deacon and Elder, from a Bishop, although not according to your
Popish Orders: For as neither Epiphanius, nor yet Augustine (quoted by you)
speaks there of any sacrificing Priest, so he never knew any such Pontifical
Prelates as your Popish Church breeds; and yet of those that were even then
in Epiphanius time, and of their difference from the Elders or Priests, if ye
know not how it came, Hi^r^ni^us (...) Titum Did. 63. Can. Oli^ id^m.
Hierome that lived in the same age will tell you; or if ye have not read him,
your own Canons will tell ye what he says. Idem est ergo Presbyter qui
Episcopus, and antequam Diaboli studia, etc. An Elder or Priest therefore is
the same that a Bishop, and before that the studies of the Devil were made in
Religion, and that the people said, I hold of Paul; I of Apollo, I of Cephas,
the Churches were governed by the Common Council of the Elders; but after that
every one did account those to be his, and not to be Christ's, whom he had
baptized, in all the world, it was decreed, that one of the Elders being
chosen, should be placed above the rest: to whom all the care or charge of the
Churches should belong, and the seed of Schisms be taken away. And a little
after, Sicut ergo Presbyteri, as therefore the Elders know that they by the
custom of the Church are subject to him, that is set over them: so let the
Bishops know, that they more by custom, than by the truth of the Lords
dispensation, are greater than the Elders. This was the judgment of the
ancient Fathers, and yet were they no Arians nor Aerians therefore. Yea Pe^er
Lombard the master of the sentences, citing also Isidorus to witness, says.
Lib. 4. Did. 24.1.
Apud veteres idem Episcopi and Presbyteri fuerunt. Among the the Ancient
Fathers, Bishops and Elders were all one. And again alleging the Apostle S.
Paul, he says, Qualis autem, etc. But what manner an El^er ought to be chosen,
the Apostle writing to Timothy declares where by the name of Bishop he
signifies an Elder, ^ Tim. 3^
and a non after; Cumque omnes, and when all of them (he means his false
seven orders) are spiritual and holy, yet the Canons account only two Orders
to be excelling holy, that is to say Deaconship and Eldership. Because the
primitive Church is read to have these alone, and we have the Apostles
Commandment of these alone, for the Apostles in every City ordained Bishop and
Elders. Neither the Master only writes thus; but almost all your Schoolmen,
yea though they be themselves of the contrary opinion, yet they write this was
the ancient opinion. And so Durandus, though he make a difference between the
power of Jurisdiction, and the power of order, yet he shows that both the
Scripture, and S. Hierome makes no difference, but only the custom and
institution of the Church. The Apostle (says he) writing to the Philippians
cap. 1. says, with the Bishops and the Deacons, by them understanding the
Elders, since in one City as in Philippos, many Bishops oug^t not to be. Again,
Act. 2. he says, Look to your selves and to all the flock in which the Holy
^host has placed you to be Bishops. And he spoke unto them of the only City
of Ephesus. But this appears more expressly to Titus the 1. Where he says,
For this cause I have left thee at Crete, that thou should correct those
things that want, and ordain Elders throughout the Cities, even as I have
appointed to thee, if any be blameless, the husband of one wife. And straight
he sets under it, a Bishop must me blameless: and whom before he named an
Elder he calls now a Bishop: and in the 4. of the 1. to Timothy, Despise not
(says he) the grace of God which is given to thee through the imposition of
the hands of an Elder, that is to say of a Bishop. S. Paul called himself an
Elder, when he was the Bishop that ordained him. Thus far and more at large
Durandus, concluding at length Sic Ergo, Thus therefore says S. Hierome, that
a Bishop and an Elder, olim fuerunt synonyma, etc. were in the old time diverse
names betokening one thing indifferently, and also of one administration;
because the Churches were ruled by the Commune Counsel of the Priests. But for
the remedy of a Schism, lest each one d^awing the Church after him, should
break her, it was ordained that one should be above the rest, Et quoad nomen,
etc. And so far forth as stretches to the name, that he only should be
called Bishop, and that so far as stretches to the administration of some
Sacraments and Sacramentals, they should be reserved to him by the custom and
constitution of the Church: And this would Hierome, expressly 93. Did. cap.
legimus, in Esa and super Epistolam ad Tit. and recitatur. Did. 93. cap. Olim
Presbyteri, etc. Consuetudo aut institutio Ecclesiae potest dare
Iurisdictionem, sed non potestatem ordinis aut consecrationis, quare etc. He
therefore that counts this erroneous or perrilous let him impute this to
Hierome, out of whose saying in the fore alleged Chapter Legimus in Esa, the
foresaid authorities are taken. Where also he puts an example. That is of a
Bishop in respect of Priests, as of an Archdeacon in respect of Deacons:
unless the Deacons choose one among themselves whom they call Archdeacon, etc.
In the end, Durandus reconciling Hierome, says, and the authorities alleged
by Hierome withstand it not, because according to the name and the truth of the
thing, every Bishop is an Elder, and on the other part, so far as stretches
to the name, every Elder having cure, may be called a Bishop, as Superattendent
on other, although the consecration of a Bishop, or the chief Priest, be
larger than of a simple Priest or Elder, but peradventure in the Primitive
Church, they made not such force in the difference of names as they do now; And
therefore they called a Bishop every ^ne that had a cure. Thus writes Durandus
of the ancient Fathers opinions. And will you count him or them Aerian^ too?
And this also does your Insti^uti^ d^ctr. Christi, de sh^r^ ordinis. fol. 196.
Institution in Colonie Council confess: Non est tamen putandum. We must not
for all this t^inke, that he ordained Bishops another order from Priests, for
in the primitive Church Bishops and Priests were all one. The which the
Epistles of Peter and Paul the Apostles; Saint Hierome also and almost all the
ancient Ecclesiastical Writers do witness. And chiefly that place of the
first Epistle of Saint Peter the fifth Chapter, is evident to declare this: For
when Peter had said, the Elders that are among you, I also an Elder with you
beseech, which am also a witness of the passions of Christ, and partaker of
the Glory to come that shall be revealed: He joined under it, feed or guide the
flock of Christ that is among you, and oversee it, not by compulsion, but
willingly, according to God, wherein it is spoken more expressly in the Greek
(...), that is to say, Super-attendent, from whence also the name of Bishop is
drawn. Wherefore Priesthood is esteemed the highest order in the Church. In
the mean time, no body is ignorant, that this order is distinguished again,
by a certain order of offices, and dignities. Thus do your Scholemen, and
Divines wi^nesse.

First, that in the substance, order or character as they term Secondly, that
the difference is but of Accidents, and Circumstances, Thirdly, that in the
Primitive Church this difference was Fourthly, that this difference was taken
up by custom, consent Fifthly, that it was done for the avoiding of factions
and sects, Et in hoc, says, Summa Ang^lica. L. Ord.
Angelus de Clavisio, concordam communiter Theol. On this the Divines agree
commonly, but the Canonists hold that there are nine orders, according to nine
Hierarchies, that is to wit, the first notch or Psalmist, and the order of a
Bishop, and that the first notch is an order, the text is in C. cu^ contingit
and ibi do. Anto. and Canonistae de aeta. and quali or similiter quod
Episcopatus est ordo, and quod imprimatur character judicio meo, facit
inconvincibiliter, te^t. in C. i. de ordinatis ab Episcopo, etc. And so
according to the Canonists there shall be nine Orders. The papist^ controversy
about their holy order.
Great ado your Schoolmen and Canonists make about this, insomuch that Aerius
heresy will draw very near to one of you, light on which side it shall. But
your self may hold on both sides M. Stapleton, being both a Bachelor in the
one, and a student in the other. But as for your Popish Clergy, there is indeed
little difference in this point or none, which barrel is better herring,
Bishop o^ Priest; both stark naught, or rather, neither of them, either true
Priest or Bishop by Saint Paul's description.
The Heavenly and earthly Kingdom are not (...) joined that the Bishops may be
earthly Kings.
After this, p. 926.929. He writes thus concerning Bishops intermedling with
temporal affairs. You say M. Sanders, the temporal Kingdom and the heavenly
did indeed once ja^^e, but now they agree, the heavenly and the earthly
Kingdome^ are conjoined together. Agreement is a good hearing M. Sanders, but
what mean you by this conjunction that the one is become the other, and not
still distinguished from it? or that your Pope may be King, and his Bishops
Princes of both? nay M. Sanders, you find not that agreement and conjunction.
For Christ has put such a bar between them, that his spiritual Ministers
cannot have earthly Kingdoms, nor that earthly Kings should in the estate of
their earthly Kingdoms, become subject in such wise to his spiritual
Ministers, otherwise than to yield their obedience to their spiritual
ministry, representing the power and mercy of God unto them, etc. The objection
you made was this. M. Sanders objetion and answer.
Whether Bishops and Pastors of the sheep of Christ may rule temporal
Kingdoms? you answer, properly and of it self in no wise: but as those
Kingdoms do subject themselves to the Christian faith. This is a proper
elusion, M. Sanders, think you to escape thus? is it all one to subject their
Kingdoms to the Christian faith, and to subject their Kingdoms to the
Bishops? Good right it is that the faith should bear the chief rule? But the
objection was, Whether the Bishops should or no? and therefore this distinction
serves not. For Christ simply without this or that respect debarreth all his
spiritual ministers from ruling of temporal Kingdoms. Who knows not that
properly, and of their own nature temporal Kingdoms should not be ruled of
spiritual Pastors, but of Temporal Kings? None is so simple to move such a
fond objection: but the objection is, Whether the one be coincident to the
other? whether a Bishop, Whether a Bishop may take a Kingdom upon him p^operly
or unproperly.
to whom properly by his Bishoply office a Kingdom belongs nor, may take
upon him the government of a Kingdom, that properly by his Kingly office
belongs to a King? this is the question. And you say properly he cannot, I
say much less unproperly, but properly or unproperly, Christ has clean
debarred it ^vos autem non sic: But you shall not do so. These words strick
dead, M Sanders, and therefore your ^nproper distinctions may go pike him.
Page 931^ he writes that the deposings of Princes have not come so much by the
violence of their unnatural Subjects: as by the practices of the Popish
Bishops, Deposing of Princes by the Prelates practices.
as the ensamples of King John in England, of Childericke in France, the
Henry's, and other in Germany, and in other Countries, do testify, yet were
these dealings of those Bishops not allowable, but detestable: yea though it
were granted that those Princes had deserved them; and broken their faith and
prom^se, which (if it were a good faith, and promise) was no doubt an evil
breach of it, and God will take the vengeance of it, it belongs not to the
people, nor to the Bishops Vengeance is mine, says God, and I will render it
He says not my Bishop shall, but I will render it. Heb. 10.
He adds p. 980, 981.1026 Christ's Kingdom is spiritual and not earthly, and
his Ministers may not exercise in secular causes, an earthly Kings authority.
M. Saunders pretends this is to promote the Church of Christ, The Churches
promotion.
but such promotion confounds devotion, and has poisoned the Church of God, as
they say, a voice was heard what time Constantine (although falsely) is
supposed to have endowed the Church with such royal honor, Hodie venenum
intravit in Ecclesiam, This day entered poison into the Church. But Christ has
flatly forbidden it, Matthew. 2^.
and told his Disciples when they asked such promotion, that they knew not what
they asked. But afterward, they knew and found the saying of Christ to be true,
that their promotion lay in their affliction, and not in their Kingly honor,
etc. Glossa in Ly^^^^^^p^r I^h.
And this your own gloss out of your own Pope Gregory might have taught you.
Sicut ^isit me Pater, id est, ad passiones, etc. As my Father sent me, that is
to say, to troubles and afflictions, so send I you to suffer persecution, not
to reign like Kings, and rule Kingdoms. And therefore since this sentence of
Christ is true, that he sent them as he was sent, and he was not sent in his
humane nature to depose Kings, nor to dispose of their Kingdoms, nor to
govern them. Therefore his Disciples were not sent thereto. But the Pope says
he was sent thereto, and takes it upon him, therefore he is neither minister of
Christ, nor successor of his Disciples; but his Disciple that has offered him
worldly Kingdoms, if he would fall down and worship him^ as he has done,
and s^ has gotten his Kingdoms etc. Hofmeister one of your stoutest Champions
has these words: Hofmeister in Luc. 12.
Truly those things that have been spoken and heard from the beginning of this
Gospel do enough declare the Kingdom of Christ, not to be of this world,
neither that he would reign temporally in the world, since he takes not
soldiers that can oppugn others, but Fishermen, readier to suffer than to
strike. And so in this place, with most manifest words Christ decla^eth, that
he came not for this purpose, to take upon him the office of a Magistrate, Why
Christ took not on him the office of a Magistrate.
but rather, that he might reign in our hearts, so that it might be our hap
to come to the ^ternall goods, whatsoever happened of our temporal goods.
Therefore when he was interrupted of a certain Jew, that he would help him
in recovering his inheritance, he answered, Man, who has made me a judge or
divider over you? As though he should say, has not this world Judges that may
decide so base controversies? it is not appointed unto me, that this or that
man should wax rich by inheritance, but that all men should come to the
inheritance of life immortal. But in these words, Christ would be token many
things, to wit, that he which has an Apostolical office, ought not to be
wrapped with profane and filthy affairs: for so the Apostle says otherwhere,
No man going warfare under God entangleth himself with worldly business. And
the Apostles say all at once, It is not meet for us to leave the Word of God
and attend on the Tables. Christ also by this reproving, would declare that
this doctrine takes not away the Magistrates offices, but rather confirms
them. Whereupon he says also elsewhere, Render to Caesar that that is Cesars.
And when his Disciples strived for preheminencie, he said, The Kings of the
Nations govern them, and so forth. Whereby he declared, that neither he
himself, nor his, ought (as they call them) to be secular Judges: neither did
he by this refusing abolish the order of the Magistrate, but much more (as we
have said) confirm it. Christ abolished not the magistrates office, though he
himself re^used it.
Thus far your own Doctor, Hofmeister against you, that the intent of Christ
refusing to be a Judge herein was chiefly against such usurpation of worldly
Magistracy, as the Pope and his Prelates too, exercise. Page 1095. he
concludes, that a Bishop may in some cases lawfully excommunicate a wicked
Prince. But who denies this (M. Sanders) that a godly Bishop may upon great
and urgent occasion, if it shall be necessary to edify Gods Church, and there
be no other remedy, to flee to this last censure of excommunication against a
wicked King. The Bishops need not therefore calumniate Presbyteries, upon
pretense, that they hold it lawful to excommunicate Kings, since they
themselves aver, that Bishops may lawfully do it, and de facto, have sundry
times put it in practice, both at home and abroad. So Bishop Bridges.

Our laborious Historian M. John Fox M. John Fox.
in his Acts and Monuments (highly applauded by the whole Convocation in their
Canons, 1571. and enjoined to be had in every Cathedral and Collegiate Church,
and in every Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons and Canons
residentiaries house for their servants, and strangers to read in) does every
where disco^er condemn the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions, Wars, Wealth,
pride, calling, and secular employments of our Bishops: of which he writes
thus in particular. p. 1381. This has bin one great abuse in England these
many years: that such offices as been of most importance and weight have
commonly been committed to Bishops and other spiritual men: whereby three
devilli^h mischiefs, and inconveniences have happened in this Realm, to the
great dishonor of God, and utter neglecting of the flock of Christ, the which
three be these: First, they have had small leisure to attend to their pastoral
cures, which hereby have been utterly neglected and left undone. Secondly, it
has also puffed up many Bishops, and other spiritual persons into such
haughtiness, and pride, that they have thought no Noble man of the Realm
worthy to be their equal or fellow. Thirdly, where they by this means knew
the very secrets of Princes, they being in such high offices, have caused the
same to be known in Rome before the King could accomplish, and bring his
intents to pass in England. By ^his means has the Papacy b^ene so
maintained, and things ordered after their wills and pleasures, that much
mischief ha^h happened in this Realm, and others, sometimes to the
destruction of Princes; and sometimes to the utter undoing of many
Commonwealths. So he. Who page 216.358.359.360.414.430.432.434.439.517,
518.599.625.961.972.1009.1016.1463.1856. of the said Acts and Monuments.
London, 1610. writes often in the magent, That Bishops and Presbyters are all
one and the same, and that there was no difference between them in the
Primitive times, which was the common received opinion of our Martyrs: yea of
our learned D. Humfrey Regius professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford
Puritanopap. Confut. ad Rat. 3. p. 262.265. and of D. William Fulke against
Bristow Motive. 40. against Gregory Martyn, p 172. and confuration of the
Rhemish Testament Notes on Titus 1. sect. 2. and on Philip. I. sect. 1.

Bishop Iu^l.
John Iuell the incomparable Bishop of Salisbury, in his defense of the Apology
of the Church of England Part. 2. cap. 3. disp. 5. p. 98, 99, 100, 101. writes
thus of the equality of Bishops and Ministers. Ad E^agrium
Saint Jerome says, All Bishops wheresoever they be, be they at Rome, be they
at Eugubiu^, be they at Constantinople, be they at Rhegium, be all of like
pre-eminence, and of like Priesthood. And as D^ simplicit. Prelat^r.
Cyprian says, There is but one Bishopric, and a piece thereof is perfectly
and wholly holden of every particular Bishop. What Saint Jerome meant hereby;
Erasmus, a man of great learning, and judgment expounds thus. Jerome seems
to match all Bishops together, E^asm. in Schol. in Epist. ad Euagrium.
as if they were all equally the Apostles successors, and he thinks not any
Bishop to be less than other for that he is poorer, or greater than other,
for that he is richer: for he makes the Bishop of Eugubium (a poor town)
equal with the Bishop of Rome. And farther he thinks that a Bishop is no
better than any Priest, saving that the Bishop has authority to order
Ministers. Hereto M. Harding answers thus. M. Harding.
Erasmus says within five lines following, that the Me^ropolitan has a
certain dignity, and jurisdiction above other Bishops; take the one (says
he) with the other; I am contented M. Harding: Erasmus says, The Metropolitan
had a dignity above other Bishops; but he says no^, the Bishop of Rome had
jurisdiction over all Bishops throughout the World. In Saint Hieromes time
there were Me^ropolitans, Archbishops, Archdeacons and others. But Christ
appointed not these distinctions of orders from the beginning. These names are
not found in all the Scriptures. Hieron. i^ Epist. ad Titum, c. I.
This is the thing that we de^end. S. Jerome says, Let Bishops understand
(whereunto we add further, Let the Bishops of Rome themselves undestand) that
they are in authority over Priests more by custom than by order of Gods truth.
These be Hieromes words truly translated: what he meant thereby I leave to the
judgment of the Reader. Erasmus likewise says in the self same place above
alleged, Erasm. in Schol. i^ Epist. ad Euagr.
Whereas Saint Jerome yields less dignity and authority unto Bishops, than
nowadayes they seem to have, we must understand he spoke of that time wherein
he lived. If he had seen our Bishops that now be, he would have said
otherwise. For now the Pope claims a power above all the powers in heaven and
earth, as it is written in the Council of Lateran. Again, ^rasmus in another
place speaking hereof, says thus. Sub. L^^ne S^ssi^ne 10. Erasm. in Apologia
ad Pium.
This holy man Saint Jerome says plainly and freely, and as he thinks, that
the Bishop of Rome is above other Bishops, not by Bishopricke^ but only by
riches. By riches only, M. Harding, Erasmus says, the Pope is above other
Bishops. By riches only (he says) not by right of Gods word, not by virtue,
not by learning, not by diligence in preaching, but only by riches. Now it may
please you to follow your own rule, and to lay the one saying to the other.
But Saint Ieromes words are plain of themselves, and have no need of other
expositor. Thus he writes. Hieron. ad Euagrium.
What does a Bishop saving only the ordering of Ministers, but a Priest may do
the same? Neither may we think that the Church of Rome is one^ and the Church
of all the world beside is another, France, England, Africa, Persia, Levante,
India, and all barbarous Nations worship one Christ, and keep one rule of the
truth. If we seek for Authority, the whole world is greater than the City of
Rome. Wheresoever there be a Bishop, be it at Eugu^ium, be it at Rome, be it at
Constantinople, be it at Rhegium, Be it at Alexandria, be it at Tanais, they
are all of one worthiness, they are all of one Bishopric; The power of
riches, and the baseness of poverty makes not a Bishop either higher or
lower, for they are all the Apostles successors: What bring you me the custom
of Rome, being but one City? Here M. Harding finds great fault, for that I
have translated these words, Of one Bishopric, and not as he would have it,
Of one Priesthood. God wo^, a very simple quarrel. Let him take whether he
likes best, if either other of these words shall serve his turn. Erasmus
says, Erasmus adversus Albert. Pighium.
Bishop, P^iest, and Presbyter, at that time were all t^ree all one. But M^
Harding says, The Primates had Authority over other in^eriour Bishops: I
grant they had so. Howbeit, they had it by agreement and custom, but neither
by Christ, nor by Peter, nor Paul, nor by any right of Gods Word. Saint^ Jerome
says, Hier^n. in Epist. ad Titum. c. 1.
Let Bishops understand that they are above Priests, rather of Custom than of
any truth or right of Christ's institution, and that they ought to rule the
Church altogether. And again, Hieron. ^odem loc^.
Therefore a Priest and a Bishop are both one thing, and before that by the
inflaming of the Devil, parts were taken in Religion, and these words were
uttered among the people, I hold of Paul, I hold of Apollo, I hold of Peter,
the Churches were governed by the common advice of the Priests. Saint Augustine
says, August Epist. 9.
The office of a Bi^hop is above the office of a Priest, (not by the authority
of the Scrip^ures, but) after the names of honor, which the custom of the
Church has now obtained.

So part. 2. cap. 9. Divis. 1. p. 196 He brings in M. Harding the Papist
writing thus. Even so they which denied the distinction of a Bishop and a
Priest, were condemned of heresy as we, find in Saint Augustine, in the Book
and Chapter aforesaid. And in Epiphanius Lib. 3. cap. 75. In the Council of
Constance, the same is to be found. To whom he answers in the Margent. Vnt^uth;
for hereby both Saint Paul, and Saint Jerome, and other good men are condemned
of Heresy. And p. 202. He gives this further answer. But what meant M. Harding
here to come in with the difference between Priests and Bishops, thinks he
that Priests and Bishops hold only by Tradition? or is it so horrible an
heresy as he makes it, to say, that by the Scriptures of God a Bishop and a
Priest are all one? or knows he how far, and unto whom, he reaches the
name of an Heretic? Verily Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy Homili 11.
Hieron. ad Euagrium.
Between a Bishop and a Priest, in a manner there is no difference. Saint
Hierome says somewhat in rougher sort: I hear say, there is one become so
peevish, that he sets Deacons before Priests, that is to say, before
Bishops: Whereas the Apostle plainly teaches us, that Priests and Bishops he
all one. Saint Augustine says: Aug. in quaest. Novi and Vet. Testam^ q. 101.
What is a Bishop but the first Priest, that is to say, the highest Priest? So
says Saint Ambrose. Amb. in 1 Timothy cap. 3.
There is but one cons^cration of a Priest and Bishop; for both of them are
Priests, but the Bishop is the first.

In his Sermon upon Haggai 1 p. 176. he writes thus, against the temporal
possessions and secular Offices of Clergy men: When Constantinus the Emperor
endowed the Church with lands and possessions, Ioh. de Paristis. cap. 22. in
vira Silvestri.
they say there was a voice of Angels heard in the air saying: This day poison
is powered into the Church. If there were poison powered into Church then; I
doubt there was nover Treacle powered into it since. This we see, that from
that time she has done worse and worse. Augustine finds fault with the
multitude of Ceremonies, and says, the Church in ^his time was in worse case
by man's devises, than was the Church of the Jews. Bernard said, There is no
part sound in the Clergy. And again, They which choose the first places in the
Church, are chiefest in persecuting Christ. And again, they be not Teachers,
but deceivers; they are not feeders but beguilers; they be not Prelates, but
Pilates. Which he thus further prosecutes in his Sermon on Matthew 9. p. 198.
And what shall I speak of Bishops? Their cloven Miter signifies perfect
knowledge of the new Testament, and the old; their Crosiers Staff signifies
diligence in attending the flock of Christ; their purple Boots and Sandals
signify that they should ever be booted and ready to go abroad through thick
and thin to teach the Gospel; and thereto they applied the words of the
Prophet, How beautiful are the feet of them which bring glad tidings of
peace, which bring glad tidings of good things? But alas, in what kind of
things do they bear themselves for Bishops? These mystical titles and shows
are not enough to ^e^ch in the Lords Harvest; they are garments more meet ^or
Players, than for good Laborers. Saint Bernard writes thus to Eugenius the
Bishop of Rome, who sometime had been his Scholar. De c^nsidera^^ ad Eug.
lib. 4. ^
Thou which art the shepherd ^ettest up and down shining in gold, and
gorgeously attired: but what get thy sheep? If I durst speak it, these things
are not the fodder for Christ's sheep, but for devils. Whatsoever apparel they
have upon them, unless they will fall to work, Christ will not know them for
laborers. How then can the Bishop of Rome be taken for the chief Pastor of
Christ, which these 900. years has not opened his mouth to feed the flock?
These 900. years I say? since Gregory the first of that name, it can hardly be
found, that ever any Bishop of Rome was seen in a Pulpit. One of themselves
Adrianus the fourth a Bishop of Rome was wont to say, We succeed not Peter in
teaching but Romulus in murdering. And in the Canon of ^he Apostles it is
decreed, That the Bishop that teaches not his flock, should be deposed: To
which purpose they allege Aug. de Civit. De^ lib. 19. c. 19.
Saint Augustine: A Bishops office i^ a name of labor, not a name of honor:
that he which coveteth the place of preeminence, and has not a desire to do
good, may know he is not a Bishop. Thus says Origin; Thus says Chrysostom:
thus say diverse others of the old Fathers, whom it were long and needless to
rehearse. Chrysostom. Hom. 43^ in opere imperfecto in Mat.
There be many Priests, and few Priests, (says Chrysostom) Many that bear
the name, but few that be Priests indeed. Thus the Harvest is great and
plentious, but the Laborers are but few. The laborers are but few, but the
destroyers and wasters are exceeding many; Yea, such as should be the harvest
men, most of all destroy the corn. I will not here report that I am well able,
that your eyes have seen, and that many of you have felt; the state of our
time has been such. Saint Bernard saw it in his time, and therefore says,
Sermon. 33. in Cantica.
All are ^riends, and all are enemies; all are helpers, and all are adversaries
and hinderers. Again, Bern. Sermon. 1. in Conv. S. Pauli.
Alas, alas, O Lord God, they are the chiefest in persecuting thee, that seem
to love the highest rooms, and to bear rule in thy Church, (he cites their
Latin, which I omi^.) And in his Defense of the Apology ^f the Church of
England, part. 6. c. 9. Div. 3. p. 667, 568. he writes thus of Bishops
intanglement in worldly affairs, and bravery in apparel. Our Princes never
took upon them the office of Bishops, but your Bishops have taken upon them
the office of Princes. Of your Bishops it is written in your own Conc.
Macr^^se ^itatur. ab Illyr. int^r test^s verit. p. 121.
Councels, Behold there is now in a manner no worldly affair, but Priests and
Bishops have it in hand. Such Bishops be they of whom Saint Chrysostom writes
thus, They that neither believe, nor fear the judgment of God, abusing their
Ecclesiastical dignity in secular sort, turn the same into secular dignity.
Such Bishops they be of whom Saint Hierome says thus, They themselves be to
themselves both Laymen and Bishops too. And again, Chrysostom. in Mat. Homil. 35.
They worship the Lord and Melchom both together, thinking that they may serve
both the World and the Lord, and satisfy two masters at once, God and Mammon;
who fighting under Christ, bend themselves to worldly affairs, and offer up
one image, Both to God and Caesar. And therefore Cardinal Cu^am^^ says,
Hieron. contra Lucif^rianos.
Hereof grows a great deformity, that Bishops are bent only to worldly cares.
Mark these words M. Harding, he says, Hieron. in Sophoniam, ^ap. 1.
Your Bishops are bent only to worldly cares. If ye will believe none of
these, Conc. Trident.
yet your Popes own Legates, in your late Chapter at Trident, speaking of your
Priestlike apparel say thus: Sub Paulo 3. Admonitio Legator.
Our Priests differ nothing from Laymen, saving only in apparel, nay indeed
they differ not so much from them, as in apparel. Ye say your Bishops be gay
and gallant, attended and guarded with Princelike routs both behind and before:
And therefore ye make no small account, specially in respect of our estate,
which you call beggarly. In such disdain the Heathen sometimes said,
Av^ntinus, lib. 3. de Rupert^.
That Christ was the beggerliest and poorest of all the Gods that were in
heaven. Howbeit our Bishoprics saving that certain of your Fathers have
shamefully spoiled them, are now even as they were before^ Certainly the
poorest Bishopric in England, as it is reported, is better in revenues than
three of your Popes Italian Bishoprics in the Kingdom of Naples: Howbeit the
Gospel of Christ stands not by riches, but by truth: in comparison of the
one, we make small reckoning of the other. Nevertheless the wise and godly
have evermore sound fault with the Ecclesiastical bravery of your Roman
Clergy. Ber^. in Cantic. Sermon. 33. Holcot. in sapient. lect. 23.
Saint Bernard says, Therehence comes their whorelike finenesse, their
players weed, their Princely apparel: therehence comes their gold in their
bridles, in their Saddles, and in their spurs. Again he says, Bern. in
Canti^. Sermon. 77.
They go trimly and finely in their colors, as if a spouse should come from
her chamber: if thou should suddenly see one of them jetting a far off,
would thou not rather think it were a spouse, than the keeper of the spouse?
Lau^. Valla de Donat. Constable. Paralipomen.
Laurentius Valla, although bitterly, yet not unpleasantly thus expresses your
Lordly bravey. Vrspergen.
I think if the Devil in the air have any games among them to make sport
withal, they are most busily occupied in counterfeiting the apparel and tire,
and pride and riot of Priests, and have greatest pastime. Pope Bonefacius the
8. in a great Iubilee; and in a solemn procession, went apparelled in the
Empe^ours Robes, and had the Crown Imperial on his head, and the sword of
majesty borne before him as an Emperor. This spiritual jolity M. Harding
likes you well. Notwithstanding Saint Bernard says, Bernar. de consideration^
ad Eugenium. l. 4^
These be pastures for Devils, not for sheep; no doubt even thus did Peter.
Even such pastime played Saint Paul. Ye tell us further: though they teach not,
though they say no^, though they do not, though they live not as becomes
Bishops, nor as becomes a Christian man, yet be they Bishops notwithstanding.
Hereat we will not greatly strive: for so the Wolf, if he once get a
sheep-hooke, and a cloak, may be a shepherd: and a blind man, if he get once
into the watchtower, may be a spy; But miserable are the poor sheep that so
are fed: miserable is that poor Castle that so is watched. Saint Augustine
says 8 Quast. 1. Qui Episcopatum.
A Bishops office is a name of labor, and not of honor, that who so loves to
rule, and not to profit, may understand himse^fe to be no Bishop. Again he
says of such a one, August. 2. qu. 7. Qui nec. Aug.
He ought rather to be called a shameless dog than a Bishop. As for that
ye say, Your Bishops be duly ordinated and consecrated. Saint Augustine
replieth; Aug. cont. Donatist. lib. 6.
Touching the outward consecration of a Bishop, many give it to wolves, and be
wolves themselves. Saint Bernard speaking of your Priests and Bishops says,
Bern. de considerat. ad Eugenium. lib. 3.
In their apparel they are Soldiers, in their gains they are Priests and
Bishops: But in effect and in deed they are neither of both: for neither do
they fight in the field as do Soldiers, nor do they preach as Priests and
Bishops. Of whether order therefore be they? Whereas they would be of both
Orders, 1^ Cor. 15.
they forsake both, and confound both. Saint Paul says, every man shall rise
again in his own order: but in what order shall these rise? whether forasmuch
as they have sinned without order, shall they perish without order? I fear me
they shall be ordered none otherwhere, but whereas is no Order, but disorder,
and horror everlasting.

Again, in his Defense of the Apology of the Church of England, Par. 6. chap.
2. Divis. 1. he writes thus concerning Bishops voting, and authority in
Parliament in settling matters in Religion. Where ye would seem to say, that
the Parliament holden in the first year of the Queens Majesty's Reign was no
Parliament: for that your Bishops refused wilfully to agree unto the godly
Laws there concluded, ye seem therein to bewray in your self some want of
skill: the wise and learned could soon have told you, that in the Parliaments
of England, matters have evermore used to pass not of necessity, by the
special consent of the Archbishops and Bishops, as if without them no Statute
might lawfully be enacted, but only by the more part of the voices, yea
alt^ough all the Archbishops and Bishops were never so earnestly bent against
it. And Statutes so passing in Parliament only by the voices of the Lords
temporal, without the consent and agreement of the Lords Spiri^uall, have
nevertheless always bin confirmed, and ratified by the real assent of the
Prince, and have bin enacted and published under the names of the Lords
spiritual and Temporal. Read the Statutes of King Edward the first; There
shall ye find that in a Parliament solemnly ho^tlen by him at S. Edmundbury,
the Archbishops and Bishops were quite shut forth: and yet the Parliament held
on; and good and wholesome laws were there enacted, the departing, or abs^nce,
or malice of the Lords Spiritual notwithstanding. In the records thereof it is
written thus A^. Do. 1^9^
The King keeping the Parliament wi^h his Barons, the Clergy (that is to say,
the Archbishops and Bishops) being shut forth, it was enacted, etc. Likewise
An. 1273. In provisione Mar^ona. c. 9.
In provisione de Martona in the time of King Henry the third. Whereas matter
was moved of Bastardy, touching the Legitimation of Bastards, borne before
Marriage; The Statute past wholly with the Lords Temporal, whether the Lords
Spiritual would or no: yea, and that contrary to the express Decrees and
Canons of the Church of Rome. The like hereof (as I am informed) may be found,
Extr. Qui silli sunt Legitime.
Rich. 2. An. 11. c. 3. Howbeit in these cases (I must confess) I walk
somewhat without my compass. Touching the judgment hereof, I re^erre my self
wholly unto the Learned. Further, whereas ye call the Doctrine of Christ, that
now by Gods great mercy, and to your great grief is universally and freely
preached, a Parliament Religion, and a Parliament Gospel (for such sobriety
becomes you well, and may stand you in stead when learning fails) ye might
have remembered that Christ himself at the beginning wa^ universally received,
and honored through this Realm by assent of Parliament; and further, that
without Parliament your Pope himself was never received, no not in the late
time of Queen Ma^y. Yea and even then his holiness was clogged with
Parliament conditions, that whatsoever had been determined in Parliament, and
was not repealed, were it never so contrary to his will and Canons, should
remain still inviolable and stand in force. Otherwise his holiness had gone
home again. Such, M. Harding, is the authority of a Parliament: Verily if
Parliaments of Realms be no Parliaments, then will your Pope be no Pope.
Therefore as you now call the truth of God, that we profess a Parliament
Religion, and a Parliament Gospel, even so with like sobriety and gravity of
speech ye might have said, Our Fathers in old times had a Parliamen^ Christ.
And your late Fathers and Brethren had of late, in the time of Queen Mary, a
Parliament Faith, a Parliament Mass, and a Parliament Pope. Neither is it so
strange a matter to see Ecclesiastical causes debated in Parliament. Read ^he
Laws of K. Inas, K. Elfred, K. Edward, K. Ethelstane, K. Edmund, K. Edgar, K.
Canute; and ye shall find that our godly forefathers, the Princes and Peers
of this Realm, never vouchsafed to intr^at of matters of Peace, or War, or
otherwise touching the Common State, before all controversie^ of Religion, and
causes E^clesiasticall had been concluded King, L^ges Canuti.
Canut^ in his Parliament holden at Winchester upon Christmas day, after sundry
Laws and Orders made touching the Faith, the keeping of H^ly-dayes, Publik^
prayers, learning of the Lords Prayer, receiving of the Communion thrice in the
year, the manner and ^orme of Baptism, Fasting, and other like matters of
Religion, in the end thereof says thus: Iam sequitur institutio Legum
Secularium: Now follows an order of Temporal Laws. In a Parliament holden
by King William the Conqueror, it is written thus. Rex, quia Vicarius Summi
Regis est, ad hoc constituitur, ut Regnum and populum Domini, and super omnia
sanctam Ecclesiam regat and defendat etc. The King for as much as he is the
Vicar of the Highest King, is thererefore appointed to this purpose, that he
should rule and defend the Kingdom and people of the Lord, and above all
things the holy Church, etc. Hereby it appears that Kings and Princes are
specially and of purpose appointed by God, not only to defend, but also to
Govern and Rule the Holy Church. Thus far Bishop Jewel, who here clearly
affirms, that Parliaments may be kept, and matters of Religion there
determined without Bishops. Neither is this any strange doctrine, for not only
M^. Richard Crompton in his Jurisdiction of Courts. fol. 19, 20. (who cites
this passage of Bishop Jewel) is of the same opinion; but in the famous Robert
Keilwey his Reports, f. 184. b.
case of Doctor Standish in the 7. year of King Henry the eight, at a meeting
at Black Friars before the King himself, the whole Temporal Council, and a
Committee of both Houses of Parliament, it was resolved by all the Judges,
Nostre Seig^iour le Roy poit assets bien tener son Parliament perl^y, andses
temporal Seigniours, and per ses Commons, tout sans les spirituals Seigniors;
Carlos spiritual Signiors nont ascun place en^^ Parliament Chamber per Reason
de lour spiritualty, mes solement per^ Reason de lour Temporal possessions
etc. Bishop Latymer. Bishop Bils^n.
That our Lord the King may very well hold his Parliament by himself, his
Temporal Lords, and by his Commons, altogether without the Spiritual Lords,
for the spiri^uall Lords have no place in the Parliament Chamber of reason of
their spirituality but only by reason of their Temporal possessions or
Baronies.

And if this be not sufficient evidence^ Bishop Latimer in his fourth Sermon of
the Plough, p. 19, 20. complains against Bishops placing in, and being Lords
of the Parliament; and makes this one chief cause, that they be unpreaching
Prelates, lazy loyterers, and idle Ministers. Yea, Thomas Bilson Bishop of
Winchester, a great Patriot of Episcopacie, resolves and proves as much in his
Book entitled, The true difference between Christian Subjection and
unchristian Rebellion part. 3. p. 540, 541, 542. If her Majes^y receiv^d and
^stablished nothing but the truth of Christ in her Pa^liament, A Parliament
taking part with truth has the warrant of God and the Magistrate.
in vain do you bark against God and the Magistrate for lack of competent
Courts, Ecclesiastical Judges, and legal means to debate and decide matters
of Religion. When God commands, all humane bars and Laws do cease: If they
join with God; they may be used, if they impugn the truth, they must be
despised. And yet in our case the Scepter united and adjoined it self to the
word of God, and therefore if Princes may command for truth in their own
dominions, as I have largely proved they may; why should not the Prince having
the full consent of her Nobles and Commons restore and settle the truth of God
within her Realm?

Phil. Lay men may not pronounce of Faith.


Theo. But Laymen may choose what faith they will profess, Laymen may make
their choice what faith they will profess.
and Princes may dispose of their Kingdoms, though Priests and Bishops would
say nay.


Phi. Religion they may not dispose without a Council.


Theo. Not if God command.


Phi. How shall they know what God commands unless they have a Council.


Theo. This is childish wrangling, I ask, if God command, whether the Prince
shall refuse to obey till the Clergy confirm the same?


Phi. You may be sure a wise and sober Clergy will not dissent from Gods
precepts.


Theo. What they will do, is out of our matter. But in case they do; to which
shall the Prince hearken, to God or those that bear themselves for Priests.


Phi. In case they do so, you need not doubt, but God must be regarded and not
men.


Theo. And has the Prince sufficient authority to put that in ^re which God
commands, The Prince is authorized from God to execut^ his Commandment.
though the Priests continue their wilfulnes?


Phi. There is no Council nor consent of men good against God.


Theo. Hold you there; Then when Ch^istian Princes are instructed and resolved
by learned and faithful teachers what God requires at their hands, what need
they care for the backward disposition of such false Prophets as are turned
from the truth and preach lies?


Phi. In England when her Majesty came to the Crown, it was not so. The
Bishops that dissented were grave, virtuous and honorable Pastors, standing in
defense of the Catholic and ancient Faith of their Fathers.


Theo. You say so, we say no.


Phi. Those be but words.


Theo. You say very right; and therefore the more to blame you, that in both
your books do play on that string with your Rhetorical and Thrasonicall
fluence, and never enter any point or proof, that my profi^ your Reader: you
presume your selves to have such apparent right and rule over the Faith, over
the Church, The Jesuits presume that all is theirs.
over Christian Princes, and Realms, that without your consent they shall
neither conclude, nor consult what religion they will profess. Their acts
shall be disorders, their Laws injuries, their correction tyranny, if you
mislike them. This dominion and jurisdiction over all Kingdoms and Countries,
if your holy Father and you may have for the speaking; you were not wise if you
would not claim it, but before we believe you, you must bring some better
ground of your Title then such magnificall and majesticall florishes. The
Prince and the parliament, you say, had no power to determine, or deliberate of
those matters^ And why so? you (to wit Bishops) did dissent. May not the Prince
command for truth within her Realm, The Prince may command for truth, though
the Bishops would say no.
except your consents be first required and had? May not her Highness serve
Christ in making Laws for Christ, without your liking? Claim you that
interest and prerogative, that without you nothing shall be done in matters of
Religion, by the Laws of God, or by the liberties of this Realm? By the Laws
of the Land you have no such privilege. Parliaments have been kept by the
King and his Barons, the Clergy wholly excluded, and yet their Acts and
Statutes good. And when the Bishops were present, their voices from the
Conquest to this day were never negative. By Gods Law you have nothing to do
with making Laws for Kingdoms and common^wealths: you may teach, you may not
command. Persuasion is your part, compulsion is the Princes. If Princes embrace
the truth, you must obey them. If they pursue truth, you must abide them. By
what authority then claim you this Dominion over Princes, The Jesuits have
neither Gods Law, nor man's to make that which the Prince, and the Parliament
did, to be void for lack of the Bishops assents.
that their Laws for Religion shall be void unless you consent?


Phi. They be no Judges of faith.


Theo. No more are you. It is lawful for any Christian to reject your
doctrine, if he perceive it to be false, though you teach it in your Churches,
and pronounce it in your Councels, to be never so true.


Phi. That proves not every private man's opinion to be true.


Theo. Not yet to be false, the greater number is not ever a sure warrant for
truth. And Judges of faith, though Princes be not, The Kings Judah did command
for truth without a Coun^^ll.
yet are they maintainers, establishers and upholders of faith with public
power, and positive Laws, which is the point you now withstand.


Phil. That they may do when a Council is precedent to guide them


Theo. What Councell^ had 2 Chronicles. 14. cap. 15.
Asa the King of Judah when he commanded his people to do according to the Law,
and the Commandment, and made a cov^nant, that whosoever would not seek the
Lord God of Israel should be slain?


Phi. He had Azariah the prophet.


Theo. One man is no Council, and he did but encourage and commend the King,
and that long after he had established Religion in his Realm. What council
had 2 Chronicles. ^9^.
Ezechiah to lead him, when he restored the true worship of God throughout his
land, and was feign to send for the Priests and Levites, and to put them in
mind of their duties? What Council had Josiah, when ten years after his
coming to the Crown he was forced to send for direction to Huldath the
Prophetess, not finding a man in Judah that did or could undertake the charge?
4 Kings 22.



Phi. These were Kings of the Old Testament, and they had the Law of God to
guide them.


Theo. Then since Christian Princes have the same Scriptures which they had,
and also the Gospel of Christ, and Apostolic writings to guide them, which
they had not, why should they not in their Kingdoms retain the same power,
Christian Princes may do the lik^.
which you see the Kings of Judah had and used to their immor^all praise and
joy?


Phi. The Christian Emperors ever called Counsels, before they would attempt
any thing in Ecclesiastical matters.


Theo. What Council had Constantine authorized Christian Religson without any
Co^^cell. Eus^b. de vita Constant. lib. 2.
Constantine, when with his Princely power he publicly received and settled
Christian religion throughout the World, twenty years before the Fathers met
at Nice? What councels had Justinian for all those Ecclesiastical
constitutions and orders, Justinian had no Council for the making of his
Constitutions
which he decreed^ and I have often repeated? What Councels had Charles for
the Church Laws and Chapters which he proposed and enjoined as well to the
Pastors as to the people of his Empire?


Phi. They had instruction by some godly Bishops that were about them.


Theo. Conference with some Bishops, such as they liked, they might have, but
counsels for these causes they had none. In 480. years after Christian
Religion was established by Christian Laws, I mean from Constantine the first,
to Constantine the seventh, there were very near forty Christian Emperors,
whose Laws and Acts for Ecclesiastical affairs were infinite; and yet in all
that time they never called but six general Councels, But 6. general
Councels in 790 years.
and those for the Godhead of the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and for the two
distinct natures and wills in Christ. All other points of Christian Doctrine
and Discipline they received, established, and maintained without ^ecumenicall
Councels, upon the private instruction of such Bishops and clerks as they
favored or trusted. So^ra. l. 5. c. 10. Theodosius made his own choice what
Religion he would establish.
Theodosius, as I showed before, made his own choice what faith he would
follow, and had no man, nor means to direct him unto truth, but his own
prayers unto God, and private reading of those sundry confessions that were
offered him, etc. Page 543. he thus proceeds, Had you been in the Primitive
Church of Christ, you would have gallantly disdained these and other examples
of Christian Kings and Countries converted and instructed by Merchants,
sometimes by women, Realms have been Christened upon the persuasions of Lay men
and women.
most times by the single persuasion of one man without all legal means or
judicial proceeding^: the poor souls of very zeal embracing the Word of
life when it was first offered them, and neglecting your number of voices,
consent of Priest^, and competent Courts, as frivilous exc^ptions against God,
and dangerous lets to their Salvation^ Ruff. l. ^. c. 9. And never asked the
Priests leave so to do^. Soc. l. 1. c. 19.
Frumentius a Christian Child, taken prisoner in India the farther, India
converted by Merchants.
and brought at length by Gods good Providence to bear some sway in the Realm
in the nonage of the King, carefully sought for such as were Christians among
the Roman Merchants, and gave them most free power to have assemblies in every
place, yielding them whatsoever was requisite, and exhorting them in sundry
places to use the Christian prayers. And within short time he built a Church
and brought it to pass, that some of the Indians were instructed in the faith
and joined with them. The Ruff. l. 1. c. 10.
King of Iberia near Pontus, Iberia converted by a woman.
when he saw his wi^e restored to health by the prayers of a Christian Captive,
and himself delivered out of the sudden danger that he was in, only by
thinking and calling on Christ, whom the Captive woman named so often to his
wife, sent for the woman, and desired to learn the manner of her Religion, and
promised after that never to worship any other God but Christ: The Jesuits
would have been eloquent against this King that yielded his Realm to Christ
at the direction of a seely wench.
The Captive woman taught him as much as a woman might, and admonished him to
build a Church and described the form (how it must be done;) whereupon the
King calling the people of the whole Nation together, told what had befallen
the Queen and him, and taught them the faith, and became as it were the
Apostle of this Nation, though he were not yet baptized. The examples of
England, France, and other Countries, are innumerable, where Kings and Common
wealths, at the preaching of one man, have submitted themselves to the faith of
Christ, without Councels or any Synodall or judicial proceedings. And
therefore each Prince and people without these means have lawful power to
serve God and Christ his Son, Any man may serve Christ whosoever say nay.
notwithstanding twenty Bishops as in our case, or if you will, twenty thousand
Bishops, should take exceptions to the Gospel of truth, which is nothing else
but to wax mad against God, by pretense of humane reason and order. By all
which it is evident that Parliaments may not only be held and determine
Secular matters, but likewise Ecclesiastical and Religious, without the
presence of Bishops which is no ways necessary, if expedient.

Touching the parity of Bishops and Presbyters by Divine institution and their
difference only by custom, he determins thus, Ibid. part. 2. page 233.234.
The title and authorithy of Archbishops and Patriarchs was not ordained by
the Commandment of Christ or his Apostles, Patriarchs not erected by Christ but
by consent of Bishops.
but the Bishops long after, when the Church began to be troubled with
dissentions, were content to lincke themselves together, and in every Province
to suffer one (whom they preferred for the worthiness of his City and called
their Metropolitan, that is, Bishop of the chief or mother City) to have this
prerogative in all doubts of Doctrine and Discipline to assemble the rest of
his brethren or consult them absent by Letters, and see that observed, which
the most part of them determined. Hiero. in Epist. ad Ti^. cap. 1. Ibid.
Before there began Schisms in Religion the Churches, says S. Hierome, were
governed by the Common Council of the Seniors. And therefore let the Bishops
understand that they be greater than (Ministers or) Elders rather by custom,
than by any truth of the Lords appointment, and that they ought to govern the
Church in Common: and in his Epistle to Evagrius having fully proved by the
Scriptures that the Apostles called themselves but Presbyters, Elders or
Seniors, he adds. Hiero. ad Evag. Epist. ^.
That after their times, one was chosen in every Church and preferred before
the rest to have the dignity of a Bishop, this was provided for a remedy
against Schisms, lest every man drawing some unto him should rent the Church
of Christ in pieces. For what does a Bishop, except ordering of others, Ibidem.
which an Elder may not do? And lest you should think he speaks not as well
of the chief as of the meaner Bishops, he compares three of the greatest
Patriarchs with three of the poorest Bishops he could name. Hiero^ Ibid.
A Bishop of what place soever he be, either of Rome, or of Eugubium, or of
Constantinople, or of Rhegium, or of Alexandria, or of Tajus has the same
merit and the same (function or) Priesthood, abundance of riches or baseness
of po^erty does not make a Bishop higher or lower, for they all be successors
to the Apostles. So that the Bishop of Rome by Commission from Christ and
succession from the Apostles is no higher than the meanest Bishop in world. The
Patriarchs grew by consent and custom.
The Superiority which he and others had as Metropolitanes in their own
Provinces came by custom, as the great Council of Council. Nicen. cap. 6.
Nice witnesses, not by Christ's institution. Let the old use continue in
Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria be chief over all
those places, for so much as the Bishop of Rome has the like custom. Likewise
at Antioch, and in other Provinces, let the Churches keep theer Prerogatives.
The general Council of Ephesus confesses the same. Council. Ephesians. 1.
Decretum post quam Cypr. Episc. accessissent ad council.
It seems good to this sacred and Oecumenicall Synod to conserve to every
Province, their right privileges whole and untouched, which they have had of
old according to the custom that now long has prevailed. Next their authority
was subject not only to the discretion and moderation of their brethren
assembled in Council, Patriarchs always subject to Princes and their
Ecclesiastical Laws.
but also to the Laws and Edicts of Christian Princes, to be granted,
extended, limited and ordered as they say cause. For example, the first
Council of Constantinople advanced the Bishop of that City to be the next
Patriarch to the Bishop of Rome, which before he was not. And the Council of
Council. Chalced. acti^. 16.
Chalcedon made him equal in Ecclesiastical honors with the Bishop of Rome,
and assigned him a larger Province than before he had. So Justinian gave to the
City in Africa, that he called after his own name the Sea of an Archbishop.

Touching Bishops secular Jurisdiction, imprisonment, and temporal affairs he
writes thus, Ibid. part. 2, 126.127.
Bishops be no governors of Countries, What is meant by Governor.
Princes be, that is, Bishops bear not the sword to reward and revenge,
Princes do: Bishops have no power to command and punish, Princes have. This
appears by the Words of our Savior, expressly forbidding his Apostles to be
Rulers of Nations, and leaving it to Princes. Mat. 20. and Mark. 10.
The Kings of Nations rule over (their people) and they that be great ones,
exercise authority; with you it shall not be so, that is, you shall neither
bear rule, Christ by that word distinguishes the Ministers from the
Magistrate.
nor exercise authority over your brethren. Phi. the Word is (...), they
overruled their Subjects with injustice and violence, you shall not do so.
Theo. So your new Translation over-ruleth the Word, howbeit Christ in that
place does not traduce the power of Princes, as unjust or outrageous, but
distinguishes the calling of his Apostles from the manner of regiment which
God has allowed the magistrate. Christ says not, Princes be Tyrants, you
shall deal more courteously than they do, but he says, Luke 22.
Princes be Lords and Rulers over their people, by Gods Ordinance, you shall
not be so. Again the Word which Saint Luke has is (...), without any
composition. They be Lords and Masters, and S. Paul confesses of himself and
other Apostles, Not that we be Lords or Masters of your faith: yea the compound
(...), is with power and force to rule men whether they will or no, not with
wrong and injury to oppress them, and therefore the conclusion is inevitable,
that Princes may lawfully compel and punish their Subjects which Bishops may
not. Public Government is by correction and compulsion.
This distinction between them is evident by their several commissions which
God has signed: The Prince, not the Priest, Romans 13. Mat. 26. 1 Timothy 3. and
Tit. 1. Mat. 24. 2 Timothy 2.
bears the sword, Ergo the Prince not the Priest is Gods Minister to revenge
malefactors. Peter himself was sharply rebuked by Christ for using the sword,
and in Peter all Pastors and Bishops are straitely charged not to meddle with
it. All that take the sword shall perish with the sword. And of all men a
Bishop must be no striker, for if he that should feed his Masters Household fall
to striking, he shall have his portion with hypocrites. The servants of God
must be gentle toward all, instructing those that resist with mildness,
Bishops forbid to use violence. 2 Timothy 3. and 4.
not compelling any with sharpness. Their function is limited to the
preaching of the Word, and dispensing the Sacraments, which have no kind of
compulsion in them, but invite men only by sober persuasions to believe and
embrace the promises of God. To conclude, Pastors may teach, exhort, and
reprove, not force, command or revenge, only Princes be governors, that is,
public Magistrates to prescribe by their Laws, and punish with the sword
such as resist them within their dominions, which Bishops may not do: which he
thus further prosecutes. Part. 3. p. 358. Pastors have their regiment but over
the souls, not over the bodies or goods of men.
The watchmen and Shepherds that serve Christ in his Church, have their kind
of regiment distinct from the temporal power and State, but that regiment of
theirs is by counsel and persuasion, not by terror or compulsion, and
reaches neither to the goods nor the bodies of any men, much less to the
crowns and lives of Princes, etc. Ibid. Part. 3. p. 529.526. The Pastor cannot
force his flock.
Princes may force their Subjects, by the temporal sword which they bear,
Bishops may not force their flock with any corporal or external violence.
Chrysostom. de ^ac^rd^t. l. 2.
Chrysostom largely debateth and fully concludes this matter with us. If any
sheep, says he, go out of the right way, and leaving the plentiful Pastures
graze on barren and steep places, the Sheepeheard somewhat exalts his voice
to reduce the dispersed straggling sheep, and to compel them to the ^locke.
But if any man wander from the right path of the Christian faith, the Pastor
must use great pains, care and patience. Pastors may not constraine^ but only
persuade.
Neque enim vis illi inferenda, neque terrore ille cogendus, ^erum suadendus
tantum, ut de integro ad veritatem redeat. For he may not be forced, nor
constrained with terror, but only persuaded to return to the truth. And
again, A Bishop cannot ^ure men with such authority, as a shepherd does his
sheep, for a sheepeheard ^ath his choice: to bind his sheep, to diet them,
to sear them and cut them but in the other case the facility of the cure
consists not in him that gives but only in him that takes the medicine.
This that admirable teacher perceiving said to the Corinthians; not that we
have any dominion over you under the name of Faith, but that we are helpers of
your joy: For of all men Christian (Bishops) may least correct the faults of
men by force. Bishops least of all men may cor^e^t with force.
Judges that are without (the Church) when they take any transgressing the
Laws, they show themselves to be endued with great authority and power, and
compel them in spite of their hearts to change their manners. But here (in the
Church) we may not off^r any violence, but only persuade. We have not so great
authority given us by the Laws, as to repress offenders, and if it were
lawful for us so to do, Compulsio^ neith^r Lawful nor expedient in Bishops.
we have no use of any such violent power, for that Christ crowns them which
abstain from sin, not of a forced, but of a willing mind and purpose.
Hilary teaches the same Lesson: Hillar. ad Constable. ^. 2. imperfect. Bishops may
not meddle with those that b^ ^illing.
If this violence were used for the true faith, the Doctrine of Bishops would
be against it. God needs no forced service, he requires no con^trained
confession, I cannot receive any man, but him that is willing, I cannot give
^are but to him that entreats, I cannot sign any but him that (gladly)
professes. Origin in ^^p. 13. Epist. ad RomansGod will not have crimes revenged
by the ^ulers of the Church but by the judges of the world.
Origin agrees with them both. See the wisdom of the holy Ghost; because
that other faults are judged by the Laws of Princes, and it seemed superfluous
now to prohibit those things by Gods Law, which are sufficiently revenged by
man's, he repeateth those and none else as fit for religion, of which man's Law
says nothing; whereby it appears that the Judges of this world do meddle
with the greatest part of Gods Law. For all the crimes which God would have
revenged, he would have them revenged not by the ^pp. and R^lers of the Church,
but by the Judges of the world, and that Paul knowing, rightly calls (the
Prince) Gods minister and judge of him that does evil. Phi. Bishops may not
offer force with their own hands, but they may command others to do it for
them. Theoph. A gross shift. As though Temporal Princes or Judges did execute
malefactors with their own hands. Bishops by virtue of their vocation cannot
claim the sword, Bishops by vert^e of their calling cannot authorize violence
or arms.
and consequently they cannot command, or authorize any man to take the goods
or touch the bodies of Christians o^ Infidels, which being a clear conclusion
it is most evident they can much less license you to take the Crowns and take
the lives of Princes, to whom Romans 13.
God has delivered the sword to judge the earth, and made them servants only
to himself, since all other souls must be subject to them by the tenor of his
own prescription and their first erection as the Scripture witnesses. And
touching Bishops having Conusans in their courts of Tithes, etc. he writes
thus. Ibid. part. 2. page 246.
For Tithes, Testame^ts, Administrations, Servitude, Legitimations, and such
like, you went beyond your bounds, when you restrained them to your Courts, and
without Caesar, made Laws for things that belonged unto Caesar. The goods,
Lands, Livings, States and Families of Lay men and Clerks are Caesar's charge,
The goods^ lands, and livings, of Clergy men be Cesars right.
not yours, and therefore your decrees, judgments and executions in those
cases, if you claim them from Christ as things spirit^all, not from Caesar as
matters committed of trust to you by Christian Princes, are nothing else but
open and wif^ull invasions of other men's rights, you changing the names, and
calling those things Spiritual and Ec^lesiasticall, which indeed be civil
and temporal, and shouldering Princes from their cushins, who first suffered
Bishops to sir judges in those causes, of Honor to their Persons and favor to
their sunctions, which on your part is but a bad requital of their Princely
graces and benefits; He adds. Ibid. part. 2. p. 252.253.
S. Paul expressly writes of the Prince that He bears the sword not without
cause, and is Gods minister to revenge him that does evil: And our Savior
severely forbids Pe^er and the rest of the Apostles to meddle with the
sword. The sword committed to the Prince.
All that take the sword shall perish by the sword, Romans 13.
and to them all, you know that Kings of Nations reign ^ver them and they
that be great exercise authority, with you it shall not be so. The sword is but
the sign of public and Princely power, His Apostles forbidden the sword.
Mat. 20. Mat. 26.
and where the thing is not lawful the sign is unlawful. Since then the Lord
interdicteth his Apostles and messengers all Princely power, it is evident, the
sword which is ^ut a sign th^reof is likewise interdicted them. Thus much
Bernard sticks not to tell Pope Bernard de considerat: l. 2.
Eugenius to his face, It is the Lords voice in the Gospel, Kings of Nations
are Lords over them, and they that have power over them are called gracious,
and the Lord infers, you shall not be so. It is a clear case, the Apostles
are forbidden dominion. G^ thou then, says Bernard to the Pope, and usurp if
thou d^re, either an Apostleship, if thou be a Prince, or dominion if thou be
Apostolic. Dominion interdicted the Pope himself.
Thou art expressly forbidden one of them. If thou will have both, thou shall
lose both. The pattern of an Apostle is this, Dominion is interdicted, service
is enjoined, Gird thy self with thy sword, the sword of the spirit, which is
the Word of God. And this Pope Cause. 3^3: Quaest. 2. Inter Haec.
Nicholas fairly confesses, The Church of God has no sword but the
spiritual, wherewith she quickneth, she kills not. Your own Law says,
Cause. 33. Quaest. 8. De Episc.
It is easily proved of Bishops and other Clergy m^n whatsoever, that they may
not either by their own authority, or by the authority of the Bishop of Rom^,
take weapon in hand (and exercise the material sword:) and adds his reason,
For every man besides him, and his authority which has lawful ^^wer, and
which, as the Apostle says, bears the sword not without cause, No Clergy m^n
may use the Sword no not by the Popes authority.
to whom every soul ought to be subject, every man I say, that without his
authority takes the sword, shall perish with the sword. He that bears the
sword may lawfully put malefactors to death, and wage war with his enemies,
when need so requires, which Bishops may not do. 2 Cor. 10.
The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, says Saint Paul. Ad soli^^r^
vitam agentes.
Quid Episcopis cum bello? what have Bishops to do with battle, says
Athanasius: and Ambros. l. 5. Epist. 33.
A^brose, Pugn^re non deb^o, I ought not to fight. If they may not fight, much
less kill, if they may do neither, they cannot bear the sword, which is
appointed by God, and received of men to do both. The words of our Savior are
clear with us for the negative, My Kingdom, says he, is not of this World:
if then your Priests, Prelates, and Popes will be the servants of Christ, The
servants of Christ may have no earthly Kingdom since their master had none.
they must challenge no worldly Kingdom as from him, or in his name. John 8.
The servant is not above his Master. If the master with his own mouth have
denied it, the servants may not affirm it, or usurp it. The soldiers of
Christ must not Matthew. 10^
entangle themselves with secular affairs, much less make themselves Lords,
Tim. 2.
and Judge; of ear^hly matters, which office properly belongs to the sword,
and must be sustained of all those that bear the sword. The Popes themselves
before their power and pride grew so great, were of this opinion with us. Thus,
and much more Bishop Bilson to the same effect.


Not to trouble you with more quotations of this nature, which are infinite, I
shall conclude only with two more au^horities of men of greatest eminence, and
learning in our Church, in Queen Elizabeth's later days.

The first of them, is Dr. Whitakers, Dr. Whitakers,
Regius Professor of Divinity in the University of Cambridge; he, in his Book
Contra Du^eum. l. 6. sect. 19. and Controvers. 4. De Ecclesiae regimine. Quest.
1. c. 1. sect. 1. 2. c. 2. sect. 16. Quest. 4. c. 3. sect. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31. De notis Ecclesiae, qu. 5. c. 6. p 509 and Contr. 2. Council. qu. 3. c.
2. p. 586, 587. reciting Saint Ieromes words at large on Titus 1. and to
Euagrius, concludes with him; That in former times Bishops and Presbyters were
all one and the same: that every where a Presbyter was the same that a Bishop
is: that ALL Churches were not under the Government of one man, but were
governed by the Common Counsel of their Presbyters; Ecclesiae, inquit
Jeronymus, gubernabantur, etc. id est, VBIQVE OMNES, fuit hi^ MOS Ecclesiarum
gubernandarum. That this custom was not changed by the Apostles, sed POST,
Ecclesie judicto. That Bishops are greater now than Ministers not by divine
institution, but custom, and that humano, non divino jure totum ^oc discrimen
constat: the whole difference between them is by humane, not by divine Law, or
right. That by ancient, and divine right a Presbyter was less than a Bishop
NIHILO, in nothing: After which he proceeds thus. If the Apostles had changed
that order (as Sanders pretends) what had it profited Hierome with so great
diligence to have collected testimonies out of the Apostles, whereby to show,
that they were sometimes the same? It might easily come into his memory, that
this order was changed by the Apostles themselves, after the Church was
disturbed and torn with discords. But wherefore then says Hierom: Before it
was said, I am of Paul, etc. the Church was Governed by the Common Council of
Presbyters, etc. I answer, this might deceive Sanders. Hierome only alluded to
the place of the Apostle, that he might show, that schisms were the cause of
changing this order, as he says elsewhere, that this was done to remedy
schisms. But this remedy was almost worse than the disease. Nota.
For as at first one Presbyter was set above the rest, and made a Bishop, so
afterward, one Bishop was preferred before the rest: and so this custom
brought forth the Pope with his Monarchy by little and little, and brought it
into the Church. Jerome so openly oppugneth the Pontifical Hierarchy, that the
Papists know not what to determine or answer concerning Hierome. Lib. 1. c. 5.
De Sacr. Him. Cant. ^^utia.
Michael Medina doubts not to affirm, that Jerome was an Heretic in this
kind, and that he held the very same opinion that Aerius did: verily Hierome
was of the same opinion with Aerius; whereby we may the less regard that
Aerius is so often objected to us, AB INSULSIS HOMINIBUS, by foolish men. If
Aerius was an Heretic in this thing, he had Jerome a companion of his
Heresy: and not only him but also many other Ancient Fathers both Greek and
Latin, as Medina confesses. In cap. de Epis. her. 2.
Alphonsus de Castro says, that the Church was sarre enough off from the mind
of Hierome; and a certain man has written in the Margin, that Ieromes opinion
is to be dissembled, not to be urged. De Hierarch. 2. c. ^lt.
Pighius writes that Jerome is involved in such difficulties, out of which he
could not wind himself, and that he fell into perplexed absurdities, no ways
cohearing and fighting among themselves. It is no wonder if they speak evil
of us, who thus petulantly insult over Jerome: Annot. in Epis. 85. H^^r.
Marianus Victorius endeavors to excuse Jerome, and writes, that he speaks
not of Bishops and Presbyters, but o^ Bishops only; and that verily all these
are equal, and that many did ill interpret Hierome otherwise. But Jerome most
manifestly compares Presbyters with Bishops, and that Marianus had most easily
seen unless he had been miserably blind; yet at length by the opinion of
Marianus, all Bishops are equal. Lib. I. c. 22. de Ordinat. Hierarch Minist.
Turrianus otherwise and more acutely answers: Hieronymum non dicere
Presbyterum idem, sed eundem esse cum Episcopo; What knots does this Jesui^e
here seek in a Rush? If a Presbyter be the same that a Bishop is, and the
Bishop the same that a Presbyter is, what at last good Jesuit can thou
think to be between a Presbyter and a Bishop? Thus verily our adversaries (yea
Bpp) find not how they may defend themselves from this sentence of Hierome;
and truly all of them stick in the same mire, albei^ some of them are more
foulely plunged than others. The matter now returns to Lib. 1. de Clericis ^.
15.
Bellarmine as to the Triary, he most confidently pronounces, that Jerome
differs as much from Aerius, as a Catholic from an Heretic. I most firmly
aver the contrary, that their opinions concer^ing this thing can by no means
be disjoined nor distinguished. Aerius thought, that a Presbyter differed not
from a Bishop by Divine right and authority: Hierome contends this very thing,
and defends it by the same testimonies of Scriptures as Aerius does. Now quam
inepte and pueriliter, how foolishly and childishly Heart ^5.
Epiphanius answers to those testimonies, all may perceive. For he says,
that the Apostle was wont to write thus, because that at that time, there were
not any Presbyters in many C^urches by reason of the paucity of Presbyters. I
admire so great a Theologue, who took upon him to refute all Heretics, saw
not how shamefully he was mistaken. For what? was the^^ at that time greater
plenty of Bishops than of Presbyters, that whereas there were many Bishops in
one City, yet there were no presbyters there. The notable absurdi^y of this
an^were Bellarmine himself acknowledged. And yet this is that Epiphanius who
first of all proscribed Aerius as an Heretic, absque Synodi aut Ecclesiae
judicio, without the judgment of a Synod or of the Church. But what says
Bellarmine? he propounds a double difference between Aerius and Hierom. The
first is that Ierom writes everywhere, That a Bishop is greater than a
Presbyter as to the power of Order. I answer, that it is most false; Hierome
never writ so, neither does he by any means acknowledge a Bishop to be greater
than a Pre^byter, unless it be by custom, which he distinguishes from divine
disposition. And if there were so great a difference, wherefore does Jerome,
that he may revok Deacons to modesty, and reduce them into order, affirm that
Presbyters are Bishops? Whence does he admonish that this contention taken up
against Presbyters, belongs to Bps themselves, seeing Presbyters by the first
institution of this order and Ministry are Bps? Now if there were the greatest
difference between these in the power of order, had not Jerome bin very sottish
in his argument? Now whereas, he says, Epist. ad Eva^.
What does a Bp except ordination, which a Presbyter may not do? He speaks of
the custom of those times; that not even the when by the custom of the
Church, a Bishop was greater then a Presbyter, could a Bishop do more then a
Presbyter in any thing, except in ordination: yea elsewhere Hierom himself
attributes ordination to Presbyters: (And indeed so he does, for in Zoph. 1. 2.
Tom. 5. page 218. D. he writes thus; Sacerdotes, etc That Priests who baptize
and consecrate the Lords Supper, which is the greater; MANVS IMPONVNT, LEVITAS
ET ALIOS CONSTITVVNT SACERDOTES; lay on hands, ordain Levites and other
Priests, which is in truth but the less:) The second is, that although Jerome
does not acknowledge any difference jure divino between the jurisdiction of a
Bishop and Presbyter, yet he grants that this was lawfully introduced by the
Apostles, and that necessarily to avoid Schisms. I answer first, that
Bellarmin has resolved out of the opinion of Jerome, that there is no
difference in the Jurisdiction of a Bishop and Presbyter: whence it is
manifest, what Jerome thought of the Jurisdiction and Primacy of the Pope. For
seeing the Primacy of the Pope consists in Jurisdiction, and Jerome thinks that
Iure Divino the Jurisdiction of a Bishop is not greater than that of a
Presbyter, it follows from Ieromes opinion, that the Papacy (and Prelacy)
Divino mullo ju^^ nitatur, rests upon no divine Law. Secondly, ^^llarmine
fights with himself, and makes Jerome to speak contradictions. For if Jerome
thought that jurisdiction of a Bishop not to be Iuris Divini, how the^ was that
difference introduced by the Apostles? or how could Jerome prove out of the
Apostles writings, that there was not any difference between them? Certainly,
that which the Apostles instituted and introduced, has the force of divine
right: Finally, this profound Doctor, in his Respons. ad ^0. Printed by it
self London, 1^83.
Rationem Campiani. p. 51. concludes thus of Aerius ^is opinion. And ^ruely, if
to condemn prayers for the dead^ Et Episcopo Presbyteros aequare sit
h^^reticum, NIHIL CATHOLICVM ESSE POTEST; and ^o equal Presbyters to a Bishop
he Hereti^all, nothing can be Catholic: Thus this great Doctor, William
Whitaker; with whom his Coaetaneans Doctor Willet, in his Synopsi^ Papismi,
Controversy General. 5. part. 2. in the Appendix. p. 272. to 284. in the last
Edition; and Master William Perkins in his Reformed Catholic. Cont. 18. c.
21. concur. I wonder therefore with what impudency and shameless brow In his
3. last Books, Bishop White and Docto^ H^ylin.
Bishop Hall and others dare condemn the defenders of the identity and Parity
of Presbyters and Bishops by Divine right for Aerian Heretics, Schismatickes,
Novillers, and oppugners of the received Doctrine of the Church of England;
when as the learnedest Prelates, Martyrs and writers of our Church (as appears
by the premises) have pro^essedly justified this opinon as Apostolical,
Orthodox, Ancient, and Catholic, warranted by the unanimous consent both of
Scriptures and Fathers; ^s will further appear^ by the next Authority, with
which I shall conclude.

And that is our incomparably learned Doctor John Rainolds once professor of
Divinity in the University of Oxford; Doctor John Raynolds.
who in his Letter to sir Francis Knoles, Sept. 19. 1598. (concerning some
passages in Doctor Bancrof^s Sermon at Paul's Cross) Printed in King James his
time, and now reprinted, writes thus, both touching the pretended heresy of
Aerius, and the Divine right of Episcopacy. Page 2. to 9.
It appears, by the aforesaid words of Doctor Bancroft, that he avoucheth the
Superiority which Bishops have over the Clergy to be of Gods own Ordinance,
for he improveth the impugners of it, as holding with Aerius, that there is no
difference by the Word of God, betwixt a Priest and a Bishop, which he could
not do with reason, unless he himself proved the Bishops superiority, as
established by Gods Word; and he adds, that their opinion who gainsay it is
Heresy, whereof it ensues he thinks it contrary to Gods Word, since Heresy
is an error repugnant to the truth of the Word of God, as (according to the 1 Timothy 6.3. Titus 3.10. ^ Pet. 1.19.21.
Scriptures) our own Church The defense of the Apolog: Part. 1. and 7.
devision. 2. answer to the Rhem. Tit. 3.10.
does teach us. Now the arguments which he brings to prove it an Heresy, are
partly over-weake, and partly untrue. Overweake, that he Page 18.
begins with, out of Epiphanius: U^true, that he adjoyneth of the General
consent of the Church. For though Epiphanius do say, that Aerius his assertion
is full of folly, yet he disproveth not the reason which Aerius stood on, out
of the Scriptures; nay he deals so in seeking to disprove it, that Bellarmine
the Jesui^e, Tom. 1. Cant. 3. lib. 1. c. 15.
though desirous to make the best of Epiphanius, whose opinion herein he
maintains against the Protestants, yet is forced to confess, that Epiphanius
his answer is not all of the wisest, nor any way can fit the text. As for the
general consent of the whole Church which Doctor Bancrof^ says, condemned
that opinion of Aerius for an Heresy and himself for an Here^ick, because he
persisted in it, that is a large speech, but what proof has he, that the
whole Church did so? It appears he says in H^r^s^^ 15.
Epiphanius. It does not, and the contrary appears by In Epist. ad Titum and
Epist. 85. ad Evagrium.
S. Jerome and sundry others, who lived some in the same time, some after
Epiphanius, even Saint Augustine himself, though Doctor Bancroft cite him, as
bearing witness thereof; likewise I grant Saint Augustine in his book of ^ap.
53.
Heresies, ascribes this to Aerius, for one; that he said Pres^yterum ab
Episcopo nulla differentia deberi discerni; but it is one thing to say, there
ought to be no difference between them, (which Aerius saying condemned the
Churches order, yea made a Schism therein) and so is censured by S. Austin,
counting it an heresy as Epiphanius from whom he took it recorded, himself,
as he In Argu. praefix. lib. 3.
witnesses; not knowing how far the name of Heresy should be stretched,
another thing to say, that by the Word of God there is no difference betwixt
them, but by the order and custom of the Church: which S. Austin says in
effect himself; so far was he from witnessing this to be Heresy by the
general consent of the whole Church: Epist. 19.
which untruth how wrongfully it is fathered on him, and on Epiphanius (who yet
are all the witnesses, that Doctor Bancroft has produced for the proo^e
hereof, or can for ought that I know) it may appear by this that our learned
Country man of godly memory, Defense of the Apolog. Part 2. c. 9. divis. 1. pa.
198.
Bishop Iuel, when Harding to convince the same opinion of heresy, alleged
the same witnesses, citing to the contrary Chrysostom, Jerome, Austin and
Ambrose, knit up his answer with these words: All these, and other Holy
Fathers, together with the Apostle S. Paul, for thus saying, by Hardings advice
must be held for Heretics. And De Sacror. Hom. Orig. and consecr. l. 1. c. 5.
Michael Medina, a man of great account in the Council of Trent, more
ingenuous herein than many other Papists, affirms not only the former
ancient writers alleged by Bishop Iuel, but also that another Jerome,
Theodoret, Primasius, Sedulius, and Theophylact, were of the same mind touching
this matter with Aerius: with whom agree likewise 1 Timothy 3.
Oecumenius, and In Epist. ad Titum.
Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury, and an other Collect. Can. l. 7. cap. 87.
Anselmus, and Polyc. lib. 2. Tit. 1.9. and 39.
Gregory, and Cap. legimus did. 39. cap. Olim. did. 95.
Gratian, and after them how many^ It being once enrolled in the Canon Law for
sound and Catholic Doctrine, and thereupon publickely taught by learned Author
Glossae in ca. did. citat hodorieus caol; in council. Basil. Duar^n. de sacri
Eccles. minist. lib. 1. cap. 7.
men. All which do bear witness against Doctor Bancroft of the point in
question, that it was not condemned for an Heresy by the general consent of
the whole Church. (And the rather which is observable, because Isiodor
Hispalensis, Originum lib. 8. c. 5. and Gratian himself Cause. 24. qu. 3.
reciting the heresy of Aerius, omits his equalizing of Bishops and Presbyters,
out of the li^^ of his errors, because an Orthodox truth, approved by
themselves and other Fathers; which is worthy observation.) If he should reply,
that these latter witnesses, did live a 1000. years after Christ, and
therefore touch not him, who said, Page 19.
it was condemned so in the time of S. Austin, Page 69.
and of Epiphanius, the most flourishing time of the Church that ever happened
since the Apostles days, either in respect of learning or of zeal. First,
they whom I named, though living in a latter time, yet are witnesses of the
f^rmer. Oecumenius the Greek Scholiast treading in the steps of the old Greek
Fathers, and the two Anselmes, with Gregory and Gratian, expressing S. Ieromes
sentence word by word. Besides that, perhaps it is not very likely that Anselme
of Canterbu^y, should have bin Canonized by the Pope of Rome, and Worshipped
for a St, that the other Anselme and Gregory should have such place in the
Popes Library, and be esteemed of as they are; that Gratians works should be
allowed so long time, by so many Popes for the golden foundation of the Canon
Law, if they had taught that for Catholic, and sound, which by the general
consent of the whole Church, in the most flourishing time that ever happened
since the Apostles days, was condemned for Heresy, chiefly in a matter of
such weight and moment, to the Popes supremacy^ which as they do claim over
all Bishops by the Ordinance of God, so must they allow to Bishops over Priests
by the same Ordinance, as they saw at length, and therefore have not only
decreed it now in the Sess. 23. c. 4. Canon. 6. and 7.
Council of Trent, but also in the Annot Marg ad cap. legimus did. 43.
new edition of their Canon Law, have set down this note; that one Hughs
Gloss allowed by the Archdeacon (saying, that Bishops have differed from
Priests always as they do now in Government, and Prelateship, and Offices,
and Sacraments, but not in the name and Title of Bishop, which was common to
them both) must be held hereafter for S. Jeromes meaning; at least, for the
meaning of the Canon taken out of S. Jerome, though his words be flat and
plain against this Gloss, as Tom. 1. Co^tro. 5. l. 1. c.
Bellarmine himself confesses. Whereto may be added, that they also who have
labored about the reformation of the Church these 500. years, have taught
that all Pastors be they entitled Bishops or Priests, have equal authority
and power by Gods Word. First the Aeneas Silvius Hist. B^hem. cap. 35. and
Pigh. Hierarch Eccles. l. 2. c. 10.
Waldenses, next Defens. pacis Artic. 2. c. 15.
Marsilius Patavinus: then The. Walden Doct. fidei Tom. 1. lib. 2. c. 60. and
Tom. 2. c. 17.
Wickliffe and his Scholars; afterward Aeneas Silvius loco citato.
Husse, and Hussites; last of all Adversus falso nominat ordin. Epist. and
adver. Papa. Romans
Luther, In Epist. ad Philip. and Tit. 1.
Calvin, Apol. Confess. Wittenh. c. 2.21.
Brentius, Decad. 5. Ser. 2.
Bullinger, Loc. Com. Tit. de minist. verbi.
Musculus and other, who might be rec^koned particularly in great number, since
as here with us, both Iuel loco citat, and Pilkington in the Treatise of
burning Paul's Church.
Bishops, and the Queens D. Humphrey in Camp. and in Dureum Jesuitam part. 2.
rat. 3. and D. Whit. ad rat. Campiani. and Confuta. Durei Jesuitae. lib. 6.
pro^essors of Divinity in our Universities, and Mr. Bradford. L^mbert and
others. Mr. Fox Acts, and Dr. Fulke against Bri^^ow motives 40. and answer to
the Rh^mists, Tit. 1.5.
other learned men do consent therein: so in ^orraigne Nations, all whom I
have read treating of this matter, and many more (no doubt) whom I have not
read. The si^ting and examining of the Trent Council, has been undertaken by
only two, which I have seen; the one a Divine, the other a Lawyer Part. 2.
Kemnisius, and L^b. 4.
Gentilletus: they both condemn the contrary doctrine thereunto, as a Trent
error, the one by Scriptures, and Fathers; the others, by the Canon Law. But
what do I further speak of several persons? It is the common judgment of
the reformed Churches of Helvetia, Savoy, France, Scotland, Germany, Hungary,
Po^on, the Low Countries, and our own, witness the Harmony of Confessions.
Wherefore si^h Doctor Bancroft, I assure my self, will not say that all these
have approved that as sound and Christian Doctrine, which by the general
consent of the whole Church in a most flourishing time, was condemned for
Heresy: I hope he will acknowledge, that he was overseene, in that he avouched
the Superiority which Bishops have among us over the Clergy to be of Gods own
Ordinance. Thus Doctor Rainold^: of whom you may read more to this purpose, in
his Conference with Heart, Aug. 1584. London. 1609. p.
12^.123.185.218.4^1.540.541.

I could recite many more of our own writers and records to the same effect,
but because I have published, A Catalogue of them, and of such Testimonies in
all ages, as plainly evidence Bishops and Presbyters to be both one and the
same in Jurisdiction, O^^^ce, Dignity, Order, and Degree, by Divine Law and
Institution, and their Disparity to be a mere humane Ordinance long after the
Apostles times, etc. and because I have at large manifested this tr^th, in my
Vnbishoping of Timothy and Titus; and in my Breviate of the Prelates
intolerable Usurpations, both upon the Kings Prerogative Royal and the
Subjects Liberties, I shall for brevity sake refer you to them; and proceed
to answer some principal Objections in defense and maintenance of Episcopacy,
and then cast Anchor.

CHAP. IX. Comprising an Answer to the Principal Objections alleged by the
Prelates in defense of the Divine pretended Institution, and for the
continuance of their Episcopacy in our Church.
HAving thus given you a taste what our own Authors ancient and Mode^ne,
Protestants and Papists, Martyrs, and Prelates have formerly written touching
the pretended Divine Jurisdiction, the Treasons, Conspiracies, Seditions,
Antimonarchicall practices, Lordlinesse, secular employments, courtship, and
great Temporal possessions of our prelates, I shall only Answer two
A^guments, or rather bare Allegation^ now principally insisted on, for the
maintenance of Episcopal Superiority by a Divine right, with three more
Objections for the continuance of Episcopacy still in our Church, and so
conclude.

The first Allegation for Episcopacies Divine institution; Allegation. I. For
the Divine right of Episcopacy.
is taken Angel of the Church of Ephesus, whom An humble Remonstrance.p. 27.
Defense of the humble Remonstrance. p. 103. to 127. and in his former Books
for Episcopacy.
Bishop Hall, The judgment of Doctor Rai^olds, etc. more largely confirmed out
of antiquity by James Bishop of Armagh.
Bishop Usher Willi^m^Bishop of R^chester Se^m. 1. at Hampton Court. Sept. 21.
1606.
and Sir Thomas Astons brie^e Relation of Episcopacy, Sect. 2. p. 6.7.
others will ne^d^s have ^o be a Bishop Superior in Authority and Jurisdiction
to other Ministers, because he writes only in the singular number to the
Angel, not to the Angels of that Church, which say ^hey implies a Sup^riority
of one special Minister in that Church, to whom this Epistle is principally
directed, over the other Presbyters not once mentioned in this Epistle.

To which I answer: First, that ^his word Angel is but a metaphorical Title,
proper only to the heavenly Spirits in strictness of speech, and in a large
sense, as it signifies a Angelus nomen est Offici^, non naturae, etc. A^ge^us
enim Graco vocabulo, L^tine dicitur nuntius, si qua^^s nomen naturae, spiritus
est; si officium Ang^l^s: ex eo quod subsistit s^iritus est; ex eo quod
mittitur Angelus. Remigius Explan in Epist. ad Heb^aeos, c. 1.
Messenger, or Servant, it may as aptly deno^e a Minister or Presbyter, as a
Bishop. The Ti^le therefore of it self, as it is used by S. John, makes
nothing ^or Episcopacy, since ordinary Presbyters are in Scripture sometimes
styled 1. Cor. 11.10. Rev. 1.20. c. 2.1.8.12.18. c. 3.1.7.14.
Angels, but Bishops (distinct from Presbyters) are never so named there.

Secondly, our Bishops themselves if not the whole Church of England with our
late famous King James, in the Contents annexed by them to the Bibles of the
last Translation, now only used and permitted in our Churches, in express
Terms, expound the Angels of ^he 7. Churches to be the Ministers of them, the
Contents of the second Chap. of the Revelation running thus. What is commanded
to be written to the ANGELS, that is, The Ministers of the Churches of Ephesus,
Smyrna, Pergamus, Thiatyra, etc. had these Angels been such as you now call
Bishops, you would have rendered the Contents thus, What is written to the
Angels, that is, to the Bishops of Ephesus, etc. But since you expound Angels
thus, to be the Ministers of these Churches, who in vulgar appellation and
acception are distinct from Bishops, and as you hold inferior to them; you
must now either renounce your own and our Churches exposition, or your
Episcopacy: For if the Angels of these Churches be the most eminent persons and
rulers in them, as you argue; and these, as the Contents testify, be not
Bishops, but Minister^, it follows infallibly, that Ordinary Ministers and
Presbyters, are superior to Bishops, not Bishops to them. And that these
Angels were the Ministers of these Chur^hes, is evident by the express
resolution of our own learned James Pilkington, late Bishop of Durham, in his
Exposition upon the Prophet Aggeus. cap. 1. v. 13. London. 1562. where he
writes thus: That more worshipful names are given to the Preaching Minister,
than to any sort of men. This name Angel, is given to the Preachers for the
heavenly comfort that they bring to man from God, whose Messengers they be. In
the Revel. of S. John, he writes to the 7. Angels, ^. to the 7. Ministers (not
Bishops) of the 7. Congregations or Churches in Asia. By this Bishops
resolution then, and by Saepe sacram Scripturam praedicatores Ecclesiae pr^ eo
quod Patris gloriam annunciant Angelor, nomine solere designare; and hinc est
quod Joannes in Apocalypsi septem Eccles^^s, scribens, Angel^s Ecclesiarum
loq^^tur, id est, Praedicatoribus popul^rum^ Moraliuml. 34. in Job c. 4.
Pope Gregory the firsts too, these seven Angels are seven Preaching Ministers,
not Lordly Non-Preaching Prelates. And Master Fox in his Meditations on Apoc.
c. 2, p. 27.28. concurres with them; averri^g, That by the seven Angels, is
meant either the Ministers of the seven Churches, or the Churches themselves;
which exposition is as ancient as Lib. 1. c. 1.2.9.10.
Aretas, In Apoc. c. 2. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 6. pars. 1. p. 523.
Primasius, and Lib. 2. in Apoc.
Ambrosius Ansbertus, who in their Commentaries on Apocalypsis, write thus.
Septem stellae Angeli sunt septem Ecclesiarum. Nec putandum est quod hoc loco
Angeli singuli singulis deputentur hominibus, quod incongrue ab aliquibus
aestimatur, sed potius Angeli Eccles. hic intelligendi sunt rectores populi,
qui singulis Ecclesiis praesidentes, verbum vitae cunctis annunciant. Nam and
Angeli nomen, nuncius interpretatum dicitur. Et Angelo Ecclesiae Ephesi scribe.
Darivo hic casu Angelo posuit, non genitivo. Ac si diceret, Scribe Angelo huic
Ecclesiae, ut non tam Angelum and Ecclesiam separatim videatur dixisse, quam
quis Angelus exponere voluisset, unam videlicet faciens Angeli Ecclesiaeque
personam. Quamvi^ enim Sacramenti dispensatione praeponatur, compaginis tamen
unitate connectitur. Nam hanc regulam a principio servans, non septem Angelis,
sed Septem Ecclesiis scripsisset; Johannes, inquiens, Septem Ecclesiis quae
sunt in Asia, and dominus quem vidit; Scribe, inquit, in libro quae vidisti,
and mitte septem Ecclesiis. Postea tamen Angelis jubet scribi, ut ostenderet,
unum esse. Sed etiam siqua singulis partiliter Ecclesiis praedicat, universam
generaliter conven^re docetur Ecclesiam. Neque enim dicit, Quid spiritus dicat
Ecclesiae, sed Ecclesiis. Angelum ergo Ecclesiam significans, duas in eo parts
ostendit, dum and laudat and increpat. In consequentibus autem manifestatur non
eandem increpare, quam laudat, sic ut Dominus in Evanglio omne praepositorum
corpus, Luc. 12. Mat. 24.
unum servum dixit beatum and nequam, quem veniens Dominus ipse dividet, and
non tantum servum sed partem, inquit, ejus cum hypocritis ponet: Yea, Ludovicus
ab Alcasar a late Jesuit, in his Commentary on the Apocalypse. See Gersomus
Bucerus de Gubern. Ecclesiae. p. 205.393.408.419.422.433.
Antu. 1614. Proem. in c. 2. K 3. Notatio. 1. p. 250.251. writes, That Andreas,
Aretas, Ansbertus, Anselmus, Pererius, Victorinus, Ticinius, Ambrosius, Haymo
and Beda are of this opinion. Augelarum and stellarum nomine designari
Ecclesias ipsas; That by the name of Angels the C^urches themselves are
signified; not the Lordly Prelates in them, not one ancient Commentator on this
that I find, and few modern expounding these Angels to be Bishops, as our
Prelates against all sense will make them: yea, Andreas Cesariensis, Comment.
in Ioan^ Apoc. c. 3. p. 8. writes, Probabile fit per 7. Angelos totius universi
gubernationem, quae in dextera Christi, sicut omnes qu^que terrae fines, sita
est, hoc loco significari. Since ^hen by Angels is here meant either the
Ministers of the Church of Ephesus, or the whole Church it self, or Christ's
government over the Universe, as these Authors a v^^re; this Text makes nothing
at all for our Prelates Hi^rarchy.

John neither in his Gospel nor Epistle, nor in his Book of ^he Revelation,
does so much as once use the name or word Bishop, but the name of Elder, or
Presbyter very often, both in his Epistle, and in the Apocalypse. I then appeal
to any reasonable Creature, whether it is not more probable, that Saint John by
this word Angel, should rather mean the Elders or Presbyters of those
Churches; (a Title which he gives himself, 2 John 1. 3 John 1.) and which
Title and Office he so Rev. 4.10. c. 5.5.8.11.14. c. ^ 11.13. c. 11.16. c.
19.4. c. 14.^.
frequently mentions in the 4. and 5. and 7. Rev. 4.4. c. 5.11. c. 7.11.
Chapters of the Apocalypse next ensuing, rather than the Lordly Bishops of
those Churches superior to Presbyters, whose office (for ought appears) he
never knew, and whose Title he never uses in his writings?

John does ^ever place the 24. Elders, sitting on so many seats, next unto the
throne of Christ himself; and the Angels standing further off from the Throne
without the Elders. If then by the Elders (as is generally agreed by all) be
meant the Presbyters or Ministers of the Church, and by Angels as you pretend,
be meant Bishops; then the Presbyters must needs be more honorable by divine
institution than Bishops, because they are next to the Throne of Christ, and
Rev. 4.4. c. 11.16.
sit on seats or chaires whiles the Angels Rev. 7.11.
stand about them. Add to this, that these Elders are still introduced by S.
John in this book, Rev. 4.10.11. c. 5.8.9. c. 11 16.17.18.
Worshipping and adoring God and Christ, and giving thanks, honor, praise,
and glory unto them: That they only are said to have Rev. 4.4.10
Crowns of gold upon their heads (the badge of Sovereignty and Superioriority)
and Rev. 5.8.9.
harpes (...) Golden Vials in their hands, full of Odours, which are the
prayers of Saints: That they Rev. 5.9.
sing the new Song; And among other passages praise Christ for this in special
manner. Rev. 5.10. And have made US (not Bishops) unto our God KINGS and
PRIESTS, and we shall reign on the Earth. Therefor Presbyters doubtless are
the chief and principal Ministers and Priests in the Church of Christ by
divine institution; and being thus made Kings and Priests, and adorned with
Crowns, to the end that they may reign upon the Earth; no Prelates or Lord
Bishops ought to rule over them, or climb Paramount them, as they do.
Besides, these Elders no^ Bishops informed S. John himself and instructed him
in the things he doubted of Revel. 5.4.5. c. 7.13.14.15.16. Therefore these
Elders must certainly be the better, the most emin^nt Scient men, and so
Paramount the Angel-Bishops.

Fifthly, though the Angel be here put in the singular number, Elders are still
mentioned in the Plural. And as for the Church of Ephesus in those days, it
is most certain by Acts 20.17.28. 1 Timothy 5.17. That there were diverse Elders,
of equal authority ^uling in it, whom the holy Ghost expressly not only
calls, but made Bishops and Overseers of that Church, both to Rule and Feed
it. To make therefore one special Bishop and Superintendent in this Church,
superior to all the rest, and he only graced by the name of an Angel, is but
a crazie conceit of a proud Episcopal brain, contrary to apparent Texts.

Sixthly, This Angel is not said to have any Jurisdiction or Ephesus, nor to be
the supreme or general Superintendent Prelate of that Church, neither is
there any thing spoken of him with reference to any other Minister of Ephesus:
What then can this poor title make for Episcopal priority and Jurisdiction?
The Spirit writes to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus: Ergo this Angel was
a Bishop, and sup^riour to all other Ministers of Ephesus, is a strange non
sequitur, and yet this is all this ^ext affords you.

Seventhly, Bishop Hall and other contenders for Episcopacy, grant that there
were diverse particular Churches and Congregations Ephesus, every one of which
had its several Minister or Presbyter to instruct them; else they could prove
no Episcopacy or Diocaesan superintendency from one particular Congregation.
This being granted by him and his party: Let them then tell me seriously,
whether this Angel, (which they will not have taken collectively and Plurally,
for the whole Presbytery and Ministry of that Church as many ancient and
modern Commentators expound it, but individually for one particular person)
should not rather be one particular Pastor of one of the Churches of Ephesus
only, who had lost his first love, and therefore was worthily reprehended,
then a Diocaesan Bishop or Archbishop of that Church to whose Jurisdiction all
other Presbyters and Bishops of that National Church were subordinate; for
which there is no ground in Scripture.

Downham, Hall, Usher, and others.
Prelates all plead very hard, That Timothy was ordained the first Bishop of
Ephesus, and dyed Bishop of that See: which if I admit (though I think untrue)
then it is clear that this Angel of Ephesus, who lost his first love, was
famous and zealous, Timothy not dead when this Epistle was written, as In Apoc.
c. 2. Disp. 2.
Pererius and Com. in Apoc in c. 2.3. Notatio 1. p. 251. where he cites Lyra
and Ribera to this effect.
Alcazar both Jesuits, with Lyra, Ribera, Not. in vita Polycarp. c. 7.
P. Halloix, and others confess. And who dare be so presumptuous as to think
Timothy a man so eminent, famous, zealous, and so much applauded in Scripture,
would prove an Apostate or backeslider; and lose his first love? Either
therefore you must deny Timothy, or this Angel to be the Bishop of this Church.

Centur. Magd 1. l. 2. ^. 10. col. 626^ Nic^ph. l. 3. c. 71. Vinc^ntius. spec.
Hist. l. 38. c. 10. Fasciculus Temporum.
and of which there were many in one Church (no^ one over many Churches)
according to the holy Ghosts and the Apostles own institution as appears by
Act. 20.17.28. Phil. 1.1. Tit. 1.5.7. compared with the 1 Pet. 5.2.3. Iam.
5.14. Act. 14.23. 1 Timothy 5.17. which makes nothing for, but directly against
that Episcopacy, you contend for.

from, and lost his first love, by being made a Lord Bp: And it will be but
little credit for our Prelates, to found their Hierarchy upon an Apostate: And
if I conjecture not amiss, this may be one probable reason, why so many
Ministers prove turne-coates, and Apostates, losing their first love and zeal
to God when they are made Lord Bishops, because they have an Apostate Angel,
both for their foundation, and imitation; Happy man be their dole; let them
make the best of this Apostate; I will not hinder but rather pity them in this
folly.

Allegation.
that Timothy and Titus were Bishops (such as our Lordly Prelates now are, the
one of Ephesus, the other of Crete) which Preface to his Treatise of ^he
Sabbath.
Bishop White, and others endeavor to prove, especially by the Postscript of
the second Epistle to Timothy. The second Epistle unto Timotheus, ordained the
first Bishop of the Church of the Ephesians was written from Rome, when Paul
was brought before Nero the second time: And by this Postscript to the Epistle
to Titus: It was wri^ten to Titus, ordained the first Bishop of the Church of
the Cretians, from Nicopolis of Macedonia; which Post-scripts they say are very
ancient, if not Canonical and irrefragable.

I shall not here enter into a large discourse to prove Timothy neither a
Bishop^ Answ.
nor first, nor sole, nor any Bishop at all of Ephesus (who as some say
preached the Gospel in our Island of Britain, whiles our Prelates would
crea^e him the Apost^ate Angel residing in the Church of Ephesus to whom Christ
writ an Epistle by S. John Rev. 2.1.2.) or to disprove Titus to be Lord Bishop,
or rather Lord Archbishop of Crete, Mercat^rs Atla^ London. 1635. p. 812.
which had an hundred Cities in it in Homers days, and no less than 4.
Archbishops, and 21. Bishops in former times; since I have sufficiently
manifested this long since, in The Vnbishopping of Timothy and Titus, not
hitherto answered. And indeed were there no other Arguments but two, First,
that though Paul in his Epistles, mentions Timothy Titus more frequently than
any other persons; yet we never find him so much as once stiling them Bishops,
no not in the Epistles to them. Secondly, that Paul does never write to them in
the Ordinary To the Right Reverend Father in God, Timothy, Lord Bishop of
Ephesus: To the Most Reverend Father in God Titus, Lord Archbishop of Crete
his Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all that Island; which doubtless he
would have done had they been such Bishops as ours are, and this style had
been due or fitting for them; but only: To Timothy my own son, or dearly
beloved son in the faith. To Titus mine own son after ^he common ^aith,
etc. these were sufficient to satisfy any indifferent man, that neither of
them was a Bishop or Archbishop of these places; or at least, that they were
no such Lordly Prelates as ours now are, who may well be ashamed of these
pompous swelling Titles, which no Apostle nor Apostolical Bishop ever usurped.
But the only thing I shall here insist on, shall be to take away ^he grounds
of this false Allegation, to wit, the pretended Authority and Antiquity of
these two Post-scripts, wi^h which the world has been much abused.




Secondly, that they are not of infallible truth, many of Baronius, the
Rhemists, Estius, Mr. Beza, Mr. Perkins, and sundry others prove.

Paul b^ himself, when he writ the Epistles, as some have dreamed, but by some
third person since, as the whole frame of the words, running only in the third
person imports. For their Antiquity, when, and by whom they were first added?
will be the sole question. To clear this doubt, I shall have recourse to the
Postscript of the first Epistle to Timothy, which runs thus: The first to
Timothy, was written from Laodicea, which is the chief City of Phrygia
Pacatiana. This Postscript of the first Epistle, no doubt was written either
before, or at the same time when the Postscript of the Second Epistle was
penned, and that must needs be after Phrygia was commonly styled Pacatiana,
since it is thus named in this Postscript. Now we shall not find Phrygia so
styled in any Authors, till about 340. years after Christ, in the reign of
Constantine the great, at which time it begun to be called Pacatiana, and that
as some conjecture from Pacatianus, who (as the Code of Theodosius, Cambdens,
Brit. p. 75. Speeds Historry. p. 159.
M. Cambden and Speed affirm) was Vicegerent of Britain some 330. years
after Christ. Who it was who first annexed these Post-scripts to Paul's Epistles
only [^or the other Apostles Epistles have none] will be the greatest
question. For resolution whereof, I take it somewhat clear, that Theodoret was
the man, who flourished about the y^are of our Lord.430. For I find these
Post-scripts added to his Commentary upon Paul's Epistles, and in no other
Commentator before nor in any after him till Oecumenius, his Ape, and
transcriber, who lived about the year 1050. Theodoret then being the first in
whom Post-scripts are extant, and Oecumenius his follower, Operum Tom. 2.
Parisis 1608. p. 645.646.
the next, it is probable that he was the first Author of them. And that which
puts it out of doubt is this, that Theodoret in his Preface to his Commentaries
on Paul's Epistles, is the first who does modestly undertake (with scriptum esse
existimo only) to show both the time when, and the place from whence Paul writ
his several Epistles, which Preface fully accords with the Post-scripts
placed, not after the text it self, but after the end of his Commentaries on
every Epistle. Since then this Preface and Post-scripts both accord: and see^ng
there are no Post-scripts in any Ancient Latin Authors or Coppies of the new
Testament, nor in any Greek ones, but those who followed Theodoret, and no
Post-scripts added to any but Paul's Epistles on which he only Commented, not
to Peter's or John's which he interpreted not, I presume I may safely conclude,
that Theodore^ was the Original Author of these Post-scripts. But then I pray
take notice of these material observations.

First, that these Post-sc^ipts were added to Paul's Epistles at Secondly, that
they are extant only in Theodore^, and not Oecumenius time, Anno. 1050.
Thirdly, that these Post-scripts both in him, and Oecumenius Fourthly, that
these clauses (ordained the first Bishop of the Timothy and Titu^, and their
own Hierarchy too, are not extant in Theodorets Post-scrips to the Epistles of
Timothy and Titus: which run only thus, The second to Timothy was written
from Rome, when Paul was brought before Nero the Roman Emperor the second
time. The Epistle to Titus was written from Nicopolis: S^cunda ad Timotheu^^
scripta est Romae, quando ad, Neronem adductus; est Romano^un^ Caesarem.
Epistola ad Titum Cretensis Ecclesiae scripta est Nicopoliopp^d^ Macedoniae.
his Post-scripts therefore will no ways aid but confound their cause, since
I may well argue, neither Paul in his Epistles, nor Theodoret in his
Post-scripts term Timothy or Titus Bishops of Ephesus or Crete, therefore they
were no Bishops of these places, un^^sse better proof than these Epistles and
Post-scripts be produced to evidence it. The rare Ancient Manuscript Parchment
Copy of the Greek Bible, sent to his Majesty by Cyrillus late Patriarch of
Constantinople, remaining in his Majesty's Library at Saint James, supposed by
some to be as Ancient as Tecla: but undoubtedly one of the ancientest Copies
this day extant; has no other Postscript to the first Epistle to Timothy, but
this; (...) A. (...): No other to the second to Timothy, but this; (...) B.
(...): not from Rome: And no other Postscript to Titus but, (...) (all written
in Capitals) with which the Syriac Coppies accord. So that all the residue is
but a late spurious addition. The first man I find these additionall clauses
(ordained first Bishop of the Ephesians, and ordained the first Bishop of the
Church of the Cretians) extant in, is Oecumenius, who flourished not till the
year 1050. being a patcher together only of other men's Commentaries and none
of the Orthodoxest writ^rs. And withal, this is observable, Oecumenius places
these Postscripts after his Commentaries, as a part of them, not immediately
after the Text as a Part, or appendant thereof. Theodorets Postscript in
another different line some good distance under it, in this manner, (...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
Thirdly, from Oecumenius till about 450. years after that those Oecumenius.
Therefore doubtless he was the first Author of them. And so they are of no
great Antiquity or credit.

Now that you may more clearly discern what a sandy foundation these
Post-scripts are to build the weighty Hierarchy of our Lordly Prelates on, give
me leave to inform you of some observable particulars touching these
Post-scripts upon mine own search and observation.

Athanasius, Ambrose, Jerome, Sedullus, Chrysostom, Primasius, Remig^us, Beda,
Raba^us Maurus, Haymo, Hugo Cardinalis, Bruno, Aquinas, Nicholaus de Lyra,
Ghorran, Dionysius Carthusianus, John Salesbury, Anselme, and Peter Lombard,
the ancientest Commentators on the Epistles of Paul, have no postscripts at all
extant in them, neither after the text, nor after their Commentaries; no nor
yet Erasmus, Melancton, Zuinglius, Zanchius, Alfonsus Salmeron, Benedictus
Iustinianus, Ambrosius Caterinus, Cornelius a Lapide, Claudius Espencaeus,
Antonius Scaynus, Estius, Hemingius, Ioannis Arboreus, Sotto Major, nor any
other Commentator almost, whether Protestant or Papist. Secondly, That in
sundry ancient English and Latin Manuscripts, and Bibles which I have seen;
in the Printed New Testament, set forth in Greek and Latin by Franciscus
Xemenez, in Academia Complutensi; in the Bible of Isiodor Clarius Venetiis,
1557. in all the Latin vulgar Bibles, attributed to Saint Jerome; In the New
Testament, set forth by Erasmus; in the Latin Bible Printed at Rome by command
of Pope Sixtus the fifth, Anno 1592. In the New Testament, comprising the
Latin vulgar translation, that of Guido Fabricius out of the Syriacke, that of
Arias Montanus and Erasmus, set forth altogether by Laurentius Bierlinke
An^werpiae, 1616. In the New Testament set forth by Miles Coverdale in Latin
and English, Anno. 1536. in Master Tyndalls English Bible, and in the English
Translation, which Doctor Fulke follows in his answer to the Rhemish
Testament, and in many ancient Greek Coppies, there is no Postscript at all to
be found. Thirdly, That in the Latin Bible, set forth and Printed by Robert
Stephen, Parisiis 1532. And in the Latin Bible of Ioannis Benedictus, Parisiis
1558, the Postscripts are thrust out and put into the Margin, as nor worthy to
stand under the Text, and being of small or no account. Fourthly, That in the
Latin Bible set forth by Robert Stephen Latin and Greek Bibles of Philip
Melanctons Edition Tiguri 1543. and Basileae 1545. In Sebastian Castalio his
Edition of the Bible, Basileae. 1551. In the Translations of the New Testament
out of the Syriacke both by Guido Fabritius, and Emanuell Tremelius, in the
Dutch Bible set forth by David Walderus, Hamburgae 1596. In the Frenc^ Bible
set out by the Doctors of Louvaine a Paris 1616. In the Latin Bible of Ioannis
Benedictus, Parisiis, 1558. In the Bible translated into English by Thomas
Matthew. Anno. 1537. In ^he English Bible set forth by diverse excellent
Learned men, Printed Cum privilegio, by Thomas Petit and Robert Redman. London
1540. In the English Bible appointed to be read in Churches, Printed at London,
1568^ And in sundry other Bibles and New Testaments which I have seen, these
clauses ( Ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Ephesians, and
ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians) are not to be found in
the Postscripts to the Epistles to Timothy and Titus; And indeed, you shall
seldom find them in any but Master Beza, and in those that follow his
Edition, (as Master Calvin and some few others do in their Commentaries)
whereas both he and they are professed Enemies to Episcopacy, and disclaim
those Postscripts as false and spurious. Beza, and the ^et^ers forth of the
Greek Bible, Printed by the Heirs of Andrew, Francofurti. 1597. pass this
sentence upon these Postscripts: and this clause, Ordained the first Bishops of
Ephesus, or, of the Church of the Ephesians. Non exta^ in quibusdam vetustis
Codi^ibus, and sane supposttum fuisse pu^o. And Guilielmus Estius, a famous
Roman Doctor, in his Commentary on 2 Timothy 1.4. writes thus of the Postscript to
it. Grae^a subscriptio post finem Epistolae sic habet; Scriptae Roma ad
Timotheum secunda, cum Paulus iterum sisteretur Caesari Neroni, (where he omits
this addition Ephesiorum Ecclesiae primus Episcopus) and then passes this
verdict upon it, Sed hujusmodi Graecae subscriptiones, ut incerti sunt
authoris, ITA NON Magnae authoritatis. And Thom^s de vio Cajetanus, Andreas
Hyperius, Estius with others, de^^ the subscription to Titus; That this Epistle
was written from Nicopolis of Macedonia; and the Con^. Mag. 2. ^ol. 597.
Century writers with others, that the Second to Timothy was written from Rome
a^ Paul's second appearing before Nero, a mere falsehood and mistake: All which
considered, I wonder our great learned Prelates, Bishop Downeham, Bishop White,
and Bishop Hall, and especially our great Antiquary, The judgment of Dr.
Reinolds touching the original of Episcopacy, more largely confirmed out of
antiquity by James Archbishop of Armagh. p. 5.
Bishop Usher, should so much insist upon these spurious false postscripts, and
draw a maine Argument from, to prove their Episcopacy of Divine Institution;
when Bellarmine and those Papists, who write most eagerly for the Prelates
Hierarchy, are ashamed to produce such a false and impotent proof for their
groundless Episcopal jurisdiction. If these Answers satisfy not this
Objection from these Postscripts, you may receive more full satisfaction and
further Answers to it in my Vnbishoping of Timothy and Titus. p. 52. to 58.
Object. 1.
To which I shall remit the Reader.
From these two Arguments for the pretended Divine right of Episcopacy, I shall
next proceed to answer the most considerable reasons produced for the
continuing of Lordly Prelates in our Church.

The first, for order and moment, is the Antiquity of Lordly Bishops in our
Church, who (if we credit Episcopacy by divine right, 2. part. p. 110, 111,
113. His humble Remonstrance, and defense of the humble Remonstrance, p 40.
Bishop Hall, and Sir Thom. Aston his remonst. epistle to the Reader, and
brief review of Episcopacy, sect. 1, 2 3, 4. and the conclusion.
others) are not only of Divine institution, but their Episcopal Government
has continued in this our Island, ever since the first plantation of the
Gospel, without contradiction: Therefore, it will be neither decent, nor
expedient, but dangerous and inconvenient to remove them now.

To this I answer; first, that though Bishops have been very ancient in our
Church, Answ. 1.
yet how ancient, and what kind of Bishops these were, will be the question.
De Pe^^^ and Paulo ad diem 29 Ianuarii Bar^nius annal. ^om. 1. ann. 61. sect.
4. Hen^. Spelman Concilia. p. 4, 5.
Metraphrastes writes, that Saint Peter continued long in Britain, constituted
Churches, and ordained Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, and then returned to
Rome, the 12 year of Nero Caesar. But as this Author is very fabulous in
other things, so without doubt he is false and singular i^ this, as I could
easily manifest, did not Bishop De Brit. Eccle. Prim^r. c. 1. p. 7.
Vshers, siquidem Symeoni Metaphrastae credimus; and Annal. E^cles. t^m. 1.
ann. 44. p. 371. Godwins discourse of the conversion of Britain p. 3.
Baronius his sicut in aliis multis ibi a se positis errare Metaphrastum certum
est, ita in his hallucinatum esse constat, History l. 6. c. 9. p. 74.
John Speed his, For a dream we leave it, etc. and Francis Godwin Bishop of
Landaffe, in his Discourse of the first conversion of this Island of Britain
unto Christian Religion, p. 3, 4, 5, 6. (where he largely and professedly
proves against this Impostor, That Peter was never in Britain) ease me of this
Labor, and sufficiently refute the vain confidence of See a Romanstrance
against Presbytery, Epi. to the Reader.
those, who have lately produced this branded Authority to derive the Antiquity
of our Lordly Prelates from the Apostles themselves, as if they had first
planted them in our Church.

That which is likewise alleged out of the Greek Martyrologe and Dorotheus
his Synopsis, See Bishop Vs^er de Brit. eccles. primer. c. 1. p. 9. and Sir
Thomas Astons Epistle to the read.
That Aristobulus was ordained Bishop of the Britains by Paul, and by him sent
Bishop into England; seems to be of the same stamp with the former in A
discourse of the convers^on of Brit. c. 2. p. 8.
Bishop Godwins judgment, who rejects it as fabulous, because none of our own
Authors or Histories so much as once mention his so memorable labor and
martyrdom among us. But grant it true, ye^ since the word Bishop, is here used
only for an ordinary Minister or Preacher of the Gospel, and Aristobulus (
sent only to convert our Nation being Pagans) had no Bishopric or Diocese
here, nor any Inferior Presbyters under him for ought appears, over whom to
play the Lord, as our Lordly Prelates have, this Authority will stand those in
small steed, who with more confidence then judgment have objected it in
defense of our Lordly Bishops, which by the common consent of all our Writers,
began not till King Lucius his reign, about the year of Christ 179. So that
from the Preaching of the Gospel in our Island Bishop Usher. de Britan.
Eccles. Primor. c. 1. p. 1. to 17. and p. 1072. to 1078. Godwins discourse of
the Conversion of Britain. c. 1, 2, 3 Antiquit. Eccle. Brit. Speeds Hist. l.
6. c. 9. p. 73. ^t^. Henr. Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. p. 1. to 16. Balaeus Cent. 1.
p. 23, 24.
by Iacobus Zebedeus, Anno Christi 41. of Simon Zelotes, Anno 47. of Joseph of
Ara^at^aea, Anno 48. of Saint Paul Anno 60. of Philip the Apostle and his
twelve associates. Anno 63. till Lucius erected Bishops and Bishoprics; to
wit, for the space of about one hundred and forty years after the first
Preaching of the Gospel here, our Church of Britain had no Bishops at all to
govern it, but only Presbyters, for ought app^ares by any credible Author,
the Christian faith all this while continuing un-extinguished among us at
Glastenbury, and in some other places; as our Antiquaries manifest. If then
that rule of Tertullian be infallible, De Praescript. advers. haeretic.
That is best and truest which is first: and that of Ad Evagrium and Comment,
in Tit. c. 1. See cha. 8. throughout.
Hierome most certain: That the Church of God, immediately after the Apostles
times, before the erection of Lord Bishops, was governed by a common Council
of Presbyters, not by Bishops; and our Church, as is probable, and the Church
of Scotland (as John Fordon Scotch. in. l. 3. c. 8. John Major de Gestis
Scotorum, l. 21. c. 3. Bishop Usher de Brit. ^^cle. Primor. p. 800
some Authors write for certain) was governed in this manner by Presbyters,
for above an hundred years, together; it will rather follow, that our Lord
Bishops should now be totally suppressed, and a Presbyteriall government
re-erected in our Church, because it is ancienter than that of Bishops, and
planted among us by the Apostles when our Island first received the Gospel;
then that the government of our Lordly Prelates should be perpetua^ed among us,
because ancient only, yet not so old as that of Presbyters, by above one
hundred years.

The Original of Bishops in our Church.
Touching the first erection of Archbishops, Bishops, and Bishoprics among
us, there is great variance, obscurity and incertaine^y in Writers; yet this is
the general verdict, both of our own and foreign Authors; That in King
Lucius his time, before the conversion of our Island to Christianity, there
were in it 28 Some write but 25.
Flamines and three Arch Flamines, to whom the other Judges of manners and
Priests were subject; that upon the conversion of King Lucius and his people to
the Christian Faith, by Fagan and De^wan, they by command from Pope
Eleutherius, with the Kings consent, placed Bishops where there were Flamines,
and three Archbishops where there were Arch Flamines, turning the three
Arch^flamines Sees in the three chief Cities, into Arch-bishoprickes, and the
28. Flamines Sees into 28 Bishoprics. This is punctually averred for Truth by
Geofry Monmoth: Histor. Brit. l. 2. c. 1. Edit. Ascent, and l. 4. c. 19. Edit.
Heidelb. by Gild^s in his Book, De victoria Aurelii Ambrosii, by Gervasius
Tilburiensis, de Otiis Imperialibus ad Othonem Imperatorem, Historiolae
Wintoniensis Ecclesiae, Alphredus Beuer lacensis, Radulphus de Diceto,
Bartholomaeus de Cotton, Gerardus Cornubiensis Ranulphus Cestrensis, the
Authors of the History of Rochester, of the Chronicles of Hales, and Dunstaple,
of the Book of Abingdon, of the Geneologicall Chronicle of the Monastery of
Hales, and of the Abbreviated Chronicle of the Britains, Thomas Rudburne,
Thomas Stubs, Thomas Harfield, Ponticus Virunnius, Polydor Virgil, Martinus
Polonus, P^olomaeus Lucensis Tuscus, cited by Ioannis Leydensis in Chronico
Belgico, l. 2. c. 1. Ioannis B^ptista Platina, in vita Eleutherii, Iacobus
Philippus Bergomiensis. Suppl. Chron. l. 8. Nauclerus. vol. 1. Chronograph.
genesis 30. and Vol. 2. Genesis 6. Tritemius compend. l. 1. Pope Leo the ninth Epist.
4. Guilielmus Durandus, Rationale^ l. 2. c. 1. n. 21, 22. Polydorus Virgilius,
de Jnvent^ rerum^ l. 4. c. 11. All quoted to my hand by that excellent learned
Antiquary, Bishop Usher. De Britannicarum Ecclesiarum primordiis. c. 5. p. 56,
57, 58, 59.99.100. To whom I might add Matthew Parker his Antiquitates.
Ecclesiae, Brit. p. 7. John F^x his Acts and Monuments: Edit ult. Vol. 1. p.
138, 139. John Speed in his History of Great Britain, p. 132. Richard Grafton
in his Chronicle, part 7. p. 83. William Harrison in his Description of
England. l. 2. c. 1, 2. With many more of our own Writers, and generally all
the Canonists and Glossers on Gratian, Dictinctio 80. and the Schoolmen on
Peter Lombard, sent. l. 4. distinct. 24, who concu^re in this opinion. For in
Gratian distinct. 80. f. 130. I find these two decrees cited; the one of Pope
Lucinus with this Rubricke prefixed. In what places Primates and Patriarchs
ought to be ordained. The Cities and places wherein Primates ought to preside,
were not ordained by modern times, but long before the coming of Christ, to
whose Primates even the Gentiles did appeal for their greater businesses; In
those very Cities after the coming of Christ, the Apostles and their
Successors placed Patriarchs and Primates to whom the businesses of Bishops
(yet saving the Apostolical authority in all things) and the greater causes
after the Apostolic See are to be referred. On which John Thierry and others
make this gloss. Primates are constituted there, where heretofore the
proto-Flamines of the Gentiles were placed, Archbishops, where there were
Arch-Flamines, Bishops where their Flamines were, and this for the most part
(if we may credit them) was done by Saint Peter's appointment. The second is
this Decree of Pope Clemens, which warrants this gloss. In those Cities
wherein heretofore among the Ethnickes, their chief Flamines and prime Doctors
of the Law were placed, Saint Peter commanded (but God knows when and where)
Primates or Patriarchs of Bishops to be placed, who should agitate the causes
of the rest of the Bishops, and the greater businesses in Faith. But in those
Cities in which in times past among the foresaid Ethnickes, their arch-Flamines
were, whom yet they held to be less than their foresaid Primates, he commanded
Archbishops to be iustituted; but in every other particular City^ he commanded
one sole Bishop and not many to be ordained, who should only ^btaine the name
of Bishops, because among the Apostles themselves, there was the like
institution, sed unus praefuit omnibus, but one had authority over the rest,
(which is most false:) On which the gloss thus descants. The Gentiles had
three Orders of Priests: to wit proto-Flamines, arch-Flamines, and Flamines. In
the place of the proto-Flamines, Peter commanded Patriarchs to be placed, who
should take conusance of the greater causes of other Bishops; in the place of
arch-Flamines, Archbishops, in the place of Flamines, Bishops, of whom there
ought to be but one in every City. Which Grai^an himself thus backs in his 21
Distinction. There is a certain distinction observed among Priests, whence
others are called simply Priests, others arch-Priests, others chorall Bishops,
others Bishops, others Archbishops or Metropolitanes, others Primates, others
chief Priests; Horum discretio a Gentibus maxim introducta est; The
distinction of these was principally int^oduced by the Gentiles, who called
their Flamines, some simply Flamines, others Arch-flamines, others
Proto-flamines. All which Peter Lombard the Father of the Schoolmen affirming
after Gratian in his lib. 4. Senten^iarum Did. 24. made this to pass as an
undubitable verity among all the Canonists and Schoolmen. There is only one
thing needs explanation in these Popes d^crees, and that is what is meant by
Saint Peter, who is made the Author of this Institution? For this we need
resort no further then to the Decree of Pope Nicholas recorded by the same
Gratian: Distinct, 22. c. Omnes f. 33. Omnes sive Patriarchae cujuslibet
apicem, sive Metropoleon primatus, Episcopatuum cathedras, vel Ecclesiarum,
sive cujuscunque ordinis dignitatem instituit Romana Ecclesia. By which it is
evident, that by Saint Peter, is meant the Church and Popes of Rome, who style
themselves often times Peter, in their bulls and writings, as well as his
successors. By all these Authorities compared together, it is evident, that our
Archbishops and Bishops had their Original Institution from the Church and
Popes of Rome, and that not out of their imitation of any divine pattern, or
form of government prescribed by Christ in Scripture, and settled in those
primitive Churches of the Gen^iles, which the Apostles planted, and to whom
they directed their Epistles, but out of an apish imitation of the Heathenish
Hierarchicall government of the Idolatrous Proto-Flamines, Arch Flamines, and
Flamines used among the Pagan Gentiles, and Britains before their conversion
to the Christian Faith, in whose very places, Sees, and form of government
they succeeded; Eleuther^us instituting and ordaining, that all, or the most
part of the Arch-Flamines, which is to mean Archbishops, and Bishops of the
Pagan Law, which at that day were in number, three Arch Flamines, and 28
Flamines should be made Arch bishops and Bishops of the Church of Christ, as
Part. 7. p. 83.
Graf^on and others write in positive terms: which if it be true, (as this
cloud of witnesses aver) it will thence necessarily follow, that our
Arch^bishops and Bishops are not of divine and Apostolical, but rather of
Papal and E^hnicall institution, and a mere continuance of the Diabolical,
heathenish Hierarchy, exercised among the Idolatrous Priests in times of
Paganism, within our I^land; and so by necessary consequence they and their
government, are rather to be utterly extirpated then perpetuated in our
Christian reformed Church, which ought 2 Cor. 6.14c 15, 16, 17. Deuteronomy. 12.30,
31, 32. Jer. 10, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 10.19.20, 21.
wholly to abandon all Relics of Idolatry, and to have no fellowship nor
communion with Infidels and unbeleavers in their discipline or Church
government. Wherefore to avoid this dangerous rock and necessary consequence,
some of our Prelates (as Defense of the Apolog. part. 2. c. 4. divis. 2.
Bishop Iuell, Bishop A discourse of the Conversion of Brit. p. 26, 27, 28.
Godwin, De Brit. Eccles. primor. p 57, 58 92, 99, 100.
Bishop Usher, together with Doctor Subversion of F. persons, 3. conversions.
Sutcliffe, and that learned Knight, Sir Concilia. Tom. 1. p. 13.14.
Henry Spelman, reject this original of our Archbishops, Bishops, and
Bishoprics as false and fabulous, informing us:

First, that Roger de Wendover, Matthew Paris, Matthew Westmin. William of
Mal^esbury, the Poet under the name of Gildas, Giraldus Cambrensis and
Radulphus Niger (to whom I may add William Caxton in his Chronicle. part. 4.
in the life of King Lucie) omit this figment of the Arch Flamines and Flamines,
(which they say, was first invented without any ground by Galfridus
Monu^etensis^) and relate only that Lucius erected 28 Bishops and three Arch
bishops among us, but record not that it was done in imitation of the Arch
Flamines or Flamines, or that they were substituted in their places, and
enjoyed their Lands, and Sees, as the former Historians write. But this is no
argument to disprove the premised Authors, far more in number, since these
few Historians silence of what sundry others record expressly, is no
conviction of their falsehood, seeing one may relate, what another pretermits,
either out of brevity, ignorance, or negligence.

Wherefore in the Second place A di^course of the Conversion of Brit. p. 26,
27, 28, 29,
Bishop Godwin affirms; that there is nothing more absurd in this History,
then the imagination of ^itting the Sees of Bishops and Arch bishops, according
to the place and number of Flamines for sooth, and arch Flamines of the Pagans.
A devise (writes he) so childish and ridiculous as I cannot but wonder, that
any man of learning and judgment should approve it, and yet I perceive not
(says he) any that have gainsaid it before Master Sutcliffe, but contrariwise
dive^s, both ancient and learned are to be found, that have partly broached and
partly applauded the same; among whom he reckons up two, especially; Fenestella
de Sacrif. Romans c. 5. and Gratian Distinct. 21. and 80. To confute whose
mistakes he produces these two Reasons.

That not so much as the name of proto Flamin, or Arch Flamine is to be found
in any author or monument of credit, before Gratians time. that it is
manifest, that diverse Cities had many Colleges of Priests and consequently
many Flamines, which he proves at large. Therefore it is not possible that
there should be any manner of proportion at all, between our Bishops and their
Flamines, they having diverse Flamines to almost every town, and we one Bishop
not so much as for every whole shire. To which Sir Council. Tom. 1 p. 13.14.
Henry Spelman adds in the third place: That the Flamines were no other but
ordinary Priests among the Romans, so called, a filo, quasi Filamines, or a
pilo, quasi Pilamines: that every one of them received his name from the God
he served, as Flamen Dialis, Flamen Martialis, Flamen Quirinalis, Vulcanalis,
Floralis, Volturnalis, Pomalis, Furinalis, Falacer, Caesaris Flamen, and the
like. That none of these had any Priestly Jurisdiction over any certain
Province, or did solely administer in any one cure, but that every cure or
Parish had two Flamines at least set over it. Neither were these subject to any
superior Flamin who from thence might be called an Arch- Flamin or
Proto-Flamin, (whose names are no where to be found among the ancients unless
it be in Fenestella, which Author he proves to be spurious) Sed toti Pontificum
Collegio, but to the whole College of Pontifs, and to the chief Priest that
governed it, not to an Arch-Flamin: and though some Flamines were called
greater, others lesser, yet this (writes he) was not from their power, but from
their Antiquity, the three first being instituted by Numa and the Senators, the
others afterward by the people. Admit then these their reasons true, that the
Flamines were but ordinary Priests among the Pagans, and not in nature of
Archbishops or Bishops: that they were all of equal authority and had no
Jurisdiction one over another: that there were many of them in every City, and
not one of them set over an whole City, much less a Diocese; and that they
were subject only to the whole College of Priests, and not to any Arch-
Flamin, or Proto-Flamin: I^ our Archbishops and Bishops be derived from them,
and successors to them in our Island, as the first recited Authors affirm;
this quite overturnes their Archiepiscopall and Episcopal, pretended
Jurisdiction over other Ministers, and their sole Episcopacy and Jurisdiction
in or over one City and Province; since the Flamines were all equal, and many
in each Parish and City; and directly proves, that there ought to be a parity
between Archbishops, Bishops and our Ministers now, and no disparity, because
there was none among the Flamines, and that no Ministers ought to be subject to
our Archbishops and Bishops but only to the whole Synod or Convocation of
Presbyters, because the Flamines were so: and that there ought to be not one
sole, but many Bishops of equal Authority in every City, because it was so
among the Flamines their Predecessor^, yea in the first Christian Churches,
(planted by the Apostles) as appears by Act. 14.23. c. 20.17.28. Phil. 1.1.
Tit. 1.5.7. 1 Timothy 5.17, Jam. 5.14. with other Texts. If they be not these
Arch- Flamines and Flamines Successors, as these last Authors testify, then I
fear our Prelates can hardly derive their pedigree as high as King Lucius, nor
yet certainly define at what time, or by whom Archbishops and Bishops were
first erected in our Island: For A discourse of the Conversion of Brit. p.
23.24.25.
Bishop Godwin, (who rejects the conceit of King Lucius his erecting of
Archbishops and Bishops in steed of Arch- Flamines and Flamines) gives these
three very probable Reasons against his erecting of three Arch-bishoprickes,
and 28. Bishoprics in this Isle, or any Bishoprics at all.
Lucius was never King of all Britain, but rather some petty King, or King
happily of some principal part thereof; therefore he could not erect
Archbishoprickes and Bishoprics throughout the Island, as the recited Authors
Fable.

Council of Arles in the year 325. mention is made of one Restitutus a
British Bishop, not entitled to any certain See, but only called
Bri^anniarum Episcopus; and even so likewise after him Fastidius, is mentioned
by Gennadius by the same style, which being considered (says he) together with
the rare and seldom mention that we find of British Bishops, whose
Antiquities I have hun^ed after with all diligence, I cannot but rest
persuaded, that our Britains had very few Bishops until the coming over of
Germanus and Lupus to suppress the Pelagian Heresy; which after they had
rooted out, the History of Landaff says, they Consecrated Bishops in many
places of Britain, and over all the Britains dwelling on the right side of
Britain, they consecrated for Archbishop, Saint Dubritius who was chosen for
the Supreme Doctor by the King and all the Diocese: which dignity being
bestowed upon him by Germanus and Lupus, they with the consent of Maurice the
King, the Nobility, Clergy and people, appointed his See to be at the manner
of Lantani, and founded his See there^ This was about the year of Christ 430.
about which time also, or somewhat later, Palladius, did first appoint Bishops
and ordain Bishoprics in Scotland, as Buchanan has delivered. Upon these
testimonies, I reason thus: If before these times we had so many Bishops, and
Bishoprics, how comes it to pass, that in no Monument whatsoever, we
find any name or mention of any Bishop of this Land, saving some few that (as
we say) had their See at London? and if so many Sees had been furnished
before, what occasion had Germanus and Lupus to consecrate so many Bishops (and
erect new Bishoprics too) as is before mentioned in the History of Landaff?
Thus Bishop Godwin argues, against the pretended first erection of our
Bishoprics and Arch-bishoprickes, most of which now extant, ( London only
excepted) were erected long after King Lucius reign, See Antiquitates
Ecclesiae, Brit. p. 19. to 29. William Harrison Description of England l. 2. c.
1.2. Godwin Catalogue of Bishops. 33. H. ^. c. 31.31. H. 8. c. 8.34. and 35. H.
c. 17. Eadmerus Hist. Noverum l. 4 p. 95.96.165.166.167.168.
above 600. years after Christ, and five of them in King Henry the 8. his
reign; so that William of Malmesbury one of our most juditious writers, and
the most diligent searcher out of the Antiquities of our Bishops Sees, who writ
the History of our Bishop^ and their Sees above 500. years since could find
no Archbishops See in our Island ancienter than Canterbury (erected See. part.
1. p. 153.
about the the year of Christ 600. or 602.) and determines positively ^n
Prologo ad. l 1. De Gesti^ Pontif. p. 195.
Ibi Prima seeds Archiepiscopi habteur, qui est totius Angliae Primas and
Patriarcha. Caeterum ubi fuerit Archi-Episcopa^us (if there were any such)
tempore Britonum, cognitio l^hat, quia vetustas consumpsit nostri seculi
memoriam; Whence our most diligent Antiquary Council. Tom. 1. p. 16.
Sir Henry Spelman concludes thus, concerning the Original of our Archbishops
and Bishops, (the certain time of whose Primitive institution among us he
cannot determine) Sufficit quidem, etc. Truly it is sufficient that we had
many Bishops here, and some Metropolitans; either under Lucius himself, or
soon after his age, licet de ipsorum sedibus a^que numero lucide satis non
constiterir; although their Sees and number do not plainly enough appear. So
that upon the whole matter, when all things are thoroughly scanned, we can find
no undoubted Bishops at all in our British Church till Restitutus his time, who
was present at the Council of Arles about the year of Christ 325. and he a
Bishop without any particular See or Diocese known only by the name of
Britanniarum Episcopus, as Godwin writes (though Spel. Council. Tom. 1. p. 24.
others style him Civitate Londinensi Restitutus Episcopus) who for ought we
find had no Presbyters at all under his Jurisdiction, and was no more than an
ordinary Minister as the Bishops in the Apostles time were. Act. 20.17.28. Phi.
1.1. Tit. 1.5.7. And so by this computation, our Church after the first
preaching of the Gospel among us continued without Lord Bishops and
Archbishops, about 280. years or more. And if she remained and flourished
without Bishops for so many years then, why may she not without any great
Soloecisme or prejudice remove, and flourish without them now? yea, why should
she not (by the Objecters own argument from antiquity) now quite abandon them,
and set up a Presbyteriall government without any scruple, since Presbyters by
some hundred^ of years, are the ancientest, and those by which our Church, and
the Church of Scotland were first governed, for so long a space before any Lord
Bishops were instituted in them?

Answ. 2.
Secondly, grant our Bishops as ancient as King Lucius, yet these ancient
Bishops, no doubt, were far different from ours.

England Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. p. 152.
till Archbishop Theodores time, who first divided the Province of Canterbury
into Parishes about the year of Christ 670. And for ought appears they were
no more than ordinary Presbyters.

British Bishops present at the Council of Ariminum, under Constantius, Anno
379. who were so poor Sulpitius Severus, Hist. Sacr. l. 2. Vss^rius de Brit.
Eccles. Primord. p. 196.
that they were maintained at the Emperors cost, inopia proprii publico usi
sunt, cum collatam a caeteris collationem respuissent, sanctius putantes fiscum
gravare, quam singulos. By the Bishopric of Rochester, Godwins Ca^. p.
392.393.
Putta and Quichelmus the 6. and 7. Bishops of this See, being forced to leave
it through want and poverty; and by other

Thirdly, they had no stately Palaces and Cathedralls, as is evident by the
first Bishops of York and Lindisfarne, who lived in See Godwin in the life of
Paulinus A^dan and Fian, p. 435.495. Spel. Council. Tom. 1. p. 5.11.
poor Cottages, and had either no Cathedralls a^ all, or some built only of
wattle or boords, and covered over with reed; stately stone Churches being not
in use among the Britains, Scots, or Irish, for many hundred years, as De
Brit. Eccl. Primordi^s, p. 114.661.736.737.13.14.
Bishop Usher proves out of Beda, Eccles. Hist l. 3 cap. 4.5. and S. Bernard in
the life of Malachy. Therefore stone Altars (no doubt) were not then in use,
when as the very walls of their

Fourthly, they had no stately Coaches and Palfryes as our Lord Bishops have,
neither were they unpreaching, or rare-preaching Prelates, but they went about
the Country on foot from place to place (as Mat. 10.5. to 15 ^9.35. Mar. 6.6.
Act. 20.13. Luke 13.22.
Christ and his Apostles did at first) and Preached the Gospel to the people
day by day: Witness Aidan the first Bishop of Lindisfarne (now Durham and a
Count Palatine) who purposely avoiding the Pomp and frequency of York chose
the little Island of Lindisfarne for his See, and for 15. years space together
traveled up and down the Country (...), even Discur^ere per cuncta urbana and
rusti^a loca non equorum dors^, sed pedum incessu vectus, nisi si m^ra forte
nec^ssitas compuliss^t, solebat. Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 5. Godwins
Catalogue. p. 495.
on foot, to preach the Gospel to the people, not seeking nor having any
thing in this world, and giving whatsoever he could get unto the poor: So
Godwins Catalogue. Malmes. de Gestis, Pontif. A^gl. l. 3. Beda Eccles. Hist. l.
2. c. 14.
Paulinus, the first Archbishop of York for 36. days together never rested
one moment, but either instructed the people by preaching that flocked
continually about him, or else imparted Christ unto them in Baptism, and that
in the open field^ and Rivers, there being then no Churches built.

Fifthly, they intermedled not with any secular affairs; and when some began
to tamper with them they made this Canon Spel. Council. Tom. 1. p. 246.
Council of Cloueshow under Cuthbert Anno. 747. That Bishops should follow
their pastoral cure with their uttermost endeavor, and instruct the people
with wholesome doctrine, and not addict themselves to secular affairs more
than to Gods s^rvice, as most of our Lordly Prelates do now.

Sixthly, Bishops in those days were not reputed very necessary Godwins
Catalogue. p. 435.136.
Paulinus the first Bishop of York, that See continued void of a Bishop 30.
years. So after the translation of Mellitus to Canterbury, Anno. 617. that See
continued void near 40 years: and how these and other Bishoprics have
continued void in several ages, 2.3.4.6.10.15.20. and 30. years together
without any prejudice, I have A Catalogue, etc. p. 16.17.18.
elsewhere manifested more at large. If then our Bishoprics may want Bishops
for so many years space without any inconvenience to our Church (when as no
Parish Church by our Rastall Advouson 1.2. Conci. Later a^ens^. 2. Can. 29.
Summa Angelica, Beneficium; 31. Summa Rosella. Beneficium^ 1.
Common, and the Canon Laws, ought to be void above six months at most) I
presume by the selfsame reason, our Church may well subsist without for all
future times, especially now when there are so many complaints and petitions
against them, and so many Bishoprics void of Prelates already.

Finally, in those primitive times, Bishops were not so great but that some of
them, were subject unto Presbyters: For our venerable L. 3. de Gestis, c. 3.
Spelm Council. Tom. 1. p. 118.
Beda informs us of an Island in Ireland, which in those days had an Abbot
Presbyter for its governor, to whose jurisdiction the whole Province, Et etiam
Episcopi sunt subjecti, and even Bishops themselves were subject, according to
the example of the first Teacher thereof, who was no Bishop, but a Presbyter
and a Monk. So the Abbot of Henrici Spel. Council. Tom. 1. p. 229.
Glastonbury exempt from all Episcopal Jurisdiction, had a kind of
superiority above the Bishop of Bath and Wells, which Bishop by the Charter of
King Ina, was bound with his Clerks at Wells every year, Ipsam matrem suam
Glastoniensem Ecclesiam feria secunda post ascensionem Domini cum Litania
recognoscere, to do his homage to his mother Church of Glastonbury with a
Letany; quod si superbia inflatus distulerit, and if he refused to do it out
of pride, then he was to forfeite two houses which this King gave him. And in
the Hen. Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. p. 261.263.
Excerptions of Egbert Archbishop of York, Anno. 750. I find these Canons of
the fourth Council of Carthage revived here among us, as Ecclesiastical
Laws, That Bishops and Presbyters should have Hospitiolum, a little Cottage
(not a Lordly Palace) near the Church. That the Bishop in the Church by the
consent of the Presbyters should set somewhat above them, but within the house,
Collegam Presbyterorum se esse cognoscat, should know himself to be the
Colleague (or Companion) of the Presbyters. That a Bishop should not ordain
Clerks without a Council of his Presbyters. That a Bishop should hear no
man's cause without the presence of his Clerks, except the cause of confession,
because a decree cannot be firm which shall not seem to have the consent of
many. All which considered, it is evident, that our Bishops in those days had
no Lordly Jurisdiction over other Ministers, no such sole power of Ordination
and judicature as our present Lord Bishops now claim and exercise as their
peculiar right. Therefore their Antiquity and Episcopacy, can be no warrant at
all for the lawfulness or continuance of our Lordly Prelacy.

Thirdly, admit our Bishops as ancient as King Lucius days, or there abouts,
yet this is no good Plea for their continuance.

First, because our Abbots, Priors, Monks could make as good if not a better
prescription for themselves as our Lordly Prelates, who can allege nothing
for their continuance but what these either did or might have done when they
were suppressed.

For first our Monks, Abbots, Priors and their Abbeyes were every way as
ancient, if not elder then our Lordly Bishops and Bishoprics, the Monks and
Abbey of See Iacobus Vsserius de Brit. Eccles. Primordiis c. 2.6 8. Guilielmus
Malmesb. de Antiqu. Ecclesiae Glaston Camden in Sommersetshire. p. 164. etc.
Henrici Spelmans Council. p. 4. to 22.
Glastonbury deriving their pedigree from Joseph of Aramathea (which Church and
Abbey our writers call, Prima Ecclesia; fons and Origo totius Religionis, etc.
the first Church, the fountain and Original of all our Religion.) And many
other of our other Abbeys [as that of Winchester, S. Albans, Westminster with
others] being ancienter than all or most of our Bishoprics.

Secondly, Most of them were confirmed by more Acts of Parliament,
228.229.427.483. to 489. See Speed^s Catalogue p. 1058. to 1060.
Bulls of Popes, and Charters of our Kings, endowed with greater privileges
than any of our Bishoprics whatsoever, as is evident by the Sea the Authors
in (v) Sir Edward Cook his Preface to the 9. Report, and Mat. Westminster,
Mat. Paris, Heveden, Ingulply, and Will. Malmes. sparsim, Spelmanns Glossarium,
and Council. Tom. 1. Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, and Spicilegium in Eadmerum.
Charters, Bulls, and exemptions, granted to Glastonbury, Saint Albans, Berry,
Redding, Westminster, Saint Augustine,

Thirdly, many of our Abbots and Priors, (sometimes above an hundred) were
mitred, had Episcopal Jurisdiction, and sat in See Mr. Seldens, Tit. Hon. p.
700. to 736. Henrici Spel. Council. Tom. 1.347. and Glossarium, Tit. Abbas Cowel
Interpret. Tit. Abbot.
Parliament as Barons and Peers of the Realm as well as Bishops; yet
notwithstanding they were all See Rastall Tit. Monasteries.
suppressed by Acts of Parliament even in time of Popery, though double in
number to our Bishops; therefore our Bishops and Bishoprics being now found
by long experience not only unprofitable, but pernicious to our Kings and
State, as here I have manifested, and to our Church, our Religion, as our Book
of Martyrs largely demonstrates, may lawfully be extirpated, notwithstanding
this Plea of Antiquity, as well as they.

Fourthly, the Bishops in other reformed Churches, could and did plead as large
Antiquity and prescription for their continuance, inveterate and lasting they
have been. In a word, the government of our Church by a Presbytery has been
more ancient, more profitable, and less prejudicial to our State, Kings,
Church, than the Government of our Lordly Prelacy: therefore it is most
reasonable that it should be revived, reestablished, and the Prelacy
suppressed. All which I hope, may suffice in Answer to the first part of this
grand objection, which has stumbled many.

To the second branch of it, touching the danger and inconvenience of this
change in suppressing Episcopacy. Answ. 2.


I answer: First, that there can be no danger or inconvenience

Scotland, with other reformed Churches requires it: the divisions and
distractions in our Church (which in many wise men's apprehensions cannot be
reconciled, nor any unity or uniformity in Gods worship established among us
without it;) call for it Episcopacy being now grown such a root of
bitterness, and wall of partition, as there is little hope of any unity,
peace, or harmony in our Church if it continue.

Object. 2.


The second Allegation for the continuance of Episcopacy is this, See Bishop
Halls. 3. last Books, the Oxford Petition. Sir Tho. Astons Petition and book.
that if Bishops be taken away, we shall have nothing but Sects, Schisms, and
divisions in our Church, and almost as many Religions as men.

To this I answer. Answ. 1.
First; that the tyranny, Lordlinesse, profaneness, Superstition and
Innovations of our Prelates both in Ceremones, Doctrine, Worship, have been
the Original, Principal, if not only cause of all those Sects, divisions,
and Separations lately sprung up in our Church; for proof of which I appeal
only to every man's conscience and experience, it being a most known
undubitable truth: the removing therefore of our Bishops (the Sublata causa
tollitur effectus, Kickerman.
cause of all our Schisms and devisions) must needs be a means of future
peace and unity, not cause of Schisms, or divisions in Religion, as is vainly
suggested.

Secondly, Episcopacy it self is now a See all the Seperatists late Pamplets
and Books.
maine ground of

Thirdly, Saint Hierome, and sedulius Com. in Tit. 1. with others who follow
them.
Jerome and others inform us, that Episcopacy; but it has been so far from
effecting this, that it has on the contrary occasioned all or most of those
See Ioannis Marius, Zabarella, and Theodericus a Niem de Schismate. Centur.
Magd. Cent. 3.5.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13. 6.10.
Schisms and divisions that ever happened in the Church of God since its first
institution, both at home and abroad, as is evident by all Ecclesiastical
Histories, by the several Schisms of the Popes and other Prelates in
foreign parts; of Canterbury, York, and other Lordly Prelates at home, which
if God send life and opportunity, I shall irrefragably manifest in a peculiar
Treatise of that Subject, if there be occasion. It cannot be then, but that
their suppression should rather remedy than procure Sects and Schisms.

Fourthly, in the reformed Churches of France, and Geneva, Germany and the
Netherlands there be many Sects, yet this is not through want of Bishops, but
by reason of the connivance of the temporal Magistrates who permit them, and
will neither suppress them themselves, nor suffer their Presbyteries to do it,
out of I know not what State policy, permitting all Religions and Sects.

Ex Officio Oaths and proceedings, Visitation, Fees and extortions, abuses of
Ecclesiastical Courts and processes, Selling of Orders, of licenses to preach,
keep School, and the like, commutations of penance, admission of profane and
scandalous persons to the Sacrament, toleration of scandalous, superstitious,
lasie, non-preaching, rare-preaching and insufficient Ministers, Altars,
Images, Tapers, Cathedral chaunting and music, bowing at Altars, and to the
name Jesus, with those Superfluous Ceremonies of the Cross, Ring, Surplesse,
and kneeling at the Sacrament, which scandalize many, and may be better omitted
than retained, been complained against from time to time in Parliament and
elsewhere, without any the least redress or reformation; and all by reason of
our Prelates obstinacy, who peremptorily maintain, and will not suffer them to
be either amended or removed to the glory of God, the honor of our Religion,
the satisfying of tender Consciences, the peace of our Church and State; and
do they not now in this present Parliament, which threatens ruin to their
Lordly chaires, oppose with all their might^ the reformation of all or most of
those corruptions which are the occasions of our Schisms and distractions? Yea
did they not in their late new Canons, in affront of the whole Parliament and
Kingdom, not only justify, but establish as much as in them lay, and that
for perpetuity, all those Innovations, extravagances and grievances which were
chief occasions of our late unhappy divisions, and of many thousands
separations from our Church? This being then an experimental known truth, the
removing of these incorrigible Prelates, who will neither refo^me themselves,
nor suffer any abuses in our Church to be redressed, must of necessity be the
only cure of our ren^s and divisions for the present, and the best means to
prevent them for the future.

Sixthly, I appeal to all indifferent men, whether Schisms Papists and
Arminians, the chief patriots and supporters of their Hierarchy) but those who
directly oppose their Prelacy and corruptions, as those they nickename
Puritanes do, who shall be sure to smart and feel the Bishops severity to the
uttermost, how ever others escape. If so; then I hope there is no need at all
to continue our Lordly Prelates to suppress these mischiefs, which may be
better reformed, and suppressed by others, than by our Bishops and their
Officers. I shall conclude this point with the words of learned R^sp^nsi^ ad
Turriani Sophismata, part. 2. L^ctio. 18.
Antonie Sadeel, in his answer to Turrian the Jesuit, who made the same
objection for the defense and continuance of Bishops, as our Prelates do here.
I answer in few words, That this superior degree of Bishops is an ancien^,
but yet ONLY a humane Institution, whereby the pious Ancients intended to
prevent Schisms. And although perchance considering those times, this remedy
was not unusefull, yet experience has taught us, that these good Fathers while
they desired to shun^ Charybdis, fell into Scylla. For the ambition of Prelates
which followed soon after, was no less pernicious to the Church than those
Schisms. And to speak truly: THIS WAS THE MOST PERNICIOVS SCHISM OF ALL
OTHERS, when a Divorce was made from the parity and true doctrine of the
Gospel, and the Spiritual Discipline of the Church changed into a kind of
Regal Authority, and terrene power. This I hope will abundantly answer this
second Objection for Episcopacy.

The last Objection is this. Object. 3.
That by the Statute of 16. R. 2. cap. 5. Sir Thomas Aston, Brief review of
Episcopacy. p. 54. to 78
Bishops are declared to be profitable and necessary to our Lord the King and
to all his Realm, and that by the removal of them the Realm should be
destitute of Counsel. That they are 8. El^z. c^ 1.
one of the greatest States of the Land^ settled by many Acts of Parliament,
which cannot well be held without them. That the removal of them will breed a
great confusion both in the Common and Statute Law; and that the King is sworn
to defend and protect them to his power: Therefore it must needs be dangerous
and inconvenient to remove them.

Answ.
This Objection consists of several heads, to all which I shall give a
particular answer, with as much brevity as may be.

Richard the 2d. I doubt not but they were inserted into that Act by the
Bishops themselves, or by their procurement, who ought not to be Trumpeters of
their own praises, nor witnesses in their own cause. That Bishops are neither
necessary, nor profitable to the King, nor to all his Realm, but pernicious to
both, and that the Kingdom will be no ways destitute of Counsel if they
should ^e removed, especially in our days when there are so many learned
Lords, Lawyers, and Gentlemen of all sorts, to Counsel and advise his Majesty
in all State affairs. Ricard the second his time, were so far from being
profitable and necessary to him, as their Lord and King, and to all his Realm,
that some of them were the chief men that miscounselled him, as appears by
the Statut^ of 11. R. 2. c. 1^5.6. which recites; that for cause of great and
horrible mischiefs and perils, which were fallen by evil Governance which
was about the Kings person by all his time before, by Alexander late
Archbishop of York, Thomas Bishop of Chichester and other their adhaerents,
thereby the King and all his Realm were very nigh to have been wholly undone
and destroyed, for which cause these Prelates were attainted, removed from the
King, and their lands confiscated by this Act. And the residue of them were the
principle agents that opposed, deprived, and thrust him (as they did King
Edward the second before him) from his Crown and royal dignity, as appears
by the premises. Now if this were to be profitable and necessary to our
Sovereign Lord the King, let all men judge. How necessary they were to all the
Kingdom in his time, let the Histories of this Kings life, and the Treasons of
Archbishop Arundell, fore related declare. How well they used the people and
their tenants, you may see by a Commission granted about this time, to enquire
of ^he Bishop of Winchesters oppressions and abuses of the Kings people,
recorded in the Register of Writs, See Part 1. p. 72 73.
part. 2 f. 125. b. De audiendo and termina^do contra Epis^opum Winton^en
semballivos, constabulari^s and ministr^s su^^.
Rex Vicecomiti salutem. Ex clamosis quer^mon^is diversorum hominum de comitatu
tuo ad nostium saepius pervenit auditum, quod A Episcopus Wintoniensis, nec no^
ballivi, c^nstabulari^ and alii ministri and servientes ipsius Episcopi,
plu^imas and diversas oppressiones, extortiones, duritias, damna, excessus, and
gravamina intolerabilia, dictis ^ominibus in diversis partibus Comita^us
praedicti, tam infra liber^ates quam extra multipliciter and diversimode
intulerunt, and de die in diem infer non desistunt, plures de dictis
hominibus vi and armis multotiens verberando, vulnerando, eosque capiendo,
imprisonando, and in prisona forti and dura super terram nudam and absque
alimento, fame, frigore, and nuditate fere ad mortem cruciando, and eos in
prisona ^ujusmodi, donec fines and redemptiones ad voluntatem suam fecerint,
null^ modo deliberari permittendo, nec non domos quorundam hominum hujusmodi vi
armata, and bona and catalla sua capiendo and asportando, eosdemque uxores and
servientes suos verberando, vulnerando, and male trac^ando, and hominibus super
hujusmodi duri^iis conqueri volentibus in tantum comminando, quod iidem homines
in hundredis and aliis curiis dicti Episcopi vel alibi negocia sua inde
prosequi metu mortis non sunt ausi, and alia hujusmodi mala, damna, and
excessus inhumaniter indies perpetrando, in nostri dedecus and contemptum, and
populi nostri partium praedictarum destructionem and depressionem manifestam,
unde plurimum conturbamur, Nos oppressiones, dur^^ias damna and excessus ac
gravamina praedicta, si perpetrata fuerint nolente^ relinquere impunita,
volentesque salvationi and quieti dicti populi nostri in hac part prospicere
ut tenemur, assignavimus dilectis and fidelibus nostris, etc. sciri poterit, de
oppressionibus, exto^tionibus, duritiis, damnis and gravaminibus praedictis,
per dictos episcopum, ballivos, constabularios, ministros and servientes suos
and alios quoscunque de confederatione sua in hac part existentes
qualitercunque perpetratis, and de praemissis omnibus and singulis before
veritatem, and ad querelas omnium and singulorum pro nobis vel prose ipsi^ inde
conqueri and prosequi volentium, nec non ad praemissa omnia and singula tam ad
sectam nostram quam aliorum quorumcunque audiendum and terminandum secundum
legem and consuetudinem regni nostri Angliae, Et ideo ti^i praecipimus quod ad
certos etc. quos, etc. tibi scire facias, venire facias coram, etc. tot and
tales probos and legales homines de balliva tua tam infra libertates quam
extra, per quos rei ver^tas in praemissis melius sciri poterit and inquiri, Et
habeas, etc. For their profitablenesse and necessary use in our Church in that
Kings reign, let the Statute of 5. R. 2. c. 5. See Part 1. p. 73. etc.
surreptitiously procured by the Prelates, and complained against by the
Commons the next Parliament, and with several bloody persecutions of the true
Christians^ in that age under the name of Lollards by William Caurtney, Thomas
Arundell and other our Prelates (related at large by Master Fox in his Acts and
Monuments) testify to the world. For mine own part I could never yet find
any good at all that our Lordly Prelates ever did in our Church or State,
quatenus Prelates. If any o^ them have done any good by their preaching and
writing (as some of them have, which is rare,) I answer, that the most of them
who have done any good in this kind, did it not as, or whiles they were
P^elates, but as, or whiles they were Private men, their Episcopacy making none
of them to preach, or write more than otherwise they would have done, but
less, as experience manifests. So that their Bishoprics made them not to do
more good, but rather hindered them to do so much good as they would have done,
had they still continued private Ministers only.


Answ. 1.
I answer, first, that our Lord Abbots and Priors might and did plead this as
well as Bishops, yet this was held no Plea at all, no not in times of Popery,
and shall we allow it now in times of clearer light?

Magna Charta, c. 1. with all 1^ Rich. 2. c. 1.3. R. 2. c. 1.5. R. 2. c. 1.6.
R. 2. c. 1.7. R. 2. c. 1.9. R. 2. c. 1.12. R. 2. c. 1.21. R. 2. c. 1.4. H. 4.
c. 1^ 2. H. 4. c. 1.4. H. 4. c. 1.7. H. 4. c. 1.9. H. 4. c. 1.13. H. 4. c. 1.3.
H. 5. c. 1 2. H. 6. c. 1.
other Acts of Parliament since, enacting, that holy Church, (or the Church of
England) Bishops and Churchmen shall enjoy^ all their ^ranchises, Rights,
Liberties, Privileges, etc^ are meant only of our Popish Prelates, Abbots,
Priors, Monks Nuns, Mass Priests; and of exemption from secular
Jurisdiction, Sanctuaries, with other Anti-Monarchicall privileges granted to
them by Kings, Popes, or Parliaments in times of Popery? shall then our Popish
Recusants or any other argue thence, therefore it is fit that Popery, with all
Popish orders, Bishops, Sanctuaries, and exemptions should be now revived and
perpetuated among us, because established by so many Laws? If this be no
argument for the continuance of Popery, or Popish Prelates, who were
principally established by these objected Laws, then certainly it can be no
good Plea for the continuance of such of our Prelates who are true Protestants,
whom most of these Acts never established, nor intended to continue.

Thirdly, It is a rule in Philosophy and Law, Eodem modo: Since therefore our
Lordly Bishops were first erected and constituted such Bishops and States of
the Land by Acts of Parliament only, not by any divine institution, which
prohibits them all such secular Lordly Sovereignty, and dominion, as I have
largely manifested in the premises, They may lawfully without any injury or
inconvenience, by an Act of Parliament, be unbishopped, unlorded again, and
thrust out of our Church as well as the Pope, Abbots, Priors, Monks and
Mass Priests were, upon the reformation of Religion, both at home and in
foreign parts. As for our Prelates necessity of sitting in Parliament; I
answer.

First, that though they have been anciently admitted to ^it in Parliament,
yet there is no necessity of their sitting there, Bishop Iuell, with Bishop
Bilson, confess and prove at large, that a Parliament may be, and some
Parliaments have been kept without Bishops, as I have page 458. to 465.
Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts. f^ 19. b.
formerly demonstrated. Secondly, many ^imes all, some, or a great part of our
Bishops have been secluded the Parliament, and yet this has been Parliament
(...) See Hus. p. 449, 460.
Saint Edmonds-bury, Anno 1296. all the Bishops were brought in a Praemunire,
and secluded the House. In King Edward the sixth his time, Fox Acts, and
Monuments, olddest Edition. p. 748.902.907.927. b. 1708. b^ 1717. b. Martins
History. p. 450 to 454. Speed. p. 1156.
Stephen Gardner Bishop of Winchester, and Bonner Bishop of London were
sequestered and kept out of the House: In the first year of Q^eene Mary all the
Married Protestant Bishops; and in the first of Queen Elizabeth, many of the
Popish Prelates were secluded and thrust out of the Parliament. yea, many
Parliaments have been held when one, or both the Arch-Bishoprickes, with many
other Bi^hoprickes have been void, and no Proxies admitted to supply their
places: All which proves, that there is no necessity of their Session there,
and that all of them may be excluded thence at all times as well Thirdly, our
Bishops sit not in the Parliament, quatenus Bishops^ but as they a^e A^tiq.
Eccles. Brit. p. 299.300. Here pars. 1. page 71.72. Crompton Jurisdiction. p.
12 19. Ke^lwayes Reports. f. 184. Stamfords Pl^^^. f. 153. Mr. S^ldens Titles
of honor p. 690. to 736.
Barons, and hold by Barony, as is clear both by our Histories, Law Books,
and their own confessions: Now most of them at this day are no Barons, nor
hold of the King by Barony; therefore they have no legal Right to sit there,
being no Peers of the Realm nor yet to be tried by their Peers in case of
Treason or Felony, but only by an Ordinary Jury, as has been adjudged in our
Law Books, and practiced in point of experience. Fourthly, Henr^c^ Spelmani
Glossarium. Tit. Abbas. Mr. Seldons Tit. Hon. p. 700. to 735. Cowels
Interpreter Abbot.
Abbots and Priors who were spiritual Lords Fifthly, In cases of Antiq. Eccle.
Brit. p. 299.300, See Part. 1. p, 71 72.10. E. 4. F. 6. Stamford Plee^. ^.3. c,
1^ f. 153.
Felony and Treason, the Bishops by their own Laws and practice neither are
nor ought to be present in the; And in cases of Lands and possessions, or in
passing of Laws for the Civil Government of the Realm, they have no
judiciary nor Legislative power at all, as Bishop Bilson and others See. p.
459. ^^ 465.
forecited prove at large; therefore their Session in Parliament is not
necessary nor expedient by way of vote. Br. Co^one 153. Walsingham. Hist.
Anglia, An. 1.3.9.7. p. 392. Ypodigna Neustria, p. 151.
and if all the Bishops be dead or absent, or if present, if all the Temporal
Lords vote one way, and the Bishops, the lesser number, another: the vote is
good. Therefore their presence and votes in Parliament are nor simply
necessary, and may be spared without any mischief or inconvenience. than
Bishops; yet we know they have no votes at all by way of descition, because no
Barons nor Peers of the Realm, but only by way of direction and advice, when
their Judgments are demanded. Why then our Bishops (especially those who are
no Barons, as few or none of them are) should not now be ranked in equipage
with the Judges, and have no other but a directive, not voting, descitive or
Legislative voice in Parliament, I think no reason can be given; and indeed
many think there is little reason why they should have any votes at all, since
ancient, that I say not present, experience manifests, that they cross or
oppose all, or most good Bills, and motions, for the advancement of religion
and reformation of Ecclesiastical abuses; and for the most part vote with the
Popish Lords, or worser side against the better; and so by Pope Gratian. Cause.
11. qu. 2.
Gregory his own rule, approved by Bishop. Jewel Reply to Harding, Artic. 4.
divis. 53. p. 234.
Bishop Jewel, ought to lose their privilege of voting: Quia Privilegium
meretur amittere, qui abutitur potestate.
Now whereas some Object that if the Bishops were put out of the Upper House of
Parliament, Object.
the Clergy could not grant subsidies to the King.

I answer, Answ.
it is a most gross mistake, for the Clergy ever grant their subsidies in the
Convocation, not in the Lords house, and if the Major part of the Clerks in
Convocation grant subsidies without the Bishops, and then send their Bill by
which they grant them, to the Commons and Lords House to be confirmed, (as they
usually do) if the Commons and Temporal Lords, without the Bishops pass it,
this, with the Kings Royal assent, will bind all the Clergy and Bishops too.
So as their presence and votes in Parliament is no ways necessary for the
granting of Subsidies. Wherefore they may be thence excluded without any
prejudice to the King or Subject, if not with great benefit unto both.

For the third clause of the Objection; that the removal of them will breed a
great confusion in the Common and Statute

I answer, first, that the same Objection might have been Creating estate
Tails, levying of Fines, Uses, Devises, Ioyntures, and the like, which bred
greater alterations in the Common and former Statute Laws, than the removing
of Bishops can do.









See Brook Fi^z herbert, and Ra^^all. Title (...) re^ Cooks I^stitutes, ^.
12^.130.
put themselves out of the Kings Protection, and forfeite both their goods,
lives, and estates, notwithstanding this Coronation Oath; So by the same reason
when Bishops (and Bishoprics, by their misdemeanors) prove intolerable
grievances both to Church and State (as now they have done) they have thereby
deprived themselves of the Kings Protection and de^ence specified in this Oath^
and thereupon may be justly suppressed by the King and State, without the least
violation of this most solemn Oath, as Abbots, Monks, and Sanctuaries were.
Having thus removed all the principal Objections for the continuance of our
Lordly Prelates; I shall in the last place answer one Evasion Evasion.
whereby our present Lord Bishops think to shift off this Antipathy from
themselves, as having no relation at all to them; They Bishop Hall defense of
the humble Remonstrance. p. 163.164.165.
say, that those Prelates whose Treasons, Rebellions, Seditions, Oppressions,
and Antimonarchicall practices, I have here collected, were Popish Bishops,
Limbs of that body whose head they all abjure; the fault of their wickedness
was in the Popery, not in the Episcopacy, in the men, not the calling; and so
utterly unconcerneth them, and haveth no reflection at all on them, who are
generally taxed for being excessive royalists, and siding too much with the
King and Court.

To this I answer, Answ. 1.
first, that most of all the premised rebellious, disloyal, seditious,
extravagant actions of our Bishops have proceeded from them only as Lordly,
not Popish Prelates, and issued from their Episcopacy, not their Popery, their
Prelaticall functions, not personal corruptions, as the Histories themselves
sufficiently demonstrate.

Secondly, I answer, that some of the recited Bishops were

Thirdly, I suppose our Prelates will not renounce Archbishop and other of
their fellow Bishops yet alive, or lately dead, as Popish Prelates, and members
of the Church of Rome, as some account them: yet their impious, seditious,
oppressive, profane, not trayterly Actions, equal or exceed many of our
Popish Archbishops and Bishops, as he that will but compare them may easily
discern. It is not then the leaven of Popery, but of the Lordly Prelacy it
self which infected our Bishops, and made them so treacherous and impious in
all ages. It is true indeed, that Popery (some of whose See King Iam^s his
Proclamation, for banishing Jesuits, June 10. 1606. and June 2. 1610. John
Whit^ his Defense of the Way. chapter 6. and 10.
positions are treasonable; and seditious) and dependency upon the Pope, has
made some of our Bishops more disloyal and Rebellious than otherwise they
would have been, as is evident by the first proceeding of Stephen Langhton and
his confederates against King John; See part. 1. p. 33. to 41.
but yet afterward when the Pope sided with King John and Henry the third,
against Langton, and the other Bishops, who stirred up the Barons Wars, these
Bishops continued as traiterous and rebellious to these Kings as ever they were
before whiles they adhered to the Pope, and the Pope to them; therefore their
Hierarchy (the cause of all these stirs) not their Popery was the ground work
of their Treachery and enormities. Now because our present Prelates boast so
much of their loyalty to his Majesty, whose absolute Civil Royal
prerogative, they have lately overmuch courted and endeavored to extend beyond
due limits to the impeachment of the Laws and Subjects hereditary liberties,
not out of any zeal to his Majesty's service, but only to advance their own
Episcopal power and Jurisdiction, and to usurp a more than Royal or Papal
authority over all his Majesty's Subjects for the present, and over himself at
last; I shall make bold to present them with some particular instances, whereby
I shall demonstrate, that all or most of our present Lordly Bishops have been
more seditious, contumacious, disloyal and injurious to his Majesty's royal
prerogative, more oppressive to his Loyal Subjects, and more destructive to
the fundamental Laws of the Realm, and liberties of the Subject, than all
other professions of men whatsoever.

England, authorizing them to do it, contrary to the Statutes of 26. Hen. 8.
c. 1.37. Hen. 8. c. 17. 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1.5 Eliz. c. 1. and 8. Eliz.
c. 1.

Iure Patronatus, accounts of Executors, and the like in their own names and
Styles, and under their own Seals alone, not the Kings, as if they were the
only Kings, the Supreme Ecclesiastical heads and Governors of the Church of
England, not his Majesty, contrary to the Statutes of 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1 Ed. 6.
c. 2. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 1 Jac. c. 25.

Thirdly, they have presumed in The Archbishop in his speech in
Star Chamber. Dr. H^ylin, and D^w, in their Answers to Mr. Bur^^n.
Printed Books to justify they have most audaciously caused all the Judges of
England to resolve, and moved his Majesty to d^clare and proclaim these their
disloyal unjust usurpations on his Crown to be just and legal; when as I
dare make good the contrary, against all the Prela^es and Lawyers of England,
and have done it in part, in my Breviate of the Prelates intolerable
encroachments upon the Kings Prerogative royal and the Subjects Liberties.
This resolution of ^he Judges against the Kings Prerogative the Prelates have
caused to be See a new Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny. p. 33. to. 38.
^nrolled both in the High Commission at Lambeth and York and in all their
Ecclesiastical Courts throughout England in perpetuam rei memoriam, the
Archbishop of Canterbury keeping the Original certificate of the Judges among
the records of his Court, as a good evidence against his Majesty and his
successors.

Fourthly, they have pillored, stigmatized, banished, close

Fifthly, they have taken upon them to make, Print and publish H. 8. c.
19.21.27. H. 8. c. 15.3 Ed. 6. c. 10.11. 1 Eliz. c. 2.13 Eliz. c. 12. Magna
Charta, c. 29. and the Petition of Right.

Sixthly, they have presumed to grant Licenses to marry 2. and 3. Ed. 6. c.
21.5. and 6. Ed. 6. c. 12. and the Rubric before Matrimony
enjoyne no marriages to be solemnized, unless the Banes be first thrice asked
in the Church.

Seventhly, they have adventured to hold plea of diverse cases in their
Consistories of which the Conusance belongs only Pro^ibitions, and Ad Iura
Regia in the Pars 2. ^ol. 36. to 66.
Register, determine, to be a dis-inheriting of the Kings Crown and Royal
dignity, a contempt, derogation, and grievous prejudice to his Royal
authority, and intolerable rebellion, affront, disloyalty and contu^acy to his
Sovereign Jurisdiction.



John Clobery in the High Commission, only for suing out of a Prohibition to
that Court, as if it were a Capital o^fence. For which contum^cy and Rebellion
their temporalities might be justly seized into the Kings hands, and
themselves attainted in a Pre^unire Add to this, that the now Archbishop of
Canterbury has many times openly protested in Court; that he would break both
the neck and back of Prohibitions. See the Articles of his Impeachment.
And Matthew Wren whilst Bishop of Norwich, in the 14. year of his M^jesties
reign, procured his Majesty to declare under his Highness great Seal of
England, his royal pleasure; That if any person within the said City of
Norwhich should refuse to pay according to the rate of two shillings the pound
in lieu of the Tithes of Houses, unto the Minister of any Parish within the
said City, that the same should be heard in the Court of Chancery, or in the
Consistory of the Bishop of Norwich. And that in such Case no Prohibition
should be granted against the said Bishop of Norwich their Chancellors, or
Commissaries in the said Courts of Consistory.

London, hunting after new prefe^ments, to the ill example of the in^erior
Cl^rgi^, the delapidation and ruin of their mansion houses, the decay of
Hospitality, the impairing of their woods and temporalties, the increase of
Popery and decrease of Religion; was pleased to send a letter to Doctor Abbot,
then Archbishop of Canterbury for the redress of the said inconveniences,
commanding him in his Royal name, to enjoyne every Bishop then residing about
London, upon his Canonical Obedience, under pain of his Majesty's displeasure
forthwith to repair to his Bishopric, and no longer to abide about London.
The Archbishop hereupon, sends his Secretary with this his Majesty's Letter,
to the Bishops then in London and Westminster; charging them upon their
Canonical Obedience, according to this Letter, presently to depart to their
several Bishoprics. His Secretary repaired with this Letter and the
Archbishops instructions to Dr Howson, the Bp of Durham lodging on Snowhill,
near Sepulchers Church, and required him in the Archbishops name by virtue of
his Canonical obedience, to repair to his Bishopric according to his
Majesty's command. He hereupon in a great rage giving the Secretary some harsh
words, told him plainly, that he neither would nor could obey this mandate, for
he had many great suits in Law with Sr Henry Martyn, and others, of which be
would ^ee an end ere he departed London; besides he had not as yet furnished
his house at Durham, for his entertainment, that it was a great way to Durham,
the ways somewhat foul, the weather cold, and himself aged; wherefore he
neither would nor could go out of Town till the next Summer, if then, come
what would: and bid him return this answer to the Archbishop. Neither could
the Secretary (who persuaded him to send a milder answer, and to sue to his
Majesty for License to abide in Town) obtain any other resolution from this
Choleric Prelate. From him he repaired to Doctor Buckeridge, Bishop of Ely,
at Ely house in Holburne, acquainting him with this his Majesty's Letter, and
commanding him by his Majesty's Order upon his Canonical obedience, to repair
forthwith to his Bishopric, according to his Majesty's command. But this
dutiful Prelategrew more Choleric than the former, answering him to this
effect: Let who would obey this Command, yet he would not: what, said he, have
I lately bestowed almost 500. l. in repairing and furnishing my house, here in
London, to make it fit for my habitation, and must I now be Commanded to depart
from it, and sent into the cold wa^^y rotten fens of Ely, to impair my health
and kill me up quite? I will not be so served nor abused. And therefore tell
your Lord from me, that I take it ill ^e should send me such a Command, and
that I will not go from my house to Ely for his or any other man's pleasure.
The Secretary thereupon desired his Lordship to take notice, that it was his
Majesty's pleasure he should depart to his Bishopric, as well as the
Archbishops, who did no more than he was enjoined by the King, whose mandate
he hoped his Lordship would obey, however he neglected or disobeyed the
Archbishops Command, which yet was not to be slighted, being his Metropolitan.
In conclusion, the Bishop told him plainly, he would obey neither the one nor
other, and that he would not stir out of London all the winter till the
spring, if then. The Secretary wondering at these two Bishops strange
disobedience, and contumacy both in words and deeds, departes from them to
Bishop Harsnet, and Bishop Field, with his Letter and instructions, who gave
him the like answers in effect, though in calmer Terms, not one of them
stirring from London, either upon the Kings Letter, or Archbishops Command,
for all their Oath of Allegiance to the King, and of Canonical obedience to
the Archbishop. If then these late Prelates have been so Rebellious, so
contumacious, both against his Majesty's and their Metropolitanes commands,
when they required them only to reside on their Bishoprics, as the Law of
God, the Statutes of the Realm, the Canons of the Church in all ages, yea the
very Canon Law it self, enjoyne them to do, under pain of mortal sin;
What Rebels, and disobedient Varlets would they have proved, think you, in
matters and commands less reasonable?

Young Deane of Winchester was put by the Mastership of Saint Crosses, though
granted him by Patent, that Doctor Lewis, who left his Provostship in Oriel
College in Oxford with other preferment, and fled into France for buggery as
was reported; might be thrust in. So Doctor Manwering, publickely censured in
Parliament for a Seditious Sermon, and made incapable of any preferment, by the
sentence of the House, was immediately after the Parliament ended, thrust into
a living of three hundred pound per annum, by our Prelates; and he who had the
grant of the next advowson by Patent put by. Thus diverse others have been
thrust by such places as the King himself has granted them by Patent by our
Omnipotent Prelates, to advance those of their own saction, yea one of them
has not stuck to say, that had the King himself granted a Patent for the
Execution of Writs of Capias Excommunicatum to some who had long sued for it,
that he would make the King recall it, or in case he would not, he would
withstand and not obey it. Nay, we know, that though the Lord Majors of London,
by Patent, and prescription time out of mind, as the Kings Leiutenants and
Vicegerents, have used to carry up their swords before them in Paul's
Churchyard and Church, yet a proud ambitious Prelate, not long since^
questioned him for doing it before the Lords of the Privy Council, as if the
Kings sword of Justice, had nothing to do within that Precinct but only the
Bishops Crosier. Neither has the City of York escaped Scotfree: for the
Bishops and Pre^ends of that City have contested with the Citizens of York,
even in his Majesty's presence, about those Liberties which both his Majesty
himself but five years before, and his royal Ancestors had anciently granted
to them, by several Charters in express words; endeavoring to nullify and
repeal their Patent, and caused the Major of York not to bear his sword
within the close, as he and his predecessors had usually done, (and that by
special Charter) from Richard the seconds time, till of late. Since that the
now Archbishop of Canterbury has had contests with the University of
Cambridge touching their Charters and Privileges which must all stop to adore
his greatness, contesting even before the King and Lords with that Universitie
and Oxford too, whether he as Archbishop, or his Majesty as King, should be
their Visitor. Now what greater affront almost can there be to royal Majesty,
than thus publicly to nullify, oppose and spurn under feet the Kings own
Charters and Patents, as things of no value or moment.

Twelfthly, they have most contemptuously affron^ed his Declarations to all his
Loyal Subjects, both before the 39. Articles of Religion, and concerning the
dissolution of the last Parliament, in the very highest degree, and that,
England sundry ways, caused an apparent back^liding to Arminianisme, Popery,
Superstition, Schism, oppressed and grieved his Majesty's good Subjects, and
deprived many of them both of their livings, liberties, and freedom of their
Consciences, contrary to the express Provision, Letter and purport of these
his Majesty's Royal Decla^ions, as has been lately manifested in sundry new
Printed books, and voted by the Present Parliament.


Ask, late Recorder of Colchester, Mr. Buroughs, and the grand Jury of that
Town, who were thus vexed for finding an Indictment against Par^on Newcoman,
for refusing to deliver the Sacrament to those who came not up to his new
rail. And no doubt the Bishops secret Commands and Instructions, were the
Original cause that moved Sir Articles of Accusation against the Judges, p.
7.8.9.
Robert Berkely Knight, one of the Judges of the Kings Bench at the General
Sessions at Har^ford in January 7. 1638. to fine Mr. Henry Brown, one of the
grand Jury men at that Sessions, and lay him in Irons one night, only for
finding an Indictment for railing in the Communion Table at Hartford Altarwise,
which indictment he caused the said Brown openly to tear and trample under his
feet, and one tha^ stayed other indictments of this nature, in high affront
both o^ Law and Justice, only to please the Prela^es, whose commands,
threats, and persecutions, have been the Original causes of most of the
Judges irregular proceedings.

Fourteenthly, They have not only cited, but censured some of his Majesty's
Officers in the High Commission, for executing his Laws according to their
Oath and duty, as the Major of Arundell for punishing a drumken Minister: and
likewise ci^ed Mr. Staple a Justice of peace in Sussex into the High-Co^mission
for giving in charge at the quarter Sessions his (...) against Innovations, and
deaucht Clergy men.

Fift^^n^hly^ ^hey have most unjustly caused some Posters to be ^^opped af^^r
^^^dicts ^ound for the plaintiffes and damages Bayton, against Doctor Martyn
Com^^ssary of Tomes and others.

Sixtee^^hly, they have caused some Solliciters, Atturnies Ferdinando Adams,
whose Atturny Master Letchford was committed to the Kings Bench, by Judge Jones
and some other Judges, only for bringing an Action of the Case, against Dade
the the Bishop of Norwich, Commissary at Ipswich for Excommunicating him
maliciously and unjustly, because he re^used to blot out this Text of Scripture
written over the Commissaries Court in Saint Mary's Church in Ipswich, Mark.
11.17. Mat. 21.13. Luk 19.56. Isa. 56.7.
It is written, My house shall be called an house of Prayer of all Nations, but
ye have made it a den of thieves: detaining him in prison till he gave over the
prosecution and discontinued the suite: sundry others having since been served
in this kind, by the Prelates solicitation.

Seventeenthly, They have been the Original occasions of Scotland and
England, which they styled Bellum Episcopale, the Bishops war, to which they
liberally contributed themselves, and enforced others to do the like, when
these differences were comprimised, and this war happily concluded in peace,
they were the chief Authors of the breach of the pacifica^ion formerly made,
and of a second war, to the great danger, trouble, and unsupportable charge
o^ his Majesty's three kingdoms.

Eighteenthly, they have been the prime causes of all, or unhappy breaches of
our former Parliaments, to the infinite prejudice both of King and Subject.

Omni Appellatione semota, without any benefit of appeal, one of the highest
strains of tyranny and injustice, that ever I have met with. For which Canons
Oath, and Subsidies, they now stand impeached by the whole house of Commons, as
delinquents in a high nature, and are like ere long to receive condign
punishment.

Twentiethly, it is very suspicious, that they or some of them, See the Report
of the Conspira^y to the house of Commons June the 17. 1641. p. 2.3. and Mr.
Henry Piercies Letter, p. 3. The Declaration of Colonel Go^ing. p. 2^
first clause of the Oath of Se^recy administered to the Conspirators was, To
maintain the Bishops in their functions, and votes in Parliament, and the
Clergy would at their own charge (as Serjant Major Wallis confesses in his
examination) maintain a thousand horse to promote this Traiterous design, and
have now (as some report) an hundred thousand pound ready for such a service.

In the twentieth one place, they have oppressed and ruined diverse of his
Majesty's Loyal Subjects, Ministers and others, whose Honor and safety
consists in the multitude and wealth of his people, ^rov. 14.2^^
and his destruction in want of people.

In the twenty second rank, they have most undutifully and odium of all their
late Innovations in Religion, their new Canons and tyrannical exorbitant
proceedings, on his Majesty, proclaiming it openly to the people, that all
they did, was only by his Majesty's special direction and command, of purpose
to alienate the hearts of the people from his Majesty, as much as in them lay.

In the twenty third place, they and their Officers have

Finally, in their last High Commission Pa^ent they obtained Non-obstante
(which robs the King of his Supremacy, and the Subjects of their Laws and
Liberties) namely, That their Lordships in all Ecclesiastical causes specified
in that Commission might proceed in a mere arbitrary manner, as they list
themselves, Notwithstanding any Appellation, provocation, privilege, or
exemption, in that behalf to be had, made, pretended or alleged, by ANY
PERSON OR PERSONS (therefore by Lords and Peers as well as others) resident or
dwelling in any place or places, exempt or not exempt within the Realms of
England and Ireland and Principality of Wales (for no les^er circuit would
content them) and all Laws, Statutes, Proclamations, or other grants
Privileges, or Ordinances, which be or may seem contrary to the premises
notwithstanding. What Hist. Anglia p. 694. See p. 68^.784.905.
Matthew Paris writes of the Popes Non-obstantees in his Bulls, which first
begar them, Per illud verbum and adjectionem detestabilem Non Obstante, omnem
^xtinguit justitiam praehabitam: I may more truly affirm of this, that it
extinguisheth all Justice; yea his Majesty's Supremacy, our fundamental Laws,
Statutes, and the Subjects Liberties, since it robs the King of the Regal
right of 25. H. 8. c. 19.21.24. H. 8. c. 12.
receiving appeals as supreme head of the Church of England, for releese of
his oppressed Subjects, and of the honor of his Royal Laws, Proclamations,
grants, exemptions, which must all stoop to the Prelates pleasures; and strips
the Subjects naked of the benefit and protection of all Laws, Statutes,
Proclamations, and other grants, privileges, Ordinances or exemptions
whatsoever, which might shelter them from the Prelates tyranny and oppressions.
So that you have here the very height of Treason, Conspiracy, and Contumacy,
against his Majesty, the Laws of the Realm and hereditary liberties of the
people.

In all these respects (to omit other particulars) our Prelates if they be not
direct Traitors to his Majesty and the Realm, so far as to incur a
Capital Censure, as is more than probable, or at least a Praemunire, of which
there is no question; yet I dare aver they are the most notorious Rebels, the
obstinatest contemners, enemies and oppugners of his Majesty's Royal
Prerogative, the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, and just Liberties of the
Subject, this day breathing; inferior to none of their predecessors in
contumacy and disobedience to their Sovereign and our Laws (what ever they
pretend) and exceeding them in many particulars.

Having thus I hope sufficiently answered all our Prelates Arguments for the
supportation, and continuance of their Lordly Prelacy in our Church, and their
Evasions to shift off this Antipathy as no way pertinent unto them; give me
leave only to observe these six remarkable Circumstances in our Prelates
premised Treason, Conspiracies and Rebellions, which highly aggravate their
offenses, and make them far more execrable Traitors, Rebels, and delinquents,
than all other ranks of men; and then I shall conclude.

Saints and Martyrs, as appears by the examples of See Capg^ave, Surius,
Ribadeneira, and others, de vitis Sanctorum, Baronius his Martyriologe, and our
Common Popish Primers, Calenders, and Almanackes.
Dunstan, Anselme, Becket, Edmund of Canterbury, Hugh of Lincoln, S. Germain
(...), Richard Scroope of York, with others: no Laymen having yet been so
happy, as for their Treasons and Rebellions onel^, or especially, to be
Sainted and adored, as many Bishops and Clergy men have been. Hence Doctor
Barnes in his Supplication to King Henry the 8. p. 190. writes thus, I would
not speak how damnable it is to institute Masses, for a willing Traitor, and
murderer, there was never no learning that could allow this. But there is no
remedy, he that dies against his King, and for the maintaining of your Treason,
must needs be a Saint, if Masses, blessings, and miracles will help; for all
these be at your Commandment, to give where your list. So that we poor men,
must be accused of insurrection and Treason, and we must bear all the blame,
we must be driven out of the Realm, we must be burned for it, when as God
knows there is no people under heaven, that more abhors and with earnester
^eart resists, and more diligently does preach against disobedience than we
do: yea, I dare say boldly, let all your books be searched, tha^ were written
this 500. years, and all they shall not declare the authority of a Prince, and
the true obedience toward him, as one of our little books shall do, that be
condemned by you for heresy, and all this will not help us. But as for you,
you may preach, you may write, you may do, you may swear against your
Princes, and also assoile all other men of their obedience toward their
Princes, you may compel Princes to be sworn to you, and yet are you children
of obedience and good Christian men. And if ye dye for this doctrine then is
there no remedy, but you must be Saints, and rather than fail ye shall do
miracles: which he proves by the example of Thomas Becket and of Germane
formerly cited, who was made a Saint for deposing King Vortiger, and making his
Neat-heard King in his steed. These shameful and abominable things do ye
praise and allow, and in the mean time condemn us for heretics and
Traitors. Secondly, in interceding for, saving, rescuing, protecting, Adam de
Tarlton, Part. 1. p 54.55.56.57.265.266. Thirdly, in mincing, extenuating,
excusing, and patronizing was capable of, but only Bishops and Clerks. See
Part. 1. p. 193. to 196.
Richard Scroope and others: which story of Scroope Doctor Barnes thus descants
on in his Supplication to King Henry the 8. p. 188.189. Do you not remember,
how that in the days of Henry the fourth, a captain of your Church, called
Richard Scroope Archbishop of York, did gather an Host of men, and waged battle
against his King? but God the Defendor of his Ruler, gave the King the victory,
which caused the Traitor to be beheaded. And then your forefathers with their
devilish cra^t, made the people believe by their false Chronicle, that at
every stroke that was given at the Bishops neck, the King received another of
God in his neck. And whereas the King was afterward stricken with a
sickness, you made him and all his Subjects believe, that it was Gods
punishment, because he had killed the Bishop: and not thus content, but you
fained after his death, that he did miracles. Is not this too much, both to be
Traitors to your King, and also to feign God to be displeased with your King
for punishing of Treason? Finally, to make him a Saint, and also that God had
done miracles to the defending of his Treason? How is it possible to invent a
more pestilent Doctrine than this is? Here is Gods Ruler despised, and hereby
is open Treason maintained: Think you that God will show miracles to fortify
these things? But no doubt the Proverb is true, Such lips, such Lettuce,
such Saints, such miracles. Anselme, Becket, Langton, Stafford and others.
Monarchy, honor, Sovereignty, as in the case of Henry the se^cond, King John
and others. In these six respects, our Lordly Bishops have transcended all
other Traitors, Rebels, Conspirators, and Seditious persons whatsoever; as also
in Censuring Loyalty See Aventine. Annal. B^iorum. l. 6. and 7.
for Heresy, true Subjects to their Princes for Heretics; and Canonizing
High Treason, Rebellion against Emperors, Kings, Princes, for Orthodox faith;
notorious Traitors and Rebels, for good Christians and true believers; as
appears in the Case of Hildebrand and his Hellish crew of Bishops, who branded
Henry the Emperor and those who sided with him, for Heretics, and their
Loyalty for Heresy, in the Case of Henry the second and King John in their
difference with Anselme, Becket, and Langhton. In imitation of whom our present
Prelates now slander those who oppugn and withstand their encroachments upon
the Kings prerogative Royal, with odious terms of Puritans, Novellers,
Seditious persons, Schismatickes, Rebels, and brand Loyalty, and true
allegiance to the King, with the terms of Faction, Schism, Sedition, Novelty,
and Rebellion.
You have seen now a large Anatomy of our Lordly Prelates desperate Treasons,
Conspiracies, Rebellions, Contumacies, Wars, disloyal oppressive practices
in all ages against our Kings, Kingdoms, Laws, Liberties: which duly
pondered, we may easily conclude, there is little cause any longer to tolerate
them in our Church or State, but great ground eternally to extirpate them out
of both. It is storyed of the people of General History of Spain, l. 22.
Heylins Geogr. p. 55.
Biscany in Spain, That they have such a natural enmity against Bishops, that
they will admit no Bishops to come among them, and that when Fe^dinand the
Catholic came in Progress into Biscany, accompanied with the Bishop of
Pampilone, the people rose up in Arms, drove back the Bishop out of their
Coast, and gathering up all the dust they thought he or his Mule had trod on,
threw it into the Sea with curses and imprecations. I dare not say, that our
people should rise up in Arms like these Biscaners, and drive out our Bishops,
God forbid any such Tumultuous, or Seditious practice: but this I dare
confidently aver, that his Majesty and our High Court of Parliament, have
far greater reason to drive, and extirpate them out of our Realm and Church,
even with curses and execrations, and to subvert their Sees in an orderly,
just, and legal way, than these Biscaners had to repulse this Bishop, who
entered thus into their Country, only to accompany Ferdinand in his progress,
not to play the Lord Bishop among them.

I shall close up all with the words of Musculus, a Learned foreign
Protestant Divine; who after he had largely proved by Scriptures and Fathers,
That Bishops and Presbyters by Divine right are both one, and of equal
authority, and that the difference between them was only a humane institution
to prevent Schisms, concludes thus. Musculus. Loc^ Communes, Basil^a. 1560. p.
246.
Whether o^ no this Counsel has profited the Church of God, whereby such
Bishops who should be greater than Presbyters were introduced, rather our of
Custom (that I may use the words of Hierome) than out of the truth of the
Lords institution, is better declared in after ages, than when this custom was
first brought in; to which we owe all that insolency, opulency and tyranny of
Princely and Lordly Bishops; imo omnem corruptionem Ecclesiarum Christi; yea
all the corruption of the Churches of Christ; which if Hierome should now
perceive, without doubt he would acknowledge this, not to be the Counsel of
the Holy Ghost, to take away Schisms, as was pretended; but of the Nota.
Devil himself, to waste and destroy the ancient Offices of feeding the Lords
^locke; by which it comes to pass, that the Church has not true Pastors,
Doctors, Elders, and Bi^hops, but Idle bellies, and magnificent Princes under
the vizors of these names, who not only neglect to feed the people of the
Lord in proper person with wholesome and Apostolical doctrine, but also by
most wicked violence take special care, that no man else may do it. This
verily was done by the Nota.
Counsel of Satan, that the Church in stead of Bishops should have powerful
Lords and P^inces, elected for the greatest part out of the Order of the Nobles
and Princes of the world, (as they are in Germany) who under-propped with their
own and their kindreds power, may domineer over the flock of Christ at their
pleas^re. And with the complaint of the Emperor Lewis the fourth, and the
German Princes against the Italian and German Lordly Prelates, which I may
justly accomodate to ours. Aventinus Annali^^ B^i^rum. l. 7. p. 546.547.577.
Flamines isti Babyloniae soli regnare cupiunt; far parem n^n possunt; non
desistent, donec omnia pedibus suis conculcaverint, atque in Templo Dei
s^deant, ext^llanturque supra omne id quod colitur. Sub Pontificis titulo,
pastoris pelle, lupum saevissimum, nisi caeci sumus, sentimus. Cum nostri servi
sint, ipsi dominari contra jus gentium, adversus leges, auspicia and Oracula
divina, Dominos, sibi servire volunt. Caesarem Italia, Roma, Christum terris
exclusere: illi coelum quidem permittunt, inferos atque terras sibi asseruere.

Bernard Epist. 158. Quid spirituali gladio, quid censurae Ecclesiasticae, quid
Christianae legi and Disciplinae, quid denique divino timori relinquitur, si
metu potentiae secularis nullus mu^ire jam audeat contra insolentiam
Praelatorum?

FINIS.
Kind Reader, I shall desire thee to recti^ie these Presse-Errours, which in my
absence in the Country happened in many Copies in some Pages of the first and
Second Part, besides those forementioned, after the Table of Chapters.
In the first Part.
PAge 8. l. 6. departing p. 10. l. 5. their, this, p. 11. l. 28. largely,
lately^ p. 16. l. 1. del^, as. p. 24. l. 2. we, ^e. p. 25. l. 3. marred l 29.
Kings. p. 53. l. 40. dele the p. 62. l. 13. and, the p. 63. l. 30. still,
style. p^ 64. l. 16. be, he p 70. l. 3. his, this p. 79. l. 33. no, hot p. 81.
l. 12. against the p. 221. l. 18.19.20.21 read thus: he was smitten mortally
with a d^ngerous d^sease, for which he repaired to the Bath for relief, and
ret^rning from thence, dyed by the way at Morton Hinmast in Gloucester shire,
the very night before he had resolved to silence and suspend some godly
Ministers, convented before him ^re his departure to the Bath, and summoned to
appear before him, the morning after his decease, had he returned alive by
that time;

Which being more briefly expressed in the Book, has caused some to question
the truth, of what I long since received from good information.

In the second Part.
PAge 239. l. 9. dele in the p. 243. l. 15. Traitor, Tower p. 276. l. 29.
liberty. p. 283. l. 21. ^. p 286. l. 15. our^ the. p. 291. l. 33. which she. p.
292. l. 17. ^ne of l. 29. spend. p. 300. l. 14. Prelates. l. 23. arms, p. 304.
l. 5. hearing, fearing p. 313. l. 30. one, out. p. 326. l. 37. Arrane, p. 327.
l. 1 same. p. 331. l. 22.1544. p. 336. l. 38. does, do, p. 333. l. 15. div^rs
Acts. l. 21. Dundy, p. 338. l. 20. from, of l 28, orders, adoreth, l. 29 500.
p. 341. l. 11. Church of Scotland, p. 342. l. 5 I^^es, p. 356. l. 38. null, p.
499. l. 23. habetur, p. 501. l 40. without them, p. 503. l. 19. Westminster,
Winchester, p. 515. l. 29. if not, p. 523. l. 4. debaucht, p. 526. l. 35. dele,
and others, p. 478. l. 19. Harmony Sect. II. in Hel^^t. post Gallia, Gallia,
B^lgia, Anglia, etc. should have been put in the Margin.

Omissions.
PAge 489. l. 38. In the Ancient Italian Bible set forth by Antonius Bruciolus,
Venetiis, 1543. In the French Bible set forth by John Crespin 1541; and that
Printed at Lions 1540. In the Latin Testament Printed at Lundon, 1540. and
dedicated to King H^nry the 8. are omitted.

Page 513. l. 17: In the Patent Rols of 18. H. 3. m. 17. and Cooks Institutes
f. 97. a: I find this notable Record: Mandatum est Omnibus Episcopis qui
conventuri s^^t apud Gloucestriam die Sabbath^ in crastine Sanctae Katherinae,
firmiter inhib^nd^, quod sicut Baronias suas qua^ de Rege tenent, diligunt,
nullo modo pr^sumant Conciltum t^nere a^ aliquibus qua ad Coronam Regis
pertinent, vel qua personam Regis vel statum suum, vel statum concilit su^
contingunt; scituri pro c^rto, quod si fecerint; Rex inde se capie^ ad Baronias
suas. Test Rege apud Hereford 23. N^vemb^ By which it appears, that our
Bishops by their late pretended Synodicall proceedings, have forfeited, and
giv^n the King and Parliament just occasion to seize upon their Bishoprics,
and Baronies, and so to thrust them out of the Parliament house, Where they ^it
only as Baron^^ ^ot as Bishops, Cooks Institutes f. 97. a.

Directions for the Booke-Binder.
a: b: aa: BB, BB3 a half sheet, CC: DD: EE: E3 a single leaf, ff: gg: hh:
II: KK: LL: Mm* Mm: 289. Cap. 6. Nn: * arti- Bri-: Toge- a single leaf: Oo
Cap. 7. Pp: Qq: Rr: Ss: Tt: Vv: Xx: Yy: RR * 307. Cap. 8. Ss*: Tt*: Vv: Xx*:
Yy*: Zz*: Aaa: Bbb: Ccc: Ddd: Eee: Fff: Ggg: Hhh: Iii: Kkk: Lll: Mmm: Nnn: Ooo:
Ppp: Qqq: Rrr: Sss: Ttt: Vvv: Xxx: Yyy.


