The Altar Dispute, OR A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING THE SEVERAL INNOVATIONS OF THE
ALTAR, Wherein is discussed several of the chief grounds and foundations
whereon our Altar Champions have erected their buildings.

By H. PARKER

Hebr. 13. 10. We have an Altar whereof they have no right to eat, which
serve the Tabernacle. LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes for Samuel Enderby, and are
to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Star in Popes-head-Ally. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM LORD Viscount SAY, and Seal Master of his
Highness Court of Wards and Liveries, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable privy Counsel.
MY LORD,
THe several concurrent attempts which were made of late upon the settled
doctrine and discipline of our Church begot jealous conceits in me, that
either our Religion had been hitherto erroneous, or was likely to prove unsure
for the future. Some blame, me thought, was due either to former times, that
they had not been wise in receding from Rome so far as they had done, or to
the present for not being sincere in returning so fast back again. To excuse
both (...) secure in points of so great concernment, (...), and tenderness of
conscience would not permit, and to be rash in my censure without search, and
diligent study seemed unjust, and unchristian: wherefore that I might purchase
to my self being thus perplexed just and fair satisfaction, and ex^ricate my
self out of the mischieves of stupidity and temerity both, I did seriously
addict my self notwithstanding the dissuasions of my own particular
profession, interest and want of (...) debate, ventilate, and examine the
novelties of the time. And verily, as to my self, my endeavors were not long
successesse, for I did at last perceive that there was more danger in our
innovators then depth in our Innovations: and as to some others not
injudicious, I found them concurring with me in opinion, and encouraging me
withal to make my observations more public. My Lord, I know none more
desirous to diffuse good then your Honor, nor scarce any better mean whereby
to diffuse it to others then your (...) wherefore I beseech this as an addition
to (...) former favors, that I may (...) Honored Name, whereby to make more
acceptable to all good men thesepoore endeavors of

Your most gratefully devoted servant and Allies-man H. P.

Errata.
Page 8. l. 30. for Lev; Min: read Lincolnshire Mr. p. 11. l. 9. for exception
r. acception, p. 12. l. 9. for opposed r. opposite, p. 26. l. 22. for trnd r.
round. p. 27. l. 13. for instituted r. instructed, p. 30. l. 14. for specified
r. speciphicall, p. 34, l. 12. for portable r. probable, l. 14. probable, r.
portable, p. 35. l. 7. for Western r. Eastern p. 37. l. 16. for stranger r.
stronger. p. 40. l. 1 for po. r. posture. p. 45 l. 23. for not, r. most, p. 54.
l. 10. read of Peter, p 72. l. 5. for supposition r. suppositum. p. 74. l. 27.
for consecrated, r. unconsecrated

THE ALTAR DISPVTE, OR DISCOVRSE, CONCERNING THE SEVERAL INNOVATIONS OF THE
ALTAR.
Of ALTARS.
A Great Faction of Churchmen has of late years, by many several innovations
attempted to alter our Religion, and to new reform that Reformation of it
which was begun by Edw. 6. and further matured by Queen Eliz. The pretense
was, that our Ancestors in the Reformation did depart too far from Popery,
out of favor to Puritanicall Calvin, and so the design was, to have brought
in Popery again; but with a muzzle upon it at first (as Sir Ben. Ruddlard
says) which muzzell would soon have fallen off, or been taken off, as is
generally conceived, Amongst other innovations, much care was had of Altars,
many books were printed and set forth by authority in favor of them, but no
man was suffered to say do, or write any thing in answer or prejudice thereof.
The times are now a little more propitious, and that audaciates me beyond my
learning, or profession to enterprise at this time something for the better
clearing of the truth in this case concerning Altars. If I fail not for want
of learning and judgment, I shall not for want of ingenuity, and modesty; and
I wish that our Altar-Patrons had not been so scurrilous, and bitter as they
have been; for it seems to me, that the venomous raylings and distempers of
men within sacred Orders, when they are treating of matters of Religion, cast a
great disgrace upon the age we are borne in, the Country we are bred in, the
Religion we are Baptized in. In this Altar-dispute, four things come into
question.

1 Concerning the reality of Altars. 2 Concerning the propriety of the names. 3
Concerning the Altar posture. 4 Concerning the sanctity of the Altar or its due
adoration.
CHAP. 1.
1 Concerning the reality of Altars.
AS for the maintaining of real, and proper Altars, Doctor Heylin lays these
grounds. He says, that the Passion of our Savior, as it was prefigured to
the Jews in the legal Sacrifice, a part ante: so by Christ's Institution it
is to be commemorated by us Christians in the holy Supper a part post. A
Sacrifice it was in figure, a Sacrifice in fact, and so by consequence a
Sacrifice in the commemoration, or upon the post fact. He says further, that
if a Sacrifice be, there must also be both Priest and Altar. Yet he assigns
these differences, that the former Sacrifices were bloody, as this is not; that
the former Priests were from Aaron, ours from Melehisedeck; that the former
Altars were for Mosaicall, ours for Evangelicall Sacrifices.

To show the weakness of these grounds, we answer: that the word Sacrifice
taken in a general sense for any sacred office, or divine service performed,
does not infer any propriety of either Priest, or Altar; and if we take
Sacrifice in that serise, as the Patriarchs, Jews, or Heathens did, or as
Papists now do: we grant Priests, and Altars are necessarily implied thereby,
but such a Sacrifice we deny our Communion to be.

It Is true, the Passion of our Savior was prefigured in Sacrifices a part
ante, but very darkly; and if Cain, Abel, Noah, or Aaron, did sacrifice to
foresignifie the death of Christ: yet their maine, or their mere end was not
to make any such type, or figure.

Sacrifices were from the beginning as well before Aaron, as after, but the
knowledge of our Saviors death was obscure under Aaron, but much more before the
most knowing times under the Law, did not expect such a suffering dying
Redeemer, as God had ordained, much less did those more cloudy times before
the Law. The Rock in the Wilderness, the Manna, and diverse other things were
typical, yet no Sacrifices, and Sacrifices may as well be, not typical, and
even those Sacrifices which are typical, are not typical, qua Sacrifices,
more then Types are Sacrifices, qua Types. By the very light of nature, all
Nations did agree in all ages in presenting their God both with free
will-offerings in testimony of his goodness, and with expiatory Sacrifices in
testimony of their own finfulnesse. Howsoever, all such oblations, whether
expiatory or gratulatory were equally Sacrifices, though not equally typical;
for all expiatory Sacrifices were not bloody only, nor all gratulatory
unbloody.

We read of Cain and Abel before the institution of Aarons Order, that the one
presented to God his homage in part of his flock, the other in part of his
grain; the one did sacrifice upon an Altar as well as the other: and that
Sacrifice which was unbloody was typical, and expiatory as well as that which
was bloody, and that which was bloody might be graulatory as well as that which
was unbloody, or at least nothing appears to the contrary.

We read also of Noah that he had a distinct notice of clean and unclean
creatures, and did sacrifice accordingly, so that the Religion and Priesthood
before the Law was not so far different from that under the Law, though pomp
and ceremonies and some other accidental parts were wanting, as from ours
under the Gospel: or at least in matters of Sacrifice, it was little or not at
all different. All Sacrifices also under the Mosaicall Law were not bloody, for
Incense was offered to God as well as flesh; and there was an Altar for Odours,
as well as for blood: and all Sacrifices whatsoever received their value and
acceptance from the Passion of Christ, as that did purify them, not as they
did typifie that: for it seems else that other divine services should not be
so valuable, and acceptable as Sacrifices, not those Sacrifices which were
less typical, as those which were more: and that no Sacrifices at all had
been admitted of by God from such men as did not understand their typical
nature, as few did either before, or under the Law. Besides it does not appear
that the Passion of Christ, was a proper, real Sacrifice in fact, and
therefore it was necessary that it should be prefigured, yet no necessity is,
that it should be prefigured by Sacrifice a part ante, or commemorated by
Sacrifice a part post. The death of our Savior was rather a pious Passion,
then a divine action, or service done to God, and though our Savior did not
resist, or shun such a martyrdom wickedly enforced by other; yet he was not
so active in it, as to imbrue his own hands in his own blood. So that if our
Saviors Passion was a Sacrifice, it was but a figurative, improper, mental
Sacrifice, in as much as the meritorious sanctity thereof did not consist in
the act done, but in the innocence, patience, and excellence of the party
suffering. We cannot more properly call the death of Christ a Sacrifice, then
we may the Cross the Altar, or God the Priest, and we cannot properly say that
God did sacrifice to himself upon an Altar of that form and matter. It is a
very lame inference therefore, that Sacrifice must now be to commemorate
Christ's Passion past, because it was prefigured by Sacrifice being yet to come,
and because it was it self a proper Sacrifice in the act Doctor Heylin says
once, that Christ did not deprive us of all manner of Sacrifices, but only
those which had been before, which might, if continued, have been a strong
presumption of his not coming in the flesh. This seems a weak reason, for if
our Saviors Passion were a proper Sacrifice, it was a bloody one, and if there
be the same reason of representing it past, as there was future by Sacrifice,
then bloody Sacrifices are no less proper now to represent it, then they were
before: and if so, why were former Sacrifices abolished at all Surely the best
reason why Jewish Sacrifices were abolished, is because those services were but
shadows of that body, which in our Sacrament is really presented and
exhibited. If we do acknowledge that the body of our Savior is otherwise
present in our Sacrament then it was in the Jewish Types, we must acknowledge
that the shadows of that body are the less needful: for gianting that Jewish
Sacrifices and ours differ not in nature, but in circumstance; as their
signify a thing future, ours past, I do not see but that our Sacrament is as
mere a shadow, as their Sacrifice was, and that beasts now slain might as
well commemorate our Saviors death past, as they did prefigure it to come. The
Doctor says that the Jewish Sacrifices were bloody, ours not; that the Jewish
Priests were from Aaron, ours from Melchisedeck; and these he puts as
substantial differences, tomake our Sacrament no Jewish Sacrifice. But these
differences are not sufficient for his purpose, because we know that all Jewish
Sacrifices were not bloody, nor does the order of Melchisedeck hinder from
bloody Sacrifices, for if Melchisedeck did sacrifice, as it is most probable
that he did, it is as probable that his Sacrifices were not all unbloody.

So then his other difference also is as fond, when he says that our Altars
are for Evangelicall, not Mosaicall offerings; in as much as betwixt
Evangelicall and Mosaicall offerings, he has not yet proved any other
difference, but nominall, or circumstantiall only: of the like reason and
weight are the rest of the Doctors inferences, for as he has proved yet no true
proper Sacrifice, so much less has he proved any necessity of either Priest,
or Altar in a downright sense. We may grant Sacrifice, yet deny both Priest,
and Altar, for we read that the Passover was called the Lords Sacrifice, yet
we know it was not killed only by Priests, nor eaten upon an Altar, though it
was the most honorable of Jewish Sacrifices, and most nearly relating to the
Passion of Christ. So also the Passion it self of Christ, if it was a proper
Sacrifice, yet it was offered up upon a wooden Cross, not a stone Altar, and
the Sacrificer thereof was not a Priest; wherefore we see plainly that all the
Doctors allegations hitherto are frivolous, and altogether insufficient.

We come now from the Old, to the New Testament, and here Doctor Pocklington,
and Master Meade lay hold of these words of our Savior. Leave thy gift at the
Altar, and g^e and reconcile thy self to thy brother, etc. These words were
spoken by our Savior, whilst the Altar was in use, and before the Communion
was instituted, and may more properly be interpreted of such an Altar, as men
did repair to with gifts, and offerings, then to our Tables, where we come
rather to receive then give; yet our Divines now cite them to patronise the
word Altar. It would little advance the reality of Altars that they had been
so named once by our Savior: but here so much as the name used is not clearly
proved. Doctor Heylin for his next evidence, cites 1 Cor. 11. Do this in
remembrance of me, etc. As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup,
ye show forth the Lords death till be come. Here is (says Doctor Heylin) a
Sacrifice whose nature is commemorative, here is in this Sacrifice an Hoe
facite for Priests, different from the Hoc edite, and bibite of Laymen: and so
here is proof both for Sacrifice and Priest: by this proof it seems, that
the life of the Sacrament consists in this that it is a Sacrifice, and that the
life of the Sacrifice consists in this that the Priest consecrates it, not that
the people of God celebrate it; but I take this as a strange gloss of the
Doctors, not agreeable to common understanding, or natural to the text, or
savouring of Protestantisme, and so I leave it as not worth an answer. He cites
further, 13. Heb. Habemus Altar: and so he concludes that Saint Paul furnishes
us both with Priest, Sacrifice, and Altar; if Saint Paul did here by Altar
mean the Table, here is some authority for the name, not thing, but this is it
self controverted: for first, it is plain that the word Altar is taken for
the epulum, not the thing upon which it was offered, for of this Altar, it is
said that they may not eat which serve at the Tabernacle. Secondly, the Papists
do not always here by Altar interpret our Communion Table, and therefore says
Bellarmine, Non urgeo hune loeum quia non desunt ex Catholicis, qui
interpretantur de cruce, vel de Christo ipso, etc. But says the Doctor, I am
not the first of the Church of England, that so interpret it, for Bishop
Andrews has it thus: The Altar in the Old Testament is called Mensa Domini, by
Malachy, and of the holy Table the Apostle in 13. Heb. says, Habemus Altar.
The Lev. Minister here rightly answers, that the Apostle here calls the Table,
Altar no otherwise then as Malachy calls the Altar Table, and that must needs be
improperly: for the Jewish Altar was not a proper Table, more then the Table
whereon the Shewbread stood was an Altar. It is certain and plain that the
Syriack word, Luke 22. and the Hebrew in Saint Matthew is Table, and not Altar.
And Saint Paul, Heb. 10. uses the word Mensa, and the word (...) is frequent,
and not denied to be proper, but the word (...) is seldom used for the Table,
and not properly at all, if we do grant it at all used for Table, as is
questioned. And therefore Bellar. gives a reason why the Apostles all their
time used no other word then Table, especially not Altar; to which opinion the
Bishop of Durham agrees, though not to the reason of it. And we know also that
the Romish pictures present Christ, and his Disciples in their Churches
communicating always at a Table, not at an Altar.

We come now to the practice of the Ancients, and they (as Doctor Heylin says)
without scruple, or opposition, used the words Priest, Sacrifice, and Altar,
not tying themselves only to those words; but not shunning the use of them: but
the truth is, the Greek Fathers used the word Table more frequently, the Latin
less; but both Greek and Latins used the word Table more frequently then
Altar. But upon the reformation begun by Luther, etc. both words began to
be examined, and then the Protestants not allowing the Sacrament to be a
Sacrifice, rejected Altar as improper, but the Papists, though they pretend not
to disallow the word Table, yet in their reformed Canon of the Mass, they used
not at all the word Table: and yet still in the Roman Pontifical we find the
word Table used. Howsoever the dispute being not about the mere use, but sense
of the word Altar, we come now to other arguments.

All metaphors (says Doctor Heylin) allude to something which has real
existence in nature, and therefore the Fathers in the word Altar, did allude to
something existent. I answer, Metaphors must have some basis to support them,
but that basis may be any thing past, or incorporeall: Christ may be called
the brazen Serpent, the sting of conscience may be called Ixions wheel, etc.
Yet there is no such thing now as the one, nor ever was as the other; but
(says Doctor Pocklington) those Altars which bore carpets, corporals, etc.
could not be mere notionall, metaphorical Altars, but such were those of the
Ancients, etc. Ergo. I answer, the same thing might be a notionall Altar, yet a
material Table, and, as it was a material Table, it might support carpets,
etc. That cursed Tree whereon our Savior suffered, was a metaphorical Altar;
yet it did not truly bear our Savior, as an Altar, but as a Cross: but
(says the same Doctor again) these Altars were such as were frequented for
oblations sakes, to which none came without Sacrifices of wealth, as well as of
praise. I answer, for presents and alms Tables are as proper as Altars; and
such being but metaphorical Sacrifices prove the Table to be the rather a
metaphorical Altar: but (says Doctor Heylin) some Sacrifices are merely
spiritual, and to such no material Altar is requisite, for such the heart is
a sufficient Altar, and every man is a sufficient Priest: but the Sacrament is
a Sacrifice, not only spiritual and mystical, but also external and
visible, and to such a Sacrifice, a visible Priest and material Altar is
requisite. This is answered already in the Paschall Lam^, for that was a
Sacrifice visible and external, yet it required no material Altar; and so it
may be said of our Saviors crucified body: besides, we may make a difference
with Saint August. between the Sacrament it self, and that which is visible
in the Sacrament, and so deny any visible Altar to be necessary; and for
further instance, man is said to offer up his soul and body to God as a
reasonable Sacrifice, and the body being material, does not require any
material, gross Altar: but, says D. Heylin, if the Sacrament be but an
improper metaphorical Sacrifice, then no more a material Table, then a
material Altar is requisite. I answer, though in that exception of a Sacrifice
it be metaphorical; yet as a Communion, it is a real action, and requires a
real Table whence to communicate. So the Passion of our Savior, it was a
tropical Sacrifice, but a proper execution, and therefore though our Savior was
sacrificed without a proper Altar, yet he was not executed but upon a proper
Cross: but (says the same Doctor) if the Sacrament be an improper,
immateriall Sacrifice; it may not only be celebrated without a Table, but
without a Church also: any place may serve for such a Sacrifice: the Pulpit,
the Pewe, the Belfrie, the Chancell may be as proper Altars as the holy Table,
and what a profane Doctrine is this? We do say that any place may be as
properly called an Altar, but not that any place may be as fitly and honorably
employed to communicate in. Our Savior did communicate in a common room upon
a common Table for necessities sake; and so we in case of necessity dare not
despise such communicating, but we use not this example to prove a parity of
all places: the Doctor knows this is but a slanderous consequent, issuing out
of his malice, not out of our tenet; for if the honor of the Sacrament do not
wholly consist in being a Sacrifice, or the honor of Sacrifice in the
external work done, there is no more necessity of Altar, then Table; or that
either Altar or Table should be held so essentially honorable to the
Sacrament, and this may be held by him, which holds not all places equal and
indifferent for divine services. Wherefore, as for Saint Cyprians rule:
Eucharistia in altari consecratur, which Doctor Pocklington affirms to be
undeniable: we say it must stand with our Saviors example, who did administer
the Eucharist upon a real Table, but upon an imaginary Altar, and so we are
not opposed to it: but (says Doctor Heylin further) material Altars are very
ancient in the Church, which if they were not erected for our Sacrifices,
certainly they were for Popish, and this will prove Popery to be very ancient,
I answer, the Doctor has not proved formal stone Altars so ancient, but if he
had, he has not proved antiquity free from all error, and superstition, but we
can easily prove the contrary: but Doctor Heylin proceeds thus; he which
teaches that in the Primitive Church there was neither Priest, Sacrifice, nor
Altar, properly so called, brings in confusion and ruin into the Church, takes
away all external worship, inables every man to the Priestly function, and
robs the Church of all due reverence. This is a strange inference that I cannot
sufficiently honor the Sacrament, but under the name of Sacrifice, nor
Ministers, but under the name of Priests; nor the Communion Table, but under
the name of Altar. D. Heylins supposition herein of me, must be more weighty
then my own certain knowledge of my self. Doctor Pocklington also concurres
herein, for he which denies Altars (says he) may as well deny Churches, and
he which denies Churches, may as well deny the Throne of Bishops in the Quire
near the Altar-place, and he which denies Thrones, denies the truth of
Christian Religion: by a strange dismembered, deformed kind of argumentation;
he makes Altars as necessary to be believed, as Thrones of Bishops; and
Thrones, as the succession of Bishops; and the succession of Bishops, as the
rock and foundation of all Religion. Cartwright, Ames, and those of Geneva,
and all other Countries which cannot derive their lineall succession of Bishops
from the Apostles are Puritanes, and Heretics: though they scarce differ from
us in any other point of consequence, yet in this they are in worse condition
then the Papists. The Anchor of our Salvation is, that my Lord of Canterbury is
lineally descended from Saint Peter, for no inthronization of Bishops, no
personal succession; and no personal succession, no derivation of faith can
be from God to, etc. Were not this written against Puritans, or by such as have
an authority to prove quidlibet ex quolibet, it would deserve laughter, and not
an answer: but now we must be more serious. The allegation is, that there is
the same evidence for Altars, as Thrones, and therefore since it is most
impious to deny Thrones, it is the like to deny Altars. I wish Thrones had
been better proved, for if Thrones do prove Altars, yet men of such ordinary
faiths as mine may something scruple Thrones themselves. Saint Aug. says that
Thrones were remaining at Rome and Jerusalem till his days from the very
Apostles times. Saint Augustine might see thrones standing in both places, but
when they were first raised, or by whom, or for whom, or for what reason; he
could not understand but by relation, and what that relation might be, he has
not expressed: neither do I think that his maine hope of salvation was chained
to that relation, neither can I chain mine to the same; for my part, I am so
far from making Thrones or Altars my souls anchorage, that I believe neither
to be Apostolical, and till the Doctor can better convince me of them, I could
wish he would call in his Anathemaes; or rather Epigrams against such Atheists
as I am: but (says Doctor Pocklington further) No Altar, no Priest; no Priest,
no Rubric, etc. but we say in answer, First, that the relation between Priest
and Altar is not inseparable, as has been proved. Secondly that the word
Priest derived from (...) implies not real Sacrifice. Thirdly, if we did
reject the word Priest utterly as less proper then Minister, and less fit to
be used (as Sir Francis Bacon maintains) and as we do not affect to use it,
yet we reject not the thing with the name, the same Ministry, the same sacred
order we retain, and honor, and hold it as revenerd as either Jew, or Papist
do their sacrificing Priesthood. But what consequence is this? no Priest, no
Ordination; no Ordination, no Rubric; no Rubric, no Law. He which opposes the
word Priest only, does not oppose the thing; and he which opposes not the
thing, opposes not the Rubric; and he which opposes not the Rubric, opposes
not the Parl. establishing it: it is sufficient that we oppose neither the
thing Priest, nor the word, except only in its Popish sense as it intimates
real Sacrifice to us.

I come now to such proofs as clear antiquity from meaning of real proper
Altars. And first we read the word Altar sometines in the works of ancient
Authors, but that is no proof that Altar was the common term or word so used
in common speech, of that there is no proof, or color at all; it is ordinary
to use Metaphors in studied discourses, and as unusual to use them in our
ordinary language. That the word Table was first in common use at the beginning
is very credible, that it is now wholly disused amongst Papists is evident,
therefore when we see the change, but cannot perceive the certain time or
motion of that change, as it happens in the shadow upon the Sun-diall, we may
well suppose that the mystery of inquity has had its secret operation upon it,
as upon diverse other things. We find secondly, in the most ancient times, that
it was a common objection made against Christians by Jews, Pagans, and
renegado Christians, that they had neither Churches, Altars, nor Images. And to
this common objection we find that the greatest Apologetick, and most learned
Divines of those days did all unanimously yield that they had no material
proper Altars, nor no other but Metaphorical only. Clesus objected to Origin
that the Christians did avoid to raise (...). Caecilius asks Octavius, Cur
nullas aras habent, templa nulla, nulla nota simulacra? Arnobius says to his
adversaries, Nos accusatis quod nec templa habeamus, nec imagines, nec aras.
And Julian who had been a Christian, and knew their worship well enough, and
lived after the erection of Churches, yet says to Cyrill, offerre in altars,
and sacrificare cavetis: 'twas strange if any Christian Altars then were, that
neither Heathens, nor apostate Christians should know thereof: and yet the more
s^^ange that this being objected against Christians, and not being true, that
Christians would not justify themselves against so manifest an untruth. Origin
answers that the Christians Altar was his understanding, and that prayers were
his (...). Octavius answers that the Church Sacrifice was bonus animus, sincera
men's, and pura conscientia. Arnobius confesses sacrifices, but not corporeal,
agreeing with the former that they were mental only. And Cyrill gives not a
deny all to Julian. Is it not to be wondered at, that so many men, of several
places and times, should all so far prevaricate, and make such fond answers,
if they could have advantaged their own cause, or satisfied their adversaries,
by affirming proper Altars, and such real Sacrifices, as our Doctors now
affirm? How easy had it been, and how true, and how necessary was it to have
made this direct answer? Persecution suffers not Christians to build such
sumptuous Churches and Altars as you do: but we have Altars as proper, and
would build Temples as stately as you do, if we had power and liberty; we deny
not al Sacrifices, as you erroneously object, we deny not true, visible,
external Sacrifices, we deny only Jewish, bloody, and merely corporeal
Sacrifices: so that the force of that objectio^ is against our hard condition,
not against our worship or Religion. But Mr. Mede says that these
Apologeticall Divines denied Altars, under the Heathen name (...), not denying
the Church word (...): whereby he accounts them mere cheaters, and triflers,
not regarding whom they treated withal, or the current sense of the words
according to common acception, but desiring to obscure truth, and deinde their
opponents, this is to be slighted as a toy. Pocklington takes pains to prove
Churches out of the Scripture, and antiquity, and says that those Churches had
Altars, to which none came without oblations, and that with those oblations,
captives, widows, orphans, etc. were relieved. He also insists upon the great
names of Thrones and Syndos: but his proofs are most of them indefinite, both
to time, place, and thing. We say, that before Constantine few Churches were,
especially so formally, built with Thrones, and other divisions, as he seems
to intimate, and in respect of the vast surface of the earth scarce visible, or
considerable, especially to several men, living in several places, and at
several times, such as the Apologeticks were. And yet the word Church is taken
sometimes for any place where God was publicly worshipped, and sometimes for the
congregation it self of the faithful named by such a Town, City, or Country;
and in this sense, and no other the Church of Rome, is said to maintain in it,
1. Bishop, 46. Priests, 7. Deacons, 7. Subdeacons, 42. Acolythites, Exorcists,
Readers, Porters, 52. Widows, 1500. Poor. It is not meant that any local
material Church in Rome during the times of persecution, was so rich,
capacious, or stately: for this would evince more then a mere toleration of
christianity, and yet we read not of so much. Hospinian for the ^^ace betwixt
Christ and Constantine more reasonably collects, that those Altars which were
then, were neither fixed nor of stone, which sufficiently cleeres that they
were wooden unfixed Tables, not stone, and fixed Altars: for if Christians
during Heathenisme, had liberty to build and meet in such formal Churches,
and had such Synods, Thrones, Libraries, Schools, Gazophylacies, as the Doctor
labors to prove, they could not want power, or opportunity to adorn or enrich
Altars, or to fix them and fashion them as they pleased. And thus the ages
before Constantine might be defective in Discipline by reason of persecution,
and we may suspect the ages after for their superstition. Constantine was too
pompous in Discipline, and soon inclined to Arianisme, and long deferred his
own Baptism; in his times the foundations of Popish usurpation began to be
laid. Then it was said, hodie venenum infusum est Ecclesiae: then it was said,
That there were as many Religions as opinions, and opinions as men. I ascribe
not to antiquity such infallibility as some do, and yet many things might fit
those times which fit not ours, and many things may be misreported,
misunderstood, and mistaken by us in these times; which perhaps were not in such
repute of old, as we now believe. Our third reason against material and proper
Altars, is grounded upon the Fathers. Eusebius often calls that of Christians,
an unbloody, and reasonable Sacrifice: the word Unbloody is used in opposition
to corporeal and sensitive things, the word Reasonable, to real or vegetative
things; for if we conceive that Reasonable, and Unbloody distinguish from
Jewish Sacrifices, we must understand notionall, or mental Sacrifices, because
the Jewish were not all bloody. The same Eusebius also says that we are
appointed to offer daily to God the commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice (...). A
Kings deputy is entertained as a King, and its an honor to him; but Kings are
not entertained as deputies, that is derogatory: so, if this were a Sacrifice,
it were an undervaluing, lessening word, to say it were a mere commemoration,
or instead of a Sacrifice. In another place also he calls it (...), that which
is the representation of a proper Sacrifice, is not it self a proper
Sacrifice, these things differ in predicament. And to put all out of doubt,
Chrysostom by way of correction, for more proprieties sake, having called it a
Sacrifice, adds this word (...), to show that it is in propriety but (...). It
may be called a Sacrifice figuratively, but in truth it is rather the
remembrance of a Sacrifice. Our fourth reason is taken from the acts of our
Ancestors in the reformation, who did express great dislike of Altars, and did
remove, and abollsh the same as Popish innovations. We will therefore against
Doctor Heylin, make these two things clear.

First, that the Reformers were very adverse to Altars.

Secondly, that they were so upon just grounds.

Constantines times, though not so pure as the former; yet were far more pure
then those which succeeded; for Antichrists entrance is obscure: he seems
likes Melchisedeck without pedigree, as to some of his mysteries of tyranny: He
began to work presently after the the infancy of the Church, but as to his
solemn inthronization at Rome, he is much younger then Constantine. Tantae
mo'is erat Romanam condere gentem. It appears by Saint Ambrose his insulting
over Theodosius that the Hierarchy was advanced in good times, and that by the
blind zeal of some men otherwise very good. Altars had gotten great adoration
before St. Ambrose, but that adoration was not wholly abused till the
installment of Antichrist; and then the Sacrament was soon turned into a
present propitiatory Sacrifice, and the form of a Table being utterly
rejected, a stone Altar was received into its place, and an immolating Priest
ordained. Priest, Altar, Sacrifice, are now grown the common terms, and only
proper words, and though the instant creeping in of this factious change be not
known, yet the change is now apparent, it is now is plain, that these words
are grown common, as it is that they were not so from the beginning. And for
this cause our English Martyrs, were necessitated to use these words conversing
with Papists at that time when no other words were current: and this is no
proof for the propriety thereof. Frith, Lambert, etc. mention their
examination touching the Sacrament of the Altar: and so must I now repeat the
same name, and so must any man in the same case, but what? this mention or
repetition proves not our approbation thereof. So that the Parliament, 1. Ed.
6. use the name both in the act, and in the writ granted thereby: but what?
neither was the tide of language yet turned, nor the reformation in any degree
perfected: and so in the first Liturgy, the word Altar for the same reason is
usually mentioned: but in the second Liturgy we see the better judgment, and
more settled practice of the State, by the utter rejection of the very names of
Sacrifice and Altar. But the Doctor replies that the second Liturgy was
introduced upon no other just consideration, but only to please the fond,
pragmaticall, puritanicall humor of John Calvin. King Edw. 6. coming to the
Crown 1547. found the enterprise of altering Religion very difficult and
dangerous, and not suddenly to be expedited. Young he was, and destitute of a
competent number of trusty, potent, and learned Ministers, and his Father had
altered nothing but in discipline only, and his task now was to extirpate a
sensual Religion of great antiquity, and yet within six months he sets out
his injunctions, wherein he prescribes diverse things tending to a reformation.
Some few months after in Parliament, the Sacrament is commanded to be
administrrd sub utraque specie, and a Writ therefore awarded; in both which Act
and Writ, the vulgar common name is not yet disused. In 1548. Images are
ejected, and a new celebration of the Sacrament ordered: The first Liturgy is
now composed, and Bucer sent for, and as yet the word Altar is not quite
relinquisht. In 1549. the King having thus far adventured to countenance
Protestantisme, he now adventures to strike at the heart of Popery, by pulling
down the Mass; but this he does by Proclamation, not daring to put it to
votes in Parliament. Upon this a great rebellion is raised in the West, the
French King also bidding defiance at the same instant; and now Bucer first
arrives. In 1550. great troubles happened about the Protector, but the West being
calmed, and the French threatenings diverted, Bishop Ridly is commanded to take
down Altars in his Diocese, and in Paul's Church it self the Altar-wall was
removed: by the Kings letters also to Ridly, it appears that Altars had been
displaced in many other parts before, and the Act is allowed by the King to be
good and godly, though our Doctors now term it an horrible outrage: and by
this it seems that Bucer and Calvin were not the first instigators thereof. In
1551. we read of Bucers death, and the arraignment, commitment, and execution
of the Protector; and now Hooper in his Sermon before the King, preaches
against the remainder of Altars, yet standing as occasions of superstition. In
1552. a Parliament establishes the second Liturgy in stead of the first, and
finally, and generally demolishes Altars, not using so much as the name of
Sacrifice, or Altar. And by such limits and degrees did the Kings power
increase, and the reformation ripen; but amongst these public affairs we may
take notice also that some other considerable passages did intervene. Bucer
about Autumn, 1549. received advertisements from Calvin not to be mediis
consilii^ authorem vel approbatorem, and to be instant with the Protector for
the taking away of superstitious ceremonies. The like counsel also Calvin had
sent to the Protector to go on in abrogating all superstitions without regard
of correspondence abroad, or peace at home, such cautions being only requisite
in civil, not divine affairs; for in these the word of God is the strict
rule, and nothing is more distasteful to God, then to alter; or mitigate divine
precepts according to worldly wisdom. His advise also was further that the
Protector would hasten the compounding of ceremony differences, and to support
Hooper, a man zealous against Altars, and ceremonies; and one that had interest
in the Duke of Northumberland. In his letters also to Farellus 1551. it
appears that Calvin had written to the King, and that his letters had been
graciously accepted both by the King and his council, and that the Archbishop
had wished him to write more frequently, and that the Archbishop also had
received letters from him; and that the State had received the like
advertisements from Bullinger also. These pious endeavors of Calvin seconded
by Bullinger, etc. so honorably entertained by the King, and his Prelates and
Counselors of State; nay, and by the whole Parliament, Doctor Heylin traduces
as the busy offices of his tampering, practicing, and unhappy meddling: and
thus through Calvin's sides our heavenly inspired Ancestors are wounded, and
through their sides our Religion. It Is true, the first Liturgy had a Moral,
though not a Mathematical perfection in it; and so it was attestated by Fox,
etc. But this concludes not that therefore it was altered only to please Calvin;
for though in the first Liturgy, nothing was introduced but what was good and
godly, as might be well justified; yet that was more good and godly which was
afterward introduced in the second: the one might be as Nehemiahs Temple, the
other as Solomon's, both beautiful, yet one more beautiful: He that rightly
considers the Acts of Edw. 6. and his short reign, will wonder to see so much,
not so little done in such a space of time: especially since his Peers was so
factious, his people so ignorant, and his Clergy so Popish. Had not Divines
also been so averse at home to reformation, the consultation of foreign
Doctors was necessary, especially of such as had been actors and spectators
abroad in the like alterations: but such Doctors were now precious in the
world, the Harvest was far too great for the Laborers, and the age also too
queasie to endure their rigor. It is no wonder therefore if Bucer came not till
two years after the beginning of the reformation, and if Calvin, Beza, and
Bullinger, came not at all. Tantae molis erat Romanam extinguere gentem. Doctor
Heylin supposes Calvin pragmaticall, because he was not sent for into England,
though he proffered himself unsent for, and was so forward to engage himself
by his avisoes: but this is ill supposed, for Calvin was known to be a
rigorous man against ceremonies, and the pomp of Prelates, and this made him
terrible here in England. Hooper is a sure instance of this, for being a
learned pious Bishop, his mere consent with Calvin cast him out of his
Bishopric, and scarce could he ever obtain his reinvestment, though the King
countenanced him, though Northumberland supported him, though the greatest of
foreign Divines entreated for him. So tender a point, even in those days was
it to touch upon ceremonies, the darling of Episcopacie, and so jealous were
the holiest of our Prelates in a case of such concernment to Hierarchy.
Certainly Hooper and Calvin had the same opposites, and friends; and therefore
though the King and Council did not send for Calvin, Bullinger, etc. because
the Popish and Episcopal faction hated them; yet they kindldy embraced their
counsels, and (as far as might be) put them into execution. The mere Popish
faction could not have deterred, or retarded the King and his council, we see
greater matters carried against that side, some other more potent enemies both
Hooper and Calvin had even in those zealous times; but in other ceremonies
whatsoever difference might be, I do not see but that in the amoving and
condemning of Altars, all sides did fully agree, and that Ridly and Cranmer
were as forward as either Hooper or Calvin. It is manifest also that Queen
Eliz. in her restitution of Religion was as ill affected to them, as her
brother had been in his first reformation, abolishing both the name, form,
and use of them, and adhering wholly to the second Liturgy, and imitating in
all things her brothers pattern. And it is as manifest, that in all the reign
of King James under any visitor whatsoever, there was no question ever moved
concerning the name, nature, pattern, or adoration of any Altar, till these
later years made them a ground of schism. We may more probably guess that
Edw. the sixth, and the best of his Clegry would have followed Calvin further
if they had had power, and further time to perfect their designs, then that
they followed him too far, being deceived by his P^ritanicall faction. But
Doctor Heylin blames Calvin for being an enemy to middle counsels in performing
Gods strict commands: not to regard humane policy in such divine affairs, the
Doctor calls going on without fear or wit. We know how far Saul departed from
Gods command for politic respects when he would offer Sacrifice before Samuel
came, and when he would reserve some of the Amalekitish spoil for Sacrifice;
yet this was not mere temporal wisdom: Sacrifice was his end, and the
service of God in both, yet we know strict obedience had been better accepted
then such uncommanded Sacrifice: besides, though Saul was strictly commanded to
destroy the Amalekites, yet he was not commanded to destroy the Amalekites
without all preparation, consultation, or opportunity: Gods command did bind
him from all mitigation in the execution of it, but not from all policy in
effecting it. So King Edw. the sixth, received a command from God to expel
Popery; in this case for want of power, the King might awaite time and
opportunity whereby to compass his end, as he did; but being master of
opportunity, he might not by any dispensation depart from that end, or fail of
executing his commission to the utmost. When Calvin dissuaded from middle
counsels, he took notice withal of the ceasing both of foreign and civil
wars, (as appears by his letters) so that we may well suppose his counsel
was chiefly touching the end, not the means: for the end is strictly defined
by God in divine affairs, but the means are commonly left to humane advise.
Let the Doctor carp at Calvin, and at our Ancestors, for crediting so meddling a
fellow, let him disdain that Elijah, or Baptist-like spirit wherewith God had
so plenteously anointed him: but this is no warrant for us to do the like. We
may better imagine that Calvin was one of the blessedst instruments whom God
fitted, and qualified for the most blessed employment which was ever effected
the redemption. We may (...) in Calvin and Luther, (...) two Testaments of God
rose again after they ha^ been slain in Babell, and after that their (...)
had lain unburied in the streets for so long a time, and that by their sacred
testimony the sun it self was relieved from a total observation, and a
greater, and more gross darkness was chased away from the face of Religion,
then that which the Aegypti^ns groped with their hands. But (says Doctor
Heylin) in Germany Altars are still retained; and there the reformation was
complete: and so complete reformation, and Altars may well subsist together. I
answer, Altars do remain in Germany: but it seems in the first place Luther
was no favourer of them, for he reproves it in Carolostadiue, that he did by
force show down Altars, when by dispute he ought to have expelled them.
Secondly, it appears by the same story that Altar were in many places very
offensive. Thirdly, the Lutherans use and repute their Altars as mere Tables:
and we admit that the formal relation of an Altar, is not the external form
as its wood or stone, round, or square, etc. but its employment for Sacrifice
We allow Occ^^^^padius to say, that for peace sake we abhor not from the
title of Sacrifice, so no deceit be carried under it. But we say, if not for
peace, and such as is (...) from deceit, we do abhor the word Sacrifice,
much more the thing. We allow with Zanchy also, Quod neque Christus, neque
Apostoli prohibuern^ Altaria, aut mondarunt, quod liguris mensis utantur: we
allow both external forms in themselves indifferent made absit superstitio: nay
Calvin himself (that man of rigor) did leave a stone Altar standing at
La^sauna. But if Altars be not necessary causes, yet as they are possible
occasions of superstition, with our Ancestors we reject them. The Fathers did
use the words Altar, Sacrifice, etc. harmlesly as to themselves, but not as to
others, who have mistaken their meaning therein; but this very mistake is
avoided by our Ancestors. The Germans herein imitatethe Fathers, being not so
scrupulous in a mere occasion of abuse; I do not say that they do ill, but I
say they do not so well as we, who avoid all misinterpretation both in our
selves and others; besides that which is not necessary to them by Law, is so to
us, for we are bound to believe, that such a King and such a Council as ours
were in the reformation, being instituted also by such foreign Doctors, would
not have abolisht Altars contrary to the disposition of those diffrents times,
but upon very good and godly considerations. And certainly if the form and
name of Altar we^^ so considerable held to our sanctified illuminated
Lawmakers, then the reality thereof was of deeper consequence, and much more
to be provided against. And therefore it is sufficient to allege, that in our
Liturgy in force there is no mention of Altars, or Sacrifices, and that
Sacrifice which is mentioned in the Sacrament, is only of spiritual praise,
and that wherein other Host, but our souls and bodies are offered unto God.
And so in our books of Homilies pub^^^^ly authorized, we are warried not to
make a Sacrifice, but a memory of the holy Communion: And in the book of
Articles it in maintained (...) he Popish Land is a blasphe^^^^ figment, and
per^^^ious imposture, and we are not supplied with any other in (...) thereof;
and yet if our Communion be at all a Sacrifice so properly called, how can it
differ from the Popish Land? So lastly in the (...) and enlarged by King
James, 1603. The two Sacraments are there named, and called, one of Baptism,
the other of the Lords Supper; there is no mention made of Altar, as if the
Communion might fitly still be called the Sacrifice, or Sacrament of the Altar,
as the name in Popish times.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the propriety of the Name.
THus we see there is no Altar but tropicall, and the name cannot be proper,
where the thing is improper: and yet we further say, that as the name Altar is
less proper; so it is also less ancient then Table, and in both these
respects less convenient to be used. For antiquity, D. Pocklington affirms,
that Noah built an Altar, and Noah being a Christian, his Altar was a Christian
Altar; and hence it results, that the Altar amongst Christians, is far
antienter then Table.

To this we reply, that if Noah was not a Jew, because not descended of Judah,
nor of the Mosaicall Religion, because he was many hundreds of years antienter
then Moses, by the same reason he was not a Christian, being ancestor to Christ
himself. And as for his Religion it does not appear that he had therein any
nearer relation to Christ, then Moses, especially in Sacrifices, for as Moses
had his bloody Sacrifices, so had Noah: and as Moses in his bloody Sacrifices
did observe a distinction of clean, and unclean creatures; so did Noah.
Wherefore it Noah be no Jew, it follows not he was a Christian; and if a
Christian, it follows not his Altar was a Christian Altar; and if a Christian
Altar, it follows not that it is that Christian Altar, which we call the
Communion Table. And surely Saint Ambrose is ill applied, as to this purpose,
to prove that the Christian is antienter then the Jew: as if that because
Altars came in with Noah; therefore Tables came not in till under the
Ceremonial Law, or as if it concerned us to strive about the general
indefinite words of Altar, or Table, in this dispute of the Communion Table.
Our dispute is about that Table, or other utensill whereupon our Savior did
eat both the old Passover, and his new one; and this Saint Matthew, and Saint
Luke call a Table, using the same word as is used for that utensill whereon
Dives his meat was served in; and the Papists deny not the proprlety of this
word, nor the use of the thing, only Doctor Pocklington affirms our Savior
to have supped upon the pavement, not that he can thereby aver his Altar, but
that he may impugn our Table. If the Sacrament be a true Sacrifice, it
follows not that Sacrifice ever implies any Altar: but we have disproved it to
be a Sacrifice, we prove it to be (...), rather a commemoration of a Sacrifice,
nay even that Sacrifice which it does commemorate, was not simply, it was but
secundum quid a Sacrifice. We say our Saviors Passion as to its virtue was
the most odoriferous Sacrifice that ever was, but as to its manner of oblation
it might be as figurative a Sacrifice, as the Cross was an Altar, or as the
crucifiers were Priests; and if Christ did by way of proper Sacrifice offer
himself for us on the Cross, yet its no necessary result, that he so offers
himself to us in the Sacrament: for the Sacrament, if it be any, it is but a
commemorative Sacrifice at the most: but says Pocklington, he that admits
commemorative Sacrifice, admite Sacrifice. Ergo. I answer, when we allow a
twofold Sacrifice, one of propitiation, a^^ther of commemration; one real,
the other representative of the real only, we intend the (...) to be proper,
the other improper; the one truly socalled, the other as it represents the
true. So we difference a painted from a livingman, and a (...) from a true
King; for ne^^lict is the picture a (...), nor the Actor a King, but
improperly, But says M. Mede, admitting no true Sacrifice, yet the Table is a
true Altar; for Table and Altar both have the same genus: Altar and Table
differ as Church and house, Altar is a holy Table, as Church is a holy house:
so the difference is specified only. I answer.

First, all Sacrifice is not offered: as (...), some things are offered neither
edible, nor potable, a Incense, and by this it seems that the relative
for^^lity of an Altar is not merely to support sacred repasts, as it should,
if it were only a sacred Table.

Secondly, this crosses the typical intention of Sacrifice, for in this sense
Christ was no proper Sacrifice, nor his Cross as Altar.

Thirdly, in the Jewish Temple there was both a sacred Altar. and a sacred
Table, and as they had several names, so they were different in form, and
sitted (...) several uses, although both their uses were sacred.

Fourthly, if we admit Table to be called Altar, in respect of the sacred food
there pres^^ed, not thereon sacrificed, this opposes not our opinion, but it
regard that holy Table expresses as much as Altar in Master Mede^ sense; but
the word Altar does not always e^presse so much as holy Table in our sense, as
the vulgar now use it, for this reason it is not so fitly used in common speech.

Fifthly, Altar is more (...) and uncertain then the holy Table; for as
Sacrifice is appliable to all divine services of Heathens, Jews, and Papists;
so Altar is as general: but our Service here being more eminent and excellent,
deserves a name as peculiar. A King is a man and more, he is truly a man, yet
his distinct name of King is more fit to be be used: for the title of King,
includes the name of man; but the name of man does not include the title of
King. The Doctors being so egar for the names of Sacrifice and Altar, ought to
have proved those name^ the most honorable; but of this they have made no
proof at all: for even amongst the Jews, obedience, humiliation, and
internal prostration of the soul was of more acceptance in the sight of God,
then the flesh of Bulls, or the fat of a thousand Rams. The Passover also,
which was both Sacrament and Sacrifice; yet was far more reverent as a
Sacrament, then as a Sacrifice: and they which did keep that with the inward
preparation of an humbled spirit without legal purity, were more accepted (as
appears by Hezekiahs Passover) then mere legal preparation could make any.
Besides, the Table to our Sacrament is not as the Altar was to the Jewish
Sacrifice, for the Jewish Altar did sanctify the Sacrifice, but our Table
borrowes its sanctity from the Sacrament. We therefore honor the Table as a
sacred Utensill, but we attract no honor from it, we hold it a diminution to
name the Sacrament by the Altar, when we may more honorably name it by the
body and blood of our Savior. For our Princes sake we bow to his chair, but
we denominate not the Prince by his chair, or bow to the Prince for the
chaires sake; neither do we disgrace the word Table, or Altar, when we
denominate not the Sacrament by them, but contrary to the Papists, we rather
name the Sacrament by the body of Christ, then by them, as we style Kings
rather by Nations then Castles, or Villages, though they be equally Lords of
both. The Jews had Sacraments more honorable in nature then mere Sacrifices,
and our Sacraments are far more precious then the Jewish, and therefore the
wrods Sacrifice and Altar must needs be lessening words to our Sacrament. And
were they not lessening words, yet for other reasons, we see our Ancestors
have disused them; and chosen rather to nominate the Sacrament by the body of
Christ, then to descend to a community of name therein with Jews, Pagans, and
Papists. And we may conceive, that if our Ancestors had no respect to future
abuse in abolishing the words Sacrifice, and Altar; yet they might have to
former: for Altars as they are Jewish are to be deserted, as Paganish detested,
as Popish abhorred. The brazen Serpent might have remained as free from abuse
after Hezekiahs days, as it had done before; and yet though the sin night
have been reformed, and the thing reserved, that good King out of indignation,
as well as prevention, takes it away, and defaces it. We may read further of
this, Exodus 23. 13. For the same reason the Greek Fathers would not use the
word (...), but (...), nor the Latins aru, but Altar: because they would avoid
community with Heathens, though there was no sin in the bare words. And this
kind of detestation is commended as pious by Sir Francis, Bacon, even against
words in themselves offencelesse, where better choice may be had, and where
great abuse has been offered. To conclude then, if words may be profaned,
and made unchristian, merely by coming into the mouths of Pagans, etc. Surely
much more impurity and offense is likely to stick upon the things themselves:
but in things abused by Papists, wherein we ought to to elongue our selves from
them, I think we ought not to look upon them as the Primitive Christians did
the Jews, but as the Jews did Heathens. For the Jewish Religion had been
true, and was rather altered then abolisht, and that in accidents, rather then
in substance; and so we must not hold of the Popish schism. And it may be
conceived, that our Ancestors in the reformation did shun correspondence and
conformity with Papists in some things and words otherwise indifferent, not
only for conscience sake, but also out of policy; for my opinion is that our
approaching toward Popery in some of their rites, and traditions, does the
more obdurate Papists, and make our cause seem a weak and warping cause. But
this is a sic videtur only; Iobtrude it upon no man, it may be the good work
which the piety of these warping times seems so willing to incline to, is more
visible to Doctor Heylin, then it is to me.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the Altar posture.
AS for the posture of the Altar or Table, it is not of it self of much
consequence, but our Innovators are now very strict in urging it upon us, and
that only for innovations sake. Doctor Pocklington in favor of this Posture,
takes great pains to prove that Christianity for the first two hundred years,
was not so oppressed and persecuted, but that Churches and Altars might have
been; but (...) those Heathen Emperors did not extirpate Religigion, this is
no proof that they did protect it: and if they were some way indulgent to the
persons of Christians, this is no proof that they were not adverse to the
Religion of Christians; we will rather admit with Platina, that the Christians
had no Churches for 150. years, but only Sac^^^ abdita and plerunque
subterranea; and though under Pius the first, some mean Churches were, yet
under Dioclesian they were demolisht again; and therefore it is most portable,
as he says, that during those times of uncertainty and calamity, Altars were
unfixt and probable, or (according to Strabo) placed ad diversas plagas propter
aliquam locorum opportunitatem, and G^. Biel mentions a wooden Altar, at which
the Popes did officiate; and it was removed from place to place, Vbic^nque
Roman^s Episcopus latuerit. These descriptions agree rather with a Table then
an Altar, and rather with our (...) thereof then theirs: but it is a wonder,
since the Doctors would feign prove such toleration of Religion, that Churches
and Altars might have been before Constantine, that they make no proof at all
that any were; but even since Constantines time, Altar posture is but poorly
maintained. Doctor Heylin for his first proof alleadges, that the Primitive
Christians prayed toward the East, and that the reason thereof was, because
the Table was plac^^ at the East end of the Church. And says he, if the Table
was placed Eastward, then doubtless in the most eminent part of the East,
that no man might have place beyond it: for any man standing beyond the Table,
must either not pray toward the East, or not toward the Table. Be it granted
that the Ancient Christians had a custom to pray (...), and that because our
Savior hung upon the Cross with his face Westward, as both may be
questioned; yet this we receive only from writers which lived West from Judea,
where our Savior was crucified, and this justifies it not in the Western
parts of Christendom, and if it does, yet what follows? does the reason of
this maintain the Altar posture. So is it therefore a sin to take the wall
of the Altar when we pray? or if thi^ be a sin, can it be no ways avoided,
but by the Altar posture? Amongst the Jews, the West was most honorable, and
yet the Arc was not so fixed to the West wall of the Oracle, that the
Cherubins might not stand between; and therefore honor is not always
rigorously, and superstitiously to be applied Besides, if our Saviors posture
on the Cross be the rule of our posture in our dev^^ions, this rule extrud^
not to all Christians, but only to such as lie West from Judea; for those
which lie East, by the same rule, if they will not turn their backs to our
Savior ought to turn their faces to the West: but why should any certain
postures be held so necessary, when all nations cannot agree in the same for
the same reason? Whatsoever was formerly by some imagined, we know that the
East is named so from the rising of the Sun, and we know the Sun has
neither rising not setting, but comparative, and so America is as properly
East, as China, for if America lie West to us, yet it lies East to China; which
lies East to us. The Doctor tells as not certainly whether the Ancients prayed
Eastward, because their Churches were so built, or whether they built so,
because they praye^ so, but both ways he makes use of it for his own posture;
although we may both ways as probably thus reto^^^ to the contrary. If the
Christians prayed Eastward only, because their Churches were so built, then
they held that posture of praying in it self indifferent, and if they built so
because they prayed so, then they held the posture for building so to be
indifferent: and sure the proof is very weak, that the Primitives did put any
virtue in all places of the world either in building or in praying Eastward,
since it is most apparent, that private dwellings, and Pagan Temples, and
Jewish Synagogues were at first converted into Churches, and some new erections
were not contrived in this Eastern posture. For his second proof, the Doctor
says, that anciently (according to Bishop Juell, the Quire or Chancell was
drawn with curtains, and this would be very unsightly (he says) if the Table
should stand in the middle, (...) far from the wall* The Doctor here makes no
difference between a Cathedral, and Parochial Church, for in Par^chials a
curtain may hang at the Chancell door without incumb^ance, and in Cathedrals
it may be drawn in the midst of the Quire without any inconvenience, though
the Table stand not near the wall. In our Cathedrals, the Quires are now so
spacious, that a third part of them may be assigned to the (...), or Altar
place, and yet all the congregation may stand in the other division, nay, if in
Saint Paul's London, the Altar wall were again removed, as it was in Ridleys
time, the Altar would be seen standing in the very middle of the Quire. For
his third proof, the Doctor cites the Altar in the Church of Antioch, which
not standing to the East, is storied to have differed in posture from all other
Churches. If it be granted that all Churches in the West parts from Antioch;
nay, all of the whole world had Altars standing toward the East; this proves
not that they touched the East wall, and stood side ways. The Doctors fourth
proof is from the divisions in Churches, for first occurred (he says) the
seats of the Presbyters, and then above them the Episcopal throne, and above
all the (...). This is spoken only of Cathedrals, and in Cathedrals we see the
same division still; yet see withal, that betwixt the Bishops throne and the
Altar wall, there is a great distance, so that the Altar is not necessarily
driven close to the wall. The Doctors last and maine proof is from the custom
of Papists, who since they retain the old fashion of their buildings, are not
likely to innovate in the fashion of their Altars. This proof is no stranger
for Altar posture, then for the multitude of Pillar- Altars, Chapel- Altars,
and Requiem- Altars, and for a thousand other superstitions; and yet we answer
more over that it was not so easy for the Papists to alter in the fashion of
Churches, as Altars, and therefore this is a very non-concludent, argument. I
have now answered Doctor Heylin, and I might proceed to confute him also, but
that is done to my hand by a Lin. Minister, in a book called the Holy Table,
name, and thing; and hither I shall refer all that are unsatisfied in this
point. I shall note only of that learned Author, that he puts his examples of
the chiefest metropolies of Europe and Asia, and in Rome it self, his first
instance is in the Catacombe, the most ancient and reverent Church there,
wherein Saint Paul and Peter first were buried, and where none might officiate,
but the Pope: yet even this Church was not canonical in this Eastern Altar
posture. His next instance is in Saint Peter's there the holy mother Church of
the world, for (...) there, that most reverent Altar, which stood over the
translated b^nes of Peter and (...), stood some distance from the wall. Many
other instances are given not fit to be repeated, and yet of all instances none
can be more convincing the^ those of his four Tables so precious, and richly
adorned, and inscribed round about, which were dedicated at Constantinople,
Rome, and S. Dennis. If Altars were only in use, why was such incredible cost
pow^ed out upon Tables? If the Altar posture was only in use, why were those
Tables round about on (...) side inscribed, when the inscription had been
(...) in part obliterated? I come now to this later age, and to our own
Nation. In the time of Edw^^^* we find that Altars were taken down, that
Hooker preached against them, that Ridley took away the Altar wall in Paul's to
destroy the posture of them, that Bucer complained in C^or^ tantum sacra
representari. And when at first things were not fully settled, when the old
posture was rejected, and not any new one instead thereof constantly (...) we
find Huggaid deriding that incertainty: and we find^ King Edwards second
Liturgy ending that doubt by appointing the North side of the Table, for the
place whereat to officiate: In the time of Queen Eliz. we find an injunction
to place the Table where the Altar stood, saving when the Communion is to be
administered, and other things referred to the appointment of visitors. And in
the third of Queen Eliz* the visitors set forth their order, that the steps in
the Chancell shall be decently (...) and that there the Communion Table shall
stand out of the time of receiving: and we know no reason w^y they which
endured not the form of an Altar, should endure the posture, or why they which
liked not that posture in time of receiving, should like it at other times: or
why they should call that the North side, which our Doctors now will needs
understand the North end of the Table. Lastly, (...) sanctorum be interpres
praeoeptorum, we must believe that the Altar posture had not been so generally
used in all Parochials in the whole Kingdom ever since the reformation, and no
care thereof taken by authority, if it had been irregular. But the Doctor
says that the Altar posture is retained in the Kings Chapel, and in
Cathedrals, and that they ought to give Law, and not to receive it from
Parochials. For answer we say that Chapels and Cathedrals have their own
peculiar Statutes, and may differ sometimes from themselves therein, and from
Parochials, but Parochials are all governed by the public Canons: besides we
see there is a great difference in the very fabric between Cathedrals,
Chapels, and Parochials; and therefore in Parochials the Table is removed in
time of administration, because the Chancel was not held so fit for the
audience and access of the people, but in Cathedrals, and Chapels, no such
removal is necessary. Chapels and Cathedrals (...) also otherwise, as in
pomp, and in the intelligence of the congregation; and in this respect also
ceremoni^s may be perhaps the more plausible in them, then they are in
Parochials. The Doctor lastly cites Saint Gregory's case, and says that their
Altar posture was adjudged by the Kings own decision. But I conceive
otherwise, for these reasons.

First, because that Church of Saint Gregory stood under the very wall of
Paul's, and owed a filial subjection thereunto.

Secondly, because that Church had no Chancell to officiate in, but was built
Chapel wise, the East eud thereof being sufficiently visible to all the
congregation.

Thirdly, because the King did not intimate in his order that he intended to
make that case a precedent to other Parochials, and we know no reason why that
pleasure should be concealed, which desires to be obeyed.

Fourthly, because many other visitors both wise and godly, have not taken it
as an overruling Law in their Jurisdictions.

Fifthly, the King did only settle the Table being removed, and prevent
further removals, but he did not place it side-way to the East wall himself,
and we know the Law would not have all things done, which it hinders from being
undone. For these reasons it may be conjectured that the Kings aim was at
uniformity only, but not in all things, nor at all times where the like reason
is not. And since B. Bilson says that the very word Altar so^^nts
superstition, and the Parliament adjudges that the form of a Table shall more
move from superstition, and there can be no reason why the posture of the Altar
should not fall under the same, consideration, we conceive the Kings meaning to
have been mistaken.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the sanctity of the Altar, or its due adoration.
THe honor and sanctity of the Altar, and that adoration which is due
thereunto, is now to be insisted upon. The name, nature, and posture of Altar
has been all this while so stiffly vindicated, and maintained in behalf of the
Table; that a divine worship might be asserted and challenged as due to it: but
now behold on a sudden, when the name of Altar will not serve, the name of Arc
must supply that office. In the twinkling of (...) eye the scene is changed by
our Doctors, and that which was an Altar before, is now become an Arc; and
that which stood before in the Sanctuary is now removed into the Propitiatory,
and there shrowdes it self under the wings of Cherubins. The surest argument
now is, that as our Churches are to be accounted holy, and reverenced as the
Temple was amongst the Jews; so in our Churches the holy Table (not Altar)
stands responsible to the Arc of the Covenant, and the Mercie-seate. Doctor
Micklethwaite says, that God may be worshipped in such places where his
presence is truly specified: as it was in the Mount, in the Temple, etc. and if
under the Law it was no idolatry to worship toward the places, and monuments
of Gods extraordinary presence, it is none in the Gospel. And thus it is
lawful (he says) to lift up our hands and eyes toward heaven, and so vocally
implore God, because in the act of such worship, we use heaven but as a mere
circumstance, not as an object, no not relative, or mediate, and we direct our
posture only, and not at all the act of our worship toward it. Hence he infers
that the like respect may be used to our Table or Altar, which the Jews used
to the Arc or Temple, because ours answer to theirs, being according to
antiquity, solium, Christi, and oculus Ecclesiae. So we see his maine ground
is that a reverentiall posture being due to any sacred place where Gods
presence is specially manifested, as in the Church, etc. this pois best
directed to that place of the Church which is most sacred, and of most eminent
relation to God; and that place is the Altar, or Table. God is in all places
present, and yet the monuments, and specifications of his presence are not
alike clear and glorious in all places: his presence in heaven is not as it is
in the Jewish Temple, nor in the Jewish Temple as in ours, nor in our Churches
as in common places: Gods presence is sometimes in some places extraordinary,
yet even his very extraordinary pre^ence is not always to be alike honored in
all places, and at all times. Heaven it self is not to be made the object, but
only the circumstance of devotion, and that not of the act, but only of the
posture of our worship; and yet Heaven is indeed the true Throne of God, and
can therefore the lifting up of our hands to God in Heaven, justify the
falling down before an Altar? Had the Doctor first proved that the Table was
solium Christi, and the Chancell oculus Ecclesiae, and that there was the same
adoration now due to the Altar, as was once to the Arc; and that Gods presence
is so now specified in our Churches as it was in Solomon's Temple, or as it is
in Heaven; he had maintained enough for the mere posture of adoration. But
since this maine (...) is still unproved, it will be better worth my while to
pass from hence to Doctor* Lawrence his Sermon upon Exodus 3. 5. where he is
more full, express, and direct in the point, then any other of the Doctors.
There was (says Doctor Lawrence) a holiness acknowledged amongst the Jews in
places, in persons, and in things; and that according to degrees, some holy,
some more holy, some most holy: according to the dispensation of Gods residence
and grace, as that did more or less shine upon them. Not only the Tabernacle,
the Mount, the Temple; but even the staming bush shows this: for at a nearer
distance Moses might not be at all, nor at a farther without unloosing his
shoes. Hence the Doctor endeavors to conclude, that if Gods presence and
grace was the cause of this holiness amongst the Jews; then the same reason
of holiness remains still amongst us Christians, since no man can deny that
God is still as present and gracious amongst Christians, as eve^ he was amongst
the Jews. And in this he does not depart from the same principles which
Doctor Mi^klethwaite took before for granted, and which at first view carry a
very specious color of reason with them. To this therefore I make a fourefold
answer.

First, It is true, God is now as present, and as gracious in his presence as
ever he was amongst the Jews: but he is not so visibly, nor so majestically
present to us as to the Jews. There is some kind of opposition betwixt
Majesty and love; and therefore as the Poet affirms, No^ been convenient, nec
in una sede morantur: To us God descends in more love, to the Jews in more
Majesty, and we hold that a several entertainment is due accordingly. Majesty
requires more external prostration, and fear; love expects more internal
joy, and confidence. Even in these days when we come to the Church of God; we
ought to make our address with all possible humility and zeal: but if God
should in the Church appear in fire, or any fearful similitude to us, as he
did formerly, certainly we ought to clea^e to the dust, and to inwrap our
selves externally in the more confusion; and yet God is not the more truly, or
graciously present, because of that apparition.

Secondly, when God did ocularly appear amongst the Jews, he did not at all
times, and in all places, and of all men require the same adoration: so that we
may suppose that the manner of adoration given, was not merely because God did
appear; but brcause God would have his apparition so entertained. Moses here
did worship, but God commanded the manner of his worship; and in many other
interviewes in Scripture, wherein God did grace both Patriarchs and Prophets,
we do not read of any consecration of place, or any such distinct adoration,
as this of Moses, either commanded by God or performed by man. Certainly
Elijah, when God passed by him, and gave him the beatificall sight of his
back-parts fell prostrate upon the ground, to humble, and debase himself
before that gracious presence: but that he performed any homage, or grateful
service to the place it self, we do not read. Besides, in this case of the
blazing bush, there was a command, and that but temporal; and we do not read
that any holiness did remain in the bush after the command. So also the
holiness of the Mount, of the Tabernacle, of the Temple, as it was created by
the command of God, so that command had its limits of time, by which we may
observe in my opinion, that the honor was rather political then physical (as
I may so say) and without special command had not bin due in such a manner or
degree. But (says D. Lawrence) after an apparition in Luz, Jacob anointed a
Pillar, and built an Altar and changed the name of the place from Luz to
Bethel. Jacob did so, and did religiously in doing so; but yet if we suppose
Jacob had no especial command to do so, it is not consequent that Jacob had
finned if he had not done so. Besides, Jacob did erect those Monuments of
honor, not only in celebration of that ground whereon he was reposed, when he
beheld the Angels ascending, and descending: but also of that radiant gate of
Heaven which opened it self to him to inebriate his soul with such celestial
beautiful spectacles. And lastly, Jacob did choose that place whereon to
worship God, but this does not imply that Jacob did perform any reverence at
all, or honor to the place it self; and so if he had done the like in another
place, upon another occasion, he had done well.

Thirdly, the Jewish honor and reverence in regard of the manner of it was
chiefly negative, and except in cases of divine worship, and civil worship,
we read of no other. The Arc was so holy that it might not be approacht, or
touched but with such and such conditions: so the bush which Gods presence
inflamed, it was too holy for too near access, a^^ the ground about it too
precious to be trod upon with unclean shoes: but who ever read of any bowing,
or kneeling, or positive adoration attributed to the Arc, or bush, or Temple,
or any other thing under the Jewish discipline? Doctor Lawrence indeed does
produce a third kind of worship betwixt divine and civil, which he calls
reverentiall, or religious: but he does not fully prove what kind of conditions
it had, whether it was positive, or negative, internal, or external, or how
far it did extend, or how far it was due to (...) relative instruments for
Gods sake; wherefore, if the Doctor means this negative kind of worship which
consists in distance and forbearance for reverentiall, it is most evident that
this kind of worship was never in use since Christ's time, as to the rigor of
it, nor cannot be now introduced without great absurdity, and superstition.

Fourthly, the honor and worship of God i^ not to be weighed in humane
balances, and ^s not greater or less according to that proportion, which we
call Arithmetical, or Geometrical. Moses being in the bosom of God, far above
the sight of the people, is not to be supposed to honor or worship God less
by his familiarity, then the meanest of the peopl which lay grovelling and
trembling at the feet of God, and durst not approach the very outmost, and
lowest borders of the mountain. Some resemblance we have of this in Princes
Courts, for it is not presumption in some favorites to be covered in the Kings
presence, or to approach the bedchamber, though it be almost capital in
others; and yet where Princes are so familiarly honored, they may be sincerely
honored without all sauciness; and such familiarity may stand as compatible
with internal humility, as the most debafing subjection in (...) men. So if
God do admit Moses into familiarity, into such familiarity as abates of
external prostration, and distance, and fear; yet it is not consequent, that
Moses is hereby transported beyond the limits of internal awe, and zeal, and
humiliation. And if it was so amongst the Jews themselves in those rigorous
times, shall it not be so now amongst Christians, when Christ's iron Scepter is
turned to a golden sheep-book in his hand? In the Jewish worship there was
fear, but not without joy, in the Christian worship there is joy, but not
without some fear: for as fear was more predominant in them, so joy is in us.
Why is our Saviors reign over us now called in the Scripture, the Kingdom of
Heaven? Certainly, in comparison of that discipline which the Jews lived
under, for in comparison of the Jewish, which is more earthly, our worship now
is like that of the triumphant Saints in Heaven, where joy is predominant, and
not fear; wherefore it is not rightly objected by Doctor Lawrence, when he
expostulates thus. Shall God loose part of his honor from us, by sending his
Son to us? must there be less ^^linesse in the Church where Christ is in
truth sacrificed by himself, then where he was sacrificed in a type or shadow
by Aaron in the Temple? I answer, no: God loses no honor, the Church loses no
holiness, although the rigorous worship of the Jews which consisted in
distance and terror, and forbearance, be mitigated by the mild, sweet, and
peaceful reign of our Savior over us, we worship with more joy and confidence
then Moses did, Moses then the Jews, the Saints in Heaven then us; yet neither
Moses, nor we, nor the glorified Saints diminish, but add rather to the glory
of God, and if any men now think that the most servile worship is not
honorable to God, even when they are most overwhelmed with fear, and lie
lowest upon the dust, the Saints in Heaven may upbraidingly say unto them, or
rather triumphantly sing: Rent your hearts, and not your garments, Curvae in
terras animae, at ^^lesti^inanes. But will D. Lawrence say, is not this the
doctrine of the seditious Corahs of this age? does not this doctrine make all
persons alike holy, and all places, and so confound all order in Religion? Our
Savior tells us in the Gospel, that the Temple is holier then the gold, and the
Altar then the gift; and by expulsing those exchangers and hucksters beyond the
utmost borders of the Sanctuary, both after his Baptism, and before his
Passion, when those legal Sacrifices were before ejected thence, where the
Christian Church was best represented, their lasting devotion being performed
here, their expiring types within, shows that this distinction should last.
The Doctors first proof was, So it was amongst the Jews, therefore so it
ought to be now: in this place the Doctor proceeds to show further, that by our
Saviors own doctrine and precedent the Jewish distinction of holiness in the
Church ought still to remain. To the Jewish platform of Worship, it was in
part answered before; that our Savior had made an alteration thereof, inducing
in its stead a more ingenuous confident manner of worship: but now this of the
Doctors seems to cross that opinion. By this argument the Doctor would seem
to prove that our Savior was so far from violating the Jewish distinctions,
that he did zealously preserve them and vindicate them from the violations of
other men; and that also after the ejection of legal Sacrifices. I answer, It
is confessed that our Savior did purge the Temple from the profanation of those
which bought and sold therein, as in a common place: but herein many things are
considerable, which the Doctor passes over with silence.

First, these buyers, and sellers, did not only exercise a common trade in
that sanctified place, but it should seem their trading was full of fraud, and
unjustice: for our Savior says plainly that they made the house of prayer a
very den of thieves.

Secondly, it is not manifest whether legal Sacrifices were now de jure
ejected or no, and so whether this profanation be to be considered as a
trespass committed against the law of Moses, or as a violation of a Christian
Oratory. Baptism was now in force by John's institution, but Circumcision was
not disanulled by any act of our Savior, nor disused by his Apostles, for we
find the contrary even after Christ's Ascension. Besides, we find not that our
Savior, till his passion, did repeat, or oppose any Mosaicall rites
whatsoever, but we find apparently, that he did observe strictly many of
them. He observed the Sabbath, he did eat the Passover, he did refrain the
lists of the inner courts, etc. and till his expiration he did not tear the
veil of the Oracle in sunder: so that we see no reason why the Temple till
then might not remain wholly Jewish.

Thirdly, consider this act of profanation either way, and it is no wonder
that our Savior should reform it: for even in Christian Oratories at this day
no such thing ought to be endured. He which denies any external positive
adoration or genuflexion due to the Church it self, or any division of it, or
utensill in it, does not deny internal, and such negative reverence as this,
viz. that it should be free, and preserved inviolable from common, servile
exercises, and offices, and much more from impious abuses. This unjust
aspersion the Doctors every where labor to cast upon us, but as they want
proof to confirm it, so I hope they will want auditors to believe it. But if
we suppose this as a hrist an abuse, the Temple being now de jure Christian,
why did not our Savior coming with such unresistible authority purge the
inner court, and Oracle also from Jewish ceremonious services, and destinate
them to prayer, and preaching, as well as the outer court? Why did he not enter
and draw the veil, and dissolve that partition as after he did? If the Jewish
devotions had been now fully consummated, who had been more fit to enter into
the Holiest, then He and his Disciples? or what Incense could have been more
sacred in that place then his prayers? Certainly if his time had been come,
he might have as well expelled the Priests and Levites usurping against him, as
he did the chapmen of Doves and Oxen: and certainly he did not want boldness,
for we know with what freedom he spoke at other times to the greatest of
them. So then this is a very weak argument to prove that our Savior did still
preserve in force that terrible kind of holiness in the Church of God, which
makes some parts thereof inaccessible to Laymen, and others to Priests
according to the Jewish pattern. But on the contrary what is more apparent
then this truth, that our Savior has rent in sunder that veil of partition,
which these Doctors would feign hang up again, that they might usurp a
greater dignity to themselves, and their own Order, then the Gospel of Christ
does allow them? As to the approaching of the throne of grace, and that with
boldness, we say we are all royal Priests now, and we are not to disclaim
that prerogative, because the Doctor seems to jeere at it. It is true that the
Nation of the Jews was also styled a Priestly Kingdom to the Lord, and it was
so in comparison of all other Nations which then lived: but whereas it is said
now that we are a royal Priesthood, it is said in comparison of the Jews
themselves. Aaron might once a year approach the Oracle, but with fear and
trembling, presenting Incense in one hand and blood in the other: but we may
now approach that Throne which is more honorable then the Oracle, and that
with boldness, and at all times whatsoever. Nevertheless, I do not say that
the reign of our Sovereign does take away the holiness of persons, or
places, or things, but it changes that holiness which was in them, and makes
the manner thereof different. That holiness which was then in the High Priest,
is now dispersed into all the people of God, for if we are all Pri^^^ as Aaron
was, certainly we are all Priests of a higher order then Aarons was. Therefore
the sin of Corah cannot justly be charged upon us under the Gospel (as the
Doctor would have it) if we claim access into the Holiest, for Aarons order
is now dissolved, and so are the conditions of Aarons order. Neither ^et the
Doctor suppose that I make no difference now betwixt the person of a Priest,
and of a Layman as to all purposes: for all equality does not overthrow all
order and decency. Vzziah had a person as sacred as the Priest, yet Vzzia^
might not officiate as the Priest did: Vzziah had his offices distinct, and so
had the Priest; and these offices might not be confounded ^ontrary to decency,
although the sanctity of persons might be communicable without disorder. So now
it were disorder and the confusion of Corah for a secular man to usurp the
function of a Minister, but it is not the same, to challenge an equal
prerogative in the spiritual empire of our Savior. In the like manner we say
of places, the sanctity of them is altered, not destroyed: we say, God is now
more extensively, and universally present by his grace then he was amongst the
Jews. In Judea (as to his terrestrial habitation) he did confine himself
within the walls of one Temple, but now that of Malachy is verified, where the
Lord ^aith, from the rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same, my
name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place I^cense shall be
offered unto my name, and a pure offering. Besides, as God now inhabits amongst
us more universally, so also more amiably: or else no Laymen, nor Priests, but
with such and such restraints might make any address at all into the Church or
C^^^cell; which the Papists themselves do not maintain. To the Jews God was
more dreadful, as to servants; to us he is more mild, as to sons. The Law
was delivered with terror, and so kept, for it was made mortal to approach
either the Moune where the Law was delivered, or to touch the Arc where it was
kept: But when our Savior came into the world to publish his Gospel, he took
not on the habit of a Lord, but of a servant; and as his entrance, so his life
and death was, and as his sovereignty was acquired, so it seems to be
maintained ever since. In the like manner we say also, that there is a change
of things. Many external rites, and customs of reverence, which consisted in
the rigorous observations of times, and in the lotions of their bodies, and
purity of garments, and cleanness of diet, are vanished; and yet some equity
of these still remains according to the rules of order, and decency, but no
further. Though these rites were honorable to God, and conducing to decency,
and the pomp of Religion; yet the strictness thereof is now relinquished
according to the Heb. 3. 10. for there they are called carnal ordinances
imposed on the Jews only, until the time of reformation. Wherefore let the
Doctor con^ider, if all the Jewish rites which were requisite to the external
honor of Religion, be not as properly vindicated, and maintained by these
arguments as the distinct sanctity of places in the Church: and yet these no
Papist will defend. Nevertheless I do not speak against all pomp in
Religion, I only say that simplicity seems more suitable with these times of
Christianity wherein we worship such a Savior as we do. And on the other
side, it is most apparent that our pomp adds nothing to God: for Aaron in all
his beauty, Solomon in all his Majesty, did retribute no more honor to God,
then Abraham, or Isaac in their naked simplicity. But it has been rather
observed, that when the Church had wooden Chalices, it had golden Priests, but
God send us golden Priests and golden Chalices both. After our Saviors death,
Saint Stephen, and Saint Paul were accused amongst the Jews for speaking
against these Mosaicall distinctions in the Temple, and here Doctor Lawrence
says if the accusation were true, it was just. I will ask the Doctor this
question: Was the Temple at that time de jure Jewish, or Christian? was Moses
or Christ to take place in it? if he say Christ, as he must, then why should he
think Saint Stephen, and Saint Paul more unworthy to enter into the most
honorable parts of the Temple, then any of the Jewish priests? It ought not to
be presumed that these blessed followers of Christ did generally vilify the
honor of Gods house: but their crime was, that they did preach against the
Mosaicall strictness of the limits and divisions of the Temple, showing that
all places therein were approachable by the ador^^s of Christ. There can be no
other charge probable, and if the Doctor say that in this they were justly
accused, he is as wrongful a judge over them, as any of the Jews whatsoever
could be.

Now we come to Fathers, and Antiquity. The Primitive Christians (says Doctor
Lawrence) distinguished their Oratories into an ^^rium, Sanctum, and Sanctum
Sanctorum, and accordingly put more holiness in one then in the other, having
an Altar here answerable to an Arc there, and in sign of perpetuity poynted
their Churches East, looking toward the Temple. In this conceit Doctor
La^rence goes not alone; only the other Doctors, because the changing of the
Scene from the Sanctum, to the Sanctum Sanctorum, from the Altar to the Arc,
upon the sudden would be too remarkable, are more sparing of language. But what
an argument is this? Because the Primitive Christians did build their Churches
with some kinds of divisions resembling the Jewish Temple, and because they did
esteem one place more holy then another, therefore they did esteem the very
Jewish holiness, and distinctions in all things equally in force. It should
seem the Altar was advanced to an higher dignity, and removed out of the
Sanctum, to possess the place of the Arc, and the Mercy seat, because this
alteration suits with the Doctors purpose* but in all other things the Jewish
honor and holiness remains unchanged in our Churches. The building of our
Churches East also looking toward the Jewish Temple, shows the perpetuity of
holiness, and although this be but a particular reason not to be extended to
any Churches, but such as stand West from Judaea; yet for the Doctors benefit
it must be taken for universal. Neither must we make any use of this Doctors
argument to any other purpose, although it be as apply able to the Heathen
Temples, as to ours, or the Jewish, for they had the same divisions also,
whereof some were more holy and unaccessible then others. But it is apparent
that the Jewish sanctity in its strictness cannot be attributed to our Quire
by our Doctors own Tenet, for he himself grants it accessible to Priests, and
all within Orders: and we on the other side in an equitable sense allow it more
reverence then other parts of the Church, therefore what kind of honor is it
which the Doctor challenges both different from the Jewish, and ours also? If
the Primitive Church stood wholly to the Jewish pattern, then they may be
produced against the Doctor, as well as against us, if not, how are they
produced against us in this point more then against the Doctor himself? That
antiquity did observe a difference between common and consecrated ground, and
also between one consecrated place and another, and in the fashion of their
buildings hold some compliance with Jews and Gentiles both, so far as the
rules of decency, and charity did require, certainly it was piously, and
prudently done. That which we say is only this.

First, we do not perceive that antiquity did strictly adhere to the Jewish
discipline.

Secondly, if antiquity in honoring of sacred places were more rigorous then
we are now, we do imagine that in part it was erroneous, and in part that it
had some reasons unknown to us at this time, and so vanished now, that they
ought not to prescribe to us. All rude profanation of holy ground we do
dislike as antiquity did, because it is opposite to the rules of decency and
order, and if any man teach that the house of God is contemptible, or that
there ought to be a community of places, or persons we wish the Anathema of
Gangra to seize upon him. Howsoever we dare not in all things follow antiquity.
If antiquity did think the Church too holy for justice to approach, when
malefactors sought shelter there from the due execution of law, we dare not
follow antiquity therein; if antiquity did think the Quire so holy that the
person of an anointed Emperor might have no place therein, we dare not in this
follow antiquity: if antiquity did think the Chancell ground too holy for any
Lay-mans bones to repose in, or the Churchyard too unholy for a Priests
interment, we dare not justify this usage: if antiquity did think fit to
translate the bones Peter, Paul, Augustine, Aidan, etc. from one consecrated
place to another for more holiness sake, as if it were profitable to the ashes
of the Saints so to be translated, we dare not applaud this invention: if
antiquity did place such holiness in the Altar, as if it had medicinal force
in it to cure bodily diseases, and for that reason did fall down before it, as
to a common Physician, we cannot so far abuse our belief: if antiquity did
exclude diverse stations of Christians from diverse partitions and limits in the
body of the Church, we dare not now in these days practice this observation.
We do not hold the judgment of antiquity to be in all things infallible,
neither in these circumstances dare we strictly addict our selves to their
imitation: the Papists themselves being scarce devoted to all these
observations at this day. But if we approve antiquity in all these things, yet
how does it appear that it did sanctify the Altar in stead of the Arc, and
Mercie-seate, or the Chancell in the same manner as the Jewish Oracle was? and
if it did, how could our Priests prove hence such worship as they now challenge
due to the Altar? If we consider the Arc and the Oracle, and compare them with
our Table, and Quire, we shall find that the parallel of honor cannot hold
for many reasons; for, (...)

First, Those times were not as ours are, the sweet pacification of Christ had
not then made God so indulgent to mankind, as now he is, so that he would be
glorified then with more terror than now he is. God in those days did not
admit of so much familiarity in his Servants, as now he does, yet to show that
some familiarity might be without sauciness (which the Doctor seems
unwillingly to grant) to some men he offered himself in the mild semblance of
a familiar friend, even in those times. This, the examples of Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Moses, etc. sufficiently verify. Was Moses saucy, or Joshua, etc. when
he ascended up into the Mount within the cloud, and brightness of God? or was
the Congregation more reverent, and obsequious when they durst not so much as
lift up their eye after Moses, because of the terror of God? certainly no: for
God was more sanctified by the bold address of Moses, then by the awful
distance of the people, and therefore, whilst their faces were black with
fear, his face was arrayed in divine splendour, and Majesty. Neither was it the
holiness of Moses his person, but the gracious indulgence of God, that made
this difference betwixt him and the people: And so we say now of these days,
mutatis, mutandis.

Secondly, The Table is of it self much different from the Arc, and Mercy
seat. The Arc was terrible, by reason of the Law of God, which was therein
enclosed, that mortal Law, from whose condemnation no man living could escape
of himself: But the Table presents us with the very marrow of the Gospel,
wherein is life, and health, and forgiveness of sins. Also, the Arc was
Canopyed with the Mercy seat, that dreadful Thro^^ of God, where God did
keep a strange residence, vocally ruling his people, and administering justice
after a terrible manner: But the Table is an ^^^fill, wherein God is not so
presentiall at all times, nor at any time merely by the means of that it
self, but by the means of the Sacrament at some times supported by it. Also,
the Sanctum Sanctorum it self was such a place, as was wonderfully terrible by
reason of Gods residence in it, after the loss of the Arc, and the Mercy
seat: And so^e do not repute our Chancells; whose chiefest honor is borrowed
from the holy table: and for these reasons we know the Arc was not to be
touched, even by a Priest, and that upon a godly consideration, but upon such
penalty as Vzzah endured, and with this condition our Table cannot ^uite, and
we know that the Oracle also was not to be approached but once a year, and
that by the High Priest only, and with this condition also our Quires cannot
agree, for if these conditions were admitted, the Table might not be touched,
or remooved, or altered for any reason whatsoever, or any other place designed
for the administration of the Communion: or any other time appointed but once
every year.

Lastly, Neither the Gospel written, nor the pr^ctise of antiquity do inform
us, that ever the Altar and Chancell were so honored by Christians, as the
Arc, and Oracle were by the Jews, we see no probability that ever the Table
was accounted any thing but a holy utensill, till Doctor Helyn dis^^yned ned
that (...), for why should the chalice and patin be utensils, and not the
Table, they being more necrely employed about the body and blood of our
Savior, then the Table? if the Table be not as mere an instrument, and
utensill as the Chalice is, then the Doctor must derive its honor from some
other thing than the Sacrament, and design it for some higher use proper to it
self, as the Arc and Merci-seate was: but this the Doctor cannot do, and if
he should attempt it, even so he would cross his own assertions. The Arc
with the Mercy-seat could not properly be said an utensill in the Jewish
service, because they were ordained by God for no humane office, but rather for
a receptacle of the divinity, as a place where God would set the soles of his
feet. But the Table is therefore placed in the Church, that it may be employed
in the Communion, and if the Communion had not been instituted, no such thing
had been necessary at all. Neither is it of any absolute necessity in the
Communion, for in case of persecution, it is held, that for want of a Table,
we may celebrate the Eucharist upon the ground it self. Besides, among the
Jews the Altar, and the Altar instruments were of the same metal, in the same
manner beautified, and with the same solemnity consecrated, and therefore why
our chalice and patin should not much rather be of the same honor and sanctity
as the Table, I cannot discern. For it is most certain that our Table is more
properly a relative instrument in our Sacrament, from whence it receives all
its honor, then the Jewish Altar was, which lent honor to Mosaical Sacrifices,
rather than borrow' d any.

But (says Doctor Lawrence) we find a kind of Worship in Cyrill, a direct
worship in Eusebius, Emissenus, Theodoret, Augustine, and Chrysostom. We have
(...) in Ignatius, and adgeniculation in Tertullian, etc. I answer,

First, We our selves do grant a reverentiall honor due to all holy relative
instruments for Go^^ sake, and therefore from all those Fathers which speak
generally, and mean no other but (...), as Ignatius does, we do not at all
dissent.

Secondly, Where particular adgeniculation is required, or bodily prostration,
so it be in the time of receiving, and tendered for the Sacraments sake, and
not to the very Table, we do practice, and allow it. And so we agree with
Saint Chrysostom that we ought to approach the Table, (...), etc. and cum prius
adoraverimus with, Saint Austine.

Thirdly, At any time, as well when the Sacrament is not upon the Table, as
when it is, we do not always censure of such a decent bowing before the
Table, or toward the Table, as the Jews did perform toward the Mount, or
Tabernacle, so the Table it self be not the object, or held the only occasion
of our worship.

Fourthly, we say the Table may be called holy, venerable, and divine in a
qualified sense, by reason of its relation, as the garments of Aaron, and the
utensils of the Temple were, but this infers no duty of Worship.

Fifthly, We say that antiquity might err, by way of superstition toward the
Table, and this we believe the rather, because in some places they did ascribe
inherent, physical virtue to it, and at some times such rigor of holiness,
that Princes, and Emperors might not be permitted to abide in the same
division of the Church where it stood: if Tertullian say that bodily worship is
due to the Altar, yet i^ he prove it not out of Scripture, we answer out of
Saine Augustine: Non credimus, quod non legimus.

Sixthly, it is not proved by any one humane authority or more, that Altar
worship was in use in all parts of Christendom at one time, or in any one part
at all times: much less is any thing brought out of Scripture to this purpose.

Seventhly, In the same manner, and by the same authority we find Presbyteris
advolvi due, as well as aris adgeniculari, and in antiquity also, it was part
of penance Presbyteris, and aris advolvi. And we know moreover, that not only
excessive honors, but also all the revenues and treasure of Churchmen, was
first raised and advanced by this Art. It is not to be wondered therefore, if
ambitious and covetous Prelates did so much magnify, and extol that, which
did so much magnify and extol them. Well may the Pope still in all
consecrations hallow the Altar with most pomp, and ceremony, well may he
anoint that, which was the first cause of anointing him: well may he sacrifice
to that net, which has made all Princes sacrifice to him: well may he claim
divinity, and sanctity for that, which has promoted him to fit in the Temple of
God, as God, nay above all that is called God. When the horns of Antichrist
first began to shoot forth, when the man of sin, and the son of perdition
first began to be revealed, it had been very unadvisedly ordered, if Psalms
of degrees had not been sung at the ascending of those stairs, whereby the
Priest did mount to as much, or more exaltation himself as he did procure to
the holy Altar. But this is a tender point, and if I speak any thing in
disparagement of antiquity, especially the great Bishops of old times; I shall
be fore-judged as a man ill-affected to Truth, or Religion, and all which I
shall say will be soon rejected, and easily refuted.

Therefore, to avoid unjust imputations, I will confine my self to the mere
point in question, and digress no further then the Doctors arguments (...) me,
and therein also my chief endeavor shall be to do reason to Princes, not to
detract at all from Priests. Two things I shall observe.

First, that this tenet of the Altar-doctrine, and Altar-worship does naturally
issue forth conclusions that are very dangerous, and prejudicial to Princes.

Secondly, that the Doctors have too far co^^tenanced, and maintained the
same in their late Treatises concerning the Altar, contrary to th^se many
pretenses of zeal and devotion, which they every where make to the name of
royalty. By the Doctors grounds, mere relation to sacred things is of vigor,
and honor sufficient to transfer revere^ce and dignity upon the instruments
relatively used, for says Doctor Lawrence, God is not worshipped, if relative
instruments be not worshipped for his sake. This being granted, it follows,
that most honor is to be transferred upon that instrument, which is most nobly
relative, and so in the Sacrament the Priest being (...), and the Table or
patin, being but insensible utensils, the Priest is to be accounted more holy,
and honorable, then either the Table, or patin. If so, then what becomes of
Princes? for they are as much inferior to the Altars in sanctity, as Altars
are to Priests. They are not holy enough to approach the rail of the Altar, or
to stay in the Chancell, therefore, how shall they demean themselves toward
Priests, who are far more honorable, and venerable in their offices, then
the Altars are in their employments?

Besides, if the Altar be honorable for the Sacraments sake, and the Sacrament
only or chiefly, as it is a Sacrifice, then how honorable is he that makes
this a sacrifice, for the Sacrament is not a sacrifice by virtue of our hoc
edite, but only by virtue of the Priests, hoc facite, so says Doctor Heylin
very plainly. How many Kings has this doctrine formerly dethroned? what wars
and calamities has it imbrued the whole world withal? when it first brought
Christians down to the Clergies feet, how many heresies did it broach?
withal, how many myriads of Souls did it at the same instant sink into the
Lake of Hell?

But will the Doctors say, if Popish Priests have made ill use of this
doctrine, what is that to us, who honor and adore sovereignty above all other
men? I wish the Doctors were as they pretend to be, I wish they were not
(...), as they tax their opposites unjustly: I wish they did no more profit by
this doctrine then their adversaries do, or else I wish they did not more
advance this doctrine, then those which they call the seditious Corahs of the
time. But if the Doctors are so well wishing to temporal rulers, how is it
that they all allege the example of Ambrose, and Theodosius so often without
any kind of detestation, or dislike, nay seeming rather to justify, and
applaud it? and how is it, that they speak so pleasingly of Numerianus?
Numerianus son to Carus the Emperor coming into the Church at Antioch, and
desiring to behold their mysteries quasi per transennam, peeping it is likely
through the rayles or lattice doors of the Quire, he was presently rebuked by
Babylas for that attempt: but this heinous profanation was committed but by
the son of an Emperor, and so Babylas might be the more bold in his rebuke,
therefore let us rather see how Theodosius was used at Millaine. Theodosius a
penitent Emperor having been long prohibited, the Church and at last
^^^ceived again, and permitted to communicate, yet he was thought unworthy
after his offering made (...) have any abode granted him within the bounds of
the Quire. It was not sufficient that he was an ^^perour, and a Christian
Emperor, and a (...) Christian Emperor, it was not sufficient that i^
Constantinople, and his Eastern dominions his (...) was within the Quire: but
at the proud check of a Bishop of Millaine sent by one of the Deacons, he must
depart that sacred place. This story the Doctors do all severally produce
either once, or (...) if it were not dishonorable to all Princes to have it
mentioned at all, or rather impious or ung^^tious in all Priests to suffer the
mention thereof (...) pass uncensured from their lips. Here is a clear
authority cited again and again with the weight of Saint Ambrose his name to
abet it, that by the rules of approved antiquity, the persons of Princes were
not worthy to approach that part of the Church where the Altar was placed, and
where the Priest^, and Deacons did officiate. And if Saint Ambrose would so
extrude an anointed Emperor at Mill^ine, what would the Pope himself have
done at Rome? if such a pious Bishop would be so insolent and distoyall, what
would the Bishop of all Bishops have done? The Doctors do not openly declare
themselves, in favor of this act of Saint Ambrose, because I think it needs
not, for their opinion in sufficiently evident of itself, and if they did not
discover their consent by silence, yet their scope in this whole business would
make it manifest. For by what Law did Saint Ambrose confine the Emperor to the
body of the Church? it was not by the Law of God, nor of the Emperor, for it
should seem the Emperor had a contrary Law in his Eastern dominions: it must
needs be by this Altar Law, and this only. If the Levites table be so much
dignified and hallowed merely by bearing the body of our Savior, then
certainly the Priest which con^ecrates the same, and is more nobly and
intelligently active in the celebration of the Sacrament, must needs acquire
much more dignity and holiness: and if so, then Priests must needs be more
excellent then Princes, then whom the table is more excellent. This must needs
be that which did convince Theodosius, and this if it be yielded to, will
still convince, and confound, and degrade all Christian Princes whatsoever: for
this is one of the most powerful intoxications that the Inchantresse of Rome
mingles for the princes of the earth. The foundations of the Popish Hierarchy
are not yet quite razed in many men's minds. The Scripture is clear, that as
Priests are dedicated to God, and admitted to a nearenesse in holy affairs, to
serve and officiate at Gods A^tar, and do thereby gain a sanctity above mere
Laymen: so also that Princes are sacred in a higher degree, in that they are
anointed by God to feed, govern, and protect both Priests and Laymen, and to
represent God himself in his power and majesty, and to have nearest access in
things of the highest, and holiest nature. Aar^n though the first and greatest
of his order, receives his solemn consecration from the hands of him which
weilds the scepter, and when the Law is to be delivered, the scepter-bearer is
to be admitted into the presence of God, and higher to be promoted in the
dreadful majesticall cloud, then any of the house of Levi; nay his next
subordinate attendant obtaines a higher station in the smoking Mountain, then
any of the Priests. Also when the Tabernacle, and the Arc, is to be framed,
and when the Temple is to be erected, the modells are prescribed and committed
to the charge of the Prince, and when all is finished, the Princes blessing and
prayer presents the same as dedicated, and separated to Gods service. And in
all the offices of Religion, the Priests serve in the outward action, but the
Lawgiver superintends over the Priests in that service, and when any great
difficulty requires, God is to be consulted and approached at the command of
the supreme Ruler: so that the good or ill state of Religion depends chiefly
upon the good or ill government of Gods immediate Lieutenant. And thus Aaron
is but as a mouth to Moses in some things, but Moses is as a God to Aaron in
all things, and though Moses may not officiate at the Altar merely out of
contempt to Aaron and his function, or out of enmity to all order and relation,
yet he may move uncontrolled in his own superior first moving sphere. It is a
poor shift of our Doctors to pretend that Moses was within sacerdotall orders,
and to cite the 99. Psalm, where it is said, Moses and Aaron among the
Priests; for Moses had not Ecclesiastical power, because he was of
Ecclesiastical Order, but he may therefore ^ee reckoned amongst men of
Ecclesiastical Order, because he had more then Ecclesiastical power. What
Moses had in the government of the Church over Churchmen themselves, the same
David had, and Solomon had, and all the successors of David, and Solomon ought
to have. Till the world was inslaved to Churchmen, under the pretense of
Church policy, the care of Temporal and Spiritual affairs was not divided;
neither was the one which is the basest, given to the Magistrate, and the most
excellent attributed to the Priest, as if the Prince was the body, and the
Priest the Soul of the State. Miserable were we (says Doctor Pockington; he
means in point of Religion) if my Lord of Canterbury could not derive his
lineal succession from Saint Peter: but I think if this be all our stay, we
are now most miserable, for our Religion is the same as theirs is in Geneva,
and theirs in Scotland, and theirs in the Netherlands, and in the North parts
of Germany, where no Bishops are, and if they are miserable, we cannot be
happy. Had we been Heretics, if in the reformation none of the Romish Clergy
had had hand in our reformation, if Cranmer, Latimer, Ridly, Hooper, etc. had
not turned Protestants, had we been utterly deprived of the true and effectual
power of ordination and imposition of hands? Could not God by the sacred hands
of Edward the sixth, have derived his grace unto the Protestant Clergy, unless
some from the Romish party had come over to do those offices of consecration?
Was the hand of Moses, Joshuah, etc. more gracious and effectual in the
offices of ordination under the Law, then a Protestant Princes is under the
Gospel? What is the reason of it, that the Gospel should be introduced to
the detriment and prejudice of temporal authority? Or else shall we think,
that Aaron was as the Soul in Spiritual rule whilst the Jewish Law was in
force, and that Moses had but a corporeal, subordinate, less excellent power
under him? But I will follow this chase no further now, because the times are
lately changed, and I believe the Doctors will easily yield to retreat of
their own accord. Praesbyteris and Aris advolvi, was the old penance as well
for Princes, as people, now we will be content if they will leave out
Presbyteris, and show devotion Aris only. My Lord of Canterbury, and Doctor
Pocklington think it a good argument for Alta^worship, that 300. years ago
the Founders of the Garter did perform their Ceremonies with adoration before
the Altar, and that the successors of that Order have continued the same
adoration ever since. This is scarce worth an answer, for the times when this
custom began, were blind and superstitious, and the mere practice of a few
Noble men was never yet thought a Canon in matters of Ecclesiastical
Discipline. But I come now from precedents, to give answer to our Doctors
Reasons. A difference of places (says Lawrence) requires a difference of
respect, that honor may be suitable to merit, as justice requires. I answer,
we dispute not against degrees of internal reverence, whereby we hold
Churches more honorable then Barnes, etc. our exceptions are against the
Jewish rigor of bodily adoration, or such external expressions of worship, as
favor of too much terror, and consternation: but the Doctor further presses
thus. It is but as justice requires, that that place should have the
preeminence from which virtue is derived to the rest, for the word is not
operative, but by the merit of that sacrifice, nor the streams of regeneration
pure, unless first bathed in his blood. I might deny that any one place in the
Church deriveth virtue to an other, but I will not stand upon ^avills, for the
Doctors meaning is no more then this, that the word is not operative, but by
the merit of that sacrifice, etc. therefore that place, where the word is
Preached is not so honorable, as that where Christ is sacrificed. To make
comparisons of honor betwixt the Ordinances of God is not so safe, and
commendable, but grant the Sacrament to be more operative, then the word, (for
so the Doctor should have argued) is not the word therefore operative at all,
but by the Sacrament? How does this conclude? may not Baptism, and the
Preaching make us partakers of Christ's blood, and merits, except we actually
receive the Eucharist? Is the virtue of Christ's blood only annexed to the
Sacrament? and if so, is the virtue of the Sacrament affixed to the Altar
place? and if so, must that place be infallibly in the upper end of the
Chancell? does the Church of England so oblige it self to that place in all
cases, that it will not have the Communion celebrated in any other part of the
Church? and if so, is all the honor of the Sacrament in the consecration, and
nothing in the distribution? is not the place where the people receive, of some
sanctity, as well as that place where the Priest blesses it? And grant all, yet
what do all these Paradoxes conclude for any particular kind of worship? or
what we are to worship, whether the Table, or Table-place, or both, or whether
these as relatives only to the Sacrament, for the Sacraments sake, or equally
as the Sacrament it self? But let the Doctor go on: why should any slave be
more vile in the hight of his Lord, then we before God? etc. Nor is this grace
greater then is ascribed by Ecclesiastical writers to the parts which our
Savior conversed in, etc. to his spitle, to his garments, etc. We do
acknowledge a greater duty and distance, and humility to be used toward God,
then any slave can render to his Lord; we de^y no kind of honor to God,
internal, or external, only we dare not present to him but according to his
own command. But for relative instruments which we are to hold sacred for Gods
sake, such as the ground whereon our Savior trod, or his Garment, or his
spitle, etc. or the Altar, we are uncertain how to reverence them according
to our Doctors opinion. The Jewish manner of distance according to strictness,
is not to be maintained by the Doctor himself, and we know no other kind of
worship used by the Jews; neither when the Arc was solemnly moved, or
removed, do we read of any other reverence applied. And therefore to what
purpose the Doctor does urge the Jewish example against us, we do not see:
and if he will moderate his honor according to the equitable tenor of Christ's
Gospel, we shall willingly be informed by him. In two things the Doctor
leaves us unsatisfied, and very uncertain of his meaning: first he does not
clearly and constantly nominate any distinct form of reverence, which he would
have us use; secondly, he does not certainly and fully instruct us in the
grounds, and reasons of that reverence. First he says, adoration in the Law,
which was a very strict time against superstition, was never without
prostration, and to this purpose he cites examples, wherein men did civilly so
fall down before men, and religiously before God: but he gives us no instance
at all wherein any such prostrate manner of worship was given to any third,
middle, holy relative instrument betwixt God and man. We say that bodily
adoration may be given to man, because it is but a mere civil act, and for
civil reasons, and the mind is not subject to be misled thereby into
superstition, because the nature of man whom we worship, and the manner of
adoration wherewith we worship, and the civil reasons for which we worship,
are so perfectly known to us. Also we worship God with bodily worship
prostrating together our Souls before him, acknowledging that the highest
kind of divine worship is not competent for his majesty, and herein also there
is no fear of superstition, because we cannot err in the excess: and
therefore the Doctor cannot either from divine, or civil worship, conclude any
thing for his middle kind of religious honor; because in these relative
instruments we are to divide our Souls and bodies; not ascribing so much as
to God, nor so little as to man: neither have we any precept, or precedent for
this third kind of worship in Scripture, but rather the contrary: Where do we
read in Scripture that the Jews did bodily worship the Arc, or the Altar, or
the Tabernacle, or Temple, or the Footsteps, or Garments, or Spitle, or Sweat
of our Savior, as our Doctor instances? or how can he prove that any Orthodoxe
Doctors in the Primitive times did worship the Gospells, or Cross of our
Savior? Is it sufficient for the Doctor to say, as things have been in
esteem, so religious persons have ever esteemed them? how does this tautologie
confute us? But, (says the Doctor) the constant obeisance of Israel in the
Wilderness was toward the Mount, Tabernacle, Fire, Cloud, Arc, etc. And
Ezekiel says, At the gate they shall worship God: for the gate of the Temple
was over against the Mercy-seate, and so toward the Temple they did worship as
well when they were far distant in other Lands, as near it. And so Saint
Paul says, the converted Gentile falling down shall worship, etc. I answer,
here the Doctor strives to prove religious worship, by divine, as if they were
both the same, and not to be distinguished. Is there not a plain difference
between falling down before the gates, or toward the gates of the Temple,
and to the gates, or to the Temple it self? nay, there is a difference in
falling down before, or toward the house of God in men's minds: and it is
most evident that even to the Jews did not fall down before the house of God,
as the Papists do before their Images. The Papists say, they fall not down
to, but before the Picture, worshipping that which is represented, not the thing
representing; but if so, if they have the same reason to worship God
represented in the Image, as the Jews had really, and graciously presentiall
in the Temple, then why might they not fall down toward their Pictures being
a hundred Leagues distant, as well as holding them in their hands, for so the
Jews did? It was proper in Daniel to set open his casements toward Sion, and
to worship God in that posture, and hereby he made it evident that he did not
worship by reason of any motive arising from the mere building it self, but
merely for the presence of God himself there residing. How fond would it ^ee
if Papists now should do the like to their deities, or if we should do the
like to our Altars, except we did believe God to be as presentiall in them, as
the Jews did in their Mercy-seate? This quite dashes the conceit of all
memorative instruments, for they which worship Pictures, or Altars, as being
memorative only, must needs confess that they worship them otherwise, then as
Daniel did the Mercy-seate, for he being absent was rather memorative of that
for Gods sake which there inhabited, then that was memorative of God to him.
Besides, if we did believe that the glory, and face of God (as the Scripture
says) did as majestically dwell in our Table, as it did between the Jewish
Cherubins, yet the Jewish example will not guide us to the adoration of the
Table only. Solomon in his consecration names, and blesses the whole house, and
prays God to be favorable to all supplicants extending their hands to the
whole house, and so supplicants always did extend their hands to the whole
house. I know one part of the Church is more honorable then another, but the
whole is sufficiently memorative, and so not the Table more then any other
part, and if I must distinctly worship according to the distinct degrees of
holiness, how shall I proportion my several bowings in so many several
places? At my first entrance into the house of God, I fall down and worship
that blessed name of God which sanctifies that place, must I needs ascend by
degrees unto the Table afterward, there to worship in a higher degree?
expecting there a greater blessing, or a perfecter memory of my Savior? I do
not think that the Jewish Levites, and Priests did thus perform so many
distinct worships: much less could the people by that Discipline. But in the
second place, let the Doctor give us some certain knowledge of the grounds,
and reasons of our worship, and then we shall guess at the manner thereof the
better. In this point the Doctor (in my opinion) is very much staggerd, and
gives very uncertain resolutions: Sometimes he says, that we worship not the
Altar, but God toward the Altar: and he that so worships a house for the
owners sake, worships not the house, but the owner. Sometimes, he says, that
we do worship the Altar it self, but as Damascen says, not (...), not
equally with God himself, and his reason why we may do this, is because the
Altar is for God, not an Idol, or against God. Sometimes, he says, that we
adore God in the place without separation of God from the place, as we adore
whole Christ, the whole supposition in gross, the humanity as well as the
divinity, without abstraction of one from the other. Generally, the Doctors
ground is, that we are to worship the Table, as an holy relative instrument,
for we cannot worship God, except we worship relative instruments for his
sake: but herein we are left as uncertain also, as ever, for all holy
instruments, are not holy alike, nor to be reverenced alike, and therefore in
what rank we are to place the Table, or with what height to adore it, is not
described. To all these assertions something briefly must be said; in the
first place therefore, if no worship at all be given to the Altar, but to God
toward the Altar, which is our own acknowledgment, then why is the Altar so
supereminently worshipped, before any other relative instrument whatsoever? At my
entrance at the Church door, I may so worship God, as well as at the Altar: and
so when the Font appears to me after my first entrance, thus I may as lowly,
as heartily adore God, by reason of his gracious presence in his whole house,
or his particular relation to the Font, as at the Altar; and if it be said,
that God is not so highly present in any other part of the Church, or in all,
or in any other relative instrument (which is a hard saying) as in the Table at
all times: yet this does not infirm my inference, for even before the Font
(the same God being present by the same means of consecration) my devotion may
be as intense, and as acceptable, as before the Altar. In the second place if
it be confessed, that the Altar it self is worshipped, though not, as God
himself, and that this is justifiable, because the Altar is no Idol, but a
holy instrument, and not against God, but for God. I answer, first this is more
then the Jews ever did, or then any precept in Scripture can warrant.
Secondly, this is no more then the Papists allege for their Idolatry.
Thirdly, this is contrary to reason, for if God be there extraordinarily
present, what need we honor any thing else but that extraordinary presence
it self, or how can we without indignity? indeed in civil worship when the
King is absent, we do our reverence to his chair, but when the King sits
there in person, what man is so infatuated and void of discretion, as to do
any honor to the chair? and for the absence of God, that cannot be pleaded.
But the Doctor says in the third place, that in this Altar-worship we worship
God and the place together without abstraction, as we do both natures of our
Savior. This answer (in my opinion) of all others is the worst, and I am
persuaded there is scarce any Jesuit that would not be ashamed to say the
like. In our Savior the Godhead dwelt bodily, (...), and even the dead body of
our Savior lying breathless in the grave divided from his humane Soul, was
not separated wholly from the hypostaticall union of the Godhead, and shall
this stupendous union be a resemblance of Gods union with the Table or
Tableplace? I am persuaded that Seraphins did attend the buried carcass of our
Savior, and adore it even resting in the Tomb, and this by reason of its
union with the Godhead: but shall the Doctors imagination create the like
inseparable relation betwixt God, and the Table? God deliver me from such
audacious thoughts. But grant this, and then where is the Doctors religious,
middle worship betwixt civil, and divine? how can he maintain this, and yet
maintain with Damascen too (...). In conclusion then, the Doctors shete
anchor, is the old maxim, that all relative instruments are to be worshipped
for Gods sake, and since a worship (says he) is due ex confesso, then this
worship is most proper. I answer, this rule of relation must needs be a very
uncertain fallible rule as to the manner of our worship, and the degree
thereof: because we can neither distinguish of the relations themselves, as
God values them, neither can we limit, and proportion our respects
accordingly. In the Law, nay before the Law Circumcision was a very venerable
Sacrament and gracious league betwixt God and man, and yet in the act of
Circumcising there were no other Knives used, but such as were common, and so
after accounted and valued. So also the Passover amongst the Jews it was an
ordinance more solemn and reverend then circumcision, and yet in this great
celebrity the Jews used no other then common Tables, and Dishes wherewithal
to eat their Paschall Lamb, the type of Jesus Christ. Moreover, even now
under the Gospel in our baptizations of Infants, our Ministers use consecrated
Water and sometimes common Basins without any scruple, or offense, and yet we
cannot deny, but that there is great honor due to that sacred ordinance, as to
the laver of regeneration it self. Neither do these Doctors that fight so
violently pro aris, seem at all to regard, what honor we ascribe to any other
kind of sacred utensil whatsoever: nay I think if the Patin or chalice should
be unconsecrated wherein the Body and Blood of our Savior is offered, they
would think it little to be regarded. The honor and sanctity of the Lords
day is of late much lessened, as if there were not the same relation in times,
as in places, and I fear that this swelling of Altar-worship in the Church may
grow as fatal to Religion, as the swelling of the Spleen does many times to
the body. But I desire these Doctors to consider that God has expressed
himself to be a jealous God in such cases as these, more then in any other
sins whatsoever; nay in other offenses he proclaymes himself to be long
suffering, and patient; but in the sole fruition of his worship and adoration
he professes himself jealous over us, and apt to take offense against us. Does
he not declare himself to the Israelites, as if he did purposely forbear to
appear to them in any outward apprehensible form, and similitude, that they
might not adore the same? I pray what can be more worthy to be adored in the
whole world, then such a representation? what relative instrument can be so
holy, as the ocular dispensation or sensible displaying of Gods most
inscrutable Essence, in what figure soever it was opened to the eye, or ear?
yet God we see was not delighted to be so worshipped by the means of any such
external instrument: but he did rather avoyde, and refuse such bodily worship,
and did deny gracious apparitions, that they might not remain in the minds of
men as instruments of devotion; and if God did not affect to be adored in any
heavenly resemblance of his own apprehended by any humane sense, (all such
apprehension being utterly unworthy of this infinite Majesty) why should we
imagine that it can be pleasing now to him to be adored in a Stone-Altar, or
wooden Table: but all our Altar-Patr^^s do not make this their ground of
worship, that the Altar is the same now, as the Arc was formerly, or that the
Table is solium Christi, wherein Christ is supposed to sit majestically, and
gloriously: for this will be very hard to be proved: and I think the Papists
are scarce so gross. M Ironsides ground is, not that God does reside in the
Table, as in the Mercy-seate, but that he is there strangely and efficaciously
commemorated: we worship not (says he) the Table, nor any thing set upon the
Table, but Christ, as the Messiah slain; for the Table is only a memorative
instrument, unto which the assistance of grace is never failing, either to
beget in our minds thoughts of Christ's death, or to extract from us a worship
of him, if we be not wanting to our selves. He cites Cajetan, Thomas Aquinas,
and Gerson to prove that the learned of Papists hold no more. So then Doctor
Lawrence is confuted out of the Papists themselves, if he worship the Table for
Gods sake relatively, or together with Christ without abstraction, this is
Idolatrous. The ground of this opinion is, that Consecratio non tantum est
opus, sed efficax. God is in a special manner present in consecrated things
and places to assist us, and stir up devotion in us, if we resist not his
assistance, so that though they have no real quality of holiness, or virtue
in them, yet by their very consecration they gain a certain fitness to
stir up holy thoughts. But in the first place, if the mere act of
consecration be so peremptorily vigorous, ex opere operatio, yet this concludes
nothing for adoration. The words of the Evangelists relating the Passion of our
Savior, and the Sermons of good Divines have more then an aptness of
commemoration in them, yet we worship not either the Gospells, or the
Preachers thereof. It a mere memorative aptness be maintained, and that to
be all the ground of our worship, then why shall not all things of the like
nature procure from us the same adoration? if I look upon a Cross, or
Picture, or upon the Sun, or Moon etc. and by that memorative aptness which
is in them, find thoughts of reverence and piety begotten in me, why shall
not I (according to the Doctors advice) embrace all occasions and furtherances
of devotion, and so fall down before them? And if more then a memorative
aptness be maintained, and some higher virtue transfused into an Altar merely
by its consecration, then into other things we desire further proof thereof.
Secondly, if consecration be admitted to be so infallibly vigorous, as to
imply Gods holy presence, yet this claymes worship not only to the Altar, but
also to the Font, and to all other consecrated things, places, and times, and
this involves us in many doubts. For if I must worship at the Altar more then
at the Font, or more then at the first view of the whole fabric, yet how much
oftener, how much more must I worship at the Altar, then in other places? The
consecration of the whole building has virtue to beget pious thoughts in me,
when I first approach it, and I find in me a holy commemoration, must I now
stay my worship till I come to the Altar, there to expect yet a more virtuous
commemoration? or must I bow at my entrance with less reverence, and then bow
more lowly at the Altar afterward? what must be the several measures of my
worship? Thirdly, this worship by way of motive is not agreeable to that of the
Jews, for Daniel in his worship remembers that house wherein God was
dreadfully (...) strangely present, and so directs his posture ^^^^dingly: but
the house of God is no motive inst^^ment to him to remember God, and therefore
(...) relative object, or occasion of his devotion, If (...) Papists had the
same grounds for their adora^^^ as Daniel had, they would worship their Altars
(...) Images at as great a distance, as Daniel did the J^^ish Temple being a
Captive at Babylon. But now as the occasion, so the nature of their worship is
far different from the Jewish, and by their (...) down before present
objects only, it plainly appears, that they make those present things, (...)
only the occasions of their posture, but even the objects of their adoration it
self, I wish therefore our Doctors would not mingle so far with (...) as they
do, or if they will, yet they would (...) speak so upbraidingly of those which
fear to (...) the like. I will not say they are in the gall oh bitterness,
but their invectives witness too (...) that the gall of bitterness is in
them. (...) against Satan, though all evil might (...) been said, said none;
but Satan having nothing justly to object against Michael, yet forbear (...)
evil. I wish the Doctors hereafter would rather ^^^tate Michael then Satan.

Impri^^^^ Edw: (...).
3. July. 1641.
FINIS.

