A BREVIATE OF THE LIFE, OF William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury: Extracted
(for the most part) Verbatim, out of his own Diary, and other WRITINGS, under
His own Hand.

Collected and published at the special instance of sundry Honorable Persons,
as a necessary Prologue to the History of His Trial; for which the Criminal
part of His LIFE, is specially reserved.

By William Prynne of Lincolnes Inn, Esquier.

PROVE. 10.7, 28, 29. The memory of the Just is blessed, but the Name of the
Wicked shall Rot.

The hope of the Upright shall be gladness; but the expectation of the Wicked
shall perish.

The way of the Lord is strength to the Upright: but destruction shall be to
the Workers of Iniquity.

IT is Ordered this sixteenth day of August 1644. By the Committee of the House
of Commons Assembled in Parliament concerning Printing, that this Book
entitled, A Breviate of the Life of William Laud, etc. be printed by Michaell
Spark Senior.

JOHN WHITE.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Michaell Spark Senior, and are to be sold at
the Blew-Bible in Green-Arbour. 1644.

To the Right Honorable Lords and COMMONS now Assembled IN PARLIAMENT.
HAving formerly presented Your Honorable Assembly with a large Historical
Collection of the several Execrable Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions,
Seditions, Oppressions, Antimonarchicall practices of our Lordly Prelates, in
all former and late ages, in my Antipathy of the English Lordly Prelacy, both
to Regal Monarchy, and Civil Unity (which gave a fatal blow to the
Prelaticall party;) I thereupon conjectured my Domestical Collections of that
nature, had arrived at a Non ultra: But the Death of some eminent Members of
the Commons House (principally interessed in the Archbishops prosecution)
inevitably engaging me at a dead lift (through the Committees request) to make
good the grand Charge against this Arch-Prelate, and bring him to his long
expected Trial, (a trouble which I gladly would have declined:) thereupon the
Importunity of diverse Honorable Friends in both Houses, whom I could not
deny, has (beyond expectation) in the midst of many other distracting
occasions, imposed on me this further Trouble, of collecting the ensuing
Breviate of his Life, abstracted (for the most part word for word) out of his
own Diary and Papers: which being a necessary Prologue to the much desired
History of his Trial (wherein his Crimes here pretermitted, will appear in
their proper Colors) was conceived to be a fitter Forerunner, then
Concomitant of it.

There was one special consideration which for a time did somewhat dissuade me
from this service, to wit a misconstruction which some no doubt will make of my
publications in this kind, as if they proceeded merely, or principally from
malice, or revenge of former Injuries and Cruelties inflicted on me by this
Archbishops means. But my own Conscience and forbearance to meddle with his
Prosecution, till publicly called and necessitated thereunto, acquitting me
from any such imputation; and the never sufficiently admired Providence of my
ever- Gracious God in preserving me safe in the midst of all former troubles,
imprisonments, sufferings, reducing me in safety by an Omnipotent hand (beyond
all expectation of Friends, and Enemies) even with honor and triumph, from my
long close imprisonment and exile in foreign parts (to which this
Arch-Prelate had eternally designed me, without hopes of Redemption,) and
since, that in selecting me above all others, by public authority, (contrary
to my inclination and desire) to be both the seizer and peruser of his papers,
and prosecuter of his long delayed Trial; (the protraction whereof by many
adorable providence, was one principal means of making good his charge,
though at first it seemed to disable its proof;) I could not (in pursuance of
this most remarkable work of Providence) but most cheerfully proceed in this
imposed Employment, notwithstanding all other Discouragements, Impediments:
which being brought to this perfection, I humbly commend to the public view of
the world under your Honors most Noble Patronage, to whom I most humbly
present it, only with this one most Just and Equitable Request, which I beseech
You seriously to lay to heart.

It was once a Proverb, but now a sad Complaint, that great bodies, have very
slow motions, and (alas) many experimentally feel its verity. There are to my
knowledge some hundreds of pious Christians quite ruined, or much impaired in
their fortunes, by the Tyranny and Injustice of this oppressing Arch-Prelate
and his Confederates; who at the beginning of this Parliament became humble
Suitors to it, for Relief and Reparation of their Damages. Their causes
thereupon were then, to their great expense, fully heard, and voted at several
Committees; many of them reported in the Houses, their unjust sentences there
ordered to be vacated; yea speedy Recompenses of their losses, Damages, then
promised, expected. But yet now at last (after two or three years tedious
expectation, and solicitation) their sufferings, Psalm. 31.12, Psalm. 88.5, 6.
causes, losses, are almost quite forgotten, themselves (like dead men out of
mind whom we remember no more) farther from any hopes of relief then ever,
being so remote from receiving satisfaction for their wrongs, that they still
lie under the power of their former illegal Sentences, Bressures: And if times
should alter, their Witnesses or Oppressors dye or miscarry (as many of them
have done) or themselves depart this life before their Causes fully determined,
they and theirs should be left altogether remediless, and utterly ruined,
without redress. Now I humbly beseech Your Honors, sadly to consider on the
one side, what an heartbreaking, and grand Discouragement it will be, not only
to these present Sufferers, but to all others in future times to become public
Martyrs for their Country or Religion: and on the other side, what a great
Encouragement it will prove to Tyrants, Oppressors in present and future times
to exercise all manner of Cruelties, and Injustice, if the remedy shall prove
almost as bad as the disease, and poor oppressed Suppliants in the highest
degree, find either no relief at all, or such slow redress of their
grievances, as shall quite wear out their patience, and remainder of their
decayed estates, and that even in Parliaments (where remedies in former times
were most speedy, certain) and their Oppressors, such Dilatory proceedings
against them, as shall be equivalent to Impunity, and exempt both them, their
heirs, and Executors from rendering Competent damages, to those they have
oppressed.

I confess the great public pressing Occasions, Wars and Distractions in
all our Realms have bin the chiese Remora to Your desired speedy relief of
oppressed Suitors, Your punishment of Delinquents, and may plead your just
excuse; But yet I humbly supplicate You (most Noble Senators) so far to
commiserate the long unredressed Grievances of these afflicted ones, as now at
last to allot some vacant days each week, for the final determination of
their discontinued and almost forgotten Complaints; that they and theirs, may
not have cause hereafter to lament, A failer of Justice even in the supremest
Court of Justice: the undelaied execution whereof both in point of Relief and
Punishment, has been the chief support of Our Parliaments Honor, and of the
peoples love and assistance to Parliaments.

It is one of the principal clauses in Chap. 29.
Magna Charta, which Our Ancestors, and your Honors have so much contended for,
and we all have lately Covenanted to maintain, Eccl. 4.1.2.
viz. We shall deny, NOR DEFER TO NO MAN JUSTICE OR RIGHT. Let it therefore be
put in present real execution, that so none may have cause to take up this
mournful complaint of Solomon; I returned and considered all the Oppressions
that are done under the Sun: and beheld the tears of such as were Oppressed,
and they had no Comforter: Wherefore I praised he dead, that are already dead,
more than the living that are yet alive, etc. And this through Gods blessing
will be the speediest way to put a period to our Wars, Distractions,
Grievances, and gain Your Honors highest Reputation, Grace Favor with God,
and all good men.

Now the good God strengthen both Your hearts and hands to execute speedy Psa.
103.6. Psalm. 10.18.
Justice, and Judgment for all that are oppressed, that the man of the earth
may no more oppress; and Crown all your public Counsels, Enterprises with
such happy success, as may occasion all succeeding Generations, to bless God
for You, as the best-deserving Parliament ever yet Assembled: which is the
Cordial Prayer of

Your Honors most devoted SERVANT, William Prynne.

A BREVIATE Of the LIFE of WJLLJAM LAVD, Archbishop of CANTERBVRIE, Extracted
out of his own DIARIE.
BEfore any entrance made into the relation of the Impeachment, or Trial of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, it will be neither impertinent, nor unnecessary
to present the World with a Summary of his life, extracted for the most part
out of his own Diary, written with his own hand, and found in his Pocket upon
search of his Chamber in the Tower. May 31. 1643. Some passages whereof
objected against him at his Trial, are here totally omitted, and reserved for
their proper place, to avoid Repetitions.

HE was borne at Redding in Barkshire: October. 7. 1573. Anno. 1573
of poor and obscure Patents, in a Cottage, just over against the Cage: which
Cage since his coming to the Arch-bishopricke of Canterbury, upon complaint of
Master Elveston (that it was a dishonor the Cage should be suffered to stand
so near the House, where so great a Royal Favorite, and Prelate had his
birth) was removed to some other place; and the Cottage pulled down, and new
built by the Bishop.

In his Infancy he was like to perish of a disease (as he writes) but that God
reserved him to be a future scourge, yea plague to this Church and STATE, and
for another kind of Death.

July 1589. Anno. 1589
He came a poor Scholar to Oxford: June 1590. he was chosen a Scholar of
Saint John Baptists College, June 1593. he was admitted a Fellow thereof,
June 1594. he proceeded Batcheler of Arts; and July 1589. Master of Arts.

June 4. 1600. Anno. 1600
He was made Deacon: and April 5. 1601. he was made a Priest by Doctor Young,
Bishop of Rochester.

Anno 1602. Anno. 1602
He read a Divinity Lecture in Saint John's College, maintained by Mistress May.

May 4. 1603. Anno. 1603
He was chosen Proctor of the Universitie: and on September third next ensuing,
he became Chaplain to the Earl of Devonshire; which after proved his great
happiness, and gave him hopes of greater preferments, as himself records.

July 1604. Anno. 1604
He proceeded Batchelour in Divinity: His supposition when he answered in the
Divinity Schools for this degree, concerning the efficacy of Baptism, was
taken verbatim out of Bellarmine; and he then maintained, there could be no
true Church without Diocesan Bishops; for which Doctor Holland (then Doctor of
the Chair) openly reprehended him in the Schools, for a seditious person, who
would un-Church the reformed Protestant Churches beyond the Seas, and sow
division between us, and them, who were brethren, by this novell popish
position.

December. 26. 1605. Anno. 1605
He being the Earl of Devonshires Chaplain, married this Earl to the Lady
Rich, (another man's Wife) at Wansteed in Essex: which day he puts into the
Catalogue of days of special observance to him, both in his Diary, and the
Manuscript book of his private devotions.

October 26. 1606. Anno. 1606
Docter Ayry of Queens College, questioned him for a Sermon then preached by
him at Saint Mary's, as containing sundry scandalous, and popish passages in it.

Novem. 16. 1607. Anno. 1607
He was invested into the Vicarage of Stanford, in Northamptonshire.

Anno 1608. Anno. 1608
He proceeded Doctor in Divinity, and that year August 5. he was made
Chaplain to Doctor Neale, then Bishop of Rochester; Septem. 17. 1609. he
preached his first Sermon to King James at Theobalds: October 28. 1609. Anno.
1609
he was inducted into West-Tilburie in Essex, for which he exchanged his
Advowson of North-Kilworth in Leicestershire, to be near his Lord of
Rochester, Dr. Neale, who on May 25. 1610. gave him the Rectory of Cuckston in
Kent.

October 2. 1610. Anno. 1610
He resigned his fellowship in Saint John's College in Oxford, and the same
month fell sick of a kentish Ague, caught at his new benefice, which held him
two months, whereupon he left Cuckston and Novem. 1610. was inducted into
Norton by Proxy. In the midst of this sickness, the suite about the
Presidentship of Saint John's began, in which there was great Towsing.

Christmas 1610. The Lord Chancellor Elsmeer complained against him to King
James, being incited thereunto by Docter Abbot, then Archbishop of Canterbury,
(as he writes) who always opposed him, as foreseeing he would prove a
dangerous firebrand both in Church, and State; and a bitter Enemy to the
Protestant Religion, being then commonly reputed in Oxford, a man cordially
addicted to Popery, and a Papist in heart, keeping companny with those who
were most Popishly affected.

May 10. 1611. Anno. 1611
He was chosen President of Saint John's College, by one casting voice, after
much canvasing: which election was questioned and heard for three hours space
before King James at Tichburne, August 29. being the day of beheading Saint
John Baptist. Novem. 3. He was sworn the Kings Chaplain.

April 18. 1614. Anno 1614.
Doctor Neale Bishop of Lincoln gave him the Prebend of Bugden, and after that
the Arch-Deaconrie of Huntington, December. 1. 1615.

Nov. 1616. Anno. 1616
King James gave him the Deanerie of Gloucester, and in March following, he set
forward with the King into Scotland, and returned a little before him.

August 2. 1617. Anno. 1617
he was inducted into Ibstocke, in Leicestershire, in his return from
Scotland.

June 1618. Anno. 1618
He set up a great Organ in Saint John's Chapel: and April 2d. 1619 He fell
suddenly dead for a time at Wickham, 1619.
in his return from London, to Oxford.

Ian. 22. 1620. An. 1620.
He was installed Prebend of Westminster, having had the advouson of it ten
years before.

June 3. 1622. An. 1622.
(He writes thus in his Diarie) The Kings Gracious speech unto me concerning
my long service. He was pleased to say, He had given me nothing but Gloucester,
which he well knew was a shell without a Kernel. His Majesty gave me the
grant of the Bishopprick of Saint David's, June 29. being St. Peter's day. The
General expectation in Court was, that I should then have been made Deane of
Westminster, and not Bishop of Saint David's. The King gave me leave to hold my
Presidentship of Saint John Baptist College in Oxford in my Commandam with the
Bishopric of Saints David's; I was chosen Bishop of Saint David's, October, 10.
1621. I was consecrated Bishop of Saint David's. Novem: 18. at London house
Chapple, by the Reverend Fathers, the Lords Bishops of London, Worcester,
Chichester, Ely, Landaffe, Oxon, the Archbishop being thought Irreguler, for
casual Homicide, April 13, 1622. the King renewed my Commendam.

April 16. 1622. An. 1692.
I was with his Majesty and the Princes Highness to give notice of letters I
received of a Treasonable Sermon (as he terms it) preached in Oxford on
Sunday, April 15. by one Master Knight of Broad-gates, May 10. I went to the
Court to Greenwitch, and came back in a Coach with the Lord Marquess of
Buckingham. I then promised to give his Lordship the discourse he spoke to me
for, June 8. being Whitsunday, NOTE.
my Lord Marquess of Buckingham was pleased to enter into a nearer respect to
me, THE PARTJCVLERS ARE NOT FOR PAPER. June 15. I became C. CONFESSOR (as
himself confessed, and said he held it his great honor) to the Duke of
Buckingham: who June 16. Trinity Sunday, received the Sacrament at Greenwitch.

July 5. 1622. he entered Wales and visited his Dioces, Agust 15. he set
forwards for London, and in Christmas time December following he was thrice
with the King, and read over to him his Answer to Fisher which he desired
might pass in the name of a third person, R. B. (least he should be thought
too much engaged the reby aganist his freindes the Papists.)

January 11. 1622. he writes. My Lord of Buckingham, and I in the Inner Chamber
at York House: Quod beet Deus Salvator noster Jesus Christus. January 29. I was
instituted at Peterborough to the Parsonage of Creek given me in my Commendam,
and inducted into it, January 31. Monday February 17. The Prince, and the
Marquess Buckingham set forwards very secretly into Spain, February 21. I
writ to my Lord of Buckingham into Spain.

March 31. 1623. An. 1623,
I received letters from my L. of Buckingham out of Spain; And April 9. June
13. and August 17. I received other letters from the Duke out of Spain. June
15. A very fair day till toward five at night, then great extremity of
thunder and lightening, much hurt done, the Lantern at Saint James his house
blasted, the Vane breaking, the Princes Arms to pieces, the Prince then in
Spain. It was their Saint James day stilo novo.

October 3. 1623. I was with my Lord Keeper (Williams) to whom I found some had
done me very ill Offices, October 31. I acquainted my Lord Duke of Buckingham
with that which passed between the Lord Keeper and me. December. 14. Sunday
night I dreamt that L. K. (Williams) was dead; That I passed by one of his men
that was about a monument for him: That I heard him say, his lower lip was
infinitely swellen, and fallen, and he rotten already. This Dream did much
trouble me. On Monday morning I went about business to my L. K. of Buckingham;
we had speech in the Sheeld-Gallery at White Hall: There I found that the L.K.
had strangly forgotten himself to him; and I think was dead in his
affections. December. 27. I was with my L.D. of Buck. I found that all went not
right with L. K. etc. He sent to speak with me, because he was to receive the
next day. January 11. My L. K. met me in the withdrawing Chamber, and
quarrelled me gratis. Ianu. 14. I acquainted my L. D. of Buck. with that which
passed before between L. K. and me. Febr. 6. My Lord D. of Buckingham, told me
of the Reconciliation of L. K. the day before, Febr. 18. he told me of the
reconciliation and submission of L. K. And that it was confessed unto him, that
his favor to me was a chief cause. Invidia quo tendis etc. At ille de novo
faedus pepigit. March 17. L. K. His complementing with me. etc.

March 27. 1624. An. 1624.
Saturday Easter even, my speech with my Lord Duke of Buckingham about a course
to ease the Church in times of payment of the Subsedies now to be given; His
promise to prepare both the King and the Prince. Easter Monday I went and
acquainted my Lord Keeper with what I had said to my Lord Duke: He approved it
and said it was the best office that was done for the Church this seven
years, and so said my Lord of Durham: they persuaded me to go and acquaint my
Lords Grace with what I had done, I went. His Grace was very angry, asked what
I had to do to make any suite for the Church; told me never any Bishop
attempted the like at any time, nor would any but my self have done it. That I
had given the Church such a wound in speaking to any Lord of the Latie about
it, as I could never make whole again. That if my Lord Duke did fully
understand what I had done, he could never endure me to come near him again.

I Answered, I thought I had done a very good Office for the Church, and so did
my betters think. If his Grace thought otherwise, I was sorry I had offended
him, and I hoped being done out of a good mind, for the support of many poor
Vicars abroad in the Country, who must needs sink under three Subsidies in a
year, my error (if it were one) was pardonable: so we parted.

I went to my Lord Duke and acquainted him with it, lest I might have ill
offices done me for it to the King and the Prince. Sic Deus beet me servum suum
laborantem sub pressura eorum qui semper voluerunt mala mihi.

May, 3. 1624. my Lord Duke of Buckingham came to Town with his Majesty sick,
and continued ill till Saturday, May, 22. May 16. Whitsunday night I watched
with my Lord Duke, this was the first fit that he could be persuaded to take
orderly, May 18. Tuesday night I watched with my Lord Duke, He took his fit
very orderly, Saturday he missed his fit. June 8. Tuesday, I went to New-Hall
to my L. Duke of Buckingham; and came back to London on Friday. It is reported
that the Duke made the Bishop at that time put off his Gown and Cassocke, and
then to Dance before him like an Hobgoblin to make him merry.

May 29. and June 4. he was marvellously troubled in his Dreams concerning E.
B. which dreams contained all the carriage of E. B. toward him, after which
he took his lasting leave of him, July 23. He went to preach at his
commendams of Creek and Jbstocke, and to set things in order there August. 26.
his hotsetrod on his foot, and lamed him so, that he was forced to stay a
week longer in the Country then he intended.

September 9. 1624. my Lord Duke of Buckingham consulted with me about a man
that offered him a strange way of cure for himself and his Brother. At that
time I delivered his Grace my Copies of the two little Books which he desired
me to write out. September 25. My Lord Dukes proposal about an Army and the
means: And whether Suttons Hospital might not, etc. October 10. I fell at
night in passionem Iliacam which had almost put me into a fever, I continued
ill 14. days, October 13. I delivered up my Answer about Suttons Hospital,
November 26. I went to my L. Keeper and had a Messenger sent to bring up a
Salt-Peeter man who had dug in the College, Church at Brecknock being too
bold upon his Commission, to answer that sacrilegious abuse. He prevented his
punishment by death, December 23. I delivered my Lord Duke a littele Book
about Doctrinall Puritanisme in some ten heads, NOTE.
which his Grace had spoken to me that J would draw for him, that he might be
acquainted with them, Ian. 5. My L. Duke of Buckingham showed me two letters
of, etc. the falsehood of, etc. Ian. 15. The speech which I had with my L. Duke
at Wallingford House, January 21. The business of my Lady Purbecke made known
unto me by my Lord Duke, January 23. The discourse which my Lord Duke had with
them about Witches and Astrologers, January 25. I acquainted my Lord Duke with
my hard hap in my business with L. C. D. for which I had been so often
blamed, Jan. 28. I took my leave of my Lord Duke. His wish that he had known
K. L. sooner; but etc.

An. 1624.
An 1625. March 27. Advent Sunday I preached at White Hall, when I went into the
Pulpit there was a prevayling Rumor that King James was dead: being called
away with the dolor of the Duke of Buckingham I broke off my Sermon in the
midst. The King died that day of a Tertian Ague at Theobalds, Prince Charles
that day was proclaimed King, April 3. I delivered into the hands of the Duke
of Buckingham brief Annotations upon the life and death of most renouned King
James, which he Commanded me to describe; The Copy whereof found in the Bishops
Study under his own hand is here inserted.

The Memorables of our late dear and Dread Sovereign King JAMES of famous
memory.
1. HE was a King almost from his Birth. 2. His great Clemency, that he should
Reign so long and so moderatly, that knew nothing else but to reign. 3. The
difficult times in Scotland during his Minority, as much perplexed with Church
as State factions, 4. His admirable patience in those younger times, and his
wisdom to go by those many and great difficulties, till God opend him the
ways to his just Inheritance of this Crown. 5. His peaceable entry into this
Kingdom, contrary to the fears at home, and the Hopes abroad; not without
Gods great blessing both on him and us. 6. His ability as strong in Grace as
Nature, to forgive some occurrences. 7. The continuance of full 22. years
Reign all in peace, without war, from foreign Enemy or Rebellion at home. 8.
The infinite advantage which people of all sorts might have brought to
themselves* and the enriching of the State, if they would have used such a
government with answerable care, and not made the worst use of peace. 9. Gods
great mercy over him in many deliverances from private conspirators and above
the rest that which would have blown up his posterity, and the state by
Gunpouder. 10. That in all this time of his Reign of England, he took away
the life of no one Noble man but restored many. 11. That the sweetness of his
nature, was scarce to be paralleld by any other. 12. It is little less then a
miracle that so much sweetness should be found in so great a heart, as besides
other things sickness, and death it self showed to be in him. 13. Clemency,
Mercy, Justice, and holding the State in peace, have ever bin accounted the
great virtues of Kings, And they were all eminent in him. 14. He was not only
apreserver of peace at home, but the great peace maker abroad, to settle
Christendom against the Common Enemy the Turk, which might have been a
glorious work, if others had been as true to him, as he was to the Common
good. 15. He was in private to his servants, the best Master that ever was, and
the most free. 16. He was the Justest Man that could sit between parties, and
as patient to hear. 17. He was bountiful to the highest pitch of a King. 18.
He was the greatest Patron to the Church which has been in many ages. 19. The
most learned Prince that this Kingdom has ever known for matters of
Religion. 20. His Integrity and soundness in Religion to write, and speak,
Believe, and do, Live and die, one and the same, and all Arthodox. 21. His
tender love to the King his son, our most gracious Sovereign that now is, and
his constant reverence in performance of all duties, to his Father, the
greatest blessing, and the greatest example of this and many Ages. 22. The
education of his Majesty whom we now enjoy (and I hope, and pray, that we may
long and in happiness enjoy) to be an able King, as Christendom has any the
very first day of his Reign. The benefit whereof is ours, and the honor his.
23. His sickness from the beginning more grevious then it seemed. A sharp
Melancholy humor set on fire, though usherd in by an ordinary Tertian Agu. 24.
He was from the beginning of his sickness scarce out of an opinion that he
should dye, and therefore did not suffer the great affairs of Christendom to
move him more then was fit, for he thought of his end, 25. His devout
receiving of the blessod sacrament. 26. His Regal sensure of the moderate
Reformation of the Church of England, and particulerly for the care of
retayning of absolution, the comfort of distressed souls, 27, His continual
calling for prayers, with an assured confidence in Christ. 28. His death as
full of patience as could be found in so strong a death. 29. His rest, no
Question, is in Abraham's bosom, and his Crown changed into a Crown of Glory.
April 6. 1625. I gave the Duke a Schedule wherein the names of
Ecclesiastical persons were described under the Letters O. (Orthodox) and P.
(Puritans. NOTE.
) The Duke of Buckingham himself commanded that I should thus digest then, to
show them (as he said) to King Charles. April. 9. The Duke of Buckingham most
venerable to me by all Titles, certified me, that some body, I know not out
of what envy, had blemished my name with King Charles, his most Excellent
Majesty, taking occasion from the error, into which (I know not by what fate) I
fell heretofore in the case of Charles Earl of Devon. December 26. 1605. The
same day I received a Command that I should repair to the Reverend Bishop of
Winchester, and that I should demand, what he would have done in the Cause of
the Church, and that I should bring back his Answer, especially in the 5.
Articles, etc. April 10. being Sunday, after the Sermon ended I went to the
Bishop, who was at his Chamber at White Hall. I related what things I had
received in Command. He gave me an Answer. April 13. I related to the Duke of
Buckingham what the Bishop of Winchester answered. At the same time he
certified me what the King had resolved concerning the Bishop of Durham, Clerk
of the Chapel to the King, and concerning a successor. April 17. Easter day,
the Bishop of Durham being sick, I was by the said Bishops Petition to the
illustrious Earl of Psmbrooke Lord Chamberlain, assigned to serve the Kings
Majesty in the place of the Clarke of the Closet: which Office I performed
till the first of May, April 23. Burton delivered a writing to the King.

An. 1625. May 11.19.29. I writ Letters to the Duke of Buckingham, into France:
May 30. I went to Chelsey to the Duchess of Buckingham, June 5. I received
Letters from the Duke of Buckingham out of France; I answered them the next
morning. June 12. Queen Mary passing the Seas, arrived on our shore about
seven of the Clock in the afternoon. GOD grant she may be an Evening, and
happy Star to our world. June 25. All the Bishops which were then present,
were brought in to kiss the Queens hand: She received Us with highest
savor. July 3. King James appeared to me in Dreams; I saw him only swiftly
passing by. He was of a cheerful and serene countenance. In the passage he
saw me, beckned to me, smiled, and suddenly was withdrawn out of my sight.
July 7. 1625. Richard Mountague was brought into the lower House of Parliament,
etc. July 9. Saturday, it pleased most Excellent King Charles to intimate to
that House, that those things which were there spoken and determined concerning
Mountague, without his Privitie, did not please him. July 11. The Parliament
was translated to Oxford by reason of the plague July 13. I went into the
Country to the House of my most dear Friend Francis Windebanke. NOTE.
As I was traveling thither Richard Mountague casually met me. I was the first
who certified him of the Kings favor toward him. July 31. I fell I knew not
how in the Parlour at Saint John's College in Oxford, and hurt my left
Shoulder, and Huckle-bone. August 21. I stayed at Brecon in Wales: that night
in a Dream, the Duke of Buckingham seemed to me to ascend into my bed; where
he carried himself with much love toward me, after such rest wherein wearied
men are wont exceedingly to rejoice: And likewise many seemed to me to enter
the Chamber, who did see this. Not many days before, I seemed to see the
Duchess of Buckingham that Excellent Lady, in a Dream: at first she was much
perplexed about her Husband, but afterward merry, and rejoicing, that she was
freed from the fear of abortion; that in due time she might be a mother again.
Aug. 24. My Coach was twice overturned; the first time I was in it; the later
it was empty. December. 4. I was very much troubled by Dreams. The Duke of
Buckingham, his servants, and family, wholly took me up. All things were not
well ordered; The Duchess being ill, calls out her maids, and goes to bed:
Det Deus meliora. Septem. 11. I dreamed that Dr. Theodore Price, admonished me
concerning Ma: and that he was unfaithful toward me, and revealed all things
which he knew, and that I should beware of him, and no more etc. Afterward I
dreamed of Sack Croe, that he was dead of the Plague, when as he had not been
long with the King.

Septem. 26. I Dreamed of the marriage of I knew not whom, at Oxford: all
present flourished with green garments. I knew none but Thomas Flaxney:
presently after, without any wakening, that I know of, I saw the Bishop of
Worcester, having his head covered with linen clothes. He friendly persuaded
me, that I would dwell with them, at the place where the Marches of Wales was
then kept: but not expecting my answer, himself answered, that he knew I
could not live so meanly. Nov. 17. Charles the Duke of Buckinghams son
(writes he) was borne, whom God bless with all the good things of Heaven and
earth. Janu. 4. and 23. I met to consult of the Ceremonies of the Kings
Coronation. And in January he compiled the book for the Kings Coronation,
wherein he altered the Coronation Oath; executed the Office of the Deane of
Westminster at the Coronation instead of, Dr. Williams, then Deane of
Westminster Bishop of Lincoln, and Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, whom the
King would not admit to be present at the Ceremonies of his Coronation. Ianu.
29. I understood what the Duke of Buckingham collected, King Charles had
determined with himself concerning the Cause, Book, and opinions of Richard
Mountague. I seem to see a Cloud arising, and threatening the Church of
England: God for his mercy dissipate it. Febr. 6. I preached before the King
and Nobles, at the beginning of the Parliament. Feb. 11. and 17. There was a
Conference at the Duke of Buckinghams, in the presence of many Noble men, about
Mountagues Appeal, and his Popish and Arminian Tenants therein broached.
Bishop Morton, and Doctor Preston opposing them, and he with Doctor White
defending them. Febr. 21. The Duke of Buckingham (writes he) sent for me to
come to him, then he gave me in command, that, etc. Febr. 21. I sought the
Duke at Chelsey. There I first saw his late borne heir CHARLES; but not
finding the Duke, I returned home, where I found his servant seeking me: I
hastened with him, and found him in the Court: I related what I had done, Feb.
14. I was with the Duke at his House almost three hours where with his own
hand, etc. He commanded me, that I should add some thing, I obeyed his
command, and brought it the next day.

March 1. Being Saint David's day, there began a clamor in the lower House of
Parliament against the Duke of Bukingham by name, for staying a Ship called the
St. Peter of Newhaven, after sentence pronounced: from that day there were
perpetual agitations in that House, March 11. Docter Turner a Physician,
propounded in the House seven questions, commonly called Queres against the
Duke of Buckingham; yet grounded on no other foundation, then what he received
(as he said) from public fame.

An. 1626. An. 1626.
March 26. Sunday the Duke of Buckingham sent me to the King; there I
acquainted the King with 2. business, which, etc. The most Gracious King gave me
thanks. March 29. King Charles made a speech to both Houses of Parliament,
both by himself, and by the most Honorable Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, in
the Palace of White Hall: He reproved the Lower House for many things. He
added many things concerning the Duke of Buckingham, etc. (This speech of his
was penned for him by this pragmaticall Bishop, the Original Coppie whereof
was given in evidence against him under his own hand:) In the Convocation held
that day, many things were agitated concerning the Sermon, which Gabriell
Goodman Bishop of Gloucester, preached before the King the fifth Sunday of Lent
preceding. April 5. In the morning, the King sent that the Bishops of Norwich,
Litchfield, and Saint David's, should appear before him. I and the Bishop of
Litchfield appeared; the Bishop of Norwich was gone into the Country. We
received the Kings command about, etc. and returned. April 12. At nine a
Clock in the morning, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Winchester,
and (I) Bishop of Saint David's met together, being commanded by the King to
consult about the Sermon which the Bishop of Gloucester, Doctor Goodman preached
before the Kings Majesty on the fifth Sunday in Lent: We consulted, and gave
answer to the King, that some things were spoken less warily, nothing falsely:
Neither was any thing innovated by him, in the Church of England.

That it would be best he should preach again at such time as he should choose,
and should show how and in what things he was ill taken, and misunderstood by
the Auditors. That night after nine a clock, I related to the King what I
received in command the fifth of April, and other things thereunto belonging.
The King spoke many things most graciously concerning the restoring of
Impropriations, when as I should have first determined of the manner, April 14.
the Duke of Buckingham fell into a Fever, April 19. the Petition of John
Digby Earl of Bristoll against the D. of Buckingham was read in the upper
House of Parliament; It was sharp and such as threatened destruction to one of
the parties, April 20. King Charles referred the cognizance of the whole
business, and likewise of the Petition of the Earl of Bristoll to the
Parliament house, April 21. the Duke of Buckingham sent for me to come to him;
Then I heard what Sir John Cook, principal Secretary to the King had
suggested against me to the L. Treasurer of England, and he to the Duke: Domine
miserere servi tui. April 22. Sunday, the King sent that all the Bishops
should attend him at 4. of the Clock in the after noone, we were fourteen of
us present: He reprehended us, that we were silent in the causes of the Church,
in this time of Parliament, and did not make known to him, what might be
profitable or unprofitable to the Church, for that he was ready to promote the
cause of the Church. After this he Commanded that in the causes of Bristoll and
Buckingham our Consciences being the guide, we should follow only proofs not
rumors, April 30. I preached at Whit-Hall before the King. May 1. The Earl
of Bristoll was accused of high Treason in Parliament by the Kings Attorney Sir
Robert Heath; The said Earl then and there exhibited 12. Articles against the
Duke of Buckingham, and accused him of the same crime, and exhibited other
Articles against Baron Conway, Secretary; The Earl of Bristoll was committed
to James Maxwell Keeper of the black Rod. May 8. at two of the Clock in the
afternoon the lower House impeached the Duke of Buckingham to the upper House,
saying 13. accusations to his charge; The Bishop though then a Member of the
upper House and a Judge of this cause, was yet such a sworn Vassal to the
Duke, that he penned his speech which he made to the Lords in the upper House
against the Commons impeachment, and corrected and amended his Answer to his
Impeachment, as his feed Advocate in sundry particulers, given against him in
evidence under his own hand. And likewise penned the Kings speech to the House
of Peers, touching the Duke, and the Commitment of the Earl of Arundell, as
appears by the Original draught under his hand: concerning which speech he
thus writes in his Diary, May 11. King Charles came to the Parliament House He
spoke to the Nobles in few words concerning the preservation of the honor of
Noble men; against the vile and detestable calumnies of those of the Lower
House who accused the Duke, etc. There were eight who discharged their allotted
parts in that business. The Prologue Sir Dudley Diggs, and Epilogue, Sir John
Eliot, This day they were both by the Kings Command committed to the Tower, and
both of them enlarged within few days, May 25. Because the E. of Arundell
(then under restraint) was not sent back to the House, nor the Cause of his
commitment revealed, there grew suspicion that the Privileges were infringed
and it was concluded amongst the Peers to adjourne the House till the next
day. On which day (May 26.) they adjourned the House till the second of June,
resolving that they would do nothing till the Earl were restored, or at least a
cause of his commitment declared, etc. May 25. this day wherein these tumults
were first moved was Pope Vrbans day; and at this time Urban the 8. sits Pope.
June 15. after many agitations, private malice against the D. of Buckingham
prevailed and suffocated all public businesses, nothing is done, but the
Parliament dissolved. NOTA


June 20. King Charles nominated me to be Bishop of Bath and Wells, and
likewise enjoined me to preach at the solemn Fast before him; which I did at
White Hall, July the 5. July 26. The King signed my Congedeslier to the Deane
and Chapter of Wells to elect me Bishop of Bath and Wells, July 27. Doctor
Field Bishop of Landaffe brought me certain Letters from the most illustrous
Duke of Buckingham, the Letters were open and written partly in Carecters, the
Duke sent them to me, that I should consult, one called Swaddling about them,
who could read the Characters August 4. I and Swaddling went to the Duke, he
read the Letters, which were certain malicious things, which the Duke
contemned, August 16. I was elected Bishop of Bath and Wells, it was Wednesday,
and the letter D. August 25. Two Robin-red-breasts flew together through the
door into my Study as pursuing one the other, that sudden motion made me
startle. I let them out as they had entered, I was then preparing a Sermon on
Ephesians. 4.30.

September 14. in the evening the Duke of Buckingham said that I should reduce
certain instructions into form, partly political, partly Ecclesiastical, in
the cause of the King of Denmark, a little before afflicted by Duke Tilly, to
be sent through all Parishes. Most breife heads are delivered to me, he would
have them ready by Saturday following, September 16. I prepared and brought
them by the prefixed hour. I read them, he brought me to the King. There,
being commanded, I read them once again, both of them approve them, September
17 Sunday they were proposed and read (for I left the papers with the Duke)
before the Kings Majesty's honorable Council, and thanks be to God they were
approved by all.

September 18. My election to the Bishopric of Bath and Wells, was confirmed
September 19, I went my self to the King at Theobalds who there presently
restored me to the temporalities from the time of my Predecessors death. What
things happened between me and the Lord Baron Conway the Kings principal,
Secretary whiles we returned together, September 21. Lancelot, Andrews Bishop
of Winchester, and Deane of the Kings Chapel died about four a clock in the
morning September 30. The Duke of Buckingham certified me that the King had
determined that I should succeed the Bishop of Winchester then dead, in the
office of Deane of the Kings Chapel, October 2. The same Duke told me, what
the King of that day, further determined concerning me; if A. B. C. etc. (that
is, if the Archbishop of Canterbury died, NOTE.
to wit, that he should succeed him) October 2 I went to the Court which was at
Hampton, there I gave the King thanks for the Deanery of the Chapel he granted
to me, whence I returned to London. October 6. I took the Oath appointed for
the Deane of the Chapel to take, in the Chapple before the right Honorable
Philip Earl of Mountgomery, Lord Chamberlain, Stephen Boutin Subdeacon
ministering the Oath; November 14. or there about having taken an occasion both
from the abrupt beginning and also ending of public prayers on the 5th. of
November, I requested of my Gracious King Charles, that he would be present at
the Liturgy as well as at the Sermon every Lords day, and that at whatsoever
time of Prayers he came, the Priest who ministered should proceed to the end of
Prayers. The most religious King not only assented, NOTE.
but likewise gave me thanks. This was not done before, from the beginning of
King James Reign till this day; Now thanks be to God it takes place.

December 21. I dreamed of the burial of I know not whom, and that I stood by
the dust, and I awaked sorrowful, December 25. Christmas day, I made my first
Sermon as Deane of the Chapel at White Hall. January 6. I dreamed in the
night, that my Mother, dead long before, stood by my bed side, and drawing the
Curtains a little looked chearefully upon me; I was glad to see her look so
merrily. After that she showed me an old man dead long before, whom I knew,
and loved whiles he lived; He seemed to have lain on the ground, merry enough,
but with a wrinckled face, his name was Grove, whilst I prepared to salute
him, I awaked.

January 8. I went to visit the Duke of Buckingham; he rejoiced, and gave into
my hands Papers concerning the Invocation of Saints, which his mother gave him:
I know not what Priest gave them to her, January 13. The Bishop of Lincoln
desired reconciliation with the Duke of Buckingham, etc. Ian. 14. Toward the
morning I dreamed that the Bishop of Lincoln I know not with whom, came with
Iron chains, but returning freed from them, he leaped upon a horse, departed,
neither could I overtake him January 16. I dreamed that the King went out of a
standing, and that when he was hungry I led him away at unawares into the house
of Francis Windebancke my friend, NOTE.
Whiles he prepared to eat* I, whiles others were absent, held the City to him
after the accustomed manner: I brought bear, but it pleased him not, I brought
some again, but in a silver Cup; The most Gracious King said; Thou know I
always drink out of a Glass; NOTE.
I went again, and awaked. Ianu. 17. I showed reasons to the King, why the
Papers of the deceased Bishop of Winchester, concerning Bishops, That they are
Iure Divino, were to be printed, contrary to that which the Bishop of Lincoln
miserably, and to the great detriment of the Church signified to the King, as
the King Himself had told me formerly: Febr. 7. I dreamed in the night, that I
was sick of the Scurvey, and that all my Teeth were suddenly loose,
especially one in my lower jaw bone, which I could hardly keep in with my
finger, until I might get help, etc. Febr. 20. John Fenton began the cure of a
certain Itch, etc. Febr 22. I took a journey toward New Market, where the
King then was. March 8. I came to London: The night following, I Dreamed I had
been Reconciled to the Church of Rome: This distracted me, NOTE.
and I wondered much whence it happened; being troubled at the scandal: and this
my fall, which would weaken many excellent and learned men in the Church of
England. Thus troubled in my dream, I said with my self, that I would
presently go, and making confession, ask pardon of the Church of England. As
I was going to do it, a certain Priest met me, and would hinder me; but being
moved with indignation, I went on my way; and when I had wearied my self with
wayward Cogitations, I awaked. I felt such impressions, that I could scarce
believe I had dreamed. March 12. I went with the King to Theobalds. March 17.
about midnight, I buried Charles Viscount Buckingham, eldest and the only son
of George Duke of Buckingham, being a year and near 4. months old.

March 27. 1627. A.nno 1627
I had this ensuing dream. There were certain Legacies given to Dame Dorathy
Wright, Widow of George Wright Knight, my familiar acquaintance. The Legacies
were 430l. and more given by a certain Kinsman named Farnham, to the Widow and
her Children. At the instance of the widow, when as the Executor denied or
delayed to pay the Legacies, I obtained Letters from the most illustrious Duke
of Buckingham in favor of the Widow, (for the Duke was Mr. of the Horse, and
the said George Wright was one of the Kings servants under him,) when I had now
the Letters in my hand, and was about to give them to the Widow, to send into
Ireland, where the Executor lived, this night George Wright appeared to me in a
dream, dead at least two years before; he seemed to me very handsome, and
merry enough. I told him what I had then done for his Wife and Children: He
considering with himself a little, answered, that the Executor had satisfied
him those legacies whiles he was living, and presently looking into some papers
in his Study adjoining, he added again, that it was so. NOTE.
And moreover he whispered me in the ear; That I was the cause why the Bishop
of Lincoln should not be again admitted into favor, and into the Court.

April 4. When King Charles absolved Doctor Dun, about some slips in a Sermon
preached before him on Sunday, April 1. That which he then most Graciously
said to me, I writ in my heart in indeleble Characters, with greatest giving of
thanks to God, and the King. April 7. Whiles I went to the Court to wait on the
King at Supper, going out of my Coach, my foot stumbling, I fell headlong. I
never fell a more grievous fall, but through Gods mercy, I escaped with the
contusion of my hip, and that but lightly. NOTE.
April 24. The exceptions which the Archbishop of Canterbury exhibited,
against the Sermon of Doctor Sibtharpe, were first brought to me: and those
things which follow.

April 29. Sunday, I was made a Privy Counselor to the most illustrious King
Charles. I pray God to turn it to his honor, and to the good of this Kingdom
and Church. (This day he was by His Majesty's special command, sworn of His
Privy Council, sat at the Board, and signed Letters; as His Test under the
Seal of the Council Table, and Sir William Beechers hand, attests, found in
his studdie among other writings; which makes his ill advise to the King more
criminal.)

May 13. Whitsunday I preached before the King, etc. June 7.8. I attended King
Charles from London to Southwicke by Portsmouth, Iu. 11. His Majesty dined a
board, the Triumph, where I attended him. June 17. The Bishoppricke or London
was granted me at Southwicke. June 24. I was commanded to go all the
progress. June 27. the Duke of Buckingham set forwards, toward the Isle of
Ree. July 4. The King lost a Jewel in hunting, of 1000l: value. That day the
Message was sent by the King, for the sequestring of the Archbish. of
Canterbury. July 7. I Dreamed that I had lost two teeth. The Duke of
Buckingham took the Isle of Ree. July 26. I attended the King and Queen at
Wellingburrough. July 29. The first news came from my Lord Duke of his
success: Aug. 12. The second news came from my Lord Duke to Winchester, Aug.
26. The third news came to my Lord Duke to Aldershot. Septe. News cames from
my Lord Duke to Theobalds, and after that to Hampton Court. I went to my Lord
of Rochester to consider about the Archbish. of Canterbury, NOTE.
and returned to Hampton Court. The Kings speech to me in the withdrawing
Chamber; That if any did, etc. I before any thing should sink, etc.

Octo. The Commission to the Bishops of London, Durham, Rochester, Oxford, and
my self, then Bath and Wells, to execute Archiepiscopall jurisdiction, during
the sequestration of my Lord G. of Cant: (which Commission being of his own
procurement, in malice and envy against Archbishop Abbot,) shall here be
inserted, for his casual homicide of his Keeper, in shooting at a Bucke.

CHARLES By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the FAITH, etc. TO the Right Reverend Father in God George Bish. of
London, And to the right Reverend Father in God, Our trusty and well beloved
Counselor, Rich. Lord Bishop of Durham; And to the Right Reverend Fathers in
God John, Lord Bishop of Rochester, and John, Lord Bishop of Oxford. To the
Right Reverend Father in God, Our right trusty, and well beloved Counselor,
William Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, Greeting.
WHereas George, now Archbishop of Canterbury in the right of his
Archbishopricke has several and distinct Archipiscopall, Episcopal and other
Spiritual, and Ecclesiastical powers and jurisdictions to be exercised in the
Government, and Discipline of the Church, within the Province of Canterbury,
and in the administration of Justice in causes Ecclesiastical within that
Province, which are partly executed by himself in his own person, and partly,
and more generally by several persons nominated and authorized by him, being
learned in the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, in those several places
whereunto they are deputed and appointed by the said Archbishop: which several
places, as we are informed, they severally hold, by several grants, for their
several lives; as namely Sir Henry Marten Knight, has and holds by the
grants of the said Archbishop, the Offices, and Places of the Deane of the
Arches, and Judge, or Master of the Prerogative Court, for the natural life of
the said Sir Henry Marten, Sir Charles Caesar Knight, has and holds by
grants of the said Archbishop, the Places or Offices of Judge of the Audience,
and master of the Faculties, for the term of the natural life of the said Sir
Charles Caesar, Sir Thomas Ridly Knight, has and holds by the grant of the
said Archbishop, the Place, or Office of Vicar General, to the said
Archbishop. And Nathaniell Brent, Doctor of the Laws, has and holds by the
grant of the said Archbishop, the Office or Place of Commissary to the said
Archbishop, as of his proper and peculiar Dioces of Canterbury: And likewise
the several Registers, of the Arches, Prerogative, Audience, Faculties, and of
the Vicar General, and Commissary And of Canterbury, hold their places by
Grants from the said Archbishop respectively. whereas the said Archbishop in
some or all of these several places and jurisdictions does or may sometimes
assume unto his personal and proper judicature, order or direction some
particular Causes, Actions, or Cases, at his pleasure. And for as much as the
said Archbishop cannot at this present in his own person attend these services
which are otherwise proper for his cognizance, and jurisdiction, and which, as
Archbishop of Canterbury, he might and ought in his own person to have
performed and executed in causes and matters Ecclesiastical in the proper
function of Archbishop of that Province. WE therefore of our Regal power, and
of our Princely care and providence, that nothing should be defective in the
Order, Discipline, Government, or right of the Church, have thought sit by the
service of some other learned and Reverend Bishops to be named by us to supply
those things which the said Archbishop ought or might in the cases aforesaid to
have done, but for this present cannot perform the same. KNOW ye therefore,
that We reposing especial trust and confidence in your approved Wisdoms,
Learning, and Integrity, have nominated, authorized and appointed, and do by
these presents nominate, authorize, and appoint you the said George, Lord
Bishop of London, Richard Lord Bishop of Durham, John Lord Bishop of Rochester,
John Lord Bishop of Oxford, and William Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, or any
four, three, or two of you to do, execute, and perform all and every those
Acts, matters, and things, any way touching, or concerning the power
jurisdiction or authority of the Archbishop of Canterbury, in Causes or
matters Ecclesiastical, as amply, fully, and effectually, to all intents and
purposes as the said Archbishop himself might have done. And we do hereby
command you and every of you to attend, perform, and execute this Our Royal
pleasure, in and touching the Premises, until we shall declare our will and
pleasure to the contrary. And we do further hereby will and command the said
Archbishop of Canterbury quietly and without interruption to permit and suffer
you the said George Bishop of London, Richard Bishop of Durham, John Bishop of
Rochester, John Bishop of Oxford; and William Bishop of Bath and Wells, any
four, three, or two of you to execute and perform this our Commission
according to our Royal pleasure hereby signified. And we do further will and
command all and every other person and persons whom it may any way concern in
their several places or Offices to be attendant, observant, and obedient to
you and every of you, in the execution and performance of this our Royal Will
and Command, as they and every of them will answer the contrary at their
uttermost perils. Nevertheless we do hereby declare our Royal pleasure to
be, That they the said Sir Henry Marten, Sir Charles Caesar, Sir Thomas
Ridley, and Nathaniell Brent, in their several Offices and places aforesaid,
and all other Registers, Officers, and Ministers, in the several Courts,
Offices and Jurisdictions appertaining to the said Archbishop: shall quietly
and without interruption, hold, use, occupy, and enjoy their several Offices
and Places, which they now hold by the Grant of the said Archbishop, or of any
other former Archbishop of Canterbury, in such manner and form, and with those
benefits, privileges, powers, and authorities, which they now have, hold and
enjoy therein or there out, severally, and respectively, they and every of them
in their several places being attendant and obedient, unto you the said George
Bishop of London, Richard Bishop of Durham, John Bishop of Rochester, John
Bishop of Oxford, and William Bishop of Bath and Wells, or to any four, three,
or two of you, in all things according to the Tenor of this our Commission, as
they should or ought to have been unto the said Archbishop Himself, if this
Commission had not been had or made. IN WITNESS whereof we have caused these
Our Letters to be made Patents, Witness Our self at Westminster, the ninth
Day of October, in the third year of Our Reign.

Edmondes,
Per ipsum Regem.
Octo. The Dean of Canterburies speech, that the business could not go well
in the Isle of Re, there must be a Parliament, some must be sacrificed; that I
was as like as any; NOTE.
spoken to Doctor W. The same speech after, spoken to the same man by Sir
Dudly, Diggs. I told it when I heard it doubled: let me desire you not to
trouble your self with any reports till you see me forsake my other friends,
etc. Ita, ChapterR. The retreat out of the Isle of Re, November. My Lord D.
returned to Court; The Countess of Purbecke censured in the High Commission
for Adultery. December 25. I preached to the K. at Whit-Hall, January 29.
Tuesday, A resolution at the Council Table for a Parliament to begin, March
17. If the shires go on with levying money for the Navy, January 30. Wednesday
My L. D. of Buckinghams son was borne, New Moon die 26. The L. George. Feb.
5. Tuesday, The straining of the back, sinew of my right leg as I went with
his Majesty to Hampton Court, I kept in til Feb. 14. saving that upon Tuesday,
Saint Valentines day, I made a shift to go and Christen my L.D. son, the L.
George at Wallingford House, March 7. I preached at the opening of the
Parliament, but had much a do to stand, I continued lame long after.

June 1. An. 1628. An. 1628.
Whitsunday I preached at Whit-Hall, June 11. my L.D. of Buckingham voted in
the House of Commons to be the cause or causes of all grievances in the
Kingdom June 12. Thursday, I was complaind of by the House of Commons for
warranting D. Manwarings Sermons to the Press. June 13. D. Manwaring answered
for himself before the Lords, NOTE.
and the next day being Saturday June 14. was censured: after his censure my
cause was called to the report. The same day the house of Commons were making
their Remonstrance to the King. One head was Innovation of Religion, therein
they named my Lord the Bishop of Winchester and my self: NOTE.
one in the House stood up and said, now we have named these Persons, lets
think of some causes why we did it: Sir Edward Cook answered, have we not
named my Lord of Buckingham without showing a cause, and may we not be as bold
with them. This Remonstrance was delivered to the King Tuesday June 17.
Thursday June 26. the session of Parliament ended and was proroged to Oct. 20.
Tuesday July 1. my conge deslier was signed by the King, for the Bishopprick of
London July 15. Saint Swithin, and fair with us, I was translated to the
Bishopric of London, the same day the L. Weston was made Lord Treasurer:
Saturday August 9. A terrible salt rhume in my left eye, had almost put me into
a Fever, Tuesday August 12. my L. D. of Buckingham went toward Portsmouth to
go for Rochell, Saturday August 23. Saint Bartholemews Eve, the D. of
Buckingham slain at Portsmouth by one Leiutenant Felton about 9. in the
morning. August 24. The news of his death came to Croyden, where it found my
self and the Bishops of Winchester, Elye, and Carlisle, at the consecration of
Bishop Mountague for Chichester with my Lords Grace.

What a professed Votary and Creature this Bishop was to the D. of Buckingham
will appear by these his special Prayers for him, written with his own hand,
in his book of private Prayers and Devotions found in his Chamber at the Tower,
P. 164.165.166. much used, as is evident by the fouleing of the leaves with his
fingers.

Pro Duce Buckinghamiae.
GRacious Father I humbly beseech thee, bless the Marquess was first written,
but he being made Duke whiles he continued in Spain, Marquess was blotted
out, and Duke put in over head.
Duke of Buckingham with all spiritual and temporal blessings, but especially
spiritual: make and continue him faithful to his Prince, serviceable to his
Country, devout in thy truth and Church. A most happy Husband and a blessed
Father, filled with the constant love and honor of his Prince, that all thy
blessings may flow upon himself, and his posterity after him. Continue him a
true-hearted friend to me thy poor servant, whom thou have honored in his
eyes, make my heart religious and dutiful, to thee, and in, and under thee,
true, and secret, and stout, and prudent in all things which he shall be
pleased to commit unto me. Even so Lord, and make him continually to serve
thee, that thou may bless him; Through Jesus Christ our only Lord and
Savior, Amen.

That he was privy to his Journey into Spain with Prince Charles, (now our
Sovereign, which voyage was See the Earl of Bristolls Article of Impeachment
against the Duke, May 1. 1626.
purposly plotted to pervert him in his Religion, and reconcile him to Rome) is
apparent by this ensuing prayer, annexed to the former.
O Most merciful God and gracious Father, the Prince has put himself to a
great adventure. I humbly beseech thee make clear way before him, give thine
Angels charge over him, be with him thy self in mercy, power, and protection,
in every step of his Journey, The Spanish Journey.
in every moment of his time, in every consultation and address for Action,
till thou bring him back with safety, honor, and contentment to do thee
service in this place.

Bless his most trusty and faithful servant the Lord Duke of Buckingham; That
he may be diligent in service, provident in business, wise and happy in
Council, for the honor of thy name, the good of the Church, the preservation
of the Prince, the contentment of the King, the satisfaction of the State:
preserve him I humbly beseech thee, from all envy that attends him; And bless
him that his eyes may see the Prince safely delivered to the King and State.
And after it live long in happiness to do them and thee service through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Isle of Ree 1627.
After this upon the Dukes unhappy voyage to Ree, (which lost Rochell, and all
the Protestant Towns in France) he made this special prayer for him.
O Most gracious God and merciful Father. Thou art the Lord of Hosts, all
victory over our Enemies, all safety against them is from thee: I humbly
beseech thee go out with our Armies, and bless them; Bless my dear Lord the
Duke that is gone Admiral with them, that Wisdom may attend all his
Counsels, and courage and success, all his enterprises That by his and their
means, thou will be pleased to bring safety to this Kingdom, strength and
Comfort to Religion, victory and reputation to our Country. And that he may
return with the Navy committed to him, and with safety, honor and love both
of Prince and People; Grant this for thy dear sons sake Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

When this Duke was slain, he made this special prayer on that occasion, much
daubed through frequent use, with his fingers.
O Merciful God thy Judgments are often secret, always just: At this time
they were temporally heavey upon the poor Duke of Buckingham, upon me, upon
all that had the honor to be near him. Lord thou have (I doubt not) given him
rest, and light, and blessedness in thee, give also I beseech the comfort, to
his Lady; bless his Children, uphould his friends, forget not his servants,
Lay open the bottom of all that irreligious and graceless plot that spilt
his blood. Bless and preserve the King from danger and from security in these
dangerous times. And for my self O Lord, though the sorrows of my heart are
enlarged in that thou gave this most honorable friend into my bosom, and
have taken him again from me, yet blessed be thy name, O Lord, that have given
me patience. I shall now see him no more till we meet at the Resurrection. O
make that joyful to us, and all thy faithful servants. Even for Jesus Christ
his sake, Amen.

But to return to his Diary, where he proceeds thus, Wednesday August 27, Mr.
Elphinston brought me a very gracious Message from his Majesty upon my Lord
Duks death, August 30. As I was going out to meet the Corpse of the Duke, which
that night was brought to London, Sir W. Fleetwood brought me very gracious
letters from the K. Majesty written with his own hand. Tuesday September 19.
The first time that I went to Court after the death of the D. of Buckingham my
dear Lord; The gracious speech which that night the King was pleased to use to
me, Saturday Sept. 27. I fell sick and came sick from Hampton Court. Tuesday,
September ult. I was sore plucked with this sickness, etc. Monday October 20.
I was forced to put on a Trusse for a rupture, I know not how occasioned,
unless it were with swinging of a book for my exercise in private, November
29. Felton was executed at Tiborne for killing the Duke, and afterward his
body was sent to be hanged in Chains at Portsmouth; It was Saturday and Saint
Andrews even and he killed the Duke upon Saturday Saint Bartholmews even.
December 25. I preached at Whit-Hall.

Wednesday December 30. The Statutes which I had drawn, for the reducing of
the factious, and tumultuary election of Proctors in Oxford to several
Colleges, by course, and so to continue, were passed in Convocation at Oxford,
no voices dissenting Monday January 26. The 240. Greek Manuscrips were sent to
London House; these I got my Lord of Pembrooke to buy, and give to Oxford.

Saturday night January 31. I lay in Court, NOTE.
I dreamed that I put of my Rochet all save one sleeve, and when I would have
put it on again I could not find it, Friday February 6. Sir Thomas Roe sent
to London House 20. Manuscripts in Greek to have a Catalogue drawn, and the
Books to be for Oxford. Monday March 2. the Parliament to be disolved,
declared by Proclamation upon some disobedient passages to his Majesty that day
in the House of Commons, March^ 10. NOTE.
Thursday the Parliament dissolved, the King present. The Parliament which was
broken up this March 10th. labored my ruin.

March 29. 1629. An. 1629.
Sunday, two papers were found in the Deane of Paul's his Yeard before his
house, the one was to this effect, concerning my self, Laud look to thy self
be assured thy life is sought, as thou art the fountain of all wickedness;
NOTE.
repent repent thee of thy monstrous sins before thou be taken out of the
world etc. And assure thy self, neither God nor the world can endure such a
vile Counceller to live, or such a whisperer, or to this effect. The other was
as had as this against the Lord Treasurer: Master Deane delivered both papers
to the King that night. Lord I am a grevious sinner, but I beseech thee deliver
my soul from them that hate me without a cause.

April 2 Maunday Thursday as it came this year about three of the clock in
the morning the Lady Duchess of Buckingham was delivered of her son, the Lord
Francis Villiers, whom I Christened, Tuesday 21. I preached: Wednesday, May 13.
this morning about three of the clock, the Queen was delivered before her
time of a son, he was christened and dyed within short space. His name
Charles. This was Ascension Eve. May 14. The next day being Ascension day,
paulo ante mediam noctem: I buried him at Westminster. If God repair not this
loss, I much fear, it was Descention Day to this State, August 14. dies erat
veneris, I fell sick upon the way toward the Court at Woodstooke, I took up
my*lodging at my Ancient friends house Master Francis Windebancke, there I lay
in a most grevious burning Fever till Monday September 7. on which day I had
my last fit, I was brought so low that I was not able to return toward my
own house at London till Tuesday October 20. I went first to present my humble
duty and service to his Majesty at Denmark house Monday October 26. After
this I had diverse plunges, and was not able to put my self into the service of
my place till Palm sunday which was March 21.

April 10. The Earl of Pembrooke Lord Steward being Chancellor of the
University of Oxford dyed of an Apoplexy, April 12. The University of Oxford
chose me Chauncellor, and word was brought me of it the next morning. Wednesday
April 28. The University came up to the Ceremony, and gave me my Oath.
Saturday May 29. Prince Charles was borne at Saint James paulo ante horam
primam post merediem, I was in the house three hours before, and had the
honor and the happiness to see the Prince before he was full one hour old.
(The King sent this Letter to him under the Privy signet to give him notice of
the Princes Birth.)

Charles Rex.
RIght Reverend Father in God, Right trusty and well beloved Counselor, We
greet you well, whereas it has pleased God of infinite grace and goodness, to
vouchsafe unto Us a Son, borne at our Manor of Saint Jamses, the 29 th. day
of this present month of May, to the great comfort not only of our selves in
particular, but to the general joy, and contentment of all our loving
Subjects, as being a principal means for the establishment of the prosperous
estate and peace of this and other our Kingdoms whose welfare we do, and
will ever prefer before any other earthly blessing that can befall us in this
life. We therefore according to the laudable Custom of Our Royal Progenitors
in like case heretofore used, have thought fit to make known unto you these
glad Tidings, being well assured, that with all dutiful and loving affection,
you will embrace whatsoever may make for the prosperous advancement of the
public good And to this purpose, We have sent these our Letters unto you, by
Our trusty and welbeloved Servant, Sir William Segar, Knight of the Garter,
principal King of Arms, being an Officer of Honor, specially by Us, hereunto
appointed for the more Honorable expression of Our good affection to You;
Given under Our Signet, at Our Palace of Westminster, the last day of May: In
the Sixth year of Our Reign,

Ex per Kirkham.
To the Right Reverend Father in God, Our Right Trusty, and Well beloved
Counselor, William, Lord ^^th. of LONDON.
Sunday, May 27. I had the honor as Deane of the Chapel, my Lords Grace of
Canterbury, being infirm, to Christen Prince Charles at Saint Jamses. Hora
fere quinta pomeridiana. Sunday Aug. 22. I preached at Fulham, etc. Wednesday,
Octo. 6. I was taken with an extreme Cold, and lamnesse as I was waiting upon
St. George his Feast at Windsor, and forced to return to Fulham, where I
continued ill about a week. Friday Octo. 29. I removed my Family from Fulham,
to London House. Thursday, Novem. 4. Leighton was degraded at the High
Commission. Tuesday 9. of Novem. That night Leighton broke out of the Fleet;
The Warden says he got, or was helped over the wall. The Warden professes he
knew not this, till Wednesday noone, he told it not me till Thursday night, he
was taken again in Bedfordshire, and brought back to the Fleet, within a
fortnight. Novem. 26. Friday, part of his sentence was executed upon him at
Westminster. Tuesday, December. 7. The King swore the peace with Spain. Don Carlo
Coloma was Ambassador. December 25. I preached to the King Christmas day,
January 16. Sunday, I consecrated Saint Katharin Creed-Church, in London. Janu.
21. The Lord Wentworth, Lord president of the North, and I, etc. In my little
Chamber at London House, Friday. Janu. 23. I consecrated the Church of Saint
Giles in the Fields. NOTE.
Febr. 23. Ashwensday, I preached in Court at White Hall: March 20. Sunday, His
Majesty put his great Case of Conscience to me about, etc. which I after
answered. God bless him in it.

March 27. 1631. Anno. 1631
Coronation day, and Sunday I preached at Saint Paul's Cross. Easter Monday.
April. 10. I fell ill with the great pain in my throat for a week. It was
with cold taken after heat in my service. And then with an Ague. A fourth part
almost of my Family were sick this spring. Tuesday June 7. I Consecrated the
Chapel at Hamer-Smith. Saturday June 26. My nearer acquaintance began to
settle with D. S. I pray God bless us in it. Janu. 26. My business with L. T.
etc. about the Trees which the King had given me in Shotover, toward my
building in Saint John's at Oxford, which work I resolved on in November. last.
And published it to the College, about the end of March: This day discovered
unto me, that which I was sorry, to find in L. T. (Weston) and P. C.
(Cottington) sed transeat. July 23. The first stone was laid of my building at
Saint John's. Aug. 23. In this June, and July were the great disorders in
Oxford, by appealing from Doctor Smith, then Vice chanceler. The chief
Ringleaders were, Master Foord of Magdalen-Hall, and Mr. Thorn of Bailiell
College. The Proctors, Master Atherton Bruch, and Master John Doughtie
received their appeals, as if it had not been Perturbatio pacis, etc. The
Vicechancelor was forced in a Statutable way to appeal to the King. The King
with all the Lords of his Council, then present, heard the Cause at
Wood-stocke. Aug. 23. 1631. being Tuesday in the afternoon; the sentence upon
the hearing was, That Foord, Thorn, and Hodges of Exeter College, should be
banished the University, and both the Proctors were commanded to come into the
Convocation House, and there resign their Office, that two others might be
named out of the same Colleges: Dr. Prideaux, Rector of Exeter College, and
Doctor Wilkinson, Principal of Magdalen-Hall, received a sharp admonition for
their mis-behaviour in this business. Monday Aug. 29. I went to Brent-Wood,
and the next day began my Visitation there, and so went on and finished it.
Friday, Nov. 4. The Lady Mary Princes, borne at Saint Jamses, inter horas
quintam and sextam matutinas. It was thought she was borne three weeks before
her time. December. 25. I preached at Court. Febr. 15. I preached at Court,
Ashwednesday, Febr. 19. D.S. came to my Chamber, troubled about going quite
from Court at Spring. 1. Sunday in Lent after Sermon.

April 1. 1632. Anno 1632.
I preached at Court. Saturday, May 26. Trinity Sunday Eve, I consecrated the
Lord Treasurers Chapel at Roehampton. May 29. Tuesday, my meeting and settling
upon express terms with, K.B. in the Gallerie at Green-witch, In which
business God bless me. June 15. Master Francis Windebanke, NOTE.
my old friend was sworn Secretary of State, which place I obtained for him
of my Gracious Master, King Charles. June 18. Monday, I married my Lord
Treasurer Westons eldest son to the Lady Francis, Daughter to the Duke of
Lenox: at Roehampton. June 25. D. S. with me at Fulham. Cum Ma: etc. July 10.
Doctor Juxon, NOTE.
the Deane of Worcester; at my suite, sworn Clarke of His Majesty's Closet,
That I might have one, that I might trust wear His Majesty, if I grew weak,
or infirm, as I must have a time. July 17. I consecrated the Church, at
Stanmore Magna, in Middlesex, built by Sir John Walstenham. December. 2. Sunday,
The Small-Poxe appeared upon His Majesty, but God be thanked he had a very
gentle disease of it. December. 27. Thursday, the Earl of Arundell set forward
toward the Low Countries, to fetch the Queen of Bohemia, and her Children.
December. 25. I preached to the King, Christmas day, Janu. 1. My being with K. B.
this day in the afternoon, troubled me much, God give me a good issue out of
it. January 15. K. B. and I unexpectedly came to some clearer Declaration of
our selves, which God bless, etc. Febr. 11. Monday night, till Tuesday
morning, the great fire upon London Bridge, many Houses burnt down. Wednesday
Febr. 13. The Feoffees, that pretended to buy in impropriations, were dissolved
in the Chequer Chamber. They were the maine instruments for the Puritan
faction, NOTE.
to undo the Church. The Criminal part reserved, Febr. 18. Thursday, Master
Chancellor of London. Doctor Ducke brought me word, how miserably I was
slandered by some seperatists: I pray God give me patience, and forgive them,
March 6. Ashwensday, I preached at White Hall.

April 13. 1633. Anno. 1633.
The great meeting at the Counsel Table, etc. when the Earl of Holland made
his submission to the King. May 13. Monday I set out of London to attend King
Charles into Scotland, May 24. The King was to enter into York in State, June
6. I came to Barwicke: that night I dreamed, that K. B. sent to me in
Westminster Church; that he was now as desirous to see me, as I him; and that
he was then entering into the Church: I went with hope, but met another in the
middle of the Church; who seemed to know the business, and laughed, but K. B.
was not there. June 8. Whitsun. Eve, I received Letters from K. B. unalterable,
etc. By this if I return. I shall see how true or false my Dream is, etc.
Saturday, June 15. I was sworn Councellor of Scotland, June 18. Tuesday after
Trinity Sunday. K. Charles Crowned at Holy-rood Church in Edenborough. I never
saw more expressions of joy; then were after it, etc. June 19. Wednesday, I
received second Letters from K. B. no changling, etc. within three hours after
other Letters from K. B. believe all that I say etc. June 29. Friday, Letters
from K. B. no D. true if not to my contentment, etc. June 30. I preached to His
Majesty in the Chapel in Holy-rood House at Edenborough. July 1. Monday I
went over Forth, to Brunt Island. July 2. Tuesday to Saint Andrews. July 3.
Wednesday, over Taye to Dundee. July 4. Thursday to Faukland July 7. Sunday to
S. Johnston. July 8. Monday to Dumblaine, and Stirling, my dangerous, and cruel
Journey crossing part of the Hilands by Coach, which was a wonder there: July
9. Tuesd. to Lithcoe, and so to Edenborough. July 10. Wednesday, His Majesty's
dangerous passage from Brunt Island to Edenborough. July 11. Thursday, I began
my Journie from Edinburgh toward London. July 13. Friday, that night at
Anderweeke, I dreamed that L. L. The Lord of Holland.
(the Bishop of Lincoln) came and offered to sit above me at the Council
Table, and that L. H. came in and placed him there. July 20. Saturday, the King
came from Scotland to Greenwich, having come Post from Barwicke in four days.
Friday, July 26. I came to my House at Fulham, from Scotland. July 28. Sunday,
K. B. and I met; all the strange discourses mistaken, I went away much
troubled, but all settled again well. Aug. 3. Saturday following, Sunday Aug.
4. news came to Court of the Lord Archbishop of Canterburies death, and the
King-resolved presently to give it me, which he did. Aug. 6. Aug. 4. That very
morning at Greenwich, there came one to me seriously, and that avowed ability
to perform it, and offered me to be a Cardinal: I went presently to the
King, and acquainted him both with the thing and person. NOTE.
Aug. 7. Wednesday, Absolute settlement between me and K B. after I had made
known my case at large. God bless me in it.

Aug. 14. Wednesday. A report brought me, that I was poisoned. Aug. 17.
Saturday. NOTE.
I had a serious offer made me again to be a Cardinal, I was then from Court,
but so soon as I came thither (which was Wednesday. Aug. 21. I acquainted His
Majesty with it: But my answer again was, that some what dwelt within me,
which would not suffer that, till Rome, were other then it is. Aug. 25. Sunday,
My Election to the Archbishopprick was returned to the King, then being at
Wood-stocke, Sep. 19. I was translated to the Archbishopricke of Canterbury,
the Lord make me able, etc. The day before, NOTE.
when I first went to Lambeth, my Coach-Horses and men sunk to the bottom of
the Thames in the Ferry-Boate, which was over laden, but I praise God for it, I
lost neither man nor Horse. Novem. 13. Wednesday, Richard Boyer, who had
formerly named himself Lodowick was brought into the Star Chamber, for most
grossly misusing me, and accusing me, of no less then Treason, etc. He had
broke prison for Felony when he did this. His censure is upon record. And God
forgive him. About the beginning of this month, the Lady Davis; prophecy
against me, that I should very few days outlive the Fifth of Novem. And a
little after that, one Green came into the Court at Saint Jamses, with a great
sword by his side, swearing the King should do him Justice against me, or he
would take another course with me. All the wrong I ever did this man was, that
being a poor Printer, I procured him of the Company of the Stationers five
pounds a year during his life. God preserve me and forgive him; He was
committed to Newgate. Sunday, Novem. 24. in the afternoon, I Christened King
CHARLES His second son, James Duke of YORK, at Saint Jamses December. 10. and
29. twice or thrice in the interim, I advertised His Majesty of the false-hood
and practice that was against me by L. T. etc. This brake out then.

March 30. 1634. Anno. 1634
Palm Sunday I preached to the King at White Hall May 13. I received the
seals of my being chosen Chanceller of the University of Dublin in Ireland; to
which office I was chosen September 14. 1633. There were now and somewhat
before great factions in Court, and I doubt many private ends followed to the
prejudice of public service. Good Lord preserve me, June 11. Wednesday Master
Pryn sent me a letter about his censure in the Star Chamber for his
Histriomastix, and what I said at that Censure, in which he has many ways,
(has no ways) mistaken me, and spoken untruth of me, June 16. I showed this
letter to the King and by his Command But it was with somewhat a sharp letter,
the Copy whereof was found amongst his papers.
sent it to Master Attorney Noye, June 17. Master Attorney sent for Mr. Pryn to
his Chamber, showed him the letter, asked him whether it were his hand. Mr.
Pryn said he could not tell unles he might read it, the letter being given into
his hand, But it was with somewhat a sharp letter, the Copy whereof was found
amongst his papers.
he tare it into small pieces, and threw it out at window, fearing it seems an
Ore tenus, For this, June 18. Mr. And Mr. Attorney going to his close stool,
needing a paper for that purpose.
Attorney brought him into the Star- Chamber where all this appeared, I there
forgave him July 26. I received word from Oxford that the Statutes were
accepted, and published according to my letters in the Convocation house that
week, August 9. Saturday Master William Noy, his Majesty's Attorney General,
died at Brainford, circa horam noctis decimam; And Sunday morning August 10.
his servant brought me word of it, to Croyden before I was out of my bed,
Because nothing was there proved, for Mr. Attorney knew not how to proceed.
I have lost a dear friend of him, and the Church the greatest she had of his
condition since she needed any such, August 11. One Robert Seal of Saint
Albons came to me at Croydon and told me somewhat wildly about a Vision he had
at Shrovetide last, about not preaching the word sincerely to the people: And a
hand appeared unto him and death, and a voice bid him go tell it the
Metropolitan of Lambeth, and made him swear he would do so, and I believe the
poor man was over-growne with fancy: So I troubled my self no further with
him or it, Aug. 30. Saturday at Oatelands the Queen sent for me, and gave me
thanks for a business, with which she trusted me, her promise then that she
would be my friend, NOTE.
and that I should have immediate address to her when I had occasion,
September 30. I had almost fallen into a Fever with a cold I took, and it
held me about three weeks, December 1. Monday my Ancient friend E. R. came to
me and performed great kindness which I may not forget, Dec. 4. Ian. 8 I
married the Lord Charles Harberts, and the Lady Marie Daughter to the Duke of
Buckingham in the Closet at White Hall, February 5. Thursday I was put into the
great Committee of trade, and the Kings revenew, etc. Sunday March 1. The great
business which the King Commanded me to think on, and give him account, and
L. T. Saturday March 14. I was named one of the Commissioners for the Exchequer
upon the death of Richard Lord Weston, Lord High Treasurer of England. That
evening K. B. sent to speak with me at White Hall, a great deal of free and
clear expression, if it will continue: Monday March 16. I was called against
the next day into the foreign Committee by the King, March 22. Palm Sunday I
preached to the King at White Hall,

Apr. 9. An. 1635. Anno 1635.
And from thence forward all in firm Kindness between K.B. and me. May 18.
Whitsunday at Greenwitch my account to the Queen put off till Trinity Sunday,
May 24. then given her by my self. NOTE.
And assurance of all that was desired by me, etc. May, June, July. In these
months the troubles at the Commission for the Treasurye. And the difference
which happened between the Lord Cottington and my self, etc. Saturday July 11.
Wednesday July 22. two sad meetings which K. B. and how occasioned, July 12.
Sunday at Theobalds the soap business was ended, and settled again upon the
new Corporation, against my offer for the old sope-boylers, yet my offer made
the Kings profit double two Years aftet the new Corporation was raised; how it
is performed let them look to it, whom his Majesty shall be pleased to trust
with his Treasurers staff. In this business, and some other of great
consequence, during the Commission for the Treasury: My old friend Sir F. W.
forsook me, and joined with the Lord Cottington, which put me to the exercise
of a great deal of patience, etc. September 2. Wednesday I was in attendance
upon the King at Woodstocke, and went thence to Cudsden to see the House which
Doctor John Bancroft then Lord Bishop of Oxford, had there built to be a house
for the Bishops of that sea for ever. He having built that house at my
persuasion, September 3. Thursday I went privately from the Bishop of Oxfords
house at Cudsden to Saint John's in Oxford to see my building there, and give
some directions for the last furnishing of it, and returned the same night
staying there not two hours, Sept. 23. I went to Saint Paul's to view the
building and returned that night to Croyden, September 29.. The E. of Arundell
brought an old man out of Shropshire. He was this present Michalmas day showed
to the King and the Lords for a man of 152. or 153. years of Age, October 26.
Monday, this morning between four and five of the Clock lying at Hampton
Court, I dreamed* that I was going out in have, and that when I came into my
outer Chamber. There was my servant W. Pennell; in the same riding suit which
he had on that day senight at Hampton Court with me: me-thoughts I wondered to
so him, (for I left him sick at home,) and asked him how he did and what he
made there? And that he answered me, he came to receive my blessing, and with
that fell on his knees: that hereupon I laid my hand on his head and prayed
over him, and therewith awaked. When I was up I told this to them in my
Chamber, and added that, I should, find Pennell dead or dying: my Coach came
and when I came home I found him past sense, and giving up the Ghost; so my
prayers (as they had frequently before) commended him to God. Nov. 22. Saturday
Charles Elector Palatine, came to White Hall to the King. November. 30. Saint
Andrews day, Monday Charles Prince Elector Palatine, the Kings Nephew, was with
me at Lambeth, and at solemn Evening prayer, December 14. Monday Charles
Prince Elector, came suddenly upon me, and dined with me at Lambeth, December
25. Christmas day, Charles Prince Elector, received the Communion with the King
at White Hall, He kneeled a little beside on the left hand. He sat before the
Communion upon a stool by the wall before the Traverse, and had another
stool, and a Cushine before him to kneel at, December 28. Monday Jnnocents
Day, about 10. at night, the Queen was delivered at Saint Iamses of a
Daughter, Princess Elizabeth, I Christened her on Saturday following, January
2. Tuesday. February 2. Candlemas day my nearer care of I. S. was professed and
his promise to be guided by me, and absolutely settled on Friday after, NOTE.
February 5. February 28. I consecrated Doctor Roger Manwaring Bishop of Saint
David's, March 6. Sunday William Iuxon Lord Bishop of London made Lord High
Treasurer of England, no Churchman had it since Henry the 7ths. time: I pray
God bless him to carry it so, that the Church may have honor, and the King
and the State service and contentment by it. And now if the Church will not
hold up themselves under God, I can do no more.

April 7. 1636. Anno. 1636
Thursday the bill came in this day that two dyed of the plague at
White-Chappell, God bless us through the year, May 16. Monday the settlement
between L. M. St. and me, God bless me, May 17. Tuesday I visited the Deane
and Chapter of Saint Paul's London etc. May 19. Thursday the Agreement between
me and L. K. Ch: which began very strangly, and ended just as I thought it
would, June 21. Tuesday my hearing before the King about my right to visit both
the Universities Iure Metropolitico. It was ordered with me; The hearing was at
Hampton Court June 22. Wednesday, the Statuts of Oxford finished, and published
in Convocation. August 3 Wednesday night toward the morning, I dreamed, that
L. M. St. came to me the next day, and showed me all the kindness I could
ask. And that Thursday, August 4. He did come and was very kind toward me,
somnijs tamen haud multum fido, August 19. Friday* I was in great hazard of
breaking my right Leg, August 19. Monday King Charles and Queen Mary entered
Oxford, being to be there entertained by me as Chauncellor of the University.
August 30. on Tuesday I entertained them at Saint John's College. It was Saint
Felix his day and all passed happily. Charles Prince Elector Palatin, and his
Brother Prince Rupertus was there, these two were presented in Convocation, and
with other Nobles were made Masters of Arts, Wednesday August 31. they left
Oxford, and I returned homewards the day after, having first entertaind all
the heads of Houses together, October 14. Friday night I dreamed marvelously
that the King was offended with me, and would cast me off* NOTE.
and tell me no cause why. Avertat Deus, for cause I have given none, November
20. Sunday night my fearful dream, Master Cob brought me word etc. December
24. Saturday night Christmas Eve that night I dreamed I went to se^^e M. St.
and found him with his Mother sitting in the room, it was a fair Chamber, he
went away and I went after, but missed him, and after tired my self extremely,
but neither could I find him, nor so much as the house again.

March 30. 1637. An. 1637.
Thursday I Christened the Lady Princess Anne, King Charles his second
Daughter, she was borne on Friday March 17: June 10. my book of Records in the
Tower which concerned the Clergy, and which I caused to be collected and
written in Vellam, was brought me finished. It Is ab. A. 20. Ed. 1. ad. An. 14.
Ed. 4. June 14. This day Io. Bastwicke Doctor of Physic. Henry Burton
Batchellor of Divinity, and William Prynne Barrester at Law, Were censured for
their libells against the Hierarchy of the Church, June 26. The speech J then
spoke in the Star Chamber was commanded by the King to be Printed; And it
came out June 25. June 26. This day Monday the Prince Elector and his brother
Prince Rupert began their Journey toward the Sea side, to return for Holland,
June 30. Friday. The above named three Libellers lost their Ears, July 7.
Friday a note was brought to me, of a short Libell pasted on the Cross in
Cheapside. That the Archbishop of Canterbury had his hand in persecuting the
Saints, and shedding the blood of the Martyrs, Memento for the last of June,
Tuesday July 11. Doctor Williams L. Bishop of Lincoln was Censured in the
Star Chamber for tampering and corrupting of witnesses in the Kings cause, July
24. being Monday, he was suspended by the High Commission, etc. August 3.
Thursday, I married James Duke of Lennox to the Lady Mary Villars, sole
Daughter to the Lord Duke of Buckingham, the Marriage was in my Chapel at
Lambeth, the day raynie* the King present, August 23. Wednesday my Lord Major
sent me a Libell found by the watch at the South-Gate of Paul's. That the
Devil had left that house to me, etc. Aug. 25. Friday another Libell brought
to me by an Officer of the High Commission, fastened to the Northgate of Saint
Paul's; NOTE.
That the Government of the Church of England is a Candle in the snuff going
out in a stench. The same day at night my Lord Major sent me another Libell,
hanged upon the Standard in Cheapside: My Speech in the Starr-Chamber set in a
kind of Pillery, etc. Tuesday, Aug. 29. Another short Libell against me in
verse. Sunday, Oct. 22. A great noise about the perverting of the Lady
New-port; Speech of it at the Council; my free speech there to the King
concerning the increasing of the Roman party; the freedom of Denmark House,
the carriage of Mr. Walter Mountague, and Sir Toby Matthew. The Queen acquainted
with all I said the very night, and highly displeased with me, and so
continues. December. 12. Tuesday. I had speech with the Queen a good space, and
all about the business of Master Mountague, but we parted fair.

April 29. 1638. Anno. 1638
The tumults in Scotland about the Service-Booke, offered to be brought in,
began July 23. 1637. And continued increasing by fitts, NOTE.
and has now brought that Kingdom in danger. No question but there is a great
concurrence between them, and the Puritan party in England, a great aim there
to destroy me in the Kings opinion, etc.

May 26. Saturday, James Lord Marquis Hamilton, set forth as the Kings
Commissioner to appease the tumults in Scotland. God prosper him, for God and
the King. June, My visitation then began of Merton College in Oxford, by my
visitors, was adjourned to my own hearing, against and upon Oct. 2. Oct. 2.3,
4. I sat upon this business these 3. days, and adjourned it to July 1. Inter
horas primam and tertiam, Lambeth. The Warden appeared very soul. Oct. 19.
News was brought to us as we sat in the Star Chamber, that the Queen Mother of
France was landed at Harwitch. Many and great apprehentions upon this business.
Oct. 31. The Queen Mother came into London and so to St. Jamses. Nov. 13. The
agreement between me, and A.S. etc. November 21. Wednesday, the General
Assembly in Scotland began to sit. November. 29. Thursday, the Proclamation
issued out for dissolving of the great Assembly in Scotland under pain of
Treason. December. 20. They sat notwithstanding and made many strange Acts till
December 20. which was Thursday. And then they rose. But have indicted another
Assembly against July next. Feb. 10. My book against Fisher the Jesuit, was
printed, and this day being Sunday, I delivered a Copy to His Majesty:
Tuesday, Feb. 12. NOTE.
That night I Dreamed that K. C. was to be married, to a ministers Widow: And
that I was called upon to do it: no Service-Booke could be found, and in my
own book, which I had, I could not find the Order for Marriage.

Wednesday, Coronation day, March 27. 1639. Anno 1639.
King Charles took his journey Northward, NOTE.
against the Scottish Covenanting Rebels. God of his infinite mercy bless him
with health and success. April 3. Wensday, Before the Kings going, I settled
with him a great business for the Queen, which I understood she would never
move, for her self. The Queen gave me great thanks. And this day I waited
purposely on her, to give her thanks, for her Gracious acceptance, she was
pleased to be very free with me, and to promise me freedom. April 29.
Monday, This day the King went from York toward New Castle, but stays at
Durham, for a week at least, May 28. His Majesty encamped two miles West from
Barwick, by Tweade. June 4. Whitsun-Tuesday, as I was going to do my duty to
the Queen, an Officer of the Lord Majors met me and delivered me two very
seditious papers; the one to the Lord Major and Aldermen; The other to excite
the Apprentices, etc. both subscribed by John Lilburne, a prisoner in the
Fleet, sentensed in the Star Chamber, etc. June 5. Wednesday, I delivered
both these to the Lords of the Council. Saturday, June 15. Monday, June 17.
The Peace concluded between the King and the Scottish Rebels. God make it
safe and Honorable to the King, and the Kingdom, Jun. 28. Friday, I sent the
remainder of my Manuscripts to Oxford, being in number 576. and about 100. of
them were Hebrew, Greek, Arabicke, and Persian, I had formerly sent them above
700. Volumes. Aug. 1. Thursday His Majesty came back from his Northern
Journey, to Theobalds, and to White Hall, on Saturday Aug. 3. Many varieties
since the Assembly held and ended in Scotland. NOTE.
The Bishops thrust out, the Parliament there sitting. Oct. 11. and 12. Friday
and Saturday, the Spanish Navy was set upon by the Hollanders, in the Downs.
The fight began to be hot, when they were past Dover. They were in all near
60. Sail. The Spaniards suffered much in that fight: not without our
dishonor, that they should begin the fight there: But this is one of the
effects of the Scottish dareings. Monday, December 2. A. Sh: My Surgeon in
trust, gave me great and unexpected ease in my great infirmity. But after the
weakness continued.

Thursday, December. 5. The King declared His resolution for a Parliament, in
case of the Scottish Rebellion: The first movers to it, were my Lord Deputy of
Ireland, my L. M. Hamilton, NOTE.
and my self. And a resolution voted at the board, to assist the King in
extraordinary ways, if the Parliament should prove peevish, and refuse, etc.
Friday, Janu. 24. At night, I dreamed that my Father (who dyed 46. years
since) came to me, and to my thinking he was as well, and as cheerful, as ever
I saw him; He asked me what I did there: And after some speech, I asked him,
how long he would stay with me? he answered, he would stay till he had me
along with him. I am not moved with Dreams, NOTE.
yet I thought fit to remember this. Janu. 26. Sunday, I received the Queens
Gracious assurance of Her favor, in the business which His Majesty had
committed to me with othess.

April 13. 1640. Anno. 1640
Monday The Parliament sat down, called about the Rebellion of Scotland;
April 14. Tuesday; The Convocation began at Saint Paul's, April 28. Friday,
The hot contestation in the Lords House which should have praecedence, the
Kings supply, or the Subjects greivances? voted in the upper house for the
King, May 5. Thursday, The Parliament ended, and nothing done, the Convocation
continued, May 9. Saturday, A paper pasted upon the Old Exchange, animating
Prentises to sack my house, upon the Monday following, early, May 11. Monday
night at midnight my house at Lambeth was beset with 500 persons of the Rascal
Routous multitude; I had notice and strengthened the house as well as I cold,
and God be blessed I had no harm, since I have got Canons and fortified my
house as well as I can, and hope all may be safe: But yet Libells are
continually set up in all places of note in the City, May 21. Thursday, NOTE.
One of the Chief being taken was condemned at Southwark and hanged and
quartered on Saturday morning following May 13. but before this May 15. some of
these mutinus people came in the day time and brake the White-Lyon Prison and
let loose their fellows, both out of that Prison, and the Kings Bench, and the
other Prisoners also out of the White-Lyon, May 29. Friday, The Convocation
sat after the ending of the Parliament, till May 29. and then ended, having
made in that time 17. Canons, NOTE.
which I hope will be useful to the Church.

May 29. The Bishop of Gloucester, Godfrey Goodman, suspended for notorious
scandal to the Church, in refusing, First to subscribe to the Canons, and
after to profess a reservation. He had long before been suspected, as
inclining to popery.

The Canons were all Voted, Nemine Dissentiente; Save this Bishop, who had in
general consented before. July 10. Friday I took my Oath to the new Canons at
the Council Table, and so did my Lord Bishop of London, and after him the
Bishop of Gloucester submitted himself, and took the Oath, and was released
out of prison, by the Kings command.

July 22. I Christened the Kings young son, Henry, at Oatlands; the Queen was
there happily delivered of him, on Wednesday, July 8. being the day of the
solemn Fast, about 6. of the Clock in the Evening. Aug. 20. Thursday, His
Majesty took his journey toward the North in have, upon information that the
Scots were entered the Monday before into England, and meant to be at New Castle,
by Saturday. Aug. 22. Saturday a Libell was brought me, found in Coven-Garden,
animating the Apprentices and Soldiers to fall upon me, in the Kings absence.
Septem. 21. I received a Letter from one John Rocket, a name and person
unknown to me. He was among the Scotts as he traveled through the Bishopric
of Durham: he heard them enveigh and rail at me exceedingly, and they hoped
shortly to see me as the Duke was, slain by one least suspected. His Letter
and advise to me, to look to my self. Sept. 24. A great Council of the Lords
were called by the King to York, to consider what way was best to be taken to
get out the Scotts, and this day the meeting began at York, and continued till
October 28. Octo. 22. Thursday, the High Commission sitting at Saint Paul's,
because of the troubles of the times: very near 2000. Brownists made a tumult
at the end of the Court, toare down all the Benches in the Consistory; And
cried out, they would have no Bishop, nor no High Commission. October 22.
Tuesday, Simon and Judes Eve, I went into my upper studdie, to see some
Manuscripts, NOTE.
which I was sending to Oxford. In that studdie hung my picture, taken by the
life, and coming in I found it fallen down upon the face, and lying on the
flower, the string being broken, by which it was hanged against the wall. I am
almost every day threatened with my Ruin in Parliament, God grant this be no
OMEN. Tuesday the Parliament began; the King did not ride, but went by water to
kings stairs, and thorough Westminster Hall to the Church, and so to the House.

Wednesday the Convocation began at Saint Paul's. Wednesday Thomas Viscount
Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, accused to the Lords by the House of Commons for
high Treason, and restrained to the Usher of the House, Wednesday November 22.
He was sent to the Tower. December 2. Wednesday a great debate in the House,
that no Bishop should be so much as of the Committee for preparatory
Examinations in this Cause, as accounted Causa sanguinis, put of till the next
day, December 3. Thursday the debate declined. Friday, December 4. The King
gave way that His Council should be examined upon Oath, in the Earl of
Straffords Case. I was examined this day. Wednesday, December. 16. The Canons
condemned in the House of Commons, NOTE.
as being against the Kings Prerogative, the fundamental Laws of the Realm,
the liberty and propriety of the Subject, and containing diverse other things
tending to sedition, and of dangerous consequence. Upon this, I was made the
Author of them, and a Committee put upon me, to enquire into all my Actions to
prepare a charge. The same morning in the upper House I was named an
Incendiarie by the Scottish Commissioners, and a complaint promised to be
drawn up by to morrow.

Friday, December. 18. I was accused by the House of Commons for high Treason
with out any particular charge laid against me; which they said should be
prepared in convenient time. Master Hollys was the man, that brought up the
Message to the Lords: Soon after the charge was brought into the upper House
by the Scots Commissioners tending to prove me an Incendiary: upon which I was
presently committed to the Gentleman Usher, I was permitted to go in his
company to Lambeth for a book or two to read in, and such papers as pertained
to my defense against the Scots: I stayed at Where he then burned most of his
privy Letters and Papers
Lambeth till the evening, to avoid the Gazing of the people. I went to Evening
Prayer in my Chapel; The Psalms of the day 93. and 94. and Chap. 50. of Isay,
gave me great comfort, God make me worthy of it, and fit to receive it.
December 21. I was fined 500. pounds in the Parliament house, and Sir John
Lamb and Sir Henry Martin, 250. pounds a piece for keeping Sir Robert Howard
close Prisoner, in the case of the escape of the Lady Vicountesse Purbecke, out
of the Gate House which Lady he kept lewdly, and had Children by her: in such a
Case say the Imprisonment were more then the Law allowed, what may be done, for
honor and Religion sake. Wednesday the Lords ordered me to pay the money
presently, which was done: I was forced to sell Plate to repay where I borrowed
it. Thursday A Parliament man of good note interessed in diverse Lords, sent me
word; that by reason of my patient and moderate carriage, since my Commitment,
four Earls of great power in the upper House, told him, that the Lords were
not now so sharp against me as they were at first; And that now they were
resolved only to sequester me from the Kings Council, and to put me from my
Arch-Bishopricke, So I see, what Justice I may exspect since here is a
resolution taken, not only before my Answer, but before my Charge was brought
up against me. NOTE.
February 14. Sunday A. R. And this if I live and continue Archbishop of
Canterbury till after Michaelmas day come twelvmonth, Anno 1642. God bless me
in this: Friday Feb. 26. This day I had been full 10. weeks in restraint at
Master Maxwells House, and this day being Saint Augustines day, my charge was
brought up from the House of Commons to the Lords, by Sir Henry Vane the
younger. It consisted of 14. Articles. These general they craved time to prove
in particular, The Copy of this general charge is among my papers. I spoke
some thing to it, and the Copy of that also is among my papers. I had favor of
the Lords not to go to the Tower till the Monday following, NOTE.
(where he would by no means lie in the Lodgings in which the Bishop of
Lincoln formerly lay during his imprisonment there, though fittest for him.)

March 1. I went in Master Maxwells Coach to the Tower: no noise till I came to
the end of Cheapside. But from thence to the Tower, I was followed, and railed
at by the people, and rabble in multitudes to the very Tower-Gates; where I
left them, and I thank God he made me patient: March 9. Shrove-Tuesday, etc.
was with me in the Tower, and gave great engagements of his faith to me. March
13. Saturday, the Lord Brooks dined with the Lords, at the New House, built by
the King at Lambeth; three of the Lords in Boat together, one of them saying,
he was sorry for my commitment, because the building of Saint Paul's went slow
on the while; The Lord Brook replied, I hope one of us shall live to see no
one stone left upon another, of that building.

March 21. Monday a Committee for Religion, settled in the upper House of
Parliament 10. Earls. 10. Bishops. 10. Barons. So the Lay-Votes will be
double to the Clergy. This Committee will meddle with Doctrine, as well as
Ceremonies, and will call some Divines to them, to consider of the business;
as appears by a Letter hereto annexed, NOTE.
sent by the Lord Bishop of Lincoln to some Divines, to attend this service:
upon the whole matter; I believe this Committee will prove the National Synod
of England to the great dishonor of the Church: And what else may follow upon
it, God knows.

March 22. Monday, The Earl of Straffords Trial began in Westminster Hall,
and it continued till the end of April, taking in the variation of the House
of Commons; who after a long hearing, drew a Bill of attainder against him. A.
Sh. performed his promise to the uttermost.

March 27. 1641 The King came into the upper House, Anno. 1641
and there declared before both houses, how diligently he had harkened to all
the proceedings with the E. of Strafford, and found, that his fault, what ever
it was, could not amount to High Treason: That if it went by Bill, it must
pass by him, and that he could not with his conscience find him guilty, nor
would wrong his Conscience so far, but advised them to proceed by way of
misdemeanour, and he then would concur with them: the same day after the King
was gone, a Letter was read in the upper House from the Scotts, in which they
do earnestly desire to be gone: It was moved for a present Conference with the
House of Commons about it, the debate about it was very short, yet the Commons
were risen before hand, May 12. Wednesday. The Earl of Strafford beheaded upon
Tower Hill. June 23. Wednesday I acquainted the King by my Lord of London, that
I would resign my Chauncellorship of Oxford, and why, June 25. Friday I sent
down my resignation of the Chancellorship of Oxford to be published in
Convocation. July 1 Thursday, This was done, and the Earl of Pembrooke chosen
Chauncellor by joint consent, August 10. Tuesday, The King went Post into
Scotland, the Parliament sitting, and the Armies not yet dissolved, September
23. Thursday, Master Adam Torles, my Ancient loveing and faithful servant then
my Steward, after he had served me full 42. years, dyed, to my great loss and
grief, October 23. The Lords in Parliament sequestered my Jurisdiction to my
inferior Officers, and ordered, that I should give no benefice without
acquainting them first to whom I would give it, that so they might approve.
This order was sent me on Tuesday November 2. in the afternoon. November 1.
News came to the Parliament of the troubles in Ireland, the King being then in
Scotland, where there were troubles enough also. November 25. Thursday the King
at his return from Scotland was sumptuously entertained in London, and great
joy on all hands; God prosper it. December 30. Thursday the Archbishop of
York, and 11. Bishops more sent to the Tower for high Treason for delivering a
Petition and a Protestation into the House, that this was not a free
Parliament, since they could not come to vote there as they are bound, with out
danger of their lives. January 4. Tuesday, his Majesty went into the House of
Commons, and demanded the persons of Master Denzill Hollis, Sir Arthur
Haselridge, Master John Pym, Master John Hamden, and Master William Stroude,
whom his Attorney had the day before, together with the Lord Kimbolton; accused
of High Treason upon 7. Articles; they had Information, and were not then in
the House. They came in after, and great stir was made about this breach of the
privilege of Parliament. February 6. Saturday; Voted in the Lords House, NOTE.
that the Bishops shall have no votes there in Parliament; The Commons had
passed that Bill before: great ringing for joy, and Bonefires in some Parishes,
February 11. Friday the Queen went from Greenwitch toward Dover, to go into
Holland with her Daughter, the Princes Mary, who was lately Married to the
Prince of Orange his son: But the true cause was, NOTE.
the present discontents here: the King accompanied her to the Sea. February
14. His Majesty's Message to both Houses printed, by which he puts all into
their hands: so God bless us. February. 14. An Order came that the 12. Bishops
might put in Bail if they would, and that they should have their hearing upon
Friday. February 15. they went out of the Tower on Wednesday. February 20.
Sunday there came a tall man to me under the name of Master Hunt, he professed
he was unknown to me, but came, (he said) to do me service in a great
particular, and prefaced it, that he was not set on by any States man, or any
of the Parliament; so he drew out a paper out of his Pocket, and showed me 4.
Articles drawn against me to the Parliament, all touching my near
conversation with Priests, and my endeavors by them to subvert Religion in
England: He told me the Articles were, not yet put into the House, they were
subscribed by one Willoughby, who he said was a Priest but now come from them:
I asked him, what service it was he could do me? He said, he looked for no
advantage for himself; I conceived hereupon this was a piece of villainy, and
bid him tell Willoughby, he was a villain, and bid him put his Articles into
the Parliament when he will: so I went presently into my inner Chamber, and
told Master Edward Hide, and Master Richard Cob, what had befallen me; But
after I was sorry at my heart, that my indignation at this base villainy made me
so hasty to send away Hunt, and that I had not desired Mr. Lieutenant to seize
on him till he brought forth this Willoughby. February 25. Friday the Queen
went to Sea, for Holland, and her eldest Daughter the Princess Mary with her.
March 6. Sunday after Sermon as I was walking up and down my Chamber before
dinner, without any slip or treading a wry, the sinnew of my right leg gave a
great crack, and brake asunder in the same place where I had broken it before,
February 5. 1628. It was two months before I could go out of my Chamber.

On Sunday May 15. An. 1642 I made shift between my man and my staff to go
to Church; Anno. 1642
There one Master Ioslin preached with vehen ency becoming Bedlam, with
Treason sufficient to hang him in any other state, and with such a particular
abuse to me, that Women and boys stood up in the Church to see how I could
bear it, I numbly thank God for my patience. All along things grew higher
between the King and the Parliament, God send a good issue. May 29. four
ships came into the River with part of the Ammunition from Hull, August 22.
Monday, The King set up his Standard at Nottingham, August 24. The Parliament
having Committed three Officers of the Ordinance, and sent two new ones in the
room, this day they brake open all the doors, and possessed themselves of the
stores. August. 27. Saturday the E. of Southampton, and Sir John Culpeper, sent
from the King to have a Treaty for peace, refused, unless the King would take
down his Standard, and recall his Proclamation which made them Traitors.
September 11. Bishops voted down, and Deanes and Chapters in the lower House.
NOTE.
That night Bonfires and ringing all over the City: Ordered cunningly by
Pennington the new Lord Major. Ante ult. August. about this time the Cathedral
of Canterbury grosely profaned, September. 9. Friday. An Order from the House
about the giving of Alhollowes Bread-street. The Earl of Essex set forwards
toward the King, September 10. Bishops, etc voted down in the upper House,
Dubitatur, October 15. Saturday, resolved upon the question, that the Fines*
Rents, and profits of Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes and Chapters, and of such
notorious Delinquents who have taken up Arms against the Parliament, or have
been Active in the Commission of Array shall be sequestered for the use and
service of the Commonwealth. Oct. 23. Sunday Kenton held. Oct. 24. An order
from the House to keep but 2. servants, to speak with no prisoner or other
person, but in the presence of my Warder (this common to other Prisoners.) The
Order not sent me till Oct. 26. and I sent a petition to the House for a Cook
and a Butler, Thursday October 27. this order revoked Friday October 28. and
this granted me: October 26. Wednesday my Cooks relation to me of some
resolutions taken in the City. NOTE.
November 2. I dreamed the Parliament was removed to Oxford, the Church undone:
some old Courtiers came in to see me and geared: I went to Saint John's, and
there I found the roof of some part of the College and the Walls cleft, and
ready to fall down. Wednesday November 9. in the morning 5. of the Clock,
Captain Brown and his Company entered my House at Lambeth to keep it for
public service, and they made of it, November 8. 78. pounds of my Rents taken
from my Controuler by Master Holland and Master Ashurst, which they said was
for maintenance of the Kings Children. The Lords upon my Petition to them,
denied they knew of any such order, and so did the Committee yet such an order
there was and diverse Lords hands to it but upon my Petition they made an order
that my Books should be secured and my goods. Nov. 10. some Lords went to the
King about an accommodation, November 12. Saturday* A fight about Brainford,
many slain of the Parliaments forces, and some taken Prisoners. The fight is
said to begin casually about billetting: since this voted in the House for no
accommodation but to go on and take all advantages.

November. 16. Wednesday, an order to bar all Prisoners men, from speaking one
with another, or any other, but in the presence of the Warder, n^ go out
without the Lieutenants leave. And to bar them the liberty of the Tower.
November. 22. Tuesday, Ordered that any one of them may go out to buy provision.
Novem. 24. Thursday* the Soldiers at Lambeth House brake open the Chapel
door, and offer red violence to the Organs, but before much hurt was done, the
Captains heard of it, and stayed them. Friday, December. 2. Some of the Kings
Forces taken at Faruham about 100. of them brought in Carts to London; ten
Carts full, their legs bound: they were sufficiently rayled upon in the
streets. Monday, December. 19. My Petition for Mr. Conniers to have the Vicaridge
of Horstam, before it came to be delivered, the House had made an Order against
him upon complaint from Horstam of his disorderly life, so I petition for my
Chaplain, Master William Brackston, refused yet. Dece. 24. St. Thomas Day.
This day in the morning my young Dun Horse was taken away, by warrant under the
hands of Sir John Evelyn, Master Pym, and Master Martin. December. 23. Thursday,
Docter Layton came with a warrant from the House of Commons, for the Keys of
my house, to be delivered to him, and more prisoners to be brought thither etc.
Such as would not serve the King, were sent back, with an oath given them,
Janu. 5. A final order from both Houses, for settling of Lambeth prison, etc.
Thursday, all my Wood and Coals, spent, or to be spent there, not reserving in
the order that I shall have any for my own use, nor would that motion be
harkened to. January 6. Friday, Epiphanie, Earl of Manchesters Letter from the
House, to give Allhallowes Bred-street to Master Seaman. January 26. Thursday,
The Bill passed the Lords House, for abolishing Episcopacie, etc. Feb. 3.
Friday, Doctor Heath, NOTE.
came to persuade me to give Chartam to Master Corbet, etc. Febr. 14. Tuesday,
I received a Letter dated January 17. from his Majesty, to give Chartam to
Master Redding, or Lapse it to him. That afternoon the Earl of Warwick came
to me, and brought me an Order of the House, to give it to one Master Culmer.
This Order bare date, Feb. 4. Saturday, Feb. 25. Master Culmer came to me about
it; I told him I had given my Lord my answer, Thursday, March 2. St. Ceddes
day; The Lord Brook shot in the left eye and killed in the place at
Litchfield, going to give onset upon the Close of the Church, he having ever
been fierce against Bishops, and Cathedralls. His Bever up and armed to the
knee, so that a musket at that distance could have done him but little harm.
Thus was his eye put out, who about two years since said, he hoped to ^^e to
see at Saint Paul's, not one stone left upon another. March 10. Friday This
night preceding, I dreamed, a warrant was sent to free me, and that I spoke
with Master Lieutenant, that may Warder might keep the Keys of my lodging,
till I had got some place for my self, and my stuff since I could not go to
Lambeth: I waked and slept again, and had the very same dream, a second time.
Monday, March 20. The Lord of Northumberland, Master Parpoint, Sir John
Holland, Sir William Ermin, and Master Whitlock, went from both Houses to treat
of peace with His Majesty, God of His mercy bless it and us. March 24.
Friday, one Master Foord told me (he is a Suffolk man) that there was a plot
to send me, and Bishop Wrenn, as Delinquents to New England within 14. days;
and that Wells a Minister that came thence, offered wagers of it. The meeting
was at Master Parkes a Mercers House in Friday-Street, being this Foords son in
Law, I never saw Master Foord before.

March 28. 1643. Anno. 1643
Tuesday, Another Order from the Lords to give Chartam to one Master Edward
Hudson; My answer as before. April 11. Tuesday, An other order for the same,
and very peremptory this came to me, April 12. Whereupon I petitioned the
House, Thursday. April 13. my former answer being wilfully mistaken by Hudson.
That very day, another Order very quick, which was brought to me, Friday,
April. 14. I petitioned the House, again the same day, with great submission,
but could not disobey the King. Apr. 12. Another Order to collate Chartam on
Master Ed. Corbet, brought to me Satur. April 22. I gave my answer as before,
but in as soft terms as I could, Monday, Apr. 24. Tuesday, April 25. It was
moved in the House of Commons, to send me to New England. But it was rejected;
the plot was laid by Peter's, Wells, and others: Monday, May 1. My Chapel
Windows at Lambeth defaced, and the steps torn up. May 2. Tuesday, the Cross
in Cheapside taken down, May 9. Tuesday, all my goods seized upon, Books and
all. The feasers were, Cap. Guest, Layghton, and Dickins. The same day an order
for further restraint of me not to go out of it without my keeper. This order
was brought to me. May 10. Tuesday, May 16. An order of both Houses for the
disposing of my Benefices, etc. void, or to be void: this order was brought to
me, Wednesday. May 17. at night. Me thinks I see a cloud rising over me about
Chartam business, there having been a rumor twice, that I shall be removed
to a prison lodging. May 23. Tuesday, I sent my petition, for maintenance. This
day the Queen was voted a Traitor, in the Commons House, Saturday. May 29.
Another Order to collate Edward Corbet to Chartham. It was brought to me
Friday, May 26. I answered it, Monday, May 27. as before.

Thus far the Bishop proceeded in his Diary, which had an unexpected period
put unto it, being seized on in his Pocket by Master Prynne in the Tower. May
31. 1643 By virtue of this warrant unexpectedly sent unto him from the
close-Committee by a Member of the Commons House, with unavoydable strict
commands to put it in diligent execution the next morning.

30. May 1643. At the Committee of Lords and Commons appointed for the safety
of the Kingdom.

BY virtue of an Order of both Houses of Parliament, these are to authorize,
and require you to repair unto Colonel Manwaring, at the Guild Hall to morrow
morning about 4. of the clock, and to receive from him ten foot Soldiers,
appointed to attend and assist you in the service hereafter mentioned. And you
are further required and authorized with the Soldiers before mentioned to
repair unto the Tower of London, and there to search all the prisoners
remaining under restraint by Order of either of the Houses of Parliament, or of
this Committee, and to seize upon all Letters and Papers, and to see them put
into some safe place to be perused by such as shall be thereunto authorized;
And you are forthwith to certify us what you shall have done in execution
hereof, and in the mean time so to sever and restrain their persons, that
they speak not one with another, nor with any other; that thereupon some
further order and direction may be given. And the said Colonel Manwaring, as
also the Lieutenant of the Tower, and all other His Majesty's Officers, and
loving subjects are hereby required to be ayding and assisting unto you in
execution of the premises. And for your and their so doing, this shall be a
sufficient warrant.

E. Munchester. Wharton. W. Say, and Seal* H. Vane. Gilbert Gerard, John Pym.

To Will. Prynne, of Lincolnes Inn Esquier, Will. Ball Esquier, Ralph Farmer,
Gent. William Bendy Gent. Henry Blake Gentleman.
The execution of this warrant interrupted the series of this Journall; In the
close whereof the Bishop sets down with his own hand this ensuing Catalogue
of his projected designs, to advance the Pomp, Wealth, Power, Jurisdiction of
the Prelates, and those he terms, the Church.

Things which I have projected to do if God bless me in them.
1. TO build at Saint John's in Oxford, wherein I was bred up, for the good and
safety of that College, writ in the margin. Done.

2. To overthrow the seofment, dangerous both to Church and State, going under
the specious pretense: of buying in impropriations. Done.

3. To procure King Charles to give all impropriations yet remaining in the
Crown within the Realm of Ireland, to that poor Church. Done, and settle
there.

4. To set upon the repair of Saint Paul's Church in London. Done.

5. To collect and perfect the broken Crossing, and imperfect Statutes of the
Universitie of Oxford, which had layne in a confused heap some hundred of
years. Done.

6. To settle the Statutes of all the Cathedral Churches of the new
foundations, whose statutes are imperfect, and not confirmed. Done, for Cant.

7. To annex for ever some settled Commendams, and those if it may be Sine
cura, on all the small Bishoppricks. Done, for Bristoll, Peterborough, St.
Asaph, Chester, Oxford.

8. To find a way to increase the stipends of poor Vicars.

9. To see the Tithes of London settled between the Clergy and the City.

10. To set up a Greek Press in London and Oxford for Printing of the Library
Manu-scripts, and to get both Letters and Matrices. Done for London.

11. To settle 80. pounds a year for ever out of Doctor Friars Lands (after
the death of Doctor John Friar the son) upon the Fabric of Saint Paul's,
toward the repair till that be finished, and to keep it in good state after.

12. To procure a large Charter for Oxford, to confirm their Ancient
privileges, and obtain new for them, as large as those of Cambridge, which
they had gotten since Hen. 8. which Oxford had not. Done.

13. To open the great square at Oxford between Saint Mary's and the Schools
Brasennose, and Allsoules.

14. To settle an Hospital of Land in Redding of 100. pounds a year in a new
way. I have acquainted Mr. Barnard the Vicar of Croyden with my project. He is
to call upon my Executors to do it, if the surplusage of my goods after debts
and Charges paid come to 3000. pounds. Done to the value of 200. pounds per
Annum.

15. To erect an Arabicke Lecture in Oxford, at least for my life time, my
state not being able for more: that this may lead the way, etc. The Lecture
began to be read, August 10. 1636. Done. I have now settled it for ever.

16. The impropriation of the Vicaridge of Cudsden to the Bishop of Oxford,
finally sentenced, Wednesday April 19. 1637. And so the house built by the new
Bishop of Oxford, Doctor John Bancroft, settled for ever to that Bishopric,
Done.

17. A Book in Vellam fair written, containing the records which are in the
Tower and concern the Clergy: this book I got done at my own Charge, and
have left it in my Study at Lambeth for posterity, June 10. 1637. ab Anno 20.
Ed, 1. ad Annum 14. Ed. 4. Done.

18. A new Charter for the College near Dublin to be procured of his Majesty,
and a body of new Statutes made to rectify that Government, Done.

19. A Charter for the Town of Redding and a mortmaine of. Done.

20. If I live to see the repair of Saint Paul's near an end, to move his
Majesty for the like grant from the High Commission for the buying in of
impropriations, as I have now for Saint Paul's; And then I hope to buy in two a
year at least.

21. I have procured for Saint John Baptist College in Oxford the proper
Inheritance and Patronage of.

You have here an end both of his Diary, and Projects registered therein; his
Ludicrae written with his own hand, should follow, but they are so Childish,
scurrilous, ridiculous, for the most part ( as; He dwelt within a stones cast
of her. O come kiss me Archdeacon. Who gave you those Breeches? My Godfathers
and my Godmothers. Jonas in a Quails belly, that is a little bird, the miracle
is the greater; Now Person Quota est whora? Its not one by my Dial, I doubt it
is past 12. by yours: John Dod, how does your Uncle? Which Sir. My Uncle does
very ill upon the Commandments. The Welshmens beginning from Spanish Oars, and
Newgate Thieves. The boy said to his Father, you are Gods fiddle, etc.) that
they would but wast and defile paper, such pure devout Archi-prelaticall
Recreations are they, and so unlike to what Paul prescribes, Ephesians. 5.3.4.

It seems these 1. Cor. 15.33.
evil Communications did (in part) corrupt his good manners, as appears by
these his Anniversarie Prayers, written with his own hand in his Book of
private Devotions, P. 175. to 182. The first of these prayers is for pardon of
that soul scandalous Act of his, in marrying the Lady Rich to the Earl of
Devonshire, December 26. 1605. on which very day of the Month, An. 1609. he
fell into another greivious sin (perchance uncleanesse) with E. M. December
26. 1605. Dies erat Jovis, et festum S. Stephani.

Co Devon and E. M. Anno. 1609.




O Deus meus respice seruum tuum, et miserere mei secundum viscera
misericordiae tuae: scandalum ecce factus sum Nomini tuo, dum Ambitioni meae et
aliorum peccatis servio. Quin et hoc licet aliorum suasu, oblatrante tamen
conscientia perpetravi. Obsecro Domine per misericordias Jesus, ne intres in
judicium cum servo tuo, sed exaudi sanguinem ejus pro me perorantem. Nec hoc
conjugium sit animae meae divortium a sinu tuo. O quanto satius fuisset, si vel
hujus diei satis memor, Martyrium cum Proto-Martyre tuo potius perpessus sim,
negando quod urgebant aut non satis fidi, aut non satis pij amici mei.
Pollicitus sum mihi tenebras peccato huic; sed ecce statim evolavit, nec lux
magis aperta, quam ego qui feci; Ita voluisti Domine pro nimia misericordia tua
implere ignominia faciem meam, ut discerem quaerere nomen tuum. O Domine quam
gravis adhuc est memoria peccati hujus etiam hodie, etiam post tot et toties
repetitas preces a tristi et confusa anima mea coram te profusas. O Domine
miserere. Exaudi preces depressi et humiliati valde servi tui. Parce Domine, et
remitte peccata quae peccatum hoc et induxerunt, et secuta sunt. Nam confiteor
Domine, iterum et codem die revolventis anni, nec satis adhuc cautus, aut satis
humilis factus, in aliud grave peccatum incidi. Lapidatus iterum non pro, sed a
peccato, Nunc plene suscata me Domine ne moriar ultra in peccatis meis, sed Deo
ut vivam, et vivens gaudeam in te, per merita et miserationes Jesus Christi
Salvatoris nostri Amen.

These falls (it seems) of his were great and scandalous, but his private
humiliation for them commendable.

After this he lapsed into some other special sin (perchance uncleannes)
with E. B. as this following Anniversary prayer manifests. July 28. 1617. Die
Luna E. B. and Martij 6. 1642.


O Merciful God, thou have showed me much mercy, and done great things for me
and as I was returning, instead of thankefullnesse, I wandered out of my way
from thee into a foul and a strange path: there thou made me see both my
folly and my weakness. Lord make me ever see them, ever sorry for them. O Lord
for my Savior sake forgive the folly, and strengthen me against the weakness
for ever. Lord forgive all my sins, and this* and make me by thy grace, thy
most true, humble, and faithful servant all the days of my life; Through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

September 16. 1617. He was very likely to have been burnt by fire in St.
John's College in Oxford, for his sins. (Doctor This he has attested under
his hand, and would have deposed it the Trial if pertinent.
Goodwins Son attests, that he suborned Doctor Metcalfe, to poison his Father,
then Deane of Christ Church in Oxford, which was effected.) whereupon he penned
this Anniversary prayer for that day.

Septembr. 26 1617. Die Veneris Ignis et piriculum inde
O Misericors pateriquo me vertam. Qui et exeundo et revertendo peccavi
contrate? Abij cum prodigo, prodigus in longinquam regionem: dissipavi
substantiam meam, tuam luxuriose. Ibi primum sensi omnia consumpta, et me
dignum non meliori quam porcorum consortio. Nec tamen aut vita illa immunda,
aut fames gratiae, de reditu ad meliorem frugem vel cogitavit. Reversum jam ab
itinere infausto, ecce judicia tua, Domine, insequntur me. Ignis corripit tecta
sub quibus sum. Videt enim Deus nec multum distulit, sed ignis accensus est in
Jacob, et ira ascendit in Israel, et scelera (non dubito) mea conflagrationem
Collegio minitabantur, et mihi. Nam dum igni extinguendo intentior sum, parum
abfuit quin ab igne extinctus sim: Quum ecce misericordia tua Dominevix sine
miraculo me flammis eripuit. Nam dum amica manus astantis vi quadam amovit,
eodem instanti ex eodem loco, ubipedem figere decrevi, prorupit inclusus ignis,
in flammas subsidunt gradus. Et ego si ibi invenisset incendium una perijssem O
peccata mea nunquam satis deflenda! O misericordia tua Domine nunquam satis
praedicanda! O paenitentia nunquam mihi magis necessaria! O gratia tua Domine
humilime et jugiter imploranda! Surge O Domine Pater, et ecce venio, lento
quidem et instabili gressu, sed venio, et confiteor; Peccavi enim in Caelum et
contra te, nec dignus sum vocari filius, tuus. Sim O Domine, quid vis, modo
tuus. Ablue peccata mea in sanguine filij tui, ut sim tuus: Et concede obsecro,
ut sicut tum terror, ita quotidie memoria ignis hujus exurat faeces omnes et
reliquias peccatorum meorum, ut cautior factus, melior ignis charitatis, et
devotionis, me in amorem tui, et in odium peccati accendat, Per Iesum Christum
Dominum nostrum, Amen.

February 5. 1628. as he was going to Hampton Court to wait on the King, he
brake the great cord of his Leg by treading on sinking uneven ground, March 6.
1641. he brake it again as he was walking in his Chamber in the Tower upon
which occasion he compiled this annual prayer for those days.

(...) O Domine misericors, Glorificetur Beatissimum nomen tuum, Ecce enim Ego
(Dum pro officio Regem sequor) and tui, and humanorum Causuum immentor, and
mihi praefidens, Feb. 5. 1628. Die Martij Comp. Juliano Tendonem fregi and
iterum, Mar. 6. die Solis inter ambulandum in cubiculo in Turri Land. Anno 1642.
infausto in via saltu in terram infidam incidi and tendonem fregi. Levatus in
Currum, Hamptoniam perveni. Cruciatus talis fuit, qualis nervi sentire solent,
Et certe in Febrem ferventiorem ipse angor conjecisset, nisi ingens defluxus
sanguinis me ab illo metu liberasset. Magna infirmitate laboravi, and fere per
biennium claudus incessi. Infirmitatem aliquam adhuc sentio. Sed (gratiae
immortales tibi, o Beatissima Trinitas) usum satis perfectum crurium dedisti
mihi, and confirmasti, praeter omnium expectationem, gressus meos. Dirigas nunc
eos, O Domine, in vijs mandatorum tuorum, ut nunquam vel inter te, and mundum
claudicem, sed recte pergam and viam Testimoniorum tuorum curram, quum
dilatasti cor meum. Oro itaque ne differ as vel dilatationem cordis, vel
confirmationem pedum in semitis Justificationum tuarum, per and propter Jesum
Christum Dominum Nostrum. AMEN.

May 11. 1640. The people being enraged against him for his Tyranny, his
reviving the Scottish Wars, and troubles after the first pacification,
dissolving the Parliament in great discontent, Imprisoning the Aldermen of
London for refusing to lend moneys, and certify the names of monyed men to
maintain the Scottish wars, the re-enforcing of Ship Money, fomenting of
Popery, and continuing the Convocation after the Parliament dissolved,
thereupon assaulted his House at Lambeth, to apprehend, and bring him to
punishment. Whereof he having notice prevented the danger by flight; and caused
one of them to be hanged, drawn, quartered, and another racked. Whereupon he
made this prayer.

O Eternal God and most merciful Father, Maij 11. 1640 My House at Lambeth,
beset with violent and base people.
As this day the fury of the enraged multitude was fierce upon me, and my
House, to destroy me and to pillage it; It pleased thee in mercy to preserve
both, and bring some of them to shame and punishment. I have sinned many ways
against thee, O Lord, and this was a loud call of thine, and a merciful, to
bring me to Repentance, which I beseech thee give me grace to hear and obey.
But what I have done to hurt or offend them, that should stir up this rage
against me, The premises and charge will inform you.
I know not. Lord in thy mercy look down upon me, fill my heart with
thankfulness for this great deliverance, and suffer me not to forget it, or
the examination which I took of my self upon it. And as for them and their
like, let them not have their desire, O Lord, Let not their mischievous
imaginations prosper against me, nor their fury lay hold upon me, lest they be
too proud, and least I end my weary days in misery: Yet forgive them, O Lord,
for they know not why they did it, and according to thy wanted mercy, preserve
me, to serve thee, and let the same watchful protection which now defended
me, guard me through the remainder of my life. And this for thy own goodness
sake, and the merits of my Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

After all this, December. 18. 1640. He was accused by the House of Commons of
High Treason, (as well he deserved:) upon which he composed this prayer,
wherein he most arrogantly pleades his innocence before God, though he
appears most criminal, and guilty to the eyes of most men.

O Eternal God and merciful Father, I humbly beseech thee look down upon me
in this time of my great and grievous affliction. Dece. 18. 1640 I was accused
by the House of Commons of High Treason.
Lord (if it be thy blessed will) make my innocence appear, and free both me
and my profession from all scandal thus raised on me; And however, if thou be
pleased to try me to the uttermost, I humbly beseech thee, give me full
patience, proportionable comfort, contentment, with whatsoever thou sendest,
and a heart ready to dye for thy Honor, the Kings Happiness, and this
Churches preservation. And my zeal to these is all the sin (humane frailty
excepted) which is yet known to me in this particular, for which I thus suffer.
Lord look upon me in mercy, and for the merits, of Jesus Christ pardon all my
sins many and great, which have drawn down this judgment upon me, and then
in all things do with me, as seems best in thine own eyes. And make me not
only patient under, but thankful for whatsoever thou do, O Lord my
strength, and my Redeemer. AMEN.

His special prayers made upon sundry public occasions, (registered with his
own hand in his Page 221.232.
Book of devotions) were all formerly printed, and read in Churches; the two
last of them against the Scots (being most memorable) are only necessary to be
here recorded, he being the Sea the 13. Article, and the Scots impeachment.

A Prayer for the Kings Majesty in the Northern expedition. 1639


Arch-Incendiarie against them.

O Eternal God and merciful Father, by whom alone Kings Reign, thou Lord of
Hosts, and giver of all victory, We humbly beseech thee to guard Our most
Gracious Sovereign Lord KING CHARLES: To bless him in His person with health
and safety, in His Counsels with wisdom and prudence, and in all His actions
with Honor and good success. Grant, blessed Lord, that Victory may attend
His designs, and that His Liege people may rejoice in thee, but that shame may
cover the face of thine and His Treacherous enemies. Give him blessed Father,
so to settle His Subjects in Peace, and the true fear of thy Divine Majesty,
that He may return with joy, and honor, and proceed long to govern his
Kingdoms in How could he do this when he had such a Counselor of war and
disturbance near him?

For the King in his Northern Expedition. 1640.


Peace, and plenty, and in the happiness of true Religion and Piety all his
days. These blessings, and whatsoever else shall be necessary for him, or for
our selves: We humbly beg of thee, O merciful Father, for Jesus Christ His
sake, Our only Mediator, and Redeemer. AMEN.

O Eternal God and Merciful Father, by whom alone Kings reign, thou Lord of
Hosts, and giver of all Victory, We humbly beseech thee both now and ever, to
guide and preserve Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord, KING CHARLES: To bless
him in his Person with health and safety, in His Counsels with wisdom and
prudence, and in all his actions with honor and good success: Especially
against those his traitorous Subjects, who having cast off all Obedience, to
their Anointed Sovereign, do at this time, in rebellious manner invade this
Realm. Grant, blessed LORD, that victory may attend His Majesty's designs,
that His Liege people may rejoice in thee, but that shame may cover the face of
thine and his Treacherous enemies. Enable him (blessed Father) so to vanquish
and subdue them all, that His Loyal Subjects being settled in Peace, and the
true fear of thy Holy Name, He may return with joy and honor, and continue
to govern His Kingdom in peace and plenty, and in the happiness of true
Religion and Piety all his days. These blessings, and whatsoever else shall
be necessary for him, we humbly beg of thee, O mermercifull Father, for Jesus
Christ his sake our only Mediator and Redeemer. AMEN.

These prayers were strictly enjoined to be daily read in Churches, and were so
by the Prelaticall party, with greatest Zeal and devotion, and many Godly
Ministers were questioned, pursevanted, suspended, for not reading them.

Since his Imprisonment in the Tower, he received several letters from the
King under the privy signet, and other Malignants, in opposition to the
Parliament and some proceedings in it; take one or two instead of many.

Charles Rex.
MOst reverend Father in God, and right trusty and right welbeloved We greet
you well. We are informed, that Doctor Isaak Bargrave Dean of our Cathedral of
Cant. is very lately deceased, and by his death the Parsonage of Chartham near
Cant. become void. Many good motives and reasons have graciously inclined Us
to favor therewith John Reading Clark, now beneficed at Dover in Our Country
of Kent, but deprived (as we understand) of the small livelihood he had thence
accrewing, by the perverse disposition of some of his turbulent Parishioners.
Wherefore we very earnestly desire you to bestow the said Parsonage of Chartham
upon the said John Reading, or at the least, that if you shall be restrained
from so doing by either or both Houses of Parliament, you then forbear to
present any other to the same, that so the said Parsonage lapsing into our
gift, We may, as We intend, confer it on him. This We are confident of from
you, both in regard of the persons worthiness and sufferings, and that We shall
therein receive very good content and satisfaction. Given at Our Court at
Oxford the 27 th. of January 1642.

To the most Reverend Father in God, our right trusty, and right welbeloved
Councellor, William, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace.

These directions of his Majesty he punctually observed, as appears by his
Diary, February 3. 14. 25. An. 1642. and March 28. April 11. 13. 14. 21. 22
1643.

Other Letters he received from his Majesty for the speedy payment of his first
fruits to his Officers; to which he returned an Answer under his own hand.
And this ensuing letter from the Lady Aubigny (a grand Malignant) after the
slaughter of her Husband in a fight against the Parliament.

My Lord,
THe former letter J sent your Grace, was written before J knew what great
affliction God had laid upon me by the unfortunat loss of my dear Lord,
whereby I am made unfit to stir abroad to receive them, or any other comfort,
and this Gentleman, for the most part, being at Cambridge since this miserable
accident, has been the true cause, I have not importuned your Grace to know,
if there can be any thing done in this business, till J wait upon you, which
shall be as soon as J am fit to appear in any place, for as yet I confess I
cannot be so much my self to overcome my passion, though I know my Lord dyed
in a NOTE
just and honorable action, and that I hope his soul finds: which
consideration is the only satisfaction of,

Your Graces humble servant Kath. Aubigny.
January 2. Coming from so distracted a mind, I hope this letter may be
pardoned,
You have now a short Historical View of the Archbishops life, written for
the most part with his own hand; in which you may observe.

1. How many Benefices, Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical Preferments he
passed through in his days; at most of which he was never Resident, nor did
any good to Soul or body.

2. By what means he procured most of his preferments; to wit, by unlawful
Actions, as by marying the Lady Rich to the Earl of Devon; by his base
flattery of, and obsequiousness to the Duke of Buckingham, by incensing his
Majesty against Parliament, invading the Subjects Properties, Liberties, etc.
as will more fully appear in the Relation of his trial.

3. What a superstitious observer, and diligent Register he was, of his own
idle dreams; and how ominous some of them have proved.

4. How great a Creature, Instrument, assistant, Advocate he has been to the
Duke of Buckingham who first brought him into favor at Court. What a friend to
Strafford; and malicious Enemy to the Bishop of Lincoln.

5. What extraordinary transcendent favor and power he obtained with the King
whom he often miscouncelled to the public prejudice and what ill instruments
and creatures of his own he placed about his Majesty; as Windebanck, and
others to effect his own designs.

6. What a great favorite and Instrument he was to the Queen and Popish
faction, and how grand an Enemy, a Persecuter of the zealous Protestant party,
under the name of Puritans.

7. What a bitter Enemy he has been to Parliaments and their proceedings; and
how odious he became both to Parliaments and people for his Tyranny,
Oppressions, Popish Ceremonies, Innovations in Religion and unjust proceedings.

8. What an Arch-Incendiary he has showed himself, between his Majesty and
his people, both in England and Scotland.

9. What a busy body he has been in all kinds of secular affairs,
incomparible with his spiritual function.

10. How sedulous he has showed himself to exalt the Power, Pomp, Authority
of Bishops and the Clergy; to advance them above, exempt them from all secular
powers, jurisdictions, and to ingrosse the greatest temporal Offices into
their hands, that so they might Lord it over all men.

11. That he has been exceedingly devoted to and promoted Popish Ceremonies,
and greatly favored, advanced men Popishly affected, as Windebancke,
Mountague, Manwaring and others.

12. That he took special notice of sundry As appears by the forementioned
passages, Ian. 31. 1628. Sept. 19. 1633 Feb 12. 1638. Oct. 27. 1640.
Dreams, Presages and Omens of his own downfall, to which, for a Close to this
Breviate of his life, some other memorable ominous presages yet unmentioned
shall be added.

The first is, his pulling down of the Parish Church of Saint Gregory's to
repair Paul's, and sending the Parishioners to Christ-Church: which being
related by Captain Hungerford to Master Prynne during his close imprisonment in
Iersey, he thereupon presently replied, that this seemed to him a most certain
presage, that the Archbishop, the Sea of Canterbury, and Popery should have a
speedy fall in England: for Pope Gregory, to whose memory this Demolished
Church was dedicated, was the Sea Malmesb. de Gostis Pontif. l. 1. Antiquitates
Ecclesiae Brit. Godwins Catalogue of Bishops in the life of Augustine, Camdens,
Britania, Kent. Sir Henry Solemans Concilia Tom. 1. p. 66. to 127.
first founder of the Archbishopricke and Sea of Canterbury, from whom it
derived both its being and precedence, and Austine the Munke (sent over by him)
the first Archbishop of this Sea, who introduced the first dreggs of Popery
into our British Church; seeing therefore the Archbishop was now grown so
unthankful as to demolish Saint Gregory his own founder, (from whom Doctor
Sunday no Sabbath. p. 3.48 Altire Christianum, p. 144.
Pocklington in his late printed books, derived his Lineall succession) that
himself, and his Sea of Canterbury could not stand long after, since the
building must needs fall to ground, when the foundation is rased; and the
sending of the people from Pope Gregory's Church to Christ's Church, was a good
Omen that the Popes Church and party in England should be deminished,
demolished, and Christ's Church replenished, reedified: all which we now visibly
behold in a great measure fulfilled.

The 2. is, That when the Archbishop kept his Metropoliticall visitation, Anno.
1635. etc. he concluded it at Barkin Church next to the Tower of London gate:
which Master Prynne (then a Prisoner in the Tower) observing; told the
Lieutenant of the Tower, and others: that the Archbishop had now visited all
places within the province of Canterbury, as well those exempt as not exempt,
except only the Tower, which was reserved for his last visitation, and that he
doubted not but he should see him a Prisoner in the Tower ere long, and,
himself a freeman: which accordingly came to pass; The Archbishop sitting at
Church in the Tower Chapel in the same seat, where Master Prynne usually sat
dureing his imprisonment.

The 3. is this, which is most remarkable; being a miraculous Omen from Heaven
it self, of his own and his Seas downfall by, his means. See Mr. Culmers
Cathedral. News from Canterbury. p 13.14.
The Prebends of Canterbury Anno 1639. hearing of the pacification with the
Scotts and being falsely informed, that they had condescended to entertain
Bishops; did for joy of these glad-tidings, in the hight of their Prelaticall
glory, set up four great Iron Vanes upon the 4. Pinnacles of their highest
Cathedral Tower, called Bell-harry Steple; on which the Coat-Armes, of the
King, Prince, Church, and Archbishop of Canterbury were severally, gilded,
But on Innocents day following very early in the morning, being the 27th. of
December, in the midest of their Christmas Iovialities, and Cathedral
Gamballs, the Vane which had the Archbishops Arms in it, had a tumbling cast
from the Top of the Steeple, being struck down by a stroke from Heaven in a
fearful tempest. The Archbishops Arms in the fall pulled down the top of
the Pinnacle which upheld them, and being carried (partly against the wind) a
good distance from the Steeple on which they stood, fell upon the roof of the
Cloister, in the concave and lower part whereof the Arms of the
Archbishopricke of Canterbury were Carved in Stone; which Arms in the Cloister
were dashed and broken in pieces by the Arms that fell from the Steeple; The
Arms of the present Archbishop of Canterbury, breaking down the Arms of the
Archbishopricke, and Sea of Canterbury, The fall was so violent, that it brake
through the Leads, plankes, Timber, Stone-Arch of the Cloister, and made an
impression in the pavement of the Cloister, as if it had been done with a
Canon shot, which is partly to be seen at this very day, though repaired,
being very near the place, where that proud Arch-prelate of Canterbury, Thomas
Becket. was cast down headlong in that Cathedral for his Treason and
Rebellion. The Cathedralists hereupon took down the other three Vanes, and
repaired the Cloister withal speed and secrecy, that so less notice might be
taken of this remarkable ruin.

Neither was this sad Omen singular, but seconded with others both at Lambeth,
and Croyden the selfsame night, as appears by this passage in the
Archbishops Diary under his own hand. December 27. 1639. Friday being Saint
John's day at night, between 12. and 2. of the Clock the next morning, the
greatest wind that ever I heard blow: many of the Watermen at Lambeth had
their Boats tumbled up and down, and broken to pieces, as they lay on the
Land. One of my servants went to London, and durst not come home that evening
the weather was so foul: that night the Shafts of two Chimnies at Lambeth were
blown down upon the roof of his Chamber, and beat down both the Lead and
Rafters upon his bed; where had he been that night, he must have perished, At
Croyden one of the Pinnacles fell from the Steeple, beat down the Lead, and
the roof of the Church near 20. Foot square, All which, compared with the
sincking of the Lambeth Ferry-boat with the Archbishops Coach-horses Coach and
men to the bottom of Thames Sept. 19. 1633. the very first day he removed from
Fulham to Lambeth house, was no doubt an ominous presage of his own and the
Archbishopricks sincking, through his pride and violence.

The 4th. is this. That his Majesty in the Month of February, 1641. casually
passing through the City of Canterbury with the Queen to Dover, did in Saint
Augustines Abbey of Canterbury (the first Archbishop of that Sea) sign the Act
of Parliament, against the Bishops Votes in Parliament: which Act unlorded our
Lordly Prelates, and gave them a fatal overthrow, such as struck proud
Canterbury dead at heart, and undermined all his Prelaticall designs, to
advance the Bishops Pomp, and Power.

The last is, his own fatal Dream at Oxford, long since published, and
lately attested from his own mouth at his Trial in the Lords House, the sum
whereof is this: That when he was a young Scholar in Oxford, he dreamed one
night, that he came to far greater preferment in the Church* and power in the
State, then ever any man of his birth and Calling did before him; in which
greatness and worldly happiness he continued many years; but after all this
happiness, before he awaked, he dreamed he was hanged. The first part of this
Dream, has been long since really verified, and the conclusion of it, is in
all probability like to be speedily accomplished, upon the close of his Trial:
The exact Complete Relation whereof, may (God assisting and the Parliament
commanding) hereafter follow in its order, wherein the criminal part of his
life will appear most foul, and detestable, in all the Particulars of his
impeachment.

FINIS.
Errata.
P. 3. l. 3. r. saint, l^ 41. K.r.D. p. 4. l. 45. them, me, p. 8. l. 3. then,
them, p. 9. l. 25. of, on, l. 55. City, cap. P. 1. l. 29. r. 1598. p. 19. l.
56. finished.


