AN APPENDIX TO THE LATE ANSWER, Printed by His Majesty's COMMAND: OR, Some
seasonable ANIMADVERSIONS upon the late Observator, and his seven
Anti-monarchicall ASSERTIONS. TOGETHER With a VINDICATION of the KING, And some
OBSERVATIONS upon the TWO HOUSES.

Printed Anno Dom. 1642.

Seasonable ANIMADVERSIONS upon the late Observator, and his seven
Anti-monarchicall ASSERTIONS.
IT is usual (I know) for Books to have Prefaces, and Plays Prologues; but
whosoever peruseth this, must expect nothing but concise reasons; forasmuch as
Vnusq^isque suo sensu abundat, so let him reflect and censure of this at his
pleasure.

The Observator, page 1. says, That power is originally inherent in the
people, etc.

To this the answer is, that power is in God primario and per se, according to
that of the Apostle; Romans 13. and in the King or people, but only secundario
and derivative: Power or Dominion is not a gift of Nature, that is to say,
naturally inherent in us; for if it were, then might all men have equal power,
for that by nature we are all equal; but power is a gift of God to Nature, and
is gratia gratis data; and yet power is congruous in nature, as was the power
of King, and office of Priesthood in Melchisedec: for surely he had them both
given, or appointed to him by God, being by interpretation King of
Righteousness, and King of Peace, Heb. 2.7. And therefore it is not likely
that he usurped to himself the Regal title of King, no more then he did of
being Priest; and yet it was very probable that it was also agreeable in Reason
and Nature, and although not tyrannical, yet peaceable Kingly reign, and
sacred Priesthood did fitly belong to him: Seth and his generation began first
to call upon the name of the Lord, that is to say, to give to God some set
form of worship, as Priests did, etc.
for he is by most Divines thought to have been Sem, the eldest son of Noah;
and by the law of Nature, of Moses, and of most Nations, the eldest is to
inherit; so that what was the right of Adam, Seth, and Noah, might belong unto
him by birthright, although it may be God confirmed it unto him
extraordinarily. But to return, power and dominion is derived from God, and
congruous in Nature: but the power is in the people only, when they are
absolutely free to choose to themselves what form of government they please, as
were the Jews before they subjected themselves to Kings, being formerly freed
from the bondage of Egypt by the finger of God. The Romans when they erected
their Senate and Consuls, having rebelliously (for it was no better) shaken off
the yoke of Kings. The Venetians, when they first instituted their
Commonwealth. But in Monarchies, where the people have been brought into
subjection, either by the sword, as in Turkey, Persia, and the like; or by
innate, and prescribing, and prevalent authority, as in Florence; or by both,
as in France and Castile; in these Dominions power is not inherent in the
people, but in the Prince. And although some hereditary Monarchs are more
limited then others, as is the King of France more then the great Turk, and
the King of England more then the King of France: yet is their power derived
immediately from God, and inherent in themselves, not in the people: for those
limitations are (in conquered Nations) but mere donatives of grace, proceeding
from the Prince or his Successors to the people, touching certain immunities
and privileges; so that the Prince his power is the efficient cause of them,
and such immunities or privileges are but as material effects. Now as it is
most improper to say, that the effect should cause his own cause, so is it to
say, that a privileged people should cause the Princes power, or that Power
should remain originally in such a privileged people.

Some Nations elect their Kings, or Princes, and restrain them far more by
conditional inaugurations, then hereditary Monarchs are, or ought to be
restrained or limited: Yet have not such Nations power in themselves totally,
but only partially; that is, they have power to conditionate with their Kings
or Princes, how far forth they will be subject, and by what Rules they will
be governed; but they have not power to conditionate with their Kings or
Princes, that they will only be subject at their own pleasures, and as
themselves shall think good; that is to say, if they please at any time to
assume more liberty unto themselves, and to alter and disanull former
Constitutions of Government, that they may do it without the consent of their
Kings or Princes. This they cannot do without treason to their Crowns or
Diadems: For although the persons of such Princes be elective, yet is their
power permanent, jure constituto Coronae; which though they claim not as from
progenitors, yet are they invested therewith as from Predecessors. And
therefore being enthroned, they enjoy their dignities by prescription; that is
to say, what belonged to their Predecessors; belongs in the same manner to
them, being once invested; nor can such Nations revolt from their elected
Princes, without being reputed Rebels.

Now of this nature are the Kings of Poland, Hungary, and some other (to speak
nothing of the Duke of Venice, for he is merely titulary, and a cipher) and
such Kings first and principally claim their authority from God the author of
all power, who enspheareth them in the Orb of dignity above others.

And secondly, they acknowledge it from the general consent of the Nation,
which made choice of them, and over which they rule. And surely such was the
right and title of Saul, the first King of Israel: for he was appointed by God,
1 Samuel 9.17. then anointed by Samuel, Chap. 10. v. 1. afterward approved by
the people, ibid. verse. 24. And finally, confirmed in his Kingdom, Chap. 11.
verse. 14. And in the same manner was David likewise established in his
Kingdom; so that their first and chief claim was immediately from God, and
their second from the consent of the people. Nor is it of any consequence to
allege, as the Observator seems to infer, page 1. that those Kings had an
extraordinary Institution from God; and therefore they might more lawfully
claim their right, as appointed and appropriated to them by God. For to such
Allegation it will be answered, That there is no power but of God, Romans 13. So
that whether God institute Kings by extraordinary, or ordinary means, it
makes no matter. For although Saul and David were instituted extraordinarily
by Gods special appointment; yet most of the Kings of Judah and Israel reigned
afterthem but by ordinary succession; had they not therefore the same power
that Saul and David had? Surely the Scriptures tell us they had. The Priests
and Prophets in the old Law had an extraordinary vocation, especially the
Prophets: the Priests or Ministers of the Gospel have but an ordinary
vocation, are they therefore defective in power to those of the old Law? or
have they not their vocation from God, because they have not extraordinary
calling? Surely no. For how could Sacraments be administered, and the word
preached? So is it with Monarchs: For though they have but ordinary succession;
yet is their power immediately from God. Our Sovereign is a free (though in
some things a limited) Monarch, and derived therefore his power immediately
(not mediately, as do other inferior Ministers of justice) from God. And as
touching limitations and privileges, they are nothing else (as is aforesaid)
but acts of grace conferred on this Nation by His Majesty's predecessors in
several ages, and at several times, and some of them lately by His Majesty
himself, as the continuation of this present Parliament, the abolishing of the
Star Chamber, and High Commission censures, and the like. But these
privileges, and others granted to the subjects, dis-invest the King of no
primary, or Birth-right-royalty, but only oblige him in honor to observe them
as covenants. A Lord purchases a Manor for himself and his Heirs for ever;
his son and successors grant certain Franchises to the tenants, and oblige
their heirs for ever to perform them: so the tenants live-in a more free
state and condition, then they did in the first purchasers days; and paying
their rents, and performing their services, they are not altogether subject to
be turned out at the pleasure (or rather displeasure) of the Lord; but does
this Franchisement or freedom of theirs, cause the Lord to derive his right or
title from his tenants? Law and experience tells us no. And this is our
Sovereigns case; The Conqueror by his sword, or by deed of gift, or rather
indeed by both, came in as a purchaser of the Kingdom of England, for
himself, and his heirs for ever, and by the Law of conquest had power to have
made greater alteration in the State then he did, and to have induced what
form of government he had thought good, even as the King of Spain has done
in Navarre, and the West Indies; yet he did not, but only imposed some hard
things, as the having of Laws in the French tongue, which the people generally
understood not, Cover-fue-bell, and the like: his successors afterward did
immune, and ease the people from such grievances, so that they lived, and live
at more liberty, and enjoy more securely their liberties and properties. But do
therefore such immunities granted to the people, cause the King to derive his
power and right from the people? The Laws and customs of all Nations and
Kingdoms that live under Monarchs, tell us no. The ancient and present
Monarchies of the world being sufficient witnesses thereof, besides the
Dictamen of Scripture, and reason already inserted.

The Observator, page 2. says, that it is an error in some Princes, to strive
more to be great over their people, then in their people. It may be some
Princes have committed such an error; but withal let the Observator take
notice, that it is convenient for a free Prince to be both; that is to say, to
have them wealthy, and yet obedient Subjects: for if he be only great in his
people, and not over them, he may resemble the now Roman, or German Emperor,
or the ancient Kings of France, the one whereof is daily in danger to be dis
invested by commotion, and combinations of his Princes; the other were
heretofore almost continually molested by factions of their Peers and people:
And sure the French themselves have greatly occasioned the heavy burden of
diverse tributes and impositions which they undergo: for they ever and anon
rising in Arms against their King, gave him occasion to enslave them the more
by his reconquering of them, or reducing them into his obedience, so that had
they subsisted in due allegiance, it is likely their King had been as equally
great over as in them; which equality, or parity in government, is (no doubt)
the most happy and blessed counion that any Prince and people can enjoy.

The Observator tells us in the same page, that the King, though he be
singulis major, yet he is universis minor. But why so? The Head Natural is not
only singulis, but also universis membris majus dignitate, (though it may, it is
not so in universis, as shall be by and by declared) For the Head has in it
self all Senses, other Members receive from it, but Feeling only, and Motion;
the head governs and directs the whole Body, and is therefore in dignity
more Noble then all the Members of the Body considered together: and yet though
it be more noble and excellent then them all; (for as much as Motion and
Feeling dimane from the Brain, which is in the head, to them all)
notwithstanding in universis, in all things, or faculties, the head is not more
excellent then all the members; for the Heart is the seat of Life (according to
most Philosophers) being primum vivens, and ultimum moriens, and from it
proceeds natural heat; the stomach likewise administreth sustenance, and
aliment; the Feet go, and the Hands work, and without them the head cannot
subsist, yet are they all subordinate to the Head: and even so is it, or ought
it to be in the body politic, unless we must believe the Observator, who in
his 19. Page says, That the Head Political receives more subsistence from the
Body then it gives, etc. But by his leave, if privileges and Immunities are
(as they are) matters of Grace, proceeding from free Monarchs (for of such the
Treatise is) to the people, do not such Heads give as much subsistence to the
body Politic, as they receive from it? The Observator tells us, Page, 6.
That Edward the first was the first (whether he were, or not, it is not
material) that repaired the Breaches which the Conquest had made upon this
Nation; if so, did not he, by such his reparation, give as much subsistence to
the Commonwealth, as he received from the Commonwealth, or Body Politic?
And do not his Successors give likewise as much as they receive, when they
confer the like acts of Grace? Surely, he that considers rightly Magna
Charta, and all other Privileges and Immunities, which now extend to the
freeborne people of this Kingdom, will find them first to have proceeded from
the Grace and Grant of our Kings: and therefore it is improper to say, That the
Head Politic does not give as much subsistence to the Body Politic, as it
receives from it.

The Observator says likewise in his second Page, That id quod efficit tale,
est magis tale; meaning thereby, that the people conferring, as the efficient
cause, Power on the King, have jointly more Power in themselves.

It has been showed already, that free Monarchs, such as our King is, derive
not their power from the people, but immediately from God: But suppose our King
did secundarily acknowledge his power from this Nation's general consent; as
it may be, the King of Poland does acknowledge his power in part from the
Aristocracie of that Kingdom; and as Saul and David did in part from the Jews
approbation and consent: notwithstanding, it follows not from hence, that the
people are the sole efficient cause of the Kings power, but only the secundary
and partial. Now, when it is said, that id quod efficit tale, est magis tale,
it is to be understood of entire and total causes; but in this case, the
people being at the most but the partial cause of the Kings power, the Axiom
or Rule fails: as for example, the Moon being of her self a body dark,
receives her light (at leastwise her chiefest) from the Sun, as from an
entire cause; the Sun is therefore truly said to be more light, being the
total subordinate cause of light; in this case therefore it is truly said, id
quod efficit tale, est magis tale: but the Sun, mediante homine, producit
hominem; and mediante Leone, Leonem; and mediante Planta Plantam; for that the
Sun affords to all sensible and vegetable creatures an influx of vigor and
natural heat: yet for as much as the Sun is, in the production of these
creatures, but a partial, and not an integrall cause, it were absurd to say,
that the Sun were more a man, then is a man; or more a Lion, then is a Lion;
or more a Plant, then is a Plant: and so is it to say, that because a King may
acknowledge his power in part received from the peoples general consent, that
therefore the people have more power then himself.

The Observator tells us, Page 3. That the Kings dignity was erected to
preserve the Communalty, the Communalty was not created for his service.

This is somewhat too harsh, especially if we consider our King to be, in all
Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, next and immediately under Christ,
supreme Head and Governor: such words would have been better accommodated to
a Duke of Venice, then to a King of England. The Jews, I believe, when they
asked a King at Gods hands, were somewhat inclining to the Observators opinion;
for they desired a King for their own ends, chiefly to judge them, and to
fight their Battles; not well considering, that if they had a King, he must
and ought to have a Kingly Dominion over them: Wherefore God caused the Prophet
Samuel to instruct them concerning the Praeeminence of a King; and, that if
they would have a King, a King would be such, and such a man, as is evidently
characterized in the first of Samuel, chap. 8. where amongst other things,
verse. 17. the Prophet says, He will take the Tenth of your Sheep, and ye
shall be his servants: Where, by the word will, he shows the Authority which
Kings would have; and by the word shall, he shows the obedience that
Subjects should have: nor did the Prophet speak of some, or to some few only;
but of all, and to all the people, (at leastwise to all the chiefest of them)
saying, Ye shall be his servants.

I desire therefore that the Observator, and all his other adherents, would
take more special notice of this Text of the Prophet, and that of Saint Paul's
confirmation of this Text, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers:
For, though Christian Monarchs ought not, by the Rules of Christianity, to
Tyrannize, or make our Sons their Slaves, or our Daughters their Concubines,
and the like; as did many of the Kings of the Gentiles, and some of the Jews;
yet ought they not to be thought so contemptible, as that the Communalty was no
way created for their service.

The Observator says in the same Page, That the right of Conquest cannot be
pleaded to acquit Princes of that which is due to the people, as the authors
and ends of all Power; for mere Force cannot alter the course of Nature, and
frustrate Law; and if it could, there were more reason why the people might
justify Force to re-gaine due liberty, then the Prince might to subvert the
same.

By the Observators leave, for his first Clause it is answered already, That in
Monarchies the people are not the authors or ends of Power. For the second
Clause, That mere Force cannot alter the course of Nature, or frustrate the
tenor of Law; that is to say, That mere Force cannot captivate and debase a
people by nature free, and living under a law of common consent. I suppose the
words, cannot alter, should have been, cannot, de jure, alter; or ought not to
alter, etc. For that force can alter, and de facto has altered the freedom
and laws of People and Nations, is known to most men; Histories and
Chronicles testifying to the world the several alterations and forms of
Government which Conquerours have induced; but whether they ought so to have
done, is a question. Yet should the Observator and his adherents take advice,
that though in Nature there is a parity of mankind, and therefore Dominion may
not seem to be intended by Nature, yet God the author of Nature, foreseeing
the fall of Man, and the depravation in Nature, which did ensue thereof
intended power and dominion, and that some should be masters, and others
servants; some command, and others obey; some should become slaves to Tyrants,
others subjects to free Monarchs; others members of popular Estates: and these
things God has ordained by his divine wisdom according to his will, and
disposes and alters them at his pleasure: But as for the pot, it ought not to
say to the Potter, Why have thou made me thus? It is enough for it to know,
that there is no power but of God, and so to be applyable to the use it was
made for; if for honor, to honor; if for servility, to servility; being
subject for conscience sake: Romans 13.5.

Of a strange nature therefore are those words, viz. There were more reason why
the people might justify force, to re-gaine due liberty, then the Prince might
to subvert the same. If this Doctrine had been good, our Savior would surely
have counseled the Jews (when they asked him whether it were lawful to give
tribute to Caesar) to have kept their money in their purses, or to have made up
a stock of it, and by force to have sought to re-gaine their due liberty from
Caesar, and not have bid them Give unto Caesar what is Caesar's. If it be
alleged, that in case Christ had counseled the Jews so, they would have
played the Jews indeed, and have accused him of high Treason: What then? Would
Christ have concealed, or did he at any time conceal the truth for fear of
the Jews accusations? When he was conjured to express whether or no he were
the Son of God, (a thing more hateful to the Jews ears, then the denying
of tribute could have been to the ears of the Romans) Christ answered, Thou
have said it; which is as much as Yes. But suppose the Jews would have accused
him of high Treason, in case he had denied tribute to Caesar, and that God
would not have such a vile imputation as Treason laid on the Redeemer of the
World: Yet had re-gaining of due liberty by force been lawful, Christ might
have said, Ye may give tribute to Caesar, in the Potentiall Mood, (in which
words no exceptions could have been taken) and not have said, Give tribute to
Caesar, or Give unto Caesar what is Caesar's, in the Imperative Mood. Or
otherwise, when they asked him, Whether it were lawful to pay tribute to
Caesar, he might only have answered them, Yes; but foreseeing in his divine
wisdom, that some indirect constructions might be made of such a single word
as Yes, it is lawful to pay it, ye may pay it if ye please, it is not against
the law of God, if ye do pay it, etc. therefore Christ bid them show him a
piece of money, and bid them Give it unto Caesar, informing the covetous minds
of that perverse people, that they ought and were obliged to part with their
money and substance to Caesar, if demanded as a tribute. But to let Arguments
of Divinity pass, and to induce a few State reasons: If the people may
justify force to re-gaine due liberty, what Monarchy, what Aristocracy, what
Popular estate can remain secure? The French subjects being in general
oppressed with taxes, may revolt from their King, if this Tenet be good; and so
may the Spanish: The Polish Peasants may rebel against the King and their
Lords, for that they hold them in villinage: and the Townsmen and Boores in
Holland, and the Pisani in Venice against the States, for their imposing on
them terrible excizes. This Tenet, or Position, may quadrate, it may be, with
the Irish Rebels, (for they pretend by force to re-gaine due liberty) but never
with loyal subjects. And surely this Tenet, or Position aforesaid, is
dangerous to all the Monarchies and States of the world, yea, even to
Parliaments themselves, if rightly considered; and opposite also to the law of
God and Nations.

The Observator tells us, Page 13. That where the people by public authority
will seek an inconvenience to themselves, and the King is not so much
interested as themselves, it is more inconvenience to deny it, then grant it.
This is a strange assertion, and against all rule of Monarchical Government.
Suppose (for a supposition is no fallacy) that a Christian people should
generally (which God forbid) desire to revolt from Christianity to
Mahometanisme; should their King grant it? they seem to be more interessed
then the King, because it concerns their salvation or damnation; is it
injustice therefore to deny it? Surely no; but most just and acceptable to God
to hinder them from it. Suppose this Nation should in general (which God of
his goodness prohibit) desire to turn Anabaptists and Brownists, whereof
there are too many already; is the King bound, or ought he to condescend to
their desires? Surely no: but as Gods Vicegerent, to oppose such exorbitant
inclinations of the people. But if the Assertion of the Observator be good,
Pilate seems to be excuseable, whom the Observator condemns in the page
before: for the Jews sought by authority of the Priests and Elders to crucify
Christ, (an inconvenience enough to themselves) and instanced a law, and that
by that law he ought to die, Joh. 19.7. and the Jews were more interested in
Christ, (he being their Countryman, and subject to their laws, as they
conceived)* then was Pilate; so that according to this Assertion of the
Observator, It was more inconvenience and injustice for Pilate to have denied
to the Jews Christ to have been crucified, then to have granted it. Judica
Deus.

The Observator says, Page 17. The name of a King is great, I confess, and
worthy of great honor; but is not the name of a People greater?

The Observator must give me leave to tell him, that in Monarchies, where there
were or are Kings, the name of a people neither was, nor is greater then the
name of a King: Senatus populusque Romanus, ceased to be, and gave place to the
name of Caesar. The Ottoman name at this day, dignifies that great Empire
subject to that family; and so does the name of Sophy the Persian. The name of
the House of Austria decorates their dominions; and so does that of Bourbon,
France: And I see no reason but why the name of Stewart should do as much in
England. If it be asked, But what avails the names of these great Monarchs,
without their Kingdoms or Dominions? The answer is, That Dominions are to
Monarchs, as it were, material subjects; themselves (from whom their names
result) as Forms. Now as the Form is more worthy then its Matter, so is a
free Monarch more worthy then his Empire, in respect of dignity political.

And indeed the word Monarch inferres as much; for Monarchy is derived from
Monarch, not Monarch from Monarchy. But it may be some will instance from
hence, that if it be so, the good of a Monarch seems to be preferred before
the good of all his Subjects in general, so that a whole Kingdom or Empire
should be utterly pillaged, wasted, and consumed, rather then his Treasures be
destroyed. Not so: for though Empires and Kingdoms are but as material
subjects, and Monarchs as forms political; yet even as in nature, forms
cannot subsist without matter, (from whose power all forms, except the
rational soul, are educed;) so in policy, Monarchs cannot subsist without
their people, from whose subjection and obedience their power is educed
immediately from God, as are forms from matter by nature: the good of both
therefore must be consistent together, so that not salus populi alone, as the
Observator would have it, but salus Regis and populi, is the true end of
Monarchical government.

Thus have I briefly answered the Observators chief arguments, from whence all
his other assertions and conclusions are drawn, desireing him and all others,
rather to study how to produce reasons for obedience (where it is due) to
Monarchs, then to derogate from Monarchical government: to endeavor how to
incline, and not to disaffect (by nice positions) the distracted minds of the
people toward the King: to propound prudent Arguments which might move the
King to accommodate with his Parliament; and not by lessening his authority, to
divert him from it. Finally, to seek how to unite the King and Commonwealth,
and not to dis-unite them by impertinent and invalid conclusions. God of his
goodness grant co-union (as much as in this world may be) between our
Sovereign and His people, that He may know truly how to rule, and they to
obey.

ANIMADVERSIONS upon those Notes which the late OBSERVATOR has published upon
the seven Doctrines, and Positions, which the KING by way of Recapitulation (he
says) lays open so offensive.
POSITION I.
THat the Parliament has an absolute, indisputable power of declaring Law: so
that all the right of the King and People depends upon their pleasure.

To this the Observator says;
It has been answered, That this Power must rest in them, or in the King, or
in some inferior Court; or else all suits will be endless, and it cannot rest
more safely then in Parliament.

ANIMADVERSION I.
THe Observator has contracted His Majesty's words, but has kept the sense in
more general terms, and seems (though but faintly) to justify the Position,
by approving (I know not whose answer) that this Power can rest no where m^re
safely then in Parliament. He means the Parliament without the King; if he had
allowed the King his place in Parliament, I know no understanding man but will
easily subscribe, That the King in Parliament, or the Parliament with him, have
an absolute, undisputable power, both to make, and declare Law; and to end all
suits of what kind soever, determinable by humane Law within the Kingdom. And
here is the most safe resting of this power (and here it has ever rested) and
not in the King alone (who claims not that Power, but is willing to govern
His Subjects according to the known Laws) and much less in any inferior
Court. But that such an absolute undisputable Power of declaring Law, as has
lately been assumed, by the Major part of the present sitting Parliament,
should be resting in them, is neither necessary for the ending of suites, nor
can be safe either for King or Subject. If they may declare that for a Law, a
fundamental Law, which never yet was exacted, or had any being; and deny the
plain undoubted Laws that have been Enacted, or frustrate them by some
unheard of interpretation, (as if such interpretation had been some mental (or
rather Parliamentall) reservation, laid up within the Parliament walls, to be
produced upon emergent occasions, by their Successors) they will have so full
an Arbitrary power, that the right and safety of King and People must wholly
depend upon their Votes. Which power can never be safe, either for King, or
People, nor can they produce one president that may warrant such a Power. But
they are not bound, or limited by such presidents, That Is the second Position.

POSITION II.
THat Parliaments are bound to no Presidents.

OBSERVATOUR.
Statutes are not binding to them, why then should Parliaments? Yet there is no
obligation stronger then the honor and justice of a Parliament.

ANIMADVERSION II.
IF Statutes be not binding to them, there is no reason that presidents should
be. And he says true, Statutes are not binding to them, that is, de facto,
they are not (for they in some things go directly against them) but de jure,
they are; that (...) they ought to be binding to them, till they be repealed by
the same power they were made, that is, by Bill orderly passed both Houses, and
ratified by His Majesty's Royal assent. And unless they can show better
reason then their bare Assertion, Presidents (as they are the best warrant, so)
they are, and ought to be the limits and bounds of their proceedings. He might
have said as truly, That Oaths are not binding to them: and therefore neither
Statutes, nor presidents, But the Observator tells us ( Page 44.) That the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance are not endangered, by making the Kingdom,
and not the King, the proper subject of power. And he yields reason for it. For
(says he) he that ascribes more to the whole Universality, then to the King,
yet ascribes to the King a true Supremacy of Power and Honor above all
particulars. I wonder what he means by a true Supremacy of Power and Honor
above all particulars: Surely he means nothing but priority of place, and
height of Title; for he is allowed little power over some particulars, namely,
over the Members of either House, and whom else they please to exempt (as they
did Sergeant Major Skippon for his Power and Commands.) But this distinction
helps them The Members of either House are sharers in that Supremacy which is
in the Universality and above his; and by the power of that Supremacy they can
exempt whom they please from the power of this, Inferior (pardon the phrase,
and the absurdities cannot be expressed without a Solecisme) Supremacy. Very
good: but in good sober sadness, does the Observator think this distinction
was thought on by the Framers and enjoyners of that Oath, or that the Members
of the House, at their entering the House, did take their Oath to the King, as
to the Supreme over all, with exception of themselves, or reservation of an
higher Supremacy to themselves, when they should be entered? It is hardly
credible: Nor do all (that desire to tender all due honor to the Parliament)
believe that they are so the Universality, or the Kingdom, as the Observator
presumes. They are trusted by the Universality and Kingdom, and we pray, that
they may discharge that trust, not knowing, but that a multitude of men subject
(every one of them) to error, may fail in their judgment, and being not
exempted from the common condition of the sinful Sons of Adam, may possibly,
not rightly discharge the trust committed to them, as well as the King, who is
blasted with foul failings and errors, in judgment. Me thinks, men that so
much detest Popery, should not borrow the grounds of their reasoning from them:
and I shall as soon believe the Council of Trent, telling us that they are
the Universal Church, and therefore cannot possibly err, as that the
Parliament is the Universal, unerring, and unpervertibly just body of the
Kingdom. And surely, the Spirit of declaring must needs reside in a strangely
large measure in them, who have power thus to declare, not only Law, but
Oaths too: a greater, then which the Popes flatterers never gave him: and
hardly ever any Pope assumed so great: Quo te constringam mutantem Protea nodo?
How shall these men be bound to do right, who so easily untie the knots of
these sacred books of Law and Oaths? why, yes: There is a bond that will do
it; The obligation of the Justice, and honor of a Parliament. But can any man
be sure, that they whom neither Law, Custom, and Presidents of their
Ancestors, nor Oaths can bind, will be always held in by the obligation of
Justice and Honor? Is it not possible that they may (in time) find a power in
themselves of declaring that obligation void, as well as they have done the
other? The same obligation of Justice and Honor, is as strong upon Kings, (and
has ever been held more powerful and obstrictive in them, then in any State
managed by a Community;) and yet they dare not trust His Majesty, though so
obliged. The Observatour then must pardon me, if I desire, they may rather be
held in, (and hold themselves so to be) by the old obligations of Law,
Presidents, and Oaths, rather then that the Kings liege people should be put
wholly to confide to that single obligation of the Justice and Honor of a
Parliament.

POSITION III.
THat they are Parliaments, and may judge of public necessity without the
King, and dispose of any thing.

OBSERVATOUR.
They may not desert the King, but being deserted by the King, when the
Kingdom is in distress, they may judge of that distress, and relieve it; and
are to be accounted by virtue of representation, as the whole body of the State.

ANIMADVERSION III.
HIs Majesty sets down this Position in more words, but these are much to the
same purpose; and upon these the inference which His Majesty makes, follows
undeniably, That then the life and liberty of the subject, and all good Laws
made for the security of them, may be disposed of, and repealed by the major
part of both Houses at any time present, and by any ways and means procured
so to be; and His Majesty shall have no power to protect them. They see
nothing that see not the misery which may follow upon such a vast transcendency
of arbitrary power, if it were invested in the Parliament, which (I dare boldly
say) was never claimed by any Parliament, though in conjunction with (the head
of it) the King. Every (the meanest) Subject has such a right and propriety in
his goods, that without Law they cannot be taken from him, though to be
employed for the public good. And though the safety of the people be the
highest Law, and that do (many times) give a power above other Laws, and
against them, to the supreme Magistracy in a State, to dispose of private men's
estates, yet the unchangeable rule of Justice must have place, even in that
highest Law, and that requires a compensation to be made to those, whose
estates or goods are so disposed of; and never gives power to uphold the
public good with private injury. Nor can it be imagined, that a State upheld
by such helps, should not be able to make a just compensation to those, by
whom it was upheld. But let us hear our Observatour: They may not (says he)
desert the King. Gramercy for that; I am glad to hear they have yet any
obligation upon them to tie them to the King. Yet I know not well what he
means by deserting the King: if he mean it in that sense, which he does the
Kings deserting of them, which (out of question) is his not assenting to
whatsoever they shall think fit; Then in reason they should not, by their
disallowing all his Proposals, have driven him to dissent from theirs, and so
to have deserted them. Well: But being deserted by the King, when the Kingdom
is in distress, they may judge of that distress, and relieve it. All their
power then is upon supposition of the Kings deserting them: So that if it
appear* that His Majesty has not deserted them (as many good men believe He
has not, in the redress of any real grievance,) then they have no such
power. And however, they claim this power only when the Kingdom is in
distress; But how if the Kingdom be not in distress, or (at least) that
distress be only or principally caused by their claiming of that power, which
cannot consist with the Honor and Royal Estate of His Majesty, which all men
(by their late Protestation) are bound to defend? If it be so, we may easily
discern how far they may stretch this power, which they claim only in
order to distress; and that they may make as much use of it, as the Pope does
of his power in temporals; In ordine ad spiritualia. He claims no more,
(though some have said he has right to more;) and the Parliament will need no
more, to do as much as he takes upon him to do with Christian Princes and
States. But they must have a right to their power in this case of distress;
Whence have they that? why, they have it as the whole body of the State, and
that they are, and must be so accounted, by virtue of representation. Very
good. But let us consider his words a little more. There is no understanding
man, but must and will acknowledge (unless he wilfully derogate from them,)
that the Parliament represents the body of the State, for those ends for which
they convene, as an Ambassador does the Prince that sends him, in the manage
of that business for which he is sent: But this is not an absolute
representation to all intents and purposes. Besides, whom do they represent?
The body (says he) of the State. Be it so: but it is only the Body without
the Head. And if they were not by representation only, but really, the whole
body of the People (if it were possible they should convene together) they are
all but an assembly of Subjects, of men to be governed, not to rule; to be
commanded, not to command their Head and Sovereign: and then there can be no
virtue of representation that can advance them to the power, which the
Observatour ascribes to them, when such power was never in the whole Body,
which is represented. No? never such power in the whole body? I know the
Observatours stomach will rise here. Did not the Peoples consent at first make
Kings, and conveigh power into their hands? Truly Sir, not solely: but grant
it, what then? Marry, Page 2.
he says, then it is a principle in nature. Quicquid efficit tale, est magis
tale; In English, If the People make a King, they are more King themselves; or
if they give power, they have more power: and may resume and exercise that
power when they please. Excellent learning, and well applied; I believe he
learned this piece from Suarez the Jesuit. But the Observatour may know, that
that rule admits many limitations; and surely, it holds only in causis
totalibus, which the People are not in the constitution of Kings. But suppose
their consent did at first give power to Kings; when their consent is given for
them and their Successors, to a King and His Heirs, can the succeeding people
cut off the entaile, and retract the consent their Ancestors have given? By
what right? with what justice? I know not: but the people may contract for them
and their Successors in the conveighance of Sovereign power, (if ever they
had it in their hands to give) as any man may in the conveighance of his lands
or goods: and that such conveighance may be as binding to Successors in the
one, as in the other; and then I am sure they cannot have power at all times,
and in all succeeding ages, to resume what they have so given. Our Kings right
(so far as it is derived from the people) is of this kind. And if he had no
other grounds for his claim of Sovereignty, (as it is most certain that he
has) such a consent once granted, were sufficient to bind the people, that it
cannot ever be lawful for them, by a major part of them, (coming in with a
Nolumus hunc regnare super nos) to deprive him of that right. But surely, they
would never make so absolute a grant of their power to Princes, as to divest
themselves of it. Good Sir, show me that proviso in their grant. But it seems
to you unnatural they should: Page 3.
I do not wonder it should seem so to you, who make it agreeable to the
clearest beams of humane reason, and the strongest inclinations of nature;
Page 16
(and by consequence, as you would persuade the World, justifiable:) For every
private man to defend himself by force, if assaulted, though by the force of a
Magistrate, or his own Father; and though he be not without all confidence by
flight, etc. I wish whilst you have such recourse to nature, you would not
forget Christianity, which teaches subjection and obedience, and gives no
liberty (either to private men, or the major part of the Communalty) of
resistance; but says, They that resist, Romans 13
shall receive to themselves damnation. And if the Observatur be a Gentleman,
he should tender how he has recourse to nature in point of right, lest he give
occasion to some Wat. Tyler's Chaplain, to preach again upon that Text: When
Adam dolve, and Eve span,
Who was then a Gentleman.
He may find a goodly Sermon upon that Text, set down by John Stow, in
Richard the second, and such Doctrine delivered upon it; the use of which would
shake his title to his inheritance, and the name of Gentleman.

POSITION IV.
THat no Member of the Parliament ought to be troubled for Treason, etc.
without leave.

OBSERVATOUR.
This is intended of suspicions only, and when leave may seasonably be had;
and when competent accusers appear not in the impeachment.

ANIMADVERSION IV.
HIs Majesty has said so much of this, and so little of it has been
answered, (or indeed is answerable,) that I shall not need to say much: Only I
observe the modesty of this Observatour, that he does not absolutely say they
are not to be troubled for those crimes, but not upon suspicion only; etc. I
know not what he may call suspicions, but I believe the best evidences may
easily be held for bare suspicions, if they may not have liberty to speak out;
and that they cannot have, unless the accused be first in safe custody, and
brought to trial, where they may legally be produced. And, I believe, few wise
men will think it reasonable, that the grounds of suspicion of Treason should
necessarily be opened before trial.

POSITION V
THat the Sovereign power resides in both Houses of Parliament, The King
having no negative voice.

OBSERVATOUR.
This power is not claimed as ordinary, nor to any purpose, but to save the
Kingdom from ruin; and in case, where the King is so seduced, as that he
prefers dangerous men, and persecutes his loyal Subjects.

ANIMADVERSION V.
HIs Majesty infers upon this Position, That himself must be subject to their
Commands. This sounds but harshly in the ears of loyal Subjects. That any
posture wherein they can be put, can raise Subjects to a capacity of
Sovereignty, and reduce their Sovereign to become their Subject. But he
comforts us here, and tells us, this power is not claimed as ordinary, nor to
any purpose, etc. This is but poor comfort: it is not, but it may be in good
time, if they please. He does not say, they shall not hereafter, and cannot
claim it as ordinary, and to other purposes then that he names. So that there
may be other causes that may make them claim this power, as well as this. But
indeed they need no other, if it be in their power to declare that to be the
case of the King and Kingdom when they please: But they will never do it, but
where there is a just cause for it, and the truth leads them to it. Truly, I
believe honorably of the Justice and Wisdom of Parliaments; but I do
believe that they are not either infallible, or that they cannot possibly do
amiss. And the Observator must bring better arguments; (and I fear he cannot
bring so good) to make me believe otherwise, then ever yet were brought for the
infallibility of a general Council. But I have said enough for the present of
the residence of sovereign power in the Parliament, and the ground of their
claim to it, by the virtue of representation in my third Animadversion. I
shall here only give the Reader a brief gloss upon the language here used by
the Observatour to save the Kingdom from ruin, (that is from Monarchy or
being governed by the King.) The King is seduced, that is, he is persuaded (by
his own understanding, and other evil Counselors,) not to part with his
Sovereignty, nor to become a Subject to his Subjects. He preferres dangerous
men, (that is, such as would have him still to be their King.) persecutes his
loyal Subjects, that is, such as would rule him, and the people at their
pleasure.

POSITION VI.
THat the Levying of Forces against the personal commands of the King, (though
accompanied with his presence) is not levying of war against the King: but
war against his authority, not Person, is war against the King.

OBSERVATOUR.
If this were not so, the Parliament seeing a seduced King, ruining himself,
and the Kingdom, could not save both, but stand and look on.

ANIMADVERSION VI.
I Thought this Position so strangely Paradoxall, and so apparently contrary to
reason, and common sense, that no man would have appeared in the defense of it.
Yet this Observator never blushes, nor blinkes at it, but affirms it stoutly.
But for all that, I shall believe very slowly, That the Kings Person can at any
time be without the King, or without his Authority: Or that they may destroy
the Kings Person to preserve the King. My faith is not strong enough to believe
these sublime points, and mysteries of State: I shall subscribe thus far,
That war against the Kings Authority (though in the absence of his Person) is
war against the King: But that the King and his Person should be 'intwo
places, will never (I fear) down with me. But however I Will see his reason:
What Is that? Why else the Parliament seeing a seduced King, ruining himself
and his Kingdom, could not save both, but must stand and look on. Surely this
reason is full of weight, and ready to burst, it is so big with probability. I
suppose the Reader understands his language here by my former gloss: But if we
should take the words as they sound, the reason would seem as strange, as that
which it is brought to confirm. The King ruining himself, and his Kingdom, a
mad King, or an Idiot (he means) and then 'twere fit the Parliament appointed
him a guardian. Ruining himself and his Kingdom. Is it possible, that the
King should ruin himself and his Kingdom. What? The King alone? Is he alone
able to do it without the people? It is hardly credible: If he have the people
on his side, and a prevailing major party, I think the Observatour (standing
to his own Principles) will not deny that he has Sovereign power with him,
and that it is unnatural to think the Community should destroy it self. But
the Community (he will say) is to be looked at in Parliament. Well, But good
Sir, may not the people withdraw the power of representation, which they
granted to the Parliament; was their grant so absolute, and so irrevocable,
that they dispossess themselves wholly of taking or exercising that power, in
their own proper persons? Remember your principles about the conveying of
Sovereign power into the hands of Kings; and if you can show no better Cards
for their power of representation, than the peoples revocable consent, (and I
would feign know why it should be more revocable from Kings than men) you will
find their tenure in it very tickle.

POSITION VII.
THat according to some Parliaments they may depose Kings.

OBSERVATOUR.
It Is denied that any King was deposed by a free Parliament, fairly elected.

ANIMADVERSION VII.
I Like this note better then all the rest, and am wholly of his mind: That
never any free Parliament, fairly elected, deposed any King: and I hope
(whatsoever his principles seem to insinuate) they do not believe they have
power to do it, pray that they may never attempt, (at least, not be able) to
depose the King, or destroy Monarchy.

FINIS.

