To all ye who be called BAPTISTS, who call your selves Saints and
Church Members, I write these things unto you as by the Lord moved and
instructed, that you may try and prove your selves with the Touchstone of
Truth, whether you be so in deed and in truth, as you profess your selves to be
in words.
CHrist Jesus the Son of Righteousness, Romans 8.11. John 17.^.
is risen from the dead, and is glorified with the Father with that eternal
glory that he had with him before the world was made; Ephesians. 2.5, 6.
and the Saints (who were raised from the dead, and quickened by his living
Spirit of Power) were made to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus
with the Father, and had fellowship with the Father and the Son, 1 John 1.3
Coll. 2.11, 12 and 3.9, 10, 11.
having put off the body of the sins of the flesh, and the old man with his
deeds, and having put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the
Image of him that created him, where there is neither Greek nor Jew,
Circumcision, nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but
Christ is all, and in all.

This was the privilege of the Saints, 1 John 3.8 Romans 8.21 Romans 6 13, 18, 22,
23 Heb. 12.14 John 13, 34, 35 Ephesians. 2.10 Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24 1 Cor. 15.34
even freedom from the bondage and servitude of sin, no more to yield their
members servants unto sin and unrighteousness, but unto purity and holiness,
without which no man can see the Lord; and hereby they were known, even by
their fruits of righteousness, being made Gods Workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, the Image of the Devil (as pride, covetousness,
self-seeking, envy, wrath, and malice, and such like) being defaced, and the
Image of God (as meekness and humility, gentleness, patience, and
long-suffering, truth and righteousness, love, peace, joy, and true holiness,
and such like, being) renewed in them. O friends awake and arise, and seek not
the living amongst the dead; Ephesians. 1.20, 21 Ephesians. 2.15. Coll. 2.14. Heb. ^.2.
the Lord is risen, and ascended far above all heavens, and has abolished in
his flesh the enmity, the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, blotting
out the handwriting of Ordinances, and took it out of the way, nailing it to
his cross; He was, (and is) the substance of all Elementary shadows and
figures, and the glorious appearance of his light and power, does make the
Elements to pass, and the shadows to fly away; and there is the Saints union
and fellowship, in the Light, and walking therein, 1 John 1.7. Romans 8.7, 8. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.
the blood (or life) of Jesus cleanses from all sin and the power of the cross
of Christ crucifies that carnal mind which is enmity against God, which feeds
upon the carnal things and Elementary shadows, and so the death of Christ, and
crucifying with him, comes to be witnessed by his follows, Romans 6.6. Rom 8.2.
who walk in the Light, and believes in the same; and being dead with Christ
from the Rudiments and Elements of the world, cannot turn back and feed upon
the shadow or figure, nor be subject to fading and carnal Ordinances; For (as
says the Apostle who came through the warfare, Gal. 2.19, 20 Col. 2.20, 21, 22
John 3.6. Romans 8.8. 1 John 2.15, 16, 17 2 Cor. 4 18
and was dead unto sin, and crucified with Christ) If ye be dead with Christ
from the rudiments of the world, why as though living in the world, are ye
subject to Ordinances? Touch not, taste not, handle not, etc. I know by the
Spirit of the Lord, that it is the nature of man (being alive unto sin, to
himself, and to the world) to feed upon the visible and fading things of the
world, and so the carnal feeds upon the carnal; but all that is in the world,
that are seen with a visible eye, cannot satisfy the hungering desires, nor
quench the thirstings of the weary Soul; but as man by the power of the cross
of Christ (which the true Disciple must take up daily) comes to dye unto
himself, Luke 9.23, 24, 25, 26 Gal. 6.4, 15
and unto sin and evil, and to be crucified unto the world; he can no longer
feed upon the fading shadows, nor perishing things of the world, John 6.50, 51,
to 59
but his food and bread is he who came down from above, who is the Saints
bread, and their life, and he that eats of this bread, lives, and has life in
himself, and bread in his own house, and shall not hunger; and he that has not
this life, and this bread to feed upon, has no true life nor bread that
satisfies, Isa. 55.2
but is spending his money for that which is not bread, and his labor for that
which does not satisfy: So it is he that has the Son, 1 John 5.12
which has life; but he that has not the Son of God, has not life.

You that have the Name of Christians, and of Saints and Church Members, judge
in your selves, and try with true Light whether you be so in truth, 1 Cor.
11.31, 32 John 3.21 Ephesians. 5.13 2 Cor. 13.5 2 Cor. 5.17.
and have the nature and life of that which you profess the words of; it is
indeed a high state and condition to be a true Christian; for to be a true
Christian, is to be in Christ, and if any be in Christ, he is a new creature;
old things are passed away, (old heart, old love, and old life of sin) and
behold all things are become new, (new heart, new love, and new life, which is
the life of Christ, Col. 3.3, 4 Rom 8.10. John 3.9 Gal. 3.23. John 15.4, 5, 6 7
Matt. 7.13, 14
who is the life of every true Christian;) and this life is sins death, For if
Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; and in this life is the
Saints oneness, and out of this life is no unity; but all such are in a strife
and contention about the words and practices of those who were in this new
life, and falls out about the meanings, and so are divided into Sects and
Opinions, and many Religions, (as they are called) as is manifest at this day
in these Nations, many thousands have got the Name and Profession of Truth and
Christianity in words outwardly, Psalm. 14.2, 3
but a very few there be that are possessors of the life of Truth inwardly, as
the Fruits make manifest, and the Towns and Streets declare. The eternal Eye is
open, and the Lord is come to view your fields, and to look for Fruits, but his
Garden is overgrown, Weeds, Briars and Thorns, Heb. 6, 7. 8 John 5 41, 44
and fruitless Trees cumbers the ground: Ye proud ones that are so highly
exalted, seeking honor one of another, ye cumber the ground, Isa 28.1 Iam 5.1,
2, 3, 5 1 Cor. 6.10 Isa. 5 8 James 1.26
and woe is your portion, your profession will not cover you, ye covetous ones,
who are griping for the earth, whose hearts are even set thereon, striving and
endeavoring by all your wit and policy to compass riches, and so to become
great in the Earth; ye cumber the ground, ye envious bitter spirited ones, ye
cumber the ground; ye who are at liberty to speak your own words, to think your
own thoughts, and do your own works, whose tongues be at liberty, and carnal
minds at liberty, you are in the broad way, and your Religion is vain, where
the tongue is not bridled, Hos. 4.1, 2, 3 Isa. 2.1, 9 Isa, 58.2, 3 Psalm. 66.18
Jer. 5.23, 24, 25, 26 Gal. 6.7. 1 Pet. 3.21.
ye cumber the ground. Oh! the Land mourns, and the Earth is polluted with
corruption; thus says the Lord, Pride and vainglory, self-seeking, earthly
honor and preferment, and respecting persons, is found amongst you, (called
Church Members) envy, and bitterness of spirit; you have made a show and
profession of my Name outwardly in words, but deceit and iniquity lodges and
is regarded in your hearts, and your sins have separated between you and me,
says the Lord. Oh lay things to heart, and deceive not your selves with a vain
hope; for it is not the outward Name, nor the outward washing that does make a
true Christian, no more then the outward Name, and the outward Circumcision did
make a true Jew; For as the Apostle by the spirit of the Lord said, He is not a
Jew which is one outwardly, Romans 2.28, 29
neither is that the Circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but he is a
Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart, with the
Spirit: Even so by the Spirit of the Lord I say unto you, That he is not a
Christian which is one outwardly, which has the Name only; Gal. 3.27. 1 Cor.
12.13. Heb. 10.19; 20, 21, 22.
neither is that the Baptism which is outward with Water; but he is a Christian
who is in Christ, and Baptism is that of the Spirit, having the heart sprinkled
from an evil conscience, and the body washed with pure Water; For as many as
are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, and are one in Christ.

But all that are sprinkled or dipped and plunged in Water, are not one, but
many differences there be amongst them about these outward things, Gal. 3.27,
28.
which the kingdom of God does not stand nor consist in, as I know you are in
some measure sensible of it; outward Water can do no more then wash and cleanse
the outside, it cannot cleanse the heart from sin; Matt. 5.20.
so that outward washing is but a figure of the inward washing, as other
figures are, which I own all in their time and place; but figures and parables
are to the World, 2 Cor. 3.13, 14, 15, 16. Coll. 1.26. Gal. 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Col. 3.11.
and them that understand not the mystery; For the Vail being over the heart,
the mystery is hid, as it was all the time of the Law; but as the Power of God
does arise, it rends the Vail, and the mystery is opened, and the Son of God
revealed within, the Emanuel, God with us, who is the Wisdom and the
Righteousness, the Life, Light, and Leader, Bread, Wine, and Water, and all
other things he is made to the Saints.

And as for that Scripture, Matthew. 28.19. which you call the Command for
Water Baptism, (though Water is not there mentioned) I say, If that had been of
force, and extended unto all, then why was it not binding unto Paul, who was
called into the Ministry after that, who was a true Minister of the Gospel, and
yet he says plainly, 1 Cor. 1.17.
Christ sent him not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
and he says, There is one Body, and one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism; he brings them from the many, to the one, and this one I own, which
brings people into one, Acts 4 32. Romans 8 39.
one heart, one mind, one soul, where the unity stands unseperable in the one
Spirit of Love:

And as concerning those words which Christ said to his Disciples at the eating
of the Passover, John 6.27.
This do in remembrance of me; I own; John 14. chap.
he says unto his Disciples, I go away a little while, but I come again unto
you and ye shall know that I am in the Father, and you in me, and I in you,
etc. So in the time of his absence that was to be done in remembrance of him,
but when he was come, he was their bread, and they fed upon him; and he was
their Pastor and Teacher. 1 John 5.19, 20 Col 2.19. John 10.14. 1 Cor. 11.


And whereas Paul says to the Corinthians, What I have received of the Lord,
that do I deliver unto you, That the Lord Jesus the same Night that he was
betrayed, took bread, [take notice, this was done in the night] and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, etc. for as often as ye do eat this Bread, and drink
this Cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come. Read 1 Cor. 10 16.17. Now
the Apostle declares that he could not speak unto them as unto spiritual, 1
Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. John 6 53, 60, 63, 66.
but as unto carnal, even as unto Babes in Christ; and says he, I have fed you
with milk, and not with meat, for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither
yet now are you able; So that it is plainly manifest, they could not bear what
the Apostle had to declare, like unto those who had eaten of the loaves, but
when Christ spoke unto them of the Mystery, saying, Except ye eat my flesh,
and drink my blood, ye have no life in you, they stumbled at this Saying, and
went back, and walked with him no more. So Paul came down and fed them with
such meat as they were able to digest, 2 Cor. 12.16.
according to the Wisdom of God given him, he caught them by guile, coming down
to their weak capacities, and became all to all, (in the truth) that he might
win some; but after this he tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 12.31.
that yet he shows them a more excellent way, and so in his second Epistle he
brings them nearer, and draws them from the visibles to the invisible, the
Light which shined within, and said, We have this treasure in earthen Vessels,
2 Cor. 4. chap.
that the excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of us; We are troubled
on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair;
persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed, always bearing
about in the body, the dying of the Lord Jesus, [here is a true Remembrance]
that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body, for we which
live, are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the life also of
Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh, [mind that] which life is a
pure harmless, upright, and perfect life, which life is made manifest, Heb.
13.8.
the same to day as ever, which draws us from, and out of visible fading
things, which are temporal, to look at things invisible and eternal, according
as it is written, While we look not at thing which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen; for the things which are seen, 2 Cor. 4.18.
are temporal, but the things which are not seen, are eternal. Here you may see
the Apostle brings them off the fading shadows, to look at things eternal. Now
try your ways, and see whether or no you be not looking at things seen, and
feeding on the visibles, which are temporal, which in time fades away, as
Bread, Wine, and Water, which all perish with the using; and the Writings
visible will sade away, Col. 2.20, 21, 22 2 Pet. 1.19, 20 1 Pet. 1.22, 23, 24,
25 John 15.5, 6, 7
but the invisible and spiritual Word of life (which was within the holy men of
God, from which the visible Writings were given forth) does abide and endure
for ever; and except this Word be ingrafted in your hearts, and abide in you,
you cannot be saved, though you may have all the words and writings of the holy
men, and therefore the Apostle brings them to the proof and trial, whether or
no they were in the Faith, and whether or no Christ was come; 2 Cor. 13.5
for says he, Know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you
except ye be reprobates? And John the Apostle in his Epistle declares that
Christ was come, 1 John 5 19, 20 Col. 1.26, 27, 28, 29
saying, We know that the Son of God is come, and has given to us an
understanding to know him that is true; and we are in him [mind that] that is
true, even in his Son Christ Jesus; and this was the great Mystery which was
hid from former ages, which was manifested to (and in) the Saints, and is again
appearing in this the Lord's day, glory to his Name for evermore; and this was
a fulfilling of the prayer of Christ before he was sacrificed up, he prayed to
his Father that all those who through the word of his true Ministers did
believe on him, That they all may be one, John 17.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
even as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us,
that the world may believe that thou have sent me; and the glory which thon
gave me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one; I in
them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and this (as I have
said) was fulfilled in the Saints, and what was written by them, was to bring
to this unity, as the Apostle says, 1 John 1.3, 4 Verse 5 John 8.12 1 John
1.7. 1 John 2.20.27
These things I write unto you, that your fellowship might be with us, and
truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Christ Jesus; and God
is light, and Christ declares himself to be the light of the world; and the
Saints fellowship was in the Light; and John says likewise unto them, Ye have
an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things, etc. And the anointing
that ye have received of him, abides in you, and you need not that any man
teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, which is truth
and no lie, and even as it has taught you, so ye shall continue in him.

And concerning breaking of bread, the Apostle declared what that bread was
which they broke, the Cup of blessing; which we bless, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17
it is not the Communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break, Is
it not the Communion of the body of Christ? for we being many are one bread and
one body; this bread is not carnal (for many eat that, John 6.50 to 57
but are not one) but this bread is spiritual it is Christ, in whom the Saints
are one, who is the bread of life, as it is testified of him; I am the bread of
life, I am the living bread that came down from above, he that eats of this
bread shall live (...) ever.

Christ Jesus is called by several names in the Scriptures, 1 Cor 2.11.12 Mat.
22.29: 1 Cor. 8.4, 5, 6 Rom 18.3.4 2 Cor. 15.21
and those who have the names, and are not guided by the same spirit that gave
forth those names, are in the error, and strife, and falls out about the words
and names; but though his names are many, yet his power and life of purity is
but one; and except this power and life be manifest in you, to destroy sin,
Mat. 5.20 Isa. 30.1 Acts 2.46
in vain will all your talking and profession be; for woe is and will be the
Portion of all those who be covered with a covering, and not with the covering
of Gods holy Spirit: Yet breaking of bread outwardly I do not deny, but own it
in the Covenant of Love, breaking bread from house to house, and eating
together with singleness of heart, where the word of God is known, James 1.21,
22 23, 24
and received, and dwelt in, which does purify the heart; and so to the pure
all things are pure, Titus 1.15.16
but to the unbelieving and disobedient there is nothing pure, but even their
minds and consciences are defiled, and the words and prayers of such are
abomination to the Lord; for he cannot away with a polluted Sacrifice: Mal.
1.8, 9, 1 Timothy 2.11 Jam. 5.16 John 9.31
Therefore I say with the Apostle, I will that men pray, lifting up holy hands,
without wrath and doubting; for the prayers of the righteous avails much, but
we know that God hears not sinners; therefore let every one that names the
name of Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.19
depart from iniquity; for sin is the cause of alienation and separation from
God, even your sins; your sins have made a separation between you and me, says
the Lord: Therefore bring no more vain oblations, Isa. 1.13
offer no more your hypocritical feigned cries of confession of sin, Prove. 28.13
but from the bottom of your hearts confess and forsake your sins, and so shall
you find mercy, i Cor. 3. ii i Cor. 10.4
and come to the ground and true foundation, Chrst Jesus, the rock and corner
stone, and mind his light that does discover and make your sins manifest in its
first rise and conception, Ephesians. 5:13 Isa: 40:31 1 John 3: 8
and in that same light wait upon the Lord for power, that it may be destroyed;
for for this end and purpose was the Son of God made manifest, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil; and all sin is a work of the Devil, and is
conceived in the heart, and does defile the heart, Iam: 1: i4, i5 Mat. 15.18,
i9 John 15.3, 4, 5, 6. Mat. 23.26
and seperates from God, and breaks the peace with God; and if ever you come to
witness redemption, it must be wrought within you by Christ the light; for as
the work of the Devil is within, so must also the work of Christ be within,
John 15.3
to destroy the Devils work, and so to purify the heart, and purge the
conscience from dead works, and so to make the body a habitation of holiness
for God to dwell in. Heb. 9.14 1 Cor. 3.16.17.
Therefore in the ^^ar of God I do exhort you all, to return to the Lord, and
mind the measure of true light, which manifests sin, and reproves you for it,
John 1.9. Ephesians. 5.13: Mat 3.10. Mat. 23.26 Isa. 26: 9.
though never so closely committed, and therein wait upon the Lord, that the
Axe may be laid to the root of the Tree, that so according to Christ his
exhortation, you may first cleanse the inside, and so know the Lord as a
righteous Judge, executing true judgment upon every evil thought, evil motion,
or evil desire, or vile affection that arises out of the evil heart; for thus
the Lord is known in truth and righteousness, even by his working power in the
inward man, Mal. 3 2, 3. Psalm. 51.17.
purifying the heart by his word of truth; and so a true and living sacrifice
is offered up unto the Lord, even the sacrifice of a broken heart, and of a
contrite spirit, which is, Psalm. 51.6.
and was ever acceptable in the eyes of the Lord; for it is truth in the
inward parts which the Lord loves and desires; and to draw nigh unto God with
lips, Isa. 29.13.14.
and mouths, but hearts afar off, is that which the Lord loathes, and that which
he sent his true servants to testify against: Isa. 54.13. John. 6.45.
The Lord is come, and coming to teach his people himself freely by his spirit,
and to fulfill his promises made of old: Let him that has an ear, hear what the
spirit says unto the Churches; Rev. 2.
Build not upon the water, for that is moveable; neither upon the sand, Mat.
7.24.25.26.27.
for that will not stand in the storm; but come out of the water, and build
upon the unmovable rock that will abide, and not be moved, nor shaken with a
storm: Read in the Mystery, and the Lord give all simple honest hearts an
understanding: for it is for their sakes that this was written, for whom my
soul-breaths and longs after, Luke 15.17 Isa. 55.1, 2 Mat. 11 28.39
and do hereby call and invite all the hungry freely to come into my fathers
house, where they shall find full satisfaction and drink freely at the pure
fountain of the fathers love, which alone can satisfy the hungry, thirsting
souls. John 4.13.14.

Read with understanding, prove all things, hold fast that which is good, 1
These. 5.21. To the witness of God in you all I speak and appeal, which reproves
you in secret for your secret iniquities and calls unto you for amendment of
life: Haste and amend your lives, and return at the Lords reproof, and no
longer provoke him to anger, least he cast you off for ever; for the Lord has
said, My Spirit shall not always strive with man.

To day, while it is called to day, harden not your hearts.

Written in obedience to the spirit of the Lord, in love to all your souls, by
a servant of the Lord, and labourer in his Vineyard, who is known to the world
by the name of ALEXANDER PARKER.

THE END.

