THE ARRAIGNMENT, Conviction and Condemnation of the Westminsterian-Juncto's
ENGAGEMENT.

WITH A Cautionarie Exhortation to all Honest English Spirits, to avoid the
danger of Perjurie by taking of it.

PROVERBS. 24.21.22. My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King: and meddle
not with them that are given to change.

For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

PRINTED in the year 1649.

Summary Reasons against the New Oath and Engagement.
YOU shall Swear, [or] I Declare and Promise, That I will be True and
Faithful to the Commonwealth of England, as the same is now Established
WITHOUT KING OR HOUSE OF LORDS.

FIRST, This Oath and Engagement is imposed by those who, by the Laws of God
and the Realm, had never any Power (admit them a full and free House of
Commons, under no Force, as they are not) to Administer, much less to Make or
Impose any Oath in any Case. Cooks 3. Institut. p. 165. and less Authority
then the Bishops and Clergy in Convocation, who made the etc Oath, not so bad
as this; adjudged High Treason in Canterburies Case, for which he lost his
head: Canterburies Doom p. 26.40. though not so bad as this.

Secondly, It is contrary to all the ancient Oaths of our Judges, Justices of
Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Recorders, Clearkes of Chancery and other courts of
Justice: To the Oaths of Fealty and Homage, made by all the Kings Tenants: The
ancient and late Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance; the Vow and Protestation;
the solemn League and Covenant, and Engagement of the whole Kingdom to the
King, his Heirs Successors, and Posterity for ever, to defend their
undoubted Right to the Crown with the last drop of their Blood^, contained in
the Statutes of 1. Iacobi cap. 1.2. and involves the Makers and Takers thereof,
in manifold execrable perjuries; to the scandal of our Religion, Nation,
Levit. 19.12. Deuteronomy. 5.11. Ier. 5.2. c 7.9. Ezech. 17.12. to 20. Zech. 5.3.4.
Mal. 3.5. Math. 5.34. Romans 1.31.32. 2. Tim. 3.3.4.
Dishonor and high Displeasure of God, and just-damnation of their Souls.

Thirdly, It is a new Gunpowder-Treason, blowing up the King and his
Posterity, Monarchy, the House of Lords, the Constitution and Privileges of
our English Parliaments, our ancient fundamental Government, Laws, Liberties,
and our three Kingdoms at one crack; the very same and far worse then that
of the Jesuits and Papists, condemned by the Statutes of 3. Iacobi cap. 1.2.4.
executing far more then what they intended, and quite deleting the Infamy and
memory of that, and all future celebration of that joyful day of November 5.
never to be forgotten.

Fourthly, It disseiseth, disinheriteth, fore-judgeth the King of his 1. Iac c
1.2 4.3. Iacobi. 1.2.
Rightful Crown and Revenues, the House of Lords of their Peerage,
Privileges, and A Plea for the Lords.
the undoubted Rights our English Parliament and Kingdom of their very
Liberties and beings; un-Kinging, un-Lording, un-Parliamenting, un-Kingdoming
them all at once, without once summoning and bringing them to Answer by any
legal Process, to hear what they can say for themselves, and without any
lawful Judgment of their Peers according to the Law of the Land, contrary to
the express Letter of Magna Charta 5. E. 3. c. 9.25. E, 3. c. 4.28. E. 3. c.
3.37, E. 3. c. 18.42. E. 3. c. 3. and the Petition of Right; yea Votes of
October. 11.22. 1649.
debarres those Ministers, Officers, Lawyers, Students, from their
Augmentations, Callings, Offices, Preferments and Degrees, who Refuse or
Neglect to Subscribe it; contrary to all these Statutes and the Law of the
Land, without any hearing or Trial; the extremity of Tyranny and Injustice;
transcending that of King, Prelates, Star Chamber or High Commission.

Fifthly, It inevitably involves the Makers, Takers and Subscribers thereof in
manifold High- Treasons against King, Kingdom, Parliament, for some of which
only in a far lower Degree, Strafford, Canterbury and many others have lost
their Heads, as you may read in Master St. John's Argument against Strafford,
and Sir Edward Cooks 3. Institutes cap. 1.2. to the forfeiture of their Lives,
Estates, Souls; yea, Infamy and Ruin of their ^amilles.

Sixthly, It enjoynes us to be True and Faithful to the new Commonwealth of
England (the General Council of Officers of the Army; the new created
Council of State, and their Westminster Conclave of Journey-men) as it is now
Established WITHOUT KING OR LORDS (without consent of Kingdom, People or
Parliament) by force of Arms, Treachery, Perjury, etc; that is, to assist and
defend them with our Lives, Counsels, Estates, and to submit to all their
(illegal) Acts and Taxes (to the loss of Lives, Liberties, Properties against
the Kings or Lords just Titles; and our own Laws, Liberties, Byrth-Rights;
which to do, is not only contrary to Law ^ since no Homage or Fealty is due
from any Subject, whatsoever, ^o other Subject, but to the King alone, and with
a saving of that Faith which he owes to our Sovereign Lord the King, and that
only where there is a legal Tenure between them, as Sir Edward Cook
Resolves, 1. Institutes f. 64.65.67.68.) but no less then High Treason within
the Statute of 25. E. 3. c. 2. as he Resolves in his 3. Institut. c. 1, and
therefore unreasonable and Treasonable for such as are True and Faithful
neither to King, Lords, Parliament, Kingdom or People, to exact or expect from
any others.

Seventhly, It most ingratefully and unworthily obliterates the memorial of
all the good Laws, Liberties, Franchises, Protection, Benefits, Deliverances
we have received, and the Peace, Prosperity, Freedom and Happiness^, We and
our Ancestors have enjoyed under the Reigns of most Generous, Valorous,
Bountiful, Pious, Religious Kings and Queens (especially our late renowned
King, Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, King James, and a great part of King
Charles his Reign, which the Parliaments in their Reigns in 25 H. 8 c. 22. and
all Act^ of the Subsi^ies granted by the ^^aity or Clergy in their reigns
sundry Acts, our own and foreign Historians and Writers have so highly
magnified and blessed God for; and our very last Parliament remembered and
thankfully acknowledged in some of their Exact. Collections p. 14.15.16 696.
Remonstrances, of which we need no other testimony but our Exact Collection. p
712.713.714.
Kings and Coronation Oath; in extirpating Kings and Monarchy for ever after,
for some confessed extravagancies and Errors of the beheaded King, not half so
grievous, oppressive, unjust or impious, as those themselves are guilty of,
especially in Repealing as much as in them lies the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, and the solemn League and Covenant (the principal Bullwarks
against the Pope and Papists encroachments) and imposing this new Oath and
Engagement, against the very Letter, Scope of these and sundry other just and
ancient Oaths, and forcing it against men's Consciences, to make them wilfully
perjured Psalm 15 1 a Rom 1 31 3^
and damn their Souls.

Eighthly, The maine end of this Oath is to extinguish, irradic^te our English
Monarchy and Kingship; though the ^sal 22.1. Psalm. 47 2.7. Psalm. ^9 ^^.
Go^ernment of God himself over the whole World, and of our Psalm 6 Prove 9 7
Luke 1 33.
Savior Jesus Chnist over his Church, who have the Titles of Psalm* 10.16 Psalm.
47 2. Psalm 89 13. Ps 48 2 Ps 95 3. Ps 149.2. Ps 33 17 20 1* Tim. 1 17.
King of Kings, etc. so frequently given them in Scripture, though the Seld^ns
titles of honor part. 1. c 1.2.3.
first, antientest, universallest, honourablest, ^reeest, Acknowledged by M.
Pym. himself and the house of Commons Canterburie's doom p. 29 Exact
Coll^ctions p 696.
best, happiest, saf^st, peaceablest, durablest Government of all others in the
World; as the Scripture, Histories, Politicians and Divines accord: That
Government under which all the Inhabitants of this Isle, since it was first
Peopled, have ever lived, slourished; continuing unalterable in all Changes and
Successions of those Nations which have invaded, peopled, or Conquered it, as
best and most agreeable and pleasing to the People: That of which we have so
long experience, and enjoyed the happiest, freest, peaceablest and most
Religious we are ever like to see; that which is established, ratified with so
many sacred Oaths, Laws, Vows, Acts, Records and Fences of all sorts, that
Piety or Policy could invent, that Impiety, Impudence and Treachery it self
might justly fear to invade it; and honored with such signal preservations
and deliverances, in the Persons of Que^ne Elizabeth and King James, specified
in our Annals, and 1 Iac c. 1.2 3. Iacobi c. 1.2.4.
some Acts of Parliament, as might daunt all Traitors from attempting its
subversion; and all to introduce a Lowe-Country Government, under as many Kings
and Tyrants, as there are new Lords, Officers, Soldiers, supported by a
numerous standing Army, and constant Garrisons in all Counties; which must be
maintained at the Kingdoms and Peoples charge by a Perpetual Excise so Exact
Collection. p. 6.
much declamed against in the King, who did only once secretly attempt, (but
not impose it) great arbitrary Monthly Contributions, renewed and augmented at
our new Governors mere pleasures (who both impose, receive and dispose
thereof as they please) and levy it by mere force of Arms (reputed Treason in
Mr. St. Ioans Argument at Law.
Strafford's Case, and a levying War against the King and Kingdom) and that
accompanied with the undoing pest of Condemn^d in the Petion of Right 3. Caroli.
Free Quarter, upon every March, or pretense of Arreares, or Pay: And what
happy free new State and Government this will prove (the very best all
rational men must expect, being supportable only by a perpetual Army,
Garrisons, Excise, Contributions, etc. as the Low Countries are) to justle out
our ancientest Monarchy in the World, under which we were freed from all
Armies, Garrisons, Excise, Contributions, Free Quarter, and fears of Foreign
Invasions, which now affright us, granting only a Subsidy or two in devers
years, only by Acts of Parliament, to which all consented (wherein the Commons
never presumed to Tax the Lords and Clergy at their pleasure, as they now
unjustly do, without their own free consents) amounting not to one Months
Excise and Contribution in many years; let all men judge bebefore they take or
subscribe this new Oath and Engagement to abolish the one which was so easy,
and erect the other, which must of necessity prove so grievous.

Ninthly, It will really verifiy and make good all the late King's Exact
Collection p 262.282 284 (...) 289.297.298.500 514 517.521 522.526.528.530
531.534 550 551.554 558 561.562. A Collection, etc. p. 177 worthy o^^ serious
consideration.
Declarations and Remonstrances against the proceedings of the late Houses of
Parliament; wherein He prophetically and frequently charged them (or rather a
few Factious and ambitious discontented spirits, that over-swayed and seduced
them, under the specious pretenses OF RELIGION and LIBERTY) with a Traiterous
RESOLUTION and DESIGN to alter, destroy, dissolve, shake, and rent in pieces
the whole frame and constitution of this Kingdom, so admirably framed and
continued by the blessing of God and the wisdom of our Ancestors to the
wonder and envy of all the Neigbouring Kingdoms. To turn the well founded
Monarchy into a Democarcy: To ruin Monarchy it self and Regal Power, never
before stricken at. To Depose, Murder, and Desto^y both Himself and His
Royal Posterity, and Dissolve His Government and Authority. To alter and
subvert the ancient Frame, Constitution, and Government of Church, State,
Parliament, and Fundamental Laws, Liberties of the Kingdom and People. To
destroy the house of Lords, and the Privileges, Rights and Freedom of our
Parliaments: To subject both King and People, Laws and Liberties, together
with His and his good Subjects Lives and Fortunes, and bring them into
perpetual slavery and bondage to their Vast, Unlimited, Lawless, Arbitrary,
Seditious, Iu^isdiction, Tyranny, Power Government, ( which would revive that
Tragedy Mr. Hooker relates of the Anabaptists in Germany) and to destroy both
Religion and Liberty, King and People; over which they designed to make
themselves perpetual Dictators: And, that their Armies were raised purposely
to effect all these Designs: (all which we now find effected, and fully
accomplished by the treachery of the Army and those now acting) The timely
prevention whereof, the King and his Party professed, was the only end and
Design of taking up Arms against them, for the preservation of Religion,
Laws, Liberties, Monarchy, and prevention of this foreseen Anarchy, Tyranny,
and Confusion, now brought upon us by our new pretended Governors (through
perjury, treachery, and violence) against the Votes and Remonstrances of both
houses, who particularly Exact Collection. p 695.696 657 658 A Collection etc.
p. 420. to 428 698 699.700.877.878.
Renounced and Protested against them; And whereof the Westminster Conclave in
the 16. and 17. pages of their late Declaration of September last (ordered to
be read in Churches) do sufficiently acquit both Houses, and those who
adhered to them only out of honest and public Intention, as Designs of their
own, not revealed till of late, the timely discovery whereof would have
deterred all from attempting or adhering to the chief Contrivers of them. Now
our subscription to this new Oath and Engagement, will post factum, make both
our selves, the late Houses, and all their adherents apparently guilty of all
these traiterous horrid Designs (to which they were no ways privy nor
assenting, but ever abjured in their Protestation, Vow, Solemn League and
Covenant, and abhominated from their souls) and thereby not only verify but
justify the Declarations and Proceedings of the King in every particular, as
most Just, Necessary and Honorable for the public Liberty and Safety; but
likewise canonize (as it were) him with all his slain and suffering Party, as
Martyrs for the Kingdoms and Peoples Safety, and the Public Liberty; (for
which they lost their lives and estates; as all Prescribers and Subscribers of
this Oath and Engagement must now necessarily acknowledge, and all the World
will conclude against them) and brand our selves, our Brethren of Scotland and
all those who have lost their lives, limbs and estates in opposition or wars
against them, with both the late Houses, for notorious Rebels, Traitors,
Conspirators, Murderers, on whose Heads and Souls the guilt of all the
precious blood shed in our late and present Wars, both in England, Ireland
and Scotland, must now be translated from the King and his Party (on whom we
have formerly charged it) and justly rest for the future, to their eternal
infamy, condemnation, ^uine. Which unavoydable consequence of our submission
and subscription to this Oa^h and Engagement, with the horrors of Conscience,
and divine Judgments that must necess^^ily seize upon us, when under the guilt
of so much Treachery and Blood shed, is sufficient of it self alone to deter
us from the least assent thereto, and to engage our utmost power against them,
without any other arguments; ^specially i^ compared with the Loyal and
Heroical resolutions and engagements of our Ancestors in the Parliament at
Lincoln. An. 28. E. 1. (Recorded in Walsingham Hist. Anglia. p. 49. to 56.
Cooks 2. Instit. p. 97.98) 20. H. 3. chapter 9.40. E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 8. Cooks
4. Instit. p. 13.14. The notable Statute of 16. R. 3. c. 5. of Pramunire. 11.
H. 7. c. 18.19. H. 7. c. 1.25. H. 8. c. 22.35. H. 8. c. 1.1. Mariae. Parl. 2.
chapter 1.1. Eliz. c. 1.3.5. Eliz c. 1.23. Eliz. c. 1.2 1. Iacobi chapter 1.2.3. Iac.
chapter 1.2.4.5. and 7. Iac. chapter 6. which all perjured Judges, Sergeants and
Lawyers (who have dishonored their pro^^ssions by their late subscriptions,
and exceeded Judge Thorpe, Tresilian and his companions, and the Ship Money
Judges, in their Perjuries and Treasons against King, Kingdom, Lords, People,
Laws, Liberties, which they have basely and wickedly betrayed, against their
Science and Conscience) may do well to chew the cudde upon and on Mr. St.
John's Speech at the Impeachment of the Judges concerning Ship Money, and
Argument at Law at Straffords Attainder (enough to hang and damn them all
twenty times over, with all other Imposers and Subscribers of this Treasonable
Engagement) do well to head other Str^ffords whose crimes were not half so
treasonable and abominable a^ the enforcing or subscribing of this Oath and
Engagement, by the mere pretended Authority of those, who never had the least
legal power to administer any old lawful Oath, in any case, when a full free
and lawful Commons House; much less^ to make and impose a n^w treasonable and
illegal Oath of Allegiance to themselves (who are obliged by no such
r^ciprocall Oath to preserve our L^w^^, Liberties and free Customs, as o^r
Kings always were) upon all the Nation, against the L^wes and Statutes of the
Realm, and above thirty legal Oaths yet in force, which sundry Offic^rs are
obliged to take before they may or ought to execu^e their respective ^ffic^s.

Tent^ly, The Scripture is express, that Monarchical Government is Gods own
special Ordinance, Deuteronomy. 17.14 15. and Prove. 8.15.16. Romans 13 1.2. That the
enjoymen^ (...) Kings and Kingly Government is a great honor, happiness an^
benefit to a Nation and a specia^^ blessing promised and g^ven to them by God
himself, Genesis 17.6.16. ^er. 17.25 c. 22.4. 2. Chron. 9.8. Ezach. 16.13. And
can it then be a misery and Judgment to us? that is a most s^vere Judgment
of God, and the cause of many miseries, oppressions, disorders and destruction
to a Nation or Kingdom, to be without a King, by the Scriptures and Gods own
Resolution. Judge. 17 6 c. 18.1. c. 19.1. c. 21.25. Hosea 1.4 c. 3.4.5. c. 10.3.
Ier 22.3. ^ 13 Hosea 13.11.12. Miob. 4.9.10. Amos 1.13.14.15. Zech. 9.5. And
can it be then any happiness^ and no judgment unto us to be without ^ King?
That Kings have been the greatest Reformers and Promoters of Gods Worship and
Religion and s^ppressors of Idolatry under the Law ((...) the Books of Kings,
Chronicles, Ezra, E^ter, Neh^miah, Daniel, the Psalms* Prover^s ^^stify) and
are specially proph^cied and promised to be the chief Patriots, Fathers,
Promot^rs, Propagators and Reformers of Religion, Gods Church and Worship under
the Gospel, in sundry texts, as Psalm. 62.29. Ps. 72.10.11. Ps. 112.15. Ps.
138.4.5. Ps. 148.11. Isay 41.2. c. 45.1.2.5. c. 49.7.23. c 52.15. c.
60.3.10.11. c. 62 2. Rev. 11.15. c. 21.24. which H^stories witness to be
experimentally verified, and more especialy in our Island (according to that
Prophecy Psalm. 72.10. relating unto Islands) which had the fist Christian King
Math. West. An 185.307. Speed, Godwin, Spelman, Usher, De Eccles. ^rit.
Primordijs.
Lucius, and first most renouned Christian Emperor, Constantine the Great,
borne and Crowned in it; and many pious, devout and religious Princes since, of
ancient and later times, by whose bounty, care, zeal; religion and learning
were advanced, continued and propagated amongst us, and are now likely to
expire with our Monarchy, for want of protection, maintenan^e, encouragement,
and punishment of Atheism, Heresy, Blasphemy and Profaneness, and defra^ding
Ministers both of their Tithes and promised augmentations, eating them out with
tax^, and turning them out of their Livings and livelihood, by arbitrary
Committees against Law and Justice, upon the bare suggestions of every
malicious Sectary, or Tythe-declaiming prosecutor. Upon which grounds
Christians under the Gospel are in the first place enjoined to make prayers,
intercessions and thanks-givings for Kings that under them they may live a
peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty: FOR THIS IS GOOD AND ACCEPTABL IN
THE SIGHT OF GOD OUR SAVIOR (therefore ^^^bolish Kings is sinful and
displeasing in his ^ight, and contr^^ to his reavealed will) 1. Tim. 2.1.2. To
submit to Kings as unto the Supreme, and honor them for the Lords sake; for so
it is the will of God. 1. Pet. 13.14 15.17. To be subject to Principalities
and Powers. Tit. 3.1. Romans 13.1. which Scriptures must be raised out of the
Bible as Apocr^phall, if we will extirpate Kings and Monarchy out of the
Realm and Christian World, ^s some now endeavor: the attempting whereof must
needs be an high affront to Christ himself, which robs him of one of his
most glorious Gospel Titles, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. 1. Tim. 6 15.
Rev. 17.14. c. 19 16. Ad to this, that the Scripture relates it a great honor
and prosperity to a Nation to become a Kingdom. Ezech. 16.13. and a great
judgment, misery, and dishonor to be un-Kingdomed, or made a base, or no
Kingdom. Ier. 16.7 9. c. 22.4 5 6. etc. Ezech. 29.14 15. Dan. 11 9. Hosea 1 4.
Dan. 2.44. That the Church of Christ, the Gospel, and Heaven it self are
always and Psalm. 145.11.13. Isay 9 7 Dan. 4.35. c. 6.27. Math. 3.2. c. 5 7.19
c. 12.28. c 21.43. c. 25.34. c. 26.25. Lu. 3.33. c. 10.11. 1. Cor. 6.9. Col.
1.13. 1. Tim. 4 1.18 Jam. 2.5. 2. Pe. 1.11. Rav* 12.10.
very frequently styled a Kingdom, never a State or Republique (in
contradiction to a Kingdom) throughout the Old and New Testament. That the
highest honor Christ has purchased for us with his most precious blood is to
make us Kings to God his Father: to admit us into his Kingdom of Grace here,
and of Glory hereafter, where we shall reign as Kings for ever. Rev. 1.5.6. c.
5.10. Lu. 1.13. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. 2. Tim. 4.18. And that the Kingdoms only (not
States and Republ^ques) of the Earth are Prophesied and Promised to become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. Ps. 8.31.32 Rev. 1.15. Obad. 21. upon
all which consider^t^ons, we can never subscrib^ to the extir^^^ion of our
Kingly Government, or translating our a^cientest Kingdom into the puniest
Republique in the World for ^^are we lose Gods protect^on of and interest,
reign, presence by his O^dinances in our Kingdom, and be for ever excluded
ou^ of his Kingdoms of Grace, Glory, and from reigning as Kings in eith^r of
them, which the prescribers and subscribers of this Oath and Engagement (who
usurp upon Gods special prerogative to dispose of the Kingdoms of the Earth
at his own pleasure. Da. 4 3 2.17. Ie. 18 6.7.9.) against so many Oaths,
Covenants, Reasons, Scriptures, have cause to fear and expect.

Elev^nthly, (...) are perswad^d in our consciences, that the change of our
rig^^full King into many new self created States, our Kingdom into a
Commonwealth, and ancient Parliaments of King, Lords and Commons into a new
Representative of Commons alone without King or Lords, the principal Design
of this new Oath and Engagement, against so many Oaths, Laws, and E^gagements
of former and later times inviolably to preserve them with our lives, estates,
and last drop of our bloods, and that by the far lesser part of the Kingdom
and House of Commons, against the wills and Protestations of the Major part who
are most co^cerned therein, and without hearing their reasons and objections to
the contrary, or convincing them of the necessity or convenience thereof by a
free hearing and debate thereof, in a full and free Parliament specially
conv^ned for that purpose; is not only a most u^j^st, illegal and tyrannical
act, contrary to the Laws of God, Nature and the Realm, a great scandal to
our Religion, and injury and dishonor to our whole English Nation, not to be
presidented in any age, especially by so great pretend^rs to public Liberty;
but likewise an undertaking of such dangerous consequence, as none endowed with
right Reason, the fear of God. or any real love to their Country, durst once
for to attempt, as is clear to us by these particulars.

1. It will involve us in perpetual Wars and troubles so long as there are
any of the blood Royal who have title to the Crown, or any of the Nobility
endowed with any sparks of honor left alive; who will never desist from
attempting the recovery of their lost Rights and Privileges. 2. It will sever
the united Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland from, and engage them and all the
Kings foreign friends and Allies against us; and necessitate us to mainta^n a
perpetual Army and Garrisons by Land, and Navy by Sea; which will undo us,
with Contribution, Excise, Free Quarter; expose us to perpetual Murders,
Robbery, Outrages, Tumults, Opprssions, Discontents; Decrease and Decay all
Trading, and end in our absolute Slaverie, Misery, Ruin. 3. It will
nece^ssiate our new Governors, after the sale of the Kings and Deanes and
Chapters Lands, to help ease the People (for a time only) and support their
Army and Navy, to seiz^ and sell the Lands of all Corporations, Companies,
Colleges, Hospitalls, Schools, and Rectories of Churches in the Kingdom (a
thing already projected by some) and to find out some device or other to make
new Delinquents of purpose to Sequester and Confiscate their Estates, till the
whole Kingdom be Sequestered and made Malignants to help pay the Soldiers: one
^eared Design of this new Oath and Engagement against those who out of grounds
of conscience, Law and solid prudence, refuse to subscribe it, 4. It will
dissolve all our ancient L^agues with foreign Kingdoms and States, made only
with our King and Kingdom, and by the Law of Nations give them advantage and
occasion to seize our Ships, Merchants, Merchand^ze without breach of League,
in the behalf of the King and those who stand for the Kingdoms continuanc^,
with whom only the Leagues were made and stand firm against others who oppose
them. 5. It will lose our Interest, honor and reputation in and withal other
Kingdoms or States, who will refuse to own or treat with us a State, thus
forcibly and treasonably erected; o^ else treat with us, as the puniest and
meanest State in the World, whose Agents and public Ministers must give place
to those of all Kings, Princes and other States ^hatsoeve^ which are ancient^^
then it, ^ver by the Cassanaeus Catalogus gloriae Mundi Hist. of the Cou^c^ll
of Trens
Law of Nations and resolution of all Heralds; which the generosity of the
English Nation (the ancientst and first Christian Kingdom in the Christian
World Seld^ns Titles of Hon part. 2. chapter 11.
claiming preceedency of all other Kingdoms in General Counsels add
Assemblies heretofore) will hardly brook. 6. It will null* dissolve and
extinguish all the Corporations, Tenures, ancient Customs, Rents, Services,
Courts of Justice, ancient Seal^s, Process, Writs, Legal Proceedings,
Charters, Liberties, Customs, Forfeitures u^pon penal Laws, Titles of Honout
that are either hereditary or during life, and current Coins of the Kingdom;
which being derived only the Kings and ancient Parliaments of England for them,
their Heirs and Succ^ssors, or reserved to them, their Heirs and Successors,
and none others, and be^ring their stamp and image on them; must all fall,
expire and vanish together with them, as the House falls all to pieces when the
foundation is subverted; the R^vers quite fule when the springs from whence
they flow, the ^ffects c^ase when the cause is destroyed, and the derivatives
expire and vanish quite away when the primitives are abolished: And what
confusions and mischiefs will ensue, let the World judge. 7. If we shall once
give way that our Kings, Kingdom, P^ers, and Parliaments; settled, established,
secured and fenced with so long Prescriptions, Laws, Oaths, Covenants,
Engagements and Securities of all sorts that humane wisdom can invent, shall
be thus overturned, destroyed, dissipated, annihilated in a moment, at the
wills and lusts of our present Usurpers, against all their Solemn Oaths,
Covenants and Protestations not to do it; we cannot but imagine, conceive and
believe, that every particular persons estate, goods, life, liberties and
enjoyments in the Kingdom not half so well established and fenced as they,
can be secure or exempt from their violenc and r^pine but subject to their
lawless wills, courts, acts, seizures and disposals, to deprive us of them at
their pleasures; which will render us the miserablest and slavishest People
under Heaven, instead of a free Republic; of which the late illegal
proceedings in martial arbitrary Courts and Committees against the beheaded
King, Lords and others, with their late imposed arbitrary Taxes, Excises, Acts
for new Treasons, and this very Oath and Engagement give us undeniable
experiments.
Upon which, and sundry other weighty considerations, we are peremptorily
resolved, by the grace and assistance of our Omnipotent God, rather to endure
ten thousand Sequestrations, Imprisonments, Deaths; then to betray our King,
Kingdoms, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Religion, all our earthly comforts,
wound our Consciences, damn our immortal Souls by our submission or
subscription to this irreligious, flagitious, pernicious, scandalous, illegal,
irrational, unconscionable, treasonable New Oath and Engagement; and adhere to
the death constantly and sincerely to our former Oaths, Covenants and
Engagements, which they diametrically oppose, maugre any humane powers or
forces whatsoever.

To close up all we heartily wish all perjured Prescribers of this New Oath
and Engagement (especially apostate Assemblymen, D^vines and Lawyers, who
contrary to their former Oaths, Covenants, Pretestations and Subscriptions)
have subscribed this new Oath, Conscienciously and sadly to consider and
peruse: Levit. 19.12. Psalm. 15.1.2.4. Josh. 9.18.19.20. 2 Samuel 21.1. and 1
King. 1.29.30. c. 2.42.43.46. 2 Chronicles. 13.5.6. and N^h. 5 12.13. Ier. 34.8. to
20. Ezech. 17.11. to 22. Zech. 5.1. to. 5. Mal. 3 5. Romans 1.28.31.32. 2 Timothy
3.1. to 6. Dr. Beards Theater of God Judgments L. 1. c. 27*28. of Perjurers
divine punishments (especially the example of Rodulph. p. 174. with another of
that nature p. 176. and the example of that perjured Usurper of the Crown,
against his Oath, King Herald Math. West. An. 1066. p. 430.438. with the sad
St^ri^s of Archbishop Cranmers tortures of Conscience, and Mr. Bilneys for
subscribing against their Consciences to save their Lives, in Mr. Fox his
Monuments: And then they will either with Peter, after he had abjured his Lord
and Master with an oath, go forth and weep bitterly, if they have any sparks
of Grace or hopes of Salvation remaining in them; or else with treacherous
Judas, who betrayed his Lord and Master to gratify the Highpriests, go out
despairing, and hang themselves to avoid the shame of the World, and anguish of
their tormenting Consciences.

A Quaere touching an English Monarchy, and a Low Country Free State; which of
them is the Freest, and most to be desired.
An English Monarchy,
Is a most Honorable free Government by an hereditary King according to the
Laws of the Kingdom, supplied only (without any standing Army, Garrisons,
Free Quarter, Excise, or Monthly Contributions, by a bare Ordinance of a few
Commons) with a Subsidy or two, in diverse years, freely granted by the Laity
and Clergy in full Parliament by distinct Acts of Parliament.

A Low Country Free State,
Is an Ignoble Servitude under the Military Command of many selfe-Created new
States, erected and supported by the mere Power of a standing Army, constant
Garrisons, Citadels, accompanied with perpetual Monthly Contributions, Taxes,
Excises, and Free Quarter imposed on the Clergy and Laity by these new States
alone, without common consent or Act of Parliament, and augmented and disposed
of at their own Will and Pleasures.

Utrum horum mavis, accipe.
FINIS.

