A RATIONAL ACCOUNT Why some of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects Do not
Conform To some Exuberances in, and Ceremonial Appurtenances TO THE Common
Prayer: PUBLISHED For the Instruction of the Ignorant, satisfaction of all
Contenders, and the Churches Union in Gods public Worship.

Romans 4. 13, 19.Let us therefore follow after the things which make for Peace,
and things werewith one may edify another. Let us not judge one another any
more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion
to fall in his Brothers way. Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.If there be therefore any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having
the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done through
strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better
then himself. Look not every one on his own things, but every man also on the
things of others. LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Booksellers in London
and Westminster Hall, 1673.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, CHARLES the IId. By the Grace and
admirable Providence of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland KING,
Defender of the Faith; and all sincere Professors of it, within His Dominions.
HAving had the Honor on last Easter-Eve, to present Your Majesty with a Brief
Account of my Service that Week in the almost-accomplished Great good-work of
Paying and Disbanding Your Majesty's Army and Navy (which for 7. Months space
engrossed all my time from Morning till Night, and often till Midnight) to Your
Majesty's great content, and your Peoples ease from future incessant heavy
Monthly Taxes; I humbly crave leave to prostrate at Your Royal feet my
Easter-holydayes studies, to exonerate the Backs of hundreds, and truly tender
Consciences of thousands of Your loyal, pious, sober-minded Protestant Subjects
of all Degrees, from some Exuberances in the Common Prayer Book, and
superfluous Ceremonies, Vestments attending it, (which give them offense, and
may well be laid aside, if your Majesty and your approaching Parliament shall
judge convenient) for our Churches future peace, union in Gods public worship,
in pursuance of Your Majesty's late most Gracious, Pious, Prudent, elegant
Declaration to all Your Loving Subjects of Your Kingdom of England and Dominion
of Wales, concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, which gave Life and Birth to this
Publication.

It is very observable, that albeit the Surius Council. Tom 1. p. 218, 251, 381,
382. Tom 2. p. 588, 589. Tom. 4 p. 45^. Bellarmine De Romano Pontif* and de
Concilii^, l. 2. c. 2. G^eg* de Valentia Com. Theolog. Tom 3. p. 247. Dr. John
Whites Way to the true Church, Sect. 17 p. 45. and Defense of the Way, c. 47,
48*
Popes of Rome, and their Flatterers, hold themselves infallible in their
Chair, and their Church, Councils inerrable, yet they all accord, that their
Public Missals, Liturgies, though made, confirmed by their joint advice with
greatest care and diligence, are amendable, alterable upon just occasions.
Witness their late Council of Sessio 22 Decretum de observandis and evitandis
in Celebratiene Missae, Sarius Tom. 4. Council. p. 962.
Trents Decree for the correction, amendment of their formerly established
Catechism, Missal, Breviary; and the subsequent amendations of them, and
institution of A NEW MASS BOOK, by Pope Pius the 5. with the advice of Learned
men, expressed in his Bull dated at Rome July 1557. praefixed to Missale
Romanum, ex Decreto Sacro-sanctii Concilii Tridentini RESTITUTUM; Pii 5.
Pontificis Maximi jussu editum, printed at Rome that year: enjoined by that
Bull, to be universally observed, without any subsequent addition, alteration,
or mutation, under pain of his Papal indignation: Yet notwithstanding by
another Bull of his own, dated at Rome 17 December 1570. beginning with this
memorable Clause; Ad hoc nos Deus unxit oleo laetitiae ac haereditatis suae
participes effecit, ut ad ipsius Sacerdotium voca^i tanquam Aaron, non solum ea
quae ad divinum cultum pertinent salobriter disponamus; Veri^m etiam ea quae
aliquando per Nos statuta suerant, salubrius moderemur, ac ali^s desuper disp
namus, prout rerum and personarum qualitate pensata, conspicimus in Domino
salubriter expedire.
For this purpose God has anointed us with the oil of gladness, and made us
partakers of his Inheritance, that being called to his Priesthood like Aaron,
we should not only wholsomly order those things which pertain to divine
worship, but should also more wholsomely moderate those things which have been
formerly enacted by us, and moreover alter and dispose of them, as upon serious
consideration of things and persons, we discern to be wholsomly expedient in
the Lord; He did (upon this account) by reason of some difficulties concerning
the use of this New Missal, arising in the Kingdom of Spain, tendered by some
Grave men sent to him from Philip their Catholic King, to which he gave
undoubted credit; Of his own mere motion, without the instance of any Petition
tendered to him thereupon, out of his certain knowledge and plenitude of
Apostolical power, think fit to reform several things in this New Missal, as to
the Kingdoms of Spain, and alter, dispense with it in no less than 21.
particulars ( expressed in this Bull) notwithstanding all his former Bulls and
Prohibitions to the contrary. After which Pope Gregory the 10. his immediate
Successor, by another Bull ( dated at Rome 30 December 1573.) to take away some
other new scruples and differences about this Missal in the said Kingdoms of
Spain, ( upon the motion of other Delegates sent thence from that same King
Philip) granted several other dispensations and amendments of this Missal in
sundry Particulars, comprised in his Bull; Notwithstanding his Predecessors
Letters, and all and singular clauses, prohibitions, and Decrees to the
contrary; Which two Bulls of theirs, are printed before Missale Romanum, etc.
Cum licentia and privilegio, Salmanticae 1589. Some thirty years after Pope
Clement the 8. observing diverse Errors to be crept into this Missal of Pope
Pius the 5. by the Trent Councils Decree; through the Printers Errors, and some
alterations in the Epistles, Gospels, Psalms according to the vulgar Edition
different from the Original Text, commanded his learned Cardinals to revise and
correct this Missal according to the original copy of Pius Quintus: Verum in
illo munere peragendo factum est, ut nonnulla ex dilige^ti librorum antiquorum
collatione in meliorem formam redacta, and in regulis and rubricis aliqua
uberius and clarius expressa, quae tamen ex illorum principiis and fundamentis,
quasi deducta, illorum sensum imitari potius and supplere, quam aliquid novi
afferre videantur: Mi^^am itaque quod idem Pius 5. ediderat, si^ RECOGNITUM in
nostra Typographia quam emendatissime imprimi, and ad communem utilitatem
publicari justimus.
which task they undertaking, put some things into better form in the Missal it
self, and expressed some things more clearly and fully in the Rules and
Rubricks; which being notwithstanding deduced from their principles and
foundations, may seem rather to imitate and supply their sense, than to induce
any innovation. Which being thus revised, amended, enlarged with new Masses for
new canonized Saints, and proper Masses of Saints, expressed at large for the
easier benefit of those who celebrated them, he caused to be most exactly
printed in the Vatican, and published for the common good, in the year of our
Lord 1604. as he declares in his Bull praefixed to this Missal dated at Rome
the 7. of July the same year, with this additional Title; -- Missale Romanum ex
Decreto Sacro-sancti Concilii Tridentini Restitutum, Pii 5. Pont. Max. jussu
editum; Clementis 8. auctoritate RECOGNITUM. ET CUM MISSIS NOVIS DE SANCTIS a
Paulo 5. Gregorio 15. and S. D. N. Urbano 8. ordinatis. Missae propriae de
Sanctis OMNES AD LONGUM POSITAE SUNT PRO FACILIORI CELEBRANTIUM COMMODITATE.

If therefore the Council of Trent it self thought meet to reform the ancient
Roman Catechism and Missal formerly established, Sessi^ 22. Decretum de
observandis and evitandis in celebratione Missae, Surius Council. Tom. 4. p. 961.
into which it confesses, either by the vice of times, or unwariness or
dishonesty of men, many things had crept, which were far from the dignity of so
great a Sacrifice, and had need to be reformed, that due honor and worship to
the glory of God and edification of faithful people might be restored to it.
Yea, to set out a new Masse-book by authority of Pope Pius the 5. and this
Pope, within few years after, held it necessary and expedient to make some
alterations, and dispense with other things in it, relating to the Kingdoms and
Church of Spain; and Pope Gregory the 13. within 3. years after, to dispense
with some other Formalities and Rubricks thereof upon the same reason. And Pope
Clement the 8. (about 30. years after) held it necessary to revise the whole
Masse-book, to correct the Printers errors, the Mistranslations of the
Epistles, Gospels, Psalms therein varying from the Original Text; and add new
Rules, Rubricks to it, explaining, supplying the defects of the former,
together with New Masses, for New Saints, notwithstanding all former printed
Bulls, Prohibitions, Decrees, to the contrary, and the pretended Infallibility
and Inerrability of their Chairs, Church, Councils; Then by the self-same
Presidents and better Reasons, Your Majesty, with advice of Your pious, learned
Divines and Parliament, who have by 13 Eliz c. 12.
Law established these Articles of our Churches Belief (to which all Bishops,
Ministers have subscribed) Articl^ 21. 34.
That (not only Popes, but) General Councils may err, and sometimes have
erred, even in things pertaining to GOD. That it is not necessary that
Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one, or utterly like; See Centur.
Magd. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. p. 3 c. 6. where this is proved at
large.
FOR AT ALL TIMES THEY HAVE BEEN DIVERSE, AND MAY BE CHANGED ACCORDING TO THE
DIVERSITY OF COUNTRIES, TIMES, AND MEN'S MANNERS, so that nothing be ordained
against Gods word. Every particular or National Church, has authority to
ordain, CHANGE AND ABOLISH CEREMONIES OR RITES OF THE CHURCH (and Liturgies
too) ORDAINED ONLY BY MAN'S AUTHORITY, so that all things be done to edifying;
may with much more Justice, Piety, Prudence reform all errors, mistranslations
of the Epistles, Gospels, Psalms, and obsolete or unfit expressions in the Book
of Common Prayer, 2, and 3 E. 6. c. 1. 5, and 6 E. 6. c. 1. 1 Eliz^ c. 1.
twice altered, reformed in some particulars, in few years after its first
Publication by Authority, Acts of Parliament) yea, change, abolish such
unnecessary Rites, Ceremonies attending it, which have given just offense, and
occasioned much Schism, Dissension in our Church between the Protestant Members
of it, as well of the Clergy as Laity, ever since its first establishment in
the 3d. year of K. Edw. the 6. till this very day, and will do so in
perpetuity, if not removed by your Majesty's Piety and Wisdom, according to the
purport of your late Incomparable Declaration (for which the whole House of
Commons and all Your Protestant Subjects whom they represented, returned Your
Majesty their most cordial, public Thanks by their November. 9. 1660.
Speakers own mouth) the blessed fruits whereof they all now hope and long to
reap; not only without the least prejudice to our Religion, Church, and main
fabric of the former Liturgy, but with great advantage to them all.

It is a received Maxim among all Politicians, Artists, that no human
institution, Laws, Inventions, Edifices are so absolutely exact, useful,
wholesome, necessary, but that they may upon just reasons of Policy, piety,
sundry emergent occasions and necessities be amended, altered, with wisdom,
honor, safety, and public utility. Your Majesty since your most happy
miraculous restoration, have with great prudence and glory, made some laudable
alterations in Your Royal Palaces, Walks, Parks, of Whitehall, Hampton Court,
and in Westminster hall it self, as well for Convenience as Delight (though
very noble, useful, complete before) without any prejudice to their
Structures, Foundations, Soil: And those Bishops, Deans and Chapters who seem
most opposite to the least alterations in our public Liturgy or Ceremonies,
have yet very much altered, improved their old Rents (and Tennants likewise) to
which they will not be confined by Your Majesty's late Declarations, or
Commissions: yea they daily violate and dispense with the very Rubricks in the
Common Prayer Book, and several 2, and 3 E. 6. c. 1. 21. 5, and 6 E. 6. c, 1.
12. 1 Eliz c. 1. 5 Eliz. c. 1.
Acts of Parl. by selling Licenses to marry all sorts of People for filthy
lucre, without asking the Banes three several Sundays or Holy Days in time of
Divine service, the People being present, after the accustomed manner; In
reading the Epistle, Gospel and second Service at the Communion Table when
there is no Communion; and in not receiving the Communion in their Cathedral
Churches every Sunday at the least, though they have no reasonable cause to the
contrary, as the Rubricks enjoyne them. And may not your Sacred Majesty then
with as much wisdom, honor, and all your Bishops and Cathedral Clergymen with
far more piety, justice, prudence, (in obedience to Your late Royal
Declarations and Engagements to all Your Subjects) dispense with the Oath of
Canonical Obedience, the use of Surplisses, and other Ceremonies for which
there is no Rubric, Statute, or known Law of the Land; the reading of Psalms,
Epistles, Gospels in the Church, according to the New Translation of your Royal
Grandfather of famous memory, KING JAMES; yea freely admit of all able, godly
Ministers ordained only by Presbyters during the late unhappy Differences and
Confusions of Government, to Benefices, Fellowships, Lectures, Cures of Souls,
without a Reordination by Bishops, as well as admit reclamed Popish Priests
ordained by Bishops in the Church of Rome, without the least opposition,
contest, for future Peace, Amity, Unity between all Your Protestant Subjects of
different persuasions in these dividing particulars? To facilitate, promote
this much desired work, I have spent my few vacant Holy Day hours in compiling
this Seasonable, short, sober, pacifique Examination, consisting principally of
4 Particulars (discussed in several Sections) to wit; the Use, and Frequent
Repetition of Gloria Patri; standing as it, and at Gospels, Creeds, Wearing of
Surplisses, with other Pontifical and Sacerdotal Vestments in the celebration
of Divine Service and Sacraments; in the last whereof (because most
peremptorily insisted on from pretended grounds of Scripture, Reason by many
Romanists, and some Protestant Prelates, and Peter Heylin his History of the
Reformation of the Church of England, p 91, 92, 93. History of Queen Mary, and
Queen Eliz. p. 59, 60, 115, 116, 131, 132, 164, 165, 166, 176.
Divines) I have most expatiated, I hope, without the least offense to moderate
sober Christians, or your Sacred Majesty, and good satisfaction to all
judicious Perusers.

We all use to alter the proportion, matter, quality, fashion, number of our
Garments, Attires, according to the several ages of our lives, the seasons of
the year, the temper of the Climates where we live, and extraordinary occasions
of solemnity, joy, grief or humiliation; not only without offense to others,
or prejudice to our healths, lives, but with much applause, and that for the
necessary preservation both of health, life, and humane society. The like we do
in our Corporal Food: Why may not we then use the same Liberty (by your
Majesty's and your Parliaments public Authority or Indulgence) in the
controverted Case of Ecclesiastical Garments, Ornaments, Food, now under
public consideration, provided always they be 1 Cor. 14. 40.
decent, orderly, wholesome, and Isay 8. 20 Lu. 16. 29 Gal. 6. 4* 16.
not repugnant, but agreeable to the holy Scriptures?

If this poor Mite, (humbled presented to Your allpiercing favorable Eye, and
Gracious acceptance, as a Monument of my bounden Homage to Your Sacred
Majesty, at this most joyful; triumphant Solemnity of Your CORONATION, (the In
the Second Part of my Signal Loyalty and Devotion of Gods true Saints etc. to
their Sovereigns. p. 225, etc.
Form whereof I humbly dedicated and presented to Your Majesty soon after your
Glorious return to Your Royal Palace) shall contribute any assistance to the
accomplishment of Your Majesty's healing, uniting Design of all disagreeing
parties in points of Ceremony, Liturgy, Worship, (the only end of its Compiling
and publishing;) I shall heartily bless God for its good success, and always
continue my cordiallest daily Prayers to the 1 Timothy 6. 15. Rev 17. 14. c. 15,
16.
King of Kings, for Your Majesty's long, most pious, just, peaceable, glorious
reign over all your Dominions upon Earth, for the advancement of the true
reformed Religion, the protection of all real, zealous Ministers, Professors of
it, and all Your Subjects Tranquillity, Felicity: till You shall exchange that
fading Psalm. 21. 3.
Crown of pure Gold, (which GOD himself has now set upon Your Anointed Head,
to the unspeakable Joy of all Your Loyal Subjects, maugre all Oppositions,
Conspiracies of Men or Devils to prevent it, and that with greater
Magnificence, Splendour, than any of Your Royal Progenitors have been Crowned;
which God grant You always to wear with most transcendent Renown) for an
eternal 1 Pet. 5. 4 c. 1. 4.
Crown of Glory in the Highest Heavens, which fades not away.

Your MAJESTY'S most humble, devoted Subject and Servant, WILLIAM PRYNNE.
Lincolnes Inn, Apr. 23. 1661.
A short, sober, pacifique Examination of some Exuberances in, and Ceremonial
Appurtenances to the Common Prayer.
ALthough I have in my judgment and practice always approved the use of
set-forms of public Prayers, and Administration of the Sacraments in Churches,
as warranted by Number. 6. 22, to 27. Deu^. 26. 13, 14, 15. c. 31. 1, (...) 47.
Ps. 92. Ps 66, and 67, and 6^, and 7^, and 79. and 90. Joel 2. 17. Hos. 14. 2,
^. Mat. 6. 9, 10, etc. Lu. 1^. 1, to 5. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3.
Scripture, the ancient practice and Liturgia S. S. Patrum Liturgia Basi^^i,
Chrysostostomi, Gregorii Theologi, Cyrill^ (...), etc. Paris 1560. and August
Vind. 1604. Lit^rgia Lutinorum, Colon. 1571. Antiqu^tates Lit^urgica, Duac^*
1605. Bib^^wheca Patrum* T. ^. 2, 3. and 1^. Cassandri (...).
Liturgies of the Greek, Latin, Gothic, Aethiopick, and other Churches (some
whereof are spurious Impostures, others interlaced with modern Sophistications
and Superstitions by Popish Innovators) and of all or most Churches at this day
throughout the Christian world, whether Episcopal or Presbyterial, Papists, or
Protestants; and albeit I was never an Oppugner of, or Seperatist from the Book
of Common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, established in the
Church of England, whereunto I have constantly resorted; yet I must ingeniously
profess I am clear of opinion,

1. That a set standing form of Common Prayer and Sacramental Administrations,
is not absolutely necessary for the being, though See 2, and 3 E. 6. c. 1. 3,
and 4 E. 6. c. 10. 5, and 6 Ed. 6. c. 1. 1 Eliz. c. z.
convenient for the well-being, and unity of a National Church. Therefore not
to be prescribed as a thing of absolute indispensable necessity; but only of
convenience, decency, as tending to public unity.

2. That there are and may be Act^, 15* 24, 27, 28. c. 16. 4, 5. Ephesians. 6. 18.
Ph^l. 4. 4. 6. 1 These. 5* 17. See the several Offices, Hours, Missals,
Processionals, Liturgies, Books of Devotion, in antious or present use among
the Papists, 3, and 4 E 6. c. 10. Officium be^ta M^ria secundum usum Sarum;
secundum usum Bangor; secundum usum Walsingham, Lincoln, used in England, 2,
and 3 E 6. c. 1. The diverse forms of Liturgies and Administrations used in the
Protest^n^ Churches of England, Scotland, France, Germany, Helvetia, Denmark,
and in the Greek, Russian, Ethiopian Churches.
several set-forms of public, as well as of private Prayers and Devotions,
used in several Provinces, Kingdoms, National Churches, and that all Churches,
Nations are no more obliged to used one form of public Prayer and
Administration of Sacraments, than all private Christians are to use the
self-same form of private Prayers in their several Families, Closets, or one
kind of Grace before and after meat: but are all left at liberty to embrace or
establish what forms they deem most beneficial for the Peoples spiritual
edification, best conducing to their salvation, and union in Gods public
worship.

3. That no one form of public Liturgy is so complete, exact, or unalterable,
but that upon grounds of Piety, Prudence, and sundry emergent occasions, it may
be altered, Ephesians. 6. 18. ^. 3. 14, to 22. Rom 15. ^0, 31. Phil. 1. 4, 9, 10,
11.
varied, amended, or totally set aside; and a new form of Common Prayer
established in its stead (as In their Bulle prefixed to Missale Romanum, Salm.
1588. and An^w* 1630.
Pope Pius the 5. and Clement the 8. acknowledge) being only of human and
Ecclesiastical, not Divine institution.

4. That the prescription or use of set-forms of public Prayers ought not to
suppress, discontinue, interrupt, or disparage the exercise of the gift or
grace of conceived, extemporary Prayers or Thanksgivings by Ministers and other
Christians in public or private upon ordinary or extraordinary occasions; nor
yet to hinder or disturb the constant preaching of the Word in season, and out
of season; as is evident by the whole Book of Psalms the 2 Chr. 6. c. 20. 5.
to ^4. c. 32* 24. c. 33. 12. Ezra 7. 27. c. 9. 6. ^ c. N^h. 1. 4, to 11 c. 9*
throughout. (...). 4. Dan. 9. 3, etc. Joel 2. 9, to 18. (...). 14. 2. (...).
11. 1, 2, 3.
special Prayers and Thanksgivings of Moses, David, Solomon, Nehemiah, Ezra,
Hezekiah, ^a^iel, Jeremiah, in the old, and of Matthew 14. 25. John 26. 39. John
17. 9, etc. Acts 1. 14. 24. c. 3* 1. c. 4. 24, to 31. c. 8. 22 c. 10. 1, 9. c.
12* 5. c. 13. 3. c. 14* 23. c. 16. 25. c. 20. 3^. c. 21. 5. c. 28* 8 Romans 1. ^,
9, 10. c. 8. 26. c. 15. 30, 31. c. 16. 24, 25, etc. 1 Cor. 14, 15. ^ph. 1. 16*
17, etc. c. 3. 13. to (...). c. 6. 18. Phil. 1. 4, 9, 10, 11. Col. 1. 3, 9, 10.
etc. 1 These. 1. 2 c. 5. 17. 2 These. 2. 16, 17. c. 3. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 2* 1, 2. c.
5. 5. Philemon 4. 24. Rev. 5. 8. c 8. 3, 4 (...) 20.
Christ and his Apostles, recorded in the new Testament; being all compiled and
used upon extraordinary occasions; the Acts 2. 42, 46. c. 4. 1, 2, 18, 19. 20
c. 5. 19, 20, 21, 28. 29. 42. c. ^0. 20, 31* c. 19* 8. 9, 10. c. 28. 30, 3^.
Romans 15. 19, 20. Luke 21. 36, 37, 38. Justin Martyr, and Tertul* in Apologia.
public Prayers in the Primitive Church never secluded or diminished the use
of private conceived prayers or preaching; Therefore they should not do it now.

5. That the bare-reading or chanting of Common Prayers in the Church (which
every Parish-Clerk, Chorister, Singing-man, Scholar, or Parishioner who can
read, may and can perform as well as any Archbishop, Bishop, Dean, Prebend, or
Minister;) and wearing of Canonical Vestments is no principal part of a Bishops
or Ministers Duty, as many now of late suppose it: but only the Mat. 10. 7. c.
28. 19, 20. Mar 16. 15.
constant, frequent preaching of the Gospel, and administration of the
Sacraments; wherein too many Bishops and Ministers are over-negligent, as if it
were the least part of their Function; when as their Ministerial and Episcopal
Office consists principally therein; as is evident by Christ's own first and
last Missions of, and charges to his Disciples, Go ye into all the world and
preach the Gospel to every Creature, Teach all Nations, baptising them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. By Mat. 26. 55. Mar. 14. 49
Lu. 19. 47. c 22. 52. Ps. 62. 11 Lu. 4^* 18, 19, 31, 43, 44.
Christ's and his Acts 2. 46, 47. c. 4. 1, etc. c 5. 41. c. 16. 5. c. 17. 11.
17. c. 19. ^, (...). c. 10. 18, 19, 20, 21. Romans (...) 15* 16, 17 c. 15* 15, to
26. c 16, 25* 2 Cor. 11. 28 1 Cor. 9* 13, to 27. H^b. 3. 11*
Apostles daily constant preaching the Gospel publicly, and from House to
House, in all places where they came, without intermission, By Paul's
asseverations, 1 Cor. 1. 17. c. 9. 16.
Christ sent me not to baptize, (that is principally, or in the first place,
nor yet to read, or chant Common Prayer in a Cathedral Tone) ^ut to preach the
Gospel. For though I preach the Gospel, yet I have nothing to glory of, for
necessity is laid upon me, yea, Woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel; And
that dreadful injunction of God himself by Paul to Timothy, (whom our See
Bishop Downhams Consecration Sermon; Bishop Halls Remonstrance, and Divine
Right of Episcopacy; Mr. Sudbu^yes; Mr. Sandcro^es, and Dr. Allestryes Sermons
at the last Consecrations of Bishops, 1660.
Bishops and their Chaplains, as well in their late as former Consecration
Sermons and Discourses, will needs make to be a Diocaesan Bishop or
Metropolitan by Divine institution, upon whom they found their Episcopacy, and
therefore must be equally liable to this injunction, as well as Timothy) 2 Timothy
4. 1, 2, 3. fully refuted in my Vnbishoping of T^mothy and Ti^us.
I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom, preach the Word; be
instant in season, out of season rebuke, reprove, exhort with all
long-suffering and doctrine, Do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of
thy Ministry. Thus seconded by his Charge to the Bishops of Ephesus, Acts 20,
28, 20.
Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock over the which the
Holy Ghost has made you Bishops to feed the Church of God (by teaching
publicly, and from House to House) which he has purchased with his own blood.
The due consideration whereof should terrify and amaze all Non-preaching, or
Rare-preaching Bishops and Ministers, who^ by their Curates or Choristers read^
or sing Common Prayers once or twice every day or Lords day at the least, and
yet seldom personally preach the Gospel to their People once a Month, Quarter,
Year; yea cry up Common Prayers to suppress frequent constant preachings; when
as the Sessio 14. Decr. de Reformatione, cap. 4. Surius C^ncil. Tom. 4. p. 976,
977.
Council of Trent it self resolves, That preaching of Gods word is the
principal part of a Bishops Office, and belongs chiefly to Bishops; Whereupon
it enjoins them, and the Parish Priests throughout their Diocese, to preach
every Lords day, and Holy day, and in the time of Fasts, Lent, and Advent, to
preach the word of God daily, or at least thrice a week, and at all other times
whenever it may be oportunely done, for the salvation of their people, whom
they are diligently to admonish, that they repair to the Church to hear Gods
word, when ever they can conveniently do it. Yea Sermo 10. De Observantia
Sab^ati.
Bernardinus Senensis, a famous Popish Friar, is not afraid to assert, That the
People are more obliged to hear, and Priests to preach the word of God, than to
hear or say Mass; and that experience manifests, that the People will
incomparably suffer more prejudice both in Faith and Manners, and grow more
void of the fear, love, knowledge of God, and veneration of the^ Sacraments,
and more overgrown with the stench and horror of sins, by the want of
preaching, than by the want of Mass and Common Prayer; concluding, Sic utique
est populus sine divino verbo licet etiam Missae frequententur, sicut mundus
sine sole, That the People without the preaching of Gods word, although they
frequent Mass and Common Prayers, will be but like the World without the Sun.
And therefore all our Bishops, Ministers should much more diligently press and
apply themselves to the diligent frequent preaching, and all People to the
assiduous hearing of Gods word, than to the reading or hearing of
Common Prayers, which too many esteem the principal means to instruct and save
their Souls, and more necessary than preaching of the Gospel of Christ, though
Romans 1. 16, 17. c. 10* 13, 14, 15. 1 Cor. 1. 16, 17* 21.
the Power of God unto Salvation, and principle means of faith, of converting
and saving the souls of those who believe it.

6. That there are some things in the Book of Common Prayer very necessary and
fit to be amended; As 1. the mis-recital of Ezech. 18. 21, 22. in the very
beginning of the Book, which many much abuse, to the deferring of their
repentance. 2ly. The continuance of the old English Translations of the
Psalms, Epistles, Gospels, and other Texts of Scripture, according to the
Versions of Mr. Tyndal, Thomas Matthews, and Mr. Coverdale, which are not so
exact, so agreeable with the Original, and Dialect of this Age, as the more
complete, refined Translation made by King James his Command, now only read
and used in our Churches, and most private Families: Therefore most fit to be
used, and henceforth inserted into the Common Prayer Book, to take away all
former controversies and exceptions against the old Translation, as well by Mr.
Thomas Cartwright, the Lincoln-shire-Ministers, Altar Damascenum, the Assembly
of Perth, and others heretofore, and of In their Necessity of Reformation of
the Public Worship* Rites, Ceremonies, L^nd. 1660. (...). In nomine Jesu ^^ne
gen^ flecta^ur.
sundry Ministers of late times; especially against that of ^sal. 105. v. 28.
(occasioned by the Printers omission of one syllable, to wit, obedient, for
disobedient,) not the Translators. Only I shall observe, that the old
Translation of Phil. 2* 10. in the Epistle for Palm Sunday; according to the
Greek Original, all Latin Translations but one, all English Versions whatsoever
but the Geneva, and that of King James, (which ought to be amended in this
particular) truly rendered the words, That IN (not AT) the Name of Jesus every
knee be bowed, or should bow (in the passive, not active verb and sense) of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, etc. till
corrupted and turned into A (not IN) the name of Jesus every knee should bow,
etc. in the active not passive signification, by Dr. Cosins, about 25. years
past: expressly against the Original, the Latin, and most other Translations
whatsoever, the old English translations of Trevisa, Tyndall, Matthews,
C^verdale, the Bishops Bible, Dr. Fulke, Mr. Cartwright, the Epistles and
Gospels printed in English at Paris, Anno 1558. yea against the very sense and
scope of the Text it self, and our English dialect; (...), In Nomine, etc.
being never rendered or translated At, but IN the name alone, in all Texts,
Liturgies, Collects, Writs, Warrants, Histories, Authors whatsoever; and the
phrase ^T the name, never heard of, read, used in any English, Latin, Greek,
Hebrew Syriack, Arabic, French, Spanish, Italian, German, Sclavonian, or other
Writer whatsoever, but only in this Text; and all to justify the Ceremony of
bowing the head, and putting off the hat at the sound, or hearing of the name
Jesus: first introduced and prescribed by Pope Gregory the 10. about the year
of Christ 1272. at the reading of the Gospel only; after that enjoined by other
Popes, Popish Canons, Decrees and Masse-books, with indulgences annexed for the
users thereof to induce them thereunto; though never intended nor prescribed by
this Text, nor practiced in the Primitive Church for above 1200 years space,
nor in the Reformed Churches abroad, nor enjoined by the Common Prayer Book, or
any Injunctions or Canons of our Church confirmed by Parliament, to make them
valid, as I have In the Appendix to my Ant^^arminianism, concerning bowing at
the name of Jesus, Lame ^^les his Haltings, Certain Quaeres propounded to the
bowers at the Name of Jesus, ^nno 1636. Canterburies. Doom, p. 64.
elsewhere proved at large.

3ly. The frequent repetition of the Lords Prayer, purposely instituted,
prescribed to prevent much babbling, and vain repetitions in prayer, (in 1 King,
18. 26, 27, 28. See Ecclesiasti^us 7. 4.
use only among the heathens, who thought they should be heard for their much
speaking) expressly prohibited by our Savior, Mat 6. 7, to 16. and by Eccle^.
5. 1, 2. Prove. 10. 19. Which Repetitions seem to countenance the Sea my
pleasant Purge for a Roman Catholic*
Papists vain Battologies and abuse of the Lords Prayer in their M^ssals,
Offices, Rosaries, Psalters, Beads, by many successive rehearsals thereof,
against the express command and institution of Christ.

4ly. The often rehearsals of Good Lord deliver us; We beseech thee to hear us
good Lord, by all the People in the reading of the Letany: Which Antiphonies
and Responsals between Minister, Clerk and People (except Deuteronomy 27* 15. 1 chronicles.
16. 36. Neh* 5. 13. c. 8. 6. Psalm. 41. 13. Ps. 72. 19. Ps* 89. 53. Ps. 106* 48.
Romans 1* 25. Mat* 6. 13. 1 Cor. 14. 16. Phil. 4. 20. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Rev. 5* 14.
c. 7. 12. c. 19. 4.
Amen at the cloze of every Prayer) have no Precept nor President in Scripture
or solid Antiquity, but only in Popish Missals, Pontificals, Offices,
Processionals, Ceremonials, Psalters, Primers. And the interposition of it no
less than twice, in the midst of the Letany, and Prayer for THE KING, dividing
it into three parts; seems not only superfluous, but incongruous and
ridiculous to many.

I shall not at all insist upon kneeling at the Sacrament, the Cross in
Baptism, the King in Marriage, for which there is neither command nor example in
Scripture or the Primitive Church next after the Apostles, which Mr.
Cartwright, Mr. Knewstubs, the Lincolnshire Ministers, Mr. Parker, Mr. Paybody,
Doctor John Burgess, Archbishop Whitguift, Master Hooker, Doctor Prideaux, and
sundry others have at large debated, pro and See Gulielmus Stuckius, Antiqu.
Conviv. l. 2. c* 34. De more sedendi, and accumbendi ad Mensam, etc. Tho.
Beacon his comparison between the Lords supper and the Mass f* 100, to 104 and
Catechism, f. 484, etc.
contra, and may be omitted, or left arbitrary to all; but only confine my self
to some few Particulars, which others have but slightly touched, not
satisfactorily discussed.

SECT. 1.
Of the frequent Repetition of Glory be to the Father, etc. at the end of every
Psalm, and in the midst or end of some Prayers, Canticles, Songs, Scriptures,
to which God never annexeth it; and at the close of Athanasius his Creed.
THe first thing I shall here examine, is the reasonableness, and Grounds of
this Rubric in the beginning of the Book of Common Prayer; At the end of every
Psalm throughout the year; and likewise at the end of Benedictus, Benedicite,
Magnificat, Nunc Dimittis, (and after O Lord make have to help us, Quicunque
vult, O Lord arise help us, and deliver us for thy name sake, the Psalm for the
Churching of Women, etc.) shall be repeated, Glory be to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost; As it was in the ^^^inning, is now, and ever shall
be world without end. Amen. Which is repeated (especially where the Psalms are
short) six or seven times one after another every Morning, and as often at
Evening Prayer; and that by way of Antiphony and Respousals both by the
Minister, Clerk and People, though the Rubric prescribe it not, but only
orders the Priest to say it, without the People or Clerk.

This Rubr^ick and practice seems very needless, superfluous, unreasonable,
offensive, unlawful, and fit to be redressed, to many judicious,
conscientious, sober Christians who resort to Common Prayers, as well as to
Seperatists from them, upon these ensuing considerations.

1. God himself never prescribed this form of Doxalogie, nor annexed it to the
end of any one Psalm, much less of every parcel of Scripture, Song or
Canticle, to which the Rubric, and Common Prayer Book inseparably annex it,
when read in Churches Morning or Evening all the year long without omission or
intermission; which seems to many to be an Addition to Gods sacred Word (of
which the ignorant Vulgar, and ignorant Priests repute it a Part as they do the
post-scripts to Paul's Epistles) expressly prohibited by God himself, Deu. 4. 4.
2. c. 12* 32. Josh. 1. 7. Prove. 30. 6 Rev. 2. 18. Ye shall not add to the Word
which I command you, nor diminish from it, that you may keep the Commandment of
the Lord your God. Add thou not unto his Words, lest he reprove thee, and thou
be found a liar. If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto
him the Plagues which are written in this Book. Yea, a making of our selves
wiser than the 1 Timothy 1. 17.
only wise God, who would have added Glory be to the Father, etc. to the end of
every Psalm, Song, Scripture, had he reputed it necessary or expedient for us
to use and repeat it, when they are publicly read in the time of his solemn
worship.

2. It seems to be a mere humane-invented will worship and tradition, never
particularly prescribed non required in any part or text of Scripture, in
regard of manner, form, or frequent usage; and so condemned by Matthew. 15. 9. In
vain do they worship me; teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. Isay.
1. 12, 13. Who has required this at your hands? Bring no more vain Oblations,
I am weary of them. Col. 2. 20, 22, 23. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ
from the rudiments of the world, why as though living in the world are you
subject to Ordinances, after the rudiments and doctrines of men; which things
have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship, and humility.

3. It was never thus used by Gods people in any parts of his public worship
in the Old, or New Testament, nor by any of the Apostles, Primitive Churches,
Bishops, or Christians for above 300. years after Christ; Therefore not just to
be so peremptorily enjoined or practiced now. De Divinis Off^^iis, c. 39, 40*
Deinde imponitur Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritul sancto. Quae verba ad
diversionem Psalmorum, qui prius indifferenter cane^antur. B. Hieronimus,
Damaso Papa Petente, composuit. Sed cum nequaquam id sufficeret, prae dicto
Apostolico suggerente, addidit ad^uc, sicut erat in principio, etc et hac ad
nutum Diaconi dicit Cantor.
Al^uinus, ^ulores Histor. An. 376. p. 139.
Mat. Westminster, Mr. Acts and Monuments, vol. 3. p. 11.
Fox, Bellarmin de Messa l. 2. c. 16.
others relate, and Mr. Ecclesiastical Polity. l. 5. sect 42.
Hooker, Dr. Exp^sition of the Liturgy in his works. p. 7.
Boys confess Pope Damasus in the year of our Lord 376. (or St. Jerome at his
request, as some fable) was the first who introduced Glory be to the Father,
and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, appointing it to be repeated in the
Church at the end of the Psalms. And Decreta Eccles. Gall. l. 1. Tit. ^. cap.
7, 8.
Laurentius Bochel^us informs us, That as it was in the beginning, is now, and
ever shall be, etc. was added to Gloria Patri long after, by the 2d. Provincial
Council of Vasio in France, in the year of Christ 450. not before; Seeing then
God himself commands us, Jer. 6. 16. (...) ^^hn* 2. 7. Matthew 19. 8. L^u. 5.
39.
To stand in the ways, and ask for the old Paths, where is the good way and
walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your Souls; And to keep the old
Commandment, even the Word which we have heard from the beginning; And De
Praescriptionibus advers haereticos.
Tertullian assures us, Illud verius quod antiquius; We ought not to follow
this Innovation so long after the Apostles time, introduced by a Popes
authority.

4. It was first inserted into, and prescribed to be used in and by Popish
Missals, and Mass-books after every Psalm, Hymn, Prayer, in the self-same
manner as it is in the Common Prayer Book, into which it was originally
transplanted out of these See Ordo Romanus Antiqu de Divinis Officiis, Bibl.
Patr. Tom. 8. p. 39^. etc.
Romish Missals; as is evident by Officium, and Processionale secundum usum
Sarum, Missale Romanum, ex Decreto sancti Concilii Tridentini restitutum Pii 5.
Pontificis Max. jussu editum. Salmanticae 1588. Rubricae Generales Missalis.
Missale Romanum, Clementis 8. aucthoritate recognitum. Antuerpiae 1630. and De
Divinis Officiis, c. 39. 40.
Al^uinus; Pontificale and Caeremoniale Romanum.

5. The frequent use and repetition of it after every Psalm, Hymn, some
Prayers, Creeds, at least 8. Or 9. times every Morning prayer, seems to be a
vain babbling and repetition, prohibited by Eccles. 5. 1, 2. Prove. 10. 19. and
Matthew. 6. 6, 7, 8. And an imitation, if not justification of the Papists use of
the Ave Mary after every Pater noster, which they have annexed to the Lords
Prayer, as well as Gloria Patri to the end of every Psalm and sacred Hymn, with
an addition to the Ave Maria it self; which makes it a See my pleasant purge
for a Roman Catholic.
Prayer to her; when as in it self it is but a bare salutation, and prayer for
her.

6. This daily use and frequent repetition of Gloria Patri, etc. is a mere
unnecessary superfluity and exuberancy which may well be spared: for if it were
originally introduced and still continued in the Church only as a
paraphrastical exposition of To. 11. 36. See Basil. Epist. 78. Theodoret
Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 24. Sozomen, l. 4. c. 19.
to manifest our sound judgment concerning the sacred Trinity against the
Arrians; as Ecclesiastical Polity, l. ^ sect. 42.
Mr. Hooker, In his works, London, 1622. p. 7.
Dr. Boys, and other Patrons of it affirm. And if As it was in the beginning,
etc. was superadded thereunto by the 2d. Provincial Council of Vasio, and yet
continued, by reason of the incredulity and craft of Heretics, who
blasphemously affirmed, Dei filium non semper cum Patre fuisse, sed a tempore
caepisse; That the Son of God was not always with the Father, but to have his
beginning from Time, as this Council and Decreta Ecclesiae, Gal. l. 1. Tit. 7.
c. 7. 8.
Bochellus assure us; It is then humbly submitted to the judgment of all
impartial Christians who acknowledge, glorify, and worship the Trinity in
unity, and believe the eternity of our Saviors generation: whether the single
rehearsal of one or more of these sacred Texts of Scripture at the beginning,
middle, or end of Morning or Evening Prayer, viz. 1 John 5. 7. There are three
that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost, and these
three are one, Mat. 28. 19. All power is given unto me both in Heaven and
Earth; Go therefore and teach all Nations, baptising them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Rev. 4. 8. Holy, Holy, Holy Lord
God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. John 1. 1, 2. In the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; the same was in
the beginning with God. Heb. 13. 8. Jesus Christ, yesterday, and to day, and
the same for ever: Rev. 1. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
ending says the Lord, which is, which was, and which is to come. Romans 9. 5.
Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen. Prove. 8. 22. 23. The Lord
possessed me in the brginning of his way, before his works of old: I was set up
from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was: when there were no
depths, I was brought forth; before the hills was I brought forth, etc. When he
appointed the Foundations of the earth, then I was by him, as one brought up
with him, I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him. Whether these
Texts rehearsal would not far more clearly, satisfactorily manifest, testify
our judgment concerning the right worship, eternal being, generation, and
Deity of Christ, than this invention and frequent repetition of Glory be to the
Father, etc. being no Canonical Scripture as these Texts are, and a mere humane
invention? (wherein the Leo^tius Antiochiae Episcopus cum Clerum and etiam
Laicorum multitudinem in duas parts divisam c^^neret, and alteram quo lauds
Filii magis celebra^ent hanc conjunctionem, and, exhi^e^e: alteram cu^em hana
pr^^positionem, Per in eodem penere and cum ad Spiritum Sanctum ventum esset
prepositionem In ad ^^^ere, ( viz Gloria Patri per fil^^^, in (...) sancto)
ipse totam glorificationem taci^us secum recitavit, adeo ut qui prope eum
erant, solum hanc particulam, In saecula, saeculorum, audirent, Theodoret
Eccles Hist. l. 2. c. 24. Sozomen. l* 4. c. 19.
first Inventors were much divided among themselves.) Besides, the soundness
of our Faith in the blessed Trinity, and our Saviors eternal Generation, is
more fully, clearly expressed every Morning and Evening Prayer, by the
rehearsal of the Apostles, the Nicene, Athanasius Creeds, inserted into the
Common Prayer Book, by the very beginning of the Letany read every Lords day,
Friday and Wednesday; by the form of Baptism constantly used every day in great
Parishes, and by the Psalms, Lessons, Collects, Epistle and Gospel on Trinity
Sunday, than by Gloria Patri, etc. Therefore it may very well be spared as a
needless superfluity in our Church.

7. This Addition to Gloria Patri by the Council of Vasio, As it was in the
beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen. on purpose to
express the eternal being and generation of Christ, and refute those
Heretics who denied it, if judicially examined, is very defective in it self,
and incongruously annexed to Glory be to the Father. For 1. there is no mention
at all of Christ, not one syllable in it concerning his eternal generation, as
there is in Prove. 8. John 1. and other forecited Texts. 2ly. It seems clearly
to exclude Christ, and to relate to something else; As IT (not Christ) was in
the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, imports. 3ly. Christ's eternal
generation in the beginning, cannot properly be said, is now, and ever shall be
world without end, without some incong^uity and contradiction. 4ly. As it is
coupled with the precedent clause, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and
to the Holy Ghost, it must See Basilii Epist. 76. Theodoret Eccles. Hist l. 2
c. 24. Sozomen l. 4. c 19. Hookers Ecclesiastic^l Polity, l. 5. Sect. 42.
necessarily relate to the three persons alike, and not to Christ alone, much
less to his eternal Generation, of which there is no mention in the first
clause. For since the Father and the Holy Ghost are not begotten, but only the
Son; and this Clause refers to the Father and Holy Ghost as much as to the Son;
it cannot peculiarly express or declare the eternal Generation of the Son, but
rather the eternal being and immutability of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
in a true Grammatical and Logical construction. 5ly. Any Heretic may easily
evade this Clause by applying it only to the Father, who is first, or to the
Holy Ghost, last mentioned in Gloria Patri, and not to the Son. 6ly. The
illiterate Vulgar, yea Ignorant reading Priests, Vicars, Atheists, do no ways
understand it of the Sons eternal being and Generation, but rather in a literal
and quite other sense, than the Original Contrivers of it intended, even
according to the sense and language of those Atheistical S^^f^ers prophesied of
by St. Peter in these last days, (who hold the World to be eternal, and to
have no end, contrary to Psalm. 102. 25, 26, 27. Hebr. 1. 10, 11, 12. Isay 34.
4. Mar. 13. 19, 40, 49. c. 34. 3, etc. 1 Pet. 4 7. 2 Pet. 3. 6, to 14. Rev. 6.
12, 13.) saying, Where is the promise of Christ's coming (to judgment) for
since the Fathers fell asleep ALL THINGS CONTINUE AS THEY WERE FROM THE
BEGINNING; and do so now, and ever shall do world without end; whose
Atheistical Scoff and Opinion these words do more serve to justify and
corroborate, than the eternal Generation of our Savior; Therefore not fit to
be still continued in our Church now there are so many Atheists, profane
Sco^fers and Deriders of Christ's second coming, and the worlds approaching
Dissolution, whom Peter largely refutes, 2 Pet. 3. 6, to 14.

8. If the use of Gloria Patri, etc. was first instituted and inserted into
public Liturgies (as some conceive) to render Glory and Praise to God, and the
Trinity in Unity; no doubt this may be far better, and more effectually
performed without the least exception, by the recital of the Song of the Angels
and Heavenly host, at our Saviors Nativity, Luke 2 14. and that of Luke 19.
38. Glory to God in the Highest, etc. ( inserted into the Common Prayer, and
repeated at every Celebration of the Lords Supper, with some additions of like
nature) prescribed to be used in Churches and Liturgies by Su^ius council. Tom.
1. p. 185. Honorius Augustodunensis, Gemma Animae, l 1. c* 93. Gratiande
Consecrat distinct 2. and distinct. 4. cap. Statuimus. Tho. Waldensis, Tom 3
Tit. 4. c 31. sect. 7. Gul^^lm. Durantus Rationale Divinorum l. 3. Fox Acts and
Monuments, vol. 3. p. 7. and Missale Rom^n^^m.
Pope Telesphorus, in the year 139. long before the invention or prescription
of Gloria Patri, by Pope Damasus. Of Romans 11. 36. Of him, and through him, and
for him are all things, to him be glory for ever Amen, of which Doctor Boys
and others make Glory be to the Father, etc. a mere Paraphraitical Exposition,
Gal. 1. 4, 5. According to the will of God, and our Father, to whom be glory
for ever and ever Amen. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal,
invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever Amen. 2 Timothy 4. 18. And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will
preserve me unto his Heavenly Kingdom, to whom be glory for ever and ever Amen.
Heb. 13. 20, 21. Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus, etc. make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in
you that which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
for ever and ever Amen. Romans 16. 27. To God only wise, be glory through Jesus
Christ for ever, Amen. 1 Pet. 5. 10, 11. (...) the God of all grace, who has
called us into his eternal glory through Jesus Christ, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, settle you; To him be glory and dominion for ever and
ever, Amen. Rev. 4. 9. 10, 11. c. 5. 12, 13, 14. And when those Beasts gave
glory and honor and thanks to him that sat on the Throne, who lives for ever
and ever, the 24. Elders fall down ( not stand up) before him that sat on the
Throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns
before the Throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and
honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they
are and were created. And I heard the voice of many Angels round about the
Throne, and the Beasts and the Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand
times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; saying, with a loud voice,
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and wisdom, and riches,
and honor, and glory, and blessing. And every Creature which is in heaven, and
under the earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in them, heard I,
saying, Blessing, honor, glory and power, be unto him that sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever; And the four Beasts said, Amen.
Rev. 7. 9, 10, 11, 12. After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which no
man could number, of all Nations, and kindreds of people and tongues stood
before the Throne, and before the Lamb clothed with white robes, and palms in
their hands; and cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which
sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb; And all the Angels stood round
about the Throne, etc. and fell before the Throne on their faces, ( not stood
up) and worshipped God, saying, Amen. Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and
thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and
ever. Amen. The reading or reciting of one or more of these Canonical
Doxalogies at the beginning, middle, or end of Morning or Evening Prayers,
would certainly be more Canonical, expedient, useful in and to our Churches,
and less subject to exceptions, than this frequent Repetition of Gloria Patri,
etc. a mere superfluous humane invention and tradition, which ought to give
place to these forecited sacred Texts.

9ly. The annexing of Gloria Patri to, and repetition of it at the end of every
Psalm, is either incongruous, impertinent, or superfluous at the best. The
greatest part of the Psalms are either Supplications, Intercessions, Prayers,
Exhortations, Imprecations, Lamentations, Instructions, admonitions, or
penitential Confessions of Sin, and Gods judgments inflicted for the same; and
to repeat Glory be to the Father, etc. at such Psalms cloze, seems to
considerate Christians a great Incongruity, impertinency, and absurdity;
especially when Caeremoniale Episco^o^^^, Paris^^s 1633. l. 1. c. 2^ p. 140.
sung with Organs and the Quire in Cathedrals, as Caeremoniale Romanum requires
it. Compare this Doxalogy with the last Verses of Psalm. 1. 6. 9. 10. 12. 14.
15. 19. 20. 22. 25. 31. 33. 36. 38. 39. 40. 46. 47. 49. 51. 55. 70. 76. 78. 80.
81, etc. and you shall at first discern how little coherence, harmony there is
between them. The residue of the Psalms are for the most part gratulatory,
consisting of Praises, Thanksgivings, and Gratifications to God for his
Spiritual, Temporal, and Eternal Mercies and Deliverance; concluding with Psalm.
7. 17. Ps. 9. ^. Ps. 30. 11. Psalm. 33. 1. and 34. 1. and 42. 11. and 43. 5. and
45. 17. Ps. 47. 1. and 59. 17. Ps 75* 1. and 86. 1, 2, 20. Psalm. 68. 35. and
72. 18* 19. and 75. 1. and 89. 52. and 97. 12* and 100. 1. 103* 1, 2, 21, 22.
Ps. 104. 1, 25. Ps* 105. 1, 45. Ps. 106* 1, 48* Ps. 107. 1. Ps. 111. 1. and
112. 1, ^. Ps. 115. 18. Ps. 116. 19. Ps. 117. 1, 2. P^. 118. 1, 29. Ps. 135. 1,
19, 20, 21. Ps* 145. to Ps. 150.
Praise ye the Lord, or beginning with it: and to annex Gloria Patri to them,
is either a mere unnecessary superfluity or Tautoligy, an adding of Water to
the Ocean, and of humane inventions to Divine Thanksgivings.

See Bibliotheca Patrum col. Agrip. 1618. Tom. 12. p. 1034. G. 1050, 1051.
Honorius Augustodunensis, flourishing about the year of Christ, 1120. in his
Gemma Animae, sive de Divinis ^fficiis and antiquo rit^ Missarum (out of which
^^lielmus D^rantus has borrowed most part of his Rationale Divinorum) l. 1. c.
121. Yea Ri^us Celebrandi M^ss^^, and Missa p^o Defunctis.
Missale Romanum, set forth by Pope Pius Quintus, and revised by Pope Clement
the 8th. with others inform us, That at the Mass of the Dead, Gloria Patri, and
Allelujah, which signify gladness, are not sung or used, because this Mass
intimates sorrow: and we are thereby admonished that we came into the world
with sadness, and shall depart thence with sorrow. If then Papists, Popes, and
Missals themselves repute Gloria Patri incongruous and absurd to be sung or
said in Masses for the Dead, upon this account; it must by the self-same reason
be as incongruous and absurd for any to chant or repeat it at the end of
penitential, supplicatory, lamenting complaining Psalms, or Psalms that are
read at Funerals. The same Honorius, l. 2. c. 2 and 10. informs us, H^ Ps^lmi
sub vna Gloria Patri canuntur quia j^sti illis temporibus Trinitatem (...)
creduntur. S^^guli Psalmi cum Gloria Patri canuntur, quia singuli supradicti
ordines Trinit (...) ^^^ibuntur Ideo etiam and (...) Psalmi canuntur, (...).
That the 1, 2, 3, and 6. Psalms ^ which he applies to the generation from
Adam to Noah in general, and to Ab^l, Enos, Enoch and Lamech in special) are
all said under one Gloria Patri, because the just men of that Age are believed
to have worshipped the Trinity. And that all Psalms are sung with Gloria
Patri, because all the foresaid orders, (of Priests, Judges, Kings, in the
several Ages from Adam to Christ) are written to have worshipped the Trinity;
and therefore three Psalms and three Anthems are likewise sung. This is the
only reason I meet with for the chanting and repeating Gloria Patri after every
Psalm, which how Monkish, weak, and ridiculous it is (since upon the same
account it ought to be sung or read after every Chapter in the Old and New
Testament, or else it implies, that the Penmen of those Canonical Texts and
Chapters after which it is neither sung nor read, did not adore the Trinity)
let the impartial Readers judge: since the Apostles and Christians in the
Primitive times next after Christ would have used it after every Psalm and
Canticle upon this Account, which they never did; and we ought not to be Pro.
26. 5. 12. 1 Cor 3. 18, 19, 20.
wiser in our own conceits than they, in matters which concern Gods immediate
worship.

10. Gloria Patri, etc. coupled with As it was in the beginning is now, and
ever shall be, etc. intimates that this Doxalogy was used from all eternity in
honor of the blessed Trinity by Saints and Angels, before either of them were
created, or at least from the Creation till this present time, without
variation or intermission, which is both false and absurd to assert: Yea
literally taken Archbps, Bishops Deans, Chapters, Prebends, Cathedralists who
are most zealous for its continuance, have least reason of any other Christians
to practice, chaunt, repeat it, since they have so much degenerated, swarved
from the Bishops, Ministers in the Apostles age, and Primitive Church, in their
daily Preaching, Manners, Habits, Vestments, Ornaments, Church-musick, Piety,
Humility, Jurisdictions, Temporal possessions, Ceremonies, Government, ( by See
Davidis Blondelli Apologia pro sententia Hieronymi De Episcopis and
Presbyteris. And my Vnbishoping of Timothy and Titus.
a joint Council of Presbyters) Ecclesiastical censures. Of neither whereof
they can truly say, As it was in the beginning is now, nor yet and ever shall
be world without end, Amen; which they should henceforth discontinue, unless
they will really conform themselves in all things to the primitive Bishops and
Ministers, in point of worship, doctrine, discipline, administration of
Sacraments, Ceremonies, Vestments; Church Service, and contempt of Worldly
Pomp, Riches, Honors, Heavenly conversation; and comply with his Majesty's
most gracious Declarations touching Ecclesiastical affairs, and the endowment
of poor Vicaridges with competent maintenance for the benefit of the Peoples
souls and bodies, to which they are very a verse.

11. The usual custom of repeating Gloria Patri, etc. As it was in the
beginning, etc. interchangably by the Ministers and People; the Minister
sometimes reciting the first clause, and the Clerk and People the latter;
sometimes the Clerk and People rehearsing the first part, and the Minister the
last, by way of Dialogue, Antiphony and Responsals; as it is contrary to the
Rubric, which prescribes the Priest alone to rehearse it, not the People, who
are but to say Amen thereto; So is it contrary to the practice of Gods Church
in the first and purest times. And the recital thereof with a loud obstreperous
voice as well by Women as Men, repugnant to the Apostles express precepts, 1
Cor. 14. 34, 35. Let your Women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not
permitted unto them to speak; for it is a shame for them to speak in the
Church; Therefore most fit to be reformed for the future, and laid quite aside.

12. The repetition of Glory be to the Father, etc. after every Psalm, Hymn
and Versicle, according to the Rubric in times of Divine service, has
introduced a New disorderly, confused custom and ceremony in Cathedral and some
other Churches, (though prescribed by no Rubric, Law, Sanction, or Canon of
our Church) of starting and standing up at every rehearsal of it, and quatting
down again as soon as it is repeated; which gives a great offense to many,
therefore I shall next discuss it.

SECT. II.
Of Ministers and Peoples rising and standing up at every Rehearsal of Glory be
to the Father, etc.
THough the Gesture of rising and standing up during any part of Divine
Service, simply considered in it self, be a thing indifferent, and lawful, as
well as kneeling or sitting, as the 2 Chronicles. 20. 13* Jer. 15. 1. Numb. 23. 6. 1
Kings 13. 1. 2 Kings 11. 14. c. 23. 3. 1 Kings 18. 54, 55. 2 Chronicles. 6. 3. c.
20* 5, 20. Ezec. 1. 21, 24, 25. Luke 18. 11, 13. 2 Chr. 30. 16. c. 34. 31, 32*
c. 35. 10. Neh. 8. 7, 8. Exodus 20. 21. Neh. 8. 5. c. 9. 2, 3, 4. Ezr. 10. 10*
Luk 4* 16. Acts 1. 15. c. 11. 28. Genesis 11. 22. Deuteronomy. 4. 10. Rev 7. 9. c. 8. 2.
Marginal Scriptures evidence, yet the customary, constant usage thereof at
Gloria Patri in all Cathedral, most Parish Churches, Chapels, newly revived,
gives great distaste to many sober Christians, upon these ensuing
Considerations, which make them to disgust the use of Gloria Patri it self, as
an unnecessary superfluity which may well be spared.

1. Because there is no precept nor president for any such usage or custom, in
the old or new Testament, nor in the Primitive Church, when purest, devoutest,
for above 700 years after Christ.

2. There is no Rubric, Law, legal Canon or Injunction for it in our own
Church since the Reformation of Religion, as there was before in times of
Popery; it being exploded upon the Reformation and Establishment of the Book of
Common Prayer, though since introduced by Degrees in Cathedrals and Parish
Churches, by innovating Prelates, and Prelatical Clergymen, without any Law,
against the minds of our first Reformers who exploded it.

3. Because the frequent sudden starting and standing up in the reading of the
Psalms, and other parts of the Liturgy, at and during every Rehearsal of Gloria
Patri, and pronouncing it promiscuously with a loud voice, as well by Men as
Women, who are to keep silence, and not suffered to speak in the Church, whiles
others sit as before, (because this Ceremony is not prescribed) and then
quatting down again, to the disturbance of those who sit by or near them, and
offense of those who scruple, dislike this illegal Innovation, is an undecent
and disorderly custom introduced without any solid reason, contrary to the
Apostles prescription and direction, 1 Cor. 14. 33, 34, 35, 40. and 1 Timothy 2.
11, 12. Let all things be d^ne decently and in order, for God is not the Author
of confusion but peace; Let your women keep silence in the Churches, etc. This
chaunting and rehearsing of Gloria Patri by all the people with a loud voice,
together with the Priest at the end of the Psalm, was long since thus censured
as a strange disorderly Innovation, by Cassianus Institut l. 2. c. 8. Friderici
^indebrogi Gl^ssarium Tit^Gloria Patri.
Cassianus a Presbyter of Marselles. Illud autem quod in hac Provincia vidimus,
vt uno cantante in clausula Psalmi, omnes adstantes concinent cum clamore,
Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spiritui-sancto, misquam per Orientem audivimus; sed
cum silentio omnium, ab eo qui cantat, finito Psalmo orationem succedere:
Therefore most sit to be Reformed now, there being no Rubric, Law or Canon
that prescribes it in our Church.

4. Because it is directly contrary to the president and practice of the 24.
Elders, and the great multitude of Saints of all Nations, and kinreds and
people, Rev. 4. 11, 12. cap. 7. 10, 11, 12. Who when they gave praise and glory
unto God, did all fall down on their faces (not stand up upon their feet)
before the Throne, and him that sat thereon, saying, thou art worthy, O Lord,
to receive glory, and honor, and praise: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and
thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and
ever Amen. The same in substance and words almost with Gloria Patri, etc. at
which all now use to rise and stand upright, instead of falling down on their
faces; Yea rise up not only from their seats, but knees, when they are praying,
O Lord make have to help us, to Chant or say Glory be to the Father etc.
Subjoyned to that and other Prayers.

5. Because this starting and standing up at Gloria Patri, was originally
introduced, prescribed by Popish Missals, Councils, Canons, Priests, and taken
up in imitation of Popish Prelates, Priests, Monks, Papists, in their
Celebration of their Masses, in which they all stand up together when Gloria
Patri is repeated at the entrances of their several Masses, the end of every
Psalm, and other parts of their Mass. When and by what Popes and Councils it
was first introduced, I cannot certainly define. Chronicon Reichespengense, In
^is Glossarium* Tit. Gloria Patri. Frederic. Landebrogus Codex Legum Antiqu. p.
840. and his Glossarium, Gloria Patri.
Fredericus Lindebrogus, with others forecited, inform us, That Pope Damasus,
Anno 368. in fine cujusque Psalmi Gloria Patri cantari primus invenit and
constituit: But that he enjoined all or any to stand up when it was thus sung
or read, no Author once records. The Capitularia of the Emperor Charles the
Great, and Ludovicus Pius, collected by Abbot Ansegisus, and Benedictus Levita,
l. 1. Tit. 70. De fide Presbyterorum ab Episcopis discutienda, ordain; ut
Episcopi diligenter discutiant per suas Parochias, etc. Vt Gloria Patri, cum
omni honor apud omnes ca^tetur; and ipse Sacerdos cum sanctis Angelis and
populo Dei communi voce, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus decantet: But that they
should stand up when they sung it, there is not one syllable in this
Constitution, nor in any Here p. 9, 10, etc.
forecited Council or Decretal, that enjoins the use of Gloria Patri.
Therefore it was not practiced in that age; The first Council I have yet found
that prescribes standing up at Gloria Patri, is the Provincial Surius Council.
Tom. 4. p. 740, 741. L^ur. B^chell^s Decret. Eccles. Gal. l* 1. Tit. 7. c. 31.
p. 63.
Council of Senns in France, in the year 1528. cap. 18. De hori^ Canonicis
distinct, reverenter and honest in Ecclesia decantandis, which enjoins, that
in Cathedral, Collegiate and Conventual Churches, (not Parochial or Chapels)
cum dicitur Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spiritui sancto, omnes con^urgant; but
why all should thus rise and stand up together when Glory be to the Father,
etc. is said, it renders no reason at all, nor any Council else I have yet
perused; neither can I find any probable reason for it, but that which is
intimated in Ritus celebrandi Missam, prefixed to Missale Romanum, revised by
Pope Pius the 5th. and reformed by Pope Clement the 8th. De Principio Missae,
sect. 3. Sacerdos cum in fine Psalmorum dicit, Gloria Patri, etc. caput Cruci
inclinat; that the Priest when he says Gloria Patri in the end of the Psalms,
may the better bow Ordo Romanus Antiquus. Bibl. Patrum, Tom. 8* p. 397, 398.
his head to the Crucifix or Altar, (and the people together with him) which he
and they could not so conveniently perform, unless they stood up and raised
themselves from their seats. This Council of Senns, immediately subjoynes in
the same Canon, Cum nominatur illud nomen gloriosum Jesus, in quo omne genu
flectitur (in, not at which every knee is bowed, in the passive, not active
sense) coelestium, terrestrium and infernorum, omnes caput inclinent. A Canon
contrary to the words of the Text, Phil. 2. 9, 10. which requires that every
knee, not head should be bowed, as well as repugnant to its sense, which is
only this, that God has highly exalted Jesus Christ to be the Sovereign Lord,
not only of his Church, but all other Creatures; and that in the general day of
judgment not only all Angels, Saints, but Devils, damned persons, should
actually be subjected to his Sovereign power, as their supreme Lord and Judge,
not Jesus, or Savior, (he being no Savior, but only a Lord over Devils,
damned persons, and all other Creatures but men) and actually confess him to be
their Mat. 25. 37, 44. Rev. 5. 18.
LORD, to the glory of God the Father: the genuine scope and meaning of this
much abused, mistaken Text, as it is evident by the words, and Isaiah 45. 23.
Rom, 14. 9, to 15. c. 2. 5, to 17. Mat. 25. 31, to 46. c. 28. 18, 19. Ephesians. 1.
19, to 23. Heb. 1. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8. c. 2. 8. Col. 1. 15, to 20. Acts 2. 34,
35, 36. c. 10. 36, 42. Col. 1. 15, to 20. Rev. 1. 5, 6. c. 5. 11, to 14* c. 20.
12, 13. 1 Timothy 6. 14, 15. John 5. 20, 21, 22, 23. which fully explain this
Text, as I have Appendix to my Anti-arminianisme concerning Bowing at the Name
Jesus. Lame Giles his Hal^ings. Quaeres propounded concerning Bowing at the
Name Jesus.
elsewhere largely evidenced. The next Council I find prescribing standing up
at Gloria Patri, (and bowing at the Name Jesus jointly together) is that of
Bourdeaux, (Concilium Bituriense) Anno 1584. thus registered by Decret. Eccl*
Gal. l. 1. Tit. 3. c. 38. p* 86.
Bochellus. In fine Psalmorum and ubicunque Gloria sanctissimae Trinitati
redditur, omnes consurgant: that is, in the end of Psalms, and wheresoever
Glory is rendered to the most holy Trinity, let all rise (or stand) up
together, and in invocatione nomine Jesu genu flectant; which last clause may
be more properly interpreted of kneeling or bowing the knees to Christ, in the
invocation of his Name in Prayer, then at the sound or mention of his Name
Jesus, when not invoked in the Gospels, Epistles, second Lessons or Sermons.
These are the only Councils and Canons I know, (and those but of late years
made by Popish Provincial Councils) enjoining all to stand up when Gloria Patri
is said or sung, and that principally in Cathedral, Collegiate and Conventual
Churches, without any solid reason rendered for it: Which being a practice
generally taken up and used only by Papists, Popish Prelates, Priests, Monks,
and Popish Churches in Foreign parts, and in no reformed Churches beyond the
Seas, nor prescribed by any Law, Rubric, Injunction, or Legal Canon of the
Church of England, I humbly submit to the Judgments, Consciences, of all
zealous, sober, judicious Protestants, Prelates and Cathedralists, whether upon
consideration of the Premises, they may not with more reason and discretion
henceforth give over, not only their rising and standing up at Gloria Patri,
but likewise the frequent Repetition, if not the use thereof for the future,
and quite expunge it out of the Book of Common Prayer, than any longer continue
it to the offense and scandal of thousands of their Protestant Brethren, who
are both pious, peaceable, learned, judicious, and no Enemies, but Friends to a
well-reformed Public Liturgy, wherein they may all heartily accord.

SECT. III.
Of standing up at the Reading of the Gospel, and Three Creeds.
I Am yet of opinion that the Decretals and Canons prescribing standing up at
the reading of the Gospels, were the true original of those for standing up at
the recital of Gloria Patri, and prefacing them with the repetition of Glory be
to thee O Lord, prescribed by See Rubricae Generales Missalis, and Ritus
Celebrandi Missam. prefixed to Missale Romanam, Pii 5. and Clementis 8.
Honorius Augustodunensis, Gemma Animae, l. 2. and 3. Gulielmus Durantus,
Rationale Divinorum l. 4.
Roman Missals, Ceremonials, Pontificals, Popes Decrees, Popish Writers, and
derived from them to those who practice it in our Church, being the same in
substance with Gloria Patri; which being now generally used in all our
Cathedrals, and revived of late in many Parish Churches and Chapels, though not
prescribed by any Rubric in the Book of Common Prayer, nor binding Law or
Canon of our Chuch, by innovating Clergymen, and such as are overmuch
addicted to Ceremonies and Formalities; I shall next calmly examine the
original grounds, lawfulness, decency and expediency thereof.

The original of standing up at the reading of that we call the Gospel,
specially appointed at the Communion on Sundays and Holy Days, is attributed
by some to Pope Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 666.
Clement the 1. and inserted into his spurious Apostolical Constitutions, in
these words, Cum Evangelium legitur, omnes Presbyteri, Diaconi, and Laici
Assurgant, cum magno silentio, Scriptum est enim; Deuteronomy. 5 and 27.
Tace and audi Israel. Et rursum, Tu vero hic sta and audies. Deinde vero
moneant Presbyteri populum, ut sedent. But this Constitution, 1. As it was none
of the Apostles, so neither this Popes Clements, but a spurious Imposture of
far later days, as Mr* Cook in his Censura Patrum, Dr. James, and sundry
others have evidenced. 2ly. The standing up thereby enjoined, is not at the
reading of that we now call the Gospel, but of the Second Lesson of Chapter out
of one of the 4 Evangelists, as the preceding words demonstrate. And why all
Priests, Deacons, and Laymen should stand up together at the reading of that we
now usually call the Gospel, because taken out of the Gospel, rather then at
the Second Lesson or Chapter being the Gospel as much as it, or at the Reading
of the Gospel only, rather then of the Epistle, (which is part of the 1 These*
1. 5. c. 2. 2, 4, 8. Gal. 1* 6* c. 2. 2, 5, 7* Phil. 1. 5, 12, 17, 27. c. 2.
22. Col* 2. 5. 2 These. 2. 14. 1 Timothy* 14. 6, 59. Romans 1. 15, 16, 17. c. 2. 16.
c. 15* 16, 29. c. 16. 25. 1 Cor. 4. 15. c* 3. 17, 18. 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. Heb. 4. 2.
Gospel, and new Testament, as well, as much as any Chapter or part of a
Chapter taken out of the 4 Evangelists) or any other part or Chapter of the Old
or new Testament, being all alike, sacred, Canonical, and to be read, heard,
embraced, believed, obeyed, with the like attention, reverence, devotion,
affection, faith; no ^ober Christian or Divine can render any solid convincing
reason. 3ly. This Constitution, enjoined all to rise up with great silence;
When now all rise up with a loud voice, saying, Glory be to thee O Lord; quite
contrary thereunto. 4ly. The Texts produced out of Deuteronomy. 5. 31. c. 27. 12, 13.
to justify this standing up at the Gospel; are meant only of reading the Law;
at which all now usually kneel on their knees, not stand up; which is very
preposterous and opposite to these Texts.

Others attribute the Original of standing at the Gospel to Gratian de
Consecratione distinct 2. Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 518. Thomas Waldensis,
Doctrinalis, Tom. 3. Tit. 4. c. 32. sect. 5. f. 66. 67. Gulielmus Durantus
Rationale Divin^um, l. 4. c. 5. de Evangelio Centur. Mag. 4. Baronius,
Spondanus, and others.
Pope Anastatius the 1. (or Athanasius, as some style him) about the year of
our Lord 404. who thus decreed its future use; Significastis, quosdam
sacerdotes in Ecclesia, quando leguntur Evangelia sedere, and Domini Salvatoris
verba non stantes, sed sedentes audire, and hoc ex majorum traditione se
accipisse narrant; quod ut, nullatenus deinceps ^ieri sinatis, Apostolica
authoritate mandamus. Sed dum sancta Evangelia in Ecclesia recitantur,
Sacerdotes et caeteri omnes praesentes, non sedentes, Sed venerabiliter curvi
in conspectu sancti Evangelii stantes, Dominica verba intent audiant, et
fideliter adorent. If this Decree be not forged (as most of this Nature are)
yet I shall observe from it, 1. That a Pope was the first Author, Broacher of
this Ceremony. 2ly. That it was not used before his time. 3ly. That certain
Priests used to sit, not stand, at the reading of the Gospels; and that they
received this practice by tradition from their Ancestors which the Pope denied
not, yet decreed the contrary by his own Papal authority, without advise of any
Synod or Council. 4ly. That he peremptorily prohibits any to sit, and commands
all (whether Priests or People) to stand during all the reading of the Gospel,
though aged, weak, lame, sickly: in which Cases Waldensis, Durantus, and others
grant, they may sit down when they are unable to stand, or weary of standing
up, notwithstanding this Decree. 5ly. That the Gospels (in the Plural, not
singular Number) here intended, are not those we now call Gospels; but any
Lessons or Chapters whatsoever read in the Church out of the four Evangelists
or New Testament. Therefore to confine it only to that now styled the Gospel,
not to any other Chapter, Lesson read out of the Gospel, is to contradict this
Popes Decree. 6ly. That the end why they are commanded to stand at the Gospel
was, That they might more attentively hear and attend to it; which reason, as
it is good and laudable, so it holds as well at the reading of the Epistles,
10. Commandments, Psalms, Chapters out of the Old Testament, or any other
Texts of Scripture, Lessons taken out of the four Evangelists, as at the
Gospels, at which all should equally stand, as well as at these Gospels. 7ly.
If any stand upon this account, to adore the Gospels, or yield them more
reverence, attention, adoration than other sacred Scriptures, (of equal
authority with them) as the last clause of the Decree intimates; it is
doubtless not only a Superstitious, but irreligious practice, contrary to the
Gospel and these sacred Texts, 2 Timothy 3. 16. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Mar. 12. 44. John 5.
39. Acts 17. 2, 11. c. 18. 28. Romans 1. 2. c. 10. 11. c. 15. 4. c. 16. 25, 26. 2 Timothy 3. 15. 8ly. It is observed of our Savior himself, Lu. 4. 16. that coming
to Nazareth, as his Custom was, he went into the Synogogue on the Sabbath day,
and stood up to read, not the Gospel or any of the four Evangelists, (then not
written) but the Book of the Prophet Isaias; out of which when he had read this
Text standing; he closed the Book, gave it again to the Minister, and sat
down, and preached to the People in the Synogogues, who all fastened their eyes
on him, v. 20, 21. etc. Moreover we read of Christ, Mat. 13. 2. c. 15. 29. c.
24. 3. Mar. 4. 1. c. 13. 3, etc. Lu. 5. 3. Jo. 6. 3. c. 8. 2. that when he
taught, or preached the Gospel to the People, or his Disciples, he usually sat
down, not stood up, whence he uses this expression, Mat. 26. 55. I sat daily
with you teaching in the Temple, and ye laid no hold on me. How then this Popes
Decree can well stand with our Saviors own practice, let the Impartial judge.

Gulielmus Durantus in his Rationale Divinorum, l. 4. Rubrica, de Evangelio,
writes thus of the original of standing up at the Gospel, and the reasons of
it, and other Ceremonies accompanying it: Sane Evangelium stando, and non
s^dendo auditur, sicut statuit Anas^atius Papa, de Consecr-Dist. 1. Apostolica,
ut ad Praelium pro Christi fide servanda promptitudo notetur, unde Lu. 22. Qui
non habet gladium vendat tunicam and emat illum. Et ex quo standum est,
apparet, quod nec jacere, nec appodiare debemus Evangelium audiendo.
Reclinatoria ergo tunc relinquuntur, ad notandum, quod non debemus considerare
in principibus, nec sustentare in terrenis, quia, vanitas vanitatum and omnia
vanitas dixit Ecclesiastes. Et secundum ipsum Anastatium, stantes curvi manner
debemus, ut humilitatem quae a Domino docetur etiam corpore demonstremus.
Auditur etiam Evangelium in silento, quia omnia soluta sunt in Evangelio quae
in Lege and Prophetis promissa erant. Deponuntur etiam tunc baculi and arma.
Primo, ne imitemur Judaeos in conspectu crucifixi arundines and arma ferentes.
Secundo, ad notandum quod Christo praedicante omnes legales observantiae, quae
per baculos significantur, depositae sunt. Tertio depositio baculorum and
armorum humilitatem notat, and Christianae perfectionis esse non se vindicare
sed Domino reservare vindictam. And then he proceeds to sundry other
Ceremonies, Customs, Crossings of the Body in several places, and antique
gestures which Priests and Prelate^ are to use in reading the Gospel, fitter
for the Stage than the Church or Gospel, and to provoke Laughter than Devotion.

It seems this Custom of standing at the Gospel began of late to be
discontinued or neglected even by Popish Priests and Laics; whereupon the
Bochellus. Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 1. Tit. 7. c. 115* p 72.
Popish Council of Rhemes in France, Anno 1583. reinforced it by this Canon;
Dum legitur Evangelium, vel Praefatio, omnes assurgant; Let all stand up whiles
the Gospel, or Preface is read.

This Ceremony or Gesture of Standing, is likewise customarily used by most at
the respective rehearsing of the Creeds, commonly called the Apostles, Nicene,
and Athanasius Creed, though not prescribed by any Rubric, Law of our Church
(except only at the rehearsal of the Apostles Creed) nor yet by any Popish
Canons or Decrees to my remembrance, as standing up at Gloria Patri, and the
Gospells are. If it be only used out of pure devotion, more attentively to
hear, mind what is read, or spoken, no prudent Christian can justly censure,
but approve it; But if done merely out of Custom, or Quoniam Symbolum verbum
est Evangelium quoad sensum, ideo stando illud audire sicut and Evangelium and
illo dicto signum Crucis fa^ere debemus. Gul. Durantus, Ratio. Divinorum, l. 4.
De Symbolo Rubrica.
because the Creed is the word of the Gospel, according to its sense, or to
distinguish between the recital of the Creed, and other parts of Divine
worship; or, to advance the Creeds composed by men out of the Scriptures
themselves of Divine inspiration, authority; before the sacred Fountains from
whence they flow; or to Psalm 94. 16.
stand up for, or 2 Chronicles. 34. 32.
stand to, or 1 Cor. 16. 13. Gal. 5. 1. 2 These 2. 5.
stand fast in them (as we use to speak) more than to any other parts of the
Neh. 9. 2, 5. Deuteronomy 27. 12, 13* Ps. 122. 2. Ps. 134. 1. Genesis 18. 22. Lu. 4. 16.
1 Kings 8. 14. 15. Lu. 18. 11, 13* Rev. 7. 9.
Scripture, being all of like sacred inspiration, and Divine authority: it is
no ways excusable, much less justifiable by any understanding Christians.

To close up this Discourse touching standing up at Gloria Patri, Gospels and
Creeds, it is unquestionable, that the posture of standing up is in it self
indifferent; and may be Neh. 9. 2, 5. Deuteronomy 27. 12, 13* Ps. 122. 2. Ps. 134. 1.
Genesis 18. 22. Lu. 4. 16. 1 Kings 8. 14. 15. Lu. 18. 11, 13* Rev. 7. 9.
lawfully used in any part of Divine public worship; so as it be not done out
of singularity, opposition to decency and order, or for superstitious or
unwarrantable grounds, but only to raise up our drowsy bodies, hearts, spirits
more attentively, fervently, devontly to read, hear, pray, and discharge that
part of Gods worship wherein we use it. The Primitive Christians, and Universal
Church for above Eight hundred years after his Nativity, in memory of Christ's
resurrection, did use to pray on all Lords days, and between Easter and
Whitsontide, and worship God standing, not kneeling, nor bowing their knees at
all when they prayed or worshipped; which they prescribed; prohibiting kneeling
on these days by sundry Councils, and reputing it a kind of crime or impiety:
whence they styled their Meetings on the Lords day, Stationes, a stando;
Stations from this their standing at them; and the Christians of those times
Stationarii, as Tertullian de Corona Militis; lib. De Jejunio lib. ad Vx^rem,
l. 2. and Apologeticus. See La Cerda and Beatus Rhenanus Ibid.
Tertullian, Sermo de Oratione and Pamelius. Ibid.
Cyprian, the Council of Nice, Can. 20. the 6. Synod of Constantinople in
Trullo. can. 90. the Synod of Towers under Charles the Great, can. 37. the
Council of Aquisgrane under Ludovicus Pius, c. 47. the Century writers, Cent.
3. cap. 6. col. 153. and Centur. 3, 5, 6, 7. c. 6. with sundry others attest.
From whence it is apparent, 1. That they held this gesture of Standing lawful,
and that they stood at the reading of the Psalms, Epistles, and all Lessons
out of the Old Testament, as well as at the Gospels, making no distinction
between them. 2ly. That they received the Lords Supper standing, not kneeling.
3ly. That they never bowed their knees or heads at the Name JESUS, when ever
read or heard; first introduced by Surius Council. Tom. 1. p 347. Tom. 2. p.
1052. Tom. 3. p. 2^7.
Pope Gregory the 10th. about the year 1272. who restraiued the use of it only
to the celebration of the Mass, Sexti Decret. l. 2. Tit. 23. c. 2. See my
Appendix to Lame Giles his Halting.
and never practiced before his time for ought appears by Ecclesiastical
Historians, Fathers, Councils, or Decretals of Popes themselves. Yet
notwithstanding this ancient universally received Custom of the Church, though
ratified by sundry Councils, of praying, performing all parts of Gods public
worship, only standing, not kneeling, on every Lords day, and between Easter
and Whitsontide; is long since quite laid aside in all, or most Christian
Churches; and therefore the use of Gloria Patri, Of standing up at it, and at
the Gospels and Creeds, not so ancient nor universal, nor grounded on so good
reasons as these Stations, (together with the late cringing and bowing at the
Name JESUS) may now with much more reason be set aside and discontinued for our
Churches Peace, Settlement, and Unity in Gods worship.

SECT. IV.
Of the use of White Surplistes, Rochets, and other Episcopal and Sacerdotal
Consecrated Vestments in the Celebration of Divine Service and Sacraments in
Churches.
THe last thing I shall examine, is the pretended necessity, decency or
expediency of Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, Scholars, Choristers wearing of
white Surplisses, Rochet, and other sacred Vestments, Habits, Ornaments in the
celebration of Divine service and Sacraments, which many have formerly, and now
of late over-rigidly contended for, refusing to admit such into Fellowships or
Orders, who out of scruple of Conscience refused to wear them, and silencing,
depriving many godly, orthodox, painful, learned preaching Ministers, who
could not in judgment or conscience submit to use them.

Not to enter into any General discourse concerning the several uses of
Apparel, as 1. To Genesis 3. 21. c. 9* 23. 2. Chron. 28. 15. Mat. 25. 36, 38, 43,
44. Can* 2. 15, 16. Rev. 3. 18.
cover our nakedness. 2ly. To Hag 1. 6. 2 Cor. 11. 27. Job 31. 19.
keep our Bodies warm, and defend them from cold, heat, rain, wind, tempests.
3ly. to Rev. ^1. 2. Isay 61. 10. 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5*
adorn our Bodies in a modest, decent, comely manner; without lasciviousness,
prodigality, or fantastickness. 4ly. To Deuteronomy. 22. 5. Esther 6. 1^ 6. 8, 10 Acts
12. 21. 2 Samuel 13. 18. Lu. 7. 25. 2 Chronicles. 18. 9. See Aretii Prolemata Locus,
120. De Vestitu.
distingiush the Male and Female Sexes, and some Ranks, Callings of men from
others of a different degree, or Profession. I shall only premise these 13.
considerations, which I suppose must be acknowledged by the most zealous
Contenders for these Pontifical and Ecclesiastical Vestments, and Habits,
without dispute, when duly pondered.

1. That there is no particular kind, fashion, form of holy Garments instituted
or prescribed by God in sacred Writ, to Bishops Ministers or Deacons in and
under the Gospel, as there was to Exodus 28. 2, 3, 4* c. 29. 5. 21, 29. c. 35.
19, 21. c. 42. 13. Levit. 8. 1, 30. c. 16* 4. 32. Ezr. 2. 69. Neh 7* 70, 71.
Ezra. 3. 10.
Aaron the High Priest, and Jewish Priests and Levites under the Law.

2ly. That there is no one Text throughout the New Testament, nor authentic
Testimony to prove, that either Christ or his Apostles, or any Bishops,
Ministers, or Deacons in the Apostles times, (or for some hundreds of years
after them) were distinguished by their Quali genere vestitus usi sunt
Apostoli, aut alii Christiani, non est annotatum. Cent Magd 3. cap 6. (...).
106.
Apparel from other Christians, or Believers; or that they preached, prayed or
administered the Sacraments in any consecrated Vestments whatsoever, (much less
in such Rochets, Surplesses, or other Pontifical Habits, as are now so eagerly
contested for) but only in their ordinary wearing Apparel, the fashion or
color whereof is no where particularly described, much less prescribed in the
Gospel to all or any Ministers, Bishops or Deacons. And why should not all
Prelates and Ministers be content to imitate and conform themselves to their
Example, (as they are enjoined, Ephesians. 5. 2. Phil. 3. 17. 1 Pet. 2. 21.)
unless they will be reputed, as in truth they are, the greatest
Non-conformists.

3ly. The Gospel being commanded to be preached to all Nations, who were as See
(...) de Moribus (...) Alezandri ab Alexandro, Genesis Dicrum; Purchase his
Pilgrimage and Voyages Cent. Mag. 2, ^^* 13. cap. ^.
different in their Manners, Habits, Fashions, Customs, Laws, Ceremonies,
Governments, as in their Climates and Languages, it was neither possible,
convenient nor reasonable to prescribe any one set-form of Bishops, Ministers
or Deacons Vestments, Liturgy, or Administration of Sacraments to them all, but
to leave them arbitrary and indifferent, with this general limitation, 1 Cor.
14. 40.
Let all things be done decently and in order.

4ly. That though all Qualifications and Duties of Evangelical Bishops,
Deacons, (and their Wives too) be most fully and particularly set down in the
Epistles of Timothy and Titus, yet there is not one syllable in them concerning
the form or color of their Ordinary or Priestly Vestments, Accounterments;
which if so necessary, expedient, decent as they are now pretended, would
certainly have there been specified, recommended, or prescribed to all
succeeding Bishops and Deacons.

5ly. That the Apostle in this very Epistle to Timothy where he most
particularly enjoins the use of public and private Prayers to Bishops,
Ministers, and all other Christians, and the manner how they should perform the
same; uses only these expressions, 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2, 3, 8, 9, 10*
I exhort therefore that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions,
and Thanksgivings be made for all men, for Kings, and all in Authority, that
under them we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty. I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy Hands, (he
would doubtless have added, putting on holy Garments, Rochets, Surplesses,
Albees, Hoods, etc. had they been necessary, decent, expedient) without wrath
or doubtings: In like manner also that Women adorn themselves with modest
Apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety, (now almost quite out of fashion
even in Churches as well as Theaters) not with broydred or plaited hair, or
gold, or pearls, or costly array, (or spots, or patches, now much in fashion
both in and out of Church) but (which becomes Women professing godliness)
with good works. Let the women learn in silence, etc. This transition from
Ministers, Deacons, and men's praying in every place with pure hands, to women's
apparel (especially in the Church, as the last words evidence) without one
syllable of Men's, Bishops, Ministers or Deacons apparel, or Church-vestments,
before or after it in this Epistle, or any other, is an unanswerable argument
in my weak judgment against the necessity or peremptory prescription of any
Rochets, Surplisses, or other kind of Vestments since invented, enjoined by
Popes, or Popish Prelates, Priests, Monks, or any other Prelates, in the
celebration of Divine Service, Masses, Sacraments.

6ly. That our Savior himself M^^. ^. 24. 26. Lu. 12. 22, 23.
gave this special charge to his Disciples, recorded by two Evangelists; Take
no thought for your life, what you shall eat, or what you shall drink, nor yet
for your body what you shall put on: Is not, or ( for the) life (is) more than
meat, and the body than raiment? If then the Apostles and Disciples themselves
were thus specially prohibited to take any thought for their ordinary necessary
Raiment and wearing Apparel, much more then for any extraordinary, unnecessary
Surplisses, Rochets, Canonical or Pontifical Massing Vestments, wherein they
preach, pray or administer the Sacraments. Of which Popes, Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Cathedral-men have been heretofore, and some now
be so over-carefull, so immoderately zealous, as by Gratian De consecrat. did.
1. Bochellus Decret. Eccl. Gal. l. 1. Tit. 7. l 3. Tit. 1. -- l. 6. Tit. 17.
sundry successive Councils, Synods, Canons, Decretals, Injunctions, Rubricks,
Censures, indispensibly to impose, yea force them upon their Fellow-Ministers
and Christians, against their judgments, wills, consciences, or else to
deprive them of their Ministry, Gods public Ordinances, Sacraments, contrary
to this express Inhibition of Christ himself, whom the highly affront therein.

7ly. That God by St. Paul give; this Divine Precept or Admonition to Timothy,
and all other Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, Christians, 1 Timothy 6. 6, 7, 8.
Godlyness with contentment is great gain, for we brought nothing into this
world, and it (...) certain we can carry nothing out. And having food and
raiment (though ordinary, course, mean,) let us be therewith content. O that
all over-covetous, worldly, pompous Prelates and Clergymen, would seriously
ponder, believe, practice, and preach over this Text by their heavenly
world-contemning lives, instead of vexing, disquieting, discontenting
themselves, and all others, with Law-sutes, Citations, Injunctions, Censures
about their Lordly Manors, Palaces, Temporalties, Pontifical Ornaments, and
Priestly Vestments! This would make all to love, honor, reverence them with
and from their souls, who now repute them the worldlyest, the proudest, and
most avaritious of all men professing Christianity, even when they are
departing out of this world, and dropping into their very Graves, if not into a
deeper Pit, to the scandal of the Gospel, and their holy Function. Let me only
mind them of two conclusions from this Text. 1. That if all Bishops and
Ministers ought to be contented with bare necessary raiment, as well as food,
then they ought not to lade and cloth themselves with so many superfluous,
unnecessary Pontifical robes and Priestly vestments, as now they wear and put
on, even in Gods own presence, House, whiles they are discharging their Duties,
and performing Divine services unto him; much less to force or impose them
upon their Brethren and Fellow Ministers, who are and would be content with
their ordinary Garments, without these superfluities, and are highly
discontented, that they are enjoined to put them on against this Precept, the
forecited Texts, yea the very dictates of their own Judgments and Consciences.
2ly. That they must speedily leave all their worldly Temporalties, Episcopal
robes, Priestly vestments behind them, and shall neither carry them hence into
their Graves, much less to Heaven, or another world; why then should they
either trouble themselves with them, or their Fellow-Ministers and Christians
about them, who take no contentment in them, and desire to officiate and serve
God in their Ministry without them.

8ly. (Which is most observable,) That when Christ himself commissioned and
sent forth his Disciples to preach, teach, and discharge their Ministerial
function, he expressly enjoined them among other things, Mat 10. 13, 10. Mat. 6.
9. Lu. 9. 3.
not to provide, take, or put on two Coats, Neither to have two Coats a piece,
as being an impediment to their preaching and Ministry. In obedience to which
command, the most laborious preaching Gospel-spreading Saint Paul, whiles he
was travailing from Country to Country, and City to City, to preach the Gospel,
2 Timothy 4. 13.
left his Cloak at Troas with Carpus, as a cumbersom impediment to his
Ministry, which he sent for after he was Prisoner at Rome, when he could no
longer walk abroad to preach. With what color then of Piety, Decency,
Expediency or Necessity, can Popes, Patriarks, Metropolitans, Archbishops,
Bishops, when they go to say Mass, read Divine service, preach, baptize,
celebrate the Lords Supper, confer Orders, keep Visitations, consecrate
Churches, Chapels, Vessels, Vestments, Kings, put on, adorn and load themselves
with See Honorius August dunensis his Gemma Animae, l. 1. c. 89. 198, to ^35.
Gratian, cause. ^1. qu. 4. de Consecratione Distinct. 1. Gulie^mus Durantus,
Rationale divinorum, l 3. de Indumentis, Tho. Waldenfis, Tom. 3. Tit. 4. c. 29.
30 Pontificale, Ceremoniale Romanum, Missale Romanum, Rubricae Generales
Missalis. Bochellas Decret. Eccles. Gal. l 1. Tit. 7. 16. Tit. 17. Dr Rainolds
conference with Heart chapter 8. divis. 4. 5. Thomas Beacon his Catechism. f* 485,
486. and comparison of the Lords supper with the Popes Mass. f. 101. and 104.
Miters, Caps, Cassocks, Gowns, Rochets, Surplesses, Copes, Hoods, Stoles,
Planets, Palls, Dalmaticks, Pectoral Crosses, Girdles, Colobiums, Chymers,
Gloves, Sandals, Handkerchiefs, Scarffes, without which, by their own Canons,
Decretals, Missals, Pontificals, Pro^^ssionals, Ceremonials, they neither may
nor must officiate; and enjoin all Ministers, Priests, Deacons, under severest
censures and deprivations, to wear Cassocks on their ordinary Apparel, Girdles,
and Gowns upon them, Surplesses, or Copes upon their Gowns, and if Doctors
and Graduates, Hoods, Scarfes, and Tippets upon them (which hinder and make
them unapt to preach or discharge their Ministry) against these reiterated
Precepts of our Savior, recorded by three Evangelists for their own and all
other Ministers imitation? or how can they ever answer in the great day of
judgment, when they shall appear naked before the Tribunal of our Lord Jesus
Christ, their high contemptuous, willful violations of this his sacred
Injunction, their hating, reviling, persecuting, rejecting, depriving any of
his faithful, painful Ministers, Servants, as Praecisians, Puritans,
Non-conformists, Scismaticks, or Fanatics, only because they will not or dare
not in point of Conscience, against the precedent sacred Injunctions conform in
every punctilio to those superfluous Vestments, Disguises, which their
Fantastic frothy brains have invented, prescribed in Gods worship, against and
besides his Word, and Acts ^. 19, 20. c. 5. 29.
obey God rather than men.

9ly. That John the Baptist (our Saviors immediate forerunner) gave this
command to Priests and Clergymen, as well as the People, Luke 3. 11. He that
has two Coats let him impart to him that has none; which John the Evangelist,
Paul and James have seconded in substance, if not in words, 1 John 3. 17. Romans
12. 13. Jam. 2. 15, 16. How then can Bishops, Deans, Prebends, Ministers, heap
living upon living, and one Coat, Vestment upon another, when so many poor
Christians are naked and destitute of clothing, to whom their Honorius
Augustedunensis Gemma Animae l. 1. c. 237. Tho. Waldensis, Tom. 3. Tit 4. c.
30. Sect. 5, 6. Gul. Durantes, Rationale Divinorum lib. 3. My Signal Loyalty
and Devotion p. 219, 243.
Laws, Decretals resolve, they must not impart any of their consecrated Coats
or Vestments, though old and quite worn out, but burn them rather, because fit
for, and to be worn by none but sacred persons. Yea pull off the Coats of their
fellow Ministers, and strip them of their Livings, Ministry, because they will
not heap Coat upon Coat, and one Vestment upon another, when they are to pray,
preach, administer Sacraments, and the Coats of their own poor Stipendary
Curates too, who discharge their duties and take all the pains in their
Commendaes, Appropriations, Pluralities, Benefices on which they are for the
most part Non-resident, by allowing them such contemptible Salaries as will
scarce provide them Clothes, much less a competent substance for them and
their Families.

10ly. Romans 3. 11. 1 Pet. 1. 1^. c. 2. 3, 4. Act. 10. 34. Jam. 2. 1, (...). c.
1. 27.
That God being no respecter of persons, and taking no notice of Bishops,
Ministers, or Christians Vestments in his Worship, Service, but only of their
Hearts, Spirits, Graces, Sincerity, Diligence and Fidelity. Yea St. Peter
himself resolving, That in every Nation be that fears God and works
righteousness, is accepted of him: and St. James particularly reprehending
Christians, for having the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory in
respect of persons, and preferring those who come into their Assemblies with a
gold Ring, and goodly Apparel, (as Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Prebends, and
other Pompous Clergymen use to do) and conteming poor Curates, and
conscientious humble world-contemning Ministers, who come into the Church (to
preach, officiate, or celebrate the Sacrament) in ordinary or vile raiment; The
discriminating of Ministers from other Christians, and Popes, Patriarchs,
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans, Prebends from one another, and from
other Ministers, by their different habits, and Sacerdotal Vestments, as more
honorable, holy, dear, near, acceptable to God than other inferior Ministers
or Lay-christians, and reputing Sermons, Prayers, Sacraments, preached, made,
read, administered in Surplisses Rochets, Copes, and other Church Vestments,
more Canonical, holy, decent, acceptable both to God and Men, than those
preached, read, celebrated without them, and that those Priests ^eccat graviter
qui uutur in Missa vestibus non benedictis. Sylvester verbo Missa nu. ^. Summa
Angelica Missa sect. 35. Soto in 4. sent. did. 13. qu. 2. and 4. Astensis.
Tit. 14. ar. 4. qu. ult. Armilla. verbo Missa, nu. 6. Navar. cap. 25. nu. 24.
Thomas Zerulae Praxis Episcopalis, part 1. Tit. Vestimenta Sacara: Missale
Pontificale and Ceremoniale Romanum. Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 1. Tit.
7. and l. 6. Tit. 17.
grievously sin against God, who officiate without them, is certainly a most
gross, dangerous mistake, dishonorable to God, Religion, Christianity it
self, and diametrically contrary to these sacred Texts, and 2 Timothy 4. 2, 3, 4,
5.

11ly. That St. Peter himself with all the other Apostles, Elders, Brethren,
assembled in the first Synod and Council under the Gospel, Acts 15. resolved
upon solemn debate, Acts 15. 19. 20* 28, 29. c. 16. 1, 4.
not to trouble them which from among the Gentiles were turned to God, with
Circumcision, or any other Jewish Ceremnnies instituted by God himself, and to
lay upon them no greater burden then those Necessary things comprised in their
Letters which they sent and delivered by their Delegates to all the Churches of
the Gentiles, whereof Bishops or Priests Vestments were none; being never
reputed Necessary things by that Council, or by Christ or any of his Apostles,
as Popes, Prelates, and others now repute them. To prescribe, enforce them
therefore as Necessary things, and to revile, suspend, censure, silence such
Ministers, Scholars, Christians, who repute them Unnecessary or Superfluous,
is to affront, repeal this first Apostolical Council and Decree, and to advance
themselves above the Apostles.

12ly. That our Savior himself when he commissioned his Disciples and sent
them into all the World to teach all Nations, and preach the Gospel to every
Creature, gave them no instruction at all concerning Pontifical or Sacerdotal
Vestments, or any other Ceremonies now contested for, but only enjoined them
Mat 28. 19, 20. Mark. 16. 15, 16* compared with Eccl. 12. 13. Fear God and keep
his Commandments, for this is THE WHOLE DUTY OF MAN, especially in his Worship.
to teach and baptize all Nations, teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever he had commanded them, not their own fancies or decrees, as Popes,
Prelates, and too many Ministers do now. Yea, St. Paul where he particularly
treats of preaching the Gospel, of administering and receiving the Lords Supper,
and of Church Assemblies, 1 Cor. c. 9. and 11. and 1^. delivered and prescribed
to them, only that which he received from the Lord, without one syllable of
those Vestments, Rites, Ceremonies which now infest the Churches unity and
peace. Therefore they may and ought to be set aside, by Christ's and his
Apostles own precepts, practice, who neither enacted nor commanded them to be
used in any part of Divine Service or Worship.

13ly. That Christ himself sharply reprehends all such Mat. 15. 9. Col. 2. 20.
who teach for Doctrines, the Traditions and Ordinances of men: yea his
Apostles, Apostolical Elders and Brethren in their first Council, blamed those
Ceremonial Ministers who went out from them and taught the Brethren and
converted Gentiles, Acts 15. 1, 2, 24.
that they ought to be circumcised, and keep the Law; thereby troubling them
with their words, and subverting their souls, because they gave them no such
Commandment. Till therefore Popes, Archbishops, Bishops and Prelatists can
show or produce an express command from Christ or his Apostles, for the use of
Surplisses, Rochets, Palls, with other Pontifical, Sacerdotal Vestments, in
time of Divine Service, Preaching and Sacraments, they have good grounds and
reason to lay them quite aside, and no longer to contest for, much less impose
or enforce them upon any Ministers, Scholars, Christians, as they will avoid
Gods, Christ's, and their heavy displeasure, censure.

These Scriptures and reasons premised, I shall in the next place proceed to
show the true Original, prescription, use of Surplisses, Rochets, and other
Vestments in Divine Offices, Churches; then answer the Arguments, Reasons
produced for their use and continuance.

It is ingeniously acknowledged by Gemma Animae, l. 1. c. 118.
Al^ui^us de Divinis Officiis, c. 38, 39. Rationale Divin^rum, l. 3.
Honorius Augustodunensis, Gulielmus Durantus, Doctrinalis, Tom. 3. Tit. 4.
cap. 29, 30.
Thomas Waldensis, some Bochellus Decret. Eccles Gal. lib. 6. Tit. 17.
Popish Councils, and the very Roman Pontifical and Missal, That white
Surplisses, and other Pontifical, Sacerdotal Vestments under the Gospel, were
originally (...) from Aaron, and the Levitical Priests garments under the old
abolished ceremonial Law. But who first invented, or enjoined them to be worn
in time of Divine service, Mass or Administration of Sacraments, they do not
mention, but only the various mystical significations, groundless grounds, and
frantic reasons of their several institutions. I find in a spurious Deeretal
Epistle attributed to Surius Council. Tom. 1* p. 253 Gratian de Consecratione,
Did. 1, 2. Summa Angelica, Tit. Vestis, Sylvester. Tit. Benedictio 1
Pontificale and Missale Romanum. Centur. Magd. 3. col. 246.
Pope Stephen, Anno Christi, 261. this general Clause concerning Priests
Vestments, That the Garments wherein Priests and other Ministers of the Church
ought to celebrate Divine service, and minister unto the Lord, ought to be
consecrated, and decent, and applied to none other use, nor yet to be worn or
touched by any but sacred Persons. But what these Vestments were he
particularly defines not. If Surplisses, or white Rochets, as some conceit,
then they ought not to be touched by Scholars, Choristers, Singing-men, and
others who are no consecrated Priests, nor in sacred Orders, as they are now in
Cathedrals, and some Colleges in our Universities, against this Popes and
other his Successors Decrees. This Decree the Century Writers style, idle,
superfluous, altogether disagreeing with the word of God, and savouring of the
mystery of Iniquity; Flaccus Alcuinus, De Divinis Officiis. c. 38, 39, 40.
Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gal. l. 1. Tit. 7. l. 6. Tit. 17. Honorius
Augustodunensis in his Gemma Animae, l. 1. Gulielmus Durantus, Rationale
Divinorum, l. 3. Tho. Waldensis, Tom. 3. tit. 4. cap. 29, 30. Franciscus Zerula
Praxis Episcopalis, pars 1. Pontificale and Missale Romanum, with sundry
others, have large discourses concerning the several sacred Vestments of Popes,
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deacons, Priests; and particularly of Albees and
Surplisses. But who first introduced them into Christian Churches is a Question
not resolved by them.

The next Authority I meet withal is the Decree of Pope Eusebius about the
year 309. first recorded by De Consecratione did 1.
Gratian, and Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 311. Centur. Magd. 4. c. 6. col. 480,
1271.
others out of him. Consulto omnium statuimus, ut sacrificium Altaris non
inserico panno aut tincto quisquam celebrare praesumat, sed in puro lined vel
linted ab Episcopo consecrato, terreno scilicet lino procreato atque contexto,
sicut corpus Domini Jesu Christi in Sindone linea munda sepultum fuit. John 19.
40. Mar. 15. 46. Mat. 27. 59. Lu. 23. 53. But this Decree of his, as it is
forged, spurious, repugnant to the History of that Time, the phrase, tenent,
and practice of that Age, and superstitious, as the Century writers prove and
style it; so the reason produced by the Author of it, why Priests and Clergymen
should celebrate the Sacrament of the Altar, not in a silken or died, but in a
pure white linen Garment made of Flax, engendered out of the earth; because
Christ's body was buried in linen clothes, is very absurd.

Had Christ celebrated his last Supper, or preached, prayed in a linen
Surplisse whiles he lived, the inference had been tolerable; But since he
never did it, for ought appears; and the Evangelists precisely record, that at
his Mat. 17. ^, 2, 3. Mar. 9. 28, ^9.
miraculous transfiguration only, when he went apart up into a high Mountain
with three of his Disciples alone from all other company, his Raiment (formerly
of another color) because shining, exceeding white as Snow, so as no Fuller on
earth can white them; and that only till his transfiguration was past: the
Argument recoyles upon the Author of this Imposture with great disadvantage.
For 1. Christ never preached nor celebrated his last Supper in a white linen
Garment or Surplisse whiles he lived; Therefore no Priests, Bishops or
Ministers, (who are his 2 Cor. ^. 20. 1 Pet. 11. 23. 1 John. 2. 6. Ephesians. 5. 1.
Phil. ^ 5. 1 Pet. 2. 21.
Ambassadors, and should imitate his Example) ought to do it after his death.
2ly. Christ did not put on these linen Garments himself, or to officiate in
them; but Joseph of Aramathea and Nichodemus, wrapped his dead Corpse in them to
bury it; Therefore Bishops, Priests, Deacons should never put on white Rochets
or Surplesses on their backs to preach, pray, or celebrate the Lords supper
whiles they live, but only their dead Corpse be wrapped up in them when they are
interred. 3ly. These white linen Garments wherein Christ's body was wrapped
were only his Winding Sheet and Grave-cloaths, not a Surplesse, Albee, Stole or
Rochet: neither were they consecrated by a Pope or Bishop, not worn in a
Church, but only in a Sepulcher: yea our Savior left them lying in his
Sepulcher when he rose again, John 20. 5, 6, 7, 8. and never wore them
afterward: Ergo Bishops, Priests, Deacons, should only wear unconsecrated
Winding-sheets, and fine linen Garments in their Graves when dead; and there
leave them when they rise again; not consecrated Rochets, Surplesses, Albees,
Stoles in the Church when living; 5ly. Christ's body was not wrapped in these
linen clothes in any relation to his Priestly office of function; but only as a
mere dead Corpse to be interred, it being the usual manner of the Jews thus to
bury dead Corpse, as well Laymen as Priests: witness John 19. 29. (quoted by
this Impostor) Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen
clothes, with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury: compared with
John 11. 44. So the Alexander (...) Alexandro. Genesis Dierum, l. 3. c. 7.
Nasamones, Graecians, Spartians, A^gives, Syra^^sians, Sycionians, and other
Nations wrapped the dead bodies of their deceased Friends in white linen
clothes, with spices and balmes and so interred them. Therefore if this reason
be solid, all Men and Women as well Jews as Gentiles, Pagans as Christians
should wear white Rochets, Surplisses, Albees, Stoles in Churches, as well as
Popes, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and Deacons, because they are all alike
interred and wrapped in white linen Grave clothes, when buried in their Graves.

The Sea Centur. Magd. 2* 3. 4, 5, and 6. cap. 6. De Ritibus circa caenam
Domini: and Romanae. Ecclesiae, and circa Missam Dr. Rainolds Conference with
Heart ch 8. div. 4. 5.
first probable authority in any true Antiquity, for Bishops, Ministers, and
Deacons wearing white Vestments in the Celebration of the Lords Supper, is that
of Hierom, about 410. years after Christ, Advers. Pelagianos. l. 1. c. 9. Vnde
adjungis, genera vestium and ornamentorum Deo esse contraria. Quae sunt, rogo,
inimicitiae contra Deum si tunicam habuero mundiorem? si Episcopus, Presbyter
and Diaconus, and reliquus ordo Ecclesiasticus in Administratione Sacrificiorum
cum candida vest processerint? Cavete Clerici, cavete Monachi, viduae and
virgins, periclitamini nisi sordidas vos atque pannosas vulgus aspicerit.
Taceo de hominibus saeculi, quibus aperte bellum indicitur, and inimicitiae
contra Deum, si pretiosis atque nitentibus utuntur Exuviis And in his Tom. 5.
p. 876. D.
Commentariorum l. 13. in Ezech. c. 44. Vestibus lineis utuntur Aegyptii
Sacerdotes, non solum intrinsecus sed and extrinsecu^, (he means their Pagan
not Christian Priests) Porro He writes it of the Jewish Priests, not Christian
Ministers.
religio divina, alterum habitum habet in Ministerio, alterum in usu vitaque
communi. Which compared with his former passage, intimates, that some
Ecclesiastical Persons did then wear white Vestments, in the Religious public
exercise of their Ministry, and Administration of the Sacrament: which is
further evidenced by St. Chrysostom, ad Tom. 5. Col. 338. D. and Tim. 2.
Populum Antiochiae, Sermon. 60. Wherein he applying his Speech to the Ministers
who distributed the Lords Supper to the people, uses this expression, Hoc
vestra dignitas, hoc securitas, hoc omnis Corona, (to keep scandalous unworthy
persons from the Lords Table) non ut albam et splendidam tunicam circumeatis
induti. Which he repeats again in his 83. Homily upon Matthew: 26. Haec est
dignitas vestra, haec stabilitas, haec Corona praecipua, non ut tunicam induti
candissimam per Ecclesiam ambuletis. Whence the Cent. Magd. Tom. 5. c. 6. Col.
652.
Century Writers observe, Candidae vestis meminit tantum obitur Chrysostomus,
dum de Sacramenti corporis ac sanguinis Dominici administratione disserit. From
these passages of Hierom, and Chrysostom, Rationale Divinorum l 3.
Durantus Ecclesiastical Polity l. 5. sect.
Mr. Hooker and others justify the Antiquity, use of Surplisses, though they
do not positively define these white Garments to be Surplisses; nor can they
prove they were constantly and universally used by, much less prescribed to
all Ministers, Deacons, and Ecclesiastical persons in that age, or some
hundreds of years after, by any Ecumenical, National or Provincial Councils.
See Cent. Magd. 6. c. 6. Col. 337.
Gregory of Tours in the fourth Book of his Histories, c. 60. makes mention of
the Archdeacons putting on the Albe upon the Bishop when he officiated, which
some take to be a Surplisse, about 640 years after Christ, but for Bishops or
Priests constant use of them by any Canon or Law in that age, I yet remember
none. About 700 years after Christ, Pope Cent. Magd. 7. col. 153, 154*
Sylvester and other Popes brought in the use of Stoles, Surplisses, with other
Priests Massing Vestments by degrees, and soon after turned their Masses and
Divine Services, by their manifold disguised Vestments, Ceremonies,
Processions, Bowings, Crossings, ridiculous, antique, fanatic innovations,
gestures, into a mere Pagentry or Interlude, as is evident by Bibl. Patrum Tom
8. p. 397, 398, etc.
Ordo Romanus Antiquus de Divinis Catholicae Ecclesiae Officiis, said to be
compiled about 800. years after Christ: by Abbot Alcuinus, Tutor to Charles the
Great, De divinis Officiis, cap. 38, 39. published about the year 802. where he
at large describes the use, original, and reason of instituting the several
sorts of Pontifical and Priests Vestments, both under the Law and Gospel,
paralelling them and the grounds of their institution together. After whose
time I find Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gal. l 1. Tit. 7. l. 3. Tit 1. l. 6. Tit.
17.
several Canons made in diverse Provincial Councils in France, for the use of
Albees and Surplisses in the Celebration of Masses and Sacraments; the use of
them being continued, and successively prescribed in all Popish Churches since
that age to this very day, which not only make the putting on or Cent. Magd. 9,
10, 11, 12, 13* etc. cap. 6. Baronii Annals Spondanus, Missale, Pontificale,
and Ceremoniale Romanum.
wearing a Surplisse by every Priest in the Act of his Ordination, and of a
Rochet, with sundry other Episcopal Vestments and Ornaments upon Bishops, a
principal part, badge of their Consecration, as the Roman Pontifical and
Ceremonial prescribe in their Rubricks, but likewise in their Missals,
Pontifical and Ceremonial of Bishops, enjoin set forms of Prayers and Crossings
to be used by Bishops in the consecration of, and putting on of Rochets,
Albees, and other Trinkets when they are to officiate, or discharge their
Ministry in them; which I shall here insert, that all may discern their
superstition and vanity. I shall begin with their consecration of these
Garments.

At the end of Missale Romanum, Ex Decreto Sacri Concilii Tridentini
Reformatum, etc. Antuerpiae 1630. Benedictie^es Diversae, p. 101, 102.
Pontificale Romanum, par. 2. p. 357, 358.
Benedictio in Sacerdotalium indumentorum in genere.

V. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini. R. Qui fecit coelum and terram. V.
Dominus vobiscum. R. Et cum spiritu tuo.

Oremus.
OMnipotens and sempiterne Deus, qui per Moysen famulum tuum pontificalia and
sacerdotalia, seu levitica vestimenta, ad explendum in conspectu tuo
ministerium eorum, ad honorem and decorem nominis tui fieri decrevisti: adesto
propitius Innovationibus nostris had been better.
invocationibus nostris and haec indumenta sacerdotalia, desuper irrigante
gratia tua, ingenti benedictione per nostrae humilitatis servitium Here they
make 3 Crosses.
purifi care, and benedicere, and consecrare digneris: ut divinis cultibus and
sacris mysteriis apta and benedicta existant: his quoque sacris vestibus
Pontifices, and Sacerdotes, seu Levitae tui induti, ab omnibus impulsionibus
seu tentationibus malignorum spirituum muniti and defensi esse mereantur:
tuisque mysteriis apt and condign servire and inhae^ere, atque in his tibi
placite. and devote perseverare tribue. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. R. Amen.

Oremus.
DEus, invictae virtutis triumphator, and omnium rerum creator ac sanctificator
intend propitius preces nostras; and hac indumenta Leviticae, sacerdotalis and
pontificalis gloriae, ministris tuis f^uenda, tuo ore proprio benedicere,
sanctificare, and consecrare digneris; omnesque eis utentes tuis mysteriis
aptos, and tibi devote ac laudabiliter servientes, gratos efficere digneris.
Per Dominum nostrum*

Oremus.
DOmine Deus omnipotens, qui vestimenta Pontificibus, Sacerdotibus: and
Levitis, in usum tabernaculi foederis necessaria, Not Aaron Priests, Popes or
Bishops.
Moysen famulum tuum agere jussisti, eumque spiritu sapientiae ad id peragendum
replevisti: haec vestimenta in usum and cultum mysterii tui benedicere,
sanctificare, and consecrare digneris; atque ministros altaris tui, quia ea
induerint, septiformis Spiritus gratia dignanter repleri, atque castitatis
stola, beata facias cum bonorum fructu operum ministerii congruentis
immortalitate vestiri. Per Christum Dominum. R. Amen.

Deinde aspergit ipsa indumenta aqua benedicta.

Specialis Benedictio cuj^s^^et Indumenti.

V. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.

R. Qui fecit coelum and terram.

V. Dominus vobiscum.

R. Et cum spiritu tuo.

Oremus.
DOmine Omnipotens bonarum virtutum dator, and omnium benedictionum largus
infusor, Supplices te rogamus ut manibus nostris opem tuae benedictionis
infundas, and has Caligas and Sandalia, vel Amictum, vel Albam, vel Cingulum,
vel Stolam, vel Manipulum, vel Tunicellam, vel Dalmaticam, vel Planetam divino
cultui Praeparata, vel praeparatum, vel praepartam) virtute sancti spiritus
benedicere, sanctificare, and conseciare digneris, and omnibus eis (vel eo, vel
ea) utentibus gratiam sanctificationis sacri mysterii tui benignus concede, ut
in conspectu tui sancti, immaculati atque irreprahensibiles appareant, and
auxilium misericordiae tuae acquirant. Per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum
filium tuum, qui tecum vivit and regnat in unitate spiritus sancti Deus, per
omnia saecula saeculorum. Amen.

Deinde aspergit ea aqua benedicta.

Before and after which follow several Chapters and forms, De Benedictione
Mapparum, seu Linteaminum sacri Altaris, De Benedictione Corporalium, De
Benedictione novae Crucis, De Benedictione Crucis Pectoralis, De Benedictione
Imaginum aliorum Sanctorum, De Benedictione vasorum and aliorum vasorum in
genere. De Benedictione Tabernaculi sive vasculi pro Ss. Eucharistia
Conservanda, De Benedictione Capsarum pro Reliquiis and alliis Sanctuariis
includendis, De Benedictione and impositione primae lapidis pro Ecclesia
aedificanda, De Ecclesiae Benedictione seu Consecratione, De Altaris
consecratione, De Benedictione Tobaleorum, Vasorum and Ornamentorum Ecclesiae
Altaris consecratorum, De Altaris consecratione quae fit sine Ecclesiae
dedicatione, De Altaris consecratione, cujus Sepulchrum Reliquiarum est in
medio summitatis stipitis, De Altaris portabilis consecratione, De Benedictione
Cimaeterii, De Reconciliatione Ecclesiae and Cimaeteris, De Reconciliatione
Caemiterii, sinae Ecclesiae Reconciliatione, De Consecratione Patenae and
Calicis, De Benedictione Signi v^l Campanae: ( One Consecration and
Superstition still engendring another almost in infinitum according to Popes
and Prelates fanatic devises.) All which train and beadroll of consecrated
particulars must dance attendance on Massing Priests and Prelates, to make
their Popish Mass, and divine service completely meritorious, that I say not
impious, theatrical, ridiculous, and their Bishops. Priests, little different
from, if not far worse and more antique than common Stage Players; as those who
seriously peruse their Roman Pontificals, Ceremonials, Missals, and Durantus
his Rationale Divinorum cannot but conclude: And therefore should resolve with
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 11. When I became a man, I put away ( these) childish
things, which old childish Prelates, and bis pueri senes, over much admire and
contend for, as if all Religion and Devotion consisted in such Fopperyes.

When all these Massing Utensils are thus consecrated, and these Episcopal and
Sacerdotal Garments hallowed by Bishops; yet neither Priests nor Bishops must
presume to put any of them on to say Mass, or administer Sacraments, without
the use of special Prayers prescribed by, and thus registered in the Praeparatio
ad Missam, prefixed to all the Roman Missals, set forth and revised by Pope
Pius the fifth, and Clement the eighth.

Orationes dicendae ab Episcopo, quando in Pontificalibus celebrat.
Ad Caligas. CAlcea Domine, pedes meos in praeparationem Evangelii pacis, and
protege me in velamento alarm tuarum.

Cum exuiter See Spelmanni Glossarium, Tit. Cappa.
Cappa. EXue me, Domine, veterem hominem cum moribus and actibus suis: and
indue me novum hominem, qui secundum Deum creatus est in justitia, and
sanctitate veritatis.

Cum lavat manus. DA Domine virtutem manibus meis ad abstergendam omnem maculam
immundam: ut sine pollutione mentis and corporis valeam tibi servire.

Ad Amictum. Or Impone Domine, Capiti meo Galeam Saluti^.
POne Domine galeam salutis in capite meo, ad expugnandas omnes diabolicas
frauds: inimicorum omnium versutias superando.

Ad Albam* DEalba me, Domine, and a delicto meo munda me: ut cum his qui stolas
suas dealbaverunt in Sanguine Agni, gaudiis perfruar sempiternis.

Ad Cingulum. PRaecinge me, Domine, cingulo fidei, and virtute castitatis
lumbos meos, and Priests marriage would do this better than a Girdle, 1 Cor. 7.
1, 2. 3, 4, 5, 9.
extingue in eis humorem libidinis, ut jugiter maneat in me vigor totius
castitatis.

Cum accipit Crucem pectoralem. MVnire digneris me, Domine Jesu Christ, ob
omnibus insidiis inimicorum omnium, signo sanctissimae Crucis tuae: ac
concedere digneris mihi indigno ser^o tuo, ut sicut hanc Crucem Sanctorum
tourum reliquiis refertam ante pectu^ meum teneo, sic semper mente retineam and
memoriam passionis, and sanctorum victorias Martyrum.

Ad Stolam. Read mihi, domine, obsero, stolam immortalitatis, quam perdidi in
praevaricatione primi parentis: and quamvis indignus accedere praesumo ad tuum
sacrum mysterium cum hoc ornamento, praesta ut in eodem in perpetuum merear
^aetari.

Ad Tunicellam. TVnica jucunditatis, and indumento laetitiae induat me Dominus.

Ad Dalmaticam. INdue me Domine indumento salutis, and vestimento laetitiae,
and Dalmatica justitiae circunda me semper.

Ad Chirothecas. C^cunda Domine manus meas munditia novi hominis, qui de caelo
descendit: ut quemadmodum Jacob dilectus tuus, pelliculis hoedorum opertis
manibus paternam benedictionem, oblato Patri cibo potuque gratissimo,
impetravit; sic and oblata per manus nostras salutari hostia, gratiae tuae
benedictionem merear. Per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum filium tuum, qui in
similitudinem carnis peccati pro no^is obtulit s^metipsum.

Ad Planetam. DOmine, qui dixisti, Jugum meum suave est, and onus meum leve:
praesta ut illud portare valeam, quod possim consequi tuam gratiam.

Ad Mitram. MItram, Domine and salutis galeam impone capiti meo: ut contra
antiqui hostis, omniumque inimicorum meorum insidias inoffensus ^vadam.

Ad Annulum cordis. COrdis and corporis mei, Domine, digitos virtute decora,
and septiformis Spiritus sanctificatione circumda.

Ad Manipulum. MErear, precor Domine, manipulum portare mente flebili, ut cum
exultatione portionem accipiam cum justis.


Orationes dicendae cum Sacerdos induitur Sacerdotalibus paramentis.
CVm lavat manus; Ad Amictum dum ponitur super caput; Ad Albam, cum ea
induitur; Ad Cingulum, cum se cingit; Ad Manipulam, dum imponitur brachio
sinistro; Ad stolam dum imponitur collo; Ad Capsulam cum assumitur. Are the
same with those forecited, which the Bishop uses when he puts them on.

If these respective Vestments and Prayers be necessary or convenient for
Priests and Bishops, then certainly for all other Christians too.

The P. 12, 13, 30, 32, 38, 39.
Roman Pontifical, in the Title De Clerico faciendo, prescribes, that when any
Clerk or Clergyman is to be made, quilibet ordinandorum habere debet suum
Superpellicium super brachium sinistrum, and candelam in manu dextra: and after
their shaving by the Bishop in four places in their heads, and some Prayers,
Crosses and Benedictions, (there at large recited) the Bishops sitting with his
Miter, and taking in his hand the Surplisse, says unto them all. Induat novum
hominem, qui secundum Deum creatus est, injustitia and sanctitate veritatis,
and mox imponit illud (Superpelliceum) cuilibet repetendo, Induat te, etc.
immitens usque ad scapulas, and immediate trahens, si unum tantum sit
Superpelliceum, sicque facit usque ad ultimum, qui eo totaliter induitur. After
which, in the Title De Minoribus Ordinibus, follows this Rubric: Ordinandi
omnes ad quatuor minores Ordines, esse debent Superpelliceis induti, cum
candela in manu dextra. And in the Rubric, De Consecratione Diaconi and
Sacerdotis, it writes, Eis igitur amictu, Alba, cingulo, et manipulo paratis,
ac stolam in sinistra manu, et candelam in dextra, ac dalmaticam super brachium
sinistrum tenentibus, etc. the Archdeacon presents them to the Bishop to be
ordained. Post haec Pontifex accipiens Stolam, etc. et Dalmaticam, induit ea
quemlibet successive usque ad humeros, et sic usque ad ultimum, and hoc, si una
tantum sit Dalmatica: Si vero quilibet suam habet, tunc singulos sua totaliter
induit, dicens cuilibet; Accipe stolam candidam de manu Dei, etc. Induat te
Dominus indumento salutis, et vestimento laetitiae, et Dalmatica justitiae
circumdet te semper, in nomine Domini. R. Amen. Their Ibid. p 49. 58.
Ordination being ended, in loco convenienti sacras vestes deponunt. So in the
Consecration of a Bishop elect, among other things, Vestments for his
Consecration, there are prepared, Pontificale Romanum, p. 57, to 81.
Item Paramenta omnia Pontificalia, coloris tempori and Officio Missae
convenientis, videlicet, sandalia, amictus, alba, cingulum, crux pectoralis,
stola, tunicella, dalmatica, chiroticae, planeta, mitra auriphrygiata, annulus
pontificalis, baculus pastoralis and manipulus, etc. Adsunt duo ad minus
Episcopi assistentes, qui induuntur Rocheto, and si sint regulares,
superpelliceo, amictu, stola, pluviali, coloris tempori and Officio Mis^ae
convenientis, and mitra simplici alba, and quisque habeat suum Pontificale.
After many Prayers, Crossings, and other ridiculous Ceremonies, Episcopi
assistentes ducunt Electum ad Capellam suam, and ibi deposito pluviali,
Acolythi induant illum sandalia, ipsos Psalmos and orationes consuetas legente.
Deinde tunicella, dalmatica, casula, and manipulo induitur, quibus indu^us
incedit ad suum altar, etc. After which his Miter, Ring, Pastoral staff are
consecrated, put on, and delivered to him by the Bishop, with many Prayers,
Solemnities, Crossings, Bowings, Kneelings, Prostrations, changes of habits,
places and antique Gestures, fitter for a Stage than a Church. When an
Archbishop is consecrated, he has a Pall put on, and superadded to all these
forecited Vestments, which must be used only upon certain special feasts and
occasions, put on with the like superstitious Ceremonies and Formalities,
recorded in the Roman Pontifical: the serious perusal whereof, and of Durantus
his Rationale Divinorum, l. 3, 4. is sufficient to make all grave, judicious,
sober Christians, to na^seate such theatrical disguises and Vestments, on which
grave old Bishops overmuch dote, as little Children use to do on their Babies,
Toys and Rattles.

The first foreign Synod wherein I find the use of white Garments and Surplisses
prescribed to Priests, Canons, Chaplains, is that held under Bochellus Decret.
Eccles. Gal. l. 6. Tit. 7. c. 24, 25* p 1020. 1221.
Galo and Simon the Popes Legates in France, Anno Dom. 1215. which among other
Decrees proving the luxury, pride and excesses of Priests Garments; expressly
prohibited them to wear Garments of any other color but white; or black, or
red, and commanded, ut sine So Surplices are frequently styled Therefore
Punishments, rather than Ornaments.
Suppliciis (Superpelliceis) vel tunicis lineis, vel capis clausis extra domos
suas de caetero non incedant; that from thence forth they should not walk
abroad out of their Houses without Surplisses, or linen Coats, or close Hoods:
But this Decree relates rather to their ordinary wearing Habits, than to their
sacred Vestments, and enjoynes them to wear Surplisses and white Garments as
well in their Houses as in the Church; wherefore it adds, Bochellus Decret.
Eccl. Gal. l. 3. Tit. 1. De Eucharistia. c. 32. 15. 62. See c. 43, 44. 45.
Nullus permittatur deservire altari nisi in Superpellicio vel capa clausa.
After which it subjoyns, Sacerdos fine Diaconus corporalia saepe abluat,
indutus Superpellicio, in vase mundo specialiter ad hoc deputato; omnes vero
ablutiones, si fieri potest, in piscina reponantur, vel saltem primae, caeterae
autem in baptisterio. Here Priests, and Deacons are made Lawndresses to wash
their Corporals, arrayed in their Surplisses when they wash them, and the water
wherein they wash them must be reserved in a consecrated Cisterne, or in the
Font as holy, and one superstition, foppery begetting another, till endless,
it proceeds further; Item linteamenta Altaris and indumenta Sacerdotalia non
nisi a Sacerdote vel Diacono, vel aliqua bona matrona vel virgin, sine
appositione aliorum pannorum, convenienter, quando opus fuerit abluantur, ita
ut munda and nitida conserventer; quia nimis absurdum, sordes esse in vestibus
sacris, quae dedecerent etiam in profanis. Bochel. ibid. c. 114, 115, 116, 117,
118.
The like concerning their washing, was decreed in the Synod Ecclesiae
Trecensis in France, Anno 1427. and by other French Synods.

The next Synod (prescribing the use of Surplisses under pain of
Excommunication) in the time of divine service, is the Popish Synod of
Poictiers in France under Americus, Anno 1367. which thus decreed, Bochel.
Dec^. Eccl. Gal. l. 6. (...). 17. c. 31. p 1322.
Praecipimus sub paena excommunicationis, quod cum Clerici, seu Capellani in
Ecclesiis parochialibus adstant administrantes cum divina celebrantur, honest
Superpelliciis sint induti.

The Bochellus Decret Eccles. Gal. l. 3. Tit. 1. c. 5. p. 304.
Synodalia Ecclesiae Trecensis in France, An. 1427. thus decree the wearing of
Surplisses by Priests, Attendat etiam Sacerdos vel Clericus ministrans in
Missa, ut se habeat honest, and si fieri potest, capam habeat s^u
Superpelliceum quo sit indutus, marime in solennitatibus. They subjoyn, if the
Priests nose in saying Mass chance to bleed, and any of the blood fall upon
his Surplisse, after the blood stopped, he is to proceed in his Mass, having
first washed his hands in silence, mutatis tamen prius vestimentis
Sacerdotalibus, and pannis altaris, si sint sanguine maculati.

Bochellus Decret Eccles. Gal. l. 1. Tit 6 c. 54. p. 60.
John Damboise Bishop of Lingon, in a Synod held in France, Anno 1491. made
this Decree, That all having Benefices with Cures should wear Surplisses at
Mass, Vespers, and in the Celebration of all Divine Offices. Praecipimus
omnibus and singulis Presbyteris beneficia Curata habentibus aut regentibus ut
dum ipsos pro Missa, Visperis, aut aliis officiis Divinis in eorum Ecclesiis
Celebrandis aut dicendis interesse contigerit, sint decenter et honest
Superliciis induti, et sine ipsis ad Divina Officia public accedere non
praesumant.

Bochellus Decret Eccles. Gal. l. 3. Tit. 1. c. 78. p. 371. c. 114. p 378.
Synodus Synonensis in France, An. 1524. enjoins the Priest to wear a Surplisse
when he carries the Sacrament to sick persons. Quotiens contigeri^ Sacerdotem
defer sanctam Eucharistiam ad infirmos, habeat Sacerdos Superliceum et
Stolam, and incedat tam ^undo quam redeundo usque ad Ecclesiam in habitu
decenti, faciatque ante se deferri lumen, and campanulam pulsantem praeire.

Ibid. c. 79. p. 311. c. 91. p. 374.
Synodus Carnotensis in France, An. 1526. ordained the like in these words,
Ordinamus, quod ubi ad infirmos deferendum erit corpus Christi. Sacerdos
delaturus primum lavet manus, deinde induat Superliceum, et stolam superpo^at,
incedensque cum honestate, reverentia and honor, orationes and preces ad Deum
fundat, faciat lumen ante se deferri tam eundo quam redeundo, and campanulam
pulsari.

The Synod of Paris, Anno 1557. decreed Su^plisses to be worn at Mattins,
Masses, public Prayers, Litanies, Confessions, and at Celebration of the
Eucharist, Marriage, and extreme Unction. Bochellus l. 6. Tit. 17. de vestibus
and Dornatu Clericorum, c. 20. p. 1020.
Parochi little Vicarii and caeteri Sacirdotes, in divinis obsequtis M^ss^rum
Matutinarum and V^sp^rarum, in supplicationil us publicis, Lit^aniis and
confess^n^bus Supplicus u^antur, in Euchari^^^ae vero Matrimonii, and Extremi
Vnctionis administratione, slolam addant Suppel ^^iis. After this Bochellus l.
3. Tit. 17. c. 14. p. 1018, 1019.
Synodus Aquensis in France, Anno 1585. made this Decree concerning Clergy-mens
wearing of Surplisses and other Vestments, Clericalis ordinis homines, cum
Ecclesia versantur quo tempore Superpelliceum induere non debent, ne sint sine
toga exteriori, praesertim horis quibus divina celebrantur, aut populus ad
Ecclesiam accedere solet: Nec vero abs^ue ea etiam in Diaecesanis locis, vicis
aut pagis prodeant, nisi cum eos pedibus iter facientes viae difficultas and
longitudo aliter cogit, Superpellicits, cum Ecclesiae usus id postulat, omnes
utantur, quae non lacera sint, non sordida, et quae etiam manicas habeant.
Superpellicea autem illa quae manicis carent, and quae non Superpelliceorum sed
Mantilium nomine potius digna sunt, omnino prohibemus. Canonicivero
Catbedralium and Collegiatarvm, quo tempore Cappa induuntur, ii Rocheto
induantur sub Cappa. Cleric^ autent cum Superpelliceis fuerint induti, nullo
modo in manibus flores, nec aliud quod statui suo and Ecclesiae non conveniat,
habeant; non vagentur per Ecclesiam, nec deambulent, nec circumoursitent, sed
graves semper sint in incessu and sta^^. Singuli autem praeterea praesertim qui
in aliquo minorum saltem ordinum sunt, proprium Superpelliceum habeant, quo
^tiam in Ecclesia, cui ascripti sunt et alibi, cum ipsi suis fungi muneribus
contigerit uti possint. Si quis personatus, vestes Clericales aut Monachales,
vel ad eorum formam induerit, and is qui eas assumpserit, and is qui
accomodarit, graves poenas subeant. Qui vero Clericus, cujusvis etiam gradus
ordinis, dignitatis in aliquo de praemissis non obtemperaverit, is praeter
poenas jam inflictas, aut salutari poenitentia, aut pecunia, aut suspensione ab
ordinum munere, et beneficiorum administratione, aut ipsis etiam beneficiis,
aut carcere, aut exilio, aut pluribus simul ex iis paenis, aut gravioribus pro
modo culpae, Episcopi arbiratu mulctetur. Qui iterum in eadem re peccaverit,
duplicata paena pro ratione criminis, ab codem plectur.

This Synond likewise decreed, that the Parish Priest who is to carry the
Eucharist to sick Persons, do wear a Surplisse, and proceed in this manner,
Bochellus, l. 5. Tit. 1. c. 79. p* 373.
Vbi manus laverit, tum Superpelliceo, Stola, pluviali ubi potest indutus, ad
altar genibus flexis oret. Sacerdotes vero caeteri Clericive qui comitantur
Superpellicem adhibeant. Si Canonicorum capitulum sit, cappam vel almutiam,
aliudve indumentum, ut illis in choro moris est. Reliqui fideles bini
prosequantur capite aperto, and quamplurimi candelis accensis, ac primo loco
viri, in quibus scholares sanctissimi Sacramenti praecedant, postremo foeminae:
Omnes, praesertim Ecclesiastici homines, hymno, and Psalmos paenitentiales,
aliosve intima animae pietate, sim^l cum Parocho, sed alternatim pronunciant,
atque alii etiam religiosi orent. It likewise adds, Bochellus Decreta Eccles.
Gal. l. 1. Tit. 7. De celebratione Missae c 5 p. 60.
In celebratione Missae Sacerdos ne se confer at ad altar, nisi Clericum in
decenti habitu, and cum Superpelliceo mundo cum manicis, sibi inservientem
habuerit; injoyning the Parish Clerk to wear a Surplisse as well as the Priest.

This last French Popish Synod prescribes the constant use of Surplisses to all
Canons, Prebends, Parish Priests and Curates under several Ecclesiastical and
Temporal punishments, with greatest rigor and severity; when as Ordo Romanus
Antiquus de Divinis Officiis, and Missa, the Roman Pontificals, Ceremonials,
Missals, in their Rubricks of saying or singing Mass, prefixed to them, do
only enjoy their use without any penalties Ecclesiastical or Civil expressed in
them, to be inflicted on NonConformists thereunto.

For the use of Surplisses in our British Churches, during the Britons or
Saxons times, I remember nothing in Canons or Histories; only our Alchuinus,
Tutor to Charles the Great, An. 800. De Divinis Officiis, c. 38, 39 writing of
the several Vestments wherewith Priests were clad in the Old Testament, Opera
Luttiae. 1617. col. 1085, etc.
observes, Habent etiam nunc Ministri Ecclesiae Christi superhumerale quod
amicium vocamus, quando ad altar ministrant; quod fit ex lino purissimo. Per
linum quod ex terra sumitur, and per multos labores ad candorem ducitur,
designatur corpus humanum, quod ex terra constat. Sicut ergo linum per multos
labores ad candorem reducitur, ita corpus humanum multis calamitatibus
attritum, candidum and purum esse debet ab omni sorde peccatorum. Postea
sequitur Pederis, quae vulgo Alba dicitur; significat autem perseverantiam in
bona action. After which he mentions the Stola, Dalmatica, Ca^ula, used by
Priests; and Pallium Archiepiscoporum, to distinguish the Archbishop from his
Suff^agans, subjoyning, Stepha^u^s natione Romanus ex Patre Labio (ut legitur
in gestis Pontificalibus) ^^nstituit Sacerdotibus Levitisque Vestes sacras in
usu quotidiano non uti nisi in Ecclesia. Whether any of these Garments were
then used in England, or the same with Surplisses for fashion, as color, I
cannot define. The first mention I observe in our Historians of Surplisses and
their wearing by that Name, is in the year of our Lord, 1237. the 21. of Henry
the 3d. where Hist. Angl. Tiguri. 1589. p. 431. 432. Londini, 1140.
Mat Paris records, That Otto the Popes Legate summoning all the Popish
Bishops, Abbots and Clergy to a Council in Paul's Church, London, to which he
went in great Pomp, entering the Church he put on his Pontifical Garments, and
among the rest a Surplisse, which he thus expresses: Pontificalibus se induit,
scilicet Superpelliceo, et desuper cappa Chorali pellibus variis furrata, et
mitra; et precedentibus Archiepiscopis Cantuariensi et Eboracensi cum cum
processione solemni, cum cruce and caeriis acconsis et cum Letania. The second
day the Council being begun, missi sunt ex part Domini Regis, Comes
Lincolniensis Johannes, et Johannes filius Galfridi, et Gulielmus de Raele,
Canonicus sancti Pauli, ut dicto Legato ex part Regis et Regni inhiberent, ne
ibi contra Regium Coronam et Dignitatem aliquid statuere attemptaret, et
remansit ibi, ut hoc observaretur, Gulielmus de Raele Capa canonica et
Superpelliceo, aliis reedentibus. By which it seems the Canons sat in this
Council in their See Spalm^n and Gul. Somneri Glosserium Tit. Capa, Cappa.
Simeon Dunelmensis Hist Col. 61.
Canonical Caps, or Coules and Surplisses, as well as the Popes Legate himself.
Anno* 1247. ( the 31. of King Henry the 3d. his Reign) Praecepit Dominus R^x ut
omnes Presbyteri Londinienses festive vestiti Superpelliciis et Capis, ^um suis
Cl^ricis decenter vest^tis, cum vexillis, crucious et caereis accensis, die
erastina, Mat. Paris, Hist. Angl. p. 713.
viz. S. Edvardi summo mane ordinate et reverenter convenirent apud S. Paulum,
to a accompany the King, Bishops, and Nobles, thence to the Church of
Westminster in solemn procession to bring the viol of Christ's blood, sent to
the King from Jerusalem ( who carried the viol himself from Paul's to
Westminster, under a Canopy) which they accordingly performed; the Mass
Priests of that Age using Surprisses in their Processions here in England.
About the year, 1290. John Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury, appropriating the
Church of Preston to the Monks of Canterbury, and endowing a perpetual Vicar in
it, granted in the Instrument, that the Monk^, Chronica W. Th^rne. Col. 2120.
Onera reparationis et rejectionis Cancelli praedictae Ecclesiae de Preston
intus and exterius, necnon et inventionis librorum, Vestimentorum
Superpelliceorum, and ornamentorum dictae Ecclesiae, quae per Ecclesiarum
Rectores inveniri and reparari debent aut solent, subeant. Which intimates that
Priests and Vicars did then use to wear, and find their own Surplisses, and
that by the same Archbishops Provincial Constitutions, who decreed,
Provincialis G^lielmi Lindw^de, l. 3. De Euch^^^stia, fol. 180.
Dignissimus ut Sacramentum Eucharistiae circumferatur cum debita reverentia ad
Egrotos, Sacerdoti s^ltem induto Superpelliceo gerente orarium cum lumine
praevio in lucerna, cum campana, ut populus ad revetentiam debitam excitetur
qui ad prosternendum se, vel adorandum saltem humiliter, informatur Sacerdotali
prudentia, ubicunque Regem gloriae sub panis latibulo evenerit deportari, The
original ground of kneeling at, as well as to the Sacrament. This is the 1.
Constitution in our English Church I have yet observed, prescribing Priests to
wear Surplisses when they delivered the Eucharist, or carried it to sick
Persons, on which Lindwode has this Gloss, ^t sic tolerare potest licet
Minister Sacerdotis non sit indutus, Superpelliced, licet honestus sit quod
ipsius Minister Superpelliced induatur considerata qualitate Beneficii et
facultatibus ejusdem. Which intimates that Parish Clerks should wear Surplisses
as well as Priests.

Robert Winchelsie, Provincialis Gul. Lindwode l. 3. De Ecclesiis edificandis,
f. 182 Joannis de Aton Constitutiones Provinciales f. 146 b.
his next successor in the Sea of Canterbury, as Lindwode, or Simon Islip, as
John de Aton records, about the year 1300. decreed, what Popish Trinkets,
Books, Ornaments, Vestments should be provided in every Parish Church by the
Parishioners, amongst which he enumerates, Dalmatica tunica and cum Capa de
Choro, tria Superpell^cea, unum Rochetum: On which Lindwode has this Gloss,
Tria Superpellicea ad usum scilicet trium Ministrorum Ecclesiae, vizt.
Sacerdotis, Diaconi and sub Diaconi. Rochetum, quod differt a Superpelliceo,
quia Superpellicium habet manicas pendulas, sed Rochetum est sine manicis, and
ordinatur pro Clerico Ministraturo Sacerdoti, vel forsan ad opus ipsius
Sacerdotis in Baptizando pueros, ne per manicas ipsius brachia impediantur. His
next Successor Walter Raynods, decreed, Provincialis Gul. Lyndwode, l. 1. De
Officiis Archidiaconi. fol. 38.
That Archdeacons amongst other things, should take care that there should be
in every Parish Church, ad minus duplicia Sacerdotalia Vestimenta ( the one for
Lords days, the other for holidays, as Lindwode Glosseth it) and ut honor
debitus divinis Officiis in omnibus impendatur, praecipimus etiam, ut qui
altari ministrat Suppelliceo induatur. On which Lindwode has this Gloss,
vizt. Presbytero celebranti assistens, et idem in Missae tempore ministrans:
vel potest intelligi de Sacer dote quovis tempore accedente ad altar ut
aliquid faciat vel disponat circa corpus Christi, ut videlicet, illo tempore
sit indutus Suppelliceo, et juxta communem intellectum die supplicio, i. e.
vest linea ad talem usum praeparata, de qua tamen vest non memini me legisse
in toto corpore Iuris Canonici vel civilis nec etiam in sacra Scriptura: sit
tamen de eo mentio 1. de Eccles. edif. c. ut Parochiani, et potest significare
per tunicam Lineam qua induebantur filii Aaron, in veteri l^ge, de qua legatur,
Exodus 28. ac finem, sed estimo quod proprie Suppllicium est indumentum de
pellibus confectum, sed in nostro communi usu, intelligatur ut prius dixi.

The use of these Rochets, Surplisses, and other Massing Vestments introduced
by Popish Councils and Decrees to celebrate the Mass, and Mass Priests,
Prelates officiating in them at their consecrated Altars, (who likewise clad and
wrapped up their consecrated Host or Breaden God in a pure white linen
Corporal, by the prescription of the self-same Constitutions, Canons, Missals,
Pontificals, Ceremonials, Rituals, which enjoin Rochets, and Surplisses)
continued in our Church till the abolishing of all Romish Masses. Pontificals,
Missals, by K. See 1 E. 6. c. 1. 2, and 3 E. 6. c. 1. 3, and 4 E 6. c. 10. 5,
and 6 E 6. c. 1. Fox Acts and Monuments, vol 2. p. 658, to 670.
^d. the 6. and his Parliaments, by certain steps and decrees in the 1, 2, 3,
4* 5 and 6* years of his Reign, not without some opposition, and an open
Rebellion in Devonshire, Cornwall, and other places, by Popish Priests and
their Confederates. In the first Edition of the Book of Common Prayer, E. 6. c.
1. not only all See Dr. Corn. Burges his reasons showing the necessity of
Reformation p. 33, 34.
Bowing to, and toward the Altar, and Hostia, praying toward the East,
standing up at Gloria Patri, the Gospels, Creeds, bowing at the Name of JESUS,
reading second service at the High Altar when there was no Sacrament there
administered, with other Ceremonies prescribed by former Massebooks, Breviaries,
Pontificals were abolished and left out of the Bubricks, as superstitious,
useless, offensives but likewise the wearing of Palls, Planets, Chimer^^, Lawn
Sleeves, Sandalls, Copes, Hoods, and other Vestments, (except only a Rochet, to
be worn by Archbishops, Bishops, and Surplisses only by Priests and Deacons)
were totally laid aside as Popish superfluities, or unnecessary Disguises; and
it was generally expected by diverse zealous Protestants, that Rochets,
Surplisses, and square Caps, would have been then likewise taken away upon the
same accout, being all appurtenances to the M^sse* Mass Priests, and only
prescribed by Popes and Popish Missals, Pontificals, Canons, Decretals. But the
King and Counsel not holding it necessary or convenient to reform all things
together at first, but by degrees; retained and enjoined the use of the
Surplisse and Rochet, by this Rubric prefixed to the Order for Morning Prayer.
And here is to be noted, that the Minister at the time of the Communion, and at
all other times in his Ministration SHALL USE NEITHER AL BE, VESTMENT, NOR
COPE; but being Archbishop or Bishop, HE SHALL HAVE AND WEAR A ROCHET; and
being a Priest or Deacon, HE SHALL HAVE AND WEAR A SURPLISSE. Fox Acts and
Monuments, vol. 3. p. 146, 147. Dr Heylins History of the Reformation of the
Church of England, p 90* to 98.
Mr. John Hooper (a learned Divine in great reputation with the People, Lord
Protector, and others for his excellent constant daily preaching and piety)
being soon after elected Bishop of Gloucester, scrupling to wear a square Cap,
Rochet, Surplisse, and refusing to be consecrated in his Pontificalibus,
reputing them as TRIFLES, tending rather to SUPERSTITION than otherwise: and
learned Peter Martyr (then Regius Professor in the University of Oxford) though
a Prebend of Christ-Church, constantly refusing to wear a Surplisse in the
Quire there at any time; and in a Letter to a private Friend, July 1. 1550.
(desiring his judgment concerning square Caps and Surplisses) declaring, That
though they were things indifferent in themselves, which make no man of
themselves godly or ungodly by their use or forbearance; yet he thought it most
expedient for the good of the Church, that they and all others of that kind
should be taken away when the next opportunity should present it self: because
where such Ceremonies were so stiffly contended for, which were not warranted
and supported by the word of God, commonly men were less Solicitous of the
substance of Religion, than they were of the circumstances of it. Tho Beacon,
his comparison between the Lords Supper and the Popes Mass. f 100. 101, 102,
103. and Catechism, f 485, 486. in his works.
And John Alasco, Tyms, Mr. John Rogers, Mr. John Philpot, and other learned
Protestant Ministers then denying to wear these Vestments, yea decrying them as
Superstitious, Popish, Massing attire, altogether as unfit for the Ministers of
the Holy Gospel, and Evangelical Bishops, as those other Vestments then
abolished; And Mr. Calvin, Excogitavit haec avaritia qua se Hypocres^s ^uco ad
hunc modum vinditat. Nobis Christus uni^e spectand^^ est. Quicquid aliter
geritur atque ipse gessit, flagitium est De luxu mundi Ecclesiastic^ just^^
liber extruandas est si quis d^gne ve^^t confutare. Zuinglius, De Canone Missa
Epicherisis operum, pars 1. f. 187.
Zuinglius, with other eminent Protestant Divines, quite exploding their use in
foreign Churches and declaring their judgments against them to the Lord
Protector, Cranmer, Ridly, and other Bishops; thereupon in the parliament of 5,
and 6 E. 6. c. 1. the Common Prayer Book was revised, amended in sundry
particulars, the forecited Rubricks expunged, and See Dr. Corn. Burgess his
reasons showing the necessity of Reformation, etc. p* 33* 3^.
the use of the Rochet, Surplisse, and Vestments prescribed by the Book of 2,
and 3 E. 6. quite laid aside, the reason whereof are expressed in the Preface
to the Book, why some Ceremonies were continued, and others laid aside, and in
the Articles of Religion set forth by Edw. the 6th. Anno 1552. Artic. 21. 23.
Neither were they actually or legally revived by the Common Prayer Book
revised, corrected ratified by the Statute of 1 Eliz. c. 2. that Act injoyning
all things to be done according to the Book of 5, and 6 Ed. 6. and none other
or otherwise, in which there was nothing concerning these Garments.

What hot, unchristian Schisms, Contests about Rochets, Surplisses, the form
of Bishops Priests ordinary Vestments, and Formalities afterward sprung up
between our most zealous Protestant Bishops and Ministers, in the first 7.
years of Q. Elizabeth's reign; you may read at leisure in See p. 115, to 122,
12^, 143, 134, 139, 140, 158, 259, 164. to 269, 174, 175, 176.
Dr. Heylins late partial History of the Reformation of the Church of England,
and of Qu. Elizabeth, wherein he lays many black aspertions upon K. Edw. the
6. himself, his Government, the L. Protector, sundry of our godly Bishops,
Martyrs, Divines at home, and Peter Martyr, Calvin, Zuinglius, Alasco, B^za,
with other chief Protestant Divines of reformed Churches abroad, worthy the
F^rula. These controversies about Church vestments, etc continued all her
reign, growing every year higher and higher, every Parliament in her time (as
appears by the Journals) being troubled with many Petitions, Bills against
them, which the Bishops by their power in the Lords house suppressed; and the
world was filled with Books pro and contra concerning them; as the Books of Mr.
Cartwright, Mr. Vdal, Penry, Martin Mar-Prelate, Altar Damas^^num; A Brief
Discourse against the outward apparel, and ministering Garments of the Popish
Church, printed 1^78. A Discourse, whether it be a Mortal Sin to transgress
the commandments of Civil Magistracy, concerning the Apparel of Ministers. The
Declaration of certain Ministers in London, refusing to wear the Apparel
prescribed. Mr. Philip Stubs, with sundry more on the one side, and Queen
Elizabeth's Advertisements in the seventh year of her Reign, by her High
Commissioners advice; Archbishop Whiteguist his Answer to the Admonition to the
Parliament; and Defense of his Answer against the Reply of T. C. 1574. in Fol.
Dr. John Bridges his Defense of the Government now established in the Church of
England, 1584. Mr. Rich. Hooker of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Policy, 1593.
with others on the other hand evidence.

Neither did these unnecessary, unhappy Controversies, about Priests Vestments
and Ceremonies, which perplexed our Church, and gave great advantage to our
Romish Adversaries, expire with Queen Elizabeth, but survived, and grew to a
height at the beginning of K. James his Reign; who to silence or allay them,
appointed a special See the Conference at Hampton Court, printed 1604. p. 76,
etc.
Conference at Hampton Court, between the Bishops and Non-Conformists Party
(whereof Learned Dr. Ranolds was one) about Reformation of Church matters, Anno
1603. which many hoped would have put a period to these Contests; but instead
thereof did much increase them, through the Bishops obstinacy, potency, pride;
who refusing to comply with the moderate, just defires of their
Fellow-Ministers, and Protestant Christian Brethren in some superfluous
Trifles, particularly concerning the wearing of the Surpliss, then, and yet
commonly termed A Ragge of Popery: soon after in their Convocation held at
London, 1603. prescribed the constant wearing of Surplisses, (and Copes, Hoods
besides) not only to Cathedral Churchmen, but likewise to all Ministers,
Curates reading Divine Service, or administering the Sacraments, in Parish
Churches or Chapels, and likewise to Fellows and Scholars in the Universities;
(for which there was no former binding Law nor Canon) by these ensuing
Constitutions.

Canon 16, and 17. In the whole Divine Service, and Administration of the Holy
Communion in the Colleges and Halls in both Universities, the Order, Form and
Ceremonies shall be duly observed as they are set down and prescribed in the
Book of Common Prayer, without any omission or alteration, ( even in the faulty
old English Translation) all Masters and Follows of Colleges and Halls, and all
the Scholars and Students in either of the Universities, shall in their
Churches and Chapels, upon all Sundays, Holy Days, and their Eves at the time
of Divine Service, wear Surplisses, according to the Order of the Church of
England, (which had no such Order that I can find before) and such as are
Graduates, shall agreeably wear with their Surplisses, such Hoods as do
severally appertain to their Degrees.

Canon 24. In all Collegiate and Cathedral Churches, the Holy Communion shall
be administered upon Principal Feast-dayes, sometimes by the Bishop if he be
present, and sometimes by the Dean, and sometimes by a Canon or Prebendary, the
principal Minister using a decent Cope, and being assited with the Gospeller
and Epistolar agreeably, according to advertisements published by Queen
Elizabeth, An. 7.

Canon 25. In the time of Divine Service and Prayers in all Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches, when there is no Communion, it shall be sufficient to wear
Surplisses, saving that all Deanes, Masters and Heads of Collegiate Churches,
Canons and Prebends, being Graduates, shall daily at the times both of Prayer
and Preaching, wear with their Surplisses such Hoods as are agreeable to their
Degrees.

Canon 58: Every Minister saying the Public Prayers, or ministering the
Sacraments, or other Rites of the Church, shall wear a decent and comely
Surplisse with Sleeves, to be provided at the charge of the Parish. And if any
question arise touching the matter, decency or comeliness thereof, the same
shall be decided by the discretion of the Ordinary. Further more, such
Ministers who are Graduates shall wear upon on their Surplisses at such time,
such Hoods as by the Orders of the Universities are agreeable to their Degrees;
which no Minister shall wear (being no Graduate) under pain of Suspension.
Notwithstanding, it shall be lawful for such Ministers as are no Graduates, To
wear upon their Surplisses instead of Hoods, some decent Tippet of Black, so it
be not silk. After which follows this 74. Canon, prescribing the form, species
of their ordinary wearing Apparel.

The true, ancient and flourishing Churches of Christ being ever desirous that
their Prelacy and Clergy might be had as well in outward reverence, as
otherwise regarded for the worthynesse of their Ministry, did think it (...) by
a prescript form of decent and comely Apparel, to have them known to the
People, and thereby to receive the honor and estimation due to the special
Messengers and Ministers of Almighty God. We therefore following their grave
judgment, and the ancient Custom of the Church of England, and hoping that in
time newfanglenesse of Apparel in some factious Persons will dye of it self, do
constitute and appoint, That the Archbishop and Bishops, shall not intermit to
use the accustomed Apparel of their degrees. Likewise all Deans, Masters of
Colleges, Archdeacons, and Prebendaries in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches,
(being Priests or Deacons) Doctors in Divinity, Law, and Physic, Batchelers in
Divinity. Masters of Arts, and Batchelers of Law having any Ecclesiastical
living, shall usually wear Gowns with standing collers, and sleeves straight
at the hands, or wide sleeves as is used in the Universities, with Hoods or
Tippets of Silk or Sarcenet, and square Caps. And that all other Ministers,
admitted, or to be admitted into that Function, shall also usually wear the
like Apparel, as is aforesaid, except Tippets only. We do further in like
manner ordain, That all the said Ecclesiastical Persons above mentioned, shall
usually wear in their Journeyes Cloakes with Sleeves, commonly called Priests
Cloaks without Gards, Welts, long Buttons, or Cuts. And no Ecclesiastical
person shall wear any Coif, or wrought Nightcap, but only plain Nightcaps of
black silk, Satin, or Velvet. In all which particulars concerning the Apparel
here prescribed, our meaning is not to attribute any holiness or special
worthiness to the said garments, but for decency, gravity and order, as is
before specified. In private houses, and in their studies, the said persons
Ecclefiastical may use any comely and Scholar-like Apparel. Provided, that it
be not cuts or pincks, and that in publik they go not in their Doublet and
Hose, without Coats or Cassocks: and that they wear not any light-coloured
Stockings. Likewise poor beneficed men and Such are most of our Bishops, Deans,
Chapters Curates, to their infamy.
Curates (not being able to provide themselves long Gowns,) may go in short
gowns of the fashion aforesaid.

Those who will take the pains to compare these Canons of our Protestant
Bishops and Clergy with the Canons and Constitutions of our Popish Archbishops
foreceited, or John Peckhams and John Stratfords Constitutions, See Joannis
Langeerusius, de vita and honestate Ecclesiasticorum l. 2. c. 2, 3, 4.
De habitu and honestate Clericorum, recorded by John Aton, and William
Lyndwode; the premised Popish French Synods, Canons, and sundry others
collected by Laurentius Bochellus, Decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae, l. 1. Tit. 7.
l. 3. Tit. 1. l. 6. Tit. 17. Shall at first view discern that they were almost
verbatim taken out of them, and more extensive than they in relation to all
Scholars and Students in both Universities, who were never before by any Popish
Councils, or Popes Decrees enjoined constantly to wear Surplisses in tme of
Divine Service and Sacraments.

These Constitutions and Canons (never approved nor assented to by the Lords
and Commons then or afterward assembled in Parliament, but by the King alone
under his Great Seal, and so not binding to the Subjects in their Liberties or
Freehold, against Magna Charta, chapter 29* and sundry other Acts recited in
Rastal, Tit. Accusation, and the Petition of Right) instead of allaying,
composing the Spirits, wounded the consciences, and augmented the number of
Nonconformists, many hundreds of godly preaching Protestant Ministers,
Scholars, who could not conform unto them, being thereupon suspended, deprived,
and thrust out of their Benefices, Curatships, Fellowships, Scholarships, to
their own and their Families ruin, and many learned hopeful Scholars enforced
to desert our Universities, decline the Ministry, and betake themselves to
other callings, and persons of less piety, worth, merit, thrust into their
places, the Ministry, by our Bishops and High Commissioners, and some of them
imprisoned, fined, forced to forsake the Kingdom, and fly to foreign Countries
or Plantations, to the great grief and discontent of their People, friends,
allies, and moderate Protestants; which occasioned See The Whe^^^hall of the
Abuses now in the Church of Christ 1906. See a Christian and modest offer, etc.
and a most indifferent Conference between the Prelates and late silenced
Ministers, printed 1606. The Linco^nshire Ministers Apology. A Reply to Dr.
Mort^^s general Defense of the three nocent Ceremonies, and Dr. John Burgess
his Answer rejoyned thereunto, and the Authors quoted therein, Land ^n 1631.
Necessity of (...) and hundreds more.
many new books of Controversy and Apologies on both sides touching Church
Vestments, Ceremonies, and many great complaints, animosities against the
Bishops and High Commissioners, during all King James and King Charles late
Reigns, till at last they were both suppressed by public Acts, Ordinances, and
ejected by force of Arms in England and Ireland as well as Scotland, which
their moderation and prudence in dispensing with these unnecessary Formalities,
might easily have prevented, and their rigorous re-inforcing of, or over-eager
contending for them against the Letter and purport of his Majesty's late pious
and gracious Declarations, after so long a discontinuance and universal dislike
by all sober-minded men in this time of discontent, may without Gods infinite
mercy and miraculous Providence, end in their second subvertion, and future
suppression, which they should timely consider, as well for their own
preservation, as his Majesty's and his peoples general satisfaction, and the
Churches public Peace, Unity, after so many dangerous Schisms, and Convulsions.

Having given you this account of the true original institution, prescription,
progress, forms of consecration, and putting on of these Pontifical and
Sacerdotal Vestments in the Churches of Christ, of the principal Papal,
Episcopal Decretals, Councils, Canons, that enjoin them, and Scriptures,
Arguments against them, I shall in the next place examine, answer the Scripture
Texts, Arguments produced by Popish Prelates, Canonists, Schoolmen and our own
Protestant Bishops, Writers, for their use and continuance in the Church, which
in my apprehension are very impertinent, weak, contemptible, unable to satisfy
any tender Conscience, or judicious sober Christians Judgment, though highly
magnified and cried up with great gravity, seriosity by some Reverend Prelates
and Clergymen, as well as many illiterate Novices.

The 1. Texts produced for the institution, Argum. 1.
use of these Priest Garments, under the Gospel, are Exodus 28. 2, to 43. c. 29.
5, to 30. c. 31. 10. c. 45. 19, 20, 21. c. 39. 1, 14. c. 40. 13, etc. Levit. 6.
11. c. 8. 2. 13. c. 16. 4, 23, 24, 32. Numb. 20. 16, 18. N^^. 7. 70, 72. Ezra.
2. 69. Ezech. 42. 14. c. 44. 7, 19. Where God commanded Moses ( the chief civil
Magistrate) to make holy Garments for Aaron the High Priest, for glory and
honor, to minister before God in the Priests Office, ( which Garments are
there at large described;) and to make Coats, B^nnets and Girdles for Aarons
sons, for Glory and Beauty, and to make them linen Breeches to cover their
nakedness, which should reach from their loins even to their things, and to
put them upon Aaron and his Sons when they come into the Ta^ernacle of the
Congregation, or when they come near unto the Altar to minister in the holy
place, and to consecrate and sanctify Aaron and his Sons, that they minister
to God in the Priests Office, that they bear not their iniquity and dye. And to
take of the blood that is upon the Altar, and put it upon the tip of the right
ear of Aaron and his Sons, and upon the great toe of their right foot, and
sprinkling the blood and the anointing oil (there prescribed) upon Aaron and
his Sons, and their Garments, and he and they shall be hallowed and their
Garments with them. Which Garments being accordingly made by B^zaliel, by Gods
prescription, were put upon Aaron and his Sons, who were consecrated by Moses,
together with their holy Garments, wherein they and the succeeding
Highpriests, and Jewish Priests usually ministered to the Lord: whence they
were styled, Priests Garments, and holy Garments, which they were to put on
when they ministered to the Lord, and to put off when their ministration was
ended, as these Texts at large attest; From whence Al^uinu^ de Divinis
officiis, c. 38, 39. Honorius Augustodunensis, in his Gemma Animae l. 1, and 2.
Thomas Waldensis, Doctrinalis Tom. 3. Tit. 4. c. 29. De sacris vestibus quibus
Sacerdos intrat ad Missam, Gulielmus Durantus, Rationale Divinorum, l. 3. the
Roman Missal, Pontifical, Ceremonial, and all who write of Bishops and Priests
Vestments under the Gospel, and their Consecrations, See Dr. Reinolds
Conference with Heart, chapter (...). div. 4, 5.
derive both their pattern and legitimation.

To which I answer, Answ.
That these Texts are so far from justifying, that they are the strongest
Arguments that can be against the Vestments of Priests and Prelates now
contended for, upon these several accounts.

1. All and every of these Aaronical Vestments under the Law, were particularly
invented, prescribed, together with their matter, form, color, use, by God
himself in precise terms, not by Moses or Aaron and his Sons alone, according
to their own fancies. But the Vestments, Garments, Rochets, Surplisses of
Popes, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons now contended for, were neither
particularly invented, prescribed by God himself, or Christ, either in respect
of their matter, form, color, use, directly or indirectly, nor by any one Text
in the Old or New Testament, but merely invented, prescribed by Popes,
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Monks, according to their own vain doting
fancies. Therefore no ways justified but condemned by these Texts.

2ly. All these Garments were made, and the constant use of them in Divine
services and administrations, punctually enjoined by Gods special Command,
warrant, law, not by Popes, Bishops, Councils, Decretals, Injunctions,
Constitutions, Canons, Visitation Articles, alone, as all Pontifical,
Sacerdotal Garments, Rochets, Surplisses, Hoods, and other such Trinkets are.

3ly. They were all put on Aaron and his Sons, and both of them consecrated
together, by Moses alone, the chief civil Magistrate; not by any Pope, Bishop,
Priest or other Ecclesiastical person, who now See Ponti^icale R^manum,
Caeremoniale Episcop^^um. My Vn^^sh^ing of (...) and (...). Bishop Halls Divine
Right of Episcopacy and Remonstrance Mr. Sanderofts Consecrations Sermon on
Tit. 1. 5. newly printed.
only ingrosse and claim the right of ordaining, consecrating all Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, Ministers, Deacons, Ecclesiastical persons, together with the
hallowing of their Garments, Rochets, Surplisses; and deem it no less than
Sacrilege and U^urpation for Kings or Civil Magistrates to ordain or consecrate
any of them, or order ought concerning them, but at their requests, and as
their Substitutes.

4ly. These Garments of theirs were different both in matter, kind, form,
fashion, from Rochets, Surplisses Al^ees, Hoods, Planets, Dulmaticks, Chymeres,
Palls, Stoles, Pectoral Cr^sses, Cass^ckes, Gowns, Black Silken Girdles,
Copes, Miters, square Gaps, and other Vestments now used, contended for by
Ceremonial Prelates and Clergymen. Therefore not warranted but condemned by
these Texts.

5ly. These Garments were prescribed to Aaron and his Sons to put on only when
they went in to the Tabernacle, Altar, Temple, to offer up Levitical Sacrafices
and Services unto God; not when they prayed, preached, instructed the people in
their several Cities, Synagogues, or in their Kings Palaces, as these Texts
resolve. Therefore no presidents for Bishops, Priests, or Deacons to imitate
when they preach, read Prayers, officiate or administer Sacraments in
Cathedrals or Parish Churches and Chapels.

6ly. Aaron the High Priest and his Successors, with his Sons and Jewish
Priests Sacrafices, Priesthood, Altars, Vestments, were all temporary, typical,
utterly abolished by the incarnation, passion, sacrifice, resurrection,
ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ, (who they typiFIed, shadowed,) as
inconsistent with, and not fit to be continued under the Gospel; as the Epistle
to the Hebrews, Galatians, Romans, Collossians, Acts 15. and whole New
Testament, all Commentators on them, Old and New, resolve; especially Hebr. 7,
and 8, and 9, and 10. Therefore these Vestments may not, ought not to be
revived, continued under the Gospel, unless we will revive the Aaronical
Priesthood, High Priest, Priest, Levites, with their Sacrifice^, Altars,
Tabernacle, Temple, and all other Levitical Ceremonies, Vestments in specie,
and renounce both Christ himself, with his Priesthood, Ministry, and the Gospel.

7ly. None were to put on or wear these holy Garments but Aaron and his Sons,
who were all Priests by birth and succession, not election and ordination, as
all Apostles, Bishops (...) Ministers, Deacons were, and yet are; who being
none of the Tribe of Levy, or Sons of Aaron by natu^al generation, can claim
no Title by the Law to their Priestly Garments, much less by the Gospel, which
thus expressly resolve^, Hebr. 7. 12, 13. For the Priesthood being changed,
there is made of necessity a change also of the Law: For he of whom these
things are spoken pertains to another Tribe, of which no man gave attendance
at the Altar, and of which Tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning Priesthood. An
unanswerable Text against all Evangelical Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, claims
and pretenses (especially being Gentiles, not Jews by birth, and Christians by
regeneration) to Aaronical, Levitical Priestly Vestments or Ornaments; which
Text I desire them all to answer at their leisures.

8ly. If any allege, Objection.
they only use these Garments by way of allusion or imitation, not
prescription.

I answer, Answer.
1. That they have no Precept nor warrant in the Gospel for this their allusion
or imitation, but direct Precepts, warrants, cautions against it, as
inconsistent with the Gospel, and Salvation too, Hebrews 6 and 7, and 8, and 9,
and 10. c. 12. 27, 28, 29. c. 13. 10, 11. Col. 2. 14, to the end, Phil. 3. 2,
3. Tit. 1. 10, 11. Gal. 4. 30, 31. c. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 11, 12. Acts 15. 2ly. They
have no President from the Apostles, or primitive Christians, Churches for
above 300. years after Christ. Exodus 28. 42. ^ 39. 28. Lev. 6 10. c. 16. 4 23
32. 1 Samuel Ezech. 44. 17, 19. 2 Chronicles. 5. 11, 12.
3ly. If our Bishops, Priests, Deacons will imitate them in their Garments, it
must be in fashion, species, form, end, use, as well as matter and color, the
best, reallest imitation. Our Bishops, (or the Pope, who pre^end themselves the
High Priests Successors, though they can never prove it) must then wear a
Brestplate, ephod, robe, broidered coat, miter, girdle, of the same materials,
form as Aarons were. And our Pri^sts, Deacons, must wear fine linen Ephods,
Breeches, Bonnets, and none but linen, not Ezech. 44. 1^, 18.
woolen Garments on them, whiles they minister, nor any thing that may cause
sweat; and lay aside all their Surplisses, Hoods, Gowns, Copes, Caps, Cassocks
of wool, silk, satin, (...), velvet, which now they use; else they do not
imitate but prevaricate from this president. 4ly. Then none but Bishops,
Ministers, Deacons, nor any Scholars in Colleges, Halls, nor Singing-men,
Choristers, and others not in sacred Orders, must wear Surplisses, as now they
are enjoined by the Here, p. 67.
forecited Canons; since none but Aaron and his Sons alone were to wear these
holy Garments.

5ly. All these their Garments must be consecrated in the self-same manner as
theirs were, 1. By Moses the chief Civil Magistrate; not by Missale Romanum,
Benedictiones diversae and Pontificale Romanum.
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests or Presbyters. 2ly. With sprinkling of blood and
holy anointing oil upon the Tip of their Ears, Bodies, Garments, after they
were put upon their Backs, without any solemn Prayers, Holy Water sprinkled, or
Crosses made on them, as their Episcopal Vestments, Surplisses, and Albees are
now hallowed, not upon their bodies, but before they must wear or put them on.

Upon all which considerations, they must now quite disclaim these Texts of
Scripture, and Aaronical, Levitical Garments, as fatally destructive to those
they contend for, upon what ridiculous reasons, similitudes, dissimilitudes,
and mystical Monkish reasons and mystical significations, you may read in
Al^uinus De Divinis Officiis, cap. 38, 39. Honorius Augustodunensis in his
Gemma Animae, lib. 1, 2. and Gulielmus Durantus in his Rubric to his Rationale
Divinorum, lib. 3. De Indumentis, seu Ornamentis Ecclesiae Sacerdotum, atque
Pontificum, and aliorum Ministrorum; which I shall here at large insert in his
own words for the Readers information, conviction, reformation, or shame of all
over-eager Contenders for these Vestment, and Ceremonies, grounded upon most
strange, absurd, fanatic reasons, allusions, and superstitious ridiculous
mystical whimsies, frenzies, perversions of Scripture, which all sober
Christians cannot but reject with greatest contempt, though insisted on with
much gravity and ferosity by some who would be reputed the Chief Fathers, and
Pillars of the Church.

IN quotidiano us^^ non est vestibus sacris utendum, Gul. Duramus R^t.
Divinorum, l. 3.
ad notandum, quod sicut mutationem habitus secundum literam facimus, ita and
secundum spiritum agamus. Non ergo cum vestibus communis vitae usu pollutis in
sancta sa^ctorum ingrediamur, sed cum conscientia munda and vestibus mundis and
sacris sacramenta tractemus, de Con. di. i. c. 1. Unde Stephanus papa de Con.
di. 1. Vestimenta. Statuit sacris vestibus, non nisi in Ecclesiasticis and Deo
dignis officiis uti and Ezech. xl. iij. Non sanctificabant populum in vestibus
suis. Habet ergo Hiero Religio. divina alterum habitum in Ecclesiasticis
officiis, alii in communi usu, ut cuncto populo Christiano exemplum praebeat
bonae convarsationis: quatenus loci prius sordes novi Christo siant homines.
Exuit enim tunc sacerdos Veterem hominem cum actibus suis, and induit novum qui
secundum Deum creatus est. Per vestes quoque quibus in sacris utimur tantum;
non omnia sacramenta fore populo revelanda, intelligimus, xlij. did. in
mandatis.. siq. iij. nolite. Et nota, quod tempore Ludovici Imperatori^ filii
Ca^oli magni, Episcopi and Clerici cingula auro texta, exq^isitas vestes and
alia secularia ornamenta deposuerint.

Sacrae autem vestes a veteri lege videntur assumptae, praecepit enim Dominus
Moy^^, ut faceret Aaron Sacerdoti and filiis ejus vestes sanctas, in gloriam
and decorem, ut loti, and sacris vestibus induti fungerentur officio in sacris.
Exo. xxviij xxxi xxxv. and xl. c. Docuit enim Dominus Moysem per. xl. dies
facere Pontificalia and Sacerdotalia vestimenta Sacerdotibus, and Levitis suis
ornamenta quoque and linteamina: sed and Maria texuit and fecit illa in usum
ministerii Tabernaculi saederis. Et Ecclesiasti. xlvij. dedit in
celebrationibus decus, etc. Quaedam tamen ab Apostolis sumuntur, sed tam illae
quam istae virtutes designant, vel mysterium incarnationis. Sane Pontifex
celebraturus exuit vestes quotidianas, and induit mundas and sacras. Et primo
sandalia calciat, ut sit memor Dominicae incarnationis. Secundo, sibi ponit
amitum, ut motus and cogitatus fauces and linguam cohibeat, ut fiat cor mundum
spiritum rectum percipiens in visceribus innovatum. Tertio, albam talarem, ut
habeat mundiciam carnis perseverantem. Quarto, singulum, ut impetus luxuriae
refrenet. Quinto, stolam in signum obedientiae. Sexto, tunicam jacentinam. i.
coelestem conversationem. Septimo, superinduit Dalmaticam, id est sanctam
religionem, and carnis mortificationem. Octavo, Cirothecas ut declinat vanam
gloriam. Nono, annulum ut diligat sponsam, i. Ecclesiam ficut se. Decimo,
Casulam, i. charitatem. Undecimo, sudarium, ut quicquid fragilitate vel
ignorantia peccat ponitentia tergat. Duodecimo, pallium supponit, ut sftendat
se imitatorem Christi qui langores nostros tulit. Decimotertio, mitram, ut sic
agat quod coronam mereatur percipere aeternam. Decimoquarto, baculum, i.
auctoritatem potestatis, and doctrinae. Et postea tabeta calcat, ut terram
despicere and amare coelestia discat. Omnibus autem praemissis vestibus
induitur a ministris, quia ei ut vestes i^duat spirituales angeli suff^agantur,
vel quod vicarius est Christi, cui angeli ministrant and omnia serviant.
R^^sus, pontifex versus aquilonem aspiciens, quamvis versus orientem seu versus
altar si sit magis accommodum respicere possit, tanquam advocatus and pugil
cum host pugnatu^us antiquo, vestibus sacris, quasi armi induitur, juxta
Apostolum ut jam dicetur. Primo, sandalia pro ocreis, habet, ne quid maculae
vel pulveris affectionum inhereat. Secundo, amitus pro galea caput contegit.
Tertio, alba pro lorica totum corpus cooperuit. Quarto, cingulum proarcu,
sub-cingulum pro pharetra a^^^mit, and est sub-cingulum illud quod dependet a
cingulo quo stola pontificis cum ipso cingulo colligatur. Quinto, stola collum
circumdat quasi hastam contra hostem viprans. Sexto, manipulo pro clava utitur.
Septimo, casula quasi clipeo tegitur, manus libro pro gladio armatur. De
cingulis etiam Where he gives other mystical reasons for them.
aliter dicetur infra. Haec itaque sunt arma quibus Pontifex vel Sacerdos
armari debet contra spirituales nequicias pugnaturus. Nam ut inquit Apostolus:
Arma maliciae nostrae non sunt carnalia: sed ad destructionem muniminum
potentia. Et in alia Episto^ Ephesians. vi. c. Induite vos, inquit, armatura Dei,
ut posslitis stare adversus insidias diaboli. State ergo succincti lumbos
vestros, in veritate, and induti lorica justitiae, and calciati pedes in
preparatione Evangelii pacis, in omnibus sumentes scutum fidei, in quo positis
omnia tela nequissimi ignea extinguere and galeam salutis assumere: and gladium
spiritus, quod est Verbum Dei. Haec quidem armatura est praemissa septuplex
vestis Sacerdotalis significativa, septiplicis virtutis Sacerdotis; and
representativa Christi vestium, quibus indutus fuit ipse passionis, prout infra
dicetur. Provideat ergo diligenter Episcopus and attendat studiose Sacerdos, ut
signum sine significato non ferat, i. ut vestem sine virtute non portet: ne
forte similis sit Sepulchro a foris dealbato, intus vero omni spurcicia pleno.
Quisquis, n. sacris indumentis ornatur and honestis moribus non induitur quanto
venerabilior apparet hominibus, tanto redditur indignior apud Deum:
Pontificalem itaque gloriam non jam honor commendat vestium: sed splendour
animarum: quoniam and illa quae quondam carnalibus blandiebantur obtutibus ea
potius quae in ipsis erant intelligenda poscebant: ut quicquid illa velamina in
fulgore auri, in nitore gemmarum and in multimodi operis varletate signabant,
hoc jam in moribus actibusque, clarescat: cum and apud veceles reverentiam ipsa
significationum species obtineret, and apud nos certiora sint experimenta rerum
quam enigmata figurarum, prout haec and alia in Pontificali, ubi agitur de
Episcopi consecratione leguntur. Sic itaque munitus ad certamen cum spirituali
nequiciae in coelestibus, and pro sedanda in subditos judicis ira ad altar
procedit: and per consessionem diaboli renunciat Dominio, and seipsum accusat;
populus vero quasi pro suo pugile oraturus in profestis diebus terrae
prosternitur, dum autem ille orationes and alia recitat, quasi totis viribus
cum diabolo pugnat. Dum diaconus in jejuniis ante Evangelium casulam super
humerum replicat, quasi gladium contra hostem vibrat. Dum Epistola legitur voce
praeconis, imperatoris edicta dantur; cantus sunt tubicinae praecentore, chorum
regentes sunt duces exercitum ad^ ^nam instruentes, quibus lascentibus alii
subveniunt. Cantus autem sequentiae est plansus seu laus victoriae. Dum
Evangelium legitur hostis quasi gladio vulneratur: aut exercitus post victoriam
dispersus adunatur. Episcopus praedicans est imperator victores laudans,
oblationes sunt spolia quae victoribus dividuntur. Cantus offertorii, est
triumphus qui debetur imperatori. Pax autem in fine datur, ut populi quies
host prostrato insinuetur. Et deinde populus data licentia per ite Missa est,
cum gaudio de victoria and pace obteuta ad propria redit. Celebraturus itaque
Missam Episcopus aut Presbyter, indumentis suo ordini congruentibus se exornat
and vestium cultui actionis quoque conveniant ornamenta, c. di. rationit. Circa
quod notandum est quod sex sunt indumenta Sacerdotibus and Episcopis communia,
quia and sex sunt in quibus communis Presbyterorum and Episcoporum potestas
consistit. Novem vero sunt ornamenta pontificibus specialia, quia and novum
sunt in quibus spiritualis Episcoporum potestas consistit. Per hunc Ergo
communium and specialium indumentorum numerum, communitas and specialitas
potestatum inter Episcopos and Sacerdotes significatur, de quo in part
praecedenti dictum est sub tit. de episcopo. Hoc etenim tam in novo quam in
veteri testamento legitur constitutum, ut Pontifices praeter communes vestes
habeant speciales, sed ibi quatuor erant communes, and quatuor speciales prout
dicetur sub tit. de legalibus indumentis, quod siquidem ratio mistica
postulabat: nam illae datae sunt carnalibus and mundanis, quoniam quaternarius
numerus convenit carni propter quatuor humores, and mundo propter quatuor
elementa. Haec autem spiritualibus and perfectis data sunt. Nam senarius
numerus qui perfectus est, quia redditur ex suis partibus, aggregatis perfectis
convenit. Unde and sexto die perficit Deus coelum and terram, and omnem ornatum
eorum; sed and cum in plenitudine tempore sexta venisset aetate, sexto die sub
hora sexta redemit genus humanum. Senarius ergo numerus perfectus est, quo suo
ordine numeratus perficitur. Nam cum unum duo and tres dicuntur, senarius
numerus impletur; vel quia in tribus partibus dividitur, i. in sexta tertia and
dimedia, vizt. in uno duobus vel tribus. Novenarius etiam spiritualibus
convenit, quia novem sunt ordines angelorum qui secundum prophetam per novem
gemmarum species designantur. Quindecim ergo sunt ornamenta Pontificis,
quindecim virtutum gradus ipso numero designantia, quos per quindecim cantica
graduum Psalmista distinxit. Vestes enim Sacerdotales virtutes significant,
quibus debent Sacerdotes ornari, secundum illud propheticum: Sacerdotes tui
induantur justitia and sancti tui exultent. Quae talares dicuntur, quia talus
finis est corporis, per quod ostenditur quod non sufficit opus bonum inchoare
nisi studeatur perseveranti fine compleri, prout sub ti. de tunica dicetur. Sic
ergo noster Pontifex plura quam octo induit vestimenta, quamvis Aaron non nisi
octo habuisse legatur, quibus moderna succedunt, quod ideo est quoniam oportet
justitiam nostram magis habundare quam Scribarum and Pharisaeorum, ut intrare
possumus in regnum coelorum. Potest etiam dici, quod noster Pontifex octo habet
a capite usque ad pedes: exceptis vestimentis pedum and manuum, scilicet
amictum, albam, cingulum, and stolam, duas tunicas. casulam and pallium:
vestimentum potius pertinet ad nostrum quam ad Aaron, quia nostris dictum est,
euntes in omnes gentes, etc.

Denique praeter praemissas vestes sacris ordinibus and ministris deputatas,
est and alia quaedam vestis linea quod superpellicium dicitur, quo quibuslibet
serviciis altaris and sacrorum vacantes super vestes communes uti debent, prout
in sequenti ti. dicetur. Superpelliceum autem propter sui candorem, mundiciam
seu puritatem castitatis designat. Juxta illud, Omni tempore vestimenta, id est
opera tua sint candida and munda, propter nomen vero suum carnis
mortificationem figurat. Dictum est enim Superpellicium, eo quo antiquitus
super tunicas pellicias de pellibus mortuorum animalium factas induebatur, quod
adhuc in quibusdam Ecclesiis observatur, representates, quoth. Adam post peccatum
talibus vestitutus est pelliciis. Tertio, denotat innocentiam, and ideo ante
omnes alias vestes sacras saepe induitur, quod divino cultui deputari
innocentiam vitae cunctis virtutum actibus super ponere debent. Juxta illud
Psalm. Innocents and recti adheserunt mihi. Quarto, propter sui latitudinem
congrue charitatem designat. Unde super prophanas and communes vestes induitur
ad notandum quod charitas operit multitudinem peccatorum. Quinto, propter sui
formam quod in modum crucis formatur, passionem Domini figurat, quodque illud
gerentes crucifigi debent cum viciis, and concupiscentiis: Fiunt autem
Superpellicia in quibusdam locis de crismatibus lineis, quae ponuntur super
infantulos baptizatos, exemplo Moysi, qui de purpura and bisso, and aliis a
populo in tabernaculo oblatis, fecit vestes quibus Aaron and Filii, ejus
induerentur quum ministrabant in sanctis, Exodus xxxix. c. Est etiam and alia
vestis quod pluviale vel cappa vocatur, quod creditur a legali tunica mutuata.
Unde sicut illa tintinabulis, sic ista simbris insigitur, qui sunt labores and
hujus mundi solicitudines. Habet etiam caputium, quod est supernum gaudium,
prolixa est usque ad pedes, per quod perseverentia usque in finem significatur.
In anteriori part aperta est, ad denotandum, quod sanctae conversantibus vita
pater aeterna se^ quod eorum vita patere debet aliis in exemplum, xi. q. iij.
non sunt in fi^e. Rursus per cappam gloriosa corporum immortalitas
intelligitur, unde illam non nisi in majoribus festivitatibus induimus,
aspicientes in futuram resurrectionem, quando electi deposita carne binas
stolas accipiente i. e. requiem animarum and gloriam corporum. Quae cappa recte
interius patula est, and nisi sola necessaria fibula insuta, quia corpora
spiritulia sacta nullis animam obturabunt angustii^: simbriis etiam subornatur,
quia tunc nostrae nihil deerit imperfectioni, sed quod nunc ex part
cognoscimus tunc cognoscemus sicut and cogniti sumus. Quidam au^em haeretici
garriunt, nusquam reperiti in novo testamento, quod Christus vel Discipuli ejus
praemistis vestibus induerentur, reprehendentes nos temere, quia talibus utimur
ornamentis, quoniam sicut Jo ait Dom. surgens de caena posuit vestimenta sua
and postea alia nunquam accepit nisi sua. Nos vero, ut dicunt, plura alia quam
vestimus revestimus in missam qua caenam ipsam imitamur, and Dominus ab his qui
volunt ambulare in stolis, nos cavere praecepit, dicens, Cavete a Scribis qui
volunt ambulare in stolis; dicunt enim quod hoc facimus ut justiores and
excellentiores populis appareamus, contra illud, Vos estis qui justificastis
vos coram hominibus, Deus autem novit corda vestra, quia quod hominibus altum
est, abhominatio est apud Deum. Error autem iste ex praemissis apertissime
confutatur. Legitur quoque Ezech. xlii. and xliv. Cum ingredientur sanctuarium
meum and accedant ad mensam meam ut mihi ministrent and custodiant ceremonias
meas, vestibus lineis induentur, nec ascendet super eos quicquam laneum. Cum
ingredientur atrium exterius ad populum, exuent se vestimentis suis in quibus
ministraverant, and non sanctificabant populum in vestimentis suis. Et nota,
quod hostiarii, lectores, exorcistae and accoliti vestibus albis utuntur,
videlicet Superpelliceo, amicto, and alba, and baltheo, ut Angelos Dei
ministros per castitatis mundiciam imitentur, and eis in carne gloriosa effecta
spirituali quasi in albis vestibus socientur. Inde est quod potius lineis
vestibus utuntur, quia sicut linum multo labor ad candorem perducitur, fic
necessa est per multas tribulationes ad Regni gloriam pervenire. In concilio
Magon. xi. q. 1. Episcopus Presbyter, statutum est, quod Episcopus in
ordinatione sua recipiat orarium baculum and annulum, Presbyter orarium and
planetam; Diaconus orarium and Dalmaticam; sub-Diaconus patenam and calicem,
and cum degradantur ea perdunt. Et in Concilio Toletano, xciij. di. Diaconus,
in conventu statutum est quod Diaconus tempore oblationis tantum, scil. quando
legit Evangelium, utatur Alba and Dalmatica. Notandum quoque est quod vestes
Evangelici Sacerdotis aliud designant in capite scilicet, in Christo; aliudque
figurant in membris, quamquam and caput and membra Sacerdoti^nomine
nuncupantur: ad caput dicit Psalmigraphus: Tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secundum
ordinem Melchisedech* Ad membra vero dicit Apostolus; Vos estis genus electum,
regale Sacerdotium. Exponenda ergo sunt eorum mysteria. Primo secundum quod
membris, consequenter secundum quod capiti scilicet Christo convenient, prout
in quolibet capittulo distinguetur. De ornamentis autem and palleis and
vestibus Ecclesiae vel altaris, in prima part dictum est, ubi agitur de
picturis. Porro sex indumenta Sacerdotibus and Episcopis communia sunt haec;
amictus, alba, zona, seu cingulum, stola, manipulus, planeta. Novem vero
pontificibus specialia sunt haec, caligae, sandalia, succinctorium, tunica,
Dalmatica, Chirothecae, mitra, annulus, baculus pastoralis. De quibus omnibus
singulatim prosequimur, and etiam de sudario, and de pallio, and de coloribus
quibus Ecclesia in Ecclesiasticis utitur indumentis, and de legalibus
indumentis sive veteris testamenti.

After which he prosecutes at large in sundry distinct Chapters, the reasons of
instituting each of these particular Pontifical, Sacerdotal Vestments, and
their mystical tropological significations, with such frantic, ridiculous
conceits, and impious pervertings, wrestings of sacred Scriptures, as would
affect all conscientious sober Christians with grief and indignation, and
others with more laughter than any Interlude or Puppet-play. I shall only
transcribe this Chapter De Alba, or the white Surplisse, the Vestment now most
in question*

POst amictum, camisiam sive albam Sacerdos induit; quae membris corporis
convenienter aptata, nihil superfluum aut dissolutum in vita sacerdotis aut in
^is membris esse debere demonstrat. Haec ob speciem candoris mundiciam
demonstrat; secundum quod legitur; Omni tempore vestimenta tua sint candida.
Fit autem de bisso, vel lino, propter quod scriptum est, bissum sunt
sanctificationes sanctorum. Est autem bis^us linum egyptiacum. Sic^t enim linum
vel bissus candorem quem ex natura non habet multis tonsionibus attritum
acquirit per artem, sic and hominis caro mundiciam quem non obtinet per
naturam, per exercitia bonorum operum multis cogitationil us macerata, sortitur
per gratiam. Sacerdos ergo secundum Apostolum, castiget corpus s^um and in
servitutem redigat, ne forte cum aliis praedicaverit, ipse reprobus fiat. Habet
autem alba capu^ium, quod est professio castitatis. Habet etiam linguam, quae
significat linguam sacerdotalem quae ligat contumaces and absolvit penitentes.
Rursus haec vestis quae in veteri sacerdotio linea, vel pedis greece, seu tunica
talaris dicebatur, stricta fuisse describitur propter spiritum servitutis
Judaeorum in timore. In novo vero larga est propter spiritum adoptionis in
liberate qua nos Christus liberavit. Quod autem aurifrisium and gramata
diversis in locis ac variis operibus ad decorem habet, illud insinuat quod
propheta dicit in Psalmis, Astitit regina a dextris tuis in vest deaurata
circa. vary. Rursus alba cingula stringitur, ut omnis voluptas carnalis
astricta intelligatur, dicente Don't. Sint lumbi vestri praecincti. Manicae
quoque tam albae quam etiam tunicellae convenienter debent esse strictae, non
minus laxae, ut labantur and brachia nudentur, habentes in summitatibus
aurifrisia, ad designandum aureos torques, quia brachia nuda beati Martini
missam celebrantis miraculose decenter operuerunt, prout in sexta part sub
ejus festo docetur. Per albam etiam qua corpus a sursum usque ad deorsum
tegitur, spes quem ex gratia provenit eccelesiae desursum, and ex meritis
ecclesiae deorsum figuratur. De hac Apostolus ad Roman viij. Spe salvi facti
sumus. Quia vero usque ad talos descendit, perseverentiam designat, prout
tactum est prope in prohemio hujus partis. Porro, secundum quod capiti,
scilicet Christo, advenit alba quae est lineum vestimentum longissime distans a
tunicis pellitiis, quem ex mortuis animalibus fiunt, quibus Adam vestitus est
post peccatum, novitatem vitae significat quem Christus and habuit and docuit
and tribuit in baptismo; de quo dicit Apostolus; Exuite veterem hominem cum
actibus suis, induite novum qui secundum Deum creatus est.

Nam in transfiguratione resplenduit facies ejus sicut sol, and vestimenta ejus
facta sunt alba sicut nix, semper enim vestimenta Christi munda fuerunt and
candida, quoniam peccatum non fecit, nec inventus est dolor in ore ejus. Haec
etiam vestis representat albam vestem in qua Herodes illusit Christo. Luc.
xxiij.

In answer to this Popish chaff I shall only propound the Poets interrogation
to the Readers of this irrational Rationale, Spectatum admissi risum teneatis
amici?

I now proceed to their second Scripture reason for the use of White Surplisses
and Rochets, Arg. 2.
which is this, White, and white Garments are a sign or badge of holiness,
innocence, purity, joy and gladness, as is evident by Psalm. 51. 7. Isay 1. 18.
Dan. 11. 35. Rev. 3. 4, 5, 18. c. 4. 4. c. 6. 2, 11. c. 7. 9, 13, 14. c. 19.
18. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Eccles. 9. 8. Therefore Bishops, Ministers and Deacons
ought to wear White Rochets, Surplisses and Albees in time of Divine service
and Sacraments. Thus Alcuinus, Honorius Augustodunensis, Thomas Waldensis,
Gulielmus Durantus, Archbishop Whitguift, Mr. Hooker, and sundry other Writers
argue.

To which I answer, Answer.
1. That White is not always a sign, badge of Purity and Innocence, but often
times of Corruption, Defilement, Guilt, and that in the Scriptures, Priests and
Prelates account. As 1. in the Case of Leprosy (the worst, Levit. 13. 38. 44.
45.
uncleanest of all Diseases) a white scab, spot, skin, was a sign, symptom,
consequent of the plague of Leprosy; whence it is recorded of Levit 13, and 14*
Miriam and Numb. 12* 10. 2 Kings ^. 17.
Gehazi, when smitten miraculously by God with leprosy for their Sins, that
they became leprous, and went out a Leper as white as Snow. 2ly. In the Case of
Hypocrisy, especially in false Prophets, Priests and Clergymen, against whom
Christ himself gives this description, caution, Mat. 7. 15, 16. Beware of false
Prophets, who come unto you in Sheeps clothing (which is commonly Ezech. 27*
18. Rev. 1. 24* Isay 1. 18.
white, as Wool is) but inwardly they are ravenous Wolves, ye shall know them
by their fruits; compared with Mat. 23. 2, to 12. Mar. 12. 38, 39, 40. Beware
of the Scribes and Pharisees, which love to go in Long-cloathing, (long See
page 12^. 123.
white Surplisses, Gowns, Gassocks, Cloakes, as Bishops, Priests, Deacons use
to do) which devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long Prayers; But
all their works they do to be seen of men: They make broad their Philacteries
and enlarge the borders of their Garments: And love the uppermost rooms in
Feasts, and the Chief Seats in the Synagogues: And greetings in the Market
place, and to be called Rabbi, Rabbi: But be ye not called Rabbi, for one is
your Father which is i^ Heaven, and all ye are Brethren. Which Text our famous
Apostles Wickliff Di^logorum, l. 4* c. 16, 17. De Pap^. c. 12.
John Wickliffe and others applied to the Popish Prelates and Clergy, their
Surplisses and Vestments, Doctrinalis, Tom. 3. Tit. 4. c. 29. 30.
as Thomas Waldensis, and others relate: together with that of Matthew. 23. 25,
27, 28. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye make clean the
outside of the Cup and of the Platter, but within they are full of extortion
and excess. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse that first within the Cup and
Platter, that the outside may be clean also. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites, for ye are like unto whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear White
(or beautiful) outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all
uncleanness: Even so ye also (in your long white Surplisses and Priestly
Garments) appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisy and
Iniquity. Upon which account Paul styles Acts 23. 3.
Annanias a whited Wall. Degradandus indumentis Sacerd^talibus, si Sacerdos
sit, induitui* and sic de reliquis Ordinibus, Pontificale Romanum p. 456, to
462. Fox Acts and Monuments vol. 3. p. 998, 999.
3ly. Popes and Bishops themselves when they degrade any Clergyman or Bishop
for Heresy, uncleanness, or any other scandalous crime, apparel him first in
Surplisses, Rochets, and consecrated Vestments; after which they disrobe him of
them: and when they inflict penance on Adulterers, Adulteresses, Whores,
Bawdes, Whoremasters, and other scandalous, unclean Offenders, they cause them
to stand in white Sheets or Surplisses in the Church before all the
Congregation to their shame, by way, of punishment. Whence the Synods under
Galo and Simon the Popes Legates; the Synods of Paris Here, p. 51, 53.
forecited; and other Authors usually style a Surplisse, Supplicium, a Penance
or Punishment, because Offenders did Penance in a Surplisse or White Sheet.
Therefore Surplisses and white Garments even in Churches are a badge of Guilt,
Infamy, as well as of Innocence, purity, and honor. 4ly. St. Hierome himself,
Lib* 1. Advers. Jovinianum.
and Caelius Rhodiginus out of him, censure the wearing of white Garments by
Monks, Antiqu. Lect. l. 5. c. 13. p. 220.
as a badge of Luxury and Pride, not Innocence, purity or humility. And is it
not so in Bishops, Priests, Deacons, who thereby will not only difference
themselves from, Pontificale Romanum p. 13.
but advance themselves above Lay Christians; as appears by this Prayer in the
Roman Pontifical, when they put on their Surplisses, and Priests Vestments at
their ordination, as Clerks, Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, propitiare peccatis
nostris, and ab omni servitute saecularis habitus hos famulos tuos emunda, ut
dum ignominiam saecularis habitus deponunt, tua semper in aevum gratia
perfruantur, etc. And these words of the Archbishop to the King at the time of
his Coronation, when he places him in his Throne, My Signal Loyalty and
Devotion of Gods true Saints, etc. to their Sovereigns, Part 2. p. 287, 179,
190, 231.
Stand and hold fast from henceforth that Place, whereof hitherto thou have
been heir by the succession of thy Forefathers, being now delivered unto thee
by the Authority of Almighty God, and all the Bishops and Servants of God;
(clad in their Pontificalibus) and as thou see the Clergy to come nearer unto
the Altar (than others, in their white Rochets, Surplisses,) so remember, that
in places convenient, thou give them greater honor. Finally if white Garments
be a token of Innocence, purity, then Porters, Carters, Grooms, Virgins and
Country Lasses, who usually go clad in White Frockes, Wastcoats, Garments all
the day, week, year long, should be more holy, innocent, pure than Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, who wear them only for a few hours in the Church, and are
clad in Black Garments only all the day, week, year, which are as contrary to
Innocence, purity, as white is unto black.

2ly. White is not always a badge, or Garment of Joy, but often times of
Mourning and Grief, as in the Cases of penance and degradations forecited; and
in these ensuing Presidents. Genialium Dierum, l. 3 c. 7.
Alexander ab Alexandro, De Moribus Gentium.
Bremus and Romanae quaestiones.
others record, that the Grecians, Spartians, Argivi, Syracusians used to put
on Albas vestes white Garments, when they mourned for their deceased Friends
and Kings, in which they followed their Corpse to their Graves, involved usually
in white Winding sheets and Cere-cloathes; Plutarch, and Problematus, Locus,
120. de Vestitu.
Aretius out of him informs us, That the Roman Matrons, mourned in white
Garments. In Purchase Pilgrimage, l. 1. 4. cap. 19.
China at this day the Nobles and better sort of Women use to mourn in White
array; The better sort of Sands Europae Speculum, Purchase Pilgrimage, l. 3. c.
12.
Turks use to mourn in White; and in Japan White is a Funeral color, Black a
Festival. Yea, Lins^h^t, l. 1. c. 22 Purchase Pilgrimage, l. 5. c 15. p. 667.
at this Day the Benedicti Are^i. Problemata L^^us 120. p. 36^ (...), Antiqu.
^onviv. l. 2. c. 26.
Queens of France after their Husband Kings decease wear White Garments during
their Widow-hood, in token of Grief and Retiredness: and in many places of
England when any Maids dye before marriage, other Virgins use to accompany their
Hearse to their Graves in white Wastcoats, Gloves, Ribonds; Therefore white
Garments cannot be of themselves, a badge of Joy, Chearfullnesse, Triumph, for
then white Winding-sheets should be, wherein we all inter dead Corpse.

3ly. White Garments are no peculiar badge of Evangelical Bishops or Ministers
of the Gospel, and that only in Divine administrations; For as I never read
that Christ or his Apostles, or the primitive Evangelical Bishops, Ministers,
Deacons, or for above 350. years after Christ used any such Vestments,
Surplisses, Rochets in Divine administratious, which doubtless they would have
done had they deemed them necessary, decent or expedient; so on the contrary, I
read, 1. That the Strabo, Solinus, Pomponius Mela, Alexder ab Alexandro Genesis
Dierum l. 5. c. 18. f. 291. and Boemus De Moribus Gentium.
Tapyrae, Bactriani, Iberi, and other barbarous Nations about Hyrcania, compel
their Women to wear and walk abroad Albis Tunicis in White Coats, and short cut
hair; when as the Men only wear Black Vestments, and let their Hair grow long.
2. That the Romans in their Circentian Plays had 4. Factions, clad in 4.
several sorts of colored Garments, Alexander ab Alexandro Genesis Dicrum^ l. 5.
c. 8. f. 263. lib. 6. ^. 1^ f. 664.
(just like the Popish Priests and Prelates) according to the four seasons of
the year; to wit, in Green-coloured Garments, dedicated to the Spring: in
Rose-coloured Vestments, devoted to the Harvest: in Violet-coloured,
consecrated to Winter: Antiqu ^ect. l. 14. c. 16.
and in White Garments, dedicated to Autumn, when men (as well as fruits and
leaves) usually drop into their Graves. And that the Romans used to resort to,
and behold their Plays, Toga Candida in a white Gown or Surplisse, which was
no act of Religion, but Pastime. 3ly. That those who stood for any elective
Offices among the Romans were usually clad in white Garments, from whence they
were styled Candidati, as Caelius Rhodiginus proves at large out of Hist. Rom l
4.
Titus Livius, Problemata.
Plutarch, Hist. Naturalis. l. 8.
Pliny, Digestorum. l. 1. De Officio Quaestoris.
Vlpian, Juvenal and others; which Candidates Alexander ab Alexandro Genesis
Dierum, l. 3. c. 17. f. 153. Paulus Aemilius Consul legem tulit ad populum, qu^
ne cui suffragii, causa munus dare liceret multipliti poena inter dixit. Postea
lege Calphurnia his qui mercede corrupti aut munere deliniti Candidatis obviam
issent, quique precio illos sectarentur; aut SI PRANDIUM AD CAPTANDOS ANIMOS,
AUT SI QUID MUNERIS EXHIBITUM FORET, praeter poenas legibus constitutas, etiam
^ECUNIARIA MULCTA FUIT. Id quod Fabia lege cautum, etc.
usually bribed the People to gain their Voices with money, meat, drink, feasts,
(notwithstanding many successive severe Laws made against it) as too many
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses now use to bribe their Electors before and at
every Parliamentary election, with Gifts, Feasts, and drunken entertainments,
for which they deserve expulsion out of the House of Commons, far better than
Cooks 4. Institutes. p. 23.
Thomas Long, who in the Parliament of 8. Elizabeth was expelled the Commons
House, upon examination of his Case, only for giving the Mayor of Westbury (in
Wiltshire) 4. l. to be elected a Burgess to serve in that Parliament for this
his corrupt dealing (which was to poison the very Fountain it self;) and the
Mayor fined and imprisoned; whereas some now spend one, two, or three thousand
pounds a piece in Countries to be elected Knights: and others one, two, three,
four or five hundred pounds a piece or more to be chosen Citizens and Burgesses
for the last, and this approaching Parliament, in Bribes, wine, ale, beer,
tobacco, feasts, and drunken entertainments, (which will hardly produce a sober
Parliament, and for which the Elements now mourn, yea drop down showers of
Wrath upon us) for which bribery they well deserve to be cast out of the
Parliament House, Alexander ab Alexandro, Genesis Dierum, l. 3. c. 17. Quoties
contrae ambitum istorum qui appetunt Majes^iatus pluribus lebus a Romany
obvium item fit.
and fined treble the value of their Bribes and Expenses, to his Majesty; since
the Pagan Romans were so just as by the Law of C. Petilius Tribune of the
people, to impose a fine and penalty of ambition upon Q. Coponius, quod vini
amphoram ei cujus suffragio magistratum petebat, dono dederat. And if his
giving but a Quart or Pottle of Wine was reputed a Bribe deserving punishment,
what do they demerit who give whole Tuns, Buts of Wine, and many Barrels of
Ale, Beer to their Electors for their Voices? Yea those Mercinaries who thus
unworthily sell their Voices, deserve to be for ever disabled to have any voice
in future Elections; and this Roman Law is now fit to be enacted among us, Vt
in petendis honoribus, candidati sine toga ad Comitia descenderent, ne pecuniis
in sinu reconditis tribuum suffragia mercarentur. 4ly. That the idolatrous
Hierom. Comment. in Ezech. c. 44. Alexander ab Alexandro. Genesis Dierum, l. 6. c.
12. f. 34^. Conference at Hampt^n Court, p 76. Gul. Stuckius Antiqu Conviv. l.
2. c. 26.
Priests of Isis amongst the Egyptians, when they sacrificed to this Idol,
did shave their Crowns, and wear white Surplisses, Garments, (just as the
Popish Priests do now) above a 1000. years before Christians took up this
fashion; and the Alexander, ab Alex. Genesis Dierum* l. 6. c. 19. f. 364.
Roman Matrons in the Feast of their Goddess Ceres, did annually sacrifice to
her, vest candida, in a white Garment, ut tunc Diis gratum esse censerent, si
a laetis, nec a funere pollutis celebraretur. 5ly. That the Bochellus Decret.
Eccles. Gal. l. 5. Tit. 2. c. 3* p. 702, 706. Seldens Titles of Honor, part ^
c. 8. p. 222.
four Monks of St. Denis Abbey in France, who carry the Canopy over the viol of
Holy Oil (pretended to be sent from Heaven) at the French Kings Coronation,
albis induti, are arrayed in white Surplisses and Rochets, though not in holy
Orders. 6ly. That our Bishops themselves, and the Abbot formerly, but now the
Dean of Westminster, at our Kings Coronation, stripping off his ordinary
Apparel, put on him a My signal Loyalty and Devotion of Gods true Saints and
pious Christians to their Sovereigns, part 2. p. 131, 237, 242, 244, 253, 255,
391* Tho. Walsingham, Hist. Angl. p. 295, 296.
Collobium, Dalmatica, or close Pall, linen Gloves and Sandals, immediately
after his consecrating, as they use to do on Bishops and Priests, of whose holy
Vestments, these are parcel. Either therefore they must acknowledge our Kings
to be Bishops and Priests as well as themselves, or disclaim these Vestments as
proper or peculiar to Bishops, Priest and Clergymen.

4ly. Admit white Garments, Rochets, Surplisses a Badge of Innocence, Purity,
Holiness, as is pretended, and therefore fit to be worn in time of Divine
service and Sacraments by Bishops, Priest, Deacons, and other Ecclesiastical
Persons; Then it will certainly follow from hence.

1. That all Christians whatsoever ought to wear white Surplisses, Rochets,
Albees, as well as Popes, Archbishops, Metropolitans, Bishops, Archdeacons,
Deans, Prebends, Priests, Ministers, Deacons, and other Churchmen. 1. Because
they are all equally purified, washed from their sins externally by Baptism,
and internally by the blood of Jesus Christ, yea justified, sanctified, and
made holy without spot or blemish; as well as any Prelates, Priests or
Clergymen whatsoever, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Rev. 1. 5, 6. c. 7. 14. 1 John 1. 9.
c 2* 1, 2. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Tit. 3. 5* Hebr. 10. 22. Psalm. 51. 7. Isay 1. 18.
2ly. Because they are all commanded to be pure, holy, blameless, undefiled in
all manner of conversation, and godliness, even as God is holy, as well as
Clergymen. Upon which account they are usually styled Saints, holy men, holy
brethren; and redeemed by Christ for his very end, that they should walk before
and serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of their lives, 1
Pet. 1. 15, 16. Romans 11. 49. c. 19. 2. c. 20. 7. 2 Pet. 3. 11. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26.
Col. 3. 10, 11, 16, 17. 1 These. 5. 16, 23, 27. Hebr. 3. 1. Rev. 1. 5, 6. c. 3*
18. c. 7. 14. Lu. 1. 74, 75. Tit. 2. 12, 14. Romans 1. 7. c. 6. 1. 4, etc. c. 8.
10, 11, 29, 30. Ephesians. 4. 24. c. 1. 4. Phil. 1. 1. Philem. 5. 7. 2 Cor. 1. 1.
c. 13. 13. Col. 1. 2, 4, 12, 26. Rev. 15. 3. c. 19. 8. Psalm. 34* 1. Psalm. 62.
8. Psalm. 106. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 8. 3ly. Because they are all equally a chosen
generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people, yea made
Kings and Priests to God the Father by Jesus Christ, as much as Prelates and
Clergy men, 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10. Rev. 1. 5, 6. c. 9. 10. c. 20. 6. Exodus 19. 6.
4ly. Because God is no respecter of Persons, (especially in his immediate
worship, service) but in every Nation he that fears God, and works
righteousness is equally accepted of him, Acts 10. 34, 35. 1 Pet. 1. 17. Ephesians.
1. 6. 5ly. Because all the Saints and redeemed of Christ, have equally washed
their garments, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, and are arrayed
in Spiritual (not Corporal) white garments, as well as Prelates and Priests,
Rev. 3. 4, 5, 18. c. 6. 11. c. 7. 9, 13, 14. c. 19. 8. Therefore if necessary,
decent expedient in Gods Divine service, all Lay Saints should wear them as
well as Bishops or Clergymen.

2ly. Then it will necessarily follow, that not only Prelates and other
Clergymen, but likewise all Christians should wear Rochets, Surplisses, and
white Vestments at all times, as well as in time of Divine Service, of
Sacraments administrations; especially in all their private Prayers, Devotions
in their Closets, Houses, Families, (where Bishops, Priests, Deacons themselves
use not to wear them) and in all places as well as in Cathedrals, Churches,
Chapels, since they ought to be always holy, innocent, undefiled, white, pure
in all their actions, conversations, showing as lights of the world in the
midst of a polluted and perverse generation, as 1 Ephesians. 1. 4. c. 5. 26, 27. c.
4. 22, 23, 24. Phil. 2. 15. 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. 2 Pet. 3. 11. and other forecited
Texts resolve.

3ly. It was ^ea^ Magd. 4* c. 6. (...) 419, 420. Cent. 5. Col. 658. Cent. 6.
Col. 334 Cent. 7. Col. 147. Cent. 8. Col. 189. Cent. 9. Col. 314. Cent. 10.
Col. 293. Cent. 11. Col. 262. Cent. 12. Col. 875. Cent. 13. Col. 596. Tho.
Waldensis Doctrinalis Tom. 3. Tit. 5. c* 52. Gul. Stuckius Ant^qu. Conviv. l.
2. c. 26.
an ancient custom in the Primitive Church ( long before Bishops, Priests or
Deacons wore white Rochets, Surplisses, and linen Vestments) beginning before
300. years after Christ, and continuing near 1400. years space, or more, in
most Christian Churches, to put on long white Robes, Surplisses, Garments, on
all such Christians as were baptized, immediately after their Baptism, in
testimony of their Purification and washing from their sins in their Baptism,
by the blood of Jesus Christ. Hence Lactantius flourishing about 300. years
after Christ, in his Book De Resurrectione Christi, has this elegant
expression, Rex sacer, ecce tui radiat pars magna Trophaei
Cum puras animas sacra lavacra beant.
Candidus egregitur nitidis exercitus undi
Atque vetus vitium purgat in amne novo,
Fulgentes animas vestis quoque candida signat.
Et grege de nived gaudia pastor habit.


This custom of apparelling Baptized Persons in white Robes and Garments, is
likewise attested by Gregory Nazianzen Oration 3. Ambrose De Sacramentis, l. 3.
c. 1. and De his qui initiantur, c. 7, 8. within 370. years after Christ, and
not long after by Olympidorus in Eccles. c. 9. Gregorius Turonensis, Hist. l.
9. c. 4. and our Venerable Beda, Hist. Ecclesiastica Gentis Anglorum, l. 2. c.
14. where relating the History of our King Edwins and his Peoples conversation
to the Christian Faith, and baptizing by Paulinus, Anno Christi 627. and of his
Sons soon after, adds quorum primi Albati adhuc (that is, whiles clad in white
Garments after their Baptism) erepti sunt de hac vitae. Abbot Alchuvinus
Scholar to Beda, and Tutor to Charles the Great, describing the forms and
Ceremonies of Baptism about the year of Christ 800. De Divints Officiis c. 19.
De Sabbato sancto Virgil. Paschae Operum Col. 1062.
records, that the person baptized, after his baptism, elevatur de font, ut
per Gratiam surgat ad vitam. Deinde Albis induitur Vestimentis propter Gratiam
regenerationis, et castitatem vitae, et Angelici splendoris decorem. Tunc sacro
crismate caput perungitur and mystico tegitur velamine, ut intelligat se
Diadema Regni and Sacerdotis dignitatem po^tare, juxta Apostolum, vos estis
genus electum, Regale, Sacerdotale, offerentes vosmet ipsos Deo vivo hostiam
sanctam and Deo placentem. Therefore they are entitled to wear white Garments,
Surplisses, Rochets, as well as any Bishops or Priests whatsoever, who upon
this account ought not to advance themselves above, or distinguish themselves
from other baptized Lay-Christians. De Institutione Clericorum. l. 1. c. 29.
Rabanus Maurus, flourishing about 840. years after Christ, writing of the
Forms and Ceremonies of Baptism, relates that after Baptism, a white Garment
was delivered to every Person baptized. Post baptismum traditur Christiano
Candida vestis, quae signat innocentiam and puritatem Chrstianam, quam post
ablutas veteres maculas statio santae, conversationis immaculatam servare debet
ad praesentandam ante tribunal Christi. Cujus vero renati Albis induuntur
vestibus, ad mysterium resurgentis Ecclesiae futurum. Vtuntur vestibus albis,
ut quorum primae Nativitatis infantiam vetusti erroris pannus suscaverat,
habitus secundae regenerationis gloriae praeferat indumentum. The continuance
of this custom in After-ages is attested by Vincentius Beluacensis, spec. Hist.
l. 23. c. 145. Enfordiensis, c. 66. Aponius, l. 6. in Cantica Caut. the Century
Writers, Cent. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. c. 6. Tit. De Ritibus circa Baptismum, and
to name no more, by our Thomas Waldensis, about the year of Christ 1420.
Doctrinalis Tom. 3. Tit. 5. cap. 52. sect. 1, 2. De vest candida quam accipit
baptizatus, which he largely descants upon as a badge, of their Purification,
innocence, washing away their sins, and making them as white as Snow, and
putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, citing Romans 12. Ezech. 16. Psalm. 50. Exodus
24* Heb. 3. Mat. 12. Isaiah 1. Cant. 1. (all produced by him and other Papists,
for Bishops and Priests, white Rochets, Albees, Surplisses.) Dionysius
Areopagita, Origin, Ambrose and Rabanus, to justify this custom, from whence
the Lords day, Easter week, and the Feast of Pentecost, on which Christians
heretofore were usually baptized, and then clad in White Garments, were styled
Dominica et feria in albis, and by our English Calanders, Nation till this day,
called White-sunday, and White-sontide, because all persons baptized on them,
and Virgins too, were then usually clad in White Garments. Feria 2. In albis,
hac hebdomada (to wit after Easter) vocatur, quod Sabbato sancto baptizati,
vestem candidam, quam in baptismo acceperant gestare consueverint, ac in ea
induti ac albati, usque ad alterum Sabbatum, quo solenni ritu albas deponebant,
writes Learned Gul. (...) l. 2^* c. 26. Sarius (...) Tom. 1* p* 85, 788* 49^
Tom. 3* p. 1^7, 683. 716. Tom. 3. p. 286, 365. (...) Cas sander, De Bap^^mo
Infantum, and sundry (...) Cent. Magd. 4, 5, 6, 7. cap. (...) ^48.
George Cassander. If then this ancient custom of Clothing all baptized Persons
in white Robes, Rochets, Surplisses, so long continued in the Churches of
Christ, before any such Vestments wore by Bishops, Priests, Deacons, grounded
on the self-same Texts, reasons, and some better grounds than Bishops, Priests,
or Deacons wearing these Garments, he now totally laid aside, (through the
Pride, Usurpation of Popes, Prelates, Clergymen, who appropriate them only to
themselves by way of distinction from other Christians) without any scandal or
prejudice to Religion; then a fortiori Bishops, Priests, Deacons Rochets,
Surplisses, and other Vestments, may be discontinued and laid quite aside as
useless, superfluous, if not schismatical, dividing, discriminating Christians
from Christians, and Clergymen themselves from one another, raising many
unnecessary contests, inconsistent with our Churches peace and unity.

6ly. If a white color, or white Linen Garments be badges of innocence,
purity, chastity, and should mind those who wear them of, and excite them to
these virtues, as is pretended, then there is no need at all of white
Surplisses, Albees, Rochets or Lawnsleeves for these purposes. For 1. every
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and other man's white Skins, (the natural Garment of
his Body, which he wears upon him all his life) or his white linen Shirt,
Wastcoat he wears day and night, all the week, year long; his white linen
Bands, Cuffs, Handkerchiefs, and linings of his Dublet, Hose, or the white
Sockes he usually puts on every day, and not puts off till night, his white
linen Nightcap, Sheets which he lies down and sleeps in every night, the
white linen Napkins, Table-cloaths, Towells he daily uses the white bread,
meat, milk, eggs he eats every meal; the white wax or Tallow-candles he
burns; the white sealings, walls, he beholds in his House, Church, Chapel every
day; the white Paper wherein he writes, and all the Bibles, Missals,
Common Prayers, and other Books, Papers he reads written or printed; the white
Corporals; Altar-cloaths he beholds at every Sacraments; the white frocks of
Porters, Carters, Millers Grooms, Hostlers they daily wear; the white Dublets
of, men, Wastcoats, Peticoats, Aprons, linen Mautles of every Woman, the white
sleeps, beasts, foul, birds, snow, hail, wool, flax, or radiant light of the
Sun, Moon, Stars, and via lactea in the Heavens, might abundantly mind every
Bishop, Priest, Deacon, (unless more dull and averse from purity, piety,
innocence and sincerity than any other sort of Christians) and more effectually
excite every Clergyman, or pious, reasonable Christian, to innocence, purity,
sincerity, than all their Albees, Rochets, Surplisses, or other Church
vestments, which they wear only for a short season, not constantly all the day,
as they do their other induments. And why white Rochets, Surplisses,
Lawn-sleeves alone, should be badges, memorials of, or incentives to purity,
innocence, chastity; rather than all other white ordinary Vestments, Utensils,
Meats, Creatures: or why Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Clergymen
alone should wear them, when as all wear white shirts, bands, cuffs, and other
linen Garments, as well as they, without distinction, no solid reason can be
rendered to satisfy any reasonable man's judgment, or conscience.

7ly. If White be a badge of Innocence, Holiness, chastity, purity, as is
pretended, then why should not Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and all
Cathedral-men wear white Hats, Caps, Gowns, Cassocks, Girdles, Doublets,
Breeches, Stockings, Shoes, (but only black, red or russet Vestments as sundry
B^chellus De^ret Eccles. Gal. l. 6. c. 17. Johannis de Aton. Const^t
Provincialium, fol. 129, 131, 135. Lyndewood Provincial l. 3. c. 11* De vita
and honestate Cleric. Canon 6. 1603. Can. 74.
Popish Councils, and our own Canons enjoin them) as well as white Rochets,
Surplisses, or Lawn-sleeves? Or why should they not wear only their shirts,
instead of Surplisses, Rochets, upon their Gowns, Cassocks and wearing Clothes,
or their Surplisses, Rochets, Lawn-sleeves under their other Clothes, Instead
of shirts? It was a witty Question a Mr. John ^adger^ (...) of the ^^^er Temple
who (...)
prattling Girl of seven years old demanded of Doctor Laud when Bishop of
London, arrayed in his white Lawn-sleeves and Rochet. Pray Uncle why do you
wear your shirt upon your Gown and Sleeves; when other men wear their Shirts
under them? At which the Bishop smiling, could return her no Answer but this,
That it was the custom of Bishops to do it. And had she demanded of him
further, how his white Sleeves and Rochet alone could be a badg of his
universal Innocence, purity, sanctity when his Gown and all the rest of his
Garments were coal-b lack? or, whether his Innocence, purity, sanctity were not
put off together with his Lawn-sleeves, Rochet, and laid quite aside till he
put them on again? He could hardly have returned a satisfactory Answer to these
Demands.

8ly. If Bishops and Clergymen wear white Rochets, Surplisses in the Church
only to distinguish them from the people, and others not in Orders. Then 1. no
unordained Singing-men, Parish Clerks, Choristers, Scholars in our
Universities, should be commanded, as now, but prohibited to wear Surplisses in
the Church. 2ly. Bishops and Ministers respective Consecrations, Ordinations,
presentations, inductions, installments to their Bishoprics, and Benefices,
perception of their Rents, profits, tithes, and their constant preaching,
praying, officiating, baptizing, administering the Lords Supper, and diligent
exercising of their Ministry in the Church, are sufficient of themselves
without any Rochet or Surplisse, to difference them from the people, As Mu. 7.
16. 17, 20. Luke 6. 43. 1* Tim. 4. 12, 14. 2* Tim. 4. 1, 2. 5. 1* Pet. 5. 3.
Phil. 3. 17, 20.
good trees are best known by their fruits, not leaves: so are good, pious,
holy Bishops, and Ministers of the Gospel, best known and distinguished from
the Laity by their good fruits, by their diligent discharge of their Duties,
Functions; their exemplary, transcendent Piety, Charity, Humility,
Heavenly-mindednesse, and by renouncing the Pomps, vanities, riches, honors of
this present world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh, according to their
Baptismal vow, even as Pope Coelestine the 1. asserted long since in his
Epistle to the French Bishop, cited in the Title page. The Spelmarni Council. p.
293, 294, 259, 246, 264.
Council of Calchuth under our King Alswoold, Anno 787. cap. 3. prescribes this
as the principal badge and duty of every Bishop, Priest, ut diligenti cura ad
Gregem sibi commissum praedicet. The Council of Clovesho, An 747. and the
Excerptions or Canons of Egbert Archbishop of York, about the year 750. Decree:
Vt unusquisque Episcopus and Sacerdos omnibus Festis and diebus Dominicis
Evangelium Christi praedicet populo. Vt Episcopi nullatenus secularibus
negotiis, plusquam D^i servisiis (quod absit, as most have done) subditi
existant, sed maxim curam animarum habeant, ut secundum Apostolum, populum Dei
suis exemplis been corrigant, and sanae quoque Doctrinae Sermonibus instruant;
bonis utique moribus, abstinentiae virtutibus, justitiae operibus, doctrinae
studiis adornati. Yea the Su^ius Council. Tom. 3. p. 278, 279.
2d. Council of Cavailon, under the Emperor CHARLES THE GREAT, about the year
810. cap. 1, 2, 4, 5. decreed, according to the Decrees of the holy Canons, and
the Doctrine of other sacred Scriptures; Vt Episcopi assidui sint in lectione,
and scrutentur mysteria verborum Dei, quibus in Eccles^is Doctrinae fulgore
splendeant, and verborum Dei alimentis animas sibi subditas saciare non
cessent. Vt ea quae legendo persecutantur, opere compleant Mat. 4. 17. Psalm.
102. Romans 2. 1* Cor. 14.
juxta illud, caepit Jesus facere and docere. Et memoria ferentibus mandatum
ejus, ut faciant ea. Et quia non auditores legis sed factores ejus
justificabuntur Et ut Regnum Dei non est in sermon sed opere, sint subditis
norma vivendi, ita videlicet, ut and verbis and exemplis populo ad aeternam
patriam pergenti ducatum praebent; Vt vita eorum and doctrina nequaquam
discordent, sed quod dicunt, faciant, and quae faciunt docere studeant, et
Praedicatione assidua plebem admoneant, and falce justitiae a credentium
mentibus vitiorum spinas eradicent, and verbi Dei semine agros mentis eorum ad
faecunditatem perducant. Vt humilitatem atque religionem, and in vultu, and in
opere, and in habitu, and in sermon demostrent. Vt juxta Apostoli vocem
irreprehensibiles sint and moribus ornati, and nequaquam turpibus luchris
deserviant, 2 Timothy 2.
juxta illud quod ait Scriptura; Nemo militans Deo implicat se negociis
secularibus, ut ei placeat cui se probavit. The Surius Council. Tom. 3. p. 864.
Bishops in the Council of Paris under Lewis and Lotharius, Anno 829.
unanimously decreed. Statuimus pari voto, parique consensu, ut unusquisque
nostrum dictis and exemplis, plebes parochiae suae attentius ad meliora
incitens, studeat, easque ut se a malis cohibeant, etc. solicit admoneant, cum
itaque praedicatores sine cessatione populo Dei praedicare necesse sit, juxta
illud Isay. 58.
Isaiae. Clama, necesses, quasi tuba exalta vocem tuam, and annuncia populo meo
scelera eorum, etc. tum maxim) id facere necesse est, quando iram Domini
contra populum Dei, meritis exigentibus, grassari perspexerint. Juxta illud
quod Dominus per Ezechielem Prophetam loquitur, Ezech. 3. 17. etc. and c. 33.
7, 8, etc. Which is seconded by many other Bochel. Decr. Eccl. Gal. l. 5. Tit.
18, De Archiepiscopis and Episcopis and l. 1. Tit. 3. De Praedicat^^ae and
expositione Verbi Dei.
Councills in and after that age. Hence Spelmanni Council. p. 416.
Odo Archbishop of Canterbury in his Constitutions about the year 943. cap. 3.
De Officio Episcopi, admonished all Bishops and Presbyters, Quatenus cum
honestate and modestia, bonis exemplis in sanctae religionis pietate
praedicent, and populum Dei Doctrina sua erudiant and informent, ut suas
Parochias omni anno cum omni vigslantia praedicando verbum Dei circumeant:
Absque ullo timore vel adulatione cum omni fiducia verbum Dei praedicare, Regi,
Principibus populi sui, omnibus dignitatibus, and nunquam veritatem subter
fugere. Upon which considerations our famous Martyr * John Purny preached at
Bristow, An. 1392. Quod quilibet Sacerdos magis debet demittere Matutinas,
Missam and Vesperas, and caeteras horas Canonicas quam praedicationem verbi
Dei, eo quod solum traditione humana ordinantur; and Nicholas de Hereford then
publicly taught, Nullas est vere Praelatus, nec habilis ad Praelaciam nisi sit
doctor et praedicator, which positions our un-preaching and rare-preaching
Prelates then deemed Heretical, though the very doctrine of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 3.
2. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 4, 5. Acts 20. 28. The discharge of these their Episcopal
and Sacerdotal duties, would more adorn and demonstrate them to be Bishops and
Ministers^, then all their Episcopal or Sacerdotal Vestments, wherewith they
now load and make themselves more unable to discharge these duties. I shall
close up this particular with the words of our famous John Wicliff, Dialogorum
l. 4. c. 17. De avaritia Cleri. f. 128. Sic intelligunt aliqui dictum Christi,
Mat. 10. Nihil tuleritis in via, ne peram, etc. Non enim debent viri Apostoloci
tardari cum alique temporali, quod vel eorum affectionem, vel occupationem, quo
ad suum Officium impediret. Nuda autem and moderata habitio per vergam gestam
in manibus potest intelligi. Vnde sicut oneratus multiplici vestimento est
saepe per hoc indispositus ad iter: sic ( Episcopus and Sacerdos) oneratus
temporalibus est saepe indispositus ad prodessendum Ecclesiae: Et ad istum
sensum dixit Christus ubi supra, neque duas tunicas habeatis, and ista lex
Christi est fundata in lege Naturae cum qua nemo poterit dispensare: Therefore
no Popes no Bishops can dispense therewith, much less Decree against it.

9ly. For the objected Text of Eccles. 9. 8. Let thy Garments be always white:
if taken only in a See here, P. 75, 76.
mistical sense for purity of life, chastity, innocence, or justification by
the blood, robes of the righteousness of Jesus Christ, as some expound the
place, it is nothing to the purpose; If literally interpreted, it quite
subverts the Objectors. For 1. It is universal, extending equally to all
Laymen and Clergymen, not confined to Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and
Ecclesiastical persons alone, to whom white Rochets and Surplisses are
appropriated. 2ly. It is universal in respect of time and place ^oo, Let thy
Garments be always white, as well by night as by day; as well before and after
Divine Service, Mass, Sacraments, as during their Celebration; as well out of
Cathedrals, Churches, Chapels, as in them; as well in your eating, drinking,
feasting, and private Family, or Closet devotions, as in the Cathedral or
Parochial Church or Chapel, at Common Prayers or Sacraments; to which times and
places alone the wearing of Rochets, Surplisses, principally confined by Popish
Councils, and our Bishops Canons, against the words of this Text. 3ly. This
Text no ways relates to Common prayers, Divine service or Sacraments in the
Church, or to Bishops, Priests, Deacons; (not then in use) but to men's See
Gulielm. Stuckius, Antiqu. Conviv. l. 2. c. 26. Here, p. 114.
feasting and joyful conversation out of the Church, as is evident by the next
succeeding words, And let thy Head lack no ointment. Live joyfully with thy
wife whom thou love, all the days of thy Vanity, etc. and the words next
preceding, Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry
heart, for God now accepts thy works. Therefore to apply it only to Divine
service, Sacraments, and appropriate it to Bishops and Clergymen, their Rochets
and Surplisses, is a most gross abuse, and perversion of this Text, and the Sea Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gal. l. 6. Tit. 13, 14. Claudius Espensaeus in
Tit 2. and de continentia, lib. John Bales Acts of English Votaries, Bishop
Halls honor of the married Clergy.
Popish Canons prohibiting the marriage of Priests, prescribing the wearing of
black Gowns, Cassocks, by Bishops, Priests, Deacons, (if ever intended in this
Text) are diametrically repugnant thereunto. 4. The words are in the Plural
Number, Let thy Garments be always white; Therefore Bishops, Priests, Deacons
should always wear white Hats, Gowns, Dublets, Stockings, Shoes, as well as
white Rochets, Surplisses; yea wear their Rochets, Surplisses always as they
do their Shirts; not wear Black Goats, Gowns, Cassocks, Dublets, Hose at any
time, and their Rochets, Surplisses only in the Church, as their See Bochellus
l. ^. Tit. 17.
Councils and Canons prescribe, point blank against this Text, under severe
penalties. 4ly. The Roman Missals, Pontificals, and Gulielmus Durantus
prescribe the wearing of other colored Garments, even in time of Mass, Divine
service, and Sacraments, beside White, and the laying aside of White Garments
in the Church it self on sundry Festivalls and days of public worship. As
namely black Vestments, (not white Rochets or Surplisses) all the Passion week
before Easter, on days of Affliction, and Abstinence for sin, in Rogations,
in Masses or Processions for the Dead, from Advent till the Vigills of the
Nativity, and on the Feasts of Innocents; on which Day some used to wear
Black, others Red; upon sundry other Lords days and Feasts they prescribe
Bishops and Priests to wear Red, on other days Green or Violet vestments, and
White only on other Sundays, Festivals, in the Celebration of Divine service
and Administration of Sacraments; whence they style White, Red, Black, Green,
the Quatuor sunt principales colores quibus secundum proprietates dierum,
sacr^s vestes Ecclesia distinguit; albus, niger and violdis, etc. Durantus Rat.
Divin. l. 3.
four Principal colors used by the Church; to which they reduce these five
other Colors, used likewise in the Roman Church, viz. Scarlet, Silken, Violet,
Saffron, Rose-colour, producing several Texts of Scripture (miserably wrested
by them) for to prove the use of all these respective Colors in the time of
Gods public worship, as well as the use of White, seconded with sundry
mystical Reasons and significations, which those who please to make themselves
merry with, may read at large in Durantus, l. 3. De quatuor coloribus quibus
Ecclesia in Ecclesiasti^is utitur indumentis: Now this objected Text, Let thy
Garments be always White, routs all these Romish regiments of Black-coats,
Red-coats, Green-coats, Blew-coates, Yellow-coats, Scarlet-coats, Silken-coats,
Rose-coats, at once, and White-coats too, as appropriated only to Churches,
Divine service, Sacraments, Bishops and Ecclesiastical Persons. Therefore they
must henceforth either renounce this their objected Text, or all these their
sacred Vestments and foreceited Robes, to which they are so much devoted.

The third Scripture Argument for the necessary use of white Rochets,
Surplisses in Divine service and Sacraments administration, is from Dan. 7. I
beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit; WHOSE
GARMENT WAS WHITE AS SNOW, and the hair of his head like the pure wool, etc.
compared with Mat. 17. 2. Mark 9. 3. Luke 9. 3. Jesus takes Peter, James and
John and brings them into a high mountain apart, and was transfigured before
them, and his face did shine as the sun, and his Garment was WHITE as the
light: ( so Matthew) And his raiment became shining, exceeding WHITE as snow,
so as no Fuller on earth can white them; so Mark records it: Ergo, Bishops,
Priests, Deacons must wear white Rochets and Surplisses in time of Divine
service and Sacraments in all Churches, Chapels, is but a ridiculous Non
sequitur.

For First, That Text in Daniel relates only to Christ sitting on the Throne
as a Judge, at the end of the world, not officiating as a Priest in the Church.
Ergo, all Judges must wear white Robes, Surplisses when they sit on judgment,
is a better inference thence, than that Bishops, Priests, Deacons must wear
them when they mininister in the Church. Secondly, His hair was white as wool,
as well as his garment, therefore they should all have white Hair or Periwigs,
as well as white Rochets and Surplisses, when they celebrate Divine service or
Sacraments. Thirdly, Our See here. p* 40, 41.
Saviors Transfiguration was miraculous, not ordinary; but once, not weekly;
in a high mountain apart, not within a Temple, Synagogue, Church, Cathedral,
before three only of his Disciples, not the whole congregation or multitude:
and his ordinary wearing garments miraculously became white and shining as the
light, not as linen; and so exceeding white as no Fuller on earth can white
them, and that only during this transfiguration, not afterward. Therefore
this miraculous President gives not the least shadow of warrant or president
for Bishops, Priests, Deacons ordinary wearing white Rochets or Surplisses when
they read Common Prayer, or administer Sacraments in Churches; And they might,
like Christ, forbear such white garments, till by miracles their faces become
shining as the Sun, and their black, ordinary wearing garments become as white
and shining as his. Fourthly, Our Savior never put on a white Garment, Robe or
Rochet whiles he publicly prayed, preached upon earth; nor yet when he was
thus transfigured in the mount, nor did Peter, James or John, who were present
at, and witnesses to his transfiguration, nor any other of his Apostles we read
of, wear any white Rochets, Surplisses, or linen vestments when they preached
or celebrated the Lords Supper, or Baptism in imitation of our Savior white
shining Garments, neither were they or their garments thus transfigured or made
white when present at Christ's transfiguration, or afterward. Therefore Bishops,
Priests, Prelates upon all these accounts, should henceforth lay aside these
vestments, since Christ himself and his Apostles never used them; and no longer
wrest our Saviors miraculous transfiguration, and these sacred Texts, beyond
all bounds of reason, modesty, Christianity, to maintain their own Popish
superstitious inventions, and abuse the ignorant vulgar with such gross
delusions, which all judicious sober Christians must either abominate or deride.

The fourth plea insisted on for Bishops Rochets, and Priests white Surplisses
in time of Divine service and Sacraments, is that of Matthew. 28. 3. and Mark 16.
5. At the time of Christ's resurrection, an Angel of the Lord descended from
heaven, rolled back the stone from the Sepulcher and sat upon it: His
countenance was like lightning, and his raiment WHITE as snow. And his
Disciples saw a young man ( to wit this Angel in a young man's shape) sitting on
the right hand of Christ's sepulcher, clothed in a long WHITE garment: who said
unto them, be not afraid, for ye seek Jesus of Nazareth which was crucified: he
is risen, he is not here: Ergo, Bishops, Priests, Deacons must wear white
Rochets or Surplisses in Divine administrations.

I answer, First, That the Person thus clad in a long white garment, was an
Angel of the Lord descending from Heaven, not a Bishop, Priest, Deacon or
Minister. Secondly, His long white Garment was no Rochet nor Surplisse.
Thirdly, He wore it not at all in any Temple, Church or Synagogue, but once at
or in our Saviors Sepulcher. And that but once, at his miraculous
resurrection, not constantly or ordinarily: Fifthly, To roll away the stone,
and instruct Christ's Disciples of his resurrection, not to say Mass, preach, or
read Common Prayer, or administer the Lords Supper. Sixthly, The Disciples who
saw him thus clad never imitated his white garments while they lived, much less
should Bishops and Priest (who never saw him) after their decease, without
warrant from Christ, the Angel or Disciples. The self same Answer serves to the
Objection from Acts 1. 10* where two Angels in the shape of men stood by the
Disciples in WHITE apparel, whiles they behold Christ's ascension into heaven,
and spoke the words there recorded to them: which Waldensis, Durantus and
others impertinently allege, for the use of long white Surplisses, vestments,
or Rochets of Bishops and Priests in the Church.

5. The Fifth Text produced is that of Rev. 3. 4. Thou have a few names in
Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in
WHITE for they are worthy. Ergo, Bishops must wear white Rochets and Surplisses
in time of Mass and Divine Service: Acute Logic, worthy of laughter rather
then reply.

For 1. These few persons in Sardis were neither Bishops nor Priests; these
words being not spoken to nor of the Angel of the Church of Sardis; (whom our
Bishops and Prelatists will needs have to be the sole Bishop of that Church,
but to others:) Therefore if any argument may be hence deduced for the use of
Rochets or Surplices, it is, that Lay Saints who have not defiled themselves
with sins corruptions of the times, but kept themselves undefiled, must wear
Rochets and Surplices, not temporizing Bishops or Priests. 3. They are
promised, hereafter to walk in white with Christ in heaven, and that by way of
reward, witness ver. 5. He that overcommeth the SAME SHALL BE CLOTHED IN
WHITE RAIMENT, and I will not blot his name out of the book of life, but I will
confess his name before my Father and his Angels; not commanded to say Mass,
or Common Prayer in the Church on earth by way of duty, ministry or distinction
from other Saints. 3. The white garments here meant, are only the robes of
eternal glory in heaven; not white Rochets, lawn sleeves, or material
Surplisses, as the abusers of this Text pretend and must acknowledge.

6. The sixth Text produced for Surplisses and Rochets is Rev. 4. 4. And round
about the throne, were twenty four seats, and upon the Seats I saw twenty four
elders sitting CLOTHED IN WHITE RAIMENT, and they had on their heads crowns of
gold. Ergo, Bishops must wear white Rochets, Miters of gold, and Priests white
Surplisses.

The sequel is denied. 1. Because there is no Bishop but only Elders mentioned
in the Text. 2. These Elders are but twenty four, and they only had white
raiment. 3. They sat in heaven upon Thrones in their white robes, not in any
Church or Cathedral on earth. 4. They sat constantly in those white vestments,
and never did put them off. 5. They had no other raiment on them but these
white robes: Therefore all Bishops and Priests, if they will be like these
Elders, and pursue these presidents, must wear no black doublets, cassocks,
gowns, cloaks, Wastcoats, but only white Rochets, Surplisses as they did. 6.
They sat in them upon Thrones, and had all crowns of gold upon their heads: If
this then be a president for our lordly royal Prelates, and Clergyes punctual
imitation, they must all sit upon thrones with golden crowns on their heads,
like Kings, as well as with white Rochets, Surplisses on their backs like
Prelates and Priests; which I presume they yet dare not do, and his Majesty
with his Nobility will not now suffer, should their pride and ambition prompt
them to it.

7. The seventh president insisted on is, Rev. 6. 9, 10, 11. Where St. John saw
under the Altar, the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for
the testimony which they held, etc. and WHITE ROBES were given to every one of
them.

If any consequences can be hence deduced, they are only these. 1. That those
Saints and Laymen, who suffer martyrdom for the word and testimony of God on
earth, shall have white robes, not of fine linen, but of eternal glory, given
them by God for a reward in Heaven. Not that Bishops and Priests alone, which
were never slain nor martyred for Christ, and none else but they must now wear
white Rochets and Surplisses, on earth.

2. These Souls lay interred, crying to God from under the Altar, to avenge
their blood on them that dwell on the earth. therefore they are no presidents
or warrant for Bishops or Priests to wear Surplisses or white Rochets when they
officiate at or upon their new erected Altars, and dispense Christ's Body and
blood sacramentally to their people, in their Cathedrals and Parish Churches.
3. These white robes were not material ones, made of ^awn or linen by
semstresses, nor bought with money; but spiritual and heavenly, made, and
freely given unto them by God himself: therefore Bishops and Priests who
contend for material Rochets and Surplisses from this Text; must now quite
renounce them, and produce some better proof.

8. This they presume to do in the eighth place, from Rev. 7. 9, 13, 14. cha.
15. 6. and cha. 19. 14. which I shall couple together to make the proof more
strong. After this I beheld and a great multitude which no man could number of
all Nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues stood before the throne, and
before the lamb, CLOTHED WITH WHITE ROBES, and palms in their hands. And cried
with a loud voice, Salvation to our God which sits upon the throne, and unto
the Lamb, etc. And one of the Elders answered saying unto me, what are these
WHICH ARE ARRAYED IN WHITE ROBES? and whence came they? And I said unto him,
Sir, thou know: and he said unto me, these are they which came out of great
tribulation, and HAVE WASHED THEIR ROBES, and MADE THEM WHITE IN THE BLOOD OF
THE LAMB; Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and
night in his Temple, etc. And the seven Angels came out of the Temple, having
the seven plagues, CLOTHED IN WHITE, and having their breasts girded with
golden girdles. And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse, and he that
sat upon him was clothed in a vesture dipped in blood, and his name is called,
the Word of God. And the Armies which were in heaven followed him upon white
horses, CLOTHED IN WHITE LINEN, FINE AND CLEAN. Ergo, Bishops and Priests,
ought always to wear white Rochets and Vestments in time of Mass, Sacraments
and Divine service.

Can any wise men or fools either, forbear laughter at such a ridiculous
conclusion from these premises, as Durantus, Walden with other Papists, and
some of our own Prelates and Ceremony-mongers deduce from them with great
seriousness, but little candor and sobriety.

Especially if they well consider, 1. That those arrayed in white Robes, Rev.
7. 9, 13, 14. were not Bishops, Priests or Ecclesiastical persons alone, or
under any such capacity; but a great number which no man could number, of all
Nations and kindreds and people, and tongues. Therefore if any proper
consequence can be hence deduced in relation to white Rochets or Surplisses, it
is only this, That all sanctified, regenerate Christians, Saints, of what
nations, kindred, people and tongues soever, ought to wear white Rochets and
Surplisses.

Secondly, All this innumerable multitude of all nations and people thus
clothed with white Robes; stood clad continually in them before the Throne and
Lamb, serving God in them day and night, and never put them off, having no
other Vestments besides, verse. 15, 16, 17. Therefore if this Text be pressed
home, in relation to Bishops, Priests, Ministers, they ought always to wear
their Rochets and Surplisses day and night, but not vestment else, and never to
put them off; and always to stand before God in his Temple day and night, as
these Saints did but never to sit in their Thrones, Stalls, Pues, nor yet to
kneel as they now usually do.

Thirdly, that Bishops and Priests ought always to have palms in their hands,
as well as long white robes and Rochets, on their backs in the Temple, because
all these white Saints had so.

Fourthly, These Saints white robes wherewith they were clad, were only
spiritual, not corporal or material; even their white and immaculate holiness
by the washing away of their sins in the blood of Christ; as is evident by the
Text, these are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, compared with Rev. 1. 5.
Ephesians. 5. 27, 28.

Fifthly, The seven Angels coming out of the Temple clothed in pure white
linen, had the seven Plagues, and poured out the viols of Gods wrath upon the
earth: Therefore if real Bishops (as our Prelates pretend the Angels of the
seven Churches were, chapter 2. 1, 3.) who went constantly clad in their white
robes, as well out of the Temple as in. It will be no great honor to them to
be thus arrayed, since they only carried the Plagues, and poured out the viols
of Gods wrath upon the earth, when thus arrayed.

Sixthly, If the last Text be truly enforced, it will thence most properly be
inferred, That Bishops, Priests and Clergymen should always ride and march
about upon white Horses, clothed in clean and fine white linen, not on black
or bay Horses, nor in black Canonical coats, cassocks, cloaks, as now they
usually do. 2* That they must march many together in Troops and Armies thus
arrayed. 3. That all other Christians following Jesus Christ, (the Word of God)
should do the like, rather then that they should only say Mass, read
Common Prayers, Preach, administer the Sacraments in fine white linen
Garments, Rochets, Surplisses, in their Cathedral or Pari^h Churches, wherein
they never use to ride on Horses, but only out of them. These are all the
Scriptures produced for the justification of the use, convenience, and decency
of Bishops Rochets, and Clergy-mens Surplisses; which though alleged with very
great gravity and seriousness, by chose who pretend themselves the most
reverend, learned Fathers of the Church, are most palpable abusers, and
wretched Perverters of Gods sacred Word, to countenance their own vain
Innovations and Superstitions, as the premises demonstrate.

To draw toward a conclusion of this Discourse: I have often times admired, that
when most sorts of Laborers, Workmen, Servants, set themselves to their
occupations and work, they constantly put off their outward wearing Garments,
and ordinary wearing clothes, as impediments thereunto, that yet Popes,
Bishops, Deacons, Ministers, when they are to officiate and labor in the work
of their Ministry, should put on far more garments on their backs, than they
had on before, contrary to the Apostles practice, and our Saviors command, who
bid them when he sent them forth to preach, Mat. 10. 10. Mark 6. 9. Luke 9. 3*
Not to provide, or put on two Coats apiece: which would hinder them in their
Ministry. We daily see Watermen, when they intend to row and ply their Oars,
that Carters, Threshers, Mowers, Reapers, Carpenters, Masons, Bricklayers,
Carriers, Tanners, Butchers, Fullers, when they buckle themselves to their
respective works; Footmen, when they travel or run a race; yea, Noblemen,
Gentlemen, and others, when they seriously set themselves to their very
recreations in the Tennis-Court, or Field, dousually strip themselves to their
very Shirts or Wastecoats, that they may more vigorously pursue their work,
callings and recreations. And why Bishops, Priests, Deanes, Prebends,
Archdeacons, Ministers, Deacons, should not do the like when they are to
discharge the work of their Ministry; but on the contrary, load themselves
with Cassockes, Gowns, Copes, Surplisses, Rochets, Girdles, Planets, Palls,
Chymeres, Pectoral Crosses, Hoods, Caps, Miters, Crosiers, or three or four
more Vestments than they had on before, seems a riddle unto all who seriously
consider it; of which no other true, solid reason can be rendered, but that
they intend to loyter, or do their work coldly, negligently, or by halves,
rather than vigorously, zealously to pursue it. This experience it self
sufficiently manifests to be the genuine reason; for ever since Popes,
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Chapters, and other Clergymen (contrary to the
Apostles, primitive Bishops, and Ministers practice) have loaded themselves
with Cassockes, Gowns, Copes, Palls, Rochets, Miters, Surplisses, Hoods, and
other superfluous Vestments, they have been very negligent and remiss in
preaching, (the principal work of their Ministry) in administering the
Sacraments, fasting and praying too, which they translate to their Curates and
Choristers: Ingentos Curati ( as we^l as Curae) stupent, leves loquuntur.
Yea, Popes, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Prebends, who have
greater Honors, Revenues, and more variety of Vestments on their backs than
other Ministers, usually have been, and still are, less frequent, diligent,
zealous, fervent, and more cold, frozen, sloathfull, in preaching, praying, and
the work of the Ministry, than the inferior Clergy, and poorest Curates; it
being a general observation, that poor Country Curates, Lecturers, Ministers,
who have small Pensions, Benefices, and scarce money in their Purses to buy a
Cassock, Gown, Hood, Surplisse, or Canonical Coat, do Preach, Fast, Pray, read
Divine Service, baptize, administer the Lords Supper, Catechize, visit the sick
more frequently in one year, than Popes, Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Canons,
and other rich Pluralists in ten or twenty years space.

It is a common observation, that the forehorse in the Teame, which carries all
the Plumes, Bells, trappings, usually draws and works the least; that Sumpter
Horses, which carry Kings, Nobles, Judges, Prelates, Commanders Robes,
Vestments, when they travel, are more slow in their pace than Hackney horses,
which bear no such lumber; that Officers and Soldiers who are most laden with
multiplicity of offensive or defensive Arms, are slowest of all others in
their march, like David in Saul's heavy armor, 1 Samuel 17. 38, 39, 40. yea, most
unweldy, unserviceable when they come to fight; that the little Creepers, not
the great Brass shining Andirons, bear all the Wood, and heat of the Fire: And
is it not so with Bishops and Clergymen? the more rich, great, pompous they
grow, the more Pontifical or Priestly vestments they wear, the less spiritual
work and service they perform; yea, so sloathfull are they (for the most part)
in the 1 Cor. 15. 58. Romans 1^. 11.
work of the Lord, wherein they should always abound; that instead of sweating
in the Lords Harvest, they put on double or trebble the clothes they had
before, when they are to read, preach, pray, or administer the Sacrament, to
keep them from freezing, even when they are at their harvest labor. God
preserve his Church from such cold, frozen, unzealous, lazy Workmen, and Mat.
9. 37, 38. and 10. 2.
send forth more painful Laborers (not so muffled up in variety of vestments)
into his Vineyard and Harvest. Nothing more (that either I know or have read)
can be objected for these Surplisses and superfluous Church Vestments, but
their pretended Antiquity and usage in the Church.

To which I answer, 1. That they were neither known to, Dan. 7* 9. 21.
nor used, nor prescribed by Christ himself, the ancient of days, nor by his
Apostles, nor by the primitive Christians, Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, for
above three hundred years after Christ; therefore they are all but modern
Novelties, in respect of Apostolical, real, primitive antiquity; and so rather
to be decryed, rejected as Innovations, then approved for their pretended, not
true Antiquity, as well as other See Thomas Beacons Relics of Rome.
old Popish Prelates.

2. For their pretended Decency, I have not only read many learned, discreet,
conscientious, sober Scholars Treatises, censuring them as undecent as well as
superfluous; but heard some Ladies, Women, yea Children, deride them as mere
antic disguises.

3. If Tertullians Book de Pallio, or 2 Timothy 4. 13. may be umpire, a cloak will
be more ancient, decent for a Minister, Bishop, Christian, then a Rochet or
Surplisse.

4. Antiquity is no plea at all in point of Vestments, whose forms, fashions,
Genesis 7. 7. 21. and 15. 12. Heb. 11, 37.
matter, are always various, mutable with times and places; whence the Holy
Ghost himself uses this expression in sacred Writ, Psalm. 102. 26 See Aretius,
P^bl locus 122. de vestimentis. Gul Stuckius Antiq C^al. 2, c. 2^, 27.
As a Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed, but thou art
the same. That English man or woman who should now take up or retain the
Garments, fashions used in Adams, the Britains, Saxons, Danes, Normans times;
or but in the Reigns of King Edward the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, Henry the
eighth, Queen Elizabeth, or King James, would be reputed a Cynick, Fantastic,
or Fanatic (especially at Court) and the very boys in the streets would shout
at them. Why then should not Bishops and Ministers Rochets, Surplisses, Church
Vestments be as changeable as other men's Garments, or their own ordinary
wearing clothes, which they all change with the times? We know by experience,
that all Nations, Manners, Laws, Governments, Governors, Customs, Languages,
are variable, yea changed with times and occasions; that all things under the
Sun are subject to variation; why not then these Ecclesiastical Vestments,
about which there have been formerly so many frequent and sierce contentions,
for our Churches and Kingdoms peace? Our very humane bodies (and Bishops,
Ministers bodies too, as well as others) are daily subject to alterations: from
infancy to youth, from youth to manhood, from manhood to age, yea to old age,
from health to sickness; and shall Bishops or Priests Vestments only be
immutable? though originally grounded on Popes Decrees; instituted by them to
adorn their exploded Sacrifice of the Mass, and Altar-services, and founded
upon strange perversions of sacred Scriptures, or most absurd, ridiculous,
monkish, fanatic Reasons, mystical significations, crochets, and the pretended
transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine into Christ's natural body and blood,
which all Protestants cannot but disclaim.

Since therefore what the Apostle concludes of meats, is likewise true of all
these Vestmets: 1 Cor. 8* 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
But meat (a Rochet, Surplisse, Hood, etc.) commend us not to God; for neither
if we eat (or wear them without scandal to others) are we the better; neither
if we eat (or wear them) not, are we the worse. Let all Bishops, Ministers,
Christians, upon the consideration of the premises, henceforth take up the same
Apostles resolution and inference from thence, recorded for their imitation:
But take heed lest this liberty (or power) of yours, become a stumbling block
to those that are weak; and through thy knowledge shall the weak brother
perish, for whom Christ dyed? But when ye sin so against the Brethren, and
wound their weak consciences (by using or imposing these Garments on them, with
rigor, against their wills and judgments) YE SIN AGAINST CHRIST; Wherefore if
meat (much more then if wearing these pontifical, Sacerdotal Vestments) offend,
or make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh (much less wear or impose
all or any of these Church Vestments) whilst the world stands, lest I make my
brethren to offend. And seeing these old Proverbs are most true, inserted into
the Canon Law it self, Caeliu^ Rho*^ig. Antiqu* ^ect. l, ^. v. 12* Gratian.
Did* 40.
Cucullus non facit Monachum, non item Isiacos linostola; aut Sacerdotes
amictus linei: Non Cathedra sacerdotem facit, sed Cathedram sacerdos; nec locus
seu vestis sanctificat hominem, sed locum and vestem homo. Upon which
considerations, the Surius council, tom. 4. p. 513, 514.
fourth Council of Carthage, Can. 15. and 45. decreed, Vt Episcopus vilem
supellectilem, and mensam ac victum pauperem habeat, and dignitatis suae
authoritatem, FIDEI and VITAE MERITIS QVAERAT, NEC VESTIBVS NEC CALCEAMENTIS
DECOREM QVAERAT, (which is since inserted by Gratian into the body of the Popes
Canon Law, though he truly adds in his Gloss, Hoc hodie non tenet quia modo
habent amplas possessiones.) I shall heartily, humbly, and importunately
beseech all Bishops, Ministers, Deacons and Christians whatsoever in general,
and all true members of the Church of England in special, upon serious perusal
of all the premises, from henceforth, not with the Roman Pontifical or Durantus
Magno Conatu Nugas agere, as Popes, Popish Prelates, Priests, Friars, and
little children use to do; nor yet to place the least holiness, piety,
necessity, or indispensible expediency in the use or wearing of Episcopal and
Sacerdotal Vestments, in celebration of Divine-service and Sacraments; nor any
longer rigorously to impose, or unchristianly to contend about them, they being
just like accidents in relation to the substance of Gods worship and true
Religion, which may be as well absent as present, without destruction of, or
prejudice to either; but rather seriously to fix all their meditations upon
those WHITE Windingsheets, wherein they shall all shortly be Interred in their
graves, stripped naked of all those Priestly Rags, Robes, Vestments, about which
they now overmuch contend; and seriously to endeavor to put off those old
filthy rags of fin, and put on all those spiritual Garments, Armor, Graces,
which the Gospel it self in direct terms enjoins them to put on, and that under
pain of eternal damnation, in these ensuing texts (wherewith I shall conclude)
about which there will, there can be no disputes, Romans 13. 12, 13, 14. Let us
therefore cast off the works of darkness, and put on the Armor of light: Let
us walk honestly, as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying; but PVT YE ON THE LORD
JESUS CHRIST, and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof,
Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. That ye put off concerning the former conversation, the
old man, which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts; and ^e renewed in
the spirit of your minds; and that ye put ON THE NEW Man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness. Ephesians. 6. 11, etc. PVT ON THE
WHOLE ARMOVR OF GOD, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the
Devil: Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on
the breast plate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of
the Gospel of peace; Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall
be able to quench all the fiery darts of the Devil: And take the helmet of
salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God: Praying
always, WITH ALL PRAYER AND SVPPLICATION (not with common or Canon prayer
alone, to which too many now confine themselves and others) watching thereunto
with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints. Col. 13. 12, 13, 14, 15.
PVT ON therefore (as the Elect of God holy and beloved) bowels of mercy,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a complaint against any,
even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye: And above all these things, PVT ON
CHARITY, which is the bond of perfectness and let the peace of God rule in
your hearts, to the which also ye are called in one body, and be ye thankful:
Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing with
grace in your hearts to the Lord: And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all
in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father through him.
The putting on of all these Evangelical WHITE sacred garments, the using of
such Church prayers and music, in all Cathedrals, Collegiate and Parochial
Churches, by our Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, and others; and the abandoning
all Papal, unevangelical, 3 Car. Petition of Right. Surius Council. Tom. 3. p.
279, 280. Laur. Bochellus Decret. Eccl. Gal. l. 3. Tit 2. c. 85. p. 402.
illegal, dangerous Oaths of Canonical obedience from Ministers to Bishops, not
warranted by Law or Gospel, (thus censured, inhibited, by the whole second
Council of Cavailon, under Charles the Great, about the year 812. cap. 12)
Dictum est de quibusdam fratribus, quod eos, quos ordinaturi sunt Iurare
cogant, quod digni sint, and contra Canones non sint facturi, et obedientes
sint Episcopo, qui eos ordinat, and Ecclesiae, in qua ordinantur: Quod
Iuramentum, quia periculosum, omnes una inhibendum statuimus, which Oaths are
now rigorously enforced, against his Majesty's Declaration, and Petition of
Right, 3 Caroli, to support these superfluous Vestments and Ceremonies) will
thoroughly reconcile all dissenting Parties; but a period to all future
controversies concerning the premises, and make us all the Temples of the
living God; 2 Cor. 6. 16.
who will then say, I will dwell in them* (walk in them) and will be their God,
and they shall be my People.

Prove. 25. 2.The Honor of Kings is to search out a matter. 1 These. 5. 41,
42.Prove all things, hold fast that which is good, abstain from all appearance
of evil. AN APPENDIX To the Fourth Section, CONCERNING The Use of White,
Black, and other colored Garments, both by Pagans, Jews and Christians, in
Feasts, Funerals, Plays, Inaugurations, sacred Duties, and their various
mystical Significations, Excellency and Dignity.
BEcause I would pretermit nothing, which may either inform, or satisfy the
Learned Readers of this Pacifick Examination, relating to the use of White
Vestments, both among Pagans, Jews and Christians, upon several Civil and
Religious Occasions, Grounds, Reasons; I thought ^it (by way of Appendix) to
annex this ensuing learned Discourse of Joannes Gulielmus Stuckius, Tigurinus,
concerning White Garments, in his 2d Book, Antiquilatum Convivialium; cap. 26.
De Vestitu Conviviali; DE VESTIUM ALBARUM (QUAE IN EPULIS POTISSIMUM USURPARI
FUERUNT SOLITAE ac in genere COLORIS ALBI USU, SIGNIFICATIONE, PRAESTANTIA AC
DIGNITATE: Editio secunda, Tiguri, 1597. f. 234. to 240. fraught with greatest
variety of Learning, of any Treatise I have read concerning this subject.

SEquitur nunc tertia corporis ad epulas futuras praeparandi actio, Albi
coloris vestitum in conviviis vsitatum fuisse. Vestium candidarum usus apud
^udaeos.
quae in vesitu consistit, etc. Equidem ex veterum scriptorum monumentis facile
colligi posse existimo, albi potissimum coloris vestitum in conviviis usitatum
fuisse, ita ut nigris vestibus accumbere apud gentes quasdam nephas duceretur:
unde and (...) Bachar, elegit nonnulli arbitrantur, compositum a (...) and
(...) chor, candidum, quod quae sunt candida, eligantur and approbentur. Philo
de vita Theoretica testatur, Judaeos olim dierum festorum convivia (...), hoc
est, albatos seu candidatos agitare fuisse solitos: ex quo illud: Quovis
tempore vestimenta tua candida sunt. Huc quoque referendus ille mos Judaeorum
decimum quintum diem mensis Ab celebrandi vestibus albis, atque choreis: de quo
sic scriptum extat in Tabanit fol. 26, p. 1. Decima quinta mensis Ab, id est,
Julii, filiae Jerusalem egrediebantur in vestibus albis, quas qui non habebant,
a ditioribus mutuo sumebant, ne, cui vestes deerant, remorarentur, quo minus ad
choreas venirent: omnes vestes lavabantur. Filiae Jerusalem egrediebantur, and
choreas ducebant, in vineis. Quid vero dicebant? Adolescens attolle oculos
tuos, and vide quam tu velis eligere ex omnibus, ne respicias pulchritudinem,
siquidem fallax est, at eam, Vsus vestium candid^rum ^pud Romanos in diebus
^estis.
quae Deum timet, lauds. Idem mos apud Romanos quoque fuit. Hinc Horat. lib*
2. Sat.

Ille repotia, natales, aliosve dierum.
Festos albatus celebret.
De usu vestium candidarum in diebus festis apud Romanos multa alia testimonia
praeter Horatii, extan^ apud auctore^. Xiphilinus, die celebri Romae ob
ingressum Teridatis; (...), id est, populus albatus, and laureatus. Vopiscus in
Florian. Tantum illud dico: Senatores omnes ea laetitia esse elatos, ut domibus
suis omnes albas hostias caederent, albati sederent. Persius: -- Negato
Juppiter hoc illi, quamvis te albata rogaret.

Prudentius contra Symmachum, Exultare patres videas Pulcherrima mundi
Lumina, conciliumque senum gestire Catonum
Candidiore toga, nivium pietatis amictum
Sumere. Et Ovidius,


Vestibus intactis (usu nondum sordidis, aut absoletis) Tarpeias itur in arces;
Persius in re simili, Et populus festo concolor ipse suo est.
Scilicet hoc populo pexusque togaque recenti
Et natalitia tandem cum Sardonyche albus
Sede leges celsa. Idem Satyr. 2.


Vota negato Juppiter haec illi, quam^^ albata regant. ^d est, vestibus albis
amicta. Cic. in Leg. Color albus praecipue As if God were delighted with
colors.
Deo decoru^ est, cum in caeteris, tum maxim in textill. Nec vero solum in
natalitiis, and repotiis, and nuptialibus aut sponsalibus, sed etiam in
funebribus coenis hauc consuetudinem servatam fuisse. locuples testis est M.
Tullius in Va^^nium: ubi illi objicit, quod coenaverit atratus: verba ejus haec
sunt: Atque illud etiam scire cupio, quo consilio, aut qua mente feceris, ut in
epulo Cn. Arii familiaria mei cum toga pulsa accumberes: quem unquam videri^,
quem audieris, quo exemplo, quo more feceris? In coenis sun^ bribus albat^
(...).
Dice^, supplicationes te illas non putasse. Optime. Nullae fuerint
supplicationes, etc. Quis unquam coenavit atratus? ita enim illud epulum est
funebrae, ut munus sit funeris, epulae quidem ipse dignitatis. Sed omitto
epulum, populi Romani festum diem argento, vest, omni apparatu visendo: qui^
unquam in lactu domestico, quis in funeri familiari coenavit cum toga pulla?
cui de balneis exeunti (en consuetudinem balneandi ante epulas) praeter te,
toga pulla unquam data est? cum tot hominum millia accumberent: cum ipse epuli
dominus Quintus Acius albatus esset, Balnea ante Epulas.
tu in templum Castoris te cum Caio Figulo atrato, caeterisque tuis furiis
funestum intulisti. Quis tum non ingemuit, etc. Hunc tum morem ignorabas?
nunquam epulum videras? nunquam puer, aut adolescens inter coevos fueras?
Fausti adolescentis nobilissimi paulo ante ex epulo magnificentissimo famem
illam veterem tuam non expleras? quem accumbere atratum videras dominum cum
toga pulla and ^jus amicos ante convivi^m? Quae te tanta tenuit amentia, ut tu,
nisi id fecisses, quod fas non fuit, nisi violasses templum Castoris, nomen
epuli, oculos civium, morem veterum (hinc constat morem hunc fuisse vetustum)
ejus qui te invitarat auctoritatem, parum putares testificatum esse,
supplicationes te illas non putasse. Ex gravi hac Ciceronis invectiva satis
constat, Romanos veteres convivia iniisse albatos, ita ut nephas ducerent
pullatum, se^ atratum in convivio etiam funebri accumbere. Idem color albus and
Japponiis adhuc hodie in luctu est usitatus. Sidonius quoque Apollinatis ad
hunc albarum vestium in exequiis, epulisque exequialibus usum allucit lib. 5.
epist. ad Aumastum: Nam libenter, inquit, incedunt armati ad epulas, albati ad
exequias, pelliti ad ecclesias, pullati ad nuptias, castorinati (castoriis
pellibus induti) ad laetanias. Plutarchus testatur in Problematis, foeminas
antiquius in luctu vestes, virtasque albas gestasse (qui hodie Reginarum
Galliae lugentium mos est, In exequiis at^^e luct^.
test Polid. Virgil.) and Argis quoque test Socrate, albas vesles aqua
elutas, in luctu gestare fuisse solitas. Ibidem cadaver quoque defuncti albo
tegmine involutum fuisse scribit. Apud Graecos, ut scribit Alex. ab. Alex. lib.
3. cap. 7. sed sine auctore, soeminae, virique in candida vest cum coronis,
amplissimi viri exequias prosequuntur, and veluti in luctu publico complorant
promiscue, Quod fuit in more Syracusanis, qui candido amictu velati, and front
coronati, Timoleonem extulere. Sycionii similiter Aratum in vest alba, In
(...).
and coronis sepulchro intulere. In Imperatorum Roman. funeribus, vestes albas
adhibitas fuisse, Plutarch. and Herodim. testantu^. Colorem album antiquitus
matronis in luctu fuisse usurpatum, S^aliper quoque testatur lib. 1. Poet. Sic
Blo^dus quoque Foroliviensis lib. 2. Romae triumphantis and Urbinas ille, qui
libros de Inventoribus rerum scripsit, and alii non indocti viri, nulla
temporum adhibita distinctione, in luctu antiquas mulierer, albas semper vestes
usurpasse exis^imant. Verum hos errare, and pullas, fuscas nigras seu atras
(quas anthracinas Vatro vocat, quasi dicas carbonarias) antiquissiniis
temporibus fuisse lugentium vestes, Hiero^. Magius lib. 3 Miscell. cap. 14.
veterum quorundam auctoritate probat. Varro de Vita Patrum, ut apud Nonium
legitur, de muliere: Propinquae, inquit, adolescentulae, etiam adolescentuli
proximi amiculo nigello, capillo promisso sequuntur luctum. Idem: Ut dum supra
terram essent, ricinis lugerent, funere ipso pulli pallis amictae. Erat autem
ricinum, ut Nonius ait, quod sua aetate masurtim dicebatur, palliolum faemineum
breve, cuj^s formam appingit ipsemet Varro lib. 4 de lingua latina, Alia
testimonia de vestium nigrarum usu in exequiis.
Apul. lib. 2. de Asino aureo: Umbrosum, inquit, demonstrat cubiculum, matronam
flebilem, fusca vest contectam. Eadem quoque apud Craecos consuetudo fuisse
videtur: siquidem Iphigenia Euripidis Clit^mnestrae matri in jungit, ne suam ob
mortem crinem laniet: idemque ut suis renunci^^ sororibus, scilicet ne quando
nigris vestibus membra contegant. Unde and Hom. I^. lib. 24. Thetim futuram
filii necem deflentem, velo nigro tectam Jovem adire facit. Niger enim color
mortalis est, ut inquit Hippocratin lib. de Morbo sacro, sive quisquis ille
fuit, qui librum illum conscripsit, quem Galenus Hyppocratis esse nepat. Theoc.
in Epitaphio Adonidis, Venerem cyanea stola indutam, ad lugendum Adonidis
mortem invitat. Nigrarum vestium mos apud mulieres Romanos mox obsolevit, ut
Plutarchi testimonio intelligitur. Deinde moribus depravatis, Colo^ niger
Ticinum quid.
and viros albas vestes in luctu usurpasse, colligere possumus ex his Julii
Pauli verbis lib. 1. Sententiarum, sub titulo de Sepulchris and lugendis. Qui
luget, inquit, abstinere debet a conviviis and alba vest.

Livius scribit, in luctu matronas Romanas nibil aliud quam purpuram aurumque
deponere, quae: cum eluxerunt, resumunt. Dionis. Halicar. l. 5 refert, Romanas
matronas Valerium Publicolam Brutumque luxisse annuum tempus, depositione auri
and purpuroe, ut est illis luctus consuetudo in necessariorum cognatorumque
funebribus. Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. cap. 18. scribit diebus natalitiis and
Calendis Januariis, In natalitiis.
nonnunquam ludis Roman, albas lacernas praetextasque indutos incedere, and
ludos spectare fuisse solitos. Nam in vest pulla Iudis interesse Augustus
prohibuit. Alexander Severus, test Lampridio, cum natalem diem commendaret,
hostia cruenta effugit, and ut se civiliter gerebat ac permixtus populo erat,
albam ejus vestem, cum qua constiterat, cruentavit. Lacernis candidis usos
fuisse Romanos in spectaculis, In spectaculis.
ex illis Martialis carminibus constat, quibus ille perstringit Horatium, qui
nigra lacerna spectaculis interfuerat, Spectabat modo solus inter omnes
Nigris munus Horatius lacernis,
Cum pleb^, and minor ordo maximusque
Sancto cum duce candidus sederet
Toto vix cecidet repent caelo
Albis spectat Horatius lacernis.
Augustus, In militia.
rest Suetonio, habitum vestitumque pristinum reducendi studiosus, visa
quondam pro concione pullatorum turba; indignabundus, and clamitans ait: En
Romanos rerum dominos, gentemque togatam. Negotium aedilibus dedit, ne quem
po^^hac paterentur in foro circove, nisi positis lacernis, togatum consistere.
Item, Sanxit^, ne quis pullatorum media cavea (theatrali confessu, ^bi populus
spectavit) sederet. De lacerna candida ^mphitheatrali, vide plura apud L^zium
li. 8. c. 10. Com. Reip. Plutarch. in Aemilio de Triumpho P. Aemilii verba
faciens, dicit: Omnes (...), id est, albis vestibus indutos) Iudos spectasse.
Fuit candidarum vestium alius quoque apud Romanos frequens usus, tales enim
erant vestes castrenses, sacerdotales, atque muliebres.

De castrensibus Trebellius Pollio in Galeno sic scribit: In militia.
Jam primum inter togatos patres and equestrem ordinem, albatos milites (albis
vestibus indutos) and omni populo praeeunte. Sic candidatos milites Vegetius
rei militaris vocat principales, qui privilegiis muniuntur.

Vestimenta sacerdotalia similiter linea fuerunt and alba pretiosa, In sacris.
nullo infecta color, pura. Virgil. 12 Aeneid.

Procedunt castris, puraque in vest sacerdos Ovid.
Nunc Dea linigera colitur celeberrima turba. Juvenal.
Cum grege linigere circumdatur, and grege calvo. Martial.
Linigeri fugiunt calvi, sistrat aque turba.
Sic Flamen, ut Varro tradit, cum Jovi sacra ferebat, totus albatus erat, and
pileum etiam gestabat album. Item virgins Vestales suffibulo amictae
sacrificabant. Fuit vero suffibulum vestimentum album praetextum, Suffibulum,
quadratum, oblongum, quod illae in capite habentes sacrificabant, idque sub
mento sibula comprehendi solebat, unde nomen, Pierius lib. 40. Hieroglyph. De
calceamentis sacerdotum Romanorum, Atheniensium, and Alexandrinorum candidis,
vide Lazium lib. 8. cap. 13. Com. Reipu-Rom. Talis Aegyptiorum quoque
sacerdotum vestitus fuit, de quo Herod. sic scribit: Sacerdotes linea ferunt
vestimenta, induti, semper recens abluta, huic rei semper vacantes. Iidem
calceos papyraceos gestabant. Plin. testatur li. 19. vestes sacerdotibus
Aegyptiis lineas gratissimas esse eo genere lini, quod gosypon and xylon
vocant, unde dicta xylina, quibus nulla sunt candore mollitieve praeferenda.
Apuleius caeremonias Aegyptiorum explicans, Influunt, inquit, turbae sacris
divinis initiatae, viri foeminaeque omnis dignitatis, lineae vestis candore
puro luminosi. Ab hac vest linea Poetae linigeros vocant Sacerdotes Isidis
Deae Aegyptiorum. Pierius tamen, nescio quo auctore, Sacerdotes, inquit,
Aegyptii contra nostrorum mores cumsupplicabant, nigris ut^bantur vestibus,
noque alias quam nigras vestes cum decere arbitrabantur, qui Diis preces
allegaret: quippe ut forma ipsum supplicate confirmarent, ex qua mortales
conformati sumus. Ea autem apud ipsos nigra figurabatur. De Aegyptiorum
Sacerdotum calvorum vestitu atque habitu candido, vide plura apud Apuleium
libro secundo and undecimo. Poteris hunc habitum, ut Beroaldus facit, cum
habitu sacerdotum nostri temporis confer. De vestibus religiosis, and
sacerdotalibus Judaeorum, vide Beroaldum in Suetonio ex Hieronymo.

Mulieb^ia quoque vestimenta linea atque alba Romany ^^^rint probata, (...).
ut testatur Lazius libro octavo Commentariorum capite primo. Tinum candidum.
Unde proverbium: Linum candidum lucri causa ducis, in eum qui dotis causa
ducit vel deformem, vel anum. Linum autem vocat uxorem, vel quod apud veteres
solae mulieres lineis uterentur, etc. Erasmus in Adagiis. Turnebus in suis
Advers. in illum Horatil versum: Mirator cunni Cupennius albi: Ex pudenda,
inquit, part mulierem intelligit, ex albo ingenuam: in ingenuis autem stupra
legibus vindicabantur, non item in libertinis. Ingenuae autem mulieres albatae
erant, libertinae atratae, nobiliores purpuratae. Unde Artemidorus: (...): sic
enim conjicit, somnia illa and visa Artimidorus, quod his essent solitae uti
vestibus in genuae, libertinae, and nobiles.

Praeterea vestis candida apud eosdem manumissionis quoque insigne suit. In
man^missi^^^s.
Moris enim erat Romae, ut servi facti liberti candidati ad coenam domini sui
admitterentue. Hoc perspicue docet Tertullianus libro de Resurrectione carnis,
his verbis: Oro te, si samulum tuum liberate mutaveris, quia ead^m ^aro, atque
anima pe^^^nebunt, quae flagellis, and compedibus, and s^igmatibus obnoxiae
retro fuerant: idcirco ne illa eadem pati oportebit? non opinor. Atque and See
(...) ibid*
vestis albae nitore, and aurei annuli honor, and patroni nomine, ac^^bu,
n^nsque honoratur.

Adhaec candida vestis signum erat petitionis honorum atque magistratuum, In
magistratuum petitione. Magistratuum petitores cur ^ga candida induti fuerint.
quorum petitores candida toga indue bantur, ac proinde dicebantur candidati,
unde ambitio cretata eleganter a Persio dicta est. Hoc autem ideo factitatum
esse Plutarchus in problem. existimat, ut magistratu dignos non genere, non
divitiis, non gloria, sed vulneribus, and cicatricibus judicarent, quae ut ab
his conspicerentur, quos ambiendo prensabant, in toga candida ad petendum
descendebant: vel quia corpus nudando, ac seipsos submittendo populum
captabant. De toga pura, qua tyrones, novaeque nuptae induebantur, supra dictum
est: de qua Caelius libro decimo quarto, capite decimo sexto, quibus add, quae
Calcaguinus annotat. Pura toga, Toga pura.
inquit, quam exeuntes pueritiam adolescentes induebant non sine parentum
hilaritate, suit color vel simplici, vel candido, aut in candoris animi
testimonium, aut quod gerendis magistratibus jam idonea aetas videretur.
Candidati enim magistratuum competitores comitia inibant. Vel certe, quod
nondum quicquam descriptione dignum gesserint. Nam sic and tyronibus prima
stipendia facientibus, alba parma, and pura hasta tradetur. De hac pura vest,
vide plura apud Bayff: de Re vestiaria, (...).
ubi probat, ves^em (...), id est; puram, pro candida a Plutarcho usurpati. Sic
album vicissim, pro puro usurpatur; quia hic color est purissimus. Sic lintea
vestis alba supra caeteras vestes inducta, puellaris aetatia indicium fuit,
quod eo genere amiculi apud veteres puellae ante duodecimuen annum utebantur,
Pierius. Toga, ut inquit Isidorus, candida, eademque cretaca, in qua candidati,
id est, magistratum petentes, ambiebant, addita creta, quo candidior,
insigniorque esset. Perseus huc alludens: -- Quem ducit hiantem
Cre^ata ambitio, etc.
Quae autem essent arts petitoriae (Cicero munus candidatorum dixit pro
officio and labor petitionis,) Vestis linea alba.
hoc est, candidatorum, docet Mamertius in Panegyr. his verbis: Quis ignorant
tunc quoque, cum honores populi Romani suffragiis mandabantur, multo^ fuisse
candidat^rum labores? As th^se now d^e who stand to be Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses in Parliament.
ediscenda omnia nomina tribulium, homines singuli salutandi, prehensandae
obviorum manus, omnibus arridendum, multaque alia propter honorem adipiscendum
agenda, quae alias virum honor dignum facere non deceret. Hinc Caesaris sive
Principis candidatus, proverbium de eo, qui inani quadam confidentia and
securitate nixus, negligentius munus aliquod obit, de quo multa Caelius libro
decimo quarto, capite decimo sexto. De iisdem Cicero in oratione, cui titulus
est, in toga candida, quam dixit in Senatu in petitione consulatus, (...) Arts
peti^^riae.
(hujus orationis meminit Beroaldus in Suetonium, and Caelius libro decimo
quarto, cap. decimo sexto) olim tribuni legem promulgarunt, ne cui album
vestimentum (sic ille togam candidam appellat) addere petitionis causa liceret,
sicuti tradit Livius in 4. ab urbe condita. Pierius tamen in Hieroglyph. suis
lib. 40. albam vestem modestiae, animique sua sort contenti signum esse dicit:
purpuram autem ambitionis, animique sublimis, and vasti, amplitudinis, summique
magistratus. Hinc cum apud Alexandrum quidam Antipatri parsimoniam, atque
modestiam commendaret: (...), inquit, (...). Paries dealbatus, Act. 23. and
sepulchra dealbata* Matthew. 23. (...) den^tent Purpura.
Cael, lib. 9. cap. 7. id est, Foris albo utitur pallio, intus vero totus est
purpu^eus, fictam notans in homine ambitiosissimo, qui maxima quaeque
appeteret, modestiam. Sic paries dealbatus; Act. 23. and sepulchra dealbata,
Matthew. 23. hypocrit^e appellantur. Haec ille. Talea profecto erant And are not
many Roman Prelates and Priests now such, and English (...)?
Romani illi candidati, qui candida vest animi candorem atque modestiam,
innocentiam prae se praeferebant, cum animi illorum essent purpurei, id est,
ambitiosi atque sanguinolenti. Purpuram antem Romanorum quoque magistratuum
insigne illud Martialis indicat: Divisit nostras purpura vestra togas.
Et ab eodem purpura usurpatur pro magistratibus,
Purpura te foelix, te colit omnis bonos.


Plin 20. de Gallis, ut plane digne aliti honoris tantum praebeat Romana
purpura, id est, magistratus Romanus. Hinc persidi quoque Judaei Christum per
ludibrium (...), id est, purpura, ut Marcus, inquit, sive, ut Joannes loquitur,
(...), id est, vest purpurea induerunt, cum ille sibi vere, illorum autem
opinione falso, regiam dignitatem assignaret. Purpura Christi. Coccina tunica.
Fuit simul sanguinis illius essundendi symbolum. Eam vestem clamidem coccinam
Matthaeus appellat, Coccina tunica praelii futuri signum fuit Romanorum
Imperatoribus, t^ste Plutarcho in Fabio. Sic quoque vestis Christi coccina,
fuit siguum praelii, quo Christus cum diabolo, morte atque peccato erat
dimicaturus. Fuit etiam vestis purpurea, vestis triumphalis, ut Bayssus ex
Plutarcho probat. Fuit ergo illius simul suturae victoriae atque triumphi
symbolum. Purpurae appellatione coccum non contineri Bayssius ex Ulpi^ne
probat, Evangelisto de purpurea illa sive coccinea Christi vest conciliantur.
Vestis purpureae and coccineae discrimen. Candidati, petitores non solum
Magistratuum, sed aliarum quoque rerum.
unde Evangelistae videntur a se in vicem dissidere, quorum unus, Matthaeus
nimirum coccinam, reliqui duo purpuream illam Christi vestem fuisse affirmant,
quam rem Sorbonicis Theologis dijudicandum relinquit. Vestem purpuream a
coccina differe Brodaeus probat, lib. 1. Miscell. cap. 8. Coccos enim, inquit
ille, est surculosu^ parvus fru^^x, cui grana seu lentes adjacent, test
Dioscorid: lib. 4. and Clusio de plantia Hispanicis. His colorem coccineum
fieri, eoque infecta vestimenta coccinea appellari puto. Purpura autem, ut
fatentur omnes, piscis est e concharum genere, qui s^orem illum tingendus ex
petitum vestibus in mediis habet faucibus. Mihi quidem Matthaeus colorem (est
enim coccineus color idem f^re cum purpureo) reliqui duo materiam videntur
expressisse, ut etiam Rondeletius sentit in sua Historia piscium. Candidati
autem deganter dicuntur petitiores non solum magistratuum, sed aliarum quoque
rerum. Sic a Quincil candidatus (...), a Plinio in Panegy^ico cradidatua
gloriae, and immorialitatis ab Hieronymo candidati fidei, catech^m^^i, qui ad
(...) instruuntur, and munerarius pauperum, and S^gentium candidatus: and ab
Ap^leio lib. 1. de A ^ino, candidat^^ cruci, hoc est, qui crucem petit, sive
qui jam est futuru^ ^^^ifixus, and (ut veteres loquebantur) directus, ut C
Rabirius ille pro quo Cicero. extat oration: a Plauto cruci salus dicitur, quasi
in crucem saliens: and Libertus Icelus a Suetonio, summus equestris ordinis
candidatus: a Seneca homo multarum rerum candidatus appellatur, a quo fortunae
comitia dicuntur. Sic a Tertulliano simili translatione perelegantissime,
aeternitatis candidati appellantur Enoch, and Elias, libro de Resurrectione
carnis, and candidatus timoris, qui paulatim timorem Domini imbibit, libro
secundo ad Uxorem, and candidati diaboli dicuntur, qui ido latricis sacris sunt
initiati, libro adversus Marcionem. Idem in libro^de Baptismo, Baptismum
poenitentiae, quasi candidatum remissionis and sanctificationis in Christo
subsecurata vocat. Nam quod praedicabat (scilicet Johannes Baptista) Baptismum
poenitentiae in remissione delictorum, in futuram remissionem enunciatum est.
Siquidem paenitentia antecedit, remissio subsequitur. Candida salutis, martyrii.
Ab codem libro de corona candida salutis and candida martyrii elegantur pro
aeternae salutis praemio usurpatur. Idem de S. Paulo verba faciens, dicit illum
gloriam carnis, notam circumcisionis, Pharisaeae candidae dignatem, pro
detrimento sibi deputasse: ubi candida metonymic^s pro ordine, sive honor
videtur usurpari: vel forsan Pharisaei hypocritae, qui a Christo dealba^is
sepulchris comparantur, vestes albas seu candidas gestarunt. Verum de restitu
Romanorum albo, plura tradit Justus Lipsius Elect. lib. 1. cap. 13. lectu
dignissima, quorum haec est summa: Romany in vestitu placuisse colorem album,
Albu^ c^lor in vestitu cur Romonis placuerit.
sive quod is, ut Plato valt, laetitiae sit prop^ius: sive potius quiaagrestis
illa and prima gens, spretis accersitis coloribus, lanae rativum retinu^t, id
est, album. Ita toga Romanorum alba and Tunica fuit, and Calcei and omnia
cottidiana vellis. Togam albam fuisse, quam Graeci (...), and ad discrimen
praetextae, (...) vocant, Titinnii, Plauti, Statii, Pertii, Martialis
testimoniis probat. At objiciat quis: Si toga vulgo alba, cur, qui prensabant,
Al^i and candidi coloris discrimen.
induebantur toga candida, ut hac quasi nota intelligi and excerni possent a
reliqua plebe? Respondet, albi coloris togas vulgo fuisse, non candidi. Albus
color nativus lana est: candidus proprie splendens ille, and qui est ab art.
Ideo Polybius aliquot loci; (...) dictam maluit petitorum togam, quam (...):
and Latin commode splendentem dixerimus. Nam petitores non contenti in^ito
lanae color; cretam addebant in vestem, ut splendesceret. Unde Isidorus, sit
toga addito quodam cretae genere candidior. Objiciunt item de diebus festis,
Romani inquiunt, saltem per dies festos in vest alba erant. Non ergo
cottidianas vestes censendum albas. Respondet, non aliud fuisse in eo more,
quam ut per dies privatim aut public laetos, togas recentes sumerent, and usu
nondum sordidas aut obsoletas, qui mos plane geminus est moribus nostris. Nec
vero Romani solum in laetitia aut in sacris adhibebant hunc colorem, sed etiam
externi, Rh^da Fullonum apud veteres creberrimus usus.
id quod de Rhodis Livii testimonio probat, and de Aegyptiis Suetonii in vita
Augusti. Propter has togas albas fullonum apud veteres creberrimus usus, rarior
tinctorum. Fullonum, qui maculas scilicet and sordes e toga eluebant, and
addito furfure ac creta iterum candidam faciebant. Alba igitur toga, and ea
quamdiu in communi usu, discrimen nullum inter cives suit a color vestis, nisi
quod divites, munduli elegantes semper in toga sua e fullone nivea: vulgus sere
sordidiores essent, and togis magis pallentibus, ac, ut proprie dicam,
obsoletis. Sord^d^ (...) vulgo.
Ideo Seneca epist. 115. per sordidos intelligit vulgum. Mirari, inquit, non
debes, corrupta excipi non tantum a corona, sed ab hac turba quoque cultiore.
Togis enim inter se isti, non judiciis dissident. Sed and viri illustres ac
nobiles rei facti, per dies judicii sumebant hanc togam sordidam, (...).
posita nivea, ut miserabiliores essent in vest plebeia. Itaque rei in
sordibus esse dicuntur aut sordidati: non pullati, ne quis erret, qui color
tantum, funebris. Viri etiam graves ac rigidi non amabant eximiu^ illum
candorem. Unde simia ille apud Horatium, Exiguaque toga simulat tesquore
Catonem. Duo enim lauti homines amabant in toga laxitatem and candorem: (...).
spreverat Utrumque Cato, arcta toga contentus and ea squallenti: T^ga mutata.
Id enim Horat tesquorum vocat, pro quo male vulgo legunt textorem. Postea
mutata Republ. and labente imperio, toga quae olim necessaria civibus,
Imperatorum temporibus, ad paucos remansit and non nisi honestiores. Vulgus
spreta ea, abiit ad Paenulas, lacernas aut tunicas solas easque color pullo,
id quod statim sub Augusto coepit. De paenulis, tunicis, lacernis, vide ibidem
plura. Pereunte toga, interiit color albus, and pullo plebeio omnes vestes,
Hinc discrimen natum inter cives, ignotum seculo priori, ut alii candidati
dicerentur, Pullati (...).
pullati alli. Canditati non ii, qui peterent (ut olim) sed honestioris ordinis
cives. Pullati, insima plebs sive vulgus.

Po^^o Nauc^atitas quoque testis est Athen. lib. 4. in Genethlii. (...).
Vestae Prytanitidis in Pryae^eo epulantes, nec non in Pionysiacis and Panegyri
Comaei Apollinis albis vestibus (...), fuisse, quas suo quoque tempore
Prytanicas vestes dicit fuisse appellatas: Cereris quoque initiatos candidis,
ut Bellonae nigris, and Saturni purpureis atque rubicun^is vestibus indutos
fuisse, Tertul. testatur lib. de Pallio, Vestium (...) varii (...).
his verbis: Cur istas non spectas? vel illos item, qui non vitate vestitus
religionem mentiuntur, cum ob cultum omnia candidatum and ob notam virtae and
privilegium galeti, Cereri initiantur; cum ob diversam affectionem tenebricae
vestis and tetrici super caput velleris in Bellonae montes fugantur: cum
latioris purpurae ambitio, and galatici rubori^ superjectio, Saturnum
commendat: cum ipsum hoc pallium morosius ordinatum, and crepidae Graecatae
Graecatim Aeculapio adulantur. Alexand. ab Alexand. lib. 6. cap. 19. Romanos
scribit in toga candida ludos spectare solitos fuisse, and mulieres in vest
alba Cereris sacrum sacere solitas fuisse, ut tunc (...) gratum esse censerent,
si a (...), nec s^nere postutis celebraretur. Et tamen, ut testis est Pierius
in Hieroglyph. apud Arcada^ Cererinigra vestis induebatur. Sic Falacralis
Flamen, test Pierio, nigro utebatur pileo: erat enim Plutonis, cui cum
immolabant vestibus utebantur nigris, quam colorem aiunt diis inseris dedicatum.

Ex his, quae adhuc dicta sunt, constat, vestes candidas apud Naucratitas, and
praecipue apud Romanos, non solum in conviviis, verum etiam in sacris, in
magistratuum petitione, in manumissionibus, in militia, in spectaculis, in
triumphis, in nuptiis: in luctu quoque and cadaveribas involvendis adhibitas
and usurpatas fuisse. Vestis candidae prestantia.
Ac omnino vestes albas sive candidas, in sacris pariter atque prophanis
literis vehementer commendari constat, ceu insignia atque symbola, cum
virtutum, ut modestiae, puritatis morum, innocentiae, synceritatis, atque
integritatis: tum soelicitatis, beatitudinis, victoriae, libertaris, laetitiae
atque gaudii. Hinc praeter supra commemorata exempla, Magi in Perside, test
Pierio, Deum ipsum non nisi albis vestibus delectari affirmabant. Et Plutarchus
problemate Romanorum vigesimo sexto Magos adversus Plutonem, and tenebra^,
lucido and illustri amictu se munivisse scribit. In somniis quoque candidae
vestis somnium pro felici augurio habetur. Angeli semper candidati apparuerunt.
In sacris literis, angeli semper candidati apparuerunt: id quod illorum cum
innocentiae, tum beatitudinis est argumentum. Sic, ut ex plurimis, unum
preferam, gloriosae Christi resurrectionis, quae diaboli, mortis, atque peccati
victrix extitit, primi vestes atque praecones fuerunt angeli, albis vestibus
induti atque ornati. Ejus rei testes sunt Matthaeus vigesimo octavo, qui (...)
illius nivis instar (...) fuisse dicit: Marci decimo sexto, qui illum (...), id
est, stola candida amictum fuisse perhibet. Et Joannis vigesimo, qui duorum
angelorum mentionem facien^, illos (...), id est, candidis vestibus indutos
fuisse testatur. Mar. 9. Matthew. ^7. Christus dis pulis suis ^datus (...) (...)
Christus ipse in monte Thabor (...), vestituto candido, instar lucis, sive
nivis, sese discipulis suis conspiciendum praebuit qui cum puritatis, tum
victoriae, atque beatitudinis aeternae fuit symbolum. Sic Apocalypseos capite
primo Christus candidatus Joanni apparuit: Vestitus, inquit, erat (...)
scilicet (...), vestem talarem, sive ad talosusque demissam. (...) Suida,
(...), tunica ad pedes usque demissa. Eucherio est sacerdotalis vestis lintea
corpori penitus adstricta, eademque talaris, (...) appellata, quae and subucula
dicitur. Per hanc, test Pierio in Hieroglyphicis, quae aliis subjiciebatur,
doctrinam sacratiorem intelligi, veteres Theologi tradiderunt. Exodi: Et
fecerunt vestimentum poderem sub umbone, opus textile, totum ^yacinthinum.
Sequitur apud Joannem: Caput autem ejus, and capilli erant candidi velut lana
alba, and tanquam nix. Hic candidus, niveusque Christi habitus sive vestitus,
est indumentum illud salutis and justitiae, quo ut Isaiae sexagesimo primo
dicitur, sponsam, id est, Ecclesiam suam vestit, tegit atque ornat: eique suam
imputando justitiam, and sanctitatem, facit ut illa quoque alba and candida, id
est, justa coram Deo appareat, fine ruga and macula, Ephesiorum primo: secundum
illud Isaiae primo. Si peccata vestra, etc. Huc quoque facit (...), vestis
splendida, seu, ut vulgatus interpres vertit, alba, qua Christus per ludibrium
ab Herod fuit indutus. Illa enim revera argumentum fuit Christi innocentiae,
and regiae dignitatis, Luc. 23* Forsan, (...).
(...), and (...), id est, pura vestis a Plutar, pro alba usurpatur, sicut
Bayffius testimoniis quibusdam probat: sic (...) vocabulum eodem modo
usurpatur, nisi malimus purpuream vestem intelligere, cujusmodi vest a Judaeis
per Iudibrium fuit amictus. Apoc. 3. Laodicensi ecclesiae Deus suadet, ut
vestimentis albis sese induat, ut non appareat dedecus nuditatis ejus, hoc est,
ut Christum vera fide induat, vitae mortemque candori, and synceritate studeat.
Et ab initio ejusdem capitis: Sardenses Ecclesiae nonnulli esse dicuntur, qui
non inquinaverant vestimenta sua, and additur: Et ambulabunt mecum in albis,
qui digni sunt. Qui vicerit, sic vestietur vestimentis albis, and non delebo
nomen ejus de libro vitae. En hic quoque candida, insigne est victoriae,
coelestis gloriae and felicitatis. Et capite ejusdem lib. 6. Martyribus dantur
stolae albae, ceu insignia illorum victoriae, libertatis atque beatitudinis. Ab
initio ejusdem cap. equus albus inducitur, and eques seu insessor ejus arcu, ac
sagittis armatus, and corona insignitus ceu victor. Equus ille albus,
(cujusmodi erant quatuor illi equi candidi apud Romans triumphalem currum
ducentes) ut and corona, insignia sunt victoriae, qua Christus de omnibus
hostibus suis potitur. Sic equi albi apud Virgilium cum belli tum victoria sunt
insignia. Sic enim Anchises loquitur Aeneid. 3.

Quatuor hic primum omen equos in gramine vidi
Tondentes campum late, candore nivali.
Hoc Anchises interpretatur de bello,

Bello armantur equi, bellum haec armenta minantur.
Sed paulo post, pacem candidam significare (spes est pacis) ait. Latenter
ostendit victoriam adepturos, ut Servius annotat. Huc facit illum Graecum
(...). Hinc quoque natum est proverbium illud, Equis albis praecedere: and
Plautinum illud, Nunquam aedipol albis quadrigis indipiscet postea, de quo
Erasmus in Adag. Sic equi illi albi, Zach. 6. Hieron. interpret, Machabaeorum
sub Antiocho Rege victoriam: aliis Judaeorum felicem statum sub Macedonibus;
aliis bonos angelos significat. Virg. tamen Georg. 3. album equi colorem
deterrimum facit: -- Color deterrimus albis. Equi albi.
Servius, Atqui alibi ait: Qui candores nives anteirent, Sed aliud est candidum
esse, id est, quadam nitenti luce perfusum, aliud album, quod pallori constat
esse vicinum. Judic. 5. v. 10. asinarum candidarum fit mentio in illo Deborae
epinicio: Qui ascenditis asinas candidas: omnes fere interpretes mercatores
intelligunt, alii pingues, vel forsan quia asinae candidae erant meliores,
robustiores, Asinae albae.
agiliores. Apocalyp. quoque 7. electi omnium gentium innumerabiles coram
throno coelesti and agno stantes, inducuntur amicti stolis candidis and
ferentes palmas in manibus suis Deum laudibus celebrantes. Et paulo post, Hi
sunt, qui venerunt ex afflictione magna and dilataverunt stolas suas and
dealbaverunt eas (hoc (...) videtur mundo atque rationi) per sanguinem agni.
Hae quoque stolae candidae martyrum and electorum symbola sunt illorum
munditiei, Stola albae.
justitiae, libertatis, victoriae, gloriae beatitudinis denique, quam agni
illius immaculati, hoc est, Christi sangnine fuerunt consecuti. Hujus vestitus
typus and figura, fuit vestis aspersa sanguine hostiae, de qua Levit. 16. Huc
quoque referenda illa Tertulliani lib. 4. adversus Marcinem: Nazaraeus vocari
habebat secundum prophetiam Christi Creatoris. Nazaraei.
Unde and ipso nomine nos Judaei Nazaraenos appellant per eum. Nam and sumus,
de quibus scriptum est, Nazarei exalbati sunt super nivem. Qui scilicet retro
luridati delinquentiae maculis and nigrati ignorantiae tenebris. Regius ille
concionator capite nono sui liberi, dum morem candorem and animi puritatem
persuadere vult, omni tempore, inquit, sint vestimenta tua candida: quibus
verbis, interpret Pierio in hieroglyph. praecipit, nullam aetatem, nullum
officium, nullum otium and negotium toto vitae tempore synceritate and
innocentia (cujus symbola sunt vestimenta candida) vacuum esse debere. Loci
Eccles. 9. interpretatio.
Haec ille. Sic Hieronymus in suis Eccles. Commentariis interpretatur; Habeto
corpus mundum, and esto misericors. Mihi quidem hoc ipso in loco Solomon simul
videtur alludere ad convivialem vestitum, quem apud Judaeos quoque (ut ex
Philonis loco supra citato videtur colligi posse) album fuisse verisimile est.
Nam and versu proxime antecedente 7. panem cum gaudio comedendum, vinumque
hilari cord bibendum esse praecipit: and mox versu 8. vestium albarum mentione
facta, subjungit, oleum super caput tuum ne deficiat: cujus quidem in conviviis
quantus usus fuerit, tum dictum est, tum pluribus dicetur. Omnino ergo cum
verse. 7. praecepisset in epulis atque conviviis laetitiae esse indulgendum, mox
ver. 8. sequente, duo laetitiae illius convivialis quasi signa ceu causas
effectrices subjungit, vestes nimirum albas atque oleum: quorum utrumque cum
laetitiae partim significandae, partim efficiendae maximam vim habeat, in
conviviis adhibitum and usurpatum fuisse legimus, uti supra dictum est. Simplex
ergo sensus erit, sis semper laetus and hilaris: laute vivito, genio indulge.
Sisinnius Novitianorum Episcopus homo mollis and delicatus cum and bis in die
lavaretur and candida semper vest uteretur, Nota.
and ob id reprehensus esset a quodam, excusavit se cum hoc loco Ecclesiastis,
tum Christi, Heliae and Mosis exemplo, quos vestibus albis usos fuisse dicebat.
Testis est Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 22. Hieron. lib. 2. epist. 14. Vestes pullas
aeque devita, ut candidas. Ornatus and sordes pa^i modo fugienda: quia alterum
delitias, alterum gloriam redolet Cum ergo vestes albae non in prophanis solum,
verumetiam sacris literarum monumentis tantopere commendentur, ceu maximarum
and pulcheriimarum rerum symbola and insignia, mirum profecto non est,
Christianos primitivae Ecclesiae easdem in sacris atque sacramentis suis
usurpasse.

Ut igitur apud Romanos, sicuti dictum est, magistratuum atque honorum
petitores erant candidati, sic in primitiva Ecclesia Baptismi candidati (qui
etiam competentes vulgo fuerunt appellati) cum quadragesimae initio nomina sua
dedissent, and toto illo quadraginta dierum spacio atris vestibus promisso
capillo, insordibus and squallore jacuissent, paulo ante Pascha lavabantur
(quod Augustinus Epist. 118. ad Januarium baptismum antebaptismum vocat)
tandemque loti candidisque induti vestibus, ad Baptismum accedebent. Baptiza
idorum vestis Candida.
Idem infantum quoque baptizandorum habitus fuit, de quibus elegante Pontius
Paulinus.

Inde parens sacro ducit de front sacerdos.
Infantes niveos corpore, cord, habitu.
(Quos tamen versus Pierius Fortunato tribuit) Et
Lactantius in carmine de resurrectione dominica:
Rex sacer ecce tui radiat pars magna trophaei
Cum puras animas sacra lavacra beant.
Candidus egreditur nitidis exercitus undis,
Atque vetus vitium purgat in amne novo
Fulgentes animis vestis quoque candida signat,
Et grege de niveo gaudia pastor habet.
Meminit etiam Socrates lib. 7 c. 17. candidae hujus vestis, quae dabatur
baptizatis. Loti semel salutifero font, nunquam stolam candidissimam, quam
suscipiunt in baptismate, inquinate docentur. Rabanus Maurus Moguntinus
episcopus l. de instit. cler. 1. c. 29. Post baptismum traditur Christiano
candida vestis, Nomini sancti lavaeri.
designas puritatem and innocentiam. Nazianzenus in orat. de Sancto lavacro,
illud dicit a Christianis variis nominibus appellari, nimirum (...),Et Paulo
post, (...), id est ceu turpitudinis regumentum. Hinc Ammonius monachus lib. 3.
de gestis Francorum mentionem facit pueri occisi, qui adhuc, ut ille loquitur,
erat in albis regenerationis, hoc est, qui recens erat baptizatus, nondum
baptismalibus illis atque candidis vestibus exutus. Nam qui baptizabantur in
vigilia Paschatis incedebant vest candida induti per octo dies, ac vocabantur
albati, sive in albis, atque octavo demum die vestem albani deponebant: quibus
add, quod ut Tertull. docet, lib. de Corona milites, ex en die, qua erant
baptizati, Paschatis hebdomada and dominica Quasi modo, in albis appell^ta.
Vestis candida in baptisma quale symbolum.
la vacro quotidiano per totam hebdomadam abstinebant. Et quoniam Paschatis
hebdomada, antiquitus plures una tingi consueverunt, ea de causa feriae illae,
quae ad hoc omnes institutae sunt, and quae subsequitur Hebdomada atque
dominica quam nos, Quasimodo geniti nominamus, in albis fuit appellata. Vestis
haec candida in baptismo symbolum erat cum ipsius Christi, quem electi fide
induunt: secundum Paulum Ephesians. 4. Col. 3. tum illius munerum, hoc est,
justitiae, vitae, puritatis and innocentiae, (Tertull. hoc indumentum Spiritus
sanctus vocat lib. de pudicitia libertatis, victoriae gloriae, immortalitatis,
quam ex aqua and spiritu regenerati consequuntur, de quo pluribus disserit
Ambrosius in lib. de iis, qui initiantur mysteriis c. 7. Ut ergo olim apud
Romanos candida vestis qua servi a dominis decorabantur, erat insigne illorum
manumissionis: sic candida illa baptismi vestis signum erat illos ex manibus
diaboli atque peccati immanissimis esse liberatos, ut posthac Deo ceu patrono
suo fidelissimo, servirent vitae puritate ac sanctitate. Praeterea cum candidus
color olim victoriae and triumpho fuerit consecratus, candida haec vestis illos
monebar, ut cogitarent sibi in hac vita ceu in militia perpetuo esse cum
diabolo, peccato atque mundo dimicandum in Christo and vincendum:

Jam vero in coenae quoque Dominicae administratione album vestitum antiquitus
adhibitum fuisse, exillis Hieronymi verbis videtur colligi posse libr. contra
Pelagianos, Quae sunt, rogo inimicitiae, inquit, contra Deum, si Episcopus
Presbyter and Diaconus and reliquus ordo ecclesiasticus in administratione
sacrificiorum candida vest processerint. Verisimile est cum eos, qui
sacrosancti illius epuli communione fruebantur: tum ejus administratores, hoc
est, sacerdotes atque diaconos albas vestes gestasse. Tunica (...) appellata.
Harum autem vestium antiquarum vestigia sunt tunicae illae, quas choro and
albis vulgo nominant, in quibus missa Paschatis tempore celebratur. Sic nos
vestitum quidem veterum candidum retinemus, Nota:
and imitamur: at religionis, morumque candorem integritatemque jam pridem
amisimus: contra vero (...), ut Judas in sua epistola loquitur, hoc est,
tunicam carnis contactu maculatam gestamus.

Caeterum notandum est, Vestes albae duplices.
vestes albas esse duplices: alias, quae nativo color constant, qui leucopus
dicitur: alias, quae artificiali, quas volunt proprie candidas dici. Leucopiati
dicuntur: Martiali, qui rudiori alba vest, ac vili, ac ^ativi coloris induti
sunt.

Verum quoniam multa de candidae vestis usu, Cur vestes aliaque res albo colere
imbutae in tanto fuerint apud veteres pretio atque honor.
dignitate, significationeque mystica dicta sunt, de quo etiam Clem. Alexand.
paedagog. lib. 2. Cap. 10. legere poteris: consideranda etiam nobis videtur
ratio, cur vestibus illis tantum a veteribus tributum fuerit. Ea peti potest ab
ipsius coloris albi sive candida vi atque natura. Coloris albi significationes
allegoricae.
Nam cum is color, secundum Plutarch. problem. 26. maxim sit naturalis,
simplex, purus, syncerus, lucidus, atque perspicuus, ut qui lucis plurimum
habet (unde (...) album mihi (...), id est, videndo videtur dictum) mirum
profecto non est, illo (uti etiam lumine, cui maxim est affinis, atque
cognatus) cum mores ingenuos, puros, ac simplices: tum letitiam, libertatem,
victoriam, foelicem denique quemvis rerum statum atque conditionem, in
prophan^* sacrisque literis significari: ac proinde ^estes aliasque res color
illo imbutas, in tanto fuisse apud veteres pret^o and honor. Album, inquit
Pierius in Hieroglyph. est (...) veluti materia quaedam, in quam colores,
quotqu^^ ^olueris, perinde ac in universalem illam (...) omnes species
inducere. Hinc ad Dei cultum alba p^^^imum in^umen^a, omnium pene nationum
consensu adhiberi solent: semperque albus color sacris accomodatur. Atque ideo
ait Persius: Quamvis albata roga^it. Sed quid indigem^^ Persio, si Servatoris
nostri indumenta, cum gloriam suam vellet discipulis patefacere, alba sicut nix
apparuere? Apud Cic. 2. de legibus: Color albus praecipue decorus Deo est, tum
in caeteris, tum maxim in textile. Et nostra pietas canit, vel lineas, easque
purissimas induti tunicas, sacra Deo caneremus. Plato similiter colorem album
vult laetitiae esse proprium, atque deorum. Hinc veteres, test Platone, and
Pintarcho, niveo splendore spectabiles, ut deorum venerabantur fileos. Cel.
lib. 24. Cap. 26. Album porro and candidum pro bono: ut atrum and nigrum pro
malo, passim accipitur. Juvenal. Satyra 3.

-- Maneat qui nigrum in candida vertunt. Id est vitium in virtutem: virtutem
in vitium, qui secun^um Terentium in Phorm. recta prava faciunt: secundum
Isaiam, bonum malum: dulce amarum, and contra, dicunt. Persius.

Per me equidemisint onnia protenus alba, id est bona. Ovid.
Candida de nigris, and de candentibus atra. Horat.
Hie niger est, hunc tu Roman caveto.
Candidus sermo (...) id est, perspicuus: and (...) vox candida, quae facile
hominum aures penet^at: and (...) rem clarius explicare. Sic apud Senecam
Asinius Pollio Albutii sententias albas appellavit, quod essent apertae. Eras.
in Adag. Avis alba, prore nova and auspicata. Ciceroni epist. fam. lib. 7. Sic
albae gallinae filius Juvenali, hoc est, foeliciter natus (cui contrarium apud
eandem: Nati infoelicibus ovis) quia Latini lae^^, and auspicata, alba vocant:
ut contra inauspicata, nigra and atra; Erasmus in Adag. Cic. Nec minus niger,
inquit, nec minus confidens, quam ille, pro Caecinna de test Sexto Clodio.
Horat. in Sermon.

Sani, an creta, an carbone notandi. Quem imitatur Persius in 5. Satyr.

Quaeque sequenda sorent, and quae vitanda vicissim:
Illa prius creta, mox haec carbone notasti.
Sic candido calculo, lapillo, aut creta: aut contra nigro lapillo notare: de
quibus Erasmus in suis Adagiis. Dies albus, and alba faba, ibidem. Albi
calculi, absoluco^ii ^^^gri, damnatorii in proverb (...), id est, album
calculum addera, id est, approbare. Novit quid album, quid nigrum, id est,
recti, pravique discrimen. Vultu mutabilis, albus and ater, id est, and bonus
malus est. Horat. in extrema epistolae: -- candidum Pauperis ingenium. Idem
Ode. 11. Epod. Sic passim candor, pro integritate animi. and candidus homo, pro
syncero, and ingenio usurpatur. Pythagoras aiebat, id quod esset color
candido, ad boni naturam: quod color atro, ad naturam mali pertinere, ut
Erasmus annotat in proverbia illa: Creta notare, id est, approbare: Carbone
notare, id est, damnare. Verum haec satis sint dicta de albi coloris vi,
natura, dignitate atque praestantia, ejusque significatione allegorica, de qua
multa passim in sacris and prophanus literis occurrunt, in quorum explicationem
forsan non injucundam and inutilem delapsus sum, occasion vestium candidarum,
quarum olim in conviviis, atque etiam in reliqua vitae humanae consuetudine
creber^ ^imus and si equentissimus usus fuit, ut ex supra commemoratis
testimoniis and exemplis satis patet.

BY this learned Discourse of white Vestments, colors, the judicious Reader
may discern,

1. That White Garments, Rochets, Surplisses are not peculiar to Divine
Services, Sacraments, or to Ecclesiastical Persons, or Christians alone.

2. That they have been, and still are made use of, by Heathen Priests in the
Sacrifices, Solemnities of their Idol-gods, and by Pagans in their Feasts,
Funerals, Plays, Inaugurations, Manumissions, etc. as well as by Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, in their Divine Worship and Celebrations; and by all sorts of
Lay-Baptized Christians, as well as by Clergymen.

3. That the principal mystical significations, reasons, grounds, ends for the
Civil or Sacred uses of White Vestments, are equally common to all ranks and
degrees of men, of Christians, and not one of them proper or peculiar to
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, or Clergymen, or to public Prayers, Devotions,
more than to private. Therefore not to be used or worn by Bishops, Ministers,
Deacons, or Clergymen alone, as a badge of their distinction from, and
elevation above Lay-Christians.

FINIS.

