BOOKS lately printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth mentioned by St.
Paul in his First Epistle to Timothy. Chap. 3 Verse. 15. 4o.

A Short Summary of the Principal Controversies between the Church of England
and the Church of Rome; being a Vindication of several Protestant Doctrines, in
Ansswer to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, [ Protestancy destitute of Scripture
Proofs.] 4o.

Two Discourses; of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead.

An Answer to a late Pamphlet, Intitutled [The Judgment and Doctrine of the
Clergy of the Church of England, concerning one Special Branch of the King's
Prerogative, viz. In Dispensing with the Penal Laws.] 4o.

Preparation for Death: Being a Letter sent to a young Gentlewoman in France,
in a dangerous Distemper, of which she died.

The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in
opposition to a late Book, entitutled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and Church of Rome.

A PRIVATE PRAYER to be used in Difficult Times, 8o.

REMARKS OF A PULTON MASTER in the SAVOY, UPON Dr Tho. Tenison's LATE NARRATIVE;

With a Confutation of the Doctors Rule of Faith. AND A REPLY TO A. Chresners
pretended Vindication.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed by Nathaniel Thompson at the Entrance into Old-Spring-Garden
near Charing Cross, 1687.

To the Parishioners of St. Martins in the Fields, and St James Westminster.
Gentlemen,
YOur Learned Pastor, the Reverend Dr. Tenison, having been pleased, to his
printed Account of a Conference had between Him and Me on the 29th. of
September last; in which he has not only notoriously misrepresented the Matter
of Fact, but also stuffed his whole Narrative with several false Aspersions,
reflecting, not only on my particular Person, but also on the whole Society,
whereof I am a Member; and on our. Holy Mother the Catholic Church, of which I
profess my self an unworthy Son: The Dr. I say, having been pleased to this
Account to prefix an Epistle to you, fraught with malicious Insinuations and
Calumnies: You will not, I hope, think me guilty of too great Presumption, if
endeavoring to clear my self from the false Accusations brought against me; I,
though a Stranger, making Appeal to you, before whom the Dr. has laid his
Charge, and expect from your Judgment and Candor (however prepossest with a
good Opinion of the Dr and a Prejudice against both my Religion and Order;) a
fair and equitable Hearing.

The Dr. begins his Epistle to you with a Complaint of many false Reports and
Papers industriously spread by some of the less sincere and less generous
Romanists, Now as I protest an utter Abhorrence of all such unworthy
Proceedings, so I cannot easily believe any Catholic to have been guilty of
them, without some more sufficient Testimony than the Dr's Word; of whose
insincere and disingenuous Actings, his Account is a most apparent Evidence.
And that Letters sent both into the North and West of England, bearing date the
very day of the Conference; and importing, that there were at least Eight or
Ten Jesuits put to Silence, by the force of one Dr's Arguments, manifestly
shows, that the Dr. is not the only person, who has Cause to complain of false
Reports, or Reason to fear, That unworthy Ends would be served on the Credulous.

The Dr. to excuse the Bitterness (not to say Scurrility) of his Expressions,
tells you a story of a Person, one of whose Names, as he Words it, was Gubbard,
who, in the time of the Rebellion against King Charles the I. Recommending
himself to the Committee at Norwich, as a Man, Who had a zeal for the same
Cause, in which they were engaged, took Possession of the Living of Mondesly,
out of which the Dr's Father was Ejected for his Loyalty: That after a few
years, he Preached up Purgatory, and other such Points, in so open a manner,
That the Committee turned him out again; and that in a little time he (as it
were) vanished away.

By this story, which the Dr. ushers in with his having a Motive to severe
Language toward that sort of men (meaning Catholic Priests) which few have
besides; and closes with the Impression, it made upon him when he was young,
and the raising his Suspicion and Indignation ever since; he would insinuate,
that this Gubbard was some Jesuit or Catholic Priest, which he pretends to
prove, by his changing his Name, his Favor with the Committee, and his
Preaching of Purgarory.

Catholic Priests sometimes change their Names, thereby the better to shelter
themselves from the rigorous Severity of the Sanguinary Laws, executed on them
by meek-hearted Protestants, only in respect of their Function; yet if it be
considered, that this is frequently done by other Persons on far different
Motives and Occasions, it will seem very ridiculous to infer from thence, that
the Person mentioned by the Dr. was a Priest.

Nor yet will his Preaching of Purgatory, and such other Points, evince him to
have been a Romanist (much less a Priest if it shall be considered, how many
far stranger Opinions were in those days of Liberty vented in the Pulpit; and
that many years have not passed, since a very Learned Member of the Church of
England, Dr. Thorndike Prebend of Westminster.
and dying in her Communion, desired an Ora pro anima to be Engraven on his
Tomb.

Now to show, how great Favor the Priests and Jesuits found with the
Committees of those Times. I take the Liberty to inform the World, that my
Father had six Uncles Jesuits; and yet was not only himself committed to Prison
by the Rebels for his Religion, and his Loyalty to his King; but his House was
also for a long time possessed by a Committee Minister; and two of his Brethren
were for three years Educated in another Committee Ministers house at Kettring
in Northamptonshire, where they were obliged, being under Age, to go to
Schismatical Service; though it pleased Almighty God of his Infinite Mercy to
reduce them afterward into the Bosom of his Spouse the Catholic Church, out
of which, none of our Family ever died, Nor do I believe any one Family in
England was more frequently Pillaged, or more severely Sequestered, than Ours;
yet I bless God, I am so far from having my Indignation thereby raised against
that Party, or entertaining any Hatred toward them, that I rather glory in our
having had occasion to suffer for our King, and our Religion.

I here therefore Challenge the Dr. and his Adherents to make it appear, that
this, or any other Committee Minister was either a Jesuit or Priest of the
Roman Church; or else must take leave to say, that his vending such like
scurrilous Suspicions and Surmises at this time of day, seem directly to aim at
that, of which I am unwilling to think him guilty.

Having returned this Answer to what is most material in his Epistle; I leave
you, Gentlemen, to judge, whether he has been so Just or Fair, as he pretends;
or whether his Deportment in this whole Matter is not such, as deserves far
more severe Remarks, than any he has hitherto undergone from,

Gentlemen, Your Hearty Well wisher And humble Servant in Christ Jesus. A.P.

Testimonies in favor of A. P.
THese are to Satisfy, that I John Keynes, Provincial of the English Jesuits,
have made a strict enquiry whether any of those Priests under my Obedience, in
or about London, were with A. P. at a Conference held between Dr. T. and the
said A. P. in Long-Acre on Michaelmass-day last; and cannot learn that any was
there, except one who came in toward the Evening, stayed about half an hour,
and retired again, without speaking a word to the Dr. or to A. P.

Witness my Hand, October the 31. 1687. John Keynes.

THat A. P. went the said Afternoon about Two of the Clock, all alone from the
Savoy, are Witnesses

James Cook, John Tailor, etc.

ABout half an hour after Two on Michaelmassday last, Mr. P. came alone to my
House in Old Spring-Gardenst to enquire for Mr. M. and departed after ashort
stay, with the said Mr. M. no body else being in their Company.

Witness my Hand. Dorothy Ceene,
and Ours Edward Bysshe, Mary Bysshe.

ON Thursday St. Michaels-day, Mr. Pulton came with one Gentleman to our House
in Long-Acre, and desired to be further directed toward Mr. Johnsons the Kings
Cabinet-maker; this was between Two and Three in the Afternoon, and my Brother
Thomas Jones went with the said Mr. Pulton and his Companion to Mr. Johnson's,
no other being in their Company:

Witness our Hands. Mary Lewis, Thomas Jones, Aurelius Jones.

WE also testify, that the Conference being ended, Mr. Pulton returned to our
House, only in company of the Gentleman he went with; and my Brother Thomas
Jones lighted Mr. Pulton to the Savoy.

Witness our Hands. Tho. Lewis, Elizab. Jones, Barthol. Chiven, Jane Chiven.

ON Thursday about a quarter before Three in the Afternoon, Mr. Pulton with one
Gentleman in his company, (directed by Thomas Jones) came to Mr. Johnsons the
Kings Cabinet-maker, and desired to know where the Brazier lived, he was led to
a Chamber whither no body went to him, saving a third Gentleman who casually
came in, and whom Mr. Pulton said he knew nothing of, and stayed with him till
it was told Mr. Pulton that the Dr. was come, and that he might go when he
pleased to him; he went in company of the Gentleman who came along with him,
the third also following him, but no body else was of the company when he went
to Mr. Uppingtons the Brazier, who lives next door to Mr. Johnson. In Testimony
of which,

Witness our hands. Francis Johnson, Joseph Allen, John Abercromby.

I Thomas Jones farther witness, that standing over the way, I saw Mr. Pulton
go in company of the aforesaid Gentleman to Mr. Uppingtons, nor did I observe
any body else to be with him,

Thomas Jones.

THese are to satisfy the World, (that having made a diligent enquiry) I find
that neither my Priest or any other of my Family, or from my house, was present
at a late Conference about Religion, held in Long-Acre, between Mr. P. and Dr.
T. Pastor of St. Martins in the Fields.

Witness my hand, Mary St. John's.

BEing in the Chamber where the Conference was held, I saw Mr. Pulton come up
with only one Gentleman in his company, and a third who followed them.

Witness my hand, Cath. Lamb.

BE it known to all, that A. P. having publicly in School, desired that if any
one had heard him speak a word relating to a Conference he was to have with Dr.
Tenison, or any body else, he would stand up and own it; no body was found who
could say he heard any thing thereof.

Witness the hands of the six first of his School, J. Whitaker, Prot. Joh.
Brady, Cath. Edw. Bray, Cath. Char. Tripp, Prot. Rog. Thornton, Prot. Edy Lacy,
Cat.

ADVERTISEMENT.
There are two of the Texts alleged against Luther, which A. P. has not found
in the Author (not having all his Works) but for satisfaction, he will allow at
the next occasion, sixteen grams more.

REMARKS UPON Dr. Tenison's NARRATIVE.
THe Dr. in the beginning of his Dr. T's acc. of Conf. p. 1, 2.
Narrative, Charges A. P. that having had a Discourse concerning Luther's
Contradictions, and his being Taught some things by the Devil, made this
general Inference, That ever since, the pretended Reformed had proceeded upon
the Word of the Devil. A. P. positively affirms, he never said any such thing;
but acknowledges, that on this occasion, he put indeed the following Quaery:
Now I ask, whether the Doctrine, delivered by the Spirit of Untruth, can be
from the Holy Ghost. The Dr. would by this odious Insinuation, possess his
Reader with an Aversion for A. P. as Teaching all of the late pretended
Reformation to be Scholars of Satan: So that whatever A. P. shall say in
Defense of his Cause, may be heard with prejudice and averseness of mind.

Then the Dr. gives a hint, as though the Youth was not found in his
Intellectuals; and that his Master should say, This had befallen him since his
having been seduced: As also, that he was grown a great Liar, Idle, uneasy to
the Family by Damning his fellow Servants, etc. Here I cannot but blame in the
Dr. first his want of Fraternal Charity in publishing Faults (for at present I
take them upon the Dr's word) committed in a private House, to the view of the
whole Kingdom. Secondly, His want of respect in charging the Religion, of which
the Sworn Head of his own Church is a principal Member, and which, as
themselves confess, flourished in this Kingdom near a thousand years, before
Protestancy was ever heard of, to be such, whence a mopish, lying, uneasy and
idle Temper, naturally flows.

As for the Youth's turning what was said about Luther and the Devil upon the
Dr. and ascribing it to him; I think the Boy might have some small reason for
it, since the Dr. neither then did, nor now does deny the Truth of this Passage
concerning Luther; so that his silence might be taken for a tacit and secondary
Confirmation.

He Damned his fellow-Apprentices about Whitsuntide last (as the Dr. told A. P.
in the Savoy,) which was long before A. P. began to Catechize: so that he
Learned not of him that Damning Principle, of which A. P. will speak in its
proper place. Here again the Dr. uses Artifice to create an Odium in his Reader
against A. P. that what A. P. shall say, however just and reasonable, may be
received with Passion and Rancour against him. But Truth will take place,
maugre all disingenuous Artifices.

Now had the Dr. been so successful, as to have reduced his esteemed seduced
Sheep; O then he had been (as truly I believe he is) a very Candid, Ingenuous,
Laborious, Tractable Youth: But this is a common shift with the Party, to
decry, vilify and defame all that leave their Communion, though convinced in
Conscience and Reason, that they ought so to do; and extol all that join
themselves to it, though known to be Sacrilegious, and little better than
Atheists in their Lives.

The Dr. speaks of great Boasting on the Catholics Conf. p. 3.
side; as though the Dr. durst not meet A. P. of which A. P. never heard but
from him; nor can the Dr. ever bring any Witness, who will be able to make out,
that A. P. gave the Challenge. So much he might have said to the Youth; that,
if his Master were offended at his Change, he would endeavor, if his Master so
desired, to give him satisfaction. But he never named any Dr. or Minister in
the Kingdom, much less assigned Place and Hour; as the Dr. has been pleased to
give out. And for A. P's Party, he knows none he had, except the Youth, who to
his knowledge had nothing to do in the whole Affair. What juggling Mr. V. or his
Wife, or both, may have used to make the Parties meet, A. P. knows not; and as
on the one side he will never decline any fair Conference, (though he has been
twice disappointed, waiting in vain, a Minister of the Church of England:) So
on the other, he will not easily appoint any, unless the Conditions, hereafter
set down, be punctually observed.

'Twas agreed, (says the Dr.) on all sides, that Ibid.
there should be little Company, and no noise. First, There was no agreement
made in order to any Particulars, before the Parties met; if made then, why was
it not kept? Shall I tell you? because the Dr. saw his own Party to be at least
six to one, and therefore Mr. V. would not harken to A. P. desiring the Chamber
might be cleared; so that the whole matter of Fact, contained in this
Paragraph, is very notoriously misrepresented; by which the Dr. would
cunningly insinuate, that the Catholics are forward in carrying on this Cause,
and willing to be bickering with the Church of England.

The Dr. affirms, That A. P. came in with Nine Confer. p. 4.
or Ten after him. Now a Gentleman, zealous for the Truth, will allow a Guiney
an Head, for every one, that shall be proved to have been of A. P's Company,
Invitation, or Appointment, more than Mr. M. In order to which, the Reader is
desired to consider the Testimonies alleged at the end of these Remarks. If a
third Gentleman unknown to A. P. or some others (of which A. P. knows nothing)
should casually come in, he has nothing to answer for that; and Mr. V. may
thank himself, who had buz'd the Conference abroad, whilst A. P. knew not so
much, as at which end of Long-Acre Mr. V's House was.

The Dr. adds, that presently, after he came in, (...).
He espied in the Room, a Priest in a yellow Peruke; one from my Lady St. John
's of Long-Acre, whom he supposes to be a Priest, and one in a plain Band, who
(as was said) came with him. Were not this from a Grave Dr. I should not spare
a severe Reflection upon it, since every part of the Assertion is false. And
there are two Gaineys deposited in A. P's Hands, for him, who shall find out
this yellow Peruke; (which was there presently after A. P's coming in) this
supposed Priest of my Lady St. John's, or the Gentleman in the plain Band, and
prove them to be Jesuits or Priests, or in the least to have meddled with the
dispute. There was indeed one in a yellow Peruke, but he came not till the
Evening, stayed not above half an hour, and spoke not one Syllable to the Dr.
or relating to the Conference. Now the Reason, why the Dr. has so
misrepresented this meeting, is because he was ashamed, that, all the Kingdom
being filled with the noise of Eight, Ten, and Fifteen Jesuits, silenced by
him; and that his Friend Mr. V. and his Wife being known to be the prime
Authors and spreaders of these stories, the sham should in the end be
discovered: And therefore, he would give some color and ground for these false
reports, by setting forth Jesuits under distinctive signs, viz. yellow Perukes,
plain Bands, etc. with these Salvo's, It is said, it is supposed; whilst the
Dr. is conscious, he had to deal but with one Jesuit, and another he esteems as
good as one. Where mark, that even the Dr. himself, never makes the yellow
Peruke, or plain-Band-Gentleman, speak one word through his whole Narrative;
though trimmed up with all the advantageous (though little sincere) flourishes
imaginable.

But let us grant these (supposed so) to have been truly Jesuits, how will the
Dr. make out the second part of the story, viz. of so many being silenced by
him? Now A. P. being versed in the Doctrine of Equivocation, (as the Dr. is
pleased Confer. p. 4.
to hint) has an Evasion for him: Eight Jesuits were silenced, that is, some
not known of in the crowd, besides a yellow Peruke and plain Band, etc. stood
silent before the Dr. Nor do I see how it can any other way be made out.

For what relates to Scholars pressing at the p. 4.
door, A. P. assures the World, he never spoke a tittle of this Affair to any
Scholar, as you shall see attested anon; and that one having (A. P. knows not
by what means) heard thereof, and asking leave to go, he absolutely refused it:
And that meeting two in Long-Acre, he was offended at them, and sent them
presently home: Nor was there any one, who came near the Chamber, only six or
eight at most (all living there abouts) who flocked to the Street*door, where a
numerous Crowd was assembled.

As for what he says in his 5th. Page, I refer the Reader to what Mr. M.
intends to publish in his own behalf.

The Dr. in Page 6th. Begins his Artifice of inverting Confer. p. 6.
and confounding the whole Order of the Conference, leaving out the Discourse
concerning Luther's Contradictions, which was a Preamble, and not the main
Subject, as he would make the World believe, so to cast a mist before their
Eyes, that they may not consider the stress of the prime Question in debate.

To A. P's urging, What assurance the Church of Ibid.
England could give, that she had the true Word of God, He answers, that these
Discourses tend to Atheism, to which A. P. gives his assent; and grants the
whole, to wit, that those who will not believe Transubstantiation, can never be
obliged by the Dr's Rule of Faith, to believe the Trinity, neither word being
there: The Texts of Scripture, relating to either, being equally liable to
Cavilling: And the one being as repugnant to the apparent Principles of
Discourse, as the other to the Arguments of Sense.

Now woe be to them, who have opened this door to Atheism, by teaching the
People, they ought to believe no farther than they see; whence they bid adien
to all the hidden and secret Mysteries of Faith, which are essentially obscure
in their Object, though clear in their Motive.

He brings next, that which was truly premised, Confer. p. 7.
willing to delude his Reader with an Opinion, that this was the Point in
debate: And has therefore gathered together several Passages, brought in
casually on different occasions.

He says Paschasius Radbertus allowed of Three Ibid.
Sacraments, but the Dr. should have added, he allowed of no more than Three,
which he will never make out. He adds that he was the inventor of
Transubstantiation. A. P. answered, That is no more true, than the first Nicene
Council was the Author of Consubstantiality. Where note, that on emergent
occasions, the Church, to condemn new Errors and Heresies, has been often
obliged to Coin new words (as in the abovementioned Council of Nice) thereby
to take away all Collusion in terms, the ordinary shift of Heretics.

He says also, That Luther, (some grains of Ibid.
allowance being given to him as we ought to every Man) was an excellent
Instrument of Gods, A. P. therefore, to comply with the Dr. will allow him some
grains of Allowance, and then leave it to the Judgment of every Pious
Christian, whether Luther Was an excellent Instrument of GODS, or no; and how
Christian-like a Reformation that must needs prove, which must (whatever its
greatest Abettors say to the contrary) date its Birth and Origin from him, and
own him for its prime Patriarch.

This digression into Luther's Praises, A. P. Judges the more warrantable, for
that the Dr. is frequently pleased to insinuate, that the prime Question ought
to have been concerning him.

First, As to his Religion, taking it in general, it was any thing that had but
an Opposition to Popery. He makes the Divinity it Self Threefold, as there are
Three Persons; whence Zuinglius (a competent Zuing. to. 2. fol. 474.
Interpreter of Luthers meaning) infers, that he makes Three Gods.

My Soul, says Luther, hates Homousion, and the Arians did very well in
expelling it, least so profane Lut. lib. con. Latom. tom. 2. Wit. Imp. an
1551.
and new a Word should be used in the Articles of Faith. Who sees not that the
same Spirit, which set him a quarrelling with the Nicene Council on account of
the word Homousion, guides our modern Sectaries to except against those of
Lateran, Florence and Trent, on account of the word Transubstantiation.

How can CHRIST (says Zuinglius to Luther) Par. 2. fol. 402.
be said to be made of a Woman, if, as thou say, he was from all Eternity
according to his Humane Nature? Vide Zuing. to. 2. fol 458. and Luth. lib. de
Council Par. 2.
No less impious is that which follows, If the Divinity did not suffer in
CHRIST, he was not my CHRIST.

Such being Luther's Piety toward the Deity (to omit many other execrable
Blasphemies of his touching CHRIST's suffering on the Cross, the horror of a
troubled Conscience, and pains in Hell after death;) it cannot be expected, he
should be much more respectful to the Sacred Writers of GOD's Word.

He says, Ecclesiastes has never a perfect Sentence, Conviv. Sermon. Tit. de lib.
v^t. and No. Test.
and that the Author thereof had neither Boots nor Spurs, but ridon a long
Stick, or in Begging Shoes, as he did when he was a Friar. It Is a false
Opinion, Lib. de scrip. and Eccles. Auth. cap. 3.
and to be abolished, that there are Four Gospels; for the Gospel of St. John
is the only fair, true, and principal Gospel. Is not the Church of England's
Canon notably supported by this Testimony?

But of his Services done to God, there is none more Excellent, none more
conducing to his Honor, none more beseeming the Godly and Religious Morals of
this Instrument of God, and Church-Reformer, than his abolishing the Decalogue.
The Ten Commandments (says he) belong not to Us; Sermon. de Mose.
for God did not lead Us, but the Jews out of Egypt. The Inference also is as
admirable, as the Position Godly and Religious, Hence (says he) the chief To.
5. fol. 272.
Art and Wisdom of Christians, is not to know the Law, etc.

From this Principle, so instrumental to Piety and true Religion, he drew these
admirable Documents. Polygamy, says he, is no more abrogated, than the Propos.
de Bigam. Epist. An. 1528. Propos. 62, 65, 66. Tom. 7. Wit. fol. 505.
rest of Moses 's Law. Again, He, that resolves to be without a Woman, let him
lay aside the Name of a Man, making himself a plain Angel. And again, he
Counsels the Husband, in case his Wife refuse his Bed, to say to her, If thou will not, another will; if the Mistress will not, let the Maid come. A To. 5.
fol. 123.
wholesome Advice certainly (by which, he persuaded himself, he should not fail
to get Proselytes enough,) and an admirable practice for one who was to be the
Father of the Reformation, and the best means he could invent, others proving
ineffectual, to propagate it, and multiply the godly Party. For, as he taught,
so he lived.

As it is not, says he, in my Power, that I should To. 5. fol* 119.
be no Man, so it is not in my Power, that I should be without a Woman. Whereas
he owns, that, whilst a Roman Catholic, and a Religious Man, which was above
fifteen years, He kept Chastity, punished his poor Body with Fasting, Watching,
Praying, and other Exercises, a little too harsh for his new fangled
Reformation; and therefore he prudently left them out of it.

Of his sincerity in expounding Holy Scripture (in which, if in any thing, he
ought to be esteemed an Instrument of God) I shall speak in its proper place.

His Charity to his Fellow-Gospellers, and niceness of Conscience, appears by
this, I knew, says Parva Confess. and Tom 3. Germ. fol. 55. and Coll. Men's.
Germ. fol. 210.
he, the Elevation of the Sacrament to be Idolatrous; yet I retained it in the
Church at Wittenberg, to the end I might despite the Devil Carolostadius. Now
let any one accuse the Papists of Idolatry in Worshipping of Images, when this
Excellent Instrument of GOD sticks not, at what he esteems the grossest
Idolatry, to spite one of his Brethren. The Tigurines confess, That Luther was
so Charitable, as to send Confess Orthod. 122, 123.
all to the Devil, that would not subscribe to his Opinion.

The Devil, as he was seldom out of his Mouth and Writings, so was he an
inseparable Companion to this Excellent Instrument of GOD. The Devil, Coll.
Men's. Germ. fol. 281.
says he, does more frequently sleep with me, and more near me, than my
Catharine. He confesses also, That he often walked with the Devil in his
Bedchamber; That he eat more than two Bushels of Salt with him. How then can
any one imagine this Familiarity of his with the Devil to have passed in a
Dream, improved after the Popish manner, (says the Dr.) into a Vision, Confer.
p. 7.
without owning the same of his Sacrilegious Familiarty with his Kate.

His modest and civil Language is such, as, being unfit for Christian Ears, I
willingly omit, giving you only this Remark of the Tigurines upon it. It Tigur.
Theol. Ort. Conf. fol. 10. Tigur. Tract. 3 cont. supra. Luth. Conf. page 61.
is most clear, and cannot be denied, but that never any man writ more
uncivilly, more filthily, more leudly, etc. than Luther. And again, Did ever
man hear such Speeches pass from a furious Devil himself?

No less Excellent an Instrument was he in order to Civil Authority and
Government. Among Christians, Tom. 6. Germ. de Saec. Pot. and alibi.
says he, no man can, or ought to be Magistrate, but each one is to other
equally subject. Hence, no wonder he treats Crowned Heads with that
unparalled Indignity and Impudence: He calls Henry the VIII. More Furious
than Madness it self, Tom. 2. fol. 333, 334, 335, 338, 340.
more Foolish than Folly it self; indu'd with an Impudent and Whorish Face,
without any one vein of Princely Blood in his Body; a lying Sophist, a damnable
rotten Worm, a Basilisk, and Progeny of an Adder, etc. Most wicked and impudent
Harry. And again, Thou lie in thy Throat, foolish and Sacrilegious King.

Thus giving Luther some few grains of Allowance, that is, allowing him to be
one, who questioned, if not denied, the Unity of God; held Christ to have been
Man from all Eternity; the Divinity to have suffered; several unquestioned
Books of Scripture, to be mere sigments, and idle stories, the three first
Gospels not to be true, the ten Commandments not to be made for Us, Polygamy
and Fornication not to be unlawful; Continency to be as impossible, as not to
be a Man; one generally confessed a manifest and public corrupter of
Scripture, most filthy in his Language and Writings, most dis-respectful and
insolent toward Princes; one Infamous for his intimate Familiarity with the
Devil; and in short, one, whose Principles and Practice are absolutely
destructive of all Piety, Religion, Civil Government and Morality; and then Dr.
Martin Luther will prove most undoubtedly an excellent Instrument of GOD's.
What impartial man can doubt, but these Grains of Allowance are weighty enough
to counterpoise the Dr's bare assertion of it?

Having (in compliance to the Dr's Request) given these Grains of Allowance to
Luther, whom he has been pleased to assign for an excellent Instrument of
GOD's, and a Pillar of the pretended Reformation. A. P. craves the Favor of
his kind Reader, that he may be permitted to draw also a short Scheme of one,
whom he verily believes to have been a very great Instrument of GOD, and who
was Contemporary to Martin Luther. It Is of the great Xaverius, who (when some
parts of Europe, instigated by this Trumpet of Sedition, revolted from their
Obedience to the Pope) leaving those great Pretensions in the World, to which
his extraordinary Parts might have made him justly aspire, and binding himself
to GOD by a triple Vow of following the Evangelical Counsels (as Luther had
formerly done, though now broken it) went in extreme Poverty to the farthest
parts of the East, where having Preached the Faith to near thirty Kingdoms, in
twelve of which he left it planted, having demolished many thousands of
Idolatrous Temples, and Baptized with his own hands twelve hundred thousand
Souls; Almighty GOD accompanying his Preaching by such Signs, as he is usually
pleased to confer on Apostles of the Gentiles, as a wonderful Power over
Devils, the Gift of Tongues, the Spirit of Prophecy, the Curing all Diseases,
and raising five and twenty persons from Death to Life, all which, attested by
many Eyewitnesses, were, after a very rigorous examen found indisputably true,
he died with an Opinion of admirable Sanctity, which is yet farther confirmed
by his Body remaining till this day incorrupt at Goa.

The Pious and Christian Reader is now desired to reflect a little on these two
Instruments, and having seriously compared their Lives and Doctrines, in both
of which they were Diametrically opposite to each other, freely and
indifferently to determine, which of them seems to have been sent by Almighty
GOD.

To return now to our Dr. we find him relating Confer. p. 8.
a story, that this great Instrument of GOD Martin Luther, being at Rome, heard
the very Courtizans jeering by say, that some, who Consecrated, had used these
Words: Bread thou art, Bread thou shall be; Wine thou art, Wine thou shall be.

Now had Luther heard this from the College of Cardinals, Bishops, and
Prelates, and had they allowed of it, he might have had some Motive to distrust
the sincerity of the Roman Catholic Tenet. But he heard it from the very
Courtizans. This indeed is an irrefragable Proof of Luther's Pious
Conversation. And here the Dr. has unawares pointed us out the true Motive of
Luther's Change of Life and Doctrine, viz. The Conversation of Courtizans;
which, he knew, being a Friar, he could not so easily enjoy.

The Dr. now got into a pleasant Humor, tells us another impertinent story of
an old Man, who Swore to the Devil, Adored an Image of the Blessed Virgin, and
kept his Courtizan: Giving an hint, as though the second Council of Nice
approved all this: Which are three notorious Calumnies. The Fathers, there
assembled, said, as they ought, that an Oath, made to the Devil, could not
oblige; and that it would be less Sin to be naught with a Woman (it being a
personal and private Trespass) than by denying the Respect due to Holy Images,
at that time wickedly oppugn'd by the most Impious Ieonoclasts, to give
occasion of public Scandal and Heresy.

I must upon this occasion, mind the Reader of a very disingenuous Proceeding,
frequently used by most Protestants, viz. That, if they find in History, of
whatever Time or Author, any Passage, seeming to make the least against the
Roman Catholics, they presently receive it with all the Credit, due to the
most assured Verity: Whereas, though five hundred Authors of undoubted
Sincerity, Virtue, and Learning, attest from their own knowledge and
experience, Passages, Miracles, etc. evincing our Catholic Tenets, they value
them no more than a Tale of Tom Thumb, or Valentine and Orson.

The Dr 's Rule of Faith proved Insufficient.
THis story, which, as appears by his own account, rendered the Dr. very
uneasy, till he was delivered of it, being over, he now assigns for the Rule
of Faith the Holy Bible, the sum of it in necessary Doctrines being the
Apostolical Creed. Confer. p. 9.
Now A. P. (when requisite,) will assign many necessary Points, which, as they
are unmention'd in the Apostles Creed, so are they either not at all, or much
less clearly proved from Holy Scripture, than the Doctrine of the Real
Presence, Auricular Confession, Purgatory, etc. But at present, what follows,
shall suffice. It Is necessary for Christians to keep Holy the first day of the
Week. Now where does the Bible teach the Sabbath, or seventh day, which was
commanded to be kept in the Decalogue, to have been abolished by CHRIST, and
the Sunday, being the first, substituted in its place? The same might be
instanced in the Feast of Easter, no where commanded in Scripture, either as to
the Obligation, or Time of its Celebration, as now practiced by the Church.
Baptism is necessary to Children for Salvation. We are bound to believe, that
the Son is Consubstantial to the Father; that the second Person was Really,
Physically, and Substantially united to our Humane Nature, and not Morally
only; that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son. What plain
Texts of Scripture prove these Tenets so, as the Arian, Eutychian, Anabaptist,
etc. shall be obliged to submit, being convinced by the Evidence thereof? A. P.
therefore asserts, that an Infallible Church is requisite to expound Holy Writ
to us, and by her Traditions (which are the living Word of GOD) instruct us in
necessary Doctrines. That, which the Dr. appeals to for Judge, to wit, The
written Word of GOD, is no other, than what has been the Appeal of all
Heretics from CHRIST's time: Which consequently cannot be the Rule of one True
Church, that is Essentially different from an Heretical one. And certainly no
man of Sense and Judgment can say, that a guilty Person will ever appeal to
that Judge, by whom he is evidently and sufficiently condemned; but all
Heretics are guilty Persons, and yet boldly appeal to Holy Scripture;
Therefore Holy Scripture is not the Judge, by whom Heretics are evidently and
sufficiently condemned. Whence is clearly made out, that there must be some
other (living) Judge, by whose Authority Heretics may be clearly convinced,
and all necessary Points of Doctrine taught and delivered to us.

Would not that be the worst constituted Government in the World, in which
there should be no living Judge or Explicator of the Law, but every one should
be permitted to Expound it so, as his own Capricio or private Judgment
suggests, or as it may most make for his own Interest? What Malefactor at this
rate would not find a Plea for his own Defense, and a Salvo for the most
Enormous Crimes? Now if this in Humane Laws would be esteemed highly derogotary
to the Prudence of the Lawgiver, shall those be deemed to have the Spirit of
GOD, who presume to affirm the same of his Divine Majesty, and so far to call
in question his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, as to think, that in the
establishment of his Church he would omit That, without which no State or
Government could long subsist?

But here the Dr. may reply, what he afterward says, that every one is not
left to Expound this Rule at Discretion, but must Use the help of all
Ministerial Guides possible; that is, he must Consult his Confer. p. 18.
Minister, and if one satisfy him not, advise with another, and so to the end
of the Chapter. Now what shall we say, if this Man prudently distrusts the
Mission of his pretended Ministers, as every one may that of the Church of
England, being grounded on mere Humane Authority. What if he distrust his
Ministers Sincerity, Learning, Virtue? What if he question his having used
Pious Means in humility of Soul? Of which no Body can be assured? What if
Consulting many, one tells him one thing, another (as it usually happens) quite
contrary? What Means are there left to quiet this dubious mind? You will say,
He is then left to his own Conscience. Now being so left, A. P. desires to
know, whether this Man's Conscience may be Erronous, and actually err in things
necessary to Salvation. If so, then his Religion may prove a mere Fancy, if
more, an Opinion, but at most a private Judgment, and wholly void of Divine
Faith. If he cannot err, then each one must be allowed to be Infallible in his
own Persuasion, and so the Dr. must grant that to each particular Member, which
he denies to the whole. But that each one may err after all his Endeavors (if
we allow no living Judge, to whom we are bound to submit,) is manifest from
daily Experience; by which we see, that thousands having made use of all
Ministerial Guides possible, cease not to dissent amongst themselves, and
disagree even to Contradiction in things of the greatest moment.

And against the Dr. ad hominem: Roman Catholics use all the means Protestants
can prescribe, and many more, in humility of Soul, and have an undoubted
assurance of being in the true way: Which being so, A. P. would be satisfied,
with what Conscience the Church of England can Prosecute men by Sanguinary
Laws, who follow her own Rule with the greatest Perfection.

One word to the Dr. and A. P. will go on to the other Parts of the Dr's Rule.
That cannot be the only true Rule of Faith, without which a true Church did
subsist: But without a compiled Canon of Scripture, assigned by the Church of
England, as the only true Rule of Faith, a true Church did subsist: Therefore a
compiled Canon of Scripture cannot be the only true Rule of Faith. The first
Proposition is evident; for a Church can*t subsist without its Essentials, one
whereof questionless is a Rule of Faith. The second is proved thus, The
Primitive Christians made a true Church: But this Church subsisted many years
without a compiled Canon of Scripture, as is evident: For several years after
CARIST's Death passed without any written Gospels or Epistles; more, before
they were divulged; and some Ages, before they were compiled into a Canon.
Therefore a true Church subsisted without a compiled Canon of Scripture.
Therefore that cannot be the only true Rule of Faith.

The Dr. goes on, and asserts, that they had the same Proofs for their Bible
with the Roman Catholics, viz. The Testimony of the Universal Church Conf^r.
p. 9.
of all Ages. Which is manifestly false: For neither the Universal Church, nor
any part of it, delivered them the Bible, as the Protestants have it: Whether
you consider the Number of Books, Conformity of Texts, or (what is most
Material) the Sense and Meaning thereof: For, although the Note, This was only
a National Council, and of no General Obligation.
Council of Laodicea approved of no more Books than those, which the Church of
England now allows to be Canonical, nor indeed of all those, the Apocalypse not
being then received; yet that Council rejected not the other Books as
Apocryphal. But the Church, then beginning to examine Holy Scripture, approved
for the present only the abovementioned Canon, neither rejecting, nor
admitting the other pieces. Now in the Council of Carthage, held in the year
397. the other parts of Holy Writ, being brought under Examination, were found
to be of equal Authority, and consequently received into the Canon, St.
Augustine subscribing thereto: And this was confirmed by Pope Innocent the first
in the year 402. who, giving an Account, what Books, were received, and
directing himself by the Rule of Tradition, (viz. Quid custodita Series
temporum demonstraret) sets down these very Books, the Epist 3 cap. 7.
Roman Catholics now still allow of. And St. Augustine was of the same
Judgment, as also Pope Gelasius August. de Doctr. Christ. cap. 8.
in the year 492. All which was confirmed by the sixth General Council in the
year 680.

And in the Council of Florence, held in the year 1438. the same Canon was
again confirmed, the Greeks, Armenians and Jacobites, subscribing thereto. So
that, when Protestancy began, there were no Christians in the World, who
believed those Books precisely to be Holy Scripture, which the Church of
England allows of; and consequently they have the Testimony of the Universal
Church and every Member thereof against them, wanting ten parts of that Rule,
which they believe the only essential one to Salvation. Now as for the Text,
their own private Spirit is the sole Oracle it dropped from. As for what relates
to the Sense and Meaning of Holy Scripture, the Dr. with all the Eyes of the
quick-sighted Ministry shall never discover that Body of Christians, who ever
professed those Articles of Faith, both Positive and Negative, the present
Church of England proposes for her Credenda. Hence it is evident, they have
been their own Choosers of Books, Texts, and Sense, and from first to last have
no Authority either for one or other. Mark here, how the Dr. calls the Canon,
subscribed by St. Augustine, and constantly allowed by all the Universal Church
for eleven hundred years Apocryphal Books of the later Time: As also, that his
saying, He is as sure of this Books being the Bible, as of Cicero 's Offices
being his Book; is, with submission to his Doctorship, a mistake. Nor can he be
said to believe a thing on another word, who neither believes him in his whole
story, nor in his manner of relating it, nor in the meaning of the Words, he
uses to explicate himself; but such an one must be said to believe, what
himself pleases, and not what the other relates: Which is the proper Notion of
an Heretic, derived from (...) to choose.

He proceeds to illustrate, what he slightly touched Confer. p. 10.
in the Conference, proving the Bible from Men's considering the Prophesies, and
their Events, the Characters of CHRIST, the History of CHRIST, etc. Now this
proves nothing, there being no other Testimony either for the Prophesies, or
Events, than the Church of Englands private Judgment, she not having taken
them on the Testimony of any Christians in the World. But granting the
Historical Part of Holy Writ to be cleared by these Comparisons; yet the
Doctrinal part, on which the main hinge of Controversy turns, can never be that
way made out: Which being soreseen by the Dr. he adds moreover, that Men must
use Pious Means in Humility of Soul, and so they shall have Further Assurance
begotten in them.

Here the Dr. has found a Salvo for all the Errors, that ever have been, or
shall be committed in Points of Faith: For he, that shall say, he has used
Pious Means in Humility of Soul, and that he has an Interior Assurance of the
Truth (as all Heretics in the World have ever pretended) ought never to be
proceeded against: And by the same Rule, all Penal Laws, Persecuting Christians
for Conscience, are evidently unjust: Which notwithstanding have ever been the
only Bulwark of the Church of England.

Now A. P. will demonstrate the abovementioned Assertion of the Dr's to be
Weak, Erroneous and False: Which he thus proves. The Water is clearest at the
Fountainhead: Hence, if ever any used those Pious Means, and had thereby
Assurance begotten in them, We must allow it to Luther, Carolostadius,
Zuinglius, Beza, Castalio, etc. Who were the Principal Heads of the Reformed
Churches, and consequently received more of the Divine Influence, used more
Industry in acquiring Authentic Copies, comparing Texts, imploring the Divine
Assistance, than any of their Followers.

To begin therefore with Luther, Zuinglius says of him, That He was a foul
Corrupter, and horrible Falsifier of GODS Word: One, who followed Lib. de
Sacramentia, fol. 472
the Marcionists and Arians, that rased out such Places of Holy Writ, as were
against him. Thou do, says he to Luther, Corrupt the Word of God, thou art
seen to be a manifest and common Corrupter and Perverter of the Holy
Scriptures. How much are we ashamed of thee, who have hitherto esteemed thee?
With how great reason Zuinglius objected this to him, those are Judges, who
have noted Vide Bell. Ser. de Pentec.
above a thousand places, changed by him in the New Testament alone; and that
he set forth the Gospels seven times, every Edition very much differing from
the precedent. Now A. P. desires to know, whether, and when Martin Luther had
the Assurance, he requires.

Luther on the other side affirms of the Zuinglian Vid. Pro. Ap. tract. 10. S.
10. Subd. 4.
Translators, that They were Fools, Asses, Antichrists, Deceivers, and of an
Ass-like Understanding. Beza says of the Basilian Translation, That It is in
many places wicked, and altogether differing from the Mind of the Holy Ghost.
Of Beza's Translation Castalio observes, That to note all his Errors, would
require a great Volume. Beza again pronounces of Castalio's Edition, That, It
is False, Foolish, Unskillful, Bold, Blasphemous, Vicious, Ridiculous, Cursed,
Erroneous, Wicked, Perverse. In the first English Bible, set forth in the Reign
of Henry the VIII. by Tindal the chief Apostle of the pretended Reformation,
Bishop Tunstal has noted no less than two thousand Corruptions in the
Translation of the New Testament alone.

A. P. therefore desires the Dr. to give a Rule to seekers of the Truth, by
which they may discover the True and Uncorrupted Word of GOD. Amidst so much
Disunion, Clashing, and manifest Contradictions; all which naturally flow from
that irregular Liberty of Expounding Scripture, given to all men by the
Reformers.

From what has been hitherto said, A. P. draws this Argument. That which leads
to manifest Discord of Opinion, cannot be the Rule of One Holy Catholic
Church. But the Rule, assigned by the Dr. as now proved, has opened the Door to
manifest Discord in Opinion. Therefore, it is not the Rule of One True
Catholic Church.

A. P. Humbly entreats the indifferent Reader to ponder this whole Discourse
with that Attention and Judgment, it deserves: For if A. P. proves this point
against the Dr. he is sure, That the whole Basis of the Reformation will
totter, and that the Church of England has no more to say in her Defense, than
the most Erroneous Body of Christians, which has ever been since CHRIST's Time.

A Prosecution of the REMARKS.
WEre the Quaery concerning the Ordination of Confer. p. 10.
Linus any way material to A. P's Faith, he would Answer it. And what Copy St.
Peter had of the Old Testament, makes nothing to the proof of A. P's Canon, for
which he has the Testimony of an Infallible Church; whereas the Church of
England has none at all for hers.

The Dr. in the same Page says, The Word Rock Note, That Cephas (the word our
Savior used) is a Syriach word, and signifies the same in either Gender, As,
you are a Rock, and upon this Rock.
being in the Greek of the Feminine Gender, cannot be applied to Peter, who is
of the Masculine. Had St. Paul been endowed with the Dr's Learning, he would
certainly never have said, Petra autem erat CHRISTVS, CHRIST was the Rock, He
being no more of the Feminine Gender than St. Peter.

The Dr. having Read of twelve Foundations, Page 11.
denies Peter to have had any Prerogative above the rest of the Apostles, He
should have set down A. P's Answer, who by way of Retortion, asked the Dr. why
he was by the Evangelists always named in the first place, the Order of the
others being always inverted, since he was neither called First to the
Apostolat, nor Best Beloved of Christ; why he is Read to have presided in the
Council of the Apostles; and why all Controversies of Faith in all past Ages:
were ever referred to St. Peter's Successors to be decided.

As for Mrs. Rs. saying softly, 'twas St. Peter 's Confession, Conf. p. 11.
on which Christ built his Church, A. P. knows nothing on it.

A little after the Dr. says, A. P. taxt the Greeks with being Liars, etc. A.
P. spoke this in the Dr's. Opinion: Since the Greeks (to say nothing of the
other Councils) having in the Council of Florence, as also in two other
Councils, Assembled in the East since the Reformation, Disapproved, Condemned,
and Anathematized all the Protestants Negative Articles, the Dr. could not but
hold them for Liars; and the Roman Church, with all others then in the World,
being of the same Persuasion; the Dr. must allow all those to be Liars, from
whom he has received his Scripture. Now whether the Greeks are Heretics in
their Doctrine about the Holy Ghost, it appertaining nothing to the present
Controversy, A. P. values not.

The Dr. now proves his Bible from a Principle, of which he said not a word in
the Conference, viz. that all Christians cannot be in a Confederacy to vend a
Lie. Here A. P. has gained his Point, since all Christians were in a
Confederacy in receiving the Canon of the Roman Church, the Vulgata, and Belief
of the now Controverted Articles; no one Parcel of them delivering the
Protestants Canon, Text, or Exposition.

The Dr. mistakes, when he asserts, that the Ibid.
Roman Church proves her Being and Authority out of the Scriptures. Which is
false: For she proves her self, and her Infallible Authority by all those
Arguments, by which the Dr. would prove the Christian Religion against Jews or
Gentiles, and then confirms it only by Scripture.

The Dr. in his thirteenth Page, as in several other places, complains, That A.
P. would fix to nothing: That is, A. P. in two hours and an half would not
allow the Dr. to pass from the Question in Debate, though he made several
Offers at it.

Next, you have an account of A. P's saying in a little heat, He would be
hanged, knocking the Table Confer. p. 13.
thereupon. A. P. grants both the Words and Actions to be true; and though he
seemed then justly to be provoked: Yet he confesses it to have been a Fault,
and desires, none may take occasion of Scandal from it; but rather learn, how
in the greatest Provocations, Men ought to moderate their Passions.

A little after, you are told, That the Greeks have Page 14.
always had Churches, which none deny; that Among the Latins, they have
Catalogues of Witnesses against the Romish Errors; and that a true Church
(though not as such,) may have many Corruptions. When the Dr. shall produce his
Catalogue; 'twill be then time to examine the Credit of his Witnesses, and the
Validity of their Evidence: In the mean time A. P. allows, That there may in
the True Church be Corruptions in Manners, though not in Faith. The Dr. goes
on, saying, That the present Corruptions in the Roman Church were not formerly
made Articles of Faith. A. P. absolutely denies these supposed Corruptions of
the Dr's, and avers, That the Dr. will never be able to show, That St.
Gregory's Faith was not that, which Rome now Teaches. But that some, who call
themselves Catholics, should oppugn the Synods of the second of Nice and
Trent, is no great wonder; since all Heretics are desirous to retain that
Name, and fail not to oppugn the Councils, by which they are condemned. As to
what he says concerning A Doctrine contrary to Transubstantiation, Taught in
the Saxon Church, and such other things, which (he pretends) He will prove out
of Beda, Hoveden, etc. When his Proofs are produced, A. P. will return him a
fair and candid Answer.

The Dr. next says, there were Christians in Bohemia, Ibid.
making the Bible their Rule of Faith. A. P. grants, that all Heretics have
ever done the like, and always taken for their Theme the pretended Errors of
the Church of Rome; and that, because they knew, in that Church (as in the Head
and Mother of all others) resided a Power of Condemning them.

The Dr. asserting of Transubstantiation, That Confer. p. 15.
that manner of the Breads becoming CHRIST's Body was invented by Paschasius
Radbertus. A. P. Answered, That he had nothing to do with Paschasius Radbertus;
but that it was Decreed in the great Council of Lateran: Whence the Dr. infers,
That he erred in Time near four hundred years. The Dr. by making this
Inference, seems to have forgotten the very Rudiments of Logic. A. P. says,
That he appealed to a General Council, and troubles not himself with a private
Man: Therefore (says the Dr.) he errs nigh four hundred years in Time. This is
just, as if, the Dr. being charged with following Luther's Tenets; and
replying, That he had nothing to do with Luther, but that his Religion was
established by an English Parliament, held in the year 1662. It should thence
be concluded, that he erred in Time: Than which nothing could appear more
ridiculous.

To contradict, what A. P. had affirmed about Conf. p. 15, 16.
the four Patriarchs being at the Council of Lateran either in Person, or by
their Legates, the Dr. alleges Father Walsh's Letter to the B. of L. Now, when
F. Walsh's Authority and Name in History shall be equal to that of Binnius,
Labbe, Carranza, etc. then A. P. will think it worth his Labor to answer this
Objection: But in the mean time he cannot forbear to mind the Dr. once again of
his usual Dis-ingenuity in appealing to any Paper or Person, of how little
Credit soever, when it makes for his Advantage, and slighting the Authority of
the most Learned and Understanding, when quoted against him. The account given
by Binnius, concerning this Council, with whom the other two agree, is this,
The fourth Council of Lateran consisted of four hundred Bishops, and eight
hundred other Fathers, Abbots, Deans and Priors of Convents, there assisting at
it the Patriarchs of the East: those of Constantinople and Jerusalem in
person; and those of Antioch and Alexandria by their Legates, there being
present also the Ambassadors of the Greek and Roman Emperors; and of the Kings
of Jerusalem, France, Spain, England, Aragon, Cyprus, and Hungary. 'Twas held
in the year of our Lord 1215. by the Authority of Pope Innocent the III. in the
time of the Emperor Frederick the II. For recovering the Holy Land from the
Turks, and against the Heresies of the Albigenses and Almaricus, and the
Errors of Abbot Joachim.

In the midst of this Discourse about the Lateran Conf. p. 15.
Council, the Dr. brings in the passage of the Impertinent Schoolmaster with
his Picture, which ought to have been alleged six Pages before.

From Father Walsh the Dr. passes to A. P's Breviary Conf. p. 16.
and Written Paper (though A. P. produced no such Paper,) and having showed in
one Paragraph, how the question of Transubstantiation, etc. was now agreed on,
and that he appealed to the Fathers (Though he would not take them for his
Infallible Judge,) he presently taxes A. P. that he would p. 17.
fix to nothing, and soon after complains of Mr. M. (whom the Dr. himself to
avoid the hearing A. P's Testimonies had provoked to it) That he was drawing p
18.
them away from their point. So that here is fixing, and no fixing almost in a
Breath. But here Mr. M. intends to have a word with the Dr.

The Dr. then says, That He desired A. P. to read p. 19.
out of his printed Paper the place out of Justin Martyr. Which is a
Misrepresentation: For A. P. having at least twenty times offered at it in
vain, at last took occasion of the Dr's being out of Breath, to oblige him to
hear it.

After this, the Dr. having given in his Narrative a far different Account of
his Sense of the Real Presence, from what he did in the Conference it self (as
appears in A. P's Account, to which the Reader A. P 's Account of Conf. p. 12.
is referred) where he first granted it; and then said he would not speak to
that Point, passes on to a Quaery put to A. P. by Mr. D. A. C. viz. What Dr. T
's Acc. of Conf. p. 20.
kind of Philosophy that was, which maintained, that Accidents subsisted
without Substance; and tells you, that A. P. saying, 'Twas true Philosophy; D.
T. himself asked, Whether it was true Philosophy to say, there was Whiteness
without a white thing, etc. And that it was answered, GOD could do this. A. P.
stands to his Answer, and desires to know of this Church-Divine, who measures
his Faith by his Philosophy, By what principle of Philosophy he conceives GOD
to have made all things of nothing; to have Physically united his Divine to our
Humane Nature; to be Three and One in the same indivisible Substance: What
Philosophy teaches the Resurrection of the Dead, and the washing our Soul by
Baptism. Now A. P. has been instructed, first to see what Faith Teaches, and
then to weigh it in the Balance of Philosophy; and if it surpass the reach of
Natural Discourse, rather to renounce the Principles of Philosophy, than the
Articles of his Faith. As for the Contradiction Mr. D. A. C. is said to have
discovered in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation: A. P. asserts, that Mr. D. A.
C. shall never with all his skill in Logic be able to make a Syllogism, that
implies a Contradiction, in any of the Tenets of the Roman Catholic Church. It
might be wished, that the conceited Wits of our Time had more Humility, and
less Vanity: For thence would proceed more Inclination to Faith, and less to
Atheism.

Then the Dr. alleges the Testimony of Costerus, who grants, that, if CHRIST
be not really present in the Eucharist, The Worshipping of it would be worse
Idolatry than that of the Laplanders, who Worshipped a Red-cloath. And A. P.
adds, that, if CHRIST be really there, (for the belief of which there is forty
to one on A. P's side) the denying it Divine Worship, would prove the highest
Impiety, besides the violating a Divine Precept of Eating his Sacred Body,
incumbent on all, who are arrived at the years of Discretion. This puts me in
mind of an Atheistical Expression, which fell from one of our Protestant
Bigots, who seeing Beyond Sea a Person of great Quality and Riches leave all,
to become a poor Capucin, said, How will this poor Gentleman be gulled, if
after all, there be no GOD? To which Sacrilegious Impiety a stander by,
replied, But how will you be gulled, Sir, if there prove to be a GOD? To apply
this, How great will be the Confusion of Dr. T. at the day of Judgment, when
he shall find the Catholic Tenet true; whereas if A. P. should (to suppose an
Impossibility,) find it otherwise, he will not have the least Reason to appear
confounded, since he had the same Ground to believe Transubstantiation, as the
Blessed Trinity.

Here the Dr. repeats, that A. P. was again Confer. p 21.
desired to stick to something; where A. P. in near an hour and a half could
only edge in two Quotations, whilst the Dr. rambled through twenty impertinent
Subjects, most of which he has misplaced; though here you find him by his own
account, running on no occasion, to that of St. Matthew, Hear the Matt. c 18.
Church: Which every one sees, how it was to the Quotations, A. P. was always
pressing him to A. P. Acc. of Conf. p. 13, 14.
hear: Concerning which, see A. P's. account.

The Dr. adds, That it was resolved, that Dr. T. Dr. T's Acc. of Conf. p. 22.
should write of this matter, and of St. Ambrose, St. Cyril, and Justin Martyr
to Mr. P. and receive his answer: In which there is as much Truth, as in the
matter of Fact, he represented in his 4th. Page.

The Dr. would willingly have, what he said Ibid. p. 23.
touhing Papists, being Breakers of their Words, to pass for a personal affront
put upon A. P. But A. P. has given you a most sincere and modest Account of it,
in his Relation of the Conference; and A P's Acc. of Conf. p. 14, 15.
Mr. M. being on this occasion most foully aspersed by the Dr. will add to it
what is pertinent.

The Dr. drawing to a conclusion of the Conference, says, That having charged
A. P. with being of D. T's Acc. p. 24
an Order, who had brought in a Foreign Jurisdiction, Note, That A. P. only
spoke of a Spiritual Jurisdiction.
A. P. asserted, That the Pope had had a Right of Jurisdiction here a Thousand
Years, and that Dr. T. ought not therefore to call it Foreign; and that Dr. T.
said these were dangerous words. A. P. in this matter refers himself to the
Judgment of His most Sacred MAJESTY, who alone can be injured by that
Assertion: As for what concerns the Bishops and Clergy of the Church of
England, they must either derive their Orders and Spiritual Power from the Sea
of Rome, or else they will never be able to make out, they have any at all.

The Dr. here omits A. P's. smart (but just) return to his charging A. P's.
Order with the Deposing Power, in which A. P. showed, that, whatever some
private Men amongst the Catholics had Judged in the Theory, it was the
Reformers who reduced A. P's Acc. 17, 18.
it to Practice. In reference to which, A. P. (besides what he has already
alleged,) has many Remarks in store; which he will produce, if farther
provoked. The Religion and Principles of the late Unfortunate D. of Monmouth
are but too well known; nor are we ignorant, who it was, that assisted the
Traitor Armstrong at his unhappy Exit, without obliging him to an humble
Confession of his Crimes, and an acknowledgement of the Injury done to his King
and Country.

As for the Paper, left by Mr. M. the Reader is Dr. T's Acc. p. 24.
by A. P. referred to him, whom it more immediately concerns: And for the
calling of the Constable by the Son of Mr. J. it was not altogether imprudently
thought of, the Disorder being very great toward the end of the Conference;
and the Dr's throwing out such malicious Propositions, as argued nothing but an
embittered Spirit against A. P. and his Religion, seconded by the rude Clamours
of the Dr's Adherents, might give some suspicion of a beginning a Riot.

The Dr. having now ended his Relation of the Conference, returns afresh to
Reproach and Defamation (a vein of which, little becoming the Charity, he
Hypocritically pretends to,) runs indeed through his whole Discourse; and
repeats, that the Boy, Since he had been in this new way, had troubled the
House, misspent his Time, and become Ibid. p. 25.
an intolerable Liar; and in general, That he was much worse in his Morals,
since he had been tampered with. This is so vile a Calumny, that A. P. (though
represented by the Dr. as a less calm man) has not Gall enough to return it
upon his Doctorship, as he deserves. Did the Dr. know as much of Catholics
Morals, as A. P. does, and had he seen (by living Abroad, as A. P. has done,)
how much they surpass the Morality of the pretended Reformers, he would be
ashamed of thus injuriously and shamelesly representing the Catholics, as
Corrupters of Morals. A. P. therefore most sincerely affirms, that during the
space of eighteen years he has been Abroad, he has seen more Examples of true
Christian Piety, Fear of GOD, and Sense of another Life, in any one Month
thereof amongst Catholics, even in the meanest Towns, than he has been able to
observe by his Eyes, or learn by his Ears, in this pretended Reformed Church
these five Months he has passed in England since his return. Nor yet is he so
Partial to his own Church, as not to grant, that there are many ill Livers in
it; but he has made this Remark, that in time of Persecution, such as these,
who Scandalized their Brethren by their ill Deportment, became forsooth of the
Reformed Church, and were esteemed by the Party a Credit to them, though well
known to the World to be of most flagitious Lives and Conversation. But A. P.
is unwilling to disoblige his Reader by such severe Reflections, as begin to
flow but too kindly in this unkind subject, though he has a Reserve for the Dr.
if ever he touch this string again.

Singular Effects of Dr. T 's Conference.
THe Dr. goes on, and tells you, that the Boy was gone before the Conference.
If so, why did he meet? But this is a stroke of the Dr's Artifice to palliate
his not bearing away the Prize: For the Boy was not reconcil*d till ten days
after. Now besides the Boy, there are (for the Dr's Credit) at least two more a
gaining to the Roman Note, That the Report of a Catholic Lady leaving the
Roman Church, is false.
Catholic Religion, moved by the force of the Dr's victorious Arguments; and
had A. P. had the liberty of a fair Conference, he questions not, but he should
have been yet more Successful The Dr. indeed says well, that Mr. V. and Mrs. V.
Were not Staggered, but Confirmed; doubtless in a true Religion: For they have
both made a Trade of Defaming the Innocent, and Selling false Reports ever
since, which A. P. will prove to their Faces, when they please; and exacts of
them, that they send him the Names of his Fellow Jesuits and Priests, or at
least how they knew them to be such, and who those Nine or Ten were, who (as
they have told A. P's nearest Relations) came with him. Now A. P. to give them
a civil Item, acquaints them, that some have Bought several things of them, on
design to hear their Story: So that, if their Apprentice has learned to Lie,
the World may be satisfied, who he has had for his Master and Mistress. A. P.
once designed to oblige Mr. V. and Mrs. V. by a public Notary to deliver the
matter of Fact; but on second Thoughts he resolved to let them take their
swing, so to be better informed, of the Stories they have told. The Innocent
Apprentice, having been Defamed by common Spreaders of false Reports, desires,
the World will consider, how far their Testimony is to be Credited; and he
Pities the Dr. for being so led by the Nose, as to believe on the Word of such
Persons, That to be true, which he knew by his own certain knowledge to be
otherwise.

A P. farther informs the World, that he has lately reconciled two zealous
Protestants; one of which had been with the Dr. and sincerely desired to be
satisfied in the following Queries.

First, How the Dr. could make appear, that the Protestant Religion descended
by an un-interrupted Succession from the Apostles.

The Dr. answered* He must have ten thousand Pounds worth of Books to show
that: So that A. P. perceives this to be the Threadbare Answer to that trivial
Question; or, if you please, the Fatal Edge, wherewith he cuts the Gordian
knot, which no Reformed Dr. could ever yet untie. Now the Party thought, this
Answer fell short of the Expectation, conceived of so renowned a Champion, and
that he ought to have at least some confused knowledge of so material a
Succession. A. P. will at a quarter of an Hours warning prove at a far easier
rate the Succession of his Church, whenever the Dr. pleases.

The second Quaery was, How the Church of England, granting her self to be
Fallible (and, for ought she knows, in actual Error) could be the Church,
built upon a Rock, against which Hell should never prevail.

Here the Dr. grew a little warm, and called the Party Impertinent, Impudent,
etc. said, That these were Quaeries to entrap him, that the Party had been
Tutour'd by some Jesuit, etc Now this was a most Doctor-like and direct Answer,
and enough to keep the most fluctuating Mind in an equal Balance, and fix it
to the Rock of Truth.

The third Quaery was, Whether one might securely before GOD believe that the
infinite number of Miracles, related by most virtuous and learned Men in all
Ages to have been wrought in Confirmation of the Roman Catholic Faith, were
all Lies, Cheats, and Fictions of Impostures. If so, then there was no more
Faith to be given to Man, and the Church of England would fall to nothing,
being grounded on a Presumption, borrowed from pretended Histories, of
Innovation and Corruptions in the Romish Church; if not, that is, if these
Miracles ought to be believed, then again the Reformation seemed defeated,
since GOD (who cannot be Author of a Lie,) had positively acted for the Roman
Church against that of England.

Now this was an horned Beast of a Query, which raised the Dr's Warmness to a
great height, which he mainly discharged on his dubious Client. And a direct
Answer not occurring, (as indeed there could not) he used an indirect way of
arguing, and took an oblique stroke, able to give an eternal overthrow to the
Roman Church. You talk, (said he) of Miracles in the Romish Church, I Will show
in one Example, what credit they are of: There was upon a time a certain
Priest, who got Money by exposing the Head of a pretended Saint to the Peoples
Charitable Veneration. Now, as Providence would have it, a Surgeon, on what
suspicion I know not, pierced this Saintly Head with his Lance, and found it to
be a piece of Parchment. Now, said he, tell me of Roman Miracles again. This
was certainly the happiest stroke of a Lance, we shall ever find mentioned in
History: If his Hand was not that of a Lady, his Eyes were at least those of an
Eagle, and his Heart of a Lion. I wonder this Surgeon is not Canonized by
the pretended Reformers for thus totally routing the Romish Church. What need
then of tumbling over Concordances, and beating men's Brains, to search out
mis-apply'd Texts of Scripture, and bring them in by Head and Shoulders against
Popery, an Instance whereof we have in that learned Catechism, lately cried
about the Streets; and, to give it the greater Cred^t, Fathered on our Dr. when
this one Story of the Surgeon, with the help of Dr. T's Application, would
every whit as well do the Feat and be as much to the purpose: As you may see by
this Specimen. Master, Were there ever any Miracles wrought in the Roman Church
these twelve hundred years* Scholar, No, for there was a Surgeon, etc.
Master, Must we then believe, that all those, recounted by St. Augustine, St.
Gregory, St. Bernard, Venerable Beda, and infinite others, were so many
Impostures? Scholar, Yes, for there was a Surgeon, etc. Can any man be so
unreasonable, as to desire a more irrefragable Proof of the Roman Churches
Errors.

But A. P. (not to injure the Dr.) grants, that he added another Story, to fix
this wavering mind, in an aversion to the Roman Church, and it was of a Person
of his own acquaintance, who had been at Rome, where he had known those, who
for Six pence a month, obtained a Dispensation to live at discretion, and
violate the Commands of God and the Church at pleasure. Now had this Story
fallen from Dr. Titus's mouth (when he was esteemed the Savior of the Nation)
A. P. though knowing it to be false, would not yet have dared to contradict it,
when issuing from such venerable Lips. But having it only from Dr. T. (who
cannot be thought more Infallible than his Church) A. P. craves leave to say,
That if the Dr. really believes this Story, he shows himself very weak, and
altogether ignorant of the Catholic Tenets; But if not believing it himself,
he makes use of it only to impose on the credulity of others, it is an Argument
of far greater insincerity and dis-ingenuity, than A. P. desires the Dr. should
be guilty of.

To these Stories, the Party (who truly went to the Dr. with a great opinion of
his Abilities) replied very well. If it should be granted, that there may have
been a Priest so wicked, as to expose false Relics, does it thence follow,
That there was never any true Miracle? And should there be found one so
ridiculously impudent, as to delude some ignorant Soul, by giving a pretended
leave to sin, Is it therefore sufficiently proved, that this is the Doctrine of
the Roman Church? Must I cease to believe in Christ, because Peter denied him,
and Judas, (equally trained up in his School) betrayed him? Here the Dr.
dismissed his Parishioner, as obstinate, and unworthy of any further
Instruction, who is now a very good Roman Catholic; as is also a second, who
expected the Learned Solution of the above mentioned Queries. A. P. therefore
takes the liberty to give the Dr. this Friendly Advice, That he addict not
himself much for the future, to this way of Tale-telling, which, how grateful
soever it may be to the Rabble and Scum of the People, who are often delighted
with such shallow Raileries, is yet very distastful to the sober sort, who
cannot but see through such Net-work-Sophistry at the first appearance. A. P.
has a reserve of suchlike effects, of the Dr's wonderful Query-resolving
Faculty; but this may suffice at present.

Whoever shall have read Dr. T's most Injurious and Scandalous Aspersions, cast
on A. P. in his own Person, whom he represents as a Falsifier, a Man who has
not common skill in History, a Violator of the Holy Day, etc. on the Institute
of his Order, which he charges with bringing in Foreign Jurisdiction, and
teaching the Deposing-Power; and on his Religion in general, which he accuses
of obliging People to break their words; of teaching to Lie, to be Idle, Uneasy
to others, and of making its Followers worse in their Morals; will not wonder
that A. P. has endeavored to vindicate himself, which notwithstanding, he has
endeavored to do with all the Modesty, so foul a charge could permit.

POSTSCRIPT. An account of what A. P. designs in his next PAPER.
A. P. as fast as his Religious duties, of near five, and School-imployments of
six hours a day will allow, will give the Dr. a full Answer to the remnant of
his 12 Sheets, wherein he will show, first the Dr's Exceptions against St. Quia
benidictione etiam natura ipsa mutatur. Sermo igitur Christi, qui po^^rat ex
nihilo facere quod non erat, non potest ea quae sunt, in id. mutare quod non
erat. In lib. de iis qui M^s. initiuntur. Note, that not one word was Quoted
out of St. Cyiril, in the Conference.
Ambrose's Works, de Sacram. to be very weak, and contradictory; and that St.
Ambrose is evidently against the Dr. witness at present only one Text out of an
undoubted work Which the Dr. refused to hear in the Conference. You may say
perchance; I see another thing, why do you assert that I take the Body of
Christ? The Saint Answers, How many examples do we use, to prove that this is
not what Nature has Framed, but what the Blessing has Consecrated? and that the
force of the Blessing, is greater than that of Nature; because by the Blessing,
the very Nature it self is changed, and alleges the example of Moses's Rod.
The Word therefore of Christ which made all things out of nothing, can it not
change one thing into another? For it is not less powerful to give a new
Nature, than to change Natures given. 2dly. That he has (like E. S. from whom
he has borow'd it) Quoted St. Cyril, most disingenuously leaving out that Text,
which if cited, would have left no place (...).
of doubting, but that he makes for the Roman Catholic Tenet: part of it is as
follows, That which seems Bread, is not Bread, although to the Taste it appears
to be so, but it is the Body of Christ. He that cavils about such a Text, has
doubtless, great Humility of Soul, and notable dispositions to Faith, 3dly.
That the Dr's Notes against Justin Martyr* are of no force at all.

Remarks upon Letters Printed by Dr. Tenison.
1st. A. P. Thinks the Dr. might have been so civil as to acquaint him with his
intentions, since that he thought it necessary to make his Letters public; but
this is like the What Text of Scripture makes for pu^lishing private Letters?
rest of the Doctors Charitable Procedure. 2 d. He has very injuriously
concealed A. P's fifth Letter, which was the most material of all, as
containing A. P's clearing himself from the Dr's false aspersion, whereby he
charges A. P. with not having stood to the Agreement. 3 d. A. P. finds several
false Writings in the Dr's Print, which he is morally certain he never was
Author of: but this may pass with the rest of the Dr's Ingenuity. 4th. The
Youths Letter with two or three lines bearing appearance of A. P's hand, was
carried to the Dr. by Mr. V. who broke open the Boys Chest, took out the
Letter, and made a present of it to the Dr. Now this was certainly nothing
against Morality; but argued a Gospel liberty, like that of the said Mr. V.*s,
who (to spite his Catholic Apprentice, and to show his respect to the
Common Prayer Book) changed in his Family the Abstinence of Flesh on Friday and
Saturday, into Wednesday and Thursday, that so the Youth might be compelled to
eat Flesh on Friday and Saturday, or fast four days together: Who now will
doubt but Mr. V. is confirmed in his Religion?

Now A. P. in his next, will do Dr. T. the Justice, to put his Learned Reply to
the Youths Letter, in Schoolform, that the World may see the force of the Dr's
Sophistry, of which take now a short Essay. Against Unity of Faith in the Roman
Catholic Church, alleged by the Youth, as one of his Motives, the Dr.
objects, the Jansenists, Blackloists, and Molinists, condemned by the Roman
Church. Now in form, it must run thus, There is no Union in that Church which
by her just censures does reclaim, or cut off those, who broach new and false
Doctrines; But the Church of Rome has so reclaimed, or cut off those who began
such Doctrines: Therefore in the Church of Rome there is no Union. Now, e
contra, for the Church of England. In that Church Unity is preserved where
Spreaders of various, (Doctrines in points necessary to Faith) cannot be justly
condemned, but in the Church of England, Spreaders of various Doctrines, in
Points necessary to Faith, cannot be justly condemned (as grounding themselves
on the same Rule of Faith with that Church, I mean Scripture.) Therefore, in
the Church of England is preserved Unity of Faith. Argued certainly like a
Doctor; yet this must be the Sense of his Argument, if any. Against the Spirit
of Missions in the Catholic Church (another of the Youths Note, that the
Jesuits (whom the Dr. so much loves) are actually Preaching in the most
Barbarous and Desolate Countries in the World.
Motives) the Dr. Learnedly objects, as follows. There is no Zeal of Souls in
that Church which sends Missions into Warm, Rich, and Populous Countries; But
the Chapter of Rome sends such Missions, therefore she has no Zeal of Souls.
Confirmatur, St. Peter Preached at Rome, St. Paul in Greece, St. James in
Spain, St. Thomas in the Indies, all Rich and Plentiful Countries, but they had
no Zeal of Souls; therefore a Pari. Bravely spoken Dr. the Jews will thank you
for this, as also for your Text against crossing the Dr's Narrative page 76.
Seas, which proves notably for the Synagogue against the Apostles. The Zeal of
the Church of Rome being beat down, let us Establish that of the Church of
England. There is true Zeal of Souls, where the Ministers of the Gospel care
not what becomes of the rest of the World, so they can obtain good Livings to
maintain their Godly Consorts, and Levitical Offspring. But this is the Zeal
of the Ministers of the Church of England. Ergo.

This may serve at present, for an item for what is to come; which the Dr. shall
have at large, as soon as A: P. shall have received the Dr's Vindication of his
Rule of Faith, impugned; and if I mistake not, proved Null by A. P.

A. P's Answer to the Vindication of A. Chresner, etc.
SInce Mr. A. Chresner Schoolmaster in Long-Acre, has thought fit to write a
Vindication from the pretended Aspersions of A. P. Jesuit, and Schoolmaster in
the Savoy. A. P. acknowledges, that no uncivil rudeness ought to have forced
the Word Buffoon from his Lips. However, since A. C. has provoked our Jesuit,
it is fitting the World should be a little farther instructed of the behavior
of A. C. during the Conference: and then Judge whether at least upon a Stage,
he would not have deserved that Character?

As soon as he came into the Room, facing A. P. he began to knit his Brow,
contort his Eyes, draw his Mouth into most un-natural shapes, and cut as many
Faces, and as ugly, as the greatest Professor of that Art could do. A P. not
accustomed to such grimaces, said very calmly, Pray Sir look mors sweetly on it;
but A. C. continuing his mute Scene, A. P. asked him if in any thing he had
offended him? and why he showed so much disdain and rancor in his Countenance?
Then breaking his mute Courtship, with a very ugly look, stay, says he You
cited a false Council for the Marks of the True Church, in your Catechizing.
How so, replied A. P. Why you cited the 2d. Council of Nice. A. P. answered,
Sir you mistake, it was the 2 d. General Council (which was held at
Constantinople) not the 2 d. of Nice which I cited.

Now this behavior remained with him till he came three hours after into a
private Chamber, and then entering into himself, he cried peccavi, and desired
what had passed might not be ill taken. This is the true matter of Fact, and if
A. P. allow 20 or 30 very ridiculous motions of hands, eyes, and face, to
imbellish this Gentleman's Discourses, it is short of what his deportments
merit. Page 2. it is not true what he says of Mr. M's interposing private
Questions of his own to the Dr, for this was the D's refuge for near two hours,
though A. P. grants Mr. M. once or twice to have interposed, but not private
Questions of his own. Page 3. He tells you that A. P's pulling out his
Breviary, gave occasion to him of producing his Picture, which is as far from
Truth, as A. C. from being Pope; the Picture being produced about the beginning
of the Conference, and upon no such occasion as he relates, whereas as A. P.
took out his Breviary, upon account of Authorities relating to
Transubstantiation, which happened an hour and a half after. Page 5, He denies
his wry Mouths and antic Gestures, with the same impudence he made them. It
may be A. C. through force of an inveterate habit, may not be particularly
mindful of his deformed comportment that day; as it befell the Shephards Boy,
whom A. P's Brother reprehending for his ill habit of Swearing, replied with a
great Oath, that he had never Swore in his life. Page 6. He gives you a smooth
account of his moderate temper which never appeared, till he cried peccavi with
a civil Bow and Congy a little before parting. Page 7 and 8. He plays the
Ignoramus Dr. and beats the Air, discovering a total ignorance of Symbolical
Representations, as of Angels under man's shapes, the Holy Ghost under that of
Fiery Tongues, Dove, etc. he ought not to impugn Doctrines he does not
understand, let him ask those of Trinity-Colledge in Oxford, why they represent
the Blessed Trinity by the Letter Delta? Now A. P. finding so much
dis-ingenuity, want of Truth, Spirit of Contempt and Ignorance in A. C's first
Sheet, thought it time lost, to Scribble against one whose Tongue no Wise Man
will esteem a Slander.

Now if the Reader will be pleased to consider that A. C. is a mercenary
Schoolmaster, he will presently discover the reason why in the Conference by
his uncivil Comportments, and now by his more uncivil Pen, he would sain draw
A. P. into contempt; which thanks be to God A. P. stands very little in fear of
from him, nor shall he ever give him the honor of a future Answer.

FINIS.

