THE WHOLE TRIAL OF Connor Lord Macguire, WITH The perfect Copies of the
Indictment, and all the Evidences against him. ALSO The Copy of Sir Philome
Oneales Commission, the Popes Bull to the confederate Catholics in Ireland,
with many remarkable Passages of the grand Rebellion there, from the first Rise
thereof to this present. His Plea of Peerage, and several Answers: With the
several Replies made to him, BY The Kings Sergeant at Law, and Sergeant ROLL.
WILLIAM PRYNNE, Esquire; and M. NUDIGATE. AND The Copies of the several
Testimonies brought in against him at his Trial at the Kings Bench Bar, in
Hilarie Term l^st: By

The Lord Blaney. Lady Calfield. Sir Arthur Loftus. Sir John Temple. Sir
William Stewart. Sir Fran. Hamilton. Sir Edw. Borlacey. Sir William Cole. Sir
Charles Coot. Mrs. VVordrofe. John Carmicke. Walter Gubson. M. Bunbury. Cap.
Mich. Balfoure. Captain Berisford.
LONDON,

Printed for Robert Austin, in the Old Bailey. 1645.

THere will be no need of making any long preamble to this business of the
Lord Macguire: there is none of us but have cause to be very sensible of i^ in
some of our blood, some deer friend, or at least some acquaintance in the
present unhappy war ensuing this most damnable treason, plotted by him and his
confede^ates, the particulars whereof you will find in order, which are in
themselves so copious, and satisfactorie, that it will not need any other
pointing out then the order it lies in?

Here follows a Proclamation Published upon the first discovery of the Plot.

A Proclamation, By the Lords Justices and Council.
W. PARSONS. IO. BORLASE.
THese are to make known and publish to all his Majesty's good Subjects in this
Kingdom of Ireland, that there is a discovery made to us the Lords Justices
and Counsel, of a most disloyal and detestable conspirace intended by some
evil affected Irish papists, against the lives of Us, the Lords Justices and
Counsel, and many others of his Majesty's faithful Subjects universally
throughout this Kingdom, and for the seizing not only of his Majesty's Castle
of Dublin, His Majesty's principal Fort here but also of the other
Fortifications in this Kingdom: And seeing by the great goodness and abundant
mercy of Almighty God to His Majesty and this State and Kingdom those wicked
conspiracies are brought to light, and some of the conspirators committed to
the castle of Dublin, by Us, by his Majesty's Authority so as those wicked and
damnable plots are now disappointed in the chief parts thereof, We therefor
have thought fit hereby not only to make it publicly known, for the comfort
of his Majesty's good and loyal Subjects in all parts of the Kingdom, but
also hereby to require them that they do with all confidence and
cheerfulness betake themselves to their own defense, and stand upon their
guard, so to render the more safety to themselves and all the Kindome besides,
and that they advertise Us with all possible speed of all Occurents which may
cencerne the Peace and safety of the Kingdom, and now to show fully that faith
and Loyalty, which they have always shown for the public services of the
Crown and Kingdom, which We will value to His Majesty accordingly, and a
special memory thereof will be retained for their advantage in due time, And
We require that great care be taken that no levies of men be made for foreign
service nor any men suffered to march upon any such pretense.

Given at His Majesty's Castle at Dublin, 23 October. 1641. R. Dillon. To. Digby.
Ad. Loftus. I. Temple. Tho. Rotheram. Fr. Willowby. J. Ware. Rob Meredith.


God save the King.
Imprinted at Dublin by the Society of Sationers 1641.

The Rebellion (notwithstanding this Proclamation) went on still, for though it
took not at Dublin, where this L. Macguire, Macmahan, and some other
conspirators were discovered, and appredended, and many of the Rebels were
dispersed by reason thereof; Yet they called them in again from time to time,
by Warrants, (of which sort here is the copy of one under Plunkets own hand,)
and have ever since continued this Rebellion.

By the right Honorable the General Assembly of the confederate Catholics
of Ireland.
THese are to will and command you forthwith to make diligent search and
inquiries within your several Towns, Villages, Quarters and Corporations, for
all such Soldiers as are come from the Fort of Duncannon, sithence the late
c^ssation; which were under the command of Captain Ralph Capron, and Captain
Edward Ashton, and wheresoever they or any of them shall be found, their bodies
t^ restrain and deliver unto the said Captains upon demand by the said
Captains, or either of them, the said C^ptains faithfully promising not to
inflict any further pun^shment upon the said soldiers or any of them, for this
their f^rst fault, whereof you may not fail, as you and every of you will
answer the contrary. And for so doing, shall be a sufficient warrant.

Given at Waterford the 15th. of November 1643. N. Plunket.
To all his Majesty Sheriffs, Sovereigns, Portriffs, Bailiffs, Colonels,
Captains, Commanders and other Officers whom it may concern within the County
of Wexsord or elsewhere.
And in this bloody War plotted and begun in Ireland by this Lord Macguire,
and his Confederates, and seconded in Eagland: How many thousand of men women
and children have lost their lives; and for this the Rebels plead great
Authority as appears by this Declaration following.

A Declaration of the Lords, Gentry, and others of Leinster and Munster, of
their incentions toward the English and Scottish Protestants, Inhabitants
within this Kingdom.
WHereas we are informed, that it is generally conceived and believed by the
English, and Scottish protnstants inhabitants of this Kingdom, that we the
Lords, Gentry, and others of the said Kingdom have taken Arms, and taken
Forces, for the extirpation and banishing of them out of this Kingnome, thereby
to acquire to our selves their goods and estates: we therefore desire to be
rightly understood: for we hereby declare, that we never consented, nor
intended, nor neither will intend, nor condescend to any such act, but do
utterly disciaime them: but that each man known to be a modera^e conformable
Protestant, may (as well as the Romish Catholics) respectively live and en; oy
the freedom of their own Religion, and peaceably and quietly possess their
own estates, so far forth as they, or any of them, shall join with ns in this
Oath following:

IA. B. Do in the presence of Almighty God, and all the Angels and Saints, and
by the Contents of the Bible, promise, vo^, swear and protest, to bear true
faith and Allegiauce to our Sovereign Lord King Charles, and the heirs and
successors of his body begotten, and will defend him and them, as ^r as I may,
with my life, power; and estate, against all persons that attempt any thing
against his or their Persons, Honors. Estates, and Dignities: and that I will
with the exposing of my life, power, and estate, ^oyn with the said Irish or
any other to recover his estate, roya^l ^ erogatives forcibly wreste^ from him
y the Purit^nes, in the Houses of Parliament in England, and to maintain the
same against them and all others tha^ shall directly or indirectly endeavor t^
suppress^ or do any ast contrary to regal government; as also to maintan
Episcopal Jurisdiction, and the lawfullnesse thereof in the Church, powers and
Privileges of Prelates, and the Lawful Rights and Privileges o^ the Subject:
* And I will (...)
d^e no act or thing directly or indirectly, to hinder the free and public
excercize of the Ro^ish Catholic Religion in any His Majesty's Dominions and
that I will join with, and be assistant to the members of this Common wealth
for redress to be had of the grievances and pressures thereof in ^ch manner
and sorme as shall be thought fit by a lawful Parliament, and to my power as
far as I may I will oppose and bring to condign punishment, even to loss of
life, liberty and estate, of all such as either by force, or practice,
co^ncells, plots, conspira ies or otherwise, do, or attempt any thing to the
contrary of any Article, Cl^use, or any thing in this present Oath, Vow, or
Protestation, contained, a d neither for reward fear, or punishment or any
respect whatsoever, shall relinquish this Oath and Protestation. So help me God.

This Declaration and Oath was entered inthe Counsel Book of K^lkeney, and this
is a true copy thereof.

Witness the hand of Jerem^ Green, Clerk of the supreme Council of Kilkeney.

God save the King. By the Confederate Catholics of the Supreme Counsel.
Whereas the Scottish Army in the Province of Ulster, and other their
adherents, in the said Province, and other parts of the Kingdom, have of late
(as often before taken) a Traitorous Oath of Covenant against His Sacred
Majesty, his Crown, and Dignity, and made an unchristian and profane Vow for
the utter extirpation of the Irish Nation, and total suppression of the
Catholic Roman Religion, Subversion of Monarchical government, and
introduction of confused Annarchy within this Realm: and not contented with
the inhumane and unparalleld Massacres by them committed on poor laborers,
wom^n, children, and many thousands of other Innocents of our Nation, without
distinction of age, sex, or condition, before the conclusion of the Cessasion
at Siggins Town, on the 15th. of September last, notwithstanding continual
depredations, robberies, thefts, burnings, and destruction of all the Corn and
Inhabitants in many Counties and Territories within the said Realm, and
elsewhere by them acted before the said Cessation: the said traitorous
Covenanters receiving their maintenance, support and orders, from the Rebels
now in arms against His Majesty in England; have augmented, and do rather
multiply and increase, then diminish their exhorbitant courses: and whereas the
said rebels have joined in a strict union and confederation to destroy the
Irish Nation root and branch (as they term it) and their Ministers and
adherents, by their directions, at Sea as well (...) Land, do exercise no less
cruelty: For, as often as Shipping do meet any weaker Vessels at Sea,
transporting men from this Kingdom for His Majesty's service in England, if
Irish men, Though Protestants, and Valiant and useful servitors against the
Confederate Catholics in this War, the Irish are thrown over board, as does
appear by the late throwing into the Sea, and drownig of an Irish Company of
Foot of Colonel Willowbies Regiment, all Protestants, and servitours as
aforesaid; and many women in their passage from Dublin to Bristoll, by one of
the pretended Parliament ships, and sundry other examples of that kind,
against the Law of War and Nations. And whereas the said Scottish Army, all
composed of Rebels and Assassinates, are now in their march in great numbers
toward the three Provinces of this Kingdom, to accomplish the plots and
machinations aforesaid: And whereas the said Rebels in England have provided a
great Navy, a considerable part whereof does surround the the Seacoast in this
Kingdom, and are resol^ed the next Summer, if it rest in their power, which
God defend, to land great Forces in the Province of Munster and Le^nster: and
the said Rebels of Scotland have the like design of landing of Forces in the
parts of Ulster next unto the Province of Conaght: And whereas the Auxiliarie
Forces of the three Provinces, d^signed and raised for the necessary defense of
our Religion, King, and Nation, are now marched to the Province of Ulster under
the Command of our very good Lord the Earl of C^stle haven, General,
appointed by the last General Assembly for the expedition of Ulster, to repel
the said fury and insolency of the said Rebels. Wherefore we hold it of
absolute necessity, for the safety of the Kingdom, and His Majesty's interest
therein, that all the said other three Provinces be forthwith in Arms, as well
to preserve themselves at home from the said intended invasions, as also to be
ready to assist the said Army abroad, marched into Ulster, if need require.

We do therefore by this public Act and Proclamation order, command, and
require all the Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, Freeholders, and all other
persons, from the age of 18. years, to the age of 60. forthwith to put
themselves in arms and posture of defense, and such as want arms and
ammunition, and are able, are hereby required to provide the same forthwith,
for themselves, their servants and retinue. And for the better effecting this
high and important service, we do hereby require, order, and command all and
every the Governors, Deputy Governors, Majors, Sheriffs, and all other
HeadOfficers of the respective Counties, Cities, and incorporate Towns of this
Kingdom, within our quarters, viz. the Governors, Deputie-Governours, in the
Counties where they are Governors, to call to assistance the High Sheriff,
and two or more of the Commissioners of the Array and in the County swhere
there is no Governor, the High Sheriff, calling to his assistance three, or
more of the Comissioners, of the Array: and in the Cities, and Cor^orate
Towns, the Major and other Head-officers, taking to assistance the recommended
Sheriffs and Bailiffe thereof, or any one or more of them, fo^th with to
summon-all the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Free holders, and others, able
and fit to bear arms, betwe^ne the ages asoresaid, to appear well armed upon
a certain day, and in a certain place, within the said respective Counties and
Towns respectively, and upon such appearance, to inlist the names, sirnames,
age, Arms, and Ammunition of every person, who will so appear, in a book
fairly written, and the said Governor, Deputy-Governours, Majors, High
Sheirieffs, and other Head-Officers, taking to their assistance, as aforesaid,
are hereby required and authorized to impose Fines, to the double value of the
Arms and Ammunition, upon any person or persons so summoned, that will make
default, who ought to have according to the meaning of this our Proclamation,
and of other our former Proclamations, to this effect: and to impose the single
value of the Arms he should have, upon such as will appear, and not be Armed
as becomes: And we require the said governors, and other Officers
aforesaid, at their perils to make due return unto the general Assembly now
near at hand, or unto us, in a fair book fairly written, of the number,
names, ^r-names, Arms, Ammunition, defaults, and fines aforesaid, at the
furthest, by the sixth day of the month of August.

Given at Kilkeney the 6. of July 1644. Mount-Garret. Fz. Tho. Dublin. Autrim.
Nettevill. Arthur Iveagh. John Cloynfect. Tho. Preston. Edmond Fitz. Morris.
Rich Bealing. Tirlogh O Neile. Patrick Darcy. George Comins.


Printed at Waterford by THO. BOVRKE, Printer to the Confedrate Catholics of
Ireland.

I Caused this Declaration and Proclamation to be printed here in England, and
will justify it to be their act upon oath.

Lazarus Haward.
My lodging at Master Sretchers in the Tower Bulwark.
But to come to the particulars of the trial of the Lord Maguire; which was
thus:

The copy of the Indictment. ^
Conner Maguire alias Cornelius Maguire.

(...). Rex Cont.

BY the indictment, the defendent Cornelius Maguire Esquire, that is n^w
prisoner at the Bar; is charged (...) (...), together with Sir Phil. O Neale,
Philip O Relly, Roger Moore, A^m. Roger Maguire Esquire, Tool O Conley Clarke
(being a Roman Priest) Hugh Mackmahune, and diverse other persons, false
trayt^rs unknown, as a falsetraytor against the Kings Majesty, His Supreme
liege Lord; Not having the fear of God in his heart, nor considering his duty
or allegiance, but being seduced by the instigation of the Devil, Intending
altogether to with draw, blot out and extinguish the Cordial love and due
obedience which faithful Subjects owe to their Sovereign.

20. Oct. 17. Car. At Dublin in Ireland in the parts beyond the seas, and at
diverse other times both before and after, as well at Dublin as elsewhere,
falsely, maliciously and traitorously did conspire imagine and compass utterly
to deprive and disinherit the Kings Majesty of His Royal Estate and Kingdom
of Ireland. To bring His Majesty's Person to death and destruction, To raise
sedition and breed and cause miserable slaughter and destruction amongst the
Kings Subjects, throughout all the whole Kingdom, To make an insurrection and
Rebellion against the King His Sovereign, To levy public open bloody and
fierce War against the King in that Kingdom, To change and alter according to
their own wills, the government of the Kingdom, and the Religion there
established, and totally to subvert the well ordered State of that Common
wealth, To procure and bring in dive^s strangers and forreiners (not being the
Kings Sub^ects) in a Warlike manner to invade that Kingdom of Ireland, and to
le^y War there.

And in execution of these their wicked treasons, and tr^^terous conspiracies.
20. October. 17. Car. the defendan^ Conner Maguire at Dublin, and diverse other
times and places, By one Tool O Conley and diverse other messengers by him sent
to Owen O Neale, being then in Flanders, did move and incite Phil. O Neale to
levy and raise an Army in Flanders, and thence to bring that Army over into
Ireland, in an Hostile mann^r to invade that Kingdom.

And further, to put in execution their traitorous purposes, the defendant,
together which Hugh Mac Mahun, Philim O Neale, Philip O Rely, Roger More, Roger
Maguire, and Tool O Conley the Priest. 20. Oct. 17. Car. at Dublin and diverse
other times and places in Ireland, before and after, did traitorously conspire
to enter into, seize get into their own power, and to surprise the Kings
Castle at Dublin, and all other the Kings Castles and Forts in that Kingdom,
and the Magazine therein, And at the same time unlawfully and traitorously did
endeavor and actually attempt to gain into their possession and power, and to
surprise the said Castle of Dublin, and the Munition therein.

That the defendant with the other persons named, Philip O Neale and others,
further to bring to pass their most horrid wicked treasons and conspir cies.

22. Octo. 17. Car. At Charlemont and other places before and after, being
armed and arrayed, with a great multitude, in a Warlike manner, with Bann^rs
di^played, Drums, Swords, Staves, Gunnes, and other invasive and defensive
weapons, did falsely and Traterously p^epare and levy open fierce and bloody War
against the Kings Majesty, And the same 22. Octo. seized and surprised the
Kings Fort at Charlemont. And then and there (...) and Traitorously did kill
and murder Toby Lord Caufeild, Francis Davies, and others of the Kings Subjects
that were Protestants.

That the defendents, 4. Junij. 18. Car. at the Castles of Keilagh and Cragan,
and other times and places before and after, levied War seized and surprised
those Castles, and did kill and murder, Owen Powell, and William Cosens, and
many other of the Kings Protestant Subjects in that Kingdom.

Which several offenses are laid against his duty and allegiance, against the
Peace of the King His Crown and dignity, in manifest breach and contempt of
the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

The defendant pleaded not guilty? And being demanded how he would be tried?

The Copy of the plea.
HE pleaded the Statute of Magna Charta, 10. Febr: 9. Hen: 3. that none should
be condemned but by trial of his P^ers, and pleaded the Statute of 10. Hen: 7.
that all the Statutes made in England should from thenceforth be in force in
Ireland.

And pleaded that before the time of the several Treasons charged in the
Indictme^t, Bryan Mag^ire his father by letters Pattents was created Baron of
Enis kellyn in Ireland, to him and the Heirs males of his body; by force
whereof his father was seized of the Barony in Fee tail, and 1. Febr. 12 Car.
dyed so seized; after whose death, the Barony descended to the Defendants: by
virtue whereof he was a Baron of Ireland, and that at a Parliament held at
Dublyn 16. March. 16. Car. which was there continued till 7. Aug. after, and
then adjourned to the 9. of Nov. following, and then prorogued to 24. of Febr.
thence n^xt following, and from thence continued till 24 Iun. 18. Car.

That he was as one of the Noble men and Peers of that Parliament, and that 23.
Oct. 17. Car. he was arrested and impris^ned upon pretense of the several
Treasons in the Indictment mentioned, and th^re continued till 12. Iun. 18.
Car. when he was brought against his will to Westminster, and thence committed
to the Tower of London in strict custody, And averred her Plea and prayed that
he might be tried and Judged by his Peers in Ireland.

Whereunto the Kings Council demurred in Law, And the Defendants joined in the
Demurrer.

Upon this plea of the L. Maguire the beginning of Hillary Term. Judge Bacon
delivered his judge^ent, that a Barron of Ireland was tryable by a Jury in this
Kingdom: after which the House of Commons declared their Assent unto his
opinion, in this following Vote.

Die Sabbathi 8. Febr. 1644.
Resolved upon the question,

THat the House does approve of the Judgment given by Master Justice Bacon, in
overruling the Plea of the Lord M^guire and of the manner of the trial upon
the Indictment o^ High Treason in the Kings Bench, and the Judge is he ^by
required to proceed speedily thereupon according to Law and Justice. The Lords
concurrence to be desired herein, Master Recorder is appointed to carry it up.

Unto this Vote of the Honorable House of Commons the House of Peers
afterward declared their co^currence; and thereupon this ensuing Order was
passed by both Houses of Parliament.

Di^ Lunae. 10. Feb. 1644.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, that the said Houses
d^e approve of the Judgment given by Master Justice Bacon, in over ruling the
Plea of the Lord Maguire, and of the ma^er of the trial upon the Indictment of
High Treason in the King's Bench, and the lu^ge is hereby required to proceed
speedily thereupon aco^rdingly, to Law and Justice.

John Brown, Cler. Parl. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. C.

The Trial of Connor Macguire, Baron of E^kellin in Ireland (a grand Irish
Rebell^ at the Kings Bench Bar,
On M^nday Febr. 10. and Tu^ay Febr. 11. 1644
ON Monday, February 10, the Lord (...) (one of the chief Actors in that
unparalled and unheard of Rebellion in Ireland) was brought from the Tower of
London, by the Guard belonging thereunto, unto the King's Bench Bar, where he
was arraigned by the name of Connor Macguire, alias, Cornelius Macguire
Esquire, (for his plea of Peerage was found invalid, and so declared by the
Court, and that opinion of the Judge was since assented unto, and confirmed by
both Houses of Parliament:) at his coming to the Ba^re the Prisoner spoke as
follows.

Macguire. I do humbly move, that I may have time allowed me by this Court to
send for my Witnesses.


Judge. You have had a long time; you were indicted about the beginning of the
last Term, you might have prepared Witnesses the last Term.


Mac. I did not expect a Trial.


Judge. You should expect it at your pe^ill.


Mac. I was told, when I came into the Kingdom, that I might have Witnesses.


Judge. The proof lies upon the Kings part.


Mac. Though the proof be of the Kings part, yet I must have time to clear my
self.


Judge. But if every man should ask so much time as you require, he should
never come to his Trial.


Sergeant Wh^field. Mr. Justice Bacon, we know that my L. Ma^guire was indicted
here the last Term, he was arraigned at this Bar, he pleaded, Not guilty, he
could not but expect that he had then been tried, if it had not been for the
plea of Peerage, that he then put in, upon which he knows there was a
deliberate dispute, and he could not tell but that there would be an end before
this time; and if he had had any Witnesses, he might have sent for them the
last Term: but it is a very unusual course, especially in that he could not
but expect that he should be tried before this time, but then the Court did
conceive this was a legal information. No place is mentioned by the Prisoner
where the Witnesses should be, nor are they named who they are, nor any
particular thing that they should testify: but the proof lies clear on our
part; there is no justification in Treason, if we prove that this Lord has
committed Treason, there is no justification of that, by any Witnesses he can
produce.


Judge. The Lord Gray, that was L. Deputy of Ireland, committed his Treasons in
Ireland, for which he was brought over hither, and tried here, yet the Court
did not stay for his sending over into Ireland for Witnesses.


Mac. I desire Witnesses.


Judge. What can your Witnesses say for you? Can they say thus much, That you
did not conspire, as this Indictment charges you? that there was no taking of
these Castles? Can they swear in the Negative? the proof (...), in the
Affirmative on the Kings Part?


Mac. They may be m^-informed.


Judge. Who may be ^s-informed?


Mac. The Court. I have been kept close prisoner a long time, and could not
provide my Witnesses.


Ser. Whitfield. If we were not tied to that, to nothing but his own
Confession, ther^'s enough to condemn him, for that he says he was kept close
prisoner, he might have desired that the last Term.


Sergeant Roll. If we go upon your own Examination, the witn^sses conc^rring
with that, what can you have?


Judge. If you had witnesses here, we would hear them, but to stay upon a mere
verbal supposall, for those witnesses in Ireland, they may be in that
rebellion too, and they will never come hither, and so the matter must never
come to a Tri^ll.


Mac. I desire that it may be the next Term.


Judge. We cannot protract time, they are the Kings Witnesses, there are (I
suppose) diverse here, many Witnesses of the Kings come out of Ireland, if you
will ask them any Questions for your defense, you shall: There are many
Witnesses of the Kings that know how things were in Ireland, the Court shall
put them to speak.


Mac. I humbly desire to have a formal Trial.


Judge. In what respect do you mean? I think it is (...) now: Now you are come
to be arraigned, and the evidenc^ is to come in against you, I conceive it is a
formal one.


Then the Prisoner was required to hold up his hand at the Bar; and it was
demanded, if he would challenge any of the Jur^ that were to pass upon him in
matter of life an^ death.

Then the Jury being called, he looked upon them, and challenged those which did
appear, being 23. there being only one absent, being demanded whether his
challenge was peremptory or no? He answered, it was, for causes best known to
himself.

Jury challenged.
Sir W^m Brownclow Knight and Bar^ et. Sir Henry Ro^. Sir Matthew Howl^. ^homas
Mar^, Esquire. T^omas Wilcox, Esquire. W^am Lane, Esquire. Edward Rogers,
Esquire. Edward Claxton, Es^uire. Ric^ard ^achary, Esquire. Hump^ey Westwood,
Esquire. John Iackson, Esquire. Io^ P^wlet, Gentleman. Thomas Po^ock, Gent.
Henry Smith, Gent. Francis Child, Gent. Edward Wilford, Gent. William Vincent,
Gent. John Barnes. John Arnold. John Hucksley, Esquire. Sir James Harrington,
Knight Thomas Moore, Esquire. Henry Arund^ll, Gent.
Ser. Whit. The Prisoner has challenged all the Jury that does appear, 23.
appears, and he has challenged them, and his challenge is for causes best
known to himself, which is a peremptory challenge. Truly, it is that which the
Law does allow, and we do not oppose it, but we do desire that we may have
another Writ returnable to morrow.


Judge. You must have a Venire facias.


Ser. Whit. This cause is a cause of very great weight, there are many
Witnesses that have long attended in Court, we are informed, that some of them
are gone away into I^eland; that there is the Sheriff of Dublin and some
others that are now present in Court, that cannot be here, if we should
defer this Trial, as the Prisoner does desire, and we do desire that it may
be referred till to morrow, we shall be ready to give in evidence against him.


Judge. He has spent t^ree days this Term already, this is the fourth, we
would have proceeded n^w, but for his peremptory challenge, but if we stay t^ll
^morrow h^ must be content to be tried by a ^aner Jury.


M. Prynne. This being a pu^lique case, we desire a speedy progress in it, our
Witnesses have been long det^ned h^e, and cannot attend till the next Term,
some of the being to depart within two days.


Judge. A public case must have public just^ on both sides: for your
Witnesses, you shall stay your Wit^ here. We must do that which the Law does
allow.


Ser. Whit. The Law does allow of his peremptory challenge, we desire to have a
new Writ, and t^t it may be returnable to morrow. For the doing or it, we shall
lea^ it to those that are to prosecu^e it, and to the Sh^risse.

We see that this cause cannot be tried this day, we desire we may have a
speedy end of it, there have been many day^ spent in it, and we that are of
Counsel for the King do des^e, that we may confer together, departing the
Cou^ ^or some time, and when we have conferred together, we will ret^n to the
Court again, and then we will propound to you what course we do desire for the
speedy Trial of this cause.

To this motion the Judge assented, and Ser. ^itfield and the rest of the
Counsel went to consult together abo^t it, and after a short stay, upon the^
^turne, S^r. ^hitfield spoke thus:


Ser. Whit. We that are of Counsel for the King, have consulted together with
the Clarke of the Crow^, and (...) Secretary, we have ^drawne our selves, and
(...) several presidents, and we do find by sever^ll pres^dents, that
whereas a pe^emptory challenge shall be, it is in the power of the Court to
order the course of T^l, and the course is this:

T^^^^ g^es a Writ to the Sher^ffe, that he shall distrame ^ll them that make
default, and that he shall amove those that are challenged by the Prisoner; and
further, that he ^^^ll ret^rn so many more for the Trial: this we conceive to
be the con^^ant course of this Court; and in this case my Lord Magu^re having
challenged 23. of the 24. we are to ^^^t^aine the other that made default, and
to amove the 2^. that (...) has challe^ged of them, and have a Ia^es
returnable tomorrow for a new Jury.


^r. Roll. That was in Standishes Case, and Friars Case!


Judge I know the Court may grant a Tales, but the matter is, whether it can be
done so soon as to morrow, or no, if the Sheriff can do it to morrow.


Ser. Whit. We do find this in the President of Friar, That in 3. Hen. 7. the
Jury did appear on Friday, and all those that did appear were challenged, and
there was a Distringas returned the next day, which was Saturday. It may be
immediate.


Judge. Then make your Distringas against to morrow morning, make out a
Quadraginta Tales against to morrow.


Mac. I desire I may not be so severely dealt with.


Judge. It has been so oftentimes, and the Court does proceed in these Cases
de die in diem, from day to day, and there is no difficulty in the granting of
it, but whether the Sheriff can return it so soon.

Is the Kings Council will have it to morrow, the other businesses of the
Court must be put off.

Hereupon the Prisoner was discharged, and a Rule granted to the Lieutenant of
the Tower to bring him again the next day.


ON Tuesday Febr. 11. the L. Macguire was again brought to the King's Bench
Bar, where he made a motion that his Plea of Peerage might be referred to
another Court. To which it was answered.

Ser. Whit. We know not for what end this motion is, and we know this, that
this is no time for my Lord to make this request; for you know how far we
have proceeded, he has been arraigned, and indicted of high Treason, and one
Jury he challenged, the other is returned, so as now he is in the way of his
Trial; we are now to proceed with such evidence as we have, to prosecute
instantly: We do not desire this to be produced again, and if it be, we know
not how it could be material one way or other.

After this the Lord Macguire further urged the Court to the former purpose, to
which it was answered, that he was then brought to his Trial as a Prisoner
upon the Indictment, and that both the Lords and Commons had approved of the
opinion of the Court therein.


Mac. Please you Sir, One word more: I desire to appeal to the Lords.


Ser. Whit. When one is come here, to appeal to the Lords, that was never
known: now you have put your self upon the Country.


Mac. Under favor, I conceive I may, to an higher Court.


Judge. It cannot be granted, the Lords approved it, if you would have gone to
an higher Court before, you might have taken your course, now the Jury is
returned, and you are appointed to be tried here.

After this the Lord Macguire desired further to appeal, to which the answer
was:


(...) (...). Here lies n^ such app^le here, you are out of the Eccl^all Co^t,
there is no such Plea here; you ar^ n^w upon ^he middle ^f your T^, we desire
you may go on, you h^ve challenged 23. of the Ju^y al^eady.


Judge. We have no such Course in the Common Law, ^f a man will appeal f^m me,
I cannot let him appeal to any man.

Upon this, these of the Jury following were named, which he challenged: viz.
George Ha^ger Esquire, Sir M^chael VVhart^n, James Hawley Esquire, George S^th
Esquire, Edm^nd Be^y Esquire, ^illiam Ewrsby Esquire, Stephen ^an Gent. George
^eaver-^asset, 1. Nicolls the younger, Hea^y ^alker Gent. Randolph Nicoll,
Andrew B^eat. Upon his challenging of these, which being added to the ^est,
make 35. in all, the other Jury being about to be called, the L. M^guire moved:


Mac. Under favor, I conceive, that my lands being sequestered, those men that
have bought my lands, should not pass upon my Trial; and therefore I desire
they may make answer to it upon oath, whether any of them have adventure^ or no.


Ser. Whit. To desire, that an whole Jury may be demanded such a question upon
their oath, is that that has not been known: if my Lord Macguire have cause
now against any, he has run out the liberty which the Law gave him, t^
challenge 35. peremptorily: now if he should challenge any more, he must make a
particular challenge to every particular man that comes to be sworn, and he
must have such a challenge notwithstanding as is warrantable by Law; but this
general challenge is not warrantable by Law; and if it were particular, it were
not warrantable neither.


Ser. Roll. If you will challenge any more, the Law does not d^barre you to
show cause.


Mac. I conceive, that any that have given money for Ireland for my
destruction, ought not to pass against me.


Ser. Whit. This is for the King, this is for no particular Person whatsoever.


Mac. I beseech you ^are me in it.


Judge. You know t^is that the King cannot grant it without the consent of both
Houses, and in this case it may be put to the Jury to try upon their Oath: thus
far I shall agree, that if any of this Jury be to have any particular benefit
in Ireland, of land or goods by his Attainder, it is good, but if his Lands
come to the King, and that the King is no way bound to give it any of them; it
is no Challenge: look the Statute.


Mr. Prynne. Under favor M. I B. it does not appear to the Court, that the
Prisoner has any Lands or Goods in Ireland, and therefore no such question is
to be demanded of the Jury.


Judge. You may make needless disputes upon it.


Then the Jury being accordingly required to answer upon Oath; whether they had
adventured, or had any share in Ireland for the Rebels Land: Macguire desired
the Question might be, whether they themselves, their children, or b^others?
But that would not be agreed unto, as being unreasonable: Then the Jury
following was sworn: I. Carpenter, John Cooper, A. Cordall, Rich. Atkinson,
Josias Hendall, William Greenwood, William Barnes, Robert Styles, George
Norfolk, Edw. Hudson, John VVait, Esah Risby, The Oath which they took was
this;

You shall well and truly try, and true deliverance make between our Sovereign
Lord the King, and Connor Macguire Esquire, now priso^er at the Bar, and a
true verdict give accorging to your evidence. The Jury being sworn, Macguire
moved that he might have a Jury of 24. to which it was answered.

Judge. There have been 40. named.


Mac. Under favor, I conceive, I ought to be tried by 24. there were so many
returned at first.


Judge. They returned 24. that is, because if any of them did fail, and some
may be challenged, then there might be 12. left.


Mac. Under favor, I conceive, there should be 24. now left for my Trial.


Judge. You are deceived in that. You challenged 23. and so there were 40. more
added, now you have challenged 12. of this 40. and out of them there ^emaines
so many as will make up a Jury of 12.


Then the Court proceeded to his T^iall, and the Indictment against him was
read. After which, the Court proceeded, saying:

Gentlemen of the lury, Upon this Indictment he has been arraigned, and to
his arra^gnment he has pleaded, Not guilty, and thereupon put himself upon
his Country, and your charge is to inquire whether he be guilty of the
Indictments, or any of them, if you find him not guilty, you are to declare
it, if guilty, then you are to give in evidence against him.

M. N. M. Judge Bacon. You observe by the Record that has been read to you,
that the prisoner at the Bar stands indicted of several treasons, wherein it
is found, That Connor Macguire, etc. as before in the Indictment. Now
Gentlemen, you of the Jury, if it shall be proved to you, that the prisoner at
the Bar is guilty of all, or any of these treasons, then you are to give your
Evidence.


Then these Witnesses following were sworn to give in evidence against the
Prisoner.

The Lord Blancy, Lady Calfield. Sir Arthur Loftus. Sir John Temple. Sir
William Stewart. Sir Francis Hamilton. Sir Edward Borla^y. Sir William Cole.
Sir Charles Coot. Mrs. VVordrofe. John Carmicks. Walter Gubson. M. Bunbury.
Captain Michael Balfoure. Captain Berissord.
Sir William Coals Testimony.
S. VV. You know (Sir William Cole) a great many of their names which you have
heard that were conspirators with this Lord, what Religion were they of?


Sir VV. Cole. They were all Papists.


S. VV. Who were they?


Sir VV. Cole. The L. Macguire, Sir Philom Oneale, Roger Moore, etc.


S. VV. Sir Francis Hamilton, Upon what occasion was it, that the Conspirators
got an order to view the Magazine?


Sir F. Hamilton. I was a Member of the House of Commons there, and I remember
very well, there came a Message from the House of Lords to the House of
Commons, to let them know, that there was some plot for the blowing up of the
Parliament house in Ireland, and they sent a Message, to desire that they might
search under the Parl^ament House, and there was a search made, and (as I
remember) the Lord Macguire was one of the Commi^tee from the House of Lords
made search there, but what they found, I do not know. Afterward they desired
that they might search the castle of Dublin, and other Magazines.


C. What was the cause?


Sir F. Hamilton. There was a Coac^man of m^ Lord of Straffords that had
uttered so^e big words, (as was given out) That the Parliament House ^uld be
blown ^p, but what was the ground, I am persw^ded in my conscience, it was to
know where the Store and Ammunition lay, that they might know where to surprise
it.


Sir William Stewards Testimony.
I was one of the Committee that was sent by the Pa^liament, and by Order from
the House of Lords, to search the P^rliament house, and the Lord M^guire was
one of the L^ds, they made a very strict search, and then they inquired for the
Kings Magazine, and I believe my Lord Mac^uire now here was one of the
Committee that went to search for the House of Lords, and he did search very
nar^wly, and they were desirous to know where the Store was.

The Lord Blaneys Testimony.
C. Whether this search were moved by the Lord ^ghall and what was the end of
it?


L. Blaney. So near as I can, I will give you the business, it is so long
ago: this I remember, that there was one of the Lords house, whethe^ it were
my Lord Finghall, or my L. Macary, moved it, I cannot certainly despose, but I
am sure it was one of them: the occasion was, one of the Earl of Straffords
coachmen said, he hoped to see some of the Lords blown up for it, it was about
a fortnight after the Earl of Strafford was behead^d here. Thereupon they got
an Order for it, and so they went down, and they did not find the powder, but
they made as narrow a search as ever any was; I asked what the meaning was of
this, for we had strange censures of it our selves, says of them, the L.
Clamorris, they are afraid of a powder plot of the Protestants: I answered,
that I had heard a powder plot of the Papists, but never of the Protestants in
my life; but if you ask the reason of it, it was to assure themselves of the
strength, for we found by woeful experience afterward, it was their end. My
Lord Borlace said, let them not be afraid, for upon my honor there is no
powder below. It Is a great House, the House of Commons sit on one side, and the
Lords on the other, and the Blockhouse in the middle.


C. What Religion is my Lord Fingshall, and my Lord Clamorris, of?


L. B. The L. Fingshall is a Papist, and Clamorris a pestiferous Papist!


S. VV. All Papists we shall now read the examination of the manner of his
taking, and then his own examination.


The first we shall read is this, of M. Woodcock, that was Sheriff of Dublin
he was in town, but he could not stay, but he was examined before this Court.

The information of John Woodcock the 27. of October, 1644. taken upon oath
before J. Bacon.
The said Examinat^ deposes and ^aith, That he being one of the Sheriffs of
the said City of Dublin, in the year 1641. having notice given him in the
night, upon the 22. of October in the same year, of some great design
intended, did by virtue of his off^ce walk up and down the city that night,
and coming to the house of one Nevill, a Chyrugion in Castle-street, he
understood by the ^id Nevill, that the Lord Macguire with some 10. or 12.
others were there, this Examinate told him, it was fit for his guests to be in
bed at that time of night, but the said Nevill did bring this Examinate word,
that the Lord Macguire and his company, we^e then going to bed, the said
Examinate departed, setting a watch near his house, by which watch he was
informed, that the said Lord Macguire and the rest were gone from the house,
and were at the house of one Kerne a Tailor, whereupon he searched the said
house, and there found some hatchets with the helves newly cut of ^ose to the
hatchets, five p^tronells, five or six swords, three or four small pistolls,
five or six s^^ines, with other arms of the L. Macguires in an house of office
in the said house, in another place diverse pol^axes, and also behind a
henroost some great weapons with sharp pikes of iron in one end of them, the
said Kerne affirming that he knew nothing of any of the particulars before
mentioned, nor how they came in his house. The said Examinate ^dall the said
instruments unto the said Lords Justices, and (...) of Ireland, and thereupo^
the said Lords justice^, and (...) (...) search to be made for the said Lord
Macguire, (...) (...) the (...) Examin^te searching narrowly for him, at l^st
(...) (...), in a (...) with a cloak wrapped ob^ut him, stand^g by a (...) (...)
(...) (...) upon him, there being no key to be found, us al^ the (...) of the
house flying away, and making an escape to (...) enem^.

After this the Lord Macguires own Examination was read, taken the 26. of
March, 1642. (for as Sir John Temple declared to the Court, that the Lord
Macguire was then brought to the Counsell-board and they could get nothing out
of him) whereupon he was sent back to prison for that time.

The Examination of Connor Lord Macguire Baron of Eniskillin, taken before us,
Charles Lord Lambert, and Sir Robert Meredith Knight, Chancellor of His
Majesty's Court of Exchequer the 26. day of March, 1642. by direction of the
right honor able the Lords Justices and Counsel.
Who being examined says, That about the time when M. John Bellew came out of
England with the Commission for the continuance of the present Parliament,
Roger Moore in the said Moors chamber in the house of one Peter de Costres of
this City acquainted him this Examinate, that if the Irish would rise they
might make their own condition for the regaining of their own Lands, and
freedom of their Religion, at which time the said Moore also acquainted him
this Examinate, that he had spoken with sundry of Leinster, who would be ready
for that purpose, and withal told him this Exa^inate, that he was assured a
good part of Conaght would do the like, and thereupon moved this Examinate to
join likewise with them, with all he could make; unto which motion he this
Examinate yielded: and the next day following there was a meeting in his the
said Moors chamber aforesaid, where were Col. Mac-Bryan, Macm^, Tirel^gh
Oneale, Philip Mac-Hugh O Rely, this Examinate, and Roger Moore, where
discourse was had on that bu^nesse, yet nothing concluded on, save that Roger
Moore and the rest should go and prepare their parties. And this Exa^inate
further says, That about May last, he this Examinate, Roger Moore, Philip O
Rely, and Roger Macguire, this Examinates brother, dispatched a Priest, one
T^le O Conl^y, who lived in Leinster, unto Owen Oneale, into Flanders, to
acquaint him with the business concerning the general Rebellion then in
preparation, which said Priest returned about a month before the time
appointed for execution thereof. And the Answer which the said Priest brought
from the said Owen Oneal was, That he would (within 15 days after the people
were up) be with them with his best assistance and arms; and it being demanded
why the said Owen should bring Arms, considering that the Castle of Dublin was
to be taken, with the Arms therein, this Eximinate answered, that they so
provided for Arms, that they might not want any, in case they could not take
the said Castle, whereof they doubt^d. And this Examinate acknowledges, that
the Castle of Dublin was to have been surprised by himself, Capt. Brian
Oneale, Capt. Con Oneale, Capt. Macmahone, one Owen O R^ly, Roger Moore, Hugh
Macmahone, Col. Plunket, and Capt. ^ox, and likewise further acknowledges,
that Hugh Mac-Phelim, Captain Con Oneale, and B^an Oneale, brought from Owen
Oneale, out of Flanders, the very same message which the said Priest brought.
And this Examinate further says, that he was told by Roger Moore, that a great
man was in the Plot, but he might not name him for the present: And at another
time, and during the sitting of the Parliament the last Summer, he this
Examinate was informed by one John Barnwell a Franciscan Friar, then re^dent in
this City, that thofe of the Pale were also privy unto the Plot, (meaning the
present Rebellion.) And lastly says, That of those persons who came to attend
him this Examinate so^ the surprise of the said Castle of Dublin, only
Cohonogh Macguira was privy unto the business in hand, and that the last
meeting (when the day appointed for execution thereof was resolved on) was at
Logh Rosse, where were present only, Ever Macmahone, Vicar General of the
Diocese of Clogher, Th^mas Mac-Kearnan, a Friar of Dundalke, Sir Philom
Oneale, R^ger Moore, and Bryan Oneale.

Charles Lambert. Robert Meredith. Concordat cum Originali. Ex. per P^l. H^.
This being read, and opened unto the Jury, being the L. Macguires free and
voluntary confession, which he afterward acknowledged since his coming to the
Tower, viz.

Memorandum, that this within written being showed and read unto the within
named Lord Macguire, and himself having perused the same, his Lordship did
acknowledge the same to be true in all things, saving that he does not now
acknowledge that Barnard told him, that those of the Pale were privy to the
plot, neither does acknowledge that Cohonagh Macquire was privy to the plot
before his coming to Dublin.

This examination and acknowledgement was made and taken the 22. day of June,
164^. Anno Regni Caroli Regis decimo octavo, before us.

John Bramstone. Thomas Malet.

In the presence of John Conyers. William Ayloffe. Nathanael Finch.

24. June 1642. The examination of Connor Lord Macguire, Baron of Eniskillin,
taken before Sir John Bramstone, Knight, Lord chief Justice of the King's Bench.

Who says, That he is of the age of ^6. years and upwards, and that he was
borne in the County of Fermanagh in Ireland, and says, that his Examination
taken at Dublin the 26. day of March, 1642 before Charles Lord Lambert, and Sir
Robert Meredith, with his acknowledgment thereof, the 22. of June before Judge
Bramstone, and Justice Mallet, is true, in such manner as in the said
Examination and acknowledgement is expressed. Connor Macguire. The Examination
of Cornelius Macguire, Lord Baron of Eniskillin in Ireland, taken before Isaac
Pennington, Esquire, Lieutenant of the Tower of London, and Laurence Whitaker
Esquire, 2. of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for the County of
Middlesex, the first day of October, 1644.

He denies, the receiving of any Letters or Messages out of England before the
rebellion, nor did he ever hear of any. He says, he was but a mean
Instrument in the design in Ireland, he confesses, he intended to seize upon
the Castle of Dublin, and the Magazine there, and keep it till they had
redr^sse of some grievances, which they purposed to propound to the Pa^liament
there, one whereof was, to have a tol^ration of the Roman^ Catholic Religion.
He confesses that he come accidentally to Philip O Relyes house, as he came
up to Dublin, and as he remembers, M^mahon was then there, and that his
intention of coming up to D^lin, was to put the aforesaid design in execution,
and that then and there they had speech about that design; but he remembers
not the particulars, which design was to be put in execution the 23. day of
October in that year, and that he was taken there that very day, being Saturday
upon search made for him, carried before the Lords Justices, examined,
committed, and sent over into England.

He says further, that he made his escape out of the Tower of London upon
Sunday the 18. of August l^st, about four of the clock in the morning.

Laurence Whitaker. Isaac Penningter.


John Carmicks Testimony.
That upon the 21. of October, 1641. Fergus O Howen, one of the Followers of
Brian Macguire Esquire, came to his chamber in the castle of Eniskil^in, and
after he endeavored to bind him to keep secret a matter of great concernment,
which Fergus said he had to disclose, and particularly to conc^ale it from Sir
William Cole, and all other Englishmen. This Examinate told him, he would be
secret so far as it went with his Allegiance and conscience. He discovered
unto the said Examinate, that the L. Macguire and Hugh Oge Macmahon accompanied
with several Irish-men of the Counties of Fermanagh and Monaghan, did take
their journeyes out of the said Counties upon the 19. and 20. days of October
1641. to the city of Dublin, with resolution and intent to murder and kill His
Highness Lords Justices, and Coun^ll of the Kingdom of Ireland, and the rest
of the Protestants there, and also to Poss^ t^emselves of the city of Dublin,
and to p^t all the Protestants there likewise to the sw^rd, and that to that
effect there were ^ther great m^n, and others of the Papists of that Kingdom
to repair unto, and meet them in Du^lin on Saturday 23. October. 1641. or
thereabouts; and that all the Castles, Fo^ts, Seaports and Holds that were in
the possession of the Protestants in the several Counties and Provinces in the
Kingdom of Ireland, were then also designed and resolved to be surprised and
taken by the Irish Papists, and the Protestan^s in every of those castles,
Forts, Seaports and Holds, to be then also put ^l to the sword by the Irish
Papists in Ireland in their own several parts and limits, by men thereunto
chiefly and particularly appointed by the contrivers thereof: and that
especially the town and castle of Eniskillin, with the rest, would be taken,
and all the Protestants in it put to the sword, and therefore advised the
Examinate to get himself and goods out of town; whereat the Examinate
smiling, Fergus bid him not to slight it, for he could assure those things
would come to pass in seven days, or else he would be bound to lose his head.
Whereupon the said Fergus O Howen departed, and the Examinate acquainting Sir
William Cole with it, there came one Flartagh Mac Hugh, a Gentleman and
Freeholder of that county, and affirms to the same effect to Sir William Cole,
that the Plot for the surprising of the city and castle of Dublin, the castle
of Eniskillin, and all the castles and strengths in Ireland, was to be put in
full execution by the Papists October 22. and 23. 1641. throughout the said
Kingdom, and that Brian Mac Conaght Macguire Esquire did send him the said
Flartagh Mac-Hugh to give notice and warning thereof to the said Sir William
Cole, whom he earnestly desired to be upon his Guard upon Friday the 22. and
Saturday the 23. of October, for the L. Macguire was gone with Macmahon and
others that week with purpose to possess themselves of the castle and city of
Dublin, and the L. Macguire had written his Letters to Con OBourke, Owen O
Roreicke, Martagh Oge O Fantagen, and others, to go on with that plot in those
parts, and had appointed his brother Rori Macguire (in his absence) to command
the Irish Papists of the county of Fermanagh, for the surprising of the castles
and houses of the Protestants: of all which Sir William advertised the Lords
Justices and Council of Ireland the same day. And this Examinate ^aith, that
Captain Mac-Hugh seven or eight days before the Rebellion ^rke forth,
declared. That the L. Macguire posted Letters, and r^de ^p and down to diverse
Gentlemen, and others of that County to be very active in the business. That
it was averred upon the oaths of Flart^ Mac Hugh, John Oge Mac Hugh, and
Terlagh Oge Mac Hugh, before the said Sir William Cole, that 150 men were
appointed to surp. z the Castle of Enis^n, under t^ leading of D^ M^cguire,
(...) R^ M^uire, who were to murder the said Sir William Cole, and his wi^,
children, and servants, and throw them over the wall into the river, and then
to do the like unto the Protestants in the Town and Corporation of Eniskillin,
for which service they were not only to have the spoil and riches of the said
castle and town, but to have also the Barony of Clanawley gr^ted and confirmed
in Fee to them and their h^ires, from the said Lord Macguire and his heirs.
The Examinate th^n also produced a Letter written in Irish from the L.
Macguire, to his cousin Brian Macguire, wherein taking notice that he was
abundantly inclined to the English, which did very much trouble him, and
therefore desired him to banish such thoughts out of his mind, and not to
pursue those resolutions which in the end might be his own destruction, as he
thought it would be to all those that did not appear.

Presently after, upon the 29. of October, one Captain Rori Ma^guire took upon
him the mannaging of all businesses in his absence, he fortifies first the
Castle-Hasen, the house wherein he dwelt himself, he took in the castle of one
Edward Aldrith Esquire, he put out all the English there, he went to the town,
burnt that, but killed none of the men; went thence to another place, and hanged
one ^leazar M. one that was Clarke of the Peace of the County, and from thence
he went to Newton, four Miles off from it, took in the town, stripped and
disarmed all the Protestants that were in the Church, the next day after marched
away, and killed and destroyed most of the English in those parts, murdered
Arthur Champion Esquire, and many more: 22. castles were seized upon, and the
Church of Monah, with 18. Protestants burnt in it: 764. Protestants were
destroyed in that County; and I did hear there was about 152000. that they had
destroyed in that Province of Vlster, in the first four months of the
Rebellion.

John Carmi^.

Then Sir William Cole (being present in Court) g^ve in his evidence, much to
the same effect as in Carmi^ testimony.

S W. We desire to shorten, we have a great many Witnesses; we shall go upon
these particulars. 1. Captain Oneales landing in Ireland, and what he brought
with him. 2. Guilo and Croc^. Lastly, how long besieged, and how many murdered?

Then Sir William Steward gave in testimony to this effect:

That Con Owen Oncale landed in July the same year the Rebellion began,
brought many Commanders, much Arms and Ammunition; many of his Commanders,
nine of the chief of them, were taken prisoners at one battle.


S. W. It is his own conf^ssion, that he sent a Priest over to such Arms to
come into Ireland.

Then the Lady Cal^ld was desired to declare her knowledge c^ncerning the
taking of (...) castle.


Lady Cal^ld. The 23. of October. 1641. Sir Philom Oneale and others came into
the castle, they seized upon all, murdered his servants; and those that were
alive, they bound them, and put them in prison: and at that time Sir Pbilom
Oneale himself, and other of his companions told her, That Dublin castle and
city, and most other Forts of Ireland, were surprised by their confederates the
Papists: (...) that he was sorry for his cousin the Lord Macguire, and that he
was afraid he was taken.


S. W. What was done with my Lord Calfield?


La. Calfield. He was murdered: he begged for his life, and they durst not but
do it.


S. W. When Sir Philom Oneale had taken my Lord Calfield, then they got this
Lady to write to the Lords Justices, that my L. Macguire might be exchanged for
her son, but that would not be: and thereupon they murdered my Lord Calfield,
Francis Davis, and others.


Mrs. Mary Wordrofes Testimony.
That he came on Friday night about 10. or 11. a clock, to break into the
castle; I hearing the noise, asked what was the matter: I went to call up some
of our Gentlemen: when I came in again, they had taken some of our Gentlemen,
and bound them.

She also testified the murdering of the Lord Calfield, Francis Davis, and
others; and the former words concerning the Lord Macguire.

S. W. These two Witnesses prove ^at of (...), (...) (...) the Rebels owned
the L. Macguire, as to endeavor his (...). We shall now come to the other
Castles, how long they (...) them, and who was murther^?


Walter Gu^ Testimony
They besieged it a qua^ of a year b^ore the (...) the chief conspirat^rs, and
Powell, and (...), (...) (...) force in an hostile manner.

Sir Francis Hamiltons Testimony.
Philip O R^ly came to the Castle to Guilo and Crogan C^s, and they lay before
it a q^arter of a y^er, with 2000. or 3000 (...), sometimes 1500. but rever^.

Sir Charles Cootes Testimony concerning the gen^rality of (...) Rebellion.

Sir Philom O Neale and R^ger Moore were the actors in the ma^sacres, and by
public directions of some in place, and of the Titulary Bishops, for the
sending of an exict account of what (...) were murdered throughout all Vlster,
a fou^th part of the Kin^dom of Ireland, to the Parish Priests in every Parish,
and they sent in a particular account of it, and the account was, an hundred
four^ thousand seven hundred, in one Province, in the first three months of
the Rebellion.

S. W. What say you concerning the general Counseil, and the Popes Bull?


S. C. Coote. The supreme Counsel they took up a new form^ of government
upon them of their own, and by this authority i^ was granted to the Lady
(...), that she should have the Rent, of such Lands in recompense of the loss
that he was at in their causes They have made several Judges of their own
Courts: They print, they coin, they do all in their own names.


The Copy of the Popes Bull. Ad futuram Rei Memoriam. Urbanus Octavus, etc.
HAving taken in^o Our serious consideration the great zeal of the (...),
toward the propagating of the Catholic faith, and the pieti^ of the Catholic
warriors in the several armies of that Kingdom (which was for that singular
fervency in the true worship of God, and notable care had formerly in the like
case by the inhabit^^ts thereof, for the maintenance and pr^servation of the
same Orthodox ^^ath, called of old the land of Saints) and having got certain
notice, how in imitation of their godly and worthy Ancestors, they endeavor by
force of arms to deliver their thralled Nation from the oppressions, and
grievous injuries of the Heretics, wherewith this long time it has been
afflicted, and heavily burdened, and gallantly do in them what lies to
extirpate and totally root out those workers of iniquity, who in the Kingdom
of Ireland had infected, and always striving to infect the mass of Catholic
purity with the pesteriferous leaven of their heretical contagion; We
therefore, being willing to cherish them with the gifts of those spiri^uall
graces, whereof by God we are ordained the only dispos^rs on earth, by the
mercy of the same Almighty God, trusting in the authority of the blessed
Apostles Peter and Paul, and by virtue of that power of binding, and loosing of
souls, which God was pleased (without our deserving) to confer upon us. To
all and every one of the faithful Christians in the foresaid Kingdom of
Ireland now, and for the time militating against the Heretics, and other
enemies of the Cat^olike Faith, they being truly and sincerely penitent, after
confession, and the spiritual refreshing of themselves with the sacred
communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, do grant a full and plen^ry
Indulgence, and absolute remission for all their sins, and such as in the
holy time of J^bilee, is usual to be granted to those that devoutly visit a
certain number of privileged Churches, within and without the walls of our
City of Rome, by the tenor of which present letters for once only and no more,
we freely bestow the favor of this absolution, upon all and every one of them,
and withal desiring heartily all the faithful in Christ now in arms as
aforesaid, to be partakers of this most precious treasure.

To all and every one of these foresaid faithful Christians, we grant license,
and give power to choose into, themselves for this effect any fit Confessor,
whether a secular Priest, or a Regular of ^me Order, as likewise any other
selected Person approved of b^ the Ordinary of the place, who after a diligent
hearing of their co^sions shall have power to liberate and absolve them from
exc^mmunication, suspension, and all other Ecclesiastical sentences (...)
censures by whomsoever or for what cause soever pronounced, (...) inflicted
upon them: as also from all sins, trespasses, transgressions, crimes, and
delinquencies how heinous and atrocious soever they be, not omitting those very
enormities in the most peculiar cases which by any whatsoever former
constitutions of Ours, or of our Predecessor Popes (then which we will have
these to be no less valued in every point) were designed to be reserved to the
Ordinary, or to the Apostolic Sea, from all which the Confessor shall hereby
have power granted him to absolve the foresaid Catholics at the bar of
conscience, and in that sense only. And furthermore we give them power to
exchange what vow or vows soever they were formerly astricted to (those of
religion and chastity excepted) into any other pious and good work or works:
imposed or to be imposed on them and every one of them to perform in all the
foresaid cases by a wholesome penance according to the mind and will of the
Confessor.

Therefore by the tenor of these present Letters, and by the virtue of that
Holy strict obedience, wherein all Christians are bound unto Us, we charge and
command all and every one of the reverend Brethren, Archbishops, Bishops, and
other Ecclesiastical Prelates, and whatsoever Ordinari^s of places now
residing in Ireland, together with all Vicars, substitues and officialls under
them, or these failing, We command all such to whom in these places the care of
souls is incumbent, that as soon as they shall have received the copi^s of
these Our Letters, they shall forth with without any stop or d^lay publish
them, and cause them to be published thoroughout all their Churches, Di^cesses,
Provinces, Countries, Cities, Towns, Lands, Villages, and places whatsoever.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) by these pr^ent Letters, where any public or
secret irregularity is made known, or any defection, apostasy, incapacity or
inhability in any manner of way contracted, to dispense therewith, or grant to
any other any power or faculty of dispensation, rehabilitation or restoring the
Dal nquent to his former condition, though but at the bar of consc^nce:
neither can nor should these our present Letters avail or be stedable to
those, who by us and the Apostolic Sea, or by any Prelate or Ecclesiastic
Judge have been excommunicated, suspended, interdicted, or declared, and
publicly denounced to have justly incurred the sentences and censures of the
Church, till first they have satisfied and agreed with the parties therein
concerned, not withstanding all other Constitutions and Apostolical
Ordinations, whereby nevertheless the faculty of Absolution in these as well
as other expressed cases is so reserved to his holiness^ the Pope for the time
being, that no kind of Jubilee nor power of granting such indulgences can in
any sort (...), unless express mention be made of the fault or faults in
particular, and the whole tenor of them fully deduced by an individual
relation from word to word, and not by general clauses importing the same
thing: this or some other exquisite form of the like nature being: carefully
observed, we in that case especially, expressly, and namely by the effect of
these presents do totally abolish and remit them all and every one of them
their offenses, not withstanding any thing to the contrary.

Now that these principal Letters of ours, which cannot be conveniently
brought to every place, may the sooner come to the notice of all, Our will and
pleasure is, that any whatsoever Copies or Transumpts whether written or
printed, that are subscribed with the hand of a public notary, and which have
the seal of some eminent Person in Ecclesiastical dignity affixed thereunto,
be of the same force, power, and authority, and have the like credit in every
respect given unto them, as would be to these our principal Letters ^f they
were shown and exhibited.

Dated at Rome in the Vatican or S. Peter's Palace the 25. of May 643. and in
the twentieth year of our Pontificat. M. A. Maraldus.

S. W. We have troubled you with a long relation of the actions of the
Confederates with the L. Macguire, though not done in his own person, and his
own particular Act; but for this that was done by the Generality, I heard my
Lord say at the Bar, What Is that to me? Yes my Lord: This is to you, you were
one of the Conspirators in the first plot, and you contrived the business. And
that had been Treason alone, to send the Priest to fetch Owen Oneal into
Ireland, with Arms and Soldiers, but you contrived this, and conspired it,
and you are as guilty in Law in all these cruel murders, and burnings in
every place: For the Law of England is, in Treason you are all principles, no
Accessaries; your Son was there, your Lady is Rtewarded: For the supreme
Council they have taken care of you: Why! Because you were one of the first
complotters of it, and this will light upon you and fall very heavy: And for
your Exchange it was propounded for the L. Calfield, but when they could not
have that greed upon, then what becomes of the poor Lord Calfield? murdered
too: And you see what encouragement you have from the Complotters, and from the
Devil too, for they were both together in it. And now you have seen the
Indictment fully made good.

Then the Lord Macguire proceeded to make his defense, wherein he first of all
denied his Examination (although testified as before by so many credible
witnesses) and said that he knew no such Examination.

That at the time of his apprehension at Dublin, he came about his own
particular occasions, as his Estate was in danger if he did no^ follow it: That
because he was found about the City, he was therefore apprehended; That his
lodging was not within the City, but he lodged without the City; that he did
lodge at Mr. Nevils House formerly, but not at this time: That for some of the
places mentioned, where he should be about the Conspiracy, he had not been
there a year before, he was certain of it. For the number of Protestants that
were mentioned to be slain, he said he did not think there were so many
Protestants in the whole Kingdom. That he was continually either at his own
House, or at Dublin, and knew nothing of the Plot but by hearsay.


Judge. You confess in your Examination, when the day was for the rising, that
you were in the conspiracy, and appointed for the taking of Dublin Castle; and
that you were taken when you came about it. Also you rode about it, and
provided Arms.


Macg. I was in the house in the Cock-loft where I was taken, I did not know
where any Army was!


(...). W. My Lord Macguire does forget himself what he acknowledges under his
own hand.

Then the Examination being showed him he said; There Is my n^me but not my hand.


Judge. I am sorry to hear it, I did rather expect, that you should have
acknowledged it; Here are two able witnesses that can testify it against you,
your denying your own hand, which is so manifestly proved, will be a great
discredit to what you say; you acknowledged it at two several times.


Macg. What did I acknowledge?


Judge. You say that you came to Dublin to settle your estate: By your own
Examination you acknowledge, That the Castle of Dublin was to be surprised by
your self.


Jud. It is now time we should draw to the Jury: You hear my Lord Bramston and
my Brother Finc^ here justify it to you.

Then the L. Macguires Examination was showed to my L. Bla^, b^g present in
Court, demanding whether he thought it to be Macguires hand or no?


L. Blaney. It is my Lords own hand, he has written to me many Letters.


Macg. I don't think I have written many Letters to your Lordship.


Judge. Gentlemen of the Jury you may go to the business; If there were nothing
but that you see in this case but what is in the examination if you do believe
to be his: His confession does acknowledge it: you hear this by the testimony
of my Lord Bramston, and my brother (...), expressly that were present when he
did acknowledge it and set his hand to it, and yet you see though it is here
proved by my Lord (...) he denies it, If you find this to be true here is
treason enough, and too much too. for he does here confess; That Roger Moore
did acquaint him; That if the Irish did rise, they might make their own
conditions for regaining their lands; and he acquainted him, That he had spoken
with sundry in Leinster, that would be ready for that purpose and that a great
part of Conaught would do the like; and then moved hi^ (his Lord) the prisoner
at the Bar, to join likewise with him, which he did, so then was the plot.
The next day they met, he (...) to (...) Chamber again, where Col. Mac Brian,
(...), and others, h^d discourse again about it, then he says; That they did
s^nd over ^o Owe^ O Nea^, to acquaint him concerning the general Rebellion in
Ireland, then in preparation. He confeffes expressly; That being demanded why
the said Owen should bring over Arms, seeing the Castle of Dublin was to be
surprised, answered; That they so provided Arms, that they might not want any
thing, if they should not take it, whereof they doubted. And then you have him
acknowledgeing, that the Castle of Dublin was to be surprised by himself, and
Captain Brian O Neal, and others; These words show here expressly, That the day
whereon the execution was appointed, by the Lord Maguire own confession, he was
come to Dublin for the surprise of the Castle. So that it is apparent, that he
was about this plot expressly. If this be true; That you did conspire to make
war or Rebellion within that Kingdom, though you were taken your self before
it was executed, yet it was your own conspiracy: And besides, endeavoring
after (...) to bring it to perfection, by ^ending over for Arms. All these
does discover your own intention to execute it.


Macg. I confess it not, I refer my self to the Jury.


Judge. Gentlemen you are to know, that to conspire to raise a War, if any of
that Conspiracy do Act it, as you see here Sir Philome O N^le did, if you
observe the Testimony of my La. C^field, he came and surprised the Castle of
Charlemont, and then it was given out, that my Lord Maguire had taken Dublin,
so that though it did not take effect, That which is done by any is testimony
enough.

Go together and consider of it.

Upon this the Jury went together, and staying a short space, returnea their
verdict, which was; That they found him guilty of all the Treas^ns according to
the Indictment.

C. Conner Maguire, alias Cornelius Maguire; Thou have been indicted of
several high Treasons, and thou Have been Arraigned; Upon the Arraignment,
Thou have pleaded not guilty, and for thy Traill have put thy self upon thy
country, which country have found thee guilty, according to the Indictment,
Therefore prepare thy sel^ to receive the sentence.


Magu. I desire to know by what Law?


Judge. The Law is well enough Known; That is, a Treason is within the Satute
without doubt.


Magu. I was not tried by my Peers.


Judge. This is a general Exception, formerly annexed in your plea, If you can
show some particular cause also, you shall be heard.


Magu. I desire counsel to advise me.


Judge. When you did put in a plea therein, you had council to advise you in
your plea and to argue it; Now your time is past for counsel, you must have
none assigned to pick holes in the Indictment.


Magu. I desire the Court would consider of it before they proceed to sentence.


Judge. You offer nothing to the Court that is of any difficulty, you had
counsel whether you should be tried by your Peers or the Jury here, which jury
are to try any man under a Nobleman in this Kingdom.


Magu. I desire to know under what seal you thus proceed against me, for I
think you sit here by the new seal.


Judge. What seal do you mean, I sit here by virtue of the Old by Order of
Parliament.


Mag. Under favor I conceive, that the Ordinance of Parliament for the New
seal, makes all done by the old seal to be void.


Judge. Here is nothing done but by good authority, and the Parliaments
approbation.


Mag. I conceive the Ordinance for the New seal cuts off all proceeedings of
the old.


Judge. My authority is not cut off, I was made by the Old Seal before there
was any New Seal, and so I am continued by the Parliament, and the Parliament
did take notice that I have been allowed to sit. Besides this, there is nothing
done in this Court by the New Seal, the Sheriffs are here by a Charter, and
that comes in from year to year and there is no Seal in order of execution.


Judge. Well if you have nothing to say for your self, I am to pronounce
sentence as I am a Minister of Justice: you have been Indicted here for several
Treasons contained in your indictment as was here of late read unto you, and
you have had a fair proceeding and very deliberately: for your indictment came
in about Alhallowmas last, three weeks or a Month before the end of the last
Term, three weeks at least; you then made a question whether you ought to be
tried by your Peers in Ireland, or a Jury here, the Court did so far deliberate
in it as to allow you Counsel to plead with the best advantage you could. And
afterward this Term, there has been two arguments at the Bar on each side,
where has been said as much for you as can be. The Court over ruled that, and
so you are tried by a Jury, and you had the Liberty to challenge them, and had
all the advantages that the Law will afford and take all the excep^s you could.
Truly for my part, I see, that there is not any one of them for me to sway the
Judgment: The Treason and the Offenses that you are charged withal are very
hai^ous, your crimes very impio^, great destruction has followed upon your
plot which the Jury have found you guilty of? What a mighty cruel war and great
devastation in that Kingdom, most horrid to speak or rehearse: It is sitter
for you now to be think your self, what your offenses are, and prepare your
self for death rather then seek to mask or put colors upon those things which
are so manifestly proved to all the world: And now you are found guilty, and
therefore there is no contradiction or gainsaying will avail you, you ought to
repent and pray to God to forgive that offense wheof you are guilty. The
judgment that I am by the Law to pronounce against you is this: Connor Maguire
Esquire, You being found guilty of the Treasons whereof you are indicted, your
Judgment is; That you shall be carried from hence to the place from whence
you came, that is the Tower, and from thence to Tiburne the place of execution,
and there you shall be hanged by the neck, and cut down alive, your bowels
taken out and burnt before your face, your head to be cut off, your body to be
divided into four quarters, and the head of your body to be set up and disposed
of as the State shall appoint. And the Lord have mercy upon your soul.

After judgment pronounced, the Kings Council demanded of him, whether he
would have any Ministers come to him, to prepare him for his end, and to advise
him for the good of his soul?


Macg. I desire none of them; but I desire I may be sent Prisoner to Newgate.


Counc. His reason is, because there are some Popish Priests there.


Judge. That cannot be; your judgment is to return to the Tower, where you may
have Ministers (if you please) to return to advise you for your soul.


Macg. I desire you that some Gentlemen of my own Religion may have access to
me to confer with me, and some who are my fellow Prisoners in the Tower, to
speak with me in my Keepers presence.


Judge. You must name some body in particular.


Macg. I desire to confer with Mr. Walter Mountague: (Belike he knew him to
be a Popish Priest or Jesuit.)


Judge. You must prepare your self to die against Saturday next.


Macg. I desire a fortnights time to prepare my self.


J^g. That (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)


Macg. I desire you, tha^ I may h^ three days notice at least, to prepar^ my
self.


Judge. You shall have three days warning, but however delay no time to prepare
your s^f.


Macg. I desire my execution may be altered, and not according to the
judgment; and that I may ^ot be hanged and quartered.


Judge. This li^s not in my power to grant; but here are some Members of the
House of Commons in Court, and you were best address your self to them, that
they may acquaint the House with your desires.


Macg. I shall desire the Gentlemen of the House of Commons, so many as are
here, to move the House in my behalf, that I may have a ^ortnights time to
prepare my self, and that the manner of my execution ^y be changed.


S^r (...) Clot^. My Lord, I have been your Schoole-fellow (...), and have
sound some ingenuity in you, and I have se^n some L^tters of yours imp^rting
some remorse of conscience in you for this ^ct, and I should be glad to discern
the like ingenuity in you ^till; And shall move the House, that you may have
some Ministers appointed to come to you: and likewise acquaint them with your
other desir^s.

Then the prisoner d^rting from the Bar, Mr. Prynne advising him to confer
with some godly Ministers, for the good and comfort of his soul; He answered,
That he would have none at all, unless he might ^ave some Romish Pri^sts of
his own Religion.

To which Mr. Pr^ (...); My Lord, these Romish Priests are the chief
Instruments, who have advised you to plot and perpetrate those (...) Tr^asons
for which you are now condemned, and have brought upon you that shameful
judgment of a Traitor; the execution whereof you even now so earnestly
deprecat^d. Since then they have proved such evil destructive Counselors, to
you in your life, you have great reason to disclaim them with their bloody
religion, and to s^k out better advisers for you at your death, lest you
eternally lose your soul, as well as your life; for the blood of those many
thousand ^nnocents which have been shed by your means. To which he pawsing a
little, answered: That he was resolved in his way. Whereupon another Lawyer
said; My Lord, you were best to hear both sides. To which he answered, in an
obstinate manner; I am settled on one side ^ready, and therefore I desire not to
con^rre with any of the other: And so departed through the Hall toward the
Tower, the people cro^ding and running about to behold his person.

After the sentence pronounced against the Lord Macguire as before said, he
petition^d the Parliament; As follows.

To the Right Honorable the Commons now assembled in Parliament.
The Humble Petition, of the Lord MACGUIRE.

Humbly shows;

THat your Petitioner stands cond^d (...) (...) life, (...) (...) (...) (...)
drawn, hanged, and quartere^: the performance (...) (he (...) conceives, in
some (...) favorable (...)) will be (...) to Justice. And for as much as your
Pet^r h^th hitherto en^oyed the Degree and Dignity of a Lord, which h^ humbly
conceives your Lordships are well ^quainted with;

In tender consideration whereof, he desires that your Honors would
graciously be pleased, in mercy to mitigate the rigo^r of his sentence, and
turn it to that degree which most befits the (...) (...) has: And as he has
been looked on by the eye o^ justice in ^is condem^tion, So t^ in this p^cular
he may be (...), an^ have mercy.

And he shall ever pray, etc. Cornelius Maguire.

This Petition was rejected by the Parliament, and the Lord Macguire hanged,
d^awn, and quartered, at Tyburn, on Thursday Feb. 20. According to the sentence
of the Court.

Sir Philim Roe O Neille his Pattent to Bryan Maguire Es: to b^ Governor of
the County of Ferman^gh, dated 10th. May 1642.
FOrasmuch as for the great trust, confidence, fidelity, and circumspective,
conscionable, righteous care and diligence we repose in our trusty and
welbeloved friend and Cozen Bryan Mae Cochonaght Maguier, of Clanawly in the
County of Fermannagh Es. Have by these presents constituted, nominated,
ordained, and appointed, like as by these our Letters pattents do constitute,
nominate, ordain, and appoint him the said Bryan, Mac Cochonagh Maguyre, to be
our Governor, in and throughout the whole County of Fermannagh aforesaid,
hereby granting and giving him full power and authority to execute fulfill
perform and do, all such Act and Acts, thing and things whatsoever to the
place, and office of Governor any ways appertaining, as well for the common
good, as for the upholding and maintaining of his Majesties^ rerogative, his
Crown and dignity, And the upholding and maintaining of the ancient holy
Catholic Roman Religion, hereby also ratifying, allowing and confirming all
such Act, and Acts, thing, and things, whatsoever by our said Governor done
and performed, according to the true purport meaning and intent of these our
Letters Pattents during our pleasure, in as ample and large manner as if we had
do the same in our own proper person;

Given under our hand and seal this eleventh day of May Anno. Dom. 1642. For
Bryan Mac Cochonaght Maguire, Governor of Fermannagh these. Phe. O Neill. Cop:
vera. William Cole.

FINIS.

