THE SOVEREIGN POWER OF PARLIAMENTS and KINGDOMS: Divided into FOUR PARTS.
Together with AN APPENDIX: Wherein the Superiority of our own, and most other
Foraine Parliaments, States, Kingdoms, Magistrates, (collectively considered,)
over and above their lawful Emperors, Kings, Princes, is abundantly
evidenced, confirmed by pregnant Reasons, Resolutions, Precedents, Histories,
Authorities of all sorts; the contrary Objections re-felled: The Treachery and
Disloyalty of Papists to their Sovereigns, with their present plots to
extirpate the Protestant Religion demonstrated; And all material Objections,
Calumnies, of the King, his Counsel, Royallists, Malignants, Delinquents,
Papists, against the present Parliaments proceedings, (pretended to be
excceding Derogatory to the Kings Supremacy, and Subjects Liberty)
satisfactorily answered, refuted, dissipated in all par^iculars. By WILLIAM
PRYNNE, Utter-Barrester, of Lincolnes Inn.

Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made you
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

Psalm. 2. 10, 11. Be wise now therefore Oye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of
the earth: serve the Lord in fear, and rojoyce with trembling.

It is this second day of August, 1643. Ordered by the Committee of the House
of Commons in Parliament concerning Printing, that this Book Entitled, The
Sovereign power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, etc. be Printed by Michael Spark
senior.

John White.



Printed at London for Michael Spark Senior. 1643.

TO THE Right Honorable Lords and Commons, Assembled in, and continuing
Constantly with this present PARLIAMENT, both in Person and Affection.
ETernally Renowned Senators, and most cordial Philopaters to Your bleeding,
dying dearest Country, (from which no menacing Terrors, of armed Adversaries,
nor flattering Promises of hypocritical Court-friends, could hitherto divorce
your sincerest Affections, and withdraw your undefatigablest Industries in the
least degree, to its betraying, or enslaving;) I here humbly prostrate to your
most mature Judgments, and recommend to your Highest, Noblest Patronage, this
Quadruple Discourse, OF THE SOVEREIGN POWER OF PARLIAMENTS AND KINGDOMS, (now
at last compacted into one entire Body, though formerly scattered abroad in
dismembered Parts, rather out of necessity to gratify others, then convenience
to content my self,) in which as Your Honors have the greatest Interest, so
it is just and equal You should enjoy the absolutest Propriety: being compiled
by Your Encouragement, Printed by Your Authority; published for Your
Justification, to vindicate your indubitable ancient Sovereign Privileges from
the unjust Detractions; Your legal necessary late Proceedings, from the
malicious, false, unjust Aspersions of those Royallists, Malignants,
intemperate Pens and Tongues, 2 Pet 2. 12, 14, 15.
Who like natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil
of the things they understand not, and shall perish in their own corruption:
Cursed children, who have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray,
following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of
unrighteousness; but was rebuked for his iniquity.

I must ingenuously confess, that the Subject matter, and grand public
Differences between King and Parliament (yea between most Kings and Kingdoms
in the world) herein debated, are of such an extraordinary, rare, transcendent
nature; of such infinite, universal consequence, weight, concernment, yea so
full of dangerous Precipes, Rocks, if not inextricable difficulties on either
hand, as might justly require, not only one person of the exquisitest
judgment, Heroicallest Spirit, greatest experience, deepest Policy, absolutest
abilities, vastest knowledge in all kinds of Learnings, States, Governments;
and most exempt from all other employments, that might interrupt him in these
kinds of Studies; but even an whole Parliament, or Oecumenicall Council of
the most experienced, ablest, learnedest, wisest Statists in the Universe, and
many years most advised consideration, exactly to ventilate and determine
them: Which consideration might have justly daunted, yea quite deterred me,
(the meanest of ten thousand, furnished with no competent abilities, and having
scarce one vacant hour, but what I have borrowed from my natural rest, to
accomplish so vast an undertaking) from this most difficult, weighty, public,
service, sufficient to sink the strongest Hercules, if not Atlas himself, the
worlds supporter: But yet the Goodness, the Commonnesse of the Cause, (which
concerns our whole three Kingdoms, Parliaments, Religion, and every one of
our well-beings, in this present world) the dear affection, I bear to my
native Country, Religion, Posterity, Parliaments, and your Honors; the defect
of other Advocates to plead this public Cause; seconded with the private
earnest entreaties (which were as so many Commands to me) of some Members of
Your Honorable Assembly, to undertake this weighty task, and their
authorizing my rude Collections for the Press, were such strong exciting
engagements to me to undertake this difficult employment, that I chose of two
extremes, rather to discover mine own insufficiency in an impotent speedy
discharge of this great service, so far transcending my weak indowments;
than to show any want of sincerity or industry in deserting this grand Cause in
a time of need. It being one chief Article of my belief, ever since I first
read the Scriptures, and Tullies Offices; That I was principally born for my
Countries good (next to Gods glory involved in it;) Upon which ground I have
ever bent all my Studies to promote it what I might, though to my particular
loss and disadvantage.

The sole end I aim at in these Treatises, is the re-establishment of my
bleeding, expiring Countries endangered Liberties, Privileges, Rights, Laws,
Religion, the curing of her mortal wounds, the restoration of her much
desired Peace, in truth and righteousness, the supportation of Parliaments
(the only Pillars, Bulwarks of our Church, State, Laws, Liberties, Religion)
in their perfect luster, and full Sovereign Authority; the removal of those
present grievances, differences, Wars, (arising principally from ignorant or
wilful mistakes of the Parliaments just Privileges and the Kings due
Prerogatives) which threaten present ruin to them all; for whose future
prosperity, security I could (with Exodus 32. 32.
Moses, and Rom, 9. 4.
Paul) heartily wish my self to be blotted out of the Book of life, and to be
accursed from Christ; neither count I may life, limbs, liberties, or any
earthly comforts dear unto me, so I may any ways promote Gods glory and the
public welfare. And certainly had the most of men in public places, but
Heroicke public Spirits, (as I make no doubt all Your Honors have) biased
with no private Interests, or base selfe-respects, studying nothing but the
common-good, our present unnatural wars would soon be determined, our
greatest differences easily reconciled, our foraine Irish, French, Walloon
Popish Forces, brought in to cut our English Protestants and their Religions
throats, before our faces, (at which horrid spectacle I wonder all English
spirits rise not up with unanimous indignation in stead of joining with them)
easily expulsed, our remaining Grievances speedily redressed, our disordered
Church Reformed, our Pristine Peace and Prosperity restored, yea entayled to us
and our Posterities for ever; whereas the private selfe-ends, selfe-interests,
of some ambitious, covetous, malicious, treacherous, timorous public persons,
(who serve no other Deity, Majesty, or Republicke, but themselves alone) have
most shamefully imbroyled, betrayed, and endangered both our Kingdoms,
Parliaments, Liberties, Religion, Properties, yea, all the blessings we
formerly enjoyed; whose names and memories shall be ever execrable to all
Posterity upon Earth, and their Souls, Bodies, eternally tortured in hell,
(without repentance) for this their inhumane, unchristian Treachery, and
Realme-destroying, Church-subverting selfe-seeking, detestable both to God and
Men.

To conjure down such base degenerous private spirits to the infernal pit, or
else to elevate and inflame them with great heroicke public thoughts, there is
nothing more effectual (in my weak apprehension) than the well-grounded
knowledge, serious study, and full vindication of such public Truths,
concerning Public Government, and the Sovereign Jurisdiction of Parliaments,
Kingdoms, Magistrates, People as are here debated, ratified, freed from those
black aspersions of sedition, faction, rebellion, treason, conspiracy, mutiny,
singularity, disloyalty, and the like, which sordid Sycophants, selfe-seeking
Monopolists, Courtiers, Royallists, or malignant Delinquents, have most
injuriously cast upon them to delude the world; which long obscured Truths,
though they may seem dangerous Paradoxes, and upstart Enthusiasmes, at the
first proposal, to many ignorant, seduced Souls, kept over long in Cymmerian
darkness, by those Egyptian taske-masters, who have studied to increase and
perpetuate their bondage; Yet upon serious examination will prove to be most
ancient, indubitable Verities, universally received, believed, practiced, by
most Realms and Nations in the Universe, from the beginning of Monarchy till
this present; and the contrary received opinions, to be but the vain, empty
Brainesicke lying fancies of a few illiterate, impolitick Court-Chaplaines,
Lawyers, Sycophants, who never dived into the Principles Constitutions, Laws,
Histories of States and Realms, or into the true original grounds of Regal,
Regnall, Popular, or Parliamentary Jurisdictions; and writ only to flatter
Princes, to purchase honor, gain, or favor to themselves; without any
respect at all to Verity, or the Common good, which never entered into their
narrow private thoughts.

What entertainment these New-published common Truths, are like to find in
Court, and elsewhere among many men, I may easily conjecture by that ingrate
requital Your Honors have received from them, for all your faithfulness,
pains, cost, diligence, service for the Public safety. Never did any
Parliament in England deserve half so well as this, for their indefatigable
labors night and day, almost three whole years space together, for the Common
good: Yet never was any half so ill requited. Never did any demerit greater
public applause; never any underwent half so many vile Libellous reproaches,
slanders, of all sorts, even for well-doing; and that not only in vulgar
Discourses, but in Press and Pulpit too. Never did Parliament in any age sit
half so long, or do half that work, or get any such public establishment,
as this; and yet all our Parliaments put together, were never so much opposed,
traduced, secretly conspired against, or openly assaulted with armed violence
to dissolve and ruin them, as this one alone; against whom not only the Pope
with all his Antichristian Members, at home and abroad, but (which is almost a
Miracle, not formerly heard of in any age) both King, Queen, Prince, Privy
Counselors, Courtiers; yea diverse Nobles, and Members of both Houses, contrary
to their own Protestations, have utterly deserted it, yea bent all their
policies, wits, Forces together, to dissolve and null it, (and in it all future
Parliaments,) as no Parliament at all, but as an Assembly of obstinate
refractory Traitors, and Rebels; when as all your Actions, Proceedings,
Declarations, Protestations, proclaim you nothing less, yea the
best-deserving Parliamentary Assembly that ever this Nation was blessed with,
and those Heroicke Champions, who have lately regained, resetled (as far as
humane Laws and Ordinances can secure them) our lost, at least decayed
Liberties, Laws, Privileges, Religion, in despite of all oppositions, and
utterly suppressed that confederated Triumvirate (of the Counsel-chamber,
Starchamber, and High Commission) which had almost enthralled us in more than
Egyptian bondage, and resolved to detain both us and our Posterity under it,
without the least hopes of any enfranchisement. Never were there half so many
public regal Protestations, Declarations, Proclamations, Oaths,
Remonstrances, solemnly made and published to the world, for the inviolable
preservation of all just Rights and Privileges of Parliament, as there have
been in this; and yet never were there so many apparent violations of the
undoubted Rights and Privileges of Parliament in all former ages whatsoever,
as in this one Parliament only, now at last so far affronted, by open
Proclamation, (even against an Act of Parliament, passed by the King and both
Houses when fullest,) to be Proclaimed to the world, No Parliament at all, but
a mere factious, seditious Conventicle. Which how inconsistent it is with
other former Oaths and Protestations, let all wise men judge. However; this
may be some good encouragement to your Honors, and My self too, that if all
his Majesty's solemn Printed Protestations, Oaths, Proclamations,
Remonstrances to his people and all the world, with deepest imprecations on
himself and his Posterity, to maintain the Laws and Liberties of the
Subject, the just Privileges and power of Parliaments, and Protestant Religion
to the utterrmost, be as cordially, as really intended, as they are pretended,
your Honorable proceedings, and these my polemicall Discourses (really
defending, vindicating, the indubitable Privileges of Parliaments, the
Subjects Liberties, Laws, and our Religion against all Opposites whatsoever,)
cannot but find most gracious acceptance with his Majesty's own person, yea,
with all his Counselors, Courtiers, Cavalliers, who bear any sincere
affection either to the Parliaments Privileges, their Countries Liberties, or
Religion: which all doubt an Army of English; Irish, Outlanding Papists, will
hardly fight for, or maintain, but really subvert, if possible.

However, Your Honors kind, favorable entertainment, and Noble Patronage, of
these my unworthy public Labors (of which I cannot doubt) accompanied with
the consciousnesse of my own sincerity and loyalty, in the whole contexture of
them (though some out of malice, envy, or flattery may and will misconster
them, as they have done other of my Writings, to my great damage and danger)
shall be a sufficient Sanctuary to secure both Me and them, against all adverse
Powers and Detractions whatsoever: and if I chance to suffer any future hard
measure, of what kind soever, for doing my Country or Your Honors the best
and faithfullest service I am able, I shall repute it my greatest honor, my
chiefest felicity, and chearefully undergo it (through Gods assistance) not as
a Cross of infamy, but a Crown of Glory: And so much the rather, because your
Honors have formerly taken up this Magnanimous resolution, yea sealed it with
solemn public Cove^ants and Protestations, to live and dye in the just
defense of your Privileges, Country, and Religion, (never so much endangered,
banded against by foraigne and domesticke Papists, Atheists, as now) and never
to desert them whiles you have one drop of blood in your veins, or any breath
in your Nostrils: and God forbid, but that I, and all other true Members of our
State and Church, should cordially concur with you in this Heroical
Covenant, which the desperate See Romes Masterpeece
Confederacies of our Romish Adversaries, long prosecuted among us, and now
almost promoted to perfection, have necessarily engaged Your Honors and the
whole Kingdom to enter into, for their Preservation.

Now the God of Peace, and Lord of Hoasts, be ever mightily present with, and
in Your Honorable Assembly, to counsel, direct, protect, prosper all your
sincere endeavors to promote his Gospel, Truth, Honor, the public welfare,
liberty, tranquillity, security of our endangered lacerated Church and Realms,
Isay 33. 20.
Till the Lord shall look mercifully upon Zion, the City of our solemnities,
and till our eyes shall see our English Jerusalem, a quiet habitation, a
tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not one of the stakes whereof shall
ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken,
notwithstanding all the mighty oppositions against it: And till you Isay 58. 12.
shall have built up the old waste places; raised up the Foundations of many
generations, yea erected the very Zach. 4 7.
Top-stone of an exact universal Ecclesiastical and civil Reformation in
Church and State, with shoutings, crying Grace, grace unto it. That so all
future Generations may really bless, and call you, The Repairers of our
manifold breaches, the Restorers of Paths to dwell lin. Which is, and shall be
the daily prayer of

Your Honors most affectionately devoted Servant, to live and die with You in
the Common Cause of God, Religion, and our Native Country, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

THE TREACHERY and DISLOYALTY OF PAPISTS TO THEIR SOVEREIGNS, IN DOCTRINE AND
PRACTICE. Together with The first part of the SOVEREIGN POWER OF PARLIAMENTS
and KINGDOMS. Wherein the Traitorous, Antimonarchicall Doctrines, Practices,
and Attempts of Papists upon the Persons, Crowns, Prerogatives, of their
Sovereigns, with the dangerous designs, effects, and consequences, of their
present illegal Arming, and access to the Kings Person, Court, Army, by
means of evil Counselors, are briefly discovered, related; The
Jurisdiction, Power, Privileges, claimed, exercised by our Popish Parliaments,
Prelates, Lords and Commons in former ages, exactly paralleld with those now
claimed by the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament; which are
manifested, to be far more loyal, dutiful, moderate; more consistent with,
less invasive on, and destructive to the pretended Sovereign Power and
Prerogative of the King, then those of former ages. And the high Court of
Parliament proved by pregnant Reasons, and Authorities, To be the most
Sovereign Power of all other, in this Kingdom, in several respects; And
superior to the King himself: who is not above, but subject to the Laws:
Together with a punctual Answer to the chief Calumnies, and grandest
Objections, of Royallists, Papists, Malignants, Delinquents, against the
Parliaments Power, and Proceedings; with other Particulars worthy Observation.

The Second Edition Enlarged. By WILLIAM PRYNNE, Utter-Barrester, of Lincolnes
Inn.

Isai* 24. 16, 17. Woe unto me, the treacherous dealers have dealt
treacherously: yea, the Treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously:
Fear, and the pit, and a snare are upon thee, O Inhabitant of the Earth.

Psalm 120. 5, 6. My soul has long dwelt with them, that are enemies unto
peace. I labor for peace; but when I speak unto them thereof, they make them
ready to Battle.

It is this second day of May, 1643. Ordered by the Committee of the House of
Commons in Parliament for Printing, that this Book, Entitled, The Treachery
and Disloyalty of Papists to their Sovereigns, etc. with the Additions, be
reprinted by Michael Spark, senior.

John White.



Printed at London for Michael Spark, Senior. 1643.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THE importunity of some Members of Parliament, has induced me to enlarge the
first Part of this Discourse, with sundry pertinent Additions, and to Re-print
it in a greater Character, then before; yet distinct from the following part,
for the ease, the benefit both of Stationer and Buyer. When I first entered upon
this necessary public Theme, my Primitive Intention was, to have Collected
the chief Heads, Reasons, Authorities of this and the ensuing Members, into
one compendious Summulary, and so to publish them all together in an entire
Brief: But afterward considering the extraordinary weight and consequence of
that Grand common Cause, both of Parliament and Kingdom, which I was to plead;
the Novelty and Rarity of the Subject matter; the extraordinary Prejudice of
the ignorant long-deluded world against it; the Potency, Policy, Multitude of
learned Advocates ( as well Divines as Lawyers) of the opposite Royal, and
Malignant party; the insufficiency and unsatisfactorinesse of all late Printed
Pleas for the Parliaments Interest, through defect of punctual Precedents, and
Authorities to back their rational Discourses; and that a Summary slight
debate of these important public differences, would give but small
satisfaction to the Adversary, and rather prejudice than advance the
Parliaments, Kingdoms Native Rights and Privileges: I did thereupon enlarge
my Meditations, my Collections, so far forth, as straites of Time, with other
avocating Employments, would permit, seconding all my Arguments, fortifying all
my Reasons, with such Domesticke, Foraine Precedents, and Authorities of all
sorts, as well Divine, as Humane, Political, Historical, as Legal; as
through Gods concurrence with, and blessing on my impotent endeavors, may
effectually convince the obstinate wills, abundantly satisfy the most seduced,
prejudicated Judgment, finally resolve the most scrupulous Consciences, and
eternally silence the ignorant, the most malicious Tongues and Pens of all
Royallists, etc. Anti-parliamentary Malignants, who are not wilfully wedded to
their long-espoused Errors; or more enamored with sordid Court flattery for
private selfe-ends, then fairest (though hated, ungainfull) verity, which aims
at nothing but the Public good.

For my part, I seriously protest before the great Judge of Heaven and Earth,
that I have herein wittingly maintained nothing at all, but what my Judgment
and Conscience both (biased with no sinister ends, no private respects, aiming
at naught else but the Glory of God, the settled weal, and Tranquillity, of
our distracted, bleeding, dying Church, and State, the only Motives, engaging
me in this Service) inform me, to be a well-grounded, ancient, pregnant, (
though lately over-clouded, undiscovered, neglected, much-oppugned) Truth: and
albeit most particulars therein debated, have for many years hitherto been
deposed (that I say not stigmatized) for seditious, dangerous Antimonarchicall
Paradoxes, if not worse, by the general Torrent of Court-Parasites, Lawyers,
Religion, Nature, Law, Policy, the various Precedents, and Authorities of
former ages, and thoroughly digested without prejudice or partiality; they will
appear, yea, shine forth as most necessary, profitable, loyal,
State-securing, Peace-procuring verities; yea, as the very Nerves and sinews
to unite; the Pillars to support; the Bulwarks to protect both Church and
State, against all invasions, of heresy, or tyranny; and to keep all the
Potent Members of them within their Legal bounds. Peruse it therefore with an
upright heart, a dis-ingaged Judgment, an unbiassed affection; and when thou
have thus done, let naught but naked Truth resolve thy Conscience, and regulate
all thy future Actions, services both toward thy God, King, Country, in such
sort; That Psalm. 85. 8, 9, 10.
glory may dwell in our land; that mercy and truth may meet together;
righteousness and peace may kiss each other, once more in our Nation; and God
may now at last speak peace unto his people and to his Saints: So Truth shall
spring out of the Earth, and Righteousness shall look down from Heaven: Yea,
the Lord shall give that which is good; and our Land shall yield her increase;
Righteousness shall go before him, and sha^^ set us in the way of his steps.
Isa. 32. 17, 18
And the work of Righteousness shall be Peace; and the effect of
righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever. And we ( being Gods people)
shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet
resting places; Yea, we Micah 4. 3, 4. Isay 2. 4. Joel 3. 10.
shall beat our swords into Plow-shares, and our Spears into Pruning-hookes;
Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war
any more; But we shall sit every man under his Vine and under his Fig Tree,
and none shall make us afraid; The effecting, the restoring of which sweet
blessed Harmony of Peace and quietness throughout our kingdom, has been one
principal end of this my Labor, which takes away the pretended causes, the
nourishing fuel of our present unnatural contentions, and destructive bloody
wars.

Entertain it therefore, with that Candidnesse and Ingenuity, as becomes the
cordiallest Endeavors, of a real unmercenary Philo-pater, who has freely done
and suffered many things, and is still pressed to do and suffer all things, for
his dearest Countries service, in an honorable lawful Christian way; though
he receive no other Guerdon, than the loss of all his earthly comforts, and a
new addition to his former sufferings. That saying of Symmachus has been
encouragement enough to me, Apud Ambros. Epist. l* 2. Ep. 2. Tom. 5. p. 97.
Saluti publicae dicata industria crescit Merito, cum caret Praemio; which I
wish were more considered and better practiced by some degenerous Mercenary
spirits in these sad times; who receive great wages, and do little work;
refusing to stir either hand or foot upon any advantage, or necessary
occasion to preserve their Native Country from desolation, before they have
pursed up their undemerited pay; and yet even then perchance sit still: It is a
baseness not only far below Jer. 45. 5.
Christianity, but Humanity it self, for men (especially those of public
place and abilities) to prefer their own private ends, before the public
safety; their particular gain, before the commonweal, when the whole kingdom
lies at stake. But I hope Heroicke English Spirits, will learn more generous
resolutions and Activity in times of such extremity; and that those whom it
most concerns, will take timely notice, That sordid Mercenaries are the
greatest, falsest Cowards; Christ himself resolving what poor, what ill
service they will do in days of trial, Joh. 10. 12, 13. He that is an
Hireling, sees the Wolf coming and leaves the Sheep, and FLEES; and the
Wolf catches them and scatters the Sheep. The hireling flees, because he
is an hireling, and cares not for the Sheep. He loves only his Wages, not
his Charge, his Duty; God discover and amend all such, or else speedily discard
them. That so all aiming only at the public good and Tranquillity; we may
eft-soone procure, enjoy the same to our greatest consolation.

The Treachery and Disloyalty of Papists to their Sovereigns, both in Doctrine
and Practice.
WHen I seriously consider the memorable Preamble of 3. Iac. chapter 4. That it is
found by daily experience, that many of his Majesty's Subjects who adhere in
their hearts to the Popish Religion, by the infection drawn from thence, and
by the wicked and divellish counsel of Jesuits, Seminaries, and other persons
dangerous to the Church and State, are so far perverted in the point of their
loyalties and due obedience unto the Kings Majesty, and the Crown of England,
as they are ready to entertain and execute any Treasonable Conspiracies and
Practices, as evidently appears by that more then barbarous and horrible
attempt to have blown up with Gunpowder, the King, Queen, Prince, Lords and
Commons in the House of Parliament assembled, tending to the utter subversion
of the whole State, lately undertaken by the instigation of Jesuits and
Seminaries, and in advancement of their Religion by their Scholars taught and
instructed by them for that purpose. With the Statutes of 35. Eliz. chapter 2. and
3. Jacob. chapter 5. which Enact: That all Popish Reeusants shall be restrained to
some certain places of abode, and confined to their private houses in the
Country, and not at any time after to pass or remove above five miles from
thence, under pain of forfeiting all their Lands, Goods, and Chattels, during
life. That none of them shall remain within ten miles of the City of London,
nor come into the Court or house where his Majesty, or Heir apparent to the
Crown of England shall be; nor have in their own houses, or in the hands or
possession of any other at their disposition, any Armor, Gunpowder, or
Munition, of what kind soever; And all this, for the better discovering and
avoiding of such Traiterous, and most dangerous Conspiracies, Treasons,
Practices, and attempts, as are daily devised, and practiced against our most
gracious Sovereigns Person, and the Commonweal, by rebellious and traiterous
Papists. And when I read in Dated. Ianu. 10. 1606. and Febr. 22. 1603.
two of King James his Proclamations: That those adhering to the profession of
the Church of Rome, are blindly led (together with the superstition of their
Religion) both unto some points of Doctrine which Note this.
cannot consist with the loyalty of Subjects toward their Prince, and often
times unto direct actions of conspiracies, and conjurations against the State
wherein they live, as has most notoriously appeared by the late most horrible
and almost incredible conjuration (grounded upon points of Doctrine in that
Church held and mantained, and contrived, and practiced with the privity and
warrant of many of the principal Priests of that profession) to blow up our
children and all the three States in Parliament assembled. And when we consider
the course and claim of the Sea of Rome, we have no reason to imagine, that
Princes of our Religion and profession can expect any assurance long to
continue, unless it might be assented by the mediation of other Princes
Christian, that some good course might be taken (by a general Council, free,
and lawfully called) to pluck up those roots of dangers and jealousies which
arise for cause of Religion, as well between Princes and Princes, as between
them and their Subjects; and to make it manifest, that no State or Potentate,
either does or can challenge power to dispose of earthly Kingdoms, or
Monarchies, or to dispense with Subjects obedience to their natural
Sovereigns; ( Which was never yet attempted, much less effected.) And in the
Book of Thanksgiving appointed for the fifth of November, ( set forth by King
James, and the Parliaments special direction) this observable Prayer (somewhat
altered by the now Who confesses and justifies it, in his Speech in
Starchamber, June 14. 1637.
Arch-prelate of Canterbury in the latter Editions to pleasure his Friends the
Papists) To that end strenghthen the hand of our gracious King, the Nobles and
Magistrates of the Land, with Judgment S^p justice, to cut off these workers
of iniquity ( the Papists) whose Religion is rebellion, whose faith is faction,
whose practice is murdering of Souls and bodies, and to root them out of the
confines of this Kingdom. I cannot but stand amazed, yea utterly confounded in
my self, at the Impudency and Treachery of those pernicious Counselors, who
in affront of all these Laws and premises, have issued out sundry See the
Parliaments late Declaration.
Commissions, under his Majesty's hand and seal, to diverse notorious Papists,
not only to furnish themselves with all sorts of Arms and Munition; but
likewise to meet together armed, and raise forces in the Field, to fight
against the Parliament, Kingdom, and Protestant Religion, (even contrary to
diverse his Majesty's late Printed Declarations, and Protestations, to all his
loving Subjects) advanced them to places of great trust and command in his
Majesty's several Armies; and procured them free access unto, if not places
of note about his sacred person, as if they were his loyallest Subjects, his
surest guard (as many now boldly style them) and more to be confided in, then
his best and greatest Council, the Parliament; whom they most execrably
revile, as Rebels, and Traitors, the more colourably to raise an Army of
Papists to cut their throats, and the throat of our Protestant Religion first
(as they have already done in Ireland,) and then last of all his Majesty's, in
case he refuse to become the Popes sworn vassal, or alter his Religion, which
he has often protested (and we believe) he will never do.

But I desire these il counselors of the worst edition, to inform his
Majesty, or any rational creature, how it is either probable, or possible, that
an army of papists should secure his royal person, Crown, Dignity, or protect
the Protestant Religion, the Parliament, or its Privileges, to all which they
have showed themselves most professed enemies. We all know that Popish
Recusants See King James his Apology against Bellarmin, Laurentius Byerlink,
Opus Chro. p. 319. Deus and Rex. The Lord William Howards Sons la^e Book in
Defense of Papists taking the Oath of Allegiance.
obstina^ely refuse to take the Oath of Supremacy, or Allegiance (some of them
that took it, having been excommunicated by their Priests for a reward) The
sum of which Oath is, 3 Iac. c. 4.
That they do truly and sincerely acknowledge and profess; That the Pope has
no authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any his Kingdoms, or to
authorize any foraine Prince to invade his Countries, or to discharge any his
Subjects from their Allegiance to his Majesty, or to license any of them to
bear arms, or raisetumults against him, or to offer any violence or hurt to
his royal Person, State, Government, Subjects. That notwithstanding any
Declaration, Excommunication, or deprivation made or granted by the Pope, or
any Authority derived from him, against the King, his Heirs, and Successors,
or any absolution from their obedience, they will bear faith and true
allegiance to them, and them protect to the uttermost of their power against
all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever against their Persons, Crown, and
Dignity, by reason of any such sentence or Declaration, or otherwise. And that
they do from their hearts, abhor, detest, abjure as impious and heretical,
this damnable Doctrine and position: (professedly maintained by English
Papists, else why should the Parliament prescribe, and they absolutely refuse
to take this Oath?) that Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be
deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. Will those then
who refuse to take this Oath, or abjure this King-deposing, King-killing Popish
Doctrine; harboring a S^eminary Priest in their Tents, and a Pope in their
hearts, prove a faithful guard to his Majesty's Person, Crown, Kingdoms?
Will those who so often conspired the death, and attempted the murders of Queen
Elizabeth, and King James, only because they were Protestants, and Defenders
of the Protestant Faith, now cordially protect and assist King Charles, without
attempting any thing against his Crown or Person, who has lately made and
published so many Protestations, and Declarations, that he will never embrace,
nor countenance Popery, but most resolutely Defend, and Advance the Protestant
Religion; and makes this one principal motive (how truly, he takes Heaven
and Earth to witness) of his present taking up of Arms? Will they (think
you) spend their lives for King and Parliament, who but few years since lost
their lives for attempting by a train of Gunpowder to blow up both King and
Parliament? Will those secure his Majesty in his Throne, now he is actually
King of England, who would have murdered him in his Cradle, ere he was Prince,
to forestall him of the Crown of England? Can those prove really royal to his
Majesty and his Royal Posterity, who would have blown up him and all his
Royal House at once, even long before he had posterity? In a word (if ancient
presidents will not convince us) are those who for See Dr. Jones his Book of
Examinations.
two years last past or more, have been laboring with might and maine to
uncrowne his Majesty, and utterly extirpate the Protestant Religion by horrid
conspiracies and force of Arms, in Ireland, and are now there acting the last
Scene of this most barbarous bloody Tragedy; likely to spend their dearest
blood in fighting for the preservation of his Majesty's Crown and the
Protestant cause in England, if this only be the real quarrel, as is
speciously pretended? Or will any of that Religion, who within these three
years, have by force of Arms, both in Catalonia, Portugal, and elsewhere,
revolted from, and cast off their allegiance to their own most Catholic
King, to set up others of the same Religion in his Tribunal for their greater
advantage; put to their helping hands to establish his Majesty (the most
Protestant King) in his regal Throne, admit it were really, not fictitiously
endangered to be shaken by the Parliament? Certainly, if the ground of this
unnatural war be such as these ill Counselors pretend, they would never be
so far besotted as to make choice of such unfitting Champions as Papists, for
such a design, who are very well known to be the greatest enemies and
malignants of all others, both to King, Kingdom, Religion, Parliament, whose
joint destructions (what ever these ill Counselors pretend) is questionless
the only thing really intended by the Popish party in this war, as the
proceedings in Ireland, the introducing of foraine, the raising of domestic
Popish Forces, the disarming of Protestants, and Arming Papists with their
Harness, clearly demonstrate to all whom prejudice has not blinded.

Now that I may evidence to these pernicious Counselors, and all the world,
how dangerous, how unsafe it is to his Majesty, to the Kingdom, to put Arms
into Papists hands, and make use of them to protect the Kings person, or
Crown; I shall desire them to take notice both of the Papists traitorous
Doctrine, and Practice, in these three particulars they maintain.

First, That the Pope by a mere divine right, is the sole and supreme Monarch
of the whole world, and all the Kingdoms in it, to dispose of them at his
pleasure, to whom and when he will, without giving any account of his actions.
That all Emperors and Kings are but his vassals, deriving, and holding their
Crowns from him by base unworthy services, worse then villenage; that they
call, and repute them their Popes vassals, curs, packe-asses with Bells about
their necks, and use them like such, if they offend the Pope. For full proof
whereof out of their own Authors and practice, I shall refer them to Doctor
Dedicated to King James, printed at London 1621.
Richard Crackenthorps Book, Of the Popes temporal Monarc^y, chap. 1. p. 1.
to 27. worthy any man's reading, to John Bodins Commonwealth, Lib. 1. cap. 9.
Bishop Jewels view of a Seditious Bull, and Doctor John Whites Defense of the
way to the true Church, chap. 10. p. 43.

Secondly, That the Pope alone without a Council, may lawfully excommunicate,
censure, depose both Emperors, Kings, and Princes; and dispose of their
Crowns and Kingdoms unto others; That it is meet and necessary he should
excommunicate and deprive all Kings, who are either Heretics or Apostates (as
they repute all protestant Princes) or oppressors of the Commonwealth: That as
soon as such Princes are actually excommunicated, or notoriously known to be
Heretics or Apostates, their Subjects are ipso facto absolved from their
government, and Oaths of Allegiance whereby they were bound unto them; and
may, yea ought to take up Arms against them to deprive them of their Kingdoms.

Thirdly, That such heretical, tyrannical, oppressing Kings may be killed,
poisoned, or slain by open force of Arms, not only lawfully, but with glory
and commendations; That this is to be executed by Catholics; and that it is
not only an heroical, but meritorious act, worthy the highest Encomiums; and
a Saint-ship in the Roman Calender.

These two last propositions you may read abundantly proved by the words of
Popish writers, and forty examples of several Emperors, Kings and Princes,
which Popes and Papists have excommunicated, deprived, violently assaulted and
murdered, in Dedicated to King James, and printed at London 1624.
Doctor John Whites defense of the way to the true Church, chap. 6. page 14. to
22. and chap. 10. p. 43. 44. in his Sermon at Paul's Cross, March 24. 1615.
page 11. 12. in Bishop Jewels view of a seditious Bull, in Bishop Bilsons true
difference of Christian Subjection, and unchristian rebellion, part. 3.
throughout: Aphorismi Doctrinae Iesuitarum: King James his Apology against
Bellarmine, with his Answer to Cardinal Perron, and sundry printed Sermons,
preached on the fifth of November, to which I shall refer the Reader. What
security or protection then of his Majesty's royal person, Crown, Kingdoms,
can now be expected from our popish Recusants, (infected with these traiterous
principles, and branded with so many ancient, modern, nay present Treasons and
Rebellions against their Sovereigns) let the world and all wise men seriously
judge; What fair quarter and brotherly assistance the Parliament, Protestants,
Protestant Religion, Laws and Liberties of the Subject are like to receive
from this popish Army, the late Gunpowder Treason, the Spanish Armado, the
English and French book of Martyrs, the present proceedings in Ireland,
Yorkshire, and elsewhere, will resolve without dispute: And what peace and
safety the Kingdom may expect in Church of State, whiles Popery and Papists
have any armed power or being among us, In his Sermon there, Mar. 24. 1615. p.
43. 44.
Doctor John White has long since proclaimed at Paul's Cross (and now we feel
it by experience) in these words; Papistry can stand neither with peace nor
piety; the State therefore that would have these things, has just cause to
suppress it. Touching our peace, it has not been violated in our State these
many years but by them, nor scarce in any Christian State, since Charles the
Great his time, but the Pope and his ministers have had a hand in it.

All these ill advisers (to color their close See Plain English.
design of re-establishing Popery, principally intended) can allege for
arming Papists against Law, is; That the Parliament has traitorously invaded
the Kings Prerogatives in a high degree; Object.
claimed a power and jurisdiction above his Majesty in sundry particulars; yea,
Crimination. 1.
usurped to its self a more exorbitant, unlimited, arbitrary authority in
making Laws, imposing taxes, etc. then any Parliaments challenged in former
ages; to repress which insolences, and reduce the Parliament to its due
limits, his Majesty is now necessitated to raise an Army, and pray in aid of
Papists, who in former ages have been more moderate in their Parliaments, and
are like to prove most cordial and loyal to his Majesty in this service.

To answer which pretense more fully, Object. 2.
though it be for the maine, most palpably false, yet (by way of admission
only) I shall suppose it true, and with all possible brevity manifest; That
Parliaments, Prelates, Peers, Commons in times of Popery, have both claimed
and exercised far greater authority over our Kings and their Prerogatives,
then this or any other Protestant Parliament has done: Wherefore Papists of
all others, have least cause to tax the Parliaments proceedings, and those ill
Counselors and his Majesty small reason to employ or trust Papists in this
service. Answ.
To descend to some particular heads of complaint, involved in this general.

First, it is objected, that the Parliament and some of its The observations, a
^uller answer to Dr. Fern, with others. The Remonstrance of the Lords and
Commons, Novem. 2. 1642.
Advocates, with its approbation, affirm; that the Parliament being the
representative Body of the whole Kingdom, is in some respects of greater power
and authority then the King; who though he be singulis major, yet he is,
universis minor; which is contrary to the Oath of Supremacy, ( wherein every
Subject, 1 Eliz. chapter 1.
does utterly testify and declare in his conscience, that the Kings highness
is THE ONLY SUPREME GOVERNOR of this Realm, etc. as well in all Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical causes, as Temporal:) and a kind of unkinging his Majesty,
no ways to be endured.

To which I answer, Answ.
first, that if this Doctrine be either Traytorous or Heretical, the Papists
were the first broachers of it long ago; For Hen. de Bracton a famous English
Lawyer, who writ in King Henry the third his reign, lib. 2. cap. 16. f. 34. a.
resolves thus, Rex habet superiorem, Deum, etc. Item legem per quam factus est
Rex. Item Curiam suam: viz. Comites, and Barons, quia Comites dicuntur quasi
s^cii Regis, and qui habet socium habet magistrum: Et ideo si Rex fuerit sine
fraeno, i. sine lege, DEBENTEI FRAENVM IMPONERE, etc.
But the King has a SUPERIOR, to wit God: Also the Law, by which be is made a
King: likewise HIS COURT; namely, the EARLS AND BARONS; because they are
called Comites, as being THE KINGS FELLOWS (or companions;) and he who has a
fellow (or associate) has a MASTER: and therefore if the King shall be without
a bridle, that is, without Law, THEY OUGHT TO IMPOSE A BRIDLE ON HIM, unless
they themselves with the King shall be without bridle; and then the Subject
shall cry out and say, O Lord Jesus Christ do thou bind their jaws with bit
and bridle, etc. A clear resolution, That the Law, with the Earls and Barons
assembled in Parliament, are above the King, and ought to bridle him when he
exorbitates from the Law: which he also seconds in some sort, lib. 3. cap. 9.
f. 107. This Doctrine was so authenticke in those days, and after times, that
in the great Council of Basil. Anno 1431. when this mighty question was
debated; Whether a Pope were above a general Council, or a Council above
him? such a Council was at last resolved to be above the Pope, upon this
reason, among others Fox Acts and Mon. Edi. 1641 Vol. 2, p. 879, 880. Aeneas
Sylvius de gestis concilii Basiliensis, and Surius conci. Tom. 4.
The Pope is in the Church as a King is in his Kingdom, and for a King to be
of more authority then his Kingdom, it were too absurd; Ergo, Neither ought
the Pope to be above the Church. In every well ordered Kingdom, it ought
specially to be desired, that the whole Realm should be of more authority then
the King; which if it happened contrary, were not to be called a Kingdom, but
a Tyranny. And like as oftentimes Kings, which do wickedly govern the
Commonwealth and express cruelty, are deprived of their Kingdoms; even so it
is not to be doubted but that the Bishop of Rome may be deposed by the Church,
that is to say, by the general Council. At the beginning (as Lib. 2.
Cicero in his Offices says) it is certain there was a time when as the
people lived without Kings. But afterward when Lands and Possessions began
to be divided according to the custom of every Nation, then were Kings
ordained for no other causes but only to execute justice: for when at the
beginning the common people were oppressed by rich and mighty men, they ran
by and by to some good and virtuous man, which should defend the poor from
injury, and ordain Laws, whereby the rich and poor might dwe^l together. But
when as yet under the rule of Kings, the poor were oftentimes oppressed, Laws
were ordained and instituted, the which should judge, neither for hatred nor
favor, and give like e^re unto the poor as rich: whereby we understand and
know, not only the people, but also the King to be subject to the Law. For if
we do see a King to contemn and despise the Laws, violently rob and spoil
his Subjects, deflower Virgins, dishonest Matrons, and do al things
li^entiously and temerariously, do not the Nobles of the Kingdom assemb^e
together, deposing him from his Kingdom, set up another in his place, which
shall swear to rule and govern uprightly, and be obedient unto the Laws?
Verily as reason does persuade, even so does the use thereof also teach us: It
seems also agreeable unto reason, that the same should be done in the Church,
that is, in the Counce^l, which is done in any Kingdom. And so is this
sufficiently apparent, that the Pope is subject unto the Council; Thus the
Bishop of Burgen, Ambassador of Spain, the Abbot of Scotland, and Thomas de
Corcellis, a famous Divine, reasoned in this Council, which voted with them.
Here we have a full resolution of this great Council (which the Papists call a
general one, being Surius, council. to^. 4. p. 1. etc And Aeneas Sylvius hist.
Council. Basiliensis.
approved by the Greek and Roman Emperors, and most Christian Kings, and
States, and ours among others:) That the Kingdom in Parliament Assembled, is
above the King, as a General Council is paramount the Pope: which they
manifest by five reasons.

First, because Kings were first created and instituted by their Kingdoms and
people; not their Kingdoms and people by them.

Secondly, because they were ordained only for their Kingdoms and peoples
service and welfare, not their Kingdoms and people for them.

Thirdly, because their Kingdoms and people, as they at first created, so they
still limit and confine their royal Jurisdiction by Laws, to which they are
and ought to be subject.

Fourthly, because they oblige them by a solemn Oath, to rule according, and
to be obedient unto the Laws.

Fifthly, because they have power to depose them in case they contemn the
Laws, and violently rob and spoil their Subjects.

This then being the Doctrine of Papists concerning the Power and Superiority
of Parliaments, Peers, and Kingdoms over their Kings, they have least ground
of all others, to tax this Parliament or its Advocates, as guilty of Treason,
and usurpation upon the Crown, for a more moderate claim then this amounts
to, and the King or his ill Counsel no ground to expect more moderation and
loyalty from Popish then Protestant Parliaments.

Secondly, I answer, that Popish Parliaments, Peers, and Prelates have
heretofore challenged and exercised a greater Jurisdiction over their Kings,
then this Parliament, or any other, since the embracing of the Protestant
Religion, ever claimed; and do in a great measure disclaim.

For, first of all, they have challenged and executed a just and legal power
(as they deemed it) to depose their Kings, for not governing according to Law;
for following and protecting evil Counselors, and Officers; oppressing their
Subjects, and making war against them. This is evident, not only by the
forementioned passages of the Council of Basil, with infinite presidents in
foraine Empires and Kingdoms, which I pretermit, but by sundry domesticke
examples of which I shall give you a short touch. Spe. hist. p. 207, 266, 267.
Mat. West. Ann^ 445. 454, etc. See Hunt. hist. l. 2. p. 320 Pol. l. 5. c. 1.
Fab. p. 73. Dan p. 8. H^l. Graft. Vin. Speed hist, l 20 c. 11. and others.
Anno Dom. 454. King Vortigern, when he had reigned six years space, for his
negligence and evil Government (for which Vodine Archbishop of London told
him, he had endangered both his Soul and Crown) was deposed from his Crown
by his Subjects (the Britains) general consent, imprisoned, and his Son
Vortimer chosen and crowned King in his stead; After whose untimely death
(being poisoned by Rowena) Vortigern was again restored by them to the Crown,
and at last for his notorious sins, by the just revenging hand of God,
consumed to ashes by fire, kindled by Au^elius, and Vter, as Heavens ministers
to execute its wrath. Sigebert Spee. hist. p. 229, Huntin. and Mat. West. An.
756. Hol. Graf. in his life.
King of the West Saxons, setting aside all Laws and rules of true piety,
wallowing in all sensual pleasures, and using exactions and cruelties upon his
Subjects, and slaying the Earl Cumbra, his most faithful Counselor, for
admonishing him lovingly of his vicious life: the Peers and Commons thereupon
seeing their State and lives in danger, and their Laws thus violated,
assembl^d all together; and provida omnium deliberatione, rose up in Arms
against him, deposed, and would acknowledge him no longer their Sovereign,
whereupon flying into the Woods, as his only safeguard, and there wandering in
the day like a forlorn person, and lodging in dens and caves by night, he was
slain by Cumbra his Swin-herd, in revenge of his Masters death, and Kenwolfe
made King in his stead, Anno Dom. 756. Spee. hist. p. 245, 246. Hunt. and Mat.
West. an. 792 See Holin. Graft. and others
Osred King of Northumberland, for his ill government was expelled by his
Subjects, and deprived of all Kingly Authority, Anno 789. So Ethelred, (the
son of Mollo) his next successor, being revoked from exile and restored to
the Crown, of which he was formerly deprived, thereupon murdering diverse of
his Nobles and Subjects to secure his Crown, so far offended his Subjects
thereby, that An. 794. they rose up in Arms against him, and slew him at
Cobre. Thus Matthew. West. An. 158. p. 275
An. 758. the people of the kingdom of Mercia rising up against Beornerd their
King, because ^e governed the people not by just Laws, but tyranny, assembled
all together, as well Nobles as ignoble; and Offa, most valiant young man being
their Captain, they expelled him from the kingdom: which done, unanimi omnium
consensu, by the unanimous consent of all, as well Clergy as People, they
Crowned Offa a King. Matthew. West. An. 821. Speed hist, p. 255.
Ceolwulfe King of Mercia, An. 820. after one years Reign, was for his
mis^^vernment expulsed by his people, abandoning his Crown and Country for the
^afety of his life.

Mat. West. Hunt. Poly. Fab. Holin. Graf. An. 9^7.
Ed^^yn King of Mercia and Northumberland, for his Misgovernment, Tyranny,
oppression, following vain, base, wicked Counselors, rejecting the advice of
the Wisest and noblest person, was, by the unanimous consent of all his
Subjects, removed from all Kingly dignity, and deposed; in whose place Edgar
was elected King, An. 957. DEO DICTANTE and annuente populo. Not to m^ntion the
story of Fabian, part 2. c. 49. 40. 41. p. 30. 31. with Matthew, Westin.
Huntingdon, Polychronicon, Geoffry Mommoth, Hollinsh. Graf^on, Speed, and
others in his life.
Archigallo, one of our ancient British Kings, in times of Paganism; Who
giving himself to all dissension and strise, imagining causes against his
Nobles, to put them from their goods and dignities, setting up ignoble persons
in their places, and plucking away by sinister, wrongful means from the rich
their wealth and goods, by which he enriched himself, and impoverished his
Subjects; was for these his conditions murmured against by his Subjects; who of
one assent lastly took and deprived him of all Kingly honor and dignity, when
he had Reigned almost five years, making his Brother Elidurus King of
Britain, by one assent, in the year of the world, 4915. Who after five years
good Reign, feigning himself sick, assembled the Barons of the Land, and by
his discreet words, and bearing loving carriage, Persuaded them to restore
Archigallo to his former honor and regalty; and thereupon assembling a
Council of his Britains at York, caused such means to be made to the
Commons, that in conclusion he resigned his Crown to Archigallo: Who being
thus restored to his Crown by joint consent of the people, remembered well the
evil life that before time he had led, and the punishment he had suffered for
the same. Wherefore for eschewing the like danger, he changed all his old
conditions and became a good and righteous man, ministering to the people equity
and justice, and bare himself so nobly toward his Lords and Rulers, that he
was beloved and dread of all his Subjects, and so continued during the term of
his natural life. Nor yet to remember Fabian, part 2. c. 46. p. 34. Geoffry
Mommoth, Huntingdon, Matthew Westminster. Polychron, Hollinsh. Grafton, Speed, in his
life.
Emerian, another old British King, who for misordering of his people was
deposed by them, in the sixth year of his reign, and Ydwallo promoted to the
Kingdom; who taught by Emerian his punishment, behaved himself justly all the
time of his reign: or any more such precedents before the Conquest.

We find the Matthew. Paris, hist. Angl. p. 264. to 280. Speed, p. 585. etc.
Hollinshead Grafton, Stow, Daniel, Walsingham.
Popish Barons, Prelates, and Commons, disavowing King John, whom they had
formerly elected King, for making war upon them, and wasting, burning and
spoiling the Kingdom like an Enemy, and electing Lewis of France for their
King, to whom they did homage and fealty: There are none so ignorant but know,
that the Popish Prelates, Lords and Commons in Parliament, Walsingham, hist.
Angl. p. 398. etc. Fabian, part. 7. p. 345. Polychron. l. ult. c. 9.
Hollinshead, Grafton, and Speed, p. 758 to 766.
Anno 1327. deposed King Edward the second their natural King, for his
misgovernment, and following and protecting ill Counselors, enforcing him by
way of complement to resign his Crown, threatening else, that they would never
endure him, nor any of his Children, as their Sovereign, but disclaiming all
homage and fealty, would elect some other for King not of his blood, whom
themselves should think most fit and able to defend the kingdom. After which
they elected and crowned his son Edward the third for their King. That Anno
1399. Walsingham Hol. Fab. Speed, p. 680. to 697.
King Richard the second, for sundry misdemeanors objected against him in 32.
Articles in Parliament, and breach of his Coronation Oath, was judicially
deposed by a Popish Parliament, by a definitive sentence of deposition given
against him, which you may read at large in our Historians, and Henry the
fourth elected and created King in his stead: In both which depositions the
Popish Prelates were chief actors. Speed, p. 869. 878. 879. 887. Hollinsh.
Polychronicon, Fabian, Grafton, Hall, Stow, Cax^on in their lives.
Anno 1462. King Henry the sixth, Queen Margaret and Prince Edward their Son
were by a popish Parliament disinherited of their right to the Crown; and
Edward the fourth made King: after which King Henry was by another Parliament
recrowned, and re-established in his kingdom, and Edward the fourth declared a
Traitor and usurper of the Crown. And not long after, Edward taking King Henry
prisoner, and causing him to be murdered in the Tower, another Popish
Parliament, Anno 1472. abrogated King Henry's Laws, and re-established King
Edward. All this have our Popish Parliaments, Prelates, Lords and Commons
formerly done, and that rightly and legally, as they then supposed; which far
transcends the highest strains of pretended encroachments on his Majesty's
royalties by the present Parliament.

Secondly, our Popish Parliaments, Peers and Prelates have often translated the
Crown from the right heirs, and settled it on others who had no lawful right or
title to it, electing and acknowledging them for their only Sovereign Lords;
in which actions the Popish Prelates and Clergy were commonly the Ringleaders:
witness their Speed p. 410 411* 425, 426* 404. to 407. 410. 416. 418 419. 455*
456. 466, 467. 548, 549, 550, 590, 591. 762. See Matthew Paris, Matthew. West.
Malmsbu. Hunt. Eadmerus Fabian, Walsing. Caxton, Polych. Polydor, Virgil. Hall,
Graf^on, Stow, How, Hol. Hayward, Martin, Daniel, and Sir Rich. Baker in their
several lives of these King^.
electing and crowning of Edward, who was illegitimate, and putting by Ethelred
the right heir after Edgars decease, An. 975. Their electing and Crowning
Canutus King, a mere forrainer, in opposition to Edmund the right heir to
King Ethelred, Anno 1016. Of Harold and Hardiknute, both elected and crowned
Kings successively without title, Edmund and Alfred the right heirs being
dispossessed, and the latter imprisoned and tortured to death, Anno 1036. and
1040. yet after Hardiknutes decease Edward (surnamed the Confessor) was chosen
King by consent of Parliament. And the English Nobilities, upon the death of
King Harold, enacted, That none of the Danish blood should any more reign over
them. After this Kings death, Edgar Etheling who had best title, was rejected,
and Harold elected and crowned King: so after William the Conquerors decease,
Anno 1087. Robert the elder brother was pretermitted, and William Rufus the
younger brother crowned and established in the Throne: After whose death Henry
the first, his younger brother (though not next heir) was elected King by the
Clergy, Nobles and Commons, ( who refused to admit of any King but with
capitulations and caveats to their own liking) upon fair promises for
reforming bad and rigorous Laws, remission of Taxes exacted on the Subjects,
and punishment of the chief causers of them, and a solemn Oath to frame good
Laws, and ratify Saint Edwards Laws; all which he really performed. So after
the death of Richard the first, John Earl of Morton was established and
crowned King, and his Nephew Arthur, the right heir, disinherited. And he
dying, his son Henry the third was elected and crowned, and Lewis (made King
in his fathers life by the Barons) removed. The like we find in the case of K.
Henry 4. K. Edw. 4. and Richard the third, made Kings by Acts of Parliament, by
our Popish Prelates and Nobles with the Commons consent, upon unlawful or
doubtful Titles, by way of usurpation, and the right hereditary line put by.
Such a transcendent power and jurisdiction as this to disinherit the right
heir and transfer the Crown to whom they thought meetest, neither the
present nor any other Protestant Parliaments, Peers or Subjects ever
exercised, though Popish Parliaments, Prelates, Lords, and Commons have thus
frequently done it; of which you may read more in 25 H. 8. c. 22. 26 H. 8. c.
12. 28 H. 8. c. 7. 35 H. 8. c. 1. and other Acts hereafter cited.

Thirdly, the Lords and Commons in times of Popery have sent out Writs and
summoned Parliaments in the Kings name, and forced the King to call a
Parliament without and against his full consent. Thus Anno 1214. Mat. Paris
hist. p. 243. to 255. Daniel, p. 142, 143, 144.
the Barons petitioned Kings John to confirm Magna Charta and their Liberties
tendered to him; who having heard them read, in great indignation asked; Why
the Barons did not likewise demand the Kingdom? and swore, that he would never
grant those Liberties whereby himself should be made a servant: So harsh a
thing is it ( writes Daniel) to a power that has once gotten out into the wide
liberty of his will, to hear again of any reducing within his circle: not
considering, how those who inherit Offices succeed in the Obligation of them,
and that the most certain means to preserve unto a King his kingdom, is to
possess them with the same conditions that he has inherited them. The Barons
hereupon raise a great Army at Stamford, wherein were 2000. Knights besides
Esquires, constituting Robert Fitz-Walter their General, intituling him, the
Marshall of the Army of God and holy Church; seize upon the Kings Castles: and
the Londoners sending them a privy message to join with them, and deliver up
the City to be guided by their discretion: thither they repair, and are
joyfully received under pact of their indemnity. After which they sent Letters
to the Earls, Barons, and Knights throughout England, who seemed (although
fainedly) to adhere to the King, exhorting them with a commination, that as
they loved the indemnity of their goods and possessions, they should desert a
perjured King, and that adhering faithfully to them, they should with them
stand immovably, and effectually contend for the Liberties and peace of the
kingdom. which if they contemned to do, they would with Arms and Banners
displayed, march against them as public enemies, subvert their Castles, burn
their houses, and edifices, and not cease to destroy their Ponds, Parkes, and
Orchards: Whereupon all the Lords, Knights, and people deserting the King, who
had scarce seven Knights in all left with him, confederated themselves to the
Barons. The King seeing himself generally forsaken, counterfeits the Seals of
the Bishops, and writes in their names to all Nations; that the English were
all turned Apostates, and whosoever would come to invade them, he, by the Popes
consent, would confer upon them al their lands and possessions. But this
devise working no effect in regard of the little credit they gave to and
confidence they had in the King, the truth being known, all men detested such
wickednesses and forgeries, and so the King fell into his own snares; Hereupon
the King fearing the Barons would take all his Castles without any obstacle,
though he conceived an inexorable hatred against them in his heart, yet he
craftily dissembled, that he would make peace with them for the present; ut cum
furtim surrexisset, in dissipata agmina acrius se vindicaret; and qui in omnes
non poterat, in singulos desaeviret. Wherefore sending William Marshall Earl
of Pembroke to them, with other credible messengers, he certified them, that
for the good of peace, and the exaltation and honor of his kingdom, he would
gladly grant them the Laws and Liberties they desired; commanding the Lords by
the same messengers that they should provide a fit day and place, where they
might meet and prosecute all these things: Who related all these things
deceitfully imposed on them, without fraud to the Barons at London; who
appointed the King a day to come and confer with them in a Meade between
Stanes and Windsor, called Running-meade; on the 15. day of June. Where both
parties meeting at the day, and conferring, the King perceiving his forces too
weak for the Barons, who were innumerable, easily granted their subscribed
Laws and Liberties without difficulty, and confirmed them with his Charter,
Hand, Seal, Oath, Proclamations, and other assurances, which you shall hear
anon: This meeting Daniel and others style a Parliament (as well as that at
Matthew. Paris p 96 97. Daniel p. 85.
Clarindon and other assemblies in the open field) the great Charter being
therein first confirmed; which Parliament the King by force of Arms was
constrained to summon. So Matthew. Paris p. 324. 325. Daniel. p. 151. 152.
Anno Dom. 1225. King Henry the third cancelling the Charter of the Forest at
Oxford, pretending that he was under age when he sealed and granted it at
first, and so a ^^llity: Hereupon the Barons confederate by Oath, and put
themselves in Arms at Stamford, from whence they sent to the King, requiring
him to make restitution without delay of the Liberties of the Forests lately
cancelled at Oxford, otherwise they would compel him thereto with the sword;
to avoid which danger he was enforced to summon a Parliament at Northampton,
where a concord was concluded on all hands, Anno 1226. and so the Parliament
brake up, Matthew. Paris p. 420. 421. 430. 451. 452. See Matthew. West.
Polychronicon, Fabian, Holling* Graf^on, Dan. p. 157. 158.
Anno 1237. Henry the third incensing his Nobility and generally all his
Subjects, by his entertainment of Forainers by whom he was ruled, by marrying
his sister Elianor to Simon de Monfort a banished Frenchman, and his
oppressions, contrary to his Oath and promise in Parl. that year, put them into
a new commotion, who thereupon made a harsh Remonstrance of their grievances to
him, by his brother Richard, by means whereof the King was forced to call a
Parliament at London Anno 1238. whither the Lords came armed to constrain the
King (if he refused) to the reformation of his courses. Matthew. Paris, p. 938
940 941. 942. Dan. p. 177. 179.
Anno 1250. King Henry is again enforced by the Barons and 24 Peers to call a
Parliament at Oxford and at London against his will, and to assent to
ordinances therein made: And Anno 1264. he was likewise constrained to call two
other Parliaments at London, and to assent to the new Ordinances therein
proposed, which he did only to get time and circumvent the Barons. Walsingh.
Hist p. 70 71. See Fabian, Hollinshead, Graft* Speed, Daniel, in 3. and 4. E. 2.
Anno Dom. 1310. and 1311. King Edward the second was in a manner constrained
at the instant supplication of his Nobles to summon a Parliament, and to banish
his Minion Pierce Gaveston against his will. Walsingham, Hist. p. 90. 91, 92,
93. Exilium Hugonis le Despenser, in Magn^ Charta. part. 2. f. 50. to 57. See
Hollin. Fabian, Speed, Grafton, Daniel, in 14. and 15. E. 2.
In the 14. and 15. years of this King, the Barons raising an Army by force of
Arms compelled him to summon a Parliament at Westminster, and to pass an Act
for the banishment of these two great Favorites the Spensers who miscounselled
and seduced him, and oppressed his people. Hist. p. 107. 108. Ypodigm. Neustr.
p. 109. 110.
And in the last year of this Kings reign, his Popish Prelates, Nobles, and
Commons, taking him prisoner, summoned a Parliament in his name much against
his will: wherein for his misgovernment, they enforced him to resign his
Crown; deposed him, renounced their allegiance to him, and set up his son
King Edward the third in his Throne; as you may read at large in Walsingham,
Polychronicon, Caxton, Fabian, Grafton, Hollinshead, Speed, Stow, Howes,
Daniel, Mr. Fox, and others who have written the History of his life. In the
year 1341. (the 15. of Edward the third his reign) the Popish Lords,
Prelates, and Commons in Ireland, summoned a Parliament there by their own
authority, without, and against the Kings or Deputies consents; wherein they
framed diverse Questions and Articles against the Kings Ministers there
employed, (which the Irish In Cambd. Britan. the last English edition p. 188.
Annals record at large) refusing to appear at the Parliament there summoned
by the Kings authority and Officers. I read in the Statute of 21 R. 2. c. 12.
(and our Grafton, Trysse^. H^l^inshead, Speed, Walshingham, in 10 and 11* and
21. 2.
Historians have a touch of it.) That the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earls of
Arundel and Warwick assembled forcibly and in great number at Harengy, and so
came in such manner forcibly to the Kings Palace at Westminster, arraied in
manner of mar, that the King might not then resist them without great peril
of his body and destruction of his people: so that by coertion and compulsion
the said Duke and Earls made the King to summon a Parliament at Westminster
the morrow after the Purification of our L^dy, the eleventh year of his
reign: Which Parliament so begun, the said Duke and Earls in such forcible
manner continued; and in the same did give many and diverse judgments, as well
of death of man as otherwise, upon diverse of the Kings liege people, and did
give judgment of forfeitures of lands, tenements, goods, and cattels, whereof
they be convict of high Treason; and also for certain questions, which were
demanded by the King touching his estate and regality, of certain of his
Judges, then at Notingham the same year. And for their answers of the same,
given to the King upon the same questions, the same Justices were forejudged of
their lives, and judgment given against them of forfaiting their Lands, Goods,
and Chattels; and the said Duke and Earls made diverse Statutes and Ordinances
in that Parliament at their will, the summons whereof was made expressly
against the right of the Kings Crown, and contrary to the Liberty and
Franchese of his person and Royal estate: Whereupon it was by this packed
overawed Parliament, and Act, annulled, revoked, and holden as none; as a
thing done without Authority, and against the will and liberty of the King, and
the right of his Crown. Yet it continued in full force for 10. years space,
during which time there were 8 Parliaments held which would not repeal it: and
by the Parliament in 1 H. 4. c. 3, 4. this Parliament of 21 R. 2. was repealed,
with all the circumstances, and dependants thereof; the Parliament and Statutes
of 11 R. 2. Revived, and enacted to be firmly holden and kept after the
purport and effect of the same, as a thing made for the great honor and common
profit of this Realm. After this in the 23 year of King Richard the third,
when he had yielded himself prisoner to Henry Duke of Lancaster; the Duke
coming with him to London, sent out Walsin. Fab. Holinsh. Speed, Hall, Graf.
Trussel, Hows, in 23 R. 2. and 1 H. 4. Fox Acts and Mon. vol. 1. edit. ult. p.
67 1, 677
summons for a Parliament to be holden the last of September, in the Kings
name, (sore against his will) and enforced him first to resign his Crown unto
him, and afterward caused him to be judicially and solemnly deposed by
consent of all the States of the Realm in Parliament, for certain abuses in
his Government objected against him; The whole manner of which resignation,
deprivation, and proceedings, you may read at large in our Histories.

These Popish Prelates, Lords and Commons, enforcing their Kings to summon all
these Parliaments, (with others which I pretermit) might seem to have some
legal color from the ancient Law of King Alfred; who in an assembly of
Parliament Horns Myrrour of Justices, c. 1. sect. 3. p. 10. Cooks Instit. on
Lit. f. 110. and 9. Report in the Preface, Spelm. Council. Tom. ^. p. 347.
Enacted this for a perpetual Custom: That a Parliament should be called
together at London TWICE EVERY YEAR, OR OFTENER, in time of Peace, to keep the
people of God from sin, that they might live in peace, and receive right by
certain usages and holy judgments And from the Statutes of 4 E. 3. c. 4. and
36 E. 3. c. 10. (backing this ancient Law) which enact: That for the
maintenance of the Laws and Statutes, and redress of diverse mischiefs and
grievances which daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden EVERY YEAR ONCE,
and MORE OFTEN IF NEED BE. Now these Laws would have been merely void and
ineffectual, if these Kings, who were obliged by their Coronation Oaths to
observe them, refusing to call a Parliament as often as there was need, or at
least once every year, according to the purport of these Laws, might not be
constrained by their Nobles, Prelates, people to summon them, in case they
peremptorily refused to call them of their own accords, or upon the motion or
petition of their Counsel, Lords and Commons. Whereupon in the Bill newly
passed this Session, for a Trienniall Parliament, for time to come, there is
special provision made how the Parliament shall be summoned and convented by
the Lords, Commons, and great Officers of the Realm, themselves, without the
Kings concurrent assent, (though by his Writ and in his name) in case of his
neglect or wilful refusal to summon one within that time.

Neither is this a thing unusual in other parts. In the Surius tom. 1. Council.
p. 342.
General Council of Nice An. 363. Canon 5. it was decreed; That a Council
should be held TWICE EVERY YEAR in every Province to regulate the affairs and
abuses of the Church. The Surius tom. 1. p. 407.
Council of Antioch, Can. 20. appoints two Councels to be held every year in
every Province, the one the third week after Easter, the other upon the 15. of
October: to hear and determine all Ecclesiastical causes and controversies.
And in the 1. Surius tom. 3. p. 488. 574, 575. 732. Tom: 2, p. 203. 675, 728.
754. 603. 605, 641, 642. 643. 892, 695. 713. 1042. 715 685. Gratian, Distirct.
18. luo Carnot. Decret. pars 4. c. 241, 243, 244, Spel. Council. tom. 1. p. 153.
Council of Constantinople, Can. 3. The Council of Afric, Can. 18. Pope Leo
the first, in his Decretall Epistles, Epist. 4. c. 17. The Counsel of
Chalcedon, Can. 19. the third Counsel of Toledo under King Reccaredus, An.
600. cap. 18. the fourth Counsel of Toledo, under King Sisenandus, An. 681.
The Greek Synods, Collected by Martin Bishop of Bracara, cap. 18. the second
Counsel of Aurelia, Can. 2. the third at the same place Can. 1. and the
fourth, Can. 37. the second Synod of Towers, Can. 1. the fifth Counsel of
Aurelia, cap. 22. the Counsel at Hereford, under King Egfred, An. 670. in
Beda's Ecclesiast. Hist. l. 4. t. 5. Pope Gregory the first in his Decretall
Epistles, lib. 7. Registri, Epist. 110. the sixth Counsel of Constantinople,
Can. 8. the Counsel of Antricum, Can. 7. the Counsel of Maseon, Can. 20.
Surius tom. 3. p. 24. 4^. 42, 406,
Pope Gregory the third his Decretall Epistles. The Synod of Suessons, under
King Childeric, the Counsel under King Pepin, at the Palace of Vernis, An.
755. cap. 4. The Counsel of Paris, under Lewis, and Lothaire, An. 829. l. 3.
cap. 11. The Counsel of Melden, An. 845. cap. 32. With sundry other Counsels,
decree, that a Synod or Counsel shall be kept twice (or at the least once)
every year, at a certain time and place in every Province; that all Bishops
and others, unless hindered by sickness, or other inevitable occasions,
should be present at it, and not depart from it till all businesses were ended,
and the Counsel determined, under pain of excommunication; that Kings by
their mandates should not interrupt these Counsels, nor keep back any
Members from them. And to the end they might be the more duly observed without
interruption for want of a new Summons; they likewise decreed; That before the
Counsels determined, they should still appoint both the day and place, when and
where the next Counsel should assemble, of which every one was to take notice,
and to appear there at his peril, under pain of excommunication and other
censure, without any new citation. Yea, the Great Surius tom. 4. p. 44.
Counsel of Basil, An. 1431. Session 15. provides and decrees; That in every
Province an annual, or at least a bienniall or trienniall Counsel at
farthest, shall be kept at a set time and place, where none should fail to
meet under pain of forfaiting half their annual Revenues; And if the
Metropolitan, without lawful impediment, should neglect to summon such
Counsels at the times appointed; he should for his first default forfait the
moity of his Revenues; and if within three months after he neglected to summon
the said Counsel, then he was to be suspended from all his Offices and
Benefices, and the ancientest, or most eminent Bishop in the Province in his
default, or any other that by custom ought to do it, was to supply his
neglect in assembling and holding the Counsel. As it was thus in summoning
Counsels, for the government of the Church, and Ecclesiastical affairs: (many
of which Counsels, as is evident by See H. Spel. Cencil. tom. 1, p. 529.
Sigibert, An. 528. Eadm. hist. Nonor. l. 3. p. 67. Con. Tole. 8. 12 and others
Aquisgra. Conc. sub Ludovico Pio.
diverse Saxon, British, Spanish, French Counsels, were no other but
Parliaments, wherein the King and all temporal estates assembled, and sat in
Counsel as well as the Prelates and Clergy, as they did as well in general,
as in National and Provincial Counsels;) so likewise in calling Diets,
Parliaments, and General Assemblies of the Estates, for settling and ordering
the Civil affairs of Kingdoms. Not to mention the power of assembling the
Roman Senate, residing principally in the Consuls, as Commonw. l. 3. c. 1.
Bodin proves at large.

In the Hieronymus Blanca Aragonensium Rerum comment. p. 764 etc. 688, 689.
723, 724.
kingdom of Aragon in Spain, of ancient times by an ancient statute of that
Kingdom, a Parliament or general assembly of the States was to assemble at a
set time and place, once every year at least, and of later times by other
Laws, once every second year. Neither can the King of Aragon hinder or
adjourne this Assembly above forty days at most, nor adjourne or dissolve it
when met, but BY THE GENERAL CONSENT OF ALL THE COURT. And during the
Interregnum, when there is no King, the Estates themselves have power to
assemble and make Laws, not only to bind themselves, but the succeeding
King: As they may likewise do in Hungary; where the Nichol. Isth. de Rebus
Vng. hist. l. 6. f. 84. 85
Grand Palatine (elected by the Estates of Hungary always in their Parliament,
not the King) during the Interregnum has power to call a Parliament or
general assembly of the States of Hungary, to make obligatory Laws, as well
to succeeding Kings as to the kingdom.

Arago Rerum Comment. p. 762 763.
Hieronymus Blanca recites this Law of King James of Aragon, for altering their
Annual into a Bienniall Parliament. Cum in Curiis, quas Reges suis subditis
celebrant, ea quae sunt ad conservationem pacis, ac justitiae, and Statum
pacificum Regni, and Regimen subditorum, and ad tuitionem and augmentum Reipub:
ordinent and disponant: Nos Jacobus Dei Gratia Aragonum Rex, Licet jam per
illustrissimum Dominum Regem Petrum, recolendae memo^iae patrem nostrum,
statutum fuisset in favorem Aragonensium; Quod ipse and sui Successores
QUOLIBET ANNO eis euriam celebraret in Civitate Caesar-Augustae, quod etiam
statutum fuit per Dominum Regem Alfonsum clarae memoriae fratrem nos^rum, and
per nos postmodum confirmatum. Nunc vero attendentes ad Communem utilitatem
totius Regni Aragonum, quia loca ubi Curiae celebrantur, propter congregationem
gentium magnum suscipiant incrementum; DE VOLUNTATE and ASSENSU Praelatorum,
Religiosorum, Baronum, Mesnaderiorum, Militum, and Procuratorum Civitatum,
Villarum, and Villariorum Aragonum, in hac Curia congregatorum: Statuimus, and
perpetuo ordinamus, Quod de caetero nos and successores nostri faciamus, and
celebremus Curiam generalem Aragonum DE BIENNIO IN BIENNIUM, in Festo omnium
Sanctorum, in quacunque Civitate, V^lla, vel Villario Aragonum, ubi nobis, and
successoribus nostris melius fuerit visum expedire; non obstantibus statuto and
ordinationibus praelibatis. In aliis vero, Privilegio generali Aragonum, and
Foris per nos jam editis, in suo robore duraturis. Et haec Iuramus per nos and
successores nostros perpetuo observare. Et Praelati and Religiosi, qui in dicta
Curia erant, haec firmarunt, and Barons, Mesnadarii, Milites, and Procuratores
Civitatum, Villarum, and Villariorum similiter Iurarunt. Which Law was
afterward somewhat altered, restraining these Parliaments to some Towns of
great Receipt. And concerning the form of their Parliaments and their Kings
power to adjourne them, or not adjourne them, he writes thus. In Comitiis
Respub: nostra quasi integrum quoddam fingitur corpus: cujus caput, censetur
Rex: truncus vero corporis, ac membra in eo locata, ipsi Ordines; Iustitia
autem Aragonum, collum, quod utrumque conjungit, and corporis, and eapitis
faucibus adhaerescit. Ad nostra igitur comitia hi quatuor Ordines evocandi
sunt. Evocantur autem singulatim per literas, quas apellamus, las Cartas
dellamamiento. In his a Regibus proponitu^ ratio consilii, quo ductus Comitia
habenda decreverit; tum ipsorum Comitiorum dicitur dies, ac opportunus
designatur locus. De eujus mutatione, anfieri possit, ab eodem Molino haec
traduntur. Si in aliquo loco sunt semel convocatae Curiae generales, and
inceptae, NON POTEST ILLAS MUTARE seu continuare dominus Rex ad alium locum
Regni, NISI TOTA CURIA GENERALI CONSENTIENTE. Et idem paulo post. Tamen si
Curiae generales nondum sunt integre congregatae, seu inceptae; tunc Dominus
Rex, etiam sine Curia potest illas mandare continuari ad alium locum sibi been
visum. Et ista continuatio fiet per justitiam Aragonum, seu ejus Lo^um
tenentem. Quibus poterit Dominus Rex mandare, quod illas continuent ad locum
domino Regi been visum. Ius est autem; Ne comitia nostra ultra quadraginta dies
possunt differri.

Andrew Favine his Theater of Honor. l. 2. c. 12. p. 175. 176.
The Estates and Parliaments general of France, under the Kings of the second
Line, met and held but twice in the year only, according to the Testimony of
Hincmarus Archbishop of Reimes, drawn from the Narration of the Abbot of
Corbie Alard, who lived in the time of Charlemayne; under the Reign of King
Lewis, called Sanctus, when France was in her flourishing Estate, and the
Princes and Lords were of souple nature, ranking with the terms of duty and
obedience, the Parliaments were ruled and assured at certain seasons of the
year. For in times of Peace four Parliaments were holden yearly, or three at
the least. And the same was used under the Reign of his Son Philip the
Hardy, Third of the name. In the time of Philip de Bell. his Son, King of
France and Navarre, they were reduced to two Parliaments yearly according to
the ancient custom; One in Winter, and the other in Summer during Peace; and
but one in Winter during War. (It appears nevertheless by the Registers of
the Court, that by hinderance of war against the Rebellious Flemmings, there
was not any Parliament during some years;) And the King by his Ordinance,
dated the Monday after Mid-lent, An. 1302. (set down in the Register of
ancient Orders of Parliament, fol. 45.) Willed, that for the commodity of his
Subjects there should be every year two Parliaments at Paris, and in other
Provinces; as Andrew Favin Records: By which it is apparent, that Parliaments
in France, Spain, and other kingdoms, were not arbitrarily called at the
Kings free pleasures as seldom as they pleased, but frequently summoned every
year, once, twice, or more, at certain seasons, public Acts of Parliament,
for the better government of these Realms, redress of grievances, and
preservation of the peoples Liberties against all royal encroachments on them.

In Germany, though Diets and Assemblies of the States be commonly made by the
Emperors, and in their names; yet, we find that the Princes Electors, and
Estates have assembled, not only without, but against the Emperors consents,
when they saw good cause; and not only questioned, but deposed their
Emperors, and elected new in their steads, of which there are sundry
precedents in the lives of See Orimston, Aventinus, Naucl. Munster, Sabelli.
Vsperg. Otho Frisingen. Herm. Schedel, Anton. Opinco^. Mat. Par. Mat. West.
Walsing. and others in their lives and histories.
Ludovicus pius, Henry the 1, 4, 5, 6, 7. Frederickes Barbarossa, Charles the
Gross, Winceslaus, Philip, Otho the fourth, Ludovicus Bavarus, and others. In
this regard therefore of forcing Kings to summon Parliaments (so frequent with
Popish Prelates, Peers, Subjects, both in our own and other Realms) our
present Protestant Parliament, and all others, since the Reformation, have
been more moderate and dutiful, then those in times of Popery heretofore; or
then the Popish Rebels in Ireland are now; See their 35 Articles made at their
general Assembly at Kilkenny 1642
who have lately at Kilkenny held a kind of Parliament, erected new Laws, and
Officers of Justice, enacted new Laws and Ordinances, as well Civil and
criminal as Martial, and done as much herein without the Kings assent or
Commission, as our King and Parliament could do, if conjoined.

Fourthly, Our Popish Barons, Prelates and Commons, have refused to meet in
Parliament when the King has summoned them by his Writ. Mat. Paris, an. 1233.
p. 344 473. etc. Speed hist. p. 607. to 613, Daniel p. 154, 155.
An. Dom. 1233. King Henry the third summoned his Earls and Barons to appear
at a Parliament at Oxford, (where the King now resides;) but they all jointly
sent him an express message that they would not come upon his summons, for
that the Kings person went guarded with Poictovines, and other strangers, who
swayed and miscounselled him (as ill Counselors do now the King) so as they
could not there appear with safety: at which message the King grew very angry,
resolving that they should be once, twice and thrice summoned to appear:
Whereupon Roger Bacon, who usually preached before the King, freely told him,
That if he did not remove from him Peter Bishop of Winchestor, and Peter de
Rivallis (his malignant Counselors) he could never be quiet: And Roger Bacon a
Clergy man also of a pleasant wit, seconding Roberts advise, told the King,
that Petrae and Rupes were most dangerous things at Sea, alluding to the
Bishops name, Petrus de Rupibus. The King hereupon coming a little to
himself, and taking that good advise of Who now give the King no such good
advice
Scholars which he would not of his Peers, summons another Parliament to be
holden at Westminster, giving the world to know withal, that his purpose was,
to amend by their advise whatsoever was to be amended. But the Barons
considering, that still there arrived more and more strangers, men of war,
with Horse and Arms (as now alas we see they do) and not trusting the
Peictovine Faith (as we have now cause to mistrust the perfidious papists, and
malignant Cavaliers) and seeing no footsteps of peace (our present condition)
refused to come at the appointed day; sending the King word by solemn
Messengers, that he should without any delay remove Peter Bishop of Winchester,
and the other Poictovines out of his Court, which if he refu^ed, they all of
them by the common consent of the whole kingdom, would drive him, with his
wicked Counselors, out of the Kingdom, and consult about creating a new King.
These things thus acted, the King was much dejected in mind, and all his Court
too, hanging down their heads, and fearing not a little, lest the errors of
the Son should become worse then the Fathers errors, whom his Subjects
endeavoring to depose from his Royal Throne, almost detruded him to that
name, which was given him by a certain presage; John the Banished: Wherefore
he could easily have been drawn to redeem the love of his natural Liegemen,
with the disgrace of a few strangers.

But the Bishop of Winchester, with other his ill Counselors, and Poictovine
Cavaliers, counseled him to take up Arms against his rebellious Subjects, as
they styled them, and to give their Castles and Lands to them, who would defend
him and the kingdom of England from these Traitors, (The Counsel now given to
his Majesty, by his ill Counselors and Cavaliers:) hereupon the King
inclining to the worser part, raises an Army of Poictovine, and foraine
Soldiers, which came to him being sent for out of Flanders, (from whence the
King now has many old Soldiers, and Commanders sent him) seiseth a Manor of
Guilbert Bassets, a Noble man, given him by King John, calling him Traitor when
he demanded it; sets down a day, wherein all his Lords he suspected should
deliver him sufficient pledges of their loyalty; and being at Gloucester with
his Army,) whither the Lords refused to come, being required, (the King
thereupon, as if they were Traitors, burns their Manors, destroys their
Parkes and Ponds, besieges their Castles, and without the judgment of his
Court, and of their Peers, denounces them exiles and banished men, gives
their Lands to the Poictovines, and adding grief to grief, wound to wound,
commanded their bodies to be apprehended where ever they were within the
kingdom: he likewise sends a defiance to the Earl Marshall, whose Lands he had
wasted, who thereupon understood himself discharged of that obligation by
which he was tied to the King, and free to make his defense; Whereupon, he
seeing neither Note.
Faith, nor Oath, nor Peace to be kept by the King, or his ill Counselors,
who contrary to their promise and Oath, refused to deliver up his Castle, which
they promised to render to him, upon demand; he raises a great Army, and takes
his Castle. On this the King upon better consideration, did again promise and
affirm; That by advise of his great Council, all that was amiss should be
rectified and amended; And at the day and place appointed, he holds a great
conference with the Lords; But the evil Counselors he followed, suffered him
not to make good his promise. For when diverse there present, greatly in the
Kings favor, with sundry Preachers and Friars, whom the King was wont to
reverence and hearken to, Humbly beseeched, and earnestly exhorted the King to
make peace with his Barons and Nobles, and to embrace them with due affection,
The Parliaments present case.
being his natural Subjects, whom without any judgment by their Peers he had
banished, destroying their Manours, Woods, Parkes, Ponds; and being led and
seduced by evil Counsels, less regarded his faithful Subjects, (whose native
blood would not permit them to bow down) than Forainers; and which is worse,
called them Traitors, by whom he ought to settle the peace, order the Counsels,
and dispose the affairs of his kingdom: The Bishop of Winchester (offended it
seems at Peers) takes the word out of the Kings mouth, and answers; That
there are not Peers in England, as in the Realm of France; and that therefore
the King of England, by such Iusticiars as himself pleases to ordain, may
banish any offenders out of the Realm, and by judicial process condemn
them. Which insolent speech the English Bishops relished so harshly, that they
presently with one voice threatened to accurse and excommunicate by name the
Kings principal wicked Counselors; of whom Winchester being the foreman,
appealed; whereupon they accursed (and I would our Bishops would do so now, if
the God-dam-me Cavaliers accurse not themselves sufficiently) all such as
alienated the heart of the King from his Subjects, and all others that
perturbed the peace of the Realm; and so the hoped Accommodation vanished into
greater discontents. Hereupon the Earl Marshall and other Lords with their
Forces, fell pell mell upon the Kings Army, slew diverse of his Forrainers; and
in conclusion drew him to such straits, that enforced him to be capable of
better advise: Then Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury elect, with other
suffragan Bishops, bewailing the estate of the kingdom, presented themselves
before the King at Westminster, telling him as his loyal liegeman (and O that
some Bishop or faithful person, if there be any such about his Majesty, would
now deal thus clearly with him, touching his evil Counselors!) That the
Counsel of Peter Bishop of Winchester, and his accomplices, which now he had and
used, was not sound nor safe, but evil and dangerous to himself and his
Realm: First, for that they hated and despised the English, calling them
Traitors, turning the Kings heart from the love of the people, and the hearts
of the people from him, as in the Earl Marshall, whom (being one of the
worthiest men of the Land) by sowing false tales they drove into
coffeehouse. Secondly, that by the Counsel of the said Peter, his Father
King John, first lost the hearts of his people, then Normandy, then other
lands, and finally wasted all his treasure, and almost England also, and never
after had quiet. Thirdly, that if the Subjects had now been handled according
to Justice and law, and not by their ungodly Counsels, these present troubles
had not happened, but the Kings lands had remained undestroyed, his treasure
unexhausted. Fourthly, that the Kings Council is not the Council of peace but
of perturbation, because they that cannot raise themselves by peace, must raise
themselves by the troubles and dis-inherison of others. Fifthly, that they had
the Treasure, Castles, Wardships, and strength of the kingdom in their hands,
which they insolently abused, to the great hazard of the whole estate, for that
they made no conscience of an Oath, Law, Justice, or the Churches censures.
Therefore we, O King, speak of these things faithfully unto you, in the
presence of God and man, and do counsel, beseech and admonish you, to remove
such a Council from about you; and (as it is the usage in other Realms)
govern yours by the faithful and sworn children thereof. To which the King
in brief answered; That he could not suddenly put off his Council, and
therefore prayed a short respite. Speed lbid.
Nothing had hitherto preserved the King more, Than that he could without
grief forgo any favorites, if he were nearely pressed; the contrary quality
whereof has been the cause of final desolation to so many Princes. For
though choice of Counselors be for the most part free, yet by common
intendment they should be good; or how ever they are, or are not; it is
madness to hazard a Crown, or lose the love of a whole Nation, rather than to
relinquish or diminish a particular dependence, for which the public must not
be hazarded, nor subverted; The King therefore, in this point not unfortunate,
commands Bishop Peter from his Court, to keep residence at his Cure, without
once meddling in State affairs, removes all his evil Counselors, deprives
them of their Offices, and puts good men in their places, and commands all
Poictovians and Foraine Forces to depart the Realm, receives all his Nobles
unto favor, restoring them to their lost Offices, Lands, Castles, admits them
into his Court and Council; puts all his ill Counselors, and Delinquent
Officers to their legal trials and fines. And for Peter Rivales, his
Treasurer, he was so incensed against him for his ill Counsel, that he swear
he would pluck out his eyes, were it not for reverence of his holy Orders. And
at his Arraignment at Westminster the King sitting in person with his Justices
upon the Bench, and shooting Rivales through with an angry eye, spoke thus to
him. O thou Traitor, by thy wicked advise, I was drawn to set my Seal to
those Treacherous Letters, for the destruction of the Earl Marshall, the
contents whereof were to me unknown; and by thine and such like Counsel, I
banished my natural Subjects, and turned their minds and hearts from me. By
thy bad counsel and thy accomplices, I was moved to make war upon them to my
irreparable loss, and the dishonor of my Realm, in which enterprise I wasted
my Treasure, and lost many worthy persons, together with much of my Royal
respect. Therefore, I exact of thee an account, and thou shall be carried to
the Tower of London, to deliberate till I am satisfied. And thus were these
civil wars and differences reconciled, ill Counselors removed, enormities
reformed, Delinquents punished, (not without reducing store of coin to the
King) and peace established in the kingdom. Which History, I have more largely
recited, because most of its passages are Parallel to the Kings, and his evil
Counselors present proceedings, on the one hand, and to the Parliaments in
some sort, on the other hand in the premises; and I doubt not but they will
prove parallels in the conclusion, to the terror and just punishment of all
ill counselors, Cavalieres, and Delinquents, the contentment of all good
Subjects joy, and re-establishment of our peace in truth and righteousness.

To end the point proposed; Walsing. Hist. p. 84. 44. and Ypod. Neust. p. 101.
Anno Dom. 1315. King Edward the second by his Writ summoned a Parliament at
London; But many of the Lords refused to come, pretending causes and
impediments, by which their absence might well be excused, and so this
Parliament took no effect, and nothing was done therein. In this particular
then Popish Prelates, Lords and Commons, have exceeded Protestants in this, or
any other Parliament.

Fifthly, Popish Parliaments, Prelates, Lords and Subjects have by Force of
Arms compelled their Kings to grant and confirm their Laws, Liberties,
Charters, Privileges, with their Seals, Oaths, Proclamations, the Popes
Bulls, Prelates Excommunications; and to pass, confirm, or repeal Acts of
Parliament against their wills. Thus the Barons, Prelates, and Commons, by open
war and Arms enforced both Mat. Pa. An. 1214, 1215. p. 240 to 256. (...)
Matthew. West. and Walsingh. Ypod. Neust An. 1214 1215. Fabian, Caxton, Hollin.
Grafton, Daniel in the life of K. John and Hen. 3. Speed, Hist p. 578. to 637.
King John, and King Henry the third, to confirm Magna Charta, and Charta de
Foresta (both in and out of Parliament) sundry times with their hands, Seals,
Oaths, Proclamations, and their Bishops Excommunications, taking a solemn
Oath one after another at Saint Edmonds, upon the High Altar, 1214. That if
King John should refuse to grant these Laws and Liberties, they would wage
war against him so long, and withdraw themselves from their Allegiance to
him, until he should confirm to them by a Charter ratified with his Scale,
all things which they required: And that if the King should afterward
peradventure recede from his own Oath, as they verily believed he would, by
reason of his double dealing, they would forthwith, by seizing on his Castles,
compel him to give satisfaction; Which they accordingly performed, as our
Histories at large relate. Yea, when they had enforced King Matthew. Par. p 252.
Sp. Hol. accordingly.
John thus to ratify these Charters, for the better maintenance of them, they
elected 25. Barons to be the Conservators of their Privileges, who by the
Kings appointment (though much against his liking, as afterward appeared)
took an Oath upon their Souls, that with all diligence they would observe
these Charters, and Regem cogerent; and would COMPEL THE KING, if he should
chance to repent, to observe them; All the rest of the Lords and Barons, then
likewise taking another Oath, to obey the commands of the 25. Barons.

After this Matthew. Per. An. 1258. p. 9. 940, 941. Mat. Westmin. 1258. Walsingh.
Ypod. Neustr. p. 61. Sp. p 635. Hol. Grafton, Daniel, Polychron.
Anno Dom. 1258. King Henry the third summoned a Parliament at Oxford, whither
the Lords came armed with great Troops of men for fear of the Poictovines, to
prevent treachery and civil wars, and the Kings bringing in of Foraine
force, against his natural Subjects; to which end they caused the Seaports to
be shut up, and guarded. The Parliament being begun, the Lords propounded
sundry Articles to the King, which they had immutably resolved on, to which
they required his assent. The chief points whereof were these: That the King
should firmly keep and conserve the Charter and Liberties of England, which
King John his Father made, granted, and ratified with an Oath, and which
himself had so often granted, and sworn to maintain inviolable, and caused
all the infringers of it, to be horribly excommunicated by all the Bishops of
England, in his own presence, and of all his Barons; and himself was one of
the Excommunicators. That such a one should be made their Chief Justice, who
would judge according to Right, without respect to poor or rich. With other
things concerning the kingdom, to the common utility, peace, and honor of the
King and kingdom. To these their necessary Counsels and provisions, they did
frequently, and most constantly, by way of advice, desire the King to
condescend, swearing and giving their mutual Faith and hands one to another;
That they would not desist to prosecute their purpose, neither for loss of
money or Lands, nor love, nor hate; no nor yet for life or death of them or
theirs; till they had cleared England (to which they and their forefathers were
borne) from upstarts and aliens, and procured laudable Laws. The King hearing
this, and that they came exquisitely armed that so he and his aliens might be
enforced, if they would not willingly assent, took his corporal Oath (and his
Son Prince Edward also) that he would submit to their Counsels, and all those
their Ordinances, for fear of perpetual imprisonment; The Lords having by an
Edict, threatened death to all that resisted: Which done, all the Peers and
Prelates took their Oath; To be faithful to this their Ordinance; and made all
who would abide in the Kingdom, to swear they would stand to the trial of
their Peers; the Archbishops and Bishops solemnly accursing all that should
rebel against it. And Richard King of Romans, the Kings younger brother
coming soon after into England to visit the King and his own Lands, the
Matthew. Par. p. 952, 953. Speed, p. 636.
Barons enforced him (according to his promise sent them in writing before his
arrival) to take this Oath, as soon as he landed, in the Chapter House at
Canterbury. Hear all men that I Richard Earl of Cornewal, swear upon the holy
Gospels, to be faithful and forward to reform with you the Kingdom of
England, hitherto by the Counsel of wicked men so much deformed. And I will be
an effectual coadjutor to expel the Rebels and troublers of the Realm from
out of the same. This Oath will I observe under pain to forfeit all my Lands I
have in England.

To such a high strain as this, did these Popish Parliaments, Prelates,
Peers, and Commons scrue up their jurisdictions, to preserve themselves and
the kingdom from slavery and desolation; whom Matthew Paris his continuer, for
this service styles, Histor. Angliae, p. 953.
Angliae Reipublicae Zelatores: the Zelots of the English Republicke. Neither
is this their example singular, but backed with other precedents. In the second
and third years of King Edward the second, Walsingh. Ypod. Neust. An. 1309,
1310. Hist. Ang. p. 70. 1077. S. p. 608. etc. with Hol. Stow, Grafton, How,
Daniel, and others. Fox. Act. and Mon. vol. 1. Ed ult. p. 4 so, 481.
Piers Gaves^on his great, proud, insolent, covetous, unworthy Favorite,
miscounselling and seducing the young King, (from whom he had been banished by
his Father) and swaying all things at his pleasure, the Peers and Nobles of the
Realm, seeing themselves contemned, and that foraine upstart preferred before
them all, came to the King, and humbly entreated him, That he would manage the
Affairs of his Kingdom, by the Counsels of his Barons, by whom he might not
only become more cautious, but more safe from incumbent dangers; the King Voce
tenus, consented to them, and at their instance summoned a Parliament at
London, to which he commanded all that ought to be present, to repair. Where,
upon serious debate, they earnestly demanded of the King, free liberty for the
Barons to compose certain Articles profitable to himself, to his kingdom,
and to the Church of England: The King imagining that they would order Piers to
be banished, a long time denied to grant their demand, but at last, at the
importunate instance of them all, he gave his assent, and swore he would
ratify, and observe what ever the Nobles should ordain: The Articles being
drawn up, and agreed by common consent, they propounded them to the King; and
by their importunity, much against his well-liking, caused him to ratify them
with his Seal, and to take his corporal Oath, to observe them: Which done,
the Archbishop of Canterbury with his Suffragans, solemnly denounced a
sentence of excommunication against al who should contradict these Articles;
which they caused to be openly read in Paul's Church London, in the presence of
the Prelates, Lords and Commons of the whole kingdom, the King being present;
Among which Articles they demanded; That Magna Charta, with other provisions
necessary to the Church and Realm, should be observed, that the King as his
Father had commanded, should thrust al Strangers out of his Court and kingdom,
and remove ill Counselors from him: That he would thenceforth order all the
affairs of the kingdom by the Counsel of the Clergy and Lords; and begin no
war, nor depart any where out of the kingdom without common consent. The King
consented to the Articles, and banished Piers into Ireland. No Note the credit
of Princes Regal promises and Protestations.
sooner was the Parliament dissolved, but the King neglecting his Fathers
solemn adjurations, together with his own Oath, never to reduce Piers, sends
for him back to his Court, marries him to the Countess of Gloucester, his own
sisters daughter, shows him more favor then ever; Resolving with himself to
retain this Gaveston, mangre all his Earls, Barons, and for the love of him,
to put his Crown and life in peril, when time should serve: In which, whether
the King or his Favorite showed less discretion, it is not at the first
easily determined; it being as unsafe for the one with so offensive behavior to
affect immoderate show and use of grace, as for the other, to the injury of his
name and Realm, to bestow the same. But upon the Queens complaint to the King
of France her Brother, of Piers his insolence and prodigality, and on the
Barons message to the King by common consent; That he should banish Piers from
his company, and observe the effect of the foresaid Articles, or else they
would certainly rise up against him as a perjured person by a like vow (which
speech seemed hard to the King, because he knew not how to want Piers, but yet
discerned that more danger would spring up if he obeyed not the Lords
Petition;) Piers rather by the Kings permission, then good liking, did the
third time abjure the Realm with this proviso; that if at any time afterward
he were taken in England, he should be forthwith put to death as a perilous
enemy to the Kingdom: yet he returning in Christmas to the King at York, the
Lords spiritual and temporal, to preserve the Liberties of the Church, the
kingdom, and remove this Viper, elected Tho. Earl of Lancaster for their
General, and sent honorable messengers to the King, requesting him, to deliver
Piersinto their hands, or drive him from his company out of England, as being
persuaded, while that King-bane breathed, peace could never be maintained in
the Realm, nor the King abound intreasure, nor the Queen enjoy his love. But
the wilful King would not condescend. Whereupon the Lords thus contemned and
deluded, presently raise an Army, and march with all speed toward Newcastle,
not to offer injury, or molestation to the King, writes Walsingham, (the case
and purpose of the pre^ent Parliaments Army) but that they might apprehend
Piers himself, and judge him according to the Laws enacted. Which when the
King heard, he fled together with Piers to Tynemouth, and from thence to
Scarborough Castle. Where Piers was forced to yield himself, upon condition to
speak but once more with the king. And then carried to Warwick Castle, where
he had his head struck off, at the command, and in the presence of the Earls
of Lancaster, Warwick, and Hereford; as one who had been a subverter of the
Laws, and an open Traitor to the kingdom, and that without any judicial
proceedings or trial of his Peers, though an Earl, and so dear a Favorite
of the Kings. Which bred a lasting hatred between the King and his Nobles: Who
being afterward charged by the King in Parliament with their contempt against
him, in the spoils committed by them at Newcastle, and wickedly killing Piers:
they stoutly answered, That they had not offended in any point, but deserved
his royal favor, for that they had not gathered force against him, but
against the public enemy of the Realm: And then obtained an Act of Pardon
that no man should be questioned for Gavestons return or death, printed in old
Totles Magna Charta, part. 2. f. 50. to 57.
Magna Charta.

Not long after, this unfortunate King doting upon the two Walsin. Hist. p. 90.
to 110. Ypod. Neust. p. 195. to 111. Speeds Hist. p. 674. to 683. See Fabian,
Hollin. Graf. Thomas de la More, Higden, Caxt^n, Daniel, in his life.
Spencers as much as ever he did on Gaves^on, to whom they succeeded, not only
in pride, rapine, oppression and intolerable in^olencies, but even in height of
familiarity and power with the King. So as they ruled and lead the King as they
pleased, in so much that no Earl, Baron, or Bishop was able to dispatch any
thing in Court without their advise and favor, which made them generally
envied of all, because they domineered over all. The Lords and Barons hereupon,
confederated together to live and die for justice, and to their power to
destroy the Traitors of the Realm, especially the two Spencers: And meeting
together with their forces at Shirborne, Thomas of Lancaster being their
Captain; they took an oath to prosecute their design to the division of
soul and body: Then they spoiled these Spencers and their friends goods, take
their Castles by violence, waste their Manors through malice, slay their
servants, utterly omitting the usual ways of Law and equity, and following
the impetuousnesse of their minds they march on to Saint Albons with Ensigns
displayed, and sent solemn messengers to the King then at London, commanding
him, not only to rid his Court, but kingdom too, of the Traitors of the
Realm, the Spencers, condemned in many Articles (which they had framed against
them) by the Commonalty of the Realm, if he loved the peace of the Kingdom.
And they further required the King to grant letters Patents of indemnity, to
themselves and all such as had bore arms in their company, that they should
not be punished by the King or any other for their forepast or present
transgressions. The King denied both these demands at first, as unjust and
illegal; swearing, that he would not violate his Coronation Oath, in granting
such a pardon to contemptuous Delinquents. Whereupon running to their arms,
they marched up to London, entered the City, and to avoid danger, the King
(through the Queens and others mediation) condescended to their desires,
passing an Act for the Spencers banishment, and the Barons indemnities; which
you may read in ancient Part. 2 f. 50.
Magna Chartaes. Upon this the Barons departed, neither merry nor secure,
despairing of the Kings Benevolence; which made them go always armed, and to
retire to safe places. The King soon after, recalling the Spencers, reversed
the sentence against them as erroneous, gathers an Army, encounters and
defeates the Barons, and puts many of them to death by these Spencers
procurements; who not content with their blood, procured also the confiscation
of their goods and inheritances: Whereupon getting into greater favor and
power then before, puffed up with their good success and new honors, they
discontented not only the Nobles, but Queen too; who going over into France
with her son, the Prince, (whose lives these favorites attempted) She raised
an Army beyond the Seas, and returning with it into England, most of the Lords
and Commons resorted to her, and fell off from the King: who being destitute of
friends and means, demanded assistance of the City of London, whose answer
was; That they would honor with all duty the King, the Queen and Prince, but
would shut their gates against Foreiners and Traitors to the Realm, and with
all their power withstand them. And under the name of John of Eltham the Kings
second son, whom they proclaimed Custos of the City and of the Land, they got
the Tower of London into their possession, placing and displacing the Garrison
and Officers therein as they pleased. The King hereupon (after he had commanded
all men to destroy, and kill the Queens partakers, none excepted but her
self, her son, and the Earl of Kent, and that none upon pain of death, and
loss of all that they might lose, should aid or assist them, and that he
should have a 1000. l. who did bring the Lord Mortimers head) f^ies to Bristol,
in the Castle whereof the elder Spen^er was taken by the Queens Forces, and
without any formal trial, cruelly cut up alive, and quartered; being first at
the clamours of the people, (...) and hanged in his proper armor upon the
common Gallows without the City: After which the King forsaken of all his
Subjects flies into Wales for shelter, where he was taken prisoner, and then by
his Lords and Parliament forced to resign his Crown to his son, confessing,
That for his many sins he was fallen into this calamity, and therefore ^ad the
less cause to take it grievously: That he much sorrowed for this; that the
people of the kingdom were so exasperated against him, that they should
utterly abharre his any longer rule and Sovereignty, and therefore he besought
all there present to forgive and spare him being so afflicted: Soon after he
was murdered in Ba^kly Castle: And so the sickness, and wounds which the
Commonwealth sustained by his ill reign, upon the change of her Physician,
recovered not only health and strength, but beauty also and ornament, writes
John Speed.

After all this Walsingham hist Ang. p. 349 to 400 Ypodig. Neustr. p. 144. to
158. Speed. Hist. ^ p 747. to 762 Hollinsh. Grafton, Stow, Fabian, Caxton,
Trussell, and others.
King Richard the second in the ninth year of his reign summoned a
Parliament, wherein Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, for cheating the King
was put from his Lord Chancellorship of England by the Parliament, and the
Seal^ taken from him against the Kings will, and given to Thomas Arundell
Bishop of Ely; Whereupon both the Houses gave half a tenth and half a
fifteen, to be disposed of as the Lords thought fit, for the defense of the
Realm. The Parliament was no sooner dissolved, but the King recals de la Pole
and other ill Counselors to the Court, showing them greater favor then
before: In so much that at Christmas, the King made de la Pole sit at his own
table, not in the usual garment of a Peer, but of a Prince, out of a stomach
and hatred against the Peers, whom from thenceforth be never regarded but
feiuedly, and then falls to plot the death of the Duke of Gloucester and other
Nobles, who opposed his ill Counselors; For which purpose he appoints a
meeting at Nottingham Castle, with a few persons generally ill-beloved,
ill-adwised, and ill-provided. The course agreed upon by the King and that
ill-chosen Senate was, first, to have the opinion of all the chief Lawyers;
(who says Speed, seldom fail Princes in such turns) concerning certain
Articles of Treason, within whose nets they presumed the reforming Lords were;
and if the Lawyers concluded those Articles contained Treasonable matters, then
umder a show of justice they should be proceeded against accordingly. The
Lawyers (who were the very men, which in the last Parliament, gave advice to
the Lords to do as they did) now meeting were demanded: Whether by the Law of
the Land, the King might not disanull the Decrees of the last Parliament? They
jointly answered, he might, because he was above the Laws; (a most apparent
error) confessing; that themselves had in that Parliament decreed many things,
and given their judgment, that all was according to Law, which they
acknowledged to be altogether unlawful. The King thus informed, appoints a
great Council at Nottingham, and withal sends for the Sheriffs of Shires, to
raise Forces against the Lords; who denied, saying, that they could not raise
any competent forces or Arms against them, the whole Counties were so addicted
to their favors; and being further willed; to suffer no Knights to be chosen
for their Shires, but such as the King and his Council should name; they
answered; that the election belonged to the Commons, who favored the Lords in
all, and would keep their usual customs; (a good precedent for our present
Sheriffs) whereupon they were dismissed. Then were the Lawyers and Judges (
Robert Trefilian and his companions) called before the King, to determine the
judgments of Treasons against the Lords to be legal and to set their Seals
thereto, which they did: Mean time the King and Duke of Ireland, sent
messengers to hire what Forces they could, That they might stand with them if
need were against the Lords in the day of battle: Note this.
Many of which answered, that they neither could nor would stand against the
Lords, whom they knew for certain intimately to love the King, and to endeavor
all things, study all things, do all things for his honor: yet many out of
simplicity, thinking themselves to be hired, promised to be ready upon the
Kings notice: The Lords hearing of these proceedings were much sadded; being
conscious to themselves of no guilt worthy the Kings so great indignation. The
Duke of Gloucester sent his purgation upon Oath by the Bishop of London, to the
King; who inclining to credit the same, was in an evil hour diverted by De la
Pole. The Duke hereupon makes his and their common danger known to the rest of
the Lords: upon which they severally gather Forces, that they might present
their griefs to the King; How he favored Traitors, not only to them, but to
the Public, to the imminent danger of the Realm, unless it were speedily
prevented. The King on the other side (by Traiterous Counselors advise)
sought how to take them off single, before they were united: but in vain, by
reason their party was so great. Mean time, some peaceable men procured, that
the Lords should repair safe to Westminster, and there be heard. Thither
approaching, they are advertised by some, (who had sworn on the Kings behalf
for good dealing to be used during the interim) that in the Mewes by
Charing-Crosse, a thousand armed men (which without the Kings privity Sir
Thomas Trivet, and Sir Nicholas Brambre knights, were reported to have laid for
their destruction) attended in ambush. The King swears his innocence,
promising safe conduct to the Lords if they would come; who thereupon came
strongly guarded, and would trust no longer. The King sitting in Royal State
in Westminster Hall; the Lords present themselves upon their knees before him:
and being required by the Lord Chancellor; Why they were in warlike manner
assembled at Haring gye Park, contrary to the Laws? their joint answer was:
That they were assembled for the good of the King and kingdom, and to weed
from about him, such Traitors as he continually held with him; The Traitors
they named to be- Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland; Alexander Nevill,
Archbishop of York; Michael de la Pole, Earl of Suffolk; Sir Robert
Tr^silian, that false Justiciar; Sir Nicholas Brambre, that false knight of
London, with others: To prove them such, They threw down their Gloves, as
gages of challenge for a trial by the Sword. The King hereupon replied, as
knowing they were all hidden out of the way; This shall not be done so, but at
the n^xt Parliament (which shall be the morrow after Candlemas) all parties
shall receive according as they deserve. And now to you my Lords; How or by
what authority durst you presume to levy Forces against me in this Land? did
you think to have terrified me by such your presumption? Have not I men and
arms, who (if it pleased me) could environ and kill you like sheep?
Certainly in this respect I esteem of you all no more than of the basest
Scullions in my kitchins. Having used these, and many like high words, he took
up his Uncle the Duke from the ground, where he kneeled, and bade all the
other rise. The rest of the conference was calm, and the whole deferred till
the next Parliament, then shortly to be holden at Westminster. In the mean
time (that the world might see, how little able the King was to equal his
words with deeds) a Proclamation was set forth, in which the King (before any
trial) clears the Lords of Treason, names those persons for unjust accusers,
whom the Lords had before nominated. The Lords nevertheless thought not good
to sever themselves, but kept together for fear of the worst; which fell out
for their advantage: For the Duke of Ireland (with the Kings privity, such was
his false dissimulation) had gathered a power in Wales, and Cheshire: which
they intercepting near Burford and Bablecke, slew Sir William Molineux, leader
of the Cheshire men, and made the Duke to fly in great fear. Among the Dukes
carriages was found (as the devil, or rather God would have it) certain
Letters of the Kings to the said Duke, by which their Counsels were plainly
discovered. The Lords hereupon march with speed up to London, having an Army of
forty thousand men, the Lord Mayor and City doubtful whether to displease the
King or Lords, upon consultation receive the Lords into the City, and supply
their Army with provisions in the Suburbs; Which the King hearing of, seemed to
slight them, saying; Note the peril and policy of protracting.
Let them lie here till they have spent all their goods, and then they will
return poor and empty to their houses, and then I shall speak with and judge
them one after another, The Lords hearing this, were exceedingly moved, and
swore, They would never remove thence, till they had spoken with him face to
face. And forthwith sent some to guard the Thames, lest the King should slip
out of their hands, and then scoff at them. The King being then in the Tower,
and seeing himself every way encompassed, sent a message to the Lords, that he
would treat with them; who thereupon desired him, That he would come the next
day to Westminster, where they would declare their desire to him: The King
replied, That he would not treat with them at Westminster, but in the Tower. To
which the Lords answered, That it was a suspicious place, because trains might
there be laid for them, and dangers prepared to destroy them; Whereupon the
King sent word, They should send thither two hundred men or more, to search and
view all places, lest any fraud should lie hid. Upon which the Lords repaired
to the Tower, and in the Kings Bedchamber, laid open to him briefly, all his
conspiracy, in causing them indirectly to be indicted; They object to him his
mutability, and underhand working, producing his own Letters to the Duke of
Ireland, to raise an Army to destroy them; together with the French packets
they had intercepted; whereby it appeared he had secretly practiced to fly
with the Duke of Ireland into France, to deliver up Callice to the French Kings
possession, and such pieces as the Crown of England held in those parts;
whereby his honor might diminish, his strength decay, and his fame perish. The
King seeing this, knew not what to do, especially because he knew himself
notably depressed. At last craving leave, they left him confounded and shedding
tears, yet upon condition, that he should come to Westminster the next day,
where he should hear more, and treat of the necessary affairs of the
kingdom; Which he promised to do, retaining the Earl of Darby, to sup with
him. But before he went to bed (O the fickleness of weak Princes, and
faithlessenesse of their royal words and Protestations!) some whisperers
telling him, that it was not decent, safe, nor honorable for the King to go
thither, he changed his resolution. The Nobles hearing this, were very sad, and
discontented, and thereupon sent him word, That if he came not quickly
according to appointment, they would choose them another King, who both would
and should obey the Counsel of his Peers. The King struck with this dart,
came the next day to Westminster, there attending his Nobles pleasures. To whom
(after few discourses) the Nobles said; That for his honor, and the benefit of
his kingdom, all Traitors, whisperers, flatterers, evil instruments,
slanderers, and unprofitable persons should be banished out of his Court and
company, and others substituted in their places, who both knew how, and would
serve him more honorably and faithfully. Which when the King had granted
(though with sorrow) they thought fit that Alexander Nevill Archbishop of
York, John Fordham, Bishop of Durham, with sundry other Lords, knights, and
Clergy men should be removed and kept in strait prison, to answer such
accusations as should be objected against them the next Parliament. Whereupon
they were apprehended forthwith and removed from the Court: After the feast of
Purification, the Parliament (much against the Kings will, who would have
shifted it off at that time) began at London. The first day of the Session,
Fulthorpe, and all the rest of the Judges were arrested, as they sat in
judgment on the Bench; and most of them sent to the Tower: for that having
first overruled the Lords with their Counsels and direction, which they
assured them to be according to Law, they afterward at Nottingham, gave
contrary judgment to what themselves had determined formerly. Tresilian the
chief Justice prevented them by flight, but being apprehended and brought
back to the Parliament in the forenoone, had sentence to be drawn to Tiburne
in the afternoon, and there to have his Throat cut, which was done
accordingly.

The King seeing these proceedings, by advise of his ill Counselors, Graft. p
348, 349. 150, 151.
absented himself from his Parliament, and sent Michael de la Pole then Lord
Chancellor, to demand four fifteenes in his name, of the Commons, for that
without less he could not maintain his estate and outward war. To which the
body of the Parliament made answer; that without the King were present, they
would make therein no answer; and that unless the King would remove him from
his Chancellorship, they would no further meddle with any Act this Parliament.
The King upon this sent to the Commons, that they should send to Eltham, (where
he then lay,) 40. of the wisest and best learned of the Commons, who in the
name of the whole House should declare unto him their mind, Upon which message
the House were in more fear then before; for there went a talk, that the King
intended to betray diverse of them, which followed not his mind, either that
way, or at a banquet appointed to be made purposely at London, if Nicholas
Exton the Mayor of London would have consented thereunto; at which time the
Duke of Gloucester should have been taken. Wherefore the Lords and Commons
assembled together, agreed with one assent, that the Duke of Gloucester, and
Bishop of Ely, should in the name of the whole Parliament be sent to the King
to Eltham; which was done, and the King well pleased that they should come.
When they came into his presence they most humbly saluted him, and said. Most
high and redoubted Soveraig^e Lord, the Lords and Commons of this your
Parliament assembled, with most humble subjection unto your most royal
Majesty, desire your most gracious favor; so that they may live in
tranquillity and peace under you, to the pleasure of God and wealth of the
Realm. On whose behalf we also show unto you, that one old statute and
landable custom is approved, which no man can deny; That the King our
Sovereign Lord may once in the year lawfully summon his high Court of
Parliament, and call the Lords and Commons thereunto, as to that which is the
highest Court of this Realm: In which Court all equity and justice must shine,
even as the Sun when it is at the highest, whereof poor and rich may take
refreshing: where also must be reformed all the oppressions, wrongs, exactions
and enormities within the Realm, and there to consult with the wise men for
the maintenance of the Kings estate. And if it might be known that any persons
within the Realm or without intended the contrary, there also must be devised
how such evil weeds might be destroyed. There also must be studied and
soreseene, that if any charge do come upon the King and his Realm, how it may
be well and honorably supported and sustained. Hitherto it is thought by the
whole Realm, that your Subjects have lovingly demeaned themselves to you, in
ayding you with substance to the best of their powers; and they desire to have
knowledge, how and by whom these goods be spent. One thing rests yet to
declare in their behalf unto you: Nota. The King should be present in
Parliament once in forty days.
how that by an old Ordinance, they have an Act, if the King absent himself
forty days not being sick, but of his own mind (not heeding the charges of
his people, nor their great pains) will not resort to his Parliament; they
then may lawfully return home to their houses: And now Sir, you have been
absent a longer time, and yet refuse to come amongst us; which greatly is our
discomfort: (And our Parliaments present case.) To this the King answered by
these words: Well, we do consider that the people and Commons go to rise
against us; wherefore we think we can do no better than to ask aid of our
Cousin the French King, and rather submit us to him, than to our own Subjects.
The Lords answered: Sir, that Counsel is not best, but a way rather to bring
you into danger. For it is well known, that the French King is your ancient
enemy, and your greatest adversary: and if he set foot once within your Realm,
he will rather dispoyle you, invade you, and depose you from your estate
Royal, than put any hand to help you, etc. And as that King cannot be poor
that has rich people; so cannot he be rich that has poor Commons. And all
these inconveniences be come by the evil Counsel which are about you. And if
you put not your helping hand to the redress of the premises, this Realm of
England shall be brought to naught and utter ruin, which clearly should be
laid to your default, and in your evil Counsel: Seeing that in the time of
your Father, this Realm throughout all the world was highly esteemed, and
nothing ordered after these ways. Wherefore we be sent unto you to exhort you
to sequester all such persons as might be the occasion of ruin either of you
or else of your Realm. By these good persuasions the King was appeased, and
promised within three days after to come to the Parliament, and to condescend
to their Petitions; And according to his appointment he came. Where soon after
John Fordham Bishop of Durham, was discharged of the Treasurourship, and the
Bishop of Hereford set in his place; Walsing. Ypod. Neust. p. 145, 147. Grafton
p. 352, 353.
De la Pole was put from his Chancellourship for dive scrimes, frauds,
briberies and treasons, by him committed, to the prejudice of the King and his
Realm, committed to the Tower, and fined twenty thousand Marks to the King,
in relieving of the Commons: Diverse other Judges, knights, and Delinquents of
all sorts were condemned, and executed, others banished and their states
confiscated; others put out of Offce by this Parliament, as you may read in our
Histories, and in the 10 R. 2. c. 1^ 11 R. 2. c. 1, 2 3, 4, 5, 6. 21 R. 2. ^.
2, 3. 12.
Statutes at large: in which Statutes the mischievous effects of these evil
Counselors to King, kingdom, and people are at full related, whereby the King
and all his Realm were very nigh to have been wholly undone and destroyed:
the Lords raising of Forces against them resolved to be lawful; and these
traytorous Delinquents made incapable of any pard^n; See the Records of this
Parliament published by order of both Houses, Aug. 27. 1642.
and their raising of Arms against the Parliament and kingdom, (though with
the Kings own consent and his command) declared and enacted to be high
Treason. These proceedings ratified and assented to in Parliament by the King,
much against his will, wrought an intolerable secret hatred and desire of
revenge in his heart against the Lords, which for want of power he concealed
near ten years space; but in the twentyeth year of his Reign, being
somewhat elevated in his spirit with a rumor that he should be elected
Emperor; he suddenly apprehended the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Warwick
and Arundell (the chief sticklers in the premises) committing them to several
prisons: And to blind the peoples eyes, lest they should rise up in Arms to
rescue these Lords; the King sent out a seigned Proclamation, (which he caused
to be proclaimed throughout the Realm) that these Lords were apprehended only
for new Treasons committed against him, for which he would prosecute them in
the next Parliament, and not for the old trespasses: After which he proclaims
those Lords Traitors.

Which done he summoned a Graf. p. 329 etc. Mr. Saint John's Speech, 1640. p.
33. 1 H. 4. No. 21. 21. 48
Parliament at Westminster, to this Parliament the King commanded to come all
such as he had best confidence in, omitting the rest; and the Knights were not
elected by the Commons, as custom required they should be, but by the Kings
pleasure; yea, he put out diverse persons elected, and put in other in their
places to serve his turn; which was one Article objected against him when he
was deposed. Against the time of this Parliament, the King received a guard of
4000. Archers, all Cheshire men, as if he would have gone in battle against
enemies, so that diverse came armed to the Parliament out of fear. These
Cheshire men were rude and beastly people, and so proud of the Kings favor, As
the Cavaliers do now.
that they accounted the King to be their fellow, and set the Lords at naught,
though few of them were Gentlemen, but taken from the Plough and other Trades.
After these rusticall people had a while Courted, they grew so bold, that they
would not let neither within the Court nor without to beat and slay the Kings
good Subject, (as the Cavaliers do now) and to take from them their victuals
at their pleasure, paying little or nothing for them, and to ravish their wives
and daughters: And if any man presumed to complain to the King of them, he was
soon rid out of the way, no man knew why, nor by whom, so that in effect they
did what they listed. In this Parliament the King having made the Speaker, and
a great part of mercinary, proud, ambitious men of the Commons House to be of
his side, to act what he required them; he then prevailed likewise with the
Upper House, first with the Prelates, then with the Lords, more out of fear of
him, then any reason; by means whereof the Commission, Charters of pardon, and
Acts made in Parliament in the 10. and 11. years of his Reign were quite
revoked and declared void in Law, as being done without authority and against
the will and liberty of the King and of his Crown: And withal they declared
the Judges opinions for which they were condemned in that Parliament, to be
good and lawful, and attainted the said imprisoned Lords of high Treason, and
confiscated their lands. The two Earls hereupon were beheaded, and the Duke
(by reason of his popularity) sent over to Callice, and there by Hall and
others smot^ered, only for their former actions; which done, the King
adjourned the Parliament to Shrewsbury where he subtly procured an 21 R. c. 12
Act to pass by common consent, that the power of the Parliament should
remain in seven or eight persons, who (after the Parliament dissolved) should
determine certain petitions delivered that Parliament, and not dispatched. By
color whereof, 21 R. 2. c. 16. 20. 1 H 4. c. 3. Walsin. hist. Ang. An. 1398.
p. 394. Grafton, and Holinshe^.
Those Committees proceeded to other things generally touching the Parliament,
and that by the Kings appointment, in derogation of the state of the
Parliament, the discommodity and pernicious example of the whole Realm: And by
color and authority hereof, the King caused the Parliament Rols to be altered
and defaced, against the effect of the foresaid grant. After which he much
vexed and oppressed his people with diverse forced Loanes, Oaths, Impositions,
and oppressing Projects to raise money, seeking to trample them under his feet,
and destroy the Realm, and took all the Jewels of the Crown with him into
Ireland, without the kingdoms consent. Which rendered him so odious to his
people, that Henry Duke of Lancaster, landing in England, the whole kingdom
came flocking to his aid, so that he had an Army of 60000. men in a short
time; who vowed to prosecute the Kings ill Counselors. Whereupon King Richard
returning out of Ireland, hearing of the Dukes great Army assembled against
him, and knowing that they would rather dye than yield, out of their hatred,
and fear of him, he dismissed his Courtiers, hiding obsurely in corners till
he was apprehended, and by a Parliament summoned in his name (though against
his will) judicially deposed for his misgovernment.

Among the Articles exhibited against him in Parliament for his evil
government, for which he was by sentence dethroned, these are remarkable.
First, Graft. p. 400 401, 402. etc. Trussel. p. 45, 46 47.
That he wastfully spent the Treasure of the Realm, and had given the
possessions of the Crown to men unworthy, by reason whereof daily new charges
more and more, were laid on the necks of the poor Commonalty. And when diverse
Lords were appointed by the high Court of Parliament to commune and treat of
diverse matters concerning the Commonwealth of the same, which being busy
about those Commissions, he with other of his affinity, went about to impeach
them of high Treason, and by force and threatening, compelled the Justices of
the Realm at Shrewesbury, to condescend to his opinion, for the destruction of
the said Lords; In so much that he began to raise war against John Duke of
Lancaster, Thomas Earl of Arundell, Richard Earl of Warwick, and other
Lords, contrary to his honor and promise.

Item, He assembled certain Lancashire and Cheshire men, to the intent to make
war on the foresaid Lords; and suffered them to rob and pillage without
correction or reproof.

Item, Although the King ftatteringly, and with great dissimulation made
Proclamation throughout the Realm, that the Lords before named, were not
attached for any crime of Treason, but only for extortions and oppressions
done in the Realm, yet he laid to them in the Parliament, rebellion and
manifest Treason.

Item, He has compelled diverse of the said Lords servants and friends, by
menace and extreme pains, to make great fines to their utter undoing. And
notwithstanding his pardon to them granted, yet he made them fine of new.

Item, That he put out diverse Note.
Sheriffs lawfully elected, and put in their rooms, diverse of his own
Minions, subverting the Law, contrary to his Oath and Honor.

Item, For to serve his purpose, he would suffer the Sheriffs of the Shire to
remain above one year or two.

Item, He borrowed great sums of money, and bound him under his Letters Patents
for repayment of the same, and yet not one penny paid.

Item, He taxed men at the Will of him and his unhappy Counsel, and the same
Treasure spent in folly, not paying poor men for their victual and viand.

Item, He said, That the Laws of the Realm were in his head, and sometime in
his breast, by reason of which fantastical opinion, he destroyed Noble men,
and impoverished the Commons.

Item, The Parliament settling and exacting diverse notable Statutes for the
profit and advancement of the Commonwealth, he by his private friends and
solicitors, caused to be enacted; Such a kind of proviso was endeavored to be
added to the Petition of Right, 3 Caroli.
That no Act then enacted should be more prejudi^iall to him, than it was to
any of his Predecessors, though with proviso he did often as he listed, and not
as the Law meant.

Item, That he at his going into Ireland, exacted many notable sums of money,
besides Plate and Jewels, without Law or custom, contrary to his Oath taken at
his Coronation.

Item, That without the assent of the Nobility, he carried the Jewels, Plate,
and Treasure of the kingdom over the Sea into Ireland, to the great
impoverishing of the Realm. And all the good Records for the Commonwealth,
and against his extortions, he privily caused to be imbezeled and conveyed away.

Item, When diverse Lords and Justices were sworn to say the truth for diverse
things to them committed in charge both for the honor of the Realm, and
profit of the King, the said King so menaced them with sore threatenings, that
no man would, or durst say the right.

Item, He most tyrannically and unprincely said, that the lives and goods of
all his Subjects were in the Princes hands, and at his disposing.

Item, He craftily devised certain privy Oaths, contrary to the Law, and
caused diverse of his Subjects, first to be sworn to observe the same, and
after bound them in bonds for the firmer keeping of the same, to the great
undoing of many honest men.

Which how parallel they are to the late and present Court Practices, and
Doctrines of our times, let wise men determine. The King being thus Judicially
dethroned in Parliament, Henry the fourth by the same Parliament, (which
continued notwithstanding Richards deposition who summoned it) was created
King, who in the 1 H 4 c. 1. 2. 3, 4
first Parliament of his Reign, reversed, and annulled as illegal, the
Parliament of 21 Richard 2. with all its Acts, Circumstances and dependants;
and revived that of 11 Richard 2. in all points, as made for the great honor,
and common profit of this Realm. To these I might add the Walsin* hist. Angl.
p. 416. 417. Ypodig p. 168. 170. Pol. l. 8. c. 10. Caxton p. 430 Hal. Chr. par.
1. f 25 Hol. p. 529. Speed, p. 775. Martin Fab Graft. and others Fox Acts and
Mon. vol. 1. p. 676, 677, 678. Trussell. p. 74 75.
Rebellious insurrections of Richard Scroope, Archbishop of York, the Earl
of Northumberland, and their Accomplices, against King Henry the fourth, Anno
1405. to reform the State and government, relieve the Church and Commonweal,
and Depose King Henry in and by a forced Parliament. The Spee. p. 486 Hunting
lib 8.
insurrection of the Popish Nobles against King Stephen, for violating his
Oath, touching Forests, and other immunities of Church and Commonwealth, which
they would force him to confirm; the several Walsing, hist. Angl. p. 258. to
281. Speed p. 849. etc. 734. etc.
insurrections of Jacke Cade, Jacke Straw, Wat Tyler, and their Popish V^lgar
rabble, to force their King to call Parliaments, to alter and repeal old
Laws, enact new, displace offensive great Officers, promote new on^es of their
nomination, to ratify what propositions they required, and subvert the
government of the Realm: with the Speed p. 1032 to 1049. 1112, to 1120. See
Hall. G^aft. Hollinsh. Howes, Martin. in the lives of H. 8. Ed. 6. and Q. Eliz.
several Rebellions of the Popish Lincolneshire and Yorke-shire men, under
Doctor Mackarell, a Monk, and some men of quality in Henry the eighth his
reign; Of the Cornish men, Norfolk men, Kent, and others in Edward the sixth
his Rule; of the Popish Earls of Northumberland, Westmorland, and other
Northern Papists in Queen Elizabeth's days, by force of Arms to compel
these several Princes to summon Parliaments to rep^ale all Laws against Mass
and Popery, and for the establishment of the Protestant Religion, with other
Acts concerning the government of the Commonwealth, to enact diverse new Laws
and propositions, which they demanded, to remove great Officers and privy
Counselors from their places, and the like. All which transcend the Acts and
proceedings of this or any other our Protestant Parliaments or subjects, being
done without any preceding Order or resolution of both Houses, representing the
whole kingdom, and against the general consent of the people. But I shall
conclude with one ancient precedent more, in one of our best Kings reigns, In
25 E. 1. Walsin. hist. Ang. p. 36 37, 38, 39, 40 4^, 42, 44 48. Ypodig^a ^^^st
p. 83, 84, 85, 86, 97 Co^kes Magna Cha^^ p. 530 to 5^0.
The Lords and Commons in Parliament grievo^sly complained and Petitioned to
the King^against diverse taxes, tallages, and prisages wherewith they were
oppressed by him, to the great impoverishing of the Realm; against the
violation of Magna Charta, the Charter of the Forest, the imposition upon
Wools, and their summons to go with him into Flanders, to which they were not
bound by Law. The king excusing these taxes, by reason of his necessity to
maintain the wars, and giving them a dilatory answer: the Earl Marshall,
and Hereford withdrew themselves from Parliament, and with their accomplices,
commanded the Barons of the Eschequer not to ^evie the eighth penny of the
people, granted to the King at Saint Edmonds; and induced the Citizens of
London to join with them to recover their Liberties. Whereupon the King
sending to them for peace, they would condescend to no peace but on these
terms; That the king should confirm Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, with
the other Articles to them annexed; that he should exact and take ^o ^o aides,
tax, or tallage from the Clergy or Commons without their common consent in
Parliament, and that he should remit all offenses to these Earls, and their
confederates, all which the King ratified by his Articuli super Chartas.
Charter at large, by his oath, and by a solemn excommunication of the Bishops
twice every year, of all those who should transgress this Charter of his; For
which the Laity gave him the ninth, and the Clergy the tenth penny of their
goods. And because this confirmation was made in Scotland, the Kings, and
diverse others promised for him, that he should confirm it when he came into
England, which they pressing him to do in a Parliament at London, in the 27.
year of his reign; after some delays, he ratified it with this addition in
the close; saving the right of our Crown, which when the Lords heard, they
departed home in great discontent; but the King re-summoning them at quindena
Pasche, granted all things absolutely according to their desire, committing the
per-ambulation of the Forests throughout England to three Bishops, three
Earls, and three Barons, to settle their bounds according to God and justice:
which not being speedily executed, but neglected (the King having purchased a
dispensation of his oath, wherewith he had ratified his foresaid Charter, from
the Pope) hereupon the king holding a Parliament at Stamford, the 29. of his
reign, the Lords and Barons repaired thither with great store of horses and
Arms, with a purpose to extort a full execution of the Charter of the Forests
hitherto deferred: upon which the King, considering their earnestness and
importunity, condescended to their will in all things.

Sixthly, Parliaments, Lords and Prelates, in former times have affirmed; that
when a Parliament was once met together by lawful summons, it might not be
dissolved or discontinued again at the Kings mere pleasure, till all the
public affairs for which it was called were dispatched, all grievances
redressed, and all Petitions exhibited therein, fully heard, and answered;
agreeable to the resolution of the great Surius Council. Tom. 4^ p. 103. etc.
Fox Acts and Monu. vol. 1. Edit. ult. p 879 etc.
Councels of Basil, Constans, and diverse Popish John White his way, etc. Sect
37. n. 30. p. 102.
Writers, that a general Council once lawfully summoned by the Pope and met,
cannot be dissolved by him again at his pleasure, without the Councels
consent, before all the Churches affairs be therein settled: Upon which
resolution these Councels continued together and deposed sundry Popes
notwithstanding their Bulls to dissolve them, to keep themselves in their
chaires. This is apparent; first by the Ancient Treatise, Of the manner of
holding Parliaments in England: which informs us; That the first day of the
Parliament, public Proclamations ought to be made in the City or Town where
the Parliament is kept; That all those who would deliver Petitions or Bills to
the Parliament, should deliver them in a certain time: That the Parliament
should not depart so long as any Petition made thereto hangs undiscussed or
undecided, or at the least to which there is not made a determinate answer: the
Kings Majesty being desirous of his grace and favor to give the Subject
redress of any injury, not to suffer his people to go unsatisfied. Hence
departing of the Parliament OUGHT TO BE in such manner. First, IT OUGHT TO BE
demanded, yea and publickely proclaimed in the Parliament, and within the
Palace of the Parliament, whether there be any that has delivered a Petition
to the Parliament, and has not received answer thereto? If there be none such,
it is supposed that every one is satisfied, or else answered unto at the least,
So far forth as by Law it may be. And then all may depart. Hence it was, that
in 21 R. 2. c. 16, 17, 18, 19. Diverse Petitions not read nor answered in
Parliament, by reason of shortness of time, and not determined sitting the
Parliament, were by special Acts of Parliament referred to diverse Lords and
Commons, to examine, answer, and plainly determine all matters contained in
the said Petitions, as they should think best by their good advise and
discretion; even out of Parliament; which they heard and determined
accordingly, and made binding Acts thereupon, as appears by the Statutes
themselves. This Doctrine was very well known to King John, Henry the 3.
Edward the 2. Richard the 2. Henry the 6. and Edward the 4. the Parliaments
which opposed, and deposed most of them, sitting and continuing sitting, both
before and after their deposing, sore against their wills, as the
fore-remembred histories manifest; else no doubt they would have broken up all
these Parliaments at their pleasure, and never permitted such Acts and
Judgments to pass against themselves, Favorites, ill Counselors, pretended
Prerogatives, had they lawful power to dissolve them, summoned in their names,
or the Parliaments actually determined by their depositions, or resignations,
as we find they did not, and none ever yet held they did. King Richard the 2.
fearing the loss of his Crown, or some restraints by Laws, in the 11. year
of his Reign, proposed this question among others, to his Judges at Nottingham
Castle; which (for ought I find) was never doubted before. See 21 R. 2 c. 12.
Whether the King whenever pleases him, might dissolve the Parliament, and
command his Lords, and Commons to depart from thence or not? Whereunto it was
of one mind answered, That he may: And if any would proceed in the Parliament
against the Kings will, he is to be punished as a Traitor. For which opinion
and others, some of these Judges and Lawyers (as Tresilian and Blake) were
condemned of high Treason the next Parliament, 11 R. 2. drawn upon a Hurdle to
Tyburne, and there executed, as Traitors to the King and Commonwealth: others
of them (who delivered their opinions rather out of fear of death, and bodily
tortures than malice) were yet condemned as Traitors, and banished the
kingdom, only their lives were spared. True it is, that the packed and
overawed Parliament of 21 R. 2. (terrifyed by the Kings unruly great Guard of
Cheshire Archers forementioned) 21 R. 2. c. 12. being specially interrogated by
the King, how they thought of these answers of the Judges, said; That they
thought they gave their answers duly and faithfully, as good and lawful liege
people of the King ought to do: But yet the Parliament of 1 H. 4. ^. 3, 4.
repealed this Parliament of 21 R. 2. with all its circumstances and dependents,
revived the Parliament of 11 R. 2. with the judgments and proceedings, given
against these treacherous temporising Judges, as a thing made for the great
honor and common profit of the Realm. Besides, the Cook 9. Rep. f. 1. in the
Epistle* 4 E* 3. c. 14. 36 E. 3. c 10.
Statutes of King Alfred, and Edward the 3. (which enact, that a Parliament
shall be holden once every year, and oftener if need be, for redress of
mischiefs and grievances which daily happen) strongly intimate, that if a
Parliament ought in Law to be called as often as need is, of purpose to
redress the Subjects grievances and mischiefs; then it ought not in point of
Law to be dissolved, till these grievances, and mischiefs be redressed; else
the summoning of it would be to no purpose, and bring a great trouble and
charge to the whole kingdom, without any benefit at all; Moreover, the King by
his Oath, is bound to do equal justice and right to all his Subjects in all
his Courts of Justice: In Magna Charta c. 29. he makes this Protestation; We
shall deny nor defer to no man, either Justice or Right: and by sundry other
18 E. 3. Stat. 3. ^0 E. 3. c. 1.
Acts, all the Kings Judges are sworn and commanded, to do even Law and
execution of right to all his Subjectes rich or poor, without having regard to
any person, and without letting or delaying to do right for any Letters,
Writs, or Commandments that shall come to them from the King or any others,
and shall do nothing by virtue of them, but go forth to do the Law, and hold
their Courts, and Processes where the Pleas and matters be depending before
them, notwithstanding, as if no such Letters, Writs, or Commandments, were
come unto them. The makers therefore of these Oaths and Laws (in days of
Popery) and the Parliaments of 2 E. 3. c. 8. 14 E. 3. c. 14. 1 R. 2. c. 2. 11
R. 2. c. 9. which enact, That it shall not be commanded by the great seal or
little seal, to delay or disturb common right, and though such commandments
do come, the Justices shall not therefore leave to do right in ANY POINT,
that Justice and right be indifferently ministered to every of the Kings
Subjects: did certainly believe, that the King neither by his great nor privy
seal, nor by Writ or Letter could without just or lawful cause assigned,
prorogue or adjourne the Term or sitting of any Courts of Justice, much less
prorogue or dissolve his highest Court, and grand Council of the Realm, the
Parliament, or disable them to fit to redress the kingdoms and Subjects
several grievances, or secure the Realm from danger; Which if he might
lawfully do at his pleasure, without the Houses joint assents, there would
necessarily follow, not only a deferring and denial, but likewise a fayler of
Justice in the highest Court of Justice; which these Acts disable the King (who
is so far inferior to the Law, that he cannot so much as delay the smallest
proceedings of it in any Court or Session, by his supreme power, by any means
whatsoever) to effect in his meanest Courts, much less then in the greatest;
from whence the subversion of Laws, Liberty, Justice, and the whole Realm
would ensue. If any therefore cavil at the Act for continuance of this
Parliament, till both Houses shall agree to adjourne or dissolve it; or at the
Bill for Trienniall Parliaments, which when they meet, shall not be dissolved
without their consents for fifty days space next after their first meeting:
Let them now learn, that this is no Innovation, nor encroachment on the
Crown, but an ancient Privilege of Parliament, both claimed, practiced, and
resolved in times of Popery, in an higher degree then now it is. And thus you
see how in these particulars, the Popish Parliament, Prelates, Lords and
Commons in former times, have claimed and exercised far greater Privileges
and Jurisdictions, than this or any other Protestant Parliament has hitherto
claimed or practiced: which I hope, will forever silence the clamourous tongues
of all ill Counselors, Courtiers, Royalists, Malignants, Papists, and
Cavaliers against the present Parliament, of whose highest (yet moderate)
proceedings, themselves alone have been the occasions, and therefore (of all
others) have least cause to complain against them.

BUT to return again to the first grand Objection. Thirdly, I answer, that
the High Court of Parliament, Answ. 3. The Parliament and king^dome proved to
be above the King.
and whole kingdom which it represents, may in diverse respects be truly and
properly said, to be the Highest Sovereign power of all others, and above the
King himself: which because it may seem a dangerous paradox, and tends much
to the vindication both of the Privileges, Honor, and Jurisdictions of our
High Court of Parliament, (now so much undervalued, because not really known to
most) and to the justification of the proceedings in this present Parliament,
which many out of ignorance and malice so much declaime against both by word
and writing, in a most licentious manner; I shall take a little liberty to
demonstrate the truth of it, by such convincing reasons and Authorities, as no
rational man (I hope) shall be able to contradict, but must necessarily submit
to.

First, it is undeniable that See Cromptons jurisdiction of Courts Tit.
Parliam. Brook Tit. Part. H^lm. Descript. of Eng. c. 8. p. 173. Chro. of
Ireland, p. 120. to 130. Sir Tho. Smith Commonweal. of Engl. l. 2. c. 1, 2, 3.
Cowel and Minsh. Tit. Par. Came. B^i. p. 177
the Court of Parliament has a lawful power, to question all the Kings
Patents, Charters, Commissions, Proclamations, Grants, Warrants, Writs, and
Commitments whatsoever, whether they be Legal; yea to cancel or repeal them
in case they be illegal, mischievous, or onerous to the Subject, not only
without but against the Kings consent, and mandate to the contrary; as appears
by infinite precedents in this and all foremer Parliaments, the scourges of
Monopolists, Patentees and Projectors, the Pests of the Commonwealth. The like
power have all other Courts of Justice within the kingdom in some degree, when
such Charters and Writs of the King are brought judicially before them, because
they are Courts of the Law, to which the King and all his Actions are and must
be subject. Now that which can thus question, cancel, disanull, revoke the
Kings own Royal Charters, Writs, Commissions, Patents, etc. though ratified
with the Great seal and regal power, even against his will, must certainly
be a Sovereign power and Authority, which in point of Law and Justice is
superior to the King. This is Bractons resolution, l. 2. c. 16. f. 34. a, and
Fletaesl. 1. c. 17. Where they affirm, the Law and Parliament to be above the
King, because they may censure, judge, and rescinde the Kings Acts and
Charters, legally and judicially, even against his personal, though not legal
Will, which is the Law.

Secondly, It is unquestionably true, that in all cases of difference between
the King, and all or any of his Subjects, though they concern the Kings
Prerogative and the highest branches thereof, the Parliament is the supreamest
and most proper Judge, and its resolution (from which there is no appeal to
any higher tribunal) shall finally bind not only all the Subjects, but the
King himself, notwithstanding his own personal disassent. This is manifest
by the many late resolutions given in Parliament against sundry Patents,
Commissions, Writs, Charters, Impositions, Loanes, Shipmoney, Forest-Bounds,
Marshall Law, Pressing and Billetting Soldiers, Imprisonment by special
Command of the King or his Privy Counsel, Tonnage and Poundage, Knighthood
and Taxes, the Commission of Array, and the like, which obliege both King and
Subject; the King in receiving justice, in such cases, being subject to the Law
as well as the meanest of his Subjects; as Rex in justitia reci pienda minimo
de regn^ suo comparatur: minimus* esse debet vel quasi in judicio suscipiendo,
Bracton, l, 1, c. 8. f. 5. b. and l. 3. c. 9. f. 107.
Bracton truly avers, against all Royalists mistakes. Now that which can thus
finally conclude and bind the King himself, even volens nolens, in cases of
highest concernment, entrenching farthest upon his Prerogative Royal, must
doubtless be the most Sovereign power, Superior to the Kings. And in this
sense every Court of Justice, whose just resolutions, and every petty Jury,
whose upright verdicts obliege the King (because warranted by the Law which is
Paramount the King (as Bracton, li. 1. c. 5. 17*
Fleta, Cap. 9. to 15
Fortescue, Speech in Parliam. 1609
King James, In his Laws in Fox Acts and Mon. Edit. vol. 1. p. 214.
Edward the Confessor; yea and Polit. l. 3. c. 10, 11, 12.
Aristotle, resolve) may be t^uely said to be above the Kings person, which
they bind; but not above the Parliament, which by its superlative power may
examine all 1 H. 7. 1. Br. Parlia. 92. Ash. tab. 65, 67.
judgments and verdicts, in other Courts by way of error, or appeal, and
reverse them if there be cause, when as the King in person cannot by law
examine or reverse them, but only in his Courts of Justice, by his Judges.

Thirdly, Parliaments often times do, and may as they see cause, enlarge the
Kings Prerogative and Royal power in sundry particulars, in which the King had
no such jurisdiction before these Acts; witness the Statute de Praerogativa
Regis, The notable Parliament Roll of 1. H. 4. number. 108. Where the Commons in
Parliament grant the King, that he shall be in as GREAT ROYAL LIBERTY as his
Noble Progenitors were before him: having formerly made the like Grant to King
Richard the second, who perverted it to the altering of the Laws in many
things, as appears by this Roll. 25 H. 8. c. 19, 20, 21. 26 H. 8. c. 1, 3. 31
H. 8. c, 9. 34, and 35 H. 8. c. 23. 27 H. 8. c. 15. 28 H. 8. c. 7. 17. 3 and 4
E. 6. c. 11, 12. 1 Eliz. 1, 2. with sundry other Acts. Now that Parliamentary
power, which only can create and confer on Kings a greater regal Authority,
and Prerogrative than they had before; must needs be the Original and supreme
Authority: for as we rightly argue See 1* Eliz. c. 1. Ras^all (...). S^wer ^or
Commissioners Ras^al. Tit. Iust^. etc.
That the Kings Authority is superior to all other his greatest Officers and
subordinate Ministers of Justice, because their power is by Patent, or
Commission derived from his: So we may from the selfsame reason conclude,
that the High Court of Parliaments power (the representative Body of the whole
kingdom) is the most Primitive, Sovereign and greatest Authority of all
other, yea, larger and higher than the Kings; Qui^quid efficie tale est magis
tale and nam^ potest da^e quod non labe^: are true in this case.
because it only can enlarge the Kings Prerogative, all whose original or
additionall Royalties, proceeded not from the King himself, or his Ancestors
own inherent hereditary power, (for what King could justly without his peoples
consents, usurp a Crown or lawful Royal Prerogative to himself, over an
whole Country?) but merely from the voluntary consent and grant of his people
in the Parliament. This is irrefragably evident not only by the various See
Alex. ab Alexan^^o, l. 3. c. 2. ^acile pe^sp^e^ po^est and (...) esse g^uera,
nec cande^^ (...) ii formas^ in ^mnibu^ esse regilbus Regalis potentiae genera
numero sunt qua^u^r. Arist. Pol^^. l. 3. c. 10, 11. See Dan. c. 8. and 11.
kinds of Kings; where of some are of greater power and authority. others of
less; some by Election, others by succession only, by reason of their
Kingdoms and Subjects original institution, by the diverse alterations of the
Monarchy in this kingdom, which has been See Mat. Pa. Spee. Hol. Graf. and
others*
sometimes divided into seven, sometimes into five, sometimes into three or two
kingdoms, and at last reduced unto one; by the great Livie hist. Romans l. ^.
Ar^ist. Polit. l. 2. c. 8. Goodwins Romans An^iq.
changes and alterations made in all Foraine Realms, which have sometimes
multiplied, sometimes diminished the number and power of their Princes, and
sometimes quite abolished the royal form of Government, changing it into an
Aristocraticall or popular rule, or Dukedom: by the divine Authority of S.
Peter, who in this regard calls Kings and their Supremacy, a 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14.
Alex. ab Alexandro. Genesis die. l. 3. c. 3. l. 4. c. 23.
humane creature, or Ordinance of man, because instituted, limited, and molded
into several degrees of power by men over whom they reign; but likewise by
two express determinations of Aristotle in these terms, Polit. l. 3. c. 10 p.
209, 210.
Regna patriis moribus and legibus FUNDATA and CONFIRMATA SUNT. And ^b. l. 5.
c. 13. p. 367.
Verum Regnum est imperium majo^ibus and praestantioribus viris VOLUNTATE
CIVIUM DELATUM, seconded by De Offic^^s, l. ^. C^elius Rhodi. Anti^ Lect. l. 8.
c. 1. Alex. ab Alexandro Genesis Die^^^ l* 4. c. 23 L^^iel est. Romans l. 1. Sect.
17. p. 14, 15. and l. 4. p. 144, 145. Plutar^l^ Numa Pompilius.
Tully, Livie, and others.

It is the unanswerable Argument of Marius Salamonius (an So Iacol^^s
Carbinellus and others (...) him*
incomparable Roman Lawyer and Philosopher) in his Lib. 1. de Principatu, p. 17
to 27. Printed at Paris, 1578. Cumprivilegio Regis; To prove, The whole
Kingdom and people the Sovereign power, greater than the Prince, and the
Prince (be he King or Emperor) inferior unto them; because he is not only
their Servant, but creature too; being originally created by, and for them. Now
as every Creator, is of greater power and authority than its creature, and
every cause greater then its effect: So the Authority and power of the people
which creates the Prince and Princely power, and augments or limits it as there
is cause, must needs be greater, then the Prince or royal power. Who though he
be greater than any private subject or magistrate, over whom he rules; yet he
is still inferior to all the people and kingdom, whose Servant or Creature he
is, and by whose authority he does and manageth all things. And though
Principalities generally considered be of God; yet the constitution of Princes,
and their several degrees of power are merely from men: for if the regal
Authority of Kings were merely from the Law of God, or nature (as many
ignorant Court Doctors now Preach and write) it should be the same, and like it
self in all kingdoms, the same among the Romans, as Parthians, Scythians,
Medes, and other Nations; But it is not the same among all these Nations, but
different, such, Qualis suo cuique placet populo, as every People pleases to
prescribe and make choice of; the Power, Rights, and Royalties of the Kings of
the Parthians, Medes, and Scythians, being such as the Parthians, Medes and
Scythians please; therefore the Rights and Prerogatives of the Roman Empire and
Emperors, (and of the kingdom and King of England too) such as the Romans
pleased, and prescribed by their Lex Regia: Which he there prosecutes at See p.
45. 126 127.
large. And it is the direct conclusion, not only of this Author, but
likewise of John Mariana a Spanish Jesuit in his Book De Rege and Regis
institutione, l. 1. c. 8. Dedicated to King Philip the third of Spain, and
Printed by his and the Emperors special Privilege both in Spain and
Germany; That the whole Commonweal, kingdom and people, are of greater power
and Authority than the King; as for other reasons, so for this, that he is but
their Creature, Servant, and derives all his Royal Authority from them alone,
not for his own, but their service, and benefit, who may enlarge or restrain
it as they see just cause. And not to trouble you with Foraine Authorities in
this point, which are infinite; I shall only acquaint you with the resolutions
of some eminent ancient Lawyers of our own.

Andrew Horn, an eminent Lawyer in Edward the first his Reign, in his Myrrour
of Justices; Chap. 1. Sect. 2. p. 7, 8, 9. writes thus of the original
institution of our English Monarchs. After that God had abated the Nobility of
the Britains, who rather used force than right, he delivered it to the most
humble and simple of all the neighbor Nations, the Saxons; who came from
Germany to conquer it, of which Nation there have been forty Kings, all which
held themselves to have COMPANIONS. These Princes called this Land England,
which before was named Greater Britain. These after great wars, elected from
among them a King to Reign over them, to govern the people of God, and to
maintain and defend their persons and goods in peace, by the Rules of Law (or
Right:) And at the beginning they caused the King to swear, that he will
maintain the holy Christian faith to the utmost of his power, and guide his
people by Law, without respect to any person, and shall be obedient to suffer
(or undergo) Law, as well as others of his people. And afterward this Realm
was turned to an heritage, according to the number of the Companions, who
divided the Realm into 38. Counties, and delivered each one a County to keep
and defend from Enemies, according to every ones estate. And although the King
ought to have no Peers in the Land, yet because if the King of his own wrong
should offend against any of his people, neither he, nor any his Commissaries,
can be both Judge and Party; OF RIGHT IT BEHOOVES, that the King should have
COMPANIONS, for to ^eare and determine in Parliaments all the Writs and plaints
of the wrongs of the King, the Queen, and their children, and of those
especially, of whose wrongs they could not otherwise have common right. These
Companions are now called Counts, after the Latin Comites; and so at this day
these Countries are called Counties, and in Latin Comitatus, etc. Henry de
Bracton, who writ in Henry the third his Reign, as in his forecited Passages;
so in others, resolves; Lab. I. c. 8 f 5 lib. 3. c. 9. f. 107.
That the King is under the Law, because the Law makes him a King, by giving
him dominion and power. Now how does the Law thus make him a King, but by the
Parliament, the Kingdoms great Counsel? by whose Counsel and consent alone,
all Laws were first enacted, and yet are, as the Hujus^odi leges Anglicanae
own fuerint app^^batae. and Sacramento Regis confirmatae muta^i non pote^^nt
etc. Idem. I. 1. c. 2. f. 1. b.
same Author informs us, who further adds. That the King ought to be under
the Law, because Christ whose Vicar he is on earth, when be came to redeem
mankind, made choice of this way especially to destroy the works of the
Devil, using not the strength of his power, but the reason of his justice, and
so would be Gal. 4. 4, 5.
under the Law, that he might redeem those that are under the Law; Thus the
Virgin Mary the mother of our Lord, who by singular privilege was above the
Law, yet to show an example of humility, refused not to be Luke 2. 22, 23, 24.
subject to Legal Ceremonies. So therefore the King, lest his power should
remain unbridled, there ought not to be a greater than he in the Kingdom in
the exhibition of Justice; yet he OUGHT TO BE THE LEAST, or AS THE LEAST IN
RECEIVING JUDGMENT, if he require it. Br^ct. lib. 3. c. 9. f. 10* I. 1. 8. f.
5. I. 2. c. 16. f. 34,
That a King is created and elected, (by whom but by his kingdom?) to this
purpose, to do justice unto all. Comites, viz. quia a Comita^^ sive a
societa^e nomen sumpserunt, qui etiam dici possunt Co^sules a consulendo; Reges
^uim tales sibi associant ad c^usulendum and regendum p^pulum Dei, ordinantes
cos in magna potestate, ^enore and nomine etc. Idem I. 1. c. 8 f. 5, 6.
That a King cannot do any thing else in earth (seeing he is Gods Minister and
Vicar) nisi id solum quod de jure potest: but that only which he can do by
Law. That God, the Law, and his Court (to wit) the Earls and Barons (in
Parliament) are above the King, and ought to bridle him, and are thence called
Comites, because they are the Kings Companions. Fleta an ancient Law-booke,
written in King Edward the third his Reign, l. 3. c. 3. and 17. uses the
selfsame words that Bracton does; and concludes That the King has a
Superior, to wit, God, and the Law, by which he is made a King, and his Court
of Earls and Barons; to wit, the Parliament.

Fortescue a Lawyer, Chancellor to King Henry the sixth, proves at large, That
Fortes^. de Laud. Legum Angl c. 9.
the King of England cannot alter nor change the Laws of his Realm, at his
pleasure; for why, be governs his people by power not only Royal, but
Politic. If his power over them were royal only, then he might change the
Laws of his Realm, and charge his Subjects with tallage and other burdens,
without their consent; and such is the Dominion the Civil Laws purport, when
they say; The Princes pleasure has the force of a Law. But from this much
differs the power of a King whose Government over the people is Po^itique;
For HE CAN NEITHER CHANGE the LAW without the consent of his Subjects, NOR YET
CHARGE THEM WITH STRANGE IMPOSITIONS AGAINST THEIR WILL. Wherefore his people
do frankely and freely enjoy and recover their own goods, BEING RULED BY SUCH
LAWS AS THEMSELVES DESIRE, neither are they pilled off their their own King
or any other. Like pleasure also should the Subjects ^ave of a King ruling
only by Royal power, sol ong as he falls not into tyranny, St. Thomas in
the Book he wrote to the King of Cyprus, justifies the State of a Realm to
be such, that it may not be in the Kings power to oppress his people with
tyranny; which thing is perfomed only, when the power Royal is restrained by
power Politic. Rejoice then O This he writes to our King Henry the 6. to whom
he directs his Book.
Sovereign Prince, and be glad, that the Law of the Realm wherein you shall
succeed is such, for it shall exhibit and minister to you and your people no
small security and content, Chap. 10, 11, 12. He shows the different sorts of
Kings or kingdoms, some of greater, others of lesser power; some elective,
others successive; proceeding merely from the peoples free consents and
institution, and that the ancient Egyptian, Ethiopian, and other Kings, were
subject to, and not above their Laws, quoting sundry passages out of
Aristotle, concerning the original of kingdoms. Chap. 13. He proceeds thus: A
People that will raise themselves into a kingdom or other Politic body, must
ever appoint one to be chief Ruler of the whole body; which in kingdoms is
called a King. In this kind of Order, as out of an Embryo arises a body
natural, ruled by one head, because of a multitude of people associated by the
consent of Laws, and communion of wealth, arises a kingdom, which is a body
mystical, governed by one man as by an head. And like as in a natural body,
the heart is the first that lives, having within it blood, which it
distributeth among the other members, whereby they are quickened; semblably in a
body Politic, THE INTENT OF THE PEOPLE is THE FIRST LIVING THING, having
within it blood; that is to say, Politic provision for the Utility and wealth
of the same people; which it deals forth and imparteth AS WELL TO THE HEAD as
to the Members of the same body, whereby the body is nourished and maintained,
etc. Furthermore, the Law under which a multitude of men is made a people,
represents the form of sinews in the body natural; because that like as by
sinews the joining of the body is made sound; so by the Law, (which takes the
name a Ligando, from binding) such a Mystical body is knit and preserved
together, and the members and bones of the same body, (whereby is represented
the soundness of the wealth, whereby that body is sustained) do by the Laws,
as the natural body by sinews, retain every one their proper function. And
as the head of a body natural cannot change his Sinews, nor cannot deny nor
withold from his inferior members, cheir proper powers, and several
nourishments of blood: SO NEITHER CAN THE KING (who is the head of the
Politic body) CHANGE THE LAWS OF THAT BODY, nor withdraw from the said
people THEIR PROPER SUBSTANCE AGAINST THEIR WILLS OR CONSENTS. For such a King
of a kingdom politic, is made and ordained for THE DEFENSE OF THE LAWS OF
HIS SUBJECTS, and of their bodies and goods. WHEREUNTO HE RECEIVES POWER OF
HIS PEOPLE, SO THAT HE CANNOT GOVERN HIS PEOPLE BY ANY OTHER LAW. Chap. 14.
be adds, No Nation did ever of their own voluntary mind incorporate
themselves into a kingdom FOR ANY OTHER INTENT, BUT ONLY TO THE END, that
they might thereby with MORE SAFETY THEN BEFORE MAINETAINE THEMSELVES, and
enjoy THEIR Goods free from such misfortunes and losses as they stood in fear
of. And of this intent should such a Nation be defrauded utterly, IF THEIR KING
MIGHT SPOIL THEM OF THEIR GOODS, WHICH BEFORE WAS LAWFUL FOR NO MAN TO DO.
And yet should such a people be much more injured, if they should afterward be
governed by Foraine and strange Laws, and such peradventure as they deadly
hated and abhorred, and most of all, if by those Laws their substance should
be diminished; for the safeguard whereof, as also for their honor, and of
their own bodies, THEY OF THEIR OWN FREEWILL SUBMITTED THEMSELVES TO THE
GOVERNMENT OF A KING. NO SUCH POWER FREELY COULD HAVE PROCEEDED FROM THEM; and
yet IF THEY HAD NOT BEEN, SUCH A KING COULD HAVE HAD NO POWER OVER THEM. And
Chap. 36. f. 86. He concludes thus. The King of England, neither by himself
nor his Ministers imposes no Tallages, Subsidies or any other burdens on his
Lieges, or changes their Laws, or make new ones without the concession or
assent OF HIS WHOLE KINGDOM EXPRESSED IN HIS PARLIAMENT. Thus and much more
this Learned Chancellor in point both of Law and Conscience, sufficient to
stop the mouths of all Malignant Lawyers and Royalists, being Dedicated to and
approved by one of our devoutest Kings, and written by one of the greatest and
learnedest Officers of the Kingdom in those days.

In few words, ^ap. 8. vol. 1. p. 173.
Raphael Holinshed, John Vowell and others, in their Description of England,
Printed Cum Privilegio, resolve thus of the Parliaments power. This House HAS
THE MOST HIGH AND ABSOLUTE POWER OF THE REALM, for thereby KINGS AND MIGHTY
PRINCES HAVE FROM TIME TO TIME BEEN DEPOSED FROM THEIR THRONES, and Laws are
enacted, and abrogated, Offenders of all sorts punished, and corrupted
Religion, either disanulled or reformed. It is THE HEAD AND BODY OF ALL THE
REALM, and the place where every particular man is intended to be present, if
not by himself, yet by his Advocate and Attorney: For this cause any thing
that is there enacted, is not to be withstood but obeyed of all men, without
contradiction or grudge: and to be short, all that ever the people of Rome
might do, either Centuriatis Comitiis, or Tribunitiis, the same is and may be
done by the Authority of Parliament. Now the Romans in their Assemblies had
power to enact binding Laws, to create and elect their Kings and Emperors,
and likewise to judge, censure, and depose them; to create and elect all kinds
of Officers, and to See Bodin l. 2, c 5. l. 1. c. 10. Eu^ropius and Grimston in
the life of Nero, Maximinus, Heliogabalus, and others.
change the very form of their State and Government (as I shall hereafter
manifest:) Therefore by these Authors resolution, the Parliament has an
absolute power to do the like, when they see just cause. Sir Thomas Smith one
of the Principal Secretaries of State of King Edward the 6. and Queen
Elizabeth, and a Doctor of Law, in his Commonwealth of England, l. 2. c. 1. in
the old, but 2. in the last Edition, has the same words in effect with
Holinshed, and adds, that the Parliament gives form of Succession to the
Crown, etc. Our Kings Royal power being then originally derived to them,
conferred on them by the Peoples and kingdoms common consents in Parliament,
and all their new additionall Prerogatives too, as the premises evidence, it
cannot be denied, but that the whole kingdom and Parliament, are really in
this sense above him, and the most Sovereign primitive power from whence all
other powers were, and are derived.

Fourthly, This is undeniable, because the whole kingdom in Parliament, may
not only augment, but likewise abridge, allay, abolish, and resume some
branches of the Kings royal power and prerogative if there be just cause, as
when it becomes onerous, mischievous, or dangerous to the Subjects,
inconvenient to, or inconsistent with the kingdoms, peoples welfare, peace,
safety, Liberty, or the Laws; This is most apparent by Magna Charta; Charta de
Foresta, Statutum De Tall agio non concedendo, Articuli super Chartas,
Confirmatio Chartarum, 1 E. 3. c. 6, 7. 2 E. 3. c. 2. 8. 3 E. 1. c. 35. 9 E. 3.
c. 12. 5 E. 2. c. 9. 10 E. 3. c. 2, 3. 14 E. 3. c. 1. 14. 18 E. 3. c. 8. 25 E.
3. c. 4. Stat. 3. c. 1, 2. and Stat. 5. c. 8. 11. 36 E. 3. c. 10. 37 E. 3. c.
18. 42 E. 3. c. 3. 10 R. 2. c. 1. 11 R. 2. c. 1. to 7. 1 R. 3. c. 2. 4 H. 4. c.
13. 21 Jac. c. 3. 24. 7 H. 8. c. 3. The Petition of Right, 3 Caroli, most
Statutes against Purveyens, Pardons, Protections, and for regulating the Kings
Charters, Grants, Revenues: the Acts made this Parliament against Ship Money,
Knighthood, Forest-bounds, Pressing of Soldiers, the Star Chamber,
High Commission, the Trienniall Parliament, the continuance of this Parliament,
whiles they please, with See the Arguments against Ship^money, and Impositions,
and the declarations against the commission of Array.
sundry other Acts, which restaine, abridge, repeal, resume diverse real and
pretended branches of the Kings royal Prerogative, because they proved
grievous, mischievous, dangerous, pernicious to the people and kingdom. This
then answers that irrational, groundless position of Doctor Fern; That
Resolving of Conscience Sect. 4, 5.
the Subjects neither lawfully may, nor ought in any case to resume all or any
part of that Regal power wherewith they have once invested their Kings by
common consent, though it prove never so mischievous, and be never so much
abused to the peoples prejudice. Which, as it is contrary to that received
principle of nature and reason: Eodem modo quo quid constituitur, dissolvitur,
That all Governments created by men's consents, especially being but officers in
trust for their good and welfare only; to See Joshua, Judges, Saumel, Kings
Chro. Dan. throughou^. Isa. Ierem. Ezekiel. in sundry chap.
sundry presidents and Prophesies in Scripture concerning the Alterations,
Subversions, Diminutions of Kings and kingdoms; to the constant practice of
See Sleidan de 4. or Imperiis Mat. West. Livyn Justin, Opmerus, Purchase,
Chroni. Chronicarum; and all general hist.
all Realms, all States whatsoever, from Adam till this instant, who have
undergone many strange alterations, eclipses, diminutions, yea Periods of
Government: to the Resolution of Polit. l, 2, 3, 4, 5, Plato de Republica, Bod.
Commonweal. The Repub. of sundry Nations Polyb. Hist. l. 6.
Aristotle, and all other Politicians, who hold all forms of Government
changeable and revocable, without any injustice, if necessary or convenient; So
likewise to the very end for which Kings have regal power (as well as other
Governors, and Governements) and for which they were ordained; to wit, their
kingdoms, peoples Rom, 14. 1 to 6. 1. Pet 2. 13, 14 2 Samuel 5. 12. Nehe. 2. 10.
Psa. 78. 70, 71. 2 Chro 9. 8. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. Estn. 10. 3. Arist. Pol. l. 3,
4 5. Coelius Rhodig l. 8. c. 1. Bra. l. 3. c, 9. f. 107.
welfare, safety, peace, protection, etc. Salus populi, being not only that
Suprema Lex, but principal end for which all royal power was instituted by
God and Man, and to which it must submit in case it becomes incompatible, or
inconsistent with the public weal or safety: What therefore that learned
Father Augustine Bishop of Hippo, long since resolved touching the (now much
contested for) Lordly State of Episcopacy, which he and near three hundred
African Bishops more, were then ready to lay down for the Churches peace; I
may fitly apply to the now overmuch contended for supposed royal Prerogatives
of Kings, to effect peace in our State, in these times of uncivil military
(that I say not bloody) dissentions, raised about them between King and
Parliament, An^ vero, etc. Augustinus de Gest is (...) Emerita Donatist. Epis
Tom 7 par 2. p. 882 783.
What verily did our Redeemer descend from heaven into humane members, and
shall we, lest his very members he rent in pieces with cruel division, fear
to d^scend out of out Thrones? we are ordained Bishops for Christian peoples
sake, what therefore may profit them for Christian peace, that let us do with
our Bishoprics. Quod autem sum propter te sim, si tibi prodest, non sim, si
tibi obest. What I am, I may be for thee, if it profit thee; I may not be, if
it be hurtful to thee. If we be profitable servants, why do we envy the
eternal gains of our Lord for our temporal sublimities or Prerogatives? Our
Episcopal dignity will be more fruitful to us, if being laid down it shall
more unite the flock of Christ, than disperse it if retained. If when I will
retain my Bishopric I disperse the flock of Christ, how is the damage of
the flock the honor of the Shepherd? etc. Old statute Laws, yea the common
Law of England, though above the King and his Prerogative, may be, and often are
repealed and altered by Parliaments, when they become mischievous or
inconvenient; therefore by like or greater reason, may any branches of the
Kings Prerogative, inferior to these Laws, be restrained, yea resumed, when
they prove grievous or dangerous to the Subject: It is the Kings own professed
Maxim, in full Parliament; At the end of the Petition of Right, 3 Caroli.
(Printed and enrolled by his special command, in all his Courts) That the
Kings Prerogative is but to defend the Peoples Liberties: when therefore it
either invades or subverts them, it may justly, it must necessarily be
restrained, diminished or resumed by the Parliament, from whose assent or
grant, it first proceeded, and that only for the public weal, not prejudice
of the people. The Emperor See Europius, Sabellicus, Grimston, Speed and
others of his life.
Otho the first, and our King Richard and second (as Speeds History p. 757.
some imagine) voluntary resigned, relinquished their Crowns, to their
immortal honor, to prevent the effusion of their Subjects blood, by civil
wars, and settle peace within their Realms: and shall not other Kings then
most joyfully part with some Punctilioes of their real, or branches of their
supposed Prerogatives for the selfsame ends, if their Parliaments see good
cause to resume them, and of right may do it?

Fifthly, The King though he be the chief and principal (yet he is only one
member of the Parliament and kingdom, the least (because but one person)
though the highest branch; the Lords and Commons (not elected by, but assigned
Counselors to the King, by the kingdom and people) being the greatest and
most considerable part, as representing the entire body of the Kingdom. Now
common reason, Law, and experience manifests, and Aristotle Polit. l. 1. c. 2.
with Marius Salamonius, de Principatu, l. 1. p. 40, 41. conclude, that the
whole, or greatest part in all politic or natural Bodies is of greater
excellency, power, and jurisdiction, than any one particular member. Thus in
all our See Br. Tit. Corporations.
Corporations, the Court of Aldermen and Common Council is of greater power
than the Mayor alone, though the chief Officer: the Chapter of greater
authority than the Deane, the Deane and Chapter than the Bishop; the whole
Bench, than the Lord chief Justice, the whole Council than the President; the
whole Parliament then either of the Houses: and by like reason than the King;
especially, since one of the three Estates is lesser than the three Estates
together; who in Parliament, by the fundamental Constitutions of the Realm,
are not See the Fullet Answer to Dr. Fern, p. 2, 3.
Subordinate, but Coordinate parts of the same great Common Council of the
kingdom. It is Aristotle's express determination, Quod eorum qui rempublica^
gerunt majori parti placuerit, id est ratum ac firmum, Arist. Polit. l. 4. c.
8. l. 1. c. 2. l. 3. c. 8.
that in an Oligarchie, Aristocracie, and Democracie, whatsoever seems good to
the major part of the Governors of the Commonwealth, that is ratified; that
the whole City, Kingdom, Family, is more excellent, and to be preferred before
any part or member thereof. And that it is unfit the part should be above the
whole: And in all Courts of Justice, Corporations, and Elections, Br. Corpora.
34. 8. H. 6 c. 7.
the major part have always had the greatest sway, and constantly overruled
the less, though it be but by one casting voice; as is evident to all in the
Elections of Knights, and Burgesses of, and votes in the Parliament; in which
the 14 H. 8. f. 3. b.
King, Lords and Commons, by the Common Law, make up but one entire
Corporation: since then even in Parliament it self, the major part over-swayes
the rest, yea the King himself (who has no absolute negative voice, but only
in refusing to pass some kind of Bills not all (of which more hereafter)
doubtless the whole, or Major Pars est totum, Brooks Corporati. 34. Smiths
Commonwea. of Engl. l. 2. c. 3.
major part of the Parliament (which in Law is the whole) is above the King,
the chief member of it. Which consideration, together with the Statutes of 5
R. 2. State. 2. c. 4. 6 H. 8. c. 16. Enacting, That none elected to be in any
Parliament shall depart or absent himself from the same Parliament till it be
fully ended or pro^ogued, without special license of the Speaker of the
Commons to be entered of Record in the journall Book, under pain of
amercement, loss of wages, and other punishment; nor See the manner of holding
Parliaments in England: newly Printed at London, 1641. and Dyer f. 60. a, Br.
Parl. 7.
any Member of the Upper House without that Houses license under pain of
indictment, imprisonment or fine; as appears by the Bishop of Winchesters
case, 3 E. 3. 19. Fitz. Coron. 161. and Stamford, l. 3. c. 1. f. 153.
completely answers that fond cavil of Malignants and Royalists against this
Parliament; that the King and many of the other Members have wilfully absented
themselves from the House, (of purpose to dissolve it if they could,
notwithstanding the late special Act made by their joint consents for its
continuance,) Ergo this unlawful Action of theirs (to effect this pernicious
design) must nullify, or at least invalid (in their new nonsense Law and
Logic) the lawful proceedings of those worthy faithful members who continue
in it, to preserve both Parliament, Kingdom, Religion, Laws, Liberties, from
ruin and dissolution. If these absent Members be the greater number, why do
they not come and over-vote the rest in the House in a peaceable, legal,
usual Parliamentary way, rather than challenge them into the field in a
military, illegal, unusual bloody manner, unheard of in former ages? If the
lesser party, then present or absent the major part must overruled them volens
nolens, as it has ever used, unless they will be wilfuller (I cannot say
wiser) than all their predecessors put together.

As for his Majesty's absence from the Parliament by the pernicious advise of
evil Counselors; Object.
so much insisted on by Malignants.

I answer, Answ.
First, That it was without any just cause given by the Parliament. Secondly,
It was much against their wills, who have See their Messages and petitions to
the King to this purpose.
often importuned, petitioned, and used all possible means to procure his
return. Thirdly, His absence was procured, and is yet continued by those
alone, who most unjustly tax the Parliament for it, and would take advantage
of this their own wrong. Fourthly, though he be personally absent as a man,
yet he is still Legally present in Parliament, (called the Kings presence) as
he is a King; as he is in all other his Courts of Justice, where all
proceedings are entered, See Cambd. Brit. p. 163. which styles the Parliament
the Kings presence The Register of Writs. Old and New Natura Brevium old and
new book of Entries. Cooks Instit. on Lit f. 71. 6.
Coram Rege, though the King never yet sat personally in either of them, as he
has often times done in this Parliament; for the continuance whereof he has
passed such an Act, as will inseparably tie his royal presence to it, though
the Cavaliers about him should be force withdraw his person from it, not only
as far as York, but the remotest Indies; yea, he must first cease to be King
of England, ere he can be legally absent from his Parliament of England. This
his wilful personal absence from his greatest Counsel which desires and
needs it, is (as many conceive) an Act of the highest injustice that ever any
Prince could offer of his Parliament, worse than 1 King. 12. and 2 Chronicles. 10.
Rehoboams forsaking the counsel of his ancient Sages, to follow the
hare-brain'd advise of his young Cavaelieres; for though he followed not their
ancient prudent counsel, yet he withdrew not himself from them, as his
Majesty now severs himself from his Parliament, not only without but against
all precedents of his Royal predecessors, except King Grafton, p. 348, 349,
350.
Richard the second (who once absented himself from his Parliament above forty
days, yet then returned to it upon better advise) and the very common custom
and Law of the Land, (which he is obliged by his Coronation Oath, and many late
Protestations added to it, constantly to maintain.) This appears most
clearly by the ancient Treatise, Of the manner of holding of Parliaments in
England, both before and since the Conquest, ( See Mi^shes Dictionary. lit.
Parliam. f 526.
tendered to and approved by the Conqueror himself, newly Printed 1641.)
which in the Section, Touching the Kings absence from Parliament, resolves
thus. The King is BOUND by all means possible TO BE PRESENT AT THE PARLIAMENT;
unless he be detained or let therefrom by bodily sickness, and then he may
keep his Chamber, yet so as he lie not without the Manor, or Town at the
least, where the Parliament is held: and then he ought to send for twelve
persons of the greatest and best of them that are summoned to the Parliament,
that is, two Bishops, two Earls, two Barons, two Knights of the shire, two
Burgesses, and two Citizens, to look upon his person, to testify and witness
his estate, and give Note this.
Authority to the Archbishop of the place, the Steward of England, and chief
Justice, that they jointly and severally should begin the Parliament, and
continue the same in his name, (See 8 H. 5. c. 1. Cromptons Jurisdiction. f.
13. a. 17. b. according herewith) express mention being made in that
Commission, of the cause of his absence there, which ought to suffice. The
reason is, because there was w^nt to be a cry and murmr in the Parliament for
the Kings absence, because his absence is hurtful and dangerous to the whole
commonalty of the Parliament, neither indeed OUGHT, OR MAY HE BE ABSENT, BUT
ONLY IN THE CASE AFORESAID. And whereas Malignants clamor, that most of the
Lords are absent as well as the King, and therefore this can be no lawful
Parliament; The same Author will inform them; That if the Lords be once
summoned to Parliament, and then appear not, or absent themselves, the King
may hold the Parliament with the Commonalty and Commons of the kingdom (every
of which has a greater voice in Parliament then the greatest Earl in England,
because he represents a whole County, Town, or City, the other himself alone)
without Bishops, Earls, or Barons; because in times past, before there was
either Bishop, Earl, or Baron, yet even then Kings kept their Parliaments; but
on the contrary, no Parliament can be kept by the King and Peers, if all the
Commons (for the Kings misgovernment, or such like cause) should absent
themselves. This is the judgment of In H^linsh Chron. of Ireland f. 127, 128.
Master John Vowel too, who writes in this manner: Yet nevertheless, if the
King in due order have summoned all his Lords and Barons, and they will not
come: or if they come, they will not yet appear: or if they come and appear,
yet will not do or yield to any thing, then the Kings with the consent of his
Commons, may ordain and establish any acts or Laws, which are as good,
sufficient and effectual, as if the Lords had given their consents. But on the
contrary, If the Commons be summoned and will not come, or coming will not
appear, or appearing will not consent to do any thing, illedging some just,
weighty, and great cause; the King in these cases (...) Jurisdiction of Cou^s,
f. 8. 4 H. 7, 18. 7. H. ^ 14 11 H. ^. 27. Parliament 42 76, 33 H. 6. 17.
adjudged accordingly, B^ Prerogative 134.
cannot with his Lords devise, make, or establish any Law. The reasons are
these, When Parliaments were first begun and ordained, there were no Prelates
or Barons of the Parliament, and the temporal Lords were very few or none; and
then the King and his Commons did make a full Parliament, which Authority was
never hitherto abridged. Again, every Baron in Parliament, does represent but
his own person, and speaks in the behalf of himself alone. But in the
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses are represented the Commons of the whole
Realm, and every of these gives not consent only for himself, but for all
those also for whom be is sent. And the King with the consent of his Commons
had ever a sufficient and full authority, to make, ordain, and establish good
and wholesome Laws for the Commonwealth of his Realm. Wherefore the Lords
being lawfully summoned and yet refusing to come, sit, or consent in
Parliament, cannot by their folly, abridge the King and the Gommons of their
lawful proccedings in Parliament. Thus and more John Vowel in his Order and
Usage how to keep a Parliament; Printed Cum Privilegio. And Sir Edward Cook,
in his Institutes on Magna Charta, proves that the Lords and Peers in many
Charters and Acts, are included under the name of the Commons and Commonalty of
England. But we need not retire to this last doubtful refuge; the Honorable
faithful Lords now present, though not so many as could be desired, are the
entire House of Peers in judgment of Law, (as those present at the election
of Knights of the Shire, or Burgesses (though the major part be negligently or
wilfully absent) are the whole Shire or Borough) and the wilful absence of
the residue, though the greater number, being See Stamford f. 38. 155. 3 E. 3.
19. Coro. 161.
contrary to Law, contrary to the Privileges of Parliament, and their late
Protestations, tending to the very subversion of Parliaments (for which high
contempt they and their Sec 21 R. 2. c 6.
Posterities too, may justly be disabled for ever to sit as members of that
House, which they have so dishonourably, if not treacherously, deserted, even
as Dyer f. 60. n. Bract. Parli. 7. Crompt. Iurisd. f. 16. a.
well as Knights and Burgesses, whose personal attendance is so necessary,
that if during the Parliament, they absent themselves from it, about any
businesses of their own, without leave of the House, or be so sick, or
elected Mayors of a Town, or any other judicial Officers, so as they cannot
attend the service of the House, they may thereupon be lawfully expelled the
House, and a new Writ expressing the cause of their removal, shall issue for a
new election of others in their places, to make the House complete, as was
resolved by the Commons House, 38 H. 8. Br. Parliament 7.) can no more disable
those now present from being a true and lawful House of Peers, than the
multitudes departing from the true Church of God, to the fa^se, disprove it to
be the true Church of Christ, Luke 12. 32 Matthew. 13. 23. Mat. 7. 13, 14.
whose true flock is but little. In a word See Bishop Tewels Defense of the
Apology, p 6. c. 7. Divis. 1. Bishop Bilsons true difference of Christian
subjection, and unchristian rebel. part 3. p. 540, 541, 542. Bishop Pilkington
of the burning of Paul's steeple. Keilway, f, 184, ^. Cro^p. Iurisd. of Courts,
f. 19, 20. 10 F. 4. f. 6. Stamf. Pleas, l. 33. 1. f. 153. Br. Coron 135. Antiq.
Eccles. Brit. p. 229, 300. Sp. p. I 156 Mary. hist. p. 450. to 454. John Vowels
Chronicle of Ireland p. 127, 128,
diverse Parliaments have been kept and held, and 25 E. 3. stat. 6. de
Provisionibus. 31 E. 3. c. 4. 36 E. 3. c 8. 38. E. 3. stat. 2. c. 2. 7. R 2. c.
12. 3 R. 2. c. 12. 11. R. 2. Preface and ^. 3. 12. 1 E. 3. c. 2. 14 E. 3. stat.
3. Preface. See 20 H. 3. c. 9. 21 H. 3. stat. of Leap year, 4 H3 stat of
Marlbridge. 4. E. I de Big. Prolog. and. c. 6. 6 E. 1. stat. de Gloucester.
Preface 13 E. 1. Acton Burnel. 13 E. 1. ^ 43. de malefact. in part. 21 E. 1.
Eschetors, 3 E. I. Quo warrante, 9 E. 2. Artic. Cleri. Pref.
Acts made without Bishops or Abbots heretofore, even while they were reputed
members of the Lords House, and one of the three Estates in Parliament;
therefore this Parliament (which has taken away Bishops Votes for ever) may be
lawfully held, notwithstanding any Lords or Commons wilful absence from it in
person; who yet as long as they are members of the Parliament, shall still be
adjudged legally present, whether they will or no. One puny Judge in the Courts
of Westminster may and does usually give judgment, and make binding Orders,
though the Chief Justice and his fellows be negligently or wilfully absent:
Much more then may the Lords and Commons now present, do the like, in case of
the Kings and other Members wilful absence, of purpose to ruin both
Parliament and Kingdom, against which they are now in arms, and have levied
open war.

Sixthly, it is most apparent both by 1 Samuel 19, 2 0. 2 Samuel 5. 12. 2 Chronicles. 9.
8. Isa. 49 23. Romans 13 4, 5. 1 Pet. 2 13, 14.
Scripture, the verdict of all Arist. Polit. l. 3, and 5. Plato: Agesilaus.
Xenophon de Instit. Cyri. hist. Coelius Rhodig. Antiq. Lect. l. 8. c. 1. Bodin
de Republica. Osorius de Rege and Regum Instit.
Politicians and writers of note, the The Preambles of all ancient statutes,
Bracton l. 1. c. 8. l. 3. c. 9. Fleta l. 1. c. 5. 17. Fortescue c. 9. to 15.
Statutes of our Realms and Lawyers, that kingdoms, Subjects, and
Parliaments, were not created by God for the wills, pleasures, profit or benefit
of Kings, who by birth and nature differ not at all from the meanest of their
Subjects; but Kings were at first constituted, and still continued for the
protection, welfare, benefit, service of their kingdoms, Parliaments, People,
whose public Servants, Ministers, Shepherds, Fathers, Stewards, and Officers
they are. Now Nature, Reason, and 1 Cor. 3. 21 22. 23.
Scriptures resolve, that he who is instituted merely for the benefit and
service of another (as all the Genesis 1. 26. to 31. c. 9. 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 8. 6, 7,
8.
Creatures were created for man's use, and therefore are inferior unto man in
dignity and power) is of less dignity, power, and jurisdiction, than the
entire body of those for whose good he was instituted; as the Ephesians. 6. 5. Col.
3. 22, 23.
servant is inferior to his Master; the Genesis 8. 18. c. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 11. 3 8,
9. Ephesians. 5. 23, 24. 1 Pet. 3. 1. 1. and 3. 18.
Wife to her Husband, for whom they were created; the Mayor to the whole
Corporation; and the King to his whole Kingdom and Parliament: which
consideration has caused sundry Kings and Emperors, not only to adventure
their lives in bloody battles, but to lay down their Crowns for the peace and
safety of their Subjects; witness See Eutrop. Grimsi. and other in his life.
Otho the first, and others; with the Examples of Moses, Exodus 32. 9. to 15,
32. Numb. 14. 11, to 15. of David, 2 Samuel 29. 17. 1 Chronicles. 21. 17. and John 10.
11. 15. with other precedents which I pretermit. And the reason is apparent,
for if the King be slain in defense of the kingdom or People, yet the
kingdom and people may remain secure, and another succeed him in that office
of trust, (In which respect a Politic body differs from a Natural, that it
has life, continuance, and means to guide, defend, and Order it self, though
the King and head be cut off by death.) But if the Realm and People be
destroyed, though the King survive them as a Man, yet he must necessarily
perish in and with them as a King, since he cannot possibly be a King without a
kingdom and people; for whose good and safety alone he was made a King. Hence
Aristotle, Polit. l. 3. c. 4. and Marius Salamonius, de Principatu, l. 2. p.
50. define a Principality, to be A just Government for the benefit of the
people, respecting only the public good and welfare, not its own private
advantage. Hence Plato de Repub. l. 1. thus describes the Office of a Prince
toward the Commonwealth. That as he is a Prince, he neither minds nor
commands what is advantageous to himself, but what is beneficial to his
Subjects; and whatever he says or does, he says and does it for the profit
and honor of the Republicke; which Cicero in his Offices has more elegantly
thus translated; As the defense, so the procuration of the Commonweal is to
be managed to be benefit of those who are committed, not of those to whom it is
committed. And de Finibus l. 3. A good and wise man, not ignorant of his civil
Office, is more careful of the utility of all, than of any one, or of his
own: Neither is a Traitor to his Country to be more dispraised, than a
deserter of the common profit and safety, for his own profit and safety. And
the Emperor Salamonius de Principatu l. 2. p. 52. 59. See Codicis l. 1. Tit.
1. 3. Cordi nobis est, P. C. semper nostri animi curas rebus communibus
avidissime impendere, etc.
Justinian used this golden sentence. Quod communiter omnibus prodest, hoc
privatae nostrae utilitati praeferendum esse censemus; nostrum esse proprium,
subjectorum commodum Imperialiter existimantes: Imperialis benevolentiae hoc
esse judicantes, in omni tempore Subjectorum commodatam investigare, quam eis
mederi procuremus. I shall conclude this with De Principatu l. 2. p. 57.
Salamonius his words. Let the Prince be either from God, or from men, yet
think not that the world was created by God, and in it men, that they should
serve for the benefit of Princes; for it is an absurdity, above what can be
spoken, to opine that men were made for Princes, since God has made us free
and equal: But Princes were ordained, ONLY FOR THEIR PEOPLES BENEFIT, that so
they might innocently preserve humane and civil society with greater
facility, helping one the other with mutual benefits: Which he there largely
proves by sundry Histories and Authorities. That of General Hist. of Fran. p.
1069
Peter Matthew being a certain verity. All the Actions of a Prince must tend
to the good and health of his people, for whom he lives, and more than for
himself, as the Sun does not shine and give heat, but for men, and the
elements. The King then being made King, only for the Kingdoms, Parliaments,
Peoples service, must needs (in this regard) be inferior to, not Paramount
them in absolute Sovereign power; though greater, 2 Samuel 18. 3.
better than any particular Subjects.

Seventhly, The Parliament (as our Crompt. lurisd. of Cour. f. 1. etc. Bract.
l. 1. c. 2. 19 H. 6. 63. a, 64. b. 31 H. 8. c. 10. Dyer 60. a Cooks Instit. on
Lit. f. 109, 110
Law-bookes, and Sir Thomas Smith, of the Commonweal. of England, l. 2. c. 1,
2. Holy. Descrip. of Engl. c. 8. p. 173. Came. Brit. p. 173. Io. Vowels Order
and Usage how to keep a Parliament. in Holin. Chron. of Ireland, p. 101, to
120. Minsh. Dictionary Tit. Parliament.
Writers resolve) is the most high and absolute power, the supreamest and most
ancient Court of the Realm of England, and has the power of the whole Realm,
both Head and Body; and among other Privileges this is the highest, that it is
above the Law it self, having power upon just grounds to alter the very common
Law of England; to abrogate and repeal old Laws, to enact new Laws of all
sorts, to impose taxes upon the people: Yea, it has power to declare the
meaning of any doubtful Laws, and to repeal all Patents, Charters, Grants,
and Judgments whatsoever of the King or any other Courts of Justice, if they
be erroneous or illegal, not only without, but against the Kings personal
consent, so far as finally to obliege both King and Subjects. Now it is
clear on the contrary side, that the King has not the power of the whole
Realm vested in his person, that he Fortescue, c. 10 to 15. Bract. l. 1, c 8.
l. 3. c. 9. Fleta l. 1. c. 5. 17. Brook. Pate. 25, 41, 12, 51, 53, 69, 73, 100
and Prerogative, 15, 103. Commissi. 15, 16. See Judge Crooks, and Judge Huttons
Argume. against Shipmoney, petition of Right, 3 Carol. Br. Pari. 42.
and his Prerogative are not above, but subordinate to the Laws of the Realm;
that he cannot by his absolute regal power, alter the Common Law of the Realm
in any particular point whatsoever, that he cannot repeal any old, nor enact
any new Law whatsoever, nor impose the least tax or common charge upon his
people, nor imprison their persons, distraine their goods, declare any Law, or
reverse any judgment in the meanest of his Courts, without or against his
peoples joint consents in Parliament; For Potest as sua Iuris est and non
injuriae; and, Nihil aliud potest Rex in terris, nisi ID SOLUM QUOD DE JURE
POTEST. Bracton l. 3. c. 9. f. 107. Therefore without any peradventure, the
Parliament in this regard is the most Sovereign Authority, and greater in
jurisdiction than the King. Of the Commonw. l. 1. c. 10 p. 159.
John Bodin that great Lawyer and Politician, resolves; That the chief mark
of an absolute and Sovereign Prince is to give Laws to all his Subjects in
general, and to every of them in particular without consent of any other
greater, equal, or less than himself. For if a Prince he bound not to make
any Laws, without the consent of a greater than himself, he is then a very
Subject: if not without his equal, he then has a Companion (as l. 2. c. 16.
f. 34 a. and l. 1. c. 8 f. 5. b. and Fleta l. 1. c. 17. Walsing. Hest. p. 36,
37, 40.
Bracton and others forecited, say our English King has; namely his Earls and
Lords, thence styled Comites:) if not without the consent of his inferiors,
whether it be of his Subjects, or of the Senate, or of the People; he is then
no Sovereign. Whence it follows, that the Kings of England, who cannot make
any Law to obliege either all or any of their Subjects, nor impose any Taxes,
nor repeal any Common or Statute Law, but in and by their Parliaments, are no
absolute Sovereign Princes (as some Royalists and Court Divines, most falsely
aver them to be) but mere mixed Politic King, inferior to their Laws and
Parliaments, the sole Lawmakers, Law-alterers, though not against, but with
the Kings assent, considered not abstractively as Kings, but copulative as a
branch and member of the Parliament. And indeed to speak impartially, though
the Kings Royal assent See Sir Thomas Smiths Commonwealth of England: l. 2.
c. 1, 2, 3. (...) Description of England, c. 8. p. 173. and Chronicles of
Ireland, p. 101, 102. M. Hackwels manner of passing Bills, Sect. 8. p. 74. Brock
Parliament 4. 107 33 H. 6. c. 33. 33 H. 8. c. 21. Cromptons Jurisdiction f. 7
b. Br. Parliament 26, 39, 40, 41.
be generally requisite to pass and retifie Laws: yet I humbly conceive, that
the original, prime, Legislative power of making Laws to bind the Subjects
and their Posterity, rests not in the Kings own Royal person, or
Jurisdiction, but in the Kingdom, and Parliament, which represents it.

For first, admit the King should propound any Laws to his people (as Kings
and Lawgivers usually did at first) yet these Laws would not ways obliege
them, unless they voluntarily consented and submitted to them in Parliament;
and the sole reason why our Acts of Parliament bind the Subjects in former
times, and at this day, is, not because the King willed them 4 H. 7. 18. 7 H.
7. 14. 11 H. 7. 27 33 H. 6. 17. Br. Parlia. 4 40. 76. 107. Crompt. Iurisd. f.
8. a. Bro. Ancient Demesne, 20. 10 H. 7. 20. a, 33 H. 8. c. 17.
but because the people gave their general consents unto them in Parliament,
as Sir Thomas Smith in his Commonwealth of England, Holinshed, the Prologues
to most ancient Statutes, (the King by the advice, and assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, and at the special request of the
Commons in Parliament assembled, and by THE Se^ 2. 7. 8, 12 14, 17. 4 H. 7.
AUTHORITY OF THE SAME PARLIAMENT, does grant and ordain, etc.) The Kings
Coronation Oath, Quas vulgus Elegerit and all our Lawbookes resolve, and that
upon this received Maxim of Law; Quod omnes tangit ab omnibus debet approbari.
Hence De Principatu l. 1 p. 35, 36. and p. 29, to 43.
Marius Salamonius defines a Law to be, Expressa Civium Conventio; and averres,
that Ligatur populus suis legibus, quasi pactis conventis, quae verae sunt
Leges: And he likewise proves at large, That the Laws to which Princes assent
are more the Peoples Laws than the Kings, because Kings do pass and grant
them but as the public Ministers of the people, and by their command and
direction, and they could neither assent to Laws, nor do any other Act of
Royalty unless the people had given them such authority: with which Fortescue
concurres, c. 9. 13, 14. The King in passing Bills, does but like the Minister
in Marriage, declare it to be a Law; but it is the parties consents which makes
the Marriage, and the peoples only that makes it a Law to bind them; whence
those in Cook 7. Calvin's case, 7 H. 6. 35 b. Dyer, 373. Br, Parliament, 98.
Scotland, Ireland, Man, Garnsey, and Iersie are not bound by our English
Statutes, nor Tenants in Ancient Demesne, as has been often times judged;
because they consented not to them. Therefore the chief Legislative power is
in the people and both Houses of Parliament, not in the King: as it was in the
Roman State, where the L^vie Hist. l. 1 and 2. Bod ^n Commonwealth, l. 1. c. 10.
people had the Sovereign Jurisdiction of making and confirming Laws to bind
them, not their Kings, Emperors, or Senate, as I shall hereafter manifest.

Secondly, This appears by the case of Fitz. Assise, 413. Avowry 74 Pres^^rip.
67. Br. Custom 31. Co. 5 Rep. f. 63, 64 67, 68. Kitchen 45, 73. 80.
Customs, of By-Lawes in Corporations and Manours, which bind all the
Corporation and Tenants (if they be reasonable) without the Kings or Lords
consents, by reason of their mutual assents alone; and as these private
By-Lawes oblige all those who consent to them by reason of their ownefree
assents only, so do all public Acts of Parliaments obliege all Subjects,
only because of their general assents to them in their Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, elected by and Sect ^ Iac. c.
representing their persons.

Thirdly, all 33 H. 6. 17. Br. Parli. 4. Mr. Hackwel, of passing Bills, Crom.
^uris. f. 8. Chron. of Ireland f. 127 to 130.
Bills or Acts of Parliament are usually made, framed, altered, thrice read,
engrossed, voted and fully agreed upon in both Houses, without the Kings
personal knowledge or privity for the most part, before they come to have his
Royal assent. And when they are thus agreed on by both Houses, the King cannot
alter any one word or letter in them (as the Houses may do) but must either
absolutely as^ent to, or consider further of them. And if the King send any
Bill he desires to have pass, it must be thrice read and assented to in both
Houses (which have power to reject, alter, enlarge, or limit it as they think
meet) else it can be no Act at all. A clear Demonstration, that the chief
power of enacting and making Laws is only in the people, Commons, and Peers,
not the King: who by his Writ does purposely summon them to meet and enact
Laws, as the chief Legislators. Witness this notable clause in the Cromp.
Iuris. of Courts, f. 1 2. and at the end of the manner of holding Parliaments
in England
Writ for the Election of Knights, and Burgesses: Ita quodiidem Milites plenam
and sufficientem Potestatem pro SE and COMMUNITATE Comitatus praedicti, and
dicti Cives and Burgenses pro SE and COMMUNITATE Civitatum and Burgorum
praedictorum divisim ab ipsis habeant, AD FACIENDUM ET CONSENTIENDUM HIS quae
tunc and ibidem DE COMMUNI CONSILIO DICTI REGNI (not Regis) nostri contigerint
ORDINARI super negotiis antedictis. Ita quod PRO DEFECTU POTESTATIS HUJUSMODI,
etc. dicta negotia INFECTA NON REMANEANT quovis modo: answerable to which is
that clause in Pope Elutherius his Epistle to our first Christian King Lucius,
about An. 185. Ex illis Dei gratia, PER CONSILIUM REGNI VESTRI SUM LEGEM, and
per illam Dei potentia vestrum reges Britania regnum.

Fourthly, all public Acts are the whole Kingdoms Laws, not Kings alone,
made principally and solely for the Subjects benefit, if good; their prejudice,
if ill: therefore the whole Kingdom (represented in and by both Houses, not
the King) knowing much better what is good or bad for themselves, than the King
alone, it is See r s t u before.
just and reasonable that they, and not the King, should be the principal
Lawmakers, to bind or burden themselves with any new Laws, penalties or
restraints.

This is the ground of that notable Rescript of the Emperor Theodosius to the
Roman Senate; which proves the Roman Emperors to have no right, nor power to
declare or make Laws, but by the Senates concurring assent and approbation,
Justinian Cod. l. 1. Tit. 17. Lex 8.
Humanum esse probamus, si quid de caetero in publica privatave causa emerser
it necessarium, quod formam generalem and antiquis Legibus non insertum
exposeat, id AB OMNIBUS autem tam Proceribus nostri Palatii, quam gloriosissimo
caetu vestro, Patros conscripti, tractari: and si UNIVERSIS tam Iudicibus, quam
VOBIS placuerit, tunc legata dictari; and sic ea denuo COLLECTIS OMNIBUS
recenseri: and CUM OMNES CONSENSERINT, tunc demum in sacro nostri numinis
consistorio recitari: ut UNIVERSORUM CONSENSUS, and nostrae Serenitatis
authoritate firmetur. Scitote igitur, Patres conscripti, NON ALITER IN POSTERUM
LEGEM a nostra clementia PROMULGANDAM nisi supradicta forma fuerit observata.
Been enim cognoscimus quod cum vestro consilio fuerit ordinatum ID AD
BEATITUDINEM NOSTRI IMPERII ET AD NOSTRAM GLORIAM REDUNDARE. Therefore
doubtless he deemed the Senate the chief Legislators, as knowing better than
himself, what conduced to the beatitude of the Empire, and to his own
Imperial honor, and never dreamed of any negative voice annexed to his
Imperiality, to deny such Acts as they once Voted for useful public Laws.

Fifthly, It is clear, that all Acts which give any Subsidy, Taxes,
Penalties, or forfaitures to the King, are made only by the People in
Parliament, and not principally by the King, since the King cannot be said in
any propriety to give any thing to himself. This is undeniable by the form of
penning all subsidy Bills granted by the Commons or Clergy. Your Commons
assembled in your High Court of Parliament, etc. humbly present your Majesty
with the free and cheerful gift of two entire Subsidies, which we humbly
beseech your Majesty graciously to accept, etc. Your Majesty's faithful
Subjects the Prelates and Clergy, etc. with one agreement and uniforme
consent, have given and granted, and by these presents do give and grant to
your Highness, etc. four entire Subsidies, in manner and form as follows.
And by the Kings assent to these Bills, Hackwels passing of Bills, sect. 8 p. 78.
Le Roy remercy ses Loaulz Subjects accept LOUR BENEVOLENCE, etc. the Commons
having the sole power to grant or deny See Ras^all Tax. and Tenths the Acts of
Subsidies, 21 Iac. and this present Parliament. (...). p. 745.
Subsidies and Taxes when they see cause, and to limit the proportion of them,
the manner and time of paying them; and to order how and by whom they shall be
received and employed; as all Acts of this nature manifest. If then they be the
chief Lawmakers in these Acts which lay any imposition upon the Subjects
goods, or restraint on his person; then by like reason in all other penal
public Laws. This is infallibly clear by the Kings See part 2 p. 74, 75.
Coronation Oath; who swears, That he will grant, fulfill and defend ALL RIGHT
FULL LAWS and CUSTOMS the which THE COMMONS OF THE REALM SHALL CHOOSE, and
shall strengthen and maintain them after his power. If the Commons then are to
choose Laws, and the King by his Oath bound to grant, strengthen, maintain and
defend them when chosen by them, then doubtless they are the chief
Legislators, not the King; whence Fortescue c. 9. resolves, That the People of
England, are ruled by such Laws as themselves choose or desire: And that their
Laws are their own, not the Kings.

Seventhly, all Acts of Parliament made in the Reigns of usurpers who have no
Title to the Crown, nor right to assent to Laws, are See 1 E. 4 c. 6. 4 E. 4.
10, 9 E. 4. 1, 2. Br. Charters de Pardon, 22. 13 Eliz. c. 1
firm and good in Law, and shall bind the right heirs to the Crown, as is
evident by the Laws made by King John, Henry the 4, 5, and 6. (reputed
usurpers by Edward the 4.) and Richard the 3. acknowledged an usurper, whose
Laws are yet in force. The reason is (as is clear by 1 E. 4. c. 6.) because
these Laws, and all other Judicial Acts in Courts of Justice, are the Acts of
the Parliament and Courts themselves, which are lawful; not of the usurping
King, who is unlawful. Therefore certainly the Legislative power is more in
the Parliament tha^^ in the King, if not wholly in it, there being Laws and
kingdoms before Kings were.

Eighthly, There are good and binding Laws in many Aristocraticall and
Democraticall States (as in See the Republicke of those states, and Bodin, l. 1
c. 10. l. 2, c. 3, 4, and 5.
Venice, the Netherlands, Geneva, Florence, Switzerland, and other Republickes)
where there are no Kings at all: Yea, there were such obligatory Laws in
Bohemia, Poland, Sweden, Spain, Hungary, and other Realms, before they were
erected into kingdoms; which remained in full force, and efficacy, and still
bound both King and People after they became kingdoms; And the Arist. Polit.
l. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Godwins Roman Antiquities.
Romans, Athenians, Lacedaemonians Laws of old, made under their Kings,
survived and continued in their vigor, after their Kings were abandoned, and
the very form of their states quite altered into an Aristocracy; yea the Laws
made by the Roman Senate and People, continued in force after their Emperors
were erected; and the very Lex Regia (recorded by De principatu l. 6. p. 120,
10 126.
Salamonius) which created, limited, and defined the very Prerogative, Power
and Authority of the Roman Emperors, was made only by the Senate and People,
who by that Law gave sometimes more Authority to one Emperor than to another;
and restrained the power of some Emperors more than others, and subjecting
them to some Laws from which they exempted others; and therefore doubtless
were the supreamest Lawgivers, and the Sovereign power above the Emperor) as
De principatu l. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. passim.
Marius Salamonius, and Justin. Codicis l. 1. Tit. 17 Lex 4.
Bodin prove at large. And the Emperor Theodosius is not ashamed to profess
as much in his Edict to Volusianus, in these terms: Digna vox Majestate
regnantis LEGIBVS ALLIGATVM SE PRINCIPEM PROFITERI: AD EO DE AVTHORITATE IVRIS
NOSTRA PENDET AVTHORIT AS: and revera majus Imperio est summittere Legibus
Pincipatum. Etoraculo praesentis Edicti, Quod NOBIS LICERE NON PATIMVR, aliis
indicamus. If then Laws may thus be made where there are no Kings, by the
peoples joint consents alone; If Laws enacted in a State before by consent it
be made a Kingdom, remain in force after it is erected into a kingdom, and
continue after it cease to be a kingdom, only by and for the people,
consenting to them; as is evident by infinite, examples; and the people,
Parliament, Senate, have anciently made, and may make Laws even to bind their
Kings, and Sovereigns themselves in points of their Prerogative and power;
then doubtless they, and not Kings are the chief Sovereign Legislators; and
their Royal assents to Laws, are no ways essential to the very being of
Laws, but rather a complementall Ceremony.

Ninthly, admit the King should dye without Heir, no doubt the kingdom and
Parliament have a just right either to alter the government, or dispose of the
Crown to what family they please (as the constant practice of all kingdoms in
such cases manifests, and The true difference, etc. part 3. p. 416.
Bishop Bilson himself assures us; That all Nations once members of the Roman
Empire, when the right Heirs failed, were suffered to elect their Governors,
where they pleased, as the Romans themselves might do) and no doubt they may
make binding public Laws during the Inter-regnum: as the kingdom and Estates
of Hieron. Blan^a Rer. Arag. Com. p. 588, 589.
Aragon did during their Inter-regnums. Yea, if the King be an infant (as Henry
the 3, Henry the 6. Edward 3. 5. and Richard 2. with other our Kings were, when
the Crown descended to them) or non Compos Mentis, or taken with a dead Palsy
or Apoplexy, or an Idiot by birth or Age, or a Monk professed, (as Fox Act.
and Monu. vol. 1. p. 173. Spee. Hist. p. 244.
some Kings have been) or absent in a Pilgrimage to Rome, or a voyage to the
Holy Land, (As the Mat. West. An. 1273. p. 353. Dan. p. 185. See Speed and
Holin. 1 E. 1.
Lords and State Assembled at the New Temple, after the death of King Henry the
third, during his Son King Edward the 1. his absence in the Holy Land,
Proclaimed him King, swore fealty to him, CAUSED A NEW SEAL TO BE MADE;
appointed ^it Officers and Ministers, for the Custody of his Treasure and
Peace, and proclaimed his Peace throughout the Realm) or other remote foraine
parts by reason of wars, as See Nubrig. Spee. Hol. Mat. West. and others in
the lives of R. 1. H. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Ed. 1, 2, 3, 4.
diverse of our Kings heretofore have been; and so unable personally to consent
to Laws; no doubt in all such cases, the right of creating a Protector to
execute regal power, summon Parliaments, assent to Laws, is only in the
Walsing hist. Angl An. 1422. p. 458. Spee p. 1108. Graft. p. 496, 447, 648. Fab
p. 470, Hall f. 176 to 183. Hoved. Annalpars posterior. p. 702, 703, 705, 706.
Parliament, which may in these cases make any public Acts without the Kings
personal presence or assent; and the assent; of the Regent or Protector,
usually created by them, shall as firmly bind the King, as if he had
personally consented, as is evident by all the Acts of Parliament passed during
the minority of Acts and Mon. old Edit p. 705. See Hol. Speed, Graft. in their
lives.
Henry the third, who was but nine years old; Edward the third, who was but
thirteen; Richard the second, who was but eleven years of age; Henry the sixth,
who was but nine months old; Edward the sifth, but twelve years; Henry the
eight not eighteen years; Edward the fixed but nine years of age, when they
began their Reigns; and so incapable of giving any personal consent to Laws
by themselves (of which they could not judge, but by their Protectors,) and by
all Acts made in the absence of King See Hoveden Annal. pars posterior, p. 702,
703, 705, 706.
Richard the first, Edward the 1, 2, 3, 4. Henry the 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and
others out of the Realm; all good and binding Laws, as appears by 28 H. 8.
c. 17. which altered, and 33 H. 8. c. 22, which declares the Law in these
particulars. A clear demonstration, that the Parliament is the most absolute
Supreme power, and Lawgiver, not the King.

Tenthly, The King has little or no hand in making, but only in assenting to
Laws, when they are made by the Houses; as the usual form of passing Acts
(Le Royle veult, The King wills (or assents to) it, not before, but after they
have passed both Houses, imports: which assent of his, if the Bills be public
and necessary for the Common good, is not merely arbitrary at the Kings will,
but the King by Oath and duty is bound to give it, and the Lords and Commons
may in justice demand it of mere right, as I shall show anon. His Royal
assent then, though it be the last act which compleates Bills, and makes them
Laws, yet since it is but an assent to a Law formerly made by both Houses,
which he cannot alter in any point: Yea, an assent, which the King in Honor,
Law, Justice, Duty, by virtue of his Coronation Oath, is bound to give, as
appears by the Prefaces of most Statutes, the Statute of Provisours, 25 E. 3.
Parl. 6. 20 E. 3. and other Acts) it is so far from proving the King the
Supreme power and Lawgiver, that it manifests the contrary, that this power
principally resides in both the Houses, not the King.

Eleventhly, The kingdoms Sovereignty and supreme jurisdiction above the King
is most apparent by those Coronation Oaths, which Parliaments and the kingdom
anciently, long before, or at leastwise in King Edwards days, before and ever
since the Conquest, have prescribed to our Kings ere they would accept of them
for their Sovereigns, of which I shall give you a short account.

Before the Conquest, I read in Fox Act and Mon. Edit. 1641. vol. 1. p. 214.
and Lambards Archaion, Leges Edwardi c. 17. Bishop Bilson, par. 3 p. 494.
King Edward the Confessors Laws, not only the Office, but Oath of the King
of England, (whom he and Bracton often styles, Gods and Christ's Vicar upon earth)
thus excellently described. A King ought above all things to fear God: to love
and observe his Commandments, and cause them to be observed through his whole
kingdom: He ought also to set up good Laws and customs, such as be wholesome
and approved, such as be otherwise, to repeal them and thrust them out of his
kingdom. Item, he ought to do Justice and Judgment in his kingdom, by the
counsel of the Nobles of his Realm. All these things ought the King in his
own person to do, taking his Oath upon the Evangelists, and the blessed
Relics of Saints; swearing in the presence of the whole State of his Realm
(as well of the temporalty as of the spiritualty) before he be Crowned of the
Archbishops and Bishops. Three servants the King ought to have under him as
Vassals, fleshly lust, avarice, and greedy desire, whom if be keep under as
his servants and slaves, he shall Reign well and honorably in his kingdom.
He must do all things with good advisement and pre^^e ditation: and that
properly belongs to a King: for hasty rashness brings all things to (...);
according to the saying of the Gospel; Every kingdom divided in it self
shall be brought to desolution. Master Vol. 1. p. 214
Fox informs us, that William the Conqueror through the peoples clamor
promised to confirm this King Edwards Laws, but the most part of them be
omitted, contrary to his Oath at his Coronation. Indeed, I find not in In the
life of William the first.
William of Ma^^esbury, Henry Huntingdon, Matthew Paris, or Westminster, that
William the Conqueror took this Oath at his Coronation; but only, that he
was received by the Clergy and people at London in great triumph, and AB
OMNIBUS REX ACCLAMATUS, and proclaimed King by them all, and then Crowned: but
Roger de Hoveden, and Daniel out of him, are express in point; that according
to the accustomed form, the Bishops and Barons of the Realm took their
Oaths, to be his true and loyal Subjects; and he reciprocally, being required
thereunto by Aldred, Archbishop of York, who Crowned him, made his personal
Oath before the Altar of the Apostle Saint Peter, in the presence of the Clergy
and People; That he would defend the holy Churches of God, and the Rectors of
the same: Likewise that he would govern all the people Subject to him justly,
and with royal providence: RECTAM LEGEM STATUERE ET TENERE, (which referres to
future Laws) that he would establish and observe RIGHTEOUS LAWS; and that he
would utterly prohibit rapines, and unjust judgments. Nor did he claim any
power by Conquest, but as a regular Prince submitted himself to the Orders of
the kingdom; desirous to have his Testamentary title (howsoever weak) to make
good his Succession, rather than his Sword; the flattery of the time only
giving him the Title of Conqueror afterward; but himself not claiming it.
But William soon after forgetting this his solemn Oath, did (as Hist. p. 440,
441.
Speed with others write) abrogate for the most part, the ancient Laws of the
Land, and introduce new hard Laws of his own, written in the Norman tongue,
which the people understood not, and the Judges wrested at their pleasures, to
the forfeiture of Goods, Lands, Life. Hereupon the Nobility and Natives,
seeking to cast off these snares and fetters of his Laws, set up Edgar
Atheling for their King and General once again, and fell into a new
conspiracy, raising great forces, and resolving to make the sword their judge.
The King hereupon by Lanfrankes advise, who as Rehoboams sages, gave him
counsel, somewhat to bear with their abuses, rather than hazard the ruin of
all in fight, appointed a meeting at Berkhamsteed, Anno 1172. Where the King
entering parley with the English Nobility, did so far wind himself into
their good opinions, that they all forthwith laid down their weapons. And he
for his part fearing to lose the Crown with shame, which he had gotten with
effusion of so much blood, gave his Oath upon the holy Evangelists, and the
relics of Saint Albane the Martyr (the same being ministered to him by Abbot
Frederick) swearing to observe, and inviolably to keep the ancient Laws of
this Land, and most especially those compiled by King Edward the Confessor;
though (as the event soon showed) he little meant to do as he promised. Peace
thus established; this conference ended, and the Kings Oath received, the
English Armies disband themselves, as dreaming they had now good fortune by the
foot, and hoping the greatest storms of their dangers were past; which
presently proved but a vain surmise. For King William having compounded with
the Danes, began extremely to hate the English Nobles, and with full
resolution of their destruction, suddenly set upon them apart, which he durst
not attempt when they were united; so that See Huntindon hist. l. 7. p. 369.
Mat. Par. hist p. 6.
slaying many, imprisoning others, and persecuting all of them with fire and
sword, well was he that could be first gone. Such little faith, or assurance is
there in the solemn Oaths and Protestations of Kings to their Subjects; which
are seldom really performed, and intended only as snares to entrap them, if
they confide and rely upon them without any better security.

Mat. Westminster. An. 1088. Eadmerus hist. l. 1. p. 13, 14, Matthew. Paris hist. p.
12, 13. Speed, hist. p. 456. Graft p. 21, 22. Malmsb. l. 4. p 119, 120.
After the death of William the Conqueror, William Rufus his younger son, in
the absence of Robert the elder Brother, hastens into England, to obtain the
Crown; and finding the greatest part of the Nobles against him; he gave his
solemn Oath and faith to Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury his Tutor, that
if they would make choice of him for their King, he would abrogate the
over-hard Laws of his Father, and promise to observe justice, equity and mercy
throughout the kingdom in every business, and defend the Peace and Liberty of
the Church against all men; and ease them of all hard taxes. Upon which
conditions, volentibus omnibus Provincialium animis, by the voluntary consent
and voices of all, he was chosen and Crowned King. Which promise and Oath he
soon after brake; saying, Who is it that can fulfill his promises? Whereupon
many of the Nobles, levied war against him, adopting Robert his elder Brother
King. Mat. Par. p. 52, 53, 54 Eadmerus hist. l. 2. p. 55. W. Malms. l. 5. p.
156 H. Hunt. l. 7. p. 378 Roger Hoveden, annal pars 1. p. 468. Polych l. 7 c.
11. Fab. par. 7. c. 226. p. 318. Graft. p. 32 Sp. p. 466, 467.
William Rufus dying, Henry the first his younger Brother, in the life of
Robert the right Heir assembling all the Clergy and people together to London,
to procure their favor and love to choose him for their King and Patron, He
promised the Reformation of those Laws, by which England had been oppressed
in the Reigns of his Father and Brother. To which the Clergy and Nobles
answered; That if he would with a willing mind reform those rigorous Laws,
remit the Taxes imposed upon the Subjects, and by his Charter confirm those
ancient Laws and Customs which flourished in the kingdom in the time of holy
King Edward, they would unanimously consent to him, and consecrate him for
their King. Which he willingly assenting to, and affirming with an Oath that he
would perform; he was by the assent both of Clergy and people consecrated King
at Westminster, promising by Oath, to confirm King Edwards Laws, and renounce
all oppression; in pursuance whereof as soon as he was created, he by his
Charter confirmed and reformed diverse Laws for the ease and benefit of his
Subjects, recorded at large by Matthew Paris, Speed, and others. The beginning
of this Charter is observable. Henry by the Grace of God, of England, etc. Know
ye, that by the mercy of God, and COMMON COUNSEL of the Barons of the Kingdom
of England, I am Crowned King. And because the kingdom was oppressed with
unjust exactions, I, out of respect to God, and the love I bear toward you
all, make the Church of God free, etc. And all the evil customs wherewith the
kingdom of England was unjustly oppressed, I take from thence, which evil
customs I here in part set down. And in the end of his Charter, he confirmed
and restored to them King Edwards Laws, with those amendments of them which
his Father made by the consent of his Barons. After which, those Laws of his
were published through all England, and Ranulph Bishop of Durham banished the
Court and committed to the Tower, for his oppression, bribery, and other
crimes. Henry deceasing Mat. Par. hi. p. 73. Malm. novellae hist. l. 1. p. 178,
179, 180 Hen. Hunt. l. 8. p. 386, 387. Hove. p. 481, 482. Ma. West. An. 1136.
p. 35. Sp^p. 483 484. Graf. p. 41, 42.
Maude the Empress his right Heir (to whom the Prelates and Nobles had sworn
fealty in her Fathers life time) was put by the Crown by the Prelates and
Barons; who thought it baseness for so many and great Peers to be subject to
a woman, and that they were freed of their Oath by her marrying out of the
Realm, without their consents, and Stephen Earl of Mortaine (who had no good
Title) assembling the Bishops and Peers at London, promising to them an
amendment of the Laws according to all their pleasures and liking, was by them
all proclaimed King; whereupon they all took their Oaths of Allegiance to
him, conditionally; to obey him as their King; so long as he should preserve
the Churches Liberties, and keep all Covenants, and confirm them with his
Charter; according to the old Proverb; Quamdiu habebis me pro Senatore, and
ego te pro Imperatore. All this the King at his Coronation swore, and promised
to God, the people, and Church to perform. And presently after going to
Oxford, he (in pursuance of his Oath) there sealed his fore-promised Charter of
many indulgent favors: the sum whereof was this.

That all Liberties, Customs, and Possessions granted to the Church, should be
firm and in force; that all bad usages in the Land touching Forests,
exactions, and annual Taxes which his Ancestors usually received, should be
eternally abolished; the ancient Laws restored; prefacing therein, Assensu.
Cleri and populi in Regem Angliae electus, Malm. p. 179.
That he obtained the Crown BY ELECTION ONLY; Haec autem specialiter, and
alia multa generaliter, se servaturum juravit; sed nihil horum quae Deo
promiserat, observavit, write Matthew Paris, Hoveden, and Huntindon. Pene omnia
perperam mutavit, quasi ad hoc tantum jurasset, ut praevaricatorem Sacramenti
se regno toti ostenderet, says Malmesbury. See Speed p. 483, 484.
Granting those immunities rather to blind their eyes, than with any purpose
to manacle his own hands with such parchment chains: Such faith is to be
given to the solemnest Oaths of Kings. But this his perjury was like to cost
him his Crown, his Prelates and Peers thereupon revolting unto Maude. The
form of King Henry the second his Oath I find not; only I read Hoveden p.
491. Graf. p. 50.
that upon his Coronation he caused the Laws to be reformed, by advise of
discreet men learned in the Law, and by his Proclamation commanded, that the
good Laws of his Grandfather Henry should be observed and firmly kept
throughout the Realm. Wherefore it is probable, he took the same Oath that he
did. Mat. Par. p. 147. Hoved. p. 657. Walsi. Tpodig. Neustr. An. 1189. p. 45,
46. Speed p. 530.
Richard the first, succeeding, at his Coronation in Westminster Church coming
to the High Altar, before the Clergy and people took this solemn Oath upon
the Holy Evangelists, and many Saints relics. 1. That all the days of his
life he would be are peace, honor, and reverence to God, and holy Church, and
the ordinances thereof. 2. That to the people committed to his charge, he would
exercise Right, Justice and Equity. 3. That he would abolish naughty Laws and
Customs if any were brought upon his kingdom; and would enact good Laws, and
the same in good sort keep, and without Mal-engin. Which Oath most solemnly
taken, Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury, standing at the Altar, forbad him in
the name of Almighty God, to assume that honor, UNLESS HE HAD A FULL PURPOSE
TO KEEP WHAT HE HAD SWORN; Whereunto Richard ASSENTING, and promising by Gods
help to perform all the premises WITHOUT FRAUD; With his own hand humbly
taking the Imperial Crown from the Altar, delivered it to the Archbishop, who
set it on his head. Hoveden p. 793 Mat. Par. p 189, 190. Sp. p. 548, 549. 550.
See Poly. Virg. Hol. Dan. p. 127, 128.
King Richard deceasing, John his younger Brother, to put by Arthur the next
heir to the Crown, came speedily out of Normandy into England; where the
great assembly at Northampton, to preserve their Rights and Liberties, were
content to accept of him for their King, to yield fealty, and keep faith and
Peace to King John upon condition only, if he would restore to every of them
their Rights; which, he afterward violating it, was the occasion of great
dissentions. Coming to London to be Crowned, Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury,
(the Pillar of the Commonwealths stability, and incomparable for deep
reaching wisdom) steps forth in the midst of all the Bishops, Lords, Barons,
and others there assembled at his Coronation, and spoke thus unto them. Hear
ye all, you are in discretion to know, that no man has right, or any other
fore-title to succeed another in a kingdom Astrange Archie piscopal Doctrine.
unless first (with invocation for grace, and guidance of Gods Spirit) he be
BY THE BODY OF THE KINGDOM THEREUNTO CHOSEN, and be indeed some choice man,
and picked out for some eminency of his virtues, according to the example and
similitude of Saul the first anointed King, whom God set over his people,
though neither the Son of a King nor of any royal descent. So after him
likewise David the son of Iesse; the one for being valorous, and a person
fitting Royal dignity, the other for being holy and humble minded. To show,
that whosoever in a kingdom excels all in valor and virtue, ought to
surmount all in Rule and Authority: yet so, as that, if any of the Offspring of
a deceased King surpasses others, it is fit jointly to consent in election of
such a one. This therefore we have spoken in favor of eminent Earl John, who
is present, the Brother of our most illustrious King Richard now deceased,
wanting an heir of his body; whom being provident, valiant, and truly noble,
we having invocated the grace of the holy Spirit, have all unanimously ELECTED,
as well in regard of his Merits, as of his royal Blood. Neither durst any
doubt or demurre on these things, knowing that the Archbishop had not thus
defined without cause. Wherefore Earl John, and all men approving this speech,
they ELECTED and ASSUMED the Earl for their King, and cried out saying, Let
the King live. But the Archbishop being afterward demanded, why he had spoken
these things? answered, That he was assured by some divining foresight, that
King John would work the ruin of the kingdom, corrupt the Crown, and
precipitate it into great confusion. And that he might not have the reins free
to do this, he OUGHT TO BE CHOSEN BY ELECTION, NOT BY SUCCESSION. King John at
this his Coronation was involved in a threefold Oath: namely, That he should
love holy Church and its Ministers, and preserve it harmless from the
incursion of Malignants; That abolishing perverse Laws, he should substitute
good ones, and exercise Right judgment in the kingdom of England. After which
he was adjured by the Archbishop, in the behalf of God, and strictly
prohibited, not to presume to accept this honor unless he fully purposed in
his mind, actually to fulfill what he had sworn. To which he answering,
promised that by Gods assistance he would bona fide keep those things which he
had sworn. After which he rightly settled the affairs of England by the
counsel of his Nobles, and then passed over into Normandy. But how ill he kept
this his Oath, with others of this nature; and how he violated the Statutes of
Magna Charta and De Foresta, which he had confirmed with his hand, seal, Oath,
Proclamations, the Bishops Excommunications, yea, the Popes Bull, within three
months after he had confirmed them, and procured a dispensation of his Oath,
an abrogation of these Laws from the Pope, making bloody wars upon his
Barons and Subjects (who confiding to those confirmations and royal promises
expected no such strange performances) spoiling, robbing, destroying his people
every where, in the selfsame manner as we now are plundered; See before p. 9,
10. Mat. Par. p. 243, to 247. worthy reading and consideration
the Histories of his life too manifestly relate; which often put his Crown in
danger of utter loss, Lewis of France being Crowned King by the Barons in his
stead, who renounced their allegiance to him, for his perjuries and breach of
faith and making war upon them. John departing this life, his son Henry being
but 9. years old, was proclaimed King, through the persuasion of the Earl
Marshall and of Pembroke (afterward made his Protector,) who informed the
Lords and Commons, Fox Acts and Mon. Edi^. ult v. 1. p^ 334. Speed p. 591.
that though King John for his evil demeanours deserved their persecution and
loss of his Cowne, yet his young child, tender in years, was pure and
innocent from his Fathers doings. Wherefore since every man is to be charged
with the burden of his own transgressions, neither shall the child (as
Scriptures teach) bear the iniquity of his Fathers, they ought of duty and
conscience, to bear themselves mildly toward this tender Prince, and take
compassion of his age. And for as much as he was John's natural and eldest
son, and ought to be their Sovereign, let us with one joint assistance
APPOINT HIM our King and Governor, let us reneunce from us Lewys the French
Kings Son, and suppress his people, which are a confusion and shame to our
Nation, and the yokes of their Servitude let us cast from our shoulders. Upon
which perswasion^ Henry was presently proclaimed and Crowned King at Gloucester:
And though he were but an infant, yet being Mat. Par. p. 278, 306.
set before the High Altar, he swore before the Clergy and people upon the Holy
Evangelists and diverse Saints Relics, Ioceline Bishop of Bath dictating the
Oath; That he would bear honor, peace and reverence to God, to holy Church
and Priests, all the days of his life. He likewise swore, that he would
maintain right justice among the People committed to his charge; And that he
would blot out ill Laws and unjust customs, if there should be any in the
kingdom, and observe good ones, and cause them to be kept by all men: How well
he observed this solemn Oath, with many others of like nature made to his
Lords and Subjects, for confirmation of Magna Charta, and their Liberties, In
his Edition Tigu 1589 p 876. 938, 958, 959, 960.
Matthew Paris will inform us; who writes, That the King in all his Oaths and
promises did so far transgress the bounds of truth, that the Prelates and
Lords knew not how to hold this Proteus, the King; for where there is no truth,
there can be no fixed confidence: That though be sometimes humbled himself,
confessing that he had been often bewitched by ill counsel, and promised with
a great Oath solemnly taken upon the Altar and Coffin of Saint Edward, that he
would plainly and fully correct his former Errors, and graciously condescend
to his natural Subjects good counsel; yet his frequent preceding breaches of
Oaths and promises, Se penitus incredibilem reddiderunt, made him altogether
incredible, so that (though he usually heard three Masses every day, but
seldom any Sermons (as Hist. Aug. p. 1,
Walsingham notes) yet none would afterward believe him, but ever feared and
suspected his words and actions, and to avoid the infamy of perjury, which he
feared, he sent to the Pope to absolve him from his Oaths he repented of, who
easily granted him an absolution. Such faith, such assurance is there in the
Oaths, the Protestations of Princes to their Subjects; whose Politic
capacities often times have neither soul nor conscience, and seldom keep any
Oaths or promises, no further than it stands with their own advantages,
reputing only pious frauds, to overreach and entrap their credulous people.
This perfidiousnesse in the King, made his long Reign full of troubles, of
bloody civil wars, and often times endangered the very loss of his Crown and
Kingdom, as our Historians inform us, for which he repented and promised
amendment at his death.

Lib. 3. c. 9. f. 107.
Bracton an ancient Lawyer in this Kings days, writes. That the King in his
Coronation OUGHT by an Oath taken in the name of Jesus Christ, to promise these
three things to the people subject to him. First, that he will command and
endeavor to his power, that true peace shall be kept to the Church and all
Christian people in his time. Secondly, That he will prohibit rapines (or
plunderings) and all iniquities, in all degrees. Thirdly, That in all
judgments he will command equity and mercy, that so God who is gracious and
merciful may bestow his mercy on him, and that by his justice all men may
enjoy firm peace. For (says he) a King is SACRED and ELECTED (to wit, by his
Kingdom) for this end, to do justice unto all; for if there were no justice,
peace would be easily exterminated, and it would be in vain to make Laws, and
do justice unless there were one to defend the Laws, etc.

The form of the Kings Coronation and Oath ever since Edward the second has
been this, and is thus administered. Mag. Char. Printed Cum Privilegio London
1558. part 2. f. 1640, Iuramentum Regis quando coronatur Remonstrance, Nov. 2.
p. 25. to 38.
The Metropolitan or Bishop that is to Crown the King, with a mean and
distinct voice shall interrogate him, if he will confirm with an Oath the
Laws and Customs granted to the people of England, by ancient, just, and
devout Kings toward God, to the same people, and especially the Laws, and
Customs, and Liberties granted by glorious King Edward to the Clergy and
People. And IF HE SHALL PROMISE that he will assent to all these; Let the
Metropolitan or Bishop expound to him, what things he shall swear, saying
thus. Thou shall keep to the Church of God, to the Clergy and people, peace
entirely, and concord in God, according to thy power; The King shall answer, I
will keep it. Thou shall cause to be done in all thy judgments, equal and
right justice, and discretion, in mercy and verity, according to thy power: He
shall answer; I will do it. Thou grantest just Laws and Customs to be kept,
and thou do promise. that those Laws shall be protected and confirmed by
thee to the honor of God, QUAS VULGUS ELEGERIT, which the people shall choose,
according to thy power: He shall answer; I do grant and promise. And there may
be added to the foresaid Interrogations, what other things shall be just. All
things being pronounced, he shall with an Oath upon the Altar presently taken
before all, confirm that he will observe all these things.

There has been a late unhappy difference raised between the Sea the
Parliaments Remonstrance of the 26 of May, p 9. His Majejesties Answer thereto,
p. 16, 17. and the Parliaments Reply, Nov. 2. p. 29. to 38.
King and Parllament about the word ELEGERIT; the Parliament affirming the word
to signify, shall choose; according to sundry written Rolls and Printed Copies
in Latin and French; the King on the contrary arffiming, it should be has
chosen; But he that observes the words of these ancient Oaths: Populo tibi
commisso rectam justiciam exercebis, malas leges and iniquas consuetudines, si
aliquae fuerint in Regno tu^, delebis, and bonas observabis, all in the future
tence: and the verbes, serva^is, Facies fieri, protegend^s, corroborandas in
the former and same clauses of the Oath now used, all of them in the future,
with the whole Scope, intent and purport of this part of the Oath, must
necessarily grant, shall choose, to be the true reading; and that it referres to
the confirmation of Judge Huttons Argument against Shipmoney, p. 32. determines
so.
future Laws, to be afterward made in Parliament, not to those only in being
when the Oath was administered; else Kings should not be obliged by their
Oaths, to keep any Laws made after their Coronations by their own assents,
but only those their Predecessors assented to, not themselves, which were most
absurd to affirm. But because I have largely debated this particular, and
given you an account of our Kings Coronation Oaths from King Richard the
seconds Reign downward, in my following Discourse, and debate of the Kings
pretended Negative voice in passing Bills in Parliament, I shall proceed no
further in this subject here.

From these several Oaths and Passages, the usual form of the Nobles
proclaiming such and such Kings of England, the Page 8, 9.
forecited Histories; the manner of our Kings Coronation thus expressed in the
close Roll of 1 R. 2. n. 44. Afterward the Archbishop of Canterbury having
taken the corporal Oath of our Lord the King, to grant and keep, and with his
Oath to confirm the Laws and customs granted to the people of the Kingdom
of England, by ancient, just, and devout Kings of England, the progenitors of
the said King, and especially the Laws, Customs and Freedoms granted to the
Clergy and people of the said Kingdom, by the most glorious and holy King
Edward, to keep to God and the holy Church of God, and to the Clergy and
people, peace and concord in God entirely, according to his power, and to cause
equal and right Justice to be done, and discretion in mercy and truth, and
also to hold and keep the just Laws and customs of the Church; and to cause
that by our said Lord the King they should be protected, and to the honor of
God corroborated, which the PEOPLE SHOULD JUSTLY AND REASONABLY CHOOSE to the
power of the said Lord the King: the aforesaid Archbishop, going to the four
sides of the said Scaffold, declared and related to all the people, how that
our Lord the King had taken the said Oath, inquiring of THE SAME PEOPLE, IF
THEY WOULD CONSENT TO HAVE HIM THEIR KING AND LIEGE LORD? Who with ONE ACCORD
CONSENTED THERETO. Which Hist. Angliae, 1 R. 2. p. 193.
Thomas of Walsingham who relates the whole form of this Kings Coronation thus
describes. Quibus completis, Archiepiscopus praecedente eo Marescallo Angliae
Henrico Percy, convertit se ad omnes plagas Ecclesiae, INDICANS POPULO REGIUM
JURAMENTUM and quaerens SI SE TALI PRINCIPI AC RECTORI SUBJICERE, and ejus
jussionibus obtemperare VELLENT, ET RESONSUMESTA PLEBE resono clamore, QUOD
LUBENTER SIBI PARERE VELLENT. Which custom both before and since has been
constantly in this Land observed at the Coronation of our Kings: from all these
I say it is apparent: First, that Popish Parliaments, Peers, and Subjects,
have deemed the Crown of England not merely successive and hereditary, though
it has usually gone by descent, but arbitrary and elective, when they saw
cause, many of our Kings coming to the Crown without just hereditary Title,
by the Kingdoms, Peers, and people free election only confirmed by
subsequent Acts of Parliament, which was then reputed a sufficient Right and
Title; by virtue whereof they then reigned and were obeyed as lawful Kings,
and were then and yet so acknowledged to be; their right by Election of their
Subjects (the footsteps whereof do yet continue in the solemn demanding of
the peoples consents at our Kings Inaugurations) being seldom or never
adjudged an illegal usurpation in any Parliaments: whence the statute of 1 E.
4. c. 1. and 9 E. 4. f. 2, declares King Henry the 4. 5. and 6. to be
successively Kings of England indeed, and not of right, yet not usurpers
because they came in by Parliament. Only Richard the third, (who treacherously
murdered Edward the 5. his Sovereign, and violently usurped his Crown, at
first, before any Parliament gave it him, compelling the Lords and Commons
afterward to Elect him King out of fear, after his slaughter in Bosworth
field,) was declared an usurper by Act of Parliament 1 Hen. 7. c. 6. and so
adjudged to be by 8 H. 7. f. 1. see 1 E. 4. c. 1 etc. 9 E. 4. f. 1, 2. and
Henry the 7. had the Crown set upon his head in the field, by my Lord Stanly,
as though (says Page 852.
Grafton) he had been elected king by the voice of the people, as in ancient
times past in diverse Realms it has been accustomed. Secondly, that those
Kings who have enjoyed the Crown by succession, descent, or election, have
still taken it upon the conditions and covenants contained in their Coronation
Oaths; which if they refused to swear to the Peers and people, really and
bona fide to perform, they were not then to be crowned or received as Kings,
but adjured in the name of God to renounce this dignity. And though in point of
Law, Cook 7. Report. f. 10, 11. Calvin's case, Marsil. Patavinus Defen. Pacis
pars, 2. ^. 25^
those who enjoy the Crown by Succession, be Kings, before their Coronations;
yet it is still upon those subsequent Littleton, sect. 378, 379. and Cooks
Instit. Ibid. f. 232, 233, 234.
Conditions both contained in their Coronation Oaths, which impose no new but
only ratify the old conditions in separably annexed to the Crown by the
Common Law, ever since Edward the Confessors days, and long before, as Father
Littleton, sect. 378, 379. and Cooks Instit. Ibid. f. 232, 233, 234.
Littleton resolves, (the Office of a King being an Office of the greatest
trust of any other, which the Common Law, binds the King well and lawfully to
discharge, to do that which to such Office belongs to do) as the Oaths of
all our Kings to their people; really to perform these Articles and
Conditions, fully demonstrate. Thirdly, that these Oaths are not merely
arbitrary or voluntary at the Kings pleasure, to take or refuse them if he
will, but necessary and inevitable, by the Law, and constant usage of the
Realm, yea of all Baldus Proaem de Feud. n. 32. Dr. Crakenth. defense of
Constantine, p. 163. to 175: Grimst. Imperial hist. p. 653.
Christian most Pagan Realms whatsoever, which prescribe like Oaths to their
Kings. From a^l which I may firmly conclude, that the whole kingdom and
Parliament are the Supreme Sovereign Authority, and Paramount the king,
because they See Fortescue, c. 12, to 15. Johan. Mar. de Rege and Regis Instit.
l. 1. c. 7, 8, 9.
may lawfully, and d^e usually prescribe such conditions, terms, and rules of
governing the people to him, and bind him thus by Oath, faithfully to perform
the same, as long as he shall continue King; which Oath our Kings usually
took, or at least faithfully promised to take to their Subjects in ancient
times, before ever they did or would take an Oath of fealty, homage or
Allegiance to them, as the premises evidence, and Claus. Rot. 1 R. 2. M. 44.

Tenthly, Our Parliaments and Kingdom anciently in times of popery, and
Paganism have both challenged and exercised a Supreme power over the Crown
of England it self, to transfer it from the right heir, and setle it on
whom themselves thought meet to elect for their King; and likewise to call
their Kings to an account for their mis-government, and breach of Oath to the
prejudice of their people, so far as to article against them, and either by
force of Arms, or a judicial sentence in Parliament, actually to depose them,
and set up others in the Throne, as the Page 7, 8, 9.
forecited presidents, ( of Archigallo, Emerian, two ancient British Kings,
of Edwin king of Mercia, and others deprived of all honor and kingly dignity,
by the unanimous consent of their Subjects for their Tyranny, Oppression,
Maladministration, vicious lives, and others elected and made kings in their
places) evidence, which Acts of theirs they then reputed just and legal.
Polydo^ Virgil. hist. Angl. l. 18. Sir Thomas de la More. Gra^ton, p. 215, 216.
I shall cite you only two presidents of this kind, which have mere relation
to Parliaments. The first is that of Walsingham, hist. Ang. p. 107, 108, 109:
Ipodigma, Neushia: p: 109, 110: Polychron, l. 7. chapter 43.
King Edward the second, who being taken prisoner by his Queen, Son, Nobles,
Speed, p. 681, 682. Daniel, p. 219, 218.
for his maladministration; the Queen, with her son by the advice of her
Council, summoned an high Court of Parliament at Westminster in the Kings
name, which began the 16 day of January, An. 1325. In which assembly it was
declared, that this Realm could not continue without an head and governor, and
therefore first, they agreed to draw into Articles the Mis-government of the
king that was in prison, Holinshed, Cayton, Stow, and others in his life:
and all his evil doings, which he had done by evil and naughty Counsel. And
when the said Articles were read and made known to all the Lords, Nobles, and
Commons of the Realm, they then consulted how the Realm should be governed
from thenceforth. And after good deliberation, and consultation of the foresaid
Articles of the Kings evil government, they concluded: THAT SUCH A MAN WAS NOT
WORTHY TO BE A KING, NOR TO WE ARE A CROWN ROYAL. And therefore they all
agreed, that Edward his eldest son, who was there present, and was rightful
heir, should be crowned King in stead of his Father, SO THAT HE WOULD TAKE
ABOUT HIM SAGE, TRUE, AND GOOD COUNCIL, and that from thenceforth the Realm
might be better governed then before it had been. And it was also agreed, that
the old king his father should be well and honestly kept as long as he lived,
according to his estate. All these things concluded, they ELECTED his son
Edward King in the great hall at Westminster, with the UNIVERSAL CONSENT OF
THE PEOPLE THERE PRESENT; and the Archb. of Canterbury thereupon makes there a
Sermon on this Text, Vox populi, vox Dei: exhorting the people, to invoke the
king of kings for him they had then chosen. It was further ordered and agreed,
that during the Parliament time, a solemn Message should be sent to the King
to Kenelworth Castle, (where he was kept prisoner) to declare unto him not only
the determination of the three estates concerning HIS DEPOSING FROM THE
KINGDOM, but also to resign unto him IN THE NAME OF THE WHOLE REALM, all
their homage that before time they had done him: and to do this message, there
was certain select persons chosen by the Parliament, namely, the Bishops of
Winchester, Hereford, and Lincoln, two Earls, two Abbots, four Barons, two
Justices, three knights for every County, and for London, the Cinqueports, and
other Cities and Burroughes, a certain chosen number, with the Speaker of the
Parliament, whose name was Sir William Tr^ssell: who coming into the Kings
presence told him, That the Commonweal had received so irr^ concileable
dislikes of his government, the particulars whereof had been opened in the
Assembly at London, that it was resolved never to endure him as King any
longer. That notwithstanding, those dislikes had not extended themselves so
far, as for his sake to exclude his issue, but that with universal applause
and joy, THE COMMONWEAL HAD IN PARLIAMENT ELECTED HIS ELDEST SON, THE LORD
EDWARD FOR KING. That it would be a very acceptable thing to God, willingly to
give over an earthly kingdom for the common good and quiet of his Country,
which they said could not otherwise be secured. That yet his honor should be
no less after his resignation then before it was; only him the Commonweal
would never suffer toraigne any longer. They finally told him, That unless he
did of himself renounce his Crown and Scepter, the people would neither
endure him, nor any of his children as their Sovereign; but disclaiming all
homage and fealty, would elect some other for king, who should not be of the
blood. This message struck such a chillness into the King, that he fell
grovelling to the earth in a swoun; which the Earl of Leicester and Bishop of
Winchester beholding, run unto him, and with much labor recovered the half
dead King, setting him on his feet: who being come to himself, the Bishop of
Hereford running over the former points, concludes, saying, as in the person of
the Commonwealth, That the king must resign his Diadem to his eldest son;
or, after the refusal, suffer THEM TO ELECT SUCH A PERSON AS THEMSELVES SHOULD
JUDGE TO BE MOST FIT AND ABLE TO DEFEND THE KINGDOM. The dolorous King having
heard this speech, brake forth into sighs and tears, and made at the last
this answer, to this effect, That he knew, that for his many sins he was
fallen into this calamity, and therefore had the less cause to take it
grievously. That he much sorrowed for this, that the people of the kingdom
were so exasperated against him, as that they should utterly abhor his any
longer rule and sovereignty: and therefore he besought all that were there
present, to forgive and spare him being so afflicted. That nevertheless it was
greatly to his good pleasure and liking, (seeing it could none other be in his
behal^e) that his eldest son was so gracious in their sight, and therefore he
gave them thanks for choosing him their King. This being said, then was a
proceeding to the short Ceremonies of his resignation, which principally
con^isted in the surrender of his Diadem and Ensigns of Majesty to the use of
his Son the new King. Thereupon Sir William Trussell the Speaker, ON THE
BEHALF OF THE WHOLE REALM, renounced all homage and allegiance to the said
Edward of Carnarvan, late King, in these words following, I William Trussell,
IN THE NAME OF ALL MEN OF THIS LAND OF ENGLAND, AND OF ALL THE PARLIAMENT
PROCURATOR, resign to thee Edward the homage that was sometimes made unto
thee, and from this time now forward I defy thee, AND DEPRIVE THEE OF ALL
ROYAL POWER, I shall never be attendant to thee as King after this time. After
which King Edward the third being solemnly crowned, proclaimed his peace to all
his people in these words:

Edward by the grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of
Aqui^ane, to N. N. our Sheriff of S. greeting: Because the Lord Edward our
Father, late King of England, by THE COMMON COUNSEL AND ASSENT OF THE
PRELATES, EARLS, BARONS, AND OTHER THE CHIEF MEN AND WHOLE COMMONALTIE OF THE
KINGDOM, did voluntarily remove himself from the government thereof; willing
and granting that We, as his eldest Son and Heir, should take upon us the
rule and regiment of the same: and we, with the counsel of the Prelates,
Earls, and Barons aforesaid, yielding therein to our Fathers good pleasure and
will, have taken upon Us the Governanse of the said Kingdom, and as the manner
is, have received the Fealties and Homages of the said Prelates and Peers. We
therefore desirous that Our peace for the quiet and calm of Our people should
be inviolably observed, do will and command you, that presently upon sight of
these presents, you cause Our Peace to be proclaimed throughout your
Bayli-wick, forbidding all and every one on Our behalf, under pain and peril
of disinheritance, and loss of life and limbs, not to presume to violate or
infringe Our said Peace, but that every one pursue or follow his Actions and
Complaints without any manner of outrage, according to the Laws and Customs of
Our Kingdom: for We are ready and always will be, to administer full right to
all and singular complaints, as well of poor as rich, in Our Courts of Justice.

The second Walsingham hist. Ang p 398. 399. 400. Ypodigma P 156. Halls Chron.
1. ^. 4. s. 6. to 9. Fabianpa^t 7. p. 346. to 355. Grafton p. 400. to 407.
President is, that of King Richard the second, who being taken prisoner by
Henry Duke of Lancaster, An. 1399. the Duke soon after, on the thirteenth of
September called a Parliament in the Kings Name, wherein was declared, how
unprofitable King Richard had been to the Realm during his reign, how he
subverted the Laws, p^lled the people, ministered Justice to no man, but to
such as pleased him. And to the intent the Commons might be persuaded, that he
was an unjust and unprofitable Prince, and a Tyrant over his Subjects, and
THEREFORE WORTHY TO BE DEPOSED; Speed. p. 757. 758. 759. 760. Trussel p. 43. to
50.
there were set forth certain Articles (to the number of 32. or 38. as some
record) very heinous to the ears of many: Holinshed, Stow, Heywood, and
others. Fox Acts and Mon. vol 1. p. 671.
some whereof I have Herep. 29. 30.
formerly recited, and the residue you may read in Hall, Grafton, Haywood,
Trussell, and others. After which Richard was charged with the foresaid
Articles, there was an instrument made declaring his Answers, and how he
consented willingly to be deposed; the Tenor of which instrument was as
follows.

This present Instrument made the Monday the 29. day of September, and feast of
Saint Michael, in the year of our Lord God, 1389. and the 23. year of King
Richard the second, witnesses that where by the Authority of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal of this present Parliament, and Commons of the same,
the right honorable, and discreet persons hereunder named, were by the said
Authority assigned to go unto the Tower of London, there to hear and testify
such Questions and Answers as then and there should be by the said honorable
and discreet persons heard. Know all men to whom these present Letters shall
come, That we, Sir Richard Scroop Archbishop of York, John Bishop of Hereford,
Henry Earl of Northamberland, Ralfe Earl of Westmerland, Thomas Lord of
Barkly, William Abbot of Westminster, John Prior of Canterbury, William
Thirning, and Hugh Burnell Knights, and John Markham Justice, Thomas Stowe, and
John Burbage Doctors of the Law civil, Thomas Fereby and Denis Lopham Notaries
public, the day and year abovesaid, between the hours of eight and nine of
the clock before noone, were present in the chief Chamber of the Kings lodging
within the said place of the Tower, where was rehearsed to the King by the
mouth of the foresaid E. of Northumb. that before time at Conway in north
Wales, the King being there at his pleasure and liberty, promised unto the
Archbishop of Canterbury, then Thomas Arundell. and unto the said Earl of
Northumberland, that for insufficiency which he knew himself to be of, to
occupy so great a charge as to govern this Realm of England, he would gladly
leave off, and renounce the right and title, as well of that, as of his title
to the Crown of France, and his Majesty, unto Henry Duke of Hertford; and
that to do in such convenient wise, as by the learned men of this Landit
should most sufficiently be by them devised and ordained. To the which
rehearsal the King in our said presences answered benignly and said, That such
promise he made, and so to the same he was at that hour in full purpose to
perform and fulfill, saving that he desired first to have personal speech with
the said Duke, and with the Archbishop of Canterbury his Couzens: And
furthermore, he desired to have a Bill drawn of the said Resignation, that he
might be made perfect in the rehearsal thereof. After which Copy by me the
said Earl delivered, we the said Lords and others departed. And upon the same
afternoon the King desired much of the coming of the Duke of Lancaster, at
the last the said Duke, with the Archbishop of Canterbury, entered the foresaid
Chamber, bringing with them the Lord Ros, the Lord Burgeiney, and the Lord
Willoughbie, with diverse others: where after due obeisance done by them unto
the King, he familiarly and with a glad countenance to us appearing, talked
with the said Archbishop and Duke a good season. And that Communication
finished, the King with a glad countenance in presence o^ us, and the other
above rehearsed, said openly, That he was ready to renounce and resign all his
Kingly Majesty in manner and form as he before seasons had promised: And
although he had and might sufficiently have declared his renouncement by the
reading of another mean person, yet he for the more surety of the matter, and
for the said resignation should have his full force and strength, he therefore
read the Scroll of resignation himself in manner and form as follows. In
the Name of God, Amen. I Richard by the grace of God, King of England and of
France, and Lord of Ireland, acquit and assoile all Archbishops, Bishops, and
other Prelates secular or religious, of what dignity, degree, state, or
condition that they be of; and also all Dukes, Marquesses Earls, Barons,
Lords, and all mine other liege men both spiritual and secular, of what manner
of name or degree they be from their Oath of fealty and homage, and all other
Deeds and Privileges made unto me, and from all manner of Bonds of Allegiance
and Regality or Lordship, in the which they were or be bound to me, or in any
otherwise constrained, and them their heirs and successors for evermore from
the same Bonds and Oaths I release, deliver, acquit, and let them for ever be
free, dissolved and acquit, and to be harmless for so much as belongs to my
person, by any manner way or title of right that to me might follow of the
foresaid things or any of them: And also I resign all my Kingly Dignity,
Majesty, and Crown, with all the Lordships, Power, and Privileges to the
foresaid Kingly Dignity and Crown belonging, and all other Lordships and
Possessions to me in any manner of wise pertaining, what name or condition they
be of, out take the Lands and Possessions for me and mine obite purchased and
bought. And I renounce all right and color of right, and all manner of title
of possession and Lordship which I ever had or have in the same Lordships and
possessions, or any of them, or to them, with any manner of rights belonging or
appertaining unto any part of them: And also the rule and governance of the
same Kingdom and Lordships, with all ministrations of the same, and all
things, and every of them, that so the whole Empire and Jurisdictions of the
same belongs of right, or in any wise may belong: And also I renounce the
name, worship, and r^gality, and kingly highness, clearly, freely, singularly,
and wholly in the most best manner and form that I may, and with deed and word
I leave off and resign them, and go from them for evermore, saving always to my
successors Kings of England, all the Rights, Privileges and appurtenances to
the said Kingdom and Lordships abovesaid belonging and appertaining: For well
I wot and acknowledge, and deem my self to be and have bin unsufficient and
unable, and also unprofitable, and for mine open deserts not unworthy to be put
down: And I swear upon the holy Evangelists here presently with my hands
touched, that I shall never repugne to this resignation, dimission, or yielding
up, nor never impugn them in any manner by word or by deed, by my self, nor
by none other; nor I shall not suffer it to be impugned in as much as in me is,
privily nor apart: but I shall have, hold, and keep this renouncing, dimission,
and leaving up for firm and stable for evermore in all and in every part
thereof, so God me help and all Saints, and by this holy Evangelist by me
bodily touched and kissed: And for more record of the same, here openly I
subscribe and sign this present Resignation with mine own hand. And forthwith
in our presences, and other, subscribed the same, and after delivered it to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, saying, That if it were in his power, or at his
assignment, he would that the Duke of Lancaster there present should be
Successor and King after him. And in token thereof, he took a Ring of gold
from his finger, being his Signet, and put it upon the said Dukes finger,
desiring and requiring the Archbishop of York, to show and make report unto
the Lords of the Parliament of his voluntary Resignation, and also of his
intent and good mind that he bare toward his Cousin the Duke of Lancaster, to
have him his Successor and King after him. And this done, every man took their
leave, and returned to their own.

Upon the morrow following, being Tuesday, and the last day of September, all
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, with also the Commons of the said
Parliament, assembled at Westminster, where, in the presence of them, the
Archbishop of York, according to the Kings desire, showed unto them seriously
the voluntary Renouncing of the King, with also the favor which he ought unto
his Cousin the Duke of Lancaster for to have him his Successor: And over that
showed unto them the Scedule or Bill of Renouncement, signed with King Richards
hand. After which things in order by him finished, the question was asked first
of the Lords, If they would admit and allow that Renouncement? The which when
it was of the Lords granted and confirmed, the like question was asked of the
Commons, and of them in like manner affirmed. After which admission it was then
declared, That notwithstanding the foresaid renouncing so by the Lords and
Commons adm^tted, it were needful unto the Realm, in avoiding of all
suspicions and surmises of evil disposed persons, to have in writing and
registered the manifold crimes and defaults before done by the said Richard late
King of England, to the end that they might be first openly showed to the
people, and after to remain of Record among the Kings Records. The which were
drawn and compiled, as before is said, in 38. Articles, and there showed ready
to be read: but for other causes then more needful to be preferred, the
reading of the said Articles at that season were deferred and put off. Then
for so much as the Lords of the Parliament had well considered this voluntary
Renouncement of King Richard, and that it was behovefull and necessary for the
weal of the Realm to proceed unto the sentence of his deposall, they there
appointed by authority of the States of the said Parliament, the Bishop of
Saint Ass, the Abbot of Glastenbury, the Earl of Gloucester, the Lord of
Barkley, William Thyrning Justice, and Thomas Erpingham* and Thomas Gray
Knights, that they should give and bear open sentence to the Kings deposition:
whereupon the said Commissioners laying there their heads together, by good
deliberation good counsel and advisement, and of one assent agreed among them,
that the Bishop of Saint Ass should publish the sentence for them, and in
their names, as follows. In the Name of God, Amen. We John Bishop of Saint
Ass or Assenence, John Abbot of Glastenbury, Richard Earl of Gloucester,
Thomas Lord of Barkley, William Thyrning Justice, Thomas Erpingham and Thomas
Gray Knights, chosen and deputed special Commissaries by the three Estates of
this present Parliament, representing the whole body of the Realm, for all
such matters by the said Estates to us committed; We understanding, and
considering the manifold crimes, hurts, and harms done by Richard King of
England, and misgovernance of the same by a long time, to the great decay of
the said Land, and utter ruin of the same shortly to have been, ne had the
special grace of our Lord God thereunto put the sooner remedy, and also
furthermore adverting the said King Kichard, knowing his own insufficiency,
has of his own mere voluntary and free will renounced and given up the rule
and government of this Land, with all Rights and Honors unto the same
belonging, and utterly for his merits has judged himself NOT UNWORTHY TO BE
DEPOSED OF ALL KINGLY MAJESTY AND ESTATE ROYAL, We, the Premises well
considering, by good and diligent deliberation, by the POWER, NAME, AND
AUTHORITY TO US AS ABOVE IS SAID COMMITTED, PRONOUNCE, DISCERN, AND DECLARE
the same King Richard before this to have been, and to be unprofitable,
unable, unsufficient, and unworthy to the rule and governance of the foresaid
Realms, Lordships, and all other App^rtenances to the same belonging: and FOR
THE SAME CAUSES WE DEPRIVE HIM OF ALL KINGLY DIGNITY AND WORSHIP, AND OF ANY
KINGLY WORSHIP IN HIMSELF. AND WE DEPOSE HIM BY OUR SENTENCE DEFINITIVE,
forbiding expressly to all Archbishops, Bishops, and all other Prelates, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Barons, and Knights, and to all other men of the aforesaid
Kingdom and Lordships, or of other places belonging to the same Realms and
Lordships, Subjects and Lieges whatsoever they be, that none of them from this
time forward, to the foresaid Richard as King and Lord of the foresaid Realms
and Lordships, be neither obedient nor attendant.

After which sentence thus openly declared, the said Estates admitted forthwith
the same persons for their Procurators, to resign and yield up to King Richard
all their homage and fealty which they have made and ought unto him before
times, and for to show unto him, if need were, all things before done that
concerned his deposing. The which resignation a^ that time was spared, and put
in respite till the morrow next following: And anon, as this sentence was in
this wise passed, and that by reason thereof the Realm stood void without Head
or Governor for the time, the said Duke of Lancaster rising from the place
where he before sat, and standing where all might behold him, he meekly making
the sign of the Cross upon his forehead and upon his breast, after silence by
an Officer was commanded, said unto the people there being, these words
following: In the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, I Henry of
Lancaster claim the Realm of England and the Crown, with all the
appurtenances, as I that am descended by right line of the blood, coming from
that good Lord King Henry the third, and through the right that God of his
grace has sent to me, with the help of my ki^^e and of my friends to recover
the same, which was in point to be undone for default of good Governance and
due Justice.

After which words thus by him uttered, he returned and set him down in the
place where he before had sitten. Then the Lords perceiving and hearing this
claim thus made by this noble man, either of them frained of other what he
thought; and after a distance or pause of time, the Archbishop of Canterbury
having notice of the Lords mind, stood up and asked the Commons if they would
ASSENT TO THE LORDS, WHICH in their minds thought the claim by the Duke more
to BE RIGHTFUL AND NECESSARY FOR THE WEALTH of the Realm, and of them all.
Whereunto they cried with one voice, YEA, YEA, YEA After which answer, the said
Archbishop going to the Duke, and setting him upon his knee, had unto him a few
words: the which ended, he rose, and taking the Duke by the right hand, led him
unto the Kings seat, and with great reverence set him therein, after a certain
Kneeling and Orison made by the said Duke, e^e he were therein set. And when
the King was thus set in his Throne* to the great rejoyceing of the people, the
Archbishop of Canterbury began there an Oration o^ Collation in manner as after
followe^h: Fabian part 7. p. 351. 352. 353.
Vir Dominabitur in populo, 1 R^gum cap. 9. These be the words of the high and
most mighty King, speaking to Samuel his Prophet, teaching him how he should
choose and ordain a Governor of his people of Israel, when the said people
asked of him a King to rule them. And not without cause may these words be said
here of our Lord the King: that is, For if they be inwardly conceived, they
shall give unto us matter of consolation and comfort* when it is said that a
Man shall have Lordship and rule of the people, and not a Child, for God
threatens not us as he sometime threatened the people by Esaias 3. Esaias. I fhall
says our Lord, give children to be their Rulers and Princes and weak or
fearful shall have dominion over them. But of his great mercy he has visited
us. I tru^t his peculiar people, and sent us a Man to have the rule over us,
and put by Children, that before time ruled this land after childish
conditions, as by the works of them it has right lately appeared, to the great
disturbance of all this Realm, and for want and lack of a man: For as says
the Apostle Paul, in 1. Cor. 14. When I was a child I savoured and spoke as a
child; but at the time when I came to the state of a man, then I put by all my
childish conditions. The Apostle says, he savoured and spoke as a child in
whom is no steadfastness or constancy; for a child will lightly promise, and
lightly he will break his promise, and do all things that his appetite gives
him unto, and forgeteth lightly what he has done. By which reason it
follows, that needs great inconvenience must fall to that people that a
Child is ruler and Governor of; nor is it possible for that Kingdom to stand
in felicity where such conditions reign in the head and ruler of the same. But
now we ought all to rejoice, that all such defaults be expelled, and that a
Man and not a Child shall have Lordship over us, to whom it belongs to have
a sure reine upon his tongue, that he may be known from a Child, or a Man
using childish conditions; of whom I trust I may say as the wise man says in
his Proverbs, Blessed be the man that has wisdom, and that abounds in
prudence: For that man that is ruled by sapience, must needs love and dread our
Lord God; and whosoever loves and dreadeth him, it must consequently follow, that
he must keep his Commandments. By force whereof he shall minister true Justice
unto his Subjects, and do no wrong nor injury to any man, so that then shall
follow the words of the wise man, which he rehearsed in Proverbs 10. The
blessing of our Lord God shall alight upon the head of the King, being a just
and right wise man, for the tongue of him works not iniquity and injustice,
but the tongue of the wicked and sinners covers iniquity* And who that
works or ministers Justice in due order, he not only safe guardeth himself,
but also holds the people in a surety of restfulnesse, of the which ensues
peace and plenty: and therefore it is said of the wise King Solomon, Eccles.
10. Blessed and happy is that land, of which the King or Ruler is noble and
wise, and the Princes be blessed that live in his time. As who would say, They
may take example of him to rule and guide their Subjects; for by the discretion
of a noble and wise man, being in authority, many evils are sequestered and put
apart, and all dissemblers put unto silence; for the wise man considers well
the great inconveniences which daily now grow of it, where the child or
insipient drinks the ^weet and dilicious words unadvisedly, and perceives
not intoxication which they be mingled or mixed with, till he be environed and
wrapped in all danger, as lately the experience thereof has been apparent to
all our sights and knowledges, and not without the danger of all this Realm,
and all was for lack of wisdom in the Ruler, which deemed and taught as a
child, giving sentence of wilfulness and not of reason; so that while a
child reigned, self will and lust reigned, and reason with good conscience
was outlawed, with Justice, steadfastness, and many other virtues. But of this
peril and danger we be delivered by the especial help and grace of God,
because he that now rules is not a child, but perfect in reason, for he
comes not to execute his own will, but his will that sent him, that is to
wit, Gods will, as a man unto whom God of his abundant grace has given perfect
reason and discretion to discern and deem as a perfect man; wherefore of this
man we shall not only say, that he shall dwell in wisdom, but as a perfect
man, and not a child, he shall think and deem, and have such circumspection
with him, that he shall diligently forelooke and see that Gods will be done,
and not his: and therefore now I trust the words of the wise man, Eccles. 10.
shall be verified in our King, saying, A wise and discreet Judge shall now
deem his people, and the Dominion or Lordship of a discreet wise man shall
stand steadfast; whereupon shall then follow the second verse of the same
Chapter, saying, Like as the Head and Sovereign is replenished with all
sapience and virtue in guiding of his people, administering to them Law with due
and convenient Justice, so shall the Subjects be garnished with awe and loving
dread, and bear unto him, next God, all honor, truth, and allegiance. So that
then it may be concluded with the residue of the foresaid verses, Such as the
Ruler of the City is, such then be the inhabitants of the same: So that
consequently it follows, A good Master makes a good Disciple: And likewise,
an evil King or Ruler shall lose his people, and the Cities of his Kingdom
shall be left desolate and uninhabited. Wherefore thus I make an end, in stead
of a child, wilfully doing his lust and pleasure without reason, now shall a
man be Lord and Ruler, that is replenished with sapience and reason, and shall
govern the people by skillful doings, setting apart all wilfulness and
pleasure of himself; so that the word that I began with, may be verified in
him, Ecce quia vir dominabitur in populo, the which our Lord grant, and that he
may prosperously reign unto the pleasure of God, and wealth of his Realm. Amen,

The which Oration being thus finished, and the people answering with great
gladness, Amen. The King standing upon his feet, said unto the Lords and
Commons present. Sirs, I thank you, my Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and all
the States of this Land, and do you to understand, that it is not my will that
any man think that by the way of conquest I would disinherit any man of his
heritage, franchise, or other rights that he ought to have of right, nor for to
put him out of that which he now enjoys, and has h^d before time by custom
of good Law of this Realm, except such private persons as have been against
the good purpose and the common profit of the Realm. And this speech thus
finished, all Sheriffs and other Officers were put in their Authorities, which
season for the time that the Kings Sea was void, and after every man departed.
And at afternoon were Proclamations made in accustomary places of the City in
the name of King Henry the fourth. And upon the morrow following, being
wednesday, and the first of October, the Procurators abovenamed went unto the
Tower of London, and there certified Richard of the admission of King Henry:
And the foresaid Justice, William Thyrning, in the name of the other, and for
all the States of the land, gave up unto Richard late King, all homage and
fealty unto him before him due, in like manner and form as before I have
showed to you in the deposition of King Edward the second. And thus was this
Prince deprived of all Kingly dignity and honor by reason of his evil
counsel, and such unlawful ways and means as he by his insolency in his
Realm suffered to be used, when he had reigned two and twenty years, three
months, and eight days. So Fabian and others verbatim.

Those Parliaments then and National Assemblies, which have thus disposed of
the Crown and Kings themselves, and exercised such jurisdiction over them, must
certainly be above them, and the highest Sovereign power. True it is, our
Protestant P^eres, Commons and Parliaments, never challenged nor exercised such
jurisdiction* and I presume they will not do it. However, it is neither
honorable nor safe for Kings, and the most destructive policy their ill
Counselors can suggest unto them, so far to oppress their Subjects, or
exasperate their Parliaments, as to provoke them to use the extremity of their
Sovereign power, and revive dead sleeping Presidents for their relief; The
consideration whereof when they were fresh, made succeeding Kings more just and
moderate in their governments, and reclaimed many vicious oppressing Princes,
as See Man. West. Ie^ory Monm. Polych. Fab. Grafton Holin. Speed, in his life.
Archigallo and others witness. We know what Solomon says, Eccles 7. 7.
Surely oppression makes a wise man mad; and if Kings or their evil
Instruments shall so far mad their Subjects and Parliaments (either by
oppressions, rapines, misgovernment, destroying, making war upon them, or
putting them out of their protections) as to make them cry out as they did
against King John. Matthew. Par. p. 264, 265, 268 Graft. p. 111. 112. Bishop
Bilson. part. 3. p. 480.
Johannes factus est de Rege Tyrannus, imo de homine in bestialem prorumpens
feritatem. Vae tibi Iohanni Regum ultime; Anglorum Principum abominatio,
Nobilitatis Anglicanae confusio: Heu Anglia vastata, and amplius vastanda, etc.
Whereupon presently ens^ed, a Nolumus hunc regnare. Tandemque decretum est, ut
aliquem potentem in Regem eligerent, per quem possint ad possessiones pristinas
revocari, eradextes quod nullus Iohanne peier, vel durior p^ssit dominari, and
tale miserabile statuentes argumentum.

-- Fortuna miserrima tuta est,
Nam timor eventus deterioris abest.
Cumque aliquandiu, quem eligerent haesitassent, demum in hoc pariter
consenserunt, ut Ludovicum filium Philippi Regis Francorum sibi praeficerent,
and ipsum in Regem Angliae sublimarent; Which they did, to King John's, their
own, and the whole Kingdoms great prejudice. We know what the ill advise of
Rehoboams rough evil Counselors produced, 2 Chronicles. 10. See 2 Chro. 10. and
11.
And the King answered the people roughly after the advice of the young men,
saying: My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add thereto; my father
chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions. And when all
Israel saw, that the King would not hearken unto them, the people answered the
King (though some say he came to the Crown by succession) saying, What portion
have we in David? and we have none inheritance in the Son of Iesse; every man
to your Tents O Israel: and now David, see to thine own house. So all Israel
went to their Tents, and elected Jeroboam for their King, and fell away from
the house of David to this day, being never after united to it, but continuing
a distinct Kingdom from it. This gross impoliticke maxim of ambitious
Princes, now so much cried up and prosecuted: Aut Caesar, aut Nullus, has
utterly unkinged, ruined hundreds of Kings and Emperors, with their families;
and deprived them not only of their Crowns but lives, as it did See
Plutarchi, Julius Caesar, Eutropius, Zonaras, Grimston, and others in his life.
Caesar himself, with many of his successors, whose tragical ends should
deter all other Princes from their destructive, aspiring, tyrannous counsels,
courses, maxims.

Wherefore the best policy Kings can use, to perpetutate their Thrones to them
and their posterity, is to treat their subjects so, Seneca de Clementia, l. 1.
as may win their hearts and affections, and not to strain their pretended
prerogatives beyond the bounds of Law; this being a most certain experimented
rule which Polit. l. 5. c. 10, 11. p. 367, 368. See Polybius, Hist. l. 6.
Aristotle (the Prince of politicians) gives; That there are two intestine
causes most perilous and frequent of all others, by which a Kingdom is usually
lost, and subverted. The first is, if the Nobles and people dissent from the
King himself. The second, if Kings will reign tyrannically, and usurp a
greater domination or prerogative, then the Laws of their Kingdoms give them,
Then he adds, Verily a kingdom is preserved by contrary remedies, specially,
by a moderate kind and temperate form of Government. Deuteronomy. 17. 19, 20. See
Prove. 16. 12. c. 20. 28. c. 29. 4. 14. c. 25. 5.
For by how much the m^re moderate the King shall be, and contented with
smaller and fewer prerogatives, by so much the more constant and longer-lasting
shall his kingdom necess^rily be; For by this means it recedes farther from
the domination of Tyrants, and it comes nearer to the equability of manners and
humanity of life, and is less envyed by His subjects, which he proves by the
notable speech and example of King Theopompus. And indeed this is the
principal policy which God himself has prescribed a King, to prolong his
days in his Kingdom, he and his children after him; to keep all the words of
this Law, and those Statutes to do them, (that is, to govern himself and his
subjects only by Law, not power) to do justice and judgment, avoid
oppression, and not to lift up his heart above his brethren; as if they were
his vassals and not men, not Christians of the same kind and quality as
himself is. Wherefore I shall close up this with old Bractons resolution. Lib.
3. c. 9. f. 107. and ^leta l. 1. c. 17.
Potestas itaque Regis, juris est, and non injuriae. Exercere igitur debet Rex
potestatem Iuris sicut Dei vicarius and Minister in terra: quia illa potestas
Id est, Sola.
SOLIUS Dei est: potestas autem injuriae, Diaboli and non dei: cujus horum
operum fecerit Rex, ejus Minister erit, cujus ope^a fecerit. Igitur dum facit
justitiam, vicarius est Regis aeterni, minister autem Diaboli dum declinat ad
injuriam. See Leges Edwardi Confessoris cap. 17. in Lam^bards Archaion. f. 130.
accordingly.
Dicitur enim Rex a been regendo, non a regnando: quia Rex est dum been regit.
Tyrannus dum populum sibi creditum violenta opprimit dominatione. Temperet
igitur potentiam suam per legem, quae fraenum est potentiae, quod secundum
leges vivat quia hoc sanxit Lex humana; quod leges suum ligent latorem; and
alibi in eadem, Justinian. Codit. l. 1. Tit. 17. cap. 4.
Digna vox Majestate regnantis est, legibus alligatum se Principem profiteri.
Item, nihil tam proprium est imperii quam legibus vivere: Et majus imperio est
legibus submittere principatum; and merito debet retribuere legi, quia Lex
tribuit ei; facit enim Lex quod ipse sit Rex. Item, cum non semper oporteat
Regem esse armatum armis sed legibus, addiscat Rex sapientiam and conservet
justitiam. (All which is notably seconded by Judge Fortescue, De Laudibus Legum
Angliae, c. 9. t^. 15. worthy any Princes serious perusal:) And thus doing,
neither he nor his Posterity need fear this Supreme prerogative power of
Parliaments, which has lain dead and buried for many ages; Et pereat positum
rubigine telum.

11. All Papists See p. 2. 3. and the Authors there quoted. Bishop ^ewels View
of a seditious Bull, and of the Popes Supremacy. Cassanaeus Cata. gloriae
mundi, part. 4.
attribute far more divine authority and Sovereign Jurisdiction over
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Kingdoms, Subjects, to the Pope their Lord and God,
whom they make the Supreme Monarch of the World and all kingdoms in it, and
give him greater authority to summon, ratify, and dissolve general Councels,
then ever any Christian King or Emperor, challenged or usurped: yet those who
maintain these Paradoxes of the Popes Supremacy, confess See John Writes Way
sect. 36. n. 30. 34, 35. p. 122. 104. 105. Surius Tom. 3. and 4.
that a General Council is above the Pope; and may upon just cause (though
they all plead his Soveraignety to be jure divino, and his person most sacred,
terming him his Holiness, in the abstract) not only convent and censure the
Pope for his misdemean^urs, but likewise actually depose him, and set up
another in his stead, as the Councels of Pisa, Constans, Basil, (which deposed
four Popes, namely, Gregory the 12. Benedict the 13. John the 23. and Eugenius
the fourth) the Council of Chalcedon against Pope Leo, the Council of
Sinuessa against Pope Marcellinus; the sixth, seventh, and eighth general
Councels against Honorius, the Councels of Fox Act and Monuments, vol. 1. p.
231. 235. 879. to 890. 962.
Worms and Brixia against Hildebrand, the Council of Pisa, summoned An. 1511.
of purpose to depose Pope Julius for his perjury, experimentally manifest, and
See John Writes Way sect. 36. n. 30. p. 102. and n. 34, 35. p. 104, 105.
sundry popish Writers acknowledge. Now the Council of Basil (as I showed See
p. 6.
before) defined, That the whole Kingdom or Parliament has as great power
over their Kings, as a Council has over the Pope: Therefore by Papists
verdicts they are above the King in point of Sovereign power, as a Council is
above the Pope: which John Mariana, de Rege and Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 3. to
10. professedly proves at large.

12. That Court which may lawfully censure, question, depose, banish, execute
the Kings greatest Favorites, Officers, Judges, yea Lord Protectors themselves,
the highest Peers of the realm, (notwithstanding such are said to be Psalm.
82. 1, 2. Ex. 22. 28. John 10. 34.
Gods, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Ordained of God, Gods, Ministers, To Pro. 8. 15.
decree judgment by God, to be the higher powers, etc. in Scripture, as well
as Kings;) and that not only with, but against the Kings good will; must
questionless be the highest power and jurisdiction in the realm, else the
Kings and their Authorities might protect them against its Justice. But the
Parliament may lawfully censure, question, depose, banish, execute all or any
of these, not only without, but against the Kings consent* witness the
proceedings in Parliament against Hoveden p. 702, 703. 705, 706, with Speed,
Holinshed, Grafton, Stow, Matthew Paris, Polychrenicon, Fabian.
Willam Longchamp, Bishop of Ely, Chief Justitiar, Lord Chancellor, and
Viceroy of England, in Richard the first his reign, during his absence in the
Holy Land,) from which offices he was by the Peers and Commons deposed for his
misdemeanour, and oppressions. Walsingh. Speed, Holinish. Fabian, in Edw. 2.
Froyssards Chron. part. 1. c. 12. 13.
Pierce Gaveston and the two Hugh Spencers, in Edward the seconds reign, of
banished by Parliament, and violently put to death, though the Kings highest
Officers, and darling Minions. Walsingham Holynsh* Speed, Grafton, Stow, in 11
R. 2. c. 1. 6, 7. Froysards Chro. part. 1. c. 97
Michael De la pole, with other great Officers, and Favorites to King Richard
the second, condemned, deprived of their Offices, banished and executed by the
Peers in Parliament, together with Tre^ilian, Belknap, and their fellow
Judges, who misadvised him in point of Law: Hall. Stow, Speed, Holynsh.
Grafton, Fox. in H. 6.
Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, protector to king Henry the sixth, arrested of high
Treason in a Parliament at Bury, and there murdered; Hall. Holin. Grafton,
Stow, in H. 8.
Cardinal Wolsey, that powerful favorite to king Henry the eight, accused
and put from his Chancellorship and other Offices by the Parliament; Fox,
Speed, Holinshed, Stow, Grafton in Ed. 6
The Duke of Sommerset, Lord protector to King Edward the sixth, accused and
attainted of high Treason in Parliament, for which he lost his head; the great
Earl of Strafford Lord Deputy of Ireland, who lost his head this Parliament
for Treason, full sore against his Majesty's and the Queens wills, with
infinite others mentioned in our stories and records: Nay Queens themselves
have undergone the censures of Parliament, (of which we have sundry precedents
in See Fox, Hall, Speed, Holinshed, Grafton, in his life, 28 H. 8. c* 7. and
35. H. 8. c. 1.
king Henry the eight his reign) not only to divorce, but loss of their very
heads; and shall any Delinquent then think to be protected by any power
against the Parliaments justice now?

13. Not to menion the Parlaments power and jurisdiction even in reforming the
excesses and abuses of the kings own meniall servants, and of the
extraordinary train and expenses of the Kings own Court, and gifts; for which
I find these following Presidents, with others; collected by Mr. William Noy
himself, (as is reported) his Majesty's late Attorney General, An. 1634. in a
Manuscript, entitled, A Declaration, etc. passing under his name.

Rotulo Parlia. 3 Ed. 3. n^. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
Anno, 3 Ed. 3. the household was reformed by the petition of the people.

An. 1 R. 2. the household was brought to such moderation of expense as may be
answerable to the revenue of the Crown, Rotulo Parliamenti, 1 R. 2.
in and by Parliament.

Anno. 5 and 6 R. 2. the Commons petition was, Rotulo Parliamenti, An. 5 and 6
R. 2.
that the excessive number of the Kings meniall servants may be remedied, or
else the realm would be utterly undone, and that his household might not
exceed the ordinary revenue of the realm.

Anno 4 H 4. the people crave a reformation of the Kings house; Rotulo Parliam.
4 H. 4. and 11 H. 4
and Anno 7. that he would dismiss some number of the retinue, since it was
now more chargeable and less honorable then his progenitors; and that the
ancient Ordinances of the household, in ^ase of the people might be kept, and
the Officers of the household sworn to put the Ordinances and Statutes in due
execution; and to consider the griefs of his Subjects by unjust purveyance,
contrary to the Statute, that hereafter he might live OF HIS OWN GOODS IN EASE
OF HIS PEOPLE. Ex Rotulo and act. Conc. Anno 7* H. 4.
Which the King willingly does, as appears by an Ordinance in Counsel
whereby the charge of the household is limited to 16000. marks.

Anno 12 and 18 H. 6. the charge of the Kings house is reduced to a certainty,
Rotulo Parliamenti, Ano. 12 H. 6. and 18 H. 6. Ex Rot. Parl and
lessened by petition and order in Parliament.

Anno 12 E 4. the King in Parliament promises to abate his household, Ano. 12
E. 4. Ex libro Ordinationum, Ano. 12 E 4.
and hereafter to live upon his own, so settling a new form of his Court,
which is extant in many hands, and entitled, Ordinations for the Kings house.

Anno 3 E. 2. an Ordinance was made for the Kings household in ease of the Kings
people oppressed with purveyance, Ano. 3 E 2. Ex liber dict. Au^a Regis.
by reason of the greatness thereof; and the motive of that Ordinance was, to
the honor of God, and profit of holy Church, and to the honor and profit of
the King, and the benefit of his people, according TO RIGHT AND REASON, AND THE
OATH WHICH OUR LORD THE KING MADE AT THE BEGINNING of His Reign.

Thus R. 2. did discard the Bohemians, Ex Rot. Parl. 7 and 12 H. 4. and 10. R.
2.
Anno 10. by an act of Parliament, at the peoples petition surcharged by them.

Thus H. 4. did with the Gascoignes and Welsh in like sort, Ex Rot. Parl. Ao. 7
and 12. H. 4.
overburdening and impoverishing the King and Realm with perpetual suits, so
that in Court as the Record says, there were no men almost of substance, or
valiant persons, as there ought to be, but rascals for the greater part.

Hence was it, Rotulo Parliam. Ao. 11 R. 2.
that the wisdom of former times foreseeing the mischief the open hand of
the Sovereign might bring the state into, made a Law 11 R 2. that whatsoever
comes to the King by judgment, escheat, forfeiture, wardship, or in any
other ways, Ao. 2. 4 5. H. 4* n. 9.
shall not be given away, and that the procurer of any such gift shall be
punished.

This Law the Parliament continued 7 H. 4. until the King was out of debt, 7
H. 3. Rot. Parliamenti.
making frustrate the grants of these, and ordaining a penalty of double value
to every mover or procurer of such grants.

The like in Anno 11 H. 4. and that no Petition for any thing should be
delivered to the King but in presence of the Council, Rotulo Parliamenti, Ao.
11 H. 4. n. 293.
who might examine it, lest that the Kings wants should light upon the Commons.

And to keep the hand of H. 6. from wastfull giving, 20 and 25 H. 6. marked 24.
the Council enduced him to convey to the Archbishop of Canterbury and others,
all profits of wards, marriages, reliefes, escheats and forfeitures, to defray
the charge of his house.

It is one of the greatest accusations in Parliament against the Duke of
Sommerset for suffering the King to give away the possessions and profits of
the Crown in manner of a spoil, Ex Rot. Parl. 28 H. 6.
for so are the words of the Record.

And it was the first and chiefest Article to depose R. 2. for wasting, and
bestowing the Lands and the revenue of the Crown upon unworthy persons, Ex
Rotulo Parliamenti, 1 H. 4.
and thereby overcharging the Commons with exactions.

Nor yet to mention the Parliaments Sovereign Power and Jurisdiction Matthew.
Paris p. 500, 562, 933 934, 935.
in making or proclaiming War or Peace, in which they have often times not
only advised, but overswayed the King; in creating the highest Officers, Speed
p. 750. Grafton, p. 188, 189, 240, 241, 221, 222, 223.
in ordering the Militia of the Kingdom by Sea and Land by settled Laws (of
which more anon;) or in ordering the Coin and Money of the Land, together with
the Mint, or designing how the Subsidies and Aids granted by them to the King,
shall be disposed of to the Kingdoms use, The several Acts for Subsidies and
R^stal War, Truce, Arms, Money, Mint, Musters, Taxes, Tonriage, and
Poundage. The Parliaments two Remonstrances concerning the Mi^it^a, Cooks
ins^it. on Artic. Super Chartas. 575. to 579.
of which there are sundry presidents. All which, together with the Acts
concerning his Purveyance, Pardons, Charters, Grants, and all Revenues Royal,
are strong (u) evidences of its Sovereign Authority. Nor yet to remember that
in^allible Argument, to prove Kingdoms greater, and more valuable then Kings;
that Kings as public servants to their Realms, ought to hazard their lives
for their Kingdoms safety and preservation (as many have done in wars
against enemies) but never ought the whole Kingdom to be lost or hazzarded to
preserve the Kings Prerogatives, that of John 11. 48, 49, 50. and chap. 1814.
being an undoubtted rule in Divinity and Policy. See Mat. Par. p. 268. Legimus
quod multi alii Reges, imo and Reguli, usque ad mortem dimicaru^^, etc.
That it is expedient that any one man, (though a King, yea Christ the King of
Kings) should die for the people, that the whole Nation perish no^; rather then
the whole Nation die for him. Priorque mihi and potior ejus officii ratio es^,
quod humano generi, quam quod uni hominum debe^, as Seneca de Benefic. l. 7.
Gentilis de Iure Belli. l. 1. c. 16. resolve, from the light of nature and
common reason. I shall only add this important consideration to illustrate
this obscured truth. It can See Iohannis Mariana de Rege and Regis Ins^it. l.
1: c. 8. Marius Salamonius de Principatu. l. 1, 2, 3, 6. Fortescue, c. 9. to
15. Aristot Polit. l. 3. c. 9, 10, 11. l. 5. c. 10, 11. Hugo Grotius, de Iure
Belli, l. 1 c. 4. sect. 7. p. 85* 86.
hardly seem probable, much less credible, that any free people whatsoever
when they voluntarily at first incorporated themselves into a Kingdom, and set
up an elective or hereditary King over them, would so absolutely resign up
their Sovereign popular ^riginall authority, power, and liberty to their
Kings, their heirs, and successors for ever, as to give them an absolute,
irrevocable, uncontrollable Supremacy over them, superior to, irrestrainable,
irresistible, or unalterable by their own primitive inherent National
Soveraignety, out of which their regal power was derived. For this had been to
make the Creator inferior to the Creature, the Parent subordinate to the
Child, the Derivative greater then the Primitive, the Servant (for Princes are
but their Kingdoms public Ministers) more potent then the Master; of
Freemen, to have made themselves and their Posterity absolute slaves and
vassals for ever; and in stead of a Principality, intended only for their
greater safety and immunity; to have erected a Tyranny, to their perpetual
irremediable Oppression and slavery: A most brutish, sottish, inconsiderate
rash action, not once to be imagined of any people; quite contrary to the
practice of the Lacedaemonians, Romans, Germans, Aragonians, and most other
Nations, who still reserved the Sovereign power to themselves, and never
transferred it to their kings or Emperors, who were ever subject to their
jurisdictions, and censures too, as I shall manifest at large in the Appendix:
no absolute Monarchy being ever set up in the world but by direct Tyranny and
Conquest, as Cassanaeus in his Catalogus Gloriae Mundi pars 5. Consid. 1.
manifests at large, not by the peoples free election and consents. And had our
Ancestors or any other Nations, when they first erected Kings, and instituted
Kingly government, been demanded these few questions: Whether they meant
thereby to transfer all their National authority, power, and privileges so
far over unto their Kings, their heirs, and successors for ever, as not
still to reserve the supremest power and jurisdiction to themselves, to direct,
limit, restrain their Princes supremacy and the exorbitant abuses of it, when
they should see just cause? or so as not to be able ever after to alter or
diminish this form of government upon any occasion whatsoever? Or if their King
should turn professed tyrants, endeavoring to deprive them (against all right
and justice) of their Lives, Goods, Liberties, Religion, Laws* or make open
wars upon them to destroy them, or bring in foreign enemies upon them, to
conquer or subject them to a foreign power without their free consents, that
yet they should patiently submit themselves to these their unnatural,
tyrannical, destructive proceedings without any the least resistance of them
by necessary defensive Arms, or calling the^ to account for these gross
irregularities? I make no question that they would have jointly answered (as I
doubt not but our Parliaments, Kingdoms, and all other Nations, were they at
this day to institute their preerected Principalities and Kings, would answer
to) that they had never any imagination to erect such an absolute, eternal,
unlimited, uncontrollable, irresistible Monarchy, and plain tyranny over them;
and that they ever intended to reserve the absolute original Sovereign
Jurisdiction in themselves, as their native hereditary privilege, which they
never meant to divest themselves of: that so by means thereof, if their Princes
should degenerate into Tyrants, they might have a just authority, power, and
remedy residing in them, whereby to preserve themselves, the Nation Kingdom,
from utter desolation, ruin, and vassalage. An impregnable evidence, that the
whole Kingdom and Parliament representing it, are the most Sovereign power; and
above the King himself, because having the supreme Jurisdiction in them at
first, they never totally transferred it to our Kings, but reserved it in
themselves, which is likewise further confirmed by that notable passage of In
Melch. Goldasti Monarchia, Tom. 1. p. 128.
Philocheus Archilacus in his Somnium Viridarii, c. 171. Royal power is
instituted three manner of ways: First, by the will and pleasure of the
people, because every people wanting a King of their own (not being subject to
the Emperor, or some other King) MAY BY THE LAW OF NATIONS MAKE THEMSELVES A
KING, 94. Did. c. Legitima. If a Royal Principality be thus instituted, as it
is in the proper pleasure and power of the people to ordain, that the King
shall be either Successive of Elective; so it is in their pleasure to ordain,
That Kings succeeding hereditarily shall enjoy their power due nnto them either
immediately before any Coronation, or any other solemnity, or that they shall
receive this power only by their Coronation or any other solemnity about him.
Thereason whereof is, Because as every one in the delivery of the gift of his
own goods, may impose what covenant or condition he pleases, and every man is
moderator and disposer of his own estate; so in the voluntary institution of a
King and Royal Power IT IS LAWFUL FOR THE PEOPLE, SUBMITTING THEMSELVES, TO
PRESCRIBE THE KING AND HIS SUCCESSORS WHAT LAW THEY PLEASE: so as it be not
unreasonable and unjust, and directly against the rights of a Superior:
Therefore lawful to reserve ^he Sovereign Power in and to themselves, and not
to transfer it wholly to their Kings.

14 There is one clear Demonstration yet remaining, to prove the supreme power
of Parliaments above Kings themselves, which is this: That the Parliament is
the highest Court and power, to which all See Sir Thomas Smiths Common wealth,
l. 2. c. 1. 2. Holinsheds description of England, c. 8. p. 173. and Chronicles
of Ireland, p. 127. to 130. Cromptons Jurisdiction.
Appeal^s are finally to be made from all other Courts and Judges whatsoever,
yea from the Kings own personal resolution, in, or out of any other his
Courts: and such a transcendent ^ ribunall from whence there is no appeal to
any other Court or person, no not to the King himself, but only to another
Parliament. If any erroneous Judgment be given in the Kings Bench,
Exchequer-Chamber, Chancery, Court of Wards, or any other Court within the
Realm, or in the Parliament in Ireland, it is finally to be reversed, or
determined in Parliament by a Writ of 1 H. 7. 1* Br. Parliament. 92. 98. Error
65, 88. 137. See Ash. Error 65, 66, 67, 68, 70
Error, or upon a Petition or Bill: If any sentence be unjustly given in any
Ecclesiastical Courts, or before the D^legates, the final Appeal for
redress must be to the Parliament. Illegal sentences in the (now exploded
extravagant) Courts of Star Chamber, or High Commission; Injuries done by the
King and his privy Council at the Council Table, are examinable and
remediable in this high Court. Nay, if the King himself should sit in person
in the Kings Bench, or any other Court (as sometimes our Kings have done) and
there give any Judgment, it is not so obligatory or final, but that the party
against whom Judgment is pronounced, may appeal to the Parliament for
relief, (as Seneca epist. 100. out of Tully de Repub. and Fenestella, Hugo
Grotius de jure Belli, l. 1. c. 4. s. 20. p. 65. record; that among the Romans
in certain causes they might appeal from the King to the people.) But if the
Parliament give any Judgment, There See 22. E. 3. 3. Error 8. 8 Hen. 4. 12, 13.
can be no appeal to any higher Tribunal, Court, or person, no not to the
King, but only to the next or some other Parliament, as is evident by
experience, by all 21 R. 2. cap. 1. to 15. 1 Hen. 4. cap. 2, 3, 4. 8 Hen. ^.
12, 13. See Martae c. 1. ^ Elez. cap. 1, 3, 21. Iac c. 28. And all Acts for
rest^ tution in blood of persons attainted, and Acts of repealing Statu^es,
Bracton. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Attainders of Trea^on, by or in Parliament, by all inconvenient and unjust
Acts passed in Parliament, which concern either King or Subject; which cannot
be reversed nor repealed, though erroneous, nor the right heir restored in
blood by any Charter from the King, but only by an act of repeal or
restitution in another Parliament. Now this is an infallible Maxim, both in
the Common, Civil, and Canon Law, that The Court or person to whom the last
appeal is to be made, is the Supream^st power; as the Sea Ashes Tables, Error
65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70.
Kings Bench is above the Common Pleas, the Eschequer Chamber above the Kings
Bench, and the Parliament above them all, because a Writ of Error to reverse
erroneous judgments given in the Common Pleas, lies in the Kings Bench:
Errors in the Kings Bench may be reversed in the Eschequer Chamber; and errors
in all or either of them, may be redressed finally in Parliament, from whence
there is no further appeal. Hence the Canonists conclude, a Bodin, l. 1. c.
10. Summa Angelica, and Rosella Tit. Appellatio. Lindwo^d, lib. 2. de
Appellationibus, F^X Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 448, 449. 452. 506. 24. H.
8. c. 12. All Papists and Protestants, in their Controversies of the Popes
Supremacy, and of general Councels
General Council above the Pope, the Pope above the Archbishop, the
Archbishop above the Ordinary, because men may Appeal from the Ordinary to the
Archbishop, from him to the Pope (but now with us to the Kings Delegates.) If
there be any difference between See Grafton p. 512, 513. 161. Matthew Paris,
p. 954. Fox old Edition, p. 508.
King or Subject, touching any inheritances, Privileges or Prerogatives
belonging to the Crown it self, or any points of misgovernment; yea, which is
more, if there be any suite, quarrel, or difference between our Kings in Act,
and any other their Competitors, See Hoveden, p. 724, 725
for the Crown it self, which of them has best title to it, who of them
shall enjoy it, and how, or in what manner it shall be settled, the Lords and
Commons in Parliament are and ought to be the sole and final^ Judges of it.

Not to give you any instances of this kind between King and Subjects, which
I have formerly touched; nor to relate how our King John Matthew Paris, p. 273.
274, 275.
condemned to death by a Parliament in France, by French Peers, for slaying his
Nephew* Arthur treacherously with his own hands, and likewise to lose the crown
of England: or bow Matthew Paris, p. 892. 925. 930. 948. 954, 955. Grafton, p.
188, 189 Speed, p. 687, 688. 785. 786. Andrew Favine Theater of honor, l. 2.
c. 12.
Henry the third, K. Edward the first and other our Kings have Appealed to the
Parliaments of France and England, upon differences between the Peers and
Kings of France and them, concerning their Lands and Honors in France.
Walsingham Hist. p. 514. Speed, p. 647. 648
Or how King Edward the third, and Philip of France submitted both their Titles
to the Kingdom of France, to the determination in a French Parliament, where
they were both personally present, which adjudged the Crown to Philip. Nor yet
to mention how the Parliaments and general assembly of the estates of France
have See Andrew Favine his Theater of Honor, l. 2. c. 12. Fabian, the general
History of France, with others in the Appendix.
frequently disposed of the Crown of that Kingdom, determined the
controversies of the right and titles pretended to it; and elected Protectors
or Regents of the Realm during their Kings minorities, or distractions; of
which I shall cite diverse precedents in the Appendix, to which I shall refer
you. Nor yet to trouble you with Spanish Precedents of this nature, where the
several claims and titles of the pretenders to the Crowns have been often
referred to, debated in, and finally resolved by their Parliaments and general
assemblies of the States, the proper Judges of such controversies, as Censura
Dua^di Nonii, In Iosephi Teixerae libellum, c. 76. to 83. and de Vera Regum
Portugal. Genealogia, c. 17. 18.
Ioannes Mariana, Munsteri Cosinogr. l. 2. c. 20, 21. Joan. Mariana de Rege and
Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 3. 4. 5. Michael Ritius de Regilus Hispaniae and others.
Euardus Nonius, and other Spanish writers determined; as Philip the second the
18. King of Portugal his title to that Crown and his competitors, together
with the rights and claims of Alfonso the 1. 3. 5. John the 1. Emanuel and
other Kings of Portugal, and their Corivals were solemnly debated and
determined in the assembly of the States of that Realm, and of diverse Kings
and Queens of Arragon, Castile, Navarre: A pregnant argument, that their
assemblies of States are the sovereign Tribunal, since they have power and
right to determine and settle the descent, right and succession of the Crown
between those who pretend titles thereunto: I shall confine my self to
domesticke precedents. Not to repeat the Page 9.
forementioned precedents, how the Lords and commons when the Title to the
Crown has been in dispute have transferred it from the rightful Heirs to
others; I shall give you some other pregnant evidences, where the Parliament
has finally determined the Title to the Crown, when it has been in
competition, and settled it in a legal manner to avoid debates (by way of
Appeal to them by competitors, or reference from the Kings themselves) as the
only proper Judges of such a superlative controversy. Not to mention any
stories of our British Kings to this purpose, where the Sea Matthew Westminster.
Fabian. Grafton, Holin.
Kingdom, Lords and Commons then, disposed of the Crown in cases of minority,
want of Heirs, misgovernment, and controversies about the Title to the Crown.

Polychron. l. 6 c. 18. Speed, p. 399. See Grafton and Holinshed accordingly.
Canutus after the death of King Edmund, Anno 1017. clayming the whole Realm
against Edmunds Brethren and Sons, referred his Title upon the agreement made
between Edmund and him for this purpose, to the Parliament, who resolved for
Canutus Title, and thereupon took an Oath of fealty to him, Offering to defend
his right with their swords against all others claims. After his decease, the
Matthew Westminster and Malmesbury, Anno 1036. Holinshed, l. 17. c. 13 p. 398.
Speed, p. 404. Huntingdon, Walsingham. Anno 1036. 1040.
Title to the Crown being controverted between Hardicanute the right Heir,
and Harold his elder, but base Brother; it was referred to a Parliament at
Oxford, who gave their voices to Harold, (there present) and presently
proclaimed and consecrated him King; Anno 1036. After whose death, the States
of England sent and adjudged the Crown to Hardicanute, then in Denmark. He
dying, Huntingdon, l. 6. Polychron. l. 6. c. 18. Speed. p. 410. Matthew
Westmin. Anno. 1042 p. 415.
Edward the Confessor, by a general consent of the Nobles, Clergy, and People
(who presently upon Harold^ death, enacted by Parliament,) That none of the
Danish blood should any more Reign over them) was elected King, and declared
right Heir to the Crown, Anno 1126. Hoveden, Huntingdon, Matthew Westminster.
Matthew Paris, Walsingham, Polychronicon, Fa^ian, An. 1126. Speed p. 477. See
Holinshed, Grafton, Stow, Anno 1126.
King Henry the first having no issue male, but only one Daughter Maude, to
succeed him, summoned a Parliament in the presence of himself and David King
of Scotland, wherein the Crown was settled upon Maude after his decease, being
of the ancient Royal English blood; whereupon Stephen, his Sisters Son, and
all the Nobles presently swore fealty to her, As much as in them lay, after
King Henry's death (if he died without issue male) to establish her Queen of
the Monarchy of great Britain. But Stephen after his decease, usurped the
Crown against his Oath, By the unanimous consent and election of the Lords and
Commons: And after seventeene years civil wars, to the devastation of the
Realm Walsingham, Ypod, An. 1113 Matthew Westminster. An. 1153. p. 42. Mat^hew
Paris, p. 82, 83 Speed p 497. Hoveden, p 490. Huntingdon, Hist. l. 8. p. 598.
Fox. Vol. 1. p. 261.
King Stephen and Henry the Son of Maude came to a Treaty at Wallingford,
where by the advice of the Lords, they made this accord; That Stephen if he
would, should peaceably hold the kingdom during his life, and that Henry
should be his adopted Son and Successor, enjoy the Crown as right Heir to
it after his death; and that the King and all the Bishops and Nobles should
swear, that Henry after the Kings death, if he survived him, should possess
the Kingdom without any contradiction: Which done the civil wars ceased,
and a blessed peace ensued: and then coming to Oxford, in a Parliament all the
Nobles did fealty to Henry, who was made chief Justiciar of England, and
determined all the affairs of the kingdom. In the 8. and 25. of E. 3. there
was a 25. E. Par. 2. in the Statuts at large
doubt moved in Parliament, whether the children of the King, or others borne
beyond the Seas within his Allegiance, should inherit lands in England? The
King, to clear all doubts and ambiguities in this case, and to have the Law
herein reduced to certainty; charged the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other
wise men of his Council assembled in Parliament in the 25. year of his
Reign, to deliberate of this point; who with one assent resolved, That the Law
of the Realm of England is, and always has been such, that the children of
the Kings of England in whatsoever parts they be borne, in England or
elsewhere, be able and owe to bear inheritance after the death of their
Ancestors: Which when they had declared, the King, Lords and Commons by a
special Act, did approve and affirm this Law for ever, the only Act passed
in that Parliament. And in a Cook l. 8. The Princes ca^e.
Parliament, 1^. E. 3. this Kings eldest son was created Duke of Cornwall by
Parliament, which then also entailed the Duchy of Cornwall upon the eldest
sons (...) of England. So 21. R. 2. c. 9. the Principality of Chester (...)
on the Prince by Act of Parliament.

7. H. 4. c. 2 Hals Chronicle, 1. H. 4. f. 10. 15. Fabian. part. 7. p. 376
Speed p. 763.
King Henry the (...) the inheritance of the Crowns and (...) his posterity,
caused them by a special (...) his reign, to be entailed and settled on (...)
and Prince Henry his eldest son to be established* (...) heir apparent to
him, and to succeed him in the said (...) and Realms, to have them with their
appurtenances after the Kings death, to him and the heire^ of his body
begotten; And if he should die without heir of his body begotten, (...)
remain to the Lord Thomas, the Kings second son, with successive remainders
to Lord John the third, and Lord Humfry the Kings fourth son, and the heirs
of their bodies begotten. After which Act passed (for the avoiding of all
claims, titles, and ambiguities, to be made unto the Crown) he thought never
by any of his Subjects to be molested or troubled: the rather, because in this
Parliament it was first concluded; that deposed King Richard should continue in
a large prison, and be plenteously served of all things necessary both for
viande and apparel, and if any persons should presume to rear war or
congregate a multitude to deliver him out of prison, that then he should be the
first that should die for that seditious commotion: Which King Richard (as
Fabian, part. 7 p. 373.
Sir John Bagot by his Bill exhibited to this Parliament averred) had diverse
times, at sundry Parliaments in his time holden, said; that he would have his
intent and pleasure concerning his own matters, whatsoever betide of the
residue; and if any withstood his will or mind, he would by one means or
other bring him out of his life; And further said to him at Lichfield in the
one and twentieth year of his reign, that he desired no longer for to live
then to see his Lords and Commons have him in as great awe and dread, as ever
they had of any his Progenitors, so that it might be chronicled of him, that
none passed him of honor and dignity, with condition that he were deposed, and
put from his said dignity the next morrow after. So wilful was he, as to
prefer his will before his Crown or safety.

Hall, Anno 38. and 39 H. 6. f. 176. to 183. F^bi^n, Anno 1441. p. 470.
Grafton. p. 643. to 648. Holinshed, Stow, Howes, Anno 1440. 1441.
In the years 1440. and 1441. Richard Duke of York came into the Parliament
House, and there, in a large Oration laid claim, and set forth his Title to
the Crown of England, which King Henry the sixth had long enjoyed, desiring
the Parliament to determine the right of the Title between them, both sides
submitting to their resolution as the proper Judges of this weighty royal
controversy: After long debate and consideration of the case among the Peers,
Prelates, and Commons of the Realm, it was finally agreed and resolved by
them: That in as much as Henry the sixth had been taken as King for 38. years
and more, that he should enjoy the name and title of King, and have possession
of the Realm during his natural life. And if he either died, or resigned, or
FORFAITED THE SAME for breaking any part of this concord, then the said Crown
and authority royal should immediately descend to the Duke of York ( King
Edward the 4. his Father) if he then lived; or else to the next heir of his
line. And that the said Duke from thenceforth should be Protector and Regent of
the Kingdom. Provided always, that if the King did closely or apertly, study or
go about to break or alter this agreement, or to compass or imagine the
death of the said Duke or his blood; then he TO FORFEIT THE CROWN: and the
Duke TO TAKE IT: These Articles made by the Parliament between them, they both
subscribed, sealed, and swore to, and then caused them to be enacted. Lo here
we have these two Kings submitting their Titles to the Crown and Kingdom it
self to the Resolution of both houses of Parliament, as the Sovereign Judge
between them; who settled the Crown in this order, under pain of forfeiting
it by King Henry, if he violated their Decree herein; and appointing a Lord
Protector over the Kingdom in his full age, as Historia Angliae p. 458.
Parliamentum fuit convocatum in quo Parliamento ex assensuomnium Statuum, idem
Dux, Defensor seu Protector Angliae fuerat nominatus and ordinatus, omniaque
Regni officia and beneficia ejus disposition^ sunt commissa.
Walsingham informs us, a Parliament constituted Duke Humfry to be Protector
of him and his Kingdom of England, and the Duke of Bedford to be Regent of
France, during his minority; who exercised all regal power, by virtue of that
authority which the Parliament derived to them. After this, in these two Kings
reigns, See Grafton p. 691, 692. Speed p. 869. 878. 859 886. 1. E. 4. c. 1.
17. E 4. c. 7.
the Crown and its descent were variously settled by Parliament (as I have
formerly manifested) yet so, as that which one Parliament settled in this kind,
continued firm till it was altered or reversed by another Parliament. King
Speeds Hist. p. 928. 931
Richard the third coming to the Crown by usurpation, to strengthen his
Title, procured the Lords and Commons to pass an Act of Parliament, wherein
they declare him to be their lawful King, both by election and succession,
entaile the Crown upon him and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten,
create his Son Edward, Prince of Wales, and declare him heir to succeed him
in the royal Crown and dignity after his decease.

In which Act of Parliament (recited at large by Speed) there is this memorable
passage: That the Court of Parliament is of such Authority, and the people of
this land of such a nature and disposition, as experience teaches; that
manifestation or declaration of any Truth or Right made by the three Estates of
this Realm Assembled in Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, makes
before all other things most faith and certainty, and quieting of men's minds,
removes the occasion of all doubts, and seditious language: Hals Chro. 1 H. 7.
f. 855.
Henry the seventh afterward slaying this usurping Richard at Boswell-field,
to avoid all ambiguities and questions of his Title to the Crown, in his first
Parliament procured the Lords and Commons by a special Act, to settle the
inheritance of the Crowns of England and France, on him and the heirs of his
body lawfully begotten, perpetually by the grace of God, so to endure, and on
none other, and all attainders and Acts against him, by Edward the fourth, and
King Richard Grafton p. 856.
this Parliament annihilated. After him King Henry the eighth, to ratify his
divorce from Queen Katherine, caused it to be confirmed, and his Sp. p. 1028.
marriage with her to be utterly dissolved by Act of Parliament: and by 25 H.
8. c. 22 26 H. 8. c. 13. 28 H. 8. c. 7. 35 H 8. c. 5. See Hall.
sundry Acts, ratified his subsequent Marriages, and settled the descent of the
Crown to his posterity, somewhat different from the course of the Common Law;
which Statutes were afterward altered and the descent of the Crown settled by
other special Bills in Parliament, both in 1 Mar. c. 1. and Parliament 2. c. 1.
2. 1. Eli. c. 3 13 Eliz. c. 1.
Queen Mary's, and Queen Elizabeth's Reigns, whose Titles to the Crown were
settled, and in some sort created by the Parliament.

By the notable Sta. of 13. Eli. c. 1. worthy reading for this purpose, it is
made no less then high Treason, to affirm; That the Queen, WITH, and BY THE
AUTHORITY OF THE PARLIAMENT of England, is not able to make Laws and Statutes
of sufficient force and validity to BIND, LIMIT, RESTRAIN and govern all
PERSONS, THEIR RIGHTS AND TITLES THAT IN ANY WISE may or might claim any
interest or possibility IN OR TO THE CROWN OF ENGLAND in POSSESSION,
REMAINDER, INHERITANCE, SUCCESSION, or OTHERWISE HOWSOEVER; and all other
persons whatsoever. King Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and other our
Princes holding their Crowns by a Parliamentary Title, rather then by the
course of the Sea Cooks Institut. Liulet. f. 15, 16.
Common Law, which this Statute affirms the Parliament has power to alter,
even in case of descent of the Crown.

It is observable that the Statutes of 25 H. 8. c. 22. 28 H. 8. c. 7. and 35 H.
8. c. 1. do not only Nulli^ie some of this Kings marriages, and ratify
others of them, declaring some of his issues legitimate and hereditable to the
Crown, others not, and appoint the Queen, if living, to be Protector of the
infant King or Queen, that should inherit the Crown; or such of the Lords as
the King by his last will should design; But likewise prescribe strict Oaths
for every Subject to take, to maintain the Succession of the Crown, as it is
limited by those Acts, which Oaths for any to refuse, is made high Treason, or
to write or speak any thing against the succession of the Crown as it is
therein limited: And withal they derive a plenary authority to the King (who
thereupon 35 H. 8. c. 1.
acknowledges the great trust and confidence his loving Subjects had in him,
in putting in his hands wholly the Order and Declaration of the Succession of
this Realm) by his Letters Patents under his Seal, or his last will in
writing signed with his hand, for lack of issue lawfully begotten of his body,
to 28 H. 8. c. 7. 35 H. 8. c. 1.
give, limit, assign, appoint or dispose the imperial Crown of the Realm,
to what person or persons, and for such estate in the same, and under such
conditions as it should please his Majesty. The Parliament therein promising by
one common assent to accept, take, love, dread, and obey, as their Legal
Governors, and Supreme heads, such person or persons only, as the King by
authority of those Acts should give the Crown unto, and wholly to stick to
them as true faithful Subjects. Provided, that if any of his Children or
Heirs, afterward did usurp one upon the other in the Crown of this Realm,
or claim, or challenge the said imperial Crown, otherwise, or in any other
course, form, degree or condition, then the same should be given, disposed, or
limited unto them, by the King, by virtue of those Acts. Or if any person or
persons to whom it should please the King, by authority of those Acts to
dispose the said Crown and Dignity of this Realm, or the Heirs of any of
them, should at any time hereafter demand, challenge, or claim the Crown of
this Realm, otherwise, or in any other course, form, degree or condition,
then the same should be given, disposed, and limited unto them by the King, by
virtue and authority of these Acts; That then all, and singular offenders, in
any of the premises contrary to these Acts, and all their Abettors,
Maintainers, Factours, Counselors, and Aiders therein, shall be deemed, and
adjudged HIGH TRAITORS TO THE REALM; and that every such offense shall be
accepted, reputed, and taken TO BE HIGH TREASON, and the offenders therein,
their ayders, etc. for every such offense shall suffer such judgment, pains
of death, losses and forfeitures of Lands, Goods, and Privileges of sanctuary,
as in any ^ases of high Treason. And over, that as well THE KINGS SAID HEIRS
AND CHILDREN, as EVERY SUCH PERSON and PERSONS TO WHOM THE CROWN SHOULD BE
LIMITED AS AFORESAID, and every of their Heirs, for every such offense above
specified, by them to be committed, SHALL LOSE AND FORFEITE AS WELL ALL SUCH
RIGHT, TITLE, AND INTEREST, THAT THEY MAY CLAIM OR CHALLENGE, IN OR TO THE
CROWN OF THIS REALM, AS HEIRS BY DESCENT, OR BY REASON OF ANY GIFT OR ACT
DONE BY THE KING, for his or their advancement, by authority of those Acts, or
by any manner of means or pretense whatsoever.

And the Statute of 35 H. 8. c. 1. which entailed the Crown upon Queen Mary,
after Edward the sixth his decease without issue* (...) this proviso; That if
the said Lady Mary do not keep and perform such conditions as King Henry by
(...) Patents or last Will in writing, (...) estate in the Imperial Crown;
(...) Imperial Crown shall be and come to the (...) lawfully begotten, in
such like manner and form, as (...) Mary were then dead, without any Heirs of
her body begotten, any thing in this Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding. And the like provis there is for Queen Elizabeth, That if she
perform not the like conditions, limited as aforesaid, to her estate in the
Crown, That then the said Imperial Crown shall be and come to such person or
persons as the King by his Letters patents or last Will shall appoint. By all
which Acts, (worthy reading and consideration) the Parliaments Supreme power
of settling and disposing the descent and inheritance of the Crown, and giving
Authority even to the King himself, to dispose of it upon condition, on pain
of forfeiture as aforesaid (which the King alone had no power at all to do)
will easily appear to the most malignant Spirits.

In the first 1 Iac. c. 1.
Parliament of our late King James, the first Bill then passed, was an
acknowledgement, and confirmation of his immediate, lawful, and undoubted
succession and right to the Crown of England, as the next and only Heir of
the blood Royal, to whom of right it descended; which Dolman the Priest, and
some Jesuits opposed in Printed seditious Books. So the 1 Mariae, Parl. 2. c.
2.
Articles of Qu. Mary's marriage with K. Philip, were appointed, and ratified
by Parliament: And the Imperial Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction usurped by the
Pope and Prelates, has likewise by 25 H 8. c. 19, 21. 26 H. 8 c. 1, 3. 27 H.
8. c. 10. 28 H. 8. c. p. 16. 32 H. 8. c. 22, 24, 29. 31 H. 8. c. 10, 14. 33 H.
8. c. 29. 34 and 35 H. 8 c. 17, 19. 35 H. 8 c. 1, 3. 1 Eli. c. 1 1 E. 6. c. 2,
1 Ma. c. 1. and Parl. 2. c. 1. 8. El. c. 1.
sundry Statutes been restored and united to the Crown, and the Title of
Supreme head, and Supreme Governor in all causes, and over all persons,
Spiritual, Ecclesiastical and Temporal, settled upon our Kings and Queens;
Who during their minorities have had Guardians and Protectors, appointed to
them by Walsingham Hist. Angl. H. 5 p. 458. Speed p. 1108. 28 H. 8. c. 7, 17.
1. E. 6. c. 11. Hals Chron. 1 H. 6.
Parliament, to summon Parliaments, assent to Bills, and execute all Royal
Jurisdiction in their names and steads. And as the Title and Right to the
Crown of England, and the Jurisdiction thereof has thus from time to time
been decided and settled in and by our Parliaments, so has the Title and
jurisdiction of the Crown of Scotland, been Hist. Angl. p. 16 to 26. 31 to
33, 42. 46 to 56. See Holin. Grafton, Stow, and Speed in the life of Edw. the
f^rst. Ypodig. Neust. p. 72 to 96.
frequently discussed and settled in our Parliaments, upon appeals made to them
by the Kings of Scotland, and their Corrivals to that Crown; Witness the
famous case and competition for that Crown long agitated and resolved in
Parliament between the King of Norway, Bailiol, and Bruce, (to omit others) in
the Reign of King Edward the first; And this King Edwards Title to the Crown
of Scotland, declared and resolved by our Parliament here; All which are
Recorded at large by Thomas Walsingham, and Matthew Westminster, in the life of
King Edward the first, and in the Parliament Rolls, and Pleas of his Reign,
with 1 Iac. ^.
sundry other instances of this nature (frequent in our Historians) which for
brevity I pretermit.

It is a 35 H. 8. c. 1.
clear case without dispute, that if the King should dye without any Heir,
the Crown would escheate to the whole Kingdom and Parliament, who might
dispose of it in such a case, to what person they pleased, or quite change that
form of Government, if they saw good cause; no particular kind of rule being
so simply necessary by any divine Right or Law to any State or Kingdom, but
that as it was at first instituted, so it may in such a case be changed by the
whole Kingdoms general consent, upon sufficient grounds. This appears by the
case of Blondus Decad. 2. l. 2. Regin l. 2. An. 800. Bishop Bilson of Christian
Subjection, etc. par. 3. p. 423.
Charles the Gross, who being deposed from the Empire and his Kingdoms, for a
mad man, and dying without any Heir, the Kingdoms which before were subject
to him, Destitute of a right Heir, began to fall in sunder on every side, and
to choose Kings of themselves of another Family. France elected Charles, a
child, surnamed Simple, for their King; and after his simplicity displeased
them, they Crowned Otho Son of Robert Duke of Saxony in his place* At the
same time the people of Italy meaning to have a King of (...) not agree on the
matter, but some chose Beringarius, (...) Kings in Italy, both calling and
bearing themselves as (...); And the Germans elected Arnolph Duke of Bavaria
for their Emperor. Thus Zona. Annal. Tom. 3. f. 126. Grimstons Imperial hist.
p. 303
Zeno the Emperor dying without any Heir that might succeed him, Anastasius a
man of great reputation, yet of no Noble Family, was chosen his Successor, by
the Senate and Legions. The like we read of diverse other Emperors deceasing
without Heir; of some of our Saxon and British Kings, before the Conquest; and
of other in Castile, Aragon, and other Kingdoms, where the Crown has been
translated from one Family to another, by the Kingdoms consent for want of
Heirs.

Duardus Censu. in Joseph. Tei. Libel. c. 78. in Joan. Pisterius hispan.
illust. Tam. tom. 2. p. 1250.
Nonius Leo, a learned Portugal Lawyer, informs us; That Ferdinand King of
Portugal, dying without any lawful Heir, lineall or collateral, as they
believed; the Estate of that Kingdom assembling at Coimbre, elected John a
bastard for their King upon this very ground, (specified in their decree of his
Election) That King Ferdinand dyed without any lawful issue or kindred; UNDE
JURE GENTIUM, Whence BY THE LAW OF NATIONS, they affirmed it to BE LAWFUL FOR
THE PEOPLE TO CHOOSE A KING OR GOVERNOR, WHOM THEY PLEASED. Believing
therefore, that they had returned to that state WHEREIN BY THE LAW OF ALL
NATIONS THEY MIGHT CREATE THEM A KING, namely the kingdom being void without
an Heir; They said they might lawfully elect John, a most valiant man, and one
who best deserved of the Commonweal to be their King, he being begotten of
the stock of the Kings of Portugal. Thus this whole Parliament at Coimbre;
and this Lawyer there, and elsewhere I^^d ca. 76. p. 1248.
affirms; THAT BY THE LAW OF ALL NATIONS, if the King in an Hereditary
Kingdom die without Heir, THE PEOPLE MAY LAWFULLY ELECT WHOM THEY PLEASE FOR
THEIR KING; as they do in all elective Realms: Which Ioannes Mariana, de Rege
and Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 3, 4. does likewise aver: The reason is, See
Marius Salamonius de principatu, l. 1, 2 3, 6 p. 19, 20, 27, 41, 120, 126.
Because the whole kingdom and people are the original supreme Sovereign
power, by whose common consent and Authority all lawful Kings, kingdoms, and
Royalties were at first created and instituted, and from whom they derived all
their regal Jurisdiction: And therefore as all Mesnalties, Tenancies, and
Fees, by the deaths of their Tenants without heir, return by way of Escheate
to those Lords and Sergniories, by whom they were original^y created; and all
politic Corporation Lands, (as Abbeys, Prioies, Bishoprics, Hospitals, and
the like,) by the dissolution of those Corporations by death or otherwise,
return to the first founders of them; (as See Fitz. Ash. Tab. Tit. Escheat
Eccles. 1. 7.
all Rivers run into the Sea, out of which they primitively issue:) So all
successive kingdoms by the self same reason, upon the Kings decease without
any lawful heirs to inherit or succeed them, must by all Law, right, equity,
revert to the dispose and dominion of all the People of the Realm, or to the
representative Body thereof the Parliament as to the Supreme Lords and
Founders of it; from and of whom the King himself does hold the Crown, (if I
may so speak) by those regal duties and services expressed in general in his
Coronation Oath, which he takes to all his people;) and if he die his Heir to
the Crown being within age, the Parliament and kingdom as the Sovereign Lord
and power may and usually does appoint a See Leges Edwardi Confess. c. 17. Bra.
l. 3. c. 9.
Guardian and Lord Protector over him (as I have See Par. 2. p. 48 to 65.
elsewhere proved) till his maturity, to discharge his regal Trust and duty to
his people in his name and stead. Hence Hugo Grotius in his Book de Iu^e Belli
and Pacis, r. 2. c. 9. sect. 8, 9, 10, 11. concludes: That if an elective King
dye, or (...) King decease without any known heir to succeed him, the Empire
or Sovereignty (...) in the King as Head, returns unto, and remains in the
people as in the entire body, which continues the same it was before: And
therefore in such cases they may either create a new King if they please, as in
elective kingdoms, or divide the kingdom into parts, and erect a new Empire,
as the Romans, Germans and Persians did; or change the Government; the people
in this case being Sui juris, having the raines of Government in their own
hands, as at first before they erected an hereditary Monarchy, to order and
dispose of the government as they shall think meet: it being a thing which in
its own nature is not capable of an Occupancy, nor seisible by any, unless
the people will voluntartly desert their own liberty, none having authority to
usurp a regency over them in such a case, but by their free assents. Upon
which ground he holds with Cynus, and Raynorius, That if the Roman Emperor (or
any other King by like reason) be sick, or taken prisoner, so as he cannot
administer the government, the people of Rome may create and appoint him a
Viceroy to govern them; the power of the Emperor, and the most absolute
Monarch, being only a power of Administration for the peoples good and
service, not of dominion for his own profit; of which none but the people can
dispose; as De Iure Belli l. 3. c. 15.
Abberius Gentilis proves at large.

Yea, Bishop Bilson The true difference between Christian ^ubjection and
unchristian rebellion, part. 3. p. 418. to 422.
himself (though a great Royalist,) positively affirms; That if a King, or
right Heir to any Crown be borne, or becomes a natural Fool, or stark mad,
or run besides himself, so that he is not able to govern himself, much less
his Realm; in these two cases, ANY REALM BY PUBLIC CONSENT and ADVICE MAY
CHOOSE ANOTHER KING: (for what should he do with a Royal Office, or by what
divine or humane right can he enjoy a Crown, who is utterly unable to manage
it?) Upon this ground See the general history of France in his life,
Sabellicus Ennead. 8. l. 8. p. 245. Nauclerus vol. 3. Genesis 26^ Blondus, Decad.
1. l. 10. Aventinus, l. 3. p. 293, to 300. Gaguinus l. 3. in Car. Mart. Herman.
Schedel, Chron. Aetas 6. f. 185.
King Childerick was deposed by his French and German Subjects general
consents, because he was a fool, a Sot, a Beast, unable to govern his Kingdom,
and Pepin of another race, elected and crowned King in his stead; which act by
Pope Zacharies resolution, was adjudged both just and lawful, even in point of
conscience, before it was put in execution. So Godfredus Vi^t^rbiensis Chro.
pars 17. col 468. Regino l. 3. An. 887. H. Mutius, Germ. Chr. l. 12. Grimstons
Imperial History p 404.
Charles the third, the last Emperor of Pepins race, was deposed from the
Empire, by the Princes, Dukes, and Governors of the Provinces of Germany and
France, for that he became foolish and unfit to govern, being bereaved of his
senses; and by common consent, Arnolph was elected Emperor in his stead; Thus
E^^gri^^ Eccl. hist. l. 5. c. 11 1. 3 Zonaras Annal. Tom. 3 f. 150. 151.
Eutropiu^ l. 16. p. 211.
Justinius the second falling into a frenzy and madness, so that he had no
sense nor understanding of any thing that was done, was removed, and Tiberius
placed in the Empire; at his Coronation, Justinius used this notable speech; Let
not the glory of these Imperial robes, lead thee into error, neither be thou
deceived with the glorious show of such things as are subject unto the senses,
wherewith I my self now (alas) beig snared, have brought my self foolishly into
grievous torments. Wherefore in governing the Empire with great moderation and
mildness of spirit, redress what is amiss, and correct what I have lewdly
committed. And pointing at his ill Counselors with his finger, he said; Nota.
Thou must in no wise be ruled by these men, for these be those which brought
me into this lamentable plight, and the misery thou see me in. A memorable
strange speech of a distracted Prince. And thus the Emperor Grimstons
Imperial History p. 581, 582. Sententia Exaucterationis and Depositionis
Wences^ai, An. 1400. in Germ. Hist. Tom. 2. p. 180. 181. Iean. Crespin.
L^estate de Lesglise p. 465.
Wenceslaus, was likewise deposed by the Princes electors of the Empire, For
besotting himself so with pleasures, etc. as that he became altogether unfit
for the government, and a man unprofitable for the Empire and Christian
Commonwealth; and Rupert Count Palatine of Rhine, and Duke of Bavaria, was
elected Emperor in his stead. The like (no doubt) might be lawfully done here
in England, by the whole Kingdom and Parliament, if any such cases of incurable
folly or frenzy should befall any of our Kings, who might then either create a
Lord Protector to govern both King or Kingdom, during such disabilities of
Government in the King (as Aventine l. ^. f. 293. Fr^st g. 1. 3. c. 13. Naucl.
vol. 3. Genesis 26.
Childricke for a time, before his deposition, was governed and overruled in
all things by the Marshall of the Palace) or else Crown the next Heir King, if
he be capable to Govern. Yea, in the time of our Saxon Kings, when the right
Heir was an Infant, unable to govern, the Crown usually descended to the next
Heir of full age: Hence Speeds Hist. p. 252. 253. 262. 364, 365 See Matthew
West. Polychr. Floren. Wigo^. Holinshed, Huntindon, and others.
Wibba King of Mercia deceasing* Penda his son being an Infant, the Crown
descended to his Nephew C^orl of full age, after whose death Penda being of
ripe age inherited the Kingdom. So King VVulfcher deceasing, leaving his son
Kenred within age, his Brother Ethelred succeeded him; who resigning his Crown
and turning Monk after he had Reigned 30. years, Kenred then of full age
enjoyed the Crown. So Ethelfred King of Northumberland dying, Edelwald his
Brother entered the Government and Reigned, Aldulfe, Ethelherds son, being then
a minor, who enjoyed not the Crown till after Edelwalds death. So Gauf. edu^
Mo^u. l 3. c. 20. Graf^^n p. 67.
Casse^elan succeeded Lud his Brother in the Kingdom of Britain, Luds sons
being too young and insufficient to Reign: The like was very usual in
Scotland, of which there are diverse presidents in Grafton, Grafton l. 1. 112.
Hector Boethius, and Buchanan, which I pretermit. All which particulars laid
together, are a most clear unanswerable demonstration, that the Soveraignest
power and Jurisdiction of all others, resides in the whole Kingdom and
Parliament, not in the King himself, since they may thus dispose of the very
Crown it self, and are the sole and only supreme Judges to determine all
controversies. all titles which concern it; The King alone having no power to
transfer it to any other without the Lords and Commons free consents, as was
resolved in the case of King John, who resigned and granted his Crown to the
Pope, without the Kingdoms consent; and therefore the resignation and grant
were adjudged void not only by the Matthew. Paris. p. 270.
French King and his Lords, but by our own Parliament, as you may read in 40.
Ed. 3. Nu. 8. and in Doctor Crakenthorpe, Of the Popes temporal Monarchy, Cap.
2. p. 251. to 255. I shall conclude this point with the words of this memorable
Record; 40 E. 3. n. 7. 8.
The Prelates, Dukes, Counts, and Barons, being in the white Chamber, and the
Commons in the Painted Chamber, it was showed unto them by the Chancellor, how
they had understood the cause of the Summons of Parliament in general; but the
will of the King was, that the causes should be showed unto them in special,
telling them how the King had understood that the Pope by virtue of a Deed,
which he said that King John had made to the Pope to do him homage for the
Kingdom of England and the land of Ireland, and that by reason of the said
homage that he ought to pay him every year perpetually one thousand Marks; and
that he purposes to make out Process against the King and his Realm, for the
said Service and Rent, concerning which the King prayed the advice and counsel
of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, and Barons: and what he should do in case the
Pope would proceed against him for this cause, or against the said Realm: And
the Prelates prayed the King that they might thereupon advise alone by
themselves, and return their answer the next morning: which Prelates by
themselves the next morning, and after the said Dukes, Earls, Barons, and great
men, answered and said; That the said King John, NOR NO OTHER, MIGHT PUT
HIMSELF, NOR HIS REALM, NOR HIS PEOPLE IN SUCH SUBJECTION, WITHOUT THE ASSENT
AND ACCORD OF THEM: And the Commons being advised and consulted with thereupon,
answered in the same manner. Whereupon it was ordained and assented BY COMMON
CONSENT in manner following; In this present Parliament held at Westminster,
the Monday next after the Invention of holy Cross, in the year of the reign of
King Edward, the 40. as well to maintain the estates of holy Church, as the
rights of his Realm and his Crown, it has been showed amongst other things;
how it has been reported and said, that the Pope by virtue of a Deed which he
said that the said John, late King of England, had made to the Pope in
perpetuity, to do him homage for the realm of England and land of Ireland, and
by reason of the said homage to render to him an Annual rent, and has
purposed to make Process against the King for to recover the said Services and
rent; The which thing being showed to the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and
the Commons, to have their advice and counsel thereupon, and to demand of
them, what the King should do in case that the Pope should proceed or attempt
any thing against him or his Realm for this cause: Which Prelates, Dukes,
Earls, Barons, and Commons having taken full deliberation thereupon, answered
and said, OF ONE ACCORD; That the said King John, NOR NO OTHER MIGHT PUT
THEMSELVES, NOR HIS REALM NOR HIS PEOPLE IN SUCH SUBJECTION WITHOUT THEIR
ASSENT. And as it appears by many evidences, that if it were done, it was done
WITHOUT THEIR ASSENT, AND AGAINST HIS OATH IN HIS CORONATION. And moreover that
the Dukes, Earls, Barons, great men, and Commons accorded and granted, That in
case the Pope would endeavor or attempt any thing by Process or any other
act, to constrain the King or his Subjects to perform what is said he will
claim in this behalf; That THEY WILL RESIST AND OPPOSE HIM WITH ALL THEIR
MIGHT. And before this in the great Matthew West. ch^. 1245. p. 191 to. 197
Walsing. Ypodig p. 60 Matthew Paris. p. 646. Here part. 2. p. 13.
Council of Lions, the Proxies and Procurator of the Church and realm of
England, in the name of the whole Realm, complained and protested against this
grant of King John as a mere Nullity, BECAUSE IT WAS MADE WITHOUT THE CONSENT
OF THE REALM AND LORDS, which neither did, do, nor ever after would consent
thereto, as I have elsewhere proved: This being the common received opinion of
all Civilians and Statists, That no King or Emperor can alien, or engage all
or any part of his Kingdom to another without his Subjects general consents,
and that such an alienation or Morgage is merely void in Law to all intents, as
Albert. Gent. De jure Belli, l. 3. r. 15. and Hugo Grotius proves at large, De
jure Belli and Pacis, l. 2. c. 6. 7. and lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 10. where he
affirms, That a King who aliens and would actually deliver up possession of all
or any part of his Realm to another foreign power without the peoples
consents, may lawfully be resisted with force of Arms by his Subjects;
concluding with this Sentence out of Con^r. l. 11. contr. 9.
Seneca, with which I shall close up this Discourse; Et si parendum in omnibus
Patri (natural or political) IN EO NON PARENDUM QUO EFFICITUR NE PATER SIT.

This point I have thus copiously debated, not out of any the least intention
to derogate from his Majesty's just Supremacy and Prerogatives royal, which I
have often solemnly sworn to maintain to the utmost of my power, and shall (God
willing) perform; but out of a serious desire to rectify the general mistakes
of men, touching a pretended Prerogative, which their fantasies only (not the
Law) have unduely attributed unto Kings: and to vindicate the just Liberties,
Privileges, and Prerogatives of Parliaments (so much decryed, declaimed
against of late by a company of ignorant Papists, Malignants, Royalists, who
know not what the jurisdiction of Parliaments is) according to the
Protestation, the clearing of which points (in my weak apprehension) is the
only high and ready way to compose our present differences, to settle all our
distractions, which the ignorance, the mistakes of the Kings and Parliaments
just Prerogatives and Powers, (next to the treacherous malice of Papists) have
principally raised among us, almost to the ruin of the Kingdom. For my part, I
profess sincerely, I love and honor both King and Parliament alike, and in
the controversies now between them concerning their Jurisdictions, stand as a
man indifferent to do right to both, without prejudice to either; and the King
being the Principal Member of the Parliament, the elevating of its now
disdained Power to its due altitude, can be no depression, but advancement of
the Kings Prerogative, which shines most perspicuously in Parliaments, whiles
King and Parliament are united, and is most eclipsed only when they are
divided, as the precedents in all ages manifest. And this I dare confidently
aver, That there are no such enemies to the Kings Prerogative, as those who
advancing it beyond due bounds, do necessarily draw it into dispute, in which
it commonly comes off with loss and diminution in the end, as in the late
cases of Loanes, Ship Money, and the like. It was a notable true Speech of our
King Holinshed p. 1584. Cromptons Iurisdict. of Courts f. 10.
Henry the 8. in the 34. year of his reign in the case of one George Ferrers, a
member of the Commons house, arrested contrary to their Privilege, of which
the King being informed, used these words among other to the Speaker and House
of Commons, We are informed by our Judges, That we at no time stand so highly
in our estate Royal, as in the time of Parliament; wherein we as Head, and you
as Members, are knit together into one Body politic; so as whatsoever offense
and injury (during that time) is offered to the meanest of the House, is to be
judged, as done against Our Person, and the whole Court of Parliament; which
Prerogative of the Court is so great, as all Acts and Processes coming our of
Inferior Courts, must for the time cease, and give place to the highest; which
being so, My Vindication of the Parliaments Sovereign Power and Right, can be
no impeachment, nor diminution of the Kings just Authority, though many
Sycophants and Malignants falsely repute it so.

If any here object Object.
against the premises, 1 Eliz c. 1.
That the King is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, That Lib. 1. c. 8.
f. 5, 6. l. 3. c. 3. f. 107.
Bracton, L. 1. c. 5. 17.
Fleta, and our 3 Ed. 3. 19. Corone 161. 22. E. 3. g. b Dyer, 297. a. Stamso.
253. a.
Law Books resolve: That the King has no Peer in His Kingdom, for so He should
lose His Empire, since Peers (or Equals) have no command over one another; much
more then ought He not to have a Superior, or mightier, for so He should be
Inferior to those who are subject to Him; and inferiors cannot be equal to
Superiors. The King ought not to be under man, but under God and the Law. If
then Iust^ce be demanded of Him by way of Petition, (because no W^it runs
against Him (though 22 E. 3. 3 b.
anciently some Writs did) if He do not justice, this punishment may be
sufficient to Him, that He may expect God will revenge it. Nemo quidem de
factis suis praesumat disputare, multo fortius contra factum suum venire, etc.
Therefore the King is above the Parliament, and whole Kingdom, not they above
Him.

I answer, First, That the meaning of all these Books is, That the King is
above every one of His Su^jects, and has no Peer nor Superior, if they be
taken particularly and dist^ibutively, as single men; as the words Parem,
Superiorem, in the singular number, and the like, explain the meaning of the
Books to be. But if we take them collectively in Parliament, as they are one
body and represent the whole Kingdom; then these very Authors resolve (in their
forequoted words) That they Bracto^ l. 2. Answ. c. 16. f. 134. a. Fletal. 1. c.
17.
are above the King, and may, yea, ought to restrain and question his actions,
his Mal^-Administrations, if there be just cause.

Secondly, Bracton explains himself, how He is highest and without a Peer, to
wit, In Pare^^u^em habere non debet, nec multo fortius superiorem, maxim in
justitia exhibenda, licet in justitia recipi^^^^, minime de regno suo
comp^^etur, lib. 3. c. 9. f 167. a.
distributing Justice, that is, He is the highest Iusticiar in the Kingdom, but
as low as any in receiving Justice.

Thirdly, Even in Parliament it self, the King is the Supreme Member, and in
that regard the Parliament in most public Acts, in all their Petitions or
Addresses, usual styles him, See Bodius Commonwealth. l. 2. c. 1. p. 192. the
like of the Parliaments in France.
Their Sovereign Lord: Besides, The Parliament it self is ever See Madus
renendi Parliamentum Camb. Brit. page* 177. Crompt. Iuris. of Courts, f. 1. to
6. Sir Tho. Smiths Commonwealth. l. 2. c. 2. 3. Hol. Descrip. of England c. 8*
Cowel and Minsh. Tit. Parl. Mr. Hack manner of passing Bills, sect. 8.
summoned, dissolved by his Writ, in his name, by his Authority: And in passing
all Acts and Bills of Grace, or such as are not simply necessary for the
public safety and utility of his people, He has an absolute negative voice,
and his Royal assent is in some sense simply necessary for the passing of all
ordinary lasting binding Laws: In which respects he is, and may be truly said
in some sense, To be above the Parliament it self, and the only Supreme
Governor; but yet in the forenamed regards, the Parliament really is, and may
be justly averred to be Paramount him, and the Supremest Sovereign Power,
though not Governor.

Fourthly, The Oath of Supremacy, That the King is the only Supreme Governor,
relates only, and at least principally to the Popes foreign Princes
Authorities, formerly usurped in this Realm, as the Title, Words, scope of the
Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. and the very next words in the Oath it self
undenyably manifest, ( And that NO FOREIGN Power, Person, Prelate, State or
Potentate has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, SUPERIORITY,
PRE-EMINENCE, or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm;
and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake ALL FOREIGN Jurisdictions,
etc.) Therefore it refers not at all to Parliaments, or their Jurisdiction,
Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence, or Authority; not so much as once thought of
by the prescribers of this Oath, which had its creation and Authority from the
Parliament, and made some addition to the Kings Prerogative.

Fifthly, Commonw. l. 1. c 9. l. 2. c. 5.
Bodin with others (as I shall hereafter manifest) assure us, That the
Sovereign Power, and Jurisdiction both in the Roman and German Empires, and in
most forr^ign Christian Kingdoms, was, and yet is, in the Senate, People,
Parliaments, States, Dyets; yet this is no empeachment at all to their royal
Supremacies, or Titles of Supreme Heads, and Governors, Within their own
Dominions, no more then the asserting of general Counsels to be above Popes
themselves, by the learned Papists, is any derogation (as they hold it is not
now) to the Popes most absolute pretended Sovereignty See p. 2. ^.
above all Emperors, Kings, Princes, Prelates, Subjects, and the world it
self, of which they affirm him sole Monarch: Therefore by the self-same reason,
this asserting of the whole Kingdoms, and Parliaments power to be above the
Kings, is no diminution at all, much less a denial of his Supremacy, and just
Prerogative Royal.

If then the Parliaments Power be thus higher and greater then the Kings
Personal Power and Jurisdiction out of Parliament, it will necessarily follow
from hence:

First, That in these unhappy times of division and separation of the Kings
Personal presence (not legal which cannot be severed) from the Parliament:
The Lords and Commons Orders, Votes, Ordinances, made legally in Parliament it
self, are to be preferred, obeyed by all the Kingdom, before any His Majesty's
Proclamations, Declarations, Commissions, Warrants, or Mandates, made illegally
out of Parliament in affront of both Houses proceedings and Decrees, since when
ever two distinct powers command different things, that are lawful, or of the
same nature, the higher Power ought still to be obeyed; As if a Master commands
his Servant one thing, and the King another; or the King one thing, God
another; the King is to be obeyed before the Master, because the Superior
Power; but God before the King, because the highest Power, as the Sea Gratian
causa 11. qu. 3. where he quotes August. Hier. and ^fiedor. to this purpose.
Fathers and Canonists resolve most fully: And Resolving of Conscience, sect.
1, 2, 3. An appeal to thy conscience, and others.
Doctor Fern with other asserters of the Kings Prerogative, not only grant,
but prove; And therefore press an absolute Obedience to all the Kings commands
against the Parliament, on this false ground; Because the King (say they) is
the highest Sovereign Power, and above the Parliament it self: The contrary
whereunto being now made evident to all men; The Argument falls fatally on them
that urge it. The Parliament, not the King, is the most Sovereign Power: Erg^,
Its Votes, and Ordinances must be preferred and obeyed before the Kings.

Yea, The Parliament being the highest Power, the King Himself ought to submit
thereto, and to be ruled and advised thereby. This conclusion (though it may
seem a Paradox to most men) is an undubitable verity both in point of Divinity
and Policy, as is most apparent, by the 1 Samuel 14. 38. to 46. and c. 29, 1, to
11. 2. Sam. 18. 2, 3, 4. c. 19. 1. to 9. 1 K. 12. 1. to 25. 2. K. 20. 7, 8, 9.
1 Chr. 13. 1. to 6. 2 Chr. 10. and 11. c. 30. 2, 3, 5, 23. c. 32. 3. Esth. 1.
13. to 22. c. 9. 23. to 23. Ier^. 38. 4. to 28. Dan. 6. 4. to 20 Jonah 3. 7.
Ezra 10. 3. 8. Eccles. 4. 13. Prove. 11. 14. c. 15. 22. c. 25. 5. compared
together, and with Josh. 20. 11. to 34. Judge. 20. 1. to 20. (where we find the
Princes, and people always overruling their Kings, who submitted their
judgment wholly to them, not the Kings overruling their Princes and people;)
who as Josephus records, Antiqu. Iudaeorum, l. 4. c. 18. Ought to do nothing
besides, against, or without the sentence of the Senate, or Congregation;
Whence King Zedechiah said unto his Princes, Jere. 38. 4, 5. The King is not he
that can do any thing against you: And in point of Law and Conscience, even in
our own Kings and Kingdom, as is clear by 20 E. 3. the Preface, and c. 1. 25 E.
3. Parliament 6. the Statute against Provisors, 38 E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 1, 2, 3. 3
E. 1. c. 17. and 48, with other Statutes which I shall hereafter cite at large,
in answer to the fourth Objection, concerning the Kings negative voice; which
Texts and Statutes those who will, may peruse at leisure for their better
satisfaction. And in Paul's time, the highest Powers in Rome, were not the Roman
Emperors, as ignorant Doctors make the unlearned world believe, but the Roman
Senate, who had full power, not only to elect and command, but censure, and
depose their Emperors, and adjudge them unto death, as commonwealth l. 2. c. 5.
John Bodin acknowledges, and I shall hereafter abundantly manifest in the
Appendix.

Secondly, That the Parliaments resisting of the Kings personal Commands
(especially such as are illegal and destructive to the Kingdom) or any private
Subjects resisting them by virtue of a public Ordinance or Countermand from
the Parliament, is no resisting of the higher Power, against Paul's injunction,
Romans 13. 1. to 7. as Resolution of Conscience, sect, 1, 2. etc. And
Revindication of Psalm 105. 15. Printed at Cambridge, 1643.
Doctor Fern, and other illiterated Doctors vainly fancy, but a direct
submission and obedience to the highest Powers (the Parliament;) and those who
resist the Parliaments Ordinances and Commands (especially such as tend to the
preservation of Religion, Laws, Liberties* Privileges of Parliament, and the
Kingdom, or bringing Delinquents to condign punishment) though they do it by
virtue of any extrajudiciall countermand from the King or His ill Counselors,
do both in point of Law, Divinity, Conscience, resist the higher Powers,
because they resist the Parliament (which is in truth, the highest Power, as I
have manifested, not the King:) and so shall receive damnation to themselves
for it, either here, or hereafter, if they repent not; which I seriously desire
all those Delinquents, Papists, Malignants, ill Counselors, and Cavaliers, to
consider, who contrary to several Orders, and Declarations of Parliament, yea
contrary to the Law of God, of Nature, of the Realm, have like unnatural
Vipers, taken up offensive Arms against the Parliament and Kingdom, to ruin
them, Religion, Laws, and Liberties at once.

Thirdly, Hence it follows, That the Resolutions and Declarations of the Lords
and Commons in Parliament, the supremest Court, against the Commission of
Array, Arming of Papists, raising of Forces, imposing Taxes to maintain War
against the Parliament, Plundering, and the like, ought to be obeyed, and
submitted to, as lawful and binding, both by the King Himself, the Kingdom,
and every private Subject whatsoever; and that the Kings extrajudiciall and
illegal Declarations out of Parliament in direct opposition and contradiction
to these Resolutions and Votes of both Houses in Parliament, ought not to be
obeyed, the King himself as our Law Books resolve, Being no 8 H. 4. 13. b. 24
H. 8 c 12 52 H. 3. c. 1. 25 H. 8. c. 21. Cook^. Institutes on Mag. Charta, f.
103. 25 Ed. 3. Parl. 2.
competent Judge (especially out of his Courts) what is Law, or what not in
those Cases, but the Parliament only. Which extrajudiciall new device of
controlling, affronting the Resolutions and Declarations of both Houses, by
opposite Proclamations, and Declarations published in his Majesty's name; is
such a transcendent violation of, and contempt against the known privileges,
the sacred venerable Authority, and power of Parliaments, as (I am confident)
no age can Parallel; and if not severely vindicated by exemplary punishments of
the highest nature, upon those ill Counselors, and corrupt Lawyers, who
contrive and pen them, will bring this highest, greatest and most honorable
Court (wherein the 31 H. 8. c. 1. 1 lac. c. 1. Dr. and Student, 44. a.
whole Kingdom, and every Member of it are represented) into greater contempt
and less estimation with all men, (whether Natives or Forraigners) then the
basest Court of Pipouders is. No King nor Subject ever yet attempted such
affronts against the Resolutions of any Judges in inferior Courts; Let no
person whatsoever then presume by pen or tongue, any longer to arraign or
traduce the Resolutions and Ordinances of this highest Tribunal. If Kings or
Counselors of State, will instruct or excite the Subjects, peremptorily to
disobey and contemn the Ordinances, the Judgments of the Parliament, let them
never expect the least obedience or submission to any of their own commands,
which are of lesser credit and Authority; which all former Ages have most
reverenced and submitted to.

Fourthly, That the Parliament and whole Kingdom, being the highest Power, or
any Member of the Parliament, cannot by any public Acts or Votes of theirs
consented to in Parliament, become Traitors, or guilty of high Treason, against
the King, either by the Common Law, or the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. chap, 2. of
Treasons, which running in the singular number; If A MAN, etc. (That is, any
private man or men, by their own private authority) shall levy war against
the King, etc. it ought to be judged high Treason; extends not to the whole
Kingdom, or Court of Parliament representing it, (of which no treason was ever
yet presumed,) the rather, because the Parliament by this very act is made the
Judge of all Treasons that are doubtful, and was never yet included within the
words or meaning of any Law concerning Treason, and therefore cannot be guilty
of it. Hence the depositions of Gra^ part 6. p. 62, 63. Galfredus, Momun,
Fabian, Polycha. and others.
Archigallo and Emerian, two ancient British Kings, by the unanimous assent of
the Lords and Commons, for their rapines, oppressions, and Tyranny, with other
forenamed Saxon Kings; and of Edward the second, Richard the second, Henry the
sixth, Edward the fourth, by Acts of Parliament; the creating of Richard the
third, King; with the frequent translations of the Crown from the right Heir at
Common Law, Page 5. to 10.
to others who had no good Title, by the whole Kingdom or Parliament, (no less
then Bracton l. 2. Glan. 1. 2. f. 11 2. Myrror, c 1 sect. 4. Britton. c. 8. f.
16. c. 22. f. 39. 25 E. 3 c. 2. See Rastal, Broke, Stamf. Crompt. Dalton, in
their Titles and Chapters of Treason.
high Treason in private persons) was never yet reputed, much less questioned
for, or adjudged high Treason in the whole Kingdom or Parliament, or any chief
active Members in those Parliaments; which by the Law, are incapable of
Treason, for any their judicial actions and resolutions in such cases, being
only Tortious and Erroneous, reversible by other Acts in Parliament, not
Traiterous and Rebellious, as appears by all the forequoted Statutes; and by 13
Eliz. cha. 1. which makes it high Treason for any person to affirm, That the
Queen by Authority of the Parliament of England, is not able to make Laws and
Statutes of sufficient force to alter, limit, and bind the Crown of this
Realm, and the Descent, Limitation, Inheritance, and Government thereof, and
any man's Title, or right thereto.

And for direct Authorities in this very point, Walsingham Holin. Graf. Sto.
Speed, Martyn Fab. Polychro. in 21 R* 2. and 11 R. 2. c. 3, 4. 21 R. 2. c. 12.
Robert Trisylian and Belknap (then chief Justices) Holt, Fulthorp, and Burgh,
Judges, Locton King Sergeant, and Blake the Kings Counsel, in the Parliament
of 11 Rich. 2. Were condemned, executed, and banished the Realm, as guilty of
high Treason, only for affirming under their Hands and Seals. See the
particulars more at large in 21 R 2 c. 12. Grafton, p. 312 353. John Trussels,
R. 2. p. 11, 12. Walsingham and Holinshed^in 10. and 11 R. 2.
That the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel and Warwick were; and the
other Lords and Commons might be guilty of high Treason, for procuring a
Commission, and other proceedings Voted in Parliament, and be punished it as
Traitors. Which opinion of theirs, being afterward affirmed for Law, in a
packed Parliament, 21 Rich. 1. was the very next Parliament in 1 Hen. 4. c. 2.
3, 4. repealed, and the judgment given against those Judges for this
Traiterous opinion (tending to the utter subversion of Parliaments) resolved,
and enacted to be just. This See 1 H. 4. c. 3. and here p. 13.
Judge Speed p 747
Belknap foresaw, and therefore was unwilling to put his Seal to this opinion,
saying; There wanted but a hurdle, a horse, and halter, to carry him where he
might suffer the death HE HAD DESERVED: For if I had not done this, I should
have dyed for it, and because I have done it, I DESERVE DEATH for betraying the
Lords. Which makes me wonder at a passage in Hist. p. 675.
Speed (who records it) now frequent in Malignants mouths. That the very shop
where the Barons original Treasons were forged, was THE PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
wherein from time to time they forced on the King (Edward the second)
presumptuous and TREASONOUS ORDINATIONS, not only to reform the Kings House and
Counsel, and to place, and displace all great Officers at their pleasure; but
even claimed a joint interest in the Regiment of the Kingdom, together with the
King, which William I^ge ( a Judge of the Common Law) with other like
sticklers, traitorously persuaded them, was according to Law: Which gross
slander of the Parliament House, would have been capital at least in former
ages, and may now endanger the necks of those who speak or write the same of
the present Parliament. Never did any of our Kings, charge any Parliament with
high Treason hitherto; much less indict or wage war against their
Parliaments, as Traitors, though they have questioned and deposed Kings for
offenses against, and being Enemies or Traitors to the Kingdom: Let none then
dare affirm, That the Houses of Parliament are, or can be Traitors now, for
providing for their own, and the Kingdoms safety, by a necessary defensive
War, which I shall in the third part fully clear to be neither Treason, nor
Rebellion against the King in point of Law, or Conscience, either in the Houses
of Parliament, or any that bear Arms by their command.

Fifthly, That to conspire or levy war against the Parliament, or Kingdom, to
dissolve, or destroy it, or the Members of it, is no less then High Treason;
as has been solemnly adjudged in Parliament, 15 E. 2. in the Act entitled,
Exilium Hugonis le de Spenser, in 1 E. 3. the Preface, and cap. 1. in 11 Rich.
2. c. 2, 3, 4. and in the Parliament Roll, Printed by Order of both Houses,
August 27. 1642. And before both these, in Lib. 14. sect 112 Stamf. l 1 c. 2.
f. 1. b. and Cromptons, Jurisdict. f. 73.
Glanvil, who declares it to be Treason, even at the Common Law, Si quis
machinatus fuerit vel aliquid feoerit in SEDITIONEM REGNI: Agreeable to Instit.
l. ult. Tit 8.
Vlpian, and the Tit. 3.
Saxon Laws, which inform us of Treasons against the Commonwealth and Kingdom,
(the case of Cice^o Orat. in Catil.
Cateli^^ and Li^. hist. I. 23 sect. 17.
others) as well as against the King; and to the Statute of 13. Eliz. c. 1.
which makes it High Treason for any person to stir up any Forraigners or
strangers with force to invade this Realm or Ireland. And if it be no less
then high Treason against the King to slay the Chancellor, Treasurer or any of
the Judges, or Justices of either Bench, Eyer, Assize, or Oyer and Terminer,
being in their places doing their Offices (though by the Kings command; as is
clear by 25 E. 3. c. 2. and all our Law Books;) then much more must it be high
Treason against the King and Kingdom, to war against the highest Court of
Parliament, or slay any Member of it, for doing their Offices and executing the
Houses just Commands. If bare mis-Councelling the King to the prejudice of the
Kingdom, has so frequently been adjudged high Treason against the King and
Realm in several Parliaments, as appears by the forecited Histories of
Gaveston, the two Spensers, Alexander Nevill, De la Pole, Trysilian, and
others; then what is it to miscou^cell, and assist him to make an offensive War
against his Parliament, Kingdom, people, for to ruin them? certainly this must
be high Treason against King and Realm in the superlative degree. If the
Parliament and Kingdom be destroyed, or their hearts blood shed, their vital
spirits let out by an unnatural War against them; the King himself (at least
in his royal Capacity as King) and his royal posterity too, must necessarily
be unkinged, and overwhelmed in their ruins; but if the Kingdom stand and
flourish (for whose Peace and safety Kings themselves ought not only to lay
down their Crowns, but John 10. 10, 11, 15. and 11. 50 and 18. 14.
lives, as Christ, the Rev. 17. 14. and 19. 16.
King of Kings has resolved, and the High Priest too,) though the King should
die or perish (as all Psalm. 86. 6, 7.
Kings ever were and will be mortal) yet their posterity may enjoy the Crown,
and reign in honor, in prosperity after their death, which they cannot do if
the Kingdom perish. Therefore all those Malignants, Papists, Delinquents, and
others, who have most unnaturally taken up arms against the Parliament and
Kingdom to dissolve and ruin them, though by the Kings own illegal Commission
or Command, are not only Arch-traytors to the Parliament and Realm alone, but
likewise to the King himself and his Posterity too, in the very judgment of
Law; whose blood is shed, whose Crown and Royalty subverted, ruined, in the
bloodsh^d, ruin, destruction of his Parliament, Kingdom, people. As it is in
the natural, so likewise in the politic^ Body; a mortal wound in any part of
the body, kills both body and head; the body natural or politic cannot die
or miscarry, but the head must do so likewise; therefore this War against the
Parliament and Kingdom, must in point of Law and Conscience too, be a War
against the King himself the chief politic head and member of them both, from
which he cannot legally be severed, and high Treason at least against them
both, as the Parliament, the sole Judge of Treasons has resolved long since in
their An exact (...) loction, see p. 576.
Declaration of August 18. 1642. in th^se positive words; The Lords and Commons
do declare, That all such persons as shall, upon any pretense whatsoever,
assist his Majesty in this war, with Horse, Arms, Plate, or Money, ARE TRAITORS
TO HIS MAJESTY, THE PARLIAMENT AND THE KINGDOM, and shall be brought to
condign punishment for so high an offense: which they have since seconded in
sundry other Declarations and Impeachments.

In brief, the Gunpowder plot in 3. Iacobi to blow up the Parliament House, was
then adjudged, resolved by the Parliament, 3 Iac. c. l, 2, 4, 5 and in his
Proclamations for apprehending those Traitors. The proceeding against Traitors,
Spend hist p 1248 to 1257.
King and Judges, to be high Treason, not only against the King, but
Parliament and Kingdom too: and to blow up, or assault the Parliament now, in
the Kings absence, is questionless High Treason, both against the King,
Parliament, and Kingdom. Yea, the Statute of 28. H. 8. c. 7. declares those,
who shall claim the Crown even of right, in any oeher manner then is limited by
virtue and authority of that Act, after the Kings death; with all their
Counselors and abettors, to be deemed and adjudged HIGH TRAITORS TO THE
REALM, (not the King) and such their offense to be reputed HIGH TREASON; and
they for it, to suffer such pains of death and forfeiture of Lands and Goods,
as in any cases of high Treason is used, only because it might in common
probability engender a Civil war and Dissentions in the Kingdom, to be
destruction of the people and their posterities; much more then must it be high
Treason against the Realm, and those High Traitors who now actually wage War
against the Parliament, the Kingdom, and destroy the Subjects and their estates
in diverse places, which they have burned, sacked, ruined. I read in Par. 7. p
186.
Fabian, that Eguiran, chief Counselor to Philip the third of France, was
judged to death, and hanged on the Gibbet at Paris, for Treason against King
Philip and the REALM OF FRANCE, as our Powder Traitors were executed for high
Treason against the King and Realm of England of late, and Gaveston with the
Spensers heretofore.

By the Stat. of 1 E. 3. c. 1. 5. R. 2. c. 6. 11. R. 2. c. 1. 3. 17. R. 2. c.
8. 21. R. 2. c. 2. 4. 20. 3. H. 5. Stat. 2. c. 6. and 1. Mariae c. 6. certain
offenses are declared, and made high Treason, and the committers of them,
Traitors and enemies, not only, to, and against the King, but likewise, TO,
AND AGAINST THE REALM: and in particular; the illegal indicting of some Lords
to destroy them, as guilty of high Treason, for procuring a Commission in
Parliament supposed prejudicial to the King and his Crown, in 10 R. 2. c. 1.
and the opposing and annulling of that Commission, and of some Process,
Judgments, Executions, made, given, and affirmed in some of these Parliaments,
raising forces, and leavying war against the Parliament, and Members of it to
destroy them, were then See Walsi^gh. Holinsh. Fabian, Grafton, Stow, Sp^ed, in
10. and 11. R. 2. 21 R. 2. c. 12.
adjudged high Treason both against the King and THE REALM (though done by the
Kings express Commission and command:) The reason is, because the King
himself and the whole Realm in judgment of Law, See here p. 20 21 22.
are ever legally present in and with his Parliament when they sit, (as I have
already proved) where ever the Kings person is; and his royal legal will (of
which alone the Law takes notice) is ever presumed to concur with his greatest
Counc^ll the Parliament, against whose Privileges, safety, and protection he
neither can nor ought by Law or right to attempt any thing; and if any
personal Commands or Commissions of the King, under his great Seal, to do
ought against Magna Charta, the Subjects liberty^ safety, property, the
Parliaments Privileges, the Common or Statute Laws of the Realm (all which,
together with the Kings Coronation Oath, and the Prologues of most old
Parliaments expressly prohibit the levying of war, killing, wounding,
murdering, imprisoning, disinheriting, robbing, or plundering of the Subjects,
without legal trial or conviction, as do the Statutes of 2 R 2. c. 7. 1 H. 5.
c. 6. 1 H. 5. c. 6. which prescribe exemplary punishments against such
Plunderers and Robbers, especially the Welchmen;) issue out to any person or
persons whatsoever, especially to raise forces or levy war against the
Parliament or Subjects, they are merely void in Law, and will rather aggravate
then extenuate the guilt of those who obey or execute them: as is clearly
resolved, not only by 42. Ass. p. 5. 12. Brook Commissions: 15. 16. Cook l.
5. f. 50. 51. l. 7. f. 36. 37. l. 8. f. 125. to 129. but likewise expressly
adjudged and enacted by the Statutes of 15 E. 3. 81. 1. c. 1. 3. 42. E 3. c. 1.
3. 11 R. 2. c. 1. to 6. 21 Iac. c. 3. the Petition of Right, 3 Caroli. 28. E.
2. Artic. super Chartas c. 2. 4 E. 3. c. 4. 5 E. 3. c. 2. 25 E. 3. c. 1. 15. 34
E. 3. c. 2. and generally by all Statutes concerning See Rastals A bridgment,
^it Purveyors.
Purveyors: by the memorable old Statute of 15 E. 3. Stat. 1, If any Minister
of the King, or any other person of what condition soever be be, do or come
against any point of the great Charter, or other Statutes, or the Laws of the
Land, he shall answer to the Parliament, as well as the SUIT OF THE KING, as at
the suit of the party, AS FAR FORTH WHERE IT WAS DONE BY COMMISSION OR
COMMANDMENT OF THE KING, as of his own authority: And by that parallel good Law
recorded by Part 7. p. 376.
Fabian, made in Parliament in the first year of King Henry the fourth; That no
Lord, nor other person of no degree, should after that day lay for his excuse
(as some then did) any constraint or coacting of his Prince in executing of any
wrong judgment, or other criminous or unlawful deeds, saying; That for fear
they durst not otherwise do; for such excuse after this day SHALL STAND HIM IN
NO STEAD. And in this Parliament, Fabian, part. 7. p. 342. 375. Hals Chron. 1.
H 4. f. 10 Gr^fton, p. 408 Walsinghom, Hist. p. 393. 402.
Hall was judged to be drawn from the Tower of London unto Tiburne, and there
to be hanged and quartered (which was accordingly executed) only because he
was one of those who secretly murdered the Duke of Gloucester at Calice
(illegally attainted of Treason in the Parliament of 21. R. 2. without due
process of the Law, by King Richard the second his command, for his good
service done in Parliament in 10 and 11. of this King) and likewise the Dukes
of Aumarl, Surrey, Exeter, with other Noblemen, were deprived of their
Dukedoms, of most of their Lands, Castles, Honors, for having a finger in this
Dukes suffocation and death by King Richards instigation and command, (and had
lost their heads too if the common people had been their Judges, who murmured
against King Henry for sparing their lives) as you may read in Hist. p. 402.
403. Speed p. 763.
Walsingham and Speed.

If these then who murdered but one good Peer of the Realm by the Kings
special command, for his good service done in former Parliaments, after an
illegal judgment of high Treason given against him, were thus hanged,
quartered, degraded as Traitors by a solemn Judgment in Parliament; how severe
a censure may they expect, who without, and before any such conviction or
sentence, have taken up offensive Arms to murder and destroy the Parliament it
self and chief Members of it as Traitors, and caused them or any of them
illegally to be proclaimed Traitors, the more colourably to wage War against
them? All which I would advise His Majesty's Captains, Cavalliers, and ill
Counselors to consider. The rather, because all levying of War either against
the King, or against the Kingdom and Parliament, (now made a matter of high
Treason on both sides) must and ought to be determined and resolved, which of
them is high Treason and which not, and the pa^ties guilty of it, must and
ought to be tried, arraigned, judged, and condemned for it, only in and by the
Parliament, and in and by no other Court or Judges, as is punctually resolved
by the several Statutes of 11 R. 2. c. 1. 2. 3. 4. 21 R. 2. c. 2. 3. 4. 12.
20. 8 H. 4. c. 10. and the very words of the Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 2. of
Treasons, especially being a new case. If then the Parliament are, and must be
the only judges of this question, Which of the two parties now in Arms are
Traitors? and the only Court wherein all must be tried on this point, they may
easily judge who are and must be the Traitors in this case; and those who by
the Kings mere personal command and presence (whom they have treacherously
withdrawn from his Parliament) fight now both against Parliament and King in
his legal and regal capacity, when the time of trial comes, will be found
real Traitors both to King and Kingdom (what ever their own ignorance,
temporizing Lawyers, or hopes of prevailing may now suggest unto them) as the
Parliament has already declared them in sundry Remonstrances. In the
Parliament of 15 E. 2. the two Spensers were by a Exilium H^^^gonis le
Lespersor, f. 50 52.
special Act of Parliament adjudged Traitors, banished, and their lands and
goods confiscated, for miscounselling this King, and advising him to ride with
armed Troops of horses and men into Glocestershire to assault the good people
there, and to levy war within the Realm, to the destruction of the Church and
people, contrary to the form of the great Charter, and breach of the peace of
the Realm: What severe judgment then may those ill Counselors and Cavalliers
deserve, who have actually levied war, not only against the County of
Gloc^ster, (which they have pitifully harrowed and spoiled, contrary to all
Law, sacking See the Rela^ion of the (...) of Cicester
Cicester to its utter ruin, and leading away the good people thence captives
to Oxford in triumph, for the most part barefooted, through dirt and mire, in
the cold Winter season, chained together in ropes, more like to Turkish
Gallystaves then English Christian Subjects; only for this new kind of
supposed Treason and Rebellion, the defense of their Liberties, lives, and
goods, against theeving Cavalliers, (which they may defend by Law, Fitz^
Corone. 192 194 246. 258. 261. 330. Stamford f. 11, 12, 13. 22 H. 7. 39. 24 H.
8. c. 5* Cook l. 5. f. 51. 52. 53.
and justify the killing of all those who shall violently assault them or
their houses, to rob them of them) denying them so much as a draught of cold
water to quench their thirst by the way, and keeping off all who would give it
to them, many of them being since dead at Oxford of famine and more then
barbarous usage, but likewise against most Counties and many Towns of England,
(miserably wasted, sacked, pillaged, and some in cold blood burned by them) and
the whole Kingdom, Parliament, yea King himself in his politic Capacity; and
raised an Army of Papists against express late Acts of Parliament; who not
only now set up their long exploded Mass openly in Yorkshire, Reading, and
other places, but (which my very soul abhors to think of) have lately in a most
impious manner, Shit upon the English Bible in folio, defaced and burnt many
Testaments, and godly English Books, in John Hamonds house (a Bookseller) in
Marleborough, when they sacked it, in contempt of our Religion, setting the
chimney on fire with their excessive flames; and if reports be credible, have
since burned diverse English Bibles, with other good Books, in the public
Market place at Reading, under the very Gallows, in detestation of our
Protestant Faith, whose utter extirpation is their chief design. Certainly, if
these ill Councellers, or murdering Plundering Cavalliers once come to a legal
trial, a Gallows will be too mild a punishment to expiate such a prodigious
high Treason, which former ages can hardly parallel, especially if they
persevere therein. But of this more hereafter.

Sixthly, Hence likewise it necessarily follows, that the Houses of Parliament
being the Sovereign Power, ought of right to enjoy, and may when they see just
cause for the Kingdoms safety and benefit, order the Militia, Navy, Ports,
Forts, and Ammunition of the Realm, and dispose of them into such persons
custodies as they may safely con^ide in; nominate and elect, both the great
Counselors, public Officers, and Judges of the Kingdom; of right require, (if
not enforce, if wilfully denied) the Kings Assent to all public Bills of Right
and Justice, necessary for the Commonweal and safety of his Subjects, in which
the King has no absolute Negative voice; take up defensive Arms to protect
their Privileges, Laws, Liberties, and established Religion, not only against
Malignants and Popish Recusants, but the King himself, if he raise Forces
against them, make war upon them, against his Royal Oath and duty, declaring
himself an open enemy to his Parliament and kingdom, That they may lawfully in
case of present ruin and danger, without the Kings concurrence, when he shall
separate himself wilfully from, or set himself against them, (which the Ver^ A
COMITIIS IN TEMPESTIVE DISCEDERE ID quidem d^ceb^nt, REGI NEFAS FUISSE; neque
tant^m jacturam fact^m Iuris aeque sustinendam* Hieron. Blanca. Rerum Arag.
Comment. p* 662.
Estates of Aragon held A WICKEDNESS in their King Alfonso the third:) impose
taxes on the Subject, and distrain their goods, imprison, confine, secure their
persons for the public safety, when they deem it absolutely necessary. All
which, with other particulars, I shall (God willing) fully prove, by such
Demonstrations, Arguments, punctual Authorities, and undeniable precedents in
former ages* as shall, I trust, undeceive the blinded world; and convince, if
not satisfy, the greatest Royallists, Papists, Malignants, both in point of
Law and Conscience, in the next parts of this Discourse.

Errata and Omissions in some Copies.
Page 15. l. 43. for Laws read Courts p. 40. l. 22. cons^nts, may be dissolv*
by their consents. p. 49. l. 44. dele and p. 51. l. 20. Eleventhly, r. Eigh^hly.

Finis Partis Primae.
THE SOVEREIGN POWER OF PARLIAMENTS and KINGDOMS. OR Second Part of the
Treachery and Disloialty of Papists to their Sovereigns.

Wherein the Parliaments and Kingdoms Right and Interest in, and Power over
the Militia, Ports, Forts, Navy, Ammunition of the Realm, to dispose of them
unto Confiding Officers hands, in these times of danger; Their Right and
Interest to nominate and Elect all needful Commanders, to exercise the Militia
for the Kingdoms safety, and defense: As likewise, to Recommend and make
choice of the Lord Chancellor, Keeper, Treasurer, Privy Seal, Privy
Counselors, Judges, and Sheriffs of the Kingdom, When they see just Cause:
Together with the Parliaments late Assertion; That the King has no absolute
Negative Voice in passing public Bills of Right and Justice, for the safety,
peace, and common benefit of his People, when both Houses deem them necessary
and just: are fully vindicated and confirmed, by pregnant Reasons and variety
of Authorities, for the satisfaction of all Malignants, Papists, Royallists,
who unjustly Censure the Parliaments proceedings, Claims and Declarations, in
these Particulars.

Judges 20. 1. 2. 8. 9. 10. 11. Then all the Children of Israel went out, and
the Congregation was gathered together, as one man, from Dan even to Beersheba,
etc. And ALL THE PEOPLE arose as one man, saying; We will not any of us go to
his Tent; neither will we any of us turn into his House; But now, this shall
be the thing, that we will do to Gibeah; We will go up by lot against it. And
we will take ten men of an hundred, throughout all the Tribes of Israel; and an
hundred of a thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch victuals
for the people, that they may do to Gibeah, according to all the folly that
they have wrought in Israel.

Judges 11. 5. 6. 11. And it was so when the children of Ammon made war
against Israel, the Elders of Gilead said unto Iepthah; Come, and be our
Captain, that we may fight with the children of Ammon, etc. Then Iepthah went
with the Elders of Gilead, and THE PEOPLE MADE HIM HEAD AND CAPTAIN OVER THEM.

^* ^^m. 18. 3^ 4. And the King said unto the people, WHA^^^^EMETH YOU BEST, I
WILL DO.

Jer. 38. 4. 5. Then Zedechiah the King said unto the Princes; Behold, he is in
your hand; FOR THE KING IS NOT HE THAT CAN DO ANY THING AGAINST YOU.

It is this 28th. day of March, 1643. Ordered by the Committee of the House of
Commons in Parliament concerning Printing, that this Book entitled, The
Sovereign power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, be forthwith Printed by Michael
Spark, Senior.

John White.



Printed at London by I. D. for Michael Spark, Senior, 1643.

To The Reader.
COurteous Reader, our usual Proverb concerning Science; That it has no
enemies but Ignorants; is in a great measure now verified concerning the
Proceedings of this present Parliament; that few or none malignantly clam or
against them* but such who are in a great degree Ignorant of our Parliaments
just Saveraigne Authority; though many of them in their own hightowring
conceits deem themselves almost Omniscients, and wiser than an hundred
Parliaments compacted into one. Among these Anti-parliamentall Momusses, there
are none more outragiously violent (Papists only excepted) in exorbitant
Discourses, and virulent Invectives, against this Parliaments Sovereign power,
Privileges, Orders, Remonstrances, Resolutions; then a Company of seemingly
Scient, though really Doct^m g^nu^ indoctissimorum Hominum, vix ad Doroberniam
usque docti. Erasmus.
inscient, selfe-conceited Court-Doctors, Priests, and Lawyers; who have so
long studied the Art of flattery, that they have quite forgot the very
Rudiments of Divinity, Law, Policy, and found out such a Divine, Legal,
unlimited absolute royal Prerogative in the King; and such a most despicable
Impotencie, Inanity, yea Nullity in Parliaments, without his personal presence
and concurrence with them; as was never heard of but in Utopia, if there; and
may justly challenge a Special Scene in the next Edition of Ignoramus.

What God himself long since complained off; Hos^^ 4. 1. 6*
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; may now be as truly averred of
the people of England, (seduced by these blind Guides, or overreached by
Iesuitically Policies,) they are destroyed for want of knowledge; even of the
Kings just circumscribed Prerogative; of the Parliaments Supreme unlimited
Authority, and Unquestionable Privileges; of their own Haereditary Liberties,
and Native Rights: of the Law of God, of Nature, of the Realm in the points
now controverted between King and Parliament; of the Machivilian deep Plots
of Priests and Papist^ long since contrived, and their Confederacies with
foreign States (now visibly appearing) by secret Practices, or open violence,
to set up Popery and Tyranny, throughout our Realms at once; and by false
pretenses, mixed with deceitful Protestations, to make our selves the unhappie
Instruments of our Kingdoms slavery, our Laws and Religions utter ruin. The
Ignorance, or Inadvertency of these particulars, coupled with a Popish blind
Obedience to all royal Commands though never so illegal; out of an implicit
Faith, that what ever the King Commands (though against the express Laws of
God and the Realm and Resolutions of both Houses of Parliament) may and ought
to be obeyed (...) as some new Doctor^ teach* has induced not only many poor
Ignorant English and Welsh silly souls, but likewise sundry Nobles and
Gentlemen of quality, very unworthily to engage themselves in a most unnatural
destructive war, against the High Court of Parliament, and their Cari sunt
parents, cari liberi, propinqui, familiares; sed omnes omnium caritates Patria
una complexa est; pro qua quisbonus dubitet mortem oppetere, si ei ^it
profuturus? Quo est detestabilior illotum, immanitas, quilacerant omni scelere
Patriam, and in eafunditus delenda occupati and sunt, and fuerunt, Cicero de
Officiis l. 1. p. 614.
Dearest Native Country, to their eternal infamies, and (which is almost a
miracle to consider) to join with the Jesuitical Popish Party now in Arms
both in England and Ireland, (and some say under the Popes own Standard) not
only to subvert their own Laws and Liberties, but the very Protestant
Religion here estabished, which they profess they fight for. In this
deplorable war many thousands have been already destroyed; and the whole
Kingdom almost made a desolate wilderness, or like to be so ere this Spring
pass over; and all only for want of knowledge, in the premises, which would
have prevented all those Miseries and Distractions under which we now languish
almost to desperation, and death it self.

To dissipate these black Clouds of Egyptian Darkness, spread over all the
Land, distilling down upon it in showers of Blood instead of April drops of
rain, (and I pray God they make not all our May-flowers of a Sanguine dye,) I
have, (after a long sad Contemplation, of my dear Countries bloody Tragedies)
at the special Request of some Members of Parliament, (according to my weak
Ability, and few Hours vacancy from other distracting Employments) hastily
compiled this undigested ensuing Fragment* with the preceding Branch thereof,
and by their Authority, published that in dismembered Parts, which by reason of
its difficulty to the Printers, and urgencie of present public affairs now
in agitation, I was disabled to put forth (together with the remaining member)
in one entire Body, as I desired. Be pleased therefore kindly to accept that in
Fractions, for the present, which time only must, and (God-willing) speedily
shall complete; which by Gods blessing on it, may prove a likely means to
comprimise our present Differences; and re-establish our much-desired* Peace;
together with our Religion, Laws, Liberties in their Native purity and glory;
(the very Crowns, and Garlands of our Peace;) Peace accompained with Slavery
and Popery (both which now menace Us,) being worse then the worst of Wars;
and an honorable death in the field fighting against them, better by far
then a disconsolate sordid slavish life, or a wounded oppressed Conscience,
(though in a royal Palace* under them. From such a disadvantageous,
enslaving, ensnaring, unwelcome Peace, Good Lord Deliver Us.

All I shall add, is but this request; A Charitable Construction, of this
mean Service for my Countries Liberty, Tranquillity, Felicity: and if thou, or
the Republicke reap any benefit thereby, let God only enjoy thy Praises, the
Author thy Prayers. And because I have walked in an untrodden path, in all the
Parts of this Discourse.

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti; si non, his uteremecum.
THE SOVEREIGN POWER OF PARLIAMENTS AND KINGDOMS.
HAVING answered in the former Part, the Grand Objection Object. 2.
against the Parliaments Sovereign Power, I shall in this proceed to the
particular crimes now objected against it. The second grand complaint of his
See all his Majesty's Declarations and Proclamations concerning the Militia,
Commission of Array, Hull, The Complaint against the Parliament.
Majesty and others, against the Parliament is, That both Houses by a mere
Ordinance, not only without but against the Kings assent, have unjustly
usurped the power of the Militia, a chief flower of the Crown, and in pursuit
thereof, not only appointed Lieutenants, and other Officers, to muster the
Trained Bands in each County; but likewise seized the Ports, Forts, Navy, and
Ammunition of the King, together with his Revenues; to regaine all which, his
Majesty has been necessitated to raise an Army, and proceed against them in a
Martial way.

This unhappy difference about the Mi^itia, Answ.
being (next to the Introduction of Popery) the spring from whence our uncivil
wars have issued, and the full discussion thereof, the most probable means
to put a speedy period to them: I shall with as ^uch impartiality and
perspicuity, as I may, like a faithful Advocate to my Country, and cordial
indifferent well-wisher both to King and Parliament, truly state and debate
this controversy, beginning with the occasions which first s^t it on foot.

In the late happily composed War between England and Scotland, (occasioned
by the Prelates) diverse Counties of England were much oppressed by their
Lieutenants with illegal Levies of Soldiers, Coat and Conduct money, taking
away the Trained Bands Arms against their consents, and the like, for which
many complaints were put up against them to this Parliament; many of them voted
Delinquents, unfit for such a trust, and all their Commissions resolved to be
against Law; so that the Militia of the Realm lay quite unsettled. See the
Parliaments Remonstrances, and Declarations touching all these particulars,
specially Nov 2. 1642.
Not long after, our Northern Army against he Scots, the pacification being
concluded, was by some ill instruments labored to march up to London, to
overawe or dissolve the Parliament, and quash the Bill against the Bishops
sitting in the House: Which plot being discovered, and the chief Actors in it
flying over-sea ere it took effect, made the Parliament jealous and fearful
of great dangers, if the Command of the Forces of the kingdom then vacant,
should be continued in ill-affected, or untrusty Officers hands; which
distrusts and fears of theirs were much augmented by the sudden general
rebellion of the Papists in Ireland, who See D. Jones his Book of
Examinations, Printed by the Houses Order.
pretended his Majesty's and the Queens Commissions for their warrant; by his
Majesty's unexpected accusation of, and personal coming (with an
extraordinary Guard) into the House of Commons to demand the five Members of
it, whom he charged with high Treason; by his entertaining of diverse Captains,
as a supernumerary Guard at White Hall; and denying a Guard to the House; by
the Earl of New-castles attempt to seize upon Hull, and the Magazine there, by
command; by the Lord Digbies advise to the King, to retire from the Parliament,
to some place of strength; by the Reports of Foraine Forces prepared for
England, through the solicitation of those Fugitives, who had a finger in the
former plots; and by the Queens departure into the Netherlands, to raise a
party there. Hereupon the Parliament, for their own and the kingdoms better
security (in the midst of so many fears and dangers threatened to them)
importuned his Majesty to settle the then unsettled Militia of the kingdom, by
a Bill, for a convenient time; and seeing the King himself could not
personally execute this great trust but by underofficers, by the same Bill, to
entrust such persons of quality and sincerity (nominated by both Houses, and
approved by the King) as both his Majesty, Parliament, and kingdom might
securely confide in, to exercise the Militia, and keep the Forts, Magazine,
and Ammunition of the kingdom under him only (as before) till these black
clouds were dissipated. Which his Majesty refusing to grant in so ample manner
as was thought meet for their security; by a Vote of both Houses (when they
were full) the Militia was committed to diverse Noble Lords and others; many of
whom have since laid down their Commissions, which they at first accepted from
the Houses, and instead thereof, been active instruments in executing the
Commission of Array; (issued out by his Majesty, in direct opposition to the
Militia) which the Houses by two several Declarations have since Voted and
manifested, To be against the Law, and Liberty of the Subjects. And to prevent
the arrivals of Foraine Forces, and a civil war in the bow^ls of the
kingdom, they first put the Tower of London, by the Kings consent, into a
confiding hand, trusted by either party; then they secured Hull and the
Magazine there; after this, when they were informed his Majesty had seized
Newcastle, and was raising an Army, they possessed themselves of the Navy,
Portsmouth, with other Ports and Forts; and sequestered his Revenues; (the
Nerves with which he should support this unnatural civil war) which by
degrees has now overspread the whole kingdom, and threatens inevitable
desolation to it, if not speedily determined, by an honorable safe
Accommodation.

This being the true State and progress of the Militia, the sole question will
be; Whether all the former circumstances of danger, and his Majesty's refusal
to settle the Militia, Ports, etc. by an act; in such trusty hands, as both
King and Parliament might confide in; the Parliament by an Ordinance of both
Houses only, without the King, refusing to join with them, and wilfully
absenting himself from the Parliament, might not in this case of necessity and
extremity, (for their own, and the kingdoms safety) lawfully settle and seize
the premises, for the present, as they have done? and whether this be a just
ground for the King to begin or continue a desperate civil war against his
Subjects? For my part, I shall not undertake to justify all passages on either
side, in the managing of this business; it may be there have been errors at
least in both parties: which to reconcile, as near as possible, I shall
premise such propositions on either hand, as Neither can in justice deny.

On the Kings part it is irrefragable:

First, That the Kings of England, (yea generally all Kings where ever) have
usually enjoyed the chief Ministerial Ordering of the Militia (in such sort
as it has been settled by their Parliaments) for the defense of the kingdom
by Land and Sea, against Foraine Enemies: A Truth acknowledged, not only by
Judge Crook, and Hutton, in their Arguments against Ship Money, but by the
Parliament it self, in their two Declarations against the Commission of Array;
the 1 Samuel 8. 11 12. 20. c. 13. 2. (...) 17. 2 Samuel 8. c. 11. 1. c. 12. 29 30.
c. 1 8. 1, 2.
Scripture it self in sundry places, together with Poli. l. 3. and. 5
Aristotle, Hist. l. 6.
Polybius, De Offic* l. 2.
Cicero, De Dignitate Regum Hispaniae. c. 18.
Iacobus Valdesius, the Sea Munsters C^sino. l. 2. c. 18, 19, 20. l. 4. c. 59
Histories of all kingdoms attesting, that the original cause of erecting
Kings was, and one principal part of their Royal Office is, to be their
Kingdoms Generals in their Wars, and fight their Battles for them; the
Kings of Sparta, and others, yea, the ancient Roman Emperors, being See
Grimstons impe. Hist. (...). Volater. Polyb. hist. l. 6.
nothing but their Generals to manage their Wars, and often elected Emperors
by the Roman Legions, for their skill in Martial affairs.

Secondly, That it is not only (...)
expedient, but in some respects necessary, that this chief ministerial
command of the Militia, Forts, and Navy, should constantly continue in the
Crown; unless it be in some special cases; as when the King is an Infant, or
unable, or unwilling to discharge this trust; or intends to employ this power
against his Subjects to infringe their Liberties, and erect a Tyranny instead
of a Royalty over them: And that it is not meet nor honorable to deprive his
Majesty of this part of his Sovereignty, as long as he shall faithfully
discharge his trust herein, but only to recommend unto him such persons of
trust and quality to manage the Militia, Forts, and Navy under him, in these
times of war and danger, in whose fidelity the Parliament and whole kingdom
may confide, and so be freed from their just jealousies, fears, and dangers.
Thus far the Houses have already condescended; and upon these indifferent
terms (as they conceive them) have often (...)
proffered to resign up all the Ports, Forts, Ships, Magazines, and Ammunition
they have seized on, into his Majesty's hands, they never desiring, nor
intending to divest him of this his Sovereign power over them.

On the Parliaments part, it must necessarily be granted to them by the King:

First, That the whole power which either his Majesty has or claims, or his
Predecessors enjoyed over the Militia, Forts, Navy, Ammunition, and Revenues of
the Crown; was originally derived and granted to his Ancestors, by the
Parliaments and kingdoms free consents, (...)
And that only upon trust and confidence for their prot^ction, benefit,
security, as the premises abundantly evidence.

Secondly, that the King has no other power over the Militia, to Array, Arm,
or Muster his Subjects in any case, then only in such manner as the Parliament
by special Acts has prescribed, as Sir Edward Cook in his Institutes on
Magna Charta, f. 528. 529. this Parliament in the two Declarations against the
Commission of Array, and Judge Crook and Hutton in their Arguments against
Ship Money, have largely proved.

Thirdly, That in ancient times, in and before Edward the Confessors days, and
since the Heretoches (or Lord Lieutenants of every Province and Country) who
had the chief power of the Militia, and commanded them as their Generals in
the Wars, were elected by the Common Council of the kingdom (the
Parliament) throughout all Provinces of the Realm, and in every County (by the
Freeholders) in a full Folkmote, or County Court; as appears by the express
words of King Edwards own Laws, Recorded in A^chaion p. 135.
Mr. Lambard; Recited and affirmed by Sir Edward Cook in his Institutes on
Magna Charta, f. 174, 175.

Fourthly, That the Sheriff of every County (who both 3 Ed. 3. c. 17. 19 E. 2.
Fitz. Execution 247. 8 H. 4. 19. a. 3 H. 7. 10. Cook^ Institutes on Mag. Char.
f, 193. 13 E. 1. c. 38.
then had, and now has full power to raise the Militia, and Forces of the
County upon any occasion, to apprehend Delinquents, execute Process of the Law,
suppress Riots, and preserve the peace of the County) were not elected by the
King, but by the Freeholders of each County, as the Cook Ibid. p. 558, 559.
Conservators of the Peace, and all great Officers of trust, then were, and the
Cook Ibid. No. Not. Bre. 163 164. Register part 1. 177, 178 28 E. 3. c. 6.
Stamford l. 1. f. 51.
Coroners, Foresters, and other Officers, then and yet are elected by the
Freeholders, (as well as 7 H. 4. c. 15 8 H. 6. c. 7.
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of Parliament) even at this very day; This is
evident by the express words of King Edward the Confessors Laws. Cap. de
Heretochiis (Recorded by Mr. Lambard, Archaion, p. 135. and Sir Instit. on Mag.
Charta. f. 174, 175.
Edward Cook) attesting that the Sheriffs of every County were chosen by the
Freeholders in the County Court: And by the Articles of deprivation against
Richard the second, charging this upon him as an illegal encroachment, Grafton
p. 401
That he put out diverse Sheriffs, lawfully ELECTED (to wit, by the
Freeholders,) and put in their rooms diverse of his own Minions, subverting
the Law, contrary to his Oath and honor. Mat. Westminster. Anno 126^. p. 310, 311.
Fabi. part 7 p. 30. 71 Grafton p. 137. Speed p. 636.
In the year 1261. The Barons, by virtue of an Ordinance of Parliament made at
Oxford, in the 45 year of Henry the third, admitted and made Sheriffs of
diverse Counties in England, and named them Guardians and Keepers of those
Counties, and discharged them whom the King had before admitted. After which,
great tumults and seditions arose throughout the Counties of England about the
Sheriffs; for the Man. West hist Ibid.
King making new Sheriffs in every County, and removing with regal
indignation, those to whom the custody of the Counties was committed by the
Barons and Commons of the Land; the Inhabitants of the Counties animated with
the ass^stance, and aided with the Counsel of some great men of the Realm, by
whom they were instructed; with great sagacity, Novos r^pulere viriliter
Vicecomites, manfully repulsed the new Sheriffs; Neither would they answer,
regard, or obey them in any thing. Whereat the King being grievously troubled
in mind, to gain the peoples devotion and fidelity, directed his Letters to
all the Inhabitants of the several Counties of England, moving to piety and
tending to regaine the Subjects love. Whereupon great discord increased between
the King and his Barons; who coming to London with great forces, the King
finding himself too weak, ended the matter for the present with a fained
Accommodation, which soon after was infringed by him; and so, Conquievit
tandem per internuncios ipsa perturbatio, SUB SPE PACIS reformandae, sine
strepit^^ guerrae, quorundum Procerum ad hoc electorum considerationibus, part
utraque concorditer inclinata: Sicque Baronum omnis labor, atque omne studium
praecogitatum diu, QUORUNDAM ( ut putabatur) ASTUTIA INTERMIXTA cassatum est ad
hoc tempus, and emarcuit; quia semper nocuit differ paratis; writes Matthew
Westminster* Notwithstanding these contests, the people still enjoyed the right
of electin* Sheriffs, which is evident by the Statute of Articuli super
Chartas, in the 28. year of King Edward the first, c. 8. The King grants to
the people (not by way of grace but of Right) that they shall have election of
their Sheriff IN EVERY SHIRE ( where the Shrevalty is not of Fee) IF THEY
LIST, and chap. 13. For as much as the King has granted the election of the
Sheriffs to the COMMONS of the Shire, the King will, that THEY SHALL CHOOSE
such Sheriffs, that shall not charge them, etc. And Sir Edward Cook in his
Commentary on Magna Charta, f. 174, 175. 558, 559. 566. proves at large, the
right of electing Sheriffs, to be anciently, of late, (and at this day in many
places) in the Freeholders and people, as in London, York, Bristoll,
Gloucester, Norwich, in all great Cities which are Counties, and in Middlesex.
Seeing then the Parliament and Freeholders, in ancient times had a just right
to elect their Generals, Captains, Sheriffs, (who had the sole power of the
Militia, and Counties in their hands next under the King himself) and there is
no negative Law in being (that I can find) to exclude them from this power; I
humbly conceive, that their settling the Militia by an Ordinance of Both Houses,
and electing of Commanders, Lieutenants, Captains in each County to execute
it, and defend the Counties from plundering, and destruction, without his
Majesty's consent (especially after his refusal to settle it by an Act) can be
no incroachment at all upon his Prerogative Royal, but only a reviving and
exercising of the old undoubted rightful power enjoyed by their Predecessors,
now necessary to be resumed by them (in these times of fear and danger) for
the kingdoms safety.

Fifthly, The Mayors, Bayliffes, Sheriffs, chief Officers of Cities and
Towns corporate throughout^ the Realm, (who under the King have the
principal command of those Cities, Towns, Ports* and in many places of the
Militia, and Trained Bands within them) are always chosen by the Corporations
and Freemen, not the King, without any derogation to, or usurpation on his
Prerogative. Why then may not those Corporations, (yea each County too by the
like reason) and the Parliament, which represents them and the whole kingdom,
without any prejudice or dishonor to his Majesty's Authority, by an Ordinance
of both Houses of Parliament, without the King, dispose of the Militia, and
these Military Officers, for the defense of those Corporations, and the Realm
too, now, in times of such apparent danger?

Sixthly, all See C^oks Instit. on Mag. Cha. f. 538.
Military affairs of the kingdom heretofore, have usually, even of right,
(for their original determining, counselling, ann disposing part) (...)
Ordered by the Parliament; the executive, or ministerial part only, by the
King; and so has been the use in most other kingdoms: To instance in
particulars.

First, the denouncing of war against Foraine enemies, has been usually
concluded and resolved on by the Parliament, before it was proclaimed by the
King: as our Records of Parliament, and Histories of wars in the Holy Land,
Fr^^ce, Scotland, Ireland, abundantly evidence. Speeds hist. p. 785 to 790. See
Walsing* Fab. Holin. Holl, Stow Graft. in his life Anno 1 and 5.
King Henry the fifth by the advice of his Prelates, Lords, and Commons in
Parliament, and at their encitement, twice denounced and undertook his
victorious war against France, to which Crown he then laid claim, for which
end they granted him Subsidies: King Walsing. hist. An^l. An. 1295 p. 25. See
Holin. Speed* p. 653. Grafton, Fabian.
Edward the 1. in the 21 year of his Reign, calling a Parliament at London,
de Concilio Praelatorum and Procerum, etc. by the advice of his Prelates, Lords
and Parliament, denounced war against the King of France: to recover his right
and lands there seized. Which to effect, both the Clergy and Laity granted him
large Subsidies. In the Grafton, p. 227. 222, 223.
fifth year of King Edward the third, the war against Scotland was concluded
and resolved on, in and by the Parliament; all the Nobles and Commons of
England telling the King, they would gladly and willingly assist and go with
him in that expedition, which they vigorously prosecuted: Before this, Anno
1227. A peace (as well as war) was conec^uded with the Scots in and by a
Parliament at Northampton. Matthew. Paris, Anno. 1240. p. 561, 562, 563. See
Daniel. p. 160. 561.
Anno 1242. King Henry the third summoning a Parliament, and demanding aid of
his Subjects to assist him in his war against the King of France, to recover
his rights there, they gave him a resolute answer, that they would grant him no
aid, and that he should make no war with France till the Truce were expired:
which Matthew Paris thus further expresses: The Nobles answered him with great
bitterness of heart; that he had conceived this war and vnyage into France
without their advise: Et talia effrons impudenter postularat, exagitans and
depauperans fideles suos tam frequenter, tra^ens exactiones in consequentiam
quasi a servis ultimae conditionis, and tantam pecuniam toties extorsit
inutiliter dispensandam. Contradixerunt igitur Regi in faciem, nolentes amplius
sic pecunia sua frustratorie spoliari. The King hereupon put them off till the
next day (Romanorum usus vertutis fallaciis) and then they should hear his
mind concerning this and other matters. The next day he calls them one by one
into his privy Chamber, Now one, then another, like a Priest calling penitents
to confession; and thus those whom he could not all together overcome, weakened
by being every one apart, he endeavored more cunningly to enervate with his
words* and demanding a pecuniary aid of them he said; See what this Abbot has
granted me toward my aid; behold what another has subscribed, producing a
fained Roll, that such and such an Abbot or Peer had subscribed such a sum,
when in truth not one of them had consented to it, neither came it into their
thoughts. The King therefore with such false copies, and ensnaring words.
cunningly inveagled many: Notwithstanding most stood out, and would by no
means recede from the common answer, which they had sworn not to recede from
under pain of an Anathema. To whom the King answered in anger, Shall I be
perjured? I have sworn with an inviolable oath, that passing over sea, I will
with a stretched out arm demand my rights of the King of France, which I
cannot do without store of Treasure, which must proceed from your liberality,
else I can by no means do it. Neither yet with these, or other words could
he entrap any, albeit, he called every man single to confer with. After
this, he again called others which were more familiar with him, and so talking
to them said, What a pernicious example give you to others? you who are Earls,
Barons, and valiant Soldiers, ought not to tremble as others, to wit, Prelates
of the Church do. You ought to be more covetous to demand the Kings rights,
and valiantly to fight against those who wrong me, etc. with what face then can
you relinquish me poor and desolate now, being your Lord, in such a weighty
business which concerns the Commonwealth, when I am bound by promises to
pass the Seas, which I ratified with an oath? Which when it came to the
knowledge of all, they answered:

We admire beyond all that can be spoken, into what bottomless pit the
innumerable sums of money are sunk, which thou Lord King have cunningly
gained, by diverse wardships of great men, by various escheates, frequent
extortions, as well from Churches void of a Pastor, as from the lands of
Noblemen, free granted Donatives, engendring amazement in the hearts of the
hearers, all which have never brought so much as the least increase to the
kingdom. Moreover all the Nobles of England do overmuch admire, QUOD SINE
EORUM CONSILIO ET CONSENSU, that without their counsel or consent you have
undertaken so difficult and perilous a business, giving credit to those who
want faith, and contemning the favor of thy natural Subjects, exposest thy
self to cases of so doubtful fortune: thou dishonestly and impudently, not
without just peril of thy Soul, and wounding of thy Fame breakest the
Articles of the truce between the King of France and thee, which thou have
sworn upon thy Soul indissolubly and unviolably to keep for three years
space, etc. The King hearing these things, was exceeding angry, swearing by all
the Saints, that he would be revoked by no terror, nor persuaded by any
circumstances of words, to retard his begun purpose, and taking ship on
Quindena Paschae, would undauntedly try the fortune of War in Foraine parts.
And so the Parliament dissolving in discontent and secret heart-burning on both
sides, the Lords and Barons for a perpetual memory of their Heroicke Answer
returned to the King, set it down in a notable Remonstrance (too large to
transcribe) which you may read in Pa. 562, 563.
Matthew Paris. After this in the year 1248. this Matthew. Paris, Anno 1248. p.
718, 719, 725, 726. etc. Dani. p. 164.
King summoned a general Parliament at London, wherein he demanded an aid
from his Lords and Commons to recover his Right in France; who instead of
granting it, informed him very roundly and fully of his unkingly and base
oppressions both of his Subjects and strangers, to his own and the kingdoms
dishonor, and of his tyranny and rapines: At which the King being confounded
and ashamed in himself, promised a serious and speedy Reformation; Which
because they thought to be but feigned, he answered they should shortly see it;
Whereupon they replied, they would patiently expect it till fifteen days
after St. John Baptist, adjourning the House till then. But the King seduced,
hardened and much exasperated by his bad Counselors and Courtiers, giving then
a very high displeasing answer to their demands; they all unanimously answered,
that they would no more unprofitably impoverish themselves to enrich and
strengthen the King and kingdoms Enemies; and that he had precipitately and
indiscreetly, and WITHOUT THEIR CONSENT hastened into Poictiers, and Gascoygne,
and engaged himself in that war; whence he returned ingloriously with loss
of his honor and treasure, to his great reproach. And so this Parliament
dissolving with discontent, the King grew very angry with his ill Counselors,
for putting him upon these courses, which lost the hearts of his Nobles and
people: who to pacify his anger and supply his wants, advised him to sell all
his Plate, Utensils, and Jewels to the Londoners, and then to resume and seize
them again, as belonging to the Crown.

Matthew. Paris, An. 1256. Dan. p. 172.
Anno 1256. The same King Henry summoned a Parliament to assist him in his
wars in Apulia; but because he had taken upon him that War WITHOUT HIS
BARONS AND PARLIAMENTS CONSENT they and his own Brother, Richard Earl of
Cornwall, refused to grant or lend him any aid. And Nota.
because all the Barons and Commons were not summoned to this Parliament, as
they ought to be, according to the tenor of Magna Charta, they refused to do
any thing, or grant any aid without the rest of the Peers were present; and
so returned home discontented. After this, Mat. Paris, An. 1258. p. 933, 934.
935. Dan. p. 175.
Anno 1258. this King summoning a Parliament at London, demanded aid of them
toward his wars in Apulia; to which the Parliament gave this resolute
answer, that they could no ways supply him in this case without their own
undoing: And if he had unadvisedly, and unseemingly gotten from the Pope the
kingdom of Apulia for the use of his Son Edward, he should impute it to his
own simplicity, and that he had PRESUMED UNCIRCUMSPECTLY WITHOUT THE CONSENT
OF HIS NOBLES TO UNDERTAKE THIS WAR, as a contemner of deliberation and
prudence, which is wont to forecast the end of things; therefore he should
bring it to what issue he best could, and should take example from his brother
Richard, who refused the Empire tendered to him, etc. In the second year of
Walsing. An. 1311. hist. Ang. p. 71.
King Edward the second, he consented to this Act of Parliament, That he would
begin no war without common consent in Parliament, which he then confirmed
with an Oath. So Walsin. hist. Angl. p. 37, 38. etc. Ypodigma. Neustriae Anno.
1297. p. 83. to 87.
An. 25 Edward 1. The Lords and Commons utterly refused to go with the King to
his wars in Flanders, though they were summoned to do it; Because this war
was proclaimed without their consents and good likings; and they were not bound
by their Tenures to go unto it; petitioning the King to desist from this
War; and at last caused the King in Parliament to release these services. And
Mat. Paris, An. 1205. p. 204.
Anno 1205. The Lords and Commons for this very reason, refused to go with King
John to his wars in France to recover his inheritance there. Walsing^am,
hist. p. 319, 320 321, etc.
In the sixth year of King Richard the second, in a Parliament holden at
London, it was for many days together debated, whether the Bishop of Norwich
(Henry Spens^r) wh^m the Pope had made General of his Forces against the
Schismatickes of Flanders, giving great indulgences to those who should assist
him in person or with Moneys in this War, should undertake that War or no?
and after much opposition of the Captains of the kingdom, alleging, that it
was not safe to commit the people of the King and kingdom to an unexpert
Priest; it was at last resolved in Parliament (through the constancy and valor
of the Knights and Commons) that he should undertake this war, and go General
of the Army: Which office he valiantly managed with good success; being a
better Soldier than Preacher. And the same year in another Walsingham, his^.
p. 332.
Parliament at London; it was Decreed BY THE PARLIAMENT, that because the Scots
had broken their Faith with the English, Faith should be broken with them.
(Frangenti fidem, fides frangatur eidem:) And that a select power should be
sent into Scotland out of England, (to wit, a thousand Lances, and 2000.
Archers) to curb their attempts, under the conduct of the Lord Thomas of
Woodstocke: which the Scots being informed of, were greatly afraid, and in the
end of the Parliament sent humble supplicants to it, to treat with them about a
peace or truce, which they desired. But the English having had such frequent
experience of their falsehood, would neither treat nor compound with them; but
reviling their messengers, commanded them to return home, wishing them to
defend their heads and rights as well as they could. Who returning, the
Northern Lords undertook the defense of their Country, until Thomas of
Woodstocke should be p^epared to aid them with greater Forces. Lo here both
Generals, Armies, Wars appointed by the Parliament, and Subsidies likewise
granted to supply them; and the making of a peace or truce referred to them, it
being agreed in a former Treaty; that if any damage or injury should be done
by either Nation one to another, some special Committees should be sent to the
Parliament of both kingdoms every year, who should publicly relate the
injuries sustained, and receive amends according to the damage suffered, by
the judgment of the Lords.

In the Printed Statutes of 18 Ed. 3. Parliament 2. and in our Grafton, p. 255,
250. Spe. p. 701.
Historians too, (I find this preamble, recited almost verbatim, the next
Parliament the same year, chap 1.) It is to be remembered, that at the
Parliament h^lden at Westminster, the monday next after the Utas of the Holy
Trinity, in the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, of England
the 18. and of France the 5. many things were showed in full Parliament, which
were attempted by the adversary party, against our Sovereign Lord the King of
France, against the Truce late taken in Britain, betwixt our Sovereign Lord
the King, and him. And how that he enforces himself as much as he may, to
destroy our said Sovereign Lord the King, and his Allies, Subjects, Lands and
places and the tongue of England. And that was prayed by our said Sovereign
Lord the King of the Prelates, great men and Commons, THAT THEY WOULD GIVE HIM
SUCH COUNSEL and AID AS SHOULD BE EXPEDIENT IN SO GREAT NECESSITY. And the
same Prelates, great men and Commons taking good deliberation and advice, and
openly seeing the subversion of the Land of England, and Kings great business,
which God defend, if hasty remedy be not provided, HAVE COUNSELED JOINTLY and
SEVERALLY, and prayed with great instance our Sovereign Lord the King, that he
would make him as strong as he might to pass the Sea, in assurance of the aid
of God and his good quarrel, effectually at this time, TO MAKE AN END OF HIS
WARS BY WAY OF PEACE OR ELSE BY FORCE. And that for Letters, words, nor fair
promises, he shall not let his passage, till he see the effect of his
business. And for this cause the said great men do grant, to pass and
adventure them with him. And the said Commons do grant to him for the same
cause in a certain form, two Quinzimes of the Commonalty, and two Dismes of
the Cities and Burroughes, to be levied in manner as the last Quinzime granted
to him, and not in other manner, etc. So that the money levied of the same, be
dispended in the business showed to them this Parliament, BY ADVICE OF THE
GREAT MEN THERETO ASSIGNED. And that the aids beyond Trent, BE PUT IN DEFENSE
OF THE NORTH. A pregnant Precedent of the Parliaments interest in concluding
War and Peace, and disposing of the aid contributed toward wars, to such
persons and uses as they deem meet to confide in. By these, with infinite
other precedents, the Statute of 1 Iac. c. 2. and the Act of Pacification and
oblivion between Scotland and England, made this very Parliament, enacting
that no war shall be levied or made by any of either Nation against the other
without consent of Parliament, under pain of High Treason; It is evident, that
the principal right of concluding, denouncing War or peace, resides in the
Parliament: and that the King without its previous advice and consent, ought
not to proclaim any open war, since the Subjects estates; and persons must
support, wage it, and receive most disadvantage by it; a truth not only
employed but resolved by his Majesty's own royal assent this very Parliament
in the Act of Pacification betwixt England and Scotland. Neither is this thing
unusual but common in other Kingdoms. L 2. Romans hist. Dec. 2, 3. l. 5 Dec. 1.
l. 8. Dec. 1. l. 9. D. 1.
Livy, Hist. l. 6.
Polybius, Imperial hist. pass^^.
Grimston, Numa Pompilius.
Plutarch, Commonwealth, l. 1. c. 10 p. 162, 163, 164.
John Bodin expressly affirm and confirm by sundry examples; That in the Roman
State, both under their Kings and Emperors, the chief power of denouncing
war and concluding peace, was in the Senate and people: And if any of their
Emperors, Consuls or Generals concluded peace without their consents, it did
not bind, but was merely void, unless the Senate and people ratified it by a
new decree: neither might any war be decreed, but in the great assembly of
the Senate and people together, and by a public Law. And because Caesar had,
without command of the people, made war in France, Cato Uticensis delivered
his opinion in the Senate, that the Army was to be called home, and Caesar for
his presumption delivered up to the Enemy. So in the States and Kingdoms of
the Bodin. i^ and l. 3. c. 1.
Athenians, Aetolians, Polonia, Sweden, Denmark and Norway, no War was
begun, nor Peace concluded by their Kings but by the authority and preceding
decree of their Senates, Parliaments and Diets, as Bodins Commonweal l. 1. c.
10. p. 162 to 166.
Bodin proves at large. The like Rerum Stoticarum. l. 9. p. 334. and l. 7. p.
234.
Buchanan affirms of the Kings of Scotland; and we have divine authority
concurring with it, Josh. 22. 11, 12, etc. Judge. 20. 1. to 48. compared with
Prove. 20. 18. c. 24. 6. and Judge. 11.

Secondly, All preparations belonging to war by Land or Sea, have in the
gross and general, been usually ordered, limited and settled by the
Parliaments: as namely,

First, What proportions and sums of money should be raised for the managing
of the war; in what manner and time it should be levied; to what hands it
should be paid; and how disbursed: which appears by all the Bills of
Subsidies, Tenths, Taxes, Tonnage and Poundage in the Reigns of all our Kings.

Secondly, How every man should be Mustered, Arrayed, Armed, According to his
estate, 11 R. 2. c. 7. See Rastall, Taxes, etc. 25. E. 3. Stat 9.
as is clear by all our Statutes of Armor, Musters, Captains, Ships, Horses,
Wars, reduced under heads by Abridgement of Stat.
Rastall; where you may peruse them: by Justice Crookes and Huttons Arguments
against Ship Money; Sir Edward Cooks Institutes on Magna Charta, f. 528, 529.
the Parliaments two late Declarations against the Commission of Array: and the
Statute of Winchester, 13. E. 1. c. 6.

Thirdly, How far every man shall March when he is Arrayed, 1 E. 3. c. 7. 18
E. 3. c. 8. 25 E. 3. c. 8. 4 H. 4. c. 13. 11 H 7. c. 18. 19 H. 7. c. 1, 2. 5 R.
2. c. 10. 1 H. 5. c. 9. 2. and 3 E. 6. c. 2. 4, and 5. Phil. and Mar. c. 3. 5
Eliz. c. 5. Littleton Chapter of Escuage; and Cooks Institutes on it f. 68. to
75. Fit. Not. Bre. f. 83, 84. 7, H. 4. Fitz. Ten^^res, 44. 73. The Acts for
pressing Mariners, this Parliament 1 H. 6. c. 5. 18 H. 6. c. 18.
when he shall go out of his own County with his Arms, when not: who shall
serve by Sea, who by Land; how long they shall continue in the Wars; when
they shall be at their own, when at the Kingdoms, when at the Kings costs or
wages, and for how long time; as the Marginall Statutes, and next forecited Law
Authorities manifest.

Fourthly, When, where, and by whom 1 H. 4. c. 7. 2 H. 4. c. 21. 7 H. 4. c. 14
8 H. 4. c. 1. 6. and c. 2. 19 H. 7. c. 14.
Liveries, Hats, Coats, shall be given in Wars, when not, and what 9 H. 5.
c. 3. 4 H. 6. c. 2. 14 E. 4. c. 2. 8 H. 6. c. 13. Fitz. Brook Tit. Protection,
11 E. 4. c. 1, 2, 1 H. 7. c. 6. 49 H. 7. c. 4. 7 H. 7. c. 1.
Protections or Privileges those who go to Wars, or continue in them shall
have allowed them.

Fifthly, What 1 H. 6. c. 5. 14 H. 7. c. 7. 2 R. 3. c. 4. 5 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 3.
shares or proportions of Prisoners, Prises, Booties, Captains and Soldiers
should be allowed in the Wars: And at what 13. R. 2. c. 20. 14 E. 4. c. 10.
Ports and rates they should be Shipped over Sea.

Sixthly, 2 R. 2. c. 4. 13. c. 5. 15 R. 2. c. 3, 5 R. 2. c. 3. Stat. 2. 2 H. 4.
c, 11. 2 H. 5. c. 6. 18 E. 3. c. 3. 14. H. 6. c. 6. 7, 8. 2 H 5. c. 6. 29 H. 6.
c. 2. 4. H. 5. c. 7. 14 E. 4. c. 4. 18 H. 6. c. 9. 28 H. 8. c. 15. 37 H. 8. c.
4.
How and by whom the Sea shall be guarded, and what Jurisdiction, Authority,
and share of Prises the Admirals of England shall have; When the Sea shall be
open; when shut to enemies and strangers; What punishments inflicted for
Mariners abuses on the Sea; And what redress for the Subjects there robbed by
enemies or others.

Seventhly, What 21 R. 2. c. 18. See Spelmans Gl^ss. Admiral. Cooks Instit. on
Littleion, 260. 10 H. 6. c. 5. 4. E. 4. c. 11. 37 H. ^. c. 1. 23 Eliz. c. 4.
Castles, Forts, Bulwarks, shall be built or repaired for defense of the
Realm, in what places, and by whose charges.

Eighthly, What 2 R. 2. c. 4. 18 H. 7 c. 18, 19. 7 H. 7. c. 1. 3 H. 8. c. 5. 2
E. 6. c. 2. Phil. and Mary, c. 3. 5 Eliz. ^^Dyer 211. Cook 6. r. f. 17. ^^
punishment shall be inflicted upon Captains, who abuse their trust, detain
the Soldiers wages, and on Soldiers, who sell their Arms, or desert their
colors without special License.

Ninthly, What 35 Eliz. c. 4 39 Eliz. c. 21. 43 Eliz. c. 3.
provision there shall be made for, and maintenance allowed to Soldiers hurt
or maimed in the Wars by Land, and for Mariners by Sea.

Tenthly, That 7* R. 2. c. 16. 15 R. 2. c. 7. 7 H. 7. c. 6.
no aid, Armor, Horses, Victuals shall be conveyed to the enemies by way of
Merchandise, or otherwise during the Wars; that all Scots, and other enemies
should be banished the Kingdom and their goods seized whiles the wars
continued between England and them.

Eleventhly, How 2 H. 4. c. 12 18. 20 28, 30, 31, 32, 33. 1 H. 5, c. 6, 7. 3 H.
5 c. 3. 4 H. 5. c. 6, 7. 7 Iac. c. 1. 15 R. 2 c. 7. 17 R. 2* c. 7. 4 H. 5. c.
6. 1 H. 1. c. 3.
Frontier Castles and Towns toward Wa^es, and other places of hostility should
be well manned and guarded, and no Welchmen, Irish, Scots or alien Enemies
should be permitted to stay in England to give intelligence, or suffered to
dwell or purchase Houses or Lands within those Towns; and that they shall all
be disarmed.

Twelfthly, After what 3 E. 1. c. 7.
manner Purveyances shall be made by the Captains of Castles, and how they
shall take up victual. In one word, Wars have been ended, Leagues, Truces
made, confirmed, and punishments for breach of them, provisions for
preservation of them enacted by the Parliament, 2 H. 5. c. 6. 4 H. 5. c. 17. 14
H. 6. c. 7, 7* 29 H. 6 c. 2. 14 E. 4. c. 4*
as infinite Precedents in the Parliament Rols and 15 R. 2. c. 7. 8 H. 6. c. 3.
14 H. 6 c. 8. 20 H. 6. c. 12. 23 H 6. c, 6 27 H. 6. c, 2. 12 E. 4. c. 3. 17 E.
4. c. 1.
Printed Acts, demonstrate. So that our Parliaments in all Se^ 13 R. 2. c 2. 27
E. 3* c. 17 1 H. 6. c. 5. 9 H. 5. c. 3. 4 E. 3. c. 8
former ages, even in the Reigns of our most Martial Kings, have had the
Sovereign power of ordering, settling, determining both the beginning,
progress, and conclusion of our Wars, and the chief ordering of * all
things which concerned the managing of them by Sea and Land; being indeed the
great Counsel of War, elected by the Kingdom, to direct our Kings; who were
and are in truth but the kingdoms chief Lord Generals, (as the Polyb. hist.
l. 6. Eutropius, Munster, Grimston, Zonaras in the Roman Emperors lives,
Seldens Tit. of Honor.
) Roman Emperors, and all Kings of old were their Senates, States and Peoples
Generals, to manage their Wars and fight their battles) the Sovereign
power of making and directing War or Peace, being not in the Emperors or
Kings themselves, but in their Senates, States and Parliaments, as Arist.
Polit. l. 3. and 5. 1 Samuel 8 11, 12. 22.
Bodin proves at large. And being but the Kingdoms Generals, Commonwealth l.
1. c 10
who must support and maintain the Wars, there is as great reason that they
should direct and overruled Kings in the Ordering of their Wars and Militia
when they see cause, as that they should direct and rule their Lord General
now, or the King his Generals in both his Armies. During the Walsingham hist.
Ang. p. 458 Spe. hist. p. 1108 1109, 1120.
minorities of King Henry the sixth, and Edward the sixth, the Parliament made
the Duke of Bedford Regent of France, and the Dukes of Gloucester and Sommerset,
Lord Protectors of England; committing the trust of the Militia, and Wars to
them: And ( i) 39. H. 6. the Parliament made Grafi. p. 647 Halls Chron. 39 H.
6. f. 182. Sp. 362. Holinshed, S^ow, Mar^yn, 38, and 39 H. 6.
Richard Duke of York, Lord Protector of the Realm, and gave him like power,
when the King was of full age. And in our present times: The King himself this
very Parliament voluntar^ly committed the whole care and managing of the Wars
in Ireland and the Militia there to this present Parliament; who appointed both
the Commanders and al other Officers of the Forces sent hence into Ireland: and
that without any injury, or eclipse, to his Majesty's Royal Prerogative. If
then the Subjects and Parliament in ancient times, have had the election of
their Generals, Captains, Commanders, Sheriffs, Mayors, and other Officers,
having the chief ordering of the Militia under the King; if they have
constantly Ordered all parts and matters concerning the Wars in all former
Kings Reigns; appointed Regents and Protectors, committing to them the Kings
own Royal power over the Militia, during their Minorities; and his Majesty
himself has permitted this Parliament to Order the Militia of Ireland, to
which they have no such right or Titleash to that of England, without any
prejudice to his Prerogative; I can see no just exception, why his Majesty
should at first, or now deny the Parliament such a power over the Militia, as
they desired for a time; or why in point of Honor or Justice, their Bill for
settling the Militia in safe under hands, in such persons as both sides may well
confide in, should now be rejected, being for the Kings, Kingdoms, and
Parliaments peace and security; much less, why a bloody intestine War should
be raised or continued, upon such an unconsiderable point on his Majesty's
part: who seeing he cannot manage the Militia in proper person in all Counties,
but only by Substitutes; has far more cause to accept of such persons of
Honor and quality as his Parliament shall nominate (in whom himself and his
whole Kingdom in these times of War and danger may repose confidence) to
execute this trust, then any whom his own judgment alone, or some private
Lords or Courtiers shall recommend, in whom the Kingdom and Parliament, in
these jealous deceitful times, dare not confide. The yielding to the
Parliament in this just request, will remove all fears and jealousies, restore
our peace, re-gaine his Majesty the real affections of his discontented
Subjects; the persisting in the contrary course will but add fuel to our
flames, fears, doubts, dangers, and frustrate all hopes, all endeavors of
Peace.

From the Militia it self, I descend to the consequencies of its denial, the
Parliaments seizing upon Hull, with other Ports and Forts, the Royal Navy,
Ammunition, Arms, Revenues, and detaining them still from his Majesty, the
grand difference now pretended, whence the present war has emerged; which
these ensuing considerations will in a great measure qualify, if not
altogether satisfy.

First, his Majesty and all Royalists must necessarily yield, that the Ports,
Forts, Navy, Ammunition, Arms, and Revenues thus seized on by the Parliament,
though his See the Remonstrance of both Houses, Nov. 2. 1642.
Majesty's in point of possession, yet are not his, but the Kingdoms in point
of right and interest; they being first transferred to, and placed on his
Predecessors and himself by the Parliament and Kingdom: not in right of
propriety, but See Littleton, sect. 378, 379. and Cook ibid. Fitz. Not. f. 113
a. Cook 7. f. 5. 14 E. 3. c. 1. 11 R 2 c. 1. 42 E. c. 4.
conditionally upon trust, (his Majesty being but a public Officer) for the
defense and safety of the Realm; and though his Majesty came to them by
descent, yet it was but in nature of the Heir of a Feoffee in trust, for the
use and service of the kingdom; as a King in his politic; not as a man or
Proprietor in his natural capacity; as our Pl^wd. Com. f. 245. 221. 250 34 H.
6. f. 34. Cook Instit. on Littleton. f. 15. b.
Law Books, Terminis terminantibus resolve. Hence it has been often adjudged;
35 H. 6. c. 7 Fitz. Devise. 5. 1 H. 5. Executors. 108. 21 E 4. 45* b 21 E. 3.
39. 24 E. 3. 42. 11 H. 4. 7. Fit. Quare Imp. 35 53. 54. 115 118, 189.
Presentment ab Esglise, 11 Livery. 23, Cook, l. 9 f. 97. 16 R. 2. c. 1. 4, 1
H. 6. c. 5.
that the King can neither by his will in writing, nor by his Letters Patents,
Devise or alien the Lands, Revenues, Jewels, Ships, Forts, or Ammunition of the
Crown (unless it be by virtue of some special 21 R. 2. c 9 Cook, l. 8. The
Princes case. 28 H. 8. c. 7. 35 H. 8. c. 1. 1 H 6. c. 5. 25 H. 8. c. 22.
Act of Parliament enabling him to do it by the kingdoms general consent;)
and if any such alienations be made, they are void in Law, and may be, yea have
been 1 H. 5. c. 9 31 H. 6. c. 7. 10 R. 2. c. 1.
often resumed, reversed by the Parliament; because they are not the Kings, but
kingdoms, in point of intere^t and propriety: the Kings, but in possession and
trust for the kingdoms use and defense. Hence it is, that if the King dye, all
his 14 E. 3. Stat. 2* c. 1. 5* R 2. c 3 Al Statues that give Subsidies, Tenths,
Ton^age or Poundage, See Rastal Taxes, etc.
Ships, Arms, Ammunition, Jewels, Plate, Debts to the Crown, Moneys,
Arrerages of Rents or Subsidies, Wards, and Rights of presentiments to void
Churches, go only to his Successors, not to his Executors, (as in case of a
common person,) because he enjoyes them not as a Proprietor (as other Subjects
do) but as a Trustee only, for the Sea before Cook 5* f. 15 and 14 E. 3. c.
1. 10 R. 2 c 1.
kingdoms benefit and defense; as a See Fitz and Brook, Abbey, Corpora^ions,
Deane and Chap. Parson.
Bishop, Abbot, Deane, Mayor, or such like Corporations, enjoy their Lands, not
in their natural but politic capacities, for the use and in the right of
their Churches, Houses, Corporations, not their own. Upon this ground Speed p.
459. Matthew. Paris, p. 2.
King Harold pleaded his Oath and promise of the Crown of England to William
the Conqueror, without the Kingdoms consent, to be void; and Mat. Paris hist.
Mino^, Dr. Crakenthorpe of the Popes temporal Monarchy, p. 252. to 255.
Graft^n 11.
King Philip, with all the Nobles, of France, and our own Parliament (40 E. 3.
rot. Part. nu. 8.) unanimously resolved, King John his resignation and grant of
the Crown and Kingdom of England, to the Pope, without the Nobles and
Parliaments consents, to be a mere nullity, void in Law, binding neither King
nor Subject; the Crown and possessions of it, being not the Kings but
kingdoms.

And before this, Mat. West. An. 1245. p. 191, to 197. Walsingh. Ypodig. Neust.
p. 60. Mat. Paris p. 646.
Anno Do^. 1245. in the great Council of Lions, under Pope Innocent, to which
King Henry the third, sent four Earls and Barons, together with the English
Prelates, and one Master William Powyke an Advocate, to complain of the Popes
exactions in the Council, which they did; where they likewise openly protested
against the annual tribute extorted by the Pope, by grant from King John,
(whose detestable Charter granting that annual tribute, was reported to be
burnt to ashes in the Popes closet, by a casual fire during this Council) as
a mere nullity, and that in the behalf of the whole kingdom of England; EO
QUOD DE REGNI ASSENSU NON PROCESSERAT, because the kingdom consented not
thereto; and because the King himself could make no such Charter to charge the
kingdom. Which Matthew Paris thus expresses. W. De Poweric Anglicanae
Vniversitatis Procurator assurgens, gravamina Regni Angliae ex part
universitatis Angliae, proponens satis eleganter; conquestus est graviter, quod
tempore Belli per ^^uriam Romanam, extortum est tributum injuriose, in quod
nunquam patres Nobilium regni, vel ipsi consenserunt, nec consentiunt, neque in
futurum consentient, unde sibi petunt justitiam exhiberi cum remedio. Ad quod
Papa, nec oculos elevans, nec vocem, verbum non respondit.

Upon this reason (l) Matthew Paris speaking of King Henry the third his
morgaging his kingdom to the Pope, Hist. p. 868.
Anno 1251. for such moneys as he should expend in the Wars: uses this
expression. Rex secus quam deceret, aut expediret, Se, suumque Regnum, sub
paena exhaeredationis, QUOD TAMEN FACERE NEC POTUIT NEC DEBUIT, Domino Papae
obligavit. Hence King Edward the third, having the Title of the King and Crown
of France devolved to him, which made some of the English fear, that they
should be put in subjection to the Realm of France, against the Law; the
Parliament in the 14. year of his Reign, Stat. 4. passed a special Act,
declaring; That the Realm of England never was, nor ought to be in subjection,
nor in the obeisance of the Kings of France, nor of the Realm of France: and
enacting; that the King of England or his Heirs, by color of his or their
Titles to the Crown, Seal, Arms, and Title of the King of France should not
in any time to come put the Realm of England, or people of the same, of what
estate or condition soever they be, in subjection or obeisance, of him, nor his
Heirs nor his Successors, as Kings of France, nor be subject, nor obedient,
but shall be free and quite of all manner subjection, and obeisance as they
were wont to be in the time of his Progenitors, Kings of England for ever. By
the Statute of 10 R. 2. c. 1. it is resolved, That the King could not alien the
Land, Castles, Ships, Revenues, Jewels, and Goods of the Crown; and a
Commission is thereby granted to inquire of, and resume all such alienations as
illegal. Hence the Commons in the Parliament of 16 R. 2. c. 5. of Praemunire,
in their Petition to the King, and the whole Parliament in and by that Law,
declared; That the Crown and kingdom of England, has been so free at all
times, that it has been in subjection to no Realm, but immediately subject
to God, and to none other; which (by the prosecution of suites in the Court of
Rome for Benefices, provided against by this Act) should in all things touching
the Regality thereof, be submitted to the Bishop of Rome, and the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm be by him defeated and frustrated at his will, to the
destruction of the King, his Sovereignty, Crown and Regality, and of all his
Realm; in defense whereof in all points, they would live and dye. Hence the
Kings of England have always settled, entailed, and disposed of the succession
and Revenues of the Crown by special Acts of Parliament, and consent of the
whole Realm, because the whole kingdom has an interest therein, without
whose concurring assent in Parliament, they had no power to dispose thereof: as
the Statutes of 21 R. 2. c. 9. 7 H. 4. c. 2. 25 H. 8. c. 22. 26 H. 8. c. 13. 28
H. 8. c. 7. 35 H. 8. c. 1. 1 Mar. c. 1. and Parl. 2. c. 1, 2. 1 Eliz. c. 3. 13
Eliz. c. 1. 1 Iac. c. 1. Hals Chron. f. 10. 15. 1 H. 4. p. 763. 928. to 932.
Doniels hist. p. 122. 138, 139. abundantly manifest, and Cook l. 8. the
Princes case. Upon which ground Fox Acts and Mon. vol. 3. p. 13 to 17. See Hol.
Graft. Sp. Stow Martin, and others in 1 Mariae.
King Edward the sixth, his devise of the Crown of England to the Lady Jane, by
his last will in writing, without an Act of Parliament, contrary to the Statute
of 35 H. 8. c. 1. was adjudged void; though subscribed and sworn to, by all
the Lords of the privy Counsel, and all the Judges but one; and Queen Jane,
with the Duke of Northumberland and others, who proclaimed her as Queen of
England by virtue of this devise, were condemned and executed as Traitors:
Whereas auy private Subject may devise, and settle his estate as he pleases,
without any special Act of Parliament to authorize him.

Hence in the Parliament Roll of 1 H. 6. Number. 18. The last Will and Testament
of deceased Henry the fifth, and the Legacies therein bequeathed of 40000.
Marks in Goods, Chattels, Jewels, Moneys for Payment of the Kings debts, are
ratified by the Lords, Commons, and Protectors, concurring assents by an Act of
Parliament, as being otherwise invalid to bind the King or Kingdom. And Number.
40. Queen Katherines Dower of 40000. Scutes per Annum, concluded on by
Articles upon her Marriage, and by a Parliament held the second of May in the
9. year of King Henry the fifth, well approved, authorized and accepted, which
Articles that King then swore unto, and the three Estates of the Realm of
England, to wit, the Prelates, Nobles, and Commons of England, in that
Parliament, and every one of them, for them, their Heirs and Successors,
promised well and truly to observe and fulfill for ever, as much as to them
and every of them appertained: Was after her Husbands death, upon her petition,
by a special patent made by this Infant King her Son, WITH THE ASSENT OF THE
LORDS SPIRITUAL and TEMPORAL, and COMMONS OF ENGLAND, IN THAT PRESENT
PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED, assigned, settled, and confirmed, out of the Crown Lands
therein specified: else it had not been binding to the Successor King or
Realm: the Crown Lands being the Kings but only in the Kingdoms right;
whence all our Queens Dowers and Joyntures have usually been settled and
confirmed in and by Parliaments, (whereas any other man may endow or make his
Wife a good Jointure, without the Parliaments assent or privity;) And in
Walsingham, ^ist. p. 112. Daniels hist. p. 220 Speed p. 688.
2 E. 3. the Queen Dowagers great Ioynture (which took up three parts of the
Kings Revenues) by common consent in a Parliament, held at Nottingham, was all
taken from her, (because not duly settled by Parliament, and too excessive, to
the Kings and kingdoms prejudice) and she put to a pension of 1000. li. per
annum, during her life.

And by the Statute of 1 H. 6. c. 5. it is expressly resolved, That King Henry
the fifth could not alien or pledge the ancient Jewels or Goods of the Crown,
to maintain his Wars, without a special Act of Parliament; and if he did,
those to whom he pawned or sold them, were still accomptable to the Crown for
them, and the alienation void; whence, the carrying of the Jewels, Treasure,
and Plate of the kingdom over Sea into Ireland without assent of the Nobility
and Parliament, was one of the Graf. p. 401
Articles objected against Richard the second in Parliament, when he was
deposed; the Jewels and Crown Lands being not the Kings in right of property
and interest, but the kingdoms only; and so all alienations of them without
the Parliaments consent void, and usually 1 H. 5 c. 9. 10 R. 2. c. 1. Graft. p.
90, 149 Mat. Par. p. 306 308. Sp. p. 597 Daniels hist. pa. 78, 79, 80, 123
resumed by the Parliament; witness the notable Act of Resumption in 8 H. 6.
and 31 H. 6. c. 7. of all the Kings grants of any Honors, Castles, Towns,
Villages, Manors, Lands, Rents, Reversions, Annuities, etc. from the first
year of his Reign till then, with diverse other precedents of Resumptions in
the Margin, in King Stevens, Rich. 1, 2. and Hen. 2, 3, and 5. their Reigns.

These resolutions of our Common and Statute Law, are seconded by many
foreign Civilians, as Baldus in Proem. de Feud. n. 32. 33. Aretine in Rubric.
Lucas de Penna. Cod. de omni agro deserto. l. Quicunque f. 184, 185. Albericus
de Rosate: Quodcunque. praescrip. been a Zenone. n. 4. f. 3. 1. 4. Boethius
Epan. Haeroic. quest. qu. 3. n. 43. qu. 5. n. 19. 27. 34. Didacus Cavaruvius,
Practic. qu. c. 4. n. 1. Martinus Laudensis, de Confaed. Tract. 1. qu. 13.
Joan. Andreas, in cap. dilect. de Mayor. and Obed. Franciscus Vargas de Author.
Pontif. Axiom. 1. n. 2. Concilium Toletanum 8. Surius Council. Tom. 2. p. 865,
866. with sundry others (many of whose words you may read in Doctor
Crakenthorps defense of Constantine, p. 169. to 175.) who affirm; That the
Emperor or any other King cannot give away any Towns or Territories belonging
to their Empire or Kingdoms, contrary to their Oaths and Trusts, they being
the Kingdoms not theirs in right. Whence they conclude, Constantines pretended
Donation of Rome, and Italy to the Pope, a mere Nullity. And Grimston,
Imperial history, p. 646, 647. General history of France, p: 576, 577, 578.
Francis the first King of France, An. 1525. professed publicly to all the
world; That it was not in the power of a French King, to bind himself to the
alienation of any Lands, Towns, or Territories belonging to the Crown,
without the consent of the general Estates of France, and of his Sovereign
Courts and Officers, in whose hands the Authority of the whole Realm remained;
And therefore ^e refused to consigne the Duchy of Burgoyne to the Emperor
Charles the fifth, who had taken him prisoner in the Battle of Pavia, or to
release his right to any territories belonging to the Crown of France, though
he had sworn to do it to procure his Liberty, alleging that he had no power
to do it, without his kingdoms and Parliaments consents. It is true, 7. E. 4.
17. Dyer. f. 86. 283. b. 1. R. 3. c. 5.
our Law-bookes say; That the King cannot be seized of Lands to any private
Subjects use, by way of feofment, because it stands not with his honor to be
any private man's feoffee; because no Subpena lies to force him to execute it,
and he is a Corporation: yet he may have the possession of lands in others
right, and for their uses (as of See Rastal Wards, Praerog. Regis c. 9. 10. 32.
H. 8. c. 46. Br. Idiot. 2. 3. Cook. 4. Rep. f. 126, 127.
Wards, Idiots, Lunaticks, Bishops during the vacation, and the like) and if he
alien these Lands in fee to their prejudice, the 7 H. 4. 17. b. 21. E. 3. f.
47. 7. E. 4. 17.
grant is void in Law, and shall be repealed, as has been frequently judged;
because he possesses these lands not in his own, but others rights. So the
King has his Crown Lands, revenues, Forts, Ships, Ammunition, Wards,
Escheates, not in his own but the Kingdoms right, 14. E. 3. c. 1. Stat. 2. 5.
R. 2. c. 3. 10. R. 2. c. 1. 1. H. 5. c. 9. 31. H. 6. c. 7.
for its defense and benefit; and though he cannot stand seized to private man's
use, yet he may and does stand seized of the premises to his whole kingdoms
use, to whom he is but a public servant, not only in Law but Divinity too, 1 Samuel 8. 20. 2 Samuel 5. 12. Isa. 49. 23. Psalm. 78. 72, 73, 74. Romans 13. 4. 1 Pet.
2. 13. 14. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8.

Secondly, All the Ships, Ammunition, Arms the Parliament has seized, were
purchased not with the Kings, but Kingdoms moneys, for the defense and service
of the Kingdom, as the Subsidy Bills and 12. E. 4. c. 3. 6. H. 8. c. 14. 1 E.
6. c. 1. 3. Mariae c. 18. 1 E. 2. c. 20. 1 Iac. c. 23. and the Acts* this
Parliament.
Acts for Tunnage and Poundage, the Kings own Anno. 1629 p. 44.
Declaration, and Judge Crookes Arg^ment, p. 1. to 6.
Writs for Shipmony attest. If then the representative Body of the kingdom, to
prevent the arrival of foreign Forces, and that civil war they then
foresaw was like to ensue (and has experimentally since fallen out even b^yond
their fears, and overspread the whole kingdom, to which it threatens ruin;)
has seized, sequestered the kingdoms Ports, Forts, Navy, Ammunition into
trusty hands for the Kings and Kingdoms use, to no other end, but that they
should not be employed against the King and Parliament by his Majesty's
Malignant Counselors, and outrageous plundering Cavaliers, what indifferent
sober man can justly tax them for it? Speeds hist. p. 1213, 1219, 1220, Cambden
Elizabeth, Anno 1601, p. 205, to 209.
Queen Elizabeth (and the 15 H. 6. c. 3 See Master Seldens Mare Clauswn:
State of England heretofore) during the Wars with Spain, inhibited the
Haunse towns and other foraine Merchants (over whom she had no jurisdiction)
to transport any materials for War through the narrow Seas to Spain (though
their usual Merchandise to those parts, and the Sea, as they See Master
Seldens Mare Clauswn, and Pontanus answer thereto, and Grotius his Mare l^be^^n.
alleged, was free, for fear they should be turned against our Kingdom, and
after notice given, made them prise) for any of her Subjects to seize on. And
it is the common policy this day, and anciently of all States whatsoever, to
seize on all provisions of War, that are passing by way of Merchandise only
toward their enemies, though they have no right or property in them (and to
grant letters of Mart to seize them, as we have 4 H. 6. c. 7, 8 2 R. 2. c. 4.
27 E. 3. c 17. 2 H. 5. c. 6. 4 H. 5. c* 7: 18 H. 6. c. 9. 20 H. 6. c. 1. 4 E.
4. c. 5 Speeds history p. 1195. Marti^us Laudensis de Repraesaliis, and de
Bello, 18 E. 3. c. 8. 3 E. 4. c. 2.
usually done) which they plead they may justly do, by the Law of Nature, of
Nations, to prevent their own destruction. Much more then may the Houses of
Parliament, after the sudden eruption of that horrid Popish rebellion in
Ireland, and the fears of a like intestine war from the Malignant Popish
Prelaticall party in England, expecting Forces, supplies of money and ammunition
from foraine parts, seize upon Hull, other Ports, the Navy and Ammunition (the
Kingdoms proper goods, provided only for its defense in such times as these)
when his Majesty refused to put them into such hands as the kingdom and they
might justly confide in, and the contrary Malignant faction plotted to get
possession of them to ruin Laws, Lib^rties, Religion, Parliament, Kingdom:
And what mischief think you would these have long since done to Parliament
and Subjects, had they first gotten them, who have already wrought so much
mischief without them, by the Kings own encouragement and command? Doubtless
the Parliament being the supreme power, now specially met together and
entrusted by the Subjects, to provide for the kingdoms safety, had forfeited
not only their discretion, but trust, and betrayed both themselves, their
privileges, the Subjects Liberties, Religion, Country, Kingdom; and not
only their friends, but enemies would have taxed them of infidelity,
simplicity, (that I say not desperate folly) had they not seized what they did,
in the season when they did it? which though some at first, imputed only to
their overmuch jealousy, yet time has since sufficiently discovered, that it
was only upon substantial reasons of true Christian Policy. Had the Cavaliers
and Papists (now in arms) gotten first possession of them, in all probability
we had lost our Liberties, Laws, Religion, Parliament long ere this: and
those very persons (as wise men conceive) were designed to take possession of
them at first (had they not been prevented) without resistance, whom his
Majesty now imployes to regaine them by open wars and violence. It is known
to all, that his Majesty had no actual personal possession of Hull, nor any
extraordinary officer for him there, before Sir John Hoth^m seized it, but
only the Mayor of the Town, elected by the Townsmen, not nominated by the
King; neither did Sir John enter it, by order from the Houses, till the King
had first commanded the Major and Townsmen (whom he had constantly entrusted
before) to deliver Hull up to the Earl of Newcastle, now General of the
Popish Northern Army; The first breach then of trust, and cause of jealousy
proceeding from the King himself in a very unhappy season; where the quarrel
first began, and who is most blameworthy, let all men judge. If I commit my
sword in trust to another custody for my own defense, and then fear or ^ee
that he or some others will murder me with my own weapon, it is neither
injury nor disloyalty in me for my own preservation, to seize my own Sword
till the danger be past; it is madness or folly not to do it, there being
many ancient and late examples for to warrant it; I shall instance in some few.
By the 20 E. 3. Fitz. Aid. 2. and Aid Le Roy. 43. 65 70. 57. 71. 76. 93. 98.
Ass. 20. 11 H. 4. 26. 2. H 4. 10. 14 H 4. 10. 19. 36. 44. E. 3. 16. 44. 21 E 3.
24. 44 Quare Im p. Fitz. 62. 68. 152 195. Col. 5. 57, 58. l. 7. 19. 22 E. 4.
44. 21. H 1. 7. Ash. Alien. 7.
Common Law of the Land, whiles Abbeys and Priories remained, when we had any
Wars with foraine Nations, it was lawful and usual to seize all the Lands,
goods, possessions of Abbots, of Priors aliens of those Countries* during the
wars (though they possessed them only in right of their Houses) lest they
should contribute any aid, intelligence, assistance to our enemies. Yea it
anciently has been, and now is the common custom of our own and other
kingdoms, as soon as any breaches and wars begin, after Proclamation made,
to seize and confiscate all the Ships, goods, and estates of those countries
and kingdoms with whom they begin war, as are found within their dominions
for the present, or shall arrive there afterward, left the enemies should be
aided by them in the Wars, (preventing Physic being as lawful, as useful
in politic as natural bodies;) which act is warranted by 19 E. 4. 6. Magna
Cart c. 30, 14 E. 3. c. 2. 27. E. 3. c. 2. 17. 2 R. 2. c. 1. 2 H. 5 c. 6 4 H 5
c. 7 1 H. 6. 3. 18 H. 6 c. 9. See Speeds History p. 1213, 1219, 1220.
Magna Charta, with sundry other Statutes quoted in the Margin. And though
these seisures were made by the King, in his name only, yet it was by
authority of Acts of Parliament, as the public Minister of the Realm, for the
kingdoms security, and benefit rather then his own. But to come to more
punctual precedents warranted by the supreme Law of Salus Populi, the only
reason of the former.

Matthew Paris p. 251. 252. Daniel, Hist. p. 143, 144, 145.
Anno Dom, 12^4. upon the confirmation of the Great Charter and of the Forest
by King John, it was agreed, granted and enacted in that Parliamentary
assembly* at Running-mead* that the 25. Barons then elected for the
conservators of those Liberties and Charters, with the Commons of the Land,
might distraine and enforce the King (if he violated these Charters, and made
no redress thereof within 40. days space after notice) by seizing upon his
CASTLES, lands, possessions, and other goods* till amends should be made
according to their arbitration. And for more certainety, the fou^e Chatelaines
(or chief Captains) of the Castles of Northampton, Cicero de Legibus.
Kenelworth, Nottingham, and Scarborough, should be sworn to obey the
commandment of the 25. Barons, or the major part of them in WHATSOEVER THEY
THOUGHT GOOD CONCERNING THESE CASTLES. Wherein NONE SHOULD BE PLACED BUT SUCH
AS WOULD BE FAITHFUL and OBSERVE THEIR OATH. And upon this accord, Rochester
Castle and others, whose custody, of ancient right belonged to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, with other Castles appertaining to the Barons, were restored to
them by the King; who breaking all his vows and Charters immediately after,
(through the Barons and peoples supine negligence, overmuch confiding to the
Kings Oath and confirmations, and fond conceit of holding that by peace which
they had recovered by violence from a perfidious King,) in half a years space
recovers all the Castles again even to the Borders of Scotland by means of
foraine Forces, and a malignant, despicable, domemesticke party, (he having
scarce seven Knights faithful to him, being generally forsaken of all) and
made himself absolute Master of all England, except the City of London, the
Suburbs whereof he burned and sacked, and so tyrannised over his Subjects with
fire, and Sword, pillaging them every where. Matthew Paris, Hist. p, 264, 265.
Vastand^ omnes domos, and aedificia Baronum divisis agminibus succendebat,
spolia cum animalibus rapiebat* and de rapina iniquitatis ministros quos
habebat nequissimos saginabat, etc. suffici^bat ad ca^sam mortis simplicibus
incolis, si aliquid habere credebantur, and qui nihil habebant, fateri habere
cogebantur; and qui non habeb at, habere ut persolveret, paenis exquisitis
distringebatur. Diseurrebant ^icarii caede humana cruentati, noctivagi,
incendiarii, filii Belial strictis ensibus, ut delerent a faci^ terrae, ab
homine usque ad pecus, omnia ^umanis usibus necessaria, eductisque cultellis
villas, domos, caemiteria, ecclesias perlustrabant, omnes spoliabant, ita
quidem ut nec muliebri s^xui, nec parvulorum vel decrepitorum par^erent aetati.
Et quod consumere non valebant, incendio tradebant, vel despergentes inutile
humanis usibus reddebant. Et quos nulla nota premebant, INIMICOS REGIS VOCANTES
(si inimici sui appellandi sunt, qui eum ad mansuetudinem and justitiam
mansuetam introducere voluerunt) ubicunque reperiebantur, raptim trahebantur in
^arcerem paenalem, vinculis mancipati, and tandem ad gravissimam coacti
redemptionem, etc. (A ture Character of our times, and plundering barbarous
Cavaliers:) which so far exasperated the Barons and people, that they elected
another King. But the end for which I cite this precedent is, to manifest, that
the Lords and Commons in that age, did not think the Kings own Charter,
Promise, Protestations, Oaths, Proclamations, the Bishops and Popes solemn
excommunications, and those 25. new Conservators, a sufficiant security to
preserve their Laws and Liberties against the invasions of an, unconstant,
wilful foedifragous King, unless they had the Power and Command of his chief
Castles and the Militia added to them; which we see through overmuch
security, and want of vigilance, were all too little to preserve their
Liberties against an unconstant oppressing Prince, whose oaths and
protestations were but like Judges 16. 8. 9 11. 12.
Sampsons cords, broken all to pieces like a thread in a moment, by those who
had Sampsons strength. King Henry the third was no whit inferior to his father
John, in unconstancy, and perfidiousnesse to his Subjects, with whom when he
had often broken his faith and solemn oaths, the Math. Paris p. 940. to 965.
Grafron, p. 138. 154. Speed, p. 634. to 642. Fabian Part. 7. f 70 to 99.
Matthew Westminster, Holin. s^ead, and Daniel in his life.
Lords and Barons (having no other means of security, left to preserve their
Laws, Liberties, kingdom from vassallage and destruction, or to enforce the
King to keep those ordinances which he had made and sworn to observe in a
Parliament at Oxford but few years before; all which he labored to rescinde,
having procured a dispensation of his Oath from the Pope to color his
perjury;) in the year 1260. appointed new Sheriffs and Gardians of Shires,
discharging such as the King had before admitted, and raising a strong power in
the Marches of Wales, sent a Letter to the King under the Seal of Sir Roger
Clifford, beseeching him to have in remembrance the Oath and promises he had
made, f^r the observing of the Statutes enacted at Oxford, with other
Ordinances made to the honor of God, for faith and allegiance to his person,
and for the weal and profit of his Realm; willing him further to withstand
and defy all such persons, as will be against the said acts, saving the Queen
and her children. After which letter sent, and no answer to it received; the
Barons with banners displayed, went against such Malignants as they knew held
against those Acts. And first at Hereford, they took the Bishop and all his
Chanons who were aliens borne, taking away their money and cattle, and
plundering their houses and manors. And marching toward London, much people
fiocking to them, in their passage, ever as they found any that they knew to be
against the maintenance of the said Acts, they imprisoned them and spoiled
their houses, were they spiritual or temporal men: furnished the especial
Fortresses of the kingdom with Gardians of their own, and in DIVERSE OF THE
KINGS CASTLES THEY SET IN SUCH MEN AS THEY LIKED, and PUT OUT SUCH AS THE KING
HAD PLACED THERE BEFORE; and gave them an Oath, that they would be true and
faithful to the King, and keep those Castles TO HIS USE, and TO THE WEAL OF
THE REALM. And when William de Valens denied with oaths to render up any
Castle which was given him, by the King (his brother) to keep; the Earl of
Leycester and the rest of the Barons answered; they would either have his
Castles or his head: which so terrified the Poictovines, that they left Oxford
and their Castles to the Barons, and fled into France. Which Mat. Paris, p 96^.
Matthew. Westminster. An. 1161 p. 366. 307.
Castles when the King and Lords were accorded, together with the Castles of
Dover (Nec Regi ablatum nec vetitum, sed tanquam clavis totius Regni, custodiae
esset diligentiori a Baronibus deputatum) and the Castle of Rochester and
others were readily delivered up by the Barons to the King, qui ubique liberum
invenit introitum, and exitum juxt^ vota; and tun^ primo Rex sensit se falsis
deceptionibus circumventum, and Baronum suorum fidelitate, ubique lic^t
ignoranter suffultum; and then the King first found he was circumvented with
false reports of the Barons disloyalty, who so willingly restored his Castles
to him, when those storms were blown over; though he made but ill use of it,
and took occasion thence openly to recede from his Oath; whereupon they
reseised these Castles for their safety. About Midsommer the Barons drawing
near to London, sent a Letter to the Mayor and Aldermen requiring to know of
them, Whether they would observe and maintain the Statutes made at Oxford; or
not? or aid and assist such persons as intended the breach of the same? and
sent unto them a Copy of the said Acts; with a proviso, that if there were any
of them, that should seem to be hurtful to the Realm or Commonweal of the
same, that they then by discreet persons of the land should be altered and
amended: Which Copy the Mayor bare unto the King then at the Tower of London
with the Queen and other great persons. Then the King intending to know the
mind of the City, asked the Mayor, What he thought of those Acts? who abashed
with that question, besought the King, That he might commune with his Brethr^n
the Aldermen, and then he would declare unto him both his and their opinions.
But the King said, He would hear his advice without more Counsel. Then the
Mayor boldly said, That before times, he with his Brethren and commonalty of
the City, by his commandment were sworn to maintain all Acts made to the
honor of God, to the faith of the King, and profit of the Realm; which Oath
by his license and most gracious favor they intended to observe and keep. And
moreover, to avoid all occasions that might grow of grudge and variance
between his Grace and the Barons in the City, they would avoid all aliens and
strangers out of it. (as they soon after did) if his Grace were so contented.
With* which Answer the King seemed to be pleased, so that the Mayor with his
favor departed, and he and the Citizens sent answer to the Barons, that they
condescended to those acts, binding themselves thereunto under the public
Seal of London, their Liberties always upholded and saved. Then the Barons
entered the City, and shortly after the King with his Queen and other of his
Counsel, returned to Westminster.

Mat. Paris, p. 961. Da^ hist. p. 179. 180. Mat. Westminster. An. 1263. p. 311. 316.
Anno 1264. (the 48. of Henry the third) the King made his peace with the
Barons then in Arms, upon these terms: That ALL THE CASTLES OF THE KING,
throughout England, should be delivered TO THE KEEPING OF THE BARONS: the
Provisions of Oxford be inviolably observed; and all Strangers by ^ certain
time avoided the kingdom, except such as by a general consent, should be held
faithful and profitable for the same: Whereupon the Barons took possession of
most of the Castles by agreement, or violence where they found resistance, as
they did in many places. And by the CONSENT of THE KING and BARONS, Sir Hugh le
Spenser was made Chief Justice and keeper of the Tower. This done at London;
the Barons departed to Windsor to see the guiding of that Castle, where they
put out those aliens, whom Sir Edward the Kings Son had before put in, and
put other Officers in their places; spoiling them of such goods as they had.
Who complaining thereof to the King, he put them off for that season. After
which they re-seised Dover Castle, and made Richard de Gray, a valiant and
faithful man, Constable of it; who searching all passengers that came thither,
very strictly, found great store of Treasure, which was to be secretly conveyed
to the Poictovines, which he seized, and it was employed by the Barons
appointment, upon the profitable uses of the Realm. The year following, the
Commons of London chose Thomas Fitz-Thomas for their Mayor, and without consent
of the Aldermen, swear him at the Guild Hall, without presenting him the next
day to the King or Barons of the Exchequer. For which the King was grievously
discontented; and being advertised that the Citizens took part with the
Barons, caused his Son Edward to take the Castle of Winsor by a train; to
which the King and Lords of his party repaired. And the other Lords and Knights
with great Forces drew toward London; but by mediation of friends, there was a
peace concluded, and the differences were referred to the French King (and his
PARLIAMENT as Theater of honor, l. 2. c. 12. p 185, 186.
Andrew Favine records out of Rishanger) to end. Who giving express sentence
that all the Acts of Oxenford, should from thenceforth be utterly forborne and
annulled:

The Barons discontented with this partial sentence, departed into the Marches
of Wales; where raising Forces, they seized on many Towns and Castles of the
Kings, and Prince Edward going against them, was sore distressed and almost
taken. Hereupon to end these differences, a new Parliament was appointed at
Oxford; which took no effect, Nota.
Because when the King had yielded the Statutes of Oxford should stand, the
Queen was as utterly against it; whose opposition in this point being known
to the Londoners, the baser sort of people were so enraged, that she being to
shoot the Bridge from the Tower, toward Winsor, they with darts, stones, and
villainous words, forced her to return. After which, the Lords sending a Letter
to the King, to beseech him not to believe the ill reports of some evil
Counselors about him, touching their loyalty and honest intentions; were
answered with two Letters of defiance. Upon which ensued the bloody battle of
Lewis in Sussex, in which the King and his Son, with 25. Barons and Baronets,
were taken prisoners, and twenty thousand of the Commons slain. Richard King
of Romans, the Kings Brother was likewise taken prisoner in this Battle, M^t.
Paris, p. 152, 153. Sp. p. 636.
who a little before coming over into England with some Forces to aid his
Brother, the Barons hearing thereof caused all the Ships and Galleys of the
Cinqueports and other places to meet together armed to resist him by Sea, and
sent horse and foot to withstand him by Land if he arrived: Which Richard
having intelligence of, disbanded his Forces; and sent word to the Barons, that
he would take an Oath to observe the Articles and Statutes made at Oxenford:
whereupon he was permitted to land at Dover with a small Train, whither King
Henry went to mee^ him. But the Barons would not suffer this King, nor any of
his Train to enter into Dover Castle, because he had not taken his Oath to
observe the foresaid Statutes; nor yet the King of England to go into it (for
fear of surprisall) because it was the principal Bulwark of England; (the
Barons then having both it and all the Cinqueports in their Custody to secure
the kingdom from danger) Neither would they permit King Richard to go on
toward London, till he had taken the Oath Part 1. p. 8.
forementioned. After this battle all the prisoners were sent to several
prisons, except the two Kings and Prince Edward, whom the Barons brought with
them to London; where a new Grant was made by the King, that the said Statutes
should stand in strength: and if any were thought unreasonable, they to be
amended by four Noblemen of the Realm: and if they could not agree, then the
Earl of Angiou, and Duke of Burgoin to be Judges of the matter: And this to be
firmly holden and obeyed by both the Kings; who granted that both their Sons
and Heirs should remain as Prisoners, and Hostages with the Barons, till all
things were finished according to this agreement. Upon which a Peace was
proclaimed in London between the King and his Barons. Then it was agreed by
the King, that for his more surety and the weal of the Land, the Earl of
Leycester should be resient in his Court; Upon which agreement, many of the
Prisoners were set at large. In the mean while, before the battle of Lewis,
the Queen and King of Romans, had sent over-sea for Soldiers, to aid the
King against the Barons, which now were come in great number unto Dover, and
there hovered on the Sea to have landed. Whereof the Barons hearing, they sent
the King of Romans as Prisoner to Ba^khamsted, until the said Almaines were
returned, and caused King Henry with a great power to ride to Dover, and force
the said Host of strangers to return unto their Countries. After which by the
counsel of the Lords, a Parliament was agreed and held at Westminster, wherein
a general Pardon was granted to all Lords and their adherents, for any matter
of displeasure done to the King or his Son Prince Edward before that day;
which to uphold, the King and he took a solemn Oath before the Lords; and it
was further agreed, That the Prince should reside in the Kings Court, and not
depart thence without license of the King and of certain Barons. Then were
many instruments and bonds made by the King and Prince, for the performance of
sundry Covenants between the King and Barons; which shortly after took small
effect, and begat new wars; this Kings fresh breaches of Oaths, and
promises, procuring him always new insurrections and forced Parliaments, which
the Barons constrained him to call and hold, against his will. How the Lords
and Parliament often seized upon the Castles, Forts, Ammunition in King Edward
the second, and Richard the seconds Reigns, when differences grew between
them, I have already in part remembered, and you may read the residue in the
Histories of their lives. In Hals Chron. An. 33. 39. H. 6. f. 168. to 176. Stow
and H^wes Chron. Edit. ult. p. 400. 404. Grafton p. 627* 628, etc. Speed p.
855. 856, 857* Fa^ian part 7. p 458, to 468.
the 33. year of King Henry the sixth his Reign, the valiant Earl of
Warwick, was made Captain of Calice by the Parliament; a place of great
honor and trust in those days; by virtue whereof, all the warlike affairs
and business, rested principally in the Earl of Warwick: After which the
Queen (an ambitious stirring woman) to break the peace newly made and
ratified by oath, between the King, Lords, and Duke of York, (created Lord
Protector by the Parliament) caused a fray to be made on the Earl men, which
produced a war and bloody battle, wherein the Earl gained the field.

Whereupon the King displeased with the Earl, by his Letters Patents, granted
the Captainship of Caleyes to John Duke of Summerset; who going over to
Caleyes, in the 38. year of King Henry, to take possession of his place;
showed his Patent to the Earl, who refused to resign his place, answering,
that he was put into it by the Parliament, and so could not be outed of it but
by Parliament; and kept the Duke forth of the Town; who being thus expelled
from his office, after some skirmishes with the Earls Garrison, (wherein the
Duke had the worst) he sent over to the King and Queen for aid, in defense
of this quarrel; whereupon they provided 400. warlike persons to pass the
Seas for his aid, and ships to transport them: who lying at Sandwich for a
wind; the Earl of Warwick being therewith acquainted, sent John Dingham a
valiant Esquire, with a small number of men, but a multitude of courageous
hearts to Sandwich; who suddenly entered the same, took the Lord Rivers and
his Son (who commanded those Soldiers) in their beds, pillaged some houses
and ships, and besides this, took the principal ships of the Kings Navy then
lying at the Port well furnished with ordnance and artillery (through the
favor of the Mariners, who favored the Earl most) and brought the royal
ships laden with booty and prisoners to Caleyes; With these ships the Earl
after passed to the Duke of York into Ireland, and afterward into England,
where the Duke of York in full Parliament laid claim to the Crown, which his
Son after obtained, deposing King Henry, as having no lawful Title
thereunto. I recite not this Story to justify all particulars of it, but only
to prove, That the Parliament in those times, had the conferring of Captains
places of greatest trust, who had the command of the Militia; and that, as this
Earl in policy only, for his own safety, seized on the Kings royal ships,
and Ammunition, in which he had no right; so by the same reason, the Parliament
may dispose of such places of Military trust in these times of danger, and of
the Navy and Ammunition of the kingdom, in which they have a real interest,
for the kingdoms safety and their own. 5 H. 7. b. Bar. 141. 22. E. 4. 35. b.
Bar. 202. Br. Fitz. Imprisonment, 6. 12. and Hist. 3. Compto de Pace, f 97. 98.
113, 114. 132. 1 c. 38. 7 R. 2. c 6. 13 H. 4. c. 72. H. 5. c. 6. 8. 5 R. 2 c 5.
17 R. 2. c. 8. 19 H. Act. 7. c. 13. 3 E. 6. c. 5. 1 Maria c. 12.
A Sheriff, Justice, Constable, and other Officers, by the Common and Statute
Law of the Land, may and ought to disarme and seize any man's weapons
whatsoever, and imprison his person for a time, when by act, or apparent
intention only, he shall but disturb the peace, or make any Fray, Rout, or
Riot, to the annoyance of the people, till the tumult and danger be past, and
the peace secured. Much more then may the highest Sovereign Court of
Parliament, seize the Forts, Arms, Navy, Ammunition of the Realm, (in which
they have real interest) and secure them for a season, to preserve the whole
kingdoms Peace, and prevent a civil War, without any injury to his Majesty,
till all fears of war and danger be removed Not to trouble you long with
foreign histories of this Nature; in the Roman state the Livi. Hist. l. 1. 2.
4. Polybius, Hist. l. 6. Dionys. Hal. l. 2. c. 2. Bodi^s Commonweal l. 1. c.
10. l. 5. See the Appendix.
chief power of making war or peace, of ordering of the Militia and
disposing of the custody of Castles, Forts, Ammunition was in the Senate and
people, not the King or Emperor; as it is in Germany, and most foreign States
and kingdoms, at this day; without any diminution to those Kings and Princes
just prerogatives. It is the determination of the prime Politician Poli^. l. 3.
c. 11.
Aristotle (seconded by De Rege and Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 8, 9.
John Mariana and others) that in lawful kingdoms the chief strength and
power of the Militia ought to reside in the kingdoms hands; not Kings, who
ought to have only such a moderate power and guard of men, as may suffice to
suppress riots, and maintain the Authority of the Laws; but not so great a
force as may master all his kingdom, Bodin. Commonweal, l. 5. c. 5.
lest he become a tyrant, and his Subjects slaves. In the kingdom of Arragon
in Spain (as I read in Arragonensium Rerum Commentar p. 588, 589. 723.
Hieronymus Blanca) there is a notable fundamental ancient Law, (made about
the year of Christ 842. by their Suprarbiense Forum, now commonly styled,
Iustitia Arrogoniae during the Interregnum, to preserve their Countries
Liberties, to keep their Kings power within due bounds of royalty, and prevent
a tyranny, with diverse other Laws of this nature, which their Kings solemnly
swear to observe, before they are crowned) the words of which law are these,
The King shall take heed that he neither undertake war, nor conclude peace,
nor make truce, nor handle any thing of great moment, but by the advice and
consent of the Elders: to wit, the Iustitia Arragoniae, the standing Parliament
of that kingdom, which has power over and above the King. And of later days
(as the same Ibid. p. 724.
Author writes) their Rici-homines, (or selected Peers appointed by that
kingdom, not the King) have all the charges and offices both of war and
peace lying on their necks, and the command of the Militia of the kingdom;
which they have power by their Laws to raise, even against their King
himself, in case he invade their Laws or Liberties; as he there manifests at
large. So in Foris and in castris summum Imperium summam rerum bellicarum
administ ratienem obtinet, etc.
Hungary, the great Palatine of Hungary, the greatest officer of that kingdom,
and the Kings Lieutenant General, who commands the Militia of that Realm, is
chosen by the Parliament and Estates of that country, not the King. It was
provided by the Laws of the Nicholaus Isthuanfus de Rebus Vngar. Hist. l. 6.
f. 84, 85. Bodins Commonweal, l. 1. c. 10. p. 167. Livy, Romans Hist. l. 31. 35.
Bodin. Commonweal, l. 3. c. 1.
Aetolians, that nothing should be entreated of CONCERNING PEACE OR WAR, but
in their Panaetolio, or great general Council of state: in which all
Ambassadors were heard and answered; as they were likewise in the Roman Senate.
And Bodin Ibid.
Charles the fifth of France, having a purpose to drive all the Englishmen out
of France and Aquitain, assembled a general assembly of the estates in a
Parliament at Paris, by their advise and wisdom to amend what by himself had
not been wisely done or considered of, and so undertook that war with the
counsel and good liking of the Nobility and people whose help he was to use
therein: which war being in and by that Council decreed, prospered in his
hand; and took good success as Bodin notes; because nothing gives greater
credit and authority to any public undertakings of a Prince and people in any
State or Commonweal, then to have them pass and ratified by public advise
and consent.

Yea the great Bodins l. 1. c. 10.
Constable of France, who has the government of the Kings Sword, the Army, and
Militia of France, was anciently Matthew Paris Hist. Angliae p. 835.
chosen by the great Council of the three Estates and Parliament of that
kingdom; as is manifest by their election of Arthur Duke of Britain to that
office, Anno 1324. before which, Anno 1253. they elected the * Earl of
Leycester a valiant Soldier and experienced wise man, to be the grand
Seneschall of France, ad consulendum regno desolato, and multum desperato, quia
strenuus fuit and fidelis; which office he refused, lest he should seem a
Traitor to Henry the third of England, under whom he had been governor of
Gascoigne, which place he gave over for want of pay. In brief, the late
examples of the Dinothi Historia, Sleidan l. 8. 18. 22: Grimston Imperial
History, in Rodulph 2. and Ferdinand* the second.
Protestant Princes in Germany, France, Bohemia, the Low countries, and of our
brethren in Scotland within four years last, who seized all the Kings Forts,
Ports, Arms, Ammunition, Revenues in Scotland, and some Towns in England to
preserve their Laws, Liberties, Religion, Estates, and Country from
destruction, by common consent, (without any Ordinance of both Houses in their
Parliament) will both excuse, and justify all the Acts of this nature, done by
express Ordinances of this Parliament; which being the Sovereign highest
power in the Realm, entrusted with the kingdoms safety; may put the Ports,
Forts, Navy, Ammunition (which the King himself cannot manage in person, but
by substitutes) into such under Officers hands, as shall both preserve and
rightly employ them for the King and kingdoms safety, and elect the Commanders
of the Militia according to the express letter of King Edward the Confessors
Laws (which our Kings at their Coronations were still sworn to maintain)
wherewith I shall in a manner conclude, the Legal part of the Subjects right
to elect the Commanders of the Militia, both by Sea and Land. Lambard,
Archaion, f. 135 De Heretochiis.
Erant and aliae potestates and dignitates per provincias and patrias universas
and per singulos Comitatus totius regni constitutea, qui Heretochii apud Anglos
vocabantur; Scilicet, Barons, Nobiles, and insignes, sapientes and fideles,
and animosi; Latin vero dicebantur Ductores exercitus; apud Gallos, Capitales
Constabularii, vel Mar^scha^li Exercitus. Illi vero ordinabant acies
densissimas in praeliis, and a^as constituebant, prout decuit, and prout iis
melius visum fuit, ad Honorem Coronae, ET AD UTILITATEM REGNI. Isti vero viri
ELIGEBANTUR PER COMMUNE CONCILIUM PRO COMMUNI UTILITATE REGNI, PER PROVINCIAS
ET PATRIAS UNIVERSAS, ET PER SINGULOS COMITATUS (so as the King had the choice
of them in no Province or Country, but the Parliament and people only) in
pleno Folcmote. SICUT ET VICECOMITES PROVINCIARUM ET COMITATUUM ELEGI DEBENT.
Ita quod in quolibet Comitatu sit unus Heretoch PER ELECTIO NEM ELECTUS ad
conducendum exercitum Comitatus sui, juxta praeceptum Domini Regis, ad honorem
Coronae, and UTILITATEM REGNI praedicti, semper cum opus adfuerit in Regno.
Item qui fugiet a Domino vel socio suo pro timiditate Belli vel Mortis in
conductione Heretochii sui IN EXPEDITIONE NAVALI, VEL TERRESTRI (by which it is
evident these popular Heretochs commanded the Militia of the Realm both by Sea
and Land, and might execute Martial Law in times of war) perdat omne quod suum
est, and suam ipsius vitam, and manus mittat Dominus ad terram quam ei antea
dederat. Et qui in bello ante Dominum suum ceciderit, sit hoc in terra, sit
alibi, sint ei relevationes condonatae; and habeant Haeredes ejus pecuniam and
terramejus sine aliqua diminutione, and recte dividant inter se. An
unanswerable evidence for the kingdoms and Parliaments interest in the
Militia, enough to satisfy all men. To which I shall only add that
observation of the learned Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman in his P. 232 348, 349.
Glossarium; Title Dux, and Heretochius; (where he cites this Law of King
Edward) That the Heretoch was Magister Militiae, Constabularius, Mariscallus,
DVCTOR EXERCITVS, SIVE NAVALIS, SIVE TERRESTRIS; called in Saxon See Master
Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 605.
Heretoga: ab Here, Exercitus, and Togen, Ducere. Eligebantur in pleno
Folcmote, hoc est, non in illo sub initio ea^endarum Maii, at in alio sub
capite Calendarum Octobris. Aderant tune ipsi Heretochii, and QUAE VOLUERE,
IMPERABANT EXEQUENDA; consvlto tamen PROCERUM COETU, ET JUDICIO TOTIUS FOLCMOTI
APPROBANTE. Then he subjoynes POPULARIS ISTA HERETOCHIORUM SEU DUCUM ELECTIO,
nostris Saxonibus cum Germanis aliis COMMUNIS FUIT: Vt in Boiorum ll. videas,
Tit. 2. cap. 1. S. 1. Siquis contra Ducem suum, quent Rex ordinavit, in
Provincia illa AUT POPULUS SIBI ELEGERIT DUCEM, de morte Ducis consiliatus
fuerit, in Ducis sit potestate, etc. Hue videtur pertinere quod apud Greg.
Turon. legas l. 8. Sect. 18. Wintro Dux a Pagensibus suis depulsus Ducatu
caruit, etc. sed postea pacato populo Ducatum recepit: Eigebantur enim interdum
Provinciarum Duces AB IPSO POPULO. In the Bodins Commonweal, l. 3. c. 1. p.
273.
Roman State, the Senate, and some times the people alone, without their
advise, had power to appoint Lieutenants and Governors of Provinces; whence
the Grimstones Imperial Hist. p. 171.
Senate commanded those Governors of Provinces whom the Emperor Maximinus had
made to be displaced, and others to be substituted in their rooms, which was
accordingly executed: yea Bodin Com. l. 3. c. 1. p. 273.
the Senate had power to dispose of the common Treasure, and public reventue,
one of the greatest points of Soveraingty. And so we read in Scripture, Judges
11. 5. to 12. That when the children of Ammon made war against Israel, the
Elders of Gilead went to fetch Iephthah out of the land of Tob. And they said
unto Iephthah, Come and be our Captain, that we may fight with the Children of
Ammon, etc. Then Iephthah went with the Elders of Gilead, and THE PEOPLE MADE
HIM HEAD and CAPTAIN OVER THEM: the Princes and people, even under Kings
themselves. having the chief disposing power of the Militia and denouncing
war, as is evident by Josh. 22. 11. to 32. Judges 20. and 21. throughout 1 Samuel
14. 38. to 46. c. 29. 1. to 11. 2 Samuel 18. 2, 3, 4. c. 19. 1. to 9. Prove. 20.
18. c. 24. 6. compared together.

And for a close of all, lest any should object, that no late direct precedent
can be produced to prove the office of the Lord Admiral, and custody of the
Seas disposed by Parliament, I shall conclude with one punctual precedent of
many. In 24. H. 6. prima Pars Pat. ma. 16. The King grants to John Duke of
Exeter, the OFFICE OF ADMIRAL OF ENGLAND, IRELAND and AQUITAIN, with this
subscription, Per breve de privato sigillo, AVCTORITATE PARLIAMENTI, the former
Patent of this office made jointly to him and his son by the King alone, in
the 14. year of his reign, being surrendered in the Parliament of 24. and a
new one granted them by its direction and authority. Yea most of the Admiralls
Patents (which anciently were not universal for all England, but several for
such and such parts only, and commonly but annual or triennuall at most) as
Sir Henry Spelman observes in his Glossary, in the word Admirallus, where you
have an exact Calendar of all the Admiralls names, with the dates of their
several Patents and Commissions, are DE AVISAMENTO ET ASSENSU CONSILII; which
is almost as usually taken for the Kings Cooks instit. on Lit. f. 110.
Cambdens Brit. p. 177 Holinsheds Description of England c. 8. p. 113. and
Annals of Ireland, p. 120. to 130. Brook, Crompton, Cowel, Minshew Tit.
Parlem. Sir Thomas Smiths Commonwealth. l. 2. c. 1. 2.
great Counsel, the Parliament, as for his privy Counsel. And if our Kings
have constantly disposed of this Office by the advice or assent of their privy
Counsel, there is more reason and equity they should do it by the advice of
their great Counsel, of which his privy Counsel are but a part, and by whom
they have frequently been elected, as I shall plentifully manifest in the next
objection.

Now, whereas some pretend, that the Parliaments seizing and detaining of the
Kings Castles, Ports, Ships, Arms and Ammunition is High Treason, within the
Statute of 25 Ed. 3. c. 3. and a levying of war against the King. Object.


I answer, Answ.
first; that the Parliament was never within the meaning, nor letter of that,
or any other Act concerning Treasons, as I have formerly proved; the rather
because the King is a member of it, and so should commit Treason against
himself, which were absurd.

Secondly, because both Houses are of greater authority then the King, (a
member of them as they make one Court) and so cannot commit Treason against the
less.

Thirdly, the Parliament is a mere 14 H. 8. f. 3. b.
Corporation and Court of justice, and so not capable of the guilt of Treason:
A Judge, Mayor, or particular persons of a Corporation may be culpable of high
Treason, as private men, but not a Court of justice, or Corporation. See
Littleton, Sect. 297. 314. 323. and Cooks Instit. Ibidem.


Fourthly, by the very Statutes of 25 E. 3. and of 11 R. 2. c. 3. 21 R. 2. c.
12. 1 H. 4. c. 10. 21. R. 2. c. 3. the Parliament is the sole Judge of all new
Treasons, not within the very letter of that act; and if any other case
supposed Treason, not there specified, happens before any Justices, the Justice
shall tarry without any going to judgment of the Treason, till the cause be
shown and declared before the King and his Parliament, whether it ought to be
judged Treason. And if the Parliament be the sole Judge of all Treasons, it
cannot be guilty of Treason, for then it should be both Judge and Delinquent;
and if so, no doubt it would ever acquit it self of such a crime as High
Treason, and never give judgment against it self. And no Judge or person else
can arraigne or judge it, or the members of it, because it is the highest
sovereign Court, over which no other person or Court whatsoever has any the
least jurisdiction: So that if it were capable of the guilt of Treason, yet it
could not be arraigned or judged for it, having no superior or adequate
Tribunal to arraigne it.

Fifthly, admit it might be guilty of High Treason in other cases, yet it cannot
be so in this. For having a joint interest with the King in the premises in the
Kingdoms right, (the sole propriator of them) it cannot doubtless be guilty of
treachery, much less of High Treason for taking the custody and possession
only of that which is their own; especially when they both seize and detain
it for its own proper use, the Kingdoms security and defense; without any
malicious or traytorous intention against King or kingdom.

Secondly, I answer, that the seizing or detaining of these from the King are
no Treason, or levying of War within this Law, as is most evident by the
Statutes of 6. Ed. 6. c. 11. which expressly distinguishes, the seizing and
detaining of the Kings Forts, Ammunition, Ships, from the levying war against
the King in his Realm, and by an express new clause, enacts this seizing and
detayning to be High Treason from that time, because it was no Treason within
25. Ed. 3. before, which if it had been in truth, this new clause had been
superfluous; which law of King Edward being repealed by primo Mariae, Rastal
Treason, 20. this offense then ceased to be Treason: whereupon by a special
act of Parliament in 14 Eliz. c. 1. it was made High Treason again, (which had
been needless, if it had been a levying of war, or Treason within 25. Ed.
3. before.) And that with this proviso, this Act to endure during the Queens
Majesty's life that now is, ONLY; and so by this Parliaments resolution, it is
no Treason since her death, within 25 Ed. 3 for then this proviso had been
idle and repugnant too. And therefore being now no High Treason in any person,
cannot without much calumny and injury be reputed Treason in both the Houses of
Parliament, incapable of High Treason, as the premises demonstrate.

In brief, he that seized and detained the Forts and Ships of the kingdom,
when it was Treason, was not a bare Traitor against the Kings person or Crown
only, but against the King and his Realm too, like those Traitors, mentioned
in the several statutes of 11 R. 2. c. 4. and 21 R. 2. c. 2. 4. He shall be
judged and have execution as a TRAITOR and ENEMY OF THE KING and TO THE REALM:
and in 28 H. 8. c. 7. HIGH TRAITORS TO THE REALM, As the Gunpouder Traitors
were to the Parliament and Realm in them, being the representative Body of the
Realm: the Parliament then being the Realm representatively and
authoritatively too, and so the party against whom this Treason is principally
to be committed, cannot be a Traitor to it self, by the words or intendment
of any expired Act which made such a seizure or detainer Treason. And therefore
those Lawyers, who pronounce this Parliaments seizing and detaining of the
Ports, Forts, Navy, Arms, or Ammunition of the Realm to keep them out of
worser hands, for the Kings and kingdoms right use and safety, to be High
Treason declare themselves Greater Malignants then Artists in their own
profession.

But some body (say Malignants and Royalists) must be trusted with the Militia,
Object.
Ports, Navy, Arms, Ammunition; and who so fit to be confided in as the King
himself, and those whom he shall appoint? Especially since he and his own
substitutes, have formerly been entrusted with them by the kingdom; and we
have now so many deep See all his Majesty's late Proclamations, Protestations,
and printed Declarations of this nature.
Protestations, yea public printed Asseverations and Promises from his
Majesty, to maintain the Protestant Religion, our Laws, Liberties,
Properties, Parliaments, with their just Privileges; and shall we not believe
and trust his Majesty after so many royal assurances, seconded with many Acts
of grace for the public safety already passed by him in this Parliament?
especially the Acts against Shipmoney, and all other unlawful Taxes; with the
Bills for the continuance of this, and calling of a Trienniall Parliament, when
this shall be determined? Shall we yet be diffident of his Majesty's sincerity
after so many Protestations, Promises, Imprecations; so many Pledges of his
gracious affection to his people, and some public acknowledgements of his
former misgovernment and invasions on his Subjects Liberties? If all these
Warrants will not content the Parliament, and persuade them to resign up all
the premises they have seized into his Majesty's hand, to purchase the
kingdoms much desired necessary Peace, and put a period to our destructive
war (in which there is naught but certain ruin) what other security can his
Majesty give or they expect?

To answer Answ.
this plausible allegation, I shall without prejudice to other men's judgments,
crave liberty to discharge my own and others thoughts in this particular, in
which if I chance to err (out of overmuch zeal to my countries safety) I
shall upon the first discovery profess a recantation; though for the present,
Seneca de Clementia, l. ^. c. 2.
Maluerim veris offendere, quam placere adulando. I shall reduce the sum of
the answer to these two heads;

First, that as the state of things now stands, it will be (as many wise men
conceive) not only inconvenient, but dangerous, to resign up the Militia,
Forts, Ports, Navy, Ammunition of the kingdom into his Majesty's sole
disposing power, and those hands which himself alone shall appoint and confide
in, till things be thoroughly reformed and settled both here and in Ireland, and
the Popish prevailing party in both kingdoms (now strongly up in arms)
totally suppressed and secured.

Secondly, That till this be effected, it is more reasonable and safe, both for
King and kingdom, that these should remain in the Parliaments hands, then in
the Kings alone.

For the first, there are these three general reasons, commonly alleged by
many understanding men, equally affected to either party, and by most who are
cordially inclined to the Parliament, why they deem it not only inconvenient,
but perilous, to entrust the premises wholly with the King, and those of his
appointment, as our condition now stands.

First, See the Remonstrance of the Lords and Commons Novem. 2. 1642.
a more then probable long-since resolved design in his Majesty's evil
Counselors, to make him an absolute Sovereign Monarch, and his Subjects as
mere vassals, as those of France; which design has been carried on with an
high hand from the beginning of his Reign till this present, as the Parliament
in Anno 1641, and 1642.
sundry Declarations prove, yea diverse Lord Faulkland, L. Seymor, L. Digbey, L.
Savil, Sir Io. Culpepper, Sir Edward Deering, Mr. Holborne, Mr. Hide, etc.
Lords and Members of both Houses, though now with his Majesty, in their
Parliamentary Speeches, have openly professed; which they thus demonstrate.

First, by his Majesty's several attempts against the Privileges, Power, and
very being of Parliaments; manifested by the proceedings against Sir John
Eliot, Mr. Hollice, Mr. Strode, Mr. Long, and others, after the Parliament in
3. Caroli; and the Lord Say, Mr. Crew, with others after the last Parliament
before this: By his Majesty's sad ominous breaking off in discontent, all
Parliaments in his Reign (unparalleld in any age or kingdom) till this
present; which though perpetuated by a special Act, as long as Both Houses
please, has yet long since been attempted to be dissolved like the former, by
his Majesty's accusation, and personal coming into the Commons House with an
extraordinary Guard of armed men attending him, to demand five principal
members of it, to be delivered up to his hands as Traitors, in an unpatterned
manner. By his wilful departure from, and refusal to return unto the
Parliament, though often petitioned and solicited to return; which is so much
the more observed and complained of, because his Majesty (if not his Royal
Consort and the Prince too) was constantly present in person every day this
Parliament (for sundry weeks together) at the arraignment of the Earl of
Strafford for high Treason, in a private manner, when by Law he ought not to be
personally present in a public; to countenance and encourage a capital
Oppressor, and Traiterous Delinquent against all his three kingdoms, contrary
to both Houses approbation; And yet now peremptorily denies to be present with
or near his Parliament, to countenance and assist it for the preservation of
his kingdoms against such Traitors, Rebels, conspirators, who have contrived
and attempted their utter desolation, in pursuance of his foreplotted designs;
By his commanding diverse Lords and Commons to desert the Houses, and attend his
Person without the Houses consent, detaining them still See the Parliaments
Remonstrance, Nov. 2. 1642.
when the Houses have sent for them: and protecting those who refused to
return, against the common justice of the Parliament: by casting diverse gross
aspersions on it, and naming it, A faction of Malignant, ambitious spirits, no
Parliament at all, etc. By raising an Army of Delinquents, Malignants, Papists,
Forainers, to conquer and suppress the Parliament, and deprive it of its
Liberties; By proclaiming diverse active Members of it, (specially employed by
Both Houses, for the defense of their several Counties) Traitors, only for
executing the Houses commands, without any Indictment, Evidence, Conviction,
against all Law, Justice, and the Privileges of Parliament: By commanding,
detaining the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, (the Speaker of the Lords House)
and some Judges from the House and City: By plundering diverse Parliament men's
houses, imprisoning their persons without Bail, Maineprise, or Redemption, and
laying intolerable taxations on their estates: By Declaring both Houses
Traitors, if not in positive, yet at least in equivalent words, and by
necessary consequence: By diverse unparalleld violations of the Parliaments
Privileges by extrajudiciall Declarations out of Parliament, penned by
Malignants in his Majesty's name, and avowed by him, published of purpose to
oppose, annull, reverse the solemn legal Resolutions, Declarations, and Votes
of both Houses in sundry cases, and by name that against the Commission of
Array: And finally by the manifold invectives in several his Majesty's
Declarations, and Proclamations against the Parliaments Votes, Proceedings,
Members; seconded with express commands, and invitations to the People, to
Quid potest ab co quisquam sperare, quem malum esse docuit: Non diu paret
nequitia, nec quantum jubetur, peccat. Sen. de Clem. l. 2. c. 26.
Contemn its authority, and disobey all its Orders made without his personal
consent; which is indeed naught else, but to nullify Parliaments, to make them
altogether contemptible, ridiculous, and trample them under feet; and has
wrought a strong malignity, disobedience, if not disaffection, in many people
to Parliaments, to the end they may never desire or enjoy them hereafter,
notwithstanding the Act for trienniall Parliaments, when this is once
dissolved. All these unparalleld, apparent high attempts against the very
honor, essence, of this, and all other future Parliaments, (transcending both
for quantity and quality all the violations of Parliaments Privileges, in all
his Majesty's Predecessors Reigns, since England was a kingdom, summed up in
one;) together with the late Oxford Propositions for an Accommodation; wherein
the Houses final Resolutions, Declaring what is Law, are called illegal, and
required to be reversed; the power of imprisoning and fining men denied, and
prostituted to the censures, Writs, and Examinations of inferior Courts, by
way of Habeas Corpus; the Sea. Br. Parl. 7. Dyer 60. a. Cromptons Iurisdict^f.
16. a.
just expulsions of their own Members denied them; all high Violations and
denials of the known privileges of Parliament, contrary to his Majesty's many
former, and late Printed Protestations, and those Acts newly passed concerning
Parliaments, (which will never recover their pristine dignity, honor, power,
privileges, if this should miscarry;) induce the most intelligent to opine,
that his Majesty, long since weary of the yoke of all Parliaments, (the only
Remora to his absolute intended Monarchy) and repenting of the Act for
continuing this, since he has gained his ends for which it was summoned, (more
out of absolute necessity then love to Parliaments) to wit, peace with the
Scots, for the present, by an Accommodation, wrought by this Parliament, and
purchased with his Subjects money, when as he saw no hopes of repelling them
hence by force; and the paying of his then raised Army against them by the
Parliaments free supply: is now resolved (in prosecution of his pristine
Counsels) by force or policy to dissolve this Parliament in discontent, as he
has done all former, and that with such advantages of a general ill opinion
of Parliaments in the ignorant misinformed vulgar on the one hand, and of a
prevailing conquering power on his part on the other hand, as shall either
utterly extinguish the hopes and Bill of summoning any future trienniall
Parliamentary Assemblies, or at least so emasculate the vigor, and eclipse the
power of them, if called; that they shall neither have courage, nor might, nor
means to resist his foresaid grand design, if he can now either by force or
policy resume the Militia, Forts, Navy, Ammunition into his absolute dispose;
the only present obstacle (now his forces are so great) to gain a complete
long-expected conquest over his peoples Liberties, Laws, Estates, and all
Parliaments Privileges, if not beings too. And if our Parliaments (the only
Bulwarks to protect our Laws, Liberties, Estates, Lives, Religion, Peace,
Kingdom, against the devastations of oppressing, lawless Princes, and
Officers) be once conquered, or weakened in the least degree, we can expect no
other issue, but that Tyranny, slavery, popery, shall be ere long entailed upon
us and our Heirs Souls and bodies forever.

Secondly, By his Majesty's frequent imposing of many unlawful Taxes and
Impositions on his Subjects, contrary to his Coronation Oath, the ancient Laws
of the Realm, yea his own late Statutes, Declarations, Vows, Promises; which
design has been carried on with a strong hand all his Reign till now; and
at this present, with a far higher hand then ever: which they exemplify by
the Loanes with other Taxes, Impositions, Grievances, complained of in the
Petition of Right, in the third year of his Reign; which Act when first
passed, with this his Majesty's solemn Oration and Protestation Printed with
it; I do here declare, That these things which have been done, whereby men
had some cause to suspect the Liberty of the Subject to be trenched upon, shall
not hereafter be drawn into example for your prejudice: And in time to come
(IN THE WORD OF A KING) you shall not have the like cause to complain: (backed
with his Royal Declaration to all his Subjects at the breach of that
Parliament to like purpose) made most men think, they should never be grieved
with illegal Taxes more; though the very annexing and Printing of his
Majesty's two Answers, and this Speech when he passed the Petition, at the end
thereof (with the Scope and matter of this Speech and other then concurring
circumstances) made the wisest men suspect, it was only a bait to catch the Sea 3 Car. c. 6, 7.
Temporalties and Clergies (five a piece) extraordinary great Subsidies, then
aimed at, (a greater aid then was ever before granted at once to any of his
Majesty's Predecessors) and a policy then seemingly to content, but
subsequently to delude the over-credulous impoliticke Vulgar; the verity
whereof was at that instant much confirmed, by his Majesty's clayming (even in
his very speech when he passed the Petition of Right) Tunnage and Poundage as a
mere right, and his taking it as a just duty without grant by Parliament, from
his coming to the Crown till then and since; by his extraordinary strange
commission granted under the great Seal to diverse Lords and others for the
laying of an intolerable illegal excise, on all the Subjects throughout
England and Ireland, seconded with the Commission to Dalbere and others, for
the raising and importing of German Horse, and the billeting of Irish foot in
sundry places of England to join with those horse, to set on this excise, even
at that very instant, when this Petition of Right was debated and passed; the
breaking up of that Parliament as soon as these Subsidies were granted, and
the unpatterned inundation of all kind of unjust Taxes as soon as ever that
Parliament was dissolved; as fines for Knighthood, New-buildings, Enclosures,
exacted Fees, (not to redress, but authorize them by compositions to get
money) Shipmony, Monopolies of Tobacco, Soap, Brickes, Pins, and a world of
other particulars upon which annual rents were reserved: Forrest-bounds, and
offenses prosecuted with all Rigor; Impositions upon Coal, Bear, Salt,
Wines, Tobacco, and all kind of Merchandise; Lieutenants rates, and wages,
Coat and Conduct money, excessive high Fines in Starchamber, High Commission
and other Courts, with sundry other Particulars complained off with open mouth
in this and the preceding Parliament by most of the members of both Houses, and
diverse now present with his Majesty; who notwithstanding the many public
complaints against these oppressions, the Acts this very Session passed against
them, and sundry duplicated deep Asseverations to maintain the Subjects
Property, Liberty, and govern only according to Law; has, and still daily
does in a far higher degree then ever (through the ill advise of Malignant
Counselors) proceed to afflict and ruin his people in this very particular of
Property and Taxes, by weekly or monthly assessements and contributions
imposed on sundry Towns and Counties where his Forces now lie, exceeding many
men's racked incomes; his seizing of their Ammunition, Arms, Horses, Carts,
Goods, Provisions, Houses, Lands, (yea husbandmens Teemes and Horses of their
Ploughes, Artic. super Chartas, c. 12, See Cooks Institutes on it. Agricolae
apud Indos sacri and afurto and praeda alieni Di^dorus sic. Bib. Hist. l. 2. n.
40.
privileged from distresses by Law, and by most Nations though enemies, in
times of war from spoil or plunder,) so as they cannot till their ground,
which must needs breed a famine: and stripping many thousands of his people in
Brainford, Marleborough, Cicester, Bromingham, and other places (utterly sacked
and ruined by his Cavaliers) of all their lively hoods, and estates, to their
very naked skins; and carrying away those poor Subjects in triumph like
Enemies and Traitors, who dare offer to defend their goods, houses, estates, or
make any the least resistance, ( though the Laws, Fitz. Corone. 192. 194. 58.
276. 261. 21 H. 7. 39. 24. H 8. c. 5. Stamford, f. 13, 14. Cook l 4. 91, 92.
See Matthew. Paris Hist. p. 264, 265, 266.
Common and Statute, allow them in such cases, not only to resist, but kill
all those who shall assault their houses, or persons to spoil them of their
goods) or protect them or their Liberties, Lives, Properties, against his Army
of theevish murdering Cavaliers. And which aggravates all the rest, his
Majesty has sent out such a Commission of Array to be executed in every
County, as pulls up liberty and property by the roots; which, though both
Houses by a special printed Declaration, have See the Parliaments second
Remonstrance concerning the Commission of Array.
proved to be illegal, contrary to the fundamental Laws of the Realm, the
Petition of Right, and some express Acts passed this present Session; yet his
Majesty has caused such an Answer to be published in his name to the first
Declaration, as good Law, which See this fully proved in the Parliaments second
Declaration.
frustrates all Acts whatsoever made in this or former Parliaments for the
Subjects Liberty, Property; and lays down such grounds, which will not
only justify, but revive all former pressures and grievances whatsoever, as
warranted by Law. All which considered, together with the frequent endeavors
formerly and of late to raise and keep an Army on foot among us to enslave
us, and raise what taxes shall be arbitrarily imposed without a Parliament on
the Realm by force of Arms, according to the late use of France, begun by
Strafford in Ireland, and now set on foot in diverse countries of England,
makes wise moderate men fear, that if the Militia, Forts and Navy be yielded
up unto the King before the Subjects Property, and these violations of it in
the highest degree (so that none at this day can truly say that any thing he
enjoyes, no not his Lands or Life are his own) be better settled, all
property will be for ever lost, and Turkish Subjects as free as English, in
common probability.

Thirdly, the constant design against the Liberty of the Subjects person (the
better to invade the property of his goods) prosecuted all his Majesty's time,
and more then ever since the Petition of Right and this Parliament. The which
is evidenced, by infinite illegal commitments of men for not paying the Lone,
Knight-mony, Ship-mony, with sundry other unlawful Taxes, without bail or
mainprise; of sundry members of both Houses during this, and after former
Parliaments ended, for things done in and triable only by Parliament; by the
exorbitant censures in the Star Chamber and High Commission, and judging free
men against Law, to close imprisonments; And that (which now grieves the very
Souls of all English Spirits, who have any remainders of common humanity, in
them, and would rend an heart of adamant) not only by the strict close hard
imprisonments of diverse persons at York and elsewhere, for executing the
Militia, refusing the Array, or contribution Taxes, but by the more then
barbarous, Quae alia vita esset, si L^ones ursique regnarent? Si serpentibus in
nos, ac noxissimo cuique animali daretur potestas? Illa ra^ionis experria, and
a nobis immanita is c^imine damna ta abstinent suis, and (...) est etiam inter
feras similitudo: Apud R^man^s tantum, ne^ a necessariis quidem* abies temperat
sibi. Seneca de Clem. l. 2. c. 26.
yea beastly cruelty of his Majesty's Cavaliers in chayning together in Ropes
sundry Prisoners taken at Brainford, Marleborough and Cicester, (as the true
printed Relations of these places sacking testify) like a company of Turkish
Gally-slaves, (though some of them were Gentlem^n of worth and quality, others
Ministers, others aged, sickly, and many who never bore arms in these present
wars) and leading them chained (almost naked, and barefoot) through deep
filthy ways in the cold winter season to Oxford in triumph (to his Nulli Regi
gloria est ex saeva animadversione. At contra maxima, si vim suam continet, si
multos irae alienae eripuit, neminemsuae impendit; Senecade Clementia. l. 1. c.
17.
Majesty's great dishonor, and his Subjects grief,) denying them, not only
meat and drink, but even water it self (the commonest Element) to quench
their thirst, and keeping off, yea beating any such at Cicester, and Oxford,
who offered to bring them any sustenance, though but a drop of water to cool
their tongues: (O more then Turkish Barbarousnesse, that one man, one
Christian, one English Subject even in, or near the presence of his
Sovereign, should thus ill entreat another, without any punishment or check,
much more with approbation!) After which they have been Ista frequens vindicta
paucorum odium reprimit, omnium irritat. Regia crudelitas auget inimicorum
numerum ^ollendo. Seneca de Clementia, l. 1. c. 8.
shut up in prisons and dungeons lying on the cold ground, stones or boards
without beds, straw, fire or any the least refreshment; allowed only a poor
pittance of Adams Ale, and scarce a penny bread a day to support their lives,
though their friends would provide it for them; in which sad condition many of
them are still detained close prisoners without bail, mainprise, exchange,
redemption, diverse of them being dead of Famine and ill unaccustomed usage:
Others have been murdered without mercy, and their The Relation of the taking
of Cicester, and the Prisoners Relation.
Carcasses left unburied for the fowls to prey on; others maimed and left
weltring in their blood without any relief; others forced to live exiles from
their habitations; and all for this new point of High Treason; that they stood
upon their guard, to defend the property of their persons, goods, houses,
possessions, from the robbery and plunder of theeving Cavaliers ( Quanto autem
non nasci melius fuit, quam numerari inter publico malo natos? Seneca de
Clementia l. 1. c. 18.
borne only for the public mischief of the Reame) who now live by the
Countries spoil and robbery, and must not be resisted. If this proceeding be
the so often protested preservation, the vowed defense of the Subjects Liberties,
Properties, Lives, the preserving of them in perfect and entire peace and
safety according to his Majesty's Coronation oath, the governing of them
according to the Law, even whiles the Parliament sits, and has such Forces in
the field, the possession of the Ports, Navy, and other premises in their hands
(which if the King should die without heir devolve wholly into the kingdoms
hands and possession, not to his Executors, as to the true proprietors of them,
a strong unanswerable argument, they are not now the Kings but kingdoms in
point of right and interest;) we cannot (say many men) but suspect the like
and worse usages when these are all surrendered into his Majesty's power, and
that he with his ill Counselors (who had lately such a bloody treacherous
design against Bristoll during the Treaty of Peace, and now plainly profess,
The Kings Letter on Saturday, Apil. 8. 1643 to the houses.
that they never intended the Premises should be put into such persons hands as
the Parliament and kingdom might confide in, but themselves alone;) will then
as much overawe the present and all future Parliaments, as they do now the
country people where they quarter; and handle many active worthy members of
both Houses (particularly proclaimed rebels by the King without conviction, who
has not so violently proceeded against any of the Irish Rebels in this kind,
as he has done against the houses of Parliament, and the chief well deserving
members of it) as rigorously, if not far worse, as any now imprisoned by them;
notwithstanding that true rule of De Clementia l. 1. c. 24.
Seneca: Remissius imperanti melius paretur. Et non minus Principi turpia sunt
multa supplicia, quam Medico multa funera.

Their second general reason is, an See the Parliaments Declarations and
Parliament-mens Speeches to this effect*
ancient ^ore plo^te^ con^ederacie between the Popish and Prelaticall Party in
the Kingdom to change Religion, and re-establish Pop^ry. Which design has
been vigorously prosecuted long before his Majesty's ^aigne, but more
effectually since his marriage with one of that Religion; who in regard of her
neerenesse to, and continual presence with him heretofore, and activitie to
assist him now against his Parliament, has such a merit^rious interest in his
affections, if not powerful influence upon his will and Counsels, as may
induce his Majesty (as well as 1 Kings 11. 1 to 12.
King Solomon) to grant, at least a speedy public long-expected tolleration
and free use of the Romish Religion (if not a suppression of the Protestant
faith) throughout the Realm, if all the premises be put into his Majesty's
unlimited power. And that which backs this more then conjecturall fear, is:
First, the large visible progress made in this design before this Parliament,
as not only the Houses joint Declarations, but diverse Malignant Members
declanatory Orations, (now with the King) testify, together with our Prelates
manifold Popish Innovations in Doctrines, Ceremonies, Ecclesiastical
proceedings; the Popes Nuncioes Residence near, and free access to Court; our
Agents residence at Rome; the Cell of Capuchins, Chapples erected for Mass,
the infinite swarms of Seminary Priests and Jusuites every where, with
freedom and impunity, the suspention of the Laws against them and Popish
Recusants; the late persecutions and suppressions of all godly Preaching
Ministers and most zealous Protestants, with other particulars clearly
demonstrate. Secondly, the present general Rebellion and bloody proceedings of
the Papists in Ireland, to extirpate the Protestant Religion there; and the
many prevayling Plots of the Irish Rebels party here, to delay, seize, or
frustrate all aid and opposition against them from hence: with his Majesty's
late Commissions to Papists and Protestants, and some who have been in actual
Rebellion to treat and conclude a peace with these Rebels, contrary to the
very Act he passed this Parliament for Irelands relief. Thirdly, his Majesty's
late letter to the Council in Ireland to exclude the Parliaments agents and
members there from all their Counsels and meetings; and if reports be
credible, his Majesty's Commissions lately issued to most notorious convicted
Papists in See the Parliaments Remonstrances and Declarations to this effect.
Wales, Lancashire, the North and other parts, to arm themselves and raise
forces under their Comm^nds (who are now in several bodies in the field) and
his inte^tai^ing of diverse Popists and Irish Rebels in his Army to fight
against the Parliament, contrary to the express Laws of the Realm; his own
frequent Proclamations and Protestations, ^o entertain ^o Papists near him
and to defend the Protestant Religion: Which added to the intercepting of the
Parliaments provisions for the relief of the Protestants in Ireland, the
entertaining of some of the Commanders sent to Ireland by the Parliament
against the Reb^lls, if not sending for some of them out of Ireland from that
Service to war against the Parliament; with the passes under his Majesty's
hand for the tra^s^orting of some Popish Commanders (since joined wi^h the
Irish R^bells) into Ireland; make many jealous heads suspect, the common vaunt,
of the Irish Rebels, See Doctor Jones his book of Examinatons publish^d by
Order of both Ho^ses.
that they have express Commissions both from the King and Queen to warrant
the^r ^roceedings th^re, and that they fight but for them against the
Parli^m^nt, Pu^^tanes, and Parliament-D^gs (the Language of the Cavaleeres too,
learned from them) are not only possible, but probable; and that th^re is a
general design on foot (toward which the Papists in foreign parts;
through the Priests and Queens Negotiations, have made large contributions) by
the Popish Armies now raised in both Kingdoms, to s^t up Popery in its
perfection every where, and extirpate the Prote^^ant Religion in all o^r
Kingdoms, which nothing but an absolute conquest of these blood-thirsty.
Papists ca^ in probability prevent, they being already grown so insolent, as
to say Mass openly in all the Northern parts and Army, and in Reading, in
affront of God and our Religion: If therefore the premises should now be wholly
surrendered to his Majesty, it is much to be feared, that the Popish party (now
most powerful) would in recompense of their meritorious service and assistance
in these wars, at leastwise challenge, if not gain, the chief command of
the Ports, Navy, Ammunition; the rather, because the Lord Herbert (a most
notorious Papist) both before and since this Parliament, enjoyed the sole
charge and custody of all the Military Engines and Ammunition royal at Foxes
Hall, designed for the Kings chiefest Magazine; and then farewell Religion,
Laws, Liberties; our Souls and bodies must become either Slaves or Martyr^s.

Their third general ground, is the constant practice of most of our Kings (as
John Henry the 3d. Edward, and Richard the 2d, with others) who after wars
and differences with their Parliaments, Lords, Commons, upon accommodations
made between them, as soon as ever they got possession of their Castles,
Ships, Ammunition, seized by their Subjects, brake all vows, oaths, covenants
made unto them, oppressing them more then ever; enlarging their own
prerogatives, and diminishing the Subjects Liberties, (yea taking away many of
their lives against Law, Oaths, Promises, Pardons,) on purpose to enthrall
them; which still occasioned new Commotions, as the premised Histories and
others plentifully inform us. And that the King (considering all his
forementioned proceedings, and pertinacious adhearing to his former evil
Councillors and their Counsels) should degenerate from his predecessors
Policies, in case the premises be yielded wholly to him, before our Liberties
and Religion be better settled, and the just causes of our fears experimentally
removed, i^ hardly credible.

But against these 3. General reasons, Object.
his Majesty's many late solemn Protestations, and those Acts which he has
passed this Parliament, are objected, as sufficient security against all future
fears: To which they answer.

First, Answ.
that if his Maj^sties Coronation Oath, to preserve his Peoples Liberties and
Laws of the Land inviolable, have been no sufficient security to his Subjects
hitherto, against all the forementioned grievances and illegal pressures: his
verbal Protestations and Promises are like to prove worse assurance: If
solemn Oaths be most apparently violated, what trust can there be to unswore
words?

Secondly, our Kings in former times (as I have plentifully proved and infinite
examples more declare) seldom or never kept either Oaths or Promises made to
their Subjects; but have broken oath after oath, agreement upon agreement, with
all verbal legal ties; reputing them only lawful policies to overreach
their people, and effect their own designs with greater advantage to
themselves, and prejudice to their Subjects. And shall we dream of a new
world, only in this dissembling age; when Kingcraft is improved to the utmost?

Thirdly, we had his Majesty's At the end of the Petition of Right.
solemn Protestation, in the Word of a King, in the 3d year of his Reign,
backed with Concerning the breaking up of the Parliament, and before the 39.
Articles of Religion.
Two Printed Declara^^ons then, to all his Loving Subjects, to maintain the
Pet^tion of Right, their Laws, Liberties, Properties, Religion in purity and
perfection without the l^ast violation, or any connivance a^, or back-^^iding
to Popery: And what good warrants or securities these since proved to the
Subjects to pr^se^ve them from several inundations of oppressions* Tax^s,
grievances, Innov^^^ons and relapses to Popery* (which have flowed in upon them
ever since as if these (...) b^ene ^o banks to keep them out, but sluices
only to let them in the faster) the premises manifest, and we a^l
experimentally feel this day. And are the new Promises and Protestations
(think you) better then the old? or those made this Parliament more obligatory
to the King, or his evil Counselors, then those made the two last
Parliaments, infringed in an high degree (even to the imprisoning, the
searching of Peers, of Commons Pockets, and studies against the Privileges of
Parliament) within few hours after they were published in Print? Are not the
Subjects daily taxed, imprisoned, plundered, murdered; the Privileges of
Parliament daily infringed, many ways? Protestants dis-armed, Papists armed,
foreign forces introduced, Irish Rebels privately countenanced, the greatest
acts of hostility and cruelty exercised whiles treaties of peace are pretended?
the best Justices removed in all Counties, ill affected persons set up in their
places; illegal Commissions of Array executed, justified, the best Protestant
Ministers, people most robbed, pillaged, murdered, banished every where;
Sheriffs illegally made, Subjects (even at Oxford where the king resides) more
inhumanely handled under his Majesty's view, than Gally-slaves in Turki^; and
scarce one Declaration or Promise observed so much as the very day they are
published? notwithstanding so many multiplications of them in Print; that
people may the better take notice how they are broken, if they be observant?
And shall the Parliament then take, these so notoriously often violated, never
yet observed Protestations, for our Kingdoms only substantial security, to
put all into his Majesty's hands forthwith, before they see some real
performances and change of Counsels? Certainly if they be so much over-seene,
they are like to be so far from mending our present condition, that they
shall but make it worse, yea and betray themselves, with all that trust them,
both for the present and posterity.

But we have very good Laws assented to by his Majesty this Parliament;
Object.
for our security too. Answ.
True! but are they not spiders Webbs, and already undermined in action or
intention? Do they secure us in any kind for the present, and will they do
it for the future? will time (think you) make them binding to the King, if
they oblige him not, as soon as made? Did the Petition of Right 3^ Caroli, (a
most inviolable security as most then dreamed) secure the Subjects in the least
degree against any public wrong, so long as for one months space? Was it not
turned into a kind of wrong as soon as made, and ever since? Nay, were there
not only sundry actions don, but Judgments too in the very greatest Courts of
Justice, given against it, yea against the very letter and unquestionable
meaning of Magna Charta, and other fundamental Laws, by corrupted, or over
awed timorous Judges? yea, are not most good Acts made this Session for the
Subjects benefit, and all the Subjects Liberties at one stroke quite hewn
down and undermined by a pretense of Law it self, in his Majesty's * Answer
to both the Houses Declaration, concerning the Commission of Array? Quid verba
a^diam, fact^ cunv^deam? The meanest Latin^ Scholar knows, that verba dare,
signifies properly to deceive; and Subjects have been often deceived, even with
Acts of Parliament. Now that all may see how invalid assurances Laws are to
secure the Subjects Liberties, though ratified with never so many
confirmations, oaths, s^ales; I shall give you ^. or 3. ancient presidents.
The first is that of Mat. Pa^^s Hist. p. 243. to 256 Daniel p. 143. 144. (...).
King John, who Anno 1214. confirmed Magna Charta, the Charter of the Forest,
and other Liberties with his hand, s^ale, oath, proclamations, the Popes B^ll,
solemn excommunications against the infringer^ of it, denounced by all the
Bishops in his presence; by appointing 25. Ba^ons, who by oath were to see and
force him, and all others to observe it, by seizing on ^is Castles, Lands,
goods; and by resigning the custody of his 4. chief Castles to ^he dispose of
25. Lords; whom all other Lords and Commons were bound to assist; yet in less
than on half years, space, these strongest obligations are all cancelled,
these Gordians cut in sunder with the sword of war, and the Su^j^cts reduced
to greater Vassellage than ever, as the premises evidence. So King Henry the 3d
by oath sundry times successively ratified these Charters, and the Subjects
Liberties in Parliament, which they often dearly purchased with great Subsid^es.
And Mat. Par. Hist. Angl. p. 240. 421. 430. Dan. Hist. p. 157, 158
An. 1237, this King to gain a Subsidy of his Subjects, in a Parliament then
assembled at London; denye^ that he ever intended to revoke the great Charter,
and other Liberties, or labored with the Pope to d^e it, with which the Barons
truly charged him; and that if any such thing had been casually suggested to
him, he did utterly n^ll and revoke it: and because he seemed not altogether
free from the sentence of excommunication, which Ste^en the Archbishop, with
all the other Bishops of England had denounced against all the infringers of
the great Charter, which he through ill Council had in part infringed; he
commanded them all in public, to renew the said sentence against all
contradictors of the said Charter, so that if he himself, through any
conceived rancor, had not peradventure observed it, he might more grievously
relapse into the said denounced sentence. By which means, and speech, he
wonderfully reconciled to him the hearts of all that heard of these things, and
suddenly causes the Earls Warren, and Ferrers, and John Fitz-Ieffry, by the
Parliaments appointment, to be sworn his Counselors; giving them this Oath;
That by no means, neither for rewards, nor any other cause, they should swarve
from ^he way of truth, but should give good and wholesome Council both to the
King and Kingdom. Whereupon they freely gave the King the 30th part of all
their movable goods, except their gold, silver, horses and arms, to be spent
on the good of the Republicke, with this condition often annexed; that the King
should le^ve the Council of Aliens, and only use the advice of his natural
Subjects: Which Subsidy was ord^red, to be collected by 4 knights, and one
clerk in every County, and there laid up in some religious house or Castle,
that if the King should receede from his promise and condition, every one might
faithfully receive back his own again. But no sooner was the Parliament
ended, but the King breaks all his promises; shows more favor to, and is
more ruled by strangers then ever before; levies the subsidy in a stricter and
far other manner then was prescribed, and bestows most of it on strangers to
be transported; marries his sister. Eleanor to Sim ^n Monfort, (a new come
French Exile, of mean fortunes) su^ru^eque naturalium hominum consiliis factus
est extran^us and suis b^ nevolis, Regnoque ac R^publicae u^ilibus factus est
cervicosus, ita quod per eorum consilium parum aut nihil de nego^iis Regni
tractaret aut operare^ur. Which courses, with other, so incensed the Nobility,
and generally all the subjects, as put them into a new commotion; which made
him enter into new Articles and promises ratified with seals and Oaths, yet
still infringed as soon as made. After this in the 37. year of his Reign he
ratified them in the most solemn and religious manner as Religion and State
could ever devise to do. Mat Par An: 125^ 1838, 839 The Stat. at large Dan.
Hist p 169. Speed p. 28 Mat Weston. Holinshed, Fab. Graf. An. 1253.
The King with all the great Nobility of England, all the Bishops and chief
Prelates in their Pontificalibus, with burning Tapers in their hands assemble
to hear the terrible sentence of Excommunication, and at the lighting of those
candles, the King having one of them in his hand, gives it to a Prelate there
by, saying: It becomes (...) me being no Priest, to hold this Candle, but my
bea^^ shall be a greater testimony; and withal laid his hand spread upon his
breast, the whole time the sentence was read, in this form. We Boniface
Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. by the Authority of Go^ Almigh^y, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and of all Apostle, M^rtyrs, Confessors, Virgins,
and all the Saints of God (many of them there specially named) do (...) and
separate (...) Church of God, all those who from henceforth, wittingly and
willingly shall deprive or spoil the Church of her right: likewise all those,
who by any art or cunning shall rashly violate, diminish, or alt^r privily or
openly or by (...) deed, or council, shall rashly come against al o^ any of
the ancient Liberties o^^pprov^d customs of the Realm, and especially the
Liberty, and free Customs which are contained in the Charters of the Common
Liberties of England, and of the Forest, granted by o^r Lord the King of
England, to the Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, Earls, Barons, Knights and
F^ee Tenants of England; likewise all them who shall make, or observe when
made, any statutes, or introduce or keep when introduced, any customs against
them or any of them, together with the writers, Counselors, and executioners
of such statutes, and those who shall presume to judge according to them.
Insempeternall memory whereof, we have thought meet to set our seals. And
then throwing down all their Candles, which lay smoking on the ground, every
one cried out; So let every one who incurres this sentence be extinct in hell.
Then the B^l^s ringing cut, the King himself solemnly swore and protested with
a loud voice, with his hand upon his breast: As God me h^lpe, I will faithfully
and inviolably keep these things, as I am a Man, a Christian, a Knight, a KING
CROWNED and ANO INTED. Which done, Robert Bishop of Lincoln fore-thinking,
that the King would violate the foresaid Charters, presently caused the like
excommunication to be made in all his innumerable Parish Churches; which
sentence would make men's ears to tingle, and their hearts not a little to
tremble. Daniel, p^ 169.
Never were Laws amongst men (except those holy Commandments from the Mount)
established with more majesty of Ceremony, to make them reverend and respected
then were these: they wanted but ^hunder and lightning from heaven, (which if
prayers would have procured, they would likewise have had) to make the sentence
ghastly, and hideous to the infringer^ ^ereof. The greatest security that could
be given, was an oath, and that solemnly taken; the only chain on earth,
besides love, to tie the conscience of man and humane Society together; which
should it not hold us, all the frame and government must needs fall quite
asunder. Who would have once imagined, that a man, a Christian, a Knight, a
King, after such a public oath and excommunication, would ever have violated
his faith, especially to his loyal Subjects? yet lo almost a miracle (though
over-common among our Kings,) the very next words in my Math. Paris p. 839.
Historian after this Oath and Excommunication, are these; The Parliament being
thus dissolved, the King PRESENTLY using ill Counsel, studied how to infringe
all the premises; these whisperers of Satan telling him; that he need not care
though he incurred this sentence, for the Pop^ for one or two hundred pounds
will absolve him, who out of the fullness of his power can loose and bind
whatsoever he pleases, etc. which the Pope soon after did; and the King
returned to his former oppressive courses, more violently than before. Well
then might the royal Prophet give us this divine caution, Psalm. 146. 3 Psalm
62. 9.
O put not you^ trust in Princes: Math Paris p. 825 826. speed p 627. 628.
Daniel p. 167. 168.
Surely men of high degree are a lie; to be laid in the balance they are
altogether lighter th^n vainty, both in their oaths and promises. Hence*
Isable Countess of Arundle, a well spoken Lady, receiving a repulse from this
Kings hands about a Ward, whereto she conceived she had right, the King giving
her a harsh answer, and turning from her, said thus to his face: O my Lord
King, why turn you away your face from justice, that we can obtain no right
in your Court! You are constituted in the midst between God and us, but you
neither govern your self nor us discreetely, as you ought. You shamefully vex
both the Church and Nobles of the Kingdom by all ways you may, which they
have not only felt in present but often heretofore. The King fired (...) so
free a speech, with a scornful angry countenance, and loud voice answered:
What, my Lady Countess, have the Lords of England, because you have tongue at
will, made you a Charter, and hired you to be their Orator and Advocate?
Whereunto she replied: Not so my Lord, they have not made any Charter to me;
but that Charter which your Father made, and which your self have often
confirmed, swearing to keep the same inviolably and constantly, and often
extorting money, upon promise, that the liberties therein contained should be
faithfully observed, you have not kept, but without regard to honor or
conscience broken; Therefore are you found to be a manifest violater of your
faith and Oath. Where are the liberties of England, so often fairly engrossed?
so often granted? so often bought? I, though a woman, and with me all the
natural and loyal people of the land, appeal you to the Tribunal of that
high Judge above, and heaven and earth shall be our witness, that you have
most unjustly dealt with us, and the Lord God of revenge, avenge and right us.
The King distrubed at these words asked her; If she expected not to obtain her
suite upon favor, seeing she was his kinswoman? Whereunto she answered. How
shall I hope for grace, when you deny me right? Therefore I appeal before the
face of Christ against those Councillors also of yours, who gaping only after
their own gain, have bewitched and infatuated you. I wish none had cause at
this very season to make the like appeals. As boldly, though in fewer words,
is he reproved by the Matthew Paris. p 826. 827. Daniel p 168.
Master of the Hospital of Jerusalem, in Clarken-well, who coming to
complain of an injury committed against their Charter, the King told him; The
Prelates, and especially the Templets and Hospitalers, had so many Liberties
and Charters, that their riches made them proud, and their pride mad; and that
those things which were unadvisedly granted, were with much discretion to be
revoked; alleging, that the Pope had (...) recalled his own grants, with the
clause, Non obstante; and why should not he cashiere those Charters
inconsiderately granted by him, and his Predecessors? What say your Sir? (said
the Prior) God forbid so ill a word should proceed out of your mouth: so long
as you observe justice you may be a King, as soon as you violate the same, you
shall cease to be a King. To which the King inconsiderately replied. O what
means this! you Englishmen, will you cast me down from the Kingdom as you
did my Father, and kill me being praecipitated? I could instance in diverse
like violations of Mag^a Charta and other good Laws immediately after their
making and ratification with solemnest Oaths and See Constit. Council. de
Reding. cap. de sentent. excom. public. in John de Aton. ^. 131.
excommunications, both in King E^ward the 1. and 2. and Richard the seconds
reigns, which because elsewhere lightly touched I shall pretermit; concluding
only with one president more, in one of our best and justest Princes reigns,
King Daniels History p. 260.
Edward the third, in whose reign even then when by special Acts, there was
not only a trieniall Parliament but an annual to be held; and sometimes 4. or
5. Parliamentsheld every year, and Magna Charta usually first confirmed by a
new Law in every one of them, yet we shall find not only frequent complaints
of the breaches of it, but 5 E. 3 c 9. 15. 15. E. 3. Stat. 1. c. 2. 3. 25. E.
3. Stat. 5. c. 4. 28. E. 3. c. 3. 37. E. 3. c. 8. 38. E. 3. c. 9. 42. E. 3. c.
3.
many new Laws one after another, enacted, to prevent and punish the
violations of it; and yet all to little purpose, as those Acts declare, and our
late, yea present times attest: and which is very observable; when King Edward
the 3d in the first Parliament, in the 15. year of his Reign, had ordained
and established diverse good Statutes, which he willed and granted FOR HIM and
HIS HEIRS that they should be FIRMLY KEPT and HOLDEN FOR EVER, for the
ratification of Magna Charta, and better observing other good Laws: and
enacted, That the Chancellor, Treasurer, Barons of the Exchequor, Judges, and
all other great Officers of the Kingdom should then for the present in
Parliament, and for ever after take a solemn Oath before their admission to
their Offices, to keep and maintain the points of the great Charter, and the
Charter of the Forest, and all other Statutes, without breaking any one point;
No sooner was that Parliament dissolved, but the very same year, he publicly
The Revocation of this Statute made 15 Ed. 3. in the Statutes a^ large.
revoked those Statutes: pretending, That they were contrary to the Laws and
Customs of the Realm, and to his Prerogatives and Rights Royal, all which he
by his Oath was bound to m^inta^ne; Wherefore willing providently to revoke
such things, which he so improvidently had done. Because (says he, mark the
dissimulation of Princes even in Parliaments) We nev^r realy consented to the
making of such Statutes, but as then it beloved Us, WE DISSEMBLED IN THE
PREMISES: by Protestations of r^vocations if indeed they should proceed to
secure the Dangers, which By the Denying of the same we feared to come, for as
much as the said Parliament otherwise had been without any exp^dition, in
discord dissolved, and so our earnest busi^sse had likely bee^e, which God
pr^ohibit i^ruine. And the said pretensed Statute, we promised then to be
sealed; But sithence the Statute did not of our own free will proceed, it
seemed to the Ea^^s, Barons, and other wise men, with wh^m we have treated
thereupon, (...) should be void, and ought not to have the Name nor Strength
of a Statute: And therefore by their Counsel and Ass^n^ We have Decreed the
said Statute to be void, and the same in as much as it proceeded of deed, we
have brought to be anulled. And the same we do only to the conservation and
redintegration of the Rights of our Crown, as w^ be bound, and not that (...)
should in any wise aggravate or oppress our Subjects whom we desire to rule
by lenity and gentleness. And thus his S^ablishing of these Lawe^, for Him and
his Heirs, firmly to be holden and kept for ever, was turned into an estate
at will, determined as soon as granted. By which pretense of Dissimulation, of
a consent to Acts, yet no free, but sained only to accomplish his own ends,
and of preserving and redintegrating the Rights of the Crown; how easily may
any King, (and how often have many Kings, actually, though not Legally) invallid
and ^ullifie all Acts they have passed for the Subjects benefit, as soon as
they are made by Parliaments? What weak assurances then are Laws alone, to
bind Princes hands, or secure Subjects Liberties, let all wise men judge.

If then the ignorant vulgar will be deceived with these specious fruitless
Protestations, and the bare grant only of some good Laws (already highly
violated) with^out any apparent intention to observe them; yet most presume the
great Counsel of the Kingdom (which in so many printed Declarations has
informed the Subiec^^ of the premises, to make them cautious, and vigilant
against all such circumventions) will not be so easily overreached, and find
better assurances before they trust too (...)*

Fourthly, admit (say some) His Majesty's Protestations and Promises upon t^^
hoped accommodation should be real, (which the sending abroad of his Forces,
West, South, North, at this very instant of Treating makes most doubt,) yet the
sway of ill Counselors about him, more prevalent with, more trusted by him, at
this present then his grandest Counsel, the Parliament: the Potencie of the
Queen, the great merits of her Grace and Papists (who will not be more modest
with the King, then they are with God himself, in challenging rewards ex
debito, for service done unto him) (...) of diverse Malignants about the King,
who will challenge all places of trust from his Majesty, as just reward for
their faithful service; as they did in Henry the (...) this reign, when Hist.
Arg^^ p. 371.
Matthew Paris complained, and the whole Kingdom^ with him in this manner,
Iudicia (...) injustis leges exlegibus, (...) etc. Who when they have all power
and offices shared among them, will be apt to meditate and act revenge on the
primest of their Parliamentary Opposites, to oppress and fleece the Subjects
to repair their losses, their expenses in this war, or their poor decayed
fortunes. All these with other such like probable subsequent considerations,
may justly plead the inconvenience, and great danger to Parliament and
Kingdom, to make an absolute present surrender of the Militia, Forts, Navy,
ammunition into such untrusty hands, as are likely to turn them all against
them, and to prove mischeivous, if not pernicious, unto both, for the premised
reasons; Seneca De Clementia l. 1.
Pestifera vis est valere ad n^cendum; especially if it be in Malignant hands.
And here, to avoid all misinterpretations of this impartial discourse, I
seriously protest; that as I heartily desire and constantly endeavor a speedy,
safe, cordial union between King, Parliament, People; so have I most
unwillingly been necessitated to repeat the premised objections, much feared
designs, and experimental contradictions between many late Protestations and
actions, (frequent in Parliamentary Declarations, new printed Pamphlets, and
most men's mouths;) not out of any disloyal seditious intention (as some will
maliciously mis-conster it) to stain his Majesty's Reputation with his people,
and make the breach between them incurable, that they may never trust one
another more; but only faithfully to demonstrate to his Highness and all
about him, the great disservice and impoliticke pernicious advise of those ill
Counselors, who have most unhappily engaged him in such pernicious proiects
and frequent repugnances of works and words, as have given both Parliament and
people, a more then colorable, if not just occasion to distrust his Majesty's
gracious words and promises for the present, till they shall visibly discern
them, more punctually observed, and reallized for the future; and made them so
unhappy on the one hand, that now they dare not trust his Majesty so far
forth as they desire, out of a provident care of their own future security;
and His Highness so unfortunate on the other hand, as to grow jealous of their
Loyalties, because they will not conside in his Royal Faith and Protestations,
so far as he expects, out of a care to preserve his own Kingly Honor. In
this unhappy diffidence (occasioned only by His Majesty's cvill Counsel)
between King and Kingdom, a real future renouncing of all forenamed
suspected designs, and actual performance of all Regal promises, will be the
only means to cure all Ielousies, banish all fears, remove all diffidences;
and beget an assured trust, firm peace, and lasting unity between King and
Subjects, to their mutual unexpressible felicity; which I shall daily
imprecate the God of Peace, speedily to accomplish. But to return to the
matter in hand.

Secondly, It is conceived by many indifferent men, to be far more reasonable
and safe both for King and Kingdom (as things now stand) that the Mili^ia,
Ports, etc. till our fears and jealousies be quite removed, should remain in
the Parliaments hands, then in the Kings alone: which they thus demonstrate.

First, Because all these See the Remonstrance of the Lord and Commons, May 26.
1642 and Novem. 2. 1642.
are the Kingdoms in right, property, use; not the Kings; Who being but the
Kingdoms Royal public Servant, may with Honor and better reason deliver up
the Custody of them to the representative Body of the Kingdom for a reason,
then detain them from them, when they require it. Secondly, Because the
Parliament is the Superior Sovereign power, the King but the Ministerial;
and it is more rational and just, that the inferior should condescend to the
greater Power, the Ministerial to those he serves, then they to him. Thirdly,
Many men of Honor and fidelity are more to be trusted and credited, then any
one man whatsoever, because not so mutable, so subject to seduction,
corruption, error, or selfe-ends as one, or very few. This is the true reason,
there are many Judges in all Courts of Justice; most select Members in the
highest Court of all, the Parliament, (as there See Plutar Numa Pem: Pilius,
Livie, l. 2. Bodin Com. Weal l. 3. c. 1.
was in the Roman Senate, in Foraigne Parliaments, in National and General
Councels; because Courts of greatest trust and power) many being more trusty
and juditious then one, or a few; Whence Solom^n doubles this resolution, Prove.
11. 14. c 15. 22. c. 24. 6.
In the multude of Counselors there is safety; yea, Eccles 4. 9. to 13.
two (says he) are better then one, in point of trust; whence wise men of
great estates make many (...), or Executors, and seldom do cofide in one
alone, The Parliament therefore being many, and the King but one, are most to be
confided in by the Kingdom. Fourthly, Kings have frequently broke their Faith
and Trust with their Parliaments and Kingdoms; Parliaments seldom or never
violated their trust to King or Kingdom; therefore its more just, less
dangerous for King and Kingdom to trust the Parliament, then the King.

Fifthly, The Parliament is elective, consisting for the most part of the
principal men in every County, City, Borough, in whom the people who elected
them, most confide; The King successive, not Elective. Therefore not so much
confided in by the Kingdom, as the Parliament. Sixthly, The Parliament being
the great Counsel both of King and Kingdom, consisting of the ablest men of
all Counties; is better able to judge and make choice of fit persons to manage
and keep the premises for the public safety, then the King alone, without
their advise. Seventhly, The Parliament heretofore has elected the greatest
Officers of the Kingdom, (yea the King himself, when the Title to the Crown
has been doubtful, the inheritance and descent whereof has in all or most
Princes reigns, See 7. H. 4. c. 2. 26 H. 8. c. 22. 28. H. 8. c. 7. 35. H. 8.
c. 1. 1 Eliz. 2. cap. 1. Cook 8. Report: The Princes Case.
been constantly guided and settled by the Parliament, as I have formerly
proved) because it most concerns the weal or woe; the peace and safety of the
Realm to have trusty Officers; Therefore by the selfsame reason they should
for the present appoint all Officers for the custody and ordering of the
Premises. Eighthly, The Kings trusting the Parliament with these things for a
convenient time, will be the only means to remove the peoples fears, prevent
their dangers, quiet their minds, beget a perfect unity and amity between
King, Parliament, Subject, and prevent all future differences: whereas the
present resigning of them to his Majesty's trust and power, will but augment
their jealousies, fears, dangers, discontents; and neither pacify former
differences, nor prevent future, but rather perpetuate and beget them;
especially if any notorious Papists, Malignants (the likeliest men to be
employed under his Majesty) be trusted with any of the premises, which will
endanger both Liberties and Religion; of which there will be no fear at all,
if the Parliament and such as they shall nominate be the only Trustees. In
fine, If neither King nor Parliament dare trust one the other alone with the
premises, and it is neither Royal, nor Honorable as many beleev for the King
to trust the Parliament now alone, with these, who in their Novem. 2. 1642* and
May 26. 1642.
Declarations never desired, but professed the contrary, that the chiefest
command of the Militia when indifferent Officers were appointed, should still
reside in his Majesty, in as ample manner as before; there is no other equal,
honorable, just, impartial, probable way left to secure or accord both
parties in this particular, but only to commit the premises for a convenient
time, to the custody of such trusty persons, nominated by the Parliament to the
King, or by the King to the Parliament, as both sides jointly shall allow of,
and by a special Bill to prescribe them such an Oath, as shall oblige them, to
keep and employ them only for the joint use of King, Kingdom, and Parliament,
by the joint direction of King and Parliament, and not by the single warrant or
command of either of them, whiles this Parliament continues; Under pain of
High Treason, both against the King and Kingdom.

I shall close up this objection with the words of Seneca, De Clementia l. 1.
c. 29.
Securitas securitate mutua paciscenda est: Errat enim si quis existimet tutum
esse Regem, vbi nihil a reg^ tutum est. Vnum est inexpugnabile munimentum, Amor
Ciuium; which the King shall then be sure of, when he takes up this resolution;
Non rempublicam suam esse, sed se Reipublicae: and shall really trust the
Kingdom and Parliament as much, as far forth, as he expects or desires they
should trust him.

The Parliaments Right to Elect Privy Counselors, Great Officers, and Judges.
THe third grand Complaint of the King and Royalists, Object. 3.
against this Parliament is: See his Majesty's Answer to the Parliaments 19.
Propositions, June, 2. 1642. with other Declarations and Treatises on his part.
That they take upon them a power to recommend and nominate to the King his
Privy Counselors, Judges, with other great Officers of State; demanding,
that none of them may hereafter (especially during Parliaments) be ordained by
his Majesty, but by their Nomination or advice. A great affront, an
intolerable encroachment on the Prerogative Royal, as is pretended.

The loud clamor against the Parliament, if seriously examined, will speedily
vanish into nothing. For; first, it is Page 17, 18, 19.
already cleared, ( De laudibu^ Legum Angliae c. 13, 14.
and Fortescue so resolves) That Kings themselves (the highest Officers and
Justiciaries in their Kingdoms) were both created and elected at first, Answ.
1.
by the free general votes of their people; from whom alone they received all
their Royal Authority, having still no other, nor greater lawful power then
they conferred on them, (only for the defense of their Laws, Persons,
Liberties, Estates and the Republics welfare:) which they may regulate,
augment, or diminish, for the Common good as they see just cause. Therefore
doubtless the people who thus created and elected their Kings at first, did
likewise constitute, and elect all public Councillors, Officers, Judges,
Ministers of the State, giving both being and bounds to their several Offices
and Jurisdictions by public Laws; which is most apparent not only in the Livy
Hist. l. 1, 2, 3. Dionys. Hal Antiq. Romans l. 2. and 3. Polybius. Hist. l. 6.
Bodin, Commonwealth. l. 1. c. 10.
Roman, Arist. Polit. I. 2, 3, 5. Xenophon. de Lacedaem. Republica; Diodoru^
sic. Bib. Hist. l. 2, 3.
Lacedemonian and other Kingdoms, but our own too, by infinite Acts of
Parliament creating, regulating and limiting the power, Charters, Pattents,
Graunts, and proceedings not only of our Kings, but of their Counselors,
Chancellous, Treasurers Keepers of the Great Seal and privy Seal, high
Stewards, Admiralls, Marshalls, Masters of the Horse, Presidents of the
Marches, and of York, Masters and other Officers of the Court of Wards Judges,
and Justices of all Courts, all kinds, Sherifs; Coroners, Customers, Searchers,
Escheators, and all other Temporal or Ecclesiastical public Officers: the
right of whose elections remaining originally in the Kingdom, and Parliament
representing it, was never yet irrevocably or totally transferred by them to
the King, by any public acts that I have seen: and therefore when they see
just cause, they may make use of this their primitive inherent right of
Election, without any real incroachment on the Kings Prerogative.

Secondly, I have already proved, that the Cooks Inst. on Magna Charta. f.
174, 175, 558, 559, 566.
Heretochs, Lieutenants General, and (as likewise the Conservators of the
Peace) in every County through the Realm, were anciently elected only by the
Parliament and People; not the King, (though they had the custody, power,
Command of the whole Countey,) without any impeachment to the Prerogative
Royal; why then may not these other public Officers of the Estate be thus
nominated and chosen by the Parliament likewise, without any just exception or
offense?

Thirdly, All Cook Ibid. 284. 3. c. 6. No. Not Br. 163, 164. Register, part.
1. f. 177, 178. Stamford, 1. c. 51. f 49. Brook Corporations Kitchen, f. 47,
48. See Seldens Titles of Honor p. 746, 747 694. to 71^.
Coroners, Majors, Sherifs, Baylifs, Aldermen, Recorders of London, York,
Bristoll, and generally of all Cities, Towns and Buroughs throughout the
Kingdom (which have the chief Government of these Corporations) Verderers of
the Forest, Constables and other Officers, have ever anciently, and are still
at this day elected only by the People, not the King: Yea all Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Priors, with other Ecclesiastical Officers, (who were
formerly Peers and Members of the Parliament, and Rulers in the Church,) were
anciently chosen, not by the King himself, but only by the Clergy and
people, as sundry See Antiquit. Eccle. Brit. Goodwins Cat. of Bishops and
Antiquities, Eadmerus Hist. Novell, p. 34. 36, 50, 71. 97, 109, 111, 112, 131,
132, Malms. de Gestis, Pontif.
Presidents and 25 E 3. Par. 6. 9 H. 4 c. 8 13 R. 2. Stat 2 c. 2.
Statutes manifest, and the Conge de'sliers at this day for the Election of new
Bishops, more then intimate: and all this without the least violation of the
Kings Prerogative: why then may not the Parliament nominate all those public
Officers to the King by Parallel Reason, without Ecclipsing his Prerogative?

Fourthly, The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Kings and Kingdoms
greatest Court and Council, the Parliament, Stamford Ibid. Modus tenendi
Parliamentum. Cambdens Brit. p 176, 177. Sir Tho. Smiths Commonwealth, l 2 c.
1. 2. Helinshed and Veel Description of England, c. 8. f. 173. Chron. of
Ireland, f 127, 128. Minsh Dict Tit. Parli. Cooks Instit. on Lit f. 109, 114,
and 9. Report. Epist. Dedicatorie.
(the 15 E 3. c 3, 4, 5 Stamford Iuris. of. Courts, f. 1. to 10 Rastal, Parl.
and the Statutes there cited.
supreamest Counselors and Judges of all others, to whom all other Courts,
Counselors, Officers, Judges, are responsible for their actions, Judgments,
advice;) have always of right been, and yet are elected only by the
Freeholders and Commons of the Realm: yea all the members of the Lords house,
though summoned thither by the Kings Writ, and not elected; sit there See Mr
Seldens Titles of Honor par 2. c. 5. Sect. 20 to 26.
of right (not of grace, or the Kings free choice) by the fundamental Laws
and Constitutions of the Realm; neither can the King by his absolute
Prerogative, elect any members of the Commons House, or exclude any member of
it, or Peer of the Upper House (who by virtue of his Peerage ought to sit
there) without the Houses consents: for then, if he might elect, or exclude
one, he might likewise choose and seclude more, yea most of them, by like
reason, at his pleasure; and so subvert the subjects Privileges, and by a
Packed Parliament impose what Laws or Taxes he would on his people, to their
slavery and ruin. Which freedom of the subjects Election, and all Lords
Summons is so essential and necessary to Parliaments, that the Parliaments of
21 R. 2. at Westminster, and of 38 H. 6. at Coventry, were by the Parliaments
of 1 H. 4. c. 3, 4. N^. 21, 22. and 39 H. 6. c. 1. adjudged and declared to be
void and no Parliaments at all, but unlawful, yea devilish Assemblies, and
Ordinances, for this very Reason; because in the first of them the Knights were
not duly elected by the Commons according to Law and custom, but by the Kings
pleasure; and the Lords only of the Kings party, (contrary to right and
reason) summoned to it: (by means whereof, Will, therein ruled for reason, men
alive were condemned without examination; men dead and put in execution by
privy murder, were adjudged openly to dye, others banished without answer, an
Earl arraigned, not suffered to plead his pardon, Mr. Saint John's Speech
against Ship Money, p. 33 Speed, p 762, 763. Halls Chron. f. 10, 11, 12.
Fabian. part. 7 p. 173. to 179.
etc.) and because the latter of them by 39 H. 6. c. 1. Hals Chron. 39. H. 6.
f. 1^2. Grafton* p. 647.
diverse seditious evill-disposed persons about the King, was unduly summoned,
only to destroy some of the Great Nobles, faithful and Lawful Lords, and
other faithful liege people of the Realm out of hatred and malice, which the
said seditious persons of long time had against them: and a great part of the
Knights of diverse Counties of the Realm, and many Burgesses and Citizens for
diverse Buroughs and Cities appearing in the some, were Named, returned and
accepted, some of them without due and free Election, some of them without any
Election by means and labor of the said seditious persons, against the course
of the Laws, and Liberties of the Commons of the Realm, whereby many great
Jeopardies, Enormities, and Inconveniences, wel-nigh to the ruin, decay, and
subversion of the Realm, ensued. If then the grand Counselors and Judges of
this highest Court, are and ought to be elected only by the Commons, not the
King, because they are to consult, and make Laws for the Kingdoms welfare,
safety, government, in which the Realm is more concerned then the King; and
Bishops, Abbots and Priors likewise, whiles members of the Lords House of
Parliament, were chosen by the Clergy, People, Commons, not the King: by
semblable, or better reason, the whole State in Parliament when they see just
cause, may claim the nomination of all public Officers of the Kingdom,
(being as much or more the Kingdoms Officers(...) the Kings, and as 15 E. 3.
Stat. 3, 4, 5.
responsible to the Parliament as to the King, for their misdemeanors in their
places) without any diminution of the Kings Prerogative.

Fifthly, the Parliament consisting of the most See the Prefaces of most ancient
Statutes in Ed. 1. 2. 3. 4. Rich. 2, H 4, 5, 6. and 7. reigns, Crampto^s
juris. of Courts f. 1. to 7. The Writ of Election, 15 E. 3. c. 3, 4, 5.
Honorable, Wise, Grave, and discree test persons of all parts of the
Kingdom, are best able clearly and impartially to Judge, who are the fittest,
ablest, faithfullest, most deserving men to manage all these public Offices
for the Kings, the Kingdoms honor and advantage, better then either the King
himself, his Cabinet-Counsell, or any unconsiderable Privadoes, Courtiers,
Favorites; (who now usually recommend men to these places more for their own
private ends and interests, then the Kings or Kingdoms benefit;) therefore it is
but just and equitable that they should have the principal nomination and
recommendation of them to the King, rather then any others whomsoever; and that
the King should rather confide herein to their unbiased Judgments, then to his
most powerful trustiest Minions; who would out the Parliament of this just
privilege, that they might unjustly engrosse it to themselves; and none might
mount to any places of public trust, but by their deare-purchased private
Recommendations; the cause of so many unworthy, untrusty, corrupt public
Officers and Judges of late times, who have (as See Mr. St. John's speech
concerning Ship Money, 1640.
much as in them lay) endeavored to enslave both us and our posterities by
public illegal Resolutions against their Oaths and Consciences.

Sixthly, Though our Kings have usually enjoyed the choice of Judges and State
Officers, especially out of Parliament time; yet this has been rather by the
Parliaments and peoples permissions, then concessions, and perchance by
usurpation, as appears by Sherifes and Lieutenants of Counties Elections, now
claimed by the King, though anciently the Subjects right, as I have proved. And
if so, a Title gained only by Connivance or Usurpation, can be no good plea in
Bar against the Parliaments Interest, when there is cause to claim it:
however; the Kings best Title to elect these public Officers, is only by an
ancient trust reposed in his Predecessors and him, by the Parliament and
Kingdom, with this tacit condition in Law (which Chapter of Estates upon
Condition, Sect. 378, 379. and Cooks Instit. f. 378, 379.
Littleton himself resolves is annexed to all Officers of trust whatsoever,)
that he shall well and lawfully discharge this trust, in electing such
Counselors, Officers, and Judges as shall be faithful to the Republicke and
promote the subjects good and safety. If then the King at any time shall break
or pervert this trust, by electing such great Counselors, Officers, and Judges
as shall willingly betray his Subjects Liberties, Proprieties, subvert all
Laws, foment and prosecute many desperate oppressing Projects to ruin or
inthrall the Kingdom, undermine Religion, and the like (as many such have been
advanced of late years;) no doubt the Parliament in such cases as these, may
justly regulate, or resume that trust so far into their own hands, as to
recommend able, faithful persons to these public places for the future,
without any injury to the Kings Authority. It was a strange opinion of Hugh
Spensers (great favorites to King Edward the second) which they put into a
Bill in writing, See Exilium Hugonis le Dispenser, Old Magna Charta, part. 2.
f. 50, 51. Cook l. 7. Calvin's case. f. 11.
That homage and the Oath of Allegianc^ is more by reason of the Crown, then
by reason of the Person of the King, and is more bound to the Crown, then to
the Person; which appears, because that before the descent of the Crown, no
Allegiance is due to the Person. Therefore put case the King, will not
discharge his trust well, according to reason in right of his Crown, his
Subjects are bound by the Oath made to the Crown, to reform the King and
State of the Crown, because else they could not perform their Oath. Now it
may (say they) be demanded, how the King ought to be reformed? By (...) of Law,
or by (...)? By suite at Law, a man can have no redress at all, for a man can
have no Judge, but these who are of the Kings party* In which case, if the will
of the King be not according to reason, he shall have nothing but ^rrour
maintained and con^^med. Therefore it behooves for saving the Oath, when the
King will not redress a thing, and remove what is evil for the Common people,
and prejudicial to the Crown, that the thing ought to be reformed by force,
because the King is bound by his Oath to govern his Lieges and people, and his
Lieges are bound to govern in aid of him, and in default of him. Whereupon,
these Spensers, of their own private Authority, took upon them by Usurpation
the sole government both of King and Kingdom, suffering none of the Peers of
the Realm, or the Kings good Counselors, appointed by the State, to come
near him to give him good counsel, not permitting the King so much as to
speak to them but in their presence. But let this their opinion and private
unlawful practice, be what it will; yet no doubt it is lawful for the whole
State in Parliament, to take course, that this part of the Kings Royal trust
(the choosing of good public Counselors, Officers, Judges, which much
concerns the Republike) be faithfully discharged, by recommending such persons
of quality, integrity, and ability to all public places of trust and
judicature, as both King and Kingdom may confide in; which will be so far from
depressing, that it will infinitely advance both the Kings Honor, Justice,
profit, and the Kingdoms too.

Seventhly, It is undeniable, that the Counselors, Judges and Officers of the
Kingdom, are as well the Kingdoms Councillors, Officers and Judges, as the
Kings, yea more the Kingdoms than the Kings, because the King is but for the
Kingdoms service and benefit. This is evident by the Statute of 14 E. 3. c. 5.
which enacts; that as well the Chancellor, Treasurer, Keeper of the Privy
Seal, the Justices of the one Bench and of the other, the Chancellor and
Barons of the Exchequer, as Justices assigned, and all they that do meddle in
the said places under them, shall make an Oath, well and lawfully to SERVE the
King and HIS PEOPLE, in THEIR OFFICES: which Oath was afterward enlarged by 15
E. 3. c. 3. 18 E. 3. Stat. 3. 20 E. 3. c. 1, 2, 3. 1 Rich. 2. c. 2. swearing
and injoyning them: To do even Law, and execution of right to all the Subjects
rich and poor, without having respect to any person, etc. And if any of them
do, or come against any point of the great Charter, or other Statutes or the
Laws of the Land by the Statute of 15 E. 3 c. 3. he shall answer to the
Parliament, as well at the Kings suite, as at the suite of the party. Seeing
then they are as well the Kingdoms Councillors, Officers, Judges, as the
Kings, and accountable, responsible for their misdemeanors in their places, as
well to the Parliament and Kingdom as to the King, great reason is there, that
the Parliament, Kingdom (especially when they see just cause) should have a
voice in their elections, as well as the King. The rather, because when our
Kings have been negligent in punishing evil Councillors, Officers, Judges,
our Parliaments out of their care of the public good, have in most Kings
reigns, both justly questioned, arraigned, displaced, and sometimes adjudged
to death the Kings greatest Counselors, Officers and Judges for their
misdemeanors: witness the displacing and banishing of William See Hoveden.
Mat. Par. Mat. West. Fabian, Polyc. Graf. Speed, Holinshed and Nabrigensis in
the lite of R. the 1. and Goodwin in this Bishops life.
Longcham Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellor, chief Justice, and Regent of the
Realm in Richard the 1. his Reign; Of Walls Holin. Speed, Graft, in Ed. 1. and
Cooks Instit. on Littleton. f. 133. a.
Sir Thomas Wayland chief Justice of the Common pleas, attainted of Felony,
and banished for bribery by the Parliament. 18 Ed. 1. the several banishments
of Piers Gaveston and the ^ Spensers (the Kings greatest favorites, Officers,
Counselors) for seducing, miscounselling King See Exilium Hugonis De spenser,
Walls. Fabian. Holin. Graft. Speed in the life of E. 2.
Edward the second, oppressing the Subjects, and wasting the Kings revenues;
the removal and condemnation of M. St. lohns Speech against Ship Money, p, 22,
23.
Sir William Thorpe, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, for Bribery, 25. E. 3.
The fining and displacing of ^ R. 2. c. 1. to 107. Will. Fab. Graf. Holin.
Speed. i^ 11 R. 2.
Michael de (...) Pole Lord, Chancellor, Alexander Nevell, and diverse other
great Officers, and Privy Counselors, with the condemning, executing, and
banishing of Tresilian (...), and other Judges, in 10, and 11 Rich 2. by
Parliament, for ill Council, and giving their opinions at Nottingham against
Law. Of 1 H 8. c 15. Holl. Speed, Grafton S^ow, Martin in H 8. and Ed. 6
Empson, Dudley, and that grand Cardinal Wolsey, Lord Chancellor, and the
Kings chiefest Favorite and Counselor, in Henry the eight his Reign: Of the
Duke of Sommerset, Lord Protector, and his Brother, Lord Admiral, for supposed
Treasons in Edward the 6th. his Reign: Of Sir Francis Bacon Lord Keeper, and
Cranfield Lord Treasurer, in King James his latter days; with infinite other
presidents of former and latter ages; and one more remarkable then all the
rest: Antiq. Ecclesiae Brit page 275, 28^, 282. Walsing. Hist. pa. 181. Ypodigm
Neust. p. 132. Caxton. part 7. 46 E 3. Gra^ p. 317.
In the Year 1371. (the 45. of King Edward the third his Reign) and somewhat
before, the Prelates and Clergymen had engrossed most of the Temporal Offices
into their hands; Simon Langham Archbishop of Canterbury, being Lord
Chancellor of England, John Bishop of Bath, Lord Treasurer, William Wickam
Archdeacon of Lincoln, Keeper of the Privy Seal, David Wolley Master of the
Rolls, John Troy Treasurer of Ireland, Robert Caldwell Clerk of the Kings
Household, William Bugbrig, general Receiver of the Duchy of Lancaster,
William Ashby Chancellor of the Exchequer, John Newneham and William de Mulso
Chamberlaines of the Exchequer, and keepers of the Kings Treasury and Jewels;
John Roxceby Clerk and Comptroller of the Kings works and Buildings, Roger
Barnburgh, and 7 Priests more, Clerks of the Kings Chancery, Richard
Chesterfield the Kings under-Treasurer, Thomas Brantingham Treasurer of Guives,
Merke and Calis; All these Clergymen (who abounded with pluralities of rich
Spiritual Livings, though they Monopolized all these temporal Offices:) in
the Parliament of 45 Edward the 3d. by a Petition and complaint of the Lords,
were displaced at once from these Offices (no ways suitable with their
functions) and Laymen substituted in their places: And a like Antiq. Eccles.
Brit. page 21.
president I find about 3 Hen. 3d. where the Clergy Lord Chancellor,
Treasurer, with other Officers were removed, upon a Petition against them, and
their Offices committed to Temporall-men, whom they better beseemed. If then
the Parliament in all Ages has thus displaced and Censured the greatest
Councillors, State-Officers, Judges for their misdemeanors, ill Counsel,
insufficiency, and unfitness for these places, (contrary to that twice
condemned false opinion, of the overawed Judges at Nottingham in 11 R: 2. R 2.
c. 12. Graft. p. 35^, 353. Walsing. Ypodig. Neu^t. p. 146, 147.
That the Lords and Commons might not without the Kings will impeach the Kings
Officers and Justices upon their Offenses in Parliament, and he that did
contrary was to be punished as a Traitor;) and that upon this very ground,
that they are the Kingdoms Counselors, Officers and Justices, as well as the
Kings, and so responsible to the Parliament and Kingdom for their faults. I
see no cause why they may not by like reason and authority, nominate and place
better Officers, Counselors, Judges in their steeds, or recommend such to the
King, when and where they see just cause.

Eighthly, Commonwealth li. 1. ca. 10. p. 167, 168.
John Bodin a grand Politician, truly determines and proves at large, That it
is not the right of election of great Officers, which declares the right of
Sovereignty, because this often is, and may be in the Subjects, but the Princes
approbation, and confirmation of them when they are chosen, without which they
have no power at all. It can then be no usurpation at all in the Parliament
upon the Kings Prerogative, to nominate or elect his Councillors, great
Officers, and Judges, or recommend meet persons to him (which is all they
require) so long as they leave him a Power to approve and ratify them by Writs
or special Patents, in case he cannot justly except against them; Of which
power they never attempted to divest his Majesty, though he be no absolute, but
only a politic King, De lau^legum Angliae, l. 9, 13, 14.
as Fortescue demonstrates.

Ninthly, It has been, and yet is usual in most Foreign Kingdoms, for the
Senate and people to elect their public Offi^ers and Magistrates, without any
diminution to their Kings Prerogative. In Bodin. Com. wealth, l^ 1 ea. ^0.
Livy, Hist. l, ^, 2, ^, 4, 7, Dionys Hol. l 3. and 3 Polib. hist. l. 6. See the
Appendix.
the Roman State, the people and Senate not only constantly elected their Kings
and Emperors, but all their other grand public Officers and Magistrates, (as
Consuls, Tribunes, Dictators, Senators, Decemviri, and the like) were elected
by the people; who prescribed them Laws, Oaths, and had power to question, to
punish, remoove and censure them when they offended. Arist. Polit. l 2. c. 10.
l. 3. c 7.
Solon and Aristotle, with other great Politicians, debating this Question;
Whether the power of Electing and censuring the Magistrates, and chief
Officers ought to resids in the people? Conclude offirmatively, That it is most
necessary and convenient, this power should rest in the people; because else
the people shall become both the servants and enemies of their Princes, if they
have not this power; and because all the people together are more considerable,
and better able to judge of the goodness and fitness of Magistrates for them,
then any few select particular men, which are more apt to be seduced with
by-end^, then a great multitude. Whence, among the Lacedaemonians, and in most
Kingdoms and Republics in Greece, the people had both the election, yea and
correction of their Magistrates and chief State Officers, as they manifest. In
the Kingdom of Hieronym. Blanca A^agone^sium rerum Comment. p 588, 589, 590,
716 to 724. 747 to 762.
Aragon, in Spain, their ancient Suparbiense Forum, their Iustitia Aragoniae,
and Rici homines, (who are their principal Magistrates, Great Counsel of
State, and Privi^ Counselors to their King both in War and Peace; having
power over their Kings themselves, to examine and censure all their Actions,
and remove them if there be cause;) with all their Members, Knights and
Burgesses of their Parliaments; (held formerly once a ye^re, but now once every
second year, by fixed Laws;) anciently were, and at this day are elected by
the People and not the King. Bodin. Com. wealth. l. 3. c. 1. p. 25^.
In Munst. cos. l. 3. c. 22, 23, etc.
the Germane Empire, the Electorship, Chancellourship, and all great Offices of
State, are hereditary and successive, not chosen by the Emperor: and the
greatest part of inferior Magistates, are elected in most Provinces and Cities
by the people. In Polonia the Archbishop of Gnesne, is by inheritance always
Chancellor of the Realm. In Bodin. Com. weal. l 1. c 10. N^chol. Is It huanf^^^
de rebus. Vngar. Hist. l. 6. p. 84, 85. Anno 15, 17.
Hungary, the great Palatine, the chiefest Officer of that Kingdom, next to
the King himself, who at home determines and judges all differences between
the King and Subjects, according to the Laws of that Realm (est enim apud
Panonios in usu, Regem si quid contra Legem fecerit, legibus subijci) and
during the interregnum, has right to summon Parliaments, and general
assemblies of the Estates; yea, the chief hand and power in electing a new
King; and the Sovereign command in the Wars, Adeo ut sontes punire, been de
re publica ^^ritis praemia discernere, fundosque qui 20. vel 30. agricolarum
capaces sunt juris haer^ditarij nomine confer possit, etc. (as Nicholaus
Isthuanfus writes) is elected by the States and Parliament of Hun^ary, not the
King. Bodin li. 1. c. 10. and the gener^ll History of Venice.
And in this manner Bethrius was elected Palatine in a full ass^mbly of the
States, Senatus, Nobili^ti^sque consensu, Anno Dom. 1517. and the Vayvode put
by. In See Munster Pontanus, Olaus Magnus, (...) others.
Venice, the Senate and people choose all the great public Officers, not the
Duke. In Poland (where the King is elective) by the Law of Sigismond Augustus,
all the Magistrates of every Country were to be chosen, by the particular
States of every Government, and so they are now. In Denmark, and Sweden, and
Bohemia, the Kings themselves are Elective by the States and people, and most
of their public Officers too. When Bodin l. ^. c. 10, Ca^siodor l 1. Epist.
Rome and Italy were under the Gothish Kings, they still elected their public
Officers, as is evident by King Theodoricus Letter of approbation of their
Election, in these words. Our consent, Reverend, Fathers, does accompany your
j^dgement. In Mat^ W^st. An. 1295. p. 399 Walsing. Hist. Angl p 28. and
Ypod^gma, p. 79.
Scotland, Anno 1295. the Scots in King John Bayliols Reign, considering his
simplicity and unap^n^sse, elected them 12. Peers, after the manner of France:
(to wit) 4. Bishops, 4. Earls, and 4. Lords, by whose counsel the King ought
to Govern the Realm, and by whose ordination all the affairs of the Kingdom
should be directed; which was principally done in affront of King Edward the
first, by whom this John was made King of Scotland, in some sort against the
Scots good liking; some of them secretly murmuring against it. In France it
self, where the King (as Bod. l 1. c. 10. l. 2. c. 5 Cassanaeus Ca^al. gloriae
mundi. ^onsid 24.
some think, and write, is an absolute Monarch,) the greatest public Officers
anciently, have sometimes been Elected by the Three Estates of Parliament. Math
Paris. p 8^5.
Anno 1253. The States of France, Elected the Earl of Leycester their Grand
Seneschall, and chief Counselor of State, to advise them, and their desolate
estate, what to do. Bodin l. 1. c 10.
In the Year 1324. Arthur Duke of Britain was chosen Constable of France, by
the voice of all the Peers, of the Great Counsel, and Parliament; and
thereupon was admitted to that Grand Office. Fabian, ^^rt. 7* p. 182. to 1^0.
In the Year 1357. the 7th. of King John of France, the Archbishop of Roan,
Chancellor of France, Sir Simon de Bury, chief Counselor of the King, and
of the Parliament, Sir Robert de Lorize, Chamberlain to the King, Sir Nicholas
Brake, Master of the Kings Palace, Eguerrain, Burges of Paris, and
Under-Treasurer of France, John Priest, Soveraigne-Master of the Money, and
Master of the Accounts of the King, and John Chauneon, Treasurer of the Kings
Wars, were all complained of by the Three Estates of France, assembled in
Parliament, for misguiding the King and Realm, their goods confiscated to the
King, themselves removed from these Offices, and others elected in their places
by the States. In Bodin. l. ^. c. 10.
the Year 1408. by a Law made in the Parliament at Paris, it was decreed, That
the Officers of the High Court of Parliament should be made by the Parliaments
Election, and those then vacant were so; which Law was again revived by King
Lewis the 11th. in the Year 1465. And after him in the time of Charles the
8th. not only the Presidents, the Kings Counselors and Advocates were made
by election, but even the Kings Attorney General (the only man of all the
body of the Court, that owes not Oath but to King only) was chosen by the
suffrages of the Court, in the Year, 1496. though their Letters of Provision
and confirmation of their Election then were, and yet are always granted by
the King. About the Walsin. hist. p 235, 236. Fabian, part. 7 p 317.
Year, 1380. the Earl of Flanders who had regal Jurisdiction, exacting new
Customs and Taxes from his Subjects, contrary to their Liberties, they
thereupon expelled him, with all his Family and Counselors out of their
Country, And refused upon any terms to submit to his Government, unless he
would remove all his evil Counselors from him, and deliver them into their
hands to be punished, Et recipere SOLVM VELIT CONSILIARIOS EX COMMVNIS VVLGI
DECRETO, and would receive such Counselors only as his people by common
decree should assign him; which he was constrained, sore against his will to
condescend too, ere they would restore him. Since then the Councillors,
Magistrates, Judges, and Prime Officers of State in most other Kingdoms, have
been thus elected by the people and Parliaments without any enchrochments upon
their Kings just Regalities; Why our Parliament now may not claim and enjoy
the like Privileges, without any impeachment of the Kings just Prerogative?
transcends my understanding to conceive.

Finally, our own Parliaments in most Kings Reigns, have both claimed and
enjoyed this power of Electing Privy Counselors, Chancellours, Treasurers,
Judges, and other great Officers of State, and created some new Officers of far
higher quality and power (to govern both King and Kingdom) then any the
Parliament desires, (...) are in truth fitting for them to create, unless in
cases of absolute necessity, to prevent the Kingdoms utter ru^ne. To give you
some few principal instances of many. In the Math. Paris* Hist. An 1214, 1215.
p 243. to 28^. Math.
Year 1214. the 16 Year of King John's reign, In a Parliament held at
^^^ning-Meade, near Windsor; for the settling and securing of Magna Charta, and
other the Subjects Laws and Liberties formerly granted by Henry the 1. it was
agreed by King John, Westminster. Walsing. Ypodig. Polychron.
and Enacted, That there should be 25 Barons Chosen, such as the Lords would,
who should to their uttermost power cause the same to be held and observed. And
that if either the King or his Iusticiar should transgress in any Article of
the Laws, Fabian Caxton. Grafton, Stow Hollinshed. Polydor.
and the offenses showed, 4 Barons of the 25. should come to the King, or in
his absence out of the Kingdom, to the chief Iusticiar, and declare the
excess, requiring without delay, redress for the same; which if not made
within 40. days after such declaration, Virg. An. 141 ^ Daniel, p, 143, 144.
Speed, p. ^78. to 567.
those 4 Barons should refer the cause to the rest of the 25, who with the
Commons of the Land, might distraine and enforce the King by all means they
could (by seizing upon his Castles, Lands, and Pessessions, or other goods; his
Person excepted, and that of his Queen and C^ildren,) till amends be made
according to their Arbitration. And that whosoever would should take their Oath
for the execution hereof, and obey the Commandment of the 25. Barons herein
without prohibition. And if any of them dissented, or could not assemble; The
Major part, to have the same power of proceeding: Hereupon there are 25. Barons
chosen to b^ Conservators of Magna Charta, and the Subjects Privileges (whose
Names you may read in Matthew Paris) who by the Kings Consent, took an Oath
upon their souls; that they would keep these Charters with all diligence, and
Compel the King, if he should chance to repent (as he did soon after) to
observe them: Which done: all the rest of the Lords, then likewise took
another Oath, to assist and obey the Commands of those five and twenty Barons.
In the Year 1221. Francis Thin, his Catalogue of Protectors. Holinshed vol. 3.
col. 1073.
Hugh de Burgh, was made the Protector, or Guardian of the Realm by a
Parliament, held at Oxford. In the Year 1222. I read in Hist. Angl. p. 305.
Godw. Catalogue of Bishops, p. 386. Math Westminster. An. 1222. pa. 1^3.
Matthew Paris, and others, that Ralph Nevill Bishop of Chichister, was made
Keeper of the Great Seal, and Chancellor of England, by assent of the whole
Kingdom (in Parliament,) to wit, in such sort, Vt non deponeretur ab ejusdem
sigilli. custodia, NISI TOTIVS REGNI ORDINANTE CONSENS^V and CONSILIO, That he
should not be deposed from the custody of the said Seal, but BY THE ORDINANCE,
CONSENT and COUNCIL OF THE WHOLE REALM. Lo here the greatest Officer of the
Realm, not only elected, but confirmed by Parliament, so as not to be
displaced but by the consent of the whole Realm, whose public Office^ he was.
Hereupon King Henry afterward, taking some distaste against Ralfe (because the
Monks of Winchester elected him Bishop of that Sea against his good liking)
took away the Seal from him, and delivered it to Geffery of the Temple, in
the 22^ Math. Paris p. 456. Franc. Thin, his Catalogue of Chancellors in
Holinshed, volum. 3. c. fol. 1275. Math. West. An 1238. page 149.
. Year of his Reign; but yet he held his Chancellours place still, and took
the profits of it, during all his life; though he refused to take the Seal
again, when the King offered to restore it him, the 23. of his Reign. Quod
per Consilium praedicto Cancellario commissum fuit TOTIVS REGNI. Math. West. An
1248. page 229. 233. Math. Paris An 1248. page 719, 720, 725. Math. Paris Hist.
An. 1230. p. 415. Daniel, Hist p. 157. Edit. ^6, 4.
After which he being restored to the Seal by the Parliament, An. 1236. this
King removed Ralph the Steward of his Household, with certain other his
Counselors, and great Officers of his House, from his Counsel, and their
Offices; and he likewise most instantly required his Seal from this Bishop of
Chichester his Chancellor, who executed his Office unblameably, being a Pillar
of Truth in the Court, But the Chancellor refused to deliver it, seeing the
violence of the King to exceed the bounds of Modesty; and said, That he could
by (...) means do it, Cum illud COMMVNI CONSILIO REGNI SVSCEPISSET, since he
had received it by the common Counsel of the Kingdom; wherefore he could not
resign it to any one WITHOUT THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE REALM; to wit, the
Parliament.

Math Paris H^st p. 4^o, 421 Daniel. p. 157.
Anno Dom. 1237. King Henry the third sommoning a Parliament at London, because
it seemed somewhat hard to sequester all his present Counsel from him suddenly,
as reprobate, it was concluded, that the Earl Warran, William de Ferarijs, and
John Fitz Geofrey should be added to his Privy Counsel; whom the King caused
to swear, That by no means, neither through gifts, nor any other manner, they
should deviate from the way of truth, but should give good and wholesome
council both to the King himself and the Kingdom. Whereupon they granted him
a Subsidy of the thirtieth part of their goods, upon condition; that from
thenceforth, and ever after forsaking the Counsel of strangers and all
unnatural ones (qui semper sui and non Regni amici esse consueverunt, and
Regni bona distrahere, non adunare) he should adhere to the counsel of his
faithful and natural subjects. Et sic soluto consilio non sine interiori
murmuratione and multa concepta indignatione, ^o quod cum difficultate tanta
Regis animum ad salubre consilium contorquerent; and consilijs eorum, a quibus
omnem honorem terrenum habet, obsecundarent, ad propria quisqueremeavit. But
this prefidious King, and Regni delapidator, as the Barons and Historians style
him, contrary to his solemn Oath and promise, would not be weaned from his
evil Counselors but retained them still, till by force of Arms they were
removed and banished. In the Math Paris an. 1^^4. p 61^ to 623. Danie's Hist.
p. 161, 162
Year 1244. the 28 of Henry the third his Reign (the Bishop of Chichester,
that faithful Stout Chancellor made by Parliament, dying, and the place
continuing void for a space) in a Parliament at London, the Lords and Commons
complained, That for defect of a Chancellor, diverse Writs were granted against
Justice, and they demanded, that by THEIR ELECTION a Iusticiar and Chancellor
might be made, by whom the state of the Kingdom might be settled AS IT WAS
ACCVSTOMED. The King promised to reform all things himself, least he might
seem thereto compelled by them: which they gave him a convenient time to
effect, and so adjourned; promising to give him an aid at their next meeting,
if in the mean time, he redressed things amiss, according to promise: Which
he failing to do. At their next meeting, They demanded Magna Charta to be
confirmed, which they had diverse times dearly purchased, and a new Charter to
be made for that purpose, That all the infringers thereof should be solemnly
Excommunicated by the Bishops. And because the King had not hitherto observed
the great Charter, notwithstanding his Oaths and promises, and Saint Edmonds
Excommunication against him by infringing it, least the like danger should
happen in after times, and so the last error be worse then the first, BY
COMMON ASSENT they elected 4 of the most P^l^tick discreetest men of all the
Realm, Who should be of the Kings Counsel, and swear that they would
faithfully manage the affairs of the King and Kingdom, and would administ^r
Justice to all men, without respect of persons: That these should always
follow the King; and if not all, yet two at the least, should be present with
him, to hear every man's complaint, and speedily releeve such as suffered
wrong. That the Kings Treasury should be issued by their view and testimony,
and that the money specially granted by all, should be expended for the benefit
of the King and Kingdom, in such sort, as should seem best, and most
profitable. And that these shall be Conservators of their Liberties. And that
as they Are Chosen by the assent of all, so likewise not any of them should be
removed, or deprived of his Office, without Common assent, That one of them
being taken away, by the election and assent of the three, another should be
substituted within two Months. Neither without them, but when there shall be
necessity, and at their Election, may all meet again. That the Writs
impetrated against the Law and Custom of the Realm, should be utterly revoked
and cancelled. That Sentence should be given against the Contradictors. That
they should oblige one another to excute all this by a mutual Oath. That the
Justiciar and Chancellor should be chosen by the general Voices of all the
States assembled: and because they ought to be frequently with the King, may be
of the number of the Conservators. And if the King by any intervenient occasion
shall take away his Seal from the Chancellor, whatsoever shall be sealed in
the interim, shall be reputed void and frustrate, till restitution of it be
made to the Chancellor. That none be substituted Chancellor, or Iusticiar,
but by the universal assembly and free assent of all. That Two Justices may be
chosen of the Bench; Two Barons of the Exchequer ordained: And at least One
Justice of the Jews deputed: That at this turn All the said Officers should
be Made and Constituted by the Common Universal and Free Election of All, That
like as they were to ^andle the Businesses of All, Sic etiam in eorum
Electionem concurrat assensus singulorum; So likewise For their Election the
Assent of all should Concur. And afterward, when there shall be need to
substitute another in any of the foresaid Places, this Substitution shall be
made by the Provision and Authority of the Four Counselors aforesaid. That
those hitherto suspected, and less necessary should be removed from the Kings
side. But whiles these businesses, over-profitable to the Commonwealth, had
been diligently handled by the Lords for three weeks space; the enemy of
mankind, the disturber of peace, the raiser of sedition, the devil (as
Matthew Paris writes) unhappily hindered all these things by the Popes avarice,
through the coming of Martin a new Legate, with a larger power then any ever
had before to exact upon the State; the interposition of which business in
Parliament, where it received a peremptory repulse, took up so much time, that
the former could not be fully concluded during that Parliament. Whereupon after
this, in the Year 1248. Mat. West. An. 1248. p. 229, 233. Mat Paris, An. 1248
p. 71^, 720, 725. See p. 420, 421 Daniel, p. 164.
King Henry calling a general Parliament at London to take an effectual
course for the settling of the distractions and grievances of the Realm; and
therein demanding an aid; he was grievously reprehended for this, That he was
not ashamed then to demand such an aid, especially because when he last before
demanded such an exaction (to which the Nobles in England would hardly assent)
he granted by his Charter, that he would no more do such an injury and
grievance to his Nobles: they likewise blamed him for his profuse liberality to
forraigners, on whom he wasted his Treasure; for marrying the Nobles of the
Land against their wills to strangers of base birth; for his base extortions on
all sorts of people, his detaining the Lands of Bishops and Abbots long in his
hands during vacancies, contrary to his Coronation Oath, etc. But the King was
especially grievously blamed by all and every one; who complained not a little,
for that Daniel te^ders it thus: They all generally complain for that the
chief Iusticiar, Cha^cellour and Treasurer WERE NOT MADE BY THE COMMON
COUNCIL OE THE KINGDOM, according AS THEY WERE IN THE TIME OF HIS
MAGNIFICENT PREDECESSORS, and AS IT WAS FIT and EXPEDIENT.
LIKE AS HIS MAGNIFICENT PREDECESSORS KINGS HAVE HAD, Iusticiarium nec
Cancellarium ha^et, nec Thesaurarium, PER COMMVNE CONSILIVM REGNI, prout
deceret and expediret, he had neither a Chief Justice, nor Chancellor, nor
Treasurer made, by the Common Council of the Kingdom as it was fitting and
expedient; but such who followed his pleasure whatsoever it was, so it were
gainefull to him, and such as sought not the promotion of the Commonwealth,
but their own, by collecting Money, and procuring Wardships, and Rents, first
of all to themselves; (A clear evidence, that these Officers of the Kingdom
were usually of right created by the Parliament, in this Kings and his
Ancestors times:) When the King heard this he blushed, being confounded in
himself, knowing all these things to be most true: he promised therefore most
truly and certainly, that he would gladly reform all these things, hoping
by such a humiliation, though fained, more readily to incline the hearts of all
to his request; To whom, taking counsel together, and having been often
ensnared by such promises; they all gave this answer: This will be seen, and in
a short time it will manifestly appear to all men; therefore we will yet
patiently expect; and as the King will carry himself toward us, so we will
obey him in all things: Whereupon all things were put of and adjourned till 15
days after Saint John Baptists feast; But the King in the mean time,
obdurated either by his own spirit, or by his Courtiers, who would not have
his power weakened; and being more exasperated against his people, regarded not
to make the least reformation in the foresaid excess^s, according as he had
promised to his liege people, but instead thereof, when all the Nobles and
Parliament met again at the day prefixed, firmly believing that the King,
according to promise, would reform his errors, and follow wholesome counsels,
gave them this displeasing answer, by his ill Councillors: (from whom his
Majesty's evil advisers lately borrowed it.) You would, all Ye Primates of
England, very uncivilly bind your Lord the King, to your will, and impose on
him an overservile condition, whiles you would impudently deny to him, that
which is lawful to every one of your selves. Verily it is lawful to every
one, to use whose and what council he lists. These ill Councillors forgot,
that there is a great vast difference between private Meniall servants of the
King, and public Officers of the Kingdom; so that their Argument is but a
fallacy.
Moreover it is lawful to every householder to prefer to, put by, or depose
from this or that Office any of his Household, which yet you rashly presume to
deny to your Lord the King; especially when the servants ought not at all to
judge their Lord, nor the vassalls their Prince; nor to restrain him with
their conditions; Yea verily, who ever are reputed But the whole Parliament and
Kingdom which they represented, were not inferior but above the King
himself, who was but the Kingdoms Officer and public servant; and so this
reason made more against then for the King.
inferiors, ought rather to be directed by the pleasure of their Lord, and to
be regulated by his will; for the servant is not above his Lord, nor yet the
Disciple above his Master. Therefore he should not be as your King, but as your
servant, if he should be thus inclined to your will. Wherefore he will neither
remove Chancellor, nor Justice, nor Treasurer, as you have propounded to him
to do; neither will he substitute others in their places: He likewise gave a
cavilling answer to the other Articles though wholesome enough to the King, and
demanded an aid to recover his right in foreign parts. When the Barons heard
this answer, it appeared more clear then the light, that these things sprung
from those ill Councillors, whose weakened power would be utterly blown up,
if the Council of all the Baronage should be hearkened to; Wherefore they all
gave this unanimous peremptory answer; That they would grant no aid at all to
impoverish themselves, and strengthen the enemies of the King and Kingdom: and
so the Parliament being dissolved with indignation, unusquisque spe fraudatus a
Parliamento frustra diu expectato, nihil nisi sannas, cum frivolis amissis
laboribus cum expensis, ut solent saepius, reportarunt: Which when the king had
seen he was put into a vehement anger, and said to his Councillors; Behold by
you the hearts of my Nobles are turned from me; Behold I am like to lose
Gascoigne, Poyteirs is spoiled; and I am destitute of Treasure; What shall I
do? Whereupon to satisfy him, they caused his Plate and Jewels to be sold,
and invented sundry new projects to raise moneys. The very Mat. Paris, Hist. p.
740. Dan, p. 165.
next Year 1249. the Lords assembling again at London at the end of Easter
pressed the King with his promise made unto them, That the chief Iusticiar,
Chancellor, and Treasurer might BE CONSTITVTED BY THE GENERAL CONSENT OF THE
KINGDOM; which they most certainly believed they should obtain: but by
reason of the absence of Richard Earl of Cornwall, which was thought to be of
purpose, they returned frustrate of their desire for that time. Dan. p. 171,
172.
Anno 1254. in another Parliament summoned at London, in Easter Term, the
Lords and Commons require and claim again their former Rights in electing the
Iusticiar, Chancellor, and Treasurer; but after much debate the Parliament is
proroged, and nothing concluded. Yet the Lords and Commons would not be thus
deluded of their right, which to regaine, they strained their Jurisdiction to
an higher Note then ever they had done before. For in the Mat Paris p. 940,
941, 942, 9^0 Mat West an 1258 to 1262. p. 277, 278, 300, 307. to 312. Fabian
part. 7 p. 64 to 73. Graf. p. 137. to 145. Speed p. 635, 636. etc. Holin. Dan
Stow, and others.
Year 1258. the Barons seeing the Realm almost destroyed with Taxes, and
exactions, and Poictovines to domineere and rule all things in England,
effectually to redress these grievances, and reform the State of the Realm,
in a Parliament at Oxford, (to which they came very well armed) by advise of
some Bishops; among other Articles, they demanded of the King, That such a one
should be chief Iusticiar who would judge according to Right, etc. And that
24. (others write 12. persons, (Whom Fabian styles the Douze Peers) should
there be chosen, to have the whole administration of the King and State (by
reason of the Kings former misgovernment) and the YEARLY APIOINTING OF ALL
GREAT OFFICERS; reserving only to the King the highest place at meetings, and
salutations of honor in public places. To which Article the King, and his
Son Prince Edward, out of fear, not only assented and subscribed, but
likewise took a solemn^ Oath to perform them; all the Lords and Bishops
taking then the like Oath, to hold and maintain these Articles inviolably; and
further they m^de all that would abide in the Kingdom, to swear also to them;
the Archbishops and Bishops solemly accursing all such as should Rebel
against them. Which Articles the King and his Son laboring by force of Arms to
annull, they were notwithstanding enforced to confirm them in 3. or 4
subsequent Parliaments. By virtue of these Articles enacted thus in Parliament,
those Lords not only removed old Sherifes of Counties appointed by the King,
and put in new of their own choosing; but likewise displaced Philip Lovell the
Kings Treasurer, with diverse Officers of the Exchequer, and sundry of the Kings
meniall servants, setting others whom they liked in their places; and made Hugh
Bygod, Lord Chief Justice, who executed that Office valiantly and justly,
nullatenus p^rmittens jus Regni vacillare; creating likewise a new Chancellor
and removing the old.

After this in a Parliament at London, Anno 1260. they consulted about the
electing of new Justices, and of the Chancellor and Treasurer of England for
the following year, (these places being made annull by the former Parliament:)
in pursuance whereof, Hugh Bigod his year expiring, Hugh Spenser was by the
Lords and Parliament appointed to be his successor, and made Lord Chief
Justice, and likewise Keeper of the Tower of London, by the consent of the King
and Barons; and by authority of this Parliament, the Abbot of Burgh, succeeded
John de Crakedale in the Treasurership, and the Great Seal of England was by
them committed to the custody of See Francis Thin his Catalogue of Chancellors
of England Holinshed. vol. 3. Col 1276 Daniels History, p. 139, 195.
Richard then Bishop of Ely. The very next year 1261. the Barons, with the
consent of the selected Peers, discharged Hugh Spenser of his chief
Iusticeship, when his year was expired, and substituted Sir Philip Basset in
his room; In which year the King appointed Justices of Air through England,
without the Lords, contrary to the Provisions of the Parliament at Oxford: they
coming to Hereford to keep a Sessions there, and summoning the County to
appear before them on Hockeday; diverse chief men of those parts, who sided
with the Barons assembled together, and strictly commanded those Judges not to
presume to si^, against the Ordinances of Oxford, neither would any other of
the people answer them in any thing: whereupon acquainting the King with this
opposition, they departed thence without doing ought: and the King making this
year new Sherifes in every Couunty, displacing those the Barons had made; the
inhabitants of each County hereupon marfully repulsed them, and would not obey,
nor regard, nor answer them in any thing; whereat the King was much vezed in
mind: and upon a seeming show of reconciliation to the Barons, going to Dover
and Rochester Castles (committed to the Barons custody for the Kingdoms
safety) they permitted him to enter peaceably into them without any resistance:
Upon which, minding to break his former oaths for the keeping of the Oxford
Articles, he first seiseth upon these and other Castles, and then coming to
Winchester Castle where he had free entrance permitted him by the Barons (who
suspected no ill dealing, he took it into his own custody; whether he called
to him the Chief Justice and Chancellor, not long before made that year, by
the Barons; commanding them to deliver up the Seal and Justices Roles unto
him; who answered, that they could by no means do it, without the Barons
consent and pleasure concurring with the Kings, with which answer the King
being moved, presently without consulting with the Baronage, made Walter Merton
Chancellor, and the Lord Philip Basset Chief Justice to him and the Kingdom;
removing those the Barons had appointed from those and other places. Which the
Barons hearing of, considering that this was contrary to them and their
provisions, and fearing least if the King should thus presume, he would utterly
subvert the Statutes of Oxford, thereupon they poasted to the King, guarded
with Arms and power, and charged him with the breach of his Oath; forcing him
at last to come to an agreement with them; which the King soon violating; the
Barons and he raised great Forces, met and fought a bloody battle at Jews in
Sussex; where after the loss of 20000. men, the King and his Son Prince
Edward, with sundry Lords of his party were taken and brought Prisoners to
London: where all the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, meeting in Parliament (
Anno 1265 as Matthew Westminster computes it) made new Ordinances for the
Government of the Realm; appointing among other things, that two Earls, and
one Bishop elected by the Commons should choose 9. other Persons, of which three
should still assist the King; and by the Counsel of those three and the other
nine, all things should be ordered, as well in the Kings House as in the
Kingdom, and that the King should have no power at all to do any thing
without their Counsel and assent, or at least without the advice of three of
them. To which Articles the King ( by reason of menaces to him, to elect
another King) and Prince Edward (for fear of perpetual Imprisonment if they
consented not) were enforced to assent; all the Bishops, Earls and Barons
consenting to them, and setting their Seals to the Instrument wherein these
Articles were contained. After which the Earl of Leicester and his two Sons,
being three of the twelve, divided all the Kings Castles and strong holds
between them, and bestowed all the chief Offices in the Kings House, upon his
Capital enemies; which indiscreete, disloyal carriage of theirs, much
offended not only the King and Prince, but the Earl of Gloucester and other of
the Barons; so that they fell off from the Earl to the King and Prince, and in
a battle at Eusham slew the Earl, and most of his Partisans; after which
victory the King calling a Parliament at Winchester, utterly repealed and
vacated those former Ordinances: which had they only demanded the Nomination
of great Officers, Counselors and Judges to the King, and not entrenched so
far upon his Prerogative, as to wrest all his Royal power out of his hands,
not only over his Kingdom, but household too; I doubt not but they had been
willingly condiscended to by the King and Prince as reasonable, and not have
occasioned such bloody wars to repeal them by force.

In K. Edward the second his Reign, the Lords and Commons by an Ordinance of
Parliament, having banished out of Court and Kingdom Pier; Gaveston, his
vi^ious favorite, and pernicious grand Counselor) in a Exilium Hugonis De le
Spenser: Magna Charta, part. 2. f. 50. Speed, p 764, 675, 680. See Walsing Fa^*
Holinshed in Ed ^.
Parliament held at Warwick, nominated and constituted Hugh Spenser the Son,
to be the Kings Chamberlain; and in that Parliament further enacted; that
certain Prelates and other Grandees of the Realm should remain near the
King by turns, at set seasons of the Year, to counsel the King better,
without whom no great business ought to be done: challenging (writes Speed) by
sundry Ordinances mad^ by them in Parliament, not only a power to reform the
Kings House and Council, and TO PLACE AND DISPLACE ALL GREAT OFFICERS AT THEIR
PLEASVRE, but even a joint interest in the Regiment of the Kingdom. After
which the Spensers engrossing the sole Regiment of the King and Kingdom to
themselves, and excluding those Lords from the King, appointed by the
Parliament to advise him, not suffering the King so much as to speak with them
but in their presence; they were for this and other offenses banished the Land
by Act of Parliament. This King toward the end of his reign, after the
Queens arrival with her Army, obscuring himself and not appearing; by Speed,
p. 680.
advise and consent of the Lords, the Duke of Aquitaine was made High Keeper of
England, and they, as to the Custos of the same, did swear him fealty; and by
them Robert Baldocke Lord Chancellor was removed, the Bishop of Norwich made
Chancellor of the Realm, and the Bishop of Winchester Lord Treasurer, without
the Kings assent.

In the 15 Year of K. Edward the 3d. chap. 3, 4. there was this excellent Law
enacted. Because the points of the great Charter be blemished in diverse
manners, and less well holden then they ought to be, to the great peril and
slander of the King, and damage of the people; especially in as much as
Clerks, Peers of the Land, and other freemen be arrested and imprisoned, and
outed of their goods and Cattels, which were not appealed nor indighted, nor
suite of the party against them, affirmed; It is accorded and assented that
henceforth such things shall not be done. Note this. And the like Law was
enacted in 1. H. 4. Fabians. part, 7 p. 376.
And if any Minister of the Kings, or other person of what condition he be, do
or come against any part of the great Charter, or other Statutes, or the Laws
of the Land, he shall answer to the Parliament, as well as the suite of the
King, as at the suite of the party, where no remedy nor punishment was ordained
before this time, as far forth WHERE IT WAS DONE BY COMMISSION OF THE KING,
as of his own Authority; notwithstanding the Ordinance made before this time
at Northampton, which by assent of the King, the Prelates, Earls, and Barons,
and the Commonalty of the Land, in this present Parliament is repealed, and
utterly disanulled. And that the Chancellor, Treasurer, Barons and Chancellor
of the Eschequer, the Justices of the one Bench and of the other, Justices
assigned in the County, Steward and Chamberlain of the Kings house, Keeper of
the Privy Seal, Treasurer of the Wardrobe, Controuler, and they that be
chief deputed to abide nigh the Kings Son Duke of Cornwall, shall be now
sworn in this Parliament, and so from henceforth at all times that they shall
be put in Office, to keep and maintain the Privileges and Franchises of holy
Church, and the points of the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest,
and all other Statutes, without breaking any point. Item, It is assented, that
if ANY THE OFFICERS AFORESAID, or chief Clerk to the Common Bench, or the
Kings Bench, by death or other cause be out of his Office; that our Sovereign
Lord the King BY THE ACCORD OF HIS GREAT MEN which shall be found most nighest
in the County, which he shall take toward him, and by good Council which he
shall have about him, shall put another convenient into the said Office, which
shall be sworn after the form aforesaid. And that in every Parliament at the
third day of the same Parliament, the King shall take to his hands the Offices
of all the Ministers aforesaid; and so shall they abide 4 or 5 days, except
the Offices of Justices of the one place and the other, Justices assigned,
Barons of the Exchequer; so always that they and all other Ministers be put to
answer to every complaint. And if default be ^ound in any of the said Ministers
by complaint or other manner, and of that be attainted in the Parliament, he
shall be punished by judgment of his Peers out of his Office, and other
convenient set in his place. And upon the same, our said Sovereign Lord the
King shall do to be pronounced to make execution without delay, according to
the Judgment of the said Peers in the Parliament. Lo here an express Act of
Parliament See the Preamble of this Statute accordingly in the Statutes at
large.
ordained and established by King Edward the third, by assent of the Prelates,
Earls, Barons, and other great men, and of all the Commonalty of the Realm,
which this King did give and grant for him and his heirs, firmly to be kept
and holden for ever; that all great Officers, Barons, Judges and Justices of
the Kingdom, and chief attendants about the King and Prince, should not only
take the forementioned Oath, but be elected always by the accord of the great
Men, and good Council near and about the King, out of Parliament, and by the
Peers in Parliament, and the King bound to make execution according to their
Judgment. This Law (as I conceive) was never legally repealed by Parliament,
but only by this Kings See the revoc^tion the Statute the same year by
Proclamation; in the Statutes at large.
Proclamation, by the ill advice and forced consents of some few Lords and
Councillors about him; upon pretense, that he never freely assented to it, but
by dissimulation only to obtain his own ends, that Parliament, which else
would have miscarried and broken up in discontent had not this Law been
granted in manner aforesaid. Which consideration makes me confident, that the
Parliament being so eager to obtain this Law, would never so soon yield
wholly to repeal it, and so for ought I know it stands yet in force, to
justify the present Parliaments claim in this particular. In 2 E. 3. c. 8. 14
E. 3. c. 5. 18 E. 3. Stat. 3. 20 E. 3. c. 1, 2, 3. diverse notable Oaths are
prescribed to Judges, Justices and other Officers, and that they shall not
delay nor forbear to do right for the Kings great or little Seal, or any
letters from him or any other, but go forth to do the Law, notwithstanding
them: In the Year 1375. the 50 of Edward the 3d. his reign, a Walsin Hist.
Ang, p. 185, 186^ 187. Fabian, part. 7. p. 260. Graft. p 320, 321. Speed p.
72^. Hol. Ypodig-N^ust p. 1340. 135.
Parliament, (commonly called the good Parliament by our Historians) being
assembled, the King required a Subsidy by reason of his wars; to which the
Commons answered; that they could no longer bear such charges, considering the
manifold most grievous burdens they had from time to time borne before: and
that they knew full well, that the King was rich enough to defend him and his
Land, if his Land and the Treasure were well guided and governed; but it had
been long evil ruled by evil Officers, so that the Land could not be
plenteous neither with Merchandise, chaffer, nor riches. By reason whereof, and
of their importunate charges the Commonalty was generally impoverished
Moreover, the Commons complained upon diverse Officers that were the causers of
this mis-order, whereof the Lord Latimer, (then Lord Chamberlain) was
principal, and Dame Alice Piers the Kings Concubine, (who would usually in
most impudent manner come in person into all Courts of Justice, and sitting by
the Judges and Doctors, persuade or dissuade them to judge against the Law for
her own advantage, on that side for which she was engaged; to the great
scandal and dishonor of the King, both in his own and other Realms:) and
Sir Richard Scurry Knight, by whose Counsels and sinister means the King was
mis-guided, and the government of the Land disordered. Wherefore they prayed by
the mouth of their Speaker, Sir Piers de la Mare, that the said persons with
others, might be removed from the King, and others to be set in authority about
his person, as should serve for his honor and for the weal of his Realm.
Which request of the Commons: by means of the Noble Prince Edward was
accepted; so that the said persons, with the Duke of Lancaster and others, were
removed from the King; and other Lords by advise of the said Prince, and other
wise Lords of the Realm; and PER PARLIAMENTVM PRAEDICTVM writes Walsingham,
were put in their places, such as the Prince and Peers thought fittest.
Moreover in this Parliament, at the Petition of the Commons it was ordained,
That certain Bishops, Earls and other Lords should from thence forth govern
both the King and Kingdom ( the King being then in his dotage unable to govern
himself or the Kingdom) because the king was grown old and wanted such
Governors. This passage is thus expressed in the Parliament Roll of 50. E. 3.
numb. 10. Also the Commons considering the mischiefs of the Land, showed to
the King and Lords of the Parliament; that it shall be for the honor of the
King and profit of all the Realm, which is now grieved in diverse manners by
many adversities, as well by the wars of France, Spain, Ireland, Guyon and
Bretaigne, and elsewhere, as likewise by the Officers who have been accustomed
to be about the King, who are not sufficient at all without other assistance
for so great a government; wherefore they pray that the Council of our Lord
the King, be enforced (or made up) of the Lords of the Land, Prelates and
others to the number of 10. or 12. (which the King shall please) to remain
continually with the King, in such manner that no great business shall pass
or be there decreed without all their assents and advice; and that other lesser
businesses shall be ordered by the assent of 6, or 4. of them at least,
according as the case shall require; so that at least 6. or 4. of such
Counselors shall be continually resident to council the King. And our Lord
the King, consid^ring the said request to be honorable and very profitable to
him, and to all his Realm, has thereto assented: provided always that the
Chancellor, Treasurer, or Keeper of the Privy seal, and all other Officers of
the King, may execute and dispatch the businesses belonging to their Offices,
without the presence of the said Councillors, the which the King has
assigned, etc. But this Ordinance lasted scarce three months, for after the
Commons had granted a Subsidy of four pence the pole, of all above fourteen
years old, except Beggars: Prince Edward dying, and the Parliament
determining, these removed ill-officers got into the Court, and their offices
again; and by the instance and power of Alice Piers, the Speaker, De la Mare
was adjudged to perpetual prison in Nottingham Castle, (an Act without example
in former times, and which did no good in this) where he remained prisoner two
years space, though his friends very often petitioned for his liberty: and
Walsing Hist. Angl an 1277. p. ^87 Fran. Thin his Catalogue of Protectoues.
Holi^sh vol. 3. Col 1076, 1077 Walsin. Ypodigma Neust. p 1^4, 135, ^, 6 Dan
Hist p. 257, 258, 259.
John a Gaunt Duke of Lancaster ( made Regent of the Realm, because of the
Kings irrecoverable infirmity) summoning a Parliament the year following,
repealed the Statutes made in this good Parliament, to the Subjects great
discontent, who were earnest suitors to the Duke for De la Mare his enlargement
and legal trial; which being denied, the Londoners upon this and other
discontents took arms, assaulted the Duke, spoiled his house at the Savoy,
and hung up his arms reversed, in sign of Treason in all the chief streets
of London. But in the first year of Richard the second, in a Walsin Hist. Ang
an 1. R 2. p 198, 199. Speed. p. 728.
Parliament at London, Peter De la Mare and almost all the Knights (which played
their parts so well in the good Parliament for the increase of their Country,
and benefit of the Realm) resuming their Petitions, caused Alice Piers ( who
contemning the Act of Parliament, and the oaths wherewith she had bound her
self, presumed to enter the Kings Court, to persuade and impetrate from him
whatsoever she pleased) to be banished, and all her movables and immovables to
be confiscated to the King, notwithstanding she had corrupted with money, diverse
of the Lords and Lawyers of England, to speak not only privately, but publicly
in her behalf.

Wa^sing. Hist Angl p 196, 197.
In the 1. year of Richard the 2d, William Courtney Bishop of London* Edmond
Mortymer Earl of March, and many others of whom the Common People had the best
opinion, being good, wise, and famous men, were by public consent appointed
Councillors and Regents to the King, being but young: and this year Henry
Piercie Earl of Northumberland resigning his Marshalls rod, John de Arundel,
was made Marshall in his place. In the Walsin. Hist. A^gl. p. 143. Fran. Thin
his Cat. of Protectors. Holinsh. vol. 3. Col. 1077.
third year of Richard the second in a Parliament at London the Commons
petitioned, that one of the Barons, who knew how to answer Forraigners wisely,
and might be mature in manners, potent in works, tractable and discreet, to
be the kings protector. Electus est Ergo, COMMVNI SENTENTIA, etc. Hereupon
Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, WAS ELECTED BY COMMON CONSENT IN
PARLIAMENT, Lord Protector, that he migh con^inually abide with the King, and
recei^e an honorab^e anuall stipend out of the Kings Exchequer for his pains:
and those Bishops, Earls, Barons, and Judges assigned to be the Kings Counsel
and Gardians the year before, were upon the Commons petition this Parliament
removed, because they spent much of the Kings Treasure, and nullum, a^t modicum
fructum protulerunt. In this Parliament Sir Richard Scrope, resigned his Office
of Lord Chancellor, and Simon de Sudbu^y, Archbishop of Canterbury (contrary
to his degree and dignity, as many then cried out) was substituted in his
place. In a Parliament at London in the fifth year of King Richard the second,
Sir Richard Sc^ope was again made Walsing: Hist. Angl. p. 243. Fra. Thin his
Catal. of Chauncellours. Holinsh. vol. 3. Col. 1282.
Chancellor, PETENTIBVS HOC MAGNATIBVS ET COMMVNIBVS, at the REQVEST OF THE
LORDS AND COMMONS, as being a man who for his eminent knowledge and inflexible
justice, had not his peer in England, and Hugh Segrave Knight, was then
likewise made lord Treasurer. Wall. Hist. (...). 300. Holinsh. vol. 3. Col. 1282.
Sed quid juvant (...) Parliamentorum, etc. (writes Walsi^gham of the Acts of
this Parliament, and Hist. 737.
Speed out of him.) But to what purpose are Acts of Parliament, when after they
are past, they take no manner of effect, for the king with his Privy Counsel
was wont to change and abolish all things, which by the Commons and Nobility
had been agreed upon in former Parliaments? For the very next Note this.
year the king deposed Scrope from his Chauncellourship, and took the Seal
into his own hands, ^^aling diverse Grants, and Writings with it as he pleased,
and at last delivered the S^ale to Richard Braybrooke, which Walsingha^ thus
relates. Hist. Ang. p. 311. 312. Speed, 737.
Lord Richard Scrope Knight, qui PER REGNI COMMVNIT ATEM, ET ASSENSVM DOMINORVM
ELECTVM IN REGNI CANCELLARIVM, was in those days put from his Office of
Chancellor, which he had laudably, and prudently administered. The cause of his
removal was, his peremptory resistance of the Kings Will, who desired to
impoverish himself, to exalt strangers. For certain Knights and Esquires of
inferior rank, being the kings servants, begged of the king certain lands,
and the demeasnes of such as dyed, during such time as by the custom of the
Kingdom, they ought to remain in the Kings hands. The King being a child,
without delay granted their requests, and sending them to the Chancellor,
commanded him to grant them such Charters under the great S^ale, as they
desired: But the Chauncellor, who ardently desired the benefit of the Realm,
and the Kings profit, plainly denied their requests; alleging that King was
much endebted, and that he had need retain such casualties to himself to
help discharge his debts. That those who knew in what debts the king was
obliged, were not faithful to the King, whiles they minded more their own
avarice than the kings profit, preferring their private gain before the
public necessities. Wherefore they should desist from such requests, and be
content with the Kings former gifts, which were sufficient for them. And that
they should know for certain, that he would neither make nor seal any such
Charters of ^^nfirmation to them, of such donations of the king, who was not
yet of full age, (...) he should herea^^^r receive ill thanks from him.
Whereupon these Petitioners returning from the Chancellor, inform the king;
that the Chauncellors mind was obstinate, and that he would do nothing at his
Command, but rather contemn his Royal m^ndate; that the King ought with due
severity, speedily to curb such an unbrideled disobedience, or else it would
quickly come to pass, that the kings honor would grow contemptible among his
Subjects, and his command be of no value. The King therefore who understood as
a child, more regarding the false machinations of detractors, then the
faithful allegations of his Chancellor, in a spirit of fury sends some to
demand his seal of him, and to bring it to himself. And when the king had
sent again and again by solemn messengers, that he should send the seal to
him; the Chancellor answered thus; I am ready to resign the Seal, not to
you, but to him who gave it me to keep, neither shall there be a middle bearer
between me and him, but I will restore it to his hands, who committed it to
mine own hands not to others. And so going to the king; Here delivered the
seal, promising that he would (as he had hitherto) be faithful to the king;
yet denied that he would hereafter be an Officer under him. And then the king
receiving the Seal did for many days what he listed, unt^ll Master Robert
Braibrooke Bishop of London had undertaken the Office of Chancellor. When not
only the Nobility of the kingdom, but the Commonalty likewise heard, that the
king contrary to the Custom of the Kingdom had captiously deposed the
Chancellor, whom All the Nobility of the Kingdom with the suffrage of all
the Commons had chosen, they were exceedingly moved with indignation. Yet no
man durst speak openly of the matter, by reason of the malice of those about
the king, and the irrational youth of the king himself: and so the benefits
of the king and kingdom were trodden under foot by the countenance of the
kings indiscretion, and the malice of those inhabiting with him. In the ninth
Walsi. Hist. Epi. 348. 349. 351 352. 353.
year of king Rich^rd the second Michael d^ la P^le Earl of Suffolk for
gross abuses, bribery, and Treason, was put from his Chauncellourship, fined
20000. marks to the king and condemned to dye: Haec autem omn^a quanquam sum
regi placuisse d^buerant maxim displicebant, adeo fideb^t infideli, adeo
coiuit nebulonem. Insomuch that the King and his familiars plotted to murder
the Knights of the Parliament who most opposed the subsidy he demanded, and
the said Michael, together with the Duke of Gloucester at a supper in London to
which they should be invited, thinking by this means to obtain their wills:
But the Duke and they having timely notice thereof, and Richard Exton then
Major of London, freely telling the king when he was called to assent to this
villainy, that he would never give his consent to the death of such innocents
(though Sir Nicholas Bramber Major the year before had thereto assented) this
wickedness was p^ev^nted: and being made public to all the inhabitants in
the City and parts adjoining; from thenceforth the hatred of such counselors,
and love of the Duke and fores^yd knights increased among all men. And the Duke
and Knights with greater constancy and courage opposed De la Pole; and
Walsigham. Hist* p. 354.
after many delays, the king full ^ore against his will, WAS COMPELLED to give
a commission of Oye^ and terminer to the Duke of Glocest^r, and ^i^hard Earl
of Arundell, to hear and determine the businesses and complaints against De la
Pole, and all others which the Knights of the Parliament had accused, who gave
judgment of death against them; and Thomas Arundell Bishop of Ely, was m^de
Chancellor by the Parliament, in De la Poles place, and the Bishop of Durham
removed from his Lord Treasurership, with which he was much enamoted, (taking
much p^ines and being at great cost to procure it) and (...) Gilbert Bishop of
Herefo^d (qui plus li^ gua quam fide vigebat) was su^roga^ed in (...) But this
Parliament ending, the king immediately received De la Pole, (whom Hist. A^gl.
p. 372.
Walsingham styles, P^rfidiae promptuarium, senti^a avaritiae, aur^ga
proditionis, archa malitiae, odii seminator, mendacii fabric tor, susurro
nequiss^mus, dolo p^aestantiss mus, artificiosus detractor, pat^iae del^to^,
consiliarius nequam, merito perfi us, euomens spiritum in terra p^regrina)
together with the Duke of Ireland, and Alexander N^vell Archbishop of York,
into his Court and favor, who labored night and day to incense the King
against the Lords, and to annull the Acts of this Parliament; by which means
the Kings hatred toward his Nobles and natural faithful people increased
every day more and more; these ill Counselors whispering unto him, that he
should not be a king in effect, but only, in sh^dow, and that he should enjoy
nothing of his own, if the Lords should keep t^eir received power. The King
therefore believing them, from thenceforth suspected all the Nobles, and
suffered these ill Counselors and their confederates to w^st his revenues and
oppress^ his people. Whereupon the 10 R. 2 c. 1. 11. R. 2. c. 1. 2. 3. 21. R.
2. c. 12. 1 H^c 2. 3. 4. ^ee Wall. Fab. Holinsh. Graft. Speed, Trussell, in 10.
and 11. R. 2.
next year following, a Parliament being summoned, the Lords and Commons by
reason of great and horrible mischeifes, and perils which had happened to the
King and the Realm aforetime, by reason of evil Counselors and governance
about the Kings person by the foresaid Archbishop of York, Robert de Vere Duke
of Ireland, De la Pole, Robert Trisil^an Lord Chief Justice of England, Sir
Nicholas Brambre and other their adherents, who wasted demished and destroyed
the goods, treasure and substance of the Crown, oppres^sed the people daily
with importable charges, neglecting the execution of the good Laws and
Customs of the Realm, so that no full right nor justice was done, etc.
whereby the king and all his Realm were very nigh to have been wholly undone
and destroyed; for these causes, and the eschewing of such like perils and
mischeiefes to the King and Realm for time to come, displaced and removed
these ill Counselors; and at their request, a new Chauncellor, Treasurer, and
Privy seal were ordained in Parliament, even such as were held good,
sufficient and lawful to the honor and profit of the King and his Rea^me. And
by advise and assent o^ the Lords and Commons in Parliament in aid of good
governance of the Realm, for the due executi us of good Laws, and the relief
of the Kings and his peoples ^tates in time to come, a special C^mmission
under the great Seal of England (confirm^d by the Statute of 10. R. 2. c. 1.)
was granted to both Archbishops, the Dukes of York and Gloucester (the Kings
Vncl^s) the Bishops of Worcester and Exetor, the Abbot of Waltham, the Earl of
Arundle, the Lord Cobham, and others, to be of the Kings GREAT and CONTINVALL
COUNCIL for one year then next following; to survey and examine with his said
Chauncellor, Treasur^r, and Keeper ^f the Privy ^^ale, as well the estate and
government of his house, as of all his Courts and places, as of all his Realm,
and of all his Officers and Ministers of whatsoever estate as well within the
house as without to inquire and take information, of all rents, revenues,
profits due to him in any man^er within the Realm or without, and of all
manner of gifts, gran^s aliena^ions or confirmations made by him of any Land,
Tenements, Rents, Anuities Profi^s, Revenues, Wards, Marriages, (and infinite
other particulars specified in the 10 R. 2. c. 1.
Act) and of all kind of oppressions, offenses and damages whatsoev^r done to
the King or his people; and them finally to hear and determine. And that no
man should council the king to repeal this Commission (though it took no
effect) under pain of forfaiting all his goods and imprisonment during the
kings pleasure.

No sooner was this Parliament dissolved, but this unhappie seduced King, by
the instigation and advise of his former ill Counselors; endeavors to
nullify this Commission as derogatory to his royal power, and sending for his
Judges and Council at Law to Not^ingham Castle, caused them to sub^cribe to
sundry Articles tending to the Total subversion of Parliaments; causing the
Duke of Gloc^ster and other Lords who procured this Commission to be indighted
of high Treason, to which Inditements the Judges being overawed with fear,
See Walsin. Fab. Speed, Graft. Holin. Stow, John Truss^^, and Sr R. Baker, in
10. 11. 12. and 13. of R. 2.
set their hands and seals; for which illegal proceedings destructive to
Parliaments, by 11. R. 2. c. 1 to 7. these ill pernicious Councillors and
Judges were attainted and condemned of High Treason, put from their Offices,
their Lands confiscated, many of them executed, the residue banished, and above
20. other Knights, Gentlemen, and Clergy men who mis-councelled the King,
imprisoned, condemned and banished the Court, as the Statutes at large in 11.
and 21. R. 2. and our Historian^ in those years more copiously manifest.

In 12. R. 2. c. 2. There was this notable Law enacted (which Institutes on
^it. f. 234.
Sir Edward Cook affirms, is worthy to be writ in Letters of gold, and
worthier to be put in due execution. For the Universal wealth of all the
Realm, it is enacted; that the Chauncellor, Treasurer, Keeper of the Privy
Seal, Steward of the Kings house, the Kings Chamberlain, Clarke of the Rolls,
the Justices of the one Bench and other, Barons of the Exchequor, and all other
that shall be called to ordain, name, or make Justices of peace (which whether
the Lord Keeper alone can make or unmake without consent of all these, or put
out of Commission without just cause and conviction, now commonly practiced; is
a considerable Question upon this and other statutes:) Sheriffs, Escheators,
Customers, Controllers, OR ANY OTHER OFFICER or Minister of the King, shall be
firmly sworn, that they shall not ordain, name or make Justices of peace,
Sheriff, Escheator, Customer, Controller or other Officer or Minister of the
King, for any gift or brocage, favor or affection; nor that none which
pu^sueth by him, or by other privily or apertly to be in any manner Office,
shall be put in the same Office, or in any other. But that they make ALL SVCH
OFFICERS and Ministers OF THE BEST and MOST LAWFVLL MEN and SVFFICIENT to their
estimation and knowledge. Which most excellent Law (with See 1 E 3. c. 7. 8.
34. E 3. c. 1. 38. E. 3. Stat. 2 c. 4. 4. H. 4 c. 18. 2. H. 5. stat. 2. c. 1.
8. R, 2. c. 3.
others of like nature) still in force, were it duly executed, there would not
be so many corrupt Officers of all these sorts in the kingdom, as now swarm
in every place. From which Act I shall only make these 2. Inferences. First,
that if so great a care ought to be had in the choice of these Underofficers;
then certainly far more of the grand Officers and Judges of the kingdom.
Secondly, that if it be no disparagement to the Kings honor, or prerogative
for these great Officers of the Realm to ordain, name, and make Justices of
peace, Sheriffs, and other under Officers of the King, without the kings
privitie, as often times they do; then by the same or greater reason, it can be
no diminotion of his honor or prerogative Royal, for the Parliament, (which
is best able to judge of men's abilities and honesties) to have power only to
nominate or recommend to the King, such as they know to be the best, most
lawful and sufficient men, for the highest state Offices and places of
Judicature, when they becomevoyd.

Not to trouble you with any more Presidents in this Kings Reign, recorded in
Story; I shall close them up with one or two more upon record. In the
Parliament of 3. R. 2. 3 R. 2. Rot. Pa^l. number. 11.
The C^ancellor having declared the causes of Summons, and among others, the
great st^aights the King was in for want of money; so that he had at that time
nothing in his Treasury, but was grea^ly endebted etc. He p^ayed the Parliament
^o advise, how, and after what manner he might be relieved, not only for his
own safety, but for the safety of them all, and of the R^alme. To which the
Commons after they were advised of the^r said Charge returned this Answer to
the King in Parliament by their* Speaker, in name of the whole Commons. That
the said Commons are of opinion, that if their Liege Sovereign had been well
and (...) governed in his Expenses, spent (...) the Realm and elsewhere, he
now had had no need of their aid, by charging the (...), whom they imagined to
be now more poor and indigent, then ever they were before* Wherefore they
pray, That the Prelates, and other Lords of the Kings continual Council, who
have a long time traveled in the said affairs, BE UTTERLY DISCHARGED, to
their great ease, and in disc^arge of the King from their custodies; and that
No such Counselors should be retained about ^he King, in rega^d that our Lord
the King is now of good discretion, and ^f a goodly Stature, having respect to
his Age, which is now near the age of his noble Grandfather, at the time of
his Coronation; who had no other Counselors at the beginning of his reign,
but ONLY the Five accustomed Principal Officers of HIS REALM. They further
pray, that In this Parliament these Five Principal Officers may be Elected
and Chosen out of the most Sufficient Men within the Realm, who may be
tractable, and who may best know, and execute their Offices; that is to say,
The Chancellor, Treasurer, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Chief Chamberlain, and
Steward of the Kings House; and that these so chosen, (of whose Names and
persons the Commons will be asc^rtained this Parliament) for their greater
comfort and aid to execute the business of the King, shall have it therein
declared, that they Shall not be Removed before the next Parliament, unl^sse it
be by reason of Death, Sickness, or other necessary cause. And they likewise
pray for remedy of default ^f the sa^d Government, if there be any on that
party, that a sufficient and general Commission may be made, the best that may
be devised, to certain Prelates, Lords, and others, of the most sufficient,
lawful, and wise men of the Realm, of England, diligently to Survey and
examine in all the Courts and places of the King, as well within his own house
as elsewhere, the estate of the said House, and al expenses and receipts
whatsoever made by any of the Ministers, or any Officers of the Realm, and of
other his Seignori^s and Lands, as well on this side, as ^eyond the S^ as, from
the Kings Coron^tion till this pr^s^nt; so that if there be a^y default be
found by the said Examination in any m^nner, by negligence of Officers, or
oth^rwise; ^he said Commissioners shall certify them to our L^r^ the King, to
have them amended and corrected, to the end^ that our Lo^d the King may be
honorably governed within his Realm, as b^longe^h to a King to be governed,
and may be able with his own r^veneues to support the charge of his Expenses,
and to defend the Realm on every part, and defray the other charges above
named. Which Petition and Commission the King accordingly granted.

In the Parliament of 13. R 2. An. 1389. Rot. Parl. 13. R. 2. number. 9 number. 21.
Mr. Seldons Titles of Honor, p. 503. 504. Walsing. Hist. Angl. 13. R. 2.
John Duke of Lancaster, By ASSENT of all the Estates of Parliament, was
created Duke of Aquitaine, for his life, by King Richard his Nephew; the words
of whose Patent (Printed at large in Master Seldens Titles of Honor) run
thus. De ASSENSU Praelatorum, Ducum Mag^^tum and alio^um Pro^erum, and
Communitatis Regni nostri Angliae, in instanti Parliamento nostro apud West
monasterium conv^cato existentiu^; te^ praedelectissimum Patrium no strumin
DVCEM AQVITANIAE, cum Titu^o, Stilo, ac nomin^ and honor eidem debitis
praefi^im^^, ac inde praesentiali er per ^ppositio (...) Cappae (...) capi^i,
ac traditionem Virgae aureae i^vestimus, etc. toto tempo^e vi^ae tuae
possid^ndum etc. Giving him power thereby, To Coin what Gold and Silver Money
he pleased, Nobili a^d^ ^tiam personas ignobiles, Senescallos, Iudices,
Capita^cos, Consules, (...), Proc^ratores, Recep^ores, and quoscunque
Officiarios, alios creandi, (...) and ponendi, in singulis locis Ducatus
praedicti, and quand^ opus erit, inflitutos and (...) Officiarios autedictos
amovendi, and loco amotorum alios subrogandi, etc. Here ^ (...) the Title,
ho^^ur of a Duke, and Dukedom in France, given by the (...) of England, as
King of France, by assent and authority of a Parliament in (...) Captains, and
all other Officers, within that Dukedom.

In the Parliament Rolls of 1. H. 4. number. 106. The Commons Petitioned the King,
that for the safety of himself, as likewise for the safety of all his Realm^,
and of his Lieges, BY ADVISE OF HIS SAGE COUNCIL, h^e would ordain SVRE (or
trusty) and SVFFICIENT CAPTAINS and GARDIANS OF HIS CASTLES and FORTRESSES as
well in England as in Wales, to prevent all perils. ( The very Petition in
effect that this Parliament tendered to his Majesty touching the Militia,) To
which the King readily gave this answer, Le Roy le voet. The King wills it.

In the same Roll. Number. 97. The Commons likewise petitioned; That the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal shall not be received in time to come, for to excuse
them; to say; That they durst not to do, nor speak the Law, nor what they
thought for DOUBT of death, or that they are not free of themselves, because
they are more bound under PAIN OF TREASON to keep their Oath, then to fear
death or any fo^feiture. To which the King gave this answer. The King holds all
his Lords and Justices for good, sufficient and loyal; and that they will not
give him other Counsel or Advise, but such as shall be Honest, Just, and
Profitable for him, and the Realm. And if any will complain of them in
special, for the time to come, of the contrary; the King will reform and
amend it. Whereupon we find they did afterward complain accordingly, and got
new Privy Counselors, chosen and approved in Parliament, in the 11th Year of
this Kings Reign, as we shall see anon.

And in the same Parliament, Number. 108. I find this memorable Record to prove
the King inferior to, and not above his Laws to alter or infringe them. Item,
Whereas at the request of Richard, la^e King of England, in a Parliament held
at Winchester, the Commons of the said Parliam^nt granted to him, that he
should be in as good liberty, as his Progenitors before him were; by which
grant the said King would say; that he might turn (or change) the Laws at his
pleasure, and caused them to be changed AGAINST HIS OATH; as is openly known in
diverse cases: And now in this present Parliament, the Commons thereof of their
good assent and free will, confid^ng in the Nobility, high discretion, and
gracious government of the King our Lord, have granted to him, That they will
He should be in as great Royal Liberty as his noble Progenitors were before
him; Whereupon our said Lord, of his Royal grace, AND TENDER CONSCIENCE, has
granted in full Parliament; That it is not at all his intent nor will, to
change the Laws, Statutes, nor good usag^s, nor to to take other advantage by
the said grant; but for to keep the Ancient Laws and Statutes ordained and
used in the time of his Noble Progenitors, AND TO DO RIGHT TO ALL PEOPLE IN
MERCY AND TRVTH, Not^.
ACCORDING TO HIS OATH: which he thus ratified with his Royal assent. Le Roy
le voet. By which Record it is evident: First, that the Kings Royal Authority,
and Prerogative is derived to him, and may be enlarged or abridged by the
Commons, and Houses of Parliament, as they see just cause. Secondly, that King
Richard the second, and Henry the fourth, took and received the free use and
Liberty of their Prerogatives, from the grant of the Commons in Parliament;
and that they were very subject to abuse this free grant of their Subjects to
their oppression and prejudice. Thirdly, That the King by his Prerogative when
it is most free by his Subjects grant in Parliament; has yet no right nor
power by virtue thereof to change or alter any Law or Statute; or to do any
thing at all against Law, or the Subjects Rights and Privileges, enjoyed in
the Raign^^ of ancient Kings: Therefore no power at all to deprive the
Parliament it self, of this their ancient undubitable oft-enjoyed Right and
Privilege, to elect Lord Chancellors, Treasurers, Privy Seals, Chief
Justices, Privy Counselors, Lord Lieutenants of Counties, Captains of
Castles and Fortresses, Sheriffs, and other public Officers, when they see
just cause to make use of this their right and interest for their own and the
Kingdoms safety, as now they do; and have as much reason to do, as any their
Predecessors had in any age, When they behold so many Papists, Malignants up in
Arms, both in England and Ireland, to ruin Parliaments, Religion, Laws,
Liberties, and make both them and their Posterities mere slaves and vassalls
to Foreign and Domesticke Enemies.

In the 11. year of King Henry the 4th. Rot. Parl. num^. 14. Art c. 1. The
Commons in Parliament petitioned this King: First, That it would please the
King to ordain and assign in this Parliament, the most valiant, sage, and
discretest Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of His Realm, TO BE OF HIS
COUNCIL, in aid and supportation of the Good and substantial Government, and
for the weal of the King, and of the Realm; and the said Lords of the
Counsel, and the Justices of the King should be openly sworn in that present
Parliament, to acquit themselves well and loyally in their counsels and
actions, for the weal of the King, and of the Realm in all points, without
doing favor to any manner of person for affection or affinity. And that it
would please our Lord the King in presence of all the Estates in Parliament, to
command the said Lords and Justices upon the Faith and Allegiance they owe unto
him, to do full Justice and equal right to every one without delay, as well
as they may, without (or notwithstanding) any command, or charge of any person
to the contrary. To which the King gave this answer, Le Roy le Voet 11. Hen.
4^. Rot Parl Nu. 39.
After which the second day of May, the Commons came before the King and Lords
in Parliament, and there prayed, to have connusance of the names of the Lords
which shall be of the Kings continual Counsel, to execute the good
Constitutions and Ordinances made that Parliament. To which the King answered,
that some of the Lords he had chosen and nominated to be of his said Counsel
had excused themselves, for diverse reasonable causes, for which he held them
well excused; and as to the other Lords, whom he had ordained to be of his
said Counsel; Their Names were these: Mounsier the Prince, the Bishop of
W^nchester, the Bishop of Duresme, the Bishop of Bath, the Earl of Arund^^,
the Earl of Westmerland, and the Lord Burnell. And here upon the Prince in his
own name, and of the other forementioned Lords, prayed to be excused, in case
they could not find sufficient to support their necessary charges; And that
notwithstanstanding any charge by them accepted in this Parliament, that they
may be discharged in the end of the Parliament, in case nothing shall be
granted to support their foresaid charges. And because the said Prince should
not be sworn, by reason of the highness and excellency of his Honorable
Person, the other Lords and Officers were sworn, and swore upon the condition
aforesaid, to go^erne and acquit themselves in their counsel well and
faithfully, according to the tenor of the first Article delivered among others
by the said Commons; and likewise the Justices of the one Bench and other, were
sworn, and took an Oath to keep the Laws, and do Justice and equal right,
according to the purport of the said first Article. Ibid. num^. ^. 44.
And on the 9. of May, being the last day of the Parliament; The Commons came
before the King and the Lords, and then the Spea^er, in the name of the said
commons, prayed the King, to have full conusance of the names of the Lords of
his Counsel; and because the Lords who were named before to be of the said
Counsel had taken their Oaths upon certain conditions as aforesaid, that the
same Lords of the Counsel should now be newly charged and sworn without
condition. And hereupon the Prince prayed the King, as well for himself, as for
the other Lords of the Counsel; that forasmuch as the Bishop of Durham, and
Earl of Westmorland, who are ordained to be of the same Counsel, cannot
continually attent therein, as well for diverse causes as are very likely to
happen in the Marches of Scotland, as for the enforcement of the said Marches,
that it would please the King to design other Lords to be of the same
Counsel, with the Lords before assigned. And hereupon the King IN FVLL
PARLIAMENT assigned the Bishop of Saint David's, and the Earl of Warwick to be
of his said Counsel, with the other forenamed Lords, and that they should be
charged in like manner as the other Lords without any condition.

A notable President; where all the Kings Privy Counsel are nominated and
elected by him in full Parliament; and their names particularly declared to the
Commons before they are sworn, to the end that they might except against them,
if there were just cause; who in their Petition and Articles to the King,
express in general, what persons the King should make choice of for his
Counselors, and Judges, and what Oaths they should take in Parliament before
they were admitted to their places. Which was as much or more, as this
Parliament ever desired, and the King may now with as much Honor and Justice
grant, without any diminution of his Prerogative, as this Magnanimous,
Victorious King Henry did then, without the least denial or delay. In the fi^t
Halls Chron. 5. H. 5. fol. 55. Graft. p. 464. Thin, and Hollinsh. vol. 3. Col.
1078.
Year of King Henry the fifth, This King undertaking a war with France, by
Advise and consent of his Parliament; as honorable to the King, and profitable
to the Kingdom; to^which war they liberally contributed: John Duke of Bedford
was in and by that Parliament made GOVERNOR AND REGENT OF THE REALM, AND HEAD
OF THE COMMONWEALTH; Which Office he should enjoy as long as the King was
making War on the French Nation; the Summons of which Parliament issued out
by this Duke in the Kings Name. See H. 1. c. 1.

In the Patent Rolls of 24. Hen. 6. 1 ^. pars mem. 16. The King grants to John
Duke of Exceter, the Office of Admiral of England, Ireland, and Aqultain,
which Grant is thus subscribed, Per breve de privato Sigillo; AVCTORITATE
PARLIAMENTI; So that he enjoyed that Office by apointment and Authority of the
Parliament; which was no set standing Office; nor place of great Honor in
former ages, when there were many Admiralls in England, designed to several
Quarters, and those for the most part annual, or but of short continuance, not
for life, as Sir Henry Spelman, shows at large in his Glossarie: Title
Admirallus, to whom I refer the Reader, and Title Heretoc^us; which Heretochs
(elected by the people) had the command of the Militia of the Realm, by Sea
and Land; and this word Heretoch in Saxon, signifying properly a General,
Captain, or Leader; as you may see there, and in Master Selden^, Titles of
Honor, Page 605. 606. And sometimes, though more rarely, an Earl, Count, or
Nobleman, Earlederman, or Prince, Hengist and Horsa being called Heretogan, in
a Saxon Annall.

In Walsingh. Hist, Ang. p. 459. Hall. Graf. ^abian Speed, ^russell. 1. H. 6.
the 1. year of King Henry 6. (being but 9. months old when the Crown
descended) the Parliament summoned by his Father Henry the 5. (as Walsingham
writes) was continued; in which By ASSENT OF ALL THE STATES, Humfry Duke of
Gloucester, WAS ELECTED AND ORDAINED DEFNDER AND PROTECTOR OF ENGLAND in the
absence of his elder Brother the Duke of Bedford; and all the Offices and
Benefices of the Realm were committed to his disposal. In this Parliament (a
strange sight never before seen in England) this infant king, sitting in his
Queen mothers lap, passed in Majestic manner to Westminster, and there took
state among all his Lords, before he could tell what English meant, to exercise
the place of Sovereign direction in open Parliament then assembled, to
establish the Crown upon him. In the Parliament Rolls of the 1. year of this
King, I find many notable passages pertinent to the present Theme, of which
(for their rarity) I shall give you the larger account. Numb. 1. There is a
Commission in this Infant Kings name directed to his Uncle Humfrey Duke of
Gloucester, to summon and hold this Parliament in the Kings name and stead, and
commanding all the Members of it, to attend the said Duke therein: Which
Commission being first read; the Archbishop of Canterbury taking this Theme;
The Princes of the People are assembled with God; declares 4. causes for which
this Parliament was principally summoned. 1. For the good governance of the
person of the most excellent Prince the King. 2. For the good conservation of
the peace, and the due execution and accomplishment of the Laws of the land.
3. For the good and safe defense of the Realm against enemies. 4. To provide
honorable and discreet persons of every estate, for the good governance of the
Realm, according to Iethro his Counsel given to Moses, etc. Which Speech
ended, Numb. 7. 8, 9, 10, 11. The receivers of all sorts of Petitions to the
Parliament are designed, and the Speaker of the House of Commons presented and
accepted. Numb. 12. The Lords and Commons authorize, consent to, and confirm
the Commission made to the Duke in the Infant Kings Name, to summon and hold
this Parliament, (so that they authorize and confirm that very power by which
they sat:) With other Commissions made under the great Seal to Justices,
Sheriffs, Escheators, and other officers, for the necessary execution of
Justice. Numb. 13. and 14. The Bishop of Durham, late Chancellor of England to
Henry the 5. deceased; and the Bishop of London Chancellor of the Duchy of
Normandy, severally show, that upon King Henry the 5. his decease they
delivered up their several Seals, after their homage and fealty first made,
to King Henry 6. in the presence of diverse honorable persons, (whom they name
particularly) desiring the Lords to attest their surrender of the said Seals
at the time and place specified, which they did; and thereupon they pray, that
a special act and entry thereof may be made in the Parliament Rolls for their
indemnity; which is granted and entered accordingly.

Numb. 15. It was enacted and provided by the said Lord Commissioner, Lords and
Commons; that in as much as the Inheritance of the Kingdoms and crowns of
France, England, and Ireland, were now lawfully descended to the King, which
title was not expressed in the Inscriptions of the Kings Seals, whereby great
peril might accrue to the King, if the said inscriptions were not reformed
according to his Title of Inheritance, that therefore in all the Kings Seals,
as well in England as in Ireland, Guyen, and Wales, this new style should be
engraven, Henricus Dei Gratia, Rex Franciae and Angliae, and Dominus Hiberniae,
according to the effect of his inheritances; blotting out of them whatever was
before in them superfluous or contrary to the said style; and that command
should be given to all the keepers of the said Seals of the King to reform
them without delay, according to the form and effect of the new Seal
aforesaid.

Numb. 16, Duke Humfrey the Kings Commissary, and the other spiritual and
temporal Lords being sat in Parliament, certain Knights sent by the Speaker
and whole House of Commons came before them, and in the name and behalf of the
said Commonalty requested the said Duke, that by the advice of the said
Spiritual and Temporal Lords, for the good government of the Realm of
England, he would be pleased to certify the said Commons, to their greater
consolation, what persons it would please the King to cause to be ordained for
the Offices of Chancellor and Treasure of England, and Keeper of his Privy
Seal: Upon which request so made, due consideration being had, and full advise
taken; and the sufficiency of those persons considered, which deceased King
Henry the Kings Father now had in his descretion assigned to those Offices as
fitting enough: the King following his Fathers example and advise, by the
assent of the said Lord Duke his Commissary, and of all and every one of the
Lords spiritual and temporal, has nominated and ordained anew, the Reverend
Father, Thomas Bishop of Durham to the Office of his Chancellor of England,
William Kinwolma^sh Clerk to the Office of Treasurer of England, and Mr. John
Stafford to the Office of the Keeper of the Privy Seal. And hereupon the King
our Lord wills By THE ASSENT AND ADVISE aforesaid, that (...) well to the
said Chancellor of England, as to the said Treasurer of England, and to the
said Keeper of his Privy Seal for the exercise of the said Offices, several
letters patents should be made in this form: Hen^icus Dei gratia Rex Angliae
and Franciae and Dominus H^berniae, omnibus ad quos presents lite^ae
pervenerint (...). Sciatis quod De AVISAMENTO ET ASSENSV TOTIVS CONSILII NOSTRI
IN PRAESENTI PARLIAMENTO NOSTRO EXISTENTES, constituimus venerabilem patrem
Thomam Episcopum Dunelmensem, CANCELLARIVM nostrum ANGLIAE; dant^s and
concedentes DE AVISAMENTO ET ASSENSV PRAEDICTIS eidem Cancellario nostro, omnes
and omnimodas auctoritatem and potestatem adomnia ea and fingula quae ad
officium cancellarii Angliae, de jure sive consuetudine pertinent, seu quovis
tempore pertinere consueverunt, etc. The like Patents verbatim, are in the same
role (mutatis mutandis) made to the said Treasurer of England and Keeper of the
Privy Seal. After which, the said Duke, by advice and assent of the Lords
spiritual and temporal sent the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of
Winchester and Wor^ester, the Duke of Excester, the Earl of Warwick, the
Lords of Ferrers and Talbot, to the Commons, then being in the Commons House,
and notified to the Commonalty by the said Lords, these Officers to be
nominated and ordained to the foresaid offices in form aforesaid. Upon which
notice so given THE SAID COMMONS WERE WELL CONTENTED with the nomination and
ordination of the foresaid Officers so made, rendering many thanks for this
cause to our Lord the King, and all the said Lords, as was reported by the said
Lords in the behalf of the Commons in the said Parliament.

Numb. 17. The liberties, Annuities and Offices granted by King Henry the 5.
and his Ancestors to Soldiers in foreign parts, are confirmed by Parliament,
and their grants ordered to be sealed with the Kings new Seals without paying
any Fine.

Numb. 18. Henry the 5. his last Will and the legacies therein given, are
confirmed by the Kings Letters Patents, with the assent of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament.

Numb. 19. A subsidy is granted to be employed for the defense of the Realm of
England, to which end the Lord Protector promises it shall be diligently
employed.

Numb. 22. and 23. The King by assent of all the Lords spiritual. and
temporal, wills and grants, that his dear Uncle the Duke of Gloucester shall
have and enjoy the Office of the Chamberlain of England, and of the
Constableship of the Castle of Gloucester from the death of the Kings father,
so long as it shall please the King, with all the fees, profits and wages
thereunto belonging, in the same manner as they were granted to him by his
Father.

Numb. 24. The 27. day of this Parliament, the tender age of the King being
considered, that he could not personally attend in these days the defense and
protection of his Kingdom of England, and the English Church; the same King
fully confident of the circumspection and industry of his most dear Uncles,
John Duke of Bedford, and Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, By ASSENT AND ADVICE OF
THE LORDS as well Spiritual as Temporal, and LIKEWISE OF THE COMMONS in this
present parliament, has ordained and constituted his said Uncle Duke of
Bedford, now being in foreign parts PROTECTOR and DEFENDER OF HIS KINGDOM,
and of the Church of England, and PRINCIPAL COVNSELLOR of our Lord the King;
and that he shall both be and called Protector and Defendor of the Kingdom,
and the Principal Councellor of the King himself after he shall come into
England, and repair into the Kings presence; from thenceforth, as long as he
shall stay in the Kingdom; and it shall please the King. And further, our Lord
the King BY THE FORES AID ASSENT and ADVICE, has ordained and appointed in the
absence of his said Uncle the Duke of Bedford, his foresaid Uncle the Duke of
Gloucester now being in the Realm of England, PROTECTOR of his said Realm and
Church of England, and PRINCIPAL COVNSELLOR of our said Lord the King; and
that the said Duke shall be, and be called PROTECTOR and DEFENDOR OF THE SAID
REALM AND CHVRCH OF ENGLAND, and that letters patents of the Lord the King
shall be made in this form following: Henrious Dei gracia, etc. Scitatis quod
in adeotenera aetate constituti sumus, quod circa Protectionem and Defensionem
Regni nostri Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae personaliter attendere non
possumus in presenti: Nos de circumspectione and industria charissime avunculi
nostri Johannis Ducis Bedfordiae, plenam fiduciam reportantes, DE ASSENSV ET
AVISAMENTO TAM DOMINORVM QVAM DE ASSENSV COMMVNIT ATIS DICTI REGNI ANGLIAE IN
INSTANTI PARLIAMENTO existentium, ordinavimus and constituimus ipsum avuneulum
nostrum, dicti regni nostri Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae PROTECTOREM ET
DEFENSOREM, AC CONSILIARIVM NOSTRVM PRINCIPALEM; and quod ipse dicti Regni
nostri Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae Protector and Defensor, ac principalis
consiliarius noster sit, and nominetur, in and juxta vim formam and effectum
cujusdam articuli IN DICTO PARLIAMENTO die datus pr^sentium habiti ET
CONCORDATI: Proviso semper, quod praefatus Avunculus noster, nullum habeat aut
gerat vigore praesentium potestatem, nec sicut praefatur nominotur, nisi pro
tempore quo praesens hic in regno nostro Angliae fuerit, and PROVT IN PRAEDICTO
ACTO CONTINETVR. Quodque carissimus Avnculus noster Dux Glocestriae, nobis in
agendis dicti Regni negotiis post ipsum Avunculnm no strum Ducem Bedfordiae
PRINCIPALIS CONSILIARIVS EXISTAT ET NOMINETVR, quotiens and quando praefatum
Avunculum nostrum Ducem Bedfordiae infra Regnum mostrum Angliae mor
aricontingat. Confidentes insuper ad plenum de circumspectione and industria
praedicti Avunculi nostri Ducis Glocestriae DE ASSENSV ET AVISAMENTO
PRAEDICTIS, ordinavimus and constituimus ipsum Avunculum nostrum Ducem
Glocestriae, dicto Regno nostro, Angliae jam praesentem, dicti Regni nostri
Angliae and Ecclesiae, Anglicanae PROTECTOREM ET DEFENSOREM, necnon
CONSILIARIVM NOSTRVM PRICIPALEM, quociens and quando dictum avunculum nostrum
Ducem Bedfordiae, extra Regnum nostrum Angliae morari and abesse centingat. Et
quod ipse avunculus noster Dux Glocestriae Protector and Defensor Regni nostri
Angliae, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and Principalis Consiliarius noster SIT ET
NOMINETVR IVXTA VIM FORMAM and EFFECTVM ARTICVLI PRAEDICTI. Proviso semper,
quod praefatus avuneulus and Dux Glocest nullum gerat aut habeat vigore
praesentium potestatem, vel ut praefertur nominetur, nisi pro tempore quo
praesens hic in Regno nostro Angliae fuerit in absentia dicti avunculi nostri
Ducis Bedford. and prout in predictio articulo continetur. Damus autem
universis and singulis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus,
Ducibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, and omnibus aliis fidelibus nostris
dicti Regni nostri Angliae quorum interest, tenore praesentium firmiter in
mandatis, quod tam praefato avunculo nostro Duci Bedford^ quociens and quand^
protectionem and defensionem hujusmodi sic habuerit and occupaverit, quam
praefato avunculo nostro Duci Glocestriae, quociens and quando ipse consimiles
Protectionem and Defensionem habuerit and occupaverit in premissis faciendis,
pareant obediant and intendant prout decet. In cujus reitestimonium etc. which
Act and Commission thus made, and the tenor of them being recited before the
said Duke of Gloucester, and spiritual and temporal Lords; the said Duke having
deliberated thereupon, undertook, at the request of the said Lords, the burden
and exercise of his occupation, to the honor of God, and profit of the King
and Kingdom. Protesting notwithstanding, that this his assumption or consent
in this part should not any ways prejudice his foresaid Brother, but that his
said Brother at his pleasure might assume his burden of this kind, and
deliberate and advise himself.

Numb. 25. It is ordered by this Parliament, what under Offices and Benifices
the Lords Protectors should confer, and in what manner. Numb. 26. After the
Lords and Commons in Parliament had settled and ordained the Protectors in form
aforesaid, AT THE REQVEST OF THE SAID COMMONS, there were, BY ADVISE AND ASSENT
OF ALL THE LORD'S certain persons of estate, as well spiritual as temporal,
NAMED AND ELECTED TO COUNSEL AND ASSIST THE GOVERNANCE; whose names written in
a small scedule, and read openly, were these; the Duke of Gloucester, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Winchester, Norwich,
Worcester; the Duke of Excester, the Earls of March, Warwick, Marshall,
Northumberland, Westmerland; the Lord Fitzhugh, Mr. H^gh Crumbwell, Mr. Walter
Hungerford, Mr. John Tiptof^, Mr. Walter Beauchamp. Numb. 25. These persons
thus NAMED and CHOSEN COVNSELLORS and ASSISTANTS, after this nomination and
election, condiscended to take such assistance to the government in manner and
form contained in a paper scedule written in English, with their names
thereto, containing five special articles, delivered in Parliament by the said
persons chosen Counselors assistants, of which scedule this is the tenure.

The Lords abovesaid, been condiscended to take it upon them, in manner and
form that sueth: First, for as much as execution of Law and keeping of peace
start much in Justice of peace, Sheriffs and Escheators, the profits of the
King, and revenues of the Realm, been yearly increased, and augmented by
Customers, Controllers, prisers, seachers, and all such other Offices;
therefore the same Lordswoll and desires, that such Officers, and all other be
made, by advise and denomination of the said Lords, saved always and reserved
to my Lords of Bedford and of Gloucester, all that longs unto them, by a
special Act, made in Parliament; and to the Bishop of Winchester that he has
granted him by our sovereign, Lord that last was, and by authority of
Parliament confirmed.

Numb. 29. Item, that all manner Wards, Marriages, Farms, and other casualties
that longs to the Crown, when they fall, be letten, sold, and disposed by the
said Lords of the Counsel; and that indifferently at dearest, without favor,
or any manner partiality or fraud.

Numb. 30. Item, that if any thing should be enact done by Counsel, that six
o^ four at the least, without Officers, of the said Counsel be present; and
in all great matters that shall pass by Counsel, that all be present, or else
the more party. And if it be such matter as the King has be accustomed to be
counseled of, that then the said Lords proceed not therein without the advice
of my lord of Bedford, or of Gloucester.

Numb. 31. Item, for as much as the two Chamberlaines of the Exchequer be
ordained of old time to control the receipts and payments in any manner wise
maed; the Lordys desires, that the Treasurer of England being for the time,
and either of the Chamberlaines have a key of that that should come into the
recepit, and that they be sworn to fore my Lord of Gloucester, and all the
Lords of the Counsel; that for no friendship they shall make no man privy, but
the Lords of the Counsel, what the King has in his Treasorie.

Numb. 32. Item, that the Clark of the Counsel be charged and sworn to truly
enact and write daily the names of all the Loras that shall be present from
time to time, to see what, how, and by whom any thing passes.

Numb. 33. And after that all the Lords aforesaid had read before them the said
Articles in Parliament, and had well considered of them, and fully assented and
accorded to them; the scedule of paper, by certain of the Honorable Lords of
Parliament on behalf of the King and all the Lords in Parliament, was sent and
delivered to the Commons to be ascertained of their intent: whereupon after
the said Commons had advised, the said Lords repeated in the said Parliament,
that the Commons thanked all the Lords, and that THEY WERE WELL CONTENTED with
all there contained in the said scedule, WITH THIS, that to the first of the
said Articles there should be added one clause of purveiu, which the said Lords
repeated on the behalf of the said Commons, who delivered it to them in
Parliament in one parchment scedule written in French, the tenor whereof
ensues.

Provided always that the Lords, and other persons, and Officers, which have
estate, and authority, some of inheritance, some for term of life, and
otherwise, to make and institute, by virtue of their offices, deputy Officers,
and Ministers which appertain to them to make of right; and as annexed to
them, and to their offices of ancient time accustomed and used; shall not be
restrained nor prejudiced, of that which appertains to them by color of this
Ordinance or appointment. To which parchment scedule, and the contents thereof,
read before the Lords in Parliament, the said Lords well agreed and fully
consented.

Numb. 44. The Queen Mothers dower formerly agreed, appointed, and sworn to
buy all the three estates in Parliament in 9. H. 5. was now again, upon her
Petition, confirmed and settled by this Parliament, after her husbands decease.
And Numb. 41. Pet. 2. The Commons petitioned, that it might then be enacted,
that no man nor woman should thenceforth be compelled, nor bound to answer
before the Counsel or Chancery of the King, nor elsewhere, at the suit or
complaint of any person for any matter; for which remedy by way of Action was
provided by the Common law; and that no privy Seal, nor subpoena should issue
thence, before a Bill were first there exhibited, and also fully allowed by two
Judges of the one Bench and other, that the complainant for matters and
grievances in the said Bill could have no action, nor remedy at all by the
common law, etc. A good Law to prevent the Arbitrary proceedings of these
Courts, which are now too frequent in subverting of the Common law. Lo here in
this Parliament, we have a Lord Protector, Chancellor, Treasurer, Keeper of the
privy Seal, Chamberlain, Privy Counselors, Constables of Castles, and most
other Officers of the King elected by Parliament; yea, a Commission for calling
and holding this Parliament, confirmed by this Parliament when met; the Kings
own public feales altered and new made; a new style conferred on the King, a
Kings last Will, and a Queens Dower, when fallen, confirmed by the Parliament,
and the privy Council, Court of Request, and Chancery limited by it, without
any dimininution of the Kings prerogative royal: what injury or disparagement
then can it be to his Majesty's royalties, to have his great Officers,
Counselors, and Judges, thus nominated and regulated in and by Parliament at
this present? surely none at all.

In the Parliament Rolls of 4. H. 6. number. 8. I find a Commission granted to
John Earl of Bedford, under the great Seal (which was read in Parliament) to
supply the Kings place, and power in this Parliament, and to do all that the
King himself, either might or ought to do therein; because the King ( by
reason of his minority) could not there personally attend to do it. Numb. 10.
The Commons by a Petition, lamentably complained of the great discords and
divisions between certain great Lords, and privy Counselors of the
Kingdom; and more especially, between the Duke of Gloucester Lord Protector,
and the Bishop of Winchester Lord Chanceilor, by which diverse inconveniences
might happen to the Realm, if not speedily accommodated: desiring the Duke of
Bedford, and other Lords to accord them; Upon which the Lord took a solemn
Oath to reconcile them, and made an accord between them; which you may read at
large in 4. H. 6. f. 94. to 10^.
Hall, vol. 3. 4. H. 6. p. 590. to 600.
Holinshed, and Fox vol. 1. p. 920. to 925. Speed, Fabian, Grafton, Sto^^,
Trussel, in 4. H. 6.
other our Historians* and in the Parliament Rolls, Numb, 12. 13. On the 13.
day of March, Numb. 14. The Bishop of Winchester, Lord Chancellor of England,
for certain causes declared before the Lords in Parliament, instantly desired
to be discharged of his Office, which causes they considering of and allowing,
he was by the Lords discharged from his said Office: and the same day in like
manner the Bishop of Bathe, Treasurer of England, requested to be freed from
his Office, which was that day done accordingly. Numb. 14. On the eighteenth
day of March, John Bishop of Bathe and Wells, late Treasurer of England, by
virtue of a privy seal directed to him, brought the Kings great golden seal,
sealed up in a leather Bag, into the Parliament, and really delivered it to
the Earl of Bedford, the Kings Commissary; who receiving it of the said
Bishop, caused it to be taken out of the Bag, and to be seen of all, and
then to be put into the Bag again; who sealing the Bag with his signet, he
delivered it to be kept, to the Bishop of London, then CHANCELLOR OF ENGLAND,
BY ADVICE and ASSENT of the Lords spiritual and temporal, in that Parliament.
Numb. 18. The King by the advice of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and by
the assent of the Commons in Parliament, makes an exchange of Jews de Bu^bon,
Earl of Vandosme taken prisoner at the battle of Agencourt, for the Earl of
Huntingdon, taken prisoner by the French; releasing the said Earl Vandosme of
his Ransom, and Oath. Numb. 19. The Duke of Bedford, Constable of the Castle
of Berwicke, petitioned, that the King, BY AVTHORITY OF PARLIAMENT (in regard
of his absence from that charge, by reason of his continual employments in the
Kings service in France, and elsewhere) might license him, to make a Lieutenant
under him to guard that Castle safely: Upon which Petition, the Lords
spiritual and temporal granted him power to make a s^fficient Lieutenant,
such as the Kings Counsel should allow of; so as the said Lieutenant should
find such reasonable sureties for the safe keeping of the said Castle, as the
Kings counsel should approve. And in this Parliament, Hal^ Chron: 4. H. ^. f.
100 Grefton, p. 523. Helinsh^d, vol 3. p. ^^7^. and I rancis T^in, ibib. Howes,
and Stowes Chron p. 400. 404.
BY ASSENT OF THE THREE ESTATES OF ENGLAND, Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick
was ordained to be Governor of the young King, in like manner as the Noble
Duke of Exceter was before appointed and designed; to execute which charge he
was sent for out of France the year following. In the three and thirtieth
year of this Kings reign Hall, Gra^ton, How. Speed An. ^3. H^. ^ 34.
Richard Duke of York was made Protector of the Realm, the Earl of Salisbury
was appointed to be Chancellor, and had the great seal delivered to him; and
the Earl of Warwick was elected to the Captainship of Calice, and the
territories of the same, in and BY THE PARLIAMENT: by which the Rule and
Regiment of the whole Realm consisted only in the heads, and orders of the
Duke, and Chancellor; and all the warlike affairs and business rested
principally in the Earl of Warwick. From which Offices the Duke and Earl of
Salisbury being after displaced, by ^mulation, envy and jealousy of the Dukes
of Somerset Buckingham and the Queen, a bloody civil war thereupon enfued:
after which Hall An. 38^ and 39. H. 6. f. 176. to 183. Fabian^ p. 470. Grafton,
p. 643. to 548.
Anno 39. H. 6. this Duke, by a solemn award made in Parliament between Henry
the sixth and him, was again made PROTECTOR AND REGENT OF THE KINGDOM. By the
Statutes of 25. H. 8. c. 22. 28. H. 8. c. 7. and 35. H. 8. c. 1. it is evident,
that the power and Right of nominating a Protector and Regent, during the Kings
minority, belongs to the Parliament and Kingdom; which by these Acts
authorized Henry the eighth, by his last Will in writing, or Commission under
hi^ seal, to nominate a Lord Protector, in case he died, during the (...) of
his heir to the Crown; and the Speed history, p 11^ 8.
Duke of Somerset was made Lord Protector of the King and Realm, during King
Edward the sixth his nonage, BY PARLIAMENT; And not to trouble you with any
more examples of this kind, Mr. Lambard in his Archaion, p. 135. Cowell in his
Interpreter, title Parliament, Sir Henry Spelman in his Glossarium, tit.
Cancellarius ( out of Matthew Westminster, An. 1260. 1265.) Francis Thin, and
Holinshed, vol. 3. col. 1073. to 1080. 1275. to 1286. and Sir Edward Cook in
his Institutes on Magna Charta, f. 174, 175. 558. 559. 566. acknowledge and
manifest, That the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer, Privy Seal, Lord chief
Justice, See Matthew. Paris, p. 421.
Privy Counselors, Heretochs, Sheriffs, with other Officers of the Kingdom of
England, and Constables of Castles, were usually elected by the Parliament, to
whom OF ANCIENT RIGHT THEIR ELECTION BELONGED: who being commonly styled, Lord
Chancellor, Treasurer, and chief Justice, etc. OF ENGLAND, not of the King,
were of right elected by the representative Body of the Realm of England, to
whom they were accomptable for their misdemeanors. Seeing then it is most
apparent by the premises, that the Parliaments of England have so frequently
challenged and enjoyed this right and power of electing, nominating,
recommending, approving all public Officers of the Kingdom in most former
ages, when they saw just cause; and never denuded themselves wholly of this
their interest by any negative Act of Parliament that can be produced: I humbly
conceive, it can be no offense at all in them (considering our present dangers,
and the manifold mischiefs of the Kingdom has of late years sustained by
evil Counselors, Chancellors, Treasurers, ^udges, Sheriffs, with other
corrupt public Officers) to make but a modest claim (by way of petition) of
this their undoubted ancient right, nor any dishonor for his Majesty, nor
disparagement to his Royal Prerogative, to condescend to their request herein,
it being both an honor, and benefit to the King to be furnished with such
faithful Counselors, Officers, Judges, who shall cordially promote the
public good, maintain the Laws, and subjects Liberties, and do equal
justice unto all his people, according to their oaths and duties; unfaithful
and corrupt officers being dangerous, and dishonorable, as well to the King as
Kingdom, as all now see and feel by woeful experience. In few words; If the
14. E. 3. c. 7. 28. E. 3. c. 7. 42. E. 3. c. 9.
Chancellors, Judges, and other Officers power to nominate three persons to be
Sheriff in every County annually (of which his Majesty by law is bound to
prick on, ^lse the election is void, as all the 12. R. 2. c. 2. 1. R. 2. c.
11. Cooks Instit. on Mag. Chart. f. 558. 559 566.
Judges of England long since resolved) and their authority to appoint 1 E. 3.
c. 16. 14. E. 3. c. 7. and 12. R. 2. c. 2. 34. E. 3. c. 1. 38. E. 3. stat. 2.
c. 4. 4. H. 4. c. 18. 2. H. 5. stat. 2. c. 1. 8. R. 2. c. 9. ^ee Rastals
Abridgement, Title, Justices of peace, Customers, etc.
Justices of the Peace, Escheators, with other under Officers in each shire, be
no impeachment at all of the Kings prerogative, as none ever reputed it; or if
both Houses ancient privilege, to Modus tenendi Parliamentum; Holinsheds
description of England c. 8. p. 173. and Annals, of Ireland, p. 127. etc. 1.
lac. c. 1. Mr. Hackwels manner of passing Bills.
make public Bills for the public weal, without the Kings appointment, and
when they have voted them for laws, to tender them to the King for his royal
assent, be no diminution to his Sovereignty: then by the selfsame reason, the
Parliaments nomination, or recommendation of Counselors, State-officers, and
Judges, to his Majesty, with a liberty to disallow of them if there be just
cause assigned, can be no encroachment on, nor injury at all to his Majesty's
Royalties; it being all one in effect, to recommend new Laws to the King for
his royal assent, when there is need, as to nominate meet Officers
Counselors, Judges, to him, to see these Laws put in due execution when
enacted. So that upon the whole matter, the final result will be; That the
Parliaments claim of this their ancient right, is no just ground at all on his
Majesty's part, to sever himself from his Parliament, or to be offended with
them, much less to raise or continue a bloody war against them.

That the King has no absolute Negative voice in the passing of Bills of
Common Right and Justice, for the public good.
THe fourth great Objection or Complaint of the Sea his Maies^ies Answer to the
Lords and Commons Remonstrance May 26. 1642*
King, Malignants, Royallists against the Parliament is; That they deny the
King a negative Voice in Parliament; affirming in The Remonstrance of the Lords
and Commons May 26, and Nov. 2, 1642*
some Declarations; That the King by his Coronation Oath and duty, is bound to
give his royal assent to such public Bills of Right and Justice, as both
howses have voted necessary for the common wealth, or safety of the Realm, and
ought not to reject them: Which is (say they) an absolute denial of his royal
Prerogative, not ever questioned or doubted of in former ages.

To this I answer first in general. That in most proceedings and transactions
of Parliament the King has no casting, nor absolute negative voice at all; as
namely in See A^hes Tables error 65, to 70. 21 Iac. c, 13, Cromptons
Jurisdiction of Courts, f, 1, (...) 20, ^miths Commonwealth. l. 2, c, 1, 2, 15,
E. 3. c, 2, 3,
reversing erroneous Judgments given in inferior Courts; damning illegal
Pattents, Monopolies, Impositions, Exactions, redressing, removing all public
grievances or particular wrongs complained of; censuring or judging Delinquents
of all sorts; punishing the Members of either house for offenses against the
Houses; declaring what is Law in cases of difficulty referred to the Parliament
( of which there are By acta^^, l, 1, c. 2. 2 E, 3, f. 7* Register, Fol, 271,
Westminster, 2, c, 18, 14 E, 3, c, 5, 25, E, 3, stat, 2, of these that are borne
beyond the sea^
sundry presidents.) In these, and such like particulars, the King has no
swaying negative voice at all, but the houses may proceed and give Judgment,
not only without the Kings personal presence or assent) as the highest Court
of Justice, but even against his personal Negative vote or dissassent, in case
he be present, as infinite examples of present and former times experimentally
manifest beyond all contradiction. Nay, not only the Parliament, but Kings
Bench, Common Pleas, Chancery, and every inferior Court of Justice whatsoever,
has such a Privilege by the Common law and Magna Charta, c, 29, and Cooks
Institutes ibid, 2 E, 3, c, 8. 14 E, 3, c, 24, 15 ^, 3, c, 2, 3, 18 E, 3. stat,
3, 20 E* 3. c, 1, 2. 1 R, 2 c, 2, 11 R, 2, c. 19.
statutes of the Realm, that the King himself has uo negative voice at all
so much as to stay, or delay for the smalest moment by his great or privy seal
any legal proceedings in it, much less to countermand, control, or reverse
by word of mouth or proclamation, any resolution or judgment of the Judges
given in it: If then the King has no absolute Negative overruling voice in any
of his inferior Courts; doubtless he has none in the supre^mest greatest
Court of all* the Parliament; which otherwise should be of less authority, and
in far worse condition then every petty sessions, or Court Baron in the
Kingdom.

The sole question then in debate must be; Whether the King has any absolute
Negative overruling voice in the passing of public or private Bills?

For resolving which doubt, we must thus distinguish: That public or private
Bills are of two sorts. First, Bills only of mere grace and favor; not of
common right: such are all general pardons, Bills of naturalization,
indenization, confirmation, or concession of new Franchises, and Privileges to
Corporations, or private persons, and the like; in all which the King, no
doubt, has an absolute negative voice to pass or not to pass them; because
they are acts of mere grace (which delights to be ever free and arbitrary,)
because the king by his oath and duty, is no way obliged to assent thereto;
neither can any subjects of justice or right require them at his hands, it
being in the Kingsfree power, to dispense his favors freely when and where he
pleases, and Rom, 9, 15. 16. c. 11. 6. Nisi gramita non est gratia, August. De
Natura and gratia, l. 1, c, 31. 36 E. 3. the Pardon, (...), 43. E. 3. c. 4.
501. 3. c. 3. 1 R. 2. c. 10. 2 R. 2. ^^7. 1 H. 4. c. 20. 4 H. 4. c. 1. 6 R. 2.
c. 13. stat* 2. c. 1. and all general acts of Pardon,
contrary to the very nature of free grace, to be either merited or
constrained. Secondly Bills of common right and justice, which the King by duty
and oath is bound to administer to his whole kingdom in general, and every
subject whatsoever in particular without denial or delay: Such are all Bills
for the preservation of the public peace and safety of the kingdom; the
Liberties, Properties, and Privileges of the Subject: the prevention,
removal, or punishment of all public or private grievances, mischiefs,
wrongs, offenses, frauds in persons or callings; the redress of the defects or
inconveniences of the Common Law; the advancing or regulating of all sorts of
Trades; the speedy or better execution of Justice, the Reformation of Religion,
and Ecclesiastical abuses, with sundry other Laws, enacted in every
Parliament, as occasion and necessity require. In all such Bills as these,
which the whole state in parliament shall hold expedient or necessary to be
passed, I conceive it very clear, that the king has no absolute negative
voice at all, but is bound in point of office, duty, Oath, Law, Justice,
conscience, to give his royal assent unto them when they have passed both
houses, unless he can render such substantial reasons against the passing of
them, as shall satisfy both Hou^e^. This being the only point in
controversy, my reasons against the Kings absolute over-swaying negative Voice
to such kind of Bills as these, are:

First, because being Bills of common right and Justice to the Subjects, the
denial of the Royal assent unto them is directly contrary to the Law of God,
which 2* Sam. 3. 3. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. Ezekiel. 45. 8, 9. Est. ^. 13. to 22. Dan. 3.
29. 2 Chronicles. 30. 1. to ^. 23. 1 Chronicles. 13. 1. to 7, Est. 9. 27. (...) 32.
commands kings to be just, to do judgment and justice to all their
Subjects, especially to the oppressed, and not to deny them any just request
for their relief, protection or welfare.

Secondly, because it is point-blanke against the very letter of Magna Charta
(the ancient fundamental Law of the Realm, confirmed in at least 60.
Parliaments) chapter 29. WE SHALL DENY, WE SHALL DEFER (both in the future tense)
TO NO MAN (much less to the whole Parliament and Kingdom, in denying or
def^rring to pass such necessary public Bills) JUSTICE OR RIGHT, A Law which
in terminis takes clean away the Kings p^etended absolute negative Voice to
these Bills we now dispute of.

Thirdly, Because such a disasse^t^ng Voice to Bills of this nature, is
inconsisent with the very See d^before, ^racton, l. 1. c. 2. l. 3. c. 9.
Fortescue, c. 9. to 15. Cook l. 7.
office, duty of the king, and the end for which he was instituted: to wit,
equal and speedy administration of common right, justice, and assent to all
good Laws for protection, safety, ease, and benefit of his Subjects.

Fourthly, Because it is repugnant to the very Letter and meaning of the kings
Coronation Oath solemnly made to all his Subjects; TO GRANT, FVLFILL, and
Defend ALL RIGHTFVLL LAWS which THE COMMONS OF THE REALM SHALL CHVSE, AND TO
STRENGTHEN AND MAINTAIN THEM after his power. Which Clause of the Oath (as I
formerly manifested at large, and the Lords and Commons in their Remonstrance
of May 26. and 5. 11. ^olvins case.
Nov. 2. prove most fully) extends only, or most principally to the kings
Royal assent to such new rightful and necessary Laws as the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, (not the king himself) shall make choice of. This is
infallibly evident, not only by the practice of most of our kings in all
former Parliaments, (especially in king Edward the 1, 2, 3, 4. Rich. 2. Hen. 4,
5* and 6. reigns), whereof the first Act commonly in every Parliament was, the
confirmation of Magna Charta, the Charter of the Forest, and all other former
unrepealed Laws; and then follow sundry new Act^ which the Lords and Commons
made choice of as there was occasion, and our Kings assented to, (confessing
they were bound to do it by their Coronation oath and duty, as I shall
manifest presently:) but likewise by the words of the Coronation oaths of our
ancienter Kings, already cited in the first part of this Discourse; and of our
Kings oaths of latter times: the Sea the Remonstanc^ of the Lords and Commons
Nov. 2. 1642. p. 35, 36, 37, 38.
Coronation Oaths of King Edward the 2. and 3. remaining of Record in French,
are in the future tense. Sire, grantes vous a tenir et garder LES LEYS et les
Coustumes DROITVRELES les quiels LA COMMVNANTE de vostre Royaume AVRESLV, and
les defenderer et assorcer^r al honeur de Di^u a vostre poare?

Respons. Ie le FERAI, in the future, too. The close Roll of An. 1. R. 2. M*
44. recites this clause of the Oath which King See Wa^singham, Hist. Ang. 1. R.
2. p. 192, 193, 194. where the whol^ manner of his Coronation is expressed at
large.
Rich took in these words; Et etiam de tuendo and custodiendo JUST AS LEGES and
consuetudines ecclesiae, ac de faciendo per ipsum Dominum Regem, eas esse
protegendas and ad honorem Dei CORROBOR AND AS quas VVLGVS IVSTE ET
RATIONABILITER ELEGERIT juxta vires ejusdem Domini Regis, in the future tense.
And Rot. Parliament, 1. H. 4. p. 17. expresses the clause in King Henry his
Oath thus: Concedis IVSTAS LEGES and consuetudines esse tenendas, and promittis
per te eas esse protegendas and ad honorem Dei CORROBORANDAS QV AS VVL GVS
ELEGERIT secundum vires tuas. Respondebit; Concedo and Promitto.

In the Book of Clarencieux Hanley, who lived in King Henry the 8. his reig^e,
this clause of the Oath (which this king is said to take at his Coronation) is
thus ^endred in English: Will you GRANT, FVLFILL, defend ALL RIGHTFVLL LAWS
and Customs, the which THE COMMONS OF YOUR REALM SHALL CHVSE (in the future,
and where but in the Parliament House when and where they meet together to make
good Laws?) and shall strengthen and maintain to the worship of God, after your
power* The King shall answer, I grant and behe^e. But that which puts this past
all doubt, is the Coronation Oath of K. Edward the 6. thus altered by the Lord
Protector and Kings Council in words, but not sense; Do you grant to make NO
NEW LAWS, but such as SHALL BE to the honor and glory of God, and to the good
of the Commonwealth, and that the same SHALL BE MADE BY CONSENT OF YOUR
PEOPLE, AS HAS BEEN ACCVSTOMED? Where this clause of the Oath, referres wholly
and only to future new LAWS, to be chosen and made by the Peoples consent,
not to Laws formerly enacted. And certainly it must do s^, else there would be
much Tautology in this short solemn Oath, unsuitable to the grave wisdom and
judgment of an whole Kingdom to prescribe and continue for so many ages, and
for our Kings in discretion to take: For the first clause of the Oath both in
the Latin, French, and English Copie^ of ancient and present times, is this,
Sir will you grant and keep, and by your oath confirm to the people of
England; THE LAWS AND CUSTOMS GRANTED TO THEM BY ANCIENT KINGS OF ENGLAND,
rightful men, and devout to God; and namely the Laws and Customs, and
Franchises granted to the Clergy and to the people by the glorious King Edward,
to your power? Which clause relating to all Laws and Customs granted by
forme^ Kings to the people; if this latter clause should be in the pretertense
too, HAS CHOSEN (as the King and his mistaken Counsel object) it would be a
mere Su^plusage, or Battology, yea the same insubstance with the first part of
the oath, and ou^ Kings should be only bound by their oaths to observe their
Ancestors Laws, not their own as they now argue, (the reason perchance why
the Petition of Right, and our other new Laws are so ill observed) which is
ridiculous to imagine. And whereas they object, that the word CVSTOMS joined to
laws in the last clause, cannot be meant of such Customs as the people shall
choose after the Oath made, because all Customs are, and must be time out of
mind. The Answer is very easy; For Customs here are not taken strictly for
ancient usages time out of mind; but for Statutes, Franchises, just Liberties,
or Taxes for the Kingdoms defense, chosen and freely granted by the Commons or
people, and to be confirmed by the King in Parliament; as appears by the first
clause of the oath, the laws and customs granted to them by the ancient Kings
of England. And by l^b. 1. c. 2. f, 1. b.
Bracton himself, who expounds this clause of the oath to relate to future
Laws, newly made by our Kings after their Coronations, in this observable
passage. Hujusmodi vero leges Anglicanae and CONSVETVDINES, regum authoritate
jubent quandoque, quandoque vetant, and quandoque vindicant, and puniunt
transgressores; quas quidem cum FVERINT APPROBATAE CONSENSV VTENTIVM ET
SACRAMENTO REGVM CONFIRMATAE, mutari non poterunt nec destrui, SINE COMMVNI
CONSENSV EORVM OMNIVM, see Brook and Fitz. Herbert. and Ash. Title Custom. and
Prescription. Cooks Instit. on Littleton, f. 110. b. 113, b. 175. b.
quorum CONSILIO ET CONSENSV FVERVNT PROMVLGATAE. Now no Customs properly so
called, can commence by way of grant, especially of the King alone; but only by
the people and common usage for a good space of time (as the Customs of
Gavelkinde, Borough English, and such like, never granted nor commenced by
Charter or Act of Parliament, did;) and if the King by Charter or Act of
Parliament, should grant a new Custom, before it were a Custom in this sense,
it would be utterly void in law, because there was no such custom then in
being, Cooks Instit on Little^on f. 58. b. and the Books there cited,
Register. f. 151. Brief de CONSVETVDINI^VS and ^ervitiis.
and no gran^ or act can make or create a custom or prescription that had no
former being. Therefore Custom in this oath, coupled with just and reasonable,
must needs be meant only of such just and reasonable statutes, liberties,
privilidges, immunities, aides, taxes, or services for the subjects ease and
benefit, and the public service, as they upon emergent occasions shall make
choice of in Parliament; of whose justness and reasonableness not the King
alone, but the grand Council of the Kingdom (assembled in the Parliament, to
this very end, to judge of, make, and assent to just and profitable Laws) are
and ought to be the proper Judges, as I have elsewhere manifested; and the very
words of the oath, QVAS VVLGVS ELIGERIT, to which justas leges and
consuetudines relates, resolve beyond contradiction. And King David and Achish
both were of this opinion, 1 Chronicles. 13. 1. to 6. 2 Samuel 18* 2, 3, 4. 1 Samuel 29.
2. to 11. and King Hezekiah too 2 Chronicles. 30. 1. to 7. 23. yea God himself, and
Saunel too: 1 Samuel 8. 4 to the end.

Fifthly, Because it is directly contrary to the preambles and recitals of
sundry Acts of Parliament in most of our Kings reigns comprising the two last
reasons. To instance in some few of many: the ancient statutes of Now
Mal^orrough.
Marlbridge begin thus. The year of grace 1267. for the better estate of the
Realm of England, and for the more speedy ministration of Justice, AS
BELONGS TO THE OFFICE OF A KING, the more discreet men of the Realm being
called together, as well of the higher as of the lower estate: It was provided,
agreed, and ordained, that whereas the Realm of lat^ had been disquieted with
manifold troubles and distractions, for reformation whereof statutes and laws
BE RIGHT NECESSARY, whereby the peace and tranquillity of the people may be
conserved, wherein the King intending to devise convenient remedy, has made
these Acts underwritten. Westminster. the first.
The statutes of 3 Edw. 1. have this Prologue. These be the Acts of King
Edward, etc. at his first Parliament general after his Coronation. Because our
Sovereign Lord the King has great zeal in desire to redress the state of the
Realm in such things AS REQVIRED AMENDMENT for the common profit of the holy
Church, and of the Realm etc. the King has ordained and established these
Acts underwritten, which he intends TO BE NECESSARY AND PROFITABLE unto the
whole Realm. And cap. 17. in the Marches of Wales, and elsewhere, where the
Kings Writs be not current, the King which is chief and sovereign Lord there,
SHALL DO RIGHT THERE unto such as will complain. And cap. 48. In the S^atutes
at large it is c. 48. but 51. in Mag. Charta^s.
The King has ordained these things unto the honor of God, and holy Church,
and for the commonwealth, and for the remedy of such as be grieved; and for as
much as it is great charity (which is often times put for Justice, as here) TO
DO RIGHT UNTO ALL MEN AT ALL TIMES WHEN NEED SHALL BE, by assent of all etc.
it was provided. The statute of Gloucester in the 6. year of King Edw. 1. is
thus prefaced. For the great mischiefs and disinherisons that the people of the
Realm of England have heretofore suffered, throught default of the law that
failed in diverse cases within the said Realm; our sovereign Lord the King for
the amendment of the land; for the relief of his people, and to eschew much
mischiefs, damages and dis-inherisons, has provided established these Acts
underwritten, willing and commanding that from henceforth they be firmly kept
within this Realm. The Statutes of Westminster, 2. in his 13. year begin thus:
Whereas of late our sovereign Lord the King, etc. calling his Counsel at
Gloucester, and considering that diverse of this Realm were disherited, by reason
that in many cases, where remedy should have been had, there was none provided
by him nor his Predecessors, ordained certain statutes, right necessary and
profitable for his Realm, whereby the people of England and Ireland have
obtained more speedy Justice in their oppressions then they had before, and
certain cases (wherein the law failed) did remain undetermined, and some
remained to be enacted that were for the reformation of the oppressions of the
people; our sovereign Lord the King in his Parliament holden etc. the 13) ear
of his reign at Westminster. caused many oppressions of the people, and defaults of
the laws, for the accomplishment of the said statutes of Glocest to be
rehearsed, and thereupon did provide certain Acts here following. The s^atute
of Quo Warranto, An. 1278. (the 6. year of this King, made at Glocest.) has
this exordium. The King himself providing for the wealth of his Realm, and the
morefull administration of Justice, AS TO THE OFFICE OF A KING BELONGS; the
more discreet men of the Realm, as well of high as of low degree being called
thither, it was provided etc. The sta^. of York 12 E. 2 has this Prologue.
Forasmuch as people of the Realm of England and Ireland have heretofore
suffered many times great mischiefs, damage and disherison by reason that in
diverse cases where the law failed, no remedy was purveyed etc. our sovereign
Lord the King desiring THAT RIGHT BE DONE TO HIS PEOPLE at his Parl. holden at
York etc. has made these Acts and statutes here following, the which he
wills to be straightly observed in his said Realm. In 9. Ed. 3. in a Parliament
held at York. The Prologue and (...).
the Commons desired the King in the said Parliament by their Petition, that
for the profit and commodity of his Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commons of his
Realm, it may please him, WITHOUT FVRTHER DELAY, upon the said grievances and
outrages to provide remedy: our sovereign L. the K. desiring the profit of his
people by the assent of his Prelates etc. upon the said things disclosed to
him, and found true, to the great hurt of the said Prelates etc. and oppression
of his Commons, has ordained and established etc. In 10. E. 3. stat. 1. there
is this introduction. Because our Sovereign Lord the King Edw. 3. WHICH
SOVERAIGNLY DESIRES the maintenance of his peace and safeguard of his people,
has perceived at the complaint of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and also at the
showing of the Knights of the shires, and the Commons in their Petition put in
his Parliament etc. diverse oppressions and grievances done to his people, etc.
COVETING to obvent the malice of such felons, and to see a covenable remedy,
has ordained, etc. for the quietness and peace of his people, that the articles
underneath written be kept and maintained in all points 14. E. 3. stat. 1. To
the honor of God, etc. the King for peace and quietness of his people, as well
great as small, does grant and establish the things underwritten. The like we
have in 15. E. 3. stat. 1. and in this kings Proclamation for revoking it,
there is this passage; We considering, how BY THE BOND OF OUR OATH WE BE BOUND
TO THE OBSERVANCE AND DEFENSE OF THE LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF THE REALM, etc. So
in 20. E 3. Because that by diverse complaints made to us, we perceived that the
law of the land which WE BY OUR OATH BE BOUND TO MAINTAIN is the less well
kept, and the execution of the same disturbed many times, etc. WE GREATLY MOVED
OF CONSCIENCE IN THIS MATTER, and for this cause desiring as much for the
pleasure of God and ease and quietness of our Subjects, AS TO SAVE OUR
CONSCIENCE AND TO KEEP OUR SAID OATH, by the assent of the great men and other
wise men of our Counsel, we have ordained these things following 23. E. c. 8.
That in no wise ye omit the same, as ye love us and the Commonwealth of this
Realm. 25. E. 3. stat. 2. Because that statutes made and ordained before this
time have not been holden and kept as they ought to be, the King willing to
provide quietness and common profit of his people, by the assent, etc. has
ordained and established these things underwritten. The passage in the statute
of Provisors, 25. E. 3. Parliam. 6. is notable. Whereupon the said Commons have
prayed our Sovereign Lord the King, that SINCE THE RIGHT OF THE CROWN OF
ENGLAND, AND THE LAW OF THE SAID REALM IS SVCH, that upon the mischiefs and
damages which happens to his Realm, HE OUGHT AND IS BOVNDEN OF THE ACCORD OF
HIS SAID PEOPLE IN PARLIAMENT THEREOF TO MAKE REMEDY, AND THE LAW OF VOIDING
THE MISCHIEFS and damages which thereof comes, that it may please him
thereupon to ordain remedy. Our Sovereign Lord the King seeing the mischiefs
and damages before named, and having regard to the statute made in the time of
his Grandfather, and to the cause contained in the same; which statute always
holds his force, and was never defeated, nor annulled in any point; and by so
much AS HE IS BOVNDEN BY HIS OATH TO DO THE SAME TO BE KEPT AS THE LAW OF THIS
REALM though that by sufferance and negligence it has been attempted to the
contrary; also having regard to the grievous complaints made to him by his
people in diverse his Parliaments holden heretofore, willing to ordain remedy
for the great damage and mischiefs which have happened, and daily do happen to
the Church of England by the said cause; By assent of the great men and
Commonalty of the said Realm, to the honor of God and profit of the said Church
of England, and of all his Realm, has ordered and established* etc. 28. E. 3:
The King for the common profit of him and his people, etc. has ordained. 36.
E. 3. To the honor and pleasure of God, and the amendment of the outrageous
grievances and oppressions done to the people, and in relief of their estate,
King Edward, etc. grant^d for him and his Heirs for ever these Articles
underwritten. 1. R. 2. To the honor of God and reverence of holy Church, for
to nourish peace, unity, and concord, in all the parts within our Realm of
England, which we do much desire; We have ordained, etc. 3. R. 2. For the
honor of God, and of holy Church, and for the common profit of the Realm of
England, our Sovereign Lord the king has ordained, etc. for the quietness of
his said people, the Statutes and Ordinances following, etc. cap. 2. (with 2.
H. 4. c. 1.) Our sovereign Lord the king greatly desiring the tranquillity and
quietness of his people, wills and straightly commands, that the peace within
his Realm of England be surely observed and kept, so that all his lawful
subjects may from henceforth safely and peaceably go, come, and dwell after
the Law and usage of the Realm, and that Justice and right be indifferently
ministered to every of his said subjects, as well to the poor as to the rich in
his Courts. 1. H. 4. Henry by the Grace of God, etc. to the honor of God and
reverence of holy Church for to nourish peace, unity and concord of all parties
within the Realm of England, and for the relief and recovery of the said
Realm, which now late has been mischievously put to great ruin, mischief and
desolation, of the assent, etc. has made and established, etc. 6. H. 4. c. 1.
For the grievous complaints made to our Sovereign Lord the king by his Commons
of the Parliament of the horrible mischiefs and damnable custom which is
introduced of new, etc. Our sovereign Lord the King to the honor of God, as
well to eschew the damage of this Realm, as the perils of their souls which
are to be advanced to any Archbishopricks or Bishoprics, etc. has ordained.
Diverse such recitalls are frequent in most of our statutes in all Kings
reigns, viz. 37. E. 3. c. 2, 3, 4, 5. 3. R. 2. c. 3. 5. R. 2. Stat. 1. 2. 6.
R. 2. Stat. 1. 7. R. 2. 8. R. 2. (For the common profit of the said Realm, and
especially for the good and just government and due execution of the common
Law, it is ordained, etc.) 10. R. 2. Prologue and c. 1. 11. R. 2. c. 1. 12. R.
2. 13. R. 2. Prologue and c. 3, 5, 6. 14. R. 2. 21. R. 2. 1. H. 4. and 5. c. 7.
1. H. 6. 8. H. 6. Prologue and c. 25. 10. H. 6. c. 3. 12. H. 6. c. 12. 39. H.
6. Prologue 1. R. 3. c. 2. 6. 8. 3. H. 7. c. 5, 6. 11. H. 7. c. 18. But I shall
conclude with some more punctual ones. 18. E. 3. stat. c. 1, 2. To nourish,
love, peace and concord between holy Church and the Realm and to appease and
cease the great hurt and perils and impertable losses and grievances that have
been done and happened in times past, and shall happen hereafter, if the thing
from henceforth be suffered to pass, etc. for which causes, and dispensing
whereof, the ancient laws, usages, customs, and franchises of the Realm, have
been, and be greatly appaired, blemished, and confounded, the Crown of the king
minished, and his person falsely defrauded the treasure and riches of his Realm
carried away, the inhabitants and subjects of the Realm impovirished,
troubled, etc. the King at his Parliament, etc. having regard to the quietness
of his people, which he chiefly desires to sustain in tranquillity and peac^,
to govern according to the Laws, Vsages, and Franchises of this Land, as HE
IS BOUND BY HIS OATH MADE AT HIS CORONATION; following the ways of his
Progenitors, which for their time made certain good Ordinances and provisions
against the said grievances, etc. by the assent, etc. has approved, accepted,
and confirmed. etc. 2. R. 2. c. 7. Because the King has perceived, as well by
many complaints made to him, as by the perfect knowledge of the thing, etc. the
King desiring soveraignly the peace and quietness of his Realm, and his good
Laws and Customs of the same, and the Rights of his Crown to be maintained
and kept in all points; and the offenders duly to be chastised and punished, AS
HE IS SWORN AT HIS CORONATION, by the assent of all the Lords etc. has
defended etc. And moreover it is ordained and established etc. 3 R. 2. Rot.
Parl. Number. 38. and 40. The Commons desiring a grant of new power to Justices of
Peace, to enquire into extortions; the Bishops conceiving it might extend to
them, made their protestation against this new grant; yet protested, that if it
were restrained only to what was law already, they would condescend to it, but
not if it gave any new or further power. The King answers, that notwithstanding
their protestation, or any words con^eined therein, he would not forbear to
pass this new grant, and that BY HIS OATH AT HIS CORONATION HE WAS OBLIGED TO
DO IT. And 6 H. 6. c. 5. We, for as much as by reason of our Regality, WE BE
BOVNDEN TO THE SAFEGVARD OF OUR REALM round about, willing in this behalf
convenient hasty remedy to be adhibite, have assigned, etc. By these, with
infinite such like recitalls in our ancient and late statutes in the Kings own
Proclamations, Commissions, yea and in writs of law ( wherein we find these
expressions; R^gister. part 2. f, 7. c. 15. a.
Nos qui singulis de regno nostro in EXHIBITIONE IVSTITIAE SVMVS DEBITORES;
plaenam and celerem justitiam exhiberi facias. ibid f. 10. 38. b. 127. b. 180.
a.
Nos volentes quoscunque legios nostros in curiis nostris etc. justitiam sibi
etc. nullatenus differri. Ad justitiam inde reddendam cum omni celeritate
procedatis ibid. f. 125. b, 126. 129.
Nos oppressiones, duritias, damna excessus, and gravamina praedictae nolentes
relinquere impunita; volent esque SALVATIONI and QVIETI POPVLI NOSTRI hac part
PROSPICERE VT TENEMVR; eidm celeris justitiae complementum, and debitum and
festinum iustitiae complementum fieri facies, ibid f. 42. a, 43. b, see f. 60.
to 65.
Nos huiusmodi praeindicio precavere volentes, prout ASTRINGIMVR IVRAMENTI
VINGVLO. Quia^ iudicia in curia nostra cito reddita in suis roboribus
manuteneri volumus and defendi prout AD HOC IVRAMENTI VINCVLO ASTRINGIMVR and
TENEMVR. etc, It is most apparent, that the Kings of England both by their
oath, duty, and common right, even in point of justice and conscience, are
bound to assent to all public Acts as are really neces^ary for the peace,
safety, ease, weal, benefit, prevention of mischiefs and redress of
greivances of all, or any of their subjects, without any tergiversation, or
unnecessary delays, when they are passed and tendered to them by both Houses,
and that in such acts as these they have no absolute Negative voice at all, but
ought to give their speedy, free, and full consents thereto, unless they can
give satisfactory reasons to the contrary.

Sixthly, All our ancient Kings of England, (as the premises, with all public
useful statutes enacted in their reign* evidence) have always usually given
their free and full consents in Parliament to such public acts as these,
without denial or protraction, conceiving they were bound by oath and duty so
to do; and if they ever denied their royal assents to any Petitions or Bills
of the Lords and Commons of this nature, they always gave such good reasons
for it as satisfied both Howses: witness their answers to infinite Petitions yet
extant among the Parliament records. Therefore the King now is as much obliged
thereto as they.

Seventhly, If the King in point of law, should have an absolute negative voice
in denying his assent to public Bills of mere right, and justice; then he
should have power by law to deny justice and right, and to do wrong and
injustice to his people; a prerogative which neither God himself, nor any
lawful Monarch ever yet challenged; but renounced with greatest detestation. I
read in Apo^hegm.
Plutarch that when a flatterer said to king Antigonus, that all things were
honest and just to Kings, he answered: only indeed to Kings of Barbarians, but
to us honest things are to be accounted for honest, only just things for just:
And that Plutarch Apotheg. Lat^n. p. 468.
Acrotatus gave the like answer to his parents, when they pressed him to do an
unjust thing: Quo^iam vult is me optima ag^re, optimu^ aute^^ est cum privato,
tum multo etia^ magis Principiid quod est justum, agam qu^ ^ultis, quae viro
dicitis detrectabo. Yea our law expressly denies the king any such unjust
prerogative, by these unquestionable maxims: ^ract. l. ^ c. ^. l. 6. 16. l, 3.
c. ^* Fl^t. l, 3. c, 3. 17, and f. 5, 7, Cook l: 11, ^. 72, 7^. l. 7, f, 5. 11.
C^lo. case, Fortes c. 9, to 15. Ploud. 246 247. 487. 21. E, 3, f. 47.
the King neither can, nor ought by law to do any wrong, seeing he is Gods
Vicar, and the fountain of Justice. Et hocsolum Rex NON POTEST FACERE quod NON
POTEST INIVSTE AGERE: which our Plouden, ^, 246. 247. and Ashes Table P^erogat.
60. Judge Cook^ Argu. against ship money. p, 58. to 65.
law books make no defect of power, but one of the highest branches of the
Kings Prerogative: for confirmation whereof, I shall only cite one notable
Record, 7. H. 4. Rot. Parl. Number. 59. The Commons complained, that by the favor
of Ordinaries, diverse incumbents were outed of their benefices by
superinstitutions upon presentations of the King, contrary to the statute in
that case provided; and were denied a Scire faci^s, without a special license
or command of the King first obtained, to the great offense of God, and against
reason and law (...) qu^ tiel fait^n^ poet ^ye e^^re Prerogative ^n nostr^
S^ignour le Ro^ quest derogatif al execution de droi^ et justi^^.
BECAUSE SVCH AN ACT CANNOT BE ANY PREROGATIVE AT AL IN OUR LORD THE KING,
WHICH IS DEROGATIVE TO THE EXECVTION OF RIGHT AND JUSTICE. Wherefore they
petitioned the King, that he would be pleased to grant and command the
Chancellor, to deliver a writ of Scire facias to every of his Leiges who are
outed of their benefices or possessions by the foresaid title of the King, and
that thenceforth the Chancellors shall be bound to deliver by authority of
their Offices this Writ of Scire facias at the suit of the parties: and
further, to do right to the parties, without suing to the King, and without
other warrant from him. To which the King gives this answer. The King wills,
that the said statute be firmly held and keep; and farther wills and
grants, that if he presents to any benefice which shall be full of any
Incumbext, that the Presentee of the King shall not be received by the
Ordinary to such a benefice, until the King has recovered his presentment by
process of Law in his own Court: and if any Presentee of the King be
otherwise received, and the Incumbent outed without due Process, as aforesaid,
the said Incumbent may commence his suit within one year after the Induction
of the Kings Presentee, or later. And further, the King wills that no
ratification granted for the Incumbent, after that the King has presented and
taken his suit, shall be allowed pending the plea, nor after the judgment
given for the King; but that such judgment shall be fully executed, as reason
demands. L^e here the Commons and Parliament affirm, and the King himself
subscribes thereto: That the King neither has, nor yet can have any
Prerogative at all, which is derogative, or any impediment at all in the
execution of Right and Justice; and disclaim a negative voice, or power, in
him, in granting a scire facias to particular Incumbents, unduly outed of their
Living by a pretended prerogative power, against Reason and Law. Therefore a
fortiori, the King, by his prerogative, neither has, nor can have any absolute
Negative voice at all to hinder the passing of public Bills presented to him
by both Houses, for the due execution of right and justice, and the weal,
peace, or safety of the whole Kingdom. That speech of I^t. 38. 5.
King Zed^kia^ to his Princes (though in a bad case) is an undoubted verity
here: Behold he is in your hands; FOR THE KING IS NOT HE THAT CAN DO ANY THING
AGAINST YOU: and likewise of King David to his people: 2 Samuel 18. 3. 4. WHAT
SEEMS TO YOU BEST I WILL DO. In one word, as it is no impotency in God, but a
part of his own divine prerogative; Tit. 1. 2. Heb 6. 18.
that he cannot possibly ly, 2 Timothy 2* 13
that he cannot deny himself, Mal. 3. 6. Iam. 1. 17.
that he is immutable and changes not, that he (...). 18 25.
cannot do injustice: And as it was the Apostles highest privilege. 2 ^or. 13.
8. We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. So it is no note of
impotency but of highest Sovereignty in our Kings, that in all Bills of public
Right and Common Justice, they have no Negative voice or power at all to
withstand or deny their passing; for then they should have a prerogative to
deny common Right and Justice, and so to do public injustice, which God
himself (whose vicegerents they are) is incapable of, and never derived to
them. I will close this reason with that memorable speech of that great heathen
Emperor Julius Caesar, which he sometimes used at Rome in the Councell-house;
Dion Hist 43. Bishop Jewels Defense of the Apol* part 4. c. 5. p. 363.
Touching all other affairs that are to be taken in hand for your sake, I am
both your Consul, and your Dictator; but as touching any wrong to be done to
any man, I am as a private man without office.

Eighthly, Our Kings have ever claimed this as an absolute duty from their
subjects in Parliament, to grant them such speedy, free, and competent ayds,
subsidies, customs for the necessary defense of themselves, and the Kingdom,
and support of their royal estates, as the urgency of their public wars,
and affairs required; and the subjects (though they have sometimes denied
subsidies to their Princes upon reasonable causes, and excuses alleged by
them, expressed in our Mat. Paris P. 561, 562, 563. 718, 719* 725, 726, 933,
43^, 935. Walsing. by. P. 98. 185. Speed p. 621 Daniel, p. 151, 157, 160, 161,
162, 164, 175, 256.
Historians) yet have always held it their 37 H. 8. c. 24 1 E. 6. c. 13 7 E. 6.
c. 12. 13. see Judge Crooks and Huttons ^rgum. against ship money.
BOUNDEN DUTY to grant such ayds in Parliament, when (and sometimes before)
they have been required, and have really done it without refusal, when they
saw just cause to grant them; as all the old and new Acts for the grant of
Customs, Subsidies, Dismes, Quindismes, Tonnage and Poundage, Polemoney, with
other such aides in all our Kings-Reignes, abundantly evidence. Therefore the
King (who is as much obliged by oath and duty to aid his subjects, and provide
for their common protection, weal, peace, ease, as they are to provide for
His, and the Kingdoms safety) is by like reason as much obliged in duty not to
deny them such public Acts; as they are not to deny him such public aides.

Ninthly, Kingdoms and Commonweales were existent before Kings, for there must
be a Kingdom, and society of men to govern (as Polit. l. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Aristotle, De officiis l. 2
Cicero, Hist. l ^.
Polibius, De civit. Dei l. 2. c. 21.
Augustine, De La^d. Leg Ang* c* 9. to 15.
Fortescue, and all other Politicians accord) before there could be a King
elected by them for to govern them: And those Kingdoms and societies of men
had (for the most part) some common laws of their own free choice by which
they were governed, before they had Kings; which laws they Xenoph* de Laced.
Repub. p. 690 Hier. Blanca, R^yum Aragenens. Comment p. 588. 589.
swore their Kings to observe before they would crown or admit them to the
government; and likewise gave them a further oath, to pass and confirm all
such subsequent laws as they should make choice of for their public benefit
and protection; as is evident by the Coronation oaths of all our own (yea of
most other Christian, and some Pagan Kings) continuing to this very day; and
these words in the Kings oath QUAS VULGUS ELEGERIT (which intimates the choice
of Laws to be wholly and fully in the peoples free elections) prove beyond
Contradiction: Yea those ancient lawgivers Xenoph. de Laced, and Atheni^n^ium
Repub. Plato and Cicero de legibus, lib. Aristol. Polit. l. 1 2, ^, and 4.
Diodovui^ c* Bibl, hist. l ^, 2, 3, Plut^rc, Number, Pompilius Lycurgus, S^lon.
Solon, (...) Li^^rgu^, Numa, with others, who took pains to compile Laws
for several Kingdoms and Republikes, did only recommend them to the people,
whose voluntary a^^ent unto them made them binding; Which laws they either
altered or repealed as they saw cause. Besides, during Interrognums in
sorraigne elective Kingdoms, the Estates in Parliament have power to make new
binding Laws, repeal and alter old, as they did in Hieron. Bla^ca,
Arag^nensRerum. ^omme^t. p. 588, 589. Ioannis Mari^na De Rebus Hisp. l, 8. c,
1. HierPauli R^gum Aragonen: s^ri^^. I^a^nes Pistorius Hispani, illustr: Tom 2
p. 849.
Aragon after Sanchius his decease) before they elected a new King (whom they
swore to observe the Laws then made, before they would admit him) without any
Kings assent at all, who yet give their royal assent to Laws made in their
reigns: And in our own and other successive Kingdoms during the Kings
infancy, dotage, absence, the Kingdoms and Parliaments have an absolute power
(as I have already manifested) to create Regents or Lord-Protectors^ to execute
royal authority and give royal assents to public acts in the Kings name and
steads, without their actual personal assents; which laws being necessary
for the Subject, shall be as firm and obligatory to King and Kingdom, as
those to which they actually assent: Yea, if Kings chance to die without any
heir, the Kingdom in such a case may assemble of themselves, and make binding
necessary laws without a King, and alter the very frame of government, by
public consent. Therefore the royal assent to just, necessary, public Bills,
is in truth but a formal Ceremony or complement (much like a Kings Coronation)
Cook, 7, Report, Calvin's case f. 10, 11.
without which he may be, and is a lawful King,) bestowed by the people upon
Kings for their greater honor, with this limitation, that they must not deny
it when they of right require it to any just or necessary law; Cook 7, Report
f, 36, 37.
not simply to make, but declare and confirm a law already made and passed by
both houses (much like a Tenants See Little tons chap. of Attornment, and cooks
Instit. ibid.
attornment to the grant of a Reversion) And therefore Kings may neither in
law, nor conscience deny it when it is necessarily demanded to any just public
Bills, unless they can show good reason to the contrary, so far as to
satisfy their people why such laws should not pass.

Tenthly, Our very laws in many cases deny the King an absolute negative voice
or power, even in matters of Prerogative, because they are contrary to his
oath, and mischeivous to the Republike. This appears most clearly in matters
of Pardons, the Statutes of 2 E. 3. c. 2. 14 E. 3. c. 15. 13 R. 2. c. 1. 16 R.
2. c. 6. enact. That Charters of pardon shall not be granted for man
slaughters, Roberies, Fellonies, and other Trespass, but ONLY WHERE THE KING
MAY DO IT BY HIS OATH; (that is to say, where a man slays another in his
own defense, or by misadventure,) or in case, where he may do it KEEPING AND
SAVING THE OATH OF HIS CROWN. So the King Cook l. 7* f, 36, ^7. 37, H. 6, 4.
^rooke charter de Pardon, 24, 5, report f, 50. 51.
cannot pardon nor release the repairing of a Bridge or Highway, or any such
like public charges, or any public Nusances or offenses against paenall Laws
pro bono publico, because it is contrary to the trust and confidence reposed in
him for the public good, because the republike has an interest herein: and
the pardoning of them would be mischeivous for the common good: In like manner
the King Mag. Chart. 29. 1 E, 3, c, 8. 14 E 3, c, 14. 1 R, 2, c, 3.
cannot deny, delay, nor defer Justice, nor stay the Judges from doing
present right and justice to any of his Subjects by his Letters under his great
or privy seal, because it is contrary to his oath and duty: Neither See Judge
Crookes and Hutions arguments against shipmoney, and the Books and Statutes
therein cited.
can he by his absolute Prerogative, impose any the least ^axe or imposition on
his subjects without their common consent in Parliament; nor 11 H. 7, f. 12.
B^, Charter de Pardon, 76, 42, Ass. 5, 12, Br. Com. 15, 16.
yet authorize any other to kill, beat, wound, imprison any man's person, or
take away his goods, without due process of law; Yea the very laws and
custom of the Realm deny the King any absolute negative voice even in the
Parliament House in reversing erroneous Judgments, Charters, Patents, declaring
what is law in difficult cases, or in proceedings and sentences against
Delinquents, or in any one particular whatsoever which concerns the
administration of right or common Justice. Therefore by the selfsame reason,
the very law denies him any such negative voice in refusing his royal assent
to Bills of common right and Justice; And as both Houses do always overruled
the King, not He both Houses in the one; so, by parity and congruity of reason,
they ought to oversway him in the other, there being the same reason in both
cases, and the one no greater an ^ntrenchment upon his Prerogative than the
other.

Eleventhly, This is infallibly proved by the usual form of our Kings answers
to such Bills as they assent not to, Mr. Ha^kwells passing Bills. p, 87. with
others forecited. A Remonstrance of both houses, Nov. 2, 1642. p. 27.
Le Roy so it a visera, The King will be advised, or take further
consideration: which is no absolute denial, but a craving of longer time to
advise upon them, and thereupon to assent to them if he can see no just cause
to the contrary, or else to give satisfactory reasons why he cannot assent:
Which answer were not proper, nor formal, had the King an absolute negative
voice to reject Bills, without rendering a sufficient satisfactory reason of
his refusal of them.

Twelfthly, public Bills for the Subjects common good, are formed for the most
part, by the Lords and Commons themselves, who in truth (as I have elsewhere
proved) are the chief Lawmakers, and who (as Polit. l. 3, c, 7.
Aristotle defines) know better what is good and necessary for their own
benefit, then the King, their public Minister for their good; Itaque majorum
rerum potestas jure populo tribuitur, is Aristotle's resolution. Therefore in
passing such Bills, there is greater ^eason, that both Houses should overruled
the King, then the King them. It is usual in all inferior Counsels of State,
Law, Wa^ie, of the Kings own choice, for the Counsel to overruled the King in
matters of State, Law, War, unless the king can give better reasons against,
than they do for their conclusive advise: and kings in such cases do usually
submit to their Counsels determinations, without contradiction: of which we
have sundry presidents, not only in profane, but 1 Samuel 14. 38 (...) 4. c, 29,
1. to 12. 2 Samuel 13 2, 3, 4, c. 19, 1. to 9. 1 Chronicles. 13. 1 106. 2 Chronicles, 30 2,
3* 5. 23. Esth. 1 13. to 22. Ier. 38 4. to 28, Dan. 6* 4. to 20.
Sacred story. Physicians in points of Physic, Lawyers of Law, Divines of
Divinity, Soldiers of War, Pilots of Nav^gation, and so all Artists in their
several Arts, not only instruct, but over-sway their princes, without final
contradiction: This being a known received M^xime in Law; Vnicuique in sua art
peritest credendum: And shall not then the Grand Counsel of the Realm in all
public State-affaires, and Bills of Consequence, much more overruled the king,
then his privy Counsel? Especially since in the Statutes of 1. H. 4. c. 6. 4.
H. 4. c. 1. it is enacted to the end that the King may not be deceived in his
Grants and Gifts, annual or in fee, or in any offices by him to be made,
given, or granted, HE WILL by the assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal,
and at the request of the Commons BE COVNSELLED BY THE WISE MEN OF HIS COUNSEL
IN THINGS TOUCHING THE ESTATE OF HIM AND HIS REALM; and that he will make no
such gifts nor grants, saving to such persons as the same deserves, and as
best shall seem to the King AND HIS COUNCIL. And since it is THE DESIRE OF ALL
THE ESTATES OF THE REALM, that nothing should be so demanded of the King, he
wills that all those that make any such demand contrary to this statute, shall
be punished by advise of him and his Counsel, and that ^ee that makes such
demand, shall never have the thing so demanded. A Law now meet to be put in
execution.

Thirteenthly, If the king should have an absolute Negative Voice, in refusing
such public Bills as are necessary and expedient for the common good and
safety of his people, It would rest in the mere power and pleasure of a
wilful or misadvised king, seduced by evil Counselors, to deprive the
kingdom of the principal use, benefit, and privilidges of Parliament, Sir
Tho. Smiths Comm^nwealth l. ^, c, 1, 2, Brook Minshaw, Cowell, Title Parliament
Vowel, Holinsh. Cambd in their Discourses of Parliaments.
the making of good and wholesome laws, for the good government of the Realm*
the removal or prevention of emergent grievances or dangers, and execution of
public Justice on Delinquents* to the great peril, prejudice, if not ruin of
the Realm. And our 4, E* 3. c. 4. 36. E. 3. c. 10, and She Bill for Trienniall
Parl.
Annual or Trienniall Parliaments should serve then to no other purpose, but
to supply the king with subsidies, or keep the Wool. sacks and Benches from
growing moldy, whilst the Lords and Commons sat upon them, rather-like so
many Ciphers without a ^igu^e, then a Court of Parliament; if the Laws of the
Realm were in the Kings hand or breast alone, as Richard the 2. sometimes said
they were, (an Grafton, p. 401. 402, Trussell. p. 46*
Article objected against him at his deposing) contrary to that approved
resolution of Pol^t. l, 4. c. 8
Aristotle; whatsoever se^ms good to the major part of the Governors of the
Commonwealth that is established for a law, which holds good in the Kingdom
of Hy^ronym, Blanca Arog^^ens. Rerum. Com p. 768. to 772.
Aragon at this day; where the King in making public Laws has no absolute
negative Voice, nor yet in summoning of Parliaments, which are constantly held
at their set times every year or two at furthest, whether the king will or not.

Fourteenthly, God himself ( the Deuteronomy. 10. 17. 1 Timothy ^, 15, Rev. 17. 14, and
19. 6.
King of kings and Lord of Lord) held this a principal part of his sovereign
divine prerogative; to give his people from heaven (when they needed and
required it) right Judgments, and Laws of truth, good statutes and
Commandments for their good and welfare: Neh. 9. 14. Exodus c. 19. and 20. and
21. Deuteronomy. 4. 8. to 41. and chap. 5. throughout: Neither Ps. 34* 9. 10, Psa, 84.
11. Iam. 1. 5. 17. Mat. 7, 7, 8, 5, ^, (...) 11. c 21. 22. John 16. 23. 24. 1
John 5. 14. 15. Isa. 65, 24, Dan, 9, 20, to 25.
does, will, or can he deny any Just or necessary suite, prayer or petition
that his poor servants and creatures (though but dust and ashes) jointly, or
severally put up unto him: but most willingly grants without the least denial,
or unnecessary delay, what ever good and needful things they require at his
hands. And can or dare kings then claim a greater, an higher prerogative over
their kingdoms, and subiect^, then God himself, the King of kings, does overh
is creatures? or arrogate to themselves an absolute Negative voice, where God
himself (whose servants and vicegerents only kings are) neither has nor will
have any, but utterly disclaimes it? God forbid, that any such arrogant thought
should ever enter into the hearts of any Christian kings, who being in truth
but servants to, not absolute Lords over their kingdoms, in whom the sovereign
legislative power and authority resides, must, and ought by the Laws of God
and man, rather condescend to their parliaments and kingdoms just requests, in
assenting to necessary wholesome just Laws, Eracton, l. 3. c. 9.
then their parliaments and kingdoms quietly submit to their unjust disassents
unto them to the public prejudice, as is clear by 2. Sam. 8. 4. to the end.
Act. 13. 36.

Finally, our Ancestors were so far from believing, that our kings havean
absolute negative voice, in such Bills as these, that they have not only
constrained our kings by threats, yea force of Arms, to summon and continue
Parliaments, but likewise compelled them to give their Royal Assents to Magna
Charta, Charta de Foresta, Confirmatio Chartarum, Articuli super Chartas, with
sundry other public statutes of Right and Justice for the common good and
subjects safety, and to ratify them with their hands, seals Oaths,
Proclamations, the Bishops solemn excommunications, yea and the Popes leaden
Bulls, against their will and liking, as I have plentifully manifested in the
former part: Which forced assents have been held good in Law, to bind these
kings and their successors, with this distinction, where the Laws to which
this assent was forced are convenient, necessary, or essential for the
kingdoms welfare, the subjects just Liberty, and such as the king by duty and
oath is bound to assent to: there, if they compel the king to give his assent
in case of wilful denial the assent is binding, and shall not be avoided by
Duresse, because the King does no more then he is obliged by Law, Oath, and
Duty to condescend to: Upon which ground, a ^, E, ^, ^7, ^2 E. 4. 7, 8. Ass^ 25
43. E. 3. 12. Brook Dures. 1, 4, 10, 15* ^7, 6, 22, Fitz. Dure^. 3. 3. 11, 12,
1^, 7 18.
Tenant enforced to attorne to a grant of a reversion by imprisonment, upon a
Quid juris clamat, shall never avoid this attornm^nt by Duresse; nor an 13. E.
1. P^rque servitia 23. 37. H. 6. 14, Br Attornment. 2^.
Obligation made by one taken in execution for payment of a just debt; nor the
just judgment of a Judge given by menaces, shall not be avoided: This is clear
by Magna Charta, and other Laws gotten at first by See Math. Paris, p. 244. to
257.
Duresse and Menaces from our Kings, and yet firm and binding when even thus
assented to, because just and necessary; as King Henry 3. An* 12 22. confessed;
Speed, p, 597 Mat. Par. p. 305. Deniel, p. 151.
Who when the Barons demanded of him the confirmation of the great Charter, and
their Liberties according to his Oath upon the conclusion of the peace with
Lewis; William Brewer, one of the Kings Counsel answering, that the Liberties
they demanded must not be observed, because they were violently extorted, and
words hereupon growing between the Barons and him, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury kindling at it; the young King prudently closed up the whole strife
with this speech; All of us have sworn to these ^iberties, and that which we
have sworn, ALL OF US ARE BOUND TO OBSERVE. But where the Acts to which the
assent is gained, are unjust or illegal, such to which the King was not bound
by Oath or duty to consent, but merely out of necessity to avoid imminent
danger of death, or other mischief, and where the whole Parliament was
enforced as well as the King; there the acts may be avoided by Duresse, as is
evident by the Statutes of 11. and 21. of R. 2. c. 12. by the Statute of 31 H.
6. c. 1, (which makes void all the Petitions granted by this King in a former
Parliament the 29. of his Reign, and all indictments made by Duresse, through
the Rebellion, Tyranny, and Menaces of Jack Cade and his rebellious rout of
Traitors) and by 39. H. 6. c. 1. 15. E. 3. stat. 2. and 17. E. 4. c. 7. Yet
these enforced unjust Bills, being public Acts, done in a legal form, are
not merely void, but good in Law till they be repealed, and nullified by a
subsequent Parliament; (as is evident by the next forecited Statutes;) even as
a 31. H. 6. c. ^. 3. H. 7. c. 2. 1 E. 3* c. 15. stat. 2. and stat. 1, c. ^. 1
^. 2, c 13. 5 R. 2. c 6, See Brook and Astr. Title Ducesse.
Marriage, Bond, or deed made by Duresse or Menace, are good in Law, and not
merely void, but voidable only upon a Plea and Trial. And if subsequent
Parliaments refuse to repeal these forced Laws, and to declare the Royal
assent thereto by coertion, void or illegal, the King cannot avoid them by
Duresse (because his Royal assent is a judicial Act in open Parliament, which
his oath and duty obliged him to give, and the Laws are rather the Parliaments
Act which was not forced, then his own,) but they remain in full vigor as if
he had freely assented to them; which is most evident by the Statutes made in
10. and 11. R. 2. which though extorted from the King by Duresse, against the
will and liberty of the King, and right of his Crown, as is pretended and
declared in the Statute of 21. R. 2. c. 12. yet they continued in full strength
for ten years space or more, (during which time there were no less then 8.
Parliaments held under this King) because these Parliaments refused to reverse
them upon this pretext of Duresse; and the Parliament of 1 H. 4, c, 2, 3, 4.
received and confirmed them.

From all which premises, I humbly conceive, I may infallibly conclude, That
the King in passing the forementioned kind of Bills, of Common Right and
Justice for the Kingdoms, and the Subjects weal and safety, has no absolute
negative voyee, but must and ought of common right and Justice, by virtue of
his Royalloath and duty, to give his ready and free assent unto them without
any tergiversati^n. And so the Parliament in their Declarations to this
purpose, has no ways invaded nor injured his Majesty's just Prerogative
royal in this particular.

Nor yet those members in it eclipsed his royal grace, who have upon occasion
given affirmed, the Petition of Right, the Bills for Trieniall Parliaments
(which before by Law were to be annual at least;) the continuance of this
Parliament without adjournment, for the Kingdoms necessary preservation; the
acts against Shipmoney, Forest-Bounds etc. (illegal new invented grievances,
and oppressions not heard of in former Kings Reigns) and the Statutes for the
suppression of the Star Chamber, High Commission, Knighthood, and Bishops
votes, (lately grown intolerable grivances and mischeifes to the Realm;
Especially since his Majesty's Reign;) to be no acts of See Dr* ^ullers late
Sermon* the last inaugura^ion day.
most transcendent Grace, such as never any Prince before vouchsafed to his
people, as they are daily cried up in Press and Pulpet; but Bills of mere
Common Right and Justice, which the King by his Royal Office, Oath, Duty, in
Law and Conscience ought to assent unto, and could not without apparent
injustice deny to pass, when both Houses urged him thereunto; the rather
because the unhappy fractions of all Parliaments, and Grievances of these
Natures under his Majesty's own Reign and Government, occasioned by his evil
Councellers, were the sole grounds and just occasions of enacting these
necessary Laws for the Subjects future security; if the sword now drawn to
suppress the Parliament, and cut these Gordians (or rather Cobwebs, as
Diogenes once termed Laws) a sunder, deprive them not of their benefit, before
they scarce enjoy it.

I should now here proceed, to manifest the Parliaments taking up of defensive
Arms against his Majesty's Malignant Army of professed Papists, Delinquents,
and pillaging murdering Cavaleers, (whose grand design is only to set up
Popery and an absolute tyrannical Government over our consciences, bodies,
estates) in defense of their own persons, privileges, the Subjects Laws,
Liberties, Properties, and our Protestant established Religion (devoted by
Papists to eternal ruin, as we have cause to fear) to be just, lawful, and
no treason nor rebellion at all against the King, neither in point of Law nor
conscience; And that the Parliaments assessing of men toward the maintenance
of this necessary defensive war, by an Ordinance of both Houses only without
the Kings assent, (now wilfully absent from, and in arms against his
Parliament and People) with their distraining and imprisoning of such as refuse
to pay it; and their confinement and securing of dangerous Malignants, to be
justifiable by Law and ancient presidents; with other particulars, not yet so
fully discussed by any, as is desired. But this part being already grown
somewhat large, and having lingered much longer at the Press then I expected; I
have thought it more convenient, to reserve the remainder for a future Treatise
by it self, then to hinder the state of the present benefit, which it may
receive by this, through Gods blessing, ere the other can ^ee completed; which
I hope will fully un-blindfold the hood-winkt world, and either satisfy the
consciences, or stop the mouths of all who are not wilfully malicious against
the Truth and Parliaments proceedings; and the Sovereign Power of Parliaments
and Kingdoms, over their Kings themselves; which I shall more copiously
manifest in the Appendix.

FINIS partis secunda.
THE THIRD PART OF THE SOVEREIGN POWER OF PARLIAMENTS and KINGDOMS. Wherein
the Parliaments present Necessary Defensive War against the Kings offensive
Malignant, Popish forces; and Subjects taking up Defensive Arms against their
Sovereigns, and their Armies in some Cases, is copiously manifested, to be
Just, Lawful, both in point of Law and Conscience; and neither Treason nor
Rebellion in either; by inpregnable Reasons and Authorities of all kinds.
Together With a Satisfactory Answer to all Objections, from Law, Scripture,
Fathers, Reason, hitherto alleged by Dr. Fern, or any other late opposite
Pamphleters, whose gross Mistakes in true Stating of the present Controversy,
in sundry points of Divinity, Antiquity, History, with their absurd irrational
Logic and Theology, are here more fully discovered, refuted, than hitherto
they have been by any: Besides other particulars of great concernment. By
WILLIAM PRYNNE, Utter-Barrester, of Lincolnes Inn.

2 Samuel 10. 12. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our People, and
for the City of our God, and the Lord do what seems him good.

Esther 9. 1, 2. 5, 10. In the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have
power over them, the Jews gathered themselves together into their Cities,
throughout all the Provinces of King Ahashuerus, to lay hand on those that
sought their lives, and no man could withstand them; for the fear of them fell
upon all people. Thus the Jews smote all their enemies with the stroke of the
sword, and slaughter and destruction; and did what they would with those that
hated them; but on the spoil laid they not their hand.

It is this eighth day of May, 1643. Ordered by the Committee of the House of
Commons in Parliament for Printing, that this Book, Entitled, The third Part
of the Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, be Printed by Michael
Spark, senior.

John White.



Printed at London for Michael Spark, Senior. 1643.

TO HIS EVER-HONOVRED, NOBLE, KIND FRIENDS, THE Right Honorable Lord
Ferdinando Fairfax, the Right Worshipful, Sir William Waller, and Sir William
Bruerton, Knights, Commanders in Chief, of the Parliaments Forces, in several
Counties.
Deservedly Renowned Worthies,
YOUR Incomparable Valor, Zeal, Activity, Industry for the preservation of
Your Dearest Country, Religion, Laws, Liberties, and the very being of
Parliaments, all now endangered by an unnatural generation of Popish and
Malignant Vipers, lately risen up in Arms against them in diverse parts of
this Realm; and those many miraculous Victories with which God has been
lately pleased to Crown your cordial endeavors, to promote his glory and the
Public safety, as they have justly demerited some grateful general
Acknowledgements from the whole Representative Body of the State; so they may
in some sort challenge a private gratulatory Retribution from Me, who have
formerly had the happiness to participate in your Christian Affections, and
now reap much Consolation by your Heroic Actions.

Having therefore seasonably finished this Third part, Of the Sovereign Power
of Parliaments and Kingdoms; copiously Vindicating, the Lawfulness, Justness
of the Parliaments present Necessary Defensive War (in which you have had the
Honor to be employed, not only as Chief, but which is more, as most
successful Commanders, in your several Countries,) in point both of Law and
Conscience; and fully wiping off those black Aspersions, of TREASON and
REBELLION, which the opposite party (really guilty of these crimes against both
King and Kingdom, as I have Part 1. Edit. 2 p. 108, to 112.
elsewhere manifested, and here lightly touched) have out of Malice, Ignorance,
or both conjoined, most injuriously cast upon your Loyal, honorable
proceedings, which rejoice the souls of all true Philopa^ers, who cordially
affect their Country or Religion; I could not, without much ingratitude, yea
injustice, have published it to the world, but under the Patronage of your
ever-honored res^lendent names, who have so valorously, so successefully
pleaded this Cause already in the Field, that it needs the less assistance
from the Press.

My many inevitable interruptions and straites of time in its contexture, which
may happily detract something from its perfection; shall I hope, derogate
nothing from your Honorable, Friendly acceptance; whom I have thus conjoined
in the Dedication; because the Parliament has united you in their present
Warlike employments, and God himself jointly honored you with success, even
to admiration among the Good, indignation amidst Malignants, envy with the
Malicious, and, I trust, to an active sedulous em^lation in all your Fellow
Commanders, employed in other Quarters in the selfsame Cause.

Your present busy public, and mine own private Employments, prohibit me to
expatiate; Wherefore earnestly beseeching the Glorious Lord of Hosts to be ever
mightily present with your several Noble Persons, Forces, and to make you
always eminently, active, Valorous, Victorious, as hitherto he has done, till
Peace and Truth, Tranquillity and Piety, by your several triumphant
Proceedings, shall once more lovingly embrace and kiss each other in our
divided unreformed, sinful Kingdom; And till the effect of these just wars
You manage, shall be quietness and assurance to us and our Posterities after
us for ever; I humbly recommend your Persons, Proceedings to his protection who
can secure you in and from all dangers of war, and rest,

Your Honors, Worships most affectionate Friend and Servant, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Who have been always hitherto a Cordial Desirer, endeavourer of Peace, am
here necessitated to present Thee with a Discourse of War; to justify The
Lawfulness of the Parliaments present taking up of necessary Defensive Arms.
Which neither their Ende^vours, nor my, with many others Prayers could (with
any safety to our Privileges, Persons, Religion, Liberty, Realms, now
forcibly invaded by his Majesty's Popish and Malignant Cavallieres) hitherto
prevent, or conjure down.

To plead the Justness of a War, of an unnatural Civil war, (the worst
of any) of a War between the Head and Members, may seem not only a
Paradox, but a Prodigy, in a Land heretofore blessed with an aged,
uninterrupted Peace: And Civilis Belli, l. 1. p. 1.
Lucans Bella per Aemathios plusquam civilia Campos, etc. (now most unhappily
revived among us) being but Historical, and Poetical; may pass the world
with less admiration and censure, than this harsh Piece, which is both Legally
and Theol^gically (like the Subject matter) Polemicall. But as the Apud veres
Dei Cultores etiam ipsa bella pacata sunt; quae non cupiditate aut crudelitate,
sed pacis studio ge^iunter Aug. de diverse. Eccl. obse^^. 7. Gratian Cause* 23.
qu. 2. cap. Apud. Albericus Gentilis de Iure belli l. 1. c. 5.
aim, the end of all just War, is and ought to be only future settled Peace;
so is the whole drift of this Military Dissertation: not to foment or protract,
but end our bloody Wars; which nothing has more excited, animated, lengthened
in the Adverse party, than a strong conceit, (if not serious belief,) that
The Parliaments Forces, neither would, nor lawfully might in point of Law or
Conscience forcibly resist or repulse their invasive Arms, without danger of
High Treason and Rebellion, (which Bugbeare I have here refuted, removed) and
the In-activity, the much admired slownesse of many of our Forces, in
resisting, in preventing their vigorous Proceedings, which a little timely
vigilance and diligence had easily controlled.

It is a more than Patriae deesse quoad vita sapp^^a^ nef^s est Livius, Ro^.
Hi^^t. l 5
Barbarous Inhumanity for any person, not to put to his uttermost strength,
speedily to close up the mortal wounds of his bleeding, dying Native Country;
but to protract its cure, to enlarge, increase its deadly Ulcers, Stabs, Sores,
and make a lasting trade of War, out of a sordid, Militare non est d^lictum
sed p^opter praedam militare peccatum est. August de Verbis Dom* Tract. 19. and
Gratian. cause. 23. qu. 1.
sinful desire of Gain, of Plunder, to raise a private fortune by the
Republics ruins, (a sin, of which some perchance are guilty) is an
unparalleld, most unnatural prodigious Impiety.

It was thought a great dishonor heretofore, for men of Honor and Estates,
not to serve and defend their Country gratis, as our own See Littleton in his
Chapter of Gran^ serjanty, Knight Service, Escuage, and Cook ibi.
Lawbooks and Histories plentifully manifest: and shall such Persons now turn
sordid Mercenaries; stir neither hand nor foot without their Pay; and be more
diligent to get their wages, than discharge their Service? God forbid.

It is Numb. 32 Josh. 1. 12, to 18.
Recorded of the Children of Gad and Reuben, after they had recovered their
inheritance on this side Jordan, that they went all up armed before the Lord
over Jordan, at their own free cost, until they had driven out all the
enemies in it before them, subdued the Land, and settled their brethren of the
other Tribes peaceably in it. And shall not Englishmen of Estates do the like
for their Brethren now, in these times of need, when money (the sinews of
War) is almost quite shrunk up, by reason of former Disbursements and want
of Trade? We read, Jugd 5. 19*
That the very Heathen Kings of Canaan when they came and fought in Taanach by
the waters of Megiddo, against the Israelites, THEY TOOK NO GAIN OF MONEY,
for their pains: Such was their Noble generosity, which Deborah registers in
her Song for their eternal Glory. And we hear of diverse Lords and Gentlemen
in the Kings Army, which serve against their Country gratis; yea furnish out
sundry Horse and Foot, of their proper cost; of few or none such there who
receive any Pay. And shall these be more free, generous, active in serving,
fighting against God, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Parliament and their Country;
than those of like Rank and quality on the Parliaments party are in warring
for them? O 2 Samuel 1. ^0
let not such an ignoble, unchristian Report be ever once justly told in Gath,
or published in the streets of Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines
rejoice, lest the sons and daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

I know there are some Heroicke Worthies in the Parliaments Armies, of whom I
may truly sing with Deborah, Judge. 5. 9. 1^.
My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly
among the people; and who like Zebulon and Nepthali, have freely jeoparded
their lives unto the death, in the high places of the field. Blessed be their
Endeavors, and their Names for ever Honorable: I shall now only wish that
others would imitate their laudable examples, that so our long-lingring wars,
may be speedily and happily determined in a blessed, pure, pious, secure,
honorable, lasting Peace. They are Tormentors, not Chirurgions, Executioners,
not true Soldiers, who desire, endeavor not speedily to close up and heal
their dearest Countries bleeding, festring wounds; for which I have prepared
this Treatise, as a Sovereign Balm, to incarne and cicatrize them, not
ulcerate, or inflame them.

It was the Prophets Patheticke expostulation, Jer. 8. 20. 22.
The harvest is past, the Summer is ended, and we are not healed: Is there no
balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? why then is not the health of the
Daughter of my people recovered? It may be Englands and Irelands expostulation
now: The Lord put it into the hearts of our great Physicians (the King,
Parliament, and Grandees of both Armies) that they may now at last with
bleeding, melting hearts and spirits, speedily pour forth such effectual
healing Balmes into these two dying Kingdoms deadly wounds, as may effectually
cure and restore them to more perfect health and vigor than they ever formerly
enjoyed, that so they may lose nothing but their putrid blood, their proud dead
flesh, their filthy sanies and corrupt humors, by their unnatural stabs
already received: Toward the advancement of which much desired cure, if these
my undigested rude Collections (interrupted with sundry inevitable interloping
Distractions, which may justly excuse their many defects) may add any
contribution, or satisfy any seduced, or scrupulous Consciences touching this
present War; I shall deem my labors highly recompensed; And so recommending
them to Gods blessing, and thy charitable acceptance, I shall detain thee
with no further Prologue.

Farewell.
THE SOVEREIGN POWER OF PARLIAMENTS and KINGDOMS:
PROVING 1st.
That the Parliaments present necessary Defensive War, is Just and Lawful
both in point of Law and Conscience, and no Treason nor Rebellion.
HAving in the two former Parts of this Discourse dissipated four chief
Complaints against the Parliaments proceedings; Object. 5*
I come now in order (in point of time and sequel) to the 5th Grand Objection
of the King, Royalists, and Papists against the Parliament. To wit: See many
Printed Declarations, Proclamations to this effect; with other Pamphlets.
That they have traitorously taken up Arms, and levied war against the King
himself in his Kingdom; and would have taken away his life at Keinton
battle, which is no less than Rebellion and High Treason, by the Statute of
25. E. 3. c. 2. with other obsolete Acts; and by the Common Law. Which
Objection, though last in time, is yet of greatest weight and difficulty, now
most cried up and insisted on, of all the rest, in many of his Majesty's late
Proclamations, Declarations, and in Anti-Parliamentary Pamphlets.

To give a punctual Answer Answ.
to this capital Complaint, not out of any desire to foment, but cease this
most unnatural bloody war, which threatens utter desolation to us if
proceeded in, or not determined with a just, honorable, secure, lasting peace;
now lately rejected by his Majesty's party. I say,

First, that it is apparent to all the world, who are not wilfully or
maliciously blinded;

Secondly, that the Sea the Houses several Declarations to this effect.
Parliament in raising their forces had no intention at all to offer and Army
Marching with a Petition to this purpose,) and to bring those Delinquents to
condign punishment who most contemptuously deserted the Houses, contrary to
Order, Law, the Privileges of Parliament, their own Protestation taken in
both Houses, sheltring themselves, under the power of his Majesty's presence
and Forces, from the justice of the Houses, and apprehension of their Officers,
contrary to all presidents in former ages, in High affront of the privileges,
honor, power of the Parliament, and 13 E 1 c. 38 31 H. 6, c. 1. See Ashes
Table, Contemp. 6, 7 the Law books there quoted, 6 H. 8. c. 16. 3 E. 3. 19.
Coron. 161. Dyer, 60. Stamfords Pleas, l. 1. c. 29* f. 38. l, 3, c, 63, f, 153.
Fundamental known Law of the Realm: Since which time, his Majesty having
(contrary to his former Proclamations and frequent Printed solemn
Declarations) entertained, not only diverse Irish Popish Rebels, but likewise
English and Outlandish Papists in his Army, and given Commissions to sundry The
Declaration of the Lords and Commons in Answer to his Majesty's, concerning
Keinton Battle.
Arch-Popish Recusants, to A^me themselves, and raise Forces against the
Parliament, and Kingdom, now in the field in all the Northern parts, Wales,
and other places, (and that under the Popes own consecrated Banner as many
report) in defiance of our Protestant Religion, (designed by the Popish Party
both at home and abroad, to no less then utter extirpation in England, as well
as in Ireland, if not in Scotland too, (as some of them openly profess;) the
Parliament are hereupon necessitated to augment and recrute their forces; as
for the precedent ends at first, so now more especially, for the necessary
defense of the Protestant Religion established among us by law; against which
they (and all others who are not wilfully blinded) visibly discern a most
apparent desperate conspiracy; which though not clearly perceived, but only
justly suspected at first, does now appear (all circumstances and agents
considered) to be the very Embrio and primitive cause of this deplorable war;
against which the Parliament and subjects are now more necessitated and engaged
to defend themselves then ever, seeing they have by all possible means
endeavored to prevent this war at first, and since to accommodate it, though
in vain, upon just, reasonable, and honorable safe terms for King and
Kingdom. The sole Question then in this case thus truly stated will be.

Whether his Majesty, having contrary to his Oath, Duty, the fundamental Laws
of God and the Realm, raised an Army of Malignants, Papists, Forraigners;
against his Parliament, Kingdom, People, to make an Offensive war upon them,
to murder, rob, spoil, deprive them of their peace, liberties, properties,
estates; to impose unlawful taxes by force upon them; protect Delinquents and
evil Counselors against the Parliaments Justice, and violently to undermine
our established Protestant Religion; the Commonwealth of England legally
assembled in Parliament; and all Subjects in such cases, by Command and
direction from both Houses of Parliament, may not lawfully and justly without
any Treason or Rebellion, in point of Law and Conscience, take up defensive
Arms to preserve the Privileges of Parliament, their Laws, lives, liberties,
estates, properties, Religion, to bring Delinquents and ill Councillors to
condign punishment, and rescue his seduced Majesty out of their hands and
power, though he be personally present with them, to assist and countenance
them in this unnatural destructive war?

And under correction (notwithstanding any thing I ever yet heard or read to
the contrary) I conceive affirmatively, that they may justly do it, both in
point of Law and Conscience. I shall begin with Law, because in this unhappie
controversy, it must direct the conscience.

First, I have Part 1. and 2. throughout.
already proved in Judgment of Law, the Parliament and Kingdom assembled in
it, to be the Sovereign power, and of greater authority then the King, who is
but their public Minister in point of civil Justice, and General in matters
of war, as the Roman Kings and Emperors were, and other foreign Kings of
old and at this day are. The Parliament then being the highest power, and
having principal right and authority to denounce, conclude and proclaim
war, (as I have manifested in the debate of the Militia,) may not only
lawfully resist, but oppugn, suppress all Forces raised against it, and the
Kingdoms peace or welfare.

Secondly, the principal end of the Kingdoms, original erecting Parliaments,
and investing them with supreme power at first, was, to defend not only with
good Laws and Council, but when absolute necessity requires (as now it
does,) with open force of Arms; the Subjects Liberties, Persons, Estates,
Religion, Laws, Lives, Rights, from the encroachments and violence of their
Kings, and to keep Kings within due bounds of Law and Justice; the end of
instituting the Sea Polybi^n Hist. l. 6. Arist Polit. l. 3. c. 10. 11. l. 5 c.
10. l. 2. c. 5. Bodin l. ^, c, 10. l, 2, c. 5.
Senate and Ephori among the Lacaedemonians, the Senate and Dictators among the
Romans, the Hieron. Blan. Ar^gonens. Rerum Comment. p. 588. 589. 716. to 725.
747. to 760. Joan. Mariana de Rege and Regi^ Instit. l. 1. c. 5. to 10.
F^rum Suprarbiense, and Iustitia Aragoniae among the Aragonians; of
Parliaments, Dietts, and Assemblies of the estates in other foreign
Kingdoms, and in Scotland, as I shall prove at large in its In the Appendix.
proper place. This is clear by the proceedings of all our Parliaments in
former ages; Especially in King John's, Henry the third, Edward the 1. 2. 3. and
Richard the seconds Reigns; by the latter Parliaments in King James his
reign, yea of 3. Caroli, the last dissolved Parliament, and this now sitting,
whose principal care and employment has been to vindicate the Subjects
Liberties, properties, laws, and Religion, from all illegal encroachments on
them by the Crown and its ill Instruments: by the Part. 1.
forecited resolutions of Bracton, Fleta, the Myrror of Justices, Vowell,
Holinshed, the Council of Basil, and others, that the Parliament ought to
restrain and bridle the king when he casts off the bridle of the Law, and
invades the Subjects Liberties, especially with open force of Arms in an
Hostile manner: and by the constant practice of our Ancestors and the Barons
Wars, in maintenance of Magna Charta, with other good Laws and Privileges,
confirmed by Parliament. If then the Parliament be entrusted by the Kingdom
with this Superlative power, thus to protect the Subjects Liberties,
properties, Laws, persons, Religion, etc. against the kings invasions on them
by policy or violence: they should both betray their trust, yea the whole
kingdom too, if they should not with open Force of Arms, (when Policy,
Council, and Petitions will not do it) defend their own and the Subjects
Liberties, persons, privileges, etc. against his Majesty's offensive Armies
which invade them, intending to make the whole kingdom a present booty to
their insaciable rapine, and a future vassal to his Majesty's absolute
arbitrary power, by way of conquest.

I read in Commonwealth l. 3. c. 1 See Plut. Caes. and Pompeius.
Bodin that the Roman Senate being no way able to restrain Caesar, took their
refuge to that ancient Decree of the Senate, which was commonly made but in
dangerous times of the Commonweal, Videant Consules and caeteri Magistratus
ne quid detrimenti c^piat Respublica: Let the Consulls and other Majestrates
foresee that the Commonweal take no harm. With which decree of the Senate,
the Consulls being armed, suddenly raised their power, commanding Pompey to
take up Arms and raise an Army against Caesar to oppose his violent
proceedings by force who after his conquest of Pompey refusing to rise up to
the Consulls, Pretors, and whole Senate, out of his pride, through his ill
Counselors advise, and talking with them, as if they had been but private
men, he so far offended both the Senate and people, that to free the
Republicke from his Tyranny, and preserve their hereditary Liberties, they
conspired his death, and soon after murdered him in the Senate House, where
they gave him no less than 23. wounds. And Aragonensium Rerum Comment. p. 724.
Hieronimus Blanca assures us, that the Suprariense Forum, Iustitia Aragoniae,
or States of Arag^n, (erected to withstand the tyranny and encroachments of
their kings) may by the Laws of their Realm assemble together, and RESIST
THEIR KING WITH FORCE OF ARMS, as often as there shall be need to repulse his,
or his Officers violence against the Laws; For when they erected this Court,
they said, It would be little worth to have good Laws enacted, and a middle
Court of Justice between the King and people appointed, if it might not be
lawful to take up Arms for their Defense when it was needful; (being
agreeable to the very Law of nature and reason;) Because then it will not be
sufficient to fight with Counsel: For if this were not so, and the State and
Subjects in such cases might not lawfully take up arms, all things had long
ere this been in the power of Kings. Therefore, no doubt, our Parliament and
State, as well as others, may by the very Law of Nature, and fundamental
institution of Parliaments, now justly take up Defensive arms to preserve
their Liberties, Laws, Lives, Estates, Religion, from vassallage and ruin.

Thirdly, Our own Parliaments, Prelates, Nobles, and Commons in all ages
(especially in times of Popery) as well in Parliament, as out, have by open
force of arms resisted, suppressed the oppressions, rapines, unjust violence,
and armies of their Princes raised against them; Yea, incountred their Kings in
open Battles, taken their persons Prisoners, and sometimes expelled, nay
deposed them their Royal authority, when they became incorrigible open
professed enemies to their kingdoms, their Subjects, seeking the ruin,
slavery, and desolation of those, whom by Office, Duty, Oath, and common
Justice, they were bound inviolably to protect in Liberty and peace, as the
Part 1. p. 6, 7, 8, etc.
premised Histories of Achigallo, Emerian, Vortigern, Segebert, Osred,
Ethelr^d, Bernard, Edwin, Ceolwulfe, King John, Henry the 3d. Edward 1. and 2.
Richard the 2, Henry the 6th. (our British, Saxon, English Kings,) and other
examples common in our own Annalls, plentifully manifest. Neither are their
examples singular, but all Kingdoms generally throughout the world in all ages
have done the like, when their Kings degenerated into Tyrants, of which there
are See Arist. Polir. l: 5 c. 10 D^. Beards Theater of Gods Judgments. l. 2.
c. 9. to 43. Ad generum Cere^is pauci sine sanguine fuso, Descendunt Reges, and
sicca morte Tyr^nni Iuvenal. See the Appendix.
infinite precedens in History: which actions all ages, all Kingdoms have
always reputed lawful both in point of Policy, Law, Religion, as warranted by
the very Laws of Nature, Reason, State, Nations, God; which instruct, not
only particular persons, but whole Cities and Kingdoms for their own
necessary defense, preservation, the supportation of humane Society and
Liberty, to protect themselves against all unlawful violence and Tyranny,
even of their Kings themselves, or their Ministers, to whom neither the Laws
of God, Nature, Man, nor any civil Nation, ever yet gave the least authority
to Murder, Spoil, Oppress, enslave their Subjects, or deprive them of their
lawful Liberties or Estates; which resistance were it unlawful or unjust (as
many ignorant Royallists and Parasites now ^each) some few oppressing
tyrannizing wilful Princes, might without the least resistance, ruin,
murder, enslave the whole world of men; overthrow all settled forms of civil
government, extirpate Christian Religion, and destroy all humane Society at
their pleasures; all which had been effected, yea, all States and Kingdoms
totally subverted long ago, by ambitious Tyrannizing lawless Princes, had not
this Lawful, Natural, Hereditary power of resisting and opposing their
illegal violence (inherent in their Parliaments, States, Kingdoms) restrained
and suppressed their exorbitances of this kind. Now that this necessary
Defensive opposition and resistance against open Regal Hostile violence, which
has been ever held lawful, and frequently practiced in all Kingdoms, all
ages heretofore, as just and necessary; should become suddenly unlawful to our
Parliament, and Kingdom only, at this instant, seems very unreasonable unto
me.

Fourthly, It is the express resolution of (...). l. 5. c. 13. 11.
Arist^tle, Memorabil l. 4. p. 813.
Xenophon, (...)* l. 6.
Polibius, Spelmani Council. ^om. 1 P. 34.
Pope Elutherius, (in his Epistle to our first Christian King, Lucius) King
Lambard. Archaion. p. 130. Fox Acts and Mon. vol 1. p. 214.
Edward the Confessor in his established Laws, c. 17. the Lib cap. 1. 2 S^ri^s
Tom. ^. p. 383.
Council of Paris, Anno 829. and Isiod^r cited by it; Commonwealth. l. 2. c.
4, 5.
John (...), De Rege ^t Regis (...). l. 1. c. 5. 6.
John Mariana, and generally of all foreign Divines and Politicians, Pagan or
Christian; yea of Lib 3. c. 9. fol. 107.
Bracton, ^ib 1. c. 17^
F^^ta, De Laudib. Legum Angl. c 9. to 15.
Fortescue, and Speech in Parliament House, Anno 1609.
King James himself; that a King governing in a settled Kingdom, cease to be
a King, and degenerates into a Tyrant, so soon as he leaves to rule by his
Laws; much more, when he begins to invade his Subjects, Persons, Rights,
Liberties to set up an Abitrary power; impose unlawful T^xes, raise Forces,
and make War upon his Subjects, whom he should Protect, and rule in peace; to
pillage, plund^r, ^aste, and spoil his Kingdom; imprison, murder, and
destroy his people in an hostile manner, to captivate them to his pleasure; the
very highest degree of Tyranny, condemned and detested by God, and all good
men. The whole State and Kingdom therefore in such cases as these, for their
own just necessary preservation, may lawfully with force of Arms, when no
other course can secure them, not only passively, but actively resist their
Prince, in such his violent, exorbitant, tyrannical proceedings; without
resisting any kingly, lawful royal Authority Vested in the Kings person for
the Bract. l. 3. c. 9. ^leta l. 1. c. 17. For^ ^s. c. 9. to 15. Cook 7. Report
f^l. 5. (...). Cab^ins Case Romans 13 4. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 14.
Kingdoms preservation only, not destruction; because in, and as to these
illegal oppressions, tyrannical actions, not warranted, but prohibited by the
Laws of God, and the Realm, (to whom he is See the Apendix.
accountable, and by whom he is justly censurable for them) he is no lawful
King, nor Majestrate, but an unjust oppressing Tyrant, and a mere private man,
who (as to these proceedings) has quite denuded himself of his just Regal
authority. So that all those wholesome Laws made by the whole State in
Parliament, for the necessary preservation and defense of their Kings Royal
Person, and lawful Sovereign power; the suppression of all Insurrections,
Treasons, Conspiracies and open Wars against them, whiles they govern their
people justly according to Law; 2 samuel 23. 3
(as all good Princes are Chro 9. 8 See the Kings Coron. oath.
obliged to do by oath and duty;) or the open violent resisting of their
Lawful authority and Commands; to which all Subjects both in point of Law and
Romans 13. 1 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2 13. 14. (...) 3. 1*
Conscience, ought cheerfully and readily to Submit; will yield no public
Countenance, Encouragement, or Protection at all to Kings, in their irregall,
tyrannical oppressions, or violent courses; especially when they turn
professed public enemies to their people, proclaim open War against them,
invade their Laws, Liberties, Goods, Houses, Persons, and exercise all acts of
Hostility against them, as far forth as the most barbarous Foreign Enemies
would do: It being against all common sense and reason to conceive, that our
Parliaments, Laws which strictly inhibit and punish the very smallest
violations of the public peace, with all kinds of Oppressions, Robberies,
Trespasses, Ba^t^ries, Assaults, Bloodsheds, Fraies, Murders, Routs, Riots,
Insurrections, Burglaries, Rapes, Plunderings, Force-able Entries, Invasions of
the, Subjects Liberties or Properties, in all other persons, and greatest
public Officers whatsoever (whose (...). de Repub etc. Cicero de Legi. 2 Samuel
12. 7. to 14. cap. 16. 21. 22. 2 Chr. 33. See. Marian, de Reg. and Reg. Inst l.
1 c 9.
Delinquences are so much the more heinous, De Leg. Arg c. 9. 10. 12. 13. 14.
execrable and censurable, as their persons, honors, and places are more
eminent) should so far countenance, justify, or patronize them only in the
King, the Supreme fountain of Justice (ad tutelam Legis corporum and bonorum
crectus, as Fortescue, and Sir Lib. 7. f. 5. Calvin's Case.
Edward Cook resolve; Cujus Potestas Iuris est, and non Injuriae; and cum sit
author Iuris, non debet inde injuriarum nasci occasio, unde Iura nasc^nt ur; as
Lib. 3. c. 9. f. 107.
Bracton, and Lib. 1 c. ^7.
Fleta determine;) as not to permit the Subjects, under pain of Rebillion and
high Treason, by force of Arms, upon express command and direction of the
whole Kingdom in Parliament, so much as to defend their Persons, Goods,
Estates, Houses, Wives, Children, Liberties, Lives, Religion, against the open
violence of the King himself, or his Malignant plundring, murdering Papists,
Caveleers: When as Kings of all others (as Lib 3. c. 9.
Bracton, De Laud. legum Angl. c. 9. to 15.
Fortescue, and De Rege and Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 9.
Mariana prove at large) both by Oath and Duty, ought to be more observant of,
and obedient to the Laws of God and their Realms (which are Deuteronomy. 10. 17 Prove.
28. 21 Romans 2. 11. Ephesians 6. 11. 1 Pet. 1. 17.
no respectors of Persons) then the very meanest of their Subjects. That
Precept then of Paul, Romans 13. 1. 2. 3. Let every Soul be subject to the
higher Powers, etc. And the Statute of 25. E. 3. c. 2. with other obsolete
Acts, which declare it High Treason, to levy War against the King in his
Realm, must needs be intended of, and quallified with these subsequent just
limitations, suitable to their genuine sense and meaning; to wit, That as long,
and so far forth, as Kings justly and uprightly do execute their just
Royal power, conferred on them by God and their people, according to the Law
of God, and their Realms, to the Protection, encouragement and praise of all
their good Subjects, and the deserved punishment only of Malefactors; they
must and ought to be cheerfully obeyed, and quietly submitted to, as Gods own
Ministers, without the least resistance, private or public; neither ought any
private men upon any private injuries, of their own authority to raise up in
Arms against them, seeing they are public Magistrates in whom all the
Kingdom have an interest, without the general assent and authority of the
whole State and Kingdom, or of both Houses of Parliment which represents it.
But if Kings degenerate into Tyrants, and turn professed enemies to their
Kingdoms, Parliaments, People, by making open War against them; by spoiling,
murdering, imprisoning, maiming, sacking, destroying, or putting them out of
their Protections, without any just or lawful grounds, endeavoring by force
of Arms to subvert their Laws, Liberties, Religion, and expose them as a prey
to their merciless blood-thirsty Soldiers; or bring in Foreign Forces to
conquer them, (our present case;) I dare confidently aver, it was never the
thought nor intention of Paul, or the Holy Ghost, much less of our Nobles,
Prelates, and Commons in Parliament, which enacted these Laws (who so often took
up Arms, as well offensive, as defensive, against our Kings, in such like cases
heretofore) to inhibit Subjects, Kingdoms, Parliaments (especially, by direct
Votes and Ordinances of both Houses) under pain of damnation, high Treason, or
Rebellion, by defensive Arms to resist Kings themselves, or any of their
Cavalliers: and if this question had been put to Paul, Peter, or any of those
Parliaments, which enacted these objected Laws; Whether they ever meant by
these Precepts or Statutes, totally to prohibit all Subjects, by general
assent in Parliament, to take up such defensive Arms, or make any forceable
resistance, against their Kings or their Armies, in such cases of extremity and
necessity as these, under the foresaid penalties? I make little question, but
they would have clearly resolved; that it was never so much as within the
compass of their thoughts, much less their plain intention, to prohibit
such a resistance, in this or such like cases, but only according to the
precedent exposition of their words; and that they never imagined to establish
in the world any Irresistable Lawless Tyranny, or any such spoil or butchery
of Kingdoms, of Subjects, execrable to God and man, in all persons, all ages,
which have See Doctor Beards Theater of Gods Judgments, l. 2. c. 13. to 42.
resisted them even unto blood; but rather totally to suppress them; There
being scarce any more pregnant Text, against the Tyranny, the boundless
Prerogatives, the illegal proceedings of Kings, and Higher Powers in all the
Scripture, th^^ that of Romans 13. 1. to 7. if rightly scanned, as Pareus, and
others o^ it manifest. Therefore the Parliaments and peoples present defensive
War, and resistance against their seduced King, and his Malignant Popish
Cavalliers, is no violation of any Law of God, of the Realm; but a just
necessary War, which they have to the uttermost endeavored to prevent: and
no Treason, no Rebellion at all within the meaning of any Law, or Statute,
unless we should think our Parliaments so mad, as to declare it high Treason,
or Rebellion, even for the Parliament and Kingdom itself, so much as to take
up Arms for their own necessary preservation, to prevent their inevitable
ruin, when they are openly assaulted by Royal armies; which none can ever
presume they would do, being the very high way to their own, and the whole
Kingdoms subversion.

Fifthly, admit the King should bring in Foreign forces (French, Spanish,
Danes, Dutch, or Irish) to destroy, or Conquer his Subjects, Parliament,
Kingdom, (as some such forces are already landed, and more expected daily;)
and should join himself personally with them in such a service, I think there
is no Divine, Lawyer, or true hearted Englishman, so void of reason, or common
understanding, as to affirm i^ Treason, or Rebellion in point of Law, and a
matter of Damnation in Conscien^^, or true Divinity, for the Parliaments,
Subjects, Kingdom, to take up necessary defensive arms for their own
preservation in such a case, even against the King himself, and his army of
Aliens; but would rather deem it a just, honorable, necessary action; yea, a
duty, for every English man to venture his life, and all his fortunes, for the
defense of his own dearest Native Country, Posterity, Liberty, Religion; and
no less then a glorious Gratian Causa 23 qu. 1. 2. 3. Calvin. Lexicon. Iurid
Tit Bellum.
Martyrdom, to dye manfully in the Field, in such a public quarrel: the
very Heathens generally resolving; that Cicero Tus. quaes^. l. 2.
Dulce and decorum est pro Patria mori: Et mortes pro Patria appetitae, Non
solum gloriosae Rhetoribus, sed etiam beatae videri solent: In a case of this
quallitie. Whence that noble Roman Live Romans Hist. l 5. (...) 51, p. 219.
Camillus, professed to all the Romans in a public Oration; Patriae d^esse
quoad vita suppetat, alijs turpe, Camillo etiam NEFAS EST. And is not there the
selfsame equity, and reason, when the King shall raise an Army of Popish
English, or Irish Rebels, Malignants, Delinquents, and bring in Forraigners
(though yet in no great proporation) to effect the like design. If armed
forceable resistance be no Treason, no Rebellion in Law or Conscience, in the
first, it can be no such crime in our present case.

Sixty, I would demand of any Lawyer, or Divine: What is the true genuine
reason; that the taking up of offensive arms against, or offering violence to
the person, or life of the King, is High Treason, in point of Law and
Divinity? Is it not only because, and as he is, the head and chief member of
the Kingdom, which has a Common interest in him; and because the Kingdom it
self sustaines a public prejudice and loss by this War against, and violence
to his Person? Doubtless* every man must acknowledge this, to be the only
reason; for if he were not such a public person, the levying War against, or
murdering of him, could be no High Treason at all. And this is the reason, why
the elsewhere cited Statutes of our Realm, together with our Historians, make
levying of War, deposing, or killing the King by private persons, High
Treason; not only against the King, but the REALM, and Kingdom to; Witness
the Statutes of 5. R. 2. c. 6. 11. R. 2. c. 1. 3. 6. 17 R. 2. c. 8. 21. R. 2.
c. 2. 4. 20. 3. H. 5. Parl. 2. c. 6. 28. H. 8. c. 7. 1. Mar. c. 6. 13. E^iz. c.
1. 3. Iaco. 1. 2. 3. 4. and the Act of Pacification this present Parliament,
(declaring those persons of England and Scotland TRAITORS TO EITHER REALM, who
shall take up Arms against either Realm, without common consent of
Parliament) which Enact, The levying of War against the Kingdom and
Parliament, invading of England or Ireland, treachery against the Parliament,
repealing of certain Acts of Parliament, ill Counselling the King, coining
false Money, and offering violence to the Kings person, to take away his Life,
to be high Treason, not only against the King and his Crown, but THE REALM
TO; and those who are guilty of such crimes, to be High Traitors and Enemies
TO THE REALM, (...). Hist. Ang. p. 334. 335.
as well at to the King. Hence John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, being accused
in a Parliament held in 7. R. 2. by a Carm^lite Friar, of High Treason, for
practicing suddenly to surprise the KING, and seize upon his Kingdom; the
Duke denied it, as a thing incredible upon this very ground; If I should thus
(said he) affect the Kingdom: Walsing. hist Ang. p. 337.
Is it credible after your murder (which God forbid) that the Lords of this
Kingdom, could patiently endure me, Domini mei ET PATRIAE PRODITOREM, being a
Traitor both of my LORD and COUNTRY? Hence in the same Parliament of 7. R. 2.
John Walsh Esquire Captain of Cherburg in France, was accused by one of
Navarre, DE PRODITIONE REGIS and REGNI, Of Treason against the King and
Kingdom; for delivering up that Castle to the Enemies; And in the Walsing.
hist. Ang. p. 245. 246.
Parliament of 3. R. 2. Sir John Annesley Knight, accused Thomas Ketrington
Esquire, of Treason against the King and Realm, for betraying and selling the
Castle of Saint Savior within the Is^e of Constantine in France, to the
French, for a great sum of money, when as he neither wanted Victuals,
Walsing. hist Ang. p. 72. 76 91, 92. 105, 106.
nor means to defend it: both which Accusations (being of Treasons beyond the
Sea) were determined by Battle, and Duels fought to decide them. Hence the
great Favorite, Pierce Gaveston, Tanquam Legum subversor, Hosti^ Terrae
Publicus, and Publicus Regni Proditor, capite truncatus est: and the two
Spensers after him, were in Edward the second his Reign likewise banished,
condemned, and executed, as Traitors to the King and Realm, ET REGNI
PRODITORES for miscounselling and seducing the King, and moving him to make
War upon his people: Hence both the H^lls Chro. 1 and 3 H. 4 f. 17, 22. Fox
Acts and Mon. vol. 1. Edit. ^lt. Col. 676, 677.
Pierces, and the Archbishop of York, in their Articles against King Henry the
fourth, accused him, as guilty of High Treason, and a Traitor both to the King,
Realm and Kingdom of England, for Deposing and murdering Richard the second.
And hence the Gunpouder Conspirators, were 3 Iac. c. 1, 2 3, 4. The Kings
Proclamations, 3 Jacob. Against them and the A^raignement of Traitors. ^
declared, adjudged, and executed as Traitors both to the KING and REALM, for
atte^pting to blow up the Parliament House, when the King, Nobles, and Commons
were therein assembled: If then the King shall become an open enemy to his
Kingdom, and Subjects, to waste or ruin them; or shall seek to betray them
to a Foreign Enemy (which has been held no less then Treason in a King to
do, who by the express resolution of 28. H. 8. cap. 7. may become a Traitor
to the REALM, and thereupon forfeit his very right and title^ to the Crown;)
it can be no Treason nor Rebellion in Law or Theology, for the Parliament,
Kingdom, Subjects, to take up arms against the King and his Forces, in such a
case, when he shall wilfully and mali^iously rent himself from, and set
himself in direct opposition against his Kingdom; and by his own voluntary
actions turn their common interest in him for their good and protection, into
a public engagement against him, as a common Enemy, who seeks their general
ruin. And if Kings may lawfully take up arms against their Subjects, as all
Royallists plead, after they reject their lawful power, and become open Rebels
or Traitors, because then as to this, they cease to be Subjects any longer, and
so forfeit the benefit of their Royal protection: By the self-same reason (the
bond and stipulation being mutual; Kings being their Subjects Cook 7. Report,
Calvin's case.
Liege Lords, by Oath and Duty, as well as they their Liege people:) When Kings
turn open professed Foes to their Subjects in an Hostile Warrelike way, they
presently both in Law and Conscience, cease to be their Kings de jure, as to
this particular, and their Subjects alleagiance thereby is as to this
discharged, and suspended toward them, as appears by the Kings Coronation
Oath, and the Math. Paris page 73. Speed p. 483. 484.
Lords and Prelates conditional Fealty to King Steven, so that they may justly
in Law and Conscience resist their unlawful assaults, as enemies; for which
they must only censure their own rash unjust proceedings, and breach of Faith
to their People, not their Peoples just defensive opposition which themselves
alone occasioned.

Seventhly, It must of necessity be granted; that for any King to levy war
against his Subjects, unless upon very good grounds of Law and conscience, and
in case of absolute necessity, when there is no other remedy left, is directly
contrary to his very Oath and duty, witness the Law of King Edward the
Confessor, cap. 17. and Coronation Oaths of all our Kings forementioned; To
keep PEACE and godly agreement ENTIRELY, ACCORDING TO THEIR POWER to their
people; Contrary to all the fundamental Laws of the Realm, and the Prologues
of most Statutes, entirely to preserve, and earnestly to endeavor the peace
and welfare of their peoples persons, goods, estates, laws, liberties;
Contrary to the main tenor of all 1 Timothy 2. 1 2, 3. Ier. 29 7 Psalm. 122. 6. 7,
8. Isa. 29. 8. and 9. 6.
Sacred Scriptures, which have relation unto Kings; but more especially to the
1 Kings 12. 21. 23. 24. and 2 Chronicles. 11. 1. 2. Where when King Rehoboam had
gathered a very great army to fight against the ten Tribes, (which revolted
from him for following his young Counselors advice, and denying their just
request, and crowned Jeroboam for their King) intending to reduce them to his
obedience by force of arms; God by his Prophet Shemaiah expressly prohibited
him and his army, to go up, or fight against them; and made them all to
return to their own houses without fighting; and to Isay 14. 4. 19. to 22.
where God threatens, to cast the King of Babylon out of his grave, as an
abominable branch, as a carcass trodden under foot, (mark the reason)
Because thou have destroyed thy Land, and slain thy People, to cut off from
Babylon his name and remembrance, and Sons and Nephews: as he had cut off
his peoples, though heathens. Yea, contrary to that memorable Speech of that
noble Roman Livy Romans Hist. l. 7 Dec. 40, p. 285. Arist. Polit. l. p. 5.
Marianade Rege, l. c. c. 5.
Valerius Corinus when he was chosen Dictator, and went to fight against the
Roman conspirators, who took up arms against their Country. Fugeris etiam
honestius, tergumque civi dederis, quam pugnaveris contra patriam; nunc ad
pacificandum been atque honest inter primos stabis: postulate aequa et forte,
quanquam vel iniquis standum est potius, quam impias inter nos conseramus
manus, etc. If then a Kings offensive war upon his Subjects, without very
just grounds and unevitable occasions be thus utterly sinful, and unlawful in
law and Conscience; and most diametrally contrary to the Oath, Office, trust
and duty of a King, (who by this strange metamorphosis Arist. Polit, l* 3. and
5 Buchan. de Iure Regni apud Scotos.
becomes a Wolf instead of a Shepherd, a destroyer in liew of a Protector; a
public Enemy in place of a Common friend; an unnatural Tyrant, instead of a
natural King) it follows inevitably; that the Subjects or Kingdoms
resistance and defensive war in such a case, both by the law of God, of
nature, of the Realm, must be lawful, and just; because directly opposite to,
the only preservative against that war, which is unlawful and unjust: and so
no Treason, nor Rebellion (by any Law of God or man,) which are illegal and
criminal too.

Eighthly, It is the received resolution of all Gratian. Causa, 23. qu. 1, 2, 3.
Jacob. Spie^egius, Lexicon Iuris, tit Bellum. F. de Iustitia et jure Non sine.
Ioannis Calvini Lexicon Iuris. Tit. Bellum co. 244. 245. Summa Angelica, et
Rosella A^e^sis Sum. Part. 3. qu. 36. mem. 3. and quaest. 47. number. 3. Martin
Laud. de Bello, Surius Council. Tom. 3. p. 520.
Canonists, Schoolmen, and Civil Lawyers; That a defensive war undertaken
only for necessary defense, does not properly deserve the nam of war, but
only of Defense: That it is no levying of war at all, (which implies an
active offensive, not passive defensive raising of forces, and so no Treason
nor offense within the statute of 25. E. 3. c. 2. as the Parliament, the only
proper Judge of Treasons, has already resolved in point of Law) but a faculty
only of defense Cuilibet Omni Iure, ipsoque Rationis Ductu Permissa; etc.
permitted to every one By all Law, (or right) and by the very conduct of
reason, since to propulse violence and injury, is permitted by the very Law of
Nations. Hence of all the seven sorts of war which they make, they define the
last to be, A just and Necessary War quod fit se et sua defendendo; and that
those who d^e in such a war (caeteris paribus) are safe (Causa 23. qu. 1.) and
if they be slain for defense of the Commonwealth, their memory shall live in
perpetual glory. And hence they give this Definition of a just War. Calv.
Lexicon. Iurid. Ih. ex Hotomano, and other forcited.
War is a Lawful Defense against an immi e^t or praeceeding offense upon a
public or private cause, concluding: That if Defense be severed from W^rre, it
is a Sedition, not War; Although the Emperor himself denounce it; Yea,
although the whole World combined together. Proclaim it: For the Emperor, or
King, can no more lawfully hurt another in War, t^en he can take away his
goods or life without cause. Therefore let Commentato s^b^awle et^rnally about
War, yet they shall never justify nor prove it lawful, Nisi ex Defensione
Legitima; but when it proceeds, from Lawful defense, all Wars be^^g rash and
unjust, against those who justly defend themselves. This War then being
undertaken by the Parliament, only for their own, and the Kingdoms necessary
defense, against the Kings invasive Armies and Cavalliers (especially, now
after the Kings rejection of all Honorable and safe terms of Peace and
accommodation tendered to him by the Parliament:) must needs be just and
lawful; and so no Treason, nor Rebellion, in point of Law or Conscience; Since
no Law of God, nor of the Realm, has given the King any Authority or
Commission at all to make this unnatural War upon his Parliament, his
people, to enslave their Souls and Bodies, or any inhibition to them, not to
defend themselves in such a ca^e.

These general Considerations thus premised, wherein Law and Conscience walk
hand in hand; I shall in the next place lay down such particular grounds for
the justification of this War, which are merely Legal; extracted out of the
bowels of our known Laws; which no professors of them can contradict.

First, it is unquestionable, that by the Common and Statute Law of the Land,
the King himself, who cannot lawfully proclaim War against a Foreign
Enemy, much less against his people, without his Parliaments previous assent,
as I have elsewhere proved; cannot by his absolute Sovereign Prerogative,
either by verbal Commands, or Commissions under the great Seal of England,
derive any lawful or just Authority to any General, Captain, Cavalliers, or
person whatsoever, without Legal Trial and Conviction, to seize the Goods or
Chattels of any his Subjects, much less, forcecibly to R^b, Spoil, Plunder,
Wound, Beat, Kill, Imprison, or make open War upon them, without a most just
and in^vitable occasion, and that after open hostility) denounced against them.
And if any by virtue of such illegal Commissions or Mandats, Assault, Plunder,
Spoil, Rob, Beat, Wound, Slay, Imprison, the Goods, Chattels, Houses, Persons
of any Subject not lawfully convicted; They may, and ought to be proceeded
against, resisted, apprehended, indicted cond^mned for it, notwithstanding such
Commissions, as Trespassers, Thieves, Burglarers, Felons, Murderers, both by
Statute, and Common Law; As is clearly enacted and resolved, by Magna Charta,
cap. 29. 15. E. 3. Stat. 1. cap. 1. 2. 3. 42. E. 3. cap. 1. 3. 28. E. 1. Artic.
super Cha^tas, cap. 2. 4 E. 3. c. 4 5. E. 3. cap. 2. 24. E. 3. cap. 1. 2 R. 2
cap. 7. 5. R. 2. ca 5. 1. H. 5. cap. 6. 11. R. 2. cap. 1. to 6. 24 H. 8. cap.
5. 21. Jacob. c. 3. Against Monopolies. The Petition of Right. 3. Caroli 2. E.
3. c. 8. 14. E. 3. ca. 14. 18. E. 3. Stat. 3. 20. E. 3. cap. 1. 2. 3. 1. R 2.
cap. 2. And generally all Satutes against Purv^yers 42. Ass. Pl. 5. 12. B^o^ke
Commissions, 15. 16. Fortescue, c. p. 8. 9. 10. 13. 14. 26. 1. E. 3. 2. 2. H.
4. 24. Br. Faux Imprisonment, 30. 28. 22. E. 4 45. a Tr. 16. H. 6. Monstrans de
Faits 182 Stamford lib. 1. fol. 13. a. 37. a. The Conference at the Committies
of both Houses, 3^. Aprilis, 4^. Caroli, concerning the Right and Privilege of
the Subject: newly Printed. Cook lib. 5. fol 50. 51. lib. 7. fol 36. 37. lib.
8. fol. 125. to 129. Judge Crooks and Huttons Arguments, against Sh^pmoney,
with diverse other Law-Bookes. Therefore the Cavalliers can no ways justify,
nor excuse their Wounding, Murdering, Imprisoning, Assaulting, Robbing
Pillaging, and spoiling of his Majesty's people and Subjects, and making War
upon them, by virtue of any Warrant or Commission from the King; but may justly
and legally be apprehended, resisted, and proceeded against, as Murderers,
Rebels, Robbers, Felons, notwithstanding any pretended Royal Authority to
countenance their execrable unnatural proceedings.

Secondly, It is irrefragable, that the Subjects in defense of their own
Persons, Houses, Goods, Wives, Families, against such as violently assault them
by open force of Arms, to wound, slay, beat, imprison, rob, or plunder them
(though by the Kings own illegal Commission) may not only lawfully arm
themselves, and fortify their houses (their Castles in Judgment of Law,)
against them; but resist, apprehend, disarme, beat, wound, repulse, kill them
in their just necessary defense; not only without guilt of Treason, or
Rebellion, but of Tresspas, or the very least offense; And Servants in such
Cases may lawfully justify, not only the beating, but killing of such
persons, who assault their Masters persons, goods, or houses; as is expressly
resolved by the Statute of 21. E. 1. De malefactoribus in Parcis; By 24. H. 8.
cap. 5. Fitzherbert, Corone, 192. 194. 246. 258. 261. 330. 21. H. 7 39.
Trespass, 246. Stamford, lib. 1. cap. 5. 6. 7. 22. Ass. 46. 11. H. 6. 16. a. 14.
H. 6 24. b. 35. H. 6. 1. a. 9. E. 4. 48. b. 12. E. 4. 6. a. 12. H. 8. 2. b.
Brook, Coron 63. and Tr^spas 217. Therefore they may justly defend themselves,
resist, oppose, apprehend, and kill his Majesty's Cavalliers, notwithstanding
any Commissions, and make a defensive War against them; when as they assault
their persons, houses, goods, or habitations, without any Treason, Rebellion,
or Crime all against the King or Law.

Thirdly, It is past dispute, That the Sheriffs Justices of Peace, Mayors,
Constables and all other Officers of the Realm, may and ought by our Laws and
Statutes to raise the power of the Counties and places where they live, and
command all persons to arm themselves to assist them upon their Command, when
they see just cause (which commands they are all bound to obey under pain of
imprisonment and fines, for their contemptuous disobediene herein:) to
suppress and withstand all, public breaches of the Peace, Riots, Routs,
Robberies, ^raies, Tumults, Forcible Entries, and to apprehend, disarme,
imprison, and bring to condign punishment all Peace-breakers, Riotors,
Trespassers, Robbers, Plunderers, Quarrellers, Murderers, and Forces met
together, to do any unlawful Hostile act, (though by the Kings own precept:)
and in case they make resistance of their power, they may lawfully kill and
slay them without crime or guilt, if they cannot otherwise suppress or
apprehend them: yea, the Sheriffs, and all other Officers may lawfully raise
and arm the power of the County to apprehend Delinquents, by lawful Warrants
from the Parliament, or Process out of other inferior Courts of Justice, when
they contemptuously stand out against their Justice, and will not render
themselves to a Legal trial; in which service all are bound by Law to assist
these Officers, who may lawfully slay such contemptuous Offenders, in case they
cannot otherwise apprehend them. All which is Enacted and Resolved by 19. E. 3.
cap. 38. 3. Ed. 1. cap. 5. 2. R. 2. cap. 6. 5. R. 2. cap. 5. 6. 7. R. 2. cap.
6. 17. R. 2. cap. 8. 13. H. 4. cap, 7. 1. H. 5. cap. 6. 2. H. 5. cap. 6. 8. 19.
H. 7. cap. 13. 3. E. 6. cap. 5. 1. Mar. cap. 12. 31. H. 6. cap. 2. 19. E. 2.
Fitz Execution, 247. 8. H. 4. 19. a. 22. Ass. 55. 3. H. 7. fol. 1. 10. 5. H. 7.
fol. 4. Register, f. 59. 60. 61. Fitz. Coron. 261. 288. 289. 328. 346.
Stamford, lib. 1. cap. 5. 6. Cook lib. 5. fol. 92. 9. 3. with sundry other
Books, and Acts of Parliament, and Walsingham, Hist. Angliae, page 283. 284.
Yea, the Statute of 13. Ed. 1. cap. 38. recites; That such resistance of
Process out of any the Kings Courts (much more then out of the Highest Court
of Parliament) redounds much to the dishonor of the King and his Crown; and
that such resisters shall be imprisoned and fined, because they are desturbers
of the Kings Peace, and of his Realm. And the expired Statute of 31. H. 6.
cap. 2. Enacted: That if any Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount, or Baron,
complained of for any great Riots, Extortions, Oppressio^s, or any offense by
them done against the Peace and Laws, to any of the Kings Liege people, should
refuse to obey the Process of ^he Kings Court, under his Great or privy
Seal, to him directed, to answer his said offenes; either by refusing to
receive the said Process, or despiting it, or withdrawing h^mselfe for that
cause, and not appearing after Proclamation made by the Sheriff in ^he County;
at the day prescribed by the Proclamation; that then he should for this his
contempt, forfeit and lose all his Offices, Fees, Annuities, and other
possessions that he, or any man to his use, h^th of the gift or grant of the
King, or any of his Progenitors, made to him or any of his Ancestors: And in
case he appears not upon the second Proclamation on the day therein to him
limited; that then he shall lose and forfeit his Estate and place in
Parliament, and also All the Lands and Tenements Which he has, or any other to
his use for term of his life, and all other persons having no Lands not
appearing after Proclamation, were to be put out of the Kings Protection, by
this Act. Such a heinous offense was it then repu^ed, to disobey the Process
of Chancery, and other inferior Courts of Justice even in the greatest Peers;
how much greater crime then is, and must it be, contemptuously to disobey the
Summons, Process, and Officers of the Parliament it self, the supremest Court
of Judicature, especially in those who are Members of it, and stand engaged by
their Protestations, trusts, and Places in it, to maintain its honor, power,
and privileges to the uttermost? which many of them now exceedingly vilify,
and trample under feet: and therefore deserve a severer censure then this
statute inflicts; even such as the Act of 21. R. 2. c. 6. prescribed to those
Nobles unjustly fore judged in that Parliament; That their issues males now
begotten shall not come to the Parliaments, nor to the Counsels of the King
nor his heirs; nor be of the Kings Counsel nor of his heirs; Therefore it is
undubitable, that the Sherifes, Justices of Peace, Majors, Constables,
Leivtenantes, Captains, and other Officers in every County through the Realm,
may by their own Authority (much more by an Ordinance and Act of association
of both houses) raise all the power of the County, and all the people by virtue
of such commands may lawfully meet together in Arms to suppress the riots,
burglaries, rapines, plunders, butcheries, spoiling, robberies, and armed
violence of his Majesty's Cavaleers; and apprehend, imprison, slay, arraigne,
execute them as common enemies to the kingdoms peace and welfare, even by the
known Common Law, and Statutes of the Realm, and feise Delinquents
notwithstanding any royal Commission or personal commands they may or can
produce.

Fourthly, it is most certain, that every Subject by the very Common Law of
the Realm, (yea Law of Nature) as he is a member of the State and Church of
England, See principally 48. H. 3. Rot. Pat Mem 7. and Mem. 11 Dorss.
is bound both in duty and conscience, when there is necessary occasion, to
Array and Arm himself to resist the invasions, and assaults of o^en enemies
of the Realm, especially of Forraigners, See Aristot. Pol. l. 1, c, 1, 2, and
l 2, 3. Polib. hist. l. 6. Fortescue. c, 9. to 15.
as is clear by infinite * Presidents, cited by the Kings own Council, and
recited by Judge Crook in his Argument concerning Ship Money; in both the
Houses two Remonstrances and Declarations against the Commission of Array; and
the Answer of the first of them in the Kings name; all newly Printed (to which
I shall refer the Reader for fuller Satisfaction:) and by the express
statutes of 1 E. 3. c. 5. 25. E. 3. c. 8. and 4. H. 4. c. 13. The reason is
from the Original compact and mutual stipulation of every member of any
Republicke, State or Society of men for mutual defense one of another upon all
occasions of invasion, made at their first association and incorporation into a
Republike, state, kingdom, Nation, of which we have a pregnant example, Judge.
20. 1. to 48. If then the King himself shall introduce foreign Forces and
enemies into his Realm to levy war against it, or shall himself become an
open enemy to it; the Subjects are obleiged, by the self-same reason, law,
equity, especially upon the Parliaments command, to Arm themselves to defend
their Native Country, Kingdom against these foreign and domesticke Forces,
and the King himself if he join with them; as far forth as they are bound
to do it upon the Kings own Writ and Commission, in case he joined with the
Parliament and Kingdom against them; the necessary defense and preservation of
the Kingdom and themselves (and of the King only so far forth as he shows
himself a King and Patron, not an enemy of his Kingdom, and Subjects,) being
the sole ground of their engagement in such defensive wars: according to this
notable resolution of Cicero, De Officil^ l. 2. p. 626.
Omnium Societ^tum nulla est gratior; nulla cari^ quam ea quae (...) Re^ublica
est unicuique nostrum Cari sun^ pare^t^s, cari liberi, propinqui, familiares,
SED OMNES OMNIVM CARITATES PATRIA VNA COMPLEXA EST, iro qua quis bonus dubit^t
mortem oppetere; si ei sit profuturus? Quo est detestabilior illorum immanitas,
qui lacerant omni scelere Patriam, and n^a fun^itus delenda occupati and sunt
and fuerunt: and seeing kings themselves as well as Subjects are bound to Exodus
32. 9. to. 5. 32. Number. 14. 11. to 15. 2 Samuel 8. 9 17. 1 Chr. 21. 17. John 10.
11. 15. c. 11. 48. 49. 50.
hazard their lives for the preservation of their Kingdoms, and peoples
safety; and not to endanger the ruin of the Kingdom and people to preserve
their own lives and prerogatives, as I have elsewhere manifested; it cannot be
denied, but that every Subject, when the King is unjustly divided against his
Kingdom, Parliament, and People, is more obleiged to join with the kingdom,
Parliament, and his Native dearest Country, (who are most considerable)
against the King; than with the king against the^; and rather in such a case
than any other, because there is less need of help, and no such danger of
ruin to the whole Realm and Nation, when the King joins with them against
foreign invading enemies; as there is when the king himself becomes an open
intestine Foe unto them, against his Oath and Duty: and the Cicero de L^gibus.
Peop^es safety being the Supremest Law, and the Houses of Parliament the most
Sovereign Authority, they ought in such unhappie cases of extremity and
division to oversway all Subjects, to contribute their best assistance for
their necessary just defense, even against the king himself and all his
Partisans, who take up Hostile Arms against them, and not to assist them to
ruin their own Country, Kingdom, Nation, as many as now over-rashly do.

Fifthly, I conceive it clear Law, that if the King himself, or his Courtiers
with him, shall wrongfully assault any of his Subjects to wound, rob, or
murder them without just cause, that the subjects, without any guilt of
Treason or Rebellion, may not only in their own defense resist the King and
his Courtiers assaults in such a case, and hold their hands (as Resolution of
Conscience. Sect. 2.
Doctor Fern himself accords) but likewise close with, and disarme them; and
if the King or his Courtiers receive any blows, wounds, in such a case; or be
casually slain, it is neither Treason nor Murder, in the Defendants, who had
no Treasonable nor murtherous intention at all in them, but only endeavored
their own just defense, attempting nothing at all against the kings lawful
Royal authority: as is clear by all Law See Stamfords Pleas: f. 14. 15. 16.
Cases, of man slaughter, se defe^dendo, and to put this out of question, I
shall cite but two or three cases of like Nature. It has been very See Andrew
Favine his Theater of Honor l. 10. c. 5. 6. 7. Halls Chron. H. 8. f. 6. 7. 9.
11. 12. 58. 63. 68. 78 85. 91. 95. 146 154.
frequent with the Kings of England, France, and other Princes, for trial of
their man hood, (...) run at Iousts, and fight at Barriers, not only with
forraigners, but with their own valiantest L^rds and Knights, of which there
are various Examples. In these Martial disports, by the very Law of Arms,
these Subjects have not only defended themselves against their kings assaults
and blows; but retorted lance for lance, stroke for stroke, and sometimes
unhorsed, disarmed, and wounded their Kings, our Hall An. 16. H. 8. f. 122. 123.
King Henry the eight, being like to be slain by the Earl of ^uffolke, at a
(...) in the 16. year of his reign: and no longer since then the year 1559.
Henry the 2d, King of France, was casually slain in a Ioust by the Earl of
Mountgommery, his Subject, (whom he commanded to Just one bout more with him
against his will) whose Spear in the counter-blow ran so right into one of the
Kings eyes, Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 3. Edit. ult. p. 969. 970. Iean
Crespin. Lestate de Lesglise. An. 1559. p. 615: The general History of France
in his life. p. 677.
that the shivers of it peirced into his head, perished his brain and slew
him: yet this was Judged no Treason, Felony, nor offense at all in the Earl,
who had no ill intention. If then it has ever been reputed lawful and
honorable, for Subjects in such military exercises, upon the challenges of
their kings, to defend themselves courageously against their assaults, and thus
to fight with and encounter them in a martial manner, though there were no
necessity for them to answer such a challenge; and the casual wounding or
slaying of the King by a Subject in such a case be neither Treason nor Felony:
then much more must it be lawful by the Law of Arms, Nature, and the
kingdom, for the Parliament and subjects in a necessary, just, unavoydable
war, to defend, resist, repulse the kings and his Cavaleers personal
assaults, and return them blow for blow, shot for shot, if they will wilfully
invade them; and if the king or any of his Forces miscarry in this action, they
must (like King Halis Chron. f. 123. 16. H. 8
Hen^y the 8th when endangered by tilting) blame themselves alone, and have no
other just legal remedy but p^tience, it being neither Treason, Rebellion,
nor Murder in the defensive party, and most desperate folly and frenzy in any
Prince, to engage himself in such a danger, when he need not do it. I read
of General History of France p. 227. 228. Fabians Chron part. 7. in his life;
with others.
Charles the first of France; that he fell suddenly destracted upon a message
he rec^ived from an old poor man, as he was marching in the head of his Army;
and thereupon thinking himself betray^d incountred his own m^n, and slew two
or three of them^ere they were ware of him, wounding others. Whereupon they
closing with him, dis^rmed and led him away forceably, keeping him close shut
up like a Bedlam, ^ill he recovered his senses. I think no man in his right
wits, will deem t^is their action Treasonable or unlawful; neither did the
king or any in that age thus repute it. If then a King in an angry frantic
passion (for Sene^a de^ ^ra.
Ir^ brevius furor est;) shall take up Arms against his loyal Subjects, and
assault their persons to murder them and spoil their goods; if they (by
common consent in Parliament especially) shall forcibly resist, disarme or
restrain his person, till his fury be appeased, and his judgment rectified by
better counsels; shall this be Treason, Rebellion, or Disloyalty? God forbid:
I think none but mad men can or will aver it. It was a great doubt in Law,
till the statute of 33. H. 8. c. 20. settled it, If a party that had committed
any high Treasons when he was of perfect memory; after accusation, examination,
and confession thereof be^came mad or lunaticke; where he should b^ tried and
condemned for it during this distemper? And some from that very act (and 21. H.
7. 31. 36. Ass 27. 12. H. 3. For faiture 33 and Dower 183. Fitz. Not. Br. 202.
D. Stamford Pleas, 16. b. and Cook. l. 4. f. 124. Beverlyes case, which
resolve, that a Lunaticke or Non Compos cannot be guilty of murder, feloney,
or petite Treason, because having no understanding, and knowing not what he
does, he can have no fellonius intention) conceive, that a real madman cannot
be guilty of high Treason (though Sir Edward Cook in Bev^rlies case, be of a
contrary opinion) if he should assault or kill his king. And I suppose few will
deem Eadmerus, Malmes Hunt. Hoveden, Mat. West. Mat. Par Polychonicon, ^ab.
Caxton, Holinsh. Graf. Speed, Daniel, and others in the life of Will. Rufus.
Walter Terrils casual killing of King William Rufus with the glance of his
arrow from a tree, shot at a Dear, high Treason; neither was it then reputed
so, or he prosecuted as a Traitor for it, because he had no malicious intention
(as most think) against the King, or any thought to hurt him. But I conceive
it out of question, if a king in a distracted furious passion without just
cause, shall invade his subjects persons in an open hostile manner to destroy
them; it neither is, nor can be Treason nor Rebellion in them, if in their own
necessary defense alone, they shall either casually wound or slay him contrary
to their loyal intentions; and those See Stamford Bracton, Fitz-herbert,
Brook, Cromp. Tit. Treason and Corone.
Statutes and Law-bookes which judge it high Treason, for any one maliciously
and traitorously to imagine, compass or conspire the death of the King; will
not at all extend to such a case of mere just defense; since a conspiracy or
imagination to compass or procure the Kings death, can neither be justly
imagined nor presumed, in those who are but merely defensive, no more then in
other common cases of one man's killing another in his own inevitable defense
without any precedent malice; in which a Pardon by Law, is granted of course:
however, questionless it is no Treason nor murder at all to slay any of the
kings soldiers and (...) who are no kings, in such a defensive war.

Sixthly, suppose the King should be captivated, or violently led away by any
foreign or domesticke enemies to him and the kingdom, and carried along with
them in the field, to countenance their wars and invasions upon his loyallest
Subjects, by illegal warrants or Commissions fraudulently procured, or
extorted from him. If the Parliament and Kingdom in such a case, should raise
an Army to rescue the King out of their hands, and to that end encountering the
enemies, should casually wound the King whiles they out of loyalty sought only
to rescue him; I would demand of any Lawyer or Divine, whether this Act should
be deemed Treason, Rebellion or Disloyalty in the Parliament or army? Or which
of the two Armies should in point of Law or Conscience be reputed Rebels or
Traitors in this case? those that come only to rescue the King, and so fight
really for him indeed, though against him in show; and wound him in the rescue?
Or those who in show only fought for him, that they might still detain him
captive to their wills? Doubtless there is no Lawyer, nor Theologue but would
presently resolve in such a case, that the Parliaments Army which fought only
to rescue the King were the loyal Subjects; and the Malignants army who held
him captive with them, the only Rebels and traitors; and that the casual
wounding of him (proceeding not out of any malicious intention, but love and
loyalty to redeem him from captivity,) were no trespass nor offense at all,
being quite besides their thoughts: and for a direct president; It was the very
case of King Mat. Par. An. 1266. p. 967. Speed p. 640. Dan. p. 180. 181.
Holinsh. Graft. Stow, and others.
Henry the third; who (together with his son Prince Edward) being taken
Prisoner by the Earl of Leycester in the battle of Lewis, and the Earl
afterward carrying him about in his Company in nature of a Prisoner, to
countenance his actions, to the great discontent of the Prince, the Earl of
Gloucester and other Nobles; hereupon the Prince and they raising an Army,
encountered the Earl, and his Forces in a battle at Evesham where the King was
personally present, slew the Earl, Routed his Army, and rescued the king; in
this cruel battle, the In praefenti ^ello, Dominus Rex extitit vulneatus and
morti paene vicinus, jaculo in eum ex improviso dejecto, Mat. Par. Ibid.
king himself (being wouded unawares with a Iavelin, by those who rescued him)
was almost slain, and lost much of his blood: yet in a Parliament soon after
sommoned at Winchester, Anno 1266. the Earl and his Army were dis-inherited as
Traitors and Rebels; but those who rescued them though with danger to his
person, rewarded as his loyal subjects. And is not this the present case? A
company of malignant ill Counselors, Delinquents, Prelates, Papists, have
withdrawn his Majesty from his Parliament, raised an Army of Papists,
Forraigners, Delinquents and Malcontents, to ruin the Parliament, Kingdom,
Religion, Laws, Liberties; to countenance this their design, they detain his
Majesty with them, and engage him all they can on their side: the Parliament
out of no disloyal intention, but only to rescue his Majesty's person out of
their hands, to apprehend delinquents, preserve the Kingdom from spoil, and
defend their Privileges, Persons, Liberties, estates, religion, from unjust
invasion, have raised a defensive Army, which encountered these Forces at
Edgehill, (where they say the King was present) slew the Lord General (Earl
of Lindsey) with many others; and as they never intended, so they offered no
kind of hurt or violence at all to his Majesty's person then or since; and now
full sore against their wills, Petitions, endeavors for peace, they are
necessitated to continue this offensive war, for their own and the Kingdoms
necessary preservation. The sole question is; Whether this Act, this Defensive
War of the Parliament and their Forces be high Treason or Rebellion? and who
are the Traitors and Rebels in this case? Certainly, if I understand any Law
or Reason, the Parliament and their Forces are and must be innocent from these
crimes; and their opposite Popish Malignant Cavaleers, the only Rebels and
Traitors; as this Parliament (the only proper Judge of Treasons) has See the
Remonstrance of both Houses Nov. 2. 1642.
already voted and declared them in point of Law.

Seventhly, it is Littleton sect. 378. Cook. Just. Ib f. 233. l. 5. E. 4. 26.
27. 11. E. 4. 1. b. 15. E. 4. 3. 6. Plowden p. 379. 380. 43. E. 3. c. 4 4. H.
7. c. 6. 7. Cook l. 9 f 50. 95. 96. 99.
Littleto^s and other Law-bookes express resolutions; That if a man grant to
another the Office of a Parkership, of a Park for life, the estate which he
has is upon condition in Law (though not expressed) that he shall well and
lawfully keep the Park, and do that which to his Office belongs to do, or
otherwise it shall be lawful for the grantor and his heirs to remove him, and
grant it to another if he will: and if the Parker negligently suffer the Dear
to be killed, or kill the Dear himself without sufficient warrant from his
Lord, it is a direct forfaiture of his Office. If then a Keeper of Forrester
cannot kill or negligently suffer his Dear to be killed (no nor yet destroy
the vert on which they should feed, or suffer it to be destroyed) without
forfaiture of his Office, even by a condition annexed to his Office by the very
Common Law; shall a King, think you, lawfully murder, plunder and destroy his
Subjects, his kingdom, without any forfaiture or resistance at all? or will
the Common Law of the Land in such a case which provides and annexeth a
condition to the Office of a Parker, not much more unite it to the royal
Office of a King, (who is but a regal Keeper, or Isa. 78. 70. 71. 72.
shepherd of men, of Christians, of free men, not of slaves) for the Subjects
preservation and security? Does the Common Law thus provide for the safety, the
Liberty, welfare of our beasts, yea our wild beasts, are our Dear so dear
unto it, and will it not much more provide for the security of our own
persons, Lives, Liberties, estates? shall not these be dearer to it than our
Dear? How many See Charta de Forresta. Rastals Abridgment, Title Forests. 3.
Iac. c. c. 13. Petrus Biese^ ^is de Instit. Episcopi Bibl. Patrum Tom 12. pars
2. p 944. Illud ni^ilo. minnis ^bsurdum, etc.
riged Laws have been anciently, and of late years made, against the
killing, the destroying of the kings, the Subjects Dear in Forests and
Parkes, for which some have lost their Liberties, Lives, members? And shall not
the Laws for the preservation of the Subjects Lives, Liberties, estates be
more inviolably observed, more severely prosecuted? May a Forrester, Warrener,
or Keeper of a Park lawfully beat and kill another in defense of his Dear
and other game, without any penalty or forfaiture at all, enjoying the Kings
Peace as before this fact, by the express statute of 21. E. 1. Rastall
Forests 19. and Stamfords Pleas, l. 1. c. 5. 6. And cannot a poor subject
defend his own person, family, house, goods, Liberty, life, against the kings
Forces, or Cavaleers without the danger of Treason or Rebellion, if the king
himself be present with them, or they come armed with his unjust Commission?
Certainly this is a too absurd, irrational, beastiall opinion for any to
believe. It is our Saviors own doubled argument, Mat. 6. 26. Luke 12. 24.
Behold the fowls of the air, and consider the Ravens, for they neither sow
nor reap, neither have storehouse, nor barn; yet your heavenly Father
feeds them: ARE NOT YE MVCH BETTER THEN THEY? THEN FOWLS? And Luke 12. 6.
7. Mat. 10. 29. 30. 31. Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing? and not one
of them shall fall to the ground without your Father: But the very hairs of
your head are all numbered: Fear ye not therefore; YE ARE OF MORE VALVE THEN
MANY SPARROWES And the Apostle has the like argument, 1 Cor. 9. 9. 10. Does
God take care for Oxen? Or says he it no^ altogether for our sakes? for our
sakes, NO DOUBT THIS IS WRITTEN, etc. Genesis 1. 28. 29. 30. c. 9 2. Psa. 8. 4.
^0. 9.
Men are the Sovereign Lords of all the Creatures, of far more excellency
and dignity then all, ^r any of them; especially Christian men; whence the
Apostle Paul gives this strict charge to the Elders of Ephesus (belonging as
well to kings as Ministers) Act. 20. 28. Take heed therefore unto all the
flock over which the holy Ghost has m^de you overseers to feed the Church of
God which he has purchase^ with his own blood: and God himself has given
this express inhibition even to Psalm. 105. 14. 15. 1. Chr. 16. 20. 21. See the
Vindication and Revindication of this Text.
Kings themselves, concerning his and their peoples safety (most strangely
inverted by flattering Divines, quite contrary to the words and meaning:) Touch
not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. And shall not men then made
after Gods own Image; men redeemed and purchased by the blood of Christ; men
made Rev. 1. 6. c. ^. 10. c. 20. 6.
Kings and Priests to God their Father, whom God himself has expressly
prohibited Kings themselves to touch or harm; not be allowed liberty to defend
their persons, houses, lives, liberties, without offense or Treason, against
Kings or any their Cavaleers assaults, by the Law of God, the Common or statute
Law of the Realm; when as their very Keepers, Warreners, Forresters may
lawfully resist, and slay them to without crime or punishment, if they should
offer but to kill, to steal their Dear or Connies? Are they not much better,
much dearer to God, to Kings, then fowls? then Sparrowes? then Oxen? then
Dear? and their lives, their blood more precious then theirs? surely the
Scripture is express: that Psalm. 7 ^. 14. Ps. 116. 15.
precious in the sight of the Lord is the blood the death of his Saints; and
therefore Genesis 9. 6. Mat. 26. 5^.
he that sheddeth man's blood (be he whom he will in an unlawful way) by man
shall his blood be shed; if not in a judicial way, yet by way of just defense,
as Christ himself expounds it, Mat. 26. 52. ALL they that take the sword, shall
perish with the sword: and Rev. 10 10. He that kills with the sword, MVST BE
KILLED WITH THE SWORD; (no doubt he may be killed by way of necessary defense;)
then it immediately follows; here is the patience and faith of the Saints:
that is, Saints will and must patiently endure many pressures and wrongs from
Tyrants and oppressors without resistance, but if they once come to make war
with them, as the seven headed beast there did v. 7. then both the faith and
patience of the Saints themselves will bind their hands no longer, but give
them free liberty in such an extremity (for their own and the Churches
preservation, in their just defense) to slay those seven headed beasts that
shall assault them; the very faith of Christ then teaches them no other lesson
but this: he that lead^th into captivity shall go in^o captivity, and he
that kills with the sword must be killed with the sword: and in such a case,
God says, Psalm. 149. 6. 7. 8. 9. Let a two edged sword be in their hands, to
execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishment upon the people: to (...)
their Kings with chains and their Nobles with fetters of Iron; to execute upon
them the judg^ment written: This honor (this privilege in such cases) HAVE
ALL THE SAINTS, Praise ye ^he Lord. And very good reason is there for it. For
as Nature it self has instructed Lions, Bears, Wolves, Boares, Stagges,
Backs, and most other beasts, not only to defend themselves against the
violence of one another, but even of Men their supreme Lords, when they
assault and hunt them to take away their lives, over which God has given men a
lawful power: much more then may men by natures dictate, defend their persons,
lives against the unlawful violence of their kings or Armies (over which God
has given them no power at all but in a legal way of justice for capital
offenses) when they assault or make war upon them to destroy them. Not to
trouble you with Histories of Stagges and other beasts which have killed men
that chased them, in their own defense, of which there are infinite examples
in the (...)
Roman and Spanish Histories, in those Amphithreatricall sports and spectacles
wherein men encountered and fought with Lions, Tigers, Bears, Bulls and other
savage B^asts; I shall only recite some few examples even of Kings themselves,
who have been slain and devoured by such beasts as they have chased: (...)
Mad^^ King of Britain (as Polycronicon Fabian, Grafton and others record)
being in his disport of hunting, was slain of the wild beasts he pursued, when
he had reigned 40. years: so was his son King Mempris slain and destroyed
in hunting in the same manner. Merind^^ King of Britain, was devoured by a
Sea monster which he encountered: and Zonaras Annal. To^^. 3. f. 15. Munsieri
Cosmog. l. 4. c. 59. p. 1 104.
Basilius the 33. Emperor of Constantinople hunting a Stag, of an
extraordinary greatness, and thi^ king to cut off his neck with his sword;
the Stagge ranfiercely at him, gored him with his horns on which he tossed
him, bruised his entralls, whereof he dyed some few days after, and had been
slain immediately, on the beasts horns, had not one there present drawn his
sword and cut off his girdle, by which he hung on the horns, to whom he gave a
very ill requital for this loyal service: other stories of kings slain by
beasts in their own defense occure in story, and examples of kings slain by
men in and for their preservation, are almost innumerable: that of our king
Mat. West. An. 946. p. 946. Malmes^ Huntirg. ^ab. Graft. Holins. Speed, and
others in his life.
Edmond is observable among others, who as our Historians write being at a
feast at Pulkers Church on Saint Augustines day, espied a thief named Leof,
whom he had formerly banished, sitting in the Hall, whereupon he leapt over the
Table, assaulted Leof, and plucked him by the hair of the head to the ground;
who in his own defense, wounded the king to death with a knife, hurt many of
his servants, and at length was himself hewn all in pieces. But that of our
King Hoved. An. pars posterior. p. 791. Mat. Paris, Mat. Westminster. Polyc. Fab.
Walfirg. Holinsh. Graf. Speed, Daniel in the life of Rich. 2.
Richard the 1. is more remarkable, who being shot in the arm with a barbed
Arrow by one Peter Basil, (or Bertram Gurdon as others name him) at the siege
of Chaluz Castle in Aquitain which rebelled against him; the Castle being
taken, and the king ready to dye of the wound, commanded the person that shot
him to be brought into his presence, of whom he demanded, What hurt he had done
him that provoked him to this mischief? To whom he boldly replied: Thou have
killed my father and my two Brothers with thine own hand; and now would have
slain me: take what revenge thou will; I shall willingly endure what ever
torture thou can inflict upon me, in respect I have slain thee, who have
done such and so great mischief to the world. The king hearing this his
magnanimous answer, released him from his bonds, (though he slew the rest) and
not only forgave him his death, but commanded an hundred shillings to be given
him. If then bruites by the very law of Nature have thus defended themselves
against kings, who have violently assaulted them, even to the casual death of
the assailants: Why men by the selfsame Law, may not justly defend themselves
against the unjust assailing wars of their Princes, and Armies, without
Treason or Rebellion, exceeds my shallow understanding to apprehend: and I
doubt those very persons who now plead most against it, only to accomplish
their own pernicious designs, would make no scruple of such a necessary
defensive wars and resistances lawfulness, were the case but really their own;
and those Papists and Cavalieers who now take up arms against the Parliament,
the supreamest lawful power in the Realm, and their own native Country,
without check of Conscience, would doubtless make no bones at all forcibly to
resist or fight against the King himself, should he but really join with the
Parliaments Army, against them and their designs; there being never any
Soldier or Politician, but those only who were truly sanctified and
religious, that made any conscience of fighting against, yea murdering of his
natural king, not only in a lawful defensive war, but in a Traiterous and
R^bellious manner too, if he might thereby advantage or promote his own
particular interests, as is evident by the council and speech of David's
soldiers, and King Saul himself. 1 Samuel 24. 4. 5. 6. 7. 18. 19. 21. by the
words of Abishai, to David, 1 Samuel 28. 8. 9. 23. 24. by the Council of
Achitophell, which pleased Absolon, and all the Elders of Israel well, 2 Samuel
17. 1. 2. 3. 4* and the infinite number of Emperors, of Kings, which have
been traitorously, and rebelliously slain, without any just occasion by their
own Soldiers, and that in a mere offensive, not defensive way; above half
the Roman, Grecian, and German Emperors dying of such assassinations, or
poysonings, very few of them of mere natural deaths, as the Histories of
their lives declare.

Eighthly, It is in a manner agreed by See Bishop Bilson, of Christian
subjection, etc. part. 3. P. 411. to 422. and the Authors there cited.
Historians, Politicians, and Divines, that if a King will desert the defense
and Protection of his people in times of war and danger, and neither aid nor
protect them against their enemies according to his Oath and Duty, they may in
such a case of extremity, for their own necessary defense and preservation,
desert him, who deserteth them, and elect another King, who can and will
protect them from utter ruin. Upon this very ground the Speed hist. l. 6. c.
54. l. 7. ^. 1. 4. Camb. Brit. p. 107. 108. etc. c. See Holinsh. Poly, G^^f.
Brittons of this Nation after many hundred years subjection to the Roman
Emperors, rejected their yoke and government, when they refused and neglected
to defend them against the barbarous Picts and others, who invaded them, when
they had often craved their assistance; electing them other Patriots: So the
Iacobus Valdefius de Dignitate Regum Regn. Hisp. c. 18. Franciscus Tarap^a de
Regibus Hispaniae, Michael. Ritius de Regibus. Hisp. l. 2. Manst. Cosm. l. 2 c
20.
Spaniards being deserted by the Roman Emperors and left as a prey to their
enemies; abandoned their government, and elected them Kings of their own to
protect them, which they justified to be lawful for them to do. And in like
manner the Romans and Italians being forsaken of the Emperor Constantine, when
they were invaded by See Bishop Bilsons true difference, etc. p. 3. 411. to
416, and the Appendix here p 8. 9.
Aistulfus King of the Lumbards; Elected Charles the Great for their Emperor,
and created a new Empire in the West, distinct from that of Constantinople in
the East, which Bishop Bilson himself concludes they might lawfully do, in
point of conscience. So Aventinus Amid. 3. The general hist. of France in his
life. See the Appendix.
Childerick being unfit to govern, and unable to repulse the enemies of the
French which invaded his territories; thereupon by the advice of Pope Zachary,
and of a whole Synod and Parliament in France, they deposed Childericke, and
elected P^pin for their King, who was both able and willing to protect them;
Upon this very ground the Sea Grimstons Imperial history in their lives, and
and the Appendix.
Emperors Charles the third, and Wencestius were deposed, as being unable and
unfit to defend and govern the Empire, and others elected Emperors in their
steeds, Thus The General History of Spain p* 455.
Mahomet the blind, King of Granado, was in the year 1309. deposed by his
own Brother, Nobles, and Subjects, who were discontented to be governed by a
blind King, who could not lead them to the wars in person. And Graft. part.
7 p 85. Buchanon Remou (...) l. 4. p ^. 21.
Ethodius the 2d king of Scotland, being dull of wit, given to avarice, and
nothing meet to govern the Realm; thereupon the Nobles took upon them the
government, appointing Rulers in every Province, and so continued them all his
reign, leaving him nothing but the bare title of a King, (not depriving him
thereof, out of the respect they gave to the family of Fergusius) but yet
taking away all his regal power. And not to multiply cases or examples of this
nature: Theater of Honor l. 2. c. 43. p. 183.
Andrew Favine in his Theater of Honor, out of the Chronicle of Laureshe^m and
A^monius in his 4th Book of the History of France, relates a notable
resolution given by the Parliament and Estates of France in this very point. In
the year 803. Jews the De^onnaire king of France holding his Parliament in
May, there came thither from strange Provinces two Brethren, kings of Vuilses,
who with frank and free good will submitted themselves to the judgment of the
said ^arliament, to which of them* the kingdom should belong. The elder of
these two brethren was named Miligastus, and the younger Celea^raeus, Now albeit
the custom of the said kingdom, adjudged the Crown to the eldest, according
to the right of (...) allowed and practiced by the Law of Nature, and of later
memory, in the person of the last dead King Liubus, father to the two
contendants; yet notwithstanding in regard that the Subjects by universal
consent of the kingdom, had rejected the elder brother FOR HIS COWARDICE AND
EVIL GOVERNMENT (cum secundam ritum ejus gentis commissum sibi Regnum parum
digne administraret) and had given the Crown to the younger brother FOR HIS
VALOVR and DISCREET CARRIAGE; after full hearing of both parties, BY SENTENCE
of PARLIAMENT, the Kingdom was adjudged to the younger Brother, (stat^^t ut
junior frater delatam sibi a Populo suo pot^statem haberet, etc) and thereupon
the eldest did him homage, with oath of Alleigance in the said Parliament, and
submitted to this sentence. And upon this very ground in See Pareneere the end.
some of our ancient British and Saxons Kings Reigns* when the right heir to
the Crown was an infant, unable to defend his kingdom and people against
invading enemies, the Crown has commonly descended to the Uncle or next heir
of full age, who was able to protect them and repulse their enemies, till the
right heir accomplished his complete age, as I have elsewhere manifested. If
then a Kingdom by general consent; may elect a new King to defend and
preserve it, in case of invasion and eminent danger of ruin by foreign
enemies, when their present King either cannot, or will not do his duty in
protecting them from their enemies, and exposes them for a prey to their
devastations, as these examples and authorities conclude they may, though I
will not positively determine so. Then certainly by equal, semblable and
greater reason, subjects may lawfully take up necessary defensive Arms against
their Kings, when they shall not only desert, but actually invade and wage
war against them, destroy and wast them in an open Hostile manner, and handle
them as cruelly as the worst of enemies: such a wilful unnatural Hostile
invasion, being far worse than any cowardly or bare desertion of the^ when
they are invaded by a foreign enemy. And if Kings in case of ^ot^ishnesse or
Lunacy may be lawfully deposed from their kingdoms by common consent of their
Realms, when they are altogether unfit or unable to govern, as Bishop Bilson
asserts, and I have manifested elsewhere: then much more may they be lawfully
resisted by force without guilt of Treason or Rebellion, when they wilfully and
maliciously, contrary to their oath and duty, cast off their Royal
governments, the protection of their subjects, and wage open war against
them, to enslave or ruin them. If a Father shall violently and unjustly
assault his son, a husband his wife, a master his servant, a Major or other
inferior Officer, a Citizen to murder, maime, or ruin them; They may in such
a case by See Summa^ Rosella Tit. Bel^um.
the Law of Nature, God, man, resist, repulse them in their own defense
without any crime at all, as daily practice experimentally manifests; yea they
may swear the peace against them, and have a Writ Fitz Not. Brevium f. 80. 81.
de securitate Pacis in such cases. Therefore by the selfefame reason they may
resist the King and his Army in like cases; there being no more humane nor
divine Law against resistance in the one case, than in the other.

Finally, it is the resolution of Common weal l 2. c. 5. 220. ^21.
John Bodin and others, who deny the lawfulness of Subjects taking up Arms
against their Sovereign Prince, or offering violence to his person, though he
become a Tyrant: That if a Sovereign Prince or King by lawful election or
succession turn^ a Tyrant, he may lawfully (at his Subjects request) be invaded
resisted, cond^m^ed or slain by a foreign Prince. For as of all Noble acts,
none is more honorable or glorious, then by way of fact to defend the honor,
goods, and l^ves of such as are unjustly oppressed by the power of the more
mighty, especially the gate of Justice being shut against them: thus did Moses
seeing his brother the Israelite beaten and wronged by the Egyptian, and no
means to have redress of his wrongs: So it is a most fair and magnificall
thing for a Prince to take up Arms to relieve a whole Nation and people,
unjustly oppressed by the cruelty of a Tyrant: as did the great Hercu^es who
traveling over a great part of the world with wonderful power and valor
destroyed many most horrible monsters, that is to say, Tyrants; and so
delivered people, for which he was numbered among the gods, his posterity for
many worlds of years after, holding most great Kingdoms. And other imitators
of his virtue as Dio, Timoilion, Aratus, Harmodius, Aristogiton, with other
such honorable Princes, bearing Titles of chastisers, and correctors of
Tyrants. And for that only cause Tamerlain Emperor of the Tartars, denounced
war unto See Knols Turkish Hist. in his life.
Bajazet King of the Turks, who then besieged Constantinople, saying, That he
was coming to chastise his Tyranny, and to deliver the afflicted people; and
vanquishing him in battle, routed his Army, and taking the Tyrant prisoner, he
kept him in chains in an Iron Cage till he dyed. Neither in this case is it
material that such a virtuous Prince being a stranger, proceed against a
Tyrant by open forc^, or fierceness, or else by way of justice. True it is
that a valient and worthy Prince, having the Tyrant in his power, shall gain
more honor by bringing him unto his trial, to chastise him as a murderer a
manqueller, and a robber; rather than to use the Law of Arms against him.
Wherefore let us resolve on this, that it is lawful for any stranger (Prince)
to kill a Tyrant, that is to say, a man of all men infamed, and notorious for
the oppression, murder, and slaughter of his subjects and people. And in this
sort, our Speed Hist. p. 1193. 1194 The History of the Netherlands, and the
Swedish Intelligencer.
Queen Elizabeth aided the Low Countries against the Tyranny and oppressions
of the King of Spainte and the King of Sweden of late years the Princes of
Germany against the Tyranny and usurpations of the Emperor, upon their
solicitation. If then it be thus lawful for Subjects to call in foreign
Princes to releeve them against the Tyranny and oppressions of their kings (as
the Barons in Mat. Par. Mat. West. Hoved. Speed, Holish. Fab. Graft. Daniel in
his life.
King John's time prayed in aid from Philip and Lewis of France against his
tyranny) and those Princes in such cases, may justly kill, depose, or
judicially condemn these oppressing Kings and put them to death. I conceive
these whole kingdoms and Parliaments may with far better reason, less
danger, and greater safety to themselves, their Kings and Realms take up
defensive Arms of their own to repulse their violence. For if they may
lawfully help themselves and vindicate their Liberties from their Kings
encroachments by the assistance and Arms of foreign Princes who have no
relation to them, nor particular interest in the differences between their
kings and them, which can hardly be effected without subjecting themselves to a
foreign power; the death or deposition of the oppressing King: much more may
they defend and releeve themselves against him by their own domesticke Forces,
if they be able, by general consent of the Realm; because they have a
particular interest and engagement to defend their own persons, estates,
liberties, which forraigners want; and by such domesticke Forces may prevent a
foreign subjection, preserve the life of the oppressing Prince, and
succession of the Crown in the hereditary line; which See Knols Turkish Hist.
of the calling in the Turk into Graecia and Cambd^n and Speed of the
Britains calling in the Saxons which proved their ruin and conquest.
foreign Armies most commonly endanger. And certainly it is all one in point
of Reason, State, Law, Conscience, for Subjects to relieve themselves, and make
a defensive war against their Sovereign by foreign Princes Arms, as by
their own: and if the first be just and lawful, as all men generally grant
without contradiction; and Bract^n to l. 2. c. 16. I see no color but the
latter must be just and lawful too, yea then the first rather, because less
dangerous, less inconvenient to King and Kingdom.

From Reasons, I shall next proceed to punctual Authorities. Not to mention
our ancient See Matthew. Westminster. Huntirgdon, Galfridus Monumetensis, Florentius
Wigorniensis, Polychronicon, Fabian, Caxton, Grafton, Holinshed, Speed, and
others, in their several lives.
Brittons taking up of arms by joint consent, against their oppressing,
tyrannizing Kings A^chigallo, Emerian, and Vortigern, whom they both expelled
and deposed, for their tyranny and mis-govenment; nor our Saxons. ray^sing
defensive Forces against King Sigebert, Osred, Ethelred, Beornard, Ceolwulfe
and Edwyn, who were forcibly expelled, and deprived by their Subjects for their
bloody cruelties and oppressions; which actions the whole Kingdom then, and
those Historians who recorded them since, reputed just and honorable, and no
Treasonor R^bellion in Law or Conscience, being for the Kingdoms necessary
preservation, and the peoples just defense; which Histories I have elsewhere
more largely related. Nor yet to insist long on the forementioned Barons
war, against king John and Henry the 3d. for regaining, establishing,
preserving Magna Cha^ta, and other Liberties of the Realm, which our Kings had
almost utterly deprived them off; I shall only give you some few brief
observations touching these wars, to clear them from those black aspersions
of Rebellion, Treason, and the like, which some late Historians (especially
John Speed) to flatter those Kings to whom they Dedicated their Histories, have
cast upon them, contrary to the judgment of our ancienter Choniclers, and
Matthew Paris; who generally repute them lawful and honorable.

First then consider, what opinion the Prelates, Barons, and Kingdom in
general, had of these Wars at first, Matthew. Pari^ Hist. Angl. p. 234 to 240.
Holinshed, Grafton, Speed, Fabi^^ and Daniel, p. 140 141. 142. 143.
Anno 1^14. in a Parliament held at Paul's the 16. year of King John's reign,
Steven Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, produced a Charter of King Henry the
First, whereby he granted the Ancient Libert^es of the Kingdom of England
(which had by his Predecessors been oppressed with unjust exactions, according
to the Laws of King Edward, with those emendations, which his Father, by the
counsel of his Barons, did ratify: which Charter being read before the
Barons, they much rejoiced; and swore in the presence of the Archbishop,; that
for these Liberties they would, if need required, spend their blood: which
being openly done in Parliament, they would never have taken such a public
solemn Oath, had they deemed a War against the King, for recovery, or
defense of these their Liberties unlawful, and no less then Treason and
Rebellion in point of Law or Conscience. After this the Barons assembling at
Saint Edmond bury, conferred about the said Charter, and swore upon the high
Altar, That if King John refused to confirm and restore unto them those
Liberties (the Rights of the Kingdom) they would make War upon him, and
withdraw themselves from his Allegiance, until he had ratified them all with
his Charter under h^s great Seal. And further agreed, after Christmas to
Petition him for the same, and in the mean time to provide themselves of Horse
and Furniture to be ready, if the King should start from his Oath made at
W^nchester, at the time of his absolution, for confirmation of these Liberties,
and compel him to satisfy their demand. After Christmas they repair in a
Military manner to the King, lying in the new Temple, urging their desires with
great vehemency: the King seeing their resolution and inclination to war,
made answer, That for the matter they required, he would take consideration
till after Easter next, In the mean time, he took upon him the Cross, rather
through fear, then devotion, supposing himself to be more safe under that
Protection: And to show his desperate malice and wilfuln^sse (who rather then
not to have an absolute domination over his people, to do what he listed,
would be any thing himself under any other that would but support him in his
violences) he sent an Embassage (the most base and impious that ever yet was
sent by any free and Christian Prince) unto Miramumalim the Moore, entitled
the great King of Africa, Morocco, and Spain; wherein he offered to render
unto him his Kingdom, and to hold the same by tribute from him as his
Sovereign Lord; to forgo the Christian Faith, as vain, and to receive that
of Mahomet, employing Thomas Hardington and Ralph Fitz-Nicholas, Knights, and
Robert of London Clerk, Commissioners in this negotiation; whose manner of
access to this great King, with the delivery of their Message, and King John's
Charter to that effect, are at large recited in Matthew Paris, who heard the
whole relation from Robert one of the Commissioners, Miramumalim having heard
at large their Message, and the Description of the King and Kingdom, (governed
by an anointed and Crowned King, known of old to be free and ingenuous; ad
nullius, praeterquam Dei spectans dominationem) with the nature and disposition
of the people, so much disdained the baseness and impiety of the Offerer, that
fetching a deep sigh from his heart, he answered, I have never read nor heard,
of any King possessing so prosperous a Kingdom, subject and obedient to him,
who would thus willingly ruin his Principality, as of free to make it
tributary, of his own to make it another, of happy to make it miserable, and
to submit himself to another pleasure, as one conquered without a wound. But I
have heard and read of many, who with effusion and loss of much blood (which
was laudable) have procured liberty to themselves; modo autem au^io, quod
Dominus vester miser, deses and imbellis, qui nullo null or est, de libero
servus fieri desiderat, qui omnium mortalium miserrimus est. After which he
said; That the King was unworthy of his Confederacy; and looking on the two
Knights with a stern countenance, he com^anded them to depart instantly out of
his presence, and to see his face no more; whereupon they departing with shame;
he charged Robert the Clerk, to inform him truly what manner of person King
John was: who replied, That he was rather a Tyrant then a King; rather a
Subverter then a Governor; a Subverter of his own Subjects, and a Fosterer of
Strangers; a Lion to his own Subjects, a Lamb to Aliens and Rebels; who by
his sloathfulnesse had lost the Duchy of Normandy, and many other Lands, and
moreover thirsted to lose and destroy the Kingdom of England: An unsatiable
Extortioner of money; an invader and destroyer of the possessions of his
natural people, etc. When Miramumalin heard this, he not only despised, as at
first, but detested and accursed him, and said: W^y do the miserable English
permit such a one to reign and domineer over them? Truly, they are effeminate
and slavish: To which Robert answered: the English are the most patient of all
men, unti^l they are offended and damnified beyond measure. But now they are
angry, like a Lion or Elephant, when he perceives himself hurt or bloody; and
though late, they purpose and endeavor to shake the yoke of the Oppressor
from their necks which lie under it: W^ereupon he reprehended the overmuch
patience an^ fearfulness of the English; and dismissed these Messengers; who
returning and relating his Answer to King John, he was exceeding sorrowful,
and in much bitterness of Spirit, that he was thus contemned and disapointed
of his purpos^. Yet persisting in his pre-conceived wicked design to ruin his
Kingdom and people, and hating all the Nobility and Gentry of England, with a
viperous Venom, he sets upon another course; and knowing A true Character of a
Pope.
Pope Juno cent to be the most ambitious, proud, and covetous of all men, who
by gifts and pr^mises would be wrought upon, to act any wickedness: Thereupon
he hastily dispatcheth messengers to him with great sums of Money, and a
re-assurance of his tributary Subjection, (which shortly after he confirmed by
a new Oath and Charter,) to procure him to Excommunicate the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Barons, whom he had formerly favored; which things he
greedily desired, that he might wrecke his malice on them by Dis^ inheriting,
Imprisoning, and Spoiling them being Excommunicated: Which things when he had
wickedly plotted, he more wickedly executed afterward. In the mean time, the
Barons foreseeing that nothing was to be obtained but by strong hand, assemble
an Army at Stamford, wherein were said to be two thousand Knights, besides
Esquires, and marched from thence toward Oxford, where the King expected their
coming to answer their demands. And being come to Brack^ey with their Army,
the King sends the Earl of Pembroke Mariscall, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury, with others, to demand of them, what were those Laws and Liberties
they required? to whom they showed a Schedule of them, which the Commissioners
delivered to the King: who having heard them read, in great indignation asked;
Why the Barons did not likewise demand the Kingdom? and swore he would never
grant those Articles, whereby himself should be made a Servant. So harsh a
thing is it to a power, that is once gotten out into the wide liberty of his
will, to hear again of any reducing within his Circle. Upon this answer, the
Barons resolve to seize the Kings Castles; constitute Robert Fitz-walter their
General, entituling him, Mariscall of the ARMY of GOD, and of HOLY CHVRCH: A
Title they would never have given their General, or Army, had they deemed this
War unlawful in Law or Conscience. After which they took diverse of the
Kings Castles, and are admitted into London; where their number daily
increasing, they make this Protestation; Never to give over the prosecution of
their desire, till they had constrained the King (whom they held perjured) to
grant them their Rights. Which questionless, they would not have done, had
they not believed this War to be just and lawful. King John seeing himself
in a manner generally forsaken of all his people, and Nobles, having scarce 7.
Knights faithful to him (another strong argument, that the people and Kingdom
generally apprehended, this taking up arms against the King to regaine, to
preserve their hereditary Rights and Liberties, to be lawful) counterfeits the
Seals of the Bishops, and writes in their Names to all Nations, That the
English were all Aposta^es, and whosoever would come to invade them, he, by
the Popes consent, would confer upon them all their Lands and Possossio^s.
But this device working no effect, in regard they gave no credit to it, and
found it apparently false; the King seeing himself deserted of all, and that
those of the Barons part were innumerable, ( cum tota Angliae Nobilitas in unum
collecta, quasi sub numero non cadebat, writes Matthew Paris, another argument
of the justice of this cause and war, in their beliefes and consciences; at
last condescended to grant and confirm their Liberties, which he did at
Running-Meade, in such sort as I have formerly related. And though the Pope
afterward for his own private ends and interest, (bribed by King John, who
resigned his Kingdom to him, and became his Vassal, without his peoples
consent, which resignation was judged void,) excommunicated the Barons withal
their assistance; Qui Ioha^nem illustr^m Reg^m Anglorum Cruce signatum, ET
VASALLVM ROMANAE ECCLESIAE (an honorable Title indeed for a King) pers
quuntur, molientes ei Reg^um auferre (which this Pope him self did but few
years before, giving his Crown and Kingdom it self to King Phillip of
France, which to save, he sordidly resigned up to the Pope) quod ad Ronanam
Ecclesiam dignosci^ur pertinere. Page 235. 267. 268.
Yet this Excommunication thus procured by bribery, proceeding not out of
Conscience to preserve the Kings due Rights, but selfe-respects to support the
Popes usurped interest and Title to the Realm; and being a wicked plot of the
King, more wickedly ex^cuted by the Pope, (who as Matthew Paris writes, was AD
OMNIA SCELERA pro praemijs datis v^l promissis cereus and proclivis) and the
London^rs, Barons, with diverse Prelates then contemning it, as pronounced upon
false suggestions, and especially for this cause, that the ordering of
temporal affairs belonged not to the Pope, Cum Petro Apostolo and ejus
Successoribus non nisi Ecclesiasticarum dispositio r^rum a Domino sit collata
potestas. And using likewise these memorable Speeches in those blind days
against the Pope and his usurped Supremacy, with liberty. Vt quid ad no^se
extendit Romanorum insatiata cupiditas? Quid Episcopis Apostolicis and Militiae
nostrae? Ecce successores Constantini and non Petri, non imitantur Petrum in
meri^is, vel operibus; nec assimulandi sunt in Potestate. Proh pudor, marcidi
ribaldi, qui de armis vel li^eralitate minime norunt, jam toti mundo propter
excommunicationes suas volunt dominari; ignobiles usurarij and Simoniales. O
quantum dissimu^es Petro, qui sibi Petri usurpant partem? etc. I conceive this
Excommunication rather justifies then disproves the lawfulness of this their
taking up of arms, and the war ensuing it being but for their own just
defense, when the King afterward with fire, sword, and bloody barbarous
Foreign Forces wasted his Realm in a most inhumane, tyrannical manner,
Factus de Rege Ty^annus; imo in bestialem prorumpens feritatem, etc. which
necessitated the Barons for their own preservation and the Kingdoms (devoted by
this unnatural Prince to Vassallage and utter desolation) to elect Lew^s of
France for their King. Who, together with the Peers and Estates of France,
assembled at Lions concerning this Election; resolved it to be just and
lawful, and the Barons Defensive Wars against, and rejection of King John
for his Tyranny and oppressions, to be just and honorable, since they did but
flee to these extraordinary remedies, and seek for justice abroad, when they
were denied it by him that should give it them in as or^inary way at home,
chosing as King, in place of a Tyrant, as Hist. Angl. page 270. 271.
Matthew Paris, with the Page 121. 1^2.
general History of France (written by John de Serres, and Englished by Edward
Grimston) m^re largely manifest.

Secondly, the Lawfulness and justness of the B^rons Wars in Defense of
Magna Chart^, with other their Hereditary Rights and Liberties, appears most
evidently, by the resolution of all those Parliaments summoned by King Herry
the 3d. Edward the 1^. 2. 3. Richard the 2d and other our succeeding Kings;
which have many times, even by See part. 1. p. 19. 20.
force of Arms, or Menaces; and sometimes by fair terms, caused these Kings
by new Acts of Parliament of ratify Magna Charta, the Chart^r of the Forest,
with other Fundamental Liberties, thus forcibly extorted from King John at
first; and constrained them to confirm hem with their Oaths and sol^mne
public Confirm C^^rtarum. 25. E. 1. ^. 4.
Excommunications, to be published by the Bishops in their Diocese twice every
year; often solemnly vowing, and protesting, both in and out of Parliament, to
defend these Laws and Liberties, with their estates, arms, lives, blood;
which their anc^st^rs had purchased with their blood; as I have manifested in
the two first parts of this Discourse: All which they would no doubt have
forborne, had they deemed it high Treason or Rebellion in point of Law, to take
up arms against their Kings in defense o^ these Laws and Privileges; neither
would our Kings and Parliaments in times of Peace, have so frequently confirmed
these Laws and Immunities, as just and necessary for the peoples welfare, had
they reputed their former purchases and confirmations by war and arms, no
less then Treason or Rebellion. And if it were neither Treason nor Rebellion
in the judgments of our Ancestors and those Parliaments which procured, and
ratified Magna Charta, to take up arms in defense thereof; much less can it
be Treason or Rebellion in the Parliament and Subjects now (by Votes, by
Ordinances of both Houses) with force of arms to preserv^, not only these
their hereditarie Charters, Laws, Privileges, but their very Lives, Estates;
yea, the Privileges and being of Parliaments themselves, which are now invaded,
endangered.

What opinion the world had of the lawfulness of most of the Barons Wars in
King Henry the 3d. his Reign, against this troublesome perfidious King, in
defense of their Laws, Liberties, Estates, appears first, by the Dialogue
between Agnellus, a Friar minorite, one of King Henry his Counsel, (purposely
sent to the Earl Marshall, then in arms against the King) and this Martial
Earl, in the Abbey of Morgan. Anno 1233. I will first relate the true state of
that War, and then their Dialogue concerning it: Ma^h. Par^^ Hist. p. 371 to
385. Daniel, p. 153. 154. See Holinsh* Graft. Speed Matthew. West. Anno 1233.
King Henry by the ill counsel of Peter Bishop of Winchester, removed all his
English Officers, Counselors, and Servants from his Court, and put
Poictovines, and Forraigners in their places, being ruled wholly by them;
withal he puts the English Garrisons out of all his Castles, and substitutes
Forraigners in them, which daily arived both with Horse and arms in great
multitudes, and much opprested the people, calling them Traitors; so that the
power and wealth of the Realm was wholly under their Command. The Earl
Marshall seeing the Noble and Ignoble thus oppressed, and the rights of the
Kingdom like utterly to be lost; provoked with a zeal of Justice, associating
to himself other Noble men, goes boldly to the King, reproves him in the
hearing of many, For calling in those Poictovines, by evil Counsel, to the
oppression of the Kingdom, and of his natural Subjects, and like wise of
Laws and Liber^ies; Humbly beseeching him hastily to correct these excesses,
which threatened the imminent subversion both of His Crown and Kingdom, which
if he refused to do, he and the other Nobles of the Realm, would withdraw
themselves from his Counsel, as long as he harbored those Strange^s. To which
Peter of Winchester replied: That the King might lawfully call in what
strangers he would, for the Defense of his Kingdom and Crown, and likewise so
many, and such, as might compel his proud and rebellious Subjects to due
Obedience. Whereupon the Earl Marshall and other Nobles, departing
discontented from the Court, when they could get no other answer, promised
firmly one to another; That for this cause which concerned them all, they
would manfully fight, ev^n to the separation of Soul and Body. After which,
they seeing more Strangers arrive with Horse and arms every day, sent word to
the King; That he should forthwith remove Bishop Peter, and all his Strangers
from his Court, which if he refused, they all would BY THE COMMON CONSENT OF
THE WHOLE REALM (...) him, with his wicked Counselors, out of the Realm, and
consult of choosing them a new King. After these, and some other like passage,
the King raising an Army, besieges one of the Earls Castles; and not being
able to win it, and ashamed to raise his Seige without gaining it, he sent
certain Bishops to the Earl, and requested him; that since he had besieged
his Castle, and he could not with Honor depart without winning it, which he
could not do by force, that the Earl to save his Honor would cause it to be
surrended to him, upon this condition, That he would restore it certainly to
him within 15. days, and that by advise of the Bishops h^ would amend ^all
thing amiss in his Kingdom; for performance of which the Bishops became his
Pledges, and the King appointed a meeting at Westminster, on a set day between
Him and the Lords: whereupon the Earl surrendered the Castle to the King, upon
Oath made by the Bishops that it should be restored at the day. But the King
refusing to deliver the Earl the Castle, according to promise, and threatening
to subdue his other Castles; the Earl hereupon raises his Forces, winnes his
Castle again, routs diverse of the Kings Foreign Forces, at Gorsemond,
Monmouth, and other places; and invaded the lands of his Enemies. Upon this
occasion, Friar Agnellus (or Lamb) acquaints the Earl, what the King,
together with his Counsel and Court, thought of his proceedings; to wit, that
the King said, he had proceeded over traitorously, and unjustly against him,
yet he was willing to receive him into favor, if he would wholly submit
himself to his mercy; and that others held it not just, safe, and profitable
for him to do it; because he had done wrong to the King, in that before the
King had invaded his Lands or Person, he invaded and destroyed the Kings Lands,
and flew his men; and if he should say, he did this in defense of his body and
inheritance; they answered, no, because there was never any plot against either
of them; and that were it true, yet he ought not thus to break forth against
the King his Lord, until he had certain knowledge, that the King had such
intensions against him: ET EX TVNC LICERET TALIA ATTEMPTARE; and from
thenceforth he might lawfully attempt such things, (by the Courtiers and Friars
own Confessions:) Upon which the Marshiall said to Friar Lamb: To the first
they say, that I ought to submit my self, because I have invaded the King: it
is not true, because the King himself, (though I have been ever ready to
stand to the Law and judgment of my Peers in his Court, and have often times
requested it by many messengers between us, which he always denied to grant)
violently entered my Land, and invaded it against all justice: whom hoping in
humility to please, I freely entered into a form of peace with him, which was
very prejudicial to me: wherein he granted, that if on his part all things
were not punctually performed toward me, I should be in my pristine state
before that peace concl^ded; namely, that I should be without this homage, and
obsolved from my allegiance to him, as I was at first by the Bishop of Saint
David's; Seeing then he has violated all the Articles of the Peace, IT WAS
LAWFVLL FOR ME, According to my agreement, to recover what was mine own; and
to debilitate his power by all means; especially seeing he end eavoured my
destruction, dis-inheritance, and seizing of my Body, of which I have certain
intelligence, and am able to prove it if need be. And which is more, after the
15. days truce, before I entered Wales, or made any defense, he deprived me of
the Office of Marshall, without judgment, which belongs to me, and I have
enjoyed by Inheritance, neither would he by any means restore me to it;
though required. Whence I have plainly learned, that he will keep no peace
with me, seeing since the Peace he handles me worse then before. Whereby I
ceased to be his Subject, and was absolved from his homage by him. Wherefore
it was, and is lawful for me to defend my self, and to withstand the malice
of his Counselors by all means. And whereas the Kings Counselors say, it is
profitable for me to submit to the Kings mercy because he is more rich and
powerful then I am. It is true, the King is richer and more potent then I, but
yet he is not more powerful then God, who is Justice it self, in whom I
trust, in the confirmation and prosecution of my right, and of the Kingdoms.
And whereas they say, the King can bring in Strangers of his kindred, who are
neither Scots, nor French, nor Welsh, who shall make all his foes his
Footstool, and come in such multitudes, as they shall cover the face of the
earth, and that he can raise seven men to my one: I neither trust in Strangers,
nor desire their confederacy, nor will I invoke their aid, Unless, which God
forbid, inopinata and immutabili fuero compulsus necessitate; I shall be
compelled by a sudden and immutable necessity; and I believe by his Counsels
ill advise he will quickly bring in such multitudes of Strangers, that he will
not be able to free the Kingdom of them again; for I have learned from
credible men, that the Bishop of Winchester is bound to the Emperor, that the
will make the Kingdom of England subject to him; which God in his providence
avert. And whereas they say, That I may confide in the King and his Counsel,
because the King is merciful, credible, etc. It may well be that the King is
merciful; but he is seduced be the Counsel of those, by whom we feel our
selves much hurt; and he is Noble and credible (whom God long preserve so) as
much as in him lies; but as for his Counsel, I say, that no one promise made
to me, was ever yet kept, and they have violated many corporal Oaths made to
me, and the Oaths they took for observing Magna Charta, for which they
remain excommunicate and perjured. Yea, they are e^jured concerning the
faithful Counsel which they have sworn to give to our Lord the King, when as
they have wilfully given him the Counsel of Achitophel, against justice; and
corrupted the just Laws they have sworn to keep, and introduced unusual
ones: for which, and for many other things, for which neither God nor man ought
to trust them, or their accomplices, are they not every one excommunicated?

Rumor de veteri faciet ventura timeri:
Cras poterunt fieri ^urpia sicut heri.
Faelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
Whereas the said Counselors of the King say, that I invaded the Kings body at
Gorsmund Castle, before the King had entered my Land; and so I did injury to
the King, for which I ought to implore his mercy, least others should take
example thence to raise up Arms against the King. I answer, that I was not
there in person; and if any of my Family were there by chance, they invaded
only the Family of the King, not the person of the King: which yet if they had
done, it were no wonder, seeing the king came with his Army into my Land, that
he might invade me, and oppress me by all the means he could, which may
appear to all by the tenor of his Letters, by which he made a general
assembly throughout England against my Army. And since the premises objected
against me are false, and it is true, that the King has treated me worse
since the time I expected his mercy, then any time before, and does yet use the
same Counsel as then; and since he endeavors precisely to follow their
Counsels in all things, by whose advise I suffer all the premised grievances; I
ought not to prostitute my self to his mercy. Neither would this be for the
Kings honor, that I should consent unto his will, which is not grounded upon
reason. Yea, I should do an injury to him, and to Justice, which he ought to
use toward his Subjects, and to maintain. And I should give an ill example to
all, by deserting Justice, and the prosecution of right, for an erroneous will
against all Justice, and the injury of the Subjects: For by this it would
appear, that we loved our worldly possessions, more then Justice it self. And
whereas the Kings Counselors object, that we have combined with the Kings
capital enemies, namely, the French, Scots, Welsh, out of hatred and damage
to king and kingdom: That of the French is altogether false, and that of the
Scots and Welsh too; excepting the king of Scots, and Leoline Prince of
North^ales; who were not the kings enemies, but faithful friends, until by
injuries offered them by the King and his Counsel, they were by coertion
against their wills, alienated from their fidelity, as I am. And for this
cause I am confederated with them, that we may the better being united, then
separated, regaine and defend our rights, of which we are unjustly deprived,
and in a great part spoiled. Whereas the Kings Counsel propose, that I ought
not to confide in my Confederates, because the King, without any great hurt to
his Land, can easily separate them from my friendship: Of this I make no great
doubt, but by this the iniquity of his Counselors does most of all appear:
that in some sort they would cause the King to sustain loss, by those whom he
specially calls, capital enemies, to injure me who have always been his
faithful Subject, whiles I remained with him, and yet would be so, if he would
restore to me and my friends our right. Whereas the said Counselors say, that
the Pope and Church of Rome, do specially love the King and kingdom, and will
Excommunicate all his adversaries, which thing is even at the doors, because
they have already sent for a Legate: It pleases me well, said the Marshall;
because the more they love the King and kingdom, by so much the more will they
desire that the King should treat his Realm and Subjects, according to
justice: And I am well pleased they should excommunicate the adversaries of the
Kingdom, because they are those who give Counsel against Justice, whom works
will manifest; because Justice and Peace have kissed each other; and because of
this, where Justice is corrupted, Peace is likewise violated. Also I am pleased
that a Legate is coming, because the more discreet men shall hear our
justice, by so much the more vilely shall the adversaries of Justice be
confounded. In which notable discourse we see the lawfullnesse of a necessary
defensive War yielded and justified both by the King, his Counsel, and the
Earl Marshall, as well against the King himself, if he invade his Subjects
first, as any of his Forces who assist him. After which the Marshall flew many
of his Enemies by an Ambuf^ado, while they thought to surprise him, and wasted
and spoiled their goods, houses, lands; observing this general laudable rule
which they made, to do no hurt, nor ill to any one, but to the Kings evil
Counselors by whom they were banished, whose goods, houses, woods, Orchards,
they ^poiled, burnt, and rooted up. The King remaining at Gloucester, heard of
these proceedings of the Marshall, but his forces being too weak, he durst not
encounter him, but retired to Winchester with Bishop Peter, confounded with
over much shame, leaving that Country to be wasted by his adversaries; where
innumerable carcases of those there slain lay naked and unburied in the ways,
being food to the beasts and birds of prey: a sad spectacle to passengers,
which so corrupted the air, that it infected and killed many who were healthy.
Yet the Kings heart was so hardened, by the wicked council he followed, against
the Marshall, that the Bishops admonishing him to make peace with him, WHO
FOVGHT FOR IVSTISE: he answered, that he would never make peace with him,
unless coming with an halter about his neck and acknowledging himself to be
a Traitor, he would implore his mercy. The Marshall both in England and
I^eland; professed that he was no Traitor; that his war being but defensive,
was just; immutabiliter affirmans, quod (...) sibi de j^re quod suum er at
re^etere, and posse Regis and Co^sil orum sicorum, modis omnibus quibus
poterat, infirmare.

Page 966. 967. Daniel. p. 178.
William Roshanger in his continuation of Matthew Paris, speaking of the death
of Simon Monfort Earl of Leycester, slain in the Battle of Ev^sham, the
greatest Pillar of the Barrons wars; uses this expression. Thus this
magnificent Earl Simon, ended his labors, who not only bestowed his estate
but his person also, for releiefe of the oppression of the poor, for the
asserting of Justice, and the right of the Realm: he was commendably skillful
in learning, a daily fr^quenter of divine Offices, constant in word, severe in
countenance, most confiding in the prayers of Religious persons, always very
respectfull to Ec^lesiasticall persons. He earnestly adheared to Robert
Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, and committed his children to his education. By
his advise he handled difficult things, attempted doubtful things, concluded
things begun, specially such things whereby he thought he might gain desert.
Which Bishop was said to have enjoined him, as he would obtain remission of
his sins, that he should undertake this cause for which he contended even
unto death, affirming, that the peace of the Church of England could never be
esta^lished, but by the material sword and constantly averting; THAT ALL WHO
DIED FOR IT WERE CROWNED WITH MARTYRDOM. Some say that this Bishop on a time,
laying his hand on the head of the Earls eldest son, said unto him. O most
dear son, thou and thy father shall both dye on one day, and with one hand
of death; YET FOR JUSTICE AND TRVTH. Fame reports that Simon after his death
grew famous by many miracles, which for fear of the King came not in public.
Thus this Historian, thus Robert Grosthead the most devout and learned Bishop
of that age, (who most of any opposed the Popes Usurpations and exactions)
determine of the justice and lawfulness of the Barons Wars; Walter Bishop of
Worcester concurring in the same opinion with Grosthead. The same Page. 970.
author Rishanger records; that the Earl of Gloucester, a great stickler in
these wars against the king with whom at last he accorded; signified to the
King by his Letters Patents under his seal, that he would never ^eure Arms
against the King his Lord, nor against his Son Prince Edward, NISI DEFENDO;
but onel^ in his Defense: which the King and Prince accepting of, clearly
proves; that defensive Arms against King or Prince were in that age generally
reputed Lawful, by King Prince, Prelates, Nobles, People. I may likewise add
to this what I read in An. ^ 265 p. 336.
Matthew Westminster, that Richard Bishop of Chichester the day before the
battle of Lewis against King Henry and his son (who were taken prisoners in
it by the Barons and 20000. of their Soldiers slain;) absolved all that went
to fight against the King their Lord from all their sins. Such confidence had
he of the goodness of the cause and justness of the war.

In one word, the Mat. Par. p. 95^. 953. Speed, p 636. Dan. p. 178.
oath of association prescribed by the Barons to the King of Romans, brother to
King Henry the third, in the 43. year of his Reign; Hear all men, that I
Richard Earl of Cornwall, do here swear upon the holy Evangelists, that I
shall be faithful, and diligent to reform with you the Kingdom of England,
hitherto by the council of wicked persons overmuch disordered: and be an
effectual Coadjutor TO EXPEL THE REBELS, and disturbers of the same. And
this Oath I will inviolaby observe, under pa^ne of losing all the lands I have
in England: So help me God. Which Oath all the Barrons and their associates
took, (by virtue whereof they took up arms against the Kings ill
Counselors, and himself when he joined with them,) sufficiently demonstrate
their public opinions and judgments of the lawfullnesse, the justness of
their wars; and of all other necessary defensive arms, taken up by the
Kingdoms general assent for preservation of its Laws, Liberties, and
suppression of those Rebels, and ill Counselors who fight against, or labor
to subvert them by their policies.

W^lsing. Hist. Angl. p. 70 to 75. Ypodigma Neustr. An. 1309. 1310 Dan.
Holinsh. Graf. Speed, Fab Sto^ and others in his life: Fox Acts and Monuments,
Ed^t. ult vol. 1. p. 480. 481.
In the third year of King Edward the 2d, this king revoking his great Mynion
Piers Gav^ston, newly banished by the Parliament into Ireland, and admitting
him into as great favor as before, contrary to his oath and promise: the
Barrons hereupon by common consent sent the King word; that he should banish
Piers from his company according to his agreement, or else they would
certainly rise up against him as a perjured person. Upon which the King much
terrified suffers Piers to abjure the Realm; who returning again soon after
to the Court at York; where the king entertained him; the Lords spiritual and
temporal, to preserve the liberties of the Church and Realm, sent an
honorable message to the King, to deliver Piers into their hands, or banish
him, for the preservatio^ of the peace, Treasure and weal of the Kingdom;
this wilful King denies their just request; whereupon the Lords thus contemned
and deluded, raifed an army, and march with all speed toward New Castle, NOT
TO OFFER INIVRIE OR MOLESTATION TO THE KING, but to apprehend Peirs, and judge
him according to Law: upon this the King flees together with Peirs to
Tinemouth, and from thence to Scarborough Castle, where Piers is forced to
render himself to the Barrons, who at Warwick Castle, (without any legal
trial by mere martial Law) beheaded him, as a subvertor of the Laws, and an
OPEN TRAITOR TO THE KINGDOM. For which facts this King afterward reprehending
and accusing the Lords in Parliament, in the 7th year of his Reign; they
stoutly answered, THAT THEY HAD NOT OFFENDED IN ANY ONE POINT, BV^ DESERVED HIS
ROYAL FAVOR, for they HAD NOT GATHERED FORCE AGAINST HIM (though he were in
Piers his company, assisted, countenanced, and fled with him) BUT AGAINST THE
PVBLICKE ENEMY OF THE REALM: Whereupon there were two acts of oblivion passed
by the King, Lords and Commons assembled in that Parliament, (Printed in the F.
43. 44:
2d Part of old Magna Charta:) The first, that no person (on the Kings part)
should be questioned, molested, impeached, imprisoned, and brought to
judgment, for causing Pierce to return from Exile, or barboring, councelling
or ayding him bear after his return: The second on the Barons part, in these
words: It is provided by the King, and by the Archbishops, Bish^ps, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Bar^ns and Commons, of the Realm, assembled according to our
Command, and unun mously assented and accorded, that none of what estate or
condition soever he be, shall in time, t^ come be appealed or challenged, for
the apprehending, deteining, or death of Peirsde Gaveston, nor shall for the
said death be appr^hended* nor imprisoned, impeached, mol^sted, nor grieved,
nor judgment given against him by us, nor by others at our suite, nor at the
suite of any other, either in the Kings Court or elsewhere. Which act the King
by his Writ, sent to the Judges of the Kings Bench, commanding that t^is grant
and concord shall be firm and stable i^ all its points, and that every of them
should be held, and kept in per petuitie; to which end he commands them to
cause this act to be there enrolled, and fi^mely kept for ever. A pregnant
evidence that the Barons taking up Arms then against this Traitor and enemy
of the Realm, in pursuance of the Act and sentence of Parliament for his
banishment, though the King were in his company, and assisted him all he might,
was then both by King and Parliament, adjudged no Treason, nor Rebellion at all
in point of Law, but a just and honorable action: Wherefore their taking up
Arms is not mentioned in this Act of oblivion, seeing they all held it just,
but their putting Piers to death, without legal trial; which in strictness
of Law, could not be justified. Now whether this be not the Parliaments and
kingdoms present case in point of Law (who took up arms principally at
first, for defense of their own Privileges of Parliament, and apprehention of
delinquents who seducing the king withdrew him from the Parliament, and caused
him to raise an Army to shelter themselves under its power against the
Parliament) let every reasonable man determine: and if it be so, we see this
ancient Act of Parliament resolves it, to be no high Treason, nor Rebellion,
nor offense against the King; but a just, lawful act, for the kings, the
kingdoms honor and safety.

Not long after this, the two Walsing. Holinsh. Fab. Graf. Stow, Speed, Daniel
in his life.
Spensers getting into the kings favor, and seducing, miscouncelling him as
much as Gaveston did; the Lords and Barrons hereupon in the 14th and 15th
years of his reign, confederated together, to live and dye for justice, and
to their power to destroy the TRAITORS OF THE REALM, Especially the two
Spensers: after which they raised an Army, whereof they made Thomas Earl of
Lancaster General; and meeting at Sherborne, they plunder and destroy the
Spensers Castles, Manors* Houses, Friends, Servants, and marching to Saint
Albanes with Ensigns displayed, sent Messengers to the King then at London,
admonishing him not only to rid his Court but Kingdom, if the TRAITORS TO THE
REALM, the Spensers, (condemned by the Commons in many Articles) to preserve
the peace of the Realm; and to grant them and all their followers Lette^s
Pattents of indemnity, for what they had formerly done. Which the King at first
denied but afterward this Army marching up to London, where they were
received by the City, he yielded to it, and in the 15th year of his Reign by
a special Act of Parliament the said Spensers were disinherited and banished
the Realm (for mis-councelling the king, oppressing the people by injustice,
advising him to lovie war upon his Subjects, making evil Judges and other
Officers to the hurt of the King and Kingdom, engrossing the Kings ear, and
usur^ing his Royal authority) as ENEMIES of the King and OF HIS PEOPLE: and by
another Act of Parliament, it was then provided, that no man should be
questioned for any felonies or trespasses committed in the prosecution of
Hugh^e de Sponsers the father and son; which Act runs thus? Whereas of late
many great men of the Realm surmised to Sir Hugh le Despenser the son and
Father, many misdemeanors by them committed against the estate of our Lord the
King and of his Crown, and to the disinheritance of the great men and
destruction of the people, and pursued those misdemeanors and attainder of them
by force, because they could not be attainted by process of Law, because that
the said Sir Hughes had accroached to them the royal power in diverse manner:
the said Grandees having mutually bound themselves by oath in writing, without
the advice of our Lord the King; and after in pursuing the said Hugh and Hugh,
and their alies and adherents, the said great men and others, riding with
banners displaied, having in them the Arms of the king and their own; did
take and occupy the Chattels, Villages, Manors; Lands, Tenements, Goods, and
likewise take and imprison some of the Kings liege people and others, took
some and slew others, and did many other things, in destroying the said Hugh
and Hugh, and their alies, and others in England, Wales, and in the Marches,
whereof some things may be said Trespasses, and others felonies: and the said
Hugh and Hugh, in the Parliament of our Lord the King, sommoned at Westminster
three weeks after the Nativitie of Saint John Baptist the 15. year of his
Reign, for the said misdemeanors were fore judged and banished the Realm, by
a vote of the Peers of the Land; and the foresaid great men in the said
Parliament, showed to our Lord the King, that the things done in the pursuit
of the said Hugh and Hugh, by reason of such causes of necessity, cannot be
legally redressed or punished without causing great trouble, or perchance war
in the land, which shall be worse; and prayed our Lord, that of all alliances,
trespasses and felonies they might be for ever acquitted, for the preservation
of peace, the avoiding of war, and asswaging of angers and rancors, and to
make unity in the land; and that our Lord the King may more entirely have the
hearts and Wills of the great men and of his people, to maintain and defend
his Lands, and to make war upon and grieve his enemies. It is accorded and
agreed in the said Parliament by our Lord the King, and by the Prelates,
Earls, Barrons, and Commons of the Realm there assembled by command of our
Lord the King, that none of what estate or condition soever he be for alliance,
at what time soever made, by deed, oath, writing, or in other manner, nor for
the taking, occupying, or detainer of Chattels, towns, Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and goods taken, imprisoning or ransoming the Kings liege People, or
of other homicides, robberies, felonies, or other things which may be noted as
trespasses or fellonies committed against the peace of the king by the said
great men, their allies, or adherents in the pursuit aforesaid, since the
first day of March last past, till the thursday next after the feast of the
assumption of our Lady, to wit, the 19. day of August next ensuing, be
appealed, nor challenged, taken nor imprisoned, nor grieved, nor drawn into
judgment by the King, nor any other at the suite of any other which shall be
in the Kings Court or in any place else; but that all such trespasses and
Felonies shall be discharged by this accord and assent: saving always to all
men, but to the said Hugh and Hugh, action and reason to have and recover their
Chattels, Farms, manors, Lands, tenements, wards and marriages according to
the Laws and customs used in the Realm, without punishment against the king,
or damages recovered against the party for the time aforesaid. For which end
they prescribed likewise a Charter of Pardon annexed to this Act according to
the purport of it, which every one that would might sue out, which Charter you
may read in old Magna Charta.

From which Act of Parliament I shall observe these three things. First, that
this their taking up Arms to apprehend the Sp^^se^s as enemies to the King and
kingdom, and marching with banners displayed, was not then reputed high Treason
or Rebellion against the King, though it were by way of offense, not of
defense, and without any authority of Parliament: for there is not one word of
Treason or Rebellion in this Act, or in the Charter of pardon pursuing it: and
if it had been high Treason, this Act and Charters on it extending only to
Fellonie and Trespasses not to Treasons and Rebellions, would Dyer^^. 50. pl.
4. Cook, l. 6. f. 13. Stamford. f. 2.
not have pardoned these transcendent Capita^l crimes. Secondly, that the
unlawful outrages, robberies, and murders committed by the soldiers on the
kings liege people, and not on the two Spensers the sole delinquents, were the
occasion of this Act of oblivion and pardon, not the Armed pursuing of them,
when they had gotten above the reach of Law. Thirdly, that though this were an
offensive not defensive war, made without common assent of Parliament, and
many murders, robberies, and misdemeanors committed in the prosecution of it
upon the kings liege people who were no Delinquents; yet being for the common
good to suppress and banish these ill Counselors, enemies, Traitors to King
and Kingdom, the King and Parliament though it such a public service as
merited a pardon of these misdemeanors in the carriage of it, and acquitted all
who were parties to it, from all suites and punishments. All which considered,
is a clear demonstration, that they would have resolved our present defensive
war, by Authority of both Houses, accompanied with no such outrages as
these; for the apprehension of such as have been voted Traitors and
Delinquents by Parliament, and stand out in contempt against its justice, for
the defense of the Privileges and Members of Parliament, the Liberties and
properties of the subject, the fundamental laws of the Realm, the Protestant
Religion now endangered by Papists up in Arms in England and Ireland to
extirpate it, and the removing ill Counselors from his Majesty; to be no high
Treason, Rebellion or offense at all against the king, but a just and lawful
Act, the very miscarriages whereof in the general (except in such disorderly
Soldiers for whom martial Law has provided due punishments) deserve a
public pardon both from King and Kingdom. And to put this out of Question; as
no fancy of mine own, we have an express Act of Parliament, resolving the
taking up of Arms by the Queen, Prince, (both but subjects and capable of
High Treason in such a case as well as others) the Nobles and people of the
Realm against these two Spensers and other ill Counselors about this king in
the last year of his reign, (though the King himself were in their Company,
and taken prisoner by the Forces raised against them,) for the necessary
preservation, relief, and safety of the Queen, Prince, Nobles, Kingdom, to
be no high Treason nor offense at all: namely, the statute of 1. E. 3. c. 1. 2.
3. which I shall recite at large. Whereas Hugh Spenser the Father, and Hugh
Spenser the Son, late at the suite of Thomas then Earl of Lancaster and
Leycester, and Steward of England, by the common assent and vote of the Peers
and Commons of the Realm, and by the assent of King Edward Father to our
Sovereign Lord the King, that now is, AS TRAITORS and ENEMIES OF THE KING, and
OF THE REALM, were Exled, disinherited and banished out of the Realm for
ever. And afterward the same Hugh by evil Council, which the king had about
him, without the assent of the Peers and Commons of the Realm, came again
into the Realm: and they with other pro^^cured the said king to pursue the
said Earl of Lancaster, and other great men and people of the Realm, in which
pursuit the said Earl of Lancaster and other great men and people of the
Realm, were willingly dead and disinherited, and some outlawed, banished, and
disinherited; and some disinherited and imprisoned, and some ransommed and
disherited: and after such mischief the said Hugh and Hugh Master Rob^rt
Baldocke and Edmond Earl of Arundell usurped to them the Royal power, so that
the king nothing did, nor would do, but as the said Hugh and Hugh, Robert and
Edmond Earl of Arundell did council him, were it never so great wrong* during
which usurpation, by duresse and force against the Will of the Commons, they
purchased Lands, as well by fines levied in the Court of the said Edward, as
otherwise and whereas after the death of the said Earl of Lancaster, and other
great men, our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, and Dame Isabel Queen of
England, his Mother, by the Kings will and Common Council of the Realm, went
over to France, to treat of peace between the two Realms of England and
France, upon certain debates then moved. The said Hugh and Hugh, Robert and
Edmond Earl of Arundell continuing in their mischief, encouraged the king
against our Sovereign Lord the king that now is, his son, and the said
Queen his wife, and by royal power which they had to them encroached, as
before is said, procured so much grievance by the assent of the said King
Edward, to our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, and the Queen his mother,
being in so great jeopardy of themselves in a strange Country, and seeing the
Destruction, Damage, Oppressions, and Distractions which were notoriously done
in the Realm of England, upon holy Church, Prelates, Earls Barons, and other
great men, and the Commonalty by the said Hugh and Hugh, Robert and Edmond
Earl of Arundell by the encroaching of the said royal power to them, to take
as good Council therein as they might. And seeing they might not remedy the
same unless they came into England, with an Army of men of war; and by the
Grace of God with such puissance, and with the help of great men and Commons
of the Realm, they have vanquished and destroyed the said Hugh and Hugh,
Robert and Edmond: Wherefore our Sovereign Lord King Edward that now is, at
his Parliament holden at Westminster, at the time of his Coronation, the morrow
after Candlemas, in the first year of his reign, upon certain Petitions and
requests made unto him in the said Parliament upon such Articles above
rehearsed, by the common council of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other
great men, and by the Commonalty of the Realm, there being by his Commandment,
has provided, ordained and stablished in form following. First, that no great
man, or other of what estate, dignity, or condition he be, that came with the
said king that now is, and with the Queen his mother into the Realm of
England, and none other dwelling in England, who came with the said king that
now is, N^^a.
and with the Queen, In aid of them to pursue their said enemies in which
pursuit the King his Fat^er was taken and put in ward, and yet remains in
ward, shall not be molested impeached or g^ieved in person or goods, in the
kings Court, or other Court, for the pu^suite of the said king, taking and with
holding of his body, nor pursu^te of any other, nor taking of their persons,
goods, nor death of any man, or any other things perpetrate or committed in the
said pursuit, from the day the said king and Queen did arm, till the day of
the Coronation of the same king: and it is not the kings mind, that such
offenders that committed my trespass or other offense out of the pursuites
should go quit, or have advantage of this statute, but they shall be at their
answer for the same at the Law. Item, that the repeal of the said Exile which
was made by Dures and force be adnulled for evermore, and the said Exile made
by award of the Peers and Commons, by the kings assent as before is said,
shall stand in his strength in all points, after the tenure of every particular
therein contained. Item, that the Executors of the Testament of all those that
were of the same quarrel dead, shall have actions and recover the Goods and
Chattels of them, being of the said quarrel, whose executors they be; as they
of the same quarrel should, etc.

Certainly here was an higher pursuit and levying war against the King and
his evil Counselors, then any yet attempted by this Parliament; and a war
rather offensive, then defensive, in which the king himself was both taken and
d^t^ined Priso^^r, and then forced to resign his Crown to his son; yet this
is here justified, as a necessary, just and lawful war by an Act of
Parliament, never yet repealed; and all that bare Arms against the king and
his ill Counselors, yea they who pursued, apprehended, and imprisoned the king
himself, are, as to this particular, discharged by the king, and whole
Parliament from all manner of guilt, or punishment, or prosecution whatsoever
against them. Which consideration mak^s me somewhat confident, that this King
and the Parliament held in the 25. year of his Reign, chapter 2. Which declares
it high Treason, to levy war against the King in his Realm^, did never
intend it of a necessary defensive war against a seduced King and his evil
Counselors (especially by the Votes of both Houses of Parliament, who
doubtless would never pass any Act to make themselves, or their Posterity in
succeeding Parliaments, Traitors, for taking up mere necessary defensive Arms
for their own, and the Kingdoms preservation) for that had been diametra^ly
contrary to this statute, made in the very first year and Parliament of this
King; and would have l^yd an aspertion of High Treason upon the king himself,
the Queen his Mother, their own Fathers, and many of themselves; who thus
took up Arms and made a defensive kind of war upon King ^dwar^ the 2d,
taking him p^isoner: but only to Rebellious insurrections, of private persons,
without any public authority of Parliament, or the whole Kingdom in general;
and of mere offensive wars against the King without any just occasion,
hostility or violence on the Kings part, necessitating them to take up
defensive Arms: which I humbly submit to the judgment of those grand Rabbis
and Sages of the Law, and the Honorable Houses of Parliament, who are best able
to resolve, and are the only Judges to determine this point in controversy,
by the express letter and provision of 25. Ed. 3. chapter 2. of Treasons.

In the Walsing Hist. Angl p. 213 See Holinsh. Speed. Trisse^ l in Rich. 2 and
Cambdens Britania, of the British Is. lands, p. 2^4.
first year of king Richard the 2d. John Mercer a Scot, with a Navy of
Spanish, Scottish and French ships much infested the Merchants and Coasts of
England ^aking many prises without any care taken by the king, Lords, or
Council to resist them. Whereupon John Philpot a rich Merchant of London,
diligently considering the defect, that I say not treachery of the Duke of I
ancaster, and other Lords who ought to defend the Realm, and gri^ving to see
the oppressions of the people, did at his proper charge hire a thousand
soldiers and set out a fleet, to take the said Mercers ships, with the goods
he had gotten by Pyracie, and defend the Realm of England from such
incursions: who in a short time took Mercer prisoner, with 15. Spanish ships,
and all the Booties he had gained from the English: whereat all the people
rejoiced exceedingly, commending and extolling Philpot for the great love he
showed to his Country, and casting out some reproachful words against the
Nobles and Kings council who had the rule of the kingdom and neglected its
defense: Whereupon the Nobility, Earls and Barons of the Realm, conscious of
this their negligence, and envying Philpot for this his Noble praiseworthy
action, began not only secretly to lay snares for him, but openly to reproach
him, saying: That it was not lawful for him to do such things without the advice or council of the King and Kingdom: quasi non licuisset benefacere
Regi VEL REGNO sine consilio Comitum and Baronum: (writes Walsingham) as if it
were not lawful to do good to the King or Kingdom, without the advice of the
Earls and Barrons, or Lords of the Privy Council. To whom objecting these
things, and especially to Hugh Earl of Stafford, who was the chief Prolocutor
and spoke most against it, John Philpot gave this answer: Know for certain,
that I have destinated my money, ships, and men to sea to this end, not that I
might deprive you of the good name and honor of your Militia, or warlike
actions, and engrosse it to my self, but pitying the misery of my Nation and
Country, which now by your sloathfulnesse, of a most Noble kingdom, and Lady
of Nations, is devolved into so great misery, that it lies open to the pillage
of every one of the vilest Nations, seeing there is none of you, who will put
your hand to its defense. I have exposed me and mine therefore for the
Salvation of my proper Nation, and fr^eing of my Country. To which the Earl
and others had not a word to reply. From this memorable history and discourse
(which I have translated verbatim ^ut of Walsingham,) I conceive it most
evident, that in the default of king and Nobles, it is lawful for the Commons
and every particular subject without any Commission from the king or his
Council, in times of iminent danger, to take up Arms and raise Forces by Sea
or Land to defend the king and his Native Country against invading enemies; as
Philpot did, without offense or crime. Then much more may the Houses of
Parliament, the representative body of the whole kingdom, and all private
Subjects by their Command, take up necessary defensive Arms against the kings
Popish and Malignant Forces to preserve the king, Kingdom, Parliament, People
from spoil, and ruin.

In Walsin. hist. Angl p 341.
the 8. year of King Richard the 2d. there arose a great difference between
the Duke of Lancaster, and the king and his young accomplices, who conspired the
Dukes death; agreeing suddenly to arrest and arraigne him before Robert
Trisilian Chief Justice, who boldly promised to pass sentence against him,
according to the quality of the crimes objected to him. Upon this the Duke
having private intelligence of the^r treachery, to provide for his own safety,
wisely withdrew himself, and posted to his Castleat Ponfract, storing it with
Arms and Victuals. Hereupon not only a private but public discord was like
to ensue; but by the great mediation and pains of Ione the kings mother, an
accord and peace was made between them: and this defense of the Duke by
fortifying his Castle with Arms against the King and his ill instruments for
his own just preservation, held no crime. If such a defense then were held
just and lawful in one particular Subject and Peer of the land only, much
more must it be so in both Houses of Parliament, and the Kingdom, in case the
Kings Forces invade them.

In the Walsing. Hist. Ang. p. 358, to 367. Polyc. Fab. Speed, Graft. Holin.
Howes, Trussel. in 10. and 11 R. 2. 11. R. 2. c. 1. to 7.
10th year of King Richard the second this unconstant king being instigated by
Michael de la Pole, Robert Vcere Duke of Ireland, Alexander Nevill Archbishop
of York, Robert Trysilian, and other ill Counselors and Traitors to the
kingdom, endeavored to seize upon the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of
Arundell, Warwick, Derby, Notingham, and others who were faithful to the
kingdom, and to put them to death, having caused them first to be indighted of
High Treason at Nottingham Castle, and hired many Soldiers to surprise them:
Hereupon these Lords for their own just defense, raised Forces and met at
Harynggye Park with a numerous Army: whereat the King being much perplexed,
advised what was best for him to do. The Archbishop of York and others of his
ill Council, advised him to go forth and give them battle* but his wisest
counselors dissuaded him, affirming, that the King should gain no benefit if
he vanquished them, and should sustain great dishonor and loss if he were
conquered by them. In the mean time Hugh Linne an old Soldier, who had lost
his senses, and was reputed a fool, coming in to the Council, the King
demanded of him in jest, what he should do against the Nobles met together in
the said Park? who answered; Let us go forth and assault them, and slay
every mothers son of them, and by the eyes of God, this being finished, THOU
HAVE SLAIN ALL THE FAITHFVLL FRIENDS THOU HAVE IN THE KINGDOM. Which answer,
though uttered foolishly; yet wise men did most of all consider. At last is was
resolved by the mediators of Peace, that the Lords should meet the King at
Westminster, and there receive an answer to the things for which they took
Arms; thither they came strongly Armed with a great guard, for fear of
ambuseadoes to entrap them: where the Chancellor in the Kings name spoke thus
to them. My Lords, our Lord the King hearing that you were lately assembled at
Harenggye Park in an unusual manner; would not rush upon you as he might have
easily done, had he not had care of you, and those who were with you: because
no man can doubt, if he had raised an Army, he would have had many more men
than you, and perchance much ^ lood of men had been spilt, which the King does
most of all abhor, and therefore assuming to himself patience and mildness,
he has made choice to convent you peaceably, and to tell him the reason why
you have ass^mbled so many men. To which the Lords answered, That THEY HAD MET
TOGETHER FOR THE GOOD OF THE KING AND KINGDOM; AND THAT THEY MIGHT PVLL AWAY
THOSE TRAITORS FROM HIM, WHICH HE CONTINVALLY DET AINED WITH HIM. The Traitors
they appealed were the foresaid ill Counselors, and Nicholas Brambre the false
London Knight: and to prove this appeal of them true, casting down their
gloves they said they would prosecute it by Duel: The King answered; This
shall not be done now, but in the next Parliament, which we appoint to be the
morrow after the Purification of the blessed Virgin, to which as well you as
they coming, shall receive satisfaction in all things according to Law. The
Lords for their own safety kept together till the Parliament, and in the mean
time d^feated the Forces of the Duke of Ireland, raised privately by the Kings
Command to surprise them. The Parliament coming on in the 11. year of Richard
the second: these ill counselors were therein, by special Acts attainted,
condemned of High Treason, and some of them executed; and these defensive Arms
of the Lords, for their own and the Kingdoms safety, adjudged and declared to
be no Treason: but a thing done to the honor of God, and Salvation of the King
and his Realm: witness the express words of the Printed Act of 11 R. 2. c.
1. which I shall transcribe. Our Sovereign Lord the King amongst other
Petitions and requests to him made by the Commons of his said Realm in the
said Parliament, has received one Petition in the form following. The Commons
prayed, that whereas the last Parliament for cause of the great and horrible
mischiefs and perils which another time were fallen BY EVIL GOVERNANCE WHICH
WAS ABOUT THE KINGS PERSON, by all his time before by Alexander late Archbishop
of York, Robert de Veere late Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Pole late Earl
of Suffolk, Rober Trisilian, late Justice, and Nicholas Brambre Knight, with
other their adherents, and others, Whereby the King and all his Realm, were
very nigh to have been wholly undone and destroyed; and for this cause, and to
eschew such perils and mischiefs for the time to come a certain statute was
made in the same Parliament, with a Commission to diverse Lords, for the weal,
honor and safeguard of the King, his regalty and of all the Realm, the tenor
of which Commission hereafter follows: Richard, etc. as in the Act. And
thereupon the said Alexander, Robert, Mighill, Robert, and Nicholas and their
said adherents, seeing that their said evil governance should be perceived,
and they by the same cause more likely to be punished by good justice to be
done, and also their evil deeds and purposes before used to be disturbed by
the said Lords assigned by commission as before; made, conspired, and purposed
diverse horrible Treasons, and evils against the King, and the said Lords so
assigned, and against all the other Lords and Commons, which were assenting to
the making of the said Ordinance and Commission, in destruction of the king,
his Regalty, and all his Realm. Whereupon Thomas Duke of Gloucester the kings
Uncle, Richard Earl of Arundle, and Thomas Earl of Warwick, perceiving the
evil purpose of the said Traitors, did assemble themselves in forcible manner
for the safety of their persons, to show and declare the said Treasons and
evil purposes, and thereof to set remedy; as God would, and came to the Kings
presence, affirming against the said 5. Traitors appealed of High Treason, by
them done to the King, and to his Realm: upon which appeal the king our
Sovereign Lord, adjourned the said parties till this present Parliament, and
did take them into his safe protection, as in the record made upon the same
appeal fully appears. And afterward in great Rebellion, and against the
said protection, the said Traitors, with their said adherents and others
aforesaid, continuing their evil purpose, some of them assembled a great power
(by letters and Commission from the King himself, as Walsingham and others
write) to have destroyed the said Duke and Earls appellants, and other the
kings lawful liege people, and to accomplish their Treasons and evil purposes
aforesaid. Whereupon the said Duke of Gloucester, Henry Earl of Darby, the said
Earls of Arundell and Warwick, and Thomas Earl Marshall, Seeing the open
Destruction of the King and all his Realm, if the said evil purposed Traitors
and their adherents, were not disturbed, which might not otherwise have been
done, but with strong hand; for the weal and safeguard of the King our
Sovereign Lord, and of all his Realm, did assemble them forcibly, and rode
and pursued till they had disturbed the said power gathered by the said
Traitors, and their adherents aforesaid, which five Traitors be attainted this
present Parliament of the Treasons and evils aforesaid, at the suite and
appeal of the said Duke of Gloucester, Earls of Darby, Arundle, Warwick, and
Marshall. That it would please our redoubled Sovereign Lord the King to
accept, approve, and affirm, in this present Parliament, all that was done in
the last as before, and as much as has been done since the last Parliament by
force of the statute, Ordinance, or Commission aforesaid; and also All that the
said Duke of Gloc^ster Earls of Arun^ell and Warwick did; and that the same
Duke and Earls, and the said Earls of Derby, and Marshall or any of them did,
Or any other of their company or of their aid, or of their adherents, or of
any of them, or touching the Assemblies, Ridings, Appeals, and Pursuites
aforesaid, ^ As a thing made to the Honor of God, Salvation of the King,
maintenance of his Crown, and also of the Salvation of all his Realm
(therefore doubtless no Treason Rebellion, nor any offense in point of Law:)
and also to Or (...) and St^bl^sh, that' the said Duke of Gl^c^ster, Earls of
Darby, Arundell, W^rwicke and Marshall, nor none of them, nor none of such as
have been of their return, or company, force, aid or council, or any of
them in the things aforesaid, nor none other person for any thing aforesaid
shall be impeached, molested, or grieved at the suite of the king, nor of the
party, nor in other manner, because of any assembly, riding, beating, levying
of Penons, or of Banners, discomfiture, death of a man, imprisonment of any
person, taking, leading away, or detinue of any horses or of any other beasts,
taking or carriage of goods, harness, armor, cattle, and other movable goods,
breaking of houses, or of other possessions or goods, assault, battery,
robberies, thefts, coming or tarrying with force and arms, or armed in the
Kings presence at the Parliament, or Council, or else where. Raising of
people, or exciting the people to rise forcibly against the peace by letters,
commissions, or any other deeds, or of any other thing that may be surmised by
them, or any of them, or ought or purposed to have been done from the
beginning of the world, touching any of the said matters before the end of this
present Parliament by any imagination, interpretation, or other color, but
shall be quit and discharged for ever: except that the King be answered of all
the goods, and cattels that were to them which be attainted in this present
Parliament, or to any of them, and which goods and things were taken by any
person the first day of January last past, or after hitherto. We considering
the matter of the said Petition to be true, and the request of the said Commons
in this party Nota.
to be to the honor of God, and the profit of us and our Realm, of the assent
of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barrors and all others of this present
Parliament, do garnt the requests of the said Commons in all points, after the
form of the said Petition. And moreover of the assent aforesaid, we will and
grant for the greater quietness of our said Realm, though that the said Duke
or Earls appellants, or any other of their company, retinue, force, aid,
council or adherents, or any of them have taken, led away, or withholden any
of our Iusticers, or any other of our ministers, in disturbance of execution of
the Law of our Realm of England, or in other manner, or that they have taken
any manner of person as Traitors to Us or to our Realm, or other person, and
the same have voluntarily suffered to go at large, or escape beyond the sea
from the 14th day of November. last past, till the end of this present
Parliament; that they nor any of them be for this cause impeached, molested,
nor grieved any manner of way at the suite of us, our heirs, nor none other
party, but thereof they shall be quit, and discharged for ever; nor that they
nor any of them be in any wise molested, grieved, nor impeached at the suite of
us, our heirs, or other party for any thing done at any time for to a taine to
their purpose against the said appealers or any of them, or against any other
person for this cause, nor for any other thing or deed to affirm the same
purposes, till the end of this present Parliament, but thereof shall be
acquitted.

This Act with others made the same Parliament continued inviolable without
dispute for 10. years space, during which there were 8. more Parliaments held which
approved in but it: 21 R. 2. the King having See Walsingh. Holensh. Graft.
Speed, Stow, Trvsselt. in 21. R 2. and 21 R c. 16: 17 18. 19. But especially
ca. 20. will manifest the unjustnesse of this unlawful packed conventicle if I
may so call it.
violently seized upon the Duke of Gloucester and the Earls of Warwick and
Arundell, and packed a Parliament to his mind, by not summoning any Lords
thereto but those of his party, by causing diverse Knights and Burgesses of his
own nomination, never chosen by the people, to be returned in diverse places,
and overawing the rest with a guard or 4000. Cheshire Archers, caused these
Lords to be illegally attainted of Treason upon fained pretenses, out of this
old grudge, and the Acts of this Parliament to be reversed; yet not this Act,
as I conceive, which is part of it, being specially saved by 21. R. 2. c. 13.
But however by the statute of 1 H. 4. c. 3. 4. the Parliament of 21. was wholly
repealed, reversed, revoked, voyded, undone and anulled for ever, with all the
Acts, circumstances, and dependants thereof: and this Parliament of 11. R. 2.
Enacted to be firmly holden and kept after the purport and effect of the same;
as a thing made for the great Honor and common profit of the Realm, and chapter
5. It is ordained and assented, that the Lords and other which were forejudged
in the Parliament holden the said 21. year, or by Authority of the same, which
now be in life, and the heirs of the Lords and others that be dead, shall be
wholly restitute and restored to their names, all manner of inheritaments and
possessions, reversions, fees, reversions, offices, liberties, and franchises
as entirely as the said Lords and others which be in life, or the Lords and
other which be dead, ancestors of the heirs, or the feoff^es of the said Lords
or other aforesaid, or other feoffees to their use, were at the time of the
judgment given against them, the said 21 year, by entry, without other suite
thereof to be made, or livery to be had of the same. And all the goods and
chattels which were the said Lords, or the other persons aforesaid so
forejudged, whereof the king is not answered, and be in the hands of the
Sheriffs, Escheators, or other Officers, Ministers, or any other and concealed
by them, the king wills and grants, that the same Lords and other which now
be in life, and the Executors, and administrators of them that be dead; shall
have thereof delivery and restitution; and that the Sheriffs, Escheators,
Officers and Ministers so occupying the said goods and chattels by such
concealment, be punished for the same concealment.

So that by the express resolution of these two several Parliaments, these
Lords and Commons taking up defensive Arms and making war against those wicked
Councillors of this King which sought their ruin, and endeavored the
destruction of the Realm (though they had the kings presence and commissions
to countenance all their actions and proceedings of this nature, and the Lords
wanted the Ordinances of both houses to authorize this their arming, and war)
was solemnly declared and adjudged, to be no Treason nor Rebellion at all, nor
levying of war against the king, within the statute of 25. E. 3. but
contrariwise; a thing done to the honor of God, the Salvation of the King,
(for if the Kingdom perish or miscarry, the king as king must needs perish
with it) the maintenance of his Crown, (supported only by the maintenance of
the kingdoms welfare) and the Salvation and common profit of all the Realm:
and this being one of the first solemn judgments (if not the very first)
given in Parliament after the making of the statute of 25 E. 3. which has
relation to its clause of levying war, must certainly be the best exposition
of that Law: which the Pa^liament only ought to interpret, as is evident by
the statute of 21. R. 2 c. 3. ( It is ordained and stablished, that every man
which, etc. or he the raises the people and rises against the King to make
war within his Realm; and of h^t be duly attainted and judged in the
Parliament shall be judged as a Traitor of High Treason against the Crown,)
and other forecited Acts: and if this were no Treason, nor Rebellion, nor
Trespass in the Barons against the king or kingdom; but a war for the
honor of God, the salvation of the king, the maintenance of his Crown, the
safety and common profit of ^ll the Realm; much more must our Parliaments
present defensive war against his Majesty's (...) Counselors, Papists,
Malignants, Delinquents, and men of desperate fortunes, risen up in Arms
against the Parliament, Laws, Religion, Liberties, the whole Kingdoms peace
and welfare, be so too; being backed with the very same, and far better,
greater authority, and more public reasons then their war was, in which the
safety of Religion was no great ingredient, nor the preservation of a
Parliament from a forced dissolution, though established and perpetuated by a
public Law.

King Henry the 4th. taking up Arms against King Richard, and causing him to
be Articled against, and judicially deposed in and by Parliament for his
Maladministration; It was Enacted by the Statute of 1. Hen. 4. cap. 2. That
no Lord Spiritual nor Temporal, nor other, of what estate or condition that
he be, which came with King Henry into the Realm of England, nor none other
persons whatsoever they be, then dwelling within the same Realm, and which
came to this King in aid of him, to pursue them which were against the Kings
good intent, and the COMMON PROFIT OF THE REALM, in which pursuit Richard
late King of England, the second after the Conquest, was pursued taken and put
in Ward, and yet remains in Ward, be impeached, grieved, nor vexed in person,
nor in goods, in the Kings Court, nor in none other Court, for the pursuites of
the said King, taking and withholding of his body, nor for the pursuits of any
other, taking of persons and cattells, or of the death of a man, or any other
thing done in the said pursuit, from the day of the said King that now is
arived, till the day of the Coronarion of Our said Sovereign Lord Henry. And
the intent of the King is not, that offenders which committed Trespasses, or
other offenses out of the said pursuits, without special warrant, should be
aided, nor have any advantage of this Statute, but that they be thereof
answerable at the Law. If those then who in this offensive War assisted Henry
the 4th. to apprehend, and depose this perfidious, oppressing tyrannical king,
seduced by evil Counselors and his own innate dis-affection to his natural
people, deserved such an immunity of persons and goods, from all kinds of
penalties, because though it tended to this ill kings deposition, yet in their
intentions it was really for the common profit of the Realm, as this Act
defines it. No doubt this present defensive War alone against Papists,
Delinquents, and evil Counselors, (who have miserably wasted, spoiled, sacked
many places of the Realm, and fired others in a most barbarous manner, See
Albaricus Gentiles de Iure Be^li lib. ^ cap. 18. 20, 21. 22. 23
contrary to the Law of Arms and Nations, and labor to subvert Religion,
Laws, Liberties, Parliaments, and make the Realm a common Prey) without any ill
intention against his Majesty's Person, or lawful Royal Authority, deserves a
greater immunity; and can in no reasonable man's judgment, be interpreted any
Treason, or Rebellion against the king, or his Crown, in Law or Conscience.

In G^oston, p. 625. 6^6* 627 628. Hall. 32. and 33 H 6. f. 167. 168.
Holinshead, Stow Speed, Fabian.
the 33. year of king Henry the 6th. (a weak Prince wholly gui^ed by the
Queen and Duke of Somerset, who ruled all things at their wills, under whose
Government, the greatest part of France was lost;) all things went to ruin
both abroad and at home; and the Queen (much against the Lords and Peoples
minds.) preferring the Duke of Sommerset to the Captain ship of Calice, the
Commons and Nobility were greatly offended thereat, saying, That he had lost
Normandy, and so would he do Calice. Hereupon the Duke of York, the Earls of
Warwick and Salisbury, with other their adherents, raised an Army in the
Marches of Wales, and Marched with it toward London, to suppress the Duke of
Sommerset with his Faction, and reform the Government. The king being
credibly informed hereof, assembled his Host, and marching toward the Duke of
York and his Forces, was encountered by them at Saint Albanes, notwithstanding
the kings Proclamation to keep the Peace; where in a set Battle, the Duke of
Somerset, with diverse Earls, and 8000. others were slain on the kings part,
by the Duke of York, and his companions, and the king in a manner defeated.
The Duke after this Victory obtained, remembering that he had oftentimes
declared and published abroad; The only cause of this War to be, THE
ADVANCEMENT OF THE PVBLIKE WEAL, and TO SET THE REALM IN A MORE COMMODIOVS
STATE and BETTER CONDITION; Using all lenity, mercy, and bounteousnesse, would
not once touch or apprehend the body of King Henry, whom he might have slain,
and utterly destroyed, considering that he had him in his Ward, and
Governance; but with great honor and due reverence, conveyed him to London;
and so to Westminster: where a Parliament being summoned and assembled soon
after; It was therein Enacted, That no person should either judge or report any
point of untruth of the Duke of York, the Earls of Salisbury and Warwick,
For coming in Warlike manner against the King at Saint Albanes, Considering
that their attempt and enterprise, Was only to see the Kings Person in
Safeguard and Sure-keeping, and to put and Alien from Him the public
Oppressors of the Common wealth; by whose misgovernance, his life might be in
hazard, and his Authority hang on a very small Thread. After this, the Hall,
Graft. Fabian, Caxton, Holinshed Stow, speed, Anno 37. 38. and 39. R 6.
Duke, an^ these Earls raised another Army, for like purpose, and their own
defense in the 37 and 38 years of H. 6. for which they were afterward, by a
packed Parliament at Coventree, by their Enemies procurement, Attainted of high
Treason, and their Lands and Goods confiscated. But in the Parliament of 39. H.
6. cap. 1. The said attainder, Parliament, with all Acts and Statutes therein
made, were wholly Reversed Repealed, annulled; as being made by the excitation
and procurement of seditious ill disposed Persons for the accomplishment of
their own Rancor and Covetousness, that they might enjoy the Lands, Offices,
Possessions, and Goods of the lawful Lords and liege People of the King; and
that they might finally destroy the said lawful Lords, and Liege People, and
their Issues and Heirs forever (as now the Kings ill ^ounseilors, and hungry
Cavalleers seek to destroy the Kings faithful Liege Lords and People, that
they may gain their Lands and Estates; witness the late intercepted Letter of
Sir John B^ooks, giving advise to this purpose to his Majesty:) and this
Assembly was declared; to be no lawful Parliament, but a devilish Counsel,
which desired more the destruction then advancement of the Public weal; and
the Duke, Earls, with their assistants were restored, and declared to be
Faithful and Lawful Lords, and Faithful liege People of the Realm of England,
who always had great and Fathfull Love to the Preferrement and Surety of the
Kings Person, according to their Duty.

If then these two Parliaments acquitted these Lords and their companions, thus
taking up Arms, from any the least guilt of Treason and rebellion against the
King, because they did it only for the advancement of the public weal, the
setting the Realm in a better condition the removing ill Counselors; and
public oppressors of the Realm from about the King, and to rescue his person
out of their hands: then questionless by their resolutions, our present
Parliaments taking up defensive arms, upon the selfsame grounds, and other
important causes (and that by consent of both Houses, which they wanted) can be
reputed no high Treason nor Rebellion against the King in point of Law; and no
just, no rational Judge or Lawyer can justly aver the contrary, against so
many forecited resolutions in Parliament, even in printed Acts.

The Graston, p. 847. 848 Hal. 3. R. 3. f. 5^. 56. See Holished, Stow, Speed,
and Barons Henry 7.
Earl of Richmund, afterward King Henry the seventh, taking up arms against
Richard the third, (a lawful King, de facto, being crowned by Parliament; but
an Usurper and bloody Tyrant in Verity;) to recover his Inheritance, and Title
to the Crown, and ease the Kingdom of this unnatural blood-thirsty
Oppressor, before his fight at Boswell Field, used this Oration to his
Soldiers, pertinent to our purpose. If ever God gave victory to men fighting
in a just quarrel; or if he ever aided such as made war for the wealth and
tuition of their own natural and nutritive Country: or if he ever succored
them which adventured their lives for the relief of Innocents, suppression of
malefactors, and apparent Offenders; No doubt, my Fellows and Friends, but he
of his bountiful goodness will this day send us triumphant victory, and a
lucky revenge over our proud Enemies, and arrogant adversaries; for if you
remember and consider the very cause of our just quarrel, you shall apparently
perceive the same to be true, godly, and virtuous. In the which I doubt not but
God will rather aid us, (yea, and fight for us) then see us vanquished, and
profligate by such as neither fear him, nor his Laws, nor yet regard Justice
and honesty. Our cause is so just, that no enterprise can be of more virtue,
both by the Laws Divine and Civil, etc. If this cause be not just, and this
quarrel godly, let God, the giver of victory judge and determine, etc. Let us
therefore fight like invincible Giants, and set on our enemies like untimorous
Tigers, and banish all fear like ramping Lions. March forth like strong and
robustious Champions, and begin the battle like hardy Conquerors; the Battle
is at hand, and the Victory approaches, and if we shamefully recule, or
cowardly fly, we and all our sequel be destroyed* and dishonored for ever.
This is the day of gain, and this is the time of loss; get this days
victory, and be Conquerours; and lose this days battle, and be villains.
And therefore in the name of God, and Saint George, let every man courageously
advance his standard: They did so, flew the Tyrannical Usurper, won the
Field; And in the first Parliament of his Reign, there was this Act of
indemnity passed, That all and singular persons coming with him from beyond
the Seas into the Real^e of England, taking his party and quarrel, in
recovering his just Title and Right to the Realm of England* shall be utterly
discharged, quit, and unpunishable for ever, by way of action, or otherwise, of
or for any murder, slaying of men, or of taking and disporting of goods, or
any other trespasses done by them, or any of them, to any person or persons of
this his Realm against his most Royal Person, his Banner displayed in the
said field, and in the day of the said field, etc.

Which battle though it were just, and no Treason nor Rebellion in point of
Law in those that assi^ted King Henry the 7th. against this Usurper; yet
because the killing of men, and seizing their goods in the time of War, is
against the very fundam^ntall Laws of the Realm, they needed an Act of
Parliament to discharge them from suits and prosecutions at the Law for the
same: the true reason of all the forecited Acts of this nature, which make no
mention of pardoning any Rebellions or Treasons against the King, (for they
deemed their forementioned taking up of Arms no such offenses) but only
discharge the Subjects from all suites, actions, and prosecutions at Law for
any killing or slaying of men, batteries, imprisonments, robberies and
trespasses, in seizing of Persons, Goods, Chartels.

What our Princes and State have thought of the lawful^esse of necessary
Defensive Wars of Subjects against their oppressing Kings and Princes,
appears by those aides and succors which our Kings in former ages have sent
to the French, Flemmings, Almaines, and others, when their Kings and Princes
have injuriously made Wars upon them, and more especially, by the public
aid and assistance which our Speeds Hist. p. 1192. to 1197 1^36 1237. Gamston
Hist. of the Netherlands, l. 10. p 611. 612. etc. and Imperial Hist. p. 730.
to 8^6.
Queen Elizabeth and King James by the public advise and consent of the
Realm, gave to the Protestants in France, Germany, Bohemia, and the
Netherlands against the King of France, the Emperor, and King of Spain, who
oppressed and made War upon them, to deprive them of their just Liberties and
Religion, of which more hereafter. Certainly, had their Defensive Wars
against their Sovereign Princes to preserve their Religion, Liberties,
Privileges, been deemed Treason, Rebellion, in point of Law: Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and our English State, would never have so much
dishonored themselves, nor given so ill an example to the world, to Patronize
Rebels or Traitors; or enter into any solemn Leagues and Covenants with them
as then they did, which have been frequently renewed and continued to this
present.

And to descend to our present times; our King Charles himself has not only
(in show at least) openly aided the French Protestants at Ree and Rochel
against their King who warred on them; the Germane Princes against the
Emperor; the Hollanders, and Prince of O^a^ge, (to whose Son he has
married his elstest Daughter) against the Spaniard, and entered into a solemn
League with them, (which he could not have done in point of Law, Justice,
Honor, Conscience, had they been Rebels or Traitors, for standing on their
guards, and making defensive Wars only for their own and their Religions
preservation;) but likewise by two several public See the acts of
Pacification and Oblivion in both these Kingdoms.
Acts of Parliament, the one in England, the other in Scotland, declaring, the
Scots late ^aking up Arms against him and his evil Counselors, in defense of
their Religion, Law^s, Privileges, to be no Treason, nor Rebellion; and them
to be his true and loyal Subjects (notwithstanding all aspertions cast upon
them by the Prelaticall and Popish Party) because they had no ill or disloyal
intention at all against his Majesty's Person, Crown, and Dignity, but only a
care of their own preservation, and the redress of th^se Enormities,
Pressures, grievances in Church and State, which threatn^d desolation unto
both. If then their seizing of the Kings Fortes, Ammunition, Revenues, and
raising an Army for the foresaid ends, has by his Majesty himself, and his
two Parliaments of England and Scotland, been resolved and declared to be no
Treason, no Rebellion at all against the King; by the very same, (or better
reason, all circumstances duly pondered) our Parliaments present taking up
Arms and making a Defensive War for the ends aforesaid, neither is, nor can
be adjudged Treason or Rebellion, in point of Law or Justice.

In fine, the King himself in his An exact Collection of all Remonstrances,
etc. p. 319. 331.
Answer to the 19. Propositions of both Houses, June 3. 1642. Confesses, and
calls God to witness: That a^ the Rights of his Crown are vested in him for
his Subjects sake: That the Prin^e may not make use of his high and perpetual
power to the hurt of those, for whose good he has it; nor make use of the name
of public Necessity, for the gain of his private Favorites and Followers, to
the detriment of his people; That the House of Commons may impeach those, who
for their own ends, though countenanced with any surreptitiously gotten
Command of the King, have violated that Law, which he is ^ound (when he knows
it) to protect, and to protection of which they were bound to advise him, at
least, Not to serve him in the Contrary (let the Cavalleers and others consider
this:) and the Lords being trusted with a Judiciary power, are an excellent
screene and bank between the King and people, to assist each against any
Encroachments of the other; and by just Judgments to preserve that Law, which
ought to be the Rule of every one of the three. Therefore the power Legally
placed in both Houses, Being more then sufficient to prevent and restrain the
power of Tyranny; by his Majesty's own Confession; it must needs be such a
power as may legally enable both Houses, (when Arms are taken up against them,
by the King or any other, to subvert Laws, Liberties, Religion, and introduce
an Arbitrary government;) not only to make Laws, Ordinances, and
Assessements, but likewise to take up Arms to defend and preseve themselves,
their Laws, Liberties, religion, and to prevent, restrain all forces raised
against them, to set up Tyranny; else should they want not only a more then
sufficient, but even a sufficient necessary power, to prevent and restrain the
power of Tyranny; which being once in arms cannot be restraned, prevented,
repulsed, with Petitions, Declarations, Laws, Ordinances, or any Paper
Bulwarks and Fortifications, or other such probable or possible means within
the Parliaments power, Albert. Gentil. de Iure Belli, li. 1. ca. 13. 14. 15.
but only by Arms and Military Forces, as reason and experience in all Ages
manifest.

From all which pregnant punctual domesticke Authorities and resolutions of
Ancient, Modern, and present times, I presume I may infallibly conclude; That
the Parliaments present taking up necessary Defensive Arms, is neither,
Treason, nor Rebellion, in judgment of Law; but a just and lawful Act, for
the public benefit and preservation of King, Kingdom, Parliament, Laws,
Liberties, Religion; and so neither their General, Soldiers, nor any person
whatsoever employed by them in this War, or contributing any thing toward its
maintenance, are or can be Legally indicted, prosecuted, or in any manner
proceeded against as Traitors, Rebels, Delinquents against the King or
Kingdom; and that all Proclamations, Declarations, Indictments, or proceedings
against them, or any of them, as Traitors, Rebels, or Delinquents, are utterly
unlawful, unjust, and ought to be reversed as mere Nullities.

It would be an infinite tedious labor for me to relate, what Civilians and
Canonists have written concerning War, and what War is just and lawful,
what not: In brief, they all generally accord; Gratian causa 23. qu 1. 2. 3.
and the Canonists in their Glesses on that Text. Summa Angelica and Rosel. Til
^el Anto. Cortes. Reper. in Abatem tit. Beilum; Jacob. Spieleg. and 10. Calvin.
Lexi. Iurid. Tit. ^el. Mart Lauden de Beil. Tract. Alber. Gent. de jure belli
Petrinus Belli de Re^ milita. and bel^o tract. De Iure belli Belg. Hagae, 1599.
Hugo G^ot. de Iure Belli et (...).
That no War may or ought to be undertaken cut of covetousness, lust,
ambition, cruelty, malice, desire of hurt, revenge, or fer booty: propter
praedam enim militare peccatum est; Whence John Baptist, Luke 3. 14. gave this
answer to the Soldiers who demanded of him, what shall we do? Do violence to
no man: neither accuse any man falsely; and be content with your wages. Ne dum
sumptus quaeritur, praedo grassetur. Which prooves the Wars of our plundring,
pillaging Cavalleers altogether sinful and unjust: And that such a War
only is just, which is waged for the good and necessary defense of the
Commonwealth, by public Edict or consent; or to regaine some thing, which is
unjustly detained or taken away, and cannot otherwise be acquired: or to repel
or punish some injury; or to curb the insolency of wicked men, or preserve
good men from their unjust oppressions; which Wars ought only to be
undertaken out of a desire of Peace; as they prove out of Augustine, Gregory,
Isidor Hispalensis, and others. In one word, they all accord; That a necessary
defensive War to repulse an Injury, and to preserve the State, Church,
Republike, Freedoms, Lives, Chastities, Estates, Laws, Liberties, Religion,
from unjust violence, is, and ever has been lawful by the Law of Nature, of
Nations; yea, By all Laws whatsoever, and the very dictate of Reason: And that
a necessary defensive War, is not properly a War, but a mere Defense,
against an unlawful Viol^nce; And therefore must of necessity be acknowledged
lawful; because directly opposite to, and the only remedy which God and
Nature have given men against Tyrannical and unjust invasions, which are both
sinful and unlawful. And so can be no Treason, no Rebellion, no crime at
all, though our Princes or Parents be the unjust assail^nts. Of which see more
in Hugo Grotius, de Iure Belli, l. 2. c. 1.

I shall closeup the Civillians and Canonists Opinions touching the lawfulness
of a Defensive War, with the words of Albericus Gentilis, Professor of Civil
Law in the University of Oxford, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Who in his
learned Book, De Iure Bel^i and Pacis, Dedicated to the most illustrious
Robert Devoreux Earl of Essex; (Father to the Parliaments present Lord
General:) determines thus,

Lib. 1. cap 13 page 92. etc. Although, I say, there be no cause of war from
nature, yet there are causes for which we undertake war by the conduct of
nature; as is the Cl^. 2. de Sent.
cause of Defense, and when war is undertaken, because something is denied to
to be granted, which nature it self affords, and therefore because the Law of
nature is violated, War is undertaken. We say there is a three fold Defense,
one Necessary, another Profitable, a third Honest; yet we shall deem them all
Necessary. Bal 3. cons. 458. and S. cons. 405
He who defends himself, is said to be necessitated, neither will Baldus have
us distinguish, whether he defend himself, his goods, or those under his
charge, whether near, or remote; His defense is necessary, Clar*. H^micidium.
and done for necessary defense, against whom an armed enemy comes, and his
against whom an enemy prepares himself: and to such a one the same Bal, ad. d.
l. 32. loc. I^ s. Dec. l. ut Vim
Baldus truly teaches, aid is due by compact, whom others likewise approve
Ap. Mitr.
. This war we may say, was anciently undertaken against Mithridates, and
against his great preparations. Neither ought wise men to expect, till he had
professed himself an enemy, but to look more into his deeds, then words: Thus
whiles we say necessity, we speak not properly, but we understand, that
necessity which is not rare in humane affairs, and has wont to be called
need: which yet precisely is not that true necessity, etc. Phil. de Principe.
It is a most unjust conflict, where the one side being agent, the other is
only patient. There is a just defense, and slaying, although the slayer might
flee without danger, and so save himself, whether the slayer who defends
himself be of that condition, that it would be a disgrace to him to flee, or
whether it would be no disgrace. Clra.. homicidium.
Which opinions are received in the causes of private men; and to me are much
more approved in public causes. L. 3. de Just. l. 4 adle. Aq. Ceph. cons. 721
Defense even in Bruites is a Law of nature: Cic. 2. Iuci. 121 fa. 3.
it is persuaded and constituted in us, not by opinion, but by a certain
imbred faculty: and it is a necessary Law; for what is there (says Cicero)
that can be done against force, without force? This is the most approved above
all Laws. c. 3. de se exc. c. 18 de Homicid.
All Laws, all Rights permit to repel force with force. Ammia 2^
There is one Law and that perpetual, to defend safety by all means. Cic. pro
Milo.
All means are honest of preserving safety: this, reason to the Learued,
necessity to Barbarians, cust^me to Nat^ons, nature it self to wild Beasts,
has prescribed; and this is no written, but borne, or native Law. Likewise, to
defend our Estates, is a necessary defense, and this is a just cause of
defending, if we be assaulted by ^arre, though we our selves have demerited
the war: which things others, and Paulus Cas^ensis have taught. And it will
follow and add this reason; because the Law or Force of war is not en^ed by
^btaining the things first demanded; but walks according to the conquerers
pleasure. Aug 19. con. Fav.
Who is content to repay so much revenge only as he has received wrong? says
Augustine, and all know it. This arbitrary power all not subdued may justly
decline, and therefore defend themselves against it with Arms. Witnesses,
Jason. l. 15. l. de in re.
Judges who are enemies are repelled, although they against whom they proceed
gave the cause of the enmity. Con. rig. peccatum. p. 2.. 9.
To one in Arms he gives all things who denies just things: said Caesar.
Neither do we hear make question of that blameless moderation, where there
is no superior. These things therefore are avoided: and therefore the cause of
Romulus shall be said right to me, who defended himself by war against the
invading Sabines, albeit he had given them cause of war and offense, by the
rape of their women. Bodin. 5. de Rep. 5.
The force of necessity is so great, when men are pressed with Arms, that
those things which are unjust may s^^me most just; as Bodin well, Livie l. 8.
war is just, to whom it is necessary; and pia arma, quibus nulla nisi in
armis relinquitur spes: and Arms are pious to those to whom no hope is left
but in Arms. Extreme necessity is exempted from all Law. And yet I restrain
not the present definition, to extreme necessity, or take extreme according
to the condition of men's affairs: for be it so, let it be no necessity, which
may be no necessity; Romulus might have avoided war by restoring the ravished
women; yet he might likewise defend himself against the enemies even soon
after marching against him. I stay not in this definition: for that is a
question belonging to Citizens. Costr. l. 1. de Just.
He who being banished may be hurt without danger, yet he may defend himself.

CHAP. XIIII. De utili Defensione:
He proceeds thus,

I Call that a profitable defense, when we move war, fearing least we our
selves should be warred upon: Pater. l. 2.
no man is sooner oppressed then he which fears nothing, and security is the
most frequent beginning of calamity. This first. Next, we ought not to expect
present force, it is more safe if we meet that which is Future. There is more
hope and more courage in him that infers force, then in him who repels it: he
has more courage who inferres danger, then he who repulseth it, Liu. 21^ 28.
Livy and Vigetius: if the enemy should once prevent, Veget. l. 3.
all things are disturbed with fear; it behooves them therefore (says Hist. l.
5.
Nicephorus, an historian of no contemptible authority) who would live without
danger, to meet with, and prevent impendent evils, and not to delay or
expect, that thou may revenge the received injury with danger, if for the
present thou may cut out the root of the growing plant, and suppr^sse the
endeavors of an enemy who thinks ill. And D^m. l. ad Arifleg.
Suidas, yea Demosthenes; war is not to be delayed but urged, least being
first injured, we be compelled to repulse force. Dio. l. 45.
This (as the Latin De n^sthenes Cicer^ says) is likewise a disgrace, that if
thou may prevent future thou would rather redress Present evils. That
rude youth likewise (so has nature it self prescribed this Law) Terent. 4.
Eunu. 6.
I would rather look to our selves, then I would be revenged having received
injury: Philo. de spe. Leg.
But Philo most excellently, that we presently slay a serpent at the first
sight, although he has not hurt us; nor perchance will hurt us; so careful
are we of our selves before he move himself. Am I not over-tedious to thee in
naming these Authors, which yet are none of ours? But the consent of various
and many authors is great reason, etc. Neither yet omit I, things held in lieu
of proverbes, and therefore prove much what they signify. Pers. Sat. 3. Ovid.
2. de Art. Horat. ad Loll. Ep. 1.
Meet the approaching disease. Withstand beginnings; else medicines are
provided overlate. Neglected fires are wont to g^t strength. Behold something
out of the Authors of Law: C. lib. 2. Tit. 41. l ul. l. Tit. 27. l. 1. and C.
T. de Sica. l. 1.
It is better to keep Laws unviolated, then afterward to seek remedy. Bald.
4. cons. 111 Ias. l. 3. de Just.
It is lawful to prevent: One providing to offend, I offend lawfully; and
others of this nature, which are more defined to humanity, and approved by men's
judgments. Bal. 1. Cons. 369. 4. 312. Alex. 2. 144, Cla.. Homicidium, Zas. l.
ut vim.
No man ought to expose himself to danger: no man ought to expect himself to
be smitten or slain unless he be a fool. We ought to meet the offense not
only which is in act, but that likewise which is in possibility to act. Force
is to be repelled and propulsed with force; therefore not to be expected; in
which expectation there are also both other the foresaid certain evils, and
that likewise which is mentioned in the causes of private men, least perchance
by giving the first stroke we be slain; or lest we yield by flying, and be
oppressed lying down. But not to fly is to repel force: all these things are
clear, and tried, and most apt to warlike tractates. What follows, has some
doubt, when the thing may seem to come to that pass, that we must now run to
this profitable defense. Dec. Cons. 603.
A just cause of fear is required, suspicion is not sufficient. Now p. l. 5.
6. quod met. can.
a just fear is defined, a fear of a greater evil, and such as may
deservedly happen unto a constant man. But here in this great cause of
Kingdoms, a fear that no damage should happen although not very great, or if
there be an evident cause of fear although the danger be not true, De dame^
iinf. l. 27. loc.
but the cause only of fear just, is sufficient: but not when a man fears
that he ought not, etc. But concerning prevention there are notable things in
Gell. l. 7. c. 3.
Gellius. In all things to be taken heed of, there is not the same cause;
neither in the affairs and actions and Offices of humane life; or of taking,
or deferring, or revenging, or bereaving. To a gladiator, ready to fight this
lot of fight is propounded; either to slay, if he shall prevail, or to
beslaine if he shall give over. But the life of man is not circumscribed with
such unjust untamed necessities, that therefore thou ought first to do the
injury, which unless thou shall do, thou may suffer. And Cicero; Cic. pro
tu. Quict^. 5. c. 13
who has ever enacted this, or to whom can it be granted without the greatest
peril of all men, that he might lawfully slay him, of whom he might say he
has been afraid, lest he himself might be slain afterward by him? yet
rightly, notwithstanding, the Mitileins against the Athenians. Thucid. l. 3.
If we seem injurious to any, if we have first failed, not tarrying ^till we
might plainly know, if they would do us any hurt: he does not rightly
consider^ for if we had been of equal power, we might safely lay ambushes for
them again, and we might delay: then he should speak truth: but since they
have always wit^ them a power of hurting, it beseemed us to have this power,
that we might anticipate a defense. Why again do we ask for Bartolusses, or
Baldusses with whose bare names we might rest satisfied? and yet do not more
esteem the defense of a most noble Republic, yea of Thucidides, a most noble
man, and the sentence of a most wise man fortified with reason? And seeing
there may not be one probable cause of fear, and generally nothing can be
defined concerning it, here we shall only say, that it has always been very
considerable, and at this day, and hereafter it is to be considered, that
potent and ambitious Princes may be resisted, for they being contented with no
bounds will at last sometime or other invade the fortunes of all men. Zonarus.
Thus the Romans move war against Ph^lip, lest Greece being subdued, he
should first make war upon them. Thus Pausanias, (...).
Lysimachus, when D^metrius had gotten the Kingdom, fearing least he should
provoke him, first moved war, for he knew that Demetrius had it from his
father, always to think of promoting the Empire. Thus the Hero lib. 7.
Lacedemonian Ambassadors, move the King of Sicily to war, because all the
rest of the Graecians being overcome by Persa, he might in like manner stir
up ware against the Siculi: Men say, by helping us thou may defend thy self.
Thus the Xenop. 5. Graec.
Lacaedemonians themselves, persuaded by the Acanthu took up war against the
Olynthii: who by conquering their neighbors every where, and proceeding
always to further parts, they made no end of wars and of increasing their
dominion. Thus the Live. lib. 7.
Campani for the Fidicini against the Samnites, and they say. We have fought in
word for the Fidicini, in deed for our selves: when we saw a neighboring
people, to be set upon by the wicked plundering of the Samnites: and when the
Fidicini had been inflamed, that fire would h^reafter be transferred upon us:
which also Thuc. lib. 6.
Herm^ crates a just man of Syracuse does any of us think, that a neighbor
further off being already overcome the calamity will not come upon him also?
Thus Salu. frag.
Perseus, thus Metridates did move and call in others against the power of the
Romans: for neither are occasions of war wanting to those that aspire to the
Empire, and now they are hated for their power. Which thing Dion lib. ^
Appius somewhere says to those his Romans; and it appears most true; for by
ayding their confederates and friends, presently they got the Empire of the
whole world. But to omit these manifold examples, which even Bod. 5. de rep.
ult.
others have thus noted, and which do thus declare to us the Law of Nations,
which we seek; might not all men most justly withstand the Turk on that side,
and the Span^a^d on this, meditating dominion every where and plotting it? for
indeed the Turk wrongs not many, nor yet the Spaniard, neither can the one or
other do it; but they both do injury to some, and he that does wrong to one,
threatens many: shall wars themselves be expected? we have heard of the
Turks before, and we all see it: if any one discernes it not of the Spaniards;
P Sy^^
he may hear of P. Iovius, that the nature of these are both impotent and
greedy of bearing rule; and when they have once crept in, endeavor always by
all means to attain the highest power. Iou. lib. 1.
Therefore we ought to resist; and it is Ari. 5. pol.
better to beware that men increase not too much in power, then to seek remedy
afterward against the mighty. Hier. Epi. 2.
While the enemy is little, kill him. Wickedness lest Tares grow, is to be
crushed in the seed. Why are not these sayings of Hierome pertinent even here?
We cannot jointly resist a common danger: Bal. 2. cons. 2. 6. 6.
a common fear unites even those that are most divided and furthest off: and
that by the instinct of nature, and our Dion l. 6.
Baldus teaches out of Aristotle; This is the reason of Empyres, that they may
not hurt; as he, whosoever he was, said well in Dionysius, and nothing more
true, and uttered as it were from an Oracle, Ovid. 5. Fast. Posse nocere sat
eft; Quodque potestalios perde^e, perde prior.
In the judgment of Bodin: Plut. Pomp.
It is sufficient to have power to hurt, and that which can destroy others, dee
thou destroy first: as aptly here the witty Poet; and truly it is very
grievous, that we may possibly suffer an injury although we do not suffer it:
as Bal. 2. cons. 195. 202.
Plutarch speaks: and Ap^l. de ^und.
Baldus, that it is lawful to use means for resistance: nor ought it to be in
the power of an adversary to hurt us if he would: and that we ought to
consider, that which hurts, and that which can hurt. Even the continuing of
concord among the elements is this, by Polit. 4. Ep. 1 Guic. lib. 1.
equal proportion, and while in none, one is subdued of the other: ^ And this
is that, which that most wise, most desirous of peace, and father of peace,
Laurencius Medices procured always, that the affairs of the Italian Princes
should be balanced with equal weights, whence both Italy might have peace,
which both it had whiles he lived, and was the preserver of this temper; and
which peace ceased when he deceased, and that temperature. The great offspring
of Medices, was a great safeguard both to his own City and the rest of Italy:
does he not as yet endeavor this, that one should not be able to do all
things, and all Europe come under the command of one? unless some be able to
resist the Spanyard, Europe will certainly fall. Ans. E^log.
If any will pull a middle stone out of the wall, upon which all relies, the
rest being carried together will follow. Polyb. lib. 2.
No, this must never be permitted, that the dominion of any should grow so
great, as neither to doubt before so much as of most manifest injustice, which
Polybius says, and says again: whence Hero therefore aided the Carthaginians
against the Mercenaries, least the Carthaginians being oppressed, the Romans
should be able to do all things. Thus Li^. l. 42.
Livie of the diverse conceits of men upon the war of the Romans, and Perseus,
that some favored him, some them, but there was a third part, the best and most
prudent, who would have neither part to becom^ more powerful, the other
oppressed, for so themselves should be in the best condition, always
protecting them from the injuries of the other: And these things ing^niously,
Marcus Cato for the Rhodians: who through hatred to the Romans, Gellius l. 7. ^.
3.
by their good will at least, or wishes had favored Perseus, They would not
that we should have conquered the King: but also many other people, and many
Nations; and partly not for reproach sake, but because they feared, that if
there were no man whom we stood in awe of we might do what we list, and every
one of us, if any think any thing to be attempted against his own estate,
does even with his strength contrarily endeavor that it be not attempted
against him. This the Ambassador of Persius had thus discussed before the
Rhodians, that they ought to endeavor, that the right and power of all things
be not devolved to one people. Cato adds, that their will ought not to be
punished so much, because it ought to be discerned more certainly. Dion. l. 38.
Caesar does not contradict, who thus disputes of raising of war against King
Ari^vistus, that he ought to be punished before he became great, or should do
any evil, even because he had a thought to do them hurt. Neither ought this
to be understood of the naked thought, and bare will; but of that which has
assumed the Act, declared in another L. 225. d. ^ 8.
place; that King was now fearful to the Romans in France, and his Arms
threatened danger: Caesar therefore wisely and justly thought that there was no
further delay to be made, but that he might restrain Arms with Arms. The
Iou. l. 34.
Switzers lately very wisely, that they will favor neither the French nor
Emperor, but would keep a league with them both, until their Armies should not
be hurtful to the Helveti^^ Commonwealth. But I conclude, the defense is just
which prevents dangers already meditated of, already prepared; and also not
thought upon, but very likely, possible: yet neither this last simply; or would
I call it just, to endeavor this war, as soon as ever any should be made too
potent; which I do not affirm. For what if any Princes power should be
increased by successions, by elections; will thou trouble him with war,
because his power may be dangerous to thee? Another thing therefore must be
added concerning Justice. We will add to others, who what they have thought of
a just war, attend.

CHAP. XV. of Honest Defense.
IT remains to speak of honest defense, which is undertaken without any fear
of danger to us, sought for no want of our own, for no profit, but only for
other men's sakes, L^ 3. de ju^ and ju.
and it rests upon this foundation, that (as Marcus Tullius says) nature
has ordained among men affinity, and love, and good will, and the bond of good
will, and that the law of nations is placed in the society of men, which
therefore is called by Cicero also, Cic. 3. de fi.
Civil. Plut. de Vi. Alex^
Thus Verily the Stoickes would have the City of the whole world to be one,
and all men to be commoners, and townsmen; and like one Heard feeding together
in a Common ground. Niceph. g^. li. 4.
All this that thou beholdest, wherein heavenly and earthly things are
contained, is one; and we are members of one great body, and the world it self
is one S^n. ep. 96.
body. But Nature has made u^ allied, seeing she has begotten us of the same,
and in the same, also endewed us with mutual love, and has made us ^ociable.
Sen. ep. 96.
And this our society is most like the joining of stones, in a wall; which
would fall, if the stones did not withstand, and uphold one another, as Seneca
excellently; and which as Gel. lib 6.
Gellius, consists, upholden as it were, with a mutual contrariety and
support. Hor. ad I^^. ep. 1.
This is the desagreeing concord of things, as Horace speaks, and we also
before^ And now thou hear that all the world is one body, and all men are
members of this one body, and thou hear the world to be an house, and to be
a City; which hear again, for they are beautiful. The world is the greatest
house of things, thus V^rro. Sen^ ult* ben.
Man is a sociable creature, and being (...) for the good of all, looks upon
the world as one house: thus Seneca (...) (...), the world it a Commonwealth,
Lact. de ira. Dei. c. 10.
having one form of (...) one Law; Phi. Iose
Philo, there is one Commonwealth of all and a common (...) c* Apol M ^ct.
Tertullian, Minutius, and also in Aristotle, There is one great City: what an
ha^^ony is here of wise men? Add touching Society that of Cicero; Aris^. de
mu^.
Society in the largest extent, (which though it be often said we must repeat
more often) is of men toward men, Cic. 3. de offic Lael.
more inward, of those that are of the same Country; ne^rer of those that are
of the sane City: and in another place: We are so borne that there may be a
c^rtaine Society between all; but greater as any one is nearer: Citizens are
better than strangers; kindred ^ha^ Forriners. And thus does Aug 19. de civ.
Augustine note there soci^ti^s; the first of the household, the second of the
City, the third of the world, and says, all the Nations in the world are
joined together by humane society. But what is this society and conjunction?
Among the good there is as it were a necessary benevolence, which spring of
friendship, is constituted of nature; but that same goodness belongs also to
the multitude; for virtue is not inhumane, nor cruel, nor proud, which will
not look upon all people, writes Cicero; and Ambr^^. de off. 3
Ambrose, the law of nature binds us to all charity; that one should bear
with another, as members of one body: and so also Bal ^ de prido.
Baldus, we are borne for our own* and for strangers by the bond of Charity:
those that say, care ought to be had of Citizens, deny it of strangers, these
men take away community and society of mankind. Also Cicero: which Lact. 6
instir. 6
Lactantius both cites and has approved. And the same Cicero. Ci. c. 7. A^t.
2.
It is a filthy opinion of them, Arist. 1. pol. and Psalm. 107. 122.
who refer all things to themselves, filthy indeed, for man is borne for
society, and it is his Gal. 6. and1. petr. 4.
duty to help others, and not live to himself only: and for this cause
Cicero condemned the Philosophers, because while they lacked one kind of
justice, and (as Hier. Ep. 14
another holy man writes) fulfilled indeed the greatest part of equity, not to
hurt any, they offended against the other, because they forsook the society of
life, and so forsook this part of justice, to profit when thou can; Claud.
4. cons. He.
Do thou not see how the world it self, the most beautiful of all works
does bind it self with love? we are Romans cons. 4^0.
bound by the Law of nature (so says the interpreter of the Law) to be
profitable every way: and the Dec. cons. 469 not l. 3. l. 5. de just.
same men deliver an equal defense of their own and of strangers, but
specially of confederates, from whom we must keep off an injury; and that this
defense is both of divine and humane law. Plat. 9. de leg.
Plato thinks, he ought to be punished that keeps not back an injury offered
to another. Now that which Plato and these Interpreters say of private Citizens
we may very well apply to Princes and people: for what reason there is of a
private man in a private City, there is the same in the public and universal
City of the world, of a public Citizen, that is, of a Prince, of the people
of a Prince: Bal. 2. cons. 195.
As a private man has relation to a private man, so a Prince to a Prince,
says Baldus, Sen. 1. 2. de Ira.
A man is a Citizen to a man in the greater City, and borne for mutual succor
says Seneca. And because we are one body, if one member will hurt another
member, it is meet the others should help that which is hurt, because it
concerns the whole, even that which hurts, that the whole be preserved. So
men should help men, for society cannot be preserved, but by the love and
safety of the people. Xiphil.
Vespatian cannot be approved who denies aid, I know not to whom, upon this
pretense, because the care of other men's affairs appertained not to him: for
what good man is there who does nothing but for his own sake? Cic. 7. fa. 12.
Cicero again, even to Procop. 2. pers.
Lazius King of Persia, that he is not therefore just, because he does nothing
unjustly, unless also he defended the unjustly oppressed; and by that means
they obtained help, and bands of Soldiers against the Romans: for it is not a
strange thing amongst men for a man to defend the estates and safety of men.
Cicer. pro Quin.
Cicero had said the same; he should have respect if not of the man, yet of
humanity, which is due to every one from every one, for this very cause,
because they are equally men: and humane nature the common mother of all men
commends one man to another, Just. Ge. an. ^.
It is a noble example of the barbarous King of Mauritania: who, when he heard
that his enemy Alfonse, king of Castile, was pressed and almost oppressed by
the Armies of his son, he sent a hughe mass of gold unto Alfonso, he
himself went over with a great Army of Soldiers into Spain, judging it a
most unworthy thing that his Son should expel his Father from his Kingdom;
adding withal, that the victory obtained, he would be an enemy again unto
the same Alfonso. What? do I fear the Barbarians, enemies also, and bringing
gifts? That the deed of an enemy should be taken in the worst sense? does L. 6.
de Ex
Guiccardine say truth; that these things are not done of any but in hope of
some profit? The saying of Guicciardine is dispraised by noble Mountaygn in
those his Noble examples? I demand of what right it is? It is a question, if
any be bound by Law to defend another, when he can? and they seem commonly to
deny this, and the Lib. 21. de he. vel. ac. ve.
Law sometimes says, that we may without offense neglect other men's affairs:
but our proper question is; if any can thus justly defend another? Castr. l. 2.
de just. Al. 7. 17. 27 Clar. f. q 87. and Homicidium: De cons. 678.
wherein no man denies just defense, even for the defense of a stranger it is
lawful to kill another, by the opinion which is approved of all Doctors: Lib.
6. de app. Ias. l 3. de iu. Dec. cons. 691. Ceph. 712 ^uia. 20. obs. 20.
yea, the defense of him is approved, that neglects to defend himself, yea
that refuses to be defended by another, whether a friend defend him or
another, even an enemy: and thus it is called the rule of humanity, and so L.
39. dene. ge. 1. segq.
a benefit to be conferred often times upon the unwilling. So also there be
many other definitions. Also they conclude by an argument, not firm enough
that way, in another quest^on: that a man may take money for defending another,
which he should receive dishonestly, if he were bound to defend him by law: for
may not a servant get a reward from him whom yet notwithstanding he might not
neglect without punishment? neither is it dishonestly given nor dishonestly
taken, in way of thankfulness. L 5. quis. ma ad li per. Pla. 9. de leg.
So it is not ill taken of a Citizen from a City, nor by a son from a
father: for truly it is manifest, tha^ many things cannot be done without
offense; and therefore if done they are worthy of rewards, yet not of
punishment, if they be not done. Again, somethings on the contrary neglected,
indeed contract offense, but reformed they merit not glory, so Bernard: to
which I add a mean, that there be some things which being neglected contract
offense, and fulfilled deserve reward. Ias. d. l. 3. Eug. cons. 86.
But also even in the Court of conscience they will have a man to be bound to
defend a man. Bal. l. ul. c. de ju. deimp.
But conscience is the will of a good man, yea of the best: but they deliver
this also even in the way of honesty: and we follow honesty here, and that
arbiterment: Alc. l. cons. 27. Mol. ad Dec. l. 3. de reg.
but both in Civil and Canon Law, against the rest Bartolus inclines thus:
Albericus, Igneus, Decius, Alc^atus, Molineus, so teach: and Bal. 4. cons. 111.
l. 1. ^. de ser. fug.
Baldus elegantly, that it is a fault to omit the defense of another; of
himself, a treachery: which also in another place he determines. Pla^o is also
of this mind: and thus also Eccle. 4.
Siracides: free him to whom injury is done, out of the hand of the injuri^us.
I also am of the same mind, especially, if, which the forenamed interpreters
add, defense be not made with the danger of the defender. Bal. l. 1. de of.
pr. vi.
For no man is bound to put himself in danger; no man is bound so to assist
against a fire. Nic. Call. 7. his. 19.
Otherwise thou hear Constantine say, that they which live by the rule of
Gods Law, account an injury done to another, to be their own. Behold that thus
also he aided the Romans against Maxentius. Hear again Baldus his Lawyer, he
that defends not, nor resists an injury, Cic. 2. deoff.
is as well in fault, as he that forsakes his parents, or friends, or Country:
and if these be true in private men, how much more will they be in Princes?
These mutually call themselves Cosens, Cosen-germans, Brothers. They are so
much the more true in Princes, by how much if a private man defend not a
private man, the majestrate remains, that can both revenge the wrongs, and
repair the losses of private men, but there is none can piece up the injuries
and hurts of Princes, but the same Prince, who after had rather apply a
medicine to the evil, than hinder at the first that evil be not done. These
things are true, but that also you may hold with Bal l. 10. 10. c. de op. le.
Baldus that although these were not true out of Philosophy of judgments,
which is of things nec^ssary: the^ ar^ c^^tainely true from Philosophy of
manners: which consists of things persw^d^d, which Philos^phie also we follow
in this whole ^reatise. The Philosophy of Judgments* permits a man to neglect
even himself, as Baldus writes, and if besides, as it falls out almost
always, another special cause be joined to this general rule of honesty, it
may come nearer to justice. Let the opinion verily be true for me, that this
cause of honesty alone, perch^^ce has never m^ved any man to that honest
defense. Guic. lib. 2.
Guicciardines mouth said truly, no Prince will make war for Pe^ant, unless
persuaded w^^h desire of his own gain: yet that is ignominous to Princes and
sa^ours not of justice: but I had rather concur with Leo the Philosopher. We
know very few to keep true love, for its sake alone to be stirred up to
succor those that are entangled in misery, but on the contrary side, that the
number is very great of those that for hope of getting any thing, come to help
the unworthy: which is a more mild saying, and I think more true. But I seek
another thing, it is complete justice which defends the weak: so Anbr. 1 de
off. 27. c. 5. 23. q. 3.
Ambrose, and the Canon Law, and I seek for that Justice. The Romans also
joyn^d this cause with others by which they were moved often times to make
war: D^on ^ol. de legis.
the defense of the Lucans (says Dionysius) was the manifest cause of the
Samnitic all war, which might have a show of honesty, as common, and a
National custom of the Romans to aid those that fled unto them: but the
secret cause which did more urge, was the power of the Samnites was great, and
greater would it have been, if the Lucans had been subdued, so the reason of
profit lies hid: and therefore seems not so good, as it is honest: and yet we
call profitable also, good and just, and the one is made just by the other:
therefore what if they be dear unto us whom we should defend? l. 5. qui ex ca.
in po. ea.
Vlpianus says, that for love and friendship, for no other reason defense
ought not to be omitted. The defense of those that ought to be dear unto us,
is from nature, witness M. Tullius. What, if our allies and confederates? Amb.
de off.
He that keeps not of an injury from his fellow when he can, is as well in
fault, as he that does it. Am^rose, and Live. 31. 34.
even we our selves are hurt when our fellows are hurt: as in Livie. ^. de
Repub. ult.
John Bodin judges amiss, that an ally and a confederate is not bound to
help his fellow, if there be no caution of help in the league; and the
contrary is now showed by us, and also shall be showed in the third book.
Plut. Apoph.
What if they be of the same stock and blood? Agesilaus made war against the
Persians, that he might bring the Greeks of Asia into liberty. And the petty
Kings of Iov. l. 23.
Germany by an old custom of the Nation, think it an heinous offense, not to
be assistant to those that implore mutual help: although there is there
besides a certain body of a Commonwealth: as it is reported long since, that
there was of the Achai. What if of the same Religion? Oros. l. 5. c. 2.
Nations are joined together by the tie of Religion, more than either by the
communion of another law, or contract of a league: and therefore if we implore
nature by communion, the law of Nations by covenant, the Commonwealth by
laws, by common Religion (the most powerful thing of all) we implore the
bowels of men and of the holy One, who is the head of that communion. Procop.
1^ Pers. and Call. l. 17. c. 57.
So there was war with the Persians, because their fugitives were not
delivered them, and they were not delivered by the Romans, who would not
despise the humble professors with them of the same religion, who fled from the
Persian cruelty. Thus Justinius answered the Persian, that he could not but
receive those of the Christian Religion, falling away to him from the Persian,
who compelled them to forsake Christian Religion. Alc. l. 38.. Sacra. de V. O.
And our writers do thus resolve, that war may be made if any converted to
Christian Religion, should be oppressed by their Lords, and that for the right
of society contracted from conversion. What if neighbors? Cic. pro Planc.
for what? had I not very many, very just ties of familiarity, of neighborhood
of country, of friendship to defend Plancus? says Cicero. And here is our
case. q We are in danger if our neighbors house be on fire, for if fire have
fiercely taken hold of some houses, they will hardly be defended but that the
next houses will be burnt, which was elsewhere in Salust, and now in Ovid. s
Fire that is near is hardly kept off from houses: it is good that we abstain
from near adjoined places: which verses are proverbiall in this thing; and
proverbes add some credit. This notes something that as it is lawful to pull
our neighbors house down, least the fire should come to us: and that question
of a Decia. Cons. 651.
house infected is the same, although touching this it is answered contrary:
Levit. 14.
Yet the House infected with Leprosy was pulled down. L. 29. ubi gl^ de l. Aq:
And in many cases it is so, that we may do ill to others, that it be not ill
with us. We must beware of all contagion, especially of our neighbors: the ill
contagions of a neighboring People are hurtful. Ibo. l. 1.
The Romans (says Florus) as a certain infection ran over all, and taking
in all the nearest people, brought all Italy under them, and whatsoever
Dominion they had. Eccl. 22.
Before fire is the vapor and smoke of the Chimney, Syracides also. So we see
smoke from our neighbors fire, and will we not run and put out the fire
where it is? It is C. 6 de se. exe 6. Evg con 9^
written again, that it is lawful for any to help his neighbor against an
injury, yea, he seems to be partaker of a fault, who does not aid his deadly
foe, even speaking against help, nor yet desiring it. Concerning which I have
noted before, and will note further in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XVI. Of ayding Subjects that are Strangers against their Lord.
I Demand, if we may justly defend Subjects also that are Strangers against
their Lord? What if their cause also be unjust? Lib. 1. de Offi. 13.
Ambrose notes those three gods, Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto, have thus
Articulated, lest upon their intrenching on one another jurisdiction, they
might make War among themselves: they should not usurp the rule of the Sea,
etc. E^ri. Hip.
They say likewise, that we gods have this Law, none of us will cross the
desire of him that wills, but we yield always one to another. Which being
the fictions of very wise men, are applied unto Princes of the earth. But even
without any circumstance at all, the Corinthians speak thus to the Athenians:
Thuc. l. 1^
We do plainly deny that any is forbidden to punish his ow^e: for if thou
shall defend those that have offended, even your own Subjects will defend
themselves from you. Yet I think not Subjects of other men are altogether
strangers from that neerensse of nature, and union of Society, you do also cut
off the unity of mankind, whereby life is sustained, as excelently 4. de Benes.
Seneca. And if we make not Princes lawless, tied to no Laws nor Conditions;
It is necessary, that there be some to admonish them of their duty, and may
hold them fast bound; which reason I expounded in the second Book of
Embassies. Neither will I here infer any confusion of kingdoms, or any
inspection of one Prince over another Prince: neither do I suffer those things
to be distinguished, which are most firmly glued together by nature, I mean,
that kindred with all, among all. Neither here otherwise may one Prince have
inspection over another Prince, but such as may happen by every other War,
wherein one Prince carries himself as a judge both of himself, and of
another. If a question were among private men, it were most unjust to go to a
Foreign Prince about it. Also if there arise a difference between a private
man and his Sovereign, there are Magistrates appointed which may be sought
unto. But when the controversy is touching the Commonwealth, there neither
are, nor can be any judges in the City. I call that a public matter, when
such, and so great a part of the Subjects is moved, that now there is need of
War against those that defend themselves by War. And as if those should
come into part of the Principality of the public, and are Peers to the
Prince, who can do so much as he. Ceph. 612^
Even as one King is said to be equal to another, who can resist another
offering wrong, however greater, and more powerful; although I say not these
things of the Subjects themselves, unless it be in respect of Foreign
Princes, which will aid the Subject against their Sovereign, and who can aid
them no otherwise then in a controversy, as I have expounded, of the
Commonwealth. Cou. R^g^. Pocca. par. p. 9. Bod. l. 2. de Rep. c. 5. and l. 5.
cult. Cic. 3. de Off.
And indeed, if the Subjects be used more cruelly and unjustly, this opinion
of defending is approved even of others, who both bring that laudable example
of Hercules, the Lord of Tyrants and Monsters. There is also the example of
Constantine, who aided the Romans against Maxentius, as I noted before. Bal.
lib. 4. c. de just. and subst.
We defend Sons against injust Fathers. Add now those golden Sayings of Sen.
ult. de Benef.
Seneca. That being cut off, whatsoever it was, whereby he did cleave unto me,
the Society of humane right is cut off. If he do not impugn my Country, but
is burdensome to his own, and being bannished my Country does vex his own,
yet so great naughtiness of mind has cut him off: although it makes him not
an enemy, yet hateful unto me. And the reason of the duty which I owe unto
mankind, is both more precious, and more powerful with me, then that which I
own to one single man. Thus verily; or else we make all men foreigners to all
Princes, if we determine that they can do according to their pleasure and
lust. Now what if the cause of the Subject be unjust? The foresaid Authors
deny, that men ought to aid unjust Foreign Subjects, least any by so ayding
introduce the same Law into his own Kingdom, which the Corinthians did
before. Yea, E^h. 5. 9 Caesar. (...) de si c. 4.
Aristotle thinks, that neither a wicked Father is to be loved nor assisted
with help. But this is false of a Father, as I taught in a certain
Disputation, perhaps it is more true, that those may be defended of us by war,
who are unjust. For if it be a just war which is to repulse a wrong, although
they that repulse an injury, have given occasion to the war: the same it
seems may be determined in the defense of others, even of Subjects, for the
same reason. Surely there is that iniquity in War, that it will make the same
man to pronounce law to himself in his own cause, or verily willing to
pronounce it. Upon which pretense another Prince may bring aid on the contrary
side, that things may more civelly be composed without war. And this is that
which Pl^. Pyrth.
Pyrrhus did when he came to aid the Tarentines against the Romans; he
admonished them first, that they would by their own endeavor put an end to
the Controversy; although neither the Romans would not unjustly hearken unto
the King; or because they might deservedly suspect him, as being sent for by
enemies, armed with enemies, ready to fight for enemies, and of kin to
enemies. Cr^u. cons 224. Ceph. 57 Bal l* 1, de ser. fug.
He that stands armed with another, is said to bring help and aid unto him;
neither is there need to prove any thing against that at all. Even he that
arms himself, is believed to think upon war, And Alex 7. cons. 2. c^ph.
721.
if he that is the friend of an enemy be excluded from being a witness, much
more from being a Judge. las. l. 16 de Iurisd. Cic. pro Com. Ceph 750.
For it is easier, if any be received for a witness then a Judge; L. 47. de re
iul ^8. C. de (...).
The friend of my enemy is not presently meant my enemy, as neither my friends
friend is my friend; but there is a great suspicion of them both, and of the
friend of an enemy the more. But I return to the question. Leo^nou. 103
We are bound both to defend justly unjust Sons against the cruelty of a
Father, or Servants against the cruelty of a Master; and we laudably endeavor
that by fury (here is War) no not wicked men should be chastened and
punished, for fury and war have no measure. L. 5. Bal l. 4. C. de ser. Cor.
And he that led by humanity or pity, or any other approved and just cause,
has received another man's Servant, is not bound by the Statute of a corrupt
Servant, and that reception is accounted in the nature of good, etc. Plut. qu^
nutr. li. Hi^^o. cp. 9.
Even he is commended, who being angry with his servants committed them to be
punished by another, this commendation being added, because he himself was
angry. Therefore a good Prince will have the Liberty of rage against his own
Subjects to be taken from him, being angry, as a good Father, as a good Master,
and he will always judge, That Kingdoms were not made for Kings, but Kings
for Kingdoms, which is most true. This also of Plato avails, that we ought
to use Eloquence, chiefly to accuse our friends, to whom it is the best, thus
to be drawn from future evils. And so I think that we may defend unjust
Foreign Subjects, yet to this end only, for the keeping off immoderate
cruelty and too severe punishment: Alex l. ^0, Sol. mu.
Seeing it is not inhumane to do good to those that have offended. Yet I dare
affirm, that this reason of bringing help does seldom stand alone, but that
another of necessity and profit may be pretended, or truly shown, as is said
before. Behold now is the greatest question: If the English have justly aided
the Hollanders because their cause was unjust, and the Hollanders were even now
Subjects to the Spaniards? both which notwithstanding are false. It was said,
that a War was to be undertaken upon that occasion, that a good Peace might
be obtained of the Spaniard, which otherwise, as is thought, could not have
been had: Cells. l. 5. de just.
And so truly War is lawfully undertaken, as Cells. 3. c. 9 Hypp. de loc. in
hom.
our men allege: And the most wise reason of the Physicians makes for it,
That if any Fever be slow which holds the body, and which yields to no cure,
then the Disease is to be changed, yea, to be augmented and heightened. For
when it does not receive cure for the present as it is, it may receive that
cure which is future. But even War might have been undertaken without that
evil of an unfaithful Peace. As there be many bonds of neerenesse between the
English and the Hollander: the ancient friendship with the Dukes of Burgondy,
the familiarity of these people, and the old Consanguinity; all the rest, which
are noted at the end of the former Chapter. And therefore with Cicero, Cic.
prosy
They think not that the nocent are not to be defended, if they be the friends
of a good man. Add one thing of great moment, that the Hollanders overcome in
War, should altogether change their condition, and we see it in the conquered
part, being for the most part, cast down from their ancient Liberty, and for
the most part oppressed with Garrisons, are governed now only at the pleasure
of the Prince. But this our Neighbors cannot endure. l. 3. de ho. (...). ex.
Neither is any other forbidden to favor Liberty. But L. 54. de Leg.
it much behooves Neighbors to have a Neighbor. Not. (...) Alex cons. 197.
For if one man has need of another man, what shall we say that one Neighbor
is to another, says Not. (...) Alex cons. 197.
Pindarus, and Bal l. 9. C. de P. 1. in ^. 7.
Callimac^us: Ill Neighbors are odious to me, and Heb. Apoph. 1. c. 3.
some wise Hebrew, The worst of all diseases is an ill Neighbor: And another
of the same Nation, Woe to the wicked, and woe to his Neighbor. And where may
Hes. 1. op. op.
Moral Fables be silent? Faer. 1. c. 7
An evil neighborhood is like a misfortune; The vicinity of great Men is
always to be shunned of the weaker; Alc. Emb. 164. Plut. Euth.
Good men receive good things from good Neighbors, and evil Men, evil
things, etc. So * Plato, Plu. Apoph.
and so Th^mistocl^s; When he ^old a pi^ce of ground, ^ee commanded the Crier
to Proclaim, that it had a good Neighbor: Which L. 33. de con. em.
Interpreters note, to the Law. And there be many things of the same kind.
Wherefore neither if these neighboring Subjects would change their condition,
neither if by reason of a fault committed against their own King, they be
compelled to alter it, is another Neighboring Prince compelled to suffer it,
to whom neither another man's will nor offense ought to bring damage. The Com.
Pii. 2. li. 19.
Venetian Ambassadors when they interceded for Sigismund of Maltesta, to Pope
Pius the second, they spoke even this, that Neighboring Princes would not have
another Neighbor, whom furthermore they knew not, what he might hereafter be.
And you may note, that Sigismond held Towns from the Church, and for his
committed offenses, he ought worthily to lose them. Perhaps some will doubt,
whether these things be true in private men's causes. 26. de da. inf. Alex. 2.
174.
For a private man seems to have power to do with his own what he list, if
it be profitable to himself, and hurt not another. Yet these things be true
thus in the causes of Empires. For Princes ought to take heed for the future,
that another if he will, may not yet be able to hurt another, which is
expounded in the Treatise of Profitable defense. L. 1. de aq. pl. L. 8. si. se.
ui. Bal. 4. cons. 396.
But even that rule, that it is lawful for any to do what he list with his
own, holds not otherwise; then if the condition of a Neighbor be made
neither worse nor more grievous thereby: although it be true that no man may
take care of the gain, which his Neighbor made, and which was owing to him by
no obligation. But even security, and a certain singular conjunction of love
from a Neighbor, is due to Empires: Now this we know, what things are taken
away when Neighbors are changed. Arist. 3 ^ pol.
And the same people is not the same that they were, if the Commonwealth be
not the same that it was. For it is not lawful (I say again) to do all
things with the Subjects; for that is not lawful with the Subjects which would
be a hurt, and a danger to those that are no Subjects. It is not lawful to
make Fortes in his own Land, Bal. 5. Cons. 409.
which may be terrible to those that are not his, as you shall hear in the
third Book. Therefore neither is it lawful to do with his own, that which
may be a terror to others. Bal. q. Cons. 396.
How ever these are called equivalent, to do in his own place, and toward his
own Subjects. Whether if my Neighbor should place in his House Gunnes, and
other things against my House, may I neither be careful for my self, nor
stir against my Neighbor? Thus, thus were Preparations made in Holland; and
that great Noble man, Leicester, very wisely foresaw, that the defense of the
Hollanders, was very wholesome and necessary for the Commonwealth, and he
persuaded it to be undertaken, Lyp.
least if the Spaniards should break through that Pale of Europe, as then very
wisely Iustus Lipsius, called it there should remain no obstacle at all to
their cruelty. And thus far of War Defensive.

Thus, and much more this our learned Professor of the Civil Law, Albericus
Gentilis; whose words I have thus largely transcribed; because they not only
abundantly justify the lawfulness of the Parliaments present Defensive War
in point of Law, and their Ordinances of Association and mutual Defense, but
likewise fully answer all the cavils and pretenses of Royalists and Malignants
against the progress and managing of this war, from principles of Nature,
Law, Humane Reason, Equi^y, and humane Authorities.

THE LAWFVLNES OF THE PARLIAMENTS present Defensive War in Point of Divinity
and Conscience.
THe lawfulness and justness of the Parliaments present necessary Defensive
War, in point of Common, Civil, Canon Law, and Policy, having been largely
debated in the premises, because not hitherto discussed in that kind by any,
to my knowledge; I shall in the next place proceed to justify it in point of
Divinity and Conscience; Wherein, though I shall be more concise then I
intended, because sundry Learned * Divines, Master Goodwine his Anti-cavallar.
and Bone for a Bishop. Master Burrough^ his Lord of Hosts. The several Answers
and Replies to Doctor Fern. The honest Broker, Scripture and Reason, pleading
for Defensive Arms (the best and acutest of this kind) with many others.
in many late Printed Books, common in all men's hands have professedly handled
it at large, and given good satisfaction unto many unresolved scrupulous
Consciences; yet because this Treatise may come into diverse hands, which have
not perused their discourses; and those whose judgments may be convinced by
the Legal, may still have some scruples of Conscience resting in them, in
reguard of the Theological Part, and because some things (perchance) in Point
of Theology, which others have wholly omitted, may seasonably be here supplied,
to satisfy Consciences yet unresolved of the justness of the present, and all
other necessary Defensive Wars, I shall not over-sparingly or cursorily pass
through it, without a competent debate*

Now lest the Consciences of any should be seduced, ensnared with
generalities, or clear mistakes through the mis-stating of the points in
question, with which devise, many have been hitherto deluded by the Opposites,
who cumbate only with their own misshapen fancies, discharging all their
Gu^shot against such Tenets as are not in question, and no ways coming near
the White in Controversy, I shall for my own orderly proceeding, and the
better satisfaction of ignorant, scrupulous, seduced consciences, more
punctually state the Question, then formerly in the Legal Part; first,
Negatively, next, Positively; and then proceed to its debate. Take notice
therefore.

First, that this is no part of the question in dispute. Whether the
Parliament, or any England? it being out of controversy, readily subscribed by
all of both sides; that Such commands ought not so much as to be disobeyed,
much less forcibly resisted but cheerfully submitted to, and readily executed
for Conscience sake, Romans 13. 1. to 6. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Tit. 3. 1. Hebr. 13.
17. Josh. 1. 16, 17, 18. Ezra. 7. 26. Eccles. 8 2, 3, 4, 5. the only thing
these objected Scriptures prove, which come not near the thing in question,
though our Opposites most rely upon them.

Secondly, Neither is this any branch of the dispute: Whether Subjects may
lawfully rise up, or rebel against their Prince, by way of Muteny, Faction, or
Sedition, without any just, or lawful public ground; or for every trifling
injury, or provocation offered them by their Prince? Or whether private men,
for personal wrongs (especially where their lives, chastities, livelihoods are
not immediately endangered, by actual violent, unjust assaults) may in point of
Conscience, lawfully resist, or rise up against their Kings, or any other
lawful Magistrates? Since all disavow such tumultuous Insurrections and
Rebellions in such cases: yet this is all which the often objected Examples of
Number* 16.
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, with other Scriptures of this Nature, do or can
evince.

Thirdly, nor is this any parcel of the Con^roversie. Whether Subjects may lay
violent hands upon the persons of their Princes, wittingly or willingly to
deprive them of their Lives or Liberties, ^specially, for private Injuries; or
in cold blood, when they do not actually nor personally assault their lives or
chastities; or for any public misdemeanors, without a precedent sentence of
Imprisonment, or death against them given judicially, by the whole States or
Realms, where they have such Authority to araigne and judge them? For
allunanimously disclaim, yea abominate such Traitorous practices and
Jesuitical Positions, as execrable and unchristian: yet this is all which the
example of David's not offering violence to King Saul: the 1 Samuel 24. 3. to 22.
cap. 26. 2. to 25. 2 Samuel 1. 2. to 17. or that perverted Text of Psalm. 105. 15.
( the best Artillery in our Adversaries Magazines) truly prove.

Fourthly, Neither is this the thing in difference, as most mistake it. Whether
the Parliament may lawfully raise an Army to go immediately and directly
against the very person of the King, to apprehend or offer violence to him,
much less intentionally to destroy him, or to resist his own personal
attempts against them, even to the hazard of his life? For the Parliament, and
their Army too, have in sundry See an ex^ct Collection of of al Remon.
strances, etc.
Rem^nstrances, Declarations, Protestations, and Petitions, renounced any such
disloyal intention or design at all; for which there is no color to charge
them; and were his Majesty now alone, or attended only with his Ordinary
Courtly Guard, there needed no Army nor Forces to resist his personal
assaults: Yet this is made the principal matter in question by Doctor Fern,
The Resolving of Conscience. The Necessity of Christian Subjection, etc. A
Revindication. The Grand Rebellion, etc
by An appeal to thy Conscience, and other Anti-parliamentary Pamphlets; who
m^ke this the sole Theme of their Discourses: That Subjects may not take up
Arms Against their Lawful Sovereign, because he is wicked and unjust; no,
though he be an Idolater and Oppressor: That, Sup^ose the King will not
discharge his trust, but is bent, or seduced to subvert Religion, Laws,
Liberties, yet Subjects may not take up Arms, and resist the King, it being
unwarrantable, and according to the Apostle, damnable, Romans 13. Yea, this is
all the questions the C^^valleers and Malignants demand of their Opposites in
this cause. What? will you take up Arms; will you fight against, or resist the
King? etc. Never stating the question of his Forces, his Army of Papists,
Malignants, Delinquents, but only of the King himself abstracted from his
invading, depopulating Forces, against whom, in this sense of theirs, the
Parliament never yet raised any Forces, nor made the least resistance hitherto.

These four particulars then being not in question, I shall here appeal to
the most Malignant Conscience: Whither Doctor Fern, and all other our
Opposites, pretenders of Conscience, have not ignorantly, if not maliciously,
made ship wrack of their good Consciences (had they ever any) by a wilful
mistating of the Controversy, concerning the present Defensive War, in the
four preceding particulars, which they make the only Questions; when not so
much as one of them comes within the Verge of that which is the real
Controversy; and never once naming that in all, or any of their Writings,
which is the point indeed? Secondly, Whether there be any one Text or Reason
in all their Pamphlets, particularly applied to any thing which concerns the
present War, but only to these four particulars, which are not in debate?
And if so, (as no Conscience can gainsay it) then there is naught in all the
wast Papers they have published, which may either resolve or scruple any
Conscience, That the Parliaments Defensive Arms and resistance are unlawful
in point of Divinity, or Conscience, which is steered by the Scriptures
Compass.

But if these particulars be not in question; you may now demand, what the knot
and true state of the present Controversy, in point of Conscience, is? In few
words, take it thus.

Whither both Houses of Parliament, and the Subjects by their Author^ty, for
the preservation of their own Persons, Privileges, Laws, Lives, Liberties,
Estates, Religion; the apprehension of Voted contumatious Traitors, and
Delinquents, the res^uing his seduced Majesty out of the power of Popish
pernicious Counselors and Forces, who end^avour the Kingdoms subversion, by
withdrawing him from, and incensing him against his Parliament, may not
lawfully with a good Conscience, take up necessary defensivs Arms, and make
actual Warlike resistance against his M^j^sti^s Maligna it ill Counselors,
and invading Popish Forces ( who now Murder, Rob, Spoil, Sack, Depopu^ate
the Kingdom in a most Hostile manner, to set up Tyranny, Popery, and an
Arbitrary lawless Government,) in case they come armed with his personal
presence, or commission, to ^xecute these their wicked illegal designs;
Especially, when neither the Parliament nor their forces in this their
resistance, have the least thought at all, to offer any violence* to the Kings
own person, or to oppose his Legal, just Sovereign Authority?

Or shorter, Whether the Kings Captains an^ Souldier^s invading the
Parliam^nt, and Subjects, as aforesaid, the Parliament or Subjects (especially
when authorized by an Ordinance of both Houses) may not with a safe Conscience
forcibly resist these Malignants though armed wit^ the Kings illegal
Commissions, without his personal presence, or with his presence and
Commissions too? And for my part, I think it most evident, that they may
lawfully resist, repulse them, even by Divine Authority. For the better
clearing whereof, I shall premise these three undeniable Conclusions.

First, That no lawful King or Monarch whatsoever, (much less the Kings of
England, who are no absolute Princes) have any the least Authority from the
Laws of God or man, personally by themselves, or instruments, to do any
injury or injustice to their Subjects; how much less then by open Forc^ to
Murder, Rob, Plunder, Ravish, Ruin, or Spoil them of their Laws, Liberties,
Estates, Religion, all which is plentifully proved by Law Authorities, in the
premises; and punctually confirmed by these ensuing Texts. Ezech. 44 15. 16,
17. cap. 45. 8, 9. Psalm. 105. 14 15. Isay 14. 15, to 23. 2 Samuel 23. 3. Isay 1.
23. cap. 3. 12. 14. 15. Prove. 28. 15. 16. Ez^^h. 22. 6. 7. 27. Zeph. 3. 3.
Mich. 3. 1. to 12. 1 Samuel 12. 3. 4. 5. 1 King. cap. 21. and 22. Zeph. 2. 8.
Is^y 9. 7. cap. 16. 5. cap. 32. 1. 2. cap. 49. 23. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. Ier. 22. 3.
to 32. Obad. 2. 10. to 16. Romans 13. 3. 4. 5. ^. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 16. and infinite
Scriptures more.

Secondly, That all Subjects and persons whatsoever, are obliged both in point
of Law and Conscience to disobey, resist, and not execute, the unjust illegal
Commissions, Mandates of their Kings, and other Magistrates. This is evident by
the Midwives refusal to mur^her the Hebrews Male-child^en at King Pharoahs
command, for which God blessed them, and built them houses Exodus ^. 15 to 20. By
Balaams denial to curse or defy the Israelites, at King B^lacks entreaty
Numb. 22. and 23. and 24. By the refusal of Saul's Guard and Footmen to s^ay or
fall on the Priests a Nob, by King Saul's personal command, though present, and
not only their King but Master too: 1 Samuel 22. 17. 18. By Ionathans denial to
kill, or consent to the death of David upon Saul's mandate, though not only his
Sovereign, but Father, although he might have gained the Crown by it, and
endangered his own life by refusing it, 1 Samuel 20. 27. to 42. By Saul's
Armour-beares forbearance to run him through with his Sword, when he fled
before the Philistimes, though he as his King and Master enjoined him to do
it; lest the uncircumcised should come and thrust him through and abuse him. 1 Samuel 31. 4. By Mordechai his denial to bend the knee to Haman, the great
Favorite, though the King had so commanded, Esther 3. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. By
Shadrac^, Meshach, Abednego, and Daniels refusal, to eat of the Kings portion
of meat and wine assigned them, least they should be de^iled, Dan. 1. 5. to 12.
By their peremptory resolution, not To fall down and worship King
Nebuchadnezzars golden Image, though twice strictly commanded by the King to
do it, and threatened to be cast into the fiery Furnace (as they were) for
refusing it, Dan. 3. 4. to 30. By Daniels disobeying the Kings and Lords
Idola^rous Decree, not to offer a Petition to any God or man for 30. days,
save of King Darius, under pain of being cast into the Lions Den, Dan. 6. 5.
to 24. By the Pharisees and chief Priests Officers neglect to apprehend our
Savior for his Preaching, though enjoined so to do by their Masters, John 7.
32. to 48. By the Apostles refusal to give over Preaching, and perseverance in
Preaching, notwithstanding the High Priests and Councels express Inhibitions
and doubled Commands, seconded with Apprehensions, Imprisonments, Scourgings;
and their direct resolutions in this very case, See Gratian Cause. 11. q. 3.
That we ought to obey God rather then men, Acts 4. 12. to 22 cap. 5. 17. to
the end. By Peter's Preaching to, and conversing with the Vncircumci^ed
Gentiles, notwithstanding the Christian Jews d^slike, Acts 11. 1. to 19. with
infinite Presidents of this nature in Ecclesiastical Histor^es; the very
sufferings of all the Sea Fox Acts and Monum. French Book of Martyrs, with
others.
Martyrs depending on this ground alone: which is backed by Matthew. 10. 28. 32.
33. Luc. 12 4. 8. cap. 9. 23. 24. 25. 26. Ezech. 2. 3. to 9. Rev. 13. 3. to the
end. Romans 12 1. 2. John 16. 2. 3. 1 Thess^ 2 14. 15. 16. Exodus 32. 2. Josh 24
15. Psalm. 44. 15. to 23.

Thirdly, That as all Kings illegal unjust commands are void in Law, and will
no ways extenuate the guilt, or justify the actions of those instruments who
execute them in point of Law, as I have Page 10. 11. etc.
fo^m^rly cleared; so are they likewise mere nullities, and insufficient to
excuse the executioners of them in point of Conscience; as is evident by, Psalm.
52. 5. where God threatens to destroy Doeg the Edomite, for ever, to take him
away, pluck him out of his dwelling place, and root him out of the land of the
Living, for executing King Saul's bloody command upon the Priests at Nob, 1 Samuel
22. By Gods exemplary punishment upon those Soldiers who by King
Nebuchadnezzars special command, bound the three Children and cast them into
the fiery Furnace; who were slain by the flames of the Furnac^e, though these
three Martyrs had no harm in the Furnace it self, Dan. 3. 20. to 28. By Gods
consuming the two Captains and their fifties with fire from heav^n, who came
violently to apprehend the Prophet Elija^ by King Ahaziah his commission, and
unjust command, 2 King. 1. 9. to 16. By the Precept of John Baptist given to
Soldiers themselves, Luke 3. 14. Do violence to no man: (neither by the
Kings, nor Generals Command) neither accuse any falsely. By 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay
hands suddenly on no man, (no more in a violent, Military, then an
Ecclesiastical sense) neither be partakers of other men's sins: Compared with
the next forecited Scriptures; with Romans 1. 32. Math. 15. 14. Psalm. 50. 18. 21.
Prove. 1. 10. to 16. Oba^. ver^. 10. to 16. Isay 1. 23. with Isay 9. 16. The
leaders of this people cause them to err, and those that are led of them are
destroyed. What therefore Saint John writes in another case, 2 John 10. 11. If
there come any unto you (be he an Archbishop, Bishop, Archdeadon, Fern
himself, or any Court Chaplain whatsoever,) and b^ing not this Doctrine;
receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed; for he that bids
him God speed, Is partaker of his evil Deeds: I shall apply to this particular
of executing Kings unjust Commands against their people; they are partakers of
their Kings wickedness, if they do but intertaine their unjust Commissions
into their Houses or bid them God speed; much more if they execute them either
voluntarily, or against their wills, out of an unworthy fear, or base respects.

These three Conclusions being irref^agable, Argument^
My first Argument to justify resistance

Secondly, That resi^tance which is warranted by direct Precedents recorded,
approved Minor (only questionable) is thus confirmed. First, by the notable
example of the Prophet E^ijah, 2 Kings 1. 2. to ^6. who sending back King
Ahaziah his Messengers (sent by him to enquire of Baal^ zebub the God of Ekron,
whether he should recover of his disease) with an harsh Message to the King,
contra^y to his Command, which they disobeyed; thereupon this King, in an angry
fume, sent two Captains with 50. men apeece, one after another, to apprehend
the Prophet for this affront; (as Antiq^ ^ud. lib 9 c^p. 1. Ipse Prophetae cum
^ivatus vim^sses. ut (...)sua fa^iat, vi ceactum eo pert^ahat etc.
Josephus, with other Interpreters accord,) who coming with their forces to
him, said; Thou man of God, the King has said, come down quickly. To whom he
successively answered: If I be a man of God, th^n let fire come down from
Heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty; And there came fire from heaven
thereupon, and consumed two Captains and their fifties: but the third Captain
and his fifty, who hum^led themselves to the Prophet, and begged the sparing of
their lives, were spared; the Angel of the Lord bidding the Prophet to go
down with them to the King, and not be afraid. From which Text it is
infallible, even by a divine Miracle from heaven, doubled by God himself; That
it is lawful for Subjects in some cases, to resist the unjust violence of the
Soldiers and Captains of their Kings though armed with their Regal Commands.
Secondly, by the History of the Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings 6. 31, 32, 33. Who when
King ^oram (his Sovereign) had sworn unjustly in his fury; God do so to me
and more also, if the head of Elisha shall stand on him this day; and thereupon
sent a Messenger before him to Elisha his house to take away his head; the
Prophet was so far from submitting to this Instrument of his; that he
Commanded the Elders sitting then with him in the house, to look when the
Messenger came, and shut the door, and Hold him fast at the Door, though the
sound of his Masters feet (the King) were behind him; whom he styles, the son
of a Murderer. Might these two eminentest Prophets thus openly resist the
Captains, Soldiers, and unjust Executioners of their Princes, with a good
Conscience; and may not others lawfully do the like? No doubt they may.
Thirdly, (If I be not much mistaken) this kind of resistance is warranted even
by Christ himself, and his Apostles: For a little before his Apprehention,
Christ uttered this speech unto his Disciples, Luke 22. 36, 37, 38. But Now, he
that has no Sword, let him sell his garment and buy one, etc. -- And they
said, Lord, behold, here are two Swords. And he said unto them, it is enough.
Why would Christ have his Disciples buy Swords now, unless it were for his and
their own better Defense, being the time when he was to be apprehended. Matthew.
26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22. John 18.
Soon after this Judas and his Band of men sent from the High Priests, with
Swords and Staves came to seize upon Christ. Which when they who were about him
saw what would follow: They said unto him; Lord, shall we smite with the Sword?
His commanding them to buy Swords now, was sufficient ground for this question,
and intimation enough, that they might now use them: whereupon Christ giving no
negative answer; One of them which were with Jesus (and John directly says it
was Peter) smote a servant of the High Priest (whose name was Malchus) and cut
off his right ear. Hereupon Jesus answered and said, Suffer ye Thus Far: So
Lu^. 22. ^0. 51.
Luke; Mark relates no answer at all reprehending this fact: John 18. 10. 11.
John records his speech to Peter thus. Then, said Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy
Sword into the sheath. The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not
drink? To which Matthew adds, Math. 26. 52 53.
thinkinst thou that I cannot pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me
more then twelve Legions of Angels? But how then shall the Scriptures be
fulfilled, that thus it must be? So that the reason why Christ bade Peter thus
to put up his sword; was not because he thought defense of himself, and Peter's
smiting now altogether unlawful in it self; but only inconsistent with Gods
present providence, which it should seem to cross. Christ was now by Acts 2.
23. cap. 4. 27. 28. Luke 14. 21, 26^ 27. Isay. 53.
Gods eternal decree, and the Scriptures prediction, (which must be
necessarily fulfilled) to suffer death upon the Cross for our iniquities:
should Peter then, with the other Disciples have totally resisted his
apprehention at this time, and proceeded still to smite with the Sword as they
began, till they had rescued our Savior, he could not then have suffered, nor
the Scriptures be fulfilled: had it not been for this special reason (rendered
by Christ himself, to clear all scruples against the Lawfulness of
selfe-defence in such cases,) Peter might still have used his sword to rescue
his Master from these Catchpoles violence; and if he and his fellows had been
too weak to withstand them, Christ was so far from imagining that he might
not have lawfully defended himself; that he informs them, he could (and
would no doubt) have presently commanded whole Legi^ns of Angels from heaven,
by his Fathers approba^sion, to rescue him from unjust violence. And his Speech
to Pilate, after his taking, plainly, iustifies the lawfulness of such a
forcible defense with Arms to preserve a man's life from unjust execution: John
18. 36 If my Kingdom were of this world, Then would my Servants fight (in my
Defense and Rescue) that I should Not be delivered to the Jews: but now my
kingdom is not from hence. All which considered, clearly justifies, the
Lawfulness of resisting the Kings, or higher Powers Officers, in cases of
apparent unjust open violence or assaults; and withal answers one grand
argument against resistance from our Saviors present Example: namely, See
Doct. Fernes resolving of Conscience. An Appeal to thy Conscience, with others
who much rely on this ill foundation.
Christ himself made no resistance when he was unjustly apprehended; Ergo,
Christians his Followers (Ergo, no Kings, no Magistrates too, as well as Christ
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, for they are Christians as well as
subjects;) ought not to make any for^ible resistance of open violence: Which
argument is a mere inconsequent; because the reason why Christ resisted not
these Pursevants, and High Priests Officers, was only, that his Fa^hers
decree, and the Scriptures foretelling his Passion might be fulfilled, as
himself resolves; not because he deemed resistance Unlawful, which he even
then approved, though he practiced it not, as these Texts do fully prove.

Fourthly, The lawfulness of a defensive War, against the invading Forces of
Abel; which stood out and defended it self against Ioab, David's General, and
his Forces, when they besieged and battered it; till they had made their peace,
with the head of Sheba who fled into it for shelter, 2 Samuel 20. 14. to 23. And
by that of Ester, Chapter 8. 8. to 17. chap. 9. 1. to 17. pertinent to this
purpose. Where Haman having gotten the Kings Decree, to be sent unto all
Provinces for the utter extirp^tion of the whole Nation of the Jews, the King
after Hamans Execution (through Gods great mercy, and Mordecaies and Queen
Esters diligence) to prevent this bloody massacre by their Enemies, granted to
the Jews in every City, by Letters under his Seal, To gather themselves
together, and to stand for their lives, to destroy, to slay, and to cause to
perish all the power of the people and Province That would Assault them, both
little ones and women, and to take the spoil of them for a prey; and that the
Jews should be ready against the day, to avenge themselves of their enemies.
Hereupon when the day, that the Kings Commandment and Decree (for their
extirpation) drew nee^^ to be put in execution, in the day that the enemies of
the Jews hoped to have power over them; the Jews gathered themselves together
in their Cities, throughout all the Provinces of King Ahasuerus, to lay hand on
such as sought their hurt; and no man could withstand them, for the fear of
them fell upon all people: And all the Rulers of the Provinces, and the
Lieutenants, Deputies, and Officers of the King helped the Jews, because the
fear of Mordecai fell upon them: So the Jews smote all their enemies with the
stroke of the Sword, and slaughter, and destruction, and did what they would
unto those that hated them. In the Place they slew eight hundred men, and
Hamans ten sons, on several days. And the other Jews that were in the
Provinces, gathered themselves together, and Stood for their Lives, and had
rest from their enemies, and slew of their foes seventy and five thousand, but
they laid not their hands on the prey. Lo here a Defensive war, justified, and
granted lawfu^l, by the Kings own Letters to the Jews, against their enemies,
who by former Charters from him, had Commission wholly to ex^irpate them,
Neither had this license of the Kings in point of Conscience, been lawful, had
their defense and resistance of the Kings former Commission been wholly
unlawful. And the reason of the Kings grant to them, to resist and slay their
Enemies, that would assault them; was not simply, because their resistance
without it, ad standing for their lives, had been unlawful, by reason of the
Kings first unjust Decree, which they ought not in Conscience to submit to,
without repugnancy; But only to enable the Jews, then Captives, and scattered
abroad one from another in every Province, with more convenience, security,
boldness, and courage now to join their forces together, to resist their
malicious potent enemies; to daunt them the more thereby; Nature it self, yea,
and all Laws in such a bloody National Butchery as this, without any j^st
cause at all, both taught and en^bled every one of the Jews, to stan^ for his
life, his Nations, Relig^ons, preservation, even to the last drop of blood.
Therefore the Letters of the King did not s^mply enable them to resist t^eir
enemies, which they might have done without them; but give them Authority to
destroy, and slay the Wives and little children of their Enem^es, and to take
the spoil of them for a prey; which they re^used to do, because they deemed
it unjust, notwithstanding the Kings permission and concessi^n, which as to
these particulars, was illegal, and more then he could justly grant. This
general National resistance of Gods own people then of their assaulting
cruel Enemies, even among Strangers, in the land of their Captivity under a
foreign Enemy, with the former and other following precedents, will
questionless more then conjecturally prove, if not infallibly resolve, The
lawfulness of a necessary Defensive War, and opposition by free Subjects,
against their Kings assailing Forces which seeks their ruin, though armed
with their Kings Commission, and that without any Ordinance of Parliament
authorizing them to resist, much more then, when enabled to oppose them by
O^dinances of both Houses, as the Jews were to resist and slay their enemies
by this Kings Letters and Authority.

R^m. 13. as I shall show hereafter, does no ways contradict, but approve it:)
But it has many Texts and precedents to countenance it, as the premises and
sequel attest: Therefore it must doubtless be lawful in point of Conscience.

See (...). Ofinder. Ench^nd Contr c. 9. and 10. (...)
Anabaptisticall spirit, condemning all kind of war, refusing to carry Arms
to defend themselves against any Enemies, Thieves, or Pirates) that it is
lawful not only passively to resist their Kings unlawful Commands, and
invading Forces, but like wise by flight, hiding, or other policies, to evade
and prevent their violence; which is warranted not only by Exodus 2. 15. etc.
Moses, 1 Samuel 19 to 31.
David's, and 1 King. 19.
Elijahs, their several flights from the violence of the Egyptians, Sa^^, and
(...) who sought their lives; but likewise by Mat. 2. 13. 14^ 15.
I^seph, Mar^, and Christ himself, who fled into Egypt to escape the hand^ and
but chery of King Herod; by Christ's own direction to his Disciples Matth^ 10,
23. But when they pers^cute you in this City, flee ye into another; and that
Prediction of his Matthew. 23. 34. Behold, I se^d unto you Prophets, and wise
men, and Scribes, and ^^me of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them
shall you scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute them from City to City;
which was really fulfilled. Acts 8. 3. 4. c. 9. 12. c, 11. 19. c. 13 50, 51. c.
14 1 to 24. c. 17. 1. to 16. c. 22 42. c. 26. 11. 12. c. 9. 24, 25, 26. ^ Cor.
11. 32. 33. Rev. 12. 6. Of which read more in Tertullian his b^oke De Fuga in
persecutione. Hence then I argue thus. That unjust violence of Princes and
their Armies, which Subjects with a safe conscience may decline and flee from,
when as they want power, means, or convenience to resist it, they may no doubt
lawfully resist even with force of Arms, when they have sufficient means and
conveniences to resist, and cannot flee or submit thereto, without the public
ruin: since the same justice and equity, which enables them by flight or
stratagem to decline unjust assaults of a superior power, or its judgments,
does likewise enable them to escape and prevent it with resistance, when they
cannot do it by flight or other polici^: If then they may lawfully with a safe
conscience hide, flee, or use lawful policies, to prevent the open injust
violence of their kings and their Officers, when not guilty of any capital
crime deserving censures; because by the very light of nature, and Law of
Charity they are obliged to preserve themselves from unjust tyranny; and are
no ways bound to subject themselves to the cruelty, the unjust assaults, or
oppressions of others: then by the selfsame reason, they may lawfully with
force of Arms defend themselves against such violent unjust attempts which
they are no way obliged to submit unto, when as they cannot conveniently secure
themselves and the public, but by such resistance, and should both betray
their own, the public safety, and Religion (as the Subjects and Parliament
should now do) in case they did not resist by force of Arms to the utmost of
their power: and become worse than Infidels, who have even thus often provided
for their own and the Republickes security.

Fif^ly, God himself, the founta^ne of I Tim. 5. 8.
justice, the Zeph. 3. 5. Esaias 45. 2^.
God of 1 Cor. 1^. 33 40.
Order, the Job 7. 20.
preserver of humane society who detests of all tyranny* cruelty Psalm. 5. 6.
Psalm. 11. 5.
oppression, injustice, out of his John 3. 16. 1 John 49.
Philanthropie (which brought the Son of his bosom from heaven to earth)
would never certainly in point of policy or conscience prohibit that, which is
the only probable means and apparent, remedy, to prevent, suppress disorder,
tyranny, cruelty, oppression, injustice, yea confusion in the world; and to
preserve good order and humane society: a truth so apparent, that no rational
man can contradict it. Therefore questionesse he never prohibited forcible
necessary resistance of the highest powers and their instruments in cases of
open unjust violence, and hostile invasion made upon their people to ruin
them, or subvert their established government, Laws, Liberties, Justice,
Religion: There being no other probable ordinary means left to any Kingdom,
Nation, People, to preserve their government, lives, Laws, Liberties,
Religion, and to prevent, suppress, or redress tyranny, cruelty, disorder,
confusion, yea utter ruin, when their Kings and Governors degenerate into
Tyrants, invading them with open force, but only defensive Arms: prayers and
tears alone, without military opposition by force of Arms, being no more able
to defend a person, City or Kingdom against Oppr^ssing Princes and their
Armies, then against thieves, Pirates or common enemies; whom they must and
ought to resist, as well with Arms as Orisons, with Spears as well as Tears,
else they should but tempt the Lord and destroy themselves (like those 1 Lar 2.
32. to 42. Alfonsia Carthagena Regum. Hisp. Acaphel. c. 44.
Jews and Goths who would not fight upon the Sabbath, and so were slain by
their enemies without resistance:) yea wilfully suffer the Commonweal to be
subverted, Religion ex^irpated; Laws trampled under feet, their own
posterities to be enslaved, ruined without any opposition, even in a moment.
For were it utterly unlawful, and no less then Treason or Rebellion, in point
of conscience for any subjects to take up Defensive Arms to resist the Kings
army, or forces, consisting for the most part of Papists, Delinquents, deboist
Athesticall persons of broken fortunes, seared consciences and most irreligious
lives, I appeal to every man's conscience, how soon these unresisted
Instruments of cruelty would utterly extirpate our protestant Religion, and
common faith, for which we are enjoined earnestly to contend and strive: (...)
3. Phil. 1. 27. 28. And shall we then yield it up and betray it to our
adversaries without strife or resistance? how suddenly would they ruin our
Parliament, Laws, Liberties; subvert all civil order, government; erect an
arbitrary Lawless tyrannical Regency regulated by no laws but will and lust?
how soon would they murder, imprison, execute our Noblest Lords, Knights,
Burgesses, best Ministers, and Commonwealths-men for their fidelity to God,
their King and Country? how many Noble families would they disinherite? how
many wives, widows, Virgins would they force and ravish; what Cities, what
Countries, would they not totally pillage, plunder, sack, ruin, consume with
fire and sword? how soon would our whole Kingdom become an Acheldama, a
wilderness, a desolation, and the surviving inhabitants either slaves or
beasts, if not devils incarnate? Yea how speedy might any private Officers,
Captains, Commanders, by color of illegal Com^issions and commands from the
King, or of their Offices, and all the notorious rogues and thieves of England,
under color of being listed in the Kings Army, if the people might not in
point of Law or Conscience resist them with Arms who came armed for to act
their villainies, maliciously rob, spoil, plunder, murder all the Kings liege
people, without any remedy or prevention, and by this pretext, that they are
the Kings Soldiers, suddenly seize and gain all the arms, treasure, forts,
ammunition, power of the Realm, into their possessions in a moment; and having
thus strengthened themselves, and slain the Kings faithful subjects, usurp
the crown it self if they be ambitious, as many private Captains and
Commanders have anciently slain diverse Roman and Grecian Emperors, yea sundry
Spanish, Gothish and Moorish Kings in Spain by such practices and aspired to
their Crowns, (of which there are sundry such like presidents in most other
Realms:) to prevent, redres, which several destructive mischiefs to People,
Kingdom, Kings themselves, God himself has left us no other certain,
proper, sufficient remedy but a forcible resistance, which all Kingdoms,
Nations throughout the world, have constantly used in such cases, as I shall
manifest more largely in the Appendix. Therefore certainly it must needs be
lawful, being Gods and Natures special Ordinance to secure innocent persons,
Cities, Nations, Kingdoms, Laws, Liberties, Lives, Estates, Religion, and
mankind it self, against the hurtful Lusts of unnatural Tyrants, and their
accursed instruments, against ambitious, treacherous, male-contented Spirits,
maliciously bent against the public weal, and peace. There are two things
only which usually restrain inferior persons from murdering, robbing,
disseising, injuring one another; the one is, fear of punishment by the
Magistrate; the other, fear and danger of being resisted, repulsed with shame
and loss of limb or life by those they violently assault, injure; and were
this once believed, received for Law or Divinity in the world, that it were
unlawful to resist, repulse a thief, murderer, riotor, or disseisor coming
in the Kings name, long enjoy his life, goods, liberty, lands, but some or
other would deprive him of them notwithstanding all restraints of Laws, of
penalties, and maintain suites against him with his own estate violently
seized on; the right of lawful defense, being every man's best security, to
preserve his life, estate, in peace against the violence of another, whence the
wisdom of the Common Law, makes every man's house his Castle, in the necessary
defense whereof, and of his person, goods from the violence, rape of others, it
gives him liberty to beat, repulse, yea kill injurious assailants: which
right of defense if once denied, would open a wide gap to all wickedness,
injustice, disorders whatsoever, and speedily bring in absolute confusion,
subversion of all property, Law, Order. As for Emperors, Kings, great Officers,
and other ungodly instruments, armed with Princes unjust commissions, who deem
themselves above the reach of humane Laws, censures, and accountable for their
unjust actions to none but God himself, there is no other known bar or
obstacle to hinder or restrain their armed violence, Tyranny, oppressions,
but only the fear of the oppressed assaulted subjects armed resistance; which
if once denied to be lawful, all Royalties would soon be transformed into
professed Tyranni^s, all Kings and Magistrates into Tyrants, all Liberty into
slavery, property into community, and every one would thereby be exposed as a
voluntary prey to the arbitrary cruelty covetousness, avarice, lusts, of the
greatest men. Therefore doubtless this armed resistance cannot but be lawful,
necessary, just, in point of Law and Conscience, to eschew these general
mischiefs.

Sixthly, all will readily grant it lawful in case of Conscience, for subjects
to resist a foreign enemy which invades them with force of Arms, though
animated by the King himself to such invasion; and why so, but because they
are their enemies, who would wrongfully deprive them of their native
inheritance, Liberties, estates, and work them harm; upon which ground, we
read in the 2 Kings 3. 21. That when the Moabites heard that the Kings of
Israel, Judah and Edom came up to fight against them with a great Army, they
gathered all that were able to put on armor, and upward to withstand them, and
stood in the border; and when ever the Midianites, Phili^^ines, Syrians,
Babylonians, Egyptians, Cananites or other enemies came to assault the
Israelites, they presently assembled together in Arms to encounter and repulse
them, as the Histories of Joshua, Judges, Samuel, the Kings, Chronicles, and
Nehemiah abundantly evidence, almost in every Chapter. If then Subjects may
with a good Conscience resist forragin enemies on this ground alone; then
likewise domestic foes and their Kings own Forces, when they become open
enemies, to rob, kill, plunder, destroy them as inhumanely, as injuriously as
the worst Foreign foes, there being the self same ground for the lawfulness
of resistance of the one as the other, and if the balance incline to one side
more than other, an intestine enemy being more unnatural, unjust, hurtful,
dangerous, and transgressing more Laws of the Realm (which obliege not
strangers) than a Forraigner, and a Civil war being far worse, and more
destructive than a Foreign; the resistance of an homebred enemy, must be the
more just and lawful of the two, even in point of Conscience.

Seventhly, The very Law of God both allows and commands all men, to resist
their spiritual enemies, with spiritual Arms: Iam 4. 7. Resist the Devil
and he will flee from you, otherwise he would easily subdue and destroy us. 1
Pet 5. 8. 9. Be sober and vigilant, because your adversary the devil as a
roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he may devour: whom resist steadfast in
the faith, Ephesians. 5. 10. to 19. Finally my brethren be strong in the Lord, and
in the power of his might: Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able
to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle (or war) not against
flesh and blood, but against Principalities, against powers, against the Rulers
of the darkness of this world, against Spiritual wickedness (or wicked
spirits) in high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, that
ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand:
Stand therefore having your loins girded about with truth, etc. Above all
taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked; And take the helmet of Salvation, and the sword of the
spirit, which is the Word of God: Praying always with all prayer and
supplication. Hence Christians are termed, Soldiers of Jesus Christ, and
Ch^istianity a warf^^e, against the world, the flesh, and Prince of the world,
the Devil: 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 10. 3. 1 Timothy 1. 18. Iam. 41. 1 Pet. 2. 11.
Romans 7. 23. 2 Cor. 10. 4. 1 Cor. 9. 7. I say 41. 2. Rev. 12. 7. 17. In which
warfare, we must fight and resist even unto blood striving against sin, Heb.
12. 4. Using not only prayers and tears, but other spiritual weapons of
war, mighty through God, able to ^ast down every high thing that exalts it
self, to bring into Captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, and
to revenge all disobedien^e, 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5. 6. If then we may and must
manfully resist, and fight against our Spiritual enemies, though
Principalities, Powers, Rulers, wicked spirits in high Places, and the John 14.
30. c. 12. 31. c. 16. 11.
Prince of this world himself, the Devil, when they ass^ult and seek to
devour our souls: then by the selfsame reason, we l^wfully with a safe
conscience may, yea ought to resist, repulse our corporal enemies when they
maliciously, un^u^^ly, forcibly assault us, against all rules of Law, of
Conscience, to murder, enslave, destroy our bodies, Souls, Religion, the
Republicke, which must be dearest to us, though they be Principalities, Powers,
Rulers, wicked Spirits in high Places, yea Princes of this world; with all
their under Officers and Instruments of cruelty, not only with prayers and
tears, but corporal Arms and force, because they unnaturally, tyrannically,
seek the destruction of our bodies, estates, Liberties, Republicke, Religion,
there being no inhibition in Scripture, not to resist the one or other, but
infinite Texts authorizing men, not only to resist, but war against, yea
slay their malicious open enemies, until they be sub^ued or destroyed, Exodus
23. 22. 27. Levi. 26. 7. 8. Number. 24. 8. Deuteronomy. 20. throughout. Josh. c. 8. to c.
13. 2 Samuel 22. 38. to 42. 1 Chronicles. 17. 8. 10. Esth. 9. 5. Neither do the Texts
of Mat. 5 39. Luke 6. 29. But I say unto you, that ye resist not ^vill, but
whosoever shall s^^ite thee on the right cheek^, turn to him the other also,
and hi^ that takes away thy cloak, forbid not to take thy c^ate also;
prohibit all actual resistance of public violence offered by enemies to our
persons, goods, or lawful defensive wars; which precept (as is clear by the
context, and resolved by Gratian. Cause. 23. Qu. 1.
Augustine, Gratia^, Sum Theolog. pars. 3 qu. 47. m. 3. Os^ander Enchirid c. 9.
De M^gist. Pol.
Alensis, and f others) extends only to some private injuries and revenges,
and to the inward patient preparation of the mind to suffer two injuries,
rather the^ maliciously to revenge a single one, especially in cas^s where we
want ability to resist; not to an actual bearing of all gross outward
injuries to our persons or estates, without resistance: which precept being
given generally to all Christians; to Kings and Magistrates as well as
Subjects, if it be strictly urged, prohibits Kings and Magistrates to resist
the violence and injuries of the people, as much as the people, not to repulse
the Armed violence and oppressions of their P^inces and Governors: and that
Text of James 5. 6. Ye have condemned and killed the just, and he does not
resist you, (which some think is meant of Christ alone) proves only, that
some just men, and many Martyrs have been condemned and killed without
resistance, as our Savior was; not that it is unlawful to resist an open
enemy, thief or murderer, who comes to kill, rob, or plunder us against Law
and Conscience. I read of Grati^n Cause 23. qu. 1. les Fl^urs desvies des
sanctes part. 2. p. 470.
Saint Andrew, that when the people ran together in multitudes ^o rescue him
out of the hands of a wicked man, and defend him from the injury of death, he
teaching them both by word and example, exhorted them, not to hinder his
martyrdom; yet the people lawfully rescued innocent Jonathan, from that unjust
death which his Father King Saul twice vowed he should undergo: 1 Samuel 14.
15. 38. to 46.
Some men's patient suffering death and injuries without resistance, is no
better an argument, that all therefore must so suffer without opposition, then
that all men ought to yield their purses up to highway thieves, or their
persons, goods, ships, to Turks and Pirates, without fight or resistance,
because some, yea many have shamefully done it for want of courage when they
were able to resist, and so have deservedly lost their purses, ships, goods,
liberties, and become Turkish Gally-slaves, to the ruin of their estates,
bodies, souls, which miseries by a manfull just defense, they might have
easily prevented. All which considered; I see no ground in Scripture, nor
reason, but that temporal enemies of all kinds which wrongfully invade our
persons or estates by open force of Arms in a warlike manner, may be resisted
with temporal weapons, as well as spiritual enemies with spiritual Arms.

Eighthly, That which all Nations in all ages by the very light of nature have
constantly Romans 2. 15. 15.
be lawful in point of conscience, if there be no Law of God to the contrary.
But selfe-defence against invading Tyrants and their instruments has by the
very light of Nature been constantly practiced, by all Nations in all ages, as
just and lawful, which the premises, the Appendix, the Histories of all ages
evidence; there being never any one Nation or Kingdom for ought I find, that
ever yet reputed it a thing unlawful in point of Conscience; to resist the
open malicious destructive tyranny, violence, hostility of their unnatural
Princes, or that desisted from any such resistance, giving themselves up
willingly to their outrageous lusts and butch^ries, without any opposition
(though some private men and Martyrs have sometimes done it, upon particular
reasons, as to avoid the scandal of Religion; to bear witness to the truth,
for the confirmation and conversion of others; or for want of power or
opportunity to resist; or to avoid a general massacre of their fellow
Christians, or because they were only a few private men; and their religion
directly opposite to the Laws and government under which they lived, or the
like, not because they judged all resistance simply unlawful, as Dr. Fernes
resolving of Consci^nce; An appeal to thy Conscience.
blind Doctors ^alsely inform us, which I shall prove hereafter;) and there
is no Law of God at all to prohibit such resistance: therefore doubtless it
must be lawful, even in point of conscience.





Rom* 9. 19. 20.
absolute unresistable will;) must doubtless be lawful in the Court of
Conscience. But this necessary defensive resistance now used by the Parliament
and Subjects, is such: For if they may not resist any of the Kings Officers or
Soldiers in their plunderings, rapines, fierings, sackings of Towns, beating,
wounding, murdering the Kings liege people and the like; will not every common
Soldier and Officer be an absolute Tyrant, equal in Monarchy to the great
Turk himself, and ^aramount the King, who has no absolute irresistible
Soveraignety in these particulars? Either therefore this resistance must be
granted, not only as lawful, but simply necessary, else every officer and
common Soldier will be more than an absolute King and Monarch, every subject
worse than a Turkish slave, and exposed to as many uncontrolable Sovereigns,
as there are Soldiers in the Kings Army, be their conditions never so vile,
their quality never so mean, and the greatest Peers on the Parliaments party,
must be irresistably subject to these new absolute Sovereigns lusts and wills.

Romans 13. and our opposites own confession; who have See Doctor Fern^; Appeal
to thy Conscience; The Grand Rebellion; The Necessity of Christian Subjection,
and others,
no other Argument to prove the Offensive war on the Kings part Lawful, but
because it is commanded; and the Parliaments and Subjects Defensive Arms
Unlawful, but because prohibited by the King, whom they falsely affirm, to be
the highest Sovereign power in the Kingdom, above the Parliament and whole
Realm collectively considered. But this resistance of the Kings Popish
malignant, invading Forces; is Authorized and Commanded by the express Votes
and Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament, which I have already undeniably
manifested, to be the Supreames^ Lawful Power, and Soveraignest Authority in
the Realm, Paramount the King himself, who is but the Parliaments and
Kingdoms Public Royal Servant for their good: therefore this Resistance
must infallibly be just and Lawful, even in Point of Conscience.

Thus much for the Lawfulness in Court of Conscience of resisting the Kings
unjustly assaulting Forces, armed with his Commission: I now proceed to the
justness of opposing them by way of forcible resistance when accompanied with
his personal presence.

That the Kings Army of Papists and Malignants, invading the Parliaments or
Subjects persons, goods, Laws, Liberties, Religion, may even in Conscience be
justly resisted with force, though accompanied with his person, seems most
apparently clear to me, not only by the preceding Reasons, but also by many
express Authorities recorded, and approved in Scripture, not commonly taken
notice of: as,

First, By the ancientest precedent of a defensive war that we read of in the
world, Genesis 14. 1. to 24. where the five Kings of S^dom, Gomorrah, Admah,
Zeboiim, and Zoar, rebelling against Chedorlaomer King of Nations, after they
had served him twelve years, defended themselves by arms and battle against
his assaults, and the Kings joined with him: who discomfiting these five Kings,
pillaging S^dom and Gomorrah, and taking Lot, and his goods along with them as
a prey: hereupon Abraham himself, the Father of the faithful, in defense of
his Nephew Lot, to rescue him and his substance from the enemy, taking with
him 318. trained men of his own family, pursued Chedorlaomer, and the Kings
with him, to Dan, assaulted them in the night, smote and pursued them unto
Hoba, regained all the goods and prisoners, with his Nephew Lot, and restored
both goods and persons freely to the King of Sodom, thereby justifying his and
his peoples forcible defense, against their invading enemies, in the behalf of
his captivated plundered Nephew and Neighbors.

Secondly, by the Example of the Israelites, who were not only King Pharaoh
his Moses and Aaron being sent by God to deliver them from their Egyptian
bondage, after 430. years captivity, under color of demanding but three days
liberty to go into the wilderness to serve the Lord, and Pharaoh,
(notwithstanding all Gods Miracles and Plagues,) refusing still to let them
depart, till enforced to it by the slaughter of the Egyptians first borne; as
soon as the Israelites were marching away, Pharaoh and the Egyptians,
repenting of their departure, pursued them with their Chariots and Horses, and
a great army even to the red Sea, to reduce them; hereupon the Israelites being
astonished and murmuring against Moses, giving themselves all for dead men;
Moses said unto the people fear ye not, stand still, and see the Salvation of
the Lord, which he will show to you this day: for the Egyptians whom you have
seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever, the Lord shall fight
for you, etc. And hereupon God himself discomfited routed, and drowned them
all in the red Sea: I would demand in this case, whether the Isralites might
not here lawfully (for their own redemption from unjust bondage) have fought
against and resisted their Lord, King Pharaoh, and his invading Host,
accompanied with his presence, had they had power and hearts to do it, as well
as God himself, who fought against and destroyed them on their behalf; If so,
(as all men I think must grant, unless they will censure God himself) then a
defensive war in respect of life and liberty only, is just and Lawful even
in conscience, by this most memorable story.

Judges 3. 8. 9. 10. where God growing angry with the Israelites for their
Apostacy and Idolatry, sold them (here was a divine title) into the hands of
Cushan-Rishathaim King of Mesopotamia, and the children of Israel served him 8.
years. Here was a lawful title by conquest and 8. years submission seconding
it. But when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord raised up a
deliverer to them even Othniel, the son^e of Kenaz: and the Spirit of the Lord
came upon him, and he went out to war, and the Lord delivered
Cushan-rishathaim King of Mesopotamia into his hands, and his hand prevailed
against him, so the land had rest 40. years. Lo here a just defensive war
approved and raised up by God and his Spirit (in an ordinary manner only, as I
take it, by encouraging the Instruments) wherein a conquering King, for
Redemption of former liberties, is not only resisted but conquered, taken
prisoner, and his former dominion abrogated, by those that served him, as
conquered subjects.

Ehud, and the Israelites, Judges chap. 3. 11. to 31 where we find, God
himself strengthening Eglon King of Moab against the Israelites for their
sins, who thereupon gathering an Army smote Israel, possessed their Cities,
so as the Israelites served this King 18. years. Here was a title by conquest,
approved by God, submitted to by the Israelites: yet after all this, when the
children of Israel cried unto the Lord, he raised them up a deliverer, namely
Ehud, who stabbing Eglon the King in the belly, under pretext of private
conference with him, and escaping; he thereupon blew the trumpet, commanded the
Israelites to follow him to the war, slew ten thousand valiant men of Moab,
which he subdued, and procured rest to his Country 40. years. God, his Spirit,
Word, approving this his action.

Barack and Deborah, Judges chapter 4. and 5. Where God selling the children of
Israel for their sins into the band of Iabin King of Canaan, and his Captain
Sisera, for 20. years space, during which he mightily oppressed them, hereupon
Barack at the instigation of the Prophetess Deborah, by the command of the
Lord God of Israel, gathered an Army of ten thousand men; which Sisera, and the
King of Canaan hearing of, assembled all their Chariots and Army together, at
the River of ^ishon, where the Lord discomfited Sisera and all his Host, with
the edge of the sword before Barack his Army, and subdued Iabin the King of
Canaan, before the children of Israel: which war is by a special Song of
Deborah and Barack highly extolled, and God in it, as most just and honorable:
and this curse denounced against those that refused to assist in it, Judges 4.
23. Curse ye Meroz (says the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof, because they came not out to the help of the Lord, to the
help of the Lord, against the mighty; with this Corollary; so let all thine
enemies p^rish O Lord: but let them that love thee be as the sun when it goet
forth in his might. What more can conscience desire to justify the lawfulness
of a just defensive war?

Gideon and the Israelites, Judges c. 6. Who being delivered by God into the
hands of the Prince of Midian for seven years, Gideon by special
encouragement and direction from God himself, with a poor despicable Army of
300. men, defeated the great Host of the Midianites, and took and slew their
Princes. By these 4 last pregnant presidents, it is most evident, that a
foreign King who has gained a Title only by conquest (though with divine
concurrence, by way of punishment for that peoples sin) may lawfully be
resisted, repulsed, even after some years forced subjection and submission to
him, by the people conquered, to regaine their former liberties.

Seventhly, by the precedent of Abimelech King of Shechem, who being elected
Abimelech and the men of Shechem; thereupon they revolted from him, and choosing
Gael for their Captain, fortified the City against him; and when Abimelech
came with an Army to take in the Town, they in their defense, went forth and
fought with him; resisted his seige; and they of the Tower of Shechem standing
upon their guard refused to surrender it after the Town was surprised, and so
were burnt. After which coming too near the walls, at the Tower of Thebez
assaulted by Abimelech he had his brains and head so bruised with the piece of
a millstone cast down upon him by a woman, that he called hastily to his
Armor-bearer, and said unto him, draw thy sword and slay me, that men say not
of me; a woman slew him: whereupon he thrust him through, that he dyed: and so
every man departed to his place. Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech,
and all the evil of the men of Shechem upon their own heads, Judges 9. So the
Text.

Eighthly, by the example of Iepthah, who after that God had sold the
Isra^lites for Ammon 18. years space, Iepthah being made head and Captain by
the Elders and people of Gilead, first argued the case with the King of Ammon
touching the unjustnesse of his war upon them, desiring God to be Judge
between them; and then by Gods assistance, smote and subdued the Ammonites and
their Cities, Judge. c. 11. And so cast off their yoke.

Ninthly, By the practice of Sampson, who after God had delivered the
Israelites Philistimes, rescuing the oppressed Israelites from their vass^lage;
and at his death slew more of them then in his life, Judge. c. 13. to 17. which
deliverance was afterward perfected by Samuel, 1 Samuel 7. and approved, nay,
wrought by God.

Tenthly, by the Example of David, who being persecuted by ^edifragous
dissembling Saul his father-in-law (a notable pattern of the inconstancy and
invaliditie of Kings solemnest oaths and Protestations:) who contrary to many
solemn vows and feighned reconciliations, sought unjustly to deprive him of
his life; thereupon David retired from the Court, entertained a guard of four
hundred men, and became a Captain over them. 1 Samuel 22. 2. After which
Abiather escaping to him from Nob when the Priests there were slain by Doeg,
upon Saules command, for David's sake, David used these words to him. Abide thou
with me, fear not, for ^e that seeks thy life seeks my life, but with me
thou shall be in safeguard, 1 Samuel 22. 23. Soon after the Philistimes
beseiging Keilah, David by Gods encouragement, smote them and saved Keilah;
intending there to secure himself and his men: which Saul hearing of, said;
God has delivered him into my hands, for he is shut in by ^ntring into a Town
which has gates and bars, whereupon he called all the people together to
beseige David and his men: (which he needed not do, did he or any else
believe, that they would not, ought not to have made any forcible resistance:)
David informed hereof; enquired seriously of God, whether Saul would certainly
come down? and demanded twice of him^ will the men of Keila^ deliver me and my
men up in^o his hand? And the Lord said, they will deliver thee up. Had not
David and his men resolved to fortify and defend themselves there, if the men
of Ke^lah would have been faithful to them, and believed they might have
resisted Saul with his Forces, certainly he would never have presumed to ask
such a question twice together of God himself, to receive his resolution
therein, neither would God have vouchsafed an answer thereto: but his double
inquiry, and Gods resolution, infallibly demonstrate his intention to resist,
and the lawfulnes of his defensive resistance, would the Keilites have adhered
to him. This the very next words fully clear, 1 Samuel 23. 13. Then David and
his men, about six hundred a rose, and departed out of Keilah, an^ went
wheresoever they could go, and it was told Saul, that David was escaped from
K^ilah: Gods prediction of the Keilites treachery was the only cause of their
departure thence, where they had resolved to defend themselves, of which hope
being disappointed beyond expectation, they went whithersoever they could go.
After which David and his men being but few in number, not able in humane
probability, without tempting God, to encounter Saul's great Forces, retired
themselves into woods, mountains, rocks, strong holds, wildernesses; where
Saul pursuing them, they still declined him: but had he and his army ever
assaulted them, no doubt they would and might lawfully have defended
themselves, else why did they join themselves in a body? why retire to strong
holds, and places of advantage? why 1 Samuel 23 13 to 29. c. 24. 1. to 20. etc.
26.
twice urge David to kill Saul in cold blood, when he did not actually assault
him, but came casually unawares within his danger? Why did David himself say,
even when he spared his life when he was a sleep, 1 Samuel 26. 10. As the Lord
lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or he shall
descend into battle and perish? but that if he had given him battle, he might
have defended himself against him, though Saul should casually or wilfully
perish in the fight? And why was David so importunate to go up against him
with King Achish to the battle wherein he perished, 1 Samuel 29. were resistance
of him, in case he assaulted him, and his Forces, utterly unlawful? This
precedent of David then, if rightly weighed, is very punctual, to prove the
justness of a defensive war, (of which more anon) and no evidence at all
against it.

Rehoboam for giving them an harsh indiscreet answer to their just demands,
setting up another King and Kingdom, even by divine approbation; Rehoboam
thereupon raising a great Army to fight against and reduce them to his
obdience; God himself by Semaiah the Prophet, sent this express inhibition to
Rehoboam and his Army: Thus says the Lord, ye shall not go up, nor fight
against your brethren return every man to his house, FOR THIS IS DONE OF ME:
Whereupon the obeyed the Word of the Lord and returned: 1 Kings 12. 2 Chronicles. c.
10. and 11. After which long war continued between these Kingdoms by reason
of this revolt, wherein the ten Tribes and Kings of Israel still defended
themselves with open force, and that justly, as the Scripture intimates 2 Chronicles. 12. 14. 15. though that Jeroboam and the Israelites falling to Idola^y,
were afterward (for their Idolatry, not revolt) defeated by Abiah and the men
of Judah, who relied upon God, 2 Chronicles. 13.

Twelfthly, by the example of the King of Moab and his people, who Rebelling
Iehoram King of Israel, and refusing to pay the annual Tribute of Lambs and
Rams, formerly rendered to him; hereupon Iehoram, Iehoshaphat, and the King of
Edom, raising a great Army to invade them, the Moa^ites hearing of it, gathered
all that were able to put on Armor, and upward, and stood in the border to
resist them. 2 King. 3. 4. to 27. And by the practice of the Ed^mites, who
revolting from under the hand of Judah, made a King over themselves: Whereupon
Ioram King of Iud^h going up with his Forces against them to Zair, they
encompassed him, in their own defense; and though they fled into their Tents,
yet they revolted from Judah till this day, and Libnah too, 2 Kings 8. 20 21.
22.

Thirteenthly, by the example of Samaria, which held out 3. years siege
against Shalmanezer King of Assyria, notwithstanding their King Hoshea had by
force submitted himself and his Kingdom to him, and became his servant. 2
Kings 17. 3. to 10. c. 18. 9. 10.

Fourteenthly, by the practice of godly Hezechiah, who after the Lord was with
him Assyria, and served him not (as some of his predecessors had done) 2 Kings
18. 7. whereupon the King of Assyria, and his Captains coming up against him
with great Forces, and invading his Country, he not only fortified his Cities,
and encouraged his people manfully to withstand them to the uttermost, but
actually resisted the Assyrians even by divine direction and encouragement; and
upon his prayer, God himself by his Angel for his and Jerusalems preservation,
miraculously sl^w in the Camp of the King of Assyria in one night, an hundred
fourscore and five thousand mighty men of valor, Captains and Leaders; so as
he returned with shame of face to his own Land, 2 King. c. 18. and 19. 2 Chronicles. c. 32. Isay c. 36. and 37. An Example doubtless lawful beyond
exception, ratified by God himself and his Angel too.

Fifteenthly, by the examples of King Iehoiakim, and Iehoiakin, who
successively Ze^echia, for breach of his 2 Chronicles. 36. 13. Ezekiel. 17. 10. 18. 19.
oath;) whereby they provoked God to give them up to the will of their enemies,
and to remove them out of his sight, 2 King. c. 24. and 25 2 Chr. 36. Ier. c.
37. and 38 and 39.

Finally, by the History of the Maccabees and wholestate of the Jews defensive
wars under them, which though but Apochryphall in regard of the compiler, yet
no doubt they had a divine Spirit concurring with them in respect of the
managing and Actors in them. I shall give you the sum thereof, very
succinctly. Antiochus Epiphanes conquering Jerusalem, spoiled it and the
Temple, set up Heathenish customs and Idolatry in it, subverted Gods worship,
destroyed the Books of Gods Law, forced the people to forsake God, to
sacrifice to Idols, slew and persecuted all that opposed, and exercised all
manner of Tyranny against them. Hereupon Mattathias a Priest and his Sons,
moved with a godly zeal, refusing to obey the Kings Command in falling away
from the Religion of his Fathers, slew a Jew that sacrificed to an Idol in his
presence, together with the Kings Commissary, who compelled men to Sacrifice,
and pulled down their Idolatrous Altar; which done they fled into the
mountains, whither all the will-affected Jews repaired to them. Whereupon the
Kings Forces hearing the premises pursued them, and warred against them on the
Sabbath day; whereupon they out of an over-nice superstition 1 Mac. 2. 32. to
42.
least they should profane the Sabbath by fighting on it when assaulted,
answered them not, neither cast a stone at them, nor stopped the places where
they were hid, but said, let us dye all in our innocence; heaven and earth
shall testify for us, that you put us to death wrongfully, whereupon they slew
both them, their wives, and children, without resistance, to the number of a
thousand persons. Which Mattathias and the rest of their friends hearing of,
mourned for them right sore, and said one to another (mark their speech) if we
all do as our brethren have done, and fight not for our lives, and Laws
against the Heathen, they will now quickly root us out of the earth; therefore
they decreed, saying; whosoever shall come to make battle with us on the
Sabbath day, we will fight against him, neither will we do all as our
brethren, that were murdered in their secret places. Whereupon they presently
gathered and united their Forces, assaulted their enemies, recovered their
Cities, Laws, Liberties; defended themselves manfully, and fought many battles
with good success against the several kings who invaded and laid claim to
their Country, as you may read at large in the books of Maccabees. All these
examples, (most of them managed by the most pious, religious persons of those
days, prescribed and assisted by God himself, whose Spirit specially
encouraged, strengthened the hands and Spirits of the undertakers of them (as
Enchirid. Controvers. c. 9. De Magistrate Polit.
O fiander well observes,) and therefore cannot be condemned as unjust, without
blasphemy and impiety:) in my opinion are a most clear demonstration of the
lawfulness of a defensive war (in point of Divinity and Conscience) against
Kings and their Armies who wrongfully invade or assault their Subjects, though
themselves be personally present in their armies, to countenance their
unlawful wars; and likewise evidence, that a Royal title gotten forcibly by
conquest only, though continued sundry years, is not so valid in point of
conscience, but that it may be safely questioned, yea rejected; there being no
true lawful Title of Soveraignety over any people, but that which originally
depends upon their own free election, and unconstrained subjection simply
considered, or which is subsequently seconded therewith after a possession got
by force or conquest.

Now that the kings personal presence cannot justify the unjust actions, or
protect the persons of those that assist him in any unlawful action contrary
to the Laws of God, or the Realm, is a truth so evident, that it needs no
proof, it being no part of the kings Royal prerogative or Office, but
diametrally repugnant to it, either to do injury himself, or to authorize, or
protect others in committing it, as I have elsewhere proved at large. Therefore
it can administer no patronage nor defense at all to those who accompany his
person in the unjust invasions of his Subjects, nor dis-able them to defend or
repulse their unjust assaults and rapines. For suppose a King should so far
degenerate and dishonor himself, as personally to accompany a pack of
thieves who should rob his subjects on the high way, break up their houses in
the night, or practice Piracie on the Sea, or commit Rapes or murders on his
people every where; I think no man so void of Reason, Law, Conscience, but
would readily grant, that the Subjects in all these cases might lawfully defend
themselves by force against these Robbers, Thieves, Murderers, notwithstanding
the Kings presence or association with them, whose personal Prerogatives, and
immunity from assaults or violence being incommunicable, underivable to any
other, and peculiar to himself alone, he can transfer no such protection to
others who accompany him in their injurious practices; and that these Acts of
theirs are direct fellonie and murder, for which they might be justly
apprehended, condemned, executed, though thus countenanced by the Kings own
presence. And if this be truth (as our Law-bookes resolve, and the Scripture to
in places forecited) the kings presence can no more deprive the subjects of
their necessary just defense against his Popish Forces assaults, nor justify
their proceedings, or the present unjust offensive war, then in the former
cases, there being the selfsame reason in both; wars being in truth, but
greater and more detestable Murders, and Robberies, when they are unjust, as
Epist. l. 2. Ep. 2. Donat^.
Cyprian, De Ciu. Dei. l. 4. c. 4.
Augustine, with Ofiander; Enchrid. Cont c. 9* De Polit. Magist. qu. 3. p. 203.
Abber. Gentilis de Iure Belli. l. 1. c. 5. Hugo Grotius. de Iure Belli l. 2. c.
1.. 2.
others rightly define.

Thirdly, personal un^ust assaults and violence even of Kings themselves may
in some cases lawfully be resisted by subjects; This Doctor Fern himself
acknowledges, Sect. 2. p. 9. Personal defense is lawful against the sudden
(much more then against the premeditated) and illegal assaults of such
Messengers of the King; yea, OF THE PRINCE HIMSELF THVS FAR, to ward his
blows, to hold his hands and the like: not to endanger his person, not to
return blows; no: for though it be natural to defend ^ man's self, yet the
whole commonwealth is concerned in his person: the king therefore himself,
(much more in his Cavalliers) may thus far at least safely be resisted in
point of conscience. And that he may be so indeed is manifest by two pregnant
Scripture examples, The first is that of King Saul, 1 Samuel 14. 38. to 46. where
Jonathan and his Armor-bearer, routing the Philistimes whole Army, violated
his Father Saul's command, of which he was wholly ignorant in taking a little
honey one the end of his stick in the pursuit; hereupon king Saul, most
rashly and unjustly vowed twice one after another, to put him to death:
whereupon the people much discontented with this injustice, were so far from
submitting to the Kings pleasure in it, that they presently said to the king:
shall Jonathan dye, who has wrought so great Salvation in Israel? God forbid:
As the Lord lives there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, So
the people RESCVED JONATHAN that he dyed not; though he were not only King
Saul's Subject, but Son too. Indeed it appears not in the Text, that Saul
offered any violence to Ionathans person, or the people to Saul's: and it may be
the peoples peremptory vow and unanimous resolution to defend Jonathan, from
this unjust sentence of death against him, made Saul desist from his vowed
bloody intendment: but the word rescued, with other circumstances in the story,
seem to intimate, that Jonathan was in hold to be put to death, and that the
people forcibly rescued him, out of the executioners hands. However, certainly
their vow and speeches declare, that if Saul himself or any other by his
command had assaulted Jonathan to take away his life, they Joseph as Antiq.
Iudae l. 4. c. 8, p. 104
would have forcibly resi^ted them and preserved his life, though with loss of
their own, believing they might lawfully do it, else they would not have made
this resolute vow; nor could they have performed it, had Saul wilfully
proceeded, but by a forcible rescue and resistance of his personal violence.
The other is that of king Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 27. 1^. to 22. who presumptuously
going into the Temple against Gods Law, to burn incense on the Altar, Azariah
the high Priest, and with him fourscore Priests of the Lord, that were valiant
men went in after him, and WITHS^OOD (or resisted) Vzziah the king; and said
unto him; It appertains not unto thee Vzziah to burn incense unto the Lord,
but to the Priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrat^d to burn incense:
go out of the Sanctuary for thou have trespassed, neither shall it be for
thine honor from the Lord God. Then Vzziah was wroth, and had a censor in his
hand to burn incense, and whiles he was wroth with the Priests, the Leprosy
rose up in his forehead: And Azariah, and all the Priests looked upon him, and
behold he was Leprous in his forehead: AND THEY THRVST HIM OVT FROM THENCE; yea
himself hasted also to go out, because the Lord had smitten him. If then
these Priests thus actually resisted king Vzziah in this sinful Act, thrusting
him perforce out of the Temple, when he would but offer incense; much more
might they, would they have done it, had he violently assaulted their persons.
If any king shall unjustly assault the persons of any private Subjects, men or
women, to violate their lives or chastities (over which they have no power) I
make no doubt, that they may and ought to be resisted, repulsed, even in point
of conscience, but not slain; though many kings have lost their lives, upon
such occasions: as Philip. de Melanct. Chr. l. 4. Dr Beards Theater of Gods
Judgments l. 2. c. 29. p. 400.
Rodoaldus the 8. king of Lumbardy Anno 659. being taken in the very act of
adultery by the adulteresses husband, was slain by him without delay; and how
kings attempting to murder private Subjects unjustly, have themselves been
sometimes wounded, and casually slain, is so rise in stories, that I shall
forbear examples: concluding this with the words of t Josephus, who expressly
writes. That the king of the Israelites (by Gods express Law, Deuteronomy. 17.) was
to do nothing without the consent of the high Priest and Senate, nor to
multiply money and horses over much, which might easily make him a contemner of
the Laws; and if he addicted himself to these things more than was fitting,
HE WAS TO BE RESISTED, least he became more powerful then was expedient for
their affairs.

To these Authorities, I shall only subjoyne these 5. undeniable arguments to
justify Subjects necessary defensive wars, to be lawful in point of conscience
against the persons and Forces of their injuriously invading Sovereigns.

Numb. 16. Romans 13. 1. to 6. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14.
unlawful by the Edicts of God and man; and because kings in such cases, have
no other means left to preserve their Royal persons, and just authority
against offensive armed Rebellions, but offensive arms: Therefore Subjects by
the selfsame grounds, may justly with safe consciences resist, repulse,
suppress the unjust assayling military Forces of their kings in the case
fore-stated, though the king himself be personally present and assistant,
because Esaias 14. 19. to 23. Ezech. 44. 15. 16. 17. Zech. 11. 4. 5 1 King. 25. 2
King. 24. 4.
such a war is unlawful by the resolution of God and men, and against the
oath, the duty of kings: and because the subjects in such cases have no other
means left to preserve their persons, lives, liberties, estates, religion,
established government from certain ruin, but defensive Arms, There is the
self same reason in both cases, being relatives, therefore the selfsame Law
and Conscience in both.

Littletons own resolution) to wit, that the King shall well and truly
preserve the Realm, ^ Estates upon Credit. 1. Sect. 378. 379.
and do that which to such Office belongs; which condition our king by an
express oath to all his people solemnly taken at their Coronation, ^ Part. 1.
p. ^1. to 74.
with other Articles expressed in their oath (formerly recited) is really bound
both in Law and Conscience exactly to per^orme, being admitted and elected king
by the peoples suffrages upon solemn promise, Part. 1. p. 51
to observe the same condition to the uttermost of his power, De Princip. l. 1.
2. 3. 6.
as Praefat. ad Rub. de collationibus, p. ^83 584.
I have De Iure Belli and Paci^ l. 2. c. 11. 12, 13, 24.
elsewhere cleared. Now it is a clear case resolved by Genesis 9. 9. 16 c. 17. 7.
13. Ps. 89. 28. 34. Ps. 105. 10. Ps. 111. 9. Esaias 55. 3. Esaias 33. 20. 21. Josh.
21. 45. c. 23. 14. Heb 6. 17. 18
Marius Salamonius, confirmed at large by Rebussus by 12. unanswerable reasons,
the Authorities of sundry Civil Lawyers, and Canonists quoted by him; agreed
by De Iure Belli. l. 2. c. 12, 13. l. 3 c. 14, 15, 16
Alberi^us Gentilis, and Hugo Grotius, who both largely dispute it; That Kings
as well as Subjects are really bound to perform their Covenants, Contracts,
Conditions, especially those they make to all their Subjects, and ratify with
an Oath; since God himself who is most absolute, is yet most Genesis 9. 9. 16 c.
17. 7. 13. Ps. 89. 28. 34. Ps. 105. 10. Ps. 111. 9. Esaias 55. 3. Esaias 33. 20.
21. Josh. 21. 45. c. 23. 14. Heb 6. 17. 18
fi^mely obliged by his O^thes and Covenants made to his despicable vile
^reatures, sin^ull men; and never violates them in the lea^^ degree. If then
these conditions and Oaths be firm and obligatory to our kings; if they will
obstinately break them, by violating their Subjects Laws, Liberties,
Properties, and making actual war upon them; the condition and Oath too
would be merely void, ridiculous, absurd, an high t^king of the Name of God
in vain, yea a plain delusion of the people, if the whole* State or people in
their own defense might not justly take up Arms, to resist their kings and
their malignant Forces in these per^idious violations of trust, conditions,
oaths; and force them to make good their oaths and covenants, when no other
means will induce them to it. Even as the Subjects oath of homage and
allegiance Groti^^ De Iure Belli l. 2. c. 14, Sect. 3.
would be merely frivilous, if kings had no means nor coercive power to cause
them to observe these oaths, when they are apparently broken: and many whole
kingdoms had been much overseene in point of Policy, or prudence, in
prescribing such conditions and oaths unto their kings, had they reserved no
lawful power at all which they might lawfully exercise in point of conscience,
to see them really performed and duly redressed, when notoriously
transgressed, through wilfulness, negligence, or ill pernicious advice.

Thirdly, when any common or public trust is committed to three or more,
though Mariners, Citizens, undermines the walls, fires the City, ship,
delivers it up to thieves, Pirates, murderers, as a common prey, and wilfully
runs this ship upon a rock of ruin. If the Lords and Commons jointly
entrusted with him, should not in this case by force of Arms resist him, and
his unnatural instruments, (there being no other means else of safety left
them) they should sinfully and wilfully betray their trust, and be so far
from keeping a good Christian Conscience in not resisting by force, that they
should highly sin against Conscience, against their trust and duty, against
their natural Country, yea and their very Allegiance to the king himself, by
encouraging him in, and consenting unto these proceedings, which would make him
not to be a king, but Tyrant, and destroy him as a king, in the spoil and
ruin of his Kingdom, thereby endangered to be consumed) and tempt God
himself: as Pope Nicholas, and Cause. 23. quest. 8. Suri. Council. Tom. 3. p. 520.
Gratian resolve in these words. If there be no necessity we ought at all times
to abstain from wars, but if inevitable necessity urge us, we ought not to
abstain from wars, and warlike preparations for the defense of our selves,
of our Country, and paternall Laws, no not in Lent, least man should seem to
tempt God, if when he has means, he provide not for his own and others
safety, and prevents not the Detriments of holy religion.

Fourthly, those injuries which Allies and other neighbor States or Princes
may with good Conscience repulse with Arms from Subjects wrongfully oppressed,
invaded tyrannically by their Sovereigns, or their wicked Instruments, at, or
without the Subjects entreaty, when they are unable to relieve themselves: no
doubt the Subjects themselves, if able, may with better reason, and as good
Conscience resist and repel; because every man is Lev. 19. 18. Mat. 22. 39.
Rom 93. c. 14. 4. 1 Cor. 9. 27. Phil. 2. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 8
nearer, and more obliged to defend and preserve himself and those of his
own Nation, Religion, blood, then strangers are, and may with less public
danger, inconvenience, and more speed effect it, then Forraigners: but Allies
and Foreign Neighbor States and Princes, as Did. 23. qu. 3. to 8.
Gratian (out of the 5. Council of Carthage; Augustine, Ambrose, Hier^m,
Anastatius, Calistus and other) De Iure BelL. l. 1. c. 14. 15. 16.
Albericus Gentilis, Commonweal. l. 2. c. 5. l. 5. c. 6. Sect. l. 3. a 2. c
25. Sect. 4. 5. 6.
John Bodin, Hug^ Grotius, and Generally all Canonists, Casuists, Schoolmen
accord, may in many cases with good conscience, by force of Arms repulse from
Subjects wrongfully oppressed, invaded, and tyrannically abused, the injuries
offered them by their Sovereigns; and that either at, and in some cases
without the Subjects entreaty: Which they prove by Moses his slaying the
Egyptian that oppressed the Hebrew, Exodus 2. 11. to 15. by Joshua his ayding
of the Gibeonites against the five Kings that made war against them, Josh. 10.
by the example of Iehoshaphat, 1 Kin. 22, 2 Kings 3. Of the chief Captains
securing Paul with a guard of Soldiers against the Jews who had vowed his
death, Acts 23. by Abraham's rescuing Lot, Genesis 14. by sundry ancient and late
Examples in story. Therefore Subjects themselves no doubt if able, may with good
reason and conscience, lawfully resist, and repel their Princes invading
Forces, though accompanied, assisted with his personal presence.

Fifthly, It is yielded by all Divines, Lawyers, Canonists, Schoolmen;
Cajetan. ^a. ^ae. qu. ^. ar. 1. Ambrose, Offic. l. 1. c. 36. Summa Angelica,
Rosella and Sylvester, Tit. Bellum, and the Glossers on Gratian. Causa. 23. qu.
3.
as Cause. 23. qu. 1. 2.
Gratian, ^a. 2ae. qu. ^0. art. 10. and qu. 64. ar. 7. dub. 4.
Ban^es, l. 4. disp. 5. art. 10. l. 5 qu. 1 art. 8.
S^to, lib. 11 c 9. du. 8.
Lessius, l* 1. Contr. Illust. 18.
Vasquius, P. 3. 1. ^ n 2.
Covaruvi^s, 2. 2ae. qu. 64. art. 1.
Aquinas, Verbo Bellum, par. 1. n. 3. and p 2. and Homicidium. 3. q. 4.
Sylvester, ad l. ut vim. Di de Just. and ^ure.
Bartolus, In rep. l. 1. and unde vi.
Baldus, l. ^. c. 3. n. 147.
Navarre, De Iure Bell. l. 1. c. 13. 14.
Albericus Gentilis, De Iure Bell. l. 2. c. 1^.
Grotius and others, that private men by the Law of God, and nature, may in
defense of their lives, chastities, principal members, and estates, lawfully
resist all those who forcibly assault them, to deprive them thereof; yea and
slay them to, unless they be public persons of eminency, by whose slaughter
the Commonweal should sustain much prejudice, whose lives in such cases must
not be willingly hazzarded, though their violence be resisted: which is
clearly prooved by Judges 11. 8. 15. to 18. 1 Sa^. 17 41. to 53. Deuteronomy. 22. 26.
27. since therefore all these are apparently endangered by an invasive war
and Army, more then by any private assaults; and no aid, no assistance or
protection against the loss of life, chastity, estate, and other violences,
injuries which accompany wars can be expected from the Laws, or Prince himself
(the fountain of this injustice,) or legal punishments inflicted on the
malefactors, whose armed power being above the reach of common justice, and
injuries countenanced, abetted, authorized by the Sovereign who should avenge
and punish them, every subject in particular, and the whole state in Parliament
assembled in general, may and ought in point of conscience jointly and
severally to defend themselves, their neighbors, brethren, but especially
their native Country, Kingdom, whose general safety is to be preferred
before the lives of any particular persons, how great or considerable soever,
which may be casually hazarded by their own wilfulness, though not purposely
endangered or cut off in the defensive encounter, by those who make resistance.
And if (according to 2 2. Ar. 6. 7. q 2. Card. qu. 33. li 1. Pet^. Nau. l. 11.
c. 3. n. 147 Grotius. de lure Belli. l. 2. c. 1. Sect. 4.
Cajetan and other Schoolmen,) Innocents which only casually hinder ones
^light from a mortal enemy may be lawfully with good conscience slain by the
party pursued, in case where he cannot else possibly escape the loss of his
own life, because every man's ownelife is dearer to him then another, which he
here takes away only to preserve his ownelife, without any malicious
murtherous intent, though others doubt of this case: or if innocent persons set
perforce in the front of unjust assailants (as by the Cavalleir^s at Brainford
and elsewhere,) to prevent defense, and wrong others with more security and
less resistance, may casually be slain, (though not intentionally) by the
defensive party (as I think they may) for prevention of greater danger and the
public safety; See the Relation of Brainford.
then certainly those of public place and Note; who wilfully and unnaturally
set themselves to ruin their Country, Liberty, Religion, Innocent brethren
(who only act the defensive part,) and voluntarily intrude themselves into
danger, may questionless with safe conscience be resisted, repulsed: in which
if they casually chance to lose their lives without any malice or ill intention
in the defe^dants, it being only through their own default, such a casual
accident when it happens, or the remote possibility of it in the combat before
it begins, cannot make the resistance either unjust or unlawful in point of
conscience; for then such a possibility of danger to a public person should
make all resistance unlawful, deprive the Republicke wholly of this only
remedy against tyrannical violence, and expose the whole commonweal to
ruin, whose weal and safety, is to be preferred before the life or safety of
any one member of it whatsoever.

Having thus at large evinced the lawfulness of Subjects necessary forcible
resistance, and defensive wars against the unjust offensive Forces of their
Sovereigns; I shall in the next place answer the principal arguments made
against it, some whereof (for ought I find) are yet unanswered.

These Objections are of four sorts, out of the Old Testament, the New; from
reason, from the example of the primitive Christians, backed with the words of
some Fathers; I shall propound and answer them in order.

The first out of the Old Testament, Obj^ct. 1.
is that of Numb. 16. Dr Fern Sect. 2. p. 10.
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram for their insurrection against that very divine
Authority which God himself had delegated to Moses and Aaron, without any
injury or injustice at all once offered to them or any assault upon them. Ergo
(mark the Nonsense of this argumentation) no Subjects may lawfully take up
mere necessary defensive Arms in any case to resist the bloody Tyranny,
Oppression, and outrages of wicked Princes, or their Cavalleires, when they
make war upon them to destroy or enslave them.

An Argument much like this in substance. Answ.
No man ought to rise up against an honest Officer or Captain in the due
execution of his Office, when he offers him no injury at all. Therefore he
ought not in conscience to resist him when he turns a thief or murderer, and
felloniously assaults him, to rob him of his purse, or cut his throat. Or,
private men must not causelessly mutiny against a lawful Magistrate for doing
justice and performing his duty: Ergo the whole Kingdom in Parliament may not
in Conscience resist the Kings Captains and Cavalleeres, when they most
unnaturally and impiously assault them to take away their Lives, Liberties,
Privileges, Estates, Religion, oppose and resist justice, and bring the whole
Kingdom to utter desolation. The very recital of this argument is an ample
satisfactory refutation of it, with this addition. These seditious Levites
Rebelled against Moses and Aaron, only because God himself had restrained
them from meddling with the Priests Office which they would contemptuously
usurp, and therefore were most severely punished by God himself, against whose
express Ordinance they Rebelled: Ergo, the Parliament and Kingdom may in no
case whatsoever, though the King be bent to subvert Gods Ordinances, Religion,
Laws, Liberties, make the least resistance against the king or his invading
forces, under pain of Rebellion, High Treason, and eternal condemnation, This
is Doctor Fernes and some others, Bedlam Logic, and Divinity.

The next is this, Object. 2.
Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people, Ex. 22. 28.
Eccl. 10. 20. Curse not the King no not in thy thought, and curse not the rich
in thy Bedchamber; An appeal to thy Conscience. p. 3. 4. 5.
(which is well explained by Prove. 17. 26. It is not good to strike Princes for
equity.) Ergo it is unlawful for the Subjects to defend themselves against
the Kings Popish depopulating Cavaleers.

I answer, Answ.
the first text pertaines properly to Judges and other sorts of Rulers, not to
Kings, not then in being among the Israelites: the second, to rich men as well
as Kings. They may as well argue then from these texts: that no Judges nor
underrulers, nor rich men whatsoever, though never so unjust or wicked, may or
ought in conscience to be resisted in their unjust assaults, Riots, Robberies,
no though they be bent to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties: as that the King
and his Soldiers jointly or severally considered, may not be resisted: yea,
these acute disputants may argue further by this new kind of Logic:
Christians are expressly prohibited to curse or revile any man whatsoever, under
pain of damnation, Romans 12. 14. Mat. 5^ 44. Levit. 19. 14. Numb. 23. 7. 8. 2 Samuel 16. 9. Levit. 20. 9. c. 24. P 1. 14. 23. Levit. 20. 9:* Prove. 20. 20. 1
Cor. 6. 10. 1 Cor. 4. 12. 1 Pet. 2. 23. Jude 9. Ergo, we ought to resist no man
whatsoever, (no not a thief that would rob us, cut-throate Cavaleers that
would murder us, lechers that would ravish us) under pain of damnation. What
pious profitable Doctrine, think you, is this: All cursings and railings are
simply unlawful in themselves: all resistance is not so, especially that
necessary we now discourse of, against unlawful violence to ruin Church and
State. To argue therefore, all resistance is simply unlawful, because cursing
and reviling (of a different nature) are so, is ill Logic, and worse
Divinity. If the objectors will limit their resi^tance, (to make the Argument
sensible,) and propose it thus: All cursing and r^viling of Kings and Rulers
for executing justice impartially (for so is the chief intendment of the place
objected, delinquents being apt to clamor against those who justly censure
them) is unlawful; Ergo the forcible resisting of them in the execution of
justice and their lawful authority is unlawful: the sequel I shall grant,
but the Argument will be wholly impertinent, which I leave to the Objectors to
refine.

The third Argument is this: Object. 3.
That which peculiarly belongs to God, no man without his special authority
ought to meddle with: An Appeal to thy Conscience* p. 2.
But taking up Arms peculiarly belongs to be Lord. Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Where the
Lord says, vengeance is mine: especially the sword, which of all temporal
vengeance is the greatest.

The Objector puts no Ergo, Answ.
or conclusion to it, because it concludes nothing at all to purpose, but only
this. E^go, The King and Cavalleeres must lay down their Arms and swords,
because God never gave them any special commission to take them up. Or, Ergo,
no man but God must wear a sword, at least of revenge; and whether the kings
and Cavalleers Offensive, or the Parliaments mere Defensive sword, be the
sword of vengeance and malice, let the world determine, to the Objectors shame.

The fourth is, Object. 4.
from Appeal to thy Conscience. p. 3.
Eccles. 8. 2. 3. 4. I council thee to keep the Kings Commandment and that in
regard of the Oath of God: Be not hasty to go out of his sight, stand not in
an evil thing; for he does whatsoever pleases him: where the word of a king
is there is power; and who may say unto him, what do thou?

This Text administers the Opposites a double Argument, The first is this; All
the Kings Commands are to be kept of all his Subjects, Answ.
by virtue of the Oaths of supremacy, alleigance, and the late protestation
including them both: Ergo, by virtue of these Oaths we must not resist his
Cavalleeres, but yield our thoates to their swords, our purses and estates to
their rapines, our chastities to their Lecheries, our Liberties to their
Tyrannies, our Laws to their lusts, our Religion to their Popish Superstition
and Blasphemies, without any opposition, because the king has often commanded us
not to resist them. But seeing the Oath and Law of God, and those oaths of
ours, obleige us only, to obey the Kings just legal commands and no other,
not the Commands and lusts of evil Counselors and Soldiers, this first
Argument must be better pointed ere it will wound our cause.

The second, this: The king may lawfully do whatsoever pleases him Ergo,
neither are He, or his Forces to be resisted* To which I answer, that this
verse relates only unto God, the next antecedent; who only does and may do
what he pleases, and that both in heaven and earth, Psalm. 135. 6. Psalm. 115. 3
Esaias 46. 10. not to Kings who neither may nor can do what they please in
either, being bound both by the Laws of God, man, and their Coronation Oaths
(perchance the oath of God here meant, rather then that of supremacy or
alleigance) to do Sam. 23. 30. Esaias 32. 1. c. 16. 5. c. 9. 7. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8.
only what is lawful and just, not what themselves shall please. But admit it
meant of Kings, not God: First the text says not, that a king may lawfully do
what he pleases: but he does whatsoever pleases him: Solom^n himself 1 King.
c. 11. and 12. 2 Chr. c 9 and 10. and 11. N^h. 13. 26.
committed idolatry, built Temples for Idolatrous worship, served his
idolatrous wives Gods, married with many idolatrous wives, greivously oppressed
his people, etc. for which God threatened to rent the kingdom from himself, as
he did the ten Tribes from his son, for those sins of his: 2 Samuel c. 11. and
12. and 34.
David committed adultery, and wilfully numbered the people; and what King
Jeroboam, Manasseh, Ahab, other wicked Kings have done, out of the pleasure and
freedom of their lawless wills, to the infinite dishonor of God, the ruin
of themselves, their posterities, Kingdoms, is sufficiently apparent in In the
books of Kings, Chronicles, Ieremiab, and Daniel.
Scripture: was all therefore just, lawful, unblameable, because they did
herein whatsoever they pleased, not what was pleasing to God? If not, as all
must grant: then your foundation fails; that Kings may lawfully do whatsoever
they will; and Solomon's words must be taken all together not by fragments; and
these latter words coupled with the next preceding; Stand not in an evil
matter: and then Paul's words will well interpret his, Romans 13. 4. But if thou
do that which is evil be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain, for
he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon them that do
evil. So that the genuine sense of the place is, and must be this. Stand not
in an evil matter, for the king has an absolute power to do whatsoever he
pleases, in way of justice to punish thee, if thou continue obstinate in thy
evil courses; to pardon thee, if thou confess, submit, and crave pardon for
them. Ergo, the king and his Cavalleeres have an absolute power to murder,
plunder, destroy his Subjects, subvert Religion, and he and his Forces must not
herein be resisted, is an ill consequent from such good premises.

The third is this: Where the word of a King is, there is power, See
Cassanaeus. Catal. Gloriae Mundi, pars 5. consid. 24. sect. 62. p. 222.
and who may say unto him what do thou? (that is, expostulate with, censure
him for doing justly, as Job 34. 17. 18. 19. expound it,) Ergo the king or his
Forces may not be resisted in any case: they might rather conclude. Therefore
neither Kingdom nor Parliament, nor any Subject or person whatsoever ought to
demand of the king, to what end, or why he has raised Forces and Armed Papists
against the Parliament, and Protestant Religion? These Court-Doctors might as
truly conclude from hence; If the king should command us to say Mass in his
Chapel, or our Parishes, to adorn Images, to turn professed Mass Priests,
etc. to vent any Erroneous Popish Doctrines; to pervert the Scriptures to
support Tyranny and lawless cruelty: we must and will (as some of us do)
cheerfully obey; for where the word of a King is, there is power, and we may
not say unto him, what do thou? If a King should violently ravish matrons,
defloure virgins; unnaturally abuse youth, cut all his Subjects throats, fire
their houses, sack their Cities, subvert their liberties; and (as De ^ontif.
Romans l. 4.
Bellarmine puts the case of the Popes absolute irresistible authority) send
millions of souls to hell; yet no man under pain of damnation, may or ought
to demand of him, Domine cur ita facis? Sir, what do you? But was this the
holy Ghosts meaning think you, in this place? If so, then 2 Samuel 12. 7. etc.
Nathan was much to blame for reprehending king David's Adultery, 2 Chro. 17.
17. 18. 19. 20.
Azariah and the 40. Priests who withstood King Vzziah when he would have
offered incens^, on the incense Altar, and thrust him out of the Temple,
telling him, it pertains not to thee Vzziah, to burn incense to the Lord,
etc. Were no less then Traitors. John Baptist was much over-seene to tell King
Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife. The Prophet who
sharply reprehended Amaziah for his Idolatry and new altar, 2 Chronicles 25. 15.
16. was justly checked by the king, El^iah was to be rebuked, for telling Ahab
so plainly of his faults, 1 King 18. 17. 18.
and sending such a harsh message to King Abaziah; Elisha much to be shent for
using such harsh language to King Iehoram, 2 Kings 3. 13. 14. yea Samuel and
Hanani deserved the strappado for telling King Saul, and Asa, That they had
done foolishly, ^ Sam. 13 3. 2 Chronicles. 15. 9. 2. King. 1. 3. 4. 16.
The meaning therefore of this Text, so much mistaken, (unless we will censure
all these Prophets, and have Kings not only irresistible but irreprehensible
for their wickedness) is only this: No man may presume to question the kings
just actions, warranted by his lawful royal power: (this text being parallel
with Romans 13. 1. 2. 3. 4) What then? Ergo, None must question or resist his, or
his Cavalleers unjust violence and proceedings, (not the Parliament the
supremest Judicature and Sovereign Power in the Kingdom) is a ridiculous
consequence: yet this is all this Text does contribute to their present dying
bad cause.

The 5. Object. 5.
is that usually objected Text of An Appeal to thy Conscience, p. 4. c. Answer
of the Vindication of P^. 105. 14, 15 and the Revindication printed at
Cambridge, 1^43.
Psalm. 105. 14, 15. Touch not mine anointed. Ergo the King and his Cavaleers
must not be so much as touched nor ^esisted, I wonder they did not as well
argue, Ergo none must henceforth kiss his Majesty's hand (si^ce it cannot be
done without touching him,) neither must his Barber trim him, nor his
Bedchamber^ men attire him, for fear of high Treason in touching him: And the
Cavaleers must not henceforth be arrested for their debts, apprehended for
their robberies and murders; neither must the Chyrurgi^n dress their wounds,
or pock-soars, or otherwise touch them, (so dangerous is it to touch them, not
out of fear of infection, but) for fear of transgressing this sacred Text,
scarce meant of such unhallowed God-dammee^. Such conclusions had been more
literal and genuine then the first.

But to answer this long since exploded trivial Objection, not named by Dr
Fern, Answ.
though revived by others since him. I say first, that this Text concerns not
kings at all, but the true anointed Saints of God their Subjects, whom kings
have been always apt to oppress and persecute, witness Psalm. 2. ^. etc. Act
4. 26. 27. Act. 12. 1, 2, 3 with all sacred and Ecclesiastical Histories,
ancient or modern. This is most apparent; first, because these words were
spoken by God to Kings themselves, as the Text is express, Psalm 105 14, 15. 1 Chronicles. 16. 20. 21. He suffered no man to do them wrong, but reproved even KINGS
for their sak^s saying, (even to king themselves, namely to king Pharaoh, an
king Abimelech, Genesis 12. 10. to 20. Chap. 20. and 26 1. to 17. 29) Touch not
mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: Therefore not meant of kings.
Secondly, because these words were spoken directly and immediately of Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, their wives and families, as it is evident by Verse 6. the whole
series of the Psalm, which is Historical; the forecited Te^ts of Genesis to
which the words relate, the punctual confession of Augustine, and all other
Expositors on this Psalm; Now neither they, nor their wives, nor their children
clearly, were actual, much less anointed Kings; For first, they lived long
before the government of kings was erected among the Israelites, of whom 1 Samuel
8. and 9. and 10. see 1 Chronicles. 1. 43.
Saul was the first. 2. They had no kingdom nor territories of their own when
these words were uttered, but were strangers in the Land, going from one Nation
and Kingdom to another, sojourning obscurely like Pilgrims and Strangers upon
earth, in Egypt, and Gerar, under King Pharaoh, Abimelech, and other Princes,
not as kings, but subjects and pri^ate men, as Verse 12. 13. Genesis 12. and 20.
and 26 Chap. 36. 7. Chap. 37. 1. Deuteronomy. 23. 7. Hebr. 11. 13. resolve. Thirdly,
They were but very few men in number, Verse 12. Genesis 34. 30. they were
Masters only of their own small families, and that under foreign Kings*
therefore doubtless no kings at all. Fourthly, this was spoken of these
Patriarchs Wives and Families, as well as of themselves, (and they certainly
were no kings, unless you will have kingdoms consisting only of kings, and no
subjects at all) Verse 12. 14. Genesis 12. 15. to 20. Chap. 20. 2. to 17. Chap.
26. 11. Chap. 34. 30. Chap. 35. 6. Fifthly, the Scripture no where calls them
kings, much less the Text, which terms them expressly Prophets, Touch not mine
Anointed, and do MY PROPHETS (not properly so taken, but largely, that is, My
servants, my chosen people, as Verse 6. expounds it) no harm: The later Clause,
Do my Prophets no harm, being an exact interpretation of the former, Touch not
mine Anointed, that is, My Prophets and Servants, so far forth as to do See
Zeph. 2. 8. Genesis 20. 6. Job 1. 11. c. 2. 5. c. 19. c. 5. 19. c. 1^. 14. Genesis
26. (...). 29. Ier. 12. 14. 1 Ioh. 5. 18.
them harm; For in a common sense, no doubt, they Matthew. 8. 3. 15 c. 17 7. Mar.
6. 56. Luke 8. 45, 46, 47
might be touched without offense to God or them, by way of imbracement,
assistance, and the like. Sixthly, Though there were kings in Abraham's days or
before, as is evident by Genesis 14. 1, 2, etc. yet there were no anointed kings,
nor were kings ever called Gods anointed till Saul's days, who was the first
anointed King I read of, 1 Samuel 10. 1. and the first king ever styled, The
Lords Anointed, 1 Samuel 12. 3, 5. whereas Priests were anointed long before,
Exodus 30. 30. Chap. 40. 13, 15. Therefore Anointed in the Text cannot be meant
of kings, or of persons actually anointed, but only of those Saints of God,
who were metaph^rically and spiritually anointed, having the gifts and graces
of Gods Spirit, Psalm. 28, 8, 9. Hab. 3. 13. 2. Cor. 1. 21. 1 John 2. 27. Eze.
16. 9. Isay 20. 27. This Text then being not meant of kings which are actually,
but of Christians only spiritualy anointed, in regard of which anointing (as I
have The Vindication and Revindication of Psalm. 105* 14, 15
elsewhere largely manifested) they are in Scripture, not only styled
Christians (which in plain English is anointed) Acts 11. 26. c. 26. 26. 1 Pet.
4. 16. but Christ (in the abstract) 1 Cor. 12. 12. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. the
Members, Body, Flesh and Bones of Christ. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 7. Ephesians. 1. 22. 23.
c. 5. 29, 30, 31. Col. 1. 24. Yea, Kings and Priests unto God the Father: Exodus
19. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Revel. 1. 6. c. 5. 10. c. 20. 6. for whom God has prepared
a heavenly Kingdom, (wherein they shall reign with Christ for ever) with an
everlasting Crown of glory too, Matthew. 5. 3. c. 25. 34. Luke 6. 20. c. 12. 32.
c. 22. 29. 30. Col. 1. 13. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12. 1 Corinthians. 9. 25. 2 Timothy 2. 12. c.
4. 8. Heb. 12. 28. 2 Pet. 5. 4. 2 Pet. 1. 11. Iam. 2. 5. Revel. 22. 5. The
proper argument then that can be thence deduced by our Opposites, is but this
Nonsequitur.

Kings themselves must not touch Gods spiritually anointed Saints and servants
to do them harm; Ergo, if Kings do violently and unjustly make war upon them,
not only to harm, but plunder, murder, destroy them utterly, extirpate that
Religion they profess and are bound to maintain, they are obliged in point of
conscience, under pain of damnation, not to resist; Whereas the conclusion
should be directly contrary. Therefore they may lawfully with good conscience
resist them to the uttermost, in such cases: For since God has thus directly
enjoined Kings, Not to touch, or do them harm; if Kings will wilfully violate
this injunction, they may with safe conscience, by forc^ of Arms withstand,
repulse, their unjust violence, and hinder Kings or their instruments from
doing them that injury which God himself prohibits; else they should be
accessories to their kings injustice, and authors of their own wrongs,
according to these received Maxims; Gr^^tian. causa. 23. qu. 3, ^, 5, 6. Where
many Fathers are cited, to this purpose.
Quinon pohibet malum quod potest, jubet; Qui potest obviare and perturbare
perversos and non facit, nihilest aliud quam favere eorum impietati: Nec caret
scrupulo societatis occultae, qui manifesto facinori desinit obviare. Qui
definit obviare cum potest, consentit: used by Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine,
Isiodor, Anastatius, and Gratian, who recites, applies them to defensive wars.
And if our Opposites (who pervert this Text by translating it from Subjects and
Saints, to Kings) may in their erroneous sense safely argue thence, That if
subjects take up Arms against their Princes, contrary to this Text, their
Princes may by virtue of this precept, justly resist them with force, and
repulse their injuries; then by the true genuine sense thereof (being meant of
Subjects, Saints, not Kings) if Kings will violently assault and make war upon
Saints, their Subjects, to harm them, they may with as good reason and
conscience defend themselves against their Kings and ill Instruments, as their
Kings protect themselves in this sort against them, and that by authority of
this Text, by our Opposites own argumentation.

Thirdly, admit this Scripture meant of Kings, yet what str^ngth is there in it
to privilege them from just necessary resistance? If any, it must rest in the
word anointed; but this will afford kings no such corporal privileges as
many fancy, neither from lawful resistance, nor deposition, nor sentence of
death it self, which I shall undeniably evidence to refute a commonly received
error: For, first, it is apparent, that the anointed here meant, are such
only who are spiritually anointed, either with the external profession and
ceremonies of Gods true religion, or with the internal graces of the Spirit;
for neither Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, nor their families (nor any kings or Priests
in their days) for ought we find, were corporally anointed. Besides, the
anointing here intended, is that which is common to Exodus 30. 30 c. 40 13, 15.
Levit. 4. 3. 16. 1 King. 19. 16.
Priests and Prophets (as Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm,
infallibly proves) rather then that which is peculiar to kings. Whence I thus
argue, That annoin^ing which is common to subjects as well as kings, and cannot
secure any subjects, who in the genuinesence of the Text, are Gods anointed,
from just resistance, corporal violence, legal censures, or death, cannot in
or of it self alone secure kings from any of these, no further then it secures
subjects: for the annoiting being the same in both, must have the self-same
operation and immunities in both. But this anointing in subjects can neither
exempt their persons from necessary just resistance, if they unlawfully assault
or war upon their Superiors, equals, inferiors; nor free them from arrests,
imprisonments, arraignments, deprivations, or capital censures, if they offend
and demerit them, as we all know by Eccles. 92. 6. 8. 14. Ezech. 18. 24, 26.
Ioh. 16. 2.
Scripture and experience: Therefore it can transfer no such corporal
immunities or exemptions from all or any of these, to kings; but only, exempt
them from unlawful violence and injuries, in point of right, so far forth, as
it does other Subjects. In a word, this anointing being common to all
Christians, can give no special Prerogative to Kings, but only such as are
common to all Subjects, as they are Christians. Secondly, admit it be mean of
an actual external anointing, yet that of it self affords Kings no greater
privilege then the inward unction, of which it is a type, neither can it
privilege them from just resistance, or just corporal censures of all sorts.
First, it cannot privilege them from the just assaults, invasions, resistance,
corporal punishments of other foreign kings, Princes, States, Subjects not
subordinate to them, who upon any just cause or quarrel may lawfully resist,
assault, wound, apprehend, imprison, slay, depose, judge, censure foreign
kings, even to death; as is apparent by Psalm. 136. 19, 20. Number. 21. 2^ 33, 34,
35.
S^hon King of the Amorites, and Og the king of Bashan, slain, the King of
Josh* 8. 29*
Ai hanged by Joshua, the Josh. 10. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
five kings of Canaan that besieged Gibeon, on whose ne-ks Joshua made his men
of war to put their feet, then smote, slew, and hanged them upon five trees.
Who also assaulted, resisted, imprisoned, condemned, slew, executed diverse
other Josh. 10. 42. c. 11. and 12. 7. (...) 24.
kings of Canaan, to the number of thirty one in all; by king Judge, 1, 26, to
76*
Adonibezek, Judge, 3, to 26
Eglon, 1 Samuel 15, 32, 33.
Agag, with other Heathen Kings, imprisoned, stabbed, hewn in pieces by the
I^raelites. If any object, These kings were not actually anointed, which they
cannot prove, since Isay, 45, 1.
Cyrus an Heathen King, is styled Gods anointed; no doubt Saul was an
anointed King, if not the first in the world, 1 Samuel 10. 1. yet he was justly
resisted, wounded, pursued by the Philistines, 1 Samuel 31. 3. 2 Chro. 35.
Josiah an anointed good King, was slain by Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, whom
he rashly encountered; 1 King. 22, 34, 35.
King Ahab was slain by an Archer of the King of Assyria, 2 King 9, 22 27.
King Ioram and Ahaziah were both slain by Iehu, by Gods command; 2 Chr. 31. 1,
6, 7.
Iehoaaz was deposed by the King of Egypt, 2 Ki. 25. 6, 7
Iehoiakim and Iehoiakin both deposed, fettered and kept prisoners by the King
of Babylon; who also 2 Ki. 25. 6, 7
apprehended, deposed, judicially condemned King Zedechiah, put out his eyes,
and sent him prisoner to Babylon bound with fetters of brass. So 2 Chronicles, 33.
11, 1^.
Manasses was deposed, bound with fetters of brass, and carried captive by the
Captains of the King of Assyria. 2 King. 14. 13.
Amaziah King of Judah was taken prisoner by Iehoash King of Israel. Infinite
are the presidents in stories, where kings of one Nation in just wars, have
been assaulted, invaded, imprisoned, deposed, slain, by Princes and Subjects of
another Nation; and that justly, as all grant without exception; neither their
anointing, nor Kingship being any exemption or privilege to them at all in
respect of forraigners, in cases of hostility, to whom they are no Sovereigns,
no more then to any of their Subjects. Whereas if this royal anointing did
make their persons absolutely sacred and inviolable, no foreign Princes or
Subjects could justly apprehend, imprison, smite, wound, slay, depose, or
execute them. Secondly, Kings who are suborordinate See M. Seldens Titles of
Honor. l. 1 c. 3 s^ct. 1. 2. Bodin Commonw. l. 1. c. 3. l. 2. c. 5. Joseph De
Bello Iudaico, l. 1. c. 10. 15.
Homagers and Subjects to other Kings or Emperors, though anointed, may for
Treasons and Rebellions against them, be lawfully resisted, assaulted,
imprisoned, deposed, judged to death and executed, because as to them they are
but Subjects, notwithstanding their anointing, as appears by sundry presidents
in our own and foreign Histories; and is generally confessed by the learned.
Thirdly, the Roman, Greek and German Emperors, though anointed, the ancient
Kings of France, Spain, Arragon, Britain, Hungary, Poland, Denmark, Bohemia,
India, Sparta, and other places (who were not absolute Monarchs) have in former
ages been lawfully resisted imprisoned, deposed, and some of them judicially
adjudged to death and executed by their own Senates, Parliaments, Di^ts,
States, for their oppression, mal-administration, tyranny, and that justly, as
Commonw. l. 2. c 5.
Bodin, De Iure Belli l. 1. c. 3. sect. 11. 16.
Grotius, with others affirm, notwithstanding any pretense that they were
anointed Sovereigns. Fourthly, Popes, Bishops and Priests anciently were, and
at this present in the Romish Churches are actually anointed as well as Kings;
and we know the In the^r ^itles and Contro^^rsies de Immunitate Clericorum,
Bishop Latimers Sermon at Stamford, f. 67. b.
Popish Clergy and Canonists have frequently alleged this Text, Touch not mine
anointed and do my Prophets no harm, in Councels, Decretalls and solemn
debates in Parliament, to prove their exemption from the arrests, judgments,
capital censures and proceedings of Kings and secular Judges for any crimes
whatsoever, because (forsooth) they were Gods anointed, intended in this Text,
not Kings; therefore Kings and Seculars must not touch, nor offer any the least
violence to their persons, no not in a way of justice. By color of this Text
they exceedingly deluded the world in this particular for hundreds of years.
But in the seventh year of Hen. the 8. in Keilwayes Reports, f. 181.
Dr. Standish his case debated before a Committee of both Houses of Parliament,
and all the Judges of England, this Text being chiefly insisted on to prove the
Clergies exemption, Jure Divino, was wholly exploded in England, and since that
in Germany, France, other Realms; and notwithstanding its protection, many See
par. 1. p ^8. and Fox Act and Monuments.
Popes, Bishops, and Clergymen in all Kingdoms, ages, for all their
anointing, have for their misdemeanors not only been resisted, apprehended,
imprisoned, but deprived, degraded, hanged, quartered burned, as well as other
men (Yea 1 King. 2. 2^, 27.
Abiathar the High Priest was deposed by Solomon for his Treason against him,
notwithstanding his Anointing;) their anointing giving them not the smallest
immunity to do ill, or not to suffer all kinds of corporal, capital
punishments for their misdemeanors. If this actual anointing then, cannot
lawfully exempt or secure Priests and Prelates persons, nor the Pope himself
from the premises, how then can it justly privilege the persons of Kings?
Fif^hly, among the Papists all infants, either in their baptism, or
confirmation are actually anointed with their consecrated See Claudius
Esponcaeus Dig^^s. in Po^^ ^pist. ad Tim. de C^rismatis usu. p. 261. etc.
Chrisme, and with Espencaeus Ibid. See I homas waldensis, Bellarmine and
others, De Sacramento extremae unstiouis, and all Schoolmen and Canonists, De
Sacrame^torum Numero and Extre. unct.
extreme unction to boot at last cast, which they make Catalog Gloriae Mundi,
par. 5. Consid. 35. p. 249. Alber. de Ros. Super G. of Rubr. F. desta. ho.
a Sacrament, and so a thing of more divine sovereign Nature then the very
anointing of Kings at their inauguration, which they repute no Sacrament, as
being no where commanded by God: But neither of these actual unctions, exempt
all or any of those anointed with it from resistance, or any corporal
punishments, or just censures of any kind; therefore the very anointing of
Kings cannot do it. Sixthly, the Ceremony of anointing kings, as Cassan^us
Ibid. and Consid. 29.
Cassanaeus with others write, is peculiar only to the German Emperor, the
King of Jerusalem, the King of France, the King of England, and the King of
Sicily; but to no other kings else, who are neither anointed nor crowned, as
he affirms; so that it cannot give any privilege at all to any but only to
these 4. not other kings, who are not anointed Now seeing only these 4. kings
are actually anointed, yea lawful Kings and their persons sacred, even before
they are anointed or crowned, and other kings persons (as of Spain, Hungary,
Denmark, Sweden, Poland, etc.) who are not anointed, are as sacred, as exempt
from danger, as those who are enoyled; And seeing the anointing of kings is at
this day a mere arbitrary humane Ceremony, not enjoined by divine authority,
nor common to all Kings, who are Cook 7. Report. Calvin's case f. 11. Philoch.
Arch. De Somnio Vcr (...), c. 171.
Kings before their Coronations, it is most certain and infallible, that this
enoyling in and of it self derives no personal Prerogatives or Immunities at
all to kings, much less an absolute exemption from all actual resistance in
cases of unjust invasions on their Subjects, or from the censures of their
Parliaments for public distructive exorbitances, as most have hitherto blindly
believed.

Neither will the frequent next objected speeches of David concerning Saul,
impeach the premises, 1 Samuel 24. 6. 10. c. 26. 9. 11. 23. and 2 Samuel 1. 12. 16.
The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my Master the Lords Anointed,
to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is the Lords Anointed. I will
not put forth my hand against my Lord, for he he is the Lords anointed. And
David said to Abishai, Destroy him not, for who can stretch forth his hand
against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? The Lord forbid that I should
stretch forth my hand against the Lords Anointed. The Lord delivered thee into
my hand to day, but I would not stretch forth mine hand against the Lords
Anointed. How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thy hand against the Lords
Anointed? Thy blood shall be upon thy head, for thy mouth has testified that
thou have slain the Lords Anointed. Which several Texts seem at first sight
to insinuate, that Saul's very external anointing was that which did secure
his person from assauls and violence; and that it is unlawful even by way of
defense, forcibly with A^mes to resist a persecuting unjustly invading king,
because he is anointed.

But these Texts, if duly pondered, will warrant neither of these conclusions.
First then, I answer, Object. 6.
that Saul's bare anointing, Answ.
considered as an external Ceremony to declare him a lawful King, did not,
could not add any immunity to his person against David's, or any other Subjects
justviolent resistance, as the premised reasons manifest; but it was only his
royal Sovereign Office conferred on him by God and the people, to which his
external anointing by Samuel was but a Preparation: That which made Saul,
with other his successors, a king, was not his bare anointing. For 1 Samuel
10^. 1, 2. 24.
Saul himself was anointed by Samuel, before he was made and chosen King, not
when he was made King. So 1 Samuel 16. 1. to 14.
David, 1 king. 19. (...). 16.
Hazael, 1 king. 19. 16. 2 king. 9. 1. to 8.
Iehu, with others, were anointed before they were actual Kings, and many of
their Successors by descent, were real kings before they were anointed; some
of them being not anointed at all for ought we read: therefore their unction
made them not kings, since neither simply necessary, nor essential to their
being kings. Nor did Saul's anointing only, preceding his Regality, make his
person sacred, or any other kings persons; for then it would follow, That if
Saul had not been actually anointed, or had continued king for some years
without this anointing, then David in such a case might lawfully have slain
him, without check of conscience, and that the persons of kings not at all
anointed; and of hereditary kings before their Coronations, till they are
anointed, should not be sacred, nor exempt from violence; which is both false
and perilous to affirm; but it was his Sovereign Royal Authority over David
(then his Son-in-law, Servant, Subject) which restrained him from offering
violence to his person. Saul then being thus privileged, not because he was
anointed, but because he was an anointed king, and that not quatenus
Anointed, but quatenus King; the true sense and genuine interpretation of
these Texts must be, That Saul's person was sacred, exempt from his Subjects
violence, not because he was anointed, as if that only did privilege him; but
because he was a lawful king 1 Sa. 15, 16, 17. c. 10. 1, 2, 4.
appointed by the Lord himself, the 1 Samuel 12, 13. c. 15. 13, c. 1^ 1. 1 Chro.
28. 4.
Lords anointed, being but a periphrasis, or form of speech, wherein the
Ceremony of anointing, is used for the Regality, or kingly power it self,
declared not conferred by anointing, and in plain words without any figure, it
is put for, the Lords King, that is, a King appointed by the Lord; in which
sense God calls Christ Psalm. 2. 6. Psalm. 18. 50.
my King; and David styles himself (x) Gods King. Saul's Royal Authority
without his anointing, not his anointing, predestinating him to his Authority
being the ground of this his immunity from David's violence. Secondly, 1 Samuel
10. 1, 2, 24.
Saul was anointed some space before he was made King, and 1 Samuel 16. 1. to 14.
David many year before he came to the Crown: I would then demand of any
man; if Saul or David after their unction, and before their election and
inauguration to the Crown had invaded or assaulted any of the people in an
hostile manner, whether they might not have justly resisted, repulsed, yea
slain them ^o in their own necessary defense? If no^, then one Subject may not
repulse the unjust violence of another in an elective kingdom, if by
possibility he may afterward be chosen king, though for the present he be
neither actually king nor Magistrate, but a Shepherd, as David was, Psalm. 78.
70, 71* which I presume none will affirm, I am certain none can prove: If so
then it was not Saul's anointing but only his Royal Authority, which made
David thus to spare his life, his person. So that our Opposites pressing this
Argument only from his Anointing, is both false and idle, as all the premises
demonstrate.

But to set the Argument right; I answer thirdly, That all which these Texts
and David's example prove, is but this. That Subjects ought not wilfully or
purposely to murder or offer violence to the persons of their kings; especially
in cold blood when they do not actually assault them. Ergo they may not
resist, repulse their personal actual assaults, nor oppose their cutthroat
Cavaleers when they make an unjust war against them. Which Argument is a mere
Non sequitur.

For 1. David's example extends only to Saul's own person, not to his Soldiers,
who were neither kings, nor Gods Anointed; and whom David no doubt would have
resisted and slain too had they assaulted him, though he spared Saul: as Soct.
2. p. ^.
Dr. Fern himself insinuates in these words; David's Guard that he had about
him, was only to secure his person against the cutthroats of Saul, if sent to
take away his life, etc. He was anointed and designed by the Lord to succeed
Saul, and therefore he might use an extraordinary way of safe-guarding his
person: Sect. ^.
Therefore he and his Guard would and might doubtless have with a safe
conscience resisted, repulsed Saul's cutthroat Soldiers, had they assaulted
David, to take away his life. And if so, then the Kings Cutthroat Cavalleers by
his own confession, may lawfully be resisted, repulsed, slain in a defensive
way, by the Parliaments forces now.

Secondly, the argument is absurd, because we may forcibly resist and repulse
with safe conscience, those whom we may not wilfully slay. If a man assaults
me, to beat or wound me, I may resist, repulse him with violence, but I may not
kill him in mine own defense, without murder or manslaughter, unless I could
not otherwise preserve my own life by flight or resistance. Sect. 2. p. ^.
Doctor Fern grants, that a Subject may in his own private defense, lawfully
ward off the Kings own blows, and hold his hands, in case of sudden and
illegal assaults, much more then of malicious and premeditated: but yet
denies, he may either wound or kill him, and that truly. To argue therefore
from David's example and words, The King may not with safe conscience be
wittingly slain by his subjects: Ergo, He and his Cavaleers may not be forcibly
resisted, repulsed by them for their own defense and preservation, is a gross
inconsequent by the Doctors own confession.

Thirdly, there is nothing in all these speeches, or the practice, or in David,
pertinent to the case in dispute; for when 1 Samuel 2^. 3. to 16.
David's men moved him to kill Saul, and would have risen up against him, to
slay him, and David refused to act, or suffer his men to do it; neither Saul
nor any of his men did actually assault David or his followers, nor so much as
once discover them; but Saul went casually to cover his feet into the Cave,
where they lay hid; which done, he rose up and went on his way, not once
espying David (though h^ cut off the skirt of his Robe privily) nor any of his
men with him. To argue therefore, That David and his men might not with a safe
conscience stretch forth their hands and rise up against their Soveraingne king
Saul, to kill him thus in cold blood, when he assaulted them not, nor so much
as thought of their being in the Cave, and went out of it quietly, not
discovering them; Ergo, they might not, they would not in conscience have
resisted, repulsed him, or his Forces, had they assaulted, or given them
battle in the Cave, is a Nonsense Conclusion; just in effect the same with
this. I may not resist or repulse one who assaults me not, Ergo, I may not
resist one that actually assaults me to take away my life, or to beat, rob,
wound me: What Logic, Reason, Law or Divinity is there in such an argument?
So after this when 1 Samuel 26. 7. to 25.
Abishai said to David, God has delivered Saul thine enemy into thy hand this
day, now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear, even to the
earth at once, I will not smite him the second time: And David said to Abishai,
Destroy him not, for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed
(to wit, to slay him purposely, as Abishai intended) and be guiltless? The
Text is express, That Saul and his men were then in their own Trenches, fast a
sleep, because a deep sleep from the Lord was fallen upon them; David and
Abishai were here the only assailants, they came into Saul's Trenches, he and
his whole army were in so sound a sleep, that they came to Saul's own person,
took away with them his Spear, and the Cruse of water from his Bolster, and
departed, not being once discerned; No man resists, assaults, discovers them.
To slay Saul thus in cold blood, without any assault or present provocation,
and especially upon a private quarrel, had been Treachery and impiety in a
Son-in-Law, a Servant, a Subject, a Successor; and to do it with the hazard of
their own lives, had any of Saul's Army been awakened at the stroke Abishai
would have given him. (as probably they might have been) they being but two,
and within their enemies Trenches, in the midst of the Army, who might have
easily and speedily slain them, had been rashness, indiscretion; their
departure with the Spear and Cruse was more Heroical, Loyal, prudentiall. To
conclude therefore, as our Opposites do from this speech and example, That
David thought it unlawful in point of Conscience for him or Abishai to murder
his Sovereign Lord King Saul, when he and his men were thus fast asleep in the
midst of their Trenches, offering them no wrong, making no actual assaults
upon them; Ergo, they could not, would not justly with safe consciences have
forcibly defended themselves against Saul and his Army, had they been assaulted
by them in their own Trenches; is a trascendent absurdity, refuted by the very
next words of David to Abishai at that instant, 1 Samuel 26. 10. And David said
furthermore, As the Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall
come to die; or he shall DESCEND INTO BATTLE AND PERISH; which intimates, that
if Saul would force him to a battle, then he might lawfully defend himself
against his violence, though he might not murder him now in his sleep, when he
did him no harm; and if he casually perished in the battle, it was Saul's own
wilful default, not his, who could not dissuade him by all this his fair
carriage and sparing of his life, (when he had those two advantages to slay
him) from his violent prosecution, nor yet succeed him in the Crown (as God had
appointed and foretold) should he suffer him to murder him and his men in
battle without resistance. Yea, David's earnestness to go with Achish and the
Philistines to the battle against Saul, wherein he perished, 1 Samuel 29.
(unless we will tax David for a notable Hypocrite and dissembler)
unanswerably evidenceth, that he deemed it lawful to resist, to encounter Saul
and his Forces in battle, not withstanding his person might chance to perish
in the fight, though not to slay him treacherously, and basely upon the
precedent advantages: And his slaying of that lying 2 Samuel 2.
Amalekite who brought him tidings of Saul's death, reporting that himself had
slain him, to gain a reward from David, he being then one of Saul's soldiers*
(as it seems) concludes only, that it was not lawful for any of Saul's own men
to s^y him, by his own command: Not that resistance of him in the open battle
was unlawful in point of conscience. Other answers might be given to this
Objection concerning David and Saul. As 1. that this difference was but private
and personal between Saul and David, David being then Saul's private subject,
Servant, Son in Law, not public between Saul his whole Parliament or Kingdom;
now many things are unlawful to be done in private quarrels, which are just
and honorable in public differences.

Secondly, that David himself, though he thus forbore to murder Saul, yet he
tells him, 1 Samuel 24. 10, 11, 12. This day thine eyes have seen how that the
Lord had delivered thee to day into mine hand in the Cave, and some bad me kill
thee, but mine eye SPARED THEE; and I said, I will not put forth my hand
against my Lord, for he is the Lords anointed. Moreover, my father, see, yea*
see the skirt of thy Robe in my hand, for in that I cut off the skirt of thy
Robe and KILLED THEE NOT, know thou and see, that there is neither evil nor
transgression in mine hand, and I have not sinned against thee, yet thou
huntest my soul to take it. The Lord judge between me and thee, and the Lord
avenge me of thee, but mine hand shall not be upon thee and plead my cause and
deliver me out of thine hand. And after this upon the second advantage, he
uses like words. The Lord render to every man according to his righteousness
and faithfulness, for the Lord delivered thee into my hand to day, 1 Samuel 26.
23, 24.
but I would not stretch forth my hand against the Lords anointed. And behold,
as THY LIFE WAS MVCH SET BY THIS DAY IN MY EYES, so let my life be much set by
in the eyes of the Lord, and let him deliver me out of all tribulation: Wherein
David declared, that God had given up Saul's life into his power, that it was
his own mere goodness that moved him to spare Saul contrary to his Soldiers,
and Abishaies minds, who would have slain him, without any scruple of
conscience; that the reasons he spared him were: First, because he was Gods
Anointed, that is, specially designed and made King of Israel by Gods own
election, which no kings at this day are, and so this reason extends not so
fully to them, as to Saul. Secondly, Because he was his Father and Lord too,
and so it would have been deemed somewhat an unnatural act in him. Thirdly,
because it had ^avoured only of private self-revenge and ambitious aspiring to
the Crown before due time, which became not David, the quarrel, being then not
public, but particular betwixt him and David only, who was next to succeed
him after his death. Fourthly, because by this his lenity he would convince and
reclaim Saul from his bloody pursuit, and clear his innocence to the world.
Fifthly, to evidence his dependence upon God and his special promise; that he
should enjoy the Crown after Saul by divine appointment; and therefore he would
not seem to usurp it by taking Saul's life violently away. Most of which
considerations fail in cases of public defense, and the present controversy.
Thirdly, that Saul himself, as well as David's Soldiers, conceived, that David
might with safe conscience have slain as well as spared him; witness his
words, 1 Samuel 24. 17, 18, 19 Thou art more righteous then I, for thou have
rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil: And thou have showed me
this day how thou have dealt well with me; for as much as when the Lord had
delivered me into thine hand THOU KILLEDST ME NOT. For if a man find his enemy
WILL HE LET HIM GO WELL AWAY? Wherefore the Lord reward thee good for that thou
have done unto me this day, etc. And in 1. Sam. 26. 21. Then said Saul, I have
sinned; return my son David, for I will no more do thee harm, because my
sovle was precious in thine eyes this day; behold I have played the fool
exceedingly, etc. But the former answers are so satisfactory, that I shall not
pray in aid from these, much less from that evasion of Dr. Fern, who makes
this, and all other David's demeanors in standing out against Saul Sect. 2. p.
(...).
EXTRAORDINARY; for he was anointed and designed by the Lord to succeed Saul;
and therefore he might also use all extraordinary ways of safeguarding his
person; which like wise insinua^es, that this his scruple of conscience in
sparing Saul's life was but extraordinary, (the rather, because all his
Soldiers and Abishai would have slain Saul without any such scruple, and Saul
himself conceived, that any man else but David would have done it:) and so by
consequence affirms, that this his sparing of Saul is no ways obl^gatory to
other subjects, but that they may lawfully in David's case kill their
Sovereigns* But David's resistance of Saul by a guard of men, being only that
ordinary way which all subjects in all ages have used in such cases, and that
which nature teaches not only men, but all living creatures generally to use
for their own defense, and this evasion derogating exceedingly from the
personal safety of Princes, yea, and exposing them to such perils as they have
cause to con the Dr. small thanks for such a bad invention, I shall reject it
as the extraordinary fancy of the Dr. and other loyalists, void both of truth
and loyalty.

The 7. Objection Object. 7.
out of the Old Testament is this, 1 Samuel 8. 11. Samuel tells the people, Dr
Fern, Resolving of Conscience, Sect. 2. p. 10. And others.
how they should be oppressed under kings; yet all that violence and injustice
that should be done unto them, is no just cause of resistance: for they have NO
REMEDY LEFT THEM BUT CRYING TO THE LORD, v. 18. And ye shall cry out in that
day because of the King which ye shall have chosen you, and the Lord will not
hear you in that day.

To this I answer Aswer.
1. that by the Doctors own confession, this text of Samuel, much urged by some
of his fellows, to prove an absolute divine Prerogative in Kings, is quite
contrary to their suggestion; and meant only of the oppression, violence, and
in^u^ (not lawful power) of Kings, which should cause them thus to cry out to
God This truth we have clearly gained by this objection, for which some
Royallists will renounce their champion. 2. It is but a mere fallacy and
absurdity not warranted by the Text; which says not, that they shall only cry
out; or that they shall use no remedy or resistance, but crying out; which had
been material, but barely, ye shall cry out in that day, etc. Ergo, they must
and should only cry out, and not resist at all* is a gross Non-sequitur:
which Argument because much cried up, I shall demonstrate the palpable
absurdity of it by many parallel instances. First, Every Christian is bound to
pray for Kings and Magistrates, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Ergo, they must only pray and
not fight for them, nor yield tribute or obedience to them: Kings and their
Subjects too are bound to cry out, and pray to God against foreign enemies
that come to war against them, as Exodus 14.
Moses did against Pharaoh and his Host, Psa. 59. 1, 10 and other Psalm.
David against his enemies, 2 Chronicles. 32. 20. 2 King. 19.
Hezekiah against Sennacherib and his Host, 2 Chronicles. 14. 9. 9. to 15.
Asa against his enemies, 2 Chronicles. 13 14, 15, 16.
Abijah and the men of Judah against Jeroboam and the Israelites their enemies;
and as all Christians usually do against their enemies. (Yea, I make no doubt
but the Doctor, and other Court-Chaplains, inform his Majesty and the
Cavalleers, that they must cry to God against the Parliamenteers and Roundheads
now in Arms to resist them;) Ergo, they must only pray, but in no wise resist
or fight against them; All men must pray to God for their Mat. 16. 11.
daily bread: Ergo, they must only pray and not labor for it; Sick Iam. 5.
14, 15, 16.
persons must pray to God to restore their health: Ergo, they must take no
Physic, but only pray; All men are expressly commanded to Psalm. 50. 15
cry and call upon God in the day of trouble, Ergo, they must use no means
but prayer to free themselves from trouble; pretty Logic, Reason, Divinity,
fitter for deri^ion then any serious Answer. This is all this Text concludes,
and that grossly mistaken Speech of Saint Ambrose, Christians weapons are
Prayers, and Tears; of which anon in its due place. In one word, prayer no more
excludes resistance, then resistance, prayer, both of them may, and sometimes
(when defense is necessary, as now) ought to concur; so that our Court
Doctors may as well argue, (as some Prelates not long since did in word and
deed) Ministers ought to pray, and Gods Matthew. 21. 13.
House is an Oratory for prayer: Ergo, they must not Preach (atleast, very
seldom) nor make his House an Auditory for Preaching: Or as rationally reason
from this Text, That Subjects must cry out to God against their kings
oppressions, Ergo, they must not petition their Kings, much less complain to
their Parliament for relief; as conclude from thence; Ergo, they may in no case
resist the king, Object. 8.
or his invading Forces, though they endeavor to subvert Religion, Laws,
Liberties, as the Doctor himself states the controversy: whose arguments will
hardly satisfy conscience, being so void of reason, ^ence, yea science.

The eighth is this, Dr Fern, Sect. 2, 3. An App^al to thy Conscience.
None of the Prophets in the old Testament, reprehending the Kings of Israel
and Judah for their gross Idolatry, cruelty, oppression, did call upon the
Elders of the people for the duty of resistance; neither do we find the people
resisting, or taking up Arms against any of their kings, no not against Ahab or
Manasseh, upon any of these grounds: Ergo, resistance is unlawful.

To which I must reply, first, Answ. 1.
That none of the Prophets did ever forbid resistance in such cases, under pain
of Damnation, as our new Doctors do now; Ergo, it was lawful, because not
prohibited. Secondly, 2.
that as none of the people werethen inhibited to resist, so not dehorted from
it: therefore they might freely have done it, had they had hearts and zeal to
do it. Thirdly, 3.
Antiqu. Iud. l. 4. c. 8.
Josephus resolves expressly, That by the very Law of God, Deuter. 17. If the
King did contrary to that Law, multiply silver, gold, and horses to himself,
more then was fitting, the Israelites might lawfully resist him, and were bound
to do it, to preserve themselves from Tyranny; Therefore no doubt they might
have lawfully resisted their Kings Idolatry, cruelty oppressions. Fourthly, 4.
Explan^^. Artit. 42. Operum, Tom. 1. 84
Hulderichus Zuinglius, a famous Protestant Divine, with others, positively
affirms, That the Israelites might not only lawfully resist, but likewise
depose their Kings for their wickednesses and Idolatries; yea, That all the
people were justly punished by God, because they removed not their flagitious,
idolatrous Kings and Princes out of their places, which he proves by Ie^em 15.
where after the four Plagues there recited, the Prophet subjoynes the cause of
them, saying, Verse 4. I will give them in fury to all the Kingdoms of the
Earth, ( that is, I will stir up in fury all the kings of the earth against
them) because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah king of Judah, for that which he
did in Jerusalem. This Manasseh had committed many wickednesses by Idolatry
and the shedding of innocent blood, as we may see in the one and twentieth
Chapter of the second of the Kings; for which evils the Lord grievously
punished the people of Israel: Manasseh shed over much innocent blood, until
he had filled Jerusalem even to the mouth, with his sins wherewith he made
Judah to sin, that it might do evil before the Lord: Therefore because
Manasseh King of Judah did these most vile abominations, above all that the
Amorites had done before him, and made the Land of Judah to sin in his
uncleanesse, therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel, Behold, I will bring
evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that whosever shall hear, both his ears shall
tingle etc. In sum, if the Jews had not thus permitted their King to be
wicked WITHOUT PVNISMENT; they had not been so grievously punished by God. We
ought to pull and cast away even our eye that offends, so a hand and foot, etc.
If the Israelites had thus DEPOSED Manasseh by consent and suffrages of all, or
the greatest part of the multitude, they had not been so grievously punished of
God. So Zuinglius, with whom even Third Part of the True Difference between
Christion subjection, etc p. 513. 514.
B. Bilson himself in some sort accords, who in desending and interpreting his
opinion, confesses, That it is a question among the Learned, What Soveraigney
the whole people of Israel had over their Kings; 1 Samuel 14.
confessing, that the peoples rescuing Jonathan that he ^^ed not, when Saul
would have put him to death, 1 Chronicles. 13.
David's speech to the people when he purposed to reduce the Arc, 1 Kin. 12.
all the Congregations speech and carriage toward Rehoboam when they came to
make him King, with the ^er. 26.
peoples speech to Jeremy, Thou shall die the death; have persuaded some, and
might lead Zuinglius to think, that the people of Israel, notwithstanding they
called for a King, yet RESERVED TO THEMSELVES SVFFICIENT AVTHORITY TO OVERRVLE
THEIR KING, IN THOSE THINGS WHICH SEEMED EXPEDIENT AND NEEDFVLL FOR THE PVBLIKE
WELFARE* else God would not punish the people for the kings iniquity, which
they must suffer, and not redress. Which opinion, if as Orthodox, as these
learned Divines and Josephus aver it, not only quite ruins our Opposites
Argument, but their whole Treatises and cause at once. But fifthly, I answer,
that subjects not only by command of Gods Prophets, but of God himself, and by
his special approbation have taken up Arms against their Idolatrous Princes,
to ruin them and their Posterities: A truth so apparent in Scripture, that I
wonder our purblinde Doctors discern it not: For did not God himself,
notwithstanding his frequent (conditional) promises to establish the Kingdom
of Israel on David, Solomon and their Posterity; for 1 King. 11. 1. to 40.
Solomon's gross Idolatry ( occasioned by his Wives) tell Solomon in express
terms? Wherefore for as much as this is done of thee, and thou have not kept
my Covenant and my Statutes, which I have commanded thee, I will surely REND
THE KINGDOM FROM THEE, and will give it to thy servant. Notwithstanding in thy
days I will not do it, for David thy fathers sake; but I will rend it out of
the hand of thy son. Did not the Prophet. Abijah in pursuance hereof, rending
Ieroboams garment into twelve pieces, tell him? Thus says the Lord, the God of
Israel, behold, I will rend the Kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will
give ten tribes to thee; And I will take the Kingdom out of his sons hand, and
will give it unto thee, even ten Tribes; and I will take thee, and thou shall
reign according to all that thy soul desires, and shall be King over Israel;
and I will for this afflict the Seed of David. 1 King. 12. ^ Chr. 10.
Yea, did not ALL ISRAEL upon Solomon's death, when Rehoboam his son refused to
grant their just requests at their coming to Sechem to make him king, use this
speech to the king, What Portion have we in David? neither have we inheritance
in the son of Iesse, to your Tents o Israel: now see to thine own house David.
Whereupon they departed and fell away from the house of David everafter, and
made Iereboam King over all Israel. And does not the Text directly affirm?
Wherefore Rehoboam hearkened not unto the people, for the cause was from the
Lord, that he might perform the saying which the Lord spoke to Abijah unto
Jeroboam, the son of Nebat. After which when Rehoboam raised a mighty Army to
reduce the ten Tribes to obedience, the Word of the Lord came to Shemaiah the
man of God, saying, Speak unto Rehoboam and all the house of Judah and
Benjamin, Thus SAYS THE LORD, Ye shall not go up to fight against your
brethren the children of Israel, return every man to his house; FOR THIS THING
IS FROM ME; They hearkened therefore to the word of the Lord and returned to
depart, according to the word of the Lord. Lo here a Kingdom quite rent away
from the very house of David; yea, a new King and kingdom erected by the
People, by Gods and his Prophets special direction, and approbation, for King
Solomon's Idolatry. Who is such a stranger to the sacred Story, but has
oft-times read, how God anointed Iehu King, of purpose to extirpate and cut off
the whole house of K. Ahab his Lard for his and Iezabels Idolatry and
bloodshed, in slaying the Prophets, and unjustly executing Naboth for his
Vineyard? in performance whereof he s^ew his Sovereign King Ioram, Ahaziah King
of Judah, Queen Iezabel, all Ahabs posterity, his great men, his Nobles, and
all the Priests and Worshippers of Baal, till he left none remaining, according
to the word of the Lord which he spoke by his servant Elijah, a Kings c. 9. and
10. For which good service the Lord said unto Iehu, Because THOU HAVE DONE WELL
in executing that which is right in mine eyes, and have done unto the house of
Ahab according to all that was IN MINE HEART, thy children of the ^.
generation, shall sit on the Thron of Israel. This fact therefore of his thus
specially commanded, approved, rewarded by God himself, must needs be just and
lawful, not Treason, not Rebellion in Iehu, unless the Opposites will charge
God to be the author, approver, and rewarder o^fin, of Treason.

Neither will it serve their turns to Reply, Evasion, Reply.
that this was an extraordinary example, not to be imitated without such a
special commission from heaven, as Iehu had, and no man can now a days
expect; Deuteronomy. 13. thorowout. c. 17. 1. to 8.
For since God has frequently enjoined all gross incorrigible Idolaters
(especially those who are nearest and dearest to, and most potent to seduce us)
to be put to death, without any pity, or exception of Kings, whose examples
are most pernicious, and apt to corrupt the whole Nation, as the presidents of
the Idolat^ous kings of Israel and Judah abundantly evidence) if Kings become
open professed Idolaters, though private persons may not murder them, and
their families, as Iehu; yet the representative body, or greater part of their
Kingdoms, (as many Pious Divines affirm) may lawfully convent, depose, if not
judge them capitally for it: and Gods putting zeal and courage into their
hearts, or exciting them by his faithful Ministers, to such a proceeding, is a
sufficient Divine Commission to satisfy Conscience, if no sinister private
ends, but mere zeal of Gods glory, and detestation of Idolatry be the only
Motives to such their proceedings. 1 Kin. 15. 27. to 34. c. 16. 1. 2.
Thus we read, God stirred up Baach^, exalted out of the dust, and made him a
Prince over the house of Israel, who slew king Nadab, and smote all the house
of Jeroboam, till he left him not any that breathed, because of the sins of
Jeroboam which he sinned, and which he made Israel sin, 1 Kings 16. 1, to 20.
by his provocation where with he provoked the Lord God of Israel to anger; who
going on after in Ieroboams sins, God threatens to ^ut off all his house, and
make it like the house of Jeroboam; which was actually executed by Zimri, who
slew his Sovereign King Elah, son to Baacha, With all the house of Baacha, and
left not one that pissed against the wall, neither of his kinsfolks* nor of his
friends, according to the word of the Lord which he spoke against Baacha by
Iehu the Prophet. Which act of Zimri, though a just judgment in regard of God,
on the family of Baacha for their Idolatry, was notwithstanding reputed Treason
in Zimri, because he did it not out of Conscience or zeal against Idolatry,
being, and continuing an Idolater himself; but only out of ambition to usurp
the Crown, without the peeples consent; whereupon all the people made Omri King
and then going all to the Royal Palace, set it on fire, and burnt Omri in it,
both for his sins, Idolatries, and Treason which he wrought. We read expressly,
2 Chronicles. 25. 27, 28. c, 6. 1. to 6. 1 King. 14. 19, 20, 21, c, 15.
that after the time that Amaziah did turn away from following the Lord, they
(for this) conspired a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to
Lachish, but they sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there; and they
brought him upon horses, and buried him with his fathers in the City of Judah.
Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was 16 years old, and MADE HIM
KING in the room of his father Amaziah, and he did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord. So 2 King. 15.
Zachariah, Shallum, Pekahiah, Pekah, four evil Kings of Judah, successivly
acquiring the Crown by murder, and reigning evilly in Gods sight, were all
slain by Gods just judgment on them, of one another, and Hoshea. In few words,
God himself ever annexed this condition to the Kings of Israel and Judah, that
they should serve and fear him, obey his Laws, keep his Covenant, otherwise if
they did wickedly forsake him, or commit idolatry, he would destroy, forsake,
and cast them and their seed off from being 1 Samuel 12. 14. 15. 25. 2 Samuel 7.
11, 12, 14, 15, 16. Psa. 89. 30, 31, 32. 1 Chro. 28. 7, 8, 9. 1 Kin. 11. 9, 10,
11, 12, 32, 38, 1 Samuel 15. 23, 26, 27, 28 29, ^5. c. 16. 1. compared with Deuteronomy.
17. 16. to the end.
Kings. When therefore they apparently violated the condition, the whole State
and people, as Gods Instruments, lawfully might, and sometimes did by Gods
special direction, remov depose, and sometimes put them even to death for
their gross iniquities, and idolatries; and when they did it not, it was not
(as many think) for want of lawful Sovereign Authority remaining in the whole
State and people, (as I shall fully manifest in the Appendix) but out of a
defect of zeal, out of a general complying with their Kings in 1 King 12. 30.
c. 13. 33. 34. ^. 14. 7. to 17. c. 15. to the end of, c. 22. 2 King. ^. 1. to
the end of c. 25. 2 Chro. 10. 10. to the end of c. 24.
their abominable idolatries and sins, which brought War, Captivity, ruin,
both on their Kings, their Posterity, the whole Nation and Kingdoms of Judah,
and Israel, as the Sacred Story plentifully relates. All which considered, this
objection proves not only false, but fatal to the Obiectors cause, who might
with more discretion have forborne, then forced such an answer to it, which I
hope and desire no private persons will abuse to justify any disloyalty,
sedition, Treason, Rebellion, or taking up of Arms against their lawful
Princes, though never so evil, without the public consent and authority of
the representative bodies or major part of their several Realms, biased with
no sinister nor private respects, but aiming only at Gods glory, and the
public weal, security, peace of Church and State. Thus much in answer to the
principal Objections out of the Old Testament.

The ninth and most material Dr Fern, Sect. 2. p. 10, 11, 12. and elsewhere.
The necessity of Christian Subjection, Oxford, 1643. Appeal to thy Conscience,
1643. The Lords Anoin^ed, Oxford, 1643 with others.
Objection, Object. 9.
on which our Opposites principally rely, is that noted Text in the new
Testament, Romans 13. 1, 2. Let every soul be subject unto the higher Powers, for
there is no Power but of God; the Powers that be, are Ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. From whence Dr. Fern
concludes, 1. That the King is the Supreme or Highest Power here intended. 2.
That all persons under the Highest Power are expressly forbidden to resist. 3.
That in those days there was a standing and continual great Senate, which not
long before had the Supreme Power in the Roman State, and might challenge more
by the fundamentalls of that State, then our Great Council will or can. But
now the Emperor being supreme, as S. Peter calls him, or the Higher Power, as
S. Paul here, there is no power of resistance left to any that are under him,
by the Apostle. 4 Was there ever more cause of resistance then in those days?
Were not the Kings then not only conceived to be inclined so, and so, but even
actually to be enemies of Religion, had overthrown Laws and Liberties? And
therefore if any should from the Apostles reasons that he gives against
resistance in the 3, 4, 5, Verses, ( for Rulers are not a ^error to good works,
but evil, and he is the Minster of God to thee for good) reply, That Rulers
so long as they are not a terror to the good, but ministers for our good, are
not to be resisted; the consideration of those times leaves no place for such
exception, because the Powers then (which the Apostle forbids to resist) were
nothing so, but subverters of that which was good and just. The Emperors did
then indeed rule absolutely and arbitrarily, which should have according to the
Principles of those days been a stronger motive to resist. But how did they
make themselves of Subjects such absolute Monarchs? was it not by force and
change of the Government? and was not the right of the People and Senate
(according to the Principles of these days) good against them, with as much or
more reason, then the right of the people of this Land is against the
Succession of this Crown, descending by three Conquests? 5. The prohibition
does not only concern Christians, but all the people under those Emperors, and
not only Religion was persecuted, but Liberties also lost, the people and
Senate were then enslaved by Edicts and Laws then enforced on them, by Nero and
other Roman Emperors, yet notwithstanding the Apostle prohibits them to
resist. By all which consc^ence will clearly see, it can have no warrant in
Scripture for resistance, to wit, of the King, or his invading Forces, by way
of necessary defense. So the Doctors and other Ob^ectors hence conclude

To give a satisfactory Answer to this grand Objection, Answ.
I shall in the first place inquire, Whether there be anything in this Text,
prohibiting subjects to resist with Force the armed unjust violence of their
Princes persons or instruments, especially when they are bent to overthrow
Religion, Laws, Liberties, the Republike, and turn professed Tyrants? And under
correction, I conceive there is not the least syllable or shadow in this Text
for any such inhibition, as is pretended. Not to insist upon the words, higher
Powers odained of God, etc. which extend not unto Tyranny and illegal
exorbitant oppressions, of which hereafter; I shall deduce my first
Demonstrations to prove this negative Assertion, from the occasion inducing the
Apostle to insert these objected Verses into this Epistle: Sixfold Comment. on
Romans 13. Quest. 1. p. 578.
Dr Willet recites 7. Reasons of it, all fortifying my assertion; I shall
mention only the three most probable, most received of them, and apply them as
I go.

First, the Roman Magistrates being then infidels, the new converted Christians
among them, either did, or might take themselves to be wholly exempted from any
subjection or obedience to them, reputing it a great incongruity, that
Christians should owe any subjection to Pagans: To refute which error, the
Apostle informs them, that though the Magistrates themselves were Ethnicks, yet
their Authority and Power was from God himself; therefore their profession of
Christianity did rather oblige them to, then exempt them from subjection. Thus
Haymo Soto, Calvin, Guather, Marlorat, Willet, Pareus, with others on this
Text. Turn this Reason then into an Argument, and it will be but this Non
sequitur: Christianity exempts not subjects from due obedience to just Pagan
Magistrates, Ergo, Tyrants may not be resisted, neither ought the Parliament
and their Forces to resist the Kings Cavalleers unjust assaults, as the case is
formerly stated. Pretty Logic, and Divinity.

2. The Gaulonites, as Antiqu. Iud. l. 18. c. 1. 2.
Josephus records, with other Jews, being Abraham's seed, held it unlawful for
them to yield any subjection or tribute to the Roman Emperors, or other Heathen
Princes, reigning over them; whereupon they demanded this question of Christ
himself, Is it lawful to pay tribute to Caesar? Matthew. 12. which error
perehance spread it self into the Christian Church, by reason of Evangelicall
Liberty, grounded on Ioh. 8. If the Son shall make you free, then are ye free
indeed; Mat. 17. The^ are the Children free; and To. 6. We are not under the
Law, but under Grace. To refell this mistake, the Apostle inserted these
passages into this Epistle; Thus Soto, Calvin, Peter Martyr, Willet, and
others. Whence nothing but this can be properly concluded, Neither the
Prerogative of the Jews, nor Liberty of Christians exempts them from due
subjection to lawful heathen Magistrates, because they are Gods Ordinance,
Ergo, No Subjects can with safe conscience defend themselves in any case
against the unjust invasions of Tyrannical Princes or their Armies. A palpable
Inconsequent.

Thirdly, the Apostle having formerly taught, Romans 12. (...).
that Christians might not avenge themselves: lest some might have inferred
thereupon (as many O siander. Enchir. cont^. cap. 9. de Magist. Polit.
Anabaptists have done) that it was not lawful for Christians to use the
Magistrates defense against wrongs, nor for the Magistrate himself to take
vengeance of evil doers: To prevent this the Apostle argues, That the
Magistrates are Gods Ministers, appointed by him to punish Malefactors, and
take vengeance on them. So Gualther, Willet, and others. To conclude from this
ground: Oppressed Subjects may seek redress of their grievances from the
Magistrates, who may lawfully punish Malefactors, Ergo, they may not resist
with force, Tyrannical bloody Magistrates, or their wicked Instruments, when
they actually make war upon them, to ruin, spoil, enslave them, is but a
ridiculous Non sequitur. There is nothing therefore in the occasions of the
Apostles words which gives the least color, to disprove the lawfulness of
such resistance, or of the Parliaments just defensive war.

Secondly, this is manifest by the whole Scope of this Text, which in sum is
only this, That Christians ought in conscience to (l) be subject to all
lawful higher Powers, so far forth as they are Gods Ordinance, Gods
Ministers, for their good, to the praise of the good, and punishment of evil
doers, and not to resist them in the execution of their just Authority: Or
Christianity exempts not Christians from obedience unto faithful Civil
Magistrates: to infer from thence. Ergo it is unlawful for Christians in
point of conscience to resist their Magistrates when they war upon them to
subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties, sl^y, plunder them, is but a mere nonsense
deduction.

Thirdly, this appears most perspicuously from the motives to obedience, and
reasons against resistance of Magistrates specified by the Apostle in the text
it self.

First, the higher Powers must be submitted to, and not resisted, because they
are ordained of God, and are Gods Ordinance, verse. 1. 2. But they are ordained
of God and his Ordinance, so far forth only as they govern according to his
Word; and preserve, Isay 32. 1, 2. c. 49. 23. 1 Sa. 8. 20. Psa. 78. 72, 73, 74.
protect Religion, Laws, Liberties, the persons and estates of their people;
They are not Gods Ordinance, but the Devils, Paraeus, Willet, Soto, and others.
when they do quite contrary, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
walking about lik^ roaring Lions, se^k^ng whom they may devour, as the Devil
does; According to that resolution of Bracton, and Fl^ta Lib. 3. c. 9. f. 107.
Exercere debet Rex potestatem Iuris sicut Dei Vicarius and Ministeri in terra,
quia illa Potestas SOLIVS DEI EST potestas autem injuriae DIABOLI ET NON. DEI;
Cujus horum operum fecerit Rex ejus minister crit. ^gitur dum facit justitiam,
vicarius est Regis aeterni: MINISTER AVTEM DIABOLI dum declinat ad injuriam.
El^ta, l. 1. c. 17.
Therefore they are so far forth only to be obeyed and not resisted, as they
are Gods Ordinance, and lawful Magistrates, not a^ they are tyrants and the
Devils Agents: we might have obeyed the evil spirits themselves whiles they
continued good Angels; Ergo we must not resist them now they are turned Devils,
is (...) Logic, course Divinity, contrary to the 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. Iam. 4. 7.

Secondly, because those who resist shall receive to themselves damnation,
temporal or eternal, since they resist Gods Ordinance, v. 2 But that subjects
should be temporally and eternally damned, only for resisting tyrannical
Magistrates or their Cavaleers, and that by authority from the Parliament, when
they with armed violence most impiously s^t themselves o subvert Religion,
Laws, Liberty, Property, and take away their liv^s, against all Laws of God
and Man; for which they themselves incur both I say 14* 4. to 2^. 1 king 1.
21, and 22. Psalm. 5, ^. 1. to 7. Psa. 7. 13. Psa. 94. 20. 21. 23, Psalm. 140. ^.
to 13.
temporal and eternal damnation, ^s ^^ch a Paradox, as is no ways warranted
by, but directly opposite to the Scripture. Therefore it must be intended only
of resisting lawful Authority, and just commands.

3. They must be subjected to, not refisted, because Rulers are not aterror to
good work, but to evil, v. 3. Now is this a reason why Subjects should not
resist tyrannical oppressing Princes, Magistrates, or their Instruments, who
are only a terror to good works, not to evil? who do Psalm. 140. 1. to 6. Prove
1. 16. Mich. 2. 1. 3. ^. 3. 23. 1^. 3.
evil and only evil continually, even with both hands? doubtless not. We
must not resist Rulers who are a terror to good works but to evil; Ergo, we
must not resist Rulers, who are a terror to good works, not to evil, as our
Opposites conclude hence, is to argue poi^^blank against the Apostle; Ergo, we
may and must resist them to our powers, lest we be Romans 1. 31. 32. 1 Timothy 5. 22
2 John 10. 11. Rev. 1^. 4.
partakers of their sins and punishments, and become authors of Religions and
the Commonwealths subversion, is a more proper inference.

Fourthly, the Apostle subjoynes this argument against resistance. Will thou
not then be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall have
praise of the same, Verse. 3. That power is not to be resisted, which we need
not be afraid of, and of whom we shall have praise whiles we do that which is
good: But this only can be intended of a lawful power justly executed; not
of Tyrants, or their ill Ministers bent with force of arms to ruin Religion,
Laws, Liberties,; who only terrify, disgrace, discountenance those that are
good; applaud, advance none but those who are evil, and as Micah writes, Chap.
3. 2. 3. Love the evil and hate the good, and pluck off their skin from off
them, and their flesh from off their bones, etc. Therefore this inhibition of
resistance extends only to lawful Magistrates, not to ungodly oppressing
Tyrants.

Fifthly, he is not to be resisted, but obeyed; because he is the Minister of
God to thee for good, Verse. 4. But is this true of Tyrants? of ungodly
Magistrates bent to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties, and destroy their
people? True of See Sueto^nius, Eutropius, Zonaras, Grimston and others in
their lives.
Caligula, of Nero, who wished all the Romans had but one neck, that he might
cut them all off at one stroke; and purposely fired Rome to consume it,
beholding the flames as a most delightful spectacle? Are such the Ministers of
God for our good here intended? or not rather, See Seneca de Clem. l. 1. Hosea
13. 11.
the very Pests, Judgments, Scourges, Wolves, Cutthroats, destroyers of
mankind, and direct Antinodes to all things that are good? If these be not
within the Apostles definition, they are with out his inhibition; which extends
only to such, who are the Ministers of God to us for good: and implies a
lawfulness of resisting those who are the Devils Ministers to us for evil,
rather then Gods for good.

Sixthly, He subjoynes this further reason of obedience and not resistance,
Verse. 5. But if thou do that which is evil be afraid; for he bears not the
Sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God, a revenger, to execute wrath
upon him that does evil; which no ways suites with a Tyrant bent to subvert
Religion, Laws, Liberties: For he secures all evil men, especially those who
are isntrumental to advance his cruelty, and oppressions; gives liberty to all
manner of wickednesses, Proclaims impunity to his ill instruments, knowing
that of the Poet to be true; Lu^^n. de Bello Civili. l. 8. p. 141.
Libert as scelerum est quae Regna invisa tuetur, etc. He bears the sword not
only in vain, in reference to any good end, for the promoting of Gods glory
and the public good; but likewise draws it forth, and uses it directly
against both; And is so far from being a Minister of God, or revenger to
execute wrath upon them that do evil, that he is the very Minister of the
Devil, See Fox Acts and Monuments throughout.
a bloody implacable revenger to execute wrath upon those only that do good:
Such was Nero, who then reigned, of whom Apolog. c. 5. and Seneca de v^ta
beata, c. 24.
Tertullian, Nihil nisi grande aliquid bonum a Nerone damnatum. This reason
then extends only to righteous Governors, in their execution of justice upon
wicked malefactors wherein they must not be resisted; Not to bloody,
graceless, lawless Tyrants and their instruments, who by the rule of
contraries may and ought to be resisted in their cruelties, oppressions,
impieties.

Seventhly, the Apostle hereupon concludes, Verse. 5. Wherefore you must of
necessity be subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. This
conclusion as the word, Wherefore, demonstrates, being inferred from the
premised reasons, extending only to just and upright Magistrates, not to
Tyrants, as they are such; must relate wholly unto them; namely, that we must
of necessity be subject unto just rules, and the higher powers, governing
uprightly; Because they are Gods Ordinance; because those who resist them shall
receive damnation: Because they are not a Terror to good works, but to evil:
because we shall have praise of them if we do good; because they are the
Ministers of God to u^ for good; and because they are Gods Ministers and
revengers, to execute wrath upon them only that do evil: See Fox Acts and
Monument, Eusebius, Socrates, Scholast, Nicephorus, Grimst^n in his life of
Julian the Apostate and others.
Neither of which reasons extending to Tyrants, this conclusion can never reach
to them; since no Law of God or man, necessitates any one to be subject, not
only for wrath, but even for conscience sake, to the unjust commands and
violence of Tyrants, but the quite contrary: Should Tyrants enjoyne men, as
some have done, to offer sacrifice to Idols, to renounce Christianity, abjure
Jesus Christ, and yield up their chastity to their unruly lusts; Gods Dan. 3.
5. to 25. Acts 4. 20. c. 5. 28, 29.
Law and conscience in such cases enjoynes them of necessity to disobey and
resist those commands, even for conscience sake; as every man endued with
conscience must acknowledge; Therefore this Text extends not to resistance of
such exorbitant powers in such lawless cases.

Eighthly, the Apostle thus proceeds, Verse. 6. For this cause also pay you
tribute, for they are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very
thing. What, do men pay any Tribute to Princes or Magistrates for this cause,
that they may subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties? that they may plunder,
murder, war upon, and expose them to the rapine of their ungodly Malignant
Cavaliers? Or are Magistrates, Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this
very thing, to ruin Parliaments, Church, State, people? would any men, think
you, give Tyrants wages for such a service, to cut their throats, to devour
and undo them in soul, body, estate? Or do not they pay tribute to, and
Magistrates attend continually upon quite contrary employments? If so, as none
can contradict, then the resistance here is only intended of lawful
Magistrates, who continually attend upon their charge, to protect the good, and
punish Malefactors; not of Tyrants, who do quite contrary; and therefore are
to be resisted.

Ninthly, he infers from the premises, Verse. 7. Render therefore to every man
his due, tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear,
honor to whom honor: By what Law of God are obedience, fear and honor due
to Tyrants in their ungodly, exorbitant, unjust commands, to subvert Religion,
Laws, Liberties? Certainly the Apostle has no where in this Text, nor God
himself in any other Scripture expressed such obedience, resistance, fear or
honor to be due unto them: and Elisha his speech to King Iehoram, 2 King 3.
13. 14 compared with Ezekiel. 21. 25. Job 12. 19. 21. Chapter 34. 19. Nehem. 4. 7. to
20. Chapter 13. 17. Isa. 1. 23. Chapter 41. 25. Lam. 1. 6. Chapter 5. 2 proves directly,
that they are not their due. Therefore this Text extends not to them, but only
to lawful Magistrates.

Lastly, he concludes hence, Verse. 8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one
another: for be that loves another has fulfilled the Law. Now no such Love is
owing to Tyrants who subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties; but we are to hate
them with a perfect hatr^d, as enemies both to God and man, borne for the
public prejudice, Psalm. 139. 21. 22. Psalm. 109. 1. to 21. 28, 29. but only
just and upright Magistrates: Therefore this Text is intended only of them.

By all these premises it is undeniable, that the resistance here prohibited is
only of lawful Magistrates in the due execution of their Offices, according
to the Laws of God and the Realms they live in; not of tyrannical oppressing
Princes, Rulers, or their instruments forcibly endeavoring to ruin Religion,
Laws, Liberties, Parliaments, Kingdoms; which fully refutes the Doctors
fourth Observation; of which more anon.

I now proceed to some farther disquisitions for the final clearing of this
Text; and herein I shall examine,

First, what is meant by higher powers: whether Kings or the Roman Emperor
only, as our objectors pretend, or all civil Magistrates whatsoever as well
as Kings?

Secondly, whether the Roman Emperor in Paul's time were the highest Sovereign
power in that State, or the Senate?

Thirdly, whether Tyrants and unjust oppressing Magistrates, as they are such,
be within the intendment of this Text, and not to be resisted in any case.

Fourthly, whether Kings and kingdoms be Gods Ordinance; or an institution
jure divino; or a humane ordinance jure humano; and how far divine or humane?

Fifthly, what resistance of the higher powers is here prohibited?

For the first of these. By the higher Powers it is clear, that Kings and
Emperors only are not meant, as our opposites dream; but all kind of civil
Rulers and temporal Magistrates whatsoever, from the King himself to the
Constable and Tithingman: As is apparent, first, by the word, higher Powers,
used indefinitely in the plural number, without mentioning any special kind
of power. Secondly, by those words; There is NO POWER but of God* the powers
THAT ARE (that is, all lawful powers whatsoever now in being) are ordained of
God: which universal Negative, and Affirmative, must necessarily include all
lawful civil powers. Thirdly, by the following words: See Exodus 16. 22. c.
34. ^1 2 King. 10. 1. 1 Chronicles. 26. 32 Ezra 9. 2. c. 10. 14 N^h^m. 2. 16. c. 5.
17. c. 13. 11. Ezekiel. 23 6. Joh. 7. 48. c. 12. 42. Acts 4, 5. 8* 26.
For Rulers, etc. that is, all Rulers in the plural number; a Title common to
all inferior Officers: witness Exodus 18. 21. 22. 25, 26. (See 1 Chronicles. 12.
14.) And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them HEADS over the
people: RVLERS of thousands, Rulers of hundreds, Rulers of fifties, and Rulers
of tennes, (such as our Tithingmen are) and they judged the people at all
seasons. So that the Tithingman is a Ruler, a higher power within this Text.
Fourthly, the word Ministers, For they are Gods Ministers, etc. in the plural
too, extending generally to all officers. Fifthly, by v. 6, 7, 8. Render
therefore to ALL their dues, (that is, to all Magistrates whatsoever; as these
ensuing words evidence) tribute to whom tribu^e is due, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor: Owe nothing to ANY MAN,
etc. that is, to ANY Magistrate, or Ruler of what kind soever. Sixthly, by
parallel Texts, extending as well to inferior lawful Magistrates and
Officers, as to Kings, as ^ Tim. 2. 1. I exhort therefore, that first of all
supplications, prayers, etc. be made for all men; for Kings, and ALL THAT BE IN
AVTHORITIE, etc. Titus 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities
and powers, to obey Magistrates (all in the plural:) 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. Submit
your selves to EVERY ORDINANCE of man for the Lords sake; whether it be to the
King as supreme, or unto GOVERNORS, (in the plural) as unto those that are
sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do
well; Compared with Josh. 1. 16. 17. 18. Ezra 7. 25, 26. Ephesians. 6. 1. 5. Col.
3. 18. 20. 23. 1 Timothy 6. 1. Heb. 13. 17. Exodus 22. 28. Chap. 18. 21, 22. 25*
26. 2 Kings 11. 4. Seventhly, by all Expositors generally on this Text,
ancient, modern, Protestants, Papists, who grant, that this Text extends to
all civil Magistrates, as well inferior and subordinate, as superior, (and
many stick not to strain it even to Ecclesiastical ones) So Origin, Ambrose,
Hierome, Remigius, Theodulus, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Primasius, Haymo, Rabanus
Maurus, Theophylact, O^cumenius, Haymo, Aquinas, Anselm, Iyra, Bruno, Gorran,
Hugo de Sancto Victore, Tostatus, Luther, Calvin, Erasmus, Melanchthon,
Gualther, Musculus, Bucer, Hemingius, Ferus, Fayus, Soto, Alexander Alesius,
Peter Martyr, Pareus, Beza, Piscator, Zuinglius, Tollet, Willet, Wilson,
Nacclantus, Snecanus, Vignerius, Wenerichius, Winckelman, Estius, Faber,
Cornelius a Lapide, Salmeron, Catharinus, Guilliandus, Adam Sasbout with sundry
others. This then being irrefragable, hereby it is most apparent; First, that
no resistance of the higher powers is here prohibited, but only in the due and
legal execution of their offices: For if any inferior Officers illegally
endeavor to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties, and unrightly govern the
people, they may lawfully be resisted by them: For example, if a Mayor, Justice
of Peace, Constable or other officer; extravagating from the common course of
Law and Justice; shall with force of arms in a riotous manner assault any
private man, or the whole City or Village where he lives, to beat, wound,
kill, plunder, dispossess the inhabitants of their houses, goods, franchises,
or assult them on the highway side, to take away their purses; in these and
such like cases, both in point of Law and conscience he may not only be
forcibly resisted, but repulsed, apprehended, battered, if not lawfully slain
by the people, and proceeded against as a delinquent: The reason is, because
these illegal unjust actions, are not only besides, without their
Commissions, but directly contrary to their offices, and the Laws, which never
gave them authority to act such injustice: yet they are higher Powers ordained
of God, within this Text, and no way to be resisted in the due execution of
their Offices according to Law. If then these inferior Officers may be thus
forcibly resisted, repulsed, notwithstanding this Text, in such cases as these;
then by the self same reason Kings and Emperors may be thus resisted too;
since the Text extends indifferently to them both. Let then the objectors take
their choice; either affirm, that no inferior lawful Officers whatsoever,
may be forcibly resisted, by the people, or repulsed, arraigned, censured for
their misdemeanour, by virtue of this Text; which would bring an absolute
Tyranny, Anarchy and confusion presently into the world, and make every
Constable as great a Tyrant, Monarch as the grand Emperor of the Turks; or else
confess, that this Text condemns not such resistance, even of Kings and
Princes, when they forcibly war upon their Subjects to subvert Religion, Laws,
Liberties, and ruin the republike; since it makes no distinction at all
between the onespower and the others; but equally enjoynes subjection,
prohibits resistance unto both; and that only in just administration of their
several authorities, not in the arbitrary unjust prosecutions of their wills
and lusts.

Secondly, it follows, that the Kings Soldiers, Cavaliers and Forces now
raised against Law, and armed only with illegal Commissions void in Law, as I
have proved; are none of the high powers ordained of God, nor lawful Rulers or
Magistrates within the meaning of this Scr^pture; and so the forcible resisting
of them, and of the Kings illegal commands and designs executed by them, is
no resistance of the higher powers here prohibited.

Thirdly, that the Ho^ses of Parliament being in truth the highest powers
ordained of God in this Realm, and their just legal Ordinances, Votes,
Forces, for the necessary defense of Laws, Liberties, Religion, against the
Kings ill Counselors, and Malignant Popish Forces, neither may, nor ought in
conscience to be resisted by the King himself, or any of his Subjects,
Soldiers, under the peril of that damnation mentioned in this Chapter.

For the second, Whether the Roman Emperor in Paul's time was the highest
Sovereign power in the Roman State, Quest. 2.
or not? It is taken for granted by Doctor Fern and other Doctor Fern,
Appeal to thy conscience; The necessity of subjection.
opposites, that he was, as a thing past doubt, the Senate and people (as they
say) having resigned up their power to the Emperor. But this no doubt is a
gross error, (which I have largely refuted in the Appendix, and therefore
shall be the briefer here) derived from some civil Lawyers; who out of
Justinian. Digest. lib. 2. Tet. 2. and Instit. Tit. 2. falsely affirm, that
Lege Regia; by the regal Law the Senate and people transferred all their
Empire and power unto the Emperor. For first the Senate and people (as
Albericus Gentilis Albericus Gentilis, de Iu. Belli. l. 3. c. 13. p. 309.
well observes) did not by this Law give the Emperor all power and command to
dispose of them, or the lands and revenues of the Empire, as he pleased; but
only to govern them according to their Laws, as men; not to slay and
alienate them as beasts. Thus reason dictates, so the words of the Law sound.
Alci. l. 3. de V. s. l. 35. and de pact.
Divines are deceived, Lawyers flatter, who persuade, that all things are
lawful to Princes, and that their power is highest and free. It is ridiculous
to affirm, that absolute power over the subjects belongs to Popes; which
belongs not to the Emperors themselves over the Italians, from whom they
derive it. Imagine therefore that the Emperor had a power never so free, yet
it is not of dominion, but of administration. L. 7. de Don. l. 1. quae res, p.
1. da. ob. non. pos. l. 8. qui mo pi. so l. 17. pro. Emp^.
And he who has but a free administration has not the power of donation. (e)
Agardian is then reputed in stead of a Lord, cum tutelam administrat, non cum
pupillum spoliat; when he rightly administers his tutelage, not when he spoils
his pupil. So Gentilis. If then the Emperors had only a free legal
administration, not an absolute dominion; granted them by the people, then this
sovereign power still resided in the Senate and people, as Justinian Digest.
lib. 1. Tit. 2. De Origin Iuris, will sufficiently manifest: Secondly,
Commonweal, l. 2. c. 5. p. 221.
John Bodin a learned Civilian clearly proves: That the Roman Emperors were at
the first; nothing else but Princes of the Commonweal, The SOVEREIGNTY
NEVERTHELESS STILL RESTING IN THE PEOPLE, and THE SENATE: So that this
Commonwealth was then to have been called a Principality; although that Seneca
speaking in the person of Nero his Scholar, says. I am the only man amongst
living men, elect and chosen to be the Lieutenant of God upon earth: I am the
Arbitratour of life and death; I am able of my pleasure to dispose of the state
and quality of every man. True it is, that he took upon him this Sovereign
authority, by force wrested from the people and Senate of Rome, ( therefore not
freely given him by any Law) but IN RIGHT HE HAD IT NOT, the State being but a
very principality WHEREIN THE PEOPLE HAD THE SOVEREIGNTY. In which case, THERE
IS NO DOUBT but that IT IS LAWFUL to proceed against a Tyrant by way of
justice, Suctonius, Zonaras, ^rimst^n, Eutropius, Sabel^icus, Op^neerus, and
others in his life.
if so men may prevail against him: or else by way of fact, and OPEN FORCE, if
they may not otherwise have reason; As the Senate did in the first case against
NERO: and in the other against Maximinus. So Bodin, who directly resolves, that
even in Nero his reign when this Epistle was written, the highest sovereign
power was not in the Emperor, but in the Senate and people: who
notwithstanding this objected Text, had no doubt a lawful Right, not only to
resist Nero when he turned Tyrant with open force, but likewise judicially to
arraigne and condemn him even to death, as they did, for his public crimes.
Now that the Sovereign highest Power remained in the Senate and people
notwiths^anding this Lex Regia, Marius Salamonius (an incomparable learned
Roman Civilian) has largely proved in his six Books De principatu (purposely
written to refu^e the contrary common error) where he writes, First, that the
Roman Emperors were created and constituted only by the Senate and people; and
that the Creature should be superior to the Creator, the child to the parent,
is absurd. Secondly, that the Emperors were but the Senates and peoples
public servants; therefore they were their Lords; and not inferior, but
superior to their servants. Thirdly, that they were subordinate and inferior
to the Laws made by the Senate and people; and bound by all their Laws, but
such as the Senate and people did by special Acts exempt them from. Fourthly,
Marius Salamonius de Principatu, l. 6. p. 122. to 126.
that the people and Senate did by special Laws create, limit, enlarge or
abridge their Emperors power and jurisdiction, as they saw cause, giving
sometimes more or less jurisdiction to one Emperor then another: which they
could not justly do, were they not the highest Sovereign power. Finally he
proves it by the very Lex Regia it self; which because rare and unknown to
most, I shall here recite, to inform and reform our ignorant Court Doctors,
Lawyers, with Salamonius his observations from it. Lex Regia, was not only one
single Law: There was not one Law for all Emperors, but it was revived for
every Emperor, yet not with the same conditions. The brass Table which yet
hangs in the Lateran Church, proves that the Royal Law was accustomed to be
altered in every Princes reign AT THE PLEASVRE OF THE ROMAN PEOPLE; for it is
part of the Royal Law of the Empire of Vespatian, that it should be altered:
which had been void, if from the beginning of the Empire a perpetual Law had
been made for all successors; the words of the Law are these.

Faedusve ^um quibus volet facere, ita ut licuit Divo Augusto, Tyber. Iulio
Caesari Aug. Tyherioque Claudio, Iulio Caesari Aug. Germanico.

Vtique eum Senatum habere, relationem facere, remittere Senatus consulta, per
relationem, discessionemque facere lic^at, ut licuit Divo Augusto, Tib^rio,
Iulio Caesari Augusto, Tyberio, Claudio Caesari Augusto Germanico.

Vtique quum ex voluntate, auctoritateue, jussu, mandatione ejus, praesenteve
eo Senatus habebitur, omnium rerum jus perinde habeatur, servetur, ac si elege
Senatus edictus esset, habereturque.

Vtique Coss. Magistratus potestatem, imperium, curationemve cuivis rei petenti
Senatui populoque Romano commendaverit, quibusve suffragationem suam dederit,
promiserit, eorum Comitiis qui busque extra ordinem, ratio habeatur.

Vtique ei fines pomaerii proferre, procurare, cum e Rep. censebit esse,
liceat; uti licuit Tiberio, Claudio Caesari, Augusto Germanico.

Vtique quaecunque ex usu R^ip. majestate divinar: humanar: publicar:
privatarumque rerum esse censebit, ea agere, facere jus, potestasque sit, ita
uti Divo Aug. Tyberioque, Iulio Caesari Aug. Tyberioque Claudi^ Aug. Germanico
fuit.

Vtique quibus legibus, Plehisve scitis scriptum fuit, ne Divus Augustus
Tyberiusve, Iul. Caes. Aug. Tyberiusve, Claudius Caes. Aug. Germanicus
tenerentur; his Legibus Plebisque scitis Imp. Aug. Vespatianus solutus sit;
quaeque ex quaque Lege, Rogatione Divum Aug. T^b^riumve, Iul. Caesarem Aug.
Tyb^^iumve, Claudium Caes. Aug. Germanicum facere oportuer at, ea omnia
Imperatori Caesari Vespatiano Aug. facere li^^at.

Vtique quae a^te hanc legem rogatam, acta, gesta, decreta, imperata, ab Imp.
Caesare Vespatiano Augusto, jussu, mandatuve ejus a quoque sunt, ea perinde
just a rata sint, ac si populi plebisve jussu acta essent. Sanctio* Si quis
hujusce legis ergo adversus leges, rogationes, plebisve scitoe, senatusue
consulta fecit, feceritve, sive quod cum ex lege, rogatione, plebisve scito,
senatusve consulto facere oportebit, non fecerit, hujus legis ergo, id ei ne
fraudi esto, neve quid (...) eam rem populo dari debeto, neve de ea re cui,
actioneve judicato esto, neve quis de ea re apud eum agisinito.

This Law first shows, that there was not one royal Law made for all
Emperors, but that for every several Emperor several Laws were necessary,
containing the conditions whereupon the Principality was collated by the Roman
people: For to Vespatian, it appears power was granted, of enlarging or
settling the bounds, as it was granted to Germanicus, but not to other Princes.
And in the last Chapter but one, which says: And by those things which by any
Law, etc. it is lawful to do; a larger power is given to Vespatian then to
the forenamed Emperors; and that they ought to do some things, which
Vespatian ought not to do by Law. Likewise by these words; Vtique quibus
legi^us, etc. solu^us sit: it appears that Vespati^n was not freed from all
Laws, nor yet the Emperor before him. Likewise o^t of the Chapter where it
says, Ex usu Reip. Majestate, etc. it is evident that not an absolute free
administration of things was committed to the Emperors, but only such as was
useful, that is, which should be for the profit and honor of the republike:
whence is inferred, that those things which were not for the benefit and honor
of the Commonweal, Emperors had no right nor power to do. And in the last
Chapter is perspicuo^sly set down THAT SUPERIOR POWER OF THE PEOPLE, GREATER
THEN THE PRINCIPALITY IT SE^FE. How then does Vlpian say, the Prince is loosed
from Laws? he says not from all Laws: verily that he was exempt from many is
no doubt, etc. (yet it was by a special clause in the Lex Regia.) This and
much more Salamonius. All which considered, will infallibly evidence, the Roman
Senate and People to be the highest power in Paul's time, not the Emperor; wh^
even at this day (as Commonweal l. 2 c. 5.
Bodin proves) is inferior to the Germane States, who are the Sovereign
power: when King Henry the fourth of France, Anno 1600. used this speech to the
Duke of Savoy; General History of France, p. 965.
If the King of F^ance wou^d be ambitious of any thing greater then his Crown,
it might be an Empire, but not in the estate that it is now, the title of
Empire being little more then that of the Duke of Venice; the soveraingty
(writes the Historian in the Margin) remaining in the States of the Empire.

All that is objected against the premises, Object.
is that passage of T^rtullian, much insisted on: Colimus erg^ and Imperatore^
sic, Ad S^apulam, lib. p. 163. Objected by, The nec^ssity of Subjection, and
others.
quomodo and n^bis lic^t, and ipsi expedit, ut homi^em a DEO SECUNDUM; and
quicquid est a De^ c^^secutum, SOLO DEO MINOREM. Hoc et ipse volet: Sic enim
OMNIBUS MAJOR EST, DUM SOLO VERO DEO MINOR EST. Sic and ipsis Diis major est,
dum and ipsi in potestate suntejus, etc.

To which I answer, Answ.
that these words only prove the Emperor in the Roman State to be the highest
Officer and Magistrate under God, of any one particular person; not that he was
the Sovereign highest power above the Senate and people collectively
considered: And the occasion of these words will discover the Authors intention
to be no other: which was this. The Christians in that age were persecuted and
put to death by Scapula President of Carthage, to whom Rhe^an^ Annot. I^^d.
Tertullian writes this Book, because they refused to adore the Emperor for a
God, to swear by his Genius, and to observe his solemnities and triumphs in an
Eth^icall manner; as is evident by the words preceding this passage: Sic and
circa Majestatem Imperatoris infamamur, etc. and by sundry notable passges in
his Apologeticus. In answer to which accusation Tertullian reasons in the
Christians behalf; that though they adored not the Emperor as a God; yet they
reverenced him as a man next under God; as one only less then God; as one
grea^er then all others, whiles less only then the true God, and greater then
the Idol Gods themselves, who were in the Emperors power, etc. Here was no
other thing in question; but whether the Emperor were to be adored as God?
not, whether he or the Roman Senate and people were the greatest highest
Sovereign power? And the answer being, that he was but a man next under God,
above any other particular officer in the Roman State; is no proof at all,
that he was paramount the whole Senate and people collectively considered, or
of greater Sovereign power then the^; which the premises clearly disprove.
Add; that this Father in his Apology thus censures the Pagan Romans for their
gross flattery of their Emperors whom they feared more then their Gods,
appliable to our present times; Siquidem majore formid^ne and callidiore
timiditate Caesarem observatis, quam ipsum de Olympo Iovem, etc. ^deo and in
isto irreligiosi erga deos vestros deprehendimini, cum plus timoris, hum^no
Domino dic^tis; citius denique apud vos per omnes Deos, quam per unum genium
Caesaris pejeratur* Then he adds, Interest hominis Deo cedere; satis ^abeat
appellari Imperator: gr^^nde and hoc nomen est, quod a Deo tradetur: negat
illum imperatorem qui deum dicit; nist homo sit, non est imperator. Hominem se
esse etiam triumphans in illo sublimissimo curru admonetur. Suggeritur enimei a
tergo, Respice post te; hominem memento t^. Etiam hoc magis gaudet tanta se
gloria coruscare, ut illi admonitio conditionis suae sit necessaria. Major est
qui revocatur ne se deum existimet. Augustus imperii formator, ne Dominum
quidem dici se volebat: et hoc enim Dei est cognomen. Dicam plane Imperato^em
Dominum, sed m^re communi, sed quando non cogor, ut Dominum D^i vice dicam.
Concluding thus: Nullum bonum sub ex^eptione personarum administramus, etc.
Iidem sumus Imperatoribus qui and vicinis nostris. Male enim velle, male
face^e, male dicere, male cogitare de quoquam ex aequo vetamur, Quod^unque non
licet in Imperatorem, id nec in quenquam: quod in neminem, eo forsitan magis
nec in ipsum qui per deum t^ntus est, etc. From which it is evident, that the
Christians did not deifie nor flatter their Emperors more then was meet, and
deemed they might not resist them only in such cases where they might resist
no others, and so by consequence lawfully resist them, where it was lawful for
them to resist other private men who did injuriously assault them.

If then the Roman Emperors were not the highest. Sovereign power in the Roman
State when Paul writ this Epistle, but the Roman Senate and State, as I have
cleared: and if the Parliament, not the King, be the supremest Sovereign power
in our Realm, as I have abundantly manifested; then this objected Text (so
much insisted on by our opposites) could no ways extend to the Roman Senate,
State, or our English Parliament, who are the very higher powers themselves,
and proves most fatal and destructive to their cause of any other, even by
their own Argument, which I shall thus doubly discharge upon them.

First, that power which is the highest and most sovereign Authority in any
State or kingdom by the Apostles and our Antagonists own doctrine, even in
point of conscience, neither may, nor ought in what case soever (say our
opposites) to be forcibly resisted, either in their persons, ordinances,
commands, instruments, offices, or Armed Soldiers, by any inferior powers,
persons or subjects whatsoever, especially when their proceedings are just and
legal, under pain of temporal and eternal condemnation. But the Senate
among the Romans, not the Emperor; and the Parliament in England, not the
King, really were and are the higher Powers and most sovereign Authority.
Therefore by the Apostles own Doctrine even in point of conscience, they
neither may nor ought to be disobeyed or forcibly resisted in any case
whatsoever, either in their Persons, Ordinances, Commands, Instruments,
Officers, or Armed Soldiers, by the King himself, his Counselors, Armies,
Cavaliers, or by any inferior powers, persons, or Subjects whatsoever,
especially when their proceedings are just and legal, (as hitherto they have
been) under pain of temporal and eternal condemnation. I hope the Doctor
and his Camerads will now beshrew themselves that ever they meddled with this
Text, and made such a halter to strangle their own treacherous cause, and
those who have taken up arms in its defense.

Secondly, that Power which is simply highest and supreme in any State, may
lawfully with good conscience take up Arms to resist or suppress any other
power, that shall take up arms to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties, the
Republike, or the ju^t Rights and Privileges of the Subject, or of this higher
power. This is our opposites own argumentation. Therefore the Parliament being
in verity the highest supreme Power in our State, may lawfully with good
conscience take up Arms to resist or suppress his Majesty's Malignant, Popish
Forces, or any other power which already has, or hereafter shall be raised to
subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties, the Republike, just Rights and Privileges
of Parliament, or the Subjects; and every man with safe conscience may
chearefully serve in such a war, upon the Parliaments encouragement or
command, without guilt of treason, or rebellion either in Law or Conscience.

For the third Question; Quest. 3.
Whether Tyrants or unjust oppressing Magistrates, as they are such, be within
the intendment of this Text, and not to be resisted in any case? I have fully
cleared this before from the occasion, scope and arguments used in this
Chapter; that they are not within the compass of this Text; as they are such,
and may be resisted in their Tyranny and oppressions notwiths^anding this
inhibition; I shall not repeat, but only fortify this Position with some new
reasons and authorities.

First then, that which is not the ordinance of God, but rather of the Devil,
and the me^re sin and enormity of the Governor himself, not of the
Government, is not within the intention of this Text, and may lawfully be
resisted without any violation of it. But Tyrants and unjust oppressing
Magistrates as they are such, are See Mich. 3. 1. to 5* Isay 3. 4, 5. Ze ph. 3,
3. Ezech. 45. 8, 9.
not Gods ordinance, but rather the Devils* and their Tyranny and oppression
is only the sin and enormity of the Governors themselves, not of the
government; A truth granted by all men: Therefore they are not within the
compass of this Text, and may lawfully be resisted without any violation of it.

Secondly, that which is no point of the Magistrates lawful power ordained of
God, but diametrally repugnant to it, cannot be within the meaning of this
Text, and may lawfully be resisted; but the tyranny, oppression, rapine, and
violence of lawless Kings and Magistrates are such, as all must and do
acknowledge. Ergo, they are not within the verge and compass of this Text, and
may lawfully be resisted.

Thirdly, all powers intended in the Text, are not only ordained, but ordered
of God, that is, (as In Romans 13. Col. 1266. Willet on Rom* 13 quest. 6. p. 583.
Paraeus with others observe) they are circumscribed and bounded with certain
Rules or Laws of justice and honesty, within which they must contain
themselves, else they exorbitate from Gods ordinance when they pass beyond
these limits, and become none of Gods; This the Greek word (...), (which Arias
Montanus and others render, ordinatae, and the Margin of our English Bibles,
are ordered of God;) does sufficiently warrant being coupled with the
subsequent limitations; For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to
evil, etc. they are Gods Ministers attending continually on this very thing.
Now the Tyranny and oppression of Kings and other Rulers, are mere
exorbitances, arbitrary illegal actions, exceeding the bounds of justice and
honesty prescribed by the Laws of God and men. Therefore not within the limits
of this Text, and resistible.

Fourthly, it is generally accorded by all Commentators, that though the
lawful power of Princes or other Magistrates degenerating unto Tyrants, be of
God, and not to be resisted; yet the Tyranny it self, and abuse of this power
is of Satan, not of God, and the vice of the persons only, not of the Power it
self; whence they conclude, that Tyrants are not within the meaning of this
Scripture. So Origin, Paraeus, Willet, with m^^t others on this Text; and
Zuinglius most expressly Explanatio Artic. 41. Tom. 1. f. 82. 83. where he
complains, that many Tyrants, cheat, steal, rob, slay, plunder, and attempt
any thing against their subjects to oppress them; assuming a pretext and veil
of their ma^ice from this Text of Paul. Yea Dominicus Soto, Cajetan, Pererius,
and other Popish commentators on this place observe; that Paul adds this
Epithet, of higher or excelling powers (omitted by him in other parallel Texts)
of purpose to exclude Tyrants, who are no excelling Lords, nor lawful Powers;
reigning often times by Gods permission for the peoples punishment; not by his
ordination for their good: and blame Bucer for saying, that Tyrants power is
from God, as if he were the author of sin and Tyranny.

This then fully answers that absurd error of Docto Sect. 2.
Fern, wherein all his force is placed: That the Powers in Paul's days which
he here prohibits to resist, were subverters of that which was good; and the
Roman Emperors Tyrants: where he sottishly confounds the tyranny, lusts, and
vices of the Emperors persons, which were detestable, with their power it
self, which was good and commendable; as if the Imperial power it self was
ill, because Nero was ill, and was Gri^st^n, Suet^nius, Eut^opius, Zonaras,
Volaterranus, Speed and others in his (...).
therefore justly condemned to death by the Roman Senate, as a public enemy to
the Roman State, though they approved and continued his just Imperial
principality, which lasted in succession for many hundred years after his
censure, death. To which I shall only add; that though Nero himself were a
Tyrant, yet the Roman Senate, and all their Inferior Offices were not Tyrants;
many of them, no doubt, being just and upright Magistrates. The Precept
therefore being thus in the general, and the plural number, Let every soul
be subject unto the higher powers; nor personal; let them be subject to Nero;
or special, to the Roman Emperor (whom Paul no doubt would have As he does*
Phil. 4. 22. Act. 25* v. 10, 11, 12. c. 26. 32. c. 28. 19. See Matthew 22. 17.
21. Luke 2. 1. c. 23. 2. Acts 11. 28. c. 17. 7.
specified, had he specially intended them, as our opposites fondly dream;) we
may safely conclude, that the Apostle intended it only of lawful powers and
Magistrates, not of Nero or other Tyrants: And writ this to Christians only,
to whom he dedicates this Epistle, witness Chapter 1. V. 7. To all that be at Rome
beloved of God, called to be Saints, etc. not ^o Pagan Romans, as the Doctor
dreams, to whom he writes not; much less to the Roman Senate, who were then
the sovereign power; and therefore could be subject to no other but
themselves. Precepts of obedience to children and Servants, concern not
parents and matters as such, in point of submission or obedience.

For the fourth Quere: Quest. 4.
Whether Kings and Kingdoms be Gods ordinance; or an institution Iure divino,
not a humane ordinance, instituted Iure ^umano? or, how far divine or humane?
Is a necessary considerable question grounded on this Text* and very needful
to be discussed to clear the present controversy.

Some of our opposites are so intoxicated with the divinity of Monarchy, as
they confidently Doctor Fern, Sect. 2. 3 App^ale to the Conscience, p. 11. ^0
15. The necessity of subjection, Christus D^i, p. 11. 12. with others.
determine; hat the efficient cause of royal Monarchical power is only God;
not the people. That Kings receive no power or regal Authority from the
people, but from God alone; That the power of Kings is not a humane, but a
divine power, of which God only is the efficient cause. That the people do
not make the King, but God properly and absolutely; this power, right and
authority he has from God. That the King has no dominion and power from his
Subjects by way of trust, but from God, from whom he has his kingdom and
power, so that by Idolatry and oppression, he breaks not the trust reposed in
him by hi^ Subjects, because the people HAVE COMMITTED NOTHING TO HIS CHARGE,
but God only, etc. For proof whereof they produce Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings
reign, Dan. 2. 21. God removes Kings and sets up Kings, Dan. 4. 17. 25.
The most high rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will; and sets up over it the basest of men, with Hos. 13. 11. 1 Samuel 10. 1.
Ier. 27. 5, 6, 7. Isay 45. 1, 2. and other Texts.

To this question distinctly, answer Answ.
and dissipate these gross erroneous Paradoxes; we must distinguish:

First, between, Government it self in general, and kingly or other kinds
of government, in special, (as our opposites distinguish between, a Sabbath,
and the Sabbath; the first they say is moral and of divine institution, the
later not.)

Secondly, between the Regal power of Kings, the persons invested with this
power, the manner of obtaining, and the administration of their power.

Thirdly, of Gods manner of instituting and ordaining things; which is two
fold, immediately by himself, mediately by others. And these institutions of
both kinds are either universal, extending to all places, Nations; or
particular, concerning some Countries, and Nations only, and not others;
Perpetual for ever, or temporal only for some set time: Immutable, not
capable of the least alteration; or mutable, and that either at the pleasure of
God only; or at the will of men, when they shall see just cause, either in
part or in whole.

Fourthly, in what several senses things may be said to be of God. First, in
respect of his own immediate institution. Secondly, of his general or
special commands. Thirdly, of his general or special disposing providence,
without any special institution or command. Fourthly, of his approbation of,
assent unto, and blessing on the mere institutions of men. Fifthly, of his
permission only.

To apply these distinctions to the present occas^on.

First, it is clear, that power and government in general are Gods own
institution; who as he has appointed (in the great fabric of the world a
Gen^ 1. 16. 18. 28. 29 ^0. Jer. 31. 35, 36. Psael. 136. 8* ^.
certain constant form of government and subordination of one creature to
another) so he has for the good of mankind, appointed that there should be
some form of government or other among men in the world; which in respect of
families he has specially and universally d^creed, Genesis 3. 16. Exodus 20. 12.
Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. 5 c. 5. 22. 24. Col. 3. 23. to 25. c. 4. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2.
1 Pet. 2. 18. c. 3. 1, ^ 2, 3.
as that the wife should be subject to the husband, the children to the
parents, the servants to their masters; but in regard of Commonweales, or
Nations, he has left it arbitrary and indefinite, leaving every Nation and
Country free liberty to elect such a public politic form of government, as
themselves should judge most expedient for their public good, and that mutable
(since all humane things are so) as they should see just occasion, not
prescribing any sempiternall, immutable form of government to any particular
Nations, Regions, much less to all the world.

Secondly, government in general being thus of God, but the kinds of it thus
left arbitrary to men's institution and free election; the particular
governments instituted by any Nation for the better regulating of their lives,
the preservation of humane society, and advancement of Gods glory, may be
truly said in some sense to be of God, though instituted, invented by men. Not
because God himself did immediately ordain or prescribe them by special
command to all, or any one people: or because God himself did immediately
ordain or prescribe them by special command to this, all, or any one people:
but because he by his general or special providence did direct this Nation
to make choice of such a government, or gave them wisdom to invent and settle
it, as most commodious for their republike, till they should see cause to alter
it: or because he blessed and approved it, when invented and received by them.

Thirdly, Kingly powers, Kingdoms, Kings (the things now in question) are, and
may be said to be of God, and ordained of God, in no other manner or sense,
then all other particular Governments or Magistrates are. For this Text of the
Romans, speaking only of the higher powers, the powers that are, and of
Rulers; as does that place of Titus 3. 1. And the Text of Prove. 8. 15, 16. (so
much relied on by the objectors) extending as well to all subordinate Rulers as
Kings; witness the subsequent words, By me Kings reign, and Princes decree
justice: by me Princes rule AND NOBLES, yea ALL THE JUDGES OF THE EARTH; (that
is, all Magistrates whatsoever) it cannot but be yielded; that all and every
lawful kind of government, all lawful Rulers and Magistrates of what sort
soever are of Gods ordination, and his ordinance, as far forth as Monarchies
are; and what is truly affirmable of the one, is of the other too.

These generals thus premised as indubitable; I say first of all: That
Monarchy or regal power is not of God, nor yet Gods ordinance by way of
immediate divine institution or special command from Gods own free motion, as
our opposites affirm it.

For first, God himself never immediately instituted a royal Monarchical
government in any Nation whatsoever, no not among his own people; whose
government was at first Josephus A^tiq. Iud. l. 4. c. 8. Carolus Sigo^nius de
Repub. Hecraeorum. l. 7. c. 5.
Paternall and Pa^riarchicall; next Aristocraticall; then Regal; not by Gods
immediate institution and vol^^^ary designation; but by the peoples earnest
importunity, contrary (...) as is evident by 1 Samuel c. 8, and 9, and 10, and
11. Hos. 8. 4. and the Appendix.

Secondly, Aristot. Polyt. l. 3. and 5. Polib. Hist. l. 6. Just. in Hist. l. 1.
Cassanaeus Catalog. Gloriae Mundi pars, 5. Consid. 1. Philochius Archila^us de
Somnio Viridarii, c. 171. Fortescue c. 9. 13. 15. Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor,
part. 1. c. 2, 3, 4, 5.
All Poli^icians, and Historians grant, that the original erection of all
Monarchies was either by the peoples free consent and ordination; or by Tyranny
and usurpation; or by conquest; none by divine institution or special command
from God: And it must needs be so, because most Genesis 14. 1 Samuel 8. 5. Seldens
Titles of Honor, part 1. c. 1. 2. See the Appendix.
kingdoms were primitively erected, either among Pagan Nations and States, who
knew not God nor his Word, or among Christian States since special commands
and Revelations from heaven ceased: which if our opposites deny; I shall desire
them to instance in any one Monarchy in the world, instituted immediately by
God himself, or by special command from his own free motion: Till this be
done, all their asseverations will be accounted fabulous.

Thirdly, if Regal power be Gods ordinance by way of divine immediate
institution and command; then this institution of Regal Monarchy, with the
several Prerogatives, and boundaries of it, would appear in some Text of
Scripture, and this government would be specially and perpetually prescribed
either to all, or some particular Nations by God himself. But this
institution, with the general Prerogatives and bounds of Regal Authority, are
no where extant in Scripture, neither this form of government therein
prescribed, but left arbitrary to all or any Nation in particular, for ought
any man can demonstrate. Those Texts which concern the Kings of the Israelites
in point of sovereignty, and Prerogative, being judicial only, and peculiar
to that Nation, nor moral, or extending unto others. Therefore it is not Gods
ordinance by way of divine immediate institution, or command.

Fourthly, if it were of divine ordination in this sense; then the Regal power
and authority of all Kings and Monarchs in the world should be equal, yea the
very same; and there should be no different kind of Kings; as the divine
authority of all Ministers (being of Gods own institution by one and the same
commission) is one and the same: But the regal power and jurisdiction of all
Kings and Monarchies in the world is not equal nor the same; for some have
far greater authority then others; there are many different sorts of Kings in
the world, some only annual, others for life, others hereditary, others at
will, deposible at the peoples pleasures when ever they offended, (Such were
the Kings of the Procop. Vand. l. 1.
Vandalls in Africa, of the Ammon. l. 2. c. 2. l. 4. c. 25. Hugo Grotius de
Iure Belli. l. 1. c. 3. c. 58. 72.
Goths in Spain; cum ipsos deponerent populi quoties displicuissent: such the
Kings of the Heruli (Procopius, Gothieorum) Of the Lombards, Paulus Warnafredi,
l. 4. and 6. Of the Burgundians, Ammianus, 11. lib. 28. Of the Moldavians,
Laonichus Chalcocandylas; the King of Agadis among the Africans, Ioannis Leo,
lib. 7. Of the Quadi and Iazyges (in excerptis Dionis) with sundry others
hereafter mentioned.) Some elective, others successive, some conditional,
others absolute, as I have plentifully mentioned in the Appendix. Therefore
they are not of divine ordination in the objectors sense.

Fifthly, If Kings were of divine ordination in this sense, then their kingdoms
and people upon their Elections, Institutions and Coronations could not justly
prescribe any conditions, oaths or covenants to them, upon promise of
performance whereof they only accept of them to be their Kings, refusing else
to admit them to reign over them; and such conditions, oaths, covenants,
would be mere nullities, since men have no power at all to detract from Gods
own divine institutions, or to annex any conditions or restrictions to them.
But our Antagonists themselves dare not aver, that Kingdoms and Nations upon
their Kings Coronations, Institutions and elections may not lawfully prescribe
conditions, oaths, and limitations to them, upon promise of performance
whereof they only submitted to them as their Sovereigns, it being the
received practice of our own, of all or most other Kingdoms whatsoever, See
Part ^. p. 51 to 76. Ed^t. 2*
especially elective ones, and confirmed by divine Authority, 2 Chronicles. 10. 1.
to 19. Therefore they are not of divine institution in the objected sense.

Sixthly, All Bracton l. 3. c. 9. Fl^ta l. 1. c. 5. 17. See here, p. ^5. and
part 1. p. 8^.
Lawyers and most Orthodox Divines determine, that Kings have no other just or
lawful royal Authority, but that which the Laws and customs of their
Kingdoms allot them, and that the Law only makes them Kings, from which if
they exorbitate they become Tyrants and cease to be Kings. Their Royal
authority therefore is of humane institution properly, not Divine; from their
people, who both elect, constitute them Kings, and give them all their regal
Authority by humane Laws enacted, not from God as the only efficient cause.

Seventhly, All Kingdoms, Monarchies, Policies, are mutable and variable in
themselves, while they continue such; yea, temporary and alterable into other
forms of Government by public consent, if there be just cause; without any
immediate command or alteration made by God himself, or his divine authority:
There being no positive Law of God confining any Nation, (whose humane earthly
condition is still variable) to a Monarchical or any other constant form of
government only, much less for perpetuity without variation. Therefore, they
are not of divine institution in this sense.

Eighthly, St. Peter expressly defines Kings and Monarchies, in respect of
their institution, to be humane creatures, or institutions, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Submit your selves to every ORDINANCE OF MAN for the Lords sake; whet^er it be
to the King, as supreme, etc. And they are common to Pagans who know not God,
as well as to Christians. Therefore, they are not simply divine, but humane
Ordinances.

Ninethly, Our Antigonists will yield, that other forms of Government, whether
Aristocraticall, Oligarchicall, Democraticall, or mixed of all three, are not
absolutely and immediately of divine institution; nor yet Dukes,
Principalities, with other inferior Rulers, though the Apostle in this Text
makes them all equally Gods Ordinance, and Divine. Therefore Monarchy, Kings
and Kingdoms are not so.

Tenthly, The very Text it self seems to intimate, that Royalties and higher
powers are not of God, by way of original or immediate institution^, or
command: for the Apostle says not; that all powers whatsoever were originally
instituted and ordained by God himself; but, There is no power but of God; The
powers that be, are (not were at first) ordained (or rather, ordered) of God:
that is; where powers and Governments are once erected by men, through Gods
general or special providence, there God approves and orders them for the
good of men.

2. If Monarchies, and Kings themselves be not of divine institution, and Gods
ordinance in the former sense, as is most apparent: and Aristotle, Plato, all
Politicians grant; Then they are so only in some other sense, in what I shall
truly inform you.

First, They are of God, and his Ordinance, by way of imitation, as derived
from Gods own form of Government, which is Monarchical; Whence he is called,
Psalm. 86. 10 Deuteronomy. 32. 39. Isa. 37. 16. c. 44 6. 1 Cor. 8 4. Ephesians. 4. 6.
The only God, God alone, 1 Timothy 6. ^ 5 6. 15. Romans 17. 14. c. 19. 16. Deuteronomy.
10. 17.
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Secondly, By way of approbation; He Deuteronomy. 17. 14. 15, 16. 1 Samuel 8. 22. 2 ^am.
7. 12.
approves and allows this kind of Government where it is re^^ived, as well as
other forms.

Thirdly, by way of direction, he gives diverse general 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4. ^ King
11 11. 38 2 Chro. 9, 8. Prove. 31. 4
rules and directions to Kings (and to other Rulers and Magistrates also as
well as them) in his sacred word how they ought to demean themselves, toward
him and their Subjects; and likewise 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Romans 13.
1 to 7. Tit 3. 1.
to Subjects, how they should carry themselves toward their Kings; and all
other Rulers and Governors temporal or spiritual: in which sense they may be
properly said, to be ordered and ordained too, of God.

Fourthly, By way of special providence and incitation; God excites and moves
some people to make choice of Kings, and Monarchical forms of Government,
rather than others; and to elect one man or family to that dignity rather than
others, yea his providence mightily rules and swayes in the changes, the
elections, actions, counsels, affairs of Monarchies, Kingdoms, Kings, States,
to order them for his own glory, the Kings, the Subjects good or ill, in ways
of Justice or Mercy; as is evident by Dan. 2. 21. c. 4. 17. 25. Hos. 13. 11.
Ier. 27. 5, 6, 7. Isa. 45. 1, 2, 3. c. 10. 5. to 20. Psalm. 110. 5. Psalm. 113.
7, 8. Job 12. 18. to 25. Dan. 5. 26. 28. The genuine d^ift of all these Texts.

Fifthly, Kings may be said to be of God and his Ordinance, because they, (and
so all other Rulers, Judges, Magistrates as well as they, in respect of their
representation and the true end of Government) are said to be Gods; to be Gods
Ministers and Vicegerents; to sit upon Gods Throne, and ought to reign, to
judge for God, and to rule Gods people according to Gods Word, with such
justice, equity, integrity as God himself would Govern them. Exodus 22. 28. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. Romans 13. 4, 5. 2 Samuel 23. 3. Psalm. 78. 72, 73, 74 2 Samuel 5. 2.
Prove. 8. 15, 18. Psalm. 82. 1. 1 Cor. 8. 5. Isa. 32. 1. c. 9. 7. c. 16. 5. Deuteronomy.
1. 17.

Sixthly, Ill Kings, and Tyrants, may be said to be of God, by way of
permission, and of Ordination too, in reference to the peoples punishment, Job
34. 30. Hos. 13. 11. 1 Samuel 8. 18. In these regards (common to all other
Governors and lawful Governments, as well as Kings and Monarchies) Kings and
Kingly Authority, are and may be said to be of God, and Gods Ordinance; yet not
immediately, or properly in the first acception, here refuted, but so as that
still they are really the institutions and ordinances of men, of humane, not
divine right, and authority.

As for the objected Scriptures to prove Kings jure Divino, Object.
as Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings Reign, etc. Ergo, they are of immediate divine
institution, and have all their authority from God, not from the people, and
may in no case be resisted, censured, deposed, or put to death for any
misdemeanors; the consequences, thence inferred.

I answer, Answ.
First, That this Text speaks only of the promotion or Reign of Kings; 2
Chro. 9. 8. Isa. 32. 2. c. 16. 5.
not of the erection and power of Monarchies; and so do Daniel. 2. 21. c. 4.
17. 25. c. 5. 2^. 28. with the other objected Scriptures.

Secondly, If it be meant of the rule of Kings; then true it is, that good
Kings Reign by Gods direction, according to his word, executing justice, and
judgment, (...) he enjoynes them; But then it is not true of wicked Kings and
Tyrants, who though they Reign by Gods Providence or permission, yet they rule
not by his word and will as he prescribesthem.

Thirdly, If it be meant of the means and manner of Kings coming to their
Kingdoms, as I conceive it is, and the Texts of Daniel persuade:

True it is: first, That some Kings Reigned and came to the Crown by Gods
immediate nomination and designation, as Saul, David, Solomon, Jeroboam, Iehu,
and Hazael did: But that all, or most did heretofore, or now do so, especially
in Pagan Kingdoms, is a notorious falsehood.

Secondly, it is true, That most lawful Kings in hereditary or elective
Kingdoms, come to their Crowns, and Reign; though not by Gods immediate
nomination, yet by his ordinary or special providence, (though it be untrue of
Usurpers, and Tyrants who come to Reign by Treason, Murder, or other
unlawful means; and so by Gods See Doctor Willet, Paraeus, and others on Romans
13.
permission only, rather than his providence: and then the sense of the place
is but this; That Kings receive their Crowns, and Reign by Gods general, or
more special providence: Which I think is the full and proper sense of the
place. In this sense C. Plinius Seeundus a heathen in his admirable Panegyric
to the Emperor Trajan, a Pagan, Rhetorizeth thus of him: Quid enim
praestabilius est, aut pulchrius munus Deorum, quam castus and sanctus and Diis
simillimus Princeps? Ac si adhuc dubium fuisset sort casuque Rectores terris,
an aliquo numine darentur, Principem tamen nostrum liqueret DIVINITUS
CONSTITUTUM. Non enim occulta potestate fatorum, sed ab Jove ipso, coram ac
palam repertus, electus est, etc. Which Apologeticus.
Tertullian thus seconds, speaking even of the Roman Pagan Emperors. Inde est
Imperator, under and homo antequam Imperator; inde Potestas ei, unde and
spiritus: Per Deum tantus est: So Irenaeus, Cujus jussu homines nascuntur,
hujus jussu and Reges constituuntur. And Diodorus Siculus of the Egyptians;
Existimant non SINE DIVINA QUADAM PROVIDENTIA, pervenisse ad summam de omnibus
Potestatem: So the Porphyr.
Esses, hold this opinion, Non obtingit cuiquam Imperium sine Dei cura
speciali: So Apud Cassiodoru^.
Vitigis, Omnis Provectus, maxim Regius, ad Divinitatis munera referendus est:
and Clemens Apostol. constit. 1. 7. c. 17.
Romanus, too. Regem timeto, sciens Domini esse electionem. Which Grotius de
Iure Belli, l. 1. c. 3. Sect. 8. confirms with other Authorities; all
concurring in this, That Kings and Emperors are such only by the selfsame
PROVIDENCE OF GOD, by which they were men before they were Emperors; which
gives them no greater Prerogative in respect of irresistibility in unjust
exorbitant actions, then their being men, by the selfsame providence of God,
gave them before they were Emperors, as Tertullians words most clearly prove.

But what privilege this alone should yield to Kings, more than to any other
Magistrates, Men or Beasts, for my part I cannot yet discern. For does not the
same Text say of Nobles, Princes, Judges, as well as of Kings, Prove. 8. 15, 16.
By me Princes (put as contradistinct to Kings) decree justice; By me Princes
Rule AND NOBLES, YEA ALL JUDGES OF THE EARTH? Does not David say of all kind
of Promotions whatsoever, Psalm. 113. 7, 8. The Lord raises the poor out of
the dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill; that he may set him with
Princes, even with the Princes of his people? And Psalm. 75. 5, 6. Promotion
comes neither from the East, nor from the South; but God is the Judge; he
puts down one and sets up another? Nay, does not Christ inform us Mat.
10. 29 30. Luke 12. 6, 7.
That the very hairs of our head are all numbered? That two sparrowes are sold
for a farthing, and yet one of them shall not fall on the ground without our
Fathers providence? Yea does not every man, yea every Bird, Beast, Fish, Raven,
and living creature whatsoever, (as the Scripture Psalm. 105. 27. to 32. Psalm.
145. 14, 15, 16. Psalm. 17. 27, 28.
expressly resolves) receive, enjoy their Lives, Honors, Offices, Estates,
food, raiment, being, preservation, by Gods general and special providence,
as well as Kings their Crowns, Honors, Lives, Estates?

And is not the providence, yea are not the very Psa. 307. Psalm. 92. 11, 12^
Act. 12. 7, to 18. Heb. 1. 14.
Angels of God, who are all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to them
who shall be heirs of salvation, as vigtiant ^ver every pious Christian (though
never so mean and despicable) as over the greatest Monarch in the world? If so,
as all men must necessarily acknowledge ( there being Romans 2. 1^ Acts 10 34. 1
Pet 1. 17. Deuteronomy. ^0. 17. Job 34. 19, 20. 2 Chronicles* 19. 7. Gal. 2. 6. Ephesians. 69
Col. 3* 25.
no r^spect at all of persons with God, who accepts not the persons of Princes,
regards the rich no more th^n the poor, for they are all the work of his hands)
then kings reigning by the Providence of God, can of itself no more ^xemp^ them
from resistance* censures, deprivations, for their dete^table public crimes,
then it exempts any other Nobles, Princes, Judges, Mag^strates, Christians, or
the mean^st subjects whatsoever; which I shall make good by one more
unanswerable demonstration. There is not one of our Antagonists but will
acknowledge, that Pry sunder the Law, and all Ministers under the Gospel, if
rightly qualified, are made such not only by Gods special Providence, but
likewise by Divine institution from God himself; Nay, Tollet, Quest. 4 (...)
Romans 13. p. 580. See Cassan^us, Catalogus Gl^riae Mundi, pars 4. Consid. 1* to
8.
Willet, and many others on this very Text of the Romans, make a difference
between the civil and Ecclesiastical Regiment and Power: for the first (say
they) is so from God, that yet the institution thereof may be devised and
altered by man, and therefore Peter calls it, the Ordinance of man; but the
spiritual Power is immediatelly instituted by God, and no ways alterable or
determinable by man: And therefore the Apostle says Ephesians. 4. 11. He gave some
to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, etc. So that by their
determination, Ministers are more Gods Ordinance, and more jure Divino, then
Kings; yea but few years since they all professed themselves to be as much, if
not more, Gods anointed then Kings; and some of our Archbishop Laud and Neal,
in the High Commission and Starc^amber.
Archest Prelates made public challenges in ^he open Court, That if they could
not prove their Lordly Episcopacy to be Iure Divino, they would presently burn
their Rochets, and lay down their Bishoprics; though they never made good
their promises: and to doubt, whether the Pope and his supreme Authority be
iure Divino by Christ's own immediate institution, deserves a faggot in the Roman
Church: Yet not withstanding all this Divine Right and institution, our
Opposites will grant, That if Popes, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, See Bellar.
de Romans Pon^. Cassanaeus Catalog* gloriae Mundi, pars 4^ consid. 7.
Ministers preach false Heretical doctrines, oppress, wound, slay, rob,
plunder the people committed by God to their cures; or attempt with force to
subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties; or commit any capital offenses, they may
not only with safe conscience be resisted, repulsed by their people, but
likewise apprehended, arraigned, deprived, condemned, executed, by Lay Judges,
as infinite examples in our Hi^^ories manifest, and the ^xample of Abiathar the
High Priest, 1 Kings 2. 26, 27. And if so, then why not Kings as well as they,
or other temporal M^gist^ates, not withstanding any of the objected Texts?
Either therefore our Oppo^ites must grant all Bishops, Priests, Ministers, yea,
all other Magistrates whatsoever, as irresistible, uncensurable, undeprivable,
uncondemnable, for any crimes whatsoever, as they say kings are, which they
dare not do; or else make Kings as resistible, censurable, deprivable, and
liable to all kinds of punishments, (by their whole Kingdoms consent in
Parliament) as far forth as they, notwithstanding all the former Objections,
which quite subverts their cause.

Thirdly, Kings and Kingdoms are not so Gods Ordinance, as that they should be
universal over all the world, and no other Government admitted; or so, as any
one Nation whatsoever should be eternally tied to a Monarchical Government,
without any power to alter it into an Aristocracy, or other form, upon any
occasion; or so a^ unalterably to continue the Sovereign power in one family
alone, as not to be able to transfer it to another, when the whole State shall
see just cause: Hereditary Kingdoms being but Offices of public trust for the
peoples good and safety, as well as elective; most of them were elective at
first, and F^xius de Rege, etc. p. 17. Grotius de iure Belli, l. 1. c. 3. n. 10.
made hereditary only either by violent usurpation, or the peoples voluntary
assents and insti^tution, and not by any immediate divine Authority, and so
alterable by their joint assents, as Explan. Artic. 42.
Zuinglius, Delure Reg. apud Scotos.
Buchanon, De Rege and Regis Instit. l 1. c. 4. to 8.
Mariana observe, and the Histories of most Kingdoms, the experience of all
ages evidence. Which truths being generally confess^d by all Arist. Polit. l.
3. and 5. Polyb. Hist. l. 6. Genesis Hist. of France, Spain, Hungary, Bohemia,
England. Grotius de iure Belli, l. 1. c. 4. n. 7. Covaru. Quaest. Illustr. T,
2. 396, n. ^. 4. Vasquries Contr. Illustr. 59. n. 8, 6^. n. 22 100. n. 29.
Hookers Eccles. Po^l. 1. sec. 10. p. 69. 70, 71.
Politicians, Historians, Statists; by many judicious Divines, contradicted by
no one text of Scripture that I have met with which our Opposites have objected
hitherto, they will find all Monarchies upon the matter, to be mere humane
Institutions, alterable still by that humane Power which did at first erect
them, and subordinate still thereto, as the Creature to its Creator; and to be
Gods Ordinance only in regard of special providence, and the like, a^ other
inferior Magistrates, Rulers are, who may be justly resisted, altered,
removed, censured, notwithstanding the objected Text. From which whiles some
men earnestly press, that every soul by Gods own Ordinance, ought to be
subject to some publik^ civil power, (which See Scripture and reason pleaded
for defensive Arms, p 30, 31, 32.
others saf^ly deny, since the Patria^ks, the first families of most Nations
and Countries were not so, and all Nations, all people before settled publi^e
governments, were erected, which in many places are not very ancient; since
those whose Parents are dead, and are not by them sub^ected to a Government,
are naturally free; and none bound to part with their freedom to any other,
unless they see a necessity, a great advantage, and that upon such terms and
conditions as they deem meet,) they involve even Kings and Emperors themselves
by Gods own Ordin^nce, in a subjection to a superior earthly c^vill power, to
wit, to their Laws, Parliaments, Kingdoms, (which I have proved Paramount them,
collectively considered) according to the common proverb Sen^ca Grotius de
Iure Belli, l. 1. c. 4. sect. 6. p. 84.
Omne sub Regno graviore Regnumest; and that of Eccles. 5. ^. Quest. 5.
Solomon (concerning oppressing Kings and Judge^) He that is higher then the
Highest considers, and there be higher then they: And so make kings ^ot only
resistble by their whole Kingdoms the supreme Sovereign power, but likewise
subject to their Realms superior commands, and incapable to resist their
lawful power and Forces even in point of Conscience, by virtue of this very
Text. And so much for the fourth Question.

For the fifth and last, See Paraeus, Willet, Tollet, Soto, Marlora^. and
others on this Text.
What kind of resistance of the Higher powers is here prohibited? I answer
briefly, That resistance is here forbidden, which is contrary to subjection or
obedience, as the words, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers,
coupled with the ensuing reason, Whosoever therefore resists (that is,
disobeyeth, or is not subject to) the Power, resists the Ordinance of God;
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. In the Greek there
are two distinct words used, (...), and (...), the Latin, English, French,
Dutch use them both as one, without distinction: The first word signifies
properly disordered, counter-ordered, on ordered against, (as Paraeus, Willet,
and others observe) and it is thus used by the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 7, 11;
or disobedient. 1 Timothy 1. 9. The later word signifies properly to resist,
withstand, or oppose; in which sense it is used, Matthew. 5. 39. Luk^ 21. 1, 5.
Act. 6. 10. Romans 9. 19. Gal. 2. 11. 2 Timothy 3. 1. Hebr. 12. 4. Iam. 4. 7. chap.
5. 6. 1. Pet. 5. 9. and applied indiffer^^tly both to a spiritual, corporal,
and verbal resistance of the Holy Ghost, the Devil, or men: Since* then the
Apostle in this Text uses the Hebrew phrase Soul, not Man, Let every Soul be
subject to the High^r Powers: because (as Haymo, Tollet, Willet, Soto, and most
other Interpreters observe) we Judge 5. 2. 9. 1 Cor. ^. 3. 12. 1 Cor. 9. 17. 1.
Pet. 5. 2. Philem 14. 1 Chronicles. 29. ^. 9 14. 1 Timothy ^. 18. Exodus 35. 21, 22. 29.
1 Chronicles. 28, 9. Psalm. 100. 3.
ought willingly and cheerfully to submit to the higher Powers, not only with
our bodies, but souls and spirits too: I may hence clearly infer, that the
resistance of the higher Power here prohibited as contrary to this subjection,
is not only that which is corporal and violent by force of arms, as the
Objectors gloss it; but that likewise which is verbal, mental, spiritual in
the soul it self without the body, and no more then a mere passive
resistance, or not obeying: For not to do what the higher Powers enjoin, is in
verity actually to resist, to withstand them; as not to do the will, not to
yield obedience to the motions, dictates of the Holy Ghost or devil is really
to resist them, even in Scripture phrase: Yea, corporal resistance or
opposition by way of force is only an higher degree of resistance, but not the
only or proper resistance here prohibited, which relates principally to the
Soul and Spirit. For as corporal forced obedience against a man's will which
still holds 2 Cor. 9. 7.
out, is no true obedience in the esteem of God or men: and as the very
essence, life of all outward obedience consists See (c) beso. 2 cor. 9. 13.
7. Romans 12. 8. 11.
principally in the cheerful submission or activity of the soul or will: So a
forced corporal resistance against the mind or conscience, is in a manner no
resistance; and the very malignity, quintessence of all inward or outward
resistance, disobedience, rests only in the mind, soul, will; and is here
principally forbidden, as is evident by the 5. verse; Wherefore ye must needs
be subject, not only for wrath (which relates only to the body, which men's
wrath can only harm in case of disobedience, Mat. 10. 28.) but also FOR
CONSCIENCE SAKE, which principally, if not wholly relates unto the soul, of
which the conscience is a chief-overruling part. This then being altogether
irrefragable, gives our Antagonists, with Dr. Fern, an etern all overthrow, and
unavoidably demonstrates the resistance of the Higher Powers here prescribed,
to be only of just lawful powers in their l^st commands or punishments* which
we must neither corporally, verbally, nor so much as mentally resist, but
readily submit too with our very souls, as well as bodies: not of Tyrants or
ungodly Rulers unjust oppressions, Forces, proceedings to subvert Religion,
Laws, Liberties, which all our Opposites, all Divines whatsoever grant, we are
bound in conscience passively to resist, and disobey; yea, with our Tongues to
Levit. 19. 17. Mat. 14. 4. Psalm. 139. 21. 22. P^^. 29. 27. Ps. 11. 5.
reprehend, and our Souls and spirits to oppose, detest, abhor, hate in the
very highest degree of opposition, notwithstanding this inhibition: And
therefore by like reason are no ways prohibited, but authorized by it, even
forcibly to resist to our utmost power, have we means and opportunity so to
do, as the Parliament now has: That power and proc^edings which Christians
may lawfully with good conscience, yea and are bound to resist with all their
souls, minds, tongues, they justly may and must likewise resist with all their
corporal might and strength; especially if they have good opportunity, public
encouragements, and means to do it, as Deuteronomy. 6. 12. 1 Pet. 5. 9. Jude 3. 4.
Phil. 1. 27, 28. 1 Cor. 16. 13. compared together, and with the premised
Scriptures, fully evidence. But Christians may lawfully with good conscience,
yea must resist with all their souls, minds, tongues, the forenamed violent
proceedings of kings, Oppressors, ill Counselors and Cavaleers, and no ways
submit unto them with their souls, minds, tongues, lest thereby they should
approve and be partakers, with promoters of their execrable de^ignes; therefore
they may and must with safe conscience resist them with all their corporal
might and strength, having now opportunity, a Parliamentary public command and
sufficient means to execute it. And thus have I now at last not only most
clearly wrested this sword out of the hands of our great opposite Goliahs, but
likewise cut off their heads, and so routed all their forces with it, as I
trust they shall never be able to make head again.

Yet before I wholly take my leave of this Text, to gratify our Prelaticall
Clergy, I shall for a parting blow add this one observation more, That all our
See Tostatus, Caietan, Cornelius a Lapide, Soto Estrus, with most Popish
Commentators, and Dr. Will^t on this Text, Bellarm. de Clericis, and the
Canonists, de exemption ibus, and Immunit. Clericorum.
Popish Clermen heretofore (and many of them till this day) notwithstanding the
universality of this Text, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers,
etc. not only Pretended themselves to be of right exempted from the
jurisdiction, censures, taxes of Emperors, Kings, and all Civil Magistrates,
(Which privileges some of our late Prelates began to revive, as the late cases
of Mr. Shervill, the Mayor of Arundel, and some others evidence, censured for
punishing drunken Priests:) but likewise held it lawful to censure,
excommunicate, depose even Emperors and Kings themselves, and interdict their
Kingdoms; witness not only the Bp. Bilsons true Difference etc. par. 3. p.
369. to 376. 10. VVhites Defense of the way* c. 6. p. 14. to 22.
Popes excommunications of many Emperors and Kings, by apparent usurpation and
injury; but of sundry Prelates excomunications of their own Sovereigns as of
right, and putting them to open penances; Page 62. G^. hist. of Spain.
as K. Suintilla, Sancho, Ramir in Spain, and others elsewhere, of which you may
read diverse presidents in my Appendix: The History of Theod. Eccles. hist l. 5.
c. 17, 18. Sozam. l. 7. c. c. 24.
St. Ambrose his excommunicating the Emperor Theodosius for the bloody murder
of those of Thessalonica, is so commonly known, that I need not spend time to
recite it, nor yet the Sea Math. Westminster. Math. Paris, Hov^d^n Polychron. Fa^.
Caxton, Polidor, Virgil, Holinsh. Stow, Grafton, Speed, Daniel in the Lives of
Hen ^. K. John and Hen. 3.
excommunications and censures of our King John, or Henry the 2. and 3. Suano
King of Denmark (as Saxo-Grammaticus records) was not only sharply
reprehended, but excommunicated in a most bold and solemn manner by one of his
Bishops for his uncleanness, and murdering some eminent persons, of whom he
was jealous, whiles they were at their devotions in the Church. Danicae hist.
l. 11. p. 189, 190. 19^.
This Bishop instead of meeting this King when he came to enter into the
Church, with accustomed veneration, clad in his Pontisicalibus, with his
Crosier Staff; kept him from entering so much as within the Court thereof;
calling him not by the name of a King, which he suppressed, but a shedder of
man's blood; and not content to chide him, he fixed the point of his Staff in
his breast, preferring the public scandal of Religion before private society,
not being ignorant, that the Offices of familiarity were one thing, the rights
of Priesthood another thing, that the wickednesses of Lords as well as servants
ought to be revenged, nor are Noble-mens crimes to be more partially censured,
then ignoble ones: And not content thus to repulse him, he added an execration
thereunto and denounced a sentence of damnation against him in his presence, so
as he left it doubtful, whether he repulsed him more valiantly with his hand,
or voice. Hereupon the King considering this Act to proceed from zeal and
public seve^ity against wickedness, and being confounded with the blush of
his guilty conscience, forbad any to resist his violence, and patiently
underwent, heard both his repulse and reprehention; After which, this King
laying aside his royal Robes, put on old course apparel, desiring rather to
testify his sorrow by the deformity of his habit, then his contempt by the
splendour of it. And struck with so sad a sentence of the Bishop, he would not
endure to carry about the ornaments of Royal Magnificence; but casting away
the ensigns of Regal Majesty, he put on sackcloth the badge of peni^ence;
putting off his power likewise together with his vestment, and of a
sacrilegious Tyrant, became a faithful reverencer of holy things. For
returning barefoot to the Church Porch, he cast himself prostrate in the
entrance thereof, and humbly kissed the ground, suppressing, the grief which
is wont most sharply to be inflicted from contempt, with shamefac'^nesse and
moderation, redeeming the fault of his bloody reign with shame and penitence:
After which confessing his fault, and craving pardon with tears of the Bishop,
he was absolved, and then putting on his Royal Robes, admitted into the
Church, and brought up to the Altar, to the exceeding joy of the people, who
applauding the kings humiliation and modesty; plus poenitentia pium, quam
imperio scelestum euasisse co^fessus: A memorable story of a zealous stout
Prelate, and of a penitent submissive wild Prince: I shall only add to this
some few domestic presidents of our Welsh Kings Spelm. Council. tom. 1. p. 381
382. Godwin. Catal. of Bish. Edit. 2. 2. p. 328.
Teudur king of Brecknock, for his perjury and murder of Elgistill, another
King of that Country, was solemnly excommunicated by Gurcan the 10. Bishop of
Landaffe and his Clergy, in a Synod assembled for this purpose, by uncovering
the Altars, casting the Crosses and Relics on the ground, and depriving him
of all Christian communion, Whereupon Teudur unable to undergo this
malediction and rigorous justice, with a contrite heart, and many tears powered
forth, craved pardon of his crimes, and submitted himself to the penance
imposed on him according to his quality and greatness. Spelm Council. p. 382,
383.
King Clotri slaying Iuguallaun treacherously, contrary to his League and Oath,
Berthgwin the 14. Bishop of Landaffe, hearing thereof, assembled a Synod of his
Clergy at Landaffe, and solemnly excommunicated the King with all his Progeny
and Kingdom, by uncovering the Altars, casting down the Crosses on the earth,
and depriving the Country both of Baptism and the Eucharist. Whereupon the
King unable to endure so great an excommunication, with great deiection
submitted himself to the Bishop, and leaving his Kingdom, went on pilgrimage
into foreign parts for a long space; after which returning, by the
intercession of king Morcant, he obtained ab^olution from the Bishop, to whose
enjoined penance he submitted himself, conferring diverse Lands upon the Church.
And in another Synod at Landaffe under this Bishop, King Gurcan, for living
incestuously with his Mother-in-law was solemnly excommunicated in form
aforesaid; whereupon he craved pardon, resolved to put away his Mother-in-law,
promised satisfaction by k. ^udhail his Intercessor; upon which he was
absolved, upon promise of amendment of life, with fasting, prayer and alms;
after which he bestowed diverse Lands on the Church. Spelm. Con. p. 383, 384.
Godw. Catal. of Bish. p. 523.
Houell king of Gleuissig, contrary to his Oath and League, trecherously
circumverring and slaying Gallun, hereupon Cerenhir the 18. Bishop of Landaffe,
calling a Synod, solemnly excommunicated him by laying all the crosses on the
ground, overturning the Bells, taking the Relics from the Altar and casting
them on the ground, depriving him of all Christian communion, under which
excommunication he remained almost a whole years space; After which, this king
came barefoot to the Bishop, imploring his absolution from this sentence with
many tears, which he obtained after publke penance enoyned. Not long after the
same Bishop and his Clergy in another Synod, for the like crime, in the
self-same form excommunicated Ili son of Conblus, till he came barefooted
with tears and prayed absolution; which upon performance of enjoined penance,
promise of future reformation, with prayers, fasting, alms, and the settling of
some Lands on the Church, was granted him by the Bishop. So Spelm. Council. p.
385, 386.
Loumarch son of Cargnocaun, was in a full Synod excommunicated by Gulfrid the
20. Bishop of this See, for violating the patrimony of the Church; and king
Brochuail, with his family convented before a Syno^e, threatened
Excommunication, enjoined Penance and satisfaction by the Synod, for some
injuries offered to to Ciueilliauc the two and twentieth Bishop of Landaffe.
Goduin. Catalog. of bis^. p 527.
Mauric King of of Glamorgan was excommunicated by Joseph the eigth and
twentieth Bishop of Landaffe, for treach^rously putting out the eyes of Etguin
during the truce between them; After which he was again publicly
exc^mmunicated in a Synod, for violating the Sanctuary of the Church of
Landaffe, and hurting some of this Bishops servants; and not absolved till he
made his submission, and did his Penance, and gave some lands to the Church for
satisfaction of these offense. Thus Speknanim. Council Tau. 1. p. 626, 627.
Goduin. Edit. 2. p. 528.
Calgucam King of Morganauc, and his whole family were solemnly excommunicated
by Her^wald the nine and twentieth Bishop of Landaffe in a Synod of all his
Clergy, only because one of the Kings followers being drunk, laid violent
hands upon Bathutis the Bishops Physician and Kinsman on Christmas day, Anno
1056. Whereupon all the Crosses and Relics were cast to the ground, the Bells
overturned, the Church doors stopped up with thorns, so as they continued
without a Pastor and Divine Service day and night for a long season, till the
King (though innocent) submitted himself to the Bishop; and to obtain his
absolution, gave Hen^inguinna to him and his Successors for ever, free from all
secular and royal services, in the presence of all the Clergy and people. So
Mat. Paris, H^st. p. 551. 715 Goduin. catalo. p. 537. 547.
Richard the tenth Bishop of Bangor, excommunicated David ap Lhewelin, Prince
of Wales, for detaining his brother Griffith prisoner, contrary to his Oath,
repairing to him upon the Bishops word for his safe return, who never left
vexing him, till he had delivered him up to to the King of Englands hands. Many
such presidents of Prelates censuring and excommunicating their Kings occur in
Story, which for brevity I pretermit; only I shall inform you, that Antiqu.
Eccles. Bull. p. 245. See Walsingh. Hist. Angl p. 138. to 144.
John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury, in the 14. year of K. Edw. 3,
contesting with this King, and excommunicating diverse of his followers, and all
the infringers of the Churches Liberties, presumed to write thus unto his
Sovereign; There are two things by which the world is principally governed, The
sacred Pontifical authority, and the royal power, of which the Priesthood is
by so much the more weighty, ponderous, and sublima, by how much they are to
give an account of kings themselves at the Divine audit: And therefore the
kings Majesty ought to know, that you ought to depend on their judgment, not
they to be regulated according to your will. For who doubts that the priests
of Christ are accounted the FATHERS AND MASTERS of Kings, Princes, and all
faithful Christians? Is it not known to be a part of miserable madness, if
the son should endeavor to subjugate the Father, the servant the master to
himself? The Canonical authority of Scriptures testifies, that diverse
Pontiffs have excommunicated, some of them Kings, others Emperors: And if you
require somewhat in special of the persons of Princes; Saint Innocent smote
the Emperor Archadius with the sword of excommunication, because he consented
that Saint John Chrysostom should be violently expelled from his See. Likewise
Saint Ambrose Archbishop of Millain, for a fault which seemednot so heinous to
other priests, excommunicated the Emperor Theodosius the great: From which
sentence, having first given condign satisfation, he afterward deserved to be
absolved; and many such like examples may be alleged, both more certain for
time, and nearer for place. Therefore no Bishops whatsoever neither may nor
ought to be punished by the secular Power, if they chance to offend through
humane frailty: For it is the duty of a good and religious Prince to honor
the Priests of God, and defend them with greatest reverence, inimitation of the
Pious Prince of most happy memory, Constantine, saying, when the cause of
Priests was brought before him, You cannot be judged by any, to wit, of the
secular judges, who are reserved to the judgment of God alone; according to
the assertion of the Apostle (very ill applied) saying, The spiritual man is
judged of no man, 1 Corinthians. 2. 15. (Not mean of Bishops or Clergymen, but
Saints alone, endued with Gods Spirit, not of judging in courts of justice, but
of discerning spiritual things, and their own spiritual Estates, as the
Context resolves.) Thus and much more this Prelate, who notwithstanding this
text of the Romans, pleads an exemption of all Bishops and Priests from the
kings secular power, by Divine Authority, and arrogates to Priest and Prelates,
a judiciary lawful power over Kings themselves, to excommunicate and censure
them for their offenses. And to descend to later times, even since the the
Reformation of Religion here, John Bridges Dean of Sarum, and Bishop of Oxfort,
even in his Book entitled, The supremacy of Christian Princes over all persons
thorowout their Dominions, in all causes so well Ecclesiastical as spiritual,
printed at London, 1573. p. 1095. writes thus; But who denies this (M.
Saunders) that a godly Bishop may upon great and urgent occasion, if it shall
be necessary to edify Gods Church, and there be no other remedy, flee to this
last censure of Excommunication AGAINST A WICKED KING? Making it a thing not
questionable by our Prelates and Clergy, that they may in such a case lawfully
excommunicate the King himself: And Doctor Bilson Bishop of Winchester, in his
True difference between Christian subjection and unchristian Rebellion,
dedicated to Queen Elizabeth her self, printed at Oxford, 1595. Part. 3. Page
369. to 378. grants, That Emperors, Kings and Princes, may in some cases be
Excommunicated and kept from the Lords Table by their Bishops; and grants, That
with Heretics and Apostates, be THEY PRINCES or private men, no Christian
Pastor nor people may Communicate: Neither find I any Bishop o^ Court Doctor
of the contrary opinion, but all of them readily subscribe hereto. If then not
only the ill Counselors and Instruments of Kings, but Kings and Emperors
themselves, may thus not only be lawfully, justly resisted, but actually
smitten and excommunicated by their Bishops and Clergy, with the spiritual
sword, for their notorious crimes and wickednesses, notwithstanding this
inhibition; (which Theod. Eccles. Hist. 1. 4. c. 5, 6.
Valentinian the Emperor confessed; and therefore desired, that such a Bishop
should be chosen and elected in Millain after Auxentius, as he himself might
really and cordially submit to him and his reprehensions, since he must
sometimes needserre as a man, as to the medicine of souls; as he did to
Ambrose, when he was elected Bishop there;) why they may not likewise be
resisted by their Laity in the precedent cases with the temporal sword, and
subjected unto the censures of the whole Kingdoms and Parliaments, transce^ds
my shallow apprehension to conceive, there being as great, if not greater, or
the very self-same reason for the lawfulness of the one, as of the other. And
till our Opposites shall produce a substantial difference between these cases,
or disclaim this their practice and doctrine of the lawfulness of
excommunicating Kings and Emperors, they must give me and others liberty to
conceiye, they have quite lost and yielded up the cause they now contend for,
notwithstanding this chief Text of Roma^es 13. the ground of all their strength
at first, but now of their ruin. Object. 10.


The tenth (...) Fern Sect. 2. Ap^eal to thy Conscience.
Objection is this, that of 1 Pet. 2, 13, 14, 15, 16. Submit your selves to
every ORDINANCE OF MAN for the Lords sake, whether it be to The King AS
SVPREAME, or unto Governors, as unto them that are scut by him (to wit, by
God, not the King, as the distribution manifests, and Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4.) For
the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, etc.
Fear God, Honor the King; we must submit to Kings and honor Kings, who are
the supreme Governors; therefore we may in no case forcibly resist them or
their Officers, though they degenerate into Tyrants.

To which I answer; Answ.
that this is a mere inconsequent; since the submission here enjoined is but to
such Kings, who are punishers of evil doers, and praisers of those that do
well; which the Apostle makes the Ground and motive to submission; therefore
this text extends not to Tyrants and oppressors, who do quite contrary. We
must submit to Kings when they rule well and justly, is all the Apostle here
affirms; Ergo we must submit to, and not resist them in any their violent
courses to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties; is mere nonsense both in Law,
Divinity, and common Reason.

If any reply, Reply.
as they do, that the Apostle, verse. 18, 19, 20. Bids servants be subject to
their Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward: For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure
grief suffering wrongfully, etc. Ergo this is meant of evil Magistrates and
Kings, as well as good. I answer 1. Answ.
That the Apostles speaks it only of evil ^asters not Kings; of servants, not
subjects; there being a great difference between servants, Apprentices,
Villains, and freeborn subjects, as all men know, the one being under the
arbitrary rule and government of their Masters; the other only under the just,
settled, legal Government of their Princes, according to the Laws of the
Realm: S^condly, this is meant only of private personal injuries, and undue
corrections of Masters given to servants without just cause, as verse. 20. For
what glory is it, if when ye be BVFFETED FOR your faults, etc. intimates: not
of public injuries and oppressions of Magistrates, which endanger the whole
Church and State. A Christian servant or subject must patiently endure private
See Heb. 12. 10. M^tth. 5. 39, 40.
undue corrections of a froward Master or King: Ergo whole Kingdoms and
Parliaments, must patiently without resistance suffer their kings and evil
Instruments to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties, Realms, (the proper
deduction ^een) is but a ridiculous conclusion.

Secondly, This Text enjoynes no more subjection to kings, then to any other
Magistrates; as the words: Submit your selves TO EVERY ORDINANCE of Man; Or
unto Governors, etc. prove past all contradiction; And verse 6 which bids us,
Honor the King; bids (...) first in direct terms, HONOR ALL MEN; to wit,
All Magistrates at least, if not all men in general, as such: There is then no
special Prerogative of irresistability given to kings by this Text in
injurious violent courses, more then there is to any other Magistrate or person
whatsoever; God giving no man any Authority to injure others without
resistance, especially if they assault their persons or ^nvade their Estates to
ruin them: Since then inferior Officers, and other men may be forc^bly
resisted when they actually attempt by force to ruin Religion, Laws,
Liberties, the republike, a^ I have proved, and our Antagonists must grant; by
the self-same reason kings may be resisted too, notwithstanding any thing in
this Text, which attributes no more irresistability or authority to Kings, then
unto other Magistrates.

Thirdly, Kings are here expressly called; AN ORDINANCE OF MAN, not God; as I
have formerly proved them to be. If so; I then appeal to the consciences of our
fiercest Antagonists, whether they do believe in their consciences, or dare
take their Oaths upon it; That ever any people or Nation in the world, or our
Ancestors at first, did appoint any Kings or Governors over them, to subvert
Religion, Laws, Liberties; or intend to give them such an unlimited
uncontrollable Sovereignty over them, as not to provide for their own safety,
or not to take up Arms against them, for the necessary defense of their Laws,
Liberties, Religion, Persons, States, under pain of high Treason, or eternal
damnation, in case they should degenerate into Tyrants, and undertake any such
wicked destructive design. If not (as none can without madness and impudence
aver the contrary, it being against all common sense and reason, that any man
or Nation should so absolutely, irresistably inslave themselves and their
Posterities to the very lusts and exorbitancies of Tyrants, and such a thing as
no man, no Nation in their right senses, were they at this day to erect a most
absolute Monarchy, would condescend to;) then clearly the Apostle here
confirming only the Ordinances of men, and giving no Kings nor Rulers any
other or greater power then men had formerly granted them (for that h^d been to
alter, not approve their humane Ordinances) I shall infallibly thence infer;
That whole States, and Subjects, may with safe conscience resist the unjust
violence of their Kings in the foresaid cases, because they never gave them any
authority irresistably to act them, nor yet divested themselves (much less
their posterity whom they could not eternally inslave) of the right, the power
of resisting them in such cases; whom they might justly resist before, whiles
they were private men, and as to which illegal proceedings they continue
private persons still, since they have no legal power given them by the people
to authorize any such exorbitances.

Fourthly, The subjection here enjoined, is not passive, but active, witness
ver. 15. For so is the will of God, that by WELL DOING (to wit, by your actual
cheerful submission to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, etc.) you
put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: as free, and not using your
liberty, etc. If then this Text be meant of active, not passive obedience; then
it can be intended only of lawful Kings, of Magistrates in their just
commands, whom we must actually obey; not of Tyrants and Oppressors in their
unjust wicked proceedings, whom we are bound in such cases actually to disobey,
as our Antagonists grant, and I have largely evidenced elsewhere: Wherefore, it
directly commands resistance, not subjection in such cases; since actual
disobedience to unjust commands, is actual resisting of them. And that these
Texts prescribing resistance tacitly, should apparently prohibit it under pain
of Treason, Rebellion, Damnation, is a Paradox to me.

Fifthly, This Text does no way prove that false conceit of most, who hence
conclude: That all Kings are the Supreme Powers, and above their Parliaments,
and whole Kingdoms, even by Divine institution: There is no such thing, nor
shadow of it in the Text.

For first, This Text calls Kings, not a Divine, but Humane Ordinance; If
Humane Ordination only, as the Text resolves.

Secondly, This Text prescribes not any Divine Law to all or any particular
States; nor gives any other Divine or Civil Authority to Kings and Magistrates
in any State then what they had before; for if it should give Kings greater
Authority and Prerogatives then their people at first allotted them, it should
alter and invade the settled Government of all States, contrary to the Apostles
scope, which was to leave them as they were, or should be settled by the
peoples joint consent: It does not say, That all Kings in all Kingdoms are, or
ought to be Supreme; or let them be so henceforth: no such inference appears
therein. It speaks not what Kings ought to be in point of Power; but only
takes them as they are, (according to that of Romans 13. 2. The Powers that ARE,
etc. to wit, that are, even now every where in being, not which ought to be, or
shall be) whence he says; Submit to the King as supreme: that is; where by
the Ordinance of man the King is made supreme; not, where Kings are not the
supreamest Power; as they were not among the Sea Bodin Commonweal l. 1. c. 10.
l. 2. c. 5. Hugo Grotius de jure Belli. l. 1. c. 3. sect. 8 to. 13. and
Annotata.
ancient Lacedaemonians, Indians, Carthaginians, Goths, Aragonians, and in most
other Kingdoms, as I have Part. 1. and in the Appendix.
elsewhere proved: To argue therefore, We must submit to Kings where the people
have made them supreme; Ergo, All Kings every where are and ought to be
supreme Iure divino; (as our Antagonists hence infer) is a gross absurdity.

supreme Governor, as the next words; or Governors, etc. expound it; and the
very Oath of Supremacy, 1. Eliz. Cap. 1. which gives our Kings this Title,
Supreme Governor within these his Realms. Now Kings may be properly called
Supreme Magistrates or Governors in their Realms, in respect of the actual
administration of government and justice, (all Magistrates deriving their
Commissions immediately from them, and doing justice, for, and under them:) and
yet not be the Sovereign Power, as the Roman Emperors, Bodin. Commonweal l.
2. c. 5 l. 1. c. 10.
the Kings of Sparta, Arragon, and others; the German Emperors, the Dukes of
Venice in that State, and the Prince of Orange in the Nether-lands, were and
are the Supreme Magistrates, Governors; but not the Supreme Sovereign
Powers; their whole States, Senates, Parliaments, being the Supreamest Powers,
and above them; which being Courts of State, of Justice, and a compound body of
many members, not always constantly sitting, may properly be styled, The
Supreme Courts and Powers; but not the Supreme Magistrate or Governor: As
the Pope holds himself, the Supreme Head and Governor of the Militant Church;
and the Archbishop of Canterbury styles himself, the Primate and Metropolitan
of all England; and so other Prelates in their Provinces; yet they are not the
Sovereign Ecclesiastical Power, for the King, at least General Counsels or
National Synods (which are not properly termed Governors, but Powers) are
Paramount them, and may lawfully censure or depose them, as I have Part. 1. p.
88.
elsewhere) manifested. To argue therefore, that Kings are the highest
Sovereign Power, because they are the highest particular Governors and
Magistrates in their Realms, as our Antagonists do; is a mere Fallacy, and
Inconsequent, since I have proved Par. 1. and the Appendix.
our own, and most other Kings, not to be the highest Powers, though they be
the Supreamest Governors.

Fern, with others mistake; who is never in Scripture styled a King, being a
Title extremely odious to the Romans, and for ever banished their State with
an Livy Hist. l. 1. See the Appendix. p 3. 4.
Oath of execration, by an ancient Law, in memory whereof they instituted a
special annual Feast on the 23. of February, called, Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1
c. 13. Seldens Titles of honor part. 1. c. 2. sect. 2. p. 13.
Regifugium; the hatred of which Title continued such, that Tully Aug. de Civ.
D^^. l 2.
and Augustine write; Regem Romae posthac, nec Dii nec Homines esse patiantur:
And Seldom. ibid. Plutarchi, Julius Caesar, Eutropius. Grimston in his life.
Caesar himself being saluted King by the multitude, perceiving it was very
distasteful to the States, answered, CAESAREM SE, NON REGEM ESSE: which Title
of Caesar, (not King) the Scripture ever uses to express the Emperor by:
witness Matthew. 22. 17, 21. Mark 12. 14, 16, 17. Luke 2. 1. chap. 20. 22, 24,
25. chap. 23. 2. John 19. 12, 15. Acts 11. 28. chap 17. 7. chap. 25. 8, 10, 11,
12, 21. chap. 26. 32. chap. 27. 24. chap. 28. 19. Phil. 4. 22. Which Texts do
clearly manifest, that no Title was ever used by the Apostles, Evangelists,
Jews, to express the Emperor by, but that of Caesar, not this of King.
Therefore Peter's Text, speaking only of the King, not Caesar, cannot be
intended of the Roman Emperor, as ignorant Doctors blindly fancy.

Fifthly, This Epistle of Peter (the Gal. 2. 7. 8.
Apostle of the Jews) was written only to the 1 Pet. 1. 1. over whom Herod at
that time reigned as King, by the Roman Senates and Emperors appointment, who
had then conquered the Jews, and made them a tributarie Province, as is evident
by Matthew. 27. 17, 21. Mark 12. 14, 16, 17. Luke 20. 22, 24, 25. chap. 23. 2.
Acts 17. 7. chap. 25. 8, 10, 11, 12, 21. chap. 27. 24. chap. 12. 1. to 24.
compared together; and by Ant. Iud. l. 17. c. 12. l. 18 c. 1. l 20 c. 9. and De
Bell. Iud. l. 1.
Iosep^us, the Century writers, Baronius, Sigonius, and others. The King then
here mentioned to be supreme, was Herod, or King Agrippa, or some other
immediate Mat. 3 1. c. 27. 11. Act 25. 13. 24. 26 c. 26. 2. c. 12. 1.
King of the Jews, who was their supreme Governor, not absolutely, but Ant.
Iud. l. 13. to 20. John 19. 12.
under the Roman Senate and Emperors, and made so by their appointment,
whence called in the Text; an Ordinance of man, not God: Now this King of the
Jews (as is evident by Paul's Appeal to Caesar from Festus and King Agrippa, as
to the Sovereign Tribunal; Acts 25. and 26. by Josephus, P^ilo Iud^us de
legatione ad Caium, and the consent of all Historians) was not the absolute
Sovereign Power, but subordinate to the Roman Emperor and Senate, Ios. de
Bell. Iud l. 1 c. 10. 11. 12. 15.
who both created, and bad power to control, remove, and censure him for his
misdemeanors; yet Peter calls him here Supreme, because the Highest Governor
under them, as we style our Kings See the Appendix.
Supreme Governors under Christ. Therefore having a Superior Governor and
Power over him, to which he was accountable and subordinate; Supreme in the
Text, cannot be meant, of a King absolutely Supreme, having no Power Superior
to him, but God; but only relatively Supreme, in respect of under.
Governors, there actually residing: whose Supremacy being forcibly gained
only by conquest, not free consent; (and the ancient native Schickardus jus
Regtum. H^b. p. 7. Cunaeus de Rep. Haeb. p. 101 166.
Kings of the Jews, being inferior to their whole Senates and Congregations,
and to do all by their advice, as Josephus Antiq. Iud. lib. 4. cap. 8. 2. Sam.
18. 3, 4. Jer. 38. 45. 1. Chron. 13. 1. to 6. attest) will no way advantage our
Opposites, nor advance the Prerogative of Kings; since it extends only to the
King of the Jews that then was, who was not simply Supreme, but a Subject
Prince subordinate to the Roman State and Empire, and one appointed by a
Conqueror, not freely chosen and assented to by the people. So as all the
Argument which can hence be extracted for the absolute Soveraigntie and
irresistibility of Kings over their whole Kingdoms and Parliaments, is but
this. The King of the Jews was in Peter's time the Supreme Magistrate over that
Nation, by the Roman Senates and Emperors appointment, to whom yet he was
subordinate and accountable; the Romans having conquered the Jews by force,
and imposing this government upon them, without their consents. Therefore the
Kings of England, and all other Kings are absolute Sovereign Monarchs,
Superior to their whole Parliaments and Kingdoms, collectively considered;
and may not in point of conscience be forcibly resisted by them, though they
endeavor to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties: How little coherence there is
in this Argument, the silliest child may at first discern.

From these Scriptures, Objection 11.
I descend to Reasons deduced from them, against resistance, which I shall
contract into three ArgumentS: The first is this; Bodin. l. 2. c. 5 Bilson.
part. 3. ^
Kings are the Fathers, An appeal to thy conscience, and many others.
Heads, Lords, Shepherds of the Commonwealth; Ergo, They ought not to be
resisted in any their exorbitant proceedings; it being unlawful, unseemly, ^or
a Son to resist his Father; the Members the Head; the Vassals their Lord; the
Flock their Shepherd.

To this I answer1.: Answer
First, They are Fathers, Shepherds, Lords, Heads, only in an improper,
allegorical, not genuine sense; therefore nothing can thence be properly
inferred: They are and ought to be such in respect of their 2 Samuel 24. 17. Isa
49. 23. 40. 11. c. 32. 2. Ezekiel. 34 2. to 18.
loving and careful affection toward their Subjects; not in regard of their
Sovereign Power over them: Therefore when their Tyranny makes them not such,
Ps 78 72 73. 74. Isa.
in regard of care and affection to their people; their people cease to be
such, in regard of filial, natural, and sheep-like submission: When these
Shepherds turn Ezekiel. 22. 27 Zep 3 3* Mat. 7. 15. Act. 20 29.
Wolves; these Joh. 10. 9. to 19.
Fathers, Step-fathers; the Subjects, as to this, cease to be their Sheep,
their Children, in point of Obedience and Submission.

Kingdoms children then Parents, because 1 Pet. 2. 13.
created by them, their public servants, ministers, for whose benefit they are
employed, and receive Romans 13. 6.
wages; not their Sovereign Lords; their subordinate Heads, to be directed and
advised by them, not Tyrannically to overruled them at their pleasure:
Therefore Paramount, and able in such cases to resist them.

2 John 10. 11.
false Doctrin^s and open ass^ults of their Ministers, though they be their
Spiritual Shepherds: Citizens the violent oppressions of their Majors, though
they be their Politic Heads: Servants the unjust ass^ults of their Masters,
though their lawful Lords; ( who may Litt^^ton. sect. 29 4. and Coke Ib. p.
126.
not misuse their very Villains, by Law:) And if Parents will violently
assault their natural children, Husbands their Wives, Masters their Servants,
to murder them without cause, they may See Al^ Genesis de Iur. Bell. l 1. c. 15.
16.
by Law resist, repulse them with open force.



Fifthly, This is but the common exploded Argument of the Popish Clergy, To
prove themselves superior to Kings, and exempt from all secular Jurisdiction,
because they are spiritual Fathers, P^^stors, Heads to Kings; who ought to
obey, not judge, and censure them, as Antiq Eccles. Brit. p 245.
Archbish. Stratford, and others argue. But this plea is no ways available to
exempt Clergy men from secular Jurisdiction; from actual resistance of parties
assaulted, nor yet from imprisonment, censures, and capital executions by
Kings and Civil Magistrates, in case of capital Crimes; Therefore by like
reason it can not exempt Kings from the resistance, censures of their
Parliaments, Kingdoms, in case of tyrannical invasions. We deride this
Argument in Papists as absurd, as in sufficient to prove the exemption of
Clergy men: I wonder therefore why it is now urged to as little purpose,
against resistance of Tyrants, and oppressing Kings and Magistrates.

The second reason is this, Appeal to thy conscience, and others.
The Invasions and oppressions of evil Kings and Tyrants, Object. 12.
are afflictions and punishments inflicted on us by God: Therefore we ought
patiently to submit unto them, and not forcibly to resist them.

I answer; Answ.
First, The invasions of Foreign Enemies are See 1 Kin. 11. 14. to 41. Isai.
10. 6.
just Judgments, and punishments sent upon men by God; as were the invasions
of the Sea Gildas de Excidio. Brit. Matthew West. Malmsbury, Huntingdon, and
all our Chroniclers.
Danes, Saxons and Normans in England, heretofore; of the Spaniards since.
Ergo, we ought not to resist or fight against them. The present rebellion of
the Papists in Ireland is a just punishment of God upon this Kingdom and the
Protestant party there; 2 Chro. 33. 11. ca. 35. 1. to 21.
Ergo, Neither we, nor they ought in conscience to resist or take Arms against
them. Every sickness that threatens or invades our bodies, is commonly an
affliction and punishment sent by God: Ergo, We must not endeavor to prevent
or remove it by Physic, but patiently lie under it without seeking remedy.
Injuries done us in our persons, estates, names, by wicked men, who assault,
wound, rob, defame us, are from 2 Samuel 16. 10, 11, 12.
God, and punishments for our sins: Ergo, We may not resist them: Yea, Subjects
Rebellions, Treasons, and Insurrections, against their Princes many times, are
punishments inflicted on them by God, displeased with them, as the Statute of 1
Ed. 6. c. 12. resolves, and the 1 King cap. 11. and 12.
Scripture too: Ergo, Kings ought not to resist or suppress them by force of
Arms; If all these Consequences be absurd, and idle, as every man will grant,
the objection must be so likewise.

I read, That in the Joan. Ca^^ot, lib. 4. Polycrat. c. 1. and Boc^^llus
D^creta, Eccles. Gal. l. 5. Tit 1. cap 6. p. 697.
persecution of the Hunnes, their King Attila being demanded of by a religious
Bishop, of a certain City? who he was? when he had answered; I am Attila, the
scourge of God: The Bishop reverencing the divine Majesty in him; answered,
Thou art welcome o Minister of God; and ing^minating this saying, Blessed be he
that comes in the Name of the Lord, Opene^ the Church door, and let in the
persecutor, by whom he obtained the Crown of Martyrdom, not daring to exclude
the scourge of the Lord; knowing, that the beloved son is scourged, and that
the power of the scourge it self is not from any, but God. Will it hence
follow? That all Christians are bound in conscience to do the like, and not to
resist the barbarous Turks, if they should invade them* no more then this
Bishop did the bloody Pagan Hunnes, because they are Gods wrath? I trow not.
One Swallow makes no Summer; nor this example, a general president to ^inde
all men.

The third reason is thi^, Saints forci^le resistance of Tyrants, begets civil
wars, Object 13.
great disorders, and Dr. Fern, Sect. 3, 4. and others.
many mischiefs in the State: Ergo, It is unlawful, and inconvenient.

I answer, Answ.
First, That this doctrine of not resisting Tyrants in any case, is far more
pernicious, destructive to the Realm then the contrary; because it deprives
them of all humane means, and possibilities of preservation; and denies them
that special remedy which God and nature has left them for their
preservation: Laws, denial of Subsidies, and such like remedies prescribed by
Doctor Fern, being no remoraes or restraints at all to armed Tyrants;
Wherefore I must tell thee Doctor, Theologorum utcunque dissertissimorum
sententiae, in h^^c controversia non sunt multo faciendae, quia quid sit Lex
humana ipsi ignorant, as Vasquius controvers. Illustr. 81. 11. determines.

Secondly, The knowledge of a lawful power in Subjects to resist Tyrants, will
be a good means to keep Princes from Tyrannical courses, for fear of strenuous
resistance; which if once taken away, there is no humane bridle left to stay
the Inundation of Tyranny in Princes or great Officers; and all Weapons,
Bulwarks, Walls, Laws, Arms will be merely useless to the Subjects, if
resistance be denied them, when there is such cause.

Thirdly, Resistance only in cases of public necessity, though accompanied
with civil war; serves always to prevent far greater mischiefs then war
it self can produce, it being the only Antidote to prevent public ruin, the
readiest means to preserve endangered, to regaine, or settle lost Liberties,
Laws, Religion, as all ages witness; and to Seditiones nonfacit, sed tollit
quiever ^orem Patriae, publicaeque disciplinae co^rcerit, Vindiciae. contr.
Ty^^n. p 145.
prevent all future Seditions and Oppressions.

Fourthly, Desperate diseases, have always desperate remedies, Malo nod^,
malus cuneus: When nothing but a defensive war will preserve us from ruin
and vassalage; it is better to embrace it, then hazard the loss of all,
without redemption. Ex duobus malis minimum. All Kingdoms, States in cases of
necessity, have ever had recourse to this as the lesser evil; and why not ours
as well as others.

The last (and strongest Objection as some deem it) is the sayings if some
Fathers backed with the examples of the primitive Christians, to which no such
satisfactory answer has hitherto been given, as might be. Object.


The first and grandest Objection against Subjects forcible resistance,
Authority 1.
and defensive war, is that speech of Saint Ambrose, Lib. 5. Orat. in
Auxentium. Coactus repugnare non audeo: dolere potero, potero fler^, potero
gemere: adversus arma, milites, Gothos, Lachrymae meae arma sunt: talia enim
sunt munimenta sacerdotum: ALITER NEC DEBEO, NEC POSSVM RESISTERE.

This chief Authority, Answ.
though it makes a great noise in the world, if ^olidly scanned, will prove but
Brutum fulmen; a mere scar-crow and no more.

For first, Ambrose in this place speaks not at all of Subjects resisting their
Princes, or Christians forcible resisting of the persecuting Roman Emperors;
but of resisting Valentin^, and the Arms and Soldiers of the Goths, who at
that time See Orosi^^, Eutropius, Paulu^ Diaco^us, Grimston, and others.
over ran Italy, and sacked Rome, being mortal Enemies to the Romans, the
Roman Emperour^, Saint Ambrose, and Millain where he was Bishop.

This is evident by the express objected words: I can griev^, I can weep, I
can mourn, (to wit for the wasting of my native Country Italy, by the Invading
Enemies the Goths:) against Arms, Soldiers, GOTHS (mark it) my tears are
Weapons, etc. If any sequel can be hence properly deduced, it must be that for
which the Sea Lucas Osiander E^chir Contr. cap. 9. de Magistratu. polit.
Anabaptists use it (from whence our Opposites, who tax the Parliaments Forces
for Anabaptists, when themselves are here more truly such, and fight with this
their weapon.) That it is unlawful for Christians to fight, or make so much as
a defensive war against invading Foreign barbarous Enemies, of whom this
Father speaks: And then if the Irish Rebels, Danes, Spaniards, French, should
now invade England, both against the Kings and Kingdoms Wills, we must make no
forcible resistance at all against them with Arms in point of conscience, but
only use prayers and tears.

This is the uttermost conclusion which can properly be hence deduced; which
our Antagonists will confess to be at least erroneous, Anabaptisticall, if not
Heretical.

Secondly, You must consider who it was that used this speech; Ambrose, a
Minister, then Bishop of Millain; who by reason of this his function being an
Ambassador of Peace; had his hands bound from fighting with any other weapons,
even against invading foreign Enemies, but only with the sword of the spirit,
prayers and tears: and that his calling only, was the ground of this his
speech; is infallible by the latter clause thereof, which our Opposites
cunningly conceal. Prayers are my Arms: For such are the Defensive Armor OF
PRIESTS; Otherwise I NEITHER OUGHT NOR CAN RESIST: Why so? Because he was a
Minister, a Bishop; and Paul prohibites such to be STRIKERS, Tit. 1. 7. 1 Timothy
3. 3. and because Priests under the Law did but blow the Trumpets, and never
went out armed to the wars, Josh. 6. Upon which ground Gratian Distinct 5.
and Causa. 23. qu 8. Aquinas. 2. 2. qu. 40. Artic. 2. Silu. de Bello, p 3.
Grotius de Iur. Belli. l. 1. c 5. sent. 4. p. 98. Nicetas Chro. l. 6.
Diverse Counsels, Decretalls, Canonists, expressly prohibit, and exempt Priests
and Bishops, from bearing Arms, or going to War, though many of them have
turned See W^ls^ngham. hist. Angliae p. 312. to 330.
great Soldiers, and been slain in wars.

Hence Anno 1267, in a Parliament held at Bury, K. H. 3d. and Ottobon the Popes
Legate, demanded of all the Bishops and Clergy men, holding Barronies or
Lay-fees, that they should go personally armed against the Kings enemies, or
find so great service in the Kings expedition, as appertained to so much Lands
and Tenants. To which they answered, That THEY OUGHT NOT TO FIGHT WITH THE
MATERIAL SWORD; (no not against the Kings Enemies) But with the spiritual; to
wit, with humble and devoute tears and prayers, (using these words of Ambrose:)
And that for their benefices they were bound to maintain Peace, NOT WAR.
Contin Mat. P^is, p. 971.


Hence our King R^ger de Hoved. Annal. pars post. p. 768. to 778. Neubrigensis,
hist. l. ^5. c 21.
Richard the first, taking the Bishop of Beauvoyes in France, his great Enemy,
armed from top to toe, prisoner in the field; commanded him to be strictly kept
in prison in his arms, and would by no means suffer him to put them off: for
which hard usuage he complained to the Pope, and procured his letter to King
Richard to free him from his arms and restraint; in which Letter, the Pope
sharply reproves the Bishop for preferring the secular warfare before the
spiritual, in that he had taken a Spear instead of a Crosier; an Helmst in
liew of a Miter; an Habergion instead of a white Rochet; a Target in place of a
Stole; an Iron-sword, instead of a spiritual sword. After which, the King sent
his Arms with this Message to the Pope: See whether this be thy sons Coat or
not? Which the Pope beholding, answered: No by Saint Peter, It is neither the
apparel of my sons, nor yet of my Brethren, but rather the vesture of the
sons of Mars. And upon this ground Antiqu: Eccles. Brit. p. 299. 300. 10. E
4. 6. Stamford, f. 153
Our Bishops anciently, when Members of Parliament, departed the house when
Cases of Treason or Felony came in question, because they might not by the
Canons, have their hands in blood.

This then being Ambrose his direct words and meaning, That he neither ought,
nor could use any other Weapons against the invading Goths, and their forces,
but prayers and tears; See Io: Maio^ in 4. Scot. Disc. 15.
because he was a Minister, not a Bishop, a Layman; The genvine Argument that
our opposites can thence extract, is but this. Priests must use no other
Defensive Arms, but prayers and tears, against invading foreign Enemies. Ergo,
The Priests and Ministers in his Majesty's Armies, who bear Offensive Arms,
must now in conscience lay them down, and use no other resistance, but prayers
and tears against the Parliaments forces: where as their former inference
against resistance: Ergo, It is altogether unlawful for the Parliament, or any
Lay-Subjects by their command, to defend Religion, Laws, Liberties, against his
Majesty's invading forces, who intend by force to subvert them; is but
ridiculous nonsense, which never once entered into this Fathers thoughts, and
can never be extorted from his words.

Ministers of the Gospel must not use any Arms, but prayers and tears to resist
a foreign Enemy: Ergo, None else may lawfully use them to withstand an
invading adversary; is a conclusion fitter for Anabaptists then Royallists, who
may now with shame enough, for ever bid this authority adieu; with which they
have hitherto gulled the ignorant World: And henceforth turn it against the
Commission of Array, enjoining Bishops, and Clergy men, to array and arm
themselves as well as other men, as the Presidents cited in Judge Cook his
Argument against Ship Money; in the Parliaments two Declarations against the
Commission of Array; and in the Answer published in the Kings name, to the
first of them, plentifully evidence.

Ergo, Laymen may, and must resist, and fight against them with corporal
Arms, since they are as proper for them in cases of needful defense, as these
spiritual Arms are for Priests.

The second Authority Authority 2.
is that of An appeal to thy conscience. p. 28. Grotius de Iure Belli, l. 1. c.
4. sect 4. p. 83.
Nazienzen. Oration. 2. in Julianum. Repressus of Iulianus Christianorum
lachrymis, quas mult as multi profuderunt. HOC VNUM or Solum ( as Grotius
translates it) adversus persecutionem medicamentum habentes: To which I shall
add by way of supply this other passage. Nos autem; quibus NVLLA ALIA ARMA,
nec muri, nec praesidia, praeter spem in Deum, reliqua erant: Vtpote OMNI
HVMANO SVBSIDIO PRORSVS DESTITVTIS ET SPOLIATIS, quem tandem alium aut precum
auditorem, aut inimicorum depulsor^m habituri eramus, q^am Deum Jacob, qui
adversus superbiam jurat. From whence they conclude, that Christians must use
no other weapons but prayers and tears, against Tyrants and oppressors.

To which I answer. Answ. 1.
First, that it is clear by this, that Christians may use prayers

Secondly, that these are the most powerful prevailing Arms both to resist
and Paul and Peter in the fore-objected texts, enjoyne men under pain of
damnation to be subject and obedient to for conscience sake, and no ways to
resist; since they may resist them with the powerfullest arms of all others,
prayers and tears.

Thirdly, if they may be lawfully resisted with these most prevailing arms
notwithstanding Paul's and Peter's objected inhibitions, then a fortiori they may
be with corporal, which are less noxious and prevalent; he that may with most
successeful means resist, vanquish, and overcome his tyrannizing oppressing
Sovereign, may likewise do it by the less noxious Arms. If Christians may
repulse and subdue a Tyrant with their Prayers, Tears, then why not with their
Swords? Does God or the Scripture make any such distinction, that we may and
must resist them under pain of damnation, with these kind of weapons; and
shall it be no less then Treason, Rebellion, Damnation to resist them with the
other? what difference is there in point of Allegiance, Loyalty, Treason,
Conscience, to resist an oppressing tyrannizing Prince and his Forces with a
Prayer, or with a Sword? with a Tear, or with a Spear? Are they not all one
in substance? By the Statutes of 26 H. 8. c. 13. 1 E. 6. c. 14. 5 E. 6. c. 11.
1 Eliz. c. 6. 13 Eliz. c. 1. words against the King delivered even in
Preaching, are made and declared to be high Treaeson, as well as bearing Arms,
and striking blows; yea, the Statute of 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma. 6. 9. makes
certain prayers against this persecuting Queen, high Treason; and by the
Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 2. it is high Treason for any man to COMPASS OR IMAGINE
the death of the King, Queen, Prince, The Christians then styled Julian,
Idolianus, Pisaeus, Adonaeus, Tauricremus, alter Hieroboam, Achab, Phar^o, etc.
Nazianzen, Orat. 47. and 48. in Iulianum.
as well as to slay or leavy war against them. If then we may, by the
Objectors confession, the practices and examples of the Primitive Christians,
against Julian and others, fight with our Tongues, Prayers, Tears,
Imaginations against our Sovereigns, who turn Tyrants and Persecutors; and
thereby suppress, conquer, confound them, of which none make scruple, though
our Statutes make it no less then high Treason in some cases; then
questionless they may by the self same reason and ground, resist them with
open force, notwithstanding any inhibition in Scripture. We may not, must not
resist any lawful King or Magistrate in the just execution of his office, so
mush as with a repugnant will, thought, prayer, tear: we may, yea must resist
an oppressing, persecuting Tyrant with all these; therefore with any other
Arms. means Exodus, Samuel, Kings, Chronicles, Numbers, Judges and the Book
of Psalms every where almost.
Hezekiah, David, Moses, Abijah, Asa, resisted their invading enemies, and
conquered them with their prayers; but yet they provided to repulse and
vanquish them with other external Arms. The Christians resistance and
vanquishing their Emperor Julian with the one, is an infallible argument, they
might do it with the other too, there being no such distinction in the
objected Scriptures, that we may fight against and resist them with our
prayers, tears, not arms.

Fourthly, this Father says not, that it was unlawful for the Christians to
use any Julian, the only thing in question. No such ^yllable in the Oration,
but only, that they had no other Arms to resist and conquer him with, being
utterly destitute and spoiled of all other humane help. Therefore their want
of other Arms and help, See Zozimen. l. 5. c. 2. Non Gentiles solum, etc.
not the unlawfulness of using them, had they had them, was the only ground
they used prayers and tears, not a^ me^. To argue then, those who are
destitute of all Arms, but prayers and tears, must use them only: Ergo those
who have other Arms besides prayers and tears, may not lawfully use them to
resist a Tyrant, is but Scholastical Nonsense; yet this is the very uttermost
this authority yields our opposites. In one word, this Father informs us, that
this Apostate Emperor Oration. 1. in Iulianum p. 760.
Julian, would not make open war at first upon the Christians, because this
would altogether cross the end he aimed at: (mark the reason) Nos enim, si
vis inferatur, acriores obstinatioresque futures, ac tyrannidi obnixum pietatis
TUENDAE STUDIUM OBJECTUROS cogitavit. Solent enim fortes and generosi animi, ei
QUI VIM AFFERRE PARAT CONTUMACITER OBSISTERE, non secus ac flamma, quae a vento
excitatur, quo vehementius perflatur, eo vehementius accenditur. Which argues,
that the Christians would have forcibly resisted him, had he at first with
force invaded them; therefore he weakened, subdued, disarmed them first by
policy; and then fell topersecute them with force, when they had no means of
resistance left.

The third authority Authority 3.
is that of Appeal to thy conscience, p. 28, 29.
Bernard, Epist. 221. to King Lewis of France, Quicquid vobis de Regno vestro,
de anima and corona vestra facere placeat, NOS ECCLESIAE FILII, matris
injurias, contemptum, and conculcationem omnino dissimulare non possumus.
Profecto STABIMUS ET PUGNABIMUS USQUE AD MORTEM ( si ita oportuerit) pro matre
nostra ARMIS QUIBUS LICET, non scutis and gladiis, SED PRECIBUS ET FLETIBUS AD
DEUM. Therefore it is unlawful for Christians to resist with force of Arms.

I answer Answ. 1.
first, that Bernard was both a Monk and Clergie-man, prohibited by Scripture
and ^undry Canons to fight with military Arms against any person or enemy
whatsoever; and he utters these words of himself, as he was a Clergie-man,
servant, and son of the Church; in the selfsame sense as Saint Ambrose did
before. It was then only his Calling, not the cause which prohibited him
forcibly to resist King Lewis.

Lewis to whom Bernard writes, had then raised a civil war in his Realm
against Theobald and others who desired peace; which the King rejecting,
Bernard does thus reprehend him in the premises. Verum vos nec verba pacis
recipitis; nec pactae vestra tenetis, nec sanis consiliis acquiescitis. Sed
nescio quo Dei judicio, omnia vobis ita vertitis in perversum, ut probra
honorem, honorem probra ducatis; tuta timeatis, timenda contemnatis; and quod
olim sancto and glorioso Regi David, Ioab, legitur exprobrasse; diligitis eos
qui vos oderunt, and odio habetis qui vos diligere volunt. Nota.
N^que enim qui vos instigant priorem iterare maliciam adversus non merentem,
quaerunt in hoc honorem vestrum, sed suum commodum, imo nec suum commodum, SED
DIABOLI VOLUNTATEM; ut Regis (quod absit) potentiam concepti fur^ris h^beant
effectricem; quem suis ^e posse adimple^e viribus non confidunt; INIMICI
CORONAE VESTRAE, REGNI MANIFESTISSIMI PERTURBATORES. (Our present case, in
regard of the Kings evil sedu^ing Counselors.) Then immediately follows the
objected clause, At quicquid vobis, etc. After which he gives him this sharp
reproof. Non tacebo quod cum excommunicatis iterare faedus and societatem nunc
satagis, quod in n^cem hominum, combustionem domorum, destructionem
Ecclesiarum, dispersionem pa^^perum raptoribus, predonibus (sicut dicitur,
adhaeretis; juxta illud Prophetae Ps. 49.
si videbas furem curre^as cum eo, etc. quasi non satis per vo^ mala facere
valeatis. Dico vobis, non erit diu inultum, si haec ita facere pergitis. etc.
Here this holy man prohibited by his orders to fight against this King, his
Sovereign with his Sword; fights strongly against and resists his vio^ence
with his Pen. And although he may not use a Sword and Buckler in respect of
his calling to defend his mother the Church against him: yet he is so far
from yielding obedience to and not resisting him, according to Paul's and Peter's
pretended injunctions, that he expressly tells him to his face, That HE WOULD
STAND AND FIGHT AGAINST HIM EVEN UNTO DEATH (^f there were need) with such
weapons as he (being a Monk and Minister) might use, to wit, with Prayers and
tears, though not with Sword and Buckler; which were more prevalent with God
against him then any other Arms. So that he resists him in the very highest
strain that may be; and clearly admits, that Laymen who might lawfully use
Swords and Bucklers, might with them justly defend the Church in standing and
fighting for it against him even to death, as well as he might do it with
prayers and tears, his proper Arms: Which answers that objection out of his
170. Epistle, written to the same King; and his 183 Epistle to Co^rade King of
Roman; where he subjects these Kings to the Pope, who^ he advises them to
obey; and reprehends them for their misd^^eanours, notwithstanding that text of
Romans 13 which he there recites.

The fourth authority, Authority 4.
is the example of the primitive Christians, who submitted themselves willingly
to their persecuting Emperors; without resistance in word or deed. Dr. Fern^,
The necessity of subjection. An Appeal to thy Conscience. Bishop Mort^n, Hugo
Grotius, and others.
For proof whereof, several passages are recited out of Fathers, which I shall
co^j^yne: the first is out of Tertullian his Apologeticus. Quoties exim in
Christianos desaev^tis, partim ^nimis propriis, partim l^g^bus obseque^tes?
Quoties etiam praeteritis a vobis SUO JURE NOS INIMICUM VULGUS invadit
lapidibus and incendiis? Ipsis Bacchanalium furiis, nec mortuis parcunt
Christianis, qu^^ illos de requie sepultu^ae, de asylo quodam mortis, jam
alios, jam nec totos avellant, dissecent, distrahant? quid tamen de tam
conspiratis unquam denotatis, de tam animatis ad mortem usque pro injuria
repensatis? quamvis vel unae nox pauculis f^culis largitatem ^ltionis posset
operari, si malum malo dispu^gi, penes nos liceret. Sed absit ut aut igni
humano vindicetur divina secta; aut doleat pati, in quo probatu^. Si^ e im in
hosts exortos non tantum vindices occultos agere vellemus, de sset nobis vis
numerorum and copiarum? Plures nimirum Mauri and Marcomanni, ipsique Parthi,
vel quantaecunque, unius tamen loci and suorum finium gentes, quam totius
orbis? Externi sumus and vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, insulas, castella,
municipia, conciliabula, castra ipsa, tribus, decurias, palatium, senatum,
forum, sola vobis relinquimus templa. Cui Bello non idonei, non prompti
fuissemus, etiam impares copiis, QUI TAM LIBENTER TRUCIDAMUR? Si non apud istam
disciplinam MAGIS OCCIDI LICERET, QUAM OCCIDERE. Potuimus and inerm^s, NEC
REBELIES, sed tantummodo discordes solius divortii invidia adversus vos
dimic^sse. Si enim tanta vis hominum, in aliquem orbis remoti sinum
abrupissemus a vobis, suffudisset utique damnationem vestram tot qualiumcunque
amissio civium, imo etiam and ipsa institutione punisset: proculdubio
expavissetis ad solitudinem vestram, ad silentium rerum, and stuporem quendam
quasi mortui urbes quaesissetis quibus imperaretis. Plures hosts, quam cives
vobis remanisissent, nunc enim pauciores hosts habetis prae multitudine
Christianorum, pene omnium civium. Which S. Cyprian (Tertullians imitator) thus
seconds, Laedere Dei and Christi servos persecutionibus tuis desine, quos
laesos ultio divina defendit. Inde est enim quod nemo nostrum quando
apprehenditur, Ad Demetrianum liber.
reluctatur, nec se adversus injustam violentiam vestram quamvis nimius and
copiosus noster sit populus, ulciscitur. Patientes facit de secutura ultione
securitas. Innocents nocentibus ce^unt. ^Insontes poenis and cruciatibus
acquiescunt, certi and fidentes, quod in ultum non remaneat, quodcunque
perpetimur, quantoque major fuerit persecutionis injuria, Lib. 5.
tanto and justior fiat and gravior pro persecutione vindicta. Which Lactantius
thus trebles. Confidimus enim Majestati ejus qui tam contemptum sui possit
vlcisci, quam servorum suorum labores and injurias. Et ideo cum tam nefanda
perpetimur, ne verbo quidem reluctamur, sed Deo remittimuus ulti^^nes. De
Civit. Dei, lib. 22.
Saint Augustine relates the same in these words, Neque tunc Civitas Christi
quamvis ad huc peregrinaretur in terra, and haberet tam magnorum agmina
populorum, adversus impios persecutores, pro temporali salute pugnavit, sed
potius ut obtineret aeternam, non repugnavit: ligabantur, includebantur,
caedebantur, torquebantur, urebantur, lani^bantur, cruciabantur, and
multiplicabantur. Non erat iis pro salute pugnare, nisi salutem pro salute
contemnere. The sum of all these Fathers sayings (which I have largely cited,
because I would conceal nothing that might be materially objected) is this:
That the Christians in the primitive Church, though they were many in number,
and sufficiently able to defend themselves against their persecuters by force
of Arms, did yet refuse to do it, yielding themselves up to any tortures,
punishments, deaths, without the least resistance in word or deed; Ergo, the
Parliament and Kingdom ought now to make no resistance at all against the
Kings popish Army and Cavaliers, but to expose themselves to their cruelties
and rapines, without the least resistance in word or deed.

Because this objection sticks most with many Scholars, Statists, and tender
consciences, I shall endeavor to give a satisfactory answer Answer.
to it, without any shifting evasions, or questioning the truth of Tertullians,
and Cyprians assertions, concerning the multitude and strength of the
Christians, and their ability to resist, which some have taken Mr. Goodwin his
Anti-cavalierisme, Scripture and Reason for defensive Arms.
great pains to re^ute.

unlawful, muchlesse damnable, in point of conscience for them to resist their
persecuting enemies, no such syllable in any of them. And Tertullians, Si non
apud istam disciplinam MAGIS OCCIDI LICET QUAM OCCIDERE, by way of necessary
defense, implies no such thing, but rather proves the contrary, that resistance
is lawful, because it is lawful to be slain as a martyr; therefore in this
case to slay. So as there is nothing in these authorities in point of
conscience to condemn the Parliaments present resistance, and defensive war,
as unlawful.

Christians were exceeding many in number, of strength and power abundantly
sufficient to defend themselves in a warlike manner against their persecuters,
and had full liberty and no restraint upon them in point of Conscience either
to withstand their persecutors with Arms, or to withdraw themselves from under
the jurisdiction of their persecuters into remote parts, to the great weakening
and loss of the State: yet such was their patience, innocence, and desire of
Martyrdom, that they resisted not their Adversaries with force, nor retired,
nor fled away from under their obedience, but cheerfully without the least
resistance by word, deed, or thought, yielded up their Bodies, Liberties,
Lives, to the cruelties of their Enemies, to obtain that Crown of Martyrdom
which they desired, and to offer up themselves a voluntary freewill oblation to
the Lord, who would certainly avenge all their wrongs. This is the sum of all
these Authorities, which evidence resistance lawful in it self, and to these
Christians too in their own judgments and resolutions, though the desire of
Martyrdom made them freely to forbear it. These Examples and Authorities
therefore abundantly corroborate, and no ways impeach our cause.

Thirdly, their examples of not resisting Persecuters, being rather voluntary,
then Ergo, Christians in point of Conscience ought not to make any forcible
resistance against oppressing Lords and Persecuters now: For then this their
voluntary choice and election should deprive all following Christians of that
ability of defense which both themselves then had, and since enjoy by Gods and
Natures Law. Yet this is all the argument which can be ingeniously framed from
these Authorities and Examples; the absurdity whereof I shall thus further
illustrate from like Precedents: We know, first, That See Socrat. scholast.
Theod. Niceph. Eccles. Hist. Fox Acts and Monuments. Tertul. Apolog. and ad
Martyrs Cyprian ad. Martyrei.
the primitive Christians, out of a desire of martyrdom, not only refused to
resist, but to flee away from their Persecuters, when they might safely do it;
some of them holding it unlawful and dishonorable to flee in such a case; by
name Tertullian, in his book De fuga in persecutione. Will our Opposites from
hence infer: Ergo, it is unlawful for Christians not only to resist, but
even to flee from their Persecuters, or his Majesty's murdering, plundering
Forces? Or for them selves to flee, not only from the Parliaments Forces, but
Justice too, as many of them have done, yea, made escapes against Law to flee
therefrom. If the Christians not fleeing, bind neither them, nor us, not to
flee now, why should their not resisting only do it? Secondly, See Fox Acts
and Monuments, Vol. 1. passim.
The Primitive Christians ran to the stake of martyrdom, when they were
neither accused, cited, persecuted by any, freely confessing themselves
Christians, and rather desiring presently to die Martyrs, then live Christians,
and reputing it worse then death not to be admitted to, or delaied the honor
of being Martyrs, of which we have infinite Pre^idents in Ecclesiastical
Histories commonly known and over-tedious to recite. I shall only instance in
Julian the Apostates Nazianz. Orat. 47. in I^^^ lianum.
Christian Soldiers: who being overreached by him under color of a largess,
to throw some Frankincense into a fire secretly kindled by the Emperor in
honor of an Idol, they dreaming of no such thing, and doing it only as a
mere complementall Ceremony; as soon as they heard how the Emperor had
overreached them, and given out speeches that they had sacrificed to his Idol,
presently rising from the feast prepared for them, in a ^ury, infl^med with
zeal and wrath, ran through the Market place, and cried out openly, We are
Christians, We are Christians in mind; let all men hear it, and above all,
God, to whom we both live and will also die. O Christ our Savior, we have not
broken our faith plighted to thee: If our hand has any way offended, verily
our mind followed it not at all; we are circumvented by the Emperors fraud
with whose gold we are wounded. We have put off impiety, we are purged by
blood. After which, posting speedily to the Emperor, and casting away their
gold, with a generous and strenuous mind they exclaimed against him in this
manner. O Emperor, we have not received gifts, but are damned with death. We
are not called for our honor, but branded with ignominy. Give this benefit to
thy Soldiers, kill and behead us unto Christ, to whose Empire only we are
subject. Recompense fire for fire; for those ashes reduce us into ashes. Cut
off the hands which we have wickedly stretched out; the feet wherewith we have
perniciously run together. Give gold to others, who will not afterward repent
they have received it; Christ is enough, and more then sufficient unto us, whom
we account in stead of all. The Emperor enraged with this speech, refused to
slay them openly, lest they should be made Martyrs, who as much as in them lay
were Martyrs; but only banished them, revenging this their contempt with that
punishment. Will it then follow from these memorable examples, That all true
Christians now in England and Ireland must come thus and offer themselves
voluntarily to the Popish Rebels and Forces (now in Arms to extirpate the
Protestant Religion in both Kingdoms) or that the Members of both Houses must
go speedily to Oxford to the King and h^s evil Counselors, and there let them
kill, hang, burn, quarter, slay, execute, torture them, subvert Religion,
Laws, Liberties, Parliaments, without the least resistance? Or will our
Opposites hence conclude (as they may with better Judgment and Conscience d^e)
Ergo, all such persons voted Traitors and Delinquents in any kind by both
Houses of Parliament, ought now in point of Conscience (to avoid the effusion
of blood and ruin of the Realm, through the civil wars they have
occasioned) to lay down their Arms, and voluntarily resign up themselves to
the impartial Justice of the Parliament, without any the least resistance for
the future: If no such Doctrinall, or Practical conclusions may be drawn from
these their Precedents of voluntary seeking and rendering themselves up to the
Martyrdom of their Opposites; then the unlawfulness of resisting cannot be
inferred from this their non-resisting. Thirdly, how many cowardly Soldiers in
all ages, and in this too, have volunta^ily yielded up Forts, Castles, Ships,
Arms, Persons, to their invading approaching enemies without fight or
resistance? How many persons have resigned up their Purses to highway thieves,
their Lands to disseisors, their Houses, Goods to riotors, their Ships,
Estates, Persons, to Turkish and other Pirates, without any resist^nce, when
they might have lawfully and easily preserved them by resisting? Will it
therefore follow, that all others must do so? that we must not fight against
invading Enemies, Thieves, Pirates Riotors, beca^se many good Christians out of
fear or cowardice, or for other reasons have not done it in all ages? I ^^ow
not. Will the Jews refusi^g t^ree Ios^ph. Antiq Iu. lib. 12. cap. 13. lib. 13.
c. 12. l. 14 c. 8. Dion. Hist. 5^. Stra^o Greg. lib. 16. 1 Mac. 2. Dr. Heylen
History of the (...), p. 1. cap. 8.
or four several times to defend themselves against their insulting enemies on
their Sabbath; or the Francisci ^ carthagen^ Regum. Hisp. Ae^ph. c. 44.
Goths not resisting their invading foes on the Lords Day; or will the
Alexandrian Jews example and sp^ech to Flaccus, Hugo Grotius de jure belli
lib. 1. ^ap. 4. Annos ad sect. 7. p. 95. and sect. 7. p 88 89.
Inermes sumus ut vides, and tamen sunt qui nos tanquam hosts public^s hic
crimina^tur. Etiam ^as quas ad nostri tutelam parts d^dit natura, retro
vertimus ubi nihil habent quod agant, corpora praeb^mus nuda and patentia ad
impetum eorum qui nos volunt occid re. Or that example of the Christian See
Grotius ibid.
Theban Legion, slain without the least resistance for their Religion: who as
an ancient Martyriologer says, Caed bantur passim g^adi is non reclamantes,
sed and d^positis armis cervices persecutoribus vel intectum corpus offerentes:
warrant this deduction. Ergo, no Christians now must resist their invading
enemies on the Sabbath day, but must offer their naked bodi^s heads, throats,
unto their swords and violence? If not, then these examples and autho^ities
will no ways prejudice our present resistance.

Fourthly, the Christians not only refused to resist their oppressing
Emperors even the vulgar people, who assaulted, stoned, slew them in the
streets against Law, as Tertullians words, Quoties enim praeterit is a vobis
SUO JURE NOS INIMICUM VULGUS invadit lapidibus and incendiis, etc. manifest
without all contradiction; and indeed this passage so much insisted on, relates
principally, if not only to such assaults of the rude notorious vulgar, which
every man will grant the Christians might lawfully with good conscience
forcibly resist, because they were no Magistrates nor lawful higher powers
within Romans 13. 1. 2. or 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Either then our Antagonist must
grant, that it is unlawful in point of Conscience forcibly to resist the
unlawful assaults and violence of the vulgar or private persons who are no
Magistrates: and that it is unlawful now for any Christians to resist Thieves,
Pirates, or bear defensive Arms, as the Lucas. Osiand. Enc^^. contr cap. 9.
Anabaptists (from whose quiver our Antagonists have borrowed this and all
other shafts against the present defensive war) and to make the primitive
Christians all Anabaptists in this particular: Or else inevitably grant
resistance lawful, notwithanding their examples and these passages of not
resisting. The rather, because Tertullian in the next preceding words, puts no
difference at all between the Emperor and meanest Subjects in this case; Idem
sumus (says he) Imperatoribus, qui and vicinis nostris male enim velle, male
facere, male dicere, male cogitare de quoquam ex aequo vetamur. Quodcunq^e non
licet in Imperatorem id n^c in quenquam.

Fifthly, admit the Christians then deemed all forcible resistan^e of
persecuters primitive Christians held many things unlawful in point of
Conscience, which we now hold not so. De corona Militis.
Tertullian and others inform us, That the Christians in his time thought it a
heinous sin (N^fas) to pray kneeling on the Lords day, or between Easter and
Whitsontide (and so by consequence to kneel at the Sacrament) praying always
standing on those days in memory of Christ's resurrection. Which custom was
ratified also by many Surius Council. tom. 1. p. 347. tom. 2. p. 105 2. tom. 3.
p. 324. 277.
Councels: Yet then it was lawful no doubt in it self for them to pray
kneeling, and we all use the contrary custom now. The Christians then held it
unlawful, to eat blood in puddings, or any other meats, as Apologet.
Tertullian, Octavius.
Minucius Felix testify, and many Council. Constant. 6. can. 76. Surius tom. 2.
p. 1050.
Councels expressly prohibited it since, as unlawful: Yet all Churches at
this day deem it lawful, and practice the contrary. The Christians in
Tertullians days, and he himself in a special Book, De fuga in persecutione,
held it unlawful to flee in times of persecution, and therefore they
voluntarily offered themselves to martyrdom without flight or resistance. Yet
we all now hold flying lawful, and all sorts practice it as lawful; yea many
more then they ought to do. I might give sundry other instances of like
nature: The Christians opinion therefore of the unlawfulness of any armed
resistance of Persecuters public or private (held they any such) though
seconded with their practice, is no good argument of its unlawfulness, without
better evidence, either then, or at this present. Thirdly, the case of the
Primitive Christians and ours now is far different; The Emperors, Magistrates,
and whole States under which they then lived were all Pagan Idolaters, their
Religion quite contrary to the Laws and false Religions settled in those States:
There were many Tertud. Apolog. Eusebius, Socrates, scolasticus, Hist. 1.
Laws and Edicts then in force against Christian Religion, unrepealed: most
Professors of Religion were of the lowest rank, Cot. 1. 26, John 7. 48.
not many wise, Noble, mighty men, scarce any great Officer, Magistrate, or
Senator, was of that profession, but all fierce enemies against it: For
Christians, being but private men, and no apparent body of a State, to make any
public forcible resistance in defense of Religion against Emperors, Senators,
Magistrates, Laws, and the whole State wherein they lived, had neither been
prevalent nor expedient; a great hinderance and prejudice to Religion, and as
some hold, unlawful. But our present case is far otherwise; our King,
Parliament, State, Magistrates, People, are all Christians in external
profession, our Protestant Religion established, Popery excluded, banished by
sundry public Laws; the Houses of Parliament, and others now resisting, are
the whole body of the Realm in representation, and have authority, even by
Law, to defend themselves and Religion against invading Popish Forces: In which
regards our present resistance is, and may clearly be affirmed lawful, though
the primitive Christians, in respect of the former circumstances, might not be
so. Secondly, their resistance, (especially of the Magistrates not vulgar
rabble) if made, had been only, singly for defense of their Religion then
practiced but in corners, publicly condemned, no where tolerated: Our present
war is not only for defense of our Religion established by Law, and to keep
out Popery, but for the preservation of Laws, Liberties, the very essence of
Parliaments, the safety of the Realm, and that by authority of Parliament, the
representative body of the Realm. The Parliaments defensive war, therefore,
upon these politic grounds is just and lawful, though the Primitive
Christians, perchance in defense of Religion only, as its case then stood,
would not have been so: even as the Roman Senators and States resisting of
Nero, or any other Tyrannical Emperors violations of the Laws, Liberties,
Lives, Estates of the Senate, people, were then reputed just and lawful,
though the Christians defense of Religion would not have been so esteemed in
those times. And thus I hope I have sati^factorily answered this objection
without shifts or evasions, and rectified these mistaken Fathers meanings, with
which our Opposites have seduced the illiterate over-credulous vulgar.

I have now (through Gods assistance) quite run through all Objections of
moment from Scripture, Reason, Fathers, against the lawfulness of the
Parliaments present defensive war, and discovered diverse gross errors, yea,
Impostures in our Opposites writings, wherewith they have perverted many men's
Consciences, and cheated the ignorant seduced world: I shall therefore here
adjure them in the presence of Almighty God, as they will answer the contrary
before his Tribunal at the Day of Judgment, seriously to consider these my
answers, and publicly to retract those their Errors, false gross
mis-interpretations, perve^sions of Scriptures, Authors, which I have here
discovered. And since they pretend nothing but the satisfying and keeping of a
good Doctor Fern^ Resolving of Conscience, An Appeal to thy Conscience, The
necessity of Christian subjection, etc. all plead conscience.
Conscience in and by others, concerned in this Controversy; to show a sincere
ingenuous Conscience therein themselves where they have been mistaken, since
the contestation pretended, is not for Victory, Time-serving, or Self-seeking;
but for Truth, Gods glory, and the public weal: and if I have over-shot my
self in any thing, I shall promise them a thankful acknowledgement, and ready
paline die upon their information and conviction of any apparent oversights, I
may casually fall into.

Now because they shall not deem me singular in my opinion concerning the
lawfulness of subjects defensive Arms against their Sovereigns, bent to
subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties, the Republike, or deem it is a late upstart
Novelty, I shall conclude this discourse with such personal, natural and
public authorities, as they shall not be able to balance with
counter-resolutions; in which I shall be as brief as I may be.

For personal Authorities, I shall not be ambitious to remember many,
especially Papists, whose common, constant received opinion, and practice has
always been and yet is, See part. (...) 1. p. 4. 6.
That Subjects upon the Popes command alone, and absolution of them from their
Sovereigns allegiance, may and ought to take up even offensive Arms against
their own natural Princes excommunicated, interdicted, deposed, or only
declared contumacious, Schism^ticall or Heretical by the Pope, without, yea,
against their Kingdoms, Parliaments privities or consents, much more then with
their approbation. What Papists have determined and practiced in this very
point you may read at large in Gratiau himself Causa. 15. Quaest. 6. and Causa.
23. in the very Oath of Supremacy, and Statut, of 3. Iacobi, chapter 4. which
prescribes it, in Bishop Jewels view of a seditious Bull, in Doctor John W^ite
his Defense of the way, Chap. 6. and 10. in Abbas Vsper ge^sis, Sabellicus,
Valateranus, Grimston and others, in the Lives of the Roman and German
Emperors; in Aventine his Annalium Boyorum, the General and Particular
Histories of France, Sparn, Germany, Italy, Sicily, Hungary, England; in Bishp
Bilsons third part of the True Difference between Christian Subjection and
unchristian Rebellion. In sundry Sermons on the fifth of November, to which I
shall refer you: In Pope Paschal his letter to Robert Earl of Flanders, about
the year of our Lord, 1107. Bochellus Decret. Eccl. Gal. ^* 5. Tit. 5. c. 8. p.
75^.
exorting him to war against those of Liege, Henry the Emperor and his
Assistants, wheresoever he should find them, excommunicated and deposed as an
Heretic and enemy to the Church; telling him, that he could not offer a more
grateful sacrifice to God, then to ware against them; concluding, Hoc tibi and
Militibus tuis in peccatorum remissionem, and Apostolicae sedis familiaritatem
praecipimus, ut his laboribus, and triumphis ad Coelestem Jerusalem, Domino
praestante, pervenias: Which Let er was excellently answered by those of Liege.
And in the Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l 5. Tit. 5^ c. 5. p* 757, 758.
Nich. Gilles* Annals of France.
Council of Towers in France, under Jews the twelfth, Anno 1510. it was
unanimously resolved by the Church of France, That if the Pope did make war
upon temporal Princes, in lands which they held not of the patrimony of the
Church, they might lawfully by force of Arms resist and defend both themselves
and others; and not only repulse this injury, but likewise invade the lands of
the Church, possessed by the Pope their notorious enemy, not perpetually to
retain, but to hinder the Pope from becoming more strong and potent by them,
to offend both them and theirs. And that it was lawful for such Princes, for
such notorious hatred and unjust invasion to withdraw themselves from the Popes
obedience, and with armed force to resist all censures denounced by the Pope
against them, their subjects and Confederates, and that such sentences ought
not to be obeyed, but are mear nullities in law, which obliege no man. Yet I
must inform you further in brief, that John Mayor a Popish Schoolman in Lib. 4.
Sentent. (as Grotius writes) affirms. That the people cannot deprive themselves
of the power, not only of resisting, but deposing Kings in cases which
directly tend to their destruction; and that De Potest Papae in Principes
Christ. l. 4. c. 16.
John Barclay, a late Scottish Priest, though a strenuous defendor of Princes
Prerogatives, expressly averres, That if a King will alienate and subject his
Kingdom to another, without his subjects ^onsents, or be carried with atr^e
hostile mind, to the dest^uction of all his people, that his Kingdom is
thereby actually lost and forfeited, so as the people may not only absolutely
resist, and disobey, but depose him, and elect another King: to which De lure
Belli. l. 1. c. 4. sect. 10, 11. p. 89 98.
Hugo Gortius a Protestant, freely subscribes; and John Bodin^^ ^oweth of
Subjects resistance, yea, deposing kings, in some Kingdoms absolutely, and in
some cases generally in all; De Repub. l. 1. c. 10. l. 1. c. 5 and l. 5. c. 5.
and 6. For Protestant personal authorities: we have Huldericus Zuinglius,
Explanatio Articuli, 40, 41, 42, 43. Tom. 1. fol. 82. to 86. who allows not
only Subjects actual resistance, but deprivation of Kings, Where Princes set
themselves to subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties; and that by the common consent
of the States in Parliament, from whom Kings originally receive their Royal
power and authority. Martin Luther, Bugenhagius, Iustus Jonas, Ambsdorfius,
Sp^lotinus, Melancthon, Cruciger, and other Divines, Lawyers, Statesmen, Anno
1531. who published a writing in justification of defensive Arms by subjects in
certains cases; Sleidan. Hist. lib. 8. 18, 22. David Chrytraeus, Chron.
Saxoniae, l. 13. p. 376. Richardus Dinothus de Bello Civili Gallico Religionis
causa suscepto, p. 231. 232. 225 227, etc. A book entitled, De Iure Belli
Belgici, Hagae, 1599. purposely justifying the lawfulness of the Low Countries
defensive war. Emanuel Meteranus Historia Belgica, Praefat. and lib. 1. to 17.
David Par^us, Com. in Romans 13. Dub. 8. And. Quaest. Theolog. 61. Edward
Grimston his General History of the Netherlands, l. 5. to 17. passim. Hugo
Grotius de Iure Belli and Pacis, lib. 1. cap. 4. with sundry other foreign
Protestant Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 20. sect 31. and in Dan* 6. v. 22. 25.
Osiander in Epit. Centur. 9. and 17. Sharpii Sympho. p. 244. 246, 412. Vindicae
contra. Cyannos.
writers, both in Germany, France, Bohemia, the Netherlands and elsewhere; John
Knokes his Appellation, p. 28. to 31. George Bucanon De Iure Regni apud Scotos,
with many See the ungarding of the Scottish Armor, p. 432. 34^^.
Scottish Pamphlets justifying their late wars: Ioh. Ponet once B. of
Winchester, his Book entitled, Politic Govern. p. 16. to 51. Alber. Gentilis
de Iur, Belli, l. 1. c. 25. l. 3. c. 9. 22. M. Goodmans Book in Q. Ma. days,
entitled, How superior Magistrates ought to be obeyed, c. 9. 13. 14. 16. D. A.
Willet his Sixfold Commentary on Romans 13. Quaestion. 16. and Controversy,
3. p. 588 589, 590, 608, etc. Andin. l. Iud. 34, 55.
Peter Mariyr Com. In Romans 13 p. 1026. with sundry late writers, common in
every man's hands, justifying the ^a^ulnesse of the present defensive War, whose
Names I spare. And lest any should think that none but Puritanes have
maintained this opinion, K. James himself in his Answer to Card. Perron,
justifies the French Protestant taking up Defensive Arms in France. And The
true Difference, etc. part. ^. p. 520, 521, 5. 2.
Bish. Bilson (a fierce Antipuritane) not only defends the Lawfulness of the
Protestants defensive Arms against their Sovereigns in Germany, Flaunders,
Scotland, France; but likewise dogmatically determines in these words; Neither
will I rashly pronounce all that resist to be Rebels; Cases may fall out even
in Christian Kingdoms, where the people may plead their right against the
Prince, AND NOT BE CHARGED WITH REBELLION, As where for example? If a Prince
should go about to subject his People to a foreign Realm, or change the form
of the Commonwealth from Impery to Tyranny, or neglect the Laws established
by Common consent of Prince and people, to execute his own pleasure. In these
and other cases which might be named, IF THE NOBILITY AND COMMONS IOYN TOGETHER
TO DEFEND THEIR ANCIENT AND ACCVSTOMED LIBERTY, REGIMENT AND LAWS, THEY MAY NOT
WELL BE COVNTED REBELS. I never denied, but that the People might preserve the
foundation, freedom, and form of the Commonwealth, which they fore prised
when they first consented to have a King: As I said then, so I say now, The Law
of God gives no man leave; but I never said, that Kingdoms and Commonwealths
might not proportion their States, as they thought best, by their public Laws,
which afterward the Princes themselves may not violate. By superior Powers
ordained of God, (Romans 13.) w^ understand not only Princes, BUT ALL POLITIC
STATES AND REGIMENTS; somewhere the People, somewhere the Nobles, having the
same interest to the sword, that Princes have to their Kingdoms, and in
Kingdoms where Princes bear rule by the sword; we do not mean THE PRIVATE
PRINCES WILL AGAINST HIS LAWS, BUT HIS PRECEPT DERIVED FROM HIS LAWS, AND
AGREEING WITH HIS LAWS: Which though it be wicked, yet may it not be resisted
of any subject, (when derived from, and agreeing with the Laws) with armed
violence. Marry, when Princes offer their Subjects not Justice but force, and
despise all Laws to practice their lusts, not every, nor any private man may
take the sword to redress the Prince; but if the Laws of the Land appoint the
Nobles as next to the King to assist him in doing rig^^, and withhold him from
doing wrong, THEN BE THEY LICENCED BY MAN'S LAW, AND NOT PROHIBITED BY GODS, to
interpose themselves for safeguard of equity and innocency, and by all lawful
AND NEEDFVLL MEANS TO PROCVRE THE PRINCE TO BE REFORMED, but in no case
deprived where the Scepter is Hereditary. So this learned Bishop determines in
his authorized Book dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, point blank against our
Novell Court-Doctors, and Royall^sts.

But that which swayes most with me, is not the opinions of private men,
biased oft-times with private sinister ends which corrupt their judgments,
(as I dare say most of our Opposites in this controversy have writ to flatter
Princes, to gain or retain promotions, etc.) But the general universal
opinion and practice of all Kingdoms, Nations in the world from time to time.
Never was there any State or Kingdom under heaven from the beginning of the
world till now, that held or resolved it to be unlawful in point of Law or
Conscience, to resist with force of Arms the Tyranny of their Emperors, Kings,
Princes, especially when they openly made war, or exercised violence against
them, to subvert their Religion, Laws, Liberties, State, Government. If ever
there were any Kingdom, State, People of this opinion, or which forbore to take
up Arms against their Tyrannous Princes in such cases, even for conscience
sake, I desire our An^agonists to name them; for though I have diligently
searched, inquired after such, I could never yet find or hear of them in the
world; but on the contrary, I find all Nations, States, Kingdoms whatsoever,
whether Pagan or Christian, Protestant or Popish, ancient or modern,
unanimously concurring both in judgment and constant practice, that forcible
resistance in such cases is both just, lawful, necessary, yea, a duty to be
undertaken by the general consent of the whole Kingdom, State, Nation, though
with the effusion of much blood, and hazard of many men's lives. This was the
constant practice of the Romans, Grecians, Goths, Moors, Indians, Egyptians,
Vandals, Spaniards, French, Britains, Saxons, Italians, English, Scots,
Bohemians, Polonians, Hungarians, Danes, Swedes, Jews, Flemmins, and other
Nations in former and late ages, against their Tyrannical oppressing Emperors,
Kings, Princes, together with the late defensive Wars of the protestants in
Germany, Bohemia, France, Swethland, the ^ow-countries, Scotland, and
elsewhere, against their Princes, (approved by Queen Elizabeth, king James, and
our present king Charles. who assisted the French, Bohemians, Dutch, and German
Protestant Princes in those Wars, with the unanimous consent of their
Parliaments, Clergy, people) abundantly evidence beyond all contradiction;
which I have more particularly manifested at large in my Appendix, and
therefore shall not enlarge my self further in it here: only I shall acquaint
you with the^e five Particulars.

First, that in the Sl^idan. 8. 18. 22. Bish. Bilsons Difference, etc. part. 3.
p 518. Chytraeus Chron. Sax. l. 13. p. 376, etc.
Germans Defensive Wars for Religion, in Luthers days, the Duke of Saxony,
the Lantzgrave of Hesse, the Magistrates of Magd^burge, together with other
Protestant Princes, States, Lawyers, Cities, Counselors and Ministers, after
serious consultation, concluded and resolved, That the Laws of the Empire
permitted resistance of the Emperor to the Princes and Subjects in some cases,
that defense of Religion and Liberties then invaded, was one of these cases;
that the times were then so dangerous, that THE VERY FORCE OF CONSCIENCE AND
NECESSITY DID LEAD THEM TO ARMS, and to make a League to defend themselves,
THOUGH CAESAR OR ANY IN HIS NAME WOULD MAKE WAR AGAINST THEM; That if the
Emperor had kept his bonds and Covenants* they would have done their duties;
but because he began first to make the breach, the fault is his: For since he
attempteth to root out Religion, and subvert our Liberty, he gives us cause
enough TO RESIST HIM WITH GOOD CONSCIENE; The matter standing as it does, we
may resist him, as may be showed by Sacred and profane Stories. Unjust
violence is not Gods Ordinance, neither are we bound to him by any other
reason, then if he keep the conditions on which he was created Emperor. BY THE
LAWS THE MSELVES IT IS PROVIDED, that the inferior Magistrate shall not
infringe the right of the Superior: and so likewise if the superior
Magistrate exceed the limits of his power, and command that which is wicked,
not only we need not obey him, BUT. IF HE OFFER FORCE WE MAY RESIST HIM. So
they in point of Law and Conscience then publicly resolved.

Secondly, that the Genesis Hist. of France p 682, 683 The Appendix, p 34, 35. 44.
45.
French Protestants, and others, in the reign of King Fran^is the second, Anno
1359. being much oppressed by the Guisian faction, who had got the K. into
their power, and wholly swayed him (as his Maj. ill Counselors sway him now)
thereupon assembling together to consult of some just defense, to preserve the
just and ancient government of the Realm. They demanded advice TOUCHING LAW
AND CONSCIENCE, OF MANY LEARNED LAWYERS AND DIVINES; who resolved, THAT THEY
MIGHT LAWFVLLY oppose themselves against the Government which the House of Guise
had usurped, and AT NEED TAKE ARMS TO REPVLSE THEIR VIOLENCE; so as the
Princes, who in this case are born Magistrates, or some one of them would
undertake it, being ordered by the States of the Realm, or by the sounder part
of them. Dino^hus Hist Gal, l. 40 p. 227.
That defense of Religion and Liberties against violence and oppression were
just causes of War; Et quod pia arma ea sint, ultra quae nulla restat
spesvitae nec salutis. A like resolution and determination was mad^ by the
chief Dukes, Peers, Nobles, and Officers of France, Anno 1614. which you may
read in the Appendix.

Thirdly, that the Fox Acts and Mon Vol. 2. Edit. ult. p. 201. 209, 213, 214.
Angrognians and Waldensian Protestants of Lucerne and Piedment in the year
1558. to 1561. being persecuted by the Lord of Trinity and their Popish
Sovereigns, assembling solemnly together to consult how to prevent the great
dangers then at hand, after long prayer and calling upon God for his grace and
Spirit of direction and Counsel, well to manage their weighty affairs, and to
preserve themselves and the Protest^nt Religion professed by them, concluded in
the end, to enter into a solemn mutuali Covenant, and to ioyn in a League
together for defense of themselves and their Religion; whereupon they all
promised by Gods grace and assistance, to maintain the pure preaching of the
Gospel and administration of the Sacraments, and one to aid and assist the
other, etc. which they did with good success, obtaining many glorious
victories against invading persecuting enemies. The like did Fox Acts and Mon
Vol. 1. Ed. ult. p. 848. to 852. Pontaus Bohemiae piae, lib. 1.
Zis^a, the Thaborites and Bohemians heretofore, and of Grimstons Imperial
Hist. p. 655, 730. to 740. 746. to 806 sparsim.
later times; as the Maginall Authors largely relate, resolving it just and
lawful for them in Law and Conscience, to defend themselves and their Religion
by force of Arms against their persecuting Sovereigns.

Fourthly, that the Erman. Meteranus, Hist. Bel^ica, Grimst. Genesis Hist. of the
Netherlands.
Netherland Provinces, being oppressed in their Bodies, Estates, by the Duke of
Alua and Spaniards Tyranny, and in their Religion and Consciences, by the
introduced Inquisition to extirpate Religion; did after serious deliberation,
and consultation with learned men of all sorts, unanimously conclude and enter
into a solemn Covenant to defend their Libities, Religion, Laws, by force of
Arms, against the Spanish Tyranny; as you may read at large in their
Histories. And in the year 1572. The Prince of Orange and his Confederates
having levied a goodly Army to relieve Mons besieged by the Duke of Alua,
caused this notable Grimstons Genesis Hist. of the Netherlands, l 9. p. 369, 370.
Protestation to be printed and published to the World, as well in his own
name, as in his Confederates, giving a reason of the Arms which he had taken
up, as follows.

We William by the Grace of God, Prince of Orange, Earl of Nassau, etc. To
all Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, and others, of what quality soever of these
Netherlands which desire the Liberty thereof, being miserably tyrannized and
oppressed by the Duke of Alva, the Spaniards, and other their friends, TRAITORS
AND MVRTHERERS OF THEIR OWN COUNTRY, We declare that every one of us, for a
particular love and zeal he bears unto his Country, and for the glory of
God, which we desire above all, have often sought by all means the good and
quiet of the Country, as well by Petitions and other mild mean* as by force
of Arms, thinking to draw those that were as we are, to do the like,
sometimes by sighs and prayers unto God, having had patience until that it
should please him to mollify the hearts of the said Tyrants; but in the end
solicited and called generally and particularly by the inhabitants of the said
Country, by reason of the inhumanities and oppressions; We have in the Name of
God (ACCORDING TO OUR CONSCIENCES) TAKEN ARMS; protesting before God and his
Angels, and before all Men present and to come, that we have not been moved
hereunto by any private passion, but with an ardent desire which we have to
oppose our selves against this more then barbarous and unsupportable tyranny,
to the Proclamations, Edicts, taxes, Imposts and charges of the hundredth,
thirtieth, twentieth and tenth penny imposed by the in satiable covetousness
of the Duke of Alva, against the Laws Liberties, Freedoms, and ancient
Privileges of the said country; which Laws, Liberties, freedoms and ancient
privileges, we mean (by the grace of God) to restore unto the said country,
holding it under the obedience of their Prince and nature all Lord, as we are
bound to do: affirming and maintaining, that Si Princeps ^yrannus est, iure
Naturali reliquis omnibus mundi Principi^us incumbit illi populo Tyrannidem
patienti opem and auxilium far; hominum egregiorum virorum ^aec est vera
laus, de^us and h^nor. Vasquius Contro I^l. 36. (...) 36.
all Princes and Noblemen, Gentlemen, Commonweales, or others, of what quality
(...) be they strangers or homebred, that have been moved to give us (...) or
(...) IN THIS SO JUST AN ENTERPRISE, have not don it for any other^ (...) but
for true piety and compassion which they have with us of the said (...) and
^alamities: Wherefore we pray and entreat every one, both in general (...)
p^^ticular, to assure themselves, that we intend not to do wrong to any man,
nor to attempt upon the good estates or honor of any of what quality soever,
were he of the ^lergy, but are ready to aid and assist every one freely and
willingly; as for his liberty EVERY ONE IS BOUND TO SVCCOR US BY ALL DVE AND
POSSIBLE MEANS. In the mean time we will give order, that God and the country
may be served, in procuring the preservation of the people, and the defense of
their houses, wives, and children: Praying to God, that he would favor and
bring to a good end SO HOLY AND NECESSARY AN ENTERPRISE.

This their defensive War, yet continuing, has been justified by many, and
in special maintained to be just and honorable BOTH IN LAW AND CONSCIENCE in a
particular Book De jure Belli Belgici, printed at the Hague with the States
approbation, 1599. to which I shall refer you.

Fifthly, (which comes nearest to our present case of any story I have met
with) Alphonso the 3. Hyeronimus Blanca ^^agonens. Rerum Comment. p. 661. 662.
(...) p. 652.
king of Arragon, in the year 1286, through the ill advise of some bad
Counselors and Courtiers about him, departed in discontent from the Parliament
of the Estates of Arragon then assembled at Saragossa, and posted to Osca,
because the Parliament took upon them to make Laws to reform and order his
Court, his Courtiers, which he denied, but they affirmed, they had justright
and power to do. Hereupon, the business being put unto geeater difficulty;
the Estates affirmed. A Comitiis intempestive discedere Regi NEFAS ESSE, That
IT WAS A WICKED ACT, FOR THE KING THVS UNSEASONABLY TO DEPART FROM THE
PARLIAMENT, NEITHER WAS SO GREAT A BREACH OF THEIR PRIVILEGES AND RIGHTS TO BE
PATIENTLY ENDVR^D: Whereupon they presently raised up the Name and FORCES OF
THE UNION or Association (formerly made and entered into between the Nobility,
Cities, and people, mutually to aid and assist one another to preserve the
Peace and Liberties of the Realm, even with force of Arms) IT BEING LAWFVLL
for the common cause of Liberty; Non Verbis solum. SED ARMIS QVOQVE CONTENDERE,
not only TO CONTEND with words, BUT ALSO WITH ARMS. Upon this, king Alphonso
desirous to prevent the mischiefs then present and incumbent, by advise of his
Privy Counsel, published certain good Edicts at Osca for regulating his
Court, Counsel, Judges, Officers; by which he thought to have ended all this
Controversy, but because they were promulged only by the Kings own Edict, not
by the whole Parliament as binding Laws, they still proceeded in the Union;
till at last, after various events of things, this King returning to the
General Assembly, and Parliament of the Estates at Saragossa, in the year
1287. condescended to their desires, and confirmed the two memorable
privileges of the Union, with the Sovereign power of the Justice of Aragon,
which could control their very Kings: Of which see more in the Appendix.

I shall close up this of the lawfulness of a necessary defensive war, with
the speech of the Emperor Alexander Seuerus, recorded by Quoted by Grotius de
Iure Belli 2. c. 1. Annot. ad sect. 14. p. 11.
Herodian, l. 5. He who first infers injuries has no probable color; but he
that repulseth those who are troublesome to him; EX BONA CONSCENTIA sumit
fid^c^am; assumes confidence FROM A GOOD CONSCIENCE, and good hope of success
is present with him from hence, that he offers not injury, but removes it.

Thus have I now at last waded through this weighty controversy, of the
lawfulness both in point of Law and Conscience, of the Parliaments present,
and all other subjects necessary Defensive Wars against their Sovereigns, who
invade their laws liberties, Religion, Government, to subvert them, by open
force of Arms: in which I have freely and impartially discharged my
conscience, not out of any turbulent, seditious, or disloyal intention, to
foment or perpetuate the present, or raise any future destructive, unnatural
wars between king, Parliament, and People, or to countenance, to encourage
any tumultuous, rebellious, factious, ambitious, traitorous spirits to mutiny
or rebel against their Sovereigns for private injuries, or upon any false
unwarrantable ends or pretenses whatsoever; (let Gods curse and men's for ever
rest upon all those, who are in love with any war, especially a Civil,
within their own dearest Countries bowels; or dare abuse my loyal sincere
Lucubrations to any disloyal sinister designs, to the prejudice of their
Sovereigns, or the States wherein they live:) but only out of a cordial
desire to effect such a speedy, honorable, safe, religious, sempiternall peace
between king and Parliament, as all true Christian English hearts both
cordially pray, long for, and endeavor, by informing his seduced Majesty, his
evil Cou^sellors, his Popish Ma^ignant Forces, that if they will still proceed
unnaturally and treacherously to make war against their Native Country,
Religion, Laws, Liberties, and the Parliament, (which to do I have Part. 1.
E^. 2. p. 108. to 112.
elsewhere manifested to be no less then high Treason, Rebellion, against both
King and Kingdom) they may in point of conscience and Law too, be justly
opposed, resisted, repulsed, even by force of Arms, without any guilt of
Treason, Rebellion, or fear of temporal or eternal condemnation, as public
Enemies, Rebels, Traitors to the Realm, whateve^er they have hitherto been
informed of to the contrary by temporizing Lawyers, or flattering illiterate
Court Divines; and by assuring all such noble generous public spirits, who
shall willingly adventure their lives or fortunes by the Parliaments command,
in the present necessary defensive war, for the ends pr^mised; that for this
good service they shall neither in the Courts of Law. nor Conscience, incur
the least stain, or guilt of Treason, Rebellion, sedition, or any such like
odious crime, much less eternal condemnation; the panick fear whereof,
frequently denounced against them by many sottish Malignants, Royalists,
ill-instructed Lawyers and Theologasters, has frighted, kept back, and
withdrawn multitudes from, yea cooled, corrupted many in this honorable
public duty, service, which they now owe of Right to God and their Country;
in which to be treacherous, perfidious, sloathfull, negligent, cold,
uncordiall, or timorous (as too many hitherto have been, to the greater honor
of those who have been faithful, active, Valiant, and sincere) especially now
after so many late horrid treacheries most happily discovered and a new
Covenant solemnly entered into, demerits a perpetual brand of i^famy and
reproach. To dye fighting for ones dearest bleeding, dying Country, has in
all ages been honored with a Crown of Martyrdom; to live or dye fighting
against it has ever deserved the most capital censures, ignominies, and
heaviest execrations. Let both sides therefore now seriously ponder and lay all
the premises close to their souls, consciences; and then I doubt not through
Gods blessing, but a happy peace will speedily thereon ensue Isay 2. 4.
Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, Country against Country,
Englishman against Englishman, Brother against brother any more, as now they
do, neither shall they learn such an unnatural cursed kind of Civil War
any more, but beat their swords into Plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning ^ooks; and Romans 16. 16. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 26. 1 Pet. 5. 14.
greet one another with a kiss of holy peace and charity: Which desired end
and issue of these present bloody wars God in his mercy hasten and
accomplish, to the joy of all our Souls.

I should now, according to former engagements, proceed to other remaining
particulars; but because this part has already far exceeded its intended
bounds, out of a desire to give full satisfaction in a point of highest
present, and future concernment every way; I shall reserve the residue, with
the Appendix, for another distinct part; with which I shall conclude my
Meditations and Collections of this subject, without any further Additions, if
God say Amen.

Finis Partis tertiae.
Errata in some Copies.
Page 100. l. 8. to. by. p. 101. l. 32. Omri, Zimri. l. 40. ludah, Israel. p.
115. l. 12. that. p. 127. l. 36. of their. p. 128. l. 31. hence. p 136. l. 8.
not a Bishop; a Bishop, not a Layman. p. 14. l. 17. dele as: p. 15. 1. 16.
brevis. p. 26. l. 1. assistants. p. 94. l. 22. offer to, r. ask of. p. 17. 1.
l. 8 no man should long. p. 105. l. ^2. ^ipodes. p. 106. l. 2. Rulers, l. 34.
irresistance. p. 107. l. 3. by the. p. 121. l. 16. Emperors. l. 36. Emperor.

THE FOVRTH PART OF THE SOVEREIGN POWER OF PARLIAMENTS and KINGDOMS. Wherein
the Parliaments Right and Interest in ordering the Militia, Forts* Ships,
Magazins, and great Offices of the Realm, is manifested by some fresh Records
in way of Supplement: The two Houses Imposition of moderate Taxes and
Contributions on the People in cases of extremity, without the Kings assent,
(when wilfully denied) for the necessary defense and preservation of the
Kingdom; and their imprisoning, confining of Malignant dangerous persons in
times of public danger, for the common safety* are vindicated from all
Calumnies, and proved just. Together with an APPENDIX; Manifesting by sundry
Histories and Foraine Authorities, that in the ancient Kingdom of Rome; the
Roman, Greek, German Empires; the old, the present Grecian, Indian,
Egyptian, French, Spanish, Gothish, Italian, Hungarian, Polmian, Bohemian,
Danish, Swedish, Sc^ttish, with other Foraine Kingdoms; yea in the Kingdoms
of Judah, Israel, and other Gentile Royalties, mentioned in Scripture; the
Supreme Sovereign Power resided not in the Emperors, or Kings themselves,
but in the whole Kingdom, Senate, Parliament, State, People, who had not only
Authority to restrain, resist, yea call their Emperors, and Kings to an
account, but likewise, when they saw just cause, to censure, suspend, deprive
them for their Tyranny, vice^* mis-government; and sometimes capitally to
proceed against them. With a brief Answer to the contrary Objections; and
ten material Observations, confirming all the Premises. By WILLIAM PRYNNE,
Utter-Barrester, of Lincolnes Inn.

Ola^s Magnus l. 8. c. 32. De Iniquis, Consiliariis, etc. 33. Iniqui Consilia^^
aiunt, Regem nihil injuste facere p^sse, quippe omnia (...) ipsos. Tantum^^
(...) esse proprium, quantum Regis Benignitas ei non ^^lemeirt, etc. (...)
Principes, his and similibus consiliis and consiliariis, facti sunt eaules,
miseri, infames, and inhabile, inse and p^^eritate sua, amplius gubernandi.
Principisitaque Officium est, ut non se^us curet subdi^os, quam fidelis Pastor
(...) conservet.

It is this tenth day of July, Ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons
con^erning Printing, that this Book Entitled The fourth Part of the Sovereign
power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, etc. be Printed by Michael Spark senior.

John White.



Printed at London for Michael Spark Senior. 1643.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Here present thee with the last Part, of The Sovereign Power of Parliaments
and Kingdoms, and An Appendix in pursuance of it; abundantly manifesting, from
the very fundamental Constitutions, L^^^es, Customs, Resolutions,
Remonstrances, Oaths, Inaugurations* Elections, Ceremonies, Histories,
public Transactions, Treaties, Agreements, Wars, of Forain Empires, Emperors,
Realms, Kings, States, Senates, Diets, Parliaments, in all Ages, and the most
judicious foraine Authors of all sorts; That whole Kingdoms, Parliaments,
Senates, States, Nations collectively considered, have ever constantly enjoyed
in all Ages, Nations* the most Sovereign Jurisdiction, and Authority, and
been Paramount their Kings and Emperors, who were and are subordinate,
account^ble for their actions to them; and copiously refuting the fond
erroneous fancies of all illiterate flattering Court-Doctors, Theologasters,
Lawyers, Statists, who, without any shadow of Truth or Reason, audaciously
aver the contrary, not so much to f^atter or seduce their Princes, as to
advance themselves; against whom the contrary constant practice and resolutions
of most lawful Kingdoms, that either are or have been in the world from
Adams days till now, shall unanimously rise in judgment, and pass a most
Catholic irreversible sentence on them, for their notorious flatteries and
Impostures.

For mine own particular, as I have always been, and ever shall be an
honourer, a defender of Kings and Monarchy (the best of Government, whiles it
keeps within the bounds which Law and Conscience have prescribed;) So, I shall
never degenerate so far beneath the duty of a Man, a Lawyer, a Scholar, a
Christian, as to mis-informe, or flatter either; nor yet (out of any popular
vainglory) court either Parliaments or People, to the prejudice of Kings just
Royalties; but carry such an equal hand between them, as shall do right to
both, injury to neither; and preserve, support their just, Legal several
Soveraignties, Jurisdictions, Rights, within their proper limits, without
tyrannical invasions, or seditious encroachments, upon one another, to their
mutual and the Republickes prejudice.

It fares with Regal and Popular Powers, usually, as with Seas and mighty
Rivers, if they violently break down, or swellingly overflow their fixed
banks, they presently cause an Inundation, and in stead of watering, surround,
and drown the Countries round about them, for a season, (sometimes for sundry
years) ere they can be perfectly drained, and their banks repaired, to
confine them to their ancient proper Channels,; of which we have present sad
experience, written in Capital red Bloody Letters, throughout the Realm. To
redress, prevent which overflowing mischief for the future, I have without
fear or flattery of any bumane Power, or party whatsoever, by Public
Authority divulged this last, and the three preceding Parts of this Discourse:
together with the Appendix, (all hastily collected, and more confusedly
compacted through went of time, and sundry interrupting Avocations, then I
desired) wherein I have impartially, according to my judgment, conscience,
defended naught, but ancient, undoubted, universal Truths of real
State Policy, and true Theology, (almost forgotten in the world, yea cried,
Preached, Printed down for erroneous, seditious Paradoxes, if not Treasons, by
Sycophants and Malignants in these later ages;) out of a cordial affect^on as
much as in me lies, to restore and settle the weal, tranquillity, and safety
of my bleeding, dying Country, now miserably distracted, wasted, consumed every
where: (through the long fore plotted conspiracies of Romish Priests and
Jesuits, to subvert the Protestant Religion and our Realms) upon a pretended
quarrel unhappily raised by them, between the two much mistaken Grand
Sovereign Jurisdictions, of King and Parliament, Crown and Kingdom, now
miserably clashing one against the other, through ignorance and mistakes, and
trying their Titles in the open field BY BATTLE, in stead of Law; by the
Sword of the Soldier, not of the Spirit, the only proper peaceable Judges in
these Quarrels, by which alone they can and must be finally resolved, settled;
else neither King nor kingdom, can be ever quiet, or secure from dangers, and
Commotions.

I dare not presume to arrogate to my self, a Spirit of in ^errability in the
grand Controversies here debated, wherein I have traveled in no beaten common
road; No doubt See the 21. Article of the Church of England, and Rogers ibidem.
General, National Counsels, Parliaments, Popes, Kings, Counselors,
Statesmen, Lawyers, Divines, all sorts of men, both may, and usually do err
from Truth, (especially in Questions which concern their own Jurisdictions,
Honors, Profits;) and so may I. But this I dare with safe conscience protest
to all the world, that I have not willingly erred in any particular; and if I
have casually failed in any thing, out of humane frailty, I shall (upon better
information) acknowledge and retract it. In the mean time, I trust, I have
here sufficiently discovered, refuted, many common impostures and erroneous
gross mistakes in Law, Policy, Divinity, Antiquity; which have in later ages
been generally received as indubitable verities, by most men; yea professedly
defended by sundry injudicious Lawyers, and ignorant Divines (though perchance
reputed learned, solid in their own, and others opinions) who never took the
pains to dive into the true original fundamental creations, institutions,
public Laws, Reasons, Policies, Jurisdictions, compositions, Rights,
Customs, Histories of Kings, Kingdoms, Parliaments, States, Magistrates,
People; the ignorance whereof, has made them confidently vent many grand
absurdities, and untruthes, to the prejudice, imbroyling, and almost utter
ruin of diverse Kings and States; which now, I hope, they will ingenuously
acknowledge and recant with real grief and shame, that they have so grossly
cheated, seduced Kings, Kingdoms, People, and often times stirred up civil
wars, to maintain their idle lies, crazy fictions, as just Royal Rights,
and indubitable Prerogatives, when as they are nothing less.

I shall not beg any man's belief, of any Truth here newly discovered,
further than his own Judgment and conscience, upon serious consideration,
shall convince him of it; and himself discern it fully ratified by
substantial precedents and Authorities in the body and close of the Treatise
and Appendix: Only this I shall request of every Reader, to peruse over all the
Parts of this Discourse with a cordial Love of Truth and Peace; and when he is
convinced what is Truth, then to live and dye in Paul's resolution, 2 Cor. 13.
8. We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth. It was our Saviors
own reply to Pilate, John 18. 37. For this end was I borne, and for this cause
came I into the world, THAT I SHOULD BEAR WITNESS UNTO THE TRUTH; O then let
it now be every ones end, and practice too; since it is the Joh. 8. 32.
Truth (and nothing else) that shall make (and keep) us free: Free, from
Errors, Troubles, Tumults, Wars; Slavery, Tyranny, Treachery, Popery,
dangers, fears: Wherefore, Zech. 6* 19.
love the Truth and Peace, and then through Gods mercy we shall speedily
regaine, retain them both.

Farewell.
THE Fourth Part of the Sovereign POWER of PARLIAMENTS and KINGDOMS.
The Parliaments Interest in the Militia, Forts, Navy, and Officers of the
Kingdom.
IN the preceding Parts of this Discourse, I have with as much perspicuity and
sincerity as I could, waded through those deep and weighty differences of
greatest importance, which have lately (to our great unhappiness) I know not
by what Judge ^9. 23.
evil spirits solicitation, unexpectedly risen up by insensible degrees,
between the Kings Majesty, and the present Parliament; (whose primitive sweet
agreement, made us not so happy, as their subsequent Divisions in place,
affection, opinion, have rendered the whole three Kingdoms miserable,) in point
of Royal Prerogatives only, which I have dispatched: I should now proceed to
other Controversies between them, principally concerning the Subjects
Liberties; But before I pass to those particulars; I shall present you with
some few Records of special note (casually omitted in their proper place,
through overmuch haste, and want of time) which will very much clear the
Parliaments just right, and ancient Jurisdiction In ordering the Militia of the
Realm, by Sea and Land; in disposing the Ships, the Forts of the Realm for
the public safety in times of danger; in concluding matters of War and
Peace; in placing and displacing the great Officers, the Privy Counselors of
the Kingdom; yea regulating the Kings own household, and meniall servants often
times; when there was occasion; which may serve as a supplement to the second
part.

It it the determination of Henricus Rauzovius, a Noble Dane, a great Statesman
and Soldier in his Commentarius Bellicus, Dedicated to Christierne the fourth,
King of Denmark, Anno 1565. lib. 1. c. 3. That all Kings and Princes in most
Republickes, rightly and lawfully constituted, are obliged by their paction
entered into before their Inauguration, Plato lege hoc-sanxit, li 12 de Ll. Si
quis privatim sine publico s cito, pacem beslumve fecerit, capitale esto.
Not to begin or move any War without the consent of all the Estates and
Nobles. Thus in my hearing, Philip King of Spain, when he demanded and took
an Oath from his Subjects in the Netherlands, promised by a mutual Oath to the
Estates, That he would make no war in those parts without their privi^y. The
same also (most Noble King) is received and observed not only in your Kingdoms
and (...), but likewise is in use almost in all Europe. Therefore Frederick
your Father of most famous memory, knowing himself to be bound hereunto by
compact, before he would be involved in the Swedish War, communicating the
whole business faithfully to his people, as well to the Senators of the
Realm, as to the Nobles of the Dukedomes, maturely advised with them about the
manner of waging it. Wherefore, lest the War which is undertaken be accused
as unjust by the States, because it was undertaken without their advice,
contrary to custom and agreements, all ought to be assumed into the Counsel
and care of War. For thus it will come to pass, besides, that things very
well thought on and deliberated by many, have for the most part better
successes, then those things which are rashly begun by some one; that the
Subjects, who not unwillingly bring their estates and lives into danger, will
less fear the loss of both, will fight more valiantly, and will put forth
all their strength in prosecuting and ending the combat of war, even for
this reason, that themselves have been the advisers of the war. Upon this
reason, not only the Kings of the Jews, Arragon, France, Nav^re, and others,
(as I have manifested in the Page 141. 22, 23, 95 72. and elsewhere.
Appendix) but even of this our Realm, have usually undertaken all their
wars, and ordered all their Military affairs, both by Sea and Land, by the
advice and direction of their Parliaments, as the Grand Council of War, both
for King and Kingdom. This I have plentifully manifested in Part 2. and 3.
the premises, by sundry examples, and shall here only briefly ratify with
some few new Precedents.

In the first Parliament of 13 Ed. 3. after Proclamation made, Number. 2. That
none should come armed with weapons to the Parliament, Number. 3. The causes of
summoning the Parliament were showed to the Lords and Commons, to have their
counsel and advice therein, what was best to be done; and expressed to be
three. First, that every one, great and small, should consider, in what manner
the peace might most surely be preserved within the Realm. Secondly, how the
Marches of Scotland, and the Northern parts might be best defended and kept
against the enemies of Scotland. Thirdly, how the Sea should be guarded against
the enemies, that they should do no damage, nor enter the Realm for to
destroy it. After thus. Number. 4. The Bishops and Letters from the King then in
France, relate to the Houses the Estate of the Kings Army, wars, and
proceedings in France, and the great debts the King stood engaged in for the
maintenance of his Army; for discharge whereof and the Kings further relief in
the easiest way, to support his wars the Lords condescended to grant the
ninth sheafe of all their corn, and the ninth fleece and Lamb of all their
flocks to the King, for the two next years, so as the custom of Mal-tolt,
newly imposed on Woolls, should be released, and this grant not drawn
hereafter into custom, as a precedent to their prejudice. Who acquainting the
Commons therewith, they after deliberation; As to the Kings supply; returned
this Answer. Number. 8, 9. That they thought it meet the King should be supplied,
and were ready to aid him, as they had always formerly been, but yet as the
aid was granted in this case, they durst not assent to it, until they had
consulted and advised with the Commons in the Country; for which end they
craved time to go into their Counties, and that Writs might issue to summon
another Parliament on the Octaves of Saint Hillary, of the richest Knights in
every Shire at a short day to come, (which, was Number. 22, 23 24, 25.
condescended to.) After which, Number. 9, 10, 11. they gave this answer in
writing concerning the three Articles propounded to them: First, As to the
keeping of the peace of the Realm, that the Justices of the Peace had
sufficient power already to that purpose; only they add, that disturbers of
the peace should not be let out of Prison, but upon sufficient Bail, and that
no Charters of pardon should be granted to Felons, but by common consent in
Parliament, and all other pardons held as void. To the second they answered,
That the King before his going beyond the Seas had taken so good order, and
appointed such sufficient Guardians to defend the Marches of Scotland, who were
best able to guard those parts, that the enforcement of them by the Kings
Council would be sufficient, without any charge to the Commons; Only, they
ordered, that every man who had Lands in the Marches of Scotland, of what
condition soever they were, should reside upon them to defend them (as it had
been formerly ordained) without charge to the Commons. To the third,
concerning the guard of the Seas: The Commons prayed that they might not be
charged to give Counsel in things of which they had no conisance (or charge;)
and that they were advised, that the Barons of the Ports which at all times
have honors before all the Commons of the Land, and are so enfranchized to See
Cambdens Britannia, p. 318. accordingly.
guard the Sea between us and strangers, (if so be it falls out, that they will
enter and assail our Land) that they contribute to no aids nor charges on the
said Land, but receive profits without number arising by the Sea, for the Guard
aforesaid. Wherefore the Commons are advised, that they ought to maintain a
guard upon the Sea, as the Sea 19 E. 3. pars 1. M 14 and pars 2. m. 14 Judge
Crookes Argument against Shipmony, p. 69. to 74.
Commons do upon the Land, without taking or demanding wages. Likewise, there
are other great Towns and Havens which have a Navy, that are in the same case,
and are bound to guard the Sea. And as for the safeguard of the Watch-houses
upon the Sea by Land; let the guard of them be made by the advice of the
Knights of the Shire, where the said Guardians are assigned, in the safest
manner that may be, without charge of the Commons: And that the people of the
Land, of what condition soever, which have lands on the Coast, shall keep
residence upon those Lands, the better to repulse the enemies from the Land, so
that for their abiding there, they shall be discharged to give any aid toward
the same guard elsewhere. Number. 13. The Commons frame and demand a general
pardon, upon grant whereof they promise to aid the King with moneys. Number. 14.
They make an Ordinance for increase of moneys in the Realm. Number. 15. Because
the ships of England went not out together in Fleetes, to trade, but severally,
out of desire of gain and covetousness, and so many of them were taken by the
Enemies of the King, and the men slain and murdered, to the dishonor of the
King and the whole Realm; it was agreed, and assented in full Parliament, that
all the Navy should stay and be arrested, till further order were given to the
contrary. Number. 16. It was accorded and assented in Parliament, that the Bishops
and Lords in the Parliament, should send Letters to the Archbishop of York,
and the Clergy of his Province, under their Seals, to excite them to grant a
convenient aid for the guard of the Marches of Scotland, for the defense of the
Church, the Realm, and themselves, as the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury
had done. Number. 17. It is accorded, that Master Robert de Scardeburgh shall be
put into the Commission which shall be sent into the County of York, to survey
the Array of the people, which shall be chosen for the defense of the Realm,
in lieu of Sir Thomas de Blaston. That Sir Richard Chastell shall be put in the
Commission to survey the Array in the Counties of Notingham and Derby, and John
Feriby in the County of Lancaster. Number. 18. It is assented that the people of
Holdernes shall be Arrayed, taxed, and make aid for the guarding of the
Marches of Scotland, and other businesses of the King in those parts,
notwithstanding the Commission made to them to guard the Sea, Number. 21. The
Lords who have Lands toward the Marches of Scotland, are commanded and prayed
by writs and Letters to repair thither for defense thereof, namely the Lords
of Ros, Wake, Mowbray, Clifford, and Master William Daubeny Steward of the
Earl of Richmond, and that those who could not in this case go in proper
person, should send their people to the Lords in the Marches.

In the second Parliament held this year, by appointment of the first (Octabis
Hilarii, 13. Ed. 3. Number. 2. 5. Edward Duke of Cornwall, Guardian of England (in
the Kings absence) being hindered by other businesses to be present in this
Parliament, by Letters Patents under the Kings great Seal, appointed the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and others to supply his place, and hold the
Parliament. Number. 6, 7, 8, 9. The Commons for the defense of the Realm, Sea,
and Marches of Scotland, granted the King thirty thousand sackes of Wool, and
the Earls and Barons, the ninth sheafe, Fleece and Lamb, within their Demesne
Lands; and agreed to raise a great sum of money presently, to set out a fleet
of Ships to Sea, fraught with men of arms, and archers for defense of the
Realm. Number. 10. All the Merchants of England, were summoned by writ to appear
at Westminster in proper person, to confer upon great businesses concerning
the Kings honor, the salvation of the Realm, and of themselves. Number. 11. The
Mariners of the Cinque Ports upon their departure promised to make their ships
ready by Mid-Lent; and were to receive a sum of money to help defray their
charges herein; and the men of the Cinque Ports, promised to defray the moity
of the costs; and the Kings Counsel the other moity, but not in name of wages,
but out of special grace; and the Sea Cambdens Britan. p. 318.
Cinque Ports were to find 21 ships of their own, and nine ships of the River
of Thames. Number. 12. The Mariners toward the West promised to find 70. ships
of an hundred Tun and upwards, and to make them ready by the same day; and to
defray the charges of them as far as was requisite; and for the residue, the
Kings Counsel were to send them a sum of money for their aid, but not as
wages, but of special grace; and a Clerk was ordained to survey the charges
of the Mariners of the West; and of the Cinque Ports. Number. 23. All the ships of
Portsmouth, and the West, were to meet at Dartmouth at the day assigNed; and
the Earl of Arundell was assigned their Admiral; And the ships of the
Cinque Ports and the River of Thames, were to meet, and assemble at Winchelse,
and the Earl of Huntindon, appointed their Admiral; and that all these ships
should be ready by the middle of Lent, Number. 19. The Admiralls of all parts were
commanded to arrest all other ships, that might pass the Seas, for fear of
being surprised by the enemies, and that 200. men should man those to whom the
smaller ships belonged, to bring them into such havens where they might be
safest from the Enemies. Number. 15. Writs were directed to all Sheriffs of
England to make Proclamation, that all those who had Charters of pardon, should
repair toward the Sea, in the service of the King, and at his wages by the
middle of Lent, upon pain of losing their Charters, and being put to answer
the things contained in them, in case they should not go. Number. 16. It was
accorded and assented in Parliament, that Master Richard Talbot ordained to
guard the Town of Southampton, which he had undertaken to do, should have a
company of men at Arms, and Archers at the Kings wages, which he might
increase if there were cause; that he and they should have their wages paid
them monthly, from the second Sunday in Lent, and so forwards whiles they
continued in that Service, and that he should receive 200. pounds in money, and
200. marks in Wool, in respect of his said service, and to defray his ancient
debts. And he had power given him to assesse and levy moneys upon the said
Town, toward its defense; and if the Town were not able to defray all the
charge, the King should aid them for the residue.

Number. 18. The Bishop of Winchester, the Prior of St. Swithin of Winchester, and
the Abbot of Winchester, were commanded to have the people of their Manners
next the Town of Southhampton well a^med and arrayed, that they might be ready
to their power to defend the said town, upon summons of the Guardians thereof*
that no peril might happen thereunto, Number. 19. That two Pinaces, one of
Melbroke, and the other belonging to Roger Norman^, should be assigned to
remain in the port of Southampton, at the appoi^tment of the said Mr. Richard,
for the safety the^eof. Number. 20. All the Burgesses and Seamen of the Town
which had departed thence, were ordered to go and abide therein (...) the
defense thereof, and of their own possessions; and in case they refu^ed, that
their Lands and Possessions should be seized into the Kings hands, and the
profits of their Lands which should be found elsewhere. Number. 21. That a
Commission should be made to Stephen Butterly, and William Weston, Sergeants at
Arms, to take Timber, Bords, and other things necessary for the safety of the
said Town at certain prises, upon endenture made between them and the owners
of the said goods; and that the King should pay, or give them other
satisfaction. Number. 22. 23. That all the Arms, Engines, Ammunition, Iron and
Lead in the said Town, should be delivered to the Guardian of it by Indenture;
who should have the same power in all things within that Town, as the Earl of
Warwick had, when he was Governor. Number. 24. That the Sheriff should have a
Writ of attendance, to be attendant on the said Mr. Richard, with Victuals, and
all other things necessary for the safeguard of the said Town. Number. 25. 26. 27.
Certain Merchants are appointed and take upon them to the Parliament, to buy
great proportions of Corn, Peace, Oats, Hay, and other provi^ions, (the
quantities whereof are particularly expressed) at certain rates, to victual
Barwicke, the Castles of Edenburg, and Strivelyn, (which Castles Mr. Thomas
Rokeby, Guardian thereof, promised to keep till Saint John's day then next to
come, upon condition to receive his wages formerly due, out of the first moneys
granted to the King in this Parliament,) by a certain day; provided they shall
carry no victuals to the enemies of the King and Realm, and that they should
be paid out of the first moneys arising out of the aid granted to the King.
Number. 28. 29. The inhabitants of the ^sle of Wight were respited of the aid
granted to the King, according as their good carriage should be during the war;
and it was agreed in Parliament, that no Commandment nor Ordnance, or license
granted under the great or privy Seal, to any of the said inhabitants bound to
defend the said Isle, should license any to absent himself from it during the
war, unless it were for fear of disinheriting or other great necessity: with
which the Council should be acquainted, or upon in quests. Number. 30. 31.
Provides, that the Castle of Caresbr^^ in the I Will of Weight should be furnished
with a certa^ne proportion of Wine* Corn, Peace, O^ts, Hey, Coals* Iron, Salt;
and that a Commission should be granted to Robert Vandalym Sheriff of
Southampton, and to William of Kekenwich jointly and severally, to purvey and
deliver the same provisions over by Indenture, to the Constable of that Castle;
and a Writ directed to the Kings Botteller, to deliver the Wines assigned (to
wit ten Tonne) out of the Wines then in, or which should first come into his
hands. Number. 32. Mr. Thomas Ferrers undertakes to the Parliament, to send
without delay a sufficient man to the Castle of Iernsey, to survey she defaults
and state of the said Castle, to certify the Council fully of them; and in
the mean time to find the wages of those remaining there in garrison, to the
sum of an hundred pounds; and a Writ is directed to the Sheriff of
Southampton, to furnish the said Thomas with a convenient quantity of Powder,
and Iron, and other necessaries for the defense of that Castle. And because
Thomas Pain, one of the Jurates of that Isle was gone to the enemies, contrary
to a defense made, that a Writ should issue to the Bailiffs and Jurates of the
same Isle to choose another sufficient man in his place, and to seize his
Lands, goods, and Chattels into the Kings hands, and answer the meesne profits
of them. Number. 34. dorso. There is an exact Array or List of all the Captains
and men at Arms, and archers under their several commands for defense of the
borders of Scotland, amounting in all to 4715. Number. 35. Those of the Counties
of Nottingham, Derby, York, were to go to Newcastle upon Tine, at the
Countries charges, and then to receive the Kings wages: and those of
Westmerland, Cumberland and Lancashire, to marth to Carlisle at the Counties
charges, and then to receive the Kings wages; and that the Commanders, great
men, and all the host when they assembled should lie and travel in the Land of
Scotland, and not in the Marches of England. Number. 36. 37. A fit and trusty
Clerk is appointed to pay the Soldiers wages by the advice and survey of the
Lords Percy and Nevill, and Merchants are ordered to return moneys for the
exploit, and to furnish the King of Scotland with moneys sufficient to
maintain twenty men at Arms. Number. 38. Because Mr. Richard Talbot had
discharged himself of the government of Barwicke, the Lords in Parliament
earnestly entreated Sir Walter Creake to take upon him the custody of Barwicke,
and to certify the Lords within a short time, how many men at Arms and
Archers would suffice to guard it, and whether he would accept of the charge or
not; and if not, they would provide another. Number. 39. A Commission is granted
to Master Thomas Wake and others to muster the Horse and Foot arrayed for this
expedition in Yorkshire and the other Counties, and to conduct them toward
Newcastle. Number. 46. It is accorded and assented, that Writs shall be made to
the arrayers of the Men of Arms, Hoblers, and Archers, in the Country of
Oxford, for the guarding of the Sea, for the Prior and Canons of Burnacester,
to surcease their demand which they made to the said Prior and Canons to find
a man at Arms and two Archers to make such a guard at Portsmouth; and also for
the payment of certain moneys for this cause, until they have other command
from the King; by reason that the Prelates and other great men in the
Parliament are informed, that all the possessions of their house will hardly
suffice for their sustenance, and that they cannot find such charge without
very great oppression of them and their house.

Lo here in these two Parliaments (the Rols whereof I have recited more
largely, because rare and memorable) all businesses concerning the Wars,
Militia and Array both by Land and Sea, were particularly consulted of,
ordered, and determined in and by the Parliament only; in a far more ample
manner then this present Parliament at first petitioned, desired they should
have been ordered and settled now.

In the Parliament rolls 14 E. 3. Number. 19. Certain men are appointed to guard
the Islands and Seacoasts against the enemies. Number. 42. The Lord Mowbray is
appointed keeper of the Town of Barwick^. Number. 53. 54. 55. etc. Commissions of
Array in several Counties are made by Parliament to the Earl of Angoyes and
others, for defense of the Kingdom.

In the Parliament of 50 E. 3. Number. 15. A Commission is granted in Parliament
to the Lord Percy and others, to appoint able persons for defense of the
Marches of the East Riding.

In the Parliament Roll of 1 R. 2. Number. 51. Because that the Lands of
Gascoigne, Ireland, the Seigniory of Artoyes, and the Marches of Scotland are
in peril to be lost through default of good Officers, the Commons petition,
that it would please the Lords to ordain good and sufficient ministers, which
may be sent to govern in the same Lands in the most hasty manner that may be,
by reason of the great need that requires it. And that all the chief guardians
of the Ports and Castles upon the Sea, as Dover, Bannburgh, Carlisle, and other
Marches, may be put in the form aforesaid: And that these Guardians of the
Castles and keys of the Realm may be sufficient men, who may forfeit their
inheritance if any mischief shall happen by reason of them, which God forbid.
And that in all other, sufficient persons of your Leiges be placed who may
forfeit in the same manner for the salvation of the Realm. To which the King
answers. The King wills it, and will do that which shall belong to him by
the advice of the Lords of His continual Council.

In 2 R. 2. Rot. Parliament. Number. 37. the Admiralty is disposed of by the
Parliament: and Number. 39. a Schedule of Orders for the defense of the North sea,
is confirmed by the Parliament.

In the Parliament of 7 and 8 H. 4. Number. 26. The Parliament gave power to the
Merchants to name two meet persons to be Admirals, to guard the Seas.

In the Parliament rolls of 2 R. 2. pars 2. Number. 37. The Commons supplicate,
how the enemies of France, with great Armies, and many Vessels of war have
been continually, and yet are in the Northern parts, and namely about the
coasts of Scarburrough, which Town is dangerously seated upon the Sea, open to
the assaults of the said enemies, and that the people of the said Town had
within two years last past paid above one thousand pound ransom to the said
enemies, and yet were destroyed and carried prisoners into Boloigne and other
places, where they were yet kept prisoners, and that the Town was upon the
point to be burned and destroyed, and all the coast about it in short time, if
hasty remedy were not provided. That therefore it would please the King and his
most sage Council, considering the great damages and perils the said Town
and coasts about it had sustained, and were yet apparently like to sustain, to
ordain and assign certain Vessels of war upon the said coasts, to guard
them against the malice and power of the said enemies; and that during the
wars, for saving of the said Town, and the Kings Castle there situate, and
all the Country about i^. The Answer is: This matter is in part touched by the
Merchants of the said coast which are at this Parliament, and by their advise
and others who are to pass their Merchandise in these Marches by Sea, remedy
has been ordained in such sort as the Earl of Northumber land and the Major
of London, who were assigned in Parliament to treat of this business know more
fully to declare.

In the Parliament of 6 R. 2. pars 2. Number. 11. The Bishop of Norwich offered
before the King and Lords, that if the King would grant him the quindisme and
disme of the Laity and Clergy; and the 6 pound and 2 shillings on the Tonne of
Wine, lately granted to the King for the safeguard of the Sea; that he would
within 20 days after the receipt of the last payment, transport into France
3000 Archers well armed and mounted for the aid of Gaunt; and would defray all
the charges of shipping them: And that if he might have the attendance of the
West-Admirall, he would find on the Sea for the safeguard of it, between this
and Michaelmas next, ten great ships, and ten B^rges armed; in which besides
Mariners necessary, he would find at least 500 fighting men for the said
term.

In the Parliament of 15 R. 3. Number. 15. It is to be remembered, that the Commons
said in full Parliament, that if a treaty of peace or truce should be
entertained between their Lord the King and his adversary of France, that they
thought it expedient and necessary, if it should please the King, that Mounseur
de Guyen, because he is the most suffi^ient person of the realm shall go to
the same T^eaty. And the King said, that he liked it well, if it pleased the
said Lord de Guy^n: and thereupon Mounseur de Guyen said, that he would with a
very good will travel and do any thing which might turn to the honor and
profit of the King, and of his realm.

In the Parliament of the 14 H. 6. Number. 10. The Kings grant of the c^stody of
the Town and Castle of Calice, the Town of Risbanke, the Castles of Hamures,
Mark, Oye, Stangate, Bavelingham, and of the Castle and Dominion of Guynes in
Picardy, to be made to Humfrey Duke of Gloucester his uncle, in the presence of
the Lords spiritual and temporal then being in the present Parliament, was on
the 29 day of October read before them: which being understood, and ma^ure
deliberation taken thereupon, the several reasons of the said Lord being
heard, it was at last by their assent and consent agreed and ordered, that the
said Duke should have the custody of the said Town, Castles, and premises, to
the end of nine years then next ensuing, which Charter was subscribed by all
the Lords there present.

In the Parliament of 31 H. 6. Number. 41. procustodia Maris, it was enacted: For
as much as the King, considering that as well diverse His Clergy men of this his
realm inhabiting nigh the coast of the Sea, and others His Subjects using the
Trade of Merchandises, have been oftentimes grievously imprisoned, distressed,
put to great sufferances and ransomes; and their Ships, Vessels, and
Merchandises of great value taken upon the Sea by his enemies; and also
Merchant strangers, being under his leageance, amity, safeguard, or safe conduct
upon the Sea, have been robbed and spoiled, against the form and contents of
such truces, and safe conducts signed; His Highness willing and intending
sufficiently to provi^e for the remedy of such inconveniences* and to eschew
and avoid all such (...) and dispoylers, HAS BY THE ADVICE AND ASSENT OF THE
LORDS SPIRITUAL AND TEMPORAL in his high Court of Parliament ass^mbled,
de^i^ed certain great Lords of this re^lme, that is to say, Richard Earl of
Salisbury, John Earl of Shrewsbury, John Earl of Worcester, James Earl of
Wiltshire, and John Lord Sturton with great Navies of Ships and people
defensible in great number purveyed of abiliments of war, to intend with all
diligence to their possibility the safeguard and keeping of the Sea. For which
cause the subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage granted to the King for his
natural life this Parliament, that they might be applied to such uses and
intent as they be granted the King BY THE ADVICE AND ASSENT OF THE LORDS
SPIRITUAL AND TEMPORAL, AND COMMONS IN THIS PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED, AND BY
AUTHORITY OF THE SAME, were granted to the said Earls and Lord Sturton, and
the survivers of them for three whole years; with power for them to appoint
Collectors to receive and collect them in every Port, without rendering, any
account; so as they kept the covenants and endentures made between the King and
them for the safeguard of the Seas; with a proviso, that this Act during the
three years should not: be prejudicial to the custom of the Town or Castle
of Calice or Rishbanke, for the payment of the wages and arreares of the
Soldiers there. And over that, if the goods of any of the Kings liege-people,
or any of his friends, be found in any Vessel of the Kings enemies without any
safe conduct, that then the said Earls and the Lord Sturton shall take and
depart it among them and their retinue without any impeachment, according to
the Statute thereupon made.

In the Parliament of 33 H. 6. Number. 27. the said Lords were discharged of the
custody of the Sea by the Parliament, in these words: For as much as the Earls
of Salisbury, Shrewsbury, and Worcester, and the Lord Sturton besought the
Kings Highness in this present Parliament, that it might like his Highness and
Excellency of his Noble grace to have them clearly discharged of the keeping
of the Sea, the King therefore and for other causes moving his Highness, BY
THE ADVICE OF THE LORDS SPIRITUAL AND TEMPORAL IN THE SAID PARLIAMENT
ASSEMBLED the 30 day of July, the 23 day of the same Parliament, admitted their
desire, and would that the said Earls and Lord Sturton, or any other THAT HAD
THE KEEPING OF THE SEA BY AN ACT MADE IN THE LAST PARLIAMENT begun and holden
at Redding, and ended at Westminster, be (...) the 30 day of July fully
discharged of the keeping of the same, and that IT SHOULD BEENA CTED OF RECORD.

In the Parliament of 39 H. 6. Number. 32. The King BY THE ADVICE OF THE LORDS
SPIRITUAL AND TEMPORAL, AND COMMONS IN THIS PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED, AND BY
AUTHORITY THEREOF, ordained and established, that his dearest cousin Richard
Duke of York rightful heir to the Countries of England and France, and of
the Lordship and Land of Ireland, have and take upon him the power and labor
to ride into the parts of England, and Wales, where great rebellions, murders,
riots, spoylings, executions, and oppressions be used, committed and attempted,
to repress, subdue, and appease them. And also to resist the enemies of France
and Scotland within the realm. And further granted, ordained, and established
by the said advice and authority, that every Sheriff, with the power and might
of his Sheriwicke, and every Major, Bailiffe, Officer, Minister, and Subject of
the said realm of England and of Wales, shall attend upon his said cousin for
the said intent, as the case shall require; and to the same intent be ready at
the command of his said cousin; and the same obey and perform, in like case as
they ought to do at his commandment after the course of the Laws of England,
and in Wales after the custom^s there, etc.

And to cite no more presidents in so clear a case: in the Parliament of 21
Iacobi chapter 33. The Temporalty having granted three entire Subsidies, and three
Fifteenes and tenths, to King James, toward the maintenance of the wars that
might then suddenly ensue upon the breach with Spain, and more particularly
for the defense of the realm of England, the securing of Ireland, the
assurance of the states of the united Provinces, with the Kings friends and
allies; and for the set^ing forth of the Navy-royall: did by that Act, for the
better disbursing of the said (...) and mannaging that war according to the
Parliaments true intention, by that very Act wherein they gave the Subsidies,
did especially appoint eight Aldermen and other persons of London Treasurers to
receive and issue the said moneys; and appointed ten Lords and Knights
(particularly named in the Act) to be of the King Council for the war; by
whose warrant (under five of their hands at least) all the moneys they granted
were to be issued and exported, for and toward the uses expressed in the Act
to such person or persons as the said Council of war should direct: and that
both those Treasurers, and this Council of war^e, and all other persons
trusted with the receiving, issuing, bestowing and employing of those moneys or
any part thereof, their heirs, executors and administrators, should be
answerable and accomptable for their doings and proceedings therein to the
Commons in Parliament, when they shall be thereunto required by Warrant under
the hand of the Speaker of the House of Commons for the time being; and thereby
they and every of them according to their several places and employments shall
give a true and ready declaration and account of their several respective
dealings, doings and proceeding therein; and that the said Commons in
Parliament shall have power by this Act, to hear and determine the said
account, and all things thereto appertaining; And withal they in this Act
prescribe a specialloath to the Treasurers, Not to issue out any moneys without
the Warrant of the Council of war under their hands. And another oath to the
Council of war, To make no Warrant for any moneys issued, which are given by
this Act, but for some of those ends which are expressed therein, and that to
the best of their means they should employ the said moneys accordingly; and
that freely without requiring any reward or allowance whatsoever.

Which presidents with others forementioned, made His Majesty return this An
exact collection of all Remonstrances, etc. p. 66, 67.
Answer to the Petition of the Lords and Commons touching the Articles
delivered February 2. 1641. For the securing you from all dangers or jealousies
of any; His Majesty will be content to put in all the places both of FORTS and
MILITIA, in the several Counties, such persons as both Houses of Parliament
shall either approve or recommend unto Him; so that you declare before unto His
Majesty the names of the persons whom you approve or recommend; unless such
persons shall be named against whom He shall have just and unquestionable
exception. And thus much by way of supplement touching the Militia.

Concerning the Parliaments interest and right in electing and removing the
Officers of the realm, and the Kings meniall servants, I shall only add
these Precedents to the Part. 1. p. 89, 90. part, 2. p. 41. to 74.
forementioned.

In the Parliament rolls ^4 E. 3. N^m. 1. Four Bishops, four Earls, and
four Barons were assigned to the King, without whose consent, or of four of
them, no great business was to be transacted.

14 E. 3. Number. 36. in the Parliament rolls, The Parliament agrees, that the
Duke of Cornwall be Custos of England during the Kings absence in the wars of
France.

In the Parliament rolls of 1 R. 2. Number. 18. and 19. The Commons requested
first, that it would please the King to ordain, and nominate to them now in
this present Parliament, some sufficient persons of diverse estates to be
continually resident of his counsel for the affairs of the King and of the
realm, and to have the Officers of the King of such persons who best knew, and
would and might most diligently travel for the redress of the foresaid
mischiefs, and the good government and salvation of the realm, so that the
Commons may be clearly ascertained of the names of those Counselors which
shall be disbursers and orderers of that which they shall grant for the wars,
and thereby to have greater encouragement to do to our Lord the King that
which they have in charge concerning him, as is aforesaid. Also that it would
please them to ordain and nominate in this Parliament the persons which shall
be about (or have the custody) of the person of our Lord the King himself, who
is of such tender age, and that those persons shall be of the most virtuous,
honestest, and sufficientest of the Realm; so that our said Lord, who is a
person sacred and anointed, be nobly governed, and brought up in good virtues
and manners to the pleasure of God, whereby all the Realm may be secured and
amended; and that it be likewise or^dained, that our Lord the King and ^is
house be governed with good moderation, and defray his expenses only out of
the revenues of the Realm, and other rights and seigniories of his Crown. And
that all that which shall be granted to our Lord the King in maintenance of his
wars, shall be applied and expended in the wars, and no part thereof
otherwise, in aid and discharge of his said commonaltie.

In the Parliament of 11. Richard 2. Number. 23. The Commons pray, That no person,
of what state or condition he be, should meddle with any manner of governance
about the person of our Lord the King, nor with the businesses of the Realm,
nor yet to council our Lord the King, but those Lords which are assigned and
ordained in this present Parliament, if it be not by ordinance of the
continual Council, and by assent of our Lord the King, upon grievous pain.
And the same Lords, which shall be about the person of our Lord the King and
of his Council, shall cause to remove all the persons which they think sit to
remove in the household of our Lord the King, without showing favor to any, and
to put others in their places, whom they shall think sufficient and virtuous.
And that the said Lords of the Council be charged to keep and sustain the
estate of our Lord the King in 'its regalty, and to do and use that which may
turn to the honor and profit of our Lord the King and of his Realm to their
power, according to the form of the O^^h contained in a Schedule made in this
present Parliament annexed hereunto; to the intent that it may be notoriously
known thorowout all the Realm, that good and sufficient Council is about the
person of our Lord the King, to the comfort of all his Commons, and firm
assurance and establishme^t of the Realm aforesaid; the which Oath was made in
form ensuing. You shall swear, That you will not assent, nor yet suffer, as
much as in you lies, That any Judgment, (...), or Ordinance made or given in
this present Parliament be any way annulled, reversed, or repealed in any time
to come; and moreover, That you shall keep the good Laws and usages of the
Realm before these times made and used; and shall firmly keep, and cause to be
kept, good peace, quiet, and tranquillity in the Realm ^according to your
power, without disturbing them in any manner. So help me God and his Saints.
The Answer. As to the first point of this Article, the King will it: And as to
the second point, If there be any Lord of the Council, or other Lord of the
Realm, which will inform the King, That he has any person about him not
sufficient, nor honest, he wills, that it being proved, he shall be outed and
removed, and another sufficient, by his advice, put in his place.

In the Parliament of 5. Henry 4. Number. 16. Upon certain prayers and requests
made before by the Commons, diverse times touching the removing of diverse
persons, as well aliens and others, by reason of diverse destructions by them
moved, and for certain Articles appointed by the Lords upon the charges given
to them by our Lord the King in Parliament, and by the said Lords it was
specially accorded, That four persons, to wit, the Kings Confessor, the Abbot
of Done, Master Richard Derham, and Crosseby of the Chamber, shall be quite
ousted and voided out of the Kings house; whereupon the ninth of February, the
said Confessor, Master Richard, and Crosseby came before the King and Lords in
Parliament, and there the King in excusing the said four persons said openly,
that he knew not by them any cause or occasion in special for which they ought
to be removed from his household; notwithstanding our said Lord the King well
considered, that what the said Lords and Commons shall do or ordain, Nota.
was for the good of him and of his Realm, and therefore he would conform
himself to their intentions, and did well agree to the said Ordinance, which
charged the said Confessor, Master Richard, and Crosseby to avoid his said
Court, and like charge should have been given to the said Abbot, had he been
present. And our Lord the King said further, That he would do the like with
any other which was about his royal Person, if he was in hatred or indignation
with his people. And Numb. 37. To the end that good and just government and
remedy may be made of diverse complaints, grievances, and mischiefs showed to
our Lord the King in this Parliament; our Lord the King, to the honor of God,
and upon the great instances and requests to him diverse times made in this
Parliament by the Commons of his Realm, for the ease and comfort of all his
Realm, has ordained certain Lords and others underwritten to be of his great
and continual Council, to wit, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
Lincoln Chancellor of England, the Bishops of Rochester, Winchester, Bath,
and Ba^gor, the Duke of York, the Earls of Sommerset and Westmerland, the
Lord Roos Treasurer of England, the Keeper of the Great Seal, the Lord
Berkley, the Lord Willoughby, the Lord Furnevall, the Lord Lovell, Mounsier
Pierce Courtney, Master Hugh Waterton, Master John Cheyne, Master Arnald
Savage, John Northbury, John Doreward, John Cawsou.

In the Parliament of 7. and 8. Henry 4. Numb. 31. The 22. day of May, the
Commons came before the King and his Lords in Parliament, and then John
Tibetot, their Speaker, reheased, how they had prayed the King in the beginning
of the Parliament, and after, to increase the number of his Council for the
better government of the Realm, and prayed the King to put it in execution;
and further rehearsed* how that the Archbishop of Canterbury had reported to
them, That the King would be counseled by the most sage Lords of the Realm,
the which ought to have the survey of all that which shall be done for the good
government of this Realm, which thing the King agreed to do and rehearsed
with his own mouth, That it was his entire will. And thereupon a Bill made by
the King himself, by his own will was delivered, containing the names of the
Lords which shall be of his Council, the tenor of which Bill ensues. It is
to be remembered that our Lord the King, considering the great labors,
occupations, and diligence which he ought necessarily to employ about the good
government of his Realm, and other his possessions, as well on this side the
Sea as beyond it. First of all for the preservation of our Lord the King, and
of his Crown, and that the revenues of the same may be the better collected to
his profit and increase, as much as a man may j^^rly do, to the end that he
may the better sustain his honorable estate. And secondly, for the
confirmation of the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, to the end that equal
right may be done to every one, as well poor as rich; Our Lord the King, of his
proper and good will, desirous to be supported in the foresaid causes, because
that he cannot attend thereunto in proper person so much as he would, for the
great love and good affiance which he has among others, in the most reve^end
Fathers in God, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Winchester and
Excester, the Duke of York, the Earl of Somerset, the Lord Roos, the Lord
Burnet, the Lord Lovell, the Lord Willoughbie, the Chancellor, Treasurer, and
Keeper of the privy Seal, the Steward and Chamberlaiue, Master Hugh Waterton,
Master John Cheyney, and Master Arnald Savage, has chosen and charged them to
be of his counsel, praying and commanding them, that in all the foresaid
causes they will put to their entire diligences for the profit of our said Lord
the King, and likewise for the confirmation of the Laws and Statutes aforesaid.

In the Parliament of 2. Henry 6. number. 15. After diverse special requests of
the Commons of the Realm, being in the present Parliament, made to my Lord of
Gloucester Commissary of the King, and to other Lords Spiritual and Temporal
there, for to have notice and conusance of the persons assigned and elected to
be of the Kings Council, to their great ease and consolation. By advice and
assent of all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal aforesaid, were elected and
named certain persons, as well spiritual and temporal, to be Councillors
assistant to the governance of the Realm, whose names here ensue; The Duke of
Gloucester, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Winchester,
Norwich, Worce^^er, the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Keeper of the privy Seal,
the Duke of Excester, the Earl of March, the Earl of Warwick, the Earl
Marshall, the Earl of Northumberl^nd, the Earl of Westmerland, the Lord
Cromwell, the Lord Fitz H^gh, the Lord Bourchier, the Lord Scroop, Master
Walter Hungerford, Master John Tiptoff, ^homas Chaucer, William Allington.

In the Parliament of 29. Henry 6. number. 6. Upon the Petition of the Commons
against diverse Lords, Bishops, Knights, Esquires, and others, to the number of
29. who mis-behaved themselves about the royal Person of the King, and in
other places, by whose only means it was suggested, the Kings possessions had
been greatly diminished, his Laws not executed, the peace of the Realm not
observed, to the great hurt and trouble of the liege people of the Realm, and
likely subversion of the same, of which misbehaviour, universal noise and
clamor was openly received thorowout all the Realm, upon the same persons
specified in the Petition; all of them, except the Lords and some few others,
without further evidence against them, were by the King now removed from his
presence and Court for a whole years space, within which time any man that
could and would object against any of them* should be patiently heard and
intended to.

Those few fresh Presidents added to the precedent, and to such foreign
examples of this nature cited in the Appendix, will abundantly clear the
Parliaments right and Kingdoms interest in nominating, placing, and displacing
the great Officers of the Kingdom* and in regulating the Kings own meniall
servants in some cases, when they either corrupt or mis-counsell him. And thus
much touching the unhappy differences between the King and Parliament,
concerning matters of his own royal Prerogative.

The Parliaments Right and Jurisdiction to impose Taxes and Contributions on
the Subjects for the necessary defense of the Realm, Laws, Liberties without
the King, in case of the Kings wilful absence from, and taking up Arms against
the Parliament and Kingdom, briefly vindicated from the calumnies against it.
THe several grand Objections of consequence made by the King and others
against the Parliaments pretended usurpations upon the just Rights and
Prerogatives of the Crown, being fully examined and refuted in the Premises,
so far (I hope) as to satisfy all ingenuous men, in point of Divinity, Policy,
Law, Reason, Conscience. I shall next proceed to the remaining material
Accusations which concern the Subjects only, in regard of Property and
Liberty: wherein I will contract my Discourse into a narrow compass; partly
because the debate of the foregoing Differences between the Kings Prerogative
and the Parliaments Sovereign Jurisdiction, has in some sort overruled the
Controversies betwixt the Subjects and both Houses, representing them: partly
because these accusations are not so universally insisted on, as the former
which concern the King; the justness of them being generally acknowledged,
willingly submitted to by most, except such, who calumniate and traduce them,
either out of covetousness only to ^ave their Pur^es, or from a groundless
Malignity against the Parliament, or out of a consciousnesse of their own
Delinquencies, subjecting them to the Parliaments impartial Justice, or out of
some particular interests which concern them in their gains, honors,
preferments, or such who by their restraints for not paying Parliamentary
Assessements, hope to save their purses for the present; or to gain favor and
preferment by it for the future. If these private sinister ends were once laid
by, this second sort of accusations would speedily vanish, especially with men
of public spirits, who prefer the Commonweal before their own particular
interests.

The first of these Cavillatory Objections Object. 6.
against the Parliaments proceedings is, That both Houses, without the Kings
See the Kings Declarations and Proclamations against this and other
Assessements.
Royal Assent, have contrary to Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, the
Statutes De Tallagio non concedendo, and other Acts, by their Ordinances only
imposed late Taxes on the Subjects, amounting to the twentieth part of their
estates, and since that monthly or weekly Assessements, to maintain a war
against the King; a grand incroachment on the peoples Properties, contrary to
all Law and Justice.

This Objection seems very plausible and cordial to covetous Earthworms,
being politikely contrived to Court the close-handed niggardly party, by those
who are guiltiest in themselves of that they thus object against others. But it
will easily receive an answer, Answer.
as to the Parliament, and recoyle with infinite disadvantage on those that
make it.

First (...) an^wer, That the Parliament is the absolute Sovereign power
within the Realm, not subject to, or ob^iged by the letter, or intendment of
any Laws, being in truth the sole Lawmakers, and having an absolute Sovereignty
over the Laws themselves (yea, over Magna Charta, and all other objected Acts)
to repeal, alter, determine and suspend them when there is cause, as is
undeniable by its altering the very common Law in many cases, by repealing,
changing many old Statute Laws, and enacting new ones every Sessions as there
is occasion, for the public safety and defense. This the practice of all
Parliaments in all ages (yea the constant course of all Parliaments and
Assemblies of the Estates in all foreign Kingdoms too) abundantly manifests.
The Parliament therefore never intended by all or any of these objected Acts,
to bind its own hands, but only the Kings and his Ministers, with inferior
Courts of Justice, neither is the Parliament within the letter, words, or
meaning of them; therefore not obliged by them.

2. The King, with his Officers, Judges, and inferior Courts of Justice only
are included, and the Parliament, is directly excluded out of the very letter
and meaning of all these Acts; as is apparent. First in general, from the
occasion of enacting all these Laws, which was not any complaints made to the
King of any illegal taxes, imprisonments, or proceedings of our Parliaments,
to the oppression of the people; but only the great complaints of the people
and Parliament against the illegal taxes, impositions, imprisonments, and
oppressions of the Subject by the King, his Officers, Judges, and inferior
Courts of Justice, as all our H^stories, with the Prefaces and words of the
Acts themselves attest; to redress which grievances alone th^s^ Laws were
made by the Parliaments and peoples earnest solicitations, much against the
Kings good will. See Sir Edward Cooks Iusti^ut, on Mag. Charta, and these Laws
Articuli super Chartas, Confirmatio Chartarum, part. 1.
The Parliament then (who would never solicit them king of a Law against, or to
restrain it self) being clear out of the orignall ground and mischief of
enacting these Laws, and the King, with his Ministers, and inferiou^ (...) is
only within them; they can no way extend to the Parliament, but to them alone.

3. The Parliament, (...) the making of these Acts, has always constantly
enjoyed an absolute right and power, without the least dispute, of gran^ing and
imposing on the Subjects whatsoever Taxes, Subsidies, Aids, Confiscations of
Goods, or restraint of Liberty by temporal or perpetual imprisonment, it
thought meet and necessary for the public defense, safety, and tranquillity of
the Realm, as the several T^xes, Subsidies, and Poll-monies granted by them in
all ages, the many Statutes enjoining confiscation of Lands, Goods, corporal
punishments, banishments, temporary or perpetual imprisonments, for diverse
things not punishable, nor criminal by the Common Law, or when Magna Charta,
and the ancient Statutes in pursuance of it were first enacted, abundantly
evidence past all contradiction: none of all which the King himself, his
Officers, Judges, or inferior Courts of Justice can do, being restrained by
the objected Acts. Therefore it is altogether irrefragable, that the Parliament
and Houses are neither within the words or intentions of these Acts, nor any
ways limited or restrai^ed by them, but left as free in these particulars (in
order to the public good and safety) as if those Acts had never been made,
though the King, with all other Courts, Officers, Subjects, remain obliged by
them.

4. This is evident by examination of the particular Statutes objected: The
first and principal of all the rest is Magna Charta, cap. 29. But the very
words of this Law: Not We shall not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by
the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land: We shall deny
nor defer to no man either Justice or Right, compared with the Preface to,
and first Chapter of it, Henry, etc. know ye that We, etc. out of mere and
free will, have given and granted to all Archbishops, Bishops, E^rles Barons,
and to all free men of this our Realm of England, and by this our present
Charter have confirmed FOR US AND OUR HEIRS FOR EVERMORE, these liberties
underwritten, to have and to hold to them, and their Heirs, OF US AND OUR HEIRS
FOR EVERMORE, etc. (together with the whole tenor and title of this Charter,
and the two last Chapters of it;) All those customs, and liberties aforesaid
which we have granted to be holden within our Realm, as much AS APPERTAINS
TO US AND OUR HEIRS, WE SHALL OBSERVE. And for this our gift and grant of those
Liberties, etc, our Subjects have given us the fifteenth part of all their
movables: And We have granted to them on the other part, that NEITHER, WE NOR
OUR HEIRS shall procure or do any thing, whereby the Liberties in this Charter
contained shall be infringed or broken; We confirm and make strong all the
same FOR US AND OUR HEIRS PERPETUALLY. (not the Parliament) All these, I say,
infallibly demonstrate, that this Statute of Magna Charta, did never extend
unto the Parliament to restrain its hands or power, but only to the King, his
Heirs, Officers, Courts of Justice, and particular subjects. So that the
Parliaments imprisoning of Malignants, imposing Taxes for the necessary defense
of the Realm, and seizing men's goods, or imprisoning their persons for
non-payment of it, is no ways within the words or intent of Magna Charta, as
Royallists and Malignants ignorantly clamor; but the Kings, his Officers,
Councillors, and Cavall^ers proceedings of this nature are clearly most direct
violations of this Law. Rastall Accusation 5, 6, 7, 8.
And that which puts this past dispute are the several Statutes of 25. Edward
3. cap. 4. Statute 5. 37. Edward 3. cap. 18. 38 Edward 3. cap. 9. 42. Edward 3.
cap. 3. 17. Richard 2. cap. 6. and the Petition of right it self, all which
expressly resolve, that this very objected Law of Magna Charta, extends only to
the King himself, his Privy Council, Judges, Justices, Officers, and
inferior Courts of Justice, but not unto the supreme Court of Parliament,
which no man (for ought I find) ever yet held, to be absolutely obliged by it,
before the Kings late recesse from Parliament.

The next Statute is that of 34. Edward 1. cap. 1. No tallage nor aid shall be
taken or leavied BY US AND OUR HEIRS (not the Parliament) in our Realm,
without the good will and assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons,
Knights, Burgesses, and other free men of the Land; which the Statute of
Restall Tenths, Taxes, etc. 1.
25. Edward 1. thus explains, But by the common consent of the Realm. The
Statute of 14. Edward 3. cap. 21. and Statute 2. cap 1. thus, If it be not by
common consent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great men and Commons
of our said Realm of England, AND THAT IN PARLIAMENT. The Statute of 25.
Edward the third, cap. 8. thus. If it be not BY COMMON CONSENT AND GRANT IN
PARLIAMENT. The Statute of 36. Edward the third, cap. 11. thus, That no
Subsidy nor other charge be set nor granted upon the Woolls by the Merchants,
nor by NONE OTHER from henceforth WITHOUT THE ASSENT OF THE PARLIAMENT. The
Statute of 45. Edward 3. cap. 4. thus, it is accorded and stablished, That no
imposition or charge shall be put upon Woolls, Woollsels, or Leather, other
then the custom and subsidy granted to the King, WITHOUT THE ASSENT OF THE
PARLIAMENT, and if any be, it shall be repealed and holden for none. And the
Petition of Right, 3. Caroli, thus, By which Statutes, and other good Statutes
of this Realm, your Subjects have inherited this freedom, that they should not
be compelled to contribute any Tax, Tallage, Custom, Aid^, or other like
charge, not set BY COMMON CONSENT IN PARLIAMENT. Now it is as evident as the
noonday sunshine, that these Acts only extend to the King, his Heirs,
Council, Officers, inferior Courts, and private Subjects only, and that the
Parliament is precisely excepted out of the very intent and letter of them all,
having free power to impose on the Subjects what Aids, Taxes, Tallages,
Customs, and Subsidies the shall deem meet* by the express provision of all
these Laws, concerning the granting and imposing of Subsidies, Therefore by the
direct resolution of these Acts, the Kings, his Counselors present
contributions, assessements, and ransoms imposed on the Subjects are illegal,
against the letter and provision of all these Acts; but the Parliaments and
Houses lawful, approved and confirmed by them.

True, will Royallists and Malignants answer (who have no other evasion left
but this) If the King were present in Parliament, Object.
and consenting to these contributions and taxes of the twentieth part, there
were no doubt of what you allege; but because the King is absent, and not only
disassents to, but prohibits the payment of this or any Parliamentary
Assessements by his Proclamations, therefore they are illegal and against
these Laws.

1 To which I answer, Answer.
First, that the King by his Oath, duty, the ancient custom and Law of the land
ought of right to be always present with his Parliament (as he is now in point
of Law) and not to depart from it but in cases of urgent necessity with the
Houses free consents, and then must leave See 8. H. 5. c. 1.
Commissoners, or a Deputy to supply his absence. This is not only confessed,
but proved by a Book lately printed at Oxford 1642. (with the Kings
approbation or permission) entitled, No Parliament without a King, page 5. to
16. where by sundry presidents in all Kings Reigns it is manifested, That
Kings were, and ought to be present in their Parliaments, which I have Part 1.
page 42, 43, 44.
formerly cleared. If then the King, contrary to these Presidents, his Oath,
Duty, the Laws and Customs of the Realm, the practice of all his Progenitors,
the rules of nature (which prohibit the head to separate it self from the
body) and will (through the advice of malignant Councillors) withdraw himself
from his Parliament; yea, from such a Parliament as himself by a spceiall Act
has made in some sort perpetual, at the Houses pleasure; and raise an Army of
Papists, Delinquents, Malignants, and such like against it, and that purposely
to dissolve it, contrary to this very Law of his for its continuance: why this
illegal tor^ious act of his (paralleld in no age) should nullify the
Parliament, or any way invalid its Imposicions or Proceedings, for their own,
the Kingdoms, Peoples, and Religions preservation (all now endangered)
transcends any reasonable man's capacity to apprehend.

2 The right and power of granting, imposing, assenting unto Ass^ssements,
Taxes, Suosi^i^s, and such like public charges in Parliament, for the
public safety, rests wholly in the Commons and Lords, not King; and is their
own free act alone, depending no ways on the Kings assent, nor necessarily
requiring his personal presence in Parliament.

This is evident: First by the express letter of the forecited Acts; No
Subsidy, Tax, Aid, Talleage, or Custom shall be set, granted, taken or
leavied, but by common consent and grant of the Prelates, Earls, Barons,
Knights, Burgesses, and other free men of the Realm in Parliament; or without
the assent of the Parliament: so that their See part. 1. p. 47, 48, 49, 50.
grant and assent i^ Parliament, (not the Kings) is the only thing that makes
them legal and binding to the subject. Now both Houses have granted, ordered,
and assented to this Assessement, exceeding not the twentieth part of men's
estates; and given order for the leavying of it, and that for the Parliaments,
Kingdoms, religions, necessary defense and preservation. Therefore it is
obligatory and legal, though the King himself consent not, or disassent
thereto, (especially as the present condition of things stands) even by the
very letter of these acts.

Secondly, this is apparent by the letter of all our public Acts, for the
granting of Subsidies, Ayds, Tenths, Fifteenes, Taxes, Customs, Tonnage,
Poundage, or any such like impositions in and by Parliament, either by the
Temporalty or Clergy: which Acts run usually in this manner. 12 E. 4. c. 3.
The Commons of this Realm HAVE GRANTED FOR DEFENSE OF THE SAID REALM* and
especially for the safeguard and custody of the Sea, a Subsidy, a Subsidy
called Tonnage, etc. 14. E. 3. c. 20. The King then absent in France.
The Prelates, Earls, Barons, and all the Commons of the Realm willingly and
with one assent HAVE GRANTED the ninth Lamb, ninth sheafe, and ninth fleece,
etc. And of Cities and Buroughs the ninth part of all their goods and
cha^^^ls* etc. in aid of the good keeping the Realm as well by Land as by
Sea, etc. 1. E. 6. c. 13. 1 Mar. 1 E. c. 19. 1. Jac. c. 33.
We your p^ore Commons desire your excellent Majesty willingly to accept and
receive these OUR POOR GRANTS hereafter following, as GRANTED of free hearts
and good wills, as the first fruits of our good wills and hearts, etc. by the
advice and Assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, GIVE and GRANT, for
the defense of your realm, and the keeping and safeguard of the seas, etc. one
Subsidy called Tonnage, etc. 21 Jac. c. 32. 1. Car. c. 5.
The Prelates and Clergy, etc. as a special and significant testimony of their
loyal affection, etc. with one affection and uniforme consent HAVE GIVEN and
GRANTED four whole and entire Subsidies. 1 Car. c. 6. 21. Jac. c. 33.
We your Commons assembled in your high Court of Parliament, humbly present
your Majesty with the FREE and CHEERFUL GIFT of two entire Subsidies, etc. All
Subsidies and Taxes then being the free gift of the Commons, Clergy and P^eres
in Parliament, and that only for the defense of the Kingdom by sea and land;
it is infallible, that they do, may and can oblige themselves, and those they
represent, to pay such public Taxes, to this end, without the Kings
concurrence.

Thirdly, this is clear by considering, that the Commons and Lords in
Parliament have always had: 1. And absolute right and power to grant or deny
Taxes, Subsidies, aids and assistance as they saw occassion. See Restall.
Taxes, etc. throughout.
2. To proportion the aids and Subsidies granted. 3. To limit the certain
manner, ways, and times of paying and levying them; and the persons who shall
either pay, assesse, collect, receive, or disburse them. 4. The ends and uses
to which they should be employed when leavied, debarring the King often times
(when they saw cause) of any power at all to receive or dispose of them,
appointing Collectors, and Treasurers of their own to receive and issue them
out again, by the advice and directions of these, as themselves prescribed;
for which I shall give you some few instances of note in lieu of many more,
that might be remembered. Matthew. Paris, Hist, Angl. p. 420, 421, 562, 563.
Daniels Hist, p. 157.
Anno 1237. being the 21 year of Henry the third, The Parliament after many
contestations with the King for his fraud, oppressions, favoring of Aliens,
etc. to the Kingdoms detriment; the King by Oath pr^m^sing amendment, granted
unto him the thirtieth part of all their movables (excepting ready Money,
Horse, and Armor,) to be employed for the Common wealth, and benefit of the
Realm; with this condition often annexed, that the King should leave the
Counsel of Aliens, and only use that of his natural Subjects. And for more
security it was ordained, that four Knights of every Shiere, and one Clerk of
the Kings in every several Shiere, shall upon their o^thes collect, receive
and deliver the said Subsidy either into some Abbey or Castle, to be safely
reserved there, and disposed of for the benefit of the King and Kingdom, by
the view and counsel of the Earl Warren or others, when there should be need:
Or otherwise if the King f^iled in performance of His promises and grants, it
ought to be faithfully restored and distributed to the Country whence it was
collected. Walsingham. Hist. Angl. p. 88. Holinshed, Gra^ton, and Daniel, p.
211.
In the 11. year of King Edward the 2. Anno 1318. The Parliament (not daring
to trust this prodigal mis-counselled King with moneys) instead of Subsides,
granted him an aid of armed men against the Scots: London set forth 200.
Canturbury 40. Saint Albanes 10. and so all other Buroughs and Cities
according to their proportion, whereby a great Army was leavied. The
Parliaments of 14 E. 3. c. 20. 21. Stat. 1. and Stat. 2. c. 1. 18. E. 3.
Parliament 2 and 3. (forecited at large, part. 2. p. 8. 9.) 31 H. 6. Number. 41.
21 Iac. c. 33. particularly direct how the Subsidies granted shall be disposed
of by certain Nobles and others, whom they nominate, and appoint Treasurers to
receive and issue them to the ends for which they granted them, prescribing
them an oath to issue none of them to other purposes, or in any other manner
then they prescribed. Yea the Acts of former Parliaments, and this present
concerning Tonnage. Poundage, Polemoney, and Subsidies, frequently do the like.
Therefore the granting and disposing of those Taxes, Aids, Subsidies rests
wholly in the Commons, and Lords; and no ways on the King, who commonly
desires the Parliament to great them.

Fourthly, this is further evidenced, by the Kings usual answer and assent
unto such Bills as these: Mr. Hack^^ls manner of passing Bills, s^ct. 8. p. 78.
Le Roy remercy ses Loaulx Subjects accept LOUR BENEVOLENCE, and auxy le v^ult;
taking it wholly as a free grant from them; which assent in this case is rather
formal then substantial, it being the Commons and Lords own consent only to
Bills of this nature, not the Kings, that make the Taxes and Impositions binding
as the forecited Statutes, the Petition of Right 3 Caroli; See part. 1. p. 37,
38, 39, 46, to 53.
Fortescue, and our Lawbookes resolve, and I have elsewhere manifested more at
large. Therefore the want of the Kings assent, or disassent to the Parliaments
present ass^ssement for the Kingdoms necessary defense in the present
extremity (when the King not only wilfully absents himself from, but has
raised Arms against the Parliament) is not material nor simply necessary in
point of Law, though usually requisite and necessary for formality sake, at
other seasons, to complete such Acts; since Sepenumero Necessitas vincit legem,
and quod necessarium est, lici^um est (as this assessement now is) though all
formalities be not punctually observed; as is resolved in Dormers case. Cook
l. 5. f. 40. b.

Fifthly, it is undeniable, that the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Commons
in Parliament, elected by the suffrages of the several Counties, Cities, and
Buroughs of England, do See part. 1. p. 39. 47.
really and legally represent all the Commons; and the Lords and they the whole
Realm, and all the people of England: so that what ever Tax is imposed and
assented to by them, or by both Houses only without the King (who represents
no man but Himself alone) is in point of Law imposed and assented to by all
the Commons, and whole Realm of England, (as the recitals in all our Statutes,
and Law-bookes resolve) though the King assent not to it, If therefore (as our
Fitzh. Assise 413. Auowry, 74. Prescrip. 67. Br. Custom. 31. Ruchin. 45. 73.
80. Co. 5. Rep. 63. to 69. See Rastal. title Corporations.
Law Books clearly resolve without dispute, and the experience of all
Corporations, Parishes, and Manors evidenceth past contradiction) all
Ordinances and Bylaws made for the common good of Corporations, Parishioners,
Tenants of a Manor, and the like, by all or the greater part of the
Corporations, Parishioners. Tenants, and Taxes imposed by them for the Common
good (as repairing of Churches, Highways, Bridges, relief of the poor, and
the like) shall bind the rest: even in point of Law, without the Kings assent.
Then by the same, or better reason, the imposi^ions and Taxes now laid upon the
subjects by the assent and Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament,
representing the whole Commons and Realm of England (who actually assent
likewise to these Taxes and Assessements in and by them) must and ought in
point of Law to oblige all the Subjects in this case of necessity, (at least*
as long as the Parliament continues sitting, and this their representation of
them remains entire;) especially being for the necessary defense of the
Parliament, Kingdom, Religion, all our lives, estates, liberties, laws,
against an invading Army of Papists and Malignants, in a case of extraordinary
extremley. This I shall further clear by some ancient and late judgments in
point.

Much. 14. Ed. 2. rot. 60. in the Kings Bench William Heyb^rne brought an
Action of Trespass against William Keylow, Judge Crookes argument against
Shipmoney. p. 24, 25
for entering his house and breaking his chests, and taking away 70 pounds in
money; the Defendant pleading, Not guilty, the Jury ^ound a special Verdict:
that the Scots having entered the Bishopric of Durham with an Army, and making
great burning and spoils, thereupon the Commonalty of Durham, whereof the
Plantiffe was one, met together at Durham, and agreed to send some to compound
with them for a certain sum of money to depart the Country and were all
sworn to perform what compositions should be made, and to perform what
Ordinance they should make in that behalf; and that thereupon they compounded
with the Scots for 1600 Ma^kes. But because that was to be paid immediately,
they all consented, that William Keylow the Defendant and others, should go
into every man's house to search what ready money was there, and to take it for
the raising of that sum and that it should be suddenly repaid by the
Communalty of Durham: And that thereupon the Defendant did enter into the
Plaintiffs house, and broke open the chest, and took the seventy pounds, which
was paid accordingly toward that composition. And upon a Writ of Error in the
Kings Bench, it was adjudged for the Defendant against the Plaintiff, that the
action did not lie, because he himself had agreed to this Ordinance, and was
sworn to perform it, and that the Defendant did nothing but what he assented
to by Oath; and therefore is accounted to do nothing but by his consent, as a
servant to him and the Commonalty of Durham; therefore he was no tresp^sser.
Which case was agreed for good Law by all the Judges, in the late Case of
Ship Money argued in the Exchequer Chamber; though neither King nor Parliament
consented to this Tax or Composition.

This is the Parliaments present case in effect: The King having raised an Army
of Papists, Delinquents, Forraigners, Irish Rebels, disaffected Persons, and
actually invading the Kingdom and Parliament with it; Hereupon the Parliament
were enforced to raise an Army to defend themselves and the Realm against these
Invasions; For maintenance where of, they at first made use only of voluntary
contributions and supplies; proceeding only from the liberality of some
private persons, best affected to the public service; May 5. 1641.
Which being xehausted, the Lords and Commons considering what a solemn
Covenant and Protestation themselves had made and taken, and the Subjects
likewise throwout the Realm, to maintain and defend, as far as lawfully they
might WITH THEIR LIVES, POWER AND ESTATES, The true Reformed Prote^tant
Religion. etc. As also THE POWER AND PRIVILEGES OF PARLIAMENT, THE LAWFUL
RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES OF THE SUBJECT, And every person that makes this
Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful pursuance of the sam,
etc. as in the Protestation (made by both Houses consents when fullest:) And
considering that the whole Commons and Kingdoms assents were legally and
actually included in what they assented in Parliament, for the necessary
defense of the Realm, the Subjects, Parliaments Privileges, Rights, and the
Reformed Religion (all actually invaded, endangered) by an Ordinance of both
Houses, without the Kings consent (then absent from, and in open hostility
against them) impose a general Assessement upon all the Subjects, NOT
EXCEEDING THE TWENTIETH PART OF THEIR ESTATES; And for non-payment prescribe a
distress, etc. Why, this Assessement in this case of necessity, being thus
made by assent of both Houses (and so of all the Kingdom in them) in pursuance
of this Protestation, should not as legally, yea more justly oblige every
particular subject, though the King assented not thereto, as well as that
agreement of the men of Durham, did oblige them even in point of Law, Justice,
Conscience, transcends my capacity to apprehend: and if the first Case be Law,
as all the Judges then, and of late affirmed, the latter questionless must be
much more Legal, and without exceptions, Cook 5. Report. fol. 62, 63.
M. 32. and 33. Eliz. in the Kings Bench, in the Chamberlain of Londons case,
it was adjudged, That an Ordinance made by the Common Council of London only,
that all Clothes should be brought to Blackwell-hall, to be there veiwed,
searched, and measured, before they were sold, and that a penny should be paid
for every Cloth for the Officer that did the same, and that six shillings eight
pence should be forfeited for every Cloth, not brought thither and searched;
was good to bind all within the City, and that an Action of Debt would lie at
the Common Law, both for the duty, and forfeiture, because it was for the
public benefit of the City and Commonwealth, Cook 5. Report f 62.
M. 38. Eliz. in the Common Pleas, it was adjudged in Clerks Case; That an
Ordinance made by assent of the Burgesses of Saint Albanes, whereof the
Plaintiff was one for ass^ssing of a certain sum of Money upon every
Inhabitant, for the erecting of Courts there (the Term being then adjourned
thither from London, by reason of the Plague) with a penalty to be levied, by
distress, for non-payment of this Tax, was good to bind^ all the Inhabitants
there, because it was for the public good. Cook 5 (...) fol 66 68.
Mich. 31. and 32. Eliz. in the Kings Bench, William^ Iefferies Case, and
Pasch. 41. Eliz. Pagets Case, it was resolved; That the Churchwardens with the
greater part of the Parishioners assents, may lay a Tax upon all the
Parishioners, according to the quantity of their Lands and Estates, or the
number of Acres of Land they hold (the Tax there was four pence an Acre for
Marsh-Land, and two pence for Earable) for the necessary reparation of the
Church; and that this shall bind all the Inhabitants, so as they may be
Libelled against in the Spiritual Court for non-payment thereof, and no
prohibition lies. The like has been resolved in sundry other Cases. And, by
the Common Law of England whereby the breach of Register. fol. 127. Fitz.
Nature. Breu. fol. 113. Cook, l. 10. fol. 142.
Sea-Walls, the Country is, or may be surrounded, every one who has Lands
within the level or danger, which may have benefit, or loss, by the
inundation, may and shall be enforced to contribute toward the repair, and
making up of the Sea-walls, and a reasonable Tax assessed by a Jury, or the
Major-part shall bind all the rest, because it is both for their own private,
and the common good. If the Law be thus unquestionably adjudged in all these
Cases, without the Kings assent, then much more must this Assessement imposed
by both Houses be obligatory, in point of Law and Justice, though the King
consented not thereto, since the Houses, and whole Kingdom consented to it, for
their own defense and preservation.

Sixthly, This is a duty inseparably incident by the Fundamental Law, and
original compact of every Kingdom, City, Corporation, Company or Fraternity
of men in the World; that every Member of them should contribute proportionably
upon all occasions (especially in Cases of imminent danger) toward the
necessary charges, defense, and preservation of that Kingdom, City,
Corporation, Company, or Fraternity, of which he is a Member, without which
contribution, they could be neither a Kingdom, City, Corporation, Company,
Fraternity, or have any continuance, or subsistence at all; Which
Contributions are assessed by Parliaments in Kingdoms, by the Aldermen, or
Common Council in Cities, by the Master and Assistants in Fraternities, and
what the Major part concludes, still binds the Residue, and the dissent of
some (though the Major, or Master of the Company be one) shall be no obstacle
to the rest. This all our Acts concerning Subsidies, Aids, Tonnage and
Poundage the daily practice and constant experience of every Kingdom, City,
Corporation, Company, Fraternity in the World, manifests past all
contradictions; which being an indubitable verity, I think no reasonable man
can produce the least shadow of Law or Reason, why the Parliament representing
the whole Body of the Kingdom, and being the supreme Power, Counsel, in the
Realm; bound both in Duty and Conscience, to provide for its security, may
not in this Case of extremity legally impose this necessary Tax, for their
own, the Kingdoms, Subjects, Laws, Religions preservations (of which they are
the proper Judges, Gardians) and should not rather be credited herein then a
private Cabinet Court-Counsell of persons disaffected to the Republike, who
impose now far greater Taxes on the Subjects, and plunder, spoil, destroy
them every where directly against the Law, of purpose to ruin both Parliament,
Kingdom, Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Posterity.

Seventhly, It is confessed by all, That if the King be an Infunt, Non-Compos
absent in Foreign remote parts, or detained prisoner by an Enemy, that the
Kingdom or Parliament in all such Cases, may without the Kings actual,
personal assent, create a Protector or Regent of their own Election, and not
only make Laws, but grant Subsidies, impose Taxes, and raise Forces for the
Kingdoms necessary defense, as sundry domestic and foreign Presidents in the
preceding Part. 1. p. 59 50. 99. 100, 101, 102 part. 2. p 98, etc Francis, Then
his Catalogue of Protectors, in Holinshed, p. 1073 etc
Parts, and Appendix, evidence; And De Iure Belli and Pa^is, l. 1. c. 3 nu. 24.
p. 69.
Hugo Grotius, Vindiciae contr. Tyrannos, qu. 3, 4.
Iunius Brutus, with other Lawyers acknowledge as a thing beyond all dispute.
Nay, if the King be of full age, and within the Realm, if a foreign enemy come
to invade it, and the King neglect or refuse to set out a Navy, or raise any
Forces to resist them, The Lords and Commons in such a Case of extremity may,
(and are bound in Law and Conscience so to do) for their own, and the Kingdoms
preservation, not only in and by Parliament, but without any Parliament at all
(if it cannot be conveniently summoned) lawfully raise forces by Sea and Land,
to encounter the Enemies, and impose Taxes and Contributions to this purpose on
all the Subjects by common consent, with clauses of distress and imprisonment
in case of refusal, as I have elsewhere proved. And if in Case of invasion,
even by the Common Law of the Realm, any Captains or Soldiers may lawfully
enter into another man's ground and there encamp, muster, or build Forts to
resist the Enemy, or pull down the Suburbs of a City, to preserve the City it
self, when in danger to be fired or assaulted by an Enemy, without the special
consent of King, Parliament, or the Owners of the Lands, or Houses, without 13.
H 8. 16. 9. E. 4 35 ^ 8. E 4 23. Br. Cu^^ome 145. Trespis 406. Dyer. 36.
Trespass or offense, because it is for the public safety, as our Law Books
resolve; Then much more may both Houses of Parliament, when the King has
through the advice of ill Counselors wilfully deserted them, refused to return
to them, and raised an Army of Papists and Malignants against them and the
Realm (now miserably sacked and wasted by them, as bad as by any foreign
Enemies) both take up Arms, raise an Army, and impose Assessements and
Contributions by Ordinances, unanimously voted by them, against which no Lover
of his Country, or Religion, no nor yet the greatest Royallist, or Malignant,
can with the least shadow of Law or Reason, justly except.

Eighthly, If they shall now demand what Presidents there are for this? I
Answer: First, That the Parliament being the Sovereign Power and Counsel in
the Realm, is not tied to any Presidents, but has power to make new
Presidents, as well as new Laws, in new Cases and mischiefs; where there are no
old Presidents, or vary from them though there be ancient ones, if better and
fitter Presidents may be made; as every Cook 4. Rep. f* 93, 94. Ash. Title
sidents.
Court of Justice likewise has Power to give new Judgments, and make new
Presidents in new Cases, and may sometimes swerve from old Presidents, where
there were no ancient Presidents to guide them; even as Physicians invent new
Medicines, Chyrurgions new Emplaisters for new Diseases, Ulcers, or where old
Medicines and Balsomes, are inconvenient, or not so proper as new ones. And as
men and women daily invent and use new Fashions at their pleasure, and
Tradesmen new Manifactures without license of King or a Parliament, because
they deem them better or more comely then the old. Secondly, I might demand of
them, by what old domestic lawful Presidents, His Majestis departure from the
Parliament, His Levying War against it, His proclaiming many Members of it,
See the Remonstrance of the rise and progress of the Irish Rebellion and Romes
Masterpiece.
Traitors, and now all of them Traitors and no Parliament; His unvoting of
their Votes in Parliament, out of Parliament; His imposing of Taxes and
Contributions in all Countries where His Forces are, beyond men's estates, and
annual revenues; His burning, sacking, pillaging, murdering, ruining, of His
own Kingdom, Subjects, both by Sea and Land, and putting them out of His regal
Protection; His raising of an A^my of English, Irish, Scottish, French, and
Germane Papists to maintain and settle the Protestant Religion among us, (which
they have plotted totally to extirpat; as appears by their proceedings in
Ireland, England, and the late plot discovered among the Archbishops Papers)
and the like, are warranted? (which questions I doubt would put them to a
nonplus, and silence them for eternity:) yet to satisfy their importunity,
and stop their clamorous mouths; I shall furnish them in brief, with some
Presidents in point in all States, and Kingdoms of note informer in latter
times, and in our own Realm too; In all the civil wars between Kings and
Subjects, in the Roman and Germane Empires, France, Spain, Aragon, Castile,
Hungary, Bohemia, Poland, Denmark, Scotland, and other Kingdoms mentioned in
the Appendix; They shall find that the general Assemblies of these States,
Lords and Commons, without their Emperors or Kings assents, did both raise
Forces, impose Taxes, yea, and seize on the Imperial and Royal Revenues of
the Crown to support their wars, against their Tyrannical oppressing Princes.
In See Metranus and Grimst^ns general History of the Netherlands.
Flaunders heretofore, and the Low Countries of Late years, they have
constantly done the like; as their Excises long since imposed, and yet on foot
by common consent (without the King of the Spains good liking) to preserve
their Liberties, Religion, Estates, from the Spanish Tyranny, witness; which
every one willingly at the very first imposition, and ever since has readily
submitted to, being for the public preservation. The like has been done in
former ages, and within these five years in the Realm of Scotland; the same is
now practiced even without a Parliament by the Popish Rebels both in Ireland
and England, who have laid Taxes upon See the Relation and proceedings of the
Irish Assembly at Kilkenny. The Parliaments Remonstrance of the rise and
progress of the Irish Rebellion.
all Ireland, and all the Romanists in England, for the maintenance of this
present Rebellion; and yet neither King, nor his Counsel, nor Royallists, nor
Malignants (for ought I can read or hear) have ever so much as once written or
spoken one syllable against it, when as many large Declarations, Proclamations,
Inhibitions in His Majestie^s Name, and at least forty several Pamphlets have
been published by Malignants against this Assessement of the Parliament, and
the Levying, or paying thereof, strictly prohibited under pain of high Treason;
such a grand difference is there now put by the Royal Court-partie (to the
amazement of all intelligent men) between the Irish Rebels, (now the Kings best
Subjects as it seems) who may do what they please without censure or restraint;
and the English (now un-Parliamented (Parliament, though perpetuated by an Act
of Parliament) who may do nothing for their own, or the Kingdoms safety, but it
must be high Treason at the least O tempora o mores: Quis talia fando temp^ret
a lachrymis? Add to this, See the Irish excise.
That the Lords Justices and Council in Ireland, the twenty nine of June,
1643, have without authoriti^ of Parliament or King, for their present
necessary defense, against the Popish Rebels there, imposed an Excise upon most
commodities in that Realm, here lately Printed; which no man can deem Illegal
in this case of absolute necessity. But to come close home unto our selves;
who is there that knows ought in history and policy, but must needs
acknowledg^, That the Britains and Saxons wars of this Realm, against their
oppressing Kings, See Part 1. p. 7, 8, 9 etc.
Archigallo, Emerian, Vortig^rne, Sigebert, Osred, Ethelred, B^ornard,
Leow^lfe, Edwine, (whom they deposed for their Tyranny and mis-Government;)
That our Barons long-lasting bloody wars against King John, Henry the third,
Edward the second, Richard the second, and others forementioned; were
maintained by public Assessements and Contributions made by common consent,
even without a Parliament, and with the Revenues and Rents of the very Crown,
which they seized on, as well as the Castles and Forts? This being a true rule
in Law, Qui sintit commodum, sentir^ debet and onus; All the Kingdom had the
benefit, of regaining, preserving, establishing their Fundamental Charters,
Laws, Liberties, by those wars; therefore they deemed it just, that all
should bear a share in the charge and burden, by voluntary Assessements
without King or Parliament.

During the absence of King Edward the third in France; The 14 E 3* c. 20, 21.
(...) rec. p. 2, 3, 4, 5.
Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the defense of the Realm by Sea and Land,
against foreign Enemi^s; granted an aid of the ninth Sheaf, Lamb, and Fleece,
besides many thousand Sacks of W^oll, and the ninth part of other men's Estates
in Towns and Corporations, and disposed both of the Money and Militia of the
Realm, for its defense, as you heard before: The like did they during the
Minorities of King Henry the third, King Richard the second, and King Henry the
sixth, as the premises evidence, without those Kings personal assents. Matthew
Pa^is. p 952. 953. Speed. p. 636.
Anno Dom. 1259. Richard King of Romans coming with a great Navy and Army of
Germans, and forraigners, to aid his Brother, King Henry the third, against the
Barons; thereupon, the Barons sent out a ^leet to encounter them by Sea, and
prepared a strong Army of Horse and Foot by Land, that if they prevailed
against them at Sea, (which they fear^d not,) yet they might valiantly and
constantly entertain and repulse them, on the shore and dry Land; which the
King of Romans being informed off, disbanded his forces, and came over
privat^ly with three Knights only attending him. This was done without the
Kings assent, and yet at public charge. When R^ge^ H^veden, Annal. part. past,
p. 726. Dunial. p. 121.
King Richard the first was taken prisoner by the Emperor in his return from
the holy Land, by Authority of the Kings Mother, and the Kings Justices alone
(without a Parliament) it was decreed, that the fourth part of all that years
Rents, and of all the movables, as well of the Clergy, as of the Laity, and
all the Woo^^des of the Abbots of the Order of the Cistersians, and of
Semphringham, and all the Gold and Silv^r Chalices, and Treasure of all
Churches should be paid in, toward the freeing and ransom of the King; which
was done accordingly. If such a tax might be imposed by the Queen Mother, and
Justices only, without a Parliament, for ransoming the King alone from
imprisonment, may not a tax of the twentieth part only of men's estates be
much more justly imposed on the Subjects by an Ordinance of both Houses in
Parliament without the King, for the defense and perservation, both of the
Parliament and Kingdom to, when hostily invaded by the King?

In few words, the King and his Council, yea his very Commanders* (without his
special Commission or advice) have in many Countries imposed large monthly,
weekly Contributions and Assessements on the People, beyond their abilities and
estates; yea, upon the very Speaker and Members of the Commons, and Lords
House, (notwithstanding their Privileges of Parliament, which they say they
will maintain) to the utter impoverishing, and ruining of the Country; yea,
they have burned, sacked, plundered, many whole Towns, Cities, Counties, and
spoiled thousands of all they have, contrary to their very Promises, Articles,
Agreements, which they never faithfully observe to any in the least degree; and
all this to ruin the Kingdom, People, Parliament, and Religion; yet they
justify these their actions, and the Parliament, People, must not control,
nor deem them Traitors to their Country for it: And may not the Parliament then
more justly impose a moderate in-destructive necessary tax without the King,
for the Kingdoms, Religions, and Peoples defense and preservations, against
their barbarous Taxes, Plunderings, and Devastations, then the King, or his
Commanders, Soldiers play such Rex, and use such barbarous oppressions
without, yea against the Parliaments Votes and consents? Let them therefore
first cease their own most detestable unnatural, inhumane practices, and
extortions of this nature, and condemn themselves, or else for ever clear the
Parliament, from this unjust Aspersion.

The last Objection Object. 7.
against the Parliament is, That they have Illegally imprisoned, restrained,
plundered some Malignants, and removed them from their habitations, against
Magna Charta, the Fundamental Laws forenamed, and the Liberty of the Subject,
contrary to all Presidents in former Ages.

To which I answer, First, Answ. 1.
That the Objectors and Kings party are far more guilty of this crime, then
the Parliament, or their Partisans, and therefore have no reason to object it,
unless themselves were more innocent then they are.

Secondly, For the Parliaments imprisoning of men pretended to be against Magna
Charta: I answer first, That the Parliament is not with in that or any other
Law against imprisonments, as I have formerly cleared; Therefore is not obliged
by it, nor can offend against it: Secondly, That it has power to imprison,
restrain the greatest Members of their own Houses See Cromptons Jurisdiction of
Courts, f. 7, 8, 9, 10. Hollinshead. p. 1584. Ferrers Cas^, Dyer. 275 39. E. 3.
7. 8. H. 4. 12, 13.
, though privileged men, exmept from all other arrests; and public persons
representing those that sent them thither: Therefore much more may they
imprison, or restrain, any other private persons, notwithstanding Magna Charta.
And the Parliament being the supreamest Iudicaturo paramount all other Courts,
their commitments can not be Legally questioned, determined, nor their
prisoners released by Habeas Corpus, in or by any other inferior Court or
Judicature whatsoever. 3. The Parliament has power to make new Laws for the
temporal and perpetual imprisonment of men, in mischievous cases, where they
could not be imprisoned by the Common Law, or any other Act before or since
Magna Charta; and so against the seeming letter of that Law which extends not to
the Parliament; and what persons they may restrain, imprison by a new enacted
Law, though not restrainable before by a Magna Charta, or the Common Law,
without breach of either, they may whiles they sit, in case of public danger,
restrain, imprison, by their own Authority, without, or before a new Law
enacted. In how many new Cases, by new Statutes made since Magna Charta, the
Subjects may be lawfully imprisoned, both by Judges, Justices, Majors,
Constable, and Inferior Courts or Officers; whereas they could not be
imprisoned by them, by the Common Law, before these Acts, without breach of
Magna Charta, and violating the Subjects Liberties, you may read in the Table
of Rastals Abridgements of Statutes, and in Ashes Tables. Title Imprisonment,
and False-Imprisonment; Yea, by the Statutes of 23. H. 8. cap. 1. 31. H. 8.
cap. 13. 33. H. 8. cap. 12. 5. Eliz. cap. 14. 1. and 2. Phil. Mary, cap. 3. 5.
and 6. cap. 1. Eliz. cap. 2. with others Acts, perpetual imprisonment, during
life, is inflicted in some cases, for which no imprisonment at all could be
prescribed before these Acts, and for crimes, for which the parties were not
formerly punishable; yet for the public weal, peace, safety, and prevention
of private mischiefs, even against the Letter (as it were) of the great Charter
the Parliament has quite taken away all liberty, the benefit of the Common
Law, and of Magna Charta it self, from parties convicted of such offenses,
during their natural lives; and if they bring an Habeas Corpus in such cases,
pretending their perpetual imprisonment, and these latter Laws to be against
Magna Charta, they shall notwithstanding be remanded and remain prisoners all
their days, because the Parliament is above all Laws, Statutes, yea Magna
Charta; and may deprive any Delinquents of the benefit of them, yea, alter or
repeal them, for the common good, so far as they see just cause; Though
neither the Fortescue, l. 1 c. 9, 10. 14, 15 Cromptons Iurisdict f. 14. 11 H.
4. f. 73. 76. Brook Paerag. 15.
King, nor his Counsel, nor Judges, nor any Inferior Officers, or Courts of
Justice, have any such transcendent power, but the Parliament alone, to which
all men are parties, really present, and allowing all they do; and what all
assent to, decree for the common good and safety, must be submitted to by all
particular persons, though never so mischievous to them; this being a
Fundamental Rule even in Law it self Littleton and Cook Institutes 1 H. 7. 15
a 17. b. 21 H. 7. 8. a.
, That the Law will rather suffer a private mischief, then a general
inconvenience. Seeing then the Parliament to prevent public uproars, sedition,
treachery, in or against the Kingdom, Cities, Houses, or Counties, where
factious persons live, has thought meet to restrain the most seditious
Malignants, (especially these about London and Westminster where they sit) and
to commit them to safe custody, till they receive some good assurance of their
peaceable behavior; they must patiently suffer their private restraints for
the common safety, tranquillity, till the danger be past, or themselves
reformed; who if they reform not their own malignity, not the Parliaments
cautelous severity, themselves must be blamed, since they detain themselves
prisoners only by not conforming, when as the Parliament desires rather to
release, then restrain them, if they would be regular; and so they must blame
themselves alone, not clamor against the Houses. All Leprous persons by the
Levit. 13. and 14.
Leviticall and Register. par. 1. f 267. Fitz. Not. Bre. f 234.
Common Law, were to be sequestered and shut up from others, least they should
infect them; and so all persons visited with the Plague by late 1 Iac. c 31.
Statute Laws may be shut up, without breach of Magna Charta. Why then not
Malignant, seditious ill affected persons, who infect others in these times of
Commotion and Civil Wars, as well as Leapers and Plague sick persons,
removed into Pest-houses, for fear of spreading the Infection upon the
self-same grounds, by the Houses Authority? The Parliament by an Ordinance,
Act, or Sentence, has Power to banish men out of the Kingdom in some cases
(which no other Court, nor the Sea Magna Char c 29. Cooks 1 ^^titute^ on
L^^^-leton. f ^33 a. b Cook. Ibid.
King himself can lawfully d^, as was expressly resolved in Parliament, upon the
making of the S^atute of 35. Eliz. cap. 1.) as is evident by the case of Thomas
of Weyland, An. 9. E. 1; Of See Wa^lsing. Da^^d, S^eed, (...) ^^n, in the 6.
and 7, E 2. h^ rec. p 1 p 20. 21, 22. Ex^^lium ^ugoas (...). 15 E. 2. 1 E. 3.
cap 2. ^ ^a^sing. hist. Ang. ^^366 ^^podig. Neust. p. ^^2. Hol^ng p. 328.
Speed, p. 674
Pierce Gav^ston and the two Spencers in King Edward the second his reign. Of
the Lord 10. E 3^ 53. Cocks Instit. f. 132 ^
Maltravers in Edward the third his reign; Of Walsingham, Speed, Grafton,
Trussel H^ling. in 10 and 11 R. 2. 1 H. 4 6 1. b. ^ H. 4 6 7. a. 31 E. 1. C^i
invita 31
Belknap and diverse, over Judges in the 10 and 11 y^ers of Richard 2. his
reign, by the Statutes of 33. El. c. 1. Separatists, and of 39. El. c. 5.
Rogues are to be banished: and in Regist fol. 312. b Cooks. Instit. f 133.
Calice heretofo^^, a woman might be justly banished the Town for adultery; and
a scould at this day after three convictions is to be banished out of
Westminster, and rowed over the Thames from thence thorough the water at the
tail of a Boat, for the quiet of the City. Then much more may any private
seditious turbulent Malignants be justly restrained to some safe places where
they may do no harm, till the wars and troubles be ended, or themselves
reclaimed. Fifthly, By the Regist fol. 312. b Cooks. instit s 133.
Common and Staetute Law of the Realm, yea by See Part. 2 p. 16 ^7. Fitz. Aid
l^ Rey. 43 65 57. 70 71. 76. 93. 98 1. H. 5. c 7 7. H 7. c. 6. 2. and 3. Ph.
and Mar. c. 1. (See 4. Iac. c. 1.)
Magna Charta it self, cap. 30. the Lands, Rents, Goods, and Persons of Priors,
and other aliens, Merchants, or others, residing in England may be, and have
been usually seized on, and s^cured, or else their persons banished the Realm,
and lorders of England, during the wars with others of that Nation, least
they should assist them in the wars with their Estates, persons, or
intelligences, or betray the Kingdom, or places where they resided to the
Enemy; And upon this ground by the express Statutes of 2. H. 4. cap. 12. 20.
1. H. 4. cap. 7, 8. 3. H. 5. cap. 3. 4. H. 5. cap. 6. 1. H. 6. cap. 3. the
Irish, Britains, Welshmen, and Scots, because we had frequent Warre^ with
them, were not permitted to purchase either Houses or Lands, or to remain in
any Fort, Town, or City, near the Borders of Scotland, or W^l^s, but banished
thence, and their Goods. and persons, seized on in times of war, to prevent
tr^achery, intelligence, and assistance of the Enemy A thing generally
practiced and warranted in all States and Kingdoms, (as well as in England,) ^y
the very Law of Nations, as just and necessary in times of wars; as Martinus
Laudensis de Repraesaliis and de Bello, Henricus Ranzovius his Commentarius
Bellicus, Geergius Obbr^ctus: Disput: Iuridica de Bello, Henricus Boe^rus de
Iure Pr^gnae, Hugo Grotius, and Albericus Gentilis, in their Books de Iure
Belli, and all Historians evidence: Therefore lawful for the Parliament to
practice at this present, as well as the King, or any others. Sixthly, In times
of Foreign Invasions* the Parliament has enjoined all Inhabitants near the
Seacoasts or Marches of Scotland and Wal^s, to repair to their Houses and
Lands ther^, with all their Families, for the d^fence and safety of the Realm,
under pain of imprisonment, and confi^cation of their Goods, and Revenues
there, and elsewhere, as is evident by 13. E. 3. nu. 21. Parl. 1. and Parl. 2.
n. 20. 23. Eliz. c. 4. the 35. Eliz c 2 3. Iac. c. 3, 4, 5.
Statutes confining Papists, to their Houses, and sundry other Presidents.
Therefore by like reason they may confine Malignants in times of war, for the
public peace and safety, and disarme them to for a time; a, Constables may by
the Law, disarme and imprison peace-breakers, fray-makers, riotors, and others
to prevent bloodshed, quarrels, and preserve the public peace.

Thirdly, For the plundering of Malignants, and sequestring their Estates; I
answer, that, I think the Parliament never yet approved the plundering (or in
plain English, robbing) of any man, by any of their forces; they having
plundered no places taken by assault, for ought I hear; though the Kings forces
on the contrary, have miserably plundered all the Kingdom almost, (except the
Papists who are most exempted from this rapine, and some few, chief
Malignants,) yea, those very Persons, Soldiers, Cities, Towns, which by their
very Articles of surrender, were not to be plundered; (witness, Taunton,
Bridgewater, Bristol, Gainsbo^ow, where many have been pillaged to their naked
skins, notwithstanding their Ariticles of agreement, solemnly sworn, to depart
quietly with bag and baggage, without interruption, and the Towns to be free
from plunder) contraty to the very Alber. Gent. de Iure Belli, l. 3. and Hugo
Grotius, de Iure B^li. l 3 cap 9. 10. 11. etc.
Law of war, and Arms; which may instruct all others not to trust them
henceforth. If any of the Parliaments forces have misbehaved themselves in
plundering any Malignants or disaffected persons, more then by seizing, of
their Arms, distraining their Goods for imposed Assessements; or sequestring
their Plate, Moneys, Estates, for the public service upon promise of
repayment and restitution; I know the Houses have publicly, by express
Ordinances, inhibited, disavowed the fact, and exposed the disorderly
Delinquents to condign punishments, even to the loss of their lives, if any
please to prosecute them by way of indictment or Martial Law. For my part I
abhor all violence, plunder, rapine, and disorders in Soldiers, as contrary
to the Law of God, Obadiah 10. to 16. Luke 3. 14. and leave those who are
guilty of them to the severest public justice, as offenders against the Sea
Albericus Gentilis, de lur^ Belli, l. 2. c 16. 2. 3. l. 3. c. 2 and 19. Hugo
Gretius, de Iure Belli, l. 3. c. 11. to 23.
Law of Nature, of Nations, of the Land, yea, of War it self: But God forbid
the Parliament should be unjustly charged with all the misdemeanors of their
Soldiers, which they prohibit, detest, censure; more then the King with all
the barbarous rapes, murders, cruelties, rapines, and monstrous insolences,
which his Cavaliers every where perpetrate without punishment or restraint;
especially the blood-thirsty Irish Popish Rebels among them: who having shed so
much English Protestants blood in Ireland, ere they came over hither, of which
they vaunt, is such an high dishonor to God, and the English Nation, if their
own blood be not shed for it by the hand of vengeance here; that I wonder with
what face or spirit, His Maj^stie or any English Protestant can patiently
suffer these Irish Rebels to shed any more Protestant English blood, or breath
in English air, who have cut the throats of so many thousand innocent English,
both here and elsewhere, and are like to cut all our throats ere long (as they
have designed) unless their throats be first cut by us. But yet for the
plundering of such Malignants goods, and houses, who are opposite to the whole
Kingdom and Parliament, and will not join with them in the common cause, which
concerns us all; as it has sundry See Part. 1. p 22. Part. 2. p. 18, 19, 0
Fabian. part. 7. p. 78 92.
patterns in the Barons Wars, against the Poictovines and their faction, in
Henry the third his reign, and after wards against the Spensers, in Edward the
second days formerly touched; so it has one observeable general resolution
of the whole body of the Lords and Commons, warranting it in King John's reign,
even then when they all took up Arms to enforce him to confirm the great
Charter it self, which our Opposites cry out to be violated by the Parliaments
moderate s^isures, only by way of distress or sequestration: Matthew. Paris,
Hist. p. 243. to 255. Daniel p. 142, 143, 144. Part. 1. p 9, 10.
For the Barons, Knights, and Commons, with their whole Army being met together
in London, which joined with them to gain this Charter from the King; sent from
thence Letters to all the Earls, Barons and Knights throughout England, who
seemed (though but fainedly) to adhere to the King, exhorting them with this
Commination; That as they loved the indemnitie of their Goods, and possessions,
they should desert a perjured King, and adhearing faithfully to them, should
with them inviolably stand, and effectually contend for the Liberties and Peace
of the Kingdom; which if they contemned to do, they would with force of Arms,
and Banners displayed, MARCH AGAINST THEM AS PUBLIC ENEMIES, SUBVERT THEIR
CASTLES, BURN THEIR HOUSES AND EDIFICES, AND NOT CEASE TO DESTROY THEIR PONDS,
PARKES, AND ORCHARDS. Whereupon all the Lords, Knights, and People, deserting
the King, who had scarce seven Knights i^ all left with him, confederated
themselves to the Barons in the Common Cause. (wherein to be a Neuter, was to
be an enemy, and no member of the politic body, in which all were equally
engaged.) Whereupon the King thus deserted by all condescended speedily to
their demands, and confirmed the great Charter much against his will. A very
apt President for these times, which would make the people more unanimous,
faithful, and courageous for the Common Cause, if but imitated in the
commination only, though never put into actual execution; he being unworthy
once to enjoy any privilege of a freeborn Subject in the Kingdom, who will
not join with the Parliament and Kingdom, to defend his Liberty, and the
Kingdoms privileges, in which he has as great a common share, as those who
stand, pay, and fight most for them. It is a good Cause Cook 11 Repub. f 97,
98, 99 James Bags Case.
of disfranchising any man out of any City, Corporation or Company, and to
deprive him of the Privileges of them, if he refuse to contribute toward the
common support, defense, or maintenance of them, or join in open hostility,
contributions or suites against them. There is the same and greater reason of
the general City and Corporation of the whole Realm, to which we are all most
engaged; and therefore those who refuse to contribute toward the defense and
preservation of it, if able; or by their persons, purses, intelligence, or
counsel, give any assistance to the common enemy against it, deserve to be
disfranchised out of it, to have no privilege or protection by it, and to be
proceeded against as utter enemies to it, Christ's rule being here most true,
Matthew 12. 30.
He that is not with me, is against me; and he that gathers not with me,
scatter^th abroad. The Ciero de Officiis, l 1, 2. Aristot, Polit. l. 1.
Commonwealth of which we are members, has by way of original contract for
mutual assistance and defense (seconded by the late Protestation and Covenant)
a greater interest in our Persons, and Estates, then we our selves, or the
King; and if we refuse to aid the republike, of which we are members in times
of common danger, with our Persons, Abilities, Goods; or assist the common
enemy with either of them; we thereby betray our trust and fidelity, violate
our Covenants to the Republike, and expose our bodies to restraint, our estates
to confiscation, for this most unnatural treachery, and sordid nigguardlinesse
(as well as for Treason, Felony, or other more petty injuries against the
State, or humane society, made capital by the Laws) most justly, for the
public service of the State, which has a general Sovereign Interest in them
in all times of need, paramount our private Rights, which must always submit
to the public: and lose all our formerly enjoyed Privileges, either of Laws,
Liberties, or freeborn Subjects, if we refuse to defend, or endeavor to
betray them, as the Laws and common practice of all Nations evidence. In the Sea Part. 2. p. 16. to 24.
Barons wars against King John, Henry the third, and Edward the second, in
defense of their Liberties, and Laws, they seized upon the Castles, Forts, and
Revenues of the Crown, and upon the Moneys, and Goods of the Fabian. part. 7.
p 78.
Priors aliens, and malignant Poictovines, which they employed in the Kingdoms
service Matthew. Paris p 943.
Eodem tempore Castellanus de Dovera, Richardus de Gray, vir fidelis and
strenuus, qui ex part Baronum ibidem constituebatur, omnes transeuntes and
transituros, diligenter considerabat, cuncta prudenter perscrutando, and
invenit NON MODICUM THESAURUM paratum, dictis Pictaviensibus clanculo
deferendum; qui TOTUS CAPTUS EST, IN CASTRO RESERUANDUS. Similiter Londini apud
novum Templum THE SAURUS MAXIMUS, de cujus quantitate audientes mirabantur,
quem reposuerunt Pictavienses memorati, licet contradicentes reniterenter
Hospitelarii, CAPTUS cst; AD ARBITRIUM REGIS ET BARONUM IN UTILES REGNI USUS
UTILITER EXPONENDUS, writes Rishanger the continuer of Matthew Paris; a good
President for the present times: After which the Matthew. Par^^ hist. Angl p.
959. Graston, p. 140, 141.
Barons banished all the Poictovine Malignants, who miscounselled and adhered
to the King, out of England, Anno 1260; who Anno 1261. were all banished out of
London, and other Cities, and Forts. Matthew. Paris, hist. Angl. p 380.
An. 1234. The Earl Marshall having routed John of Monmouth his forces (which
assisted King Henry the third against the Barons) in Wales, he wasted all the
said John's Villages and Edifices, and all things that were his, with sword and
fire, and so of a rich man, made him poor and indigent. In the very Christmas
holy days, there was a grievous war kindled against the King and his evil
Counselors. For Richard Suard conjoyning other Exiles to him, entered the Lands
of Richard Earl of Cornwall, the Kings brother, lying not far from Behull,
and burned them, together with the Houses, and the Corn^, the Oxen in the
Ox-stalls, the Horses in the stables, the Sheep in the Sheep-cots: they
likewise burned Segrave the native soly of Stephen, Iusticiar of England, with
very sumptuous Houses, Oxen, and Corn; and likewise brought away many horses
of great price, returning thence with spoils, and other things. They likewise
burned down a certain village of the Bishop of Winchesters, not far from
thence, and took away the spoils, with other things there found. But the
foresaid Warriers had constituted this laudable general rule among themselves,
that they would do no harm to any one, nor hurt any one BUT THE WICKED
COUNSELORS OF THE KING* by whom they were banished; and those things that were
theirs, they burnt with fire, extirpating their Woods, Orchards, and such like
by the very Roots. This they did then de facto; See 2. R. 2 c. 7. 1. H. 5. c.
6. 2. H. 5. c. 8.
de Jure, I dare not approve it, though in Cases of Attaint and Felony, the
very Common Law to terrify others, gives sentence against perjured Juries,
Traitors, and Felons, in some Cases, that their houses shall be raced to the
ground, their Woods, Parkes, Orchards, Ponds, cut down and destroyed; their A
4. Ass. 2 6. ^ss. 7. 30. Ass. 24 50. Ass 4. 6. E. 4. 5. Fitz. A^taint. 14.
Meadows, and Pastures, plowed up and defaced, though not so great Enemi^s to
the State, as evil Counselors. Matthew. Paris, p. 961.
Anno 1264. the forty eight years of Henry the third his reign; The King
keeping his Christmas with the Queen, Richard King of Romans, and many others
at London, Simon Montford the Captain of the Barons at the same time, preyed
upon the Goods of these who adheared to the King, and especially those of the
Queens retinue, brought by her into England, whom they called Aliens. Among
others, some of the Barons forces took Peter, a Burgundian, Bishop of Hereford,
in his Cathedral Church, and led him prisoner to the Castle of Ordeley, and
divided his treasure between themselves; and took diverse others of the Kings
party prisoners. Who thereupon fearing least he should be besieged in the
Tower by the Barons army, by the mediation of timorous men, be made peace with
the Barons for a time; promising inviolably to observe the Provisions of
Oxford, that all the Kings Castles thoroughout England, should be delivered
into the custody of the Barons; that all Aliens within a certain time should
void the Realm, except those who should be thought faithful thereunto by the
unanimous consent of the Kingdom, and that faithful and profitable natives of
the Realm, should thenceforth dispose of the affairs of the Kingdoms under the
King. But THE QUEEN instigated with foeminine malice, contradicted it all she
could, which made the people revile, and cast dirt and stones at her, as she
was going to Windsore, enforcing her to retire again to the Tower. How William
Long shamp Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellor of England, Earl John, and others,
when they disturbed the peace of the Realm, and turned Malignants, were
apprehended, besieged, imprisoned, excommunicated, and their Goods, and
Castles, seized on by the Lords and Commons, out of Parliament, yea, during the
time of King Richard the first his absence and captivity, you may read at
large in Annal. pars ^osterior p. 702. 703. 705 706. 734 735.
Roger de Hovedon, In the life of Richard the first.
Holinshed, Daniel, and others. Why then the Lords and Commons in Parliament
may not now much more do the like, ^or their own, and the whole Kingdoms
safety, I can yet discern no shadow of reason. I will not trouble you with
Histories, showing what violent unlawful courses, Kings and People have
sometimes used to raise moneys in times of war, by sacrilege, rapine, and
all manner of indirect means; I rather wish those Presidents, and their
occasions, buried in eternal silence, then reduced into practice; and verily
persuade my self, that every ingenuous true born Englishman, who hears a real
natural affection to his Country, or a Christian love to his Brethren, the
Parliament, and Religion, will according to his bounden duty, the
Protestation, and Covenant which he has taken, rather freely contribute his
whole estate, if need so require, toward the just defense of his Country,
Liberty, Religion, and the Parliament, against the treacherous Conspiracies of
the Pope, Jesuits, foreign Catholics, Irish Rebels, English Papists, and
Malignants, who have plotted their subvertions, then repine at, or neglect to
pay any moderate Taxes, which the Parliament shall impose, or enforce the
Houses to any extraordinary ways of Levying Moneys, for want of ordinary
voluntary supplies, to maintain these necessary defensive wars.

I shall close up all in a few words. The Parliament has much against their
wills, been enforced to this present defensive war, which they have a most
just, and lawful power to wage and manage ( as I have See Part 2. and 3.
elsewhere evidenced) by the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, yea, by the Law of
God, of Nature, of Nations

This war cannot be maintained without Moneys, the sinews of it; wherefore
when voluntary contributions fail, the Houses may by the same Laws which
enabled them to raise an Army without the King, impose necessary Taxes for the
maintaining of it, during the wars continuance, else their Legal power to
raise an Army for the Kingdoms defense, would be fruitless, if they might not
Levy Moneys, to recrute and maintain their Army, when raised: which Taxes if
any refuse to pay, they may for this contempt, be justly imprisoned, as in
cases of other Sud^idies; and if any unnaturally war against their Country,
or by way of intelligence, advise, or contribution, assist the common Enemy, or
s^duce, or withdraw others (by a factious slanderous speeches against the Power
and Proceedings of the Parliament,) from assisting the Parliament in this
kind, they may for such misdemeanors (upon conviction) be justly censured,
confined, secured, and their estates sequestered, rather then the Republike,
Parliament, Religion, or whole Kingdom should miscarry: It is better that one
should perish, then all the Nation; being the voice John 11. 50, 51. c 18. 14.
of God, Nature, and resolution of all Laws, Nations, Republikes, whatsoever.
If any heretical, scismaticall, or vicious persons, which may poison others
with their pernicious false doctrin^s, or vicious wicked lives, appear in the
Church, they may after admonition, if they repent not, yea, and de facto, are,
or ought to be 1 Cor. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 20. Fitzh (...), Brook and Ash, Title
Excommengment. Summa Angelica, Rosella and others, Tit. Excommunication.
excommunited, the Church, and society of all faithful Christians, so as none
may, or ought to converse with them till their repentance. If this be good Law
and Divinity in the Church; the banishing and confining of pestilent
Malignants in times of war, and danger, must by the self-same reason be good
Law and Divinity in the State.

^I have now (by Gods assistance) notwithstanding all distracting
Interruptions, Avocations, Remoraes incountring me in this service; ran through
all Objections of moment, which the King, or any opposites to this Parliament,
have hitherto made against their proceedings, or jurisdictions; and given such
full answers to them, as shall, I trust, in the general, abundantly clear the
Parliaments Authority, Innocence, Integrity, against all their clamarous
malignant Calumnies, convince their Judgments, satisfy their consciences, and
put them to everlasting silence, if they will without prejudice or partiality,
seriously ponder all the premises, and ensuing Appendix, which I have added for
their further satisfaction, information, conviction; and the confirmation of
all forecited domestic Laws, Presidents, by foreign examples and authorities
of all sorts. And if any shall yet continue obstinate and unresolved after so
many convincing Reasons, Presidents, Authorities, or still retain an ill
opinion of the Parliaments proceedings; I shall desire them only seriously to
consider, the most execrable conspiracy of the Pope, Jesuits, and Popish party
in all His Majesty's three Realms to extirpate the Protestant Religion, subvert
the Government, Parliament, and poison the King himself, (if he condescend not
to their desires, or cross them in their purposes,) whom they have purposely
engaged in these wars, still continued by them for this very end, to enforce
the King to side with them, and so gain possession of his person, to accomplish
this design of theirs, (as is clearly evidenced to all the world, by Romes
Masterpiece, the English Pope, the Declaration of the Lords and Commons,
concerning the Rise and Progress of the Irish Rebellion,) and then advisedly
to consider in what great present danger the Kingdom, King, Parliament, and
Religion are, when the Popish Party, and forces now in Arms have gained the
Kings, Princes, and Duke of Yorkes persons into their custody, the Cities of
Chester, and of late Bristoll, the Keys of England, with other Ports, to let
in all the Irish Rebels upon us, to cut our throats in England, as they have
cut above an hundred and forty thousand of our Protestant brethrens throats
already in Ireland, it being one part of their design, now presently to be
executed, as appears by sundry Examinations in the Irish Remonstrance; for
which end, some thousands of Irish Rebels (who have all embrued their hands
there in English blood,) are already landed here, and are in great favor and
command about the King; To which, if they add the omnipotent overruling power
of the Queen (the Head of that party) with the King, and his Council, in
disposing all Officers, all places of command and trust under him: The
Confederacy and Contributions of foreign Popish States, to maintain this
war to ruin the Parliament, Kingdom, Religion, and re-establish Popery in
its universal extent; with the large of progress the Papists have lately made
in Ireland, Scotland, and England, to accomplish this their long-agitated
Conspiracy; and the late strange proceedings in Ireland, where the best
Protestants are displaced, disgraced, restrained; the Popish Rebels advanced,
and a truce negotiated, if not fully concluded with the Rebels, to the end that
all their forces may be speedily transported hither to ruin our Religion, and
cut all our throats (enough to awake the most stupid English spirits, and rouse
them, up to a speedy unanimous resolution to unite all their purses, and forces
to the Parliament, against the Popish Conspirators, and these bloody Butchers
now ready to devour us:) and then I doubt not, if they have any true love to
God, Religion, King, Country, themselves, or their Posterities, they will soon
change their former opinions and practices against the Parliaments just
proceedings and join hearts, hands, forces, yea, their uttermost endeavors
with them, to prevent and ward off that imminent destruction which now hangs
over our heads, and will in short time wholly ruin us, if God open not our
eyes, and unite not all our hearts and minds unto the Parliament, with one
unanimous resolution to oppose these cursed Confederates, who have plotted,
occasioned all these wars and miseries, under which our Kingdoms now groan
and languish; which long plotted Treachery in humane probability can no ways
be prevented, nor a settled peace, and Reformation established, but with the
total suppression of the Popish party now in Arms, and by rescuing His
Majesty's person, Children, forces out of their Trayterly hands and power,
whose death they have conspired long ago, if he refuse to grant them an
universal open toleration of their Antichristian Religion, in all His
Kingdoms, and then to seize upon the Prince, and train him up in their
Religion; which how easy it is for them to effect, now they have the King,
Prince, Duke, the Kings Forts, his Forces in their power, yea potent Armies of
their own in the field here, and such a force of Irish Rebels now ready to be
shipped over to Chester, Milford, and Bristoll, for their assistance, and
enfor^ement, to overpower the Protestant party in the Kings Armies, no
understanding man can without fear and trembling, consider.

O then, if ever we will show our selves faithful, valiant, courageous,
magnanimous, bountiful, really cordial, and loyal to our King, Kingdoms,
Country, Parliament, Religion, Laws, Lives, Liberties, Kindred, Families,
Posterities; Let all who profess themselves Protestants lay aside all
causeless jealousies and prejudices against the Parliament, or any others; and
now speedily unite all their Prayers, Hearts, Hands, Purses, Forces, Counsels,
and utmost endeavors together, to defend, secure them all against these
foreign and domestice Jesuiticall Romish Confederates; and if any prove
traitorous, fearful, cowardly, unfaithful, base, or faint-hearted in this
public Cause, as too many, (who deserve to be made spectacles of treachery and
cowardice to posterity, and cannot without injustice or dishonor to the
Parliament and Kingdom, be suffered to escape scot-free, without severe
exemplary punishment,) have done, to their eternal infamy, and betraying of
their Country; the present generations shall abhor them, posterity curse,
and declaim against them, as most unnatural Monsters, unworthy to breath in
English air, or enjoy the name, the privileges of English men, or
Protestants. There is a double kind of Treachery in Soldiers, both of them
adjudged Capital. The first proceeds from a sordid pusillanimous fear,
unworthy the spirit of a Soldier: and this is Capital, both by the Civil and
Common Law. By the D. L. omne delictum 6^ s^ct. qui in acie Rebuff^sin L.
liberorum sect. etenim. Henricus Bocerus, lib. 1. de Bello, cap. 13. p. 49, 50.
Civil Law; The Soldiers who first begin to fly, or but fain themselves
sick, for fear of the Enemy, are to be adjudged to death for t^is their
cowardice. Yea Lacaena and Dametria, two magnanimous Women, slew their timorous
sons, who fled basely from the battle, with their own bands, disclaiming them
as degenerous Brats, and not their sons; the latter of them inscribing this
Epitaph on her sons Tomb.

Hunc timidum Matter Dametriam ipsa peremit,
Nec dignum Matre, nec Lacedaemonium.
Indeed Diodorus Sic^dus Bibl. hist. l. 12. sect. 15, 16. p^ 420.
Charondas and the Thurians, enacted, That cowards who basely fled or refused
to bear Arms for their Countries defense, should set three days one after
another in the open Marketplace, clad in Woman's apparel; (a pun^shment far
worse then death it self, writes Diodorus Siculus) where as all other Lawyers
made it Capital; yea, our See Her^ part. 2. p. 24.
Common Law adjudgeth it Treason: Witness the notable Cases of G^mines and
Weston, 1. R. 2. number. 38, 39. who were adjudged Traitors in Parliament for
surrendering two Castles in France, only out of fear, when they were strongly
besieged, and battered, sooner then they needed, without any compliency with
the enemy: The Case of Walsingham. hist. Angl. page 337.
John Walsh Esquire, accused of high Treason in Parliament against the King and
Kingdom, for yielding up the Castle of Cherburg in France, to the enemy, when
as be might have defended it. And the Case of Dani^ls hist. p. 81.
Henry Earl of Essex, in the second year of Henry the second, accused of high
Treason, by Robert de Monfort, and vanquished by him in a Duel, waged
thereupon; for throwing down the Kings Standard (which he bare by inheritance)
and flying, in passing a straight, among the Mountains, when fiercely
encountered by the Welsh. For which, though his life was pardoned, yet he was
adjudged to be shorn a Monk, put into the Abbey of Reading, and had his Lands
seized into the Kings hands. And as for D. l. 3. sect, is qui ad hostem.
Henricus B^ce^us de Bello. l. 1. c. 13. p. 48.
treacherous revolting to, or delivering up Castles to the Enemy, it is
Capital, and high Treason by all Laws, and so the resolved in Parliament, 3.
R. 2. in the Case of Walsingham. bist. Angl. p. 245, 246. See Rastall. Captains
and Soldiers. Cook 6. Rep. f. 27.
Thomas Ketrinton Esquire, accused of high Treason by Sir John Ann^sley Knight,
for delivering up the Castle of Saint Savior in the Isle of Constantine, to
the French, for a great sum of Money, when as he neither wanted provisions,
nor means to defend it. As for those unnatural Vipers, and Traitors, who shall
henceforth (after this discovery) join with the Popish Conspirators, to ruin
their Religion, Country, and the Parliament, for private ends, as The general
History of Spain, l. 5. p. 153, 154.
Count Julian the Spaniard joined with the Mores, An. Dom. 713. whom he brought
into Spain, his native Country, furiously pursuing his own private injury with
the Ruin of the public. I shall only bestow his Epitaph upon them, with
which I shall conclude this Treatise. Maledictus furor impius Iuliani, quia
pertinax; and indignatio, quia dura: vesanus furia, ammimosus furore, oblitus
fidelitatis, immemor religionis, contemptor divinitatis, crudelis in se,
homicida in vicinos, reus in omnes. Memoria ejus in omni ore amarescit, and
nomen ^jus in ^^ternum pu^r^scet.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX: Manifesting by sundry Histories and Authors, that in the ancient
Roman Kingdom and Empire; in the Greek and German Empires, derived out of it;
in the old Grecian, Indian, Aegytian Realms; in the Kingdoms of France,
Spain, Italy, Hungary, Bohemia, Denmark, Poland, Sweden, Scotland, yea, of
Judah, Israel, and others mentioned in the Scripture; the Supreme Sovereignty
and Power, resided not in the Emperors and Kings themselves, but in their
Kingdoms, Senates, Parliaements, People, who had not on^y a power to restrain,
but censure and remove their Emperors. and Princes for their Tyranny and
misgovernmen^.
With an Answer to the Principal Arguments, to prove Kings above their whole
Kingdoms and Parliaments, and not questionable nor accountable to them, nor
censurable by them for any exerbitant Actions.
HAving finished the preceding Treatise; which asserts, The Supreme Authority
and Sovereign Power in the Realm of England, legally and really to reside in
the whole Kingdom, and Parliament, which represents it, not in the Kings
Person, who is inferior to the Parliament: A Doctrine, quite contrary to what
Court Prelates and Chaplains have for sundry years inculcated into our Kings
and People (who preach little else but Tyranny to the one, and Slavery to the
other, to support their own Lordly Prelacy, and hinder an exact Church
Reformation) and directly opposite to the resolutions of many malignant
Courtiers, Lawyers, and Counselors about His Majesty; who have either out of
ignorance or malice, created him a new Utopian absolute Royal Prerogative,
unknown to our Ancestors, not bottomed on the Laws of God or the Realm; for
maintenance of each Punctilio whereof, against the Parliaments pretended
Encroachments, the whole Kingdom must be engaged in a destructive civil
War, now like to ruin it: I could not but conjecture, how in all probability
these Clergy men, Courtiers and Lawyers, out of their unskilfulnesse in true
Divinity, History, Law, and Policy would upon the first tidings of this strange
Doctrine, pass a sentence of Excommunication and death against it, as guilty
not only of Heresy, but High Treason; and judge it such a monstrous
Antimonarchicall Paradox as was never heard of in, much less claimed or
practiced by any Kingdom, Realm, or Monarchy whatsoever: To anticipate which
rash censures, and undeceive both Kings and Subjects whom these gross
Parasites have overlong seduced in this point, to their prejudices, convince
the consciences of all gainsaying Malignants, irradiate this long obscured
verity, whose seasonable discovery, may through Gods blessing, conduce very
much to period the present Differences between King and Parliament, touching
matters of Prerogatives and Privileges claimed by either; I conceived it, not
only expedient but necessary, to back the forecited presidents of our own
Kingdom with paralelled examples in most foreign Realms and Monarchies (in
which it is not mannerly to be overbusie without just cause) which I have
faithfully (though suddenly) collected out of the best approved Authors and
Historians; whereby I shall infallibly prove, that in the Roman State and
Empire at the first, in the Greek Empire since, in the German Empire heretofore
and now; in the ancient Kingdoms of Greece, Egypt, India, and elsewhere; in
the Kingdoms of France, Spain, Hungary, Bohemia, Denmark, Sweden, Poland,
Scotland, and most other Kingdoms in the world, (yea in the Kingdoms of Judah
and Israel, and others mentioned in Scripture) the Highest Sovereign
Authority, (both to elect, continue, limit, correct, depose their Emperors and
Kings, to bound their royal power and prerogatives, to enact Laws, create new
Offices and forms of Government) resided always in these whole Kingdoms,
Senates, Dyets, Parliaments, People, not in the Emperors, Kings, or Princes
persons. I shall begin with the Roman State, as having much affinity with ours,
See Camb. Br. Math. Westminster. Polychr, Fa^i^n, Holinsh. speed. Gra^ton, Grim^on.
which was long under their command heretofore.

After the building of Rome by Romulus and Remus, Livy, Romans Hist. l. 1. Plut.
Romul and Numa Pomp. Dionys. Hal^ Antiq. Romans l. ^ Munster Cosmogr. l. 2. c.
60. p. 280.
Romulus being elected King, divided the people into two Ranks; those of the
highest and richest quality, he styled Senators, making them a Court of
Counsel and Justice, much like our House of Peers; the other he termed The
People, being the body of the State, and representing our House of Commons. In
this distinction, made by the Peoples consent, the Sovereign Authority to
elect Succeeding Kings, to enact binding Laws, to make war, or peace, and
the like; rested not in the Kings person, but in the Senate and people jointly,
if they accorded; yet principally in the people, in case either of assent or
dissent between them; their very Kings and Laws having their greatest power
and efficacy chiefly from the peoples election and assent.

To begin first with their Kings Election and Authority. Plutarchi Numa Pompil.
Dionys. Hal. l. 2. sect. ^.
when Romulus their first King deceased, there arose a great controversy in
Rome about the Election of a new King; for though they all agreed to have a
King, yet who should choose him, and out of what Nation he should be elected,
was then controverted. In the Interim to avoid confusion, the Senators, being
150. divided the Regal power between them, so as every one in his turn in
Royal Robes should do Sacrifice to the Gods, and execute Justice six hours
in the nighttime, and six hours in the day; which tended to preserve an
equality among the Senators, and to diminish the envy of the people, when in
the space of one night and day, they should see one and the same man, both a
King and a private person. But the people disliking this Interregnum (as
tending to put off the Election of a King, that the Senators might keep the
principallity, and divide it among themselves) Livie Romans Hist. l. 1. p. 14.
15. Edit Francofurti, 60^. Di^nys. Hal. l. 2. sect. ^.
cried out, that their bondage was multiplied having an hundred Lords made
instead of one, neither would they suffer it any longer, unless they would
admit a King, created by themselves: Hereupon the Senate, thinking it best to
offer the people that, which they were like to lose, to gain their favor,
Summa potestate populo permissa, permitted to the people the chief power of
Electing a King: but yet that they might not give away more right, then they
detained: they decreed, That when the people had commanded and elected a King,
it should be ratified, if the Senators should approve it, or be reputed the
authors of it: Then the Interex assembling the people, spoke thus unto them: O
Romans REGEM ELIGITE, choose yea King: so the Senators think fit, and if he be
one worthy to succeed Romulus, they will approve him. This was so grateful to
the people, that left they should be overcome with the benefit, they commanded,
that the Senate should decree who should reign at Rome. At last, Numa
Pompilius was named; and none of the people or Senate daring to prefer any
before him; all of them jointly decreed, that the Kingdom should be conferred
upon him. Whence Canubius the Tribune of the people in his Speech against the
Consuls, long after, used these words Livie Romans hist, l 4. p. ^4, 145.
Numa Pompilius POPULI ^ JUSSU Patres autoribus, Romae Regnavit. Reges exacti
JUSSU POPULI: which manifests, the chief power to be in the people. Numa
departing, Livie, l. 1. p. ^7. Dionys. Hal. l. 3. c. 10.
Tullus Hostilius by the peoples command, consent and approbation was made
King, which Livy thus expresses; Tullum Hostilium REGEM POPULUS JUSSIT, patres
auctores facti: After him, the people created Ancus Martius King Livie l. ^. p.
^5. Dronys Hal. l 3. c. 9.
Regem POPULUS CREAVIT; patres fuere auctores: After him Livie l. ^ p, 28.
Dionys. Hal. l. 3. c. 10.
ingenti consensu Populus Romanus Tarquinium REGNARE JUSSIT: The People of Rome
with great consent commanded Tarquin to reign. But he dying; Servius having a
strong Guard to defend him Ibid, p, 32, Dionys Hal l. 4. c. 1, 2.
primus injussupopuli, voluntate Patrum Regnavit, was the first that reigned
without the command of the people, by the Senates consent; yet doubting his
title for want of the peoples votes, and young Tarquin his Competitour, giving
out speeches, Ibid.
se injussupopuli regnare, that he reigned without the peoples command; he
thereupon so courted the Commons, by dividing the Lands he had taken from the
enemies among them, that at last he appealed to the people, Vellent nolerintve
se regnare? whether they would or would not have him reign? tantique consensu,
quanto haud quisquam alius ante rex est declaratus. But Tarquin the Proud
affecting the Kingdom flew Servius; and Ibid p. 36, 37, 8, 44 ^ ionys
Hol^icar. l^ 4. c. 5. to the end.
Non Comitits habitis, non per suffragium populi, non auctoribus Patribus:
without the Election of the people or Senate, usurped the Crown; neque enim ad
jus regni quicquam praeter vim habebat, ut qui neque populi jussu, neque
Patribus auctoribus regnaret, writes Livy: Whereupon reposing no hope in the
love of the people, he endeavored to defend his usurped Sovereignty by force:
to which purpose, he of himself, without the Senate or Counsel, took upon
him the conusance of Capital offenses; and by color hereof, not only to
slay, banish, and plunder those whom he suspected or hated, but even those
from whom he could expect nothing but prey. Then he lesseneth the number of
the Senate to diminish their esteem and power, and at last to subvert it. He
was the first of Kings who dissolved the Custom used by all his Predecessors,
De omnibus Senatum consulendi, of consulting with the Senate about all
affairs, and administered the Commonwealth by his domesticke Counsels; making
War, Peace, Truces, Leagues with whom he would, injussu populi and Senatus,
without the peoples and Senates command; which Tyrannical Usurpations of his,
with his ravishing of Lucretia, caused Brutus and the incensed Romans to rise
up in Arms against him; deprive him of His Crown, banish him, his Wife and
Children, utterly to abolish the Kingly Government by a Decree, and to take a
Livie l. 1, p. 4^. 47. Dionys. Hal, l, 4, ^, 10, l. 5. c. 1.
solemn Oath, (lest afterward they might be overcome by Royal entreaties or
Gifts) That they would never suffer any King to Reign in Rome: Which act of
Brutus and the People is highly magnified by Livie and De officiis l. 3.
Tully. This done, the Livie l, 2. p. 47. Dionys. Halicar. l. 5, c. 1, 2.
people created two annual Consuls, who had the Power, but not the name and
continuance of Kings, Annuum imperium consulare factum est: Brutus the first
Consul was slain, whilst he was Consul, and Valerius his Companion being
suspected by the People to affect the Kingdom, because he demanded no new
Companion: Valerius hereupon calls the people together Livy ibid. p. 51, 52.
Dio^ys. Hal. l. 5. c. 2, 3.
lays down his Fasces (the badges of his Sovereignty before them) which was a
grateful spectacle to the people, confessionemque factam; Populi quam Consulis
Majestatem vimque majorem esse; and a confession made, that the People had
greater Sovereignty and Power then the Consul, who yet had regal Jurisdiction.
And then there were Laws enacted, of appealing from the Consul or Magistrate
to the people, and that he should lose both his head and goods, who should but
consult to usurp the Kingdom.

In brief, it is clearly agreed by Antiq. ^om. l. 2. sect 2. p. 132, 133, 134.
Dioxysius Halicarnasseus, Historiae, l. 6, p. 529, 530, 534,
Polibius, Hist, l, 1, and 2, l, 27, p, 330,
Livy, Ge, Dierum l, 1, c, 3, l, 4, c, 23, f, 239, 240,
Alexander ab Alexandro, Com. weal, l, 1, c, 10,
Bodin, (and Rosi^us, Godwin, and others: and Mun^t, Cosmogr, l, 3, c, 60, p,
280, 281, and c, 16, p, 379,
most who have written of the Roman Republike) that the Sovereign Authority
among the Romans, during their Kings, Consuls, Dictators, and other
Magistrates, was originally vested, not in the Kings, Senate, Consuls, or other
Magistrates, but in the whole body of the Senate, and People; the People had
the chief Sovereign Power of enacting and confirming Laws, (the Senates
Decrees and Laws being of no validity, unless the People ratified them) of
creating and electing Kings, Dictators, Tribunes, and all other great public
Officers; of denouncing war, and making Peace: these Tribunes, and Dictators
might restrain, curb, imprison, censure, depose the Roman Consuls (who had
Regal Power) yea, the Roman Kings, Senators, and highest Officers; and to them
the Live, Hist, l, 8, p, 313, with the other forecited Authors.
last appeal from King, Senate, or other Magistrate might be made, as to the
highest Tribunal: they having power likewise to Nobis eadem vi facitis
irri^am, qua peperis^is, Live, Hist, l, ^, p, ^50,
change or annull the very frame of their public Government, which they often
times did, as these Authors prove at large, to whom for brevity I refer the
Reader. Yea, after the Roman Empire (the greatest, largest Sovereignty in the
world) was erected, the Supreme Power still rested in the Senate and People,
not in the Emperors themselves, which Common wealth, l, 2, c, 5, and l, 1, c,
10,
Bodin grants and proves. This is clearly evident by these ensuing particulars:
First, the Senate and People had sole right and lawful power both to elect and
confirm their Emperors, and to decree them new Honors, Titles, Triumphs;
which power of election, though some Emperors in a sort usurped, by adopting
their Successors, and the Roman Soldiers too, by presuming sometimes to elect
Emperors without the Senate; yet these adoptions and elections were not held
valid, unless the Senate approved and confirmed them, who usually elected all
their Emperors, as of right, according to that of the Panegyrist, Imperaturum
omnibus ex omnibus elegi debere; Plinius Panegyr. Trajano dictus, and Jacobus
Valdesius, c. 18. This appears by the election and confirmation of most
Emperors from See Mun^^, Cos^^og, l, 2. c. 63 Gr^mstons imperial History,
Suetonius, Dion Cassius, Herodian, Eutropius, Zo^aras, Sabellicus, Chronicon
Chronic^rum, Opmecrus, Speed and others in these Emperors l^ves, and others.
Octavins to Leo the first, and more particularly by the Senates and Peoples
election and confirmation of Nerva P^rtinax, Severus, Gordianus, Maximius
P^pienus, Clodius B^lbinus, Philip, Decius, Trebo^ianus, Galienus, Claudius the
second, Ta^itus, Probus, Iovinianus, Aurelius, and others. This right of the
Senate was so clear, that Grim. impe. Hist. in his life, p. 3. 5. Muns^er
Cosm. l. 2. c. 63. p. 296.
after the death of Aurelian^^, the Army sent word to the Senate, that (as
reason was) they should choose and name an Emperor, and that they would obey
h^^. After six months space (during which time the Empire was governed by the
Senate) the Senate made choice of Tacitus, who earnestly r^fused the same as
first, but in the and accepted thereof, to the great joy of the Senate and
Roman people. After whose dec^ase Grim. impe. Hist. p. 208.
Pr^bus, being chosen Emperor by the Legions and Army, he presently wrote a
letter to the Senate, e^ousing himself for having accepted the Empire without
their knowledge an^ confirmation* whereupon the Senate confirmed his election
with many blessings, gave him ^he name of Augustus, Father of the Country;
made him High Pri^st, and gav^ him Tribunal Power and Authority.

(Secondly, This is manifest by the confessions, and Actions of the best Roman
Emperors. Commentar. l. 23. f. 238.
Volateranus writes of Trajan (the Sea Eu^ropius, Sabellicus, Zonaras,
Grimston, Munster, in his life: Paneg* Trojazo dictus.
best heathen Emperor that Rome enjoyed, that he used to call the Senate,
Father, but himself their Minister, or Servant of their labor; And that
standing, he did reverence to the Consuls sitting, quia SE ILLIS INFERIOREM EX
LEGIBUS esse REPERIRET, because he found by the Laws he was inferior to them.
Whence In vita Trajani.
Dion, Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 23.
Niciphorus, and Hi^^ory of Gr. ^rit. p. 95.
Speed record of him; that when he invested any Praetor or Commander, in giving
him the sword, he openly commanded him before all, to use the same even against
his own person, if he governed not the Empire well, or violated Law and
Equity; confessing thereby, that he was subject not only to the Laws, but to
the sword of Justice too in these Officers hands, in case he did offend, much
more then to the Senate. I read of the Emperor Grimstons imperial Hist. in his
life, p. 181 Munst. Cosm. l. 2. c 63.
Decius, elected by the Senate; that he preserved the authority of the Senate,
(who compelled him to make his Son his companion in the Empire) following
their Counsel in all matters of Government, governing all things with great
wisdom and equity, by the advice and consent of the Senate, to the great
contentment of all the Roman People; and going into Thracia against the Goths,
he left the Government in the hands of the Senate; permitting them to choose a
Censor at their pleasure, who had Supreme Jurisdiction over all men; which
office some former Emperors had usurped; making themselves Censors. So
Grimstons ^mperiall Hist. p. 196. 205.
Claudius the second, and Tacitus did nothing without the consent, advice, and
counsel, of the Senate, either in matters of War or Peace. And Hist. l. 6.
p. 530. 531.
Polybius writes expressly, That the Roman Emperors Counsels and purposes were
efficatious, or invalid, at the pleasure of the Senate, which had power to
remove or continue them, to increase or abridge their power and wealth; to
decree or deny them triumphs, toward which they contributed; and that they
could neither make war, nor peace, nor truces, without the peoples consent.
Their Emperors in truth, being but their chief Generals in their wars, at
the first, in right.

Thirdly, They had power to create one, two, or more Emperors at once, as
appears in their election of Grimston, ibid. p. 171. tom. 176. Munster
Cosmogr. l 2. c. 63.
Gordianus, the Father and Son to be Joint-Emperors at once, and of Maximius
Pupienus, and Clodius Balbinus, and Gordianus, to be C^^sars at once. And those
who could thus create more Emperors then one, when they pleased, no doubt had a
power above the Emperors.

Fourthly, They had a Soveraigue power, judicially to convent, censure, yea to
depose, and adjudge their Emperors to death, for their tyranny and
misgovernment: this appears by the case of Nero, that wicked Emp^rour
Grimston, Suetonius, Eutropius, Zo^^^ras Volateranus, Sabellicus, Math. Westminster.
Polychronicon, Opmeerus Ch^on Chronicorum, Speed, and others in his life.
whom the Senate jud^cially deposed, condemned for his tyranny and
misgovernment, as a public enemy to the State, adjudging him to have his head
fastened to a forke, and so to be publicly whipped to death, and then
precipitated from a rock: upon which sentence he being sought for, and forsaken
of all, to a void the execution of it, murdered himself with a poinyard. So
when Grims^^^, ^utropius, and others in his life.
Domiti^n was slain, the Senate assembling the same day, caused all his Stat^es
to be throune down, and all the inscriptions and memorials of him to be
cancelled, defaced; and elected Nerva Emperor. Grimston^ imperia^l Hist. p.
^60. M^nster Cosmog. l. 2. c. 63. p. 292.
Didius Iulianus who purchased the Empire by bribing the Soldiers, coming to
Rome with an Army, went to the Senate, where assembling such Senators as were
present, by their decree he was proclaimed Emperor, and they presently made
his Son in law Cornelius Repentin^^^ Praetor of Rome, putting Sulpetianus out
of that office, and from thence he was carried to the Imperial Palace, and
held for Emperor, more through force, then good will of any honest men: But
the people hateing, and cursing him; at last, a full Senate being assembled, by
the common consent of all the Senators, it was decreed, that Iulianus should be
deprived of the Empire, as a man unworthy to rule, and Severus proclaimed
Emperor; to whom two of the principal Senators were sent to yield him their
obedience, with the Ensigns of the Empire, and Iulianus being generally
abandoned, they commanded him to be slain in his palace. Grimson ib. p. 160.
Aelii Lampridii Heling abalus, Zonaras, Sa^ellic. and others.
Heliogabalus (that monster of wickedness) was slain by the praetorion
Soldiers by the Senates and peoples approbation, who commanded he should no
more be called Antoninus, and that in detestation of him, no other Emperor
should after that be called by this name, and that he should be called
Tiberinus, according to the manner of his death, his body being tied to great
stones, and sunk in Tiber, that it might never be found. So Grims^. in his
life p. 170, to 174. ^ith Iul. Capitol, Sabel^i^us, Munster, and others.
Maximinus the Emperor oppressing, and Tyrannizing over the people, with great
cruelty, was deposed by the Senate, and he, with his son (though already made
Caesar, and declared Emperor) adjudged enemies and Rebels; and Gordianus with
his Son elected and proclaimed Emperors by the Soldiers, people, and Senate
of Rome. After which they, considering the great power of Maximinus, to secure
the City, made great preparations to resist him, and writ letters to all their
Provinces, that Grimston p. 324.
all those Governors that Maximinus had there placed should be displaced;
which direction was generally obeyed, and the Governors most of them slain.
Thereupon Maximinus then in Hungary, posts with his Army, and Son toward Rome;
and young Gordianus being slain and his Father strangled in the interim; the
Senate assembled in the Temple of Jupiter, chose Maximus Pupienus and Clodius
Balbinus Emperors, and to please the people which consented not to their
el^ction, they likewise named young Gordianus Caesar, and raised forces to
resist Maximinus, who lying before Aquilia, his Soldiers hearing that he, with
his Son were proclaimed Rebels at Rome, and new Emperors elected, came boldly
to their Pavilions about noone, slew them, and sent their heads to Rome. By
these, with sundry presidents of like nature, it is apparent, that the
Sovereign power and Jurisdiction, even after the Roman empire erected,
continued still in the Senate and people, to whom the Emperors were
responsible, by whom they were deposed, yea put to death for their
misdemeanors and offenses against the state, and oppressions of their
Subjects: Which power they retained till the Emperors removed their Courts
from Rome to Constantinople, by which means the authority of the Senate, and
dignity of the Consuls was almost wholly lost by degrees, in Iustine the
seconds reign.

After the seat of the Empire was translated to Constantinople, the Senate,
People, Soldiers, and Patriarchs of Constantinople, claimed a right, and power
to elect their Emperors, to prescribe conditions, and Oaths unto them before
they were crowned; as also a power in some cases to depose them, yea execute
them, as you may read at large in their See Munst. Cosm. l. 4. c. 59. Zonaras,
N^uclerus, Sabe^luus Grimston, and others.
lives; Of which I shall recite some instances. Ioan^es Zonaras, Annal. ^om. 3.
p. ^9. Grimst. p. 245. ^^utropius, l. 1^. p^ 154. See Munstericosm l 4n c. 59.
throughout.
Julian the Apostate dying, Iovinian, assensu omnium, by the joint assent of
all the Soldiers, Captains, and people was elected Emperor; who absolutely
refused the Empire, saying; that he being a Christian would not be an Emperor
over Infidels: But all men were so pleased with his election, that they cried
out aloud saying; we are all Christians; And for his sake, those which were not
so, resolved to become Christians, upon condition that he would accept the
Empire; which he thereupon accepting, with incredible joy and gladness, they
swore obedi^nce to him, and gave him the Imperial Ensigns. He being casually
smoothered or death; Zonaras ib. Grimst. p. ^47. and Munster, l. 4. c. ^9^
Valentinian the first was by the joint consent of the Captains and Soldiers,
chosen Emperor: after which, the Empire went by descent till the death of
Valentinian the second and then Zonaras. Tom. 3, f. 123.
Martianus by means of Eudoxia, with the Senates and Patriarch^ assent, was
elected and crowned Emperor: After whose poisoning Zonaras ib. f. (...).
Grimst. p. 292.
Asper sought to have been his Successor; but being an Arrian, the orthodox
Christians of Constantinople would by no means elect him; whereupon, accepta a
populo potestate, he named Leo Emperor, having received power so to do from
the people. Leo adopting one of Aspars Sons Caesar, the Senate and people
were so much displeased at it, fearing that an Arrian should reign over them,
that they went tumultuously to the Emperor, desiring him to remove him from
that dignity, who soon after slew both him and his father. Zonaras ibid. f.
126.
Basiliseus usurping the Empire against the Senates and peoples consents, who
hated him for his Tyranny; the people sent for Zeno, whom he expelled, received
him into Constantinople, and restored him to the Empire; After whose death
Zonaras ib. f. 1, 12^, ^28. Grimst. p. 306.
Anastasius, de sententia Senatus and Legionum, was elected Emperor by the
Senates and Legions decree. He dying, Zonaras ib. ^. 127. 128. Grimst. p. 306.
Justinius, by the general consent both of the Senate, people, and Soldiers
was elected Emperor, though but a swineheard in his younger days; who creating
Justinian for his Successor, the people gave their consents thereto, with happy
acclamations. So Grim. p. 347.
Constans the second was made Emperor by the Senate of Constantinople. Z^n^r.
f. 137
Philipicus usurping the Empire against the peoples and Senates liking, they
rose up against him, deposed him: and a^ Des^x Aeta^e mundi.
Beda In Philyppito.
Marianus l, 5. c. 1^.
Otho Frisi^gensis and An. 713.
Abbas Vspergensis write; The people of Rome decreed, that neither his name,
nor letters, no^ coin should be received. And the Zonaras Tom. ^, f. 137
Senate and people of Constantinople created Authemius Emperor in his place,
giving him the name of Anastatius. Thus Zonaras, b^d, f. 142^
Michael Curaepalata was created Emperor by the Senate in the life of
Stauratius who intended to leave the Empire to Theophanon his wife. So See
Zonaras. ib. f. 168
Theodora, atoto Senatu, populo and sacerdotibus, was elected and saluted
Empress. Nic^tae Chroniatae, Ann. les f. 40.
Isatius Angelus was elected Emperor, and Andronicus deposed, apprehended and
put to death by the people of Constantinople for his tyranny and oppression.
After whose death Munst. Cosnog. l. 4, ^. 1109, 1110.
Baldwin Earl of Flanders, a Frenchman, was elected Emperor by the Soldiers
and people, upon condition, the Venetians should elect the Patriarch: in whose
blood the Empire continued Muns^eri Cosm. l. 4, c. 59.
four descents and then returned to the Greeks. And as the Senate and people
of Constantinople had thus the right of electing their Emperors, so likewise
See Bishop Bilsons true difference etc^ part. 3. p. 494, to (...).
they and the Patriarch of Constantinople prescribed a conditional
Coronation Oath to diverse of them, which they were to take before they were
crowned, and to deliver it under their hands in writing. Anastatius Dicori,
being chosen Emperor after Zeno his death. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 3. f. 126.
Cuspinian^ in Annastatio.
Euphemius the Patriarch of Constantinople before he would crown him, exacted
of him a confession of his faith in writing, wherein he should promise, that he
would innovate nothing in Eclesiasticall Doctrines etc. whereupon he delivered
a writing to the Patr^arch, wherein he professed, that he did embrace all the
Tenants of the Church, and that he would keep all the Decrees of the Council
of Chalcedon; which done, he was crowned, and then pr^sently took away the
grievous tribute called Aurargenteum, which much oppressed the people. Thus
when Zonar^s Tom. 3. f. 142.
Michael Rungabis was elected Emperor, and came to be crowned, Nicephorus the
Patriarch first required of him a writing, wherein he should promise, that he
would violate no ordinances of the Church, nor defile his hands with the blood
of Christians: which conditions see (q) before.
Bishop Bilson grants, the people had power to prescribe, the Empire being
elective, but not the Patriarch alone. And with all these Patriarchs sometimes
presumed to excommunicate and keep their Emperors out of the Church for
murders and such like offenses, as appears by Zonaras Annal. Tom. 3. f, 151,
161.
Polyenctus keeping John Zimisoa out of the Church, and refusing to crown him,
till he had banished the Empress Theophano, and those who slew Nicephorus; and
by Photius his putting by the Emperor Basilius from the Sacrament, when he
came to receive it, for homocides committed by him.

Fifthly, The Roman Senate and people had power to divide the ^mpire, and to
create a new Emperor at Rome in the West, distinct from that of Constantinople
in the East: About the year of Christ 456 Grim. impe. Hist. p, 291, 296, See
Mun. Cos^, l. 2, c. 64, and l, 4, c. 5^.
Gensericus King of the Vandals wasting Italy and sacking Rome whiles Marcianus
the Emperor resided at Constantinople, the Senators and Roman Gentlemen
returning to Rome when Gensericus had lost it, wanting an Emperor to protect
them, chose Avitus by common consent for Emperor of Rome, Italy, and Sicilie,
of which Marcianus was very glad, and approved his Election: And not long
after, whiles Leo the first reigned at Constantinople, the Senate successively
elected Olibrius and Glizerius Emperors of Rome, Italy, and Sicilie; yea, the
very final division of this great Empire into that of the East and West, and
the creation of a new Roman Emperor, and Empire of the West, with the
transferring of the Imperial Crown from the Greek to the German line, was
done by the authority, and joint consent of the people, Senate, and Bishop of
Rome, upon this occasion: as Decad. 1. l, 1. 10.
Blondus Enead, ^, ^^0.
Sabellicus and B^. Bilsons true diff^rence between Christian Subject^ on and
unchristian Rebellion p, 41^. to 416. Nauclerus vol. Genera^^o 26, An. 753.
Sigebext. Chron. An. 801, Aeneas S^lvius de Author. Rom, Imperii c* 9 Munst.
Cos^og. l, 2. c. 6^.
others relate. Aistulfus King of the Lombards invaded and spoiled those parts
of Italy belonging to the Romans; who being unable to resist or pacify him;
the Bishop and City of Rome hereupon sent messengers to their Emperor
Cons^antine to Constantinople, for aid, assuring him, that unless he sent them
aid the City and whole Country wo^uld be subdued by Aistulfus: But whiles Rome
and Italy were ready to sink under those ruins Constantine had no manner of
care to relieve them; and the messengers that were sent to him, signified by
letters, that there was no looking for help from Constantine, either for that
he would not, or could not, and therefore they must seek some other way: In
the mean time Aistulfus sent Heralds to menace the Bishop and people of Rome,
that unless they would yield themselves and their City, he would come and take
them by force, and kill man, woman, and child. Hereupon they being out of hope
to pacify the enemy, or to receive help from Constantine; the Pope, together
with the people of Rome, determined to send messengers to desire aid from Pepin
father to Charles the great, then King of France, who sent them succor,
subdued their enemy, and quieted Italy. After which, Charles likewise ayding
and succouring both the Pope, and Romans against their enemies, and coming in
person to Rome; the Romans (who in heart were long before falen from the
Emperor of Constantinople, because he began to neglect the City of Rome, and
to leave it as a spoil to the Barbarians and others) taking this occasion and
opportunity, and grieving that the Empire of the world, which with their blood
they had gotten, and established by their virtues, should be governed and
ruined by Irene (a lewd woman) Constantines mother (who swayed all at her
pleasure) did thereupon elect and proclaim Charles for their Emperor, and
commanded Pope Leo to crown him. I^ Leone 3.
Platina, Decad 2. l. 1.
Blondus, Vol* 3* Gen, 27, An, ^00.
Nauclerus ^nead 8 l, 8.
Sabellicus, Annal, ^ojerum, l. 4. f. 344.
Aventinus, Anno 80^.
Sig^bert, L. 5. c. 29,
Frisingensis, and De Author^ Rom, Imp. c. 9.
Aeneas Sylvius, all record that this was done (not by the Popes authority
alone, (as some late Romanists pretend, for he poor man had no such power) but
by THE DECREE, DETERMINATION, ASSENT AND REQUEST OF THE SENATE AND PEOPLE OF
ROME; who, tac^o SENATUS CONSULTO PLEBIS CITOQUE DECERNUNT to transfer the
Empire JURE SUO, By their own right, from the Greeks to the Germans, and from
Constantine to Charles the Great: ever since which time it has continued thus
divided in the blood of Charles, and other French and German Princes. A most
clear demonstration, that the most absolute Sovereign power and disposal of
the Empire resided not in the Emperors themselves, but in the Se^e and people,
even from the very first Emperors, till this partition of the Empire (more
then 800 years space,) and that their Emperors neglect to protect, to aid
them against their enemies when they needed, and craved help, was a just ground
for them to reject his Sovereignty; yea, to create a new Empire, and Emperor
of another race, as see Av^nti^e, An, l, 3, f, 344. etc. and Bishop. Bilson (z)
before
Pope Leo with all the Roman Clergy, Senate, and people then resolved; not only
in point of State policy, but of Conscience too: upon which very Jacob V^^d. de
dignitate Regum Hisp c, 18. Munst. Cosm. l. 2. c, 20, 21.
ground; not only the Spaniards fell off from the Roman Empire, electing them
Kings, and erecting Kingdoms of their own: but likewise our see Speeds Hist.
p, 189^ to 212.
Island of Britain (the fairest plume of the Roman Diadem) rejected the Roman
yoke and Government, to which it had been subject almost 500 years; craving
aid against the Sc^ts and Picts from the Sax^ns, who therereupon became their
Sovereign Lords at last, and disposessed them of the Kingdom: Now, that these
revolts and changes of the Empire in this case were lawful even in point of
Conscience, we have the resolution of Bishop Bilson himself, (in his Book
dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, wherein he professedly defends the Sovereignty of
Kings) in these very words The true difference between Christian subjection and
unchristian rebellion. part. 3, p. 416.
The Roman State and Common wealth had as goodright to dispose the Roman
Empire, as all other Christian and Heathen Kingdoms and Countries had to
settle the sword and scepter that Reigned over them. And since all Cassanaeus
catalogus glory mu^ di pars 5, consid. 29, p, 245, 246.
other Nations once members of the Roman Empire, were suffered to plant those
several forms of regiment which they best liked, and when the Right Heirs
failed to elect their own Governors, I SEE NO CAUSE why the Romans might not
provide for themselves as well as other Realms had done before them;
especially if the reports of your stories be true; that they were neglected by
the Grecians, when they were bes^iged by the Lombards; and the scepter at
Constantinople went not by descent, or succession, but by violent and wicked
invasion, and usurpation. So he; with whom Cassanaeus in his Catalogus Gloriae
mun di^ pars 5 consid. 30. p. 248. accords. and Iacobus Valdesius, de Dignitate
Regum Hisp. c, 18. n, 20, 21.

Sixthly, After this division, and translation of the Empire unto Charles the
Great, the Roman Empire for a time, by permission and connivence of the French,
and German States, went by succession till Charles the Gross; after him wholly
by Election, see Munst, Cosm. l. 3, c, 22, and Grimstons Imperial Hist.
the power of electing the Emperor residing in all the French and German
Princes, (...) at last it was by consent, about the year 1001. translated to
the 6; or rather Grimst. Imp. Hist. p, 433, 535. 560, 571. 572. Munst. Cosm, l,
3, p, 410, to 414.
7. Princes Electors: Yet during all this time the Sovereign Power and
Jurisdiction of the Empire resided only in the German Princes, States and Diets
(not the Emperors themselves) who had power, not only freely to elect what
Emperors they pleased, but also to censure, and depose their Emperors upon
just grounds, and to set limits to their Imperial Jurisdictions. Not to
trouble you with the Histories of see Grimst. Abas Vspergensis, Naucl^rus,
Rerum Germanicarum Scriptores, Munst Cosmagr. l 3, Bp. lewels veiw of a
seditious Bull. and others in their lives, and John White his Defense of the
way, c, 6, p 18. to 21.
Ludovicus Pius, Otho the great, Henry the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Lotharius,
Frederick Barbarossa, Phillip, Otho the fourth and fifth, Frederick the 2, 7.
Albert the 1, Ludovicus Bavarus, Sigismond, and other Emperors, who were much
affronted, persecuted, warred against, and some of them unjustly deposed and
murdered by their Subjects, Sons, and the Princes^electors, through the Popes
procurement; I shall pitch only upon such presidents as are pertinent to my
purpose Grimst. Imp. Hist p, 404, Munst. Cosmog. l, 3, p, 384, Herm^ld^ Chron:
Slauorum l. 1, c. 7, Iean Crespin Le state de Le glise p. 263.
Charles the third surnamed the fat, though he came to the Empire by descent,
yet the Princes, Dukes, and Governers of the Provinces of Germany, and France,
seeing his great insufficiency, and unaptnesse to govern (he being grown a
very fool and having lost his understanding) did thereupon deprive him of his
Empire, and other Kingdoms; and elected and crowned Arnolph Emperor in his
stead: He being thus degraded both of Realm, Empire, and forsaken of all the
world, not having so much as an house wherein to shroud himself, retired into
a poor village of Suabe, where he lived some few days in extreme misery, and
penury, and soon after dyed; not lamented nor pitied of any man: Which
deposition of his, I have formerly proved lawful; though his subsequent ill
usage was no doubt dishonorable and unjust. So the Emperor Munst. Cos. l, 3,
p, 415, 416 404. Grimst. Im. Hist. p, 576* 581, 582. Iean Crisp. Le state de Le
g^ise. p, 465.
Wenceslaus was* deposed by the Princes Electors of the Empire, for his
insufficiency to govern, and the little care he took to suppress and pacify
the civil wars and dissentions in the Empire, giving himself over to vain
pleasures and delights, which made his government dangerous, and unprofitable
for the Empire, and Christian common wealth; and Rupert made Emperor by them
in his room. After this, about the end of Grimst. Imp. Hist p, 736. 737.
Rodulph the second his imperial reign, the Electors called a Diet at
Nurenberg, from whence they sent ambassadors to the Emperor to acquaint him
with the State of the Empire; who told him, that the Electors required above
all things a reformation of justice: That he should make choice of more
faithful officers and Counselors then formerly he had done: That a general
Diet might be called the spring following: That the reason of the bad
government of the common weal was for that his Majesty did not impart the
important affairs of the Empire unto them, as his Predecessors had done etc.
Whereupon he appointed a general Diet to redress these disorders; but dying
before the day, according to the golden Bull made in the year 1356 the Elector
Palatine, and he of Saxon, were appointed Vicars, Governors, and
Administrators of the Empire until there were a King of Romans chosen to be
Emperor. After which they Elected Mathias, who as Emperor and King of the
Romans Munst. Cos. l. 2. c. 64, p, 303, l, 3, p* 410, to 418. Grimston. p, 737,
738.
had not any City or Town within the Empire, the whole Territory of Germany
belonging to the Electors, Bishops, Abbots, Princes, Earls, Noblemen, and free
Towns. What power the Princes Electors, and German states had, and yet have in
electing, rejecting, deposing, restraining their Emperors; in calling Diets,
and making Laws, you may read more largely in Cosm l. 3, p, 382, to 418.
Munster, and Imp. Hist. from Charles the great to the end.
Grimston: By all which, and other particulars, which for brevity I shall omit,
it is most evident, that the Supreme Sovereign Authority of the Roman State,
both under their ancient Kings and Emperors, and of the Greek, and German
Empires resided not in the Kings and Emperors, themselves, but in their
Senates, Diets, People, States, who prescribed them conditional Oaths at their
Coronations, and to whom they were still accountable for their actions and
misgovernment, This Common wealth, l, 2. c. 5. p. 221. 122.
John Bodin (a famous learned French Lawyer, of great experience in State
affairs, surpassing all who writ before him of Republikes) plainly affirms in
these words. The Roman Emperors were at first, nothing else but Princes of the
Common weal, that is to say, the chief and principal men: the SOVEREIGNTY
nevertheless still RESTING IN THE PEOPLE AND SENATE, the Emperor having the
Sovereign authority only infact, not in right: the State being but a very
Principality, wherein THE PEOPLE HAD THE SOVEREIGNTY. So the German Empire at
this day is nothing else, but an Aristocraticall Principality: wherein the
Emperor is head and chief, the POWER and majesty of the Empire BELONGING^
UNTO THE STATES THEREOF, who thrust out of the Government Adolphus the
Emperor, in the year 1296, and also after him Wenceslaus in the year 1400;
and that BY WAY OF JUSTICE, AS HAVING IVRISDICTION AND POWER OVER THEM. Bodin
Com. l, 1, c, 10, p. 15^, etc.
And so properly ancient Romans said: Cicero Oration pro Rabirio, Perd. reo.
Imperium in Magistratibus, Auctoritatem in Senatu, Potestatem in Plebe,
Maiestatem in Populo; Command to be in the Magistrates, Authority in the
Senate, Power in the Maeniall People, and Majesty in the People in General.
The Senate in Rome did consult, the people command: for Livy often times says:
Senatus decrevit, populus iussit: the Senate has decreed, and the People
commanded; Which he there more largely prosecutes, as you may read at leisure.
To all which Of the difference between Christian subjection, etc. part. 3. p.
513. to 521.
Bishop Bilson himself does fully assent, affirming, that Germany is a free
state, that the Emperor holds the Empire by election, and that but on
condition, which he takes an oath to perform. And if he violate their
liberties, or his oath, they may not only lawfully resist him by force of
arms, but repel and depose him as a tyrant, and set another in his place, by
the right and freedom of their Country. And Catalogu^ Gloriae Mundi. pars. 5.
Consid. 29. p. 246.
Cassanaeus holds, that the people may take away the very name of the Emperor
at this day, degrade him, and resume his royal power. This then being an
unquestionable verity, disproves that palpable common mistake of Resolving of
Conscience sect. 1. 2. 3. A Revindication printed at Cambridge. 1643. and other
late pamphlets.
Dr. Fern with other ignorant Court Doctors and Royalists, who would make the
world and Kings believe, that the Roman Emperors were of greater power and
authority than the Senate, people; the highest powers upon earth to which all
persons, yea the Senate and people collectively considered, ought to submit;
and that it was unlawful either for the Senate or people forcibly to resist
Caligula, Claudius, N^ro, and other their wickedest, and most tyrannical
Emperors: much less to depose, take arms against, or call them to a strict,
just account for their Tyranny, Oppression, or Misgovernment, it being directly
contrary to Paul's Doctrine Romans 13. 1, to 6. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, etc. which false groundless principle, is the sole foundation
upon which all their late Sermons, Books, and railing Discourses against this
Parliaments proceedings and taking up of defensive arms are built; when as in
truth, the Sen^te and people were the highest powers, to who^ the Roman
Emperors themselves were to be obedient in all just requests and commands,
under pain of damnation, and subject to the Senates sword of justice in case
of disobedience and misgovernment, as all the premises evidence; yea it
likewise manifestly evidenceth, that whole States and Parliaments are the
highest power and above their Kings, who are subject to the^, since the Roman
and Greek Senates and people heretofore, and the very German States at this day
are the highest power and above their Emperors, though ever reputed of
Cassanaeus Catalog. Glor^ae Mundi pars. 5. consid. 27. and Iacobus Valdesius de
Dignitate Regum Regnorumque Hispaniae passim
greater power, Sovereignty and dignity than any Kings, and the greatest
Monarchs in the world: and that therefore Kings, even by Paul's Doctrine Romans 13.
ought to be subject to the higher power and Jurisdiction of their Parliaments,
the Laws and Statutes of their Realms; and to be accountable to them, if not
subject to their censures, as some affirm, in exorbitant cases of
misgovernment which concern the Kingdoms and peoples safety. If Kings
injuriously take away the lands, goods, or imprison the persons of any
particular subjects, the 22. E. 3. 3. Error, ^. Fitzherbert Petition. The
petition of Right 3. Car^li. See Ashes Tables Annuity 22. Amerciament. 8. entr.
Congeable 84. Entrusion 1, Petition and Traversedes Offices throughout and
Habeas Corpus Hieron. Blanc^. Aragon. Rerum Comment. p. 18^. 589. 590. 724.
747. to 761.
Law gives every one a particular remedy against them by way of Action, or
Petition of Right. If then every private subject may have redress, much more
the whole Kingdom, (in and by Parliaments only not in inferior Courts)
against their Sovereigns which oppress them; who being subject unto the Laws
of God and their Realms, which have Prove. 24. 23. Romans 2. 11.
no respect of persons, may as many affirm, be questioned and judged by them
in their Parliaments as well as other princes, great officers of State and
Magistrates who in scripture are called Psa. 82. 1, 2. Exodus 22. 8. Ioh. 10.
34, 35.
Gods, the higher powers and said to be Romans 13. 1, 2 3, 4, 5. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Timothy 2. 2.
ordained, to rule Prov^. 8. 15. Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2 Chr. 19. 6, 7.
judge by and for God, as well, as Kings and Emperors. It is branded as a
spice of B. Jewels veiw of a seditious Bull. Dr. Crackenthorp of the Popes
temporal monarchy c. ^, 2, 3, 4, 5. Cassanaeus Catalogusglori^ mun di pars. 5.
cons 7.
Antichristian pride in Popes and their Parasites, to deem themselves so High
above other men, that they are accountable to none but God for their wicked
actions, though many Popes in former and later times, have been See B^laeus de
vitis Ponti^^cum. Morne^^ Misterium, and ^ere, part 1.
questioned, censured, imprisoned and deposed both by Emperors, Kings, and
Councels for their intolerable misdemeanors. And is it not the very self same
crime in Kings, in Emperors, and their flatterers, to hold this Popish
erroneous opinion, that they are in no case responsible to their whole
Kingdoms or Parliaments for their gross^st exorbitances? Our Bp. Jewels veiw
of a seditious Bull. Matt Paris. and Speed, in King John's life: Bp. Bilsons
true Diference, etc. part. 3, p, 409, to 526. Saxo grammatticus Hist. Da^i^ l,
11* p, 189, 190.
Popish Prelates and Clergy generally heretofore, and some of our Protestant
Bp. Bridges his supremacy of Christian Princes. p. 10^4.
Bishops and Divines of late times, from St. Ambrose his practice, have held,
that ^^ings for murders, rapes, and great crying offence^ may be Lawfully
excommunicated and censured by the spiritual Law and sword, as sundry
Emperors and Kings have been; then why not likewise by the temporal, when
their Parliaments and whole Kingdoms see just cause, the case of hundreds of
Emperors and Kings in former time, as the Histories of all Nations and ages
prove abundantly, beyond all contradiction? I shall here instance in some few
Kings censures subject to the Roman State and Empire, with whom I shall
conclude this discourse touching the Roman Monarchs Oration pro Deiorato Rege.
p. 629.
Deioratus King of Galatia under the Romans I^risdiction, and one of their
allies, was accused of Treason, and condemned to lose both his head and estate
for certain offenses against C. Caesar, and the Roman State; as appears by
Tullies Oration to Caesar in his behalf, to procure his pardon; which because
it was the first president of this kind, made his advocate say; tamen ita
inusitatum est, Regem capitis reumesse, ut ante hoc tempus non sit auditum: yet
long before that, Zedechiah King of Judah, rebelling against the King of
Babylon, was brought prisoner to the King of Babylon to Riblah, where he gave
judgment upon him slew both his sons and Princes before his eyes, and then
put out his own eyes bound him with fetters of brass, and carried him prisoner
to Babylon, where he died. 2 Kings 25. 1. to 8. Ier. 52. 1. to 12. And after
De^oratus Josephus Antiqu. Iudaeorum, l, 15, c, ^. Alexander ab Alexandro Genesis
Dierum. l. 3, c, 5, f. ^^6.
Antigonus King of the Jews, being taken prisoner by Antonius, for moving
sedition against the Roman State, was beheaded with an axe at Antioch, without
any legal trial, to prevent further seditions, which never befell any King
before that time, writes Alexander ab Alexandro; And Alexander ab Alexandro
ibid. Stra^o Geogr. l, 8, p. 712, 713.
Agrippa, not long after, put Bogus King of the Mores to death, for siding with
Antonius. Of later times, I read that Grimstons Imperial history, p, 389.
Ludovicus Pius the Emperor taking Bernard his Nephew (King of It^ly)
prisoner, for rebelling and denying his superiority over him, carried him into
France, to determine what should be done with him according to Justice, for
this his offense; where (though a King) he was condemned to death and
executed, as some, or at least cast into prison, and had his eyes put out, as
others write: So Munsters Geogr. l. 2, 6, 76, p. (...). Gen* hist, of France.
p. ^35.
Charles of France taking Conradine King of Sicily prisoner, publicly
arraigned and condemned him of high Treason, and cut off his head, Anno 1208.
Yea, our own Matthew. Par. Hist. Angl. p. 273, 274, 275. Genesis hist. of France.
p, 119.
King John being a Feudatary to the King of France, was by Philip the French
king in a full Parliament there (during his absence in England) arraigned,
condemned to death, and deposed from his Crown by the sentence of his Peers,
for murdering his Nephew, Arthur, (then a Subject of France) with his own
hands: So Speed, p. 653, 654 Hect. Boethius, l. 14. Walsing. Holins. Fabian,
Grant. and others.
John Bailiol king of Scotland, renouncing his homage for that Crown, to king
Edward the first, was for this offense compelled to resign his Crown with all
his right to the kingdom of Scotland, to King Edward the first, and sent
Prisoner to the Tower of London: and Speed, 1156. 1196. Cambd. Esiz. Holinsh.
Stow, Martin, Buchanon.
Mary Queen of Scots, within many men's memories, after long debate in
Parliament, was condemned and beheaded at Fothringham Castle, Febr. 8. An.
1587. for laying claim to the Crown of England, and other particulars
mentioned in our Historians. And thus much for the Roman, Grecian, German
Emperors, kings and kingdoms.

I shall now give you a brie^e Survey of what Greek Authors write concerning
Kings and Kingdoms; and of the power, the kinds of ancient Kings and Kingdoms,
in Greece and other places. That great Father of Learning and policy
Aristotle, (Tutor to the greatest Emperor Alexander the Great) whose Authority
is irrefragable in our Schools; resolves: Polit. l. 3. c. 10, p. 209. 210. and
l. 5. c. 10. p. 367.
That true Kingdoms were erected at first and conferred on the worthiest men by
the free voluntary joint consent of the people, and founded, confirmed by the
customs and Laws of each country, (which Hist l 6. p. 621. etc.
Polibius also affirms) Polit. l. 3. c. 10. 11. and l. 5. c. 10, 11.
That there are 4 several sorts of Kings, some of greater, some of lesser
Authority and continuance then others: some elective, some successive, some
during ^ife, some Annual, all of them receiving their distinct jurisdictions,
Forms, Limitations, and different Royalties, from the peoples primitive or
subsequent institutions and consents. For all men being equal by the Law of
nature, can have no dominion nor Superiority one over another, but by their own
voluntary consents. That the Polit. l. 3. c. 7. 10, 11, 12.
Laws, (not the Kings Princes, or Magistrates be they one or more, or never so
good) ought to be the sole Lords or Rulers of the Commonwealth, and that
Princes and Governors ought to govern by the Laws: who cannot command what
the Laws do not command. That those who command that the Law should rule,
command that God and the Laws should rule: but he that commands a man to be a
Prince, he commands that both a man and beast should be Princes: for
covetousness and the lust of the mind is a certain beast, which perverts
both Magistrates and the very best men; but the Law is a constant and quiet
Mind and Reason void of all motions of lusts and desires. Polit. l. 3. c. 10
p. 19^.
That the power of the greatest things, and greatest power, ought (DE IVRE) of
right to be in all the people, because their wisdoms, resolutions, and
revenues considered altogether, are greater and more considerable then those of
a few wise or honest men plased in the highest offices of Magistracy, who are
but a small particle of the State in respect of all the people. Polit. l. 3. c.
11. p. 217, 218.
That the people ought to be of more power then the King or greatest
Magistrates to prevent their Tyranny and Oppression; and that a King ought to
govern by his Laws, and not to do any thing against them, according to his
lust; wherefore he ought to have so much power and force wherewith he may
protect the authority of the Laws: yea he must necessarily have forces and
power, yet so much only, as thereby he may be able to curb every particular
man, or many also: yet not so great power but that, a populo au^em universo
idem REX ILLE IPSE COERCERI POTEST, the very King himself may yet BE CVRBED by
all the people: such Guards verily the Ancients gave to their Kings when they
would set any Tyrant or Governor over the City: And when Dionysius required
Guards, a certain Syracusan persuaded them to curb such Guard^: to which
Hist. l. 6 p. 521.
Polybius also suffragates. According to these Rules of Aristotle, I read in
Antiq. Romans l. 2. sect. 2. p. 133.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, and Hist. l. 6. p. 525, 526.
Polybius, that in the Lacedemonian Commonwealth, the Kings had not the chief
Dominion, so as they might do what they pleased, sed summa totius Reipub.
administratio penes Senatum erat: but the chief Government of the whole
Commonweal was in the Senate, from whence the Romans took their pa^terne.
Genial Dierum. l. 4. c. 23. f. 238. and l. 3. c. 3. f. 117. De Moribus Gentium.
See Xenophon Hist. Graec. l. 5. p. 504 and de Laced, repub. p. 690.
Alexander ab Alexandro, Boemus, and Xenophon write, That the Lacedaemonians
sometimes elected a King out of the Family of the Heracli^^^, or of Agis, but
more often two joint Kings of equal Authority out of the stock of Proclus and
Aemisthenes, who yet had not the chief Command as Kings, Quiajuris om^is
publici potestas penes Senatum erat, because the power of all public law or
rule was in the Senate ( the better to keep their Kings from attempting and
usurping a Tyranny; they being Kings rather in name then Dominion, and like the
Achaean two Annual Praetors; whence Pol. l. 3. c, 11.
Aristotle makes them, the lowest rank of Kings. Commonw. l. 2. c. 5. p. 221.
222.
John Bodin informs us, That in the Lacedemonian Aristocracie, the Sovereignty
remained in the State, wherein were two Kings without any Sovereignty at all,
being indeed nothing else but Captains and Regi in exercitu nihilrestat
negotii, quam ut rerum divinarum respectu sit Sacerdos, humanarum vcro
Imperator, Xenophon Lacede. Resp. 689.
Generals for the managing of their Wars; and for that cause were by the
other Magistrates of the State, sometimes for their faults condemned to pay
their fine, as was Agesilaus, and sometimes to death also, as was Agis and
Pausanias: Plutar. Apotheg. p. 468.
Agis the last of the Lacedemonean kings (as Plutarch records) being
apprehended and condemned by the Ephori, without an Indictment, and then hanged
in a halter. Finally Polit. l. 5. c. 11. p. 369.
Aristotle himself, and De Agesil. Reg p. 651.
Xenophon inform us; that the Kingdom of the Lacedaemonians flourished very
long, yea longer then any other form of Government, because their Kings power
was but small, and their Kings never desired greater things then the Laws
would bear, by which they had received their Kingdom in the beginning: for in
the beginning that Kingdom was divided between two joint Kings: After which
Theopompus left it more moderated to his successors, and constituted the
Magistracy of the Ephori (who had power even to depose and execute their kings
if they offended, and rose not up out of their seats unto them;) to retain
that moderation; By which means he verily weakened the power of the Kingdom,
but yet certainly settled it more lasting and stable: Whence Theopompus gave
this answer to his complaining and upbraiding wife; whether he was not ashamed
to leave the Kingdom less to his Children then he had received it from his
Father? No truly, says he, for by this means I leave it more stable and
lasting. A Speech well worthy the consideration of the very greatest hereditary
kings These Lacedemonian kings (whose honors, writes Xeno. de Lacedem. Repub.
p. 690.
Xenophon, were not much better then those of private men; Etenim, neque
Regibus animos addere Tyrannicos voluit, L^curgus, neque civibus eorum
potestatem invisam reddere, took an Alexan. ab Alex. l. 3. c. 5. f, 126.
Caelius Rhodig, Antiq. Lect. l, 7. c. 10.
Oath every month, to govern the Kingdom according to the Laws enacted. I
find that the Alexan. ab Alex. l. 3. c. 5. f, 126. Caelius Rhodig, Antiq.
Lect. l. 7. c. 10.
Cumaeans had a Magistrate whom they called Phylactus, whose office was, to
come into the full Senate, and hold the Kings hands who stood in judgment
before them, until by the Senators decree, their reward or punishment was
appointed. By which it is apparent, that the Cumaean Senate was above their
kings, and did usually arraigne and punish them iudicially, if they saw cause;
as they rose up in Arms against Plutarch. de virtutibus mulierum, p, 544, 545.
Aristodomus their king, (who tyrannized over them) by Zenocrita her
instigation, slew him, and so recovered their Liberties. The Alex. ab Alex, l,
3. c, 3, f, 117.
ancient Carthaginians had two kings, whom they styled Suffites; who were but
annual, removed every year* Yea, the Iberians and Parthians had two joint
kings in ancient times, the one to judge the other to govern the people. In
Strabo Geog l. 17. p 689. Al^x, ab Alex. l. 3. c. 3. Diod^rus Siculus Bibl.
hist. l. 3. c 6. p. 140, 141.
Meroe, where they elected their kings by their beauty, strength or wealth;
their Priests had the chief power; who had so great authority, that sometimes
(like the Pope and his Nuncioes) they would send a Messenger and command the
king to be put to death, and make another in his steed. Which custom was after
abolished by one of the kings, who violently assaulted and slew all the
Priests: and in Alex. ab Ale. l. 3. c. 5 f 123. Diod. Sic. Bibl. hist. l. 3. p.
140.
Meroe if the king offended, after the Priests power was abolished, they
inflicted no corporal punishment on him, but all with ^rew themselves from him
and avoided his company till he was killed with grief and consumption. The
Strabo Geogr. l 1^. p. 148 Alex. ab Alex. l. 3. c. 10. Munst. Cosmog. l. 5.
cap. 113. Boe. de moribus Gent. l. 2. c. 8. p. 102.
Indians will not permit their king to sleep in the day time, and if he be
drunken at any time if any w^man (of whom he has a guard) kill him whiles he
is drunke^ she is so far from being guilty of Treason, that for a reward, she
shall be married to his Successor: much like the ancient public institution
of the Sclavonians, recorded by Hist. Danic^, l. 8. p. 140.
^axo Grammaticus, that the assassinate of evil Kings should succeed them in
their kingdoms; a things frequently practiced in many kingdoms; and Empires,
though very ill enacted in any. The Alex. ab Ale. l. 4. c. 23, f 239.
Sabaeans confined their Kings to their Palaces, and used to stone them if they
went forth of their bounds. The Alex. ab Ale. l. 3, c. 11.
Mosseriaei whose kings were elective, used to punish them, when they offended,
by keeping them fasting a whole days space. Among some of the Munst. Cos. l.
5. c. 137. p. 1248.
Indians, if the king dies, having male children of his own, or cosen-g^rmans,
or brothers children, they shall not succeed him in the kingdom, but his
sisters son, if there be any; if not, then his next alliance; and that, ex
gentis instituto, by the institution of the Nation; the reason is, because
their Priests used to dest^ure the Queen, whose issue is held to be
illegitimate. In Munst. Cos. l. 4. c. 53. p. 1089 Boe. de Morib. Gentium. l. 3.
p 209 210.
Thracia, the people elect a king who is well qualified, merciful, grave for
his age, and one who has no children: For no Father, though never so well
qualified, is admitted to reign; and if he fortune to have issue while he
reigns, he is deprived, and so kept, lest the kingdom should become
hereditary. Yea, though the king be never so just, yet they will not that he
should have the whole power, but appoint him 40. Governors, left he alone
should judge in capital causes: And if he be convicted of any offense, he is
punished with death, yet not by laying violent hands on him, but by public
consent, all food is kept from him, so as at last he perishes with famine. The
Alex* ab Ale. l. 4. c. 23. f. 239.
Taprobani had this custom, that no man who had any children should be chosen
king, lest he should claim the kingdom as hereditary, and make it so. The
Genesis Dier. l. 4. c. 23. and l. 3. c. 11.
Athenians, Ionians, Milesians, Marchomanni Quadi, Persians, Sicilians,
Corinthians, Parthians, Meroes, Gordii, Medes, Paphii, Cathians, Aetheopians,
Sydonians, Germans, Swedes, Danes, and other Nations had several Customs,
Laws, Rules, (over-tedious to recite) by which they elected and inaugurated
their kings (of which you may read in Alexander ab Alexandro Geog. lib.
Strabo, De Meribus Gentium.
Boemus, Ind. Hist.
Peter Martyr, Pilgrimage and Voyages, Merula, Munst. Gotard. Mercator, Nov.
Orbis.
Purchase, and others) and different degrees of power and government derived
from their kingdoms and people, the sovereign Authority still residing in
them to prescribe both Laws and limits to their kings, and call them to public
account for their gross offenses and misgovernment. The ancient Died. Sicul.
Bibl. hist. l. 3. c. 5. p. 140. Boem. de moribus Gent. l. 1. c. 4. p. 27.
Fortes. de Laud. Leg. Ang, c. 12.
Aethiopians elected the most fanatique Priest for their king, whom though they
adored and honored for a God, yet Vitam agere STATVTAM LEGIBVS DEBET iuxta
patrios mores, he ought to live such a life as the Laws appointed him,
according to the manners of the Country, neither ought he to reward or punish
any man himself, though chief par^s of Royalty. The Boem de mor. Gent. l. 3.
c, 12* p. 341.
old German kings had no free nor infinite, but are strained and bounded power
by the Laws. Bibl. Hist. l. 1 sect. 10. p. 61, 62, 63. Boem. De Mor. Gent. l.
1. c. 5. p. 37, 38. Fortes. c. 12.
Diodorus Siculus writes, that the first Egyptian Kings lived not like other
Monarchs, to rule all things according to their wills, Nullis obnoxii censuris,
as obnoxious to no censures; but all things, not only their public actions,
but even the regiment of their daily life, were conformed to the rule of the
Laws ( as hethere manifests in sundry particulars) botb in respect of their
attendants, dispatches, devotions, recreations, moderate spare diet, and the
like; neither was it lawful for them to judge, nor do any thing, nor punish
any man out of petulancy or anger, or any other unjust cause, contrary to what
the established Laws required concerning every of them. Whiles they observed
these things customarily, it was so far that they took it ill, or were
offended in mind, that on the contrary they thought they lived a most blessed
life. For other men rashly giving indulgence to the affections of nature, acted
many things accompanied with losses and dangers; yea some men ofttimes although
they foreknew they should sin, did notwithstanding perpetrate evil things,
being led away with love or hatred, or some other perturbation of mind; but
they, embracing the rule of life approved by the most prudent men, resolved not
to err from their duty in the least degree. Whiles Kings used this Justice
toward their Subjects, they had their Subjects bound unto them in greater
benevolence and love then their very kindred; For not only the College of
Priests, but the whole Nation of the Egyptians, and likewise every one of them
were not so careful of their wives and children and private goods, as of the
safety of their Kings: Wherefore they preserved the estate of the Republike
entire for a long time under the mentioned kings, spending their life in
greatest felicity, as long as this constitution of Laws flourished. And when
these kings dyed, all the Egyptians generally mourned for them in an
extraordinary manner diverse ways, made solemn Orations in their praise,
buried them with great pomp and solemnity, and erected Pyramides to their
eternal honor; all which funeral pompous solemnities many ill kings wanted
after their deaths, ob plebis refragationem, because the people gain-sayed it,
(who together with the Priests and Senates, who were ever present with the
kings to assist, counsel, and direct them, were superior to their kings,
since they could thus decree or deny them these funeral honors) which made
many of their following kings to addict themselves to just actions too, for
fear of contumelious handling and sempiternall ignominy after their decease.
So this Author. To which I shall add Memorabi^ium, l. 4. p 813. De Laced.
Repu. p. 690, 691.
Xenophons definition of a Kingdom and Tyranny: A kingdom, is an Empire over
men by their free assents according to the Laws of the City: And a Tyranny, is
an unlawful Empire over men against their wills, which depends upon the will
of the Prince. And this observation of Hist. l. 6. p. 118, to 126.
Polybius, That kings in ancient times did give themselves wholly to do that
which was honest and just, and to suppress the contrary; the very beginning of
all true kingdoms, and the end for which kings were first instituted by the
people. Whiles they thus demeaned themselves, they were subject to no envy,
because they differed not much from others, neither in apparel, nor in meat
and drink, but observed a conversation of life conformable to other men, and
lived perpetually like to others. But afterward, when those who obtained the
principality of succession, and the prerogative of their blood had those things
already provided, which made them able to secure themselves, and to support
their state, following their lusts by reason of their abundance, they then
thought, it belonged to Princes to be better clad then subjects, to exceed them
in costlinesse and variety of meats, and to use venery with whom they pleased:
Hence envy and offense was begotten, and implacable hatred and anger kindled,
and a kingdom by this means changed into a Tyranny: Hence men most generous
and magnanimous bold spirits* unable to bear such affronts and insolences of
Princes, seditiously conspire against them; and the people having got such
Captains to make resistance, join with them for the foresaid causes, that the
Princes may be repressed. And thus the form of a Kingdom and Monarchy is
utterly taken away by the roots, and the beginning of an Aristocracy again
laid, the people refusing to set any more a King over them, yet not daring to
commit the Republike (...) many, fearing as yet the iujustice of Superiors,
and therefore most esteem equality and liberty; So that the Sovereign power
of settling, of changing the Kingdom and form of government resides
principally in the people, who (as he there largely proves by the Lacedemonian
and Roman state) ought to enjoy the Supreme authority, and to be above their
Kings; as it seems the Egyptians did, Munst. Cosmog. l. 6. c. 19. p. 1298 1299
who deposed and expelled Evergetes their King, for his cruelty, and after him
their King Ptolomaeus Auletes, setting up Cleopatra his eldest child in his
Thr^ne; and as the Roman Senate did, Bodin Commonw. l. ^. c. 1. p. ^73.
who had power to dispose of the common Treasury and revenue (one of the
greatest points of Sovereignty) to appoint Lieutenants and Governors of
Provinces, to grant Triumphs, to dispose of Religion: (for which cause Apolog.
adv. Gentes.
Tertullian says, that never any God was received in Rome without the decree
of the Senate,) See Liv^ Passim.
and to receive, answer, and dismiss the Ambassadors of Kings and Nations,
which none else did but the Senate; whose Sovereign power was such, that
Tiberius the Emperor in the beginning of his Reign called the Senators
(assembled altogether in the Senate) Indulgentissimos DOMINOS, his most loving
LORDS, (and moved the Senate, to divide the Empire, and not to commit it all to
one man, as we read in Annaliuml. 1. Commonw. l. 3. c. 1. p. 276.
Tacitus) though they were his Subjects and inferiors when divided and
severally considered: And such Sovereign power had the Panaetolium or general
assembly of Parliament among the Aetolians, who received and answered all
Ambassadors, determined all affairs of war and peace, it being provided by
the Laws of the Aetolians, that nothing should be entreated of concerning
peace or war, but in their Panaetolium or Pelaicon Council, as Hist. Romans l.
31. and 35.
Livy and Commonw. l. 3. c. 1. p. 261.
Bodin record.

But to leave these ancient, and come nearer our present neighbor Kings and
Kingdoms of greatest eminency and power, which may parallel our own; The
Kings of France (to whom Pars 5. consid. 29, 30, 31. p. 243. etc.
Cassanaeus in his Catalogus Gloriae mundi, gives precedence before all others,
and to the Emperor himself, whiles but elect, before his Coronation,) have in
ancient times been inferior to their Kingdoms, Parliaments, and subject to
their censures even to deposition, if not more, though Cassan. Ibid. and Bodin
Commonw. l. 2. c. 10. 5. l. 1. c. 1. l. 3. c. 1.
some cry them up for absoluts Monarchs, and make them little better then
Tyrants now.

Commonw. l. 2. c. 1. p. 222.
John Bodin, a learned French Lawyer and Statesman, writes, That in ancient
times the Kings of the Cities of the Gauls were subject to their States; whom
Caesar for this cause oftentimes calls Reguli, little Kings, being themselves
subjects and justifiable to the Nobility, who had all the Sovereignty, causing
them even to be put to death if they had so deserved: And that is it for which
Amphiorix the Captain General, whom they called the King of the Lingeois
said, Our commands are such, as that the people has no less power over us,
then we over the people: Wherein he showed evidently, that he was no sovereign
Prince; howbeit, that it was not possible for him to have equal power with the
people, as we have before showed: Wherefore these sort of Princes, if they,
polluted with wickedness and villainy, cannot be chastised by the Authority and
severity of the Magistrate, but shall abuse their wealth and power unto the
hurt hurt and destruction of good men, IT ALWAYS HAS AND SHALL BE LAWFVLL not
for strangers only, but even for the subjects themselv^s also, to take them
out of the way: But if the Prince be an absolute Sovereign, as are the true
Monarchs of France, etc. where the Kings themselves have the sovereignty
without all doubt or question not divided with their subjects; in this case it
is not lawful for any one of their subjects in particular, or all of them in
general to attempt any thing, either by way of fact or justice against the
honor, life, or dignity of the Sovereign, albeit he had committed all the
wickedness, impiety, and cruelty that could be spoken: so Bodin. By whose
words it is clear, that the ancient kings of France we^e inferior in
Jurisdiction to their whole kingdoms and Parliaments, yea censurable by them
to deposition or death: Yet that their kings of late are grown absolute
Monarchs above their kingdoms, Nobles, Parliaments, and so not responsible to,
or punishable by them for the grossest misdemeanors: But if this their
absolute Monarchy be only an usurpation (as many conceive it,) not of right,
by their Parliaments and kingdoms free grants and consents, they are still, in
truth, of no greater Authority, nor no more exempted from just censures, then
their predecessors. Now it is clear, that in ancient times, Fabian. pa. 5. 6.
155. par. 6. p. 154. 160. 164. 243, 244. par. 7. p. 107, 108. 280, 282. Andrew
Favins Theater of Honor, l. 2. c. 12. Munsteri Cosmog. l. 2. c. 40. p. 139,
140. Paulus Aemylius, l. 1. Macutus Atlas, p. 254, 255. Bodin Commonw. l. 3. c.
1.
the 3. Estates and great Council of France assembled in Parliament, and their
twelve Peers ( or kings as Fabian terms them) were the highest power and
judicature, from which there was no appeal; that the Ki^gs of France could
make no binding Laws but by their Authority (though now of late they do what
they please) and that they have judged the differences between the Crowns of
England and France (as I have formerly proved) and exercised the same, or as
great authority as the Parliament of England has done, which authority it has
lost by certain degrees. To give a few more instances to clear this truth.

Paulus Amyl l. 1. Gaguinus and the general History of France in his life,
Iean Crispin Lestate de Leglise. 144. Fabian, par. 5. c. 75. p. 66. Munsters
Cosmog. l. 2. c. 41.
Pharamond, the first King of the Franks, that Reigned in France, An. 420. was
elected King by the unanimous vote and consent of all the people: and by their
advice and consent, in his Reign, the Salique Law was made to Regulate the
descent of the Crown, that no women should be heirs to it, or claim it by
descent; which Law continues of force un^ill this day, as all the French
historians generally accord, who make frequent mention of it; though our
English have much oppugned it, as you may read in 2. H. 5. f. 35. etc.
Hall and Hist. p. 685. 687, 786. 787. etc.
Speed Fabian. pa. 5. c. 86. Gagui. Emyl. the General Hist. of France,
Crispin, Munst. and others in his life
Childericus the fourth King of France about the year 460. giving himself to
all vice and cruelty in such extreme wise, that he became odible to his
subjects, perc^iving the murmur of the people, and fearing his sudden
destruction, by the counsel of Guynemeus, fled out of his kingdom to Beseigne
king of Thuringes. Whereupon the Frenchmen with one assent, chose Gyll a
Roman, for their King and governor: who laying grieveous Taxes upon his
Subjects by the fraudulent counsel of Guynemeus (a fast friend to Childericus)
and using sharp, execution upon some of the Nobles, so far discontented his
subjects that by the help of Guynemeus, they deposed and chased him into
Soysons; and sending for Childericus again, restored and made him King: after
whose death his son Clodoviu^, was by the people ordained and authorized for
King of France: between whose four sons it was afterward divided Fabian,
pa. 5. c. 122. 126. Gaguyn. Emyl. the Genesis hist. of France.
After the death of Chilpericus, Clotharius being very young, Gunthranus king
of Orleans his uncle) with the assent of the Nobles of the Realm, was made his
Tutor: who coming to age, he offered to refer the differences between
Sigebert and himself touching Austracy, (to which both laid claim) to an
Assembly of the Lords of that Kingdom: and condemned Queen Brunicheild by the
unanimous consent of the Lords, to be tied by the hair of her head to a wild
horse tail, and so to be drawed while she was dead; for her many murders and
criminous deeds; which was accordingly executed. Fabian part. 5. c. 132.
Gag^ianus, Paulus Aemylius, Crespin, the general Hist. of France.
King Dagobert exercised such tyranny and injustice in pillaging his commons by
Exactions and Tributes, that those who dwelled in the out parts of the Realm
near the Turks, and other strange Nations, chose rather to put themselves
under their government, than under the Rule of their own natural prince:
Poytiers rebelled against him, his L^ds murmured so much against him, that
Pipin and Martain (two of his great Lords and agents) to save his Crown,
dissuaded him from his ill counsels: whence a little before his death, calling
a great counsel of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal, he made his will, and
settled his Kingdom by their advice; dividing it between his two sons.
Fabian. part. 5. c. 138, 139, 140. Gag^inus, Aemylius, Crespin, the general
History of France, in his life, and the life of Childeri^us.
Theodoricus king of France, giving himself to sloth and idleness, committed
the government of the Realm to Ebroyn Mr. of his Palace, who did what he
liked, and vexed and troubled the Subjects grievously; wherefore by assent, the
Lords assembled them, and by authority deprived the King of all Dignity, and
closed him in a Monastery during the residue of his life, when he had borne the
name of a King without executing of the art thereunto belonging, three years,
the cruel Ebroyn they exiled to Luxenbourgh during life; making Childericus
br^ther to Theodericus King, Ann. 669. who oppressing his subjects grievously,
and using the Laws of his progenitors after his pleasure, and uniustly causing
a Nobleman called Belin to be tied to a stake and beaten to death, without
guilt or Trespass. Hereupon the Lords and Commons, fearing like punishment
without deserving, murmured and conspired against him, and slew him and his
wife (then great with Child) as they were hunting in a wood: After which they
restored Theodericus (whom they had deposed) to his former dignity; under whom
Ebroyn getting into place and favor again, used such Tyranny toward the
Nobles and People, that Pipin and Martaine raised a great army against him,
lest he should destroy the Commonweal, gave him battle, and at last
Hermefreditus slew him: After which Pipin was made Master of the Palace in his
place. Fabian. part. 5. c. 144, 145. Gaguinus, Aemylius, Crespin, the general
Hist of France.
K. Dagobert the second dying without any Issue or known He^re at all, one
Daniel (after named Chilpericke) a Priest, was by the Lords and peoples
general assent chosen King of France, Anno 721. for that by their former
experience of him, they deemed him apt for the rule of the Land. After whose
death, Theodoricus son to Dagobert, (secretly fostered among Nuns within
Nunneries in woman's clothing) was espied and admitted for King: During most of
the forenamed Kings, the grand Master of the Palace swayed the Kingdom at his
pleasure, and executed the Office of the Kings, who had nothing but the bare
name of Kings, and were subject to this grand Officer: Whereupon Theodoricus
dying, Fabian. part. 5. c. 150, 153. general Hist. of France, Gaguinus,
Aemylius, Crespin, Turpin, Chronicon. Chronicarum, Sabellicus, Opmeaneus, in
the life of Childericke and Pipin, Aventius Annal. Boyor. l. 3. An^onini Chron,
Tit. 14. nu. 1. sect. 2. Munst. Cosmog. l. 2. c. 41. ^ish. lewels Reply, p.
341, 342, 343. Bishop Bilson of Christ. subjection etc. par. 3. p. 418 to 423.
Blondus Decad. ^. l. 10. Nauclerus, vol. 3. genesis 26. Regi. no, l. 2. An. 722.
Papprius Masson, An. in Child. p. 83. Aynion. Gest. Fr. p. 403.
Childericus his son being a Sott, and for his dullness unfit to govern,
Charles Martell Master of the Palace, (who swayed all things in Theodoricus
reign) deceasing, his two sons Charlemaine and Pipin, by the advice of the
Nobles of the Land, considering the insufficiency of the King to rule so great
a charge, divided the Land of France between them, so that either of them
should under the King Rule and Govern such proportion as then there was to
them appointed: Charlemayne soon after renounced his Government and turned
Monk; and Pipin, as only Ruler, took upon him the charge of the whole
Realm, Pipin then considering in his mind in what danger and trouble before
him, his Father, and he now had ruled the Land, and that the King to whom
belonged all the charge, kept his Palaces, and followed all his delights and
pleasures, without taking any pain for reformation of the same; sent an
embassage to Pope Zachary, (asking his advice in point of conscience,) Whether
it were more necessary or wealfull for the Realm of France, that he should be
admitted for King, that did nothing but apply his mind to all bodily
pleasures, without care and charge taken upon him for the guarding of the Land,
and the People of the same; or he that took upon him all the charge and pain
in defense of the Land, and keeping of the people in the due subjection? To
th^s the Pope answered, and wrote back to Pipin, that he was best worthy, and
most profitable for the Realm, to be admitted for King* that ruled well the
Commonalty by justice and prudence, and the enemies thereof defended and
subdued by his policy and manhood. Annal. Boiorum, l. 3. p. 299.
Aventine relates his answer more largely, in these words; I find (says
Zachary) in the Story of Divine Scripture, that the people fell away from their
wretchlesse and lascivious king, that despised the counsel of the wise men of
the Realm, and created a sufficient man, one of themselves, King; God himself
allowing their doings: All Power and Rule belongs to God, Princes are his
Ministers in their Kingdoms; And Rulers are therefore chosen for the people,
that they should follow the will of God, the chief Ruler in all things, and
not do what they life^ He is a true King that guides the people committed to
his charge according to the Prescript and Line of Gods Law; all that he has,
as power, glory, riches, favor and dignity, HE RECEIVES OF THE PEOPLE, and
the people, MAY WHEN THE CAUSE REQVIRETH, FORSAKE THEIR KING. It is therefore
LAVFVLL for the Franks and Germans, refusing this unkindly Monster
(Childericke) to choose some such as shall be able in war and peace, by his
wisdom to protect and keep in safety their Wives, Children, Parents, Goods
and Lives. Which answer of the Pope (recited and approved in our own King
La^^bards Archaion, f. 130 Fox Acts and Mon. vol 1. Edit, ult. p. 244.
Edward the Confessors Laws, and Childerickes deposition likewise Chap. 17.)
being declared to the Lords, Barons, and Commons of the Realm (whom this Pope
likewise wholly absolved from their allegiance to Childericke) soon after,
they of one assent and mind* proceeded, and deposed, and put down their King
and Governor, Childericke. Antonini Chron. Tit. 14. 14. n. 1. sect. 2. f. 102.
Blondus Decad. 1. l. 10. Sabellicus Enead. 8. l. 8. Gaguinus l. 3. in Car.
Martel. Nauclerus vol. 3 genesis 26. Gratian. Cause. 15. qu. 6. Platina in Zach. 1.
Frisin. l. 5. c. 22. Fabian, part. 5 c. c. 132. p, 141. Amonius degest. Franc.
p. 403.
being a Sott, a fool, abeast, and one unfit to govern, and closed him in a
Monastery, after he had reigned ten years in the Kings room, by name only;
which done, they unanimously elected and crowned Pipin for their King: By
means whereof the Royal Line of Moroveus after 17 discents ended, and the
Crown was translated to Pipins blood. Which act in point of policy, is
determined lawful by Hist. l. ^. p. 521.
Polybius, who Writes, That the reason why some Kingdoms became hereditary,
was only this, because their first Kings being virtuous and worthy men, they
were persuaded their Children would prove like them; but if at any time they
degenerat, and prove otherwise, and the Though that of Plinius secundus,
Panegyr. Traiano dictus, p. 8. be true, Quod aequiore animo ^erunt homines quem
Princeps parum faeliciter genuil quam quem male elegit.
posterity of the first Kings displease the subjects, they thenceforth make
the Kingdom elective; choosing Kings, not according to their strength of body
and minds attempting great things, but according to the difference of their
will and reason manifested by their actions: And by Polit. l. 5^ c. 10.
Aristotle, who informs us, That in Kingdoms confirmed in succession of
blood, this is to be numbered among the causes of their ruin, that the
Kingdoms descend to many contemptible and slothful persons, who although they
obtain no tyrannical but Royal dignity, yet they live lustfully and
proudly; and so the Kingdom easily falls to ground, and becomes a tyranny,
the people being unwilling that such should rule over them; and so either
wholly alter the form of government, or make choice of a fitter King for the
necessary preservation of the State; yea this election in poi^t of Policy and
Divinity too, is justified and proved lawful by Buchanan, in his Book de Iure
Regni apud Scotos; by John Mariana, de Rege and Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 3, 5. by
Pope Zachary in his forecited Epistle, by King Edward the Confessor in his Laws
c. 17. by a general Council of all the Peers, and Prelates of France;
Convocato enim Principum et Senatorum Concilio de COMMVNI SENSV ET VOLVNTATE
OMNIVN Childericum solo nomine Regem a regni fastigio deponunt, etc. ac OMNIBVS
GAVDEN^IBVS ET VOLENTIBVS, Pipinum super Francos REGNARE FACIVNT; writes Chron.
tit. 14. c. 1. sect. 2. f. 103.
Antoninus: and in a word, our Bishop Of Christian subjection, par 3. p. 420.
Bilson himself, an Anti-Puritane, and great Royalist, affirms, That if the
King be a natural fool, distracted, and altogether unable to govern, as
Childericke was, any Realm, by public consent and advice, may choose another
to govern them: of which more before.

Pipin Fab. par. 6. ^. 154. Gaguin the Genesis Hist. o^ France.
deceasing, Charlemain and Charles the great, his sons, reigned jointly over
the Frenchmen, by their joyous admittance. Having now two Kings instead of one
Fab. par. 6. c. 2^4. Grimst. ^mper. Hist. p. 390, 391. Gaguin* The Genesis hist of
France, Turpin Antoninus, Munst. Crespin, Papyr. Masson, and others.
Jews, surnamed the godly, son of Charles the great, ( a pious, yet
unfortunate Prince) by means of his son Lothair, was first imprisoned, and
then by a Council and Parliament held at Compaygne, by authority of the
spiritual and temporal Lords, and of that Parliament, discharged of all rule
and dominion, as well of the Empire, as of the Realm of France; after that
shorn a Monk, and thrust into the Monastery of Saint Mark, where he was
strictly guarded; and when some of the Nobles and people afterward desired
Lothair to release and restore him to his former dignity; he answered them:
That the deposing of him was done by the whole Authority of the Land; wherefore
if he should be again restored, it must be by the same Authority, and not by
him only: After which by the Lords assents he was restored.

Fab. par. 6. c. 175. Gaguin. Genesis hist. of France.
Jews and Charles, after Jews Balbus their fathers death, were joint Kings of
France, and being very young, by a Parliament held at Meaux, Jews the
Emperor, their Uncle, was declared to be more apt to rule the Kingdom of
France, then these Infants, or Barnard their Guardian, and these Children held
by some illegitimate. Whereupon, by the greater number of voices an Ambassador
was sent to the Emperor, to come and take upon him the Rule of middle France,
which he coming to do, his Nephews friends compounded with him, and then
caused these Infants to be c^owned and proclaimed Kings.

Fab. par. 6. c. 175. Gaguin. Genesis hist. of France, Herma-Schedel, Crispin and
others.
Charles the simple, at his Fathers death, Anno 895. being too young to take
upon him the charge of the Realm, the Lords of France put him under good and
convenient guiding, and of assent they chose Eudo, a man of great fame and
worth, to be King of the Land, for the term of his life, and to guide the
Land, till Charles should come to his lawful age, whom they put under Eudo his
tuition, making him King in his stead, who was crowned of Walter then
Archbishop of Senys. After which when Eudo knew he should dye, he called before
him the Lords and Nobles of France, charging them by solemn Oath, that after
his death they should immediately crown Charles for their King (whom he had
brought up with diligence in learning and all Princely virtues) being then of
age to govern. Charles coming to the Crown, the Danes miserably wasted ^is
Kingdoms; Whereupon his Nobles and people assembled themselves in sundry
companies, and w^nt to the King, showing their misery and blaming his
fearfulness and negligence, that he no more for him resisted the Danes
cruelty; Whereupon (he out of fear belike, lest they should choose another King
to protect them) compounded with Rollo chief Commander of the Danes, giving
him all Normandy, and his own Daughter in Marriage, to purchase peace; Fabian.
p. 6. c. ^82, 183. 186, 201. Gaguin. Turpin, General Hist. of France.
Charles being afterward slain by Hebert Earl of Vermendoyes, Algina his wife
mistrusting the Frenchmen, fled secretly with her young son Jews (Heir to
the Crown) to Edward the Elder into England: Whereupon, that the Land might
not be without a Ruler, the Lords of France assembled at Paris, and there took
Council to elect a new King: where, after long debate, they named and crowned
Raulfe, son to Richard Duke of Burgundy King, as next Heir to the Crown but
young Jews: Raulfe dying after he had reigned 12 years, the Nobles hearing
that Jews was alive in England, sent for him into France and crowned him their
King. Fab. par. 6. c. 201. 202. Gaguin. Turpin, Chron. Chron. Opmerus, Crisp.
Genesis hist. Fran.
Jews the 6. dying without issue, being the last King of Pipens blood (who
enjoyed the Crown 10. discents) Hugh Capet usurped the Crown, putting by
Charles Duke of Loraigne, Uncle and next heir to Jews, whom by the Treason of
the Bishop of Lao^, he took prisoner: After which the Crown continued in this
Hugh and his Heirs. Fab pa. 7. c. 243, 244. Gaguin. the. Genesis hist. of France.
Turpin Thea^. of honor, l. 2. c. 12.
Philip the 2. of France, by a counsel of his Prelates was excommunicated for
refusing to take Ingebert his wife, whom he unlawfully put from him, and to
renounce Mary whom he had married in her stead; And calling a Parliament, they
concluded, that King John of England should be summoned to appear as the
French Kings Liege-man, at another Parliament to be holden at Paris within 15.
days after Easter, to answer to such questions as there should be proposed to
him for the Duchy of Normandy, and the County of Angeou and Poytiers; who not
appearing at the day, Philip hereupon invaded and seized them: After which,
Fab. pa. 7. An. 1259. p. 68.
Jews the 9. and Henry the 3. of England in a parliament at Paris, made a
final composition for these Lands.

Fab. pa. 7. p. 102, 103. etc. Gaguin.
Jews the 10. being under age, was thought of many unsufficient to govern the
Realm and when he had a mind to go to the holy War (as it was then deemed)
he did not undertake it, but by the advice of his great Council of Spiritual
and Temporal Lords and persons, who assisted him therein. Fab. pa. 7. p. 187,
188. the Genesis hist. of France.
Philip the 4. in the 27. year of his Reign, raised a great Tax throughout
France, (which before that time was never heard nor spoken of) by his absolute
Prerogative, without consent of his Estates in Parliament, which had the sole
power of imposing Taxes: Which Tax all Normandy, Picardy and Champaigne
allying themselves together, utterly refused to pay: which other Countries
hearing of, took the same opinion, so that a great rumor and murmur was
raised throughout the Realm of France, in such ways, that the King for
pacifying the people, was feign to repeal the said Tax.

Fab. pa. 7. p. 187, 188. Gagu. Genesis hist. of France.
Jews 11. of France dying without issue male, left his Queen great with child,
whereupon Philip his Brother reigned as Regent of France, till the child was
borne, which proved a male, named John: who dying soon after, Philip was
crowned King at Paris, albeit, that the Duke of Burgoyn and others withstood
his Coronation, and would have preferred the Daughter of King Jews. But other
of the Lords and Nobles of France, would not agree, that a woman should inherit
so great a Kingdom, it being contrary to the Salique law: This Philip by
advise of evil counsel set a great Tax upon his Commons to the Fifth part of
their movable goods, at which they murmured and grudged wondrous sore, and
before it was levied, he fell into a Feever Quartan and great Flixe, whereof
he dyed: which Sickness fell upon him by prayer of the Commons for laying on
them the said grievous Taxes. Bodin. Common^cal. l. 3. c. 1. p. 254.
Charles the fifth of France, See the general Hist. of France in his life.
having a purpose to drive all the English ^u^ of Aquitaine, and other parts of
his Kingdom; and being provided of all things which he thought needful for
the doing of it, yet would not undertake the war without the counsel and
good liking of the Nobility and people, whose help he was to use therein:
Wherefore he commanded them all to be assembled to a Parliament at Paris to
have their advice, and by their wisdom to amend what had by himself not
altogether so wisely been done, and considered of. And this war being at last
decreed by the Council, prospered in his hand, and took good success.
Whe^eas when the Subjects see things done, either without counsel, or contrary
to the wills and decrees of the Senate or Co^ncell, then they contemn and set
them at naught, or elfe fearfully and negligently do the command of their
Princes; of which contempt of Laws, Magistrates, and sedditious speeches ensue
among the people; and so at length most dangerous rebellion, or else open
conspiracy against the Prince, as Bodin observes. This Fabian. part. 7. p. 192.
193, 263, 274. Speeds Hist. p. 687, 694, 786, 787, 788. Halls Chron. 2. H. 5.
See the general Hist. of France, and Gaguinus in the life of John.
Charles dying without Issue Male, leav^ng his Wife great with Child, Philip
Earl of Valoyes, his Nephew, was by the Barons and Lords made Protector and
Regent of the Realm of France, until such time as the Queen was delivered;
who being brought to bed of a Daughter only, hereupon Philip was crowned King.
Between him and King Edward the third of England, and their Counsels, arose
great disputations for the Right and Title to the Crown of France; for it was
thought, and strongly argued by the Council of England, for so much as King
Edward was son and sole Heir to his Mother Queen Isabel, daughter to King
Philip le Beaw, that he should rather be King of France, then Philip de
Valoyes, that was but Cousin German to Philip le Beaw: Of which disputations,
the final resolution of the Lords and Parliament, was, That for an old Decree
and Law by Authority of Parliament long before made, (which the English much
oppugned) that no woman should inherit the Crown of France; therefore the
Title of Edward by might of the Frenchmen, was put by; and Philip by an Act of
the whole French State, (by which his right was acknowledged) admitted to the
Government of the same. After which one Simon Poylet was hanged in Chains,
Headed, and Quartered at Paris, for saying in open audience, that the right of
the Crown of France belonged more rightfully unto King Edward, then to King
Philip; who had long wars about these their Titles to the Crown.

King Fabian. part. 7. p. 280, to 298. Gaguinus, the general Hist. of France,
in the life of this Philip and King John.
John of France, in the fifth year of his reig^^, had by authority of the three
estates of his Realm assembled in ^arliament (to wit of the spiritual Lords
and Nobles, and Heads of Cities and good Towns of his Kingdom) 3000 men waged
for a year, granted to him to defend him and his Realm, aga^n^t Edward the
third King of England; who the next year following took King John prisoner in
the field: Whereupon Charles Duke of Normandy, his eldest son, and Heir
apparent, assembled the 3 Estates at Paris in a Parliament there held, craving
aid of them to redeem their captivated King; who promised their uttermost help
herein, desiring convenient time to consult thereof: Which granted, the three
Estates holding their Council at the Gray Friars in Paris, appointed fifty
person* among them to take view, and make search of the grieyances and evil
guidance of the Realm; who after examination appointed six of themselves to
acquaint the Duke, That the Realm before time had been misguided by ill
Officers, and except remedy for it were shortly found, it should stand in
peril to be lost; wherefore they besought him to discharge all such as they
would name unto him, and over that to forfeit their Goods to the Kings use. And
first they name Peter Archbishop of Roa^, Chancellor of France, Sir Simond de
Bury, chief Counselor of the King and Parliament too, Sir Robert de Lorize
before time Chamberlain to the King, Sir Nicholas Brake Master of the kings
Palaces, Engueram Burgess of Paris and under Treasurer of France, John Pryll
Sovereign of the money and Kings accounts, and John Channeon Treasurer of the
Kings wars. All which Officers they would should be discharged all royal
Offices for ever: Also they would that the King of Naverne (then imprisoned by
the King of France) should be set free, and that Duke Charles himself would be
contented to be advised and counseled by such as they should appoint unto him;
namely, by four Prelates, twelve Knights, and twelve Burgesses, which eight
and twenty persons should have authority to rule and ordain all things
necessary for the Realm, to set in and put out all Officers appertaining to
the Realm, with diverse other requests which unto the Duke were nothing
agreeable: Upon which requests the Duke gave answer, That he would counsult
with his Council, and thereupon would shape unto them some reasonable answer.
But first he desired to know, what aid the three Estates would give unto him,
for delivery of his Father: Whereunto was answered, that the Clergy had given
a disme and a half to be paid in a year, with that, that they may have
license of the Pope, and the Lords as much to be levied of their lands, and the
Commons the tenth penny of their moveable goods. The morrow following the Duke
and his Council met, and after many Messages between them and the three
Estates, offers to reform some part of the Articles. But the Estates firmly
answered, That unless he would reform all the said faults, and confirm the
said Articles to their mind, for the Commonwealth of all the Land, they should
not aid him with their Goods, like as they showed him. The Duke hereupon
secretly acquainted King John of these proceedings, who wrote to him again,
that in no wise he should agree to the said requests, and to the end that these
matters should not be touched in open Parliament, he deferred the debate of
them from day to day; and at last by advice of his Council, dis^olved the
Parliament of the three Estates, and commanded every man to return home
without any effect of their long counsel: Wherewith many of the said persons
were grievously miscontent, saying among themselves, that they perceived well
this was done by the Duke to the intent the requests by them devised, should
not take place, but that the old misgovernance might continue like as before
times it had done: Wherefore diverse of them assembled again at the Gray Friars,
and there made out diverse Copies of the said requests, to bear them into their
Countries, and show them unto the good Towns. And albeit the Duke after this
Council thus disolved, asked aid of the City of Paris, and other good Towns
to maintain his wars; he was plainly answered, Note this.
That they might not aid him, unless the three Estates were again
reassembled, and that the grant of the aid might pass by their authority:
Whereunto the Duke in no wise would agree. In the mean time the 3 Estates of
Languedock assembled in their Province by the Earl of Armenake, the Kings
Lieutenant, to make aid for the Kings deliverance, agreed to purvey at their
proper costs 500 men at Arms, with a furniture to every spear, and a 1000
soldiers on horsbacke, 1000 Arbalestres, and 2000 others called Gunsiers: all
which to be waged for a whole year; and farther ordained, that no man should
wear any furs of great price: that women should leave the rich attire off
their heads, and wear neither pearl nor gold upon them, nor silver in their
girdles; and that all manner of Minstrelsie should be put to silence, so long
as the King remained prisoner. The Duke and his Counsel after this, proclaimed
at Paris certain coins and values of money, newly ordained by them; with
which Proclamation the Commons of the City were grievously moved: And for
reformation, the Provost of the Merchants with others, rode to the Earl of
Angeou the Dukes Brother and Lieutenant, (who was then absent at Meaux)
requesting him to cease the use of that money; And if not they would use such
means, that it should not be suffered to be put forth nor taken within the
City: Whereupon after long debate it was agreed, that the money should be
stopped till the Dukes pleasure was known: Upon whose return, the Dukes
counsel sent for the Provost, and desired him to suffer the said money to run
and be current throughout the said City; Which, the Provost with his company
utterly denied: and after many great and bold words, departed from the Counsel
in great ire, and after their return unto the City, incensed so the
Commonalty, that they set apart all workmanship and Occupation, shutting in
their Shops, and drew unto their Armor and Harnes. The Duke informed of this
murmr of the Commonalty of the City, straightly commanded the Provost, that the
Kings peace were kept within the City; and that he with certain Citizens
should appear at the Palace before him and his Counsel the next day, at an
hour assigned: at which time the Provost with his company came and were
conveyed into the Parliament Chamber, where the Duke and his Counsel were
present. Then the Duke after certain Challenges made to the Provost for his
obstinacy and misleading the Commonalty of the City, said: That, albert the
King by his So it has been co^ceived by some, the King by Law might do this in
England but Sir Edward Cook in his Institutes on Magna Char^a, f. 575. to 5^9.
has largely proved the cont^ary; that the King by his Prerogative and
Proclamation cannot alter, enhanse or abase his coin, but in and by the
Parliament only, because it is contrary to sundry Statutes, it is the sinues
and life of trade, and every man's estate consists in it, and so all have a
common interest therein, which cannot be altered but by common consent in
Parliament.
Prerogative, might at his pleasure, and for his advantage, make his moneys
when he would, and so to suffer them to be current through his Realm; yet for
the weal and ease of his Subjects, considering their manifold and late
charges, he was content, that at this season, this new money should be spared;
and that the 3. estates should be again assembled, and that they should
deprive all such persons then bearing Offices as they should think
prejudicial to the Realm, and over that, to ordain such Money as might be
beneficial for the Land: Of all which Grants the Provost, to the intent, that
he might of authority show them unto the Common^lty of the City, de^^ed a
writing: The which the Duke to appease the people, though it were much contrary
to his mind and his pleasure, granted unto his request. The thirtieth day of
January ensuing, the Duke, at the request of the said Provost, sent certain
Officers to the houses of Simon de Burg, and others accused of misgoverning of
the Realm, whose houses the said Officers seized and made Inventories of their
goods: That done, the Duke sent out Commissions, and assembled the Three
Estates again at Paris, the 15. day of February: Where, in the parliament
chamber in the presence of the Duke, Estates, and diverse Nobles, Robert Coke
Bishop of Laon by command of the Duke, made a long Oration, of the misguiding
the King and the Land by means of evil Officers, as well by changing of
money, as other many unlawful Excises and Taxes, to the great impoverishment
of the Commonalty of the Realm, and to the singular enriching and advancement
of the said Officers; Wherefore the Three Estates prayed, that all such
Officers may be removed from their Offices, and other that shall be thought
more beneficial for the King and his Realm to be admitted: Of which Officers
the Archbishop of Roan (then newly made Cardinal) was noted for one, and other
to the number of 21. whereof some were right near to the Duke. After which
Oration, Sir John de Pigquine, in the name of the Three Estates offered, That
the Three Estates should find to the King 30000. men for an whole year, so as
all things might after that day be ordered as the Bishop had before devised:
All which Articles were unto them by the Duke granted, and incontinently all
such Officers as they before had named were cleanly avoided, and other such, as
by the said 3. Estates were thought most necessary, were put and chosen to
their rooms, except that some of the old (as Masters of Accounts and some of
the Pr^^sidents and Masters of the Requests) were holden in for a time, to show
unto the new, how they should order and guide their said Offices: And the 26 of
March was a new money proclaimed through Paris, such as the said 3. Estates had
newly devised. The King informed of this, sends the Archbishop of Sennes and
two Earls from Bordeaux where he was prisoner, with a Proclamation, which they
caused to be proclaimed in Paris the 6. of April, That the people should not
pay such Subsidies, as the 3. Estates had ordained for the waging of the 30000.
men aforesaid, or for the Kings fine; and also that the 3. Estates after that
day should no more assemble for any causes or matter before touched, till they
had farther knowledge of the Kings pleasure: For which Proclamation the
Citizens of Paris much blamed the said Bishop and Earls, who purchased it, who
as soon as this Proclamation was made, for fear of the people, fled from
Paris. Upon this Proclamation the Commons waxed so mad, that they left their
occupations, drew them to Conventicles and Companies, and used many unfitting
words of the King and his Counsel: Whereupon to avoid inconvenience, the Duke
commanded a Watch to be kept in the City day and night, and certain Gates of
the City to be kept shut. Upon the 9. day of April, another Proclamation was
made all contrary to that other. By virtue whereof, it was charged, that the
foresaid Subsidies should be levied, and also that the 3. Estates
shouldre-assemble at Paris, the 5. day after Easter, and there to proceed upon
all such matters as were before by them began. When the Estates meet again
there grew a difference between them and the Duke, about the subsidies for the
finding of 30000. men, the sum assessed for that pu^pose being too small by
much, the Clergy and Lords th^n refusing to pay any more then they were first
sessed unto: By means of which difference, the assembly of State was
dissolved. Whereupon strait command was given by the Duke to the Provost of
Paris and others (who bare principal sway within the City, and were great
stricklers and doers in the Assemblies of the 3. Estates, so that much of the
business was ruled by them and their means;) that they should cease their
Authority, and not to deal any more with the rule of the Realm, but only
with the good rule and government of the City of Paris: That done, the Duke
rode about to diverse good Towns, making request to them for aid, and to have
this new money current among them. But he sped little of his purpose. Then
shortly after he assembled at Paris certain person of 20. or 30. Towns next
adjoining, with whom he held a Counsel for sundry days; who in the end showed
him; that they might bring no thing to effect without the assembling the 3.
states, besought him that they might be eft-soon assembled, trusting that they
would then satisfy his mind: Upon which the Duke sent forth Commissions,
charging the said 3. Estates to appear before him at Paris the next Wednesday
after All Saints day; which they did, where the Duke condiscending to their
former Articles he gave the King of Navarre and the 3. Estates full content;
who promised that they would demean themselves to his Father and him, as true
and dutiful Sub^ects; and advising (...) to take upon him the Government of
the Realm, they created him Regent of France, during his fathers imprisonment.
After this he assembled the Estates and chief Burgesses of Cities at Paris,
and acquainted them with the King of Englands large demands for his fathers
enlargement; which were so displeasing to all the company, that they answered,
The said Treaty was neither honorable nor profitable: And rather then the
King should bind him and his land to such inconveniences, they would prepare
to m^ke sharp War against England: whereupon they granted to find diverse
thousands of men at Arms, at their own costs, for certain months, to relieve
the King: And at Fabian, part. ^. p 305, 306, 311, 312. General Hist. of
France, Gaguin* and others.
another Parliament assembled when John was dead, and Charles came to the
Crown, they granted an excise of every 4 penny of all things bought and sold
for the maintenance of his wars, the spiritualty granted him a disme, and the
Lords and Gentlemen were stinted at a certain. And in the eleventh year of
his reign, he assembled his great Council of Parliament at Paris, where among
many Acts made for the weal of the Realm; he, with the assent of the Lords
and Commons there assembled, enacted for a Law after that day to be continued,
That all Heirs of the Crown of France, their fathert being dead, may be
crownned as Kings of France, so soon as they attained to the age of fourteen
years. And in the fifteenth year of his reign, the Fabian. part. 7 p 3 7. se^
p. 190, 191. 266, 477, etc. 355, 326, 357, 358, 359, 460. Walsing^em, Hist.
Angl p. 235, 236.
Duke of Flanders granted to those of Gaunt such Articles of agreement, for the
confirmation of their liberties, the repealing of illegal taxes, the electing
of their own Officers, the Dukes Councillors, and the like (which you may
read in Fabian) as plainly manifest this whole Dukedom and people to be of
greater jurisdiction then himself, though invested with regal authority, and
that he had no power to impose any taxes on them, without their grant and
consent; the contrary whereof caused many bloody wars among them.

Charles Fabian. part. 7. p. 324. 355, 356, 357, 358, 363, 364. The general
Hist. of France^ Gaguin^ and others in his life.
the seventh (after Fabians account, but sixth after the French History) a
Child of thirteen years, by reason of the difference between the Lords who
should be Vic^gerent, was by the advice of the major part of the Lords, for the
common good of the Realm, Crowned at Raynes within the age of fourteen years,
contrary to a Law made in the eleventh year of his Father. In the fourth year
of his reign, the Citizens of Paris murmuring and grudging for diverse
impositions and taxes unduely leavied upon them, suddenly arose in great
multitudes, intending to have distressed some of the kings Household: Whereupon
soon after, the Kings Council considering the weakness of the Treasure, and
his great charges and needs; and assembling a Parliament of the Rulers of
Paris, Roan, and other good Towns, exhorted them to grant the King in way of
Subsidy, twelve pence in the pound, of all such Wares at that day current, for
the defense of the Realm and subjects. ^o the which request, after
consultation taken, it was answered; That the people were so charged in times
past, that they might not bear any more charges till their necessity were
otherwise relived: and so the King and his Council at this time were
disappointed. In his seventh year, by the Duke of Angeau his procuring, a tax
was laid upon the Commons of France (without the three Estates:) Which to bring
to effect, many friend^ and promoters were made, as well of Citizens, as
others. Whereupon the Commons of Paris and Roan became wild, assembled in
great companies, chose them Captains, and kept watch day and night, as if
enemies had been about the City; utterly refusing to pay that Tax. This
Charles being none of the wisest Prince, ruled by his household servants, and
believing every light Tale brought unto him, Fabian. ibid. General Hist. of
France, p. 226. 227, 228, 229.
marching against the Duke of Britain, as he came near a wood, was suddenly
met of a man like a Beggar, which said unto him, Whither go thou Sir King?
beware thou go no further, for thou art betrayed, and into the hands of thine
enemies thine own Army shall deliver thee. With this monition the King was
astonished, and stood still, and began to muse. In which study one of his
followers that bare his Spear, sleeping on Horsback, let his Spear fall on his
fellows Helmet; with which stroke the King was suddenly feared, thinking his
enemy had come unawares upon him; wherefore in anger he drew his sword, slew
four of his own Kinghts ere he refrained, and took therewith such a deadly
fear, as he fell forthwith distracted, and so continued a long season, being
near at the point of death. VVhereupon his brother Jews of Orleans, being but
young, the States of France thought it not convenient to lay so heavy a burden
upon so weak shoulders; wherefore his two Uncles the Dukes of Berry and
Burgoine, BY AVTHORITY OF THE STATES OF THE LAND, specially assembled in
Parliament upon this occasion, took upon them to rule the Realm for that
season, it being ordered by a special Law, that they should abstain from the
name of Regent, unfit in this sudden accident, the King being alive, and of
years: And because the Duke of Berry had but an ill name, to be covetous and
violent and was therefore ill beloved of the French, his younger brother Philip
Duke of Burgoyn, had the chief charge imposed on him; and though the Title was
common to both, yet the effect of the author tie was proper to him alone, who
changed diverse Officers. After which the Duke of Orleance was made Regent,
being the Kings younger brother, who p^essing the people with quo^idian taxes
and ^allages, and the spiritual men with dismes and other exactions, he was at
length discharged of that digni^ie, and the Duke of Burgoyne put in that
authority. After this our King Chron. 2. and. 5. H. 5.
Henry the fifth, gaining a great part of France, and pretending a good title to
the Crown (recited at large by Hist p. 786. to 782.
Hall and John Speed) the Frenchmen to settle a peace, made this agreement with
King Henry: Fabian. part. 7. p. 399, 400, 475. General Hist. of France,
Holingshed, Fabian, Walsingham, Graf^on, Hall.
That he should marry Katharine the French Kings daughter, and be admitted
Regent of France, and have the whole government and rule of the Realm, during
Charles his life, who should be King of France, and take the profits of the
Crown whilst he lived; and that after the death of Charles, the Crown of
France, with all rights belonging to the same should remain to King Henry, and
to his Heirs Kings: That the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Heads and
Rulers of Cities, Castles and Towns, should make Oath to King Henry, to be
obedient to his lawful commands concerning the said Regency, and after the
death of Charles to become his true subjects and liegemen; That Charles should
in all his writing name King Henry, his most dearest son, Henry King of
England, and inheritour of the Crown of France; That no imposition or tax
should be put upon the Commons of France, but to the necessary defense and
weal of the Realm; and that by the advice of both Councels of the Realms of
England and France, such stablished Ordinances might be devised, that when the
said Realm of France, should fall to the said Henry, or his Heirs, that it
might with such unity join with the Realm of England, that one King might
rule both Kingdoms as one Monarch; reserved always to either Realm all
Rights, Liberties, Franchises and Laws, so that neither Realm should be
subject unto other, etc. Which Articles were ratified and agreed with the
consent of the more part of the Lords spiritual and temporal of France: But
Fabian, part. 7. p. 475, 478. General Hist. of France, Hall, Holinshed, Speed.
Charles dying, his son Charles the eight, was by some part of France, and
many Lords, reputed and knowledged King, but not crowned whiles the Duke of
Bedford lived and remained Regent, our Henry the sixth, both in Paris and many
other cities, being allowed for king of France. After his death, his son
Fabian, part. 7. p. 479. 480, 481* ^88. General Hist. of France.
L^wes the eleventh, (as Fabian accounts) by strength of friends was crowned
king of France; who refused the counsel and company of his Lords, and drew
unto him, as his chief Counselors, villains and men of low birth, as John de
Lude, John Bal^a, Oliver Devil, (whos^ name for odiousness he changed into
Daman) with others, whom he promoted to great honors and places: VVhereupon
the Lords murmured, and were so discontented, that the Duke of Britain, and
others, withdrew them from the king, and refused to come unto his presence when
he sent for them, raising a great power: And when no peace could be mediated
between the king and them, they met in a plain battle at Chartres, where
many were slain on both sides, but the king lost the field. After which an
accord was made between them, but the king continued his old courses,
delighting more in the company of lewd, irreverent persons, to eat and drink
with them, and to hear them talk of ribaldry and vicious fables, then to
accompany his Lords, which might have won him much honor, going liker a
Serving man then a Prince: and being a great oppressor of his subjects to
maintain hi^ prodigality, for lack of money, he was driven of necessity to
ask a priest of the citizens of Paris; who, after many excuses, which might
not be allowed, they lastly denied the kings pleasure. VVherewithall he being
grievously discontented, removed diverse from their offices, and put many of the
richest and head men of the city to death, upon surmised causes, without
proofs of justice: For which causes, and many other oppressions, the Lords
again assembled their people, intending to subdue the king, and to set his
brother in his place, or to cause him otherwise to rule the Commonwealth: To
which end all the Lords met at a Town called Stampes, where they continued
their Council fifteen days, and then marched to Paris, sending four several
letters unto the city; one to the Bishops and spiritual men, the second to
the Consulls and headmen, the third to the University, the fourth to the
Commonnalty, signifying, That neither they nor any of their company were come
thither as enemies to the City, or to war against it, or the Commonwealth of
the Land; but for the increase and augmentation thereof to the uttermost of
their powers. VVhereupon these four parties sent certain Orators for them to
the Lords, who after long communication with them had, returned to the city
with this report; First, the Lords would that the inhabitants of the City
should consider the conditions of the King, which yearly oppressed his Subjects
with taxes and other grievous servages. Secondly, how he despised the noble
blood of his Realm, and drew to him villains and men of no reputation, by
whose counsel only all the Commonweal of the Land was guided and ruled.
Thirdly, how he ruled his Subjects by force and will without administration of
justice, and himself in all Counsels and Parliaments is Judge of all causes,
and calls himself Counsels and Parliaments more for this singular weal then
for the Commonweal of his Realm. Fourthly, how he enhaunsed men of low birth
to great honors, and caused Noblemen to be obedient unto them, intending to
bring the said ignoble men to be equal with the Princes of the Land. Fifthly,
how the Laws be delayed and bolstered by such as stand in his favor,
wherethrough at this day Law is will, and will is Law, and no man almost in any
surety of life or goods; insomuch that daily many have been banished and put to
death for unlawful causes, and also to any Nobleman at this day no power or
room of honor belongs; so that to the wild Beasts in the Forests
appertains more Liberty and surety then to the more party of the Kings
subjects. Sixthly, The great taxes and sums of money which daily be levied of
the Commons be not spent in the Kings honorable needs, and for the Commonweal
of the Realm, but are spent vainly and riotously, and bribed out of the Kings
Coffers; for which enormities and misgovernance with many other, the said Lords
were come thither in defensible ways for the safeguard of their own persons,
as to the head and principal City of the Realm, for to have aid and
Counsel, to reform the foresaid evils, not intending any harm to the Kings
person, or yet to remove him from his regality or Kingly Majesty; but to
induce and advertize him to that which should be for his honor and the weal
of his Realm, and to live in wealth and honor, as his Noble Progenitors lived
before him; For which causes and considerations, the said Lords, as the Kings
true Subjects, and friends to the Commonwealth of the Land, and of that City,
desired to enter there to refresh them and their people, and to pay truly for
all things they should take, without doing harm or violence to any person. All
which requests and matters of the Lords showed to the Inhabitants of the City,
by favor of some friends they there had, it was with the more party well
accepted, and thought convenient they should be received into the City; but by
means of the Earl of Davoise it was respited, till they had further knowledge
of the Kings pleasure: who coming out of Normandy into, Paris after diverse
Skirmishes, the King and Lords fell to a Treaty of peace, whereupon
Commissioners on both sides assembled and communed together by sundry times two
days; In which season new strength of Soldiers came to the King out of
Normand^. The Treaty hanging long, and a longer Truce being proclaimed, the
soldiers fell to robbing, and other unlawful acts; and at last, through
obstinacy on both parties, all offers were refused, and the day of the Truces
expiration approached, without hope of accord; whereupon provisions for war
were made on both sides. Then begun g^udges and murmures between the kings
soldiers and the citizens of Paris: and shortly after news came to the king,
that the Castle and City of Roan was yielded up to the Duke of Burbon:
VVhereupon the King considering what great advantage the Lords had of him, both
by strength and favor of the Commons, which daily drew unto them by sundry
companies, in avoiding of more danger, concluded a peace: which being
proclaimed thorowout all France, the King and Lords met, to whom the King
showed great semblance of kindness, specially to his brother Charles Duke of
Normandy; wherein appeared great dissimulation, Jews being of such conditions,
That what he might not overcome with strength, he would win with dissimulation
and treachery. Not long after the King warred upon Charles his brother, the
Duke of Burgundy and Britain, and a Treaty of peace being propounded between
them, Charles answered, That if a perfect concord should be established between
the King and him, it should be authorized by the whole consent and counsel of
the Barons of the Realm. With which the King being content, at Turon, in the
month of April, and tenth year of his reign, assembled a counsel of his
Lords spi^tuall and temporal, in the which the demands of Charles, and offers
of the king were showed: And after the said Counce^l had at length reasoned the
said demands and offers, it was finally determined, That the Duchy of Norm^ndy
was so appropriated unto the King of France, and to his heirs, that in ^o wise
it might be dissevered from the Crown; but that a perfect unity might be had
between the King and his brother, the King should be instanced to give yearly
to his brother in recompense of the said Duchy, 12000 pounds of Turon money,
with certain land to be assigned with the name of a Duke, and 40000 ann^all
rent of like money during his natural life, for such portion as he claimed to
be his right, within the Realm. To all which the king agreed, and to pardon
the Duke of offenses against his Majesty, and all such Lordships as he had
won from him in Britain, to restore: which offers Charles refusing, was the
year following contented with the Duchy of Guyan only, and so the war of
Normandy ceased. After Jews his death most of his special and dearest beloved
Servants and ill Councillors (whom he specially recommended to his son
Charles the ninth on his deathbed) came to disgraceful ends: Fabian. part. 7.
p. 490, 521, 522, 523.
Oliver Damman was beheaded for Treason, and John Doyacon for trespass and
hatred unto the common people by his desert, was with all shame brought to the
Market place at Paris, and there bereft of both his ears, and then banished the
Court for ever; by reason whereof arose this proverb among the Frenchmen,
Principibus obsequi haeredit arium non esse, The favor of Princes is not
hereditary. Phili. d^ Com. l. 5. c. 18.
Philip de Commines living under Jews the eleventh, and Charles the eighth, by
whom he was made Lord of Argenton, being in high favor with them, and a great
Councellor of State, has this notable passage, against the French Kings power
then to impose any taxes on their Subjects, without their free assents in a
Parliament of the 3. Estates, though the contrary be now daily practiced, to
the intolerable grievance of the subjects; Phili. d^ Com. l. 5. c. 18.
Is there any King or Prince that has power to leavie one penny upon his
subjects, besides his demains, without leave or consent of those that must pay
it, unless it be by tyranny and violence? A man will say, that sometime a
Prince cannot tarry to assemble his Estates, because it would require too long
time. Whereunto I answer^, That if he move a War offensive, there needs no
such haste, for he may have leisure enough at his own pleasure to make
preparation; and further, he shall be much stronger* and much more feared of
his enemies, when he moves war with the consent of his subjects, then
otherwise. Now as touching a war defensive, that Cloud is seen long before
the tempest fall, especially when it is a foreign war; and in this case good
subjects ought not to complain, nor to refuse any thing that is laid upon
them: Notwithstanding such invasion cannot happen so suddenly, but the Prince
may have leisure at the least to call together certain wise personages, to
whom he may open the causes of the war, using no collusion therein, neither
seeking to maintain a trifling war upon no necessity, thereby to have some
color to leavie money. Money is also necessary in time of peace, to fortify
the Frontiers, for defense of those that dwell upon them, lest they be taken
unprovided, but this must be done measurably. In all these matters the wisdom
of a sage king suffices, for if he be a just Prince, he knows what he may
do, and not do, both by Gods Laws and man's. To be short, in my opinion, of all
the Seniories in the world that I know, the Realm of England is the Country
where the Commonwealth is best governed, the people least oppressed, and the
fewest buildings and houses destroyed in civil war, and always the lot of
misfortune falls upon them that be authors of this war: Note
Our King is the Prince in the whole world that has least cause to allege
that he has privileges to leavie what the lists upon his subjects,
considering that neither he nor any other Prince has power so to do; and
those that say he has, do him no honor, neither make him to be esteemed any
whit the mightier Prince thereby, but cause him to be hated and feared of his
neighbors, who for nothing would live under such a government: But if our
King, or those that seek to magnify and extol him, should say, I have so
faithful and obedient subjects that they deny me nothing I demand, and I am
more feared, better obeyed, and better served of my subjects, than any other
Prince living; they endure patiently whatsoever I lay upon them, and soonest
forget all charges past. This (me thinks, yea, I am sure) were greater honor
to the King, then to say, I leavie what I list, and have privilege so to do,
which I will stoutly maintain. King Charles the fifth used no such terms,
neither did I ever hear such language proceed from any king, but from diverse
of their servants, who thought they did their Master great service in uttering
such speeches; but, in mine opinion they misbehaved themselves toward their
Prince, and used such language, partly because they would seem to be good
servants, and partly because they knew what they said. But for a manifest
proof of the French men's loyalty and obedience to their Prince, we need
allege none other example then that we have seen our selves of late by
experience, when the Three Estates were assembled at Towrs, after the death of
our Master King Jews the eleventh, which was in the year of our Lord, 1483.
Note.
A man might have thought this good assembly to be dangerous for the kings
estate* yea, and diverse there wereof mean calling, and less honesty: that said
then, and often said since, That it is Treason to make mention of assembling
the Estates, and a thing tending to the diminishing of the Kings authority;
but themselves are those that work Treason against God, the king, and the
Commonwealth; neither do any use these speeches, but either such as are in
authorities without desert and unworthy thereof, or such as are common
Tale-carriers, and accustomed to talk of trifling matters, or such as fear
great assemblies, lest their doings should there be ripped up and reprehended,
etc. Genesis hist. of France. p. 421. 423.
Charles the eighth of France, being but thirteen years of age when the
Crowned descended to him; hereupon in the year 1484. a general Parliament was
held at Towrs, with more free access then had been usual, yet not so
effectual as was expected, every one seeking rather to maintain his private
authority then to procure the peoples ease. In this Paliament the pragmatick
sanction was restored, to use it as they had accustomed. The Constables sword
was given to the Duke of Bourgon, the government of the Kings person to his
Sister, a cunning woman, and somewhat of her fathers humor; but the name of
Regent was forbidden to them all, to prevent jealousies: and there was a
Counsel enacted of Twelve, by whom matters should be dispatched in the kings
name; of the which Jews Duke of Orleance should be President. Jews
discontented with the device, seeks to hold his rank; he pretends, that being
the first Prince of the blood, the Regency belonged unto him: he assists at the
Council in Parliament, and in the assemblies in Town, and notwithstanding the
last Will of King Jews, and the Decree of the Estates, yet will he by force
have the name and effect of Regent. VVhereupon discontents arising, he leaves
the Court in discontent, and raised a civil war. However, the Estates settled
the Regencie and affairs of the Realm. Genesis hist. of France. p. 575. to 580.
Grimst. Imper. hist. p. 647, 648.
Anno 1525. Francis the first King of France was taken prisoner by the Emperor
Charles the fifth in the Battle of Pavia; who by mediation of Friends for his
enlargement, sent the Earl of Reux his Lord S^eward, to offer the King
Liberty, so as he would resign all the right she pretended in Italy; restore
the Duchy of Burgongue, as belongs to him by right, with Provence, and
Dolphine for the Duke of Bourbon, to incorporate them with other Lands which he
had formerly enjoyed, and to make all together a Kingdom. Moreover the
Emperor offered to give him his sister in marriage, propounding many other
conditions; so absurd and void of reason, as it is better to let the curious
read them in the Originalls themselves. Amongst all losses, that of Liberty
touches nearest; but Francis having learned to withstand all adversity with a
constant resolution, said, I will dye a Prisoner rather then make any breach in
my Realm for my deliverance, whereof I neither WILL NOR CAN alienate any part
without the consent of the Sovereign Courts and Officers, in whose hands
remains the authority of the whole Realm We prefer the general good before
the private interest of Kings persons. If the Emperor will treat with me, let
him demand reasonable things which lie in my power, then shall he find me
ready to join with him, and to favor his greatness. The Emperor seeing the
King constant in this resolution, in the end yielded to his delivery, upon
these terms, That within six weeks after his delivery he should consigne the
Duchy of Burgongue to the Emperor, with all the dependancies, as well of the
Duchy, as of the County, the which should hereafter be sequestered from the
Soveraigntie of the Realm of France; That he should resign to the Emperor
all his rights pretended to the Estates of Naples, Milan, Genoa, an^ Ast: That
he should quit the Sovereignty of Flaunders and Arthois, etc. Hereupon the King
being enlarged, and arrived at Bayonne, he was required, to ratify the Accord,
which he had promised to do when he came to a free place: but he delayed it
with many excuses, giving the Emperor to understand, that before he proceeded
to such an act, it was necessary that he should pacifi^ his Subjects, who were
discontented with bonds which tended to the diminution of the Crown of France,
etc. After which, the Pope and the Venetians sending Messengers unto him, he
complained of the Emperor, that he had wronged him in that he had forced him
to make impossible promises, and that he would be revenged if ^ver occasion
were offered; and that he had often told him, Not^
that it was not in the power of a French King to bind himself to the
alienation of any thing depending of the Crown, without the consent of the
General Estates: that the Laws of Christians did not allow, that he which was
taken in War should be detained in perpetual prison, which was a punishment
proper to Malefactors, and not for such (...) had bin beaten by the cruel^y of
fortune: that all men knew that Bonds made by constraint in prison, were of no
value, and that the capitulation being of no force, the faith likewise which
was but accessory, and the confirmation of the same could not be bound: that by
the oath which he had taken at R^emes at his Coronation, he was bound
(according to the custom of other Kings of France) not to alienate the
patrimony of the Crown; and therefore for these reasons he was no less free
then ready to abate the Emperors pride. The Emperor growing jealous of the
Kings delays, for ratification thereof sent one unto him, to be certified of
his intent, who found him very unwilling to leave Burgundy; which being very
prejudicall to the Crown of France, he said, was not in his power to observe;
and that he could not alien the Bourguinans without their assents in an
assembly of the Estates of the Country* which he intended to call shortly to
know their minds. By which it is most apparent, that the Kings of France have
no power at all to dispose of their Crown lands or alienate them to others (as
other Subjects may do) because they hold them only in the right of their
Crown for their Kingdoms use and service, the true proprieters of them. Upon
which very ground Matthew Paris, p. 270, 271.
Philip Augustus King of France, Anno 1216. in a solemn Assembly of the States
at Lions, told Walo the Popes Legate (who came to prohibit his Son Jews to
go to receive the Crown of England, because King John had resigned it to the
Pope;) That no King or Prince can give away his Kingdom without the consent of
his Barons, who are bound to defend the Kingdom; and if the Pope decreed to
defend this error, he should give a most pernicious Example to all kingdoms:
domes: Whereupon all the Nobles of France began to cry out with one mouth, That
they would stand for this Article unto death, That no King or Prince by his
sole pleasure could give his Kingdom to another, or make it tributary, whereby
the Nobles of the Realm should be made servants: And the next day Jews his
Advocate alleged, that King John for his homicides and many of her enormities,
was justly rejected by his Barons, that He should not reign over them. That
he could not give the Crown of England to any one without the assent of his
Barons; and that when he had resigned it, he presantly ceased to be a King, and
the Kingdom became void without a King, and being so vacant could not be
disposed of without the Barons, who had lawfully elected Jews for their King:
who in pursuance of this his Title, (which the Estates of France held just,)
sailed into England, took possession of the Kingdom, received homage of all
the Barons, and Citizens of London, who joyfully received him, taking an Oath
upon the Evangelists, to restore them their good Laws, together with their
lost Inheritances.

The general Hist. of France, p. 657. to 690.
Henry the 2. of France being casually slain by the Earl of Montgommery in
running at the Tilt, left the Crown to Francis the 2. being but about 16.
years of age, the Queen Mother, with his wives Uncles the Duke of Guise, and
the Cardinal of Loraigne, hereupon usurped the Government of his person and
Realm, dispossessed the chief Officers of the Crown, kept back the Princes
of the Blood from Court, the true and lawful Governors of the State during
the Kings minority, and plotted the means to raise their race to the Royal
Throne, by displacing all great Officers, substituting others of their own
faction, and endeavoring to extirpate the Protestant party, whom they feared
as most opposite to their treacherous designs; They do and undo, place and
displace in Parliament and Privi^ Council, like absolute Kings; they revoke
all alienations for life or years made by the deceased King in recompense of
any services, except sales; they caused diverse Protestants to be put to death,
imprisoned, pillaged: Wherewith the princes, Officers and people being
generally discontented, to redress the present and prevent all future
disasters that might ensue, require a general Parliament (as the Sovereign
cure for such diseases, whereby the Queen Mother might be put from her usurped
Regency, and those of Guise excluded from the Kings person) who to please the
king, persuade him, that their opposites sought only to bridle and make him a
Ward, and that he should hold them enemies to his Authority and GVILTY OF HIGH
TREASON THAT TALK OF A PARLIAMENT. The King of Spain to cross them, by
Letters to the King his Brother-in-law, declares himself (for the good
affection he bare to him) Tutor and Protector of him, his Realm and affairs,
against those that would change the Government of the Estate, as if the King
were not capable of the Government. Pleasant people, which reject so much the
word of lawful tutelage, and yet usurped it against the Laws and Orders of
the Realm, holding it only by tyranny. After this they cast many slanders on
the Protestants, put Anne du Burge and other Councillors of Parliament to
death, pistol Anthony Minard president of the Parliament, publish sundry
Edicts against those of the reformed Religion, promise great recompenses to
those that discover their assemblies, fill their prisons with them, employ
air, fire and water to ruin them, and kept the king from hearing his Subjects
complaints. The princes were kept back, the greatest of the Realm out of
credit, threatened, and secretly pursued to death, the convocation of the
Estates refused, the parliaments corrupted, the Judges for the most part at the
Guisians devotion, and the public treasure, offices and benefices given to
whom they pleased. This their violent government against the laws, and orders
of the Realm, purchased them wonderful hatred, and caused many which could no
longer endure these oppressions, to consult UPON SOME JUST DEFENSE, to the end
they might preserve the just and ancient Government of the Realm. Note.
They demand advice, TOUCHING LAW AND CONSCIENCE OF MANY LEARNED LAWYERS AND
DIVINES: who resolved, THAT THEY MIGHT LAWFVLLY OPPOSE THEMSELVES against the
government which the house of Guise had usurped, AND AT NEED TAKE ARMS TO
REPVLSE THEIR VIOLECE; so as the Princes, who in the case are born Magistrates,
or some one of them, would undertake it, being required by the Estates of the
Realm, or by the sounder part of them. They who first thought of this Act of
consequence, had several considerations: Some, moved with a true zeal to
serve God, the King and Realm, thought they could not do a greater work of
piety, then to abolish Tyranny, rescue the State, and to find some means to
ease them of the Religion. There were others desirous of change, and some were
thrust on with hatred, for the wrongs which the house of Guis^ had done them,
their kinsmen and friends: yet all had one design to suppress this unlawful
government. In these consultations it was held necessary to seize on the Duke
of Guise, and the Cardinal his brother, being advowed by one chief member of
the State, and then to require an assembly of the Three Estates, to the end
they might yield an account of their Government, and provide for the King and
Realm. After which they make the Prince of Conde acquainted with this their
design, and engage him in this quarrel; which being discovered, produced a
long bloody civil war against the Protestants, under this and the two
succeeding Kings; in which war, those that died, departed this world with
this singular content, to have courageously sacrificed their lives for their
countries liberty: So the generally History of France; in which and in Richard
Dinothus you may read at large, both the History and the lawfulness of this
defensive war, overtedious to transcribe.

Francis General Hist. of France, 692, etc. and Richardus Dinothus de Bello
Civili Gallico Religionis causa suscepto. l. 2, 3, 4, 6. Speeds Hist. 1211,
1212 1213. K. lames Answer to Cardinal Peron.
dying, the Crown descended to Charles the ninth, being but eleven years of
age, and a Parliament of the Estates being assembled on the three and twentieth
days of December, 1560. The Queen Mother was thereby allowed and confirmed
Regent during the Kings minority: In several Parliaments contradictory Acts
are made, some restraining, others granting the free exercise of the Reformed
Religion thorowout the Realm. The Guisian Popish faction, being the strongest
party, most powerful at Court, and intimatest with the King, notwithstanding
all Acts for the Protestants immunitie and liberty of conscience, impose
diverse illegal restraints upon them, commit many outrages and massacres on
them, for which they could have no redress; whereupon for their own defense
and preservation, after many fruitless Petitions, and delusory promises, they
take up Arms; whereupon many bloody civil wars ensue. Many propositions and
overtures of Peace were made by the Guisian royal party, not one of them
real, but all to get advantages, and overreach the Protestants, against whom
they had the most mischievous designs in agitation, when they seemed most
earnestly to desire Peace. Four or five several conclusions of Peace were
solemnly made and ratified between them, but no sooner made and proclaimed,
but presently violated of the King and Popish party, by massacres, and new
treacherous Plots to extirpate the Protestant party; so that every
accommodation proved but a seminary of a new and more bloody war, almost to
the utter ruin of France. In the year 1592. when a public peace was made,
and all differences to outward appearance, buried in eternal oblivion; the
King, contrary to his faith and oath, caused the Admiral of France, (the
Protestants chief pillar) as he departed from the Council to dinner, to be
shot with a Harguebuze, which carried away the forefinger of his right hand,
and wounded him in the left arm The king to color this treachery, swears
with an execration to the King of Navarre, and others who complained of this
outrage, to take such exemplary punishment on the offenders, as the Admiral
and his friends should have cause to rest satisfied, commands them to be
pursued, appoints three of the Parliament to make information against them,
protests after this again and again, to be exceeding sorry; that this act
touched his honor, that he will be revenged for it, so as the memory thereof
should remain for ever; writes to the governors of the Provinces, chief
Towns, and Magistrates, That he would take such order as the Authors of so
wicked an act should be known and punished: And to his Ambassdours to
foreign Princes, That they should make it known to all the world, that this
outrage did displease him. And for the Admirals safety, he commands the
Captains of his Guards, to give him as many of his Guard as he pleased, to
suffer no Papist to enter his lodging; and advises all the Gentlemen
Protestants then in Paris to lodge about the Admirals lodging. But all this
Court Holy Water was only to keep every Bird within his own nest, and a
Pitfall to entrap the chief of the Protestants: For the same day after dinner,
the King and Queen Mother, the Duke of Guise, and others, take counsel to
murder the Admiral, and all the chief Protestants, the night ensuing, not
only in Paris, but thorowout all France, whiles they were sleeping in their
beds. Which most tyrannical barbarous Tragedy was accordingly acted, the
Admiral slain in his lodging, and his head cut off, carried to the King and
Queen Mother, who causing it to be embalmed, sent it to the Pope and Cardinal
of Lorrain, for an assurance of the death of their most capital enemy: all the
Protestants, Noblemen and Gentlemen, lodging in the Admiralls Q^arter, undergo
the like Butchery; the Streets of Paris are strewed with Carkases, the
pavements, market places and river dyed with Protestant blood, about ten
thousand of them being thus treacherously massacred in their beds, at such a
season when they thought themselves most safe, and that on the Lords own
sacred day, a very unsuitable time for such a bloody, profane, infernal
sacrifice. No sooner was this m^tchlesse treachery of this king against his
own natural subjects executed, but he avowes and justifies that which he but
the day before so solemnly and openly disclaimed, as a means to cut off all
commotions for time to come. But this bloodshed begat new wars, and made the
Protestants in Languedoc, Rochell; and other parts, to take up Arms in their
own defense, and stand more strictly on their guard than ever before: And Genesis
hist. of France. p. 744. Fox Acts and^ Mon* Vol. 3. p. 1026. Edit. u^t.
God himself out of his Divine justice, after this horrible Butchery committed
by this dissembling, cruel, blasphemous King, smote him with an answerable
disease, causing him to wallow in his own blood, which he pitifully vomited
out in great abundance, by all the conduits of his body, for div^rs hours,
till he dyed: (A just judgment for him that barbarously shed blood thorowout
all the Provinces of the Realm) he in the mean time tossing in his bed, and
casting out many horrible blasphemies. A notable spectacle for all unnatural
fidifragous Princes to look on, who imbrue their hands in the blood of their
Christian subjects. Which crime (as the Author of the Genesis Hist. of France,
p. 764.
French History observes) made his reign cursed in the City, and cursed in the
field; cursed in the beginning, and cursed in the ending; mortality, sword,
famine, cursing, fear, and desolation, following it even unto the end. I shall
conclude his reign with the words of the French History; Doubtless God loves
not the Prince that thirsts after his subjects blood, for the subjects blood is
the very blood of their Prince.

General Hist. of France, p. 765, etc.
Charles dying without Heir of his body, the Crown descended to his Brother
Henry the third, then king of Poland, Anno 1574. his first design was to
extirpate the Huguenots and Protestant Religion thorowout the Realm, though
the Emperor Maximilian told him, There is no sin so great as to force men's
consciences, and such as think to command them, supposing to win heaven, do
often lose that which they possess on earth. His pernicious Cabinet
Counselors, to effect this design, cause him first to protest by sundry
Proclamations, his love to the good of his subjects, and to abolish what was
past, so as they lay aside arms, de^iver him all his Towns, and live quietly
in their houses, without any search, constraint, or molestation for matter of
conscience. A policy practiced only to bring the Protestant party into
slavery, all those Proclamations making no mention of liberty of their
Religion, neither of a Parliament for the public Government, nor of a
national Council for matters of Conscience: hereupon the Protestants stood
the more upon their guards, they are full of jealousy, distrust, doubt, fear;
the King and his Popish Council endeavoring by this wile to keep the
Protestant party at a gaze, whiles they in the mean time made great
preparations underhand to put a^mighty army into the field, to ruin them
without hope of rising: So they arm on all sides, especially in Poicto^; the
Protestants are besieged, assaulted in many places, and so manfully repulse
their assailants, that they are willing to hearken to a Treaty of peace;
wherein the Protestants demanding free exercise of their Religion thorowout all
France, new Chambers in the Parliament for the execution of justice, punishment
of the murderers of them, ease of imposts, a free assembly of the general
Estates, and an assurance for the entertainment of the pretended peace. The
King after fifteen days conference, promises to content them all, but he
will have them to refer these demands to his will; and so the Treaty vanished
into smoke, and new wars sprung up in every place with new Court-designes to
undermine and circumvent the Protestants, who are aided by a German Army, Anno
1576. The Queen Mother seeing the Protestant party prosper in their wars,
makes a peace between the King and them; who grants the Protestants all their
former demands, restores diverse of them to their goods, offices, honors: avows
by a solemn Declaration the Massacres of them, Anno 1572. to have been
committed against all right and law of Arms; He ordained that the Children of
such Gentlemen as had been murdered, should be restored to their parents
goods, and freed from all charges of war, yea, he avowed their taking up of
Arms, as taken for his service, etc. Which Articles, with the Kings Edict
thereon, were allowed by the Parliament at Paris. But no sooner were their
Forces disbanded, but they began to find this peace to be counterfeit, being
only made to dis-arme them, and divide their Commanders: none of the premises
being really performed. In the mean time the house of Guise and their faction
send their Agents to Rome, and Spain, to join with them in a Catholic
league, and under pretense of extirpating Heresy, and establishing the Roman
religion thorowout France, endeavor to settle the Crown upon themselves:
their chief designs were, to overthrow the succ^ssion of the Crown brought
in by Hugh Capet, in the full assembly of the Estates, and to make the naming
of a Successor subject unto the said Estates, to cause the Princes of the blood
that should oppose against the Decrees of the Estates to be declared incapable
of succeeding unto the Crown; to make the Estates protest to live and die in
the faith set down by the Council of Trent; to cause it to be signed in the
open Parliament; to revoke and anull all public Edicts in favor of the
Protestants and their associates, and to pursue them to the death, that should
hinder the extirpation of Heresies, etc. These Articles of Association were
first drawn at Peronne in Picardy, but disguised with goodly shows, to blind
those that would examine them more exactly, as being only to maintain the
Law, and restore the holy service of God; to preserve the King and his
Successors in the estate, dignity, service and obedience due unto them by
their subjects; to reserve unto the Estates of the Realm, their rights,
preheminences and ancient liberties. And for the execution of these Articles, a
certain form of Oath was propounded, inflicting pains of eternal damnation
to the associates, that for any pretext whatsoever should withdraw themselves
from this league; and a Bond for such as should be enrolled, or employ their
goods, persons, and lives, to punish, and by all means to ruin the enemies
and perturbers thereof, and them that should fail, or make any delays, by
authorities of the Head, as he should think fit. Soon after a Parliament of
the three Estates is assembled at Bloyes, where the Catholic Leaguers, after
much consultation, caused the last Edict of pacification, in behalf of the
Protestants to be revoked, and procured an Edict for the exercise only of one
Religion (to wit the Popish) to be tolerated within the Realm. The King of
Navarre, the Prince of Conde, the Marshall of Montmorancy, with diverse other
Noblemen of both religions, foreseeing these practices, and refusing to assist
at this pretended Parliament, concluded a nullitie of all that should be
decreed to prejudice the former Edict of Pacification; protesting, that they
were resolved to maintain themselves in the Rights, Liberties, and freedoms
which the Edict had granted them. That the troublers of the public quiet, and
sworn enemies of France should find them in a just defense, and they should
answer before God and men for all the miseries that should ensue thereby: Yea
the Prince of Conde answered more sharply, That he did not acknowledge them
assembled at Bloys for the Estates of the Realm, but a Conventicle of persons
corrupted by the sworn enemies of the Crown, who have solicited the abolition
of the Edict, to the ruin and subversion of the Realm: That if they had been
lawfully called, he would have assisted, for the sincere affection he bears to
the Kings service and the quiet of his Country; that he will never give his
consent to the counsels of the Authors of so many confusions which he foresees,
etc. Hereupon a sixth civil War begins between these Catholic Leaguers, and
the Protestants, whose good success caused the King, An. 1580. to make a new
peace with the Protestants, and grant them their former immunities. The
Leaguers discontented herewith, begin to cast forth Libels against the King,
disgrace him in companies as a Sardanapalus, and idle Chilpericke, (...) to be
shaved and thrust into a Cloister; They cause the Preachers publicly in all
places, to term him a Tyrant, an Oppressor of his people by Taxes, and a
favourer of Heretics: And under a pretense of suppressing Heretics, reforming
public oppressions; and settling the succession of the Crown in case the King
should die without Heir, they, contrary to the Kings command, (who disavows
them, and forbids all leavyes of war) raise a great Army, and so enforce the
king to publish a Declaration in his own justification, and to procure his
peace with them, to revoke all Edicts made in favor of the Protestants, and
make open war against them. Hereupon the King of Navarre (next Heir apparent
to the Crown) for preservation of his own interest and the Protestants,
complains against the kings proceedings. lays open the mischievous Plots of
the Leaguers: and then with the Prince of Conde and other Nobles, Gentlemen,
Provinces, Towns, and Commonalties of both Religions, He protests, by a
lawful and necessary defense to maintain the fundamental laws of families,
and the Estates and liberty of the King, and Queen his Mother. The Leaguers
hereupon procure Pope Sextus the fifth, to excomunicate the king of Navar, and
Prince of Conde, to degrade them and their Successors from all dignities, from
their pretentions to the Crown of France, and to expose their Countries and
persons in prey to the first that should seize on them. The Court of Parliament
declares this Bull of the Pope to be void, rash, insolent, strange, far from
the modesty of former Popes, pernicious to all Christendom, and derogating
from the Crown of France: The Princes likewise protest against, and appeal
from it, as abusive and scandalous, to the next free and lawful Council. The
Leaguers pursue their begun wars against the King of Navarre and Protestant
party; who protest to use all lawful means to resist the violence of their
enemies, and cast all the miseries that shall ensue upon the Authors thereof.
Fresh wars are hereby prosecuted against the Protestants by the Leaguers,
German Forces come in to aid the Protestants; after macombates the King
desires peace, but the Leaguers will have none; and assembling at Nancy, they
endeavor to force the King to make his Will, and allow the Regency unto them;
to which end they conclude, That the King should be urged to join his Forces
effectually with the League, To displace such from their Offices as should be
named, To bring in the in the Inquisition of Spain, and publish the Council
of Trent, but with a moderation of such things as derogate from the privileges
of the French Church; To consent to the restoration of the goods sold by the
Clergy for the charges of the war, To give them Towns to be named and
fortified as the time and necessity required, To forfeit the Huguenots bodies
and goods, and to entertain an Army upon the frontiers of Lorraine against the
Germans. After which the Duke of Guise approaching to Paris, enters it against
the Kings command, who was jealous of him; mutinies the Citizens against the
King, who thereby is forced to retire from thence for fear of being surprised
by the Duke, who plotted to seize his Person. After which the Duke by the
Queen Mothers mediation, is reconciled to the King; who for fear of his
power, by an Edict of reunion, admits no religion but the Popish, promises
never to make Peace nor Truce with the Heretics nor any Edict in their favor;
binds his subjects to swear, never to yield obedience after him, to any
Prince that shall be an Heretic, or a favourer of Heresy; degrades from all
public charges, either in peace or war, those of the Reformed Religion;
promises all favor to the Catholics, declares them guilty of High Treason
who shall refuse to sign to this new union, and shall afterward depart from
it, But signing this forced Edict, he wept. To establish which Edict, and work
their further ends, the Leaguers cause the King to summon a Parliament of the
3. Estates at Bloyes, procuring those of their faction to be chosen of this
Assembly: where establishing the former extorted Edict, they thereby exclude
the King of Navarre, (an Herelike as they deemed him) from the Crown of
France, to which he was next Heir: An Heretic cannot reign in France, it is
an incompatible thing with the Coronation and Oath which he ought to take;
hurtful to the honor of God, and prejudicial to the good of the Realm: Then
they declare the King an enemy to, and oppressor of his people, a Tyrant over
his Realm, that so the people should presently resolve to confine him unto a
Monastery, and install the Duke in his throne. And at last, the King being
certainly informed of the Dukes traitorous designs to surpize him, and usurp
his Throne, caused the Duke and Cardinal of Burbon (the chief Heads of the
League) to be suddenly slain, and others of them to be imprisoned. Hereuppon
the Parisiens mutiny, and take up Arms afresh; The College of Sorbone
concluded by a public Act of the seventh of January, 1589. That the people of
France are freed from the Oath of obedience and fealty which they owed to Henry
of Valoys, and that lawfully and with a good conscience they may arm against
him, receive his Revenues, and employ it to make war against him. After which
the Assembly of the Estates dissolving, the Parisiens imprison the Court of
Parliament at Paris, till they condescended to their pleasures, and confirmed a
general Council of the union, consisting of forty choice men of the three
Estates, to dispose of the public affairs, and confer with the Provinces
and Towns of the League. To which many Assistants were afterward added by the
Nobles, and a Declaration (in manner of an oath) for the entertainment of the
Union, made, sworn, and subscribed to by many; one of which pricked his own
Arm, to sign it with his own blood, and became lame thereby. The people
condemn, imprison, spoil, ransom of their absolute power, and sell the goods
of any that bears not the mark of their enraged faction. Hereupon the King
turning his lenity into fury, Proclaims them Rebels and Traitors, if they come
not in and submit by a day; and reconciles himself to the King of Navarre:
They go on with greater insolency then before, set out a great Army under the
Duke of Mayenne; crave assistance from the Pope and king of Spain; surprise
diverse towns, rob Churches, ravish Wives and Virgins, murder men of all
sorts even before their Altars, commit all the outrages, wickednesses which
irreligion and impiety could invent in madd Soldiers. The King at last
besieged Paris, take some of the Outworks, and was like to master the City;
but in the midst of this attempt he was stabbed in the belly with a Knife, by
James Clement, a Iacobin Friar of two and twenty years old, (sent out of Paris
to act this Tragedy on the kings person) who vowed to kill the Tyrant, and to
deliver the City besieged by Se^nacherib. The Murderer was presently slain by
those who came in to assist the king, who within few hours after died of this
wound, which he received in the self-same chamber wherein the Counsel for the
Massacre of the Protestants was held on that fatal day of Saint Bartholmew,
1572. A notable circumstance of Divine justice upon this Prince, who being ever
a zealous promoter of the Romish Religion, was murdered by a Zealot of it, and
had his own blood shed by those who spurred him on to shed the blood of
Protestants, in the very Chamber where the most babarous Massacre of
Protestants that ever the world beheld, was contrived. Genesis Hist. of France, p.
834, 835.
Henry when the pangs of death seized on him, declared Henry the fourth, King
of Navarre (his brother in law) the lawful Successor of the Crown of France,
as in Truth he was, notwithstanding the Edict of Bloys to exclude all Heretics
from the Crown. The Parisiens and holy Union refuse to accept him for their
Sovereign, proclaiming Charles the tenth for their King, and triumphing
exceedingly at Henry his death. The Parliament at Bourdeaux commands all men
under their jurisdiction, by a Decree of the nineteenth of August, 1549. To
observe inviolably the Edict of Union in the Catholic, Apostolic and Romish
Church; and Declarations are hereupon made. The Parliament of Tholousa is more
violent; they decree, That yearly the first day of August they should make
processions and public prayers for the benefits they had received that day, in
the miraculous and fearful death of Henry the third, whereby Paris was
delivered, and other Towns of the Realm; forbidding all persons to
acknowledge Henry of Burbon, the pretended King of Navarre, for King; declaring
him incapable ever to succed to the Crown of France, by reason of the
notorious and manifest crimes contained at large in the Bull of Excommunication
of Pope Sixtus the fifth. The Court of Parliement at R^an, no less violent and
presumptuous then that of Tholousa, pronounced them guilty of High Treason,
both against God and man, and the Estate and Crown of France, that had opposed
themselves against the holy Union, and all Royalists and their Successors
deprived of all prerogatives of Nobility; their Offices to be void, not to be
recovered, and all their Goods forfeited: Anno 1592. they renew this Edict
every eight month. Thus the league kindled afresh the fire which the siege of
Paris had somewhat quenched: the King raising his siege before it, and
returning to Arques, the Leaguers Army followed him, and are there defeated:
after which the King with a small Army gains many great Conquests, which amaze
the Leaguers; he be^iegeth Paris above three months, where more then one
hundred thousand people died of famine, yet they force the Parliament to
pub^ish a Decree the fifteenth of June, 1590. Forbidding upon pain of death all
men to speak of any composition with Henry of Burbon, but to oppose themselves
by all means, yea, with the effusion of their blood. But the Belly has not
Ears, the people are not fed with paper, or promises, they mutiny and demand
peace; whereupon Deputies are sent to the King to treat a peace; who to defeat
the Spanish Army called in by the Leaguers, raises his siege, and routs the
Spanyard, with other Forces of the League in sundry places, which makes many
desire peace; yet by means of Pope Clement the eighth his Bull, the Duke of
Mayenne, and the Popes Legate, they intend to summon a Convocation of the
Estates of Paris to elect a new King, desiring the Cardinal of Placentia to
assist and confirm this their intended future election. The Parliament of
Paris removed to Chaalons gives sentence against the Popes Bull, and nulls it:
The King sets out a Declaration against the Leaguers as Traitors and Rebels,
declares this Assembly of the Estates without his Authority, to be against the
Laws, against the good and quiet of the Realm, and all that should be treated
or concluded therein, abusive, and of no force. On the contrary, the Popes
Legate, by a public exhortation full of injuries, labors to persuade the
French, that the King, long since dismembered from the body of the Church, was
most justly pronounced incapable of the Crown. The Spaniyards lobouring the
Estates to elect the Infanta of Spain king; the Parliament of Paris by a Decree
of the eight and twentieth day of July, declare all Treaties made or to be made
to that end, void, and of no validity, as being made to the prejudice of the
Salique Law, and oath fundamental laws of State. The king to quiet these
differences, and gain peaceable possession of the Crown, most unworthily
deserts his Religion, reconciles himself to the Church and Pope of Rome; yet
one Peter Barriere* seduced and persuaded by a Capuchin of Lions, Aubry a
priest of Paris, and father Varide a lesuite, was apprehend^d at Melua, and
executed, for attempting to murder the King with a sharp two-edged Knife,
which fact he confessed, After this the Towns subject to the League, return
by degrees to the obedience of the Crown; the king is solemnly Crowned at
Chartres, Rhemes shutting the gates against him. This done, he surprises Paris,
and notwitstanding their former ^ebellions, grants them all free pardon upon
their submissions. The Parliament at Paris disanuls all the Decrees of the
League, and pretended assembly of Estates, as void, and done by private
persons, without due election; grants Process against the Jesuits, as chief
pillars of the League, disgracing the new Kings Majesty, and the memory of the
deceased King in their Sermons; and persuading the execrable attempt of Peter
Barriere to stabbe him; the Cardinal of Burbon, the Duke of Nevers with
others, protect and s^e for them; who soon after suborne John Chastle, one of
their Novices, (of the age of eighteen years) to stabbe the king; who creeping
into the kings chamber at the Lonure in Paris, among the press, December 27.
1594. and thinking to stabbe the king in the belly, as he resolved, struck him
on the upper Lip* and brake a Tooth, as he stooped to take up some Gentleman
who saluted him; for which fact he was condemned by the Parliament as guilty of
High Treason, his body adjudged to be torn in pieces by four horses, then
burnt to ashes and cast into the wind, and all his Goods confiscate to the
king: All the Jesuits, with their scholars, were hereupon banished the
Realm, as corrupters of youth, troublers of the public quiet, enemies of the
Kings State, and none of them to remain above fifteen days, nor any to
harbor them within the Realm under pain of High Treason. I have heard from a
Gentleman of credit, which served this king, that when he was thus stabbed in
the mouth by Chastle, one of the Mounsieur Daubern.
Religion gave him this Christian admonition, Sir, you have denied God already
with your mouth, inrenouncing the protestant faith, which you once professed;
now God in his justice has permitted this Jesuit, of that Religion you
revolted to, thus to stabbe you in the mouth: O take heed you deny him not in
your heart, lest the next stroke they give you be to the heart. Which fell out
accordingly, for The general Hist. of France, p. 976, 977, 982.
after four or five more several attemps of the Jesuits and Papists to
murder him* which were discovered and prevented, he was stabbed to death with
a Knife by one Francis Ravillac, (a Papist at the Jesuits instigation) as he
was riding in his Caroch near to Innocents church in Paris, for suffering two
religions in the Kingdom, as the Traitor professed. This Villain stabbed him
first in the left Pap, and next between the fifth and sixth Ribbe, cutting
asunder the vein leading to the heart, and entering into the Cava vena; and
being dead the Jesuits of his royal College at la Fletche (whom he G^n.
Hist. of France, p. 914 915, 1070, 1071 1072, 1094, 1095, 1110, 1133, 1172,
1173, 1174, 1175, 1181, 1182, 1183, 1196, ^o 1220.
restored and favored exceedingly, notwithstanding their former Treasons, and
banishments of them out of France, causing the Pyramid erected by sentence of
Parliament as a monument of their Treasons to be rased, and yet were found to
have a chief hand in this his death) begged and procured his heart to be there
interred: O the admirable passages of Divine Justice, that those two Henry's,
who most advanced the Popish Religion, and abandoned the Protestant faith to
humor the Jesuits and Papists, thereby to secure their Crowns and lives, as
they believed, should thus fatally perish by those of that Religion, and their
unlawful revolts thus used to preserve their lives; whereas our nobler Queen
Elizabeth continuing constant in her Religion, notwithstanding all allurements
menaces and attempts upon her person, to withdraw her from the truth, was
miraculo^sly preserved from all the bloody assaults of this infernal
generation of Romish Vipers, and went to her grave in peace.

But to return to this kings actions; Genesis Hist. of France^, p. 887. 88^.
Anno 1596. king Henry calls a general assembly at Roan ^n form of a
Parliament, where he speaking to the assembly, told them, That at his coming to
the Crown he had found Fr^nce not only ruined, but almost all lost for the
French, but by the grace of Almighty God, the prayers and good counsel of his
subjects, the sword of his Princes, and brave generous Nobility, and hi^ own
pains and labor, he had saved it from loss; let us save it now from ruin,
participate with me, my dear subjects in this second glory, as you have done in
the first; I have not called you as my Predecessors did, to make you approve my
Will, I have caused you to assemble, TO HAVE YOUR COVNSELS, TO BELIEVE THEM,
AND TO FOLLOW THEM; finally, TO PVT MY SELF INTO YOUR HANDS: A desire which
seldom commands Kings that have white hairs and are Conquerours; But the love
I bear unto my subjects, and the desire I have to add these two goodly
Titles to that of king, makes me to find all easy and honorable. After this
the King and Parliament set forth diverse Genesis Hist. of France, p. 1009. 1022,
1023, 1124, 1154, 1156, 1157.
Edicts, against the transportation of Gold and Silver, the wearing of Gold and
Silver, excessive usurie, Advocates extortions, Duels, Bankrupts, and the like.
This Genesis Hist. of Fr. p. 1173* 1174, 1200.
Martial King being murdered by Ravillac, as aforesaid, the Crown descended
to Jews his Son, not then ten years old: The Court of Parliament at Paris
having notice of his death, made this Decree in Parliament, May 14. Anno 1610.
Whereas the Kings Attorney General has informed the Court of Parliament, and
all the Chambers thereof assembled, that the King being now murdered by a most
cruel, inhumane and detestable Paricide, committed upon his most sacred
Person, it were very necessary to provide for the affairs of the present King,
and for his Estate, and has required that there be present order given
concerning the service and good of his Estate, which cannot be well governed by
the Queen, during the minority of the King her son; and that it would please
the said Court to declare her Regent, that the affairs of the kingdom may be
governed by her: Whereupon having consulted, THE COURT HAS DECLARED AND DOES
DECLARE THE QVEEN (mother to the King) REGENT OF FRANCE, for the governing of
the State, during the minortie of her son, with all power and authority. The
next day the King himself sitting in the Seat of Justice in Parliament, by the
advice of the Princes of his blood, Prelates, Dukes, Peers and Officers of the
Crown, according to the Decree made by the Court of Parliament, declared and
did declare the Queen his Mother Regent in France, and to have the care of
bringing up his Person, and the Government of the affairs of his Kingdom
during his minority; commanding the Edict to be enrolled and published in all
the Bayliweeks, Senescaushes, and other jurisdictions depending upon the said
Court of Parliament, and in all other Parliaments of the Realm; so that the
Queen Mother was settled in the Regency by the Parliament and whole State of
France. After which Genesis Hist. France, p. 1207*
Pasquier, Counselor and Master of Requests, writ her a large Letter touching
the Government of the State, wherein he informed her, That she must not forbear
to assemble the Estates, for the reason that some would suggest unto her, that
they will be some blemish to her greatness; it is quite contrary: The Estates
having confirmed it by public authority, will settle it fully. Commonly the
Estates assemble to provide for the present and future complaints of the
general of this Monarchy, and to reduce things to their ancient course; the
people being the foundation where on this Realm is built, and the which being
ruined, it is impossible it should subsist: take away these new Edicts,
Impositions and Subsidies: it is better to gratify a people, than to entreat
them roughly. Above all things beware that you follow not your own opinion
alone, in manag^ng the affairs of the Realm. Hereupon four and fifty Edicts
and Commissions were revoked, wherewith the Subjects had been oppressed. The
continuation of the life of Jews the thirteenth, p. ^. to 7^.
When the King was to be Crowned, the Prelates made this request to him at the
Altar before his Coronation; We pray and require that you would grant unto
every one of us, and the Churches whereof we have the charge, the Canonical
priviledge^, good laws, and justice; and that you will defend us, as a king
ought all his Bishops and their Churches. Whereunto the king answered; I
promise to preserve you in your Canonical privileges, as also your Churches;
and that I WILL GIVE YOU (in the future) GOOD LAWS, and do you Justice, and
will defend you, by the help of God, according to my power; as a king in his
Realm OUGHT TO DO IN RIGHT AND REASON, to his Bishops and their Churches. After
which having been acknowledged their lawful Prince, BY A GENERAL CONSENT OF
ALL THE ORDERS, the Gardinall of Ioyeuse presented unto him the Oath of the
Kingdom, (the sacred Bond of the fundamental Laws of the State) the which he
took publicly in these words, with invocation of the Name of God, having his
hand upon the Gospel, which he kissed with great reverence.

I promise in the Nam^ of Jesus Christ, these things to the Christians subject
unto me; First, I will endeavor that the Christian people shall live peaceably
within the Church of God: Moreover, I will provide, that in all v^cations,
theft, and all iniquity shall cease: Besides, I will command, that in all
judgments equity and mercy shall take place; to the end that God, who is
gentle and merciful, may have mercy both on you and me. Furthermore, I will
se^k by all means in good faith to chase out of my Jurisdiction* and the Lands
of my subjection, all Heretics denounced by the Church; promising by Oath to
observe all that has been said: So help me God, and this holy Evangell.

After this Ibib. p. (...) 26. 29. 30. 31. (...). 49. 50. 74. 75
Bellarmines Book of the Popes power in temporal causes, Becanus, and Scoppius
Books, Marianaes Book de R^ge and Regis institutione, Suorez his Book, with
others, which taught, That the Pope was above Kings in temporal things, and
that it was lawful for private subjects by the Popes authority to murder
kings that were Heretics, and that the murders of Henry the third and fourth,
by Chastle and Ravillac were lawful and commendable; were prohibited and
condemned to be burnt by Edicts of Parliament.

Ibid p. ^^* ^8^24,
Anno 1611. the Reformed Churches of France, at their general Assembly at
Samure by the Kings permission, made a general Union, which they did swear to
keep inviolably, for the good, quiet, and advancement of the said Churches, the
service of the King, and Queen Regent, and preservation of the Estate; and
appointed six Deputies therein, for the dispatch of all their affairs, Ibid p.
59 (...) 12^.
Anno 1614. the Prince of Conde with diverse other Princes, Dukes, Peers,
Noblemen, and Officers of the Crown retinued from the Court in discontent, and
meeting at Meziers, writ several Letters to the Queen, Parliament, and others,
complaining therein of diverse g^ievanc^s and disorders in the government, which
they desired might be redressed, by summoning a general Assembly of the three
Estates to be free and safe, to be held within three ^oneths at the furt^est,
protesting, that they desired nothing but peace and the good of the Realm,
that they would not attempt any thing to the contrary, unless by the rash
resolution of their enemies, (who covered themselves with the Cloak of State
under the Queen Regents authority) they should be provoked to ^^pell the
injuries done unto the King and State BY A NATVRALL, JUST AND NECESSARY
DEFENSE. After which with much ado Articles of Peace were concluded on at
Saint Manchold, between the King, Queen Regent, and these N^bles; wherein it
was among other things accorded, That the general Estates of the Realm should
be assembled at Sens by the four and 20. day of August, in which the D^puties
of the three Estates, may with all liberty propound whatsoever they shall
think in their consciences to be for the good of the Realm and ease of the
subject; tha^ thereby the King with the advice of the Princes and Estates might
make some good Laws and Ordinances to contain every man in his duty, to
fortify the Laws and Edicts made for the preservation of the public
tranquillity, and to reform the disorders which may give just occasion of
complaint and discontent to his good subjects: That the Kings Marriage with
Spain, formerly concluded on, should be respited and not proceeded in during
his minority: that all Garrisons put into any places of the Realm by reason of
the present motions, should be discharged that Letters Patents be directed to
all Courts of Parliament to be verefied, by which his Majesty shall declare,
that the said Princes, Nobles, and others of ^ hat quality and condition
soever, which have followed and assisted them in these alterations, had no bad
intentions against his service, with all clauses necessary for their safeties
and discharges, that they may not be called in question hereafter, and that
they shall be restored to their Offices, Estates and Dignities, to enjoy them
as they had formerly done. And in like manner his Majesty shall write to all
Princes, Estates, and Commonwealths allied to the Crown, and men of quality
shall be sent expressly to them, to let them understand what he had found
concerning the innocence and good intention of the said Princes, Officers, and
Nobles. After which the three Estates were published, Deputies elected; and the
King (by his Council and Parliament of Paris) was declared of full age,
according to a fundamental Law made by Charles the fifth, ratified by the Court
of Parliamnt; That the Kings of France, having attained the full age of
thirteen years, and entering into the fourteenth, they should take upon them
the Sovereign Government of the Estate: Whereupon the Queen Mother in the
Parliament resignes the Regency and reigns of the Empire into his hands. After
which the three Estates assembling abolished the sale of all offices of
judicature, and others which tend to the oppression and ruin of the People,
suppress Duels; the Commons and Deputies of the three Estates present a
Petition of all their grievances to the King, consisting of several natures,
and pray redress: And for the securing of the Kings Crown and person against
the Popes usurpations and attempts, they desired, that it should be declared by
the said Estates, and set down as a fundamental Law, That the King did not
hold his Realm of any but God and his sword, and that he is not subject to any
superior power upon earth for his temporal estates, and that no Book should
be printed containing any Doctrine against the person of Kings touching the
question too much debated by presumptuous men, whether it be lawful to kill
Kings? The Clergy of France except against this Article, as a point of doctrine
and conscience (not of State policy, as the Commons pretended, fit only for
the Clergies determination, not the Commons or three Estates, as a means to
engender a schism and offend the Pope, and after much debate prevail and
suppress it: In fine, after many debates the three Estates brake up without
any great ^edresse of their grievances, or full answer to their Petitions,
which was defaced: hereupon the Parliament at Paris the seven and twentieth day
of March, 1615. decreed, under the Kings good pleasure, That the Princes,
Dukes, Peers, and Officers of the Crown, having place and deliberate voice
therein, being then in the City, should be invited to come into the Court,
there (with the Chancellor and all the Chambers assembled) to advise upon the
propositions which should be made for the kings service, the ease of his
subjects, and good of his estate, and to draw up a Remonstrance to this effect.
Some Court Parasites presently acquaint the King and Queen Mother with this
Decree; as if it were an apparent enterprise against the Kings Authority, and
did touch the Queens Regency which they would control; and objections are made
against it in Council, whereupon the Parliament are sent for to the Court
several times, and ordered to revoke this Decree; they excuse and justify it,
then draw up a Remonstrance to the king, consisting of many Heads; wherein
among others they ^ffirme, That the Parliament of Paris was borne with the
State of France, and holds place in Council with Princes and Barons, which in
all ages was near to the Kings person. That it had always dealt in public
affairs: that some Kings which had not liked of the Remonstrances of the
Parliament at Paris, did afterward witness their grief. That Popes,
Emperors, Kings, and Princes had voluntarily submitted their controversies to
the judgment of the Parliament of Paris, etc. Lib. 2. c 12. p. 179. to 187.
To which I shall add some passages out of Andrew Favine, in his Theater of
Honor, touching the dignity, power, and honor of the Parliaments of France:
In the Register of the Acts of Parliament, beginning, 1368. there is one dated
the twenty seventh of June 1369. for matter of murder and assassinate committed
on the person of Master Emery Doll, Councellor of the said Parliament; whereby
it was approved, That it was a crime of High Treason, to kill a Councellor of
Parliament. And in Anno 1475. on the eleventh day of November, Mounseir the
Chancellor came to advertise the Court for going to hear the confession of the
Constable of Saint Paul, to whom for his rebellions and disobediences king
Jews the eleventh directed his Process. And the said Parliament, declared,
That there was not a Lord in the Kingdom so great, except the King and
Mounsiour le Daulphine, but ought to come and appear at the said Parliament, in
person, when it was ordained for him. And this is witnessed by a Lion abasing
his tail between his Legs, exalted over the gate and entrance of the great
Chamber, by the Parquet des Huisiers thereof. So that by this illustrious and
Sovereign Parliament are ordered and determined the principal affairs of the
kingdom. And in Anno 1482. the second day of April, king Lew^^ the eleventh,
sent unto the Parliament the Oath which he took at his sacring, exhorting the
said Parliament to perform good justice, according as the King had promised to
do by his said Oath, which he purposed to keep; and the Oath is there
Registered down. The Parliaments of France are Oaks with exalted Heads, under
whose Branches the people are covered from the very strongest violencies, which
constrains them to yield obedience to their Prince: But when Princes (by bad
council) misprize the authority of them whereof they ought to be zealous
defenders, as being exalted to the Royal dignity, to rule and govern their
Subjects by justice, they cut off the right hand from the left: If they refuse
the holy Remonstrances of their Parliaments under color that they are not to
meddle with affairs of State, but only with the Act of justice, and lend a
deaf ear when they are advertised of evil Government, it is an assured
Pronostick, Note.
forewarning of the entire decadence of the Kingdom. Strange and foreign
Princes have sought and submitted themselves to the judgment of their
Parliament, ev^n in their affairs of greatest importance. The Chronicle of
Laureshime, under the year 803. (followed by the Monk Aimonius in the fourth
Book of his History of France) reports, that king Jews the Debonnaire,
holding his Parliament in May, there came thither from strange Provinces, two
Brethren, kings of Vvilses, who with frank and free good will submitted
themselves to the judgment of the said Parliament, to which of them the
Kingdom should belong: Now albeit the custom of the said kingdom adjudged the
Crown to the eldest, according to the right of Prerogative allowed and
practiced by the Law of Nature, and of late memory in the person of the last
dead king Liubus father commune to these two contendants; yet notwithstanding
in regard of the subjects universal consent of the Kingdom, who (for the
cowardice and want of government in the Elder) had given the Crown to the
Younger, for valliancie and discreet carriage; by sentence the Kingdom was
adjudged to him: and the Eldest did him homage, with Oath of allegiance, in the
said Parliament. Under the third Ligne, in the reign of Philip Augustus, Pope
Innocent the third, and the Emperor Otho the fourth, being in variance for the
form and terms of the Oath of fidelity with the said Emperor should make to
the Pope; they referred it to the judgment of king Philip in his Parliament,
furnished with Peers. Otho made some exception concerning the form and terms
of the Oath; And not being able to agree of themselves, both parties submitted
to the judgment of king Philip Augustus and of his Court of Parliament,
furnished with Peers: So that by order given at Melum in July, 1204. the form
of the said Oath was prescribed, and registered in the Parliament Register, at
request of the said parties, and sent unto Otho to render it to the said Pope
Innocent, who sent this assurance and Certificate to the said Parliament for
Registring it, being performed.

Innocentius Episcopus, servus servorum Dei, charissimo filio nostro Philippo
Francorum Regi charissimo, salutem, and Apostolicam benedictionem; absque
dubitatione noveritis, quod secundum formam a vobis and Curiae Regni vestri
paribus praescriptam, habetur apud nos jusjur andum charissimi Filii nostri
Othonis Romanorum Regis illustris aurea Bulla munitum, nobis and Ecclesiae
praestitum.

Ego Otho Romanorum Rex, and semper Augustus, tibi Domino meo Innocentio Papae,
and Ecclesiae Romanae spondeo, polli^eor, and juro, quod omnes possessiones,
honores, and jura Romanae Ecclesiae, pro posse meo, bona fide protegam, and
ipsam ad eas retinendas bona fide j^vabo. Quas autem nondum recuperavit adjutor
ero ad recuperandum, and recuperatarum, secundum posse meum, ero ^ine fraud
defensor; and quaecunque and manus meas devenient, sine difficultate restituere
procurabo. Ad hanc autem pertinent tota terra quae est de Radicafano, usque ad
Ceperanum, Exarcatus Ravenna, Pentapolis, Marchiae, Ducatus Spoletanus, terra
Conitiss^e Mathildis, Comitatus Bricenorij cum alijs adjacentibus terris
expressis in multis privilegijs Imperatorum, a tempore LVDOVICI PII FRANCORVM
ET ROMANORVM IMPERATORIS CHRISTIANISSIMI. Has omnes proposs^ m^^ restituam, and
quiet dimittam, cum omne jurisdiction^, district^, and honor suo. Verunt amen
cum adrecipiendam Coronam Imperij, vel pro necessitatibu^ Ecclesia Romana^ ab
Apostolica sede vocatus accessero, demandato summi Pontif^^^^ ab illis terris
praestationes accipiam. Praeterea adjutor ero ad retinendum and defendendum
Ecclesiae Romanae. REGNVM SICILIAE. Tibi etiam Domino meo Innocentio Papae and
Successoribus tuis omnem obedientiam and honorific entiam ^xhibeo, quam devoti
and Catholi^i Imperatores consueverunt Sedi Apostoli^ae exhibere. Stabo etiam
ad consilium and arbitrium tuum de bonis ^onsuetudinibus populo Romano
servandis and exhibendis, and de negotio Tusciae and Lombardiae. Et si propt^r
negotium meum Romanam Ecclesiam oportuerit in^urrere guerram, subveniam ei
sicut necessitas postulaverit in expensis. Omnia vero praedictat^m juramento,
quam scripto firma^o, cum Imperij Coronam adeptus fuero. Actum Aquis-Grani Anno
Incarnationis Dominicae Millessimo Ducentessimo Quinto, mense Marcy, Regni
nostri septimo.

William Rishanger Monk in the Abbey of Saint Albane in England, continue^ of
the History of Matthew Paris, observes under the year 1263. that the king of
England, Henry the third, and the Barons, of England, who made war upon him,
committed their whole difference and quarrel to be judged by the Parliament of
France; Vt pax reformaret^r inter Regem Angliae and Barons, ventum est ad
istud, ut Rex and p^oceres se submitterent ordinationi Parliamenti Regis
Fran^ae (in the time of Saint Lewis) in pr^emissis provisionibus Oxoniae. Nec
non pro depraedationibus and damnis utrobique illatis. Igitur in crastino S.
Vincentij, congregato Ambianis populopene innumerabili, Rex Franciae Ludovicus
coram Episcopis and Comitibus, alijsque Francorum proceribus sol^mniter dixit
sententiam pro Rege Angliae, contra Barons statutis Oxoniae provisionibus,
ordinationibus, ac obligationibus penitus annullatis, Ho^ excepto, quod
antiquae Chartae Joannis Regis Angliae universitati concessae per illam
sententiam in nullo intendebat penitus derogare. In this Parliament at Amiens
were present the King of England, Henry the third, Queen Elenor his wife,
Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, Peter Bishop of Hereford, and John Maunsell;
and on the Barons of Englands side a very great number of choice elected Lords;
who the same year repassed back into England after the Parliament, as the same
Monk speaks. Thus Favine in the behalf of the French Parliaments, concerning
whose power and privileges you may read much more in him and others.

But to return to the former History. Continuation of the Genesis Hist. of
France, p 13. to 150.
The Queen Mother was much discontented with this Remonstrance of the
Parliament, pretending that they had an intent to call her Regency in question,
which all had commended; that they could not speak of the Government of the
affairs of the Realm, without touching her, etc. Whereupon she commanded the
Chancellor to give them this answer in the kings name: That France was a
Monarchy wherein the king alone commanded, holding his Realm Soveraignly from
God; That he had Laws and Ordinances by which to govern them, for the which
he was not to give an account to any man; That it did not belong unto the
Parliament to control his Government; That they neither could nor ought to
complain of the Queens Regencie which had been so happy; That the Queen was not
to give an account of her Regency, but to God only; That no man could
prescribe unto the King what Counselors he should entertain, etc. with many
other such big words. After which there was a De^ree made in the Council of
State against the Decree and Remonstrance in Parliament, disanulling and
revoking them as void, and forbidding the Parliament hereafter to meddle with
affairs of State. The Court of Paliament in general complained much of this
Decree; the kings learned Coun^^ll refuse to carry, or cause it to be read in
Parli^ment, because it would cause an alteration of the good affections and
devotions of the Kings good subjects, and the disunion of the greatest
companies of the Realm, who administer justice, which makes kings to Reign:
After which this controversy was compremised, and the Decree of the Council
against the Parliament suspended, and not enrolled. Soon after the prince of
Conde, with diverse others, seeing all things disordered at Court, and little or
no reformation of their former grievances, desert Paris, expressesse their
grievances in ^undry letters and Articles of complaint, wherein they complain
of the want of freedom and redress of their grievances presented in the last
assembly of the three Estates; of the Decree and proceedings against the
Jurisdiction, Remonstrance and proceedings of the Parliament of Paris; Of
suffering some Councell^rs of State to usurp all the power of the Kingdom, to
pervert the Laws, and change all things as they list; with sundry other
particulars: In these they entreat and exhort all men of what condition or
quality soever, that call themselves Frenchmen, to assist and aid them in SO
JUST A CAUSE; conjuring all Princes and foreign Estates to do the like, and
not to su^^er such good and loyal subjects to be suppressed by such a
conspiracy. Upon this the king and Q. Mother, through advise of these ill
Counselors, raise an Army, declare these Princes and Nobles, Rebels and
Traitors, if they submit not by a day: whereupon they Arm, raise Forces in their
own and the publikes defense, and being at Noyon, concluded, That as their
Arms were levied forth maintenance of the Crown, so they should be maintained
by it; to the which end they seized on the kings Rents and Revenues in sundry
places. Mean while the Protestants being assembled in a general Synod at
Grenoble, Marsh. Desdiguires makes an Oration to them, to dissuade them from
opposing the marriage with Spai^; wherein he has this memorable passage to
justify the lawfulness of a necessary defensive war for the preservation of
Religion and Liberties: We have leisure to see the storm come, and to prepare
for our own preservation: Finally, having continued constant in our Duties, if
they seek to deprive us of our Religien, and to take that from us wherein our
liberty and safety depends, purchased by the blood of our Fathers and our
own, and granted unto us by that great King Henry the fou^th, the restorer of
France; we shall enter into this comerce full of justice and true zeal, find
again in our breasts the courage and virtue of our Ancestors: We shall be
supported IN OUR JUST DEFENSE by all good Frenchmen, assisted by all Princes
and Estates which love the true Religion, or the good of this State; and in a
word, we shall be favored of the blessings of God, whereof we have hitherto
had good experience in our Arms, and which will be to the glory of his Name,
and the spiritual advancement of our Churches. After which the Duke of Rhoan
and Protestants, in defense of their Religion and Liberties, join with the
Princes and Nobles: At last both sides came to Articles of agreement made at
Luudun, Anno 1616. whereof these were a parcel, That the grievances of the
general State should be speedily answered; That Sovereign Courts should be
preserved in their authority, and the Remonstrances of the Parliament and Peers
considered of; That such as had been put from their Offi^es, should be
restored; That all moneys they had taken out of the kings Revenues, should be
discharged; All Edicts of pacification granted to them of the Reformed
Religion, observed; The prince of Conde and all those of either Religion, who
had assisted him in this ^ar, held for the Kings good and loyal subjects; all
illegal Imposts removed; and all prisoners taken on either side, set at
liberty. Anno 1617. the King and Queen Mother seizing upon the Prince of Conde
his person, and sending him to the Bastile, upon false pretenses of disloyalty
and treason, caused new insurrections, wars, and tumults; and the Princes
hereupon meeting at Soyssons, resolved to make open war, to seize on the Kings
Revenues, and to fortify those Towns and Castles which they held in their
Government; which they executed; and withal set forth a Remonstrance of their
grievances unto the king, complaining especially against the Marshall of Ancre
and his Wife, with their adheronts, who were the causes of all their miseries;
who having drawn unto himself the whole administration of the Realm, made
himself master of the Kings Councels, Armies, and Forts; thereby suppressed the
lawful liberty and Remonstrances of the Parliament, caused the chief Officers
to be imprisoned, and was the cause of the violence done to the Prince of
^onde, first Prince of the Blood: To the end therefore that they might not be
reproached to have been so little affected to his Majesty* so ungrateful to
their Country, and so unfaithful to themselves and their posterity, as to
hold their peace, seeing the prodigious favor and power of this stranger; they
beseech his Majesty to provide by convenient means for the disorders of the
Estate, and to cause the Treaty of Loudun to be observed, and to call unto his
Councels the Princes of the Blood, with other Princes, Dukes, Peers, ancient
Officers of the Crown and Counselors of State, whom the deceased King had
employed during his reign. Withal they publish a solemn Declaration and
Protestation, for the restoring of the Kings authority, and preservation of the
Realm. against the conspiracy and tyranny of the Marshall of Ancre, and his
adherents: Who finding no safety in the settling of j^stice, resolved to make
trial of his power, by violating the public faith, thereby to plunge the
Realm into new combustions, conspiring to destroy the princes of the blood, of
Peers, and chief Officers of the Crown, and to oppress them altogether, with
the State, who might be an obstacle to his ambitious designs. To which end he
raised false accusations against them, as if they meant to attempt the Kings
and Queen Mothers persons; and caused the King to go in person to his Court of
Parliament to publish a Declaration, whereby they were declared guilty of
Treason; though at last being better informed, he declared them to be his good
Subjects, and caused De Ancre to be suddenly slain in the Louure, and his Wife
to be legally condemned and executed: Upon which the new Counselors and
Officers advanced by him, were removed, the old restored, the Princes
reconciled to the Kings, and by him declared for his good and loyal subjects:
Upon which followed a general assembly of the Estates, wherein diverse
grievances were propounded, and ^ome redressed; the King therein craving their
advice for the settling and ordering of his Privy Council. Ibid p. 220. to 306.
Anno 1620. there happen differences between the King and Queen Mother, who
fortified Towns, and raised an Army against the king; at last they came to an
agreement, and were reconciled. The two following years were spent in bloody
civil warr^s between the King and those of the Religion, who avowed their
defensive wars lawful; which at last concluded in peace: that lasted not
long, but brake out into new flames of war, by reason of the great Cardinal
Richelieu, who of late years See the Synopsis of his life.
proved the greatest Tyrant and Oppressor that France ever bred, reducing both
Nobles, Gentlemen, and Peasants into absolute slavery and vassallage, to make
the King an absolute Monarch of France, and himself both Pope and Monarch of
the world: But he lately dying by the of Divine Justice of filthy Ulcers and
Diseases, and the King since being (some say) poisoned by the Ie^uite^, who
murdered his two immediate Predecessors: wise men conjecture the French will
now at last revive and regain their ancient j^st hereditary freedom, rights
Liberties, and cast of that insupportable yoke of bondage under which they have
been oppressed for sundry years, and almost brought to utter desolation.

I have the longer insisted on these Histories of the Kings and Kingdom of
France* (which clearly demonstrate the Realm, Parliament and three Estates of
France to be the Sovereign Power in that Kingdom in some sort, paramount their
kings them selves, who are no absolute Monarchs, nor exempted from the Laws,
jurisdiction, restraints, censures of their Kingdom and Estates assembled, as
some falsely aver they are) because our Royalists and Court Doctors p^rallell
England with France, making both of them absolute Monarchies; and our greatest
malignant Counselors chief Design has been to reduce the Government of
England to the late model and new arbitrary proceedings of France; which how
pernicious they have proved to that unfortunate Realm, what infinite
di^tructive civil wars and combustions they have produced, and to what
unhappy tragical deaths they have brought diverse of their Kings, Princes,
Nobles, and thousands of their people, the premises and other Stories, will so
far discover, as to cause all prudent Kings and Statesmen, to ^^eer the Helm
of our own and other Kingdoms by a more safe, steady, and fortunate compass.
Thus I have done with France, and shall recompense any prolixity in it, with
greater brevity in other Kingdoms, when I have overpassed Spain.

From France I shall next ^^eer my course t^ the Kingdoms and Kings of Spain,
whom Iacobus Valdesius Chancellor to the King of Spain in a large Book de
Dignitate Regum Regnorumque Hispaniae printed at Granado, 1602. professedly
undertakes to prove, to be of greater dig^ity, and to have the Precedence of
the Kings and Kingdoms of France, which Catalogus Gloriae mundi, pars. 5.
Consid. 29, 30. Andrew Favne Thea^e of Honor, l 2. c. 12. See Camillus
Barellus de Regis Catholici Praestantia, etc. Ge^erall Hist. of France, p 90^.
Cassa^aeus and all French Advocates peremptorily deny. The first Kings of
Spain* overrun by the Goths and Wisigoths, are those their Writers call the
Gothish Kings, who as Micha^l Ritius de Regibus Hispaniae, L. 1, and 2.
Iohannis Mar^^na de rebus Hispaniae, L. 2, 3. the General History of Spain,
and oaths affirm, were elected by, and had their authority from the people:
You may read their liv^^ and successions at large in these Authors, and find
See Ioannis Mariana de Rege and Regis, Iustit. l. ^. c. 3. p. 33. Hieron.
Blanca Rerum Arag. Comment* See council. Toletanum. 8. Surius, Con. T. 2. p. 864
^65.
some of them dis-inherited and deposed by their subjects, others of them in
ward during their minorities to such as the State appointed; others murdered,
but all of them subject to the Laws of their Realms, as it is evident by the
express ancient Law of the Wisigoths, having this Title; Ioannis Pistorius
Hispaniae illustratae Tom. 3. Leges Wisigothorum, L. ^. c. 2 p. 859:
Quod tam Regia potestas quam populorum universitas Legum reverentiae sit
subjecta; by other laws thereto annexed, by Iohannis Mariana De Rege and Regis
institutione, L. 1, c. 9. Iac^bus Valdesius de dignitate Regum, Regnorum^,
Hispani^, pars. 1. c. 11. p. 135. Michael Ritius de Regibus Hisp. l. 2. Genesis
Hist. of Spain, l 6. ^. 168, 169.
Those whom they properly call Kings of Spain, had their royal authority
derived to them, conferred on them by the people; upon this occasion. Spain,
being a Province subject to the Roman Empire, was spoiled, over-runne and
possessed by the barbarous Moors for many years; in which time the Spaniards
often solicited the Roman Emperors for aid to expel the Moors, but could gain
none. Whereupon to free themselves and their Country from slavery, they chose
one Pelagius for their Captain, by whose valor they conquered the Moors, and
thereupon by unanimous consent Elected and Crowned Pelagius King of Oviedo,
whom the Spanish Writers mention as the first King of Spain: And this their
deser^ion by the Emperors, the Spanish Writers generally hold (and (g) Iacobus
Valdesius proves it largely) to be a sufficient lawful ground for the
Spaniards, even by the general^ law of Nations, to cast off their subjection to
the Roman Empire, and to elect a King, erect a Kingdom of their own, exempt
from all subjection to the Emperor, since they purchased their own liberty and
Country, from the Goths by conquest, of themselves alone without any aid or
assistance from the Roman Emperors, to whom ( for this reason) they hold
themselves and their Kingdom no ways subject; yet for all this they deem their
Kings inferior to their whole Kingdoms, and censurable, yea deposable by them,
as is clear by the Part. 1. ^ 6. and Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 879. 810.
forecited passage of the Bishop of Burgen, ( Ambassador to the King of Spain,
in the Council of Basil, and by Iohannis Mariana the Jesuits Book, de Rege
and Regis Institutione, dedicated to Philip the third, King of Spain, printed
at Madrit in Spain, by this Kings own special privilege, Dated at Madrit,
January 25. 1599. and after this reprinted at Mentz in Germany, Anno 1605. Cum
privilegio sacrae Caesariae Majestatis, ( to wit, of the Emperor Radulph the
second) and permiss^ Superiorum; who certainly would not thus specially
approve, authorize this Book for the Press, had it maintained any Positions
contrary to the Laws, or derogatory to the Prerogative Royal of the Crowns
and Kingdoms of Spain, though other States cannot so well digest it. In this
very Book the Author (who has likewise written a large History of the
affairs and Kings of Spain) professedly maintains (in a special Lib. 1. De
^egum, (...). ^^p. 8. p. 68, etc.
Chapter, wherein he debates this Question, Whether the power of the Republike,
or King be greater?) That the whole Kingdom, State and People in every lawful
Kingdom, and in Spain it self, are of greater power and authority then the
King: His reasons (which I have for brevity digested into number in his own
words) are these: First, because all Royal Power that is lawful, has its
original from the People, by whose grant the first Kings in every Republike
were placed in their Royal Authority; which they circumscribed with certain
laws and sanctions, lest it should too much exalt it self to the destruction
of the Subjects, and degenerate into a Tyranny. This appears in the
Lace^aemonian^ long since, who committed only the care of War and
procuration of holy things to the King, as Aristotle Writes. Also by a later
example of the Aragonians in Spain, who being incited with an earnest endeavor
of defending their libert^e, and not ignorant how the Rights of Liberty are
much diminished from smail beginnings, created a middle Magistrate, like the
Tribunal power (commonly called at this time Aragoniae Iustitia, the Justice
of Aragon) who armed with the laws, authority and endeavors of the people,
has hitherto held the Royal Power included within certain bounds; and it was
specially given to the Nobles, that there might be no collusion, if at any time
having communicated their counsel among themselves, they should keep
assemblies without the Kings privity, to defend their Laws and Liberties. In
these Nations, and those who are like them, no man will doubt, but that the
authority of the Republike is greater then the Kings. Secondly, because in
other Provinces where the people have lesser and the Kings more power, and all
grant the King to be the Rector and supreme Head of the Commonwealth, and to
have supreme authority in managing things in times of war or peace; yet
there the whole Commonwealth and those who represent it, being chosen out of
all Estates, and meeting together in one place, ( or Parliament) are of greater
power to command and deny, than the King, which is proved by experience in
Spain, where the King can impose no Taxes, nor enact no Laws if the people
dissent or approve them not: Yea, let the King use art, propound rewards to the
Citizens, sometimes speak by threats to draw others to consent to him, solicit
with words, hopes, and promises, (which whether it may be well done we dispute
not:) yet if they shall resist, their judgment shall be preferred and ratified
before the Kings will. Thirdly, because when the King dies without Issue or
Heir, the Kingdom and people, not the Prince deceased, o^ght to choose the
succeding King out of another ^am^ly. Fourthly, because if the King vex the
Republike with his evil manners, and degenerate into an open tyran^^^, the
same Commonwealth may restrain him, yea, deprive him of the Principality, and
of hi^ life to, if need be; which it could not do unless ^t were of greater
Power then the King. Fifthly, because it is not likely that the whole Kingdom
and Common^weal would ever strip themselves of all Power and Authority, and
transfer it to another, without exception, without counsel and reason, when
they had no necessity to do it, that so the Prince subject to corruption and
wickedness, might have greater Power then they all, and the Issu^ be more
excellent then the Father, the River than the Spring ( the Creature than the
Creator of it:) And although perchance it be in the pleasure of the Commonweal
to take away the pleanary Power from it self and give it to the Prince, yet the
Commonwealth should do unwisely to give it, and the Prince ras^^ly to receive
it; by which the subjects, of Free men should b^come Slaves, and the
Principality given for their saf^tie, should degenerate into a Tyranny, which
then only is Regal, if it contain it self within the bounds of modesty and
mediocritie; which Power whiles some unvisely labor daily to augment^ they
diminish and utterly corrupt it, that Power being only safe which puts a
measure to its strength* for a Prince ought to rule over those who are willing,
to gain the love of his subjects, and seek their welfare; which Power if it
grows grievous, takes the King off his peoples love, and turns his power in^o
weakness: Which he proves by the forecited Saying of Theopompus: For Princes
who impose a Bridle on this greatness, more easily govern themselves, it, and
their subjects; whereas those who forget humanity and modes^ie, the higher they
climb, the grea^^r is their fall: This danger our Ancestors, wise men,
considering how they might keep their Kings within the limits of mediocrity and
modesty, so as not to lift up themselves with overmuch power, to the Public
prejudice, have enacted many things wisely and excellently; among others this,
That nothing of great moment should be decreed without the consent of the Peers
and people; and to that end they had a custom to assemble Parliaments chosen
out of all orders of men, as Prelates, Lords, and Burgesses of ^ities; which
custom at this time is still retained in Aragon and other Provinces; and I wish
our Princes would restore it: Not^.
For why is it discontinued for the most part in our Nation, but that the
common consent being taken away, and Parliaments excluded, wherein the public
safety is contained, both public and private affairs may be turned into the
Princes pleasure, and the lusts of a few corrupt, vicious, and voluptuous
Courtiers and Parasites may domineer and order all things. Sixthly, becauss many
great and learned men hold, that the Pope of Rome, who is of greater Power then
any King, is yet subject to the whole Church and a General Council; therefore
the King must much more be inferior to his Kingdom. Seventhly, because the
whole Commonwealth has greater strength and forces than the Prince, be he
never so great in Power; and therefore if they disagree their Power will be
greater: Yea, Aristotle wisely would have the Commonweal, not only to be of
greater authority, but likewise to have stronger Forces then the King; which he
proves by Aristotle's forecited words, by the practice of the Ancients, and
those of Syracuse, who did moderate their Tyrants and Kings Guard so, that they
might be able to overpower and master them upon any occasion. How great the
authority of our Republike and Nobility was in the times of our Ancestors, I
will give you but one example, and so conclude: Alfonso the eight King of
Casteil besieged Concha, a City seated in Roc^ie places, and the most firm
Bulwark of the Moors territories on that part: wanti^g money to pay his
soldiers, and thereupon provisions failing, the King hastens to Burgon; and in
a national assembly, he demands, that because the people were wearied with
Tax: for supporting the War, the gentlemen would give five Muruedines a Poll
to his treasury; that this opportunity of blotting out the name of the Mores
was not to be omitted. Dieglius then Governor of Ca^tabria, assented to this
Counsel, Peter Earl of Cara withstood this motion, and gatheri^g a band of
Nobles* departed from the assembly, readily to defend with Arms the Liberty
gotten by their Ancestors with Arms and valor; affirming, that he would
neither suffer a beginning to be made of oppressing and vexing the Nobility
with new Subsidies, from this entrance or occasion; That to suppress the Mores
was not of so great moment, that they should suffer the Commonwealth to be
involved in a greater servitude. The King moved with the danger, desisted from
that purpose. The Nobles taking advice, decreed to entertain Peter with a
banquet every year, as a reward to him and his Posterity of this good service,
amonument so posterity of a thing well done, and a document that they should
not suffer the right of liberty to be diminished upon any occasion. Let it be
a fixed resolution therefore to provide for the safety of the Commonwealth, for
the Authority of the Prince, yet so as to retain their royal principality in
order with certain bounds and limits, and that those vain talking parasites and
decevers may not ruin both, who exalt the Princes Power without measure, of
which we may see a great number in Princes Courts, excelling in wealth, favor
and power, which plague shall always be accused and complained of, but shall
ever be and continue. Thus Mariana, who in his next Chapter (worthy reading)
proves at large by invincible arguments, De Rege and Regum Instit. ^ 1. c. 9.
That all Kings and Princes (among others the Kings of Spain) are, and ought to
be bound by Laws, and are not exempted from them; that this doctrine ought to
be inculcated into thy minds of Princes from their infancy, and to be
believed, yea often considered of them; thnt they are more strictly obliged to
observe their Laws then subjects, because they are sworn to do it; they are the
Conservators of the Laws, the Avengers of those that infringe them, and their
examples are the best means to draw subjects to obey them. Where he again
affirms, That the whole Kingdom is above the King, and may not only bind him
by Laws, but question him for the breach of them. Before both these, in his
first Book De Rege and Reguminstitutione, Chap. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. he affirms the
like; adding moreover, That in many other Realms more, where the Crown is
hereditary, the whole Commonwealth, not the King has and ought to have the
chief power to design by a Law (which the King himself may not alter, but by
their consents) who shall be the next Heir, to avoid questions and commotions
about the Title to the Crown: That where the Right of the Crown is in
controversy the whole Kingdom and State ought to decide the right, and settle
it where they see best cause: That if the right Heir in Hereditary Kingdoms,
yea in Spain, be an Idiot, Infant, Woman, or a person unmeet or not so fit to
Govern* as others of the blood, he may be lawfully put from the Crown, and
another of their Race lawfully substituted King in his place by the whole
State, especially when the good or safety of the Commonwealth requires it;
because the safety of the people is the supremest Law, and what they by common
consent have Enacted only for the public safety, they may without any
obstacle alter, when things require it, by like common consent; especially,
because the hereditary Rights of reig^ing are for the most part made, rather by
the dissimulation of the People, not daring to resist the will of former
Princes, then by their certain will, and the free consent of all the Estates:
That he which is thus settled by consent of all the Estates has a just Title
against the next Heir of the Blood and his Issue, who are put by the Crown;
else diverse Kings and Princes now reigning in Spain and elsewhere, should be
usurpers and want good Titles to their crowns, they or their Ancestors being
not the next right heirs of the Royal Stock ( for all which particulars he
gives sundry instances in the Kingdoms of Spain) as in Berengaria, Blanch,
the Mother of Jews of France, Ferdinand, Sancho the younger son of Alfonso,
Henry the Bastard, John King of Portugal, Fardinand, and John the 2. of
Aragon, etc. corluding, That if the King degenerate into a Tirant, by
subverting Religion, Laws, Liberties, oppressing, murdering, or deflowring
his subjects; the whole Kingdom may not only question, admonish, and
reprehend him, but in case he prove incorrigible after admonition, deprive him,
and substitute another in his place; which (says he) has been done more then
once in Spain: Thus King Peter was publicly rejected for his cruelty to his
subjects, and Henry his Brother (though of an unclean Mother) obtained the
Crown: so Henry his Nephews Nephew for his slothfulness and evil manners
was deposed by the Nobles suffrages, and Alphanso his Brother, though but a
young child proclaimed King. After his death Elizabeth, (Henry his sister) had
the chief government of the Realm^ leaving Henry. And for a conclusion he
adds, That such a Tyrannical King continuing incorrigible after public
admonitions of the whole State, if there be no hopes of amendnent, may not
only be deposed, but put to death and murdered by the whole State, or any
particular persons by their appointment; yea without it, ( a note somewhat
above Ela) if he be declared a public enemy by the whole state; and in case
the whole states cannot publicly assemble by reason of such a Princes known
notorious tyranny, he writes, That then in such a case it is lawful for any
private man to murder him, to free the Country and Kingdom from destruction.
Adding, that it is a wholesome meditation for Princes to be persuaded, that if
they oppress the Commonwealth, if they become intolerable through vices and
filthiness, that they live in such a condition, that they may not only be
slain of right, but with laud and glory. Peradventure this fear will retard
some Princes that they give not themselves wholly to be corrupted with vices
flatterers, and cast bridles upon their fury. The gener^ll Hist. of Fran^e, p.
833, 834, 117^* 1179.
That which is the chief, let the Prince be persuaded, that the authority of
the whole Commonwealth is greater then his, being but one, neither let him
believe the worst of men, affirming the contrary for to gratify him, which is
very pernicious. All these positions of Mariana ( however other Kings and
Kingdoms may relish them, especially the last touching private Subjects, which
few can approve, the Parliaments of France doing public execution on this
Book, as they had just cause, for extolling and justifying the barbaro^s
murder of their King Henry the 3. by James Clement a Dominican Friar, l. 1. c.
6. p. 51. to 57. and justifying the Guises Rebellion) are yet authorized as
Catholic and Orthodox by the most Catholic King of Spain, and the Emperor
of Germany, in whose Kingdoms they pass for current coin, the most dangerous
of them being seconded, not only by Hieronymus Blanca in his Aragonensium
Rerum Commentariis, Iohannis Pistorius Hispaniae Illustratae, etc. and other
Spanish Historians collected by him, but likewise by See Doctor John White ^is
Defense of the way, c. 6. where their words are quoted for tyranny and
mis-government. The Genesis Hist. of France, p. 847 914, 915. 1179, 1180, 1181,
1182 1183, 1190.
Alvarius Pelagius, Cardinal Tolet, Capistranus, Dominicus Bannes, Franciscus
Victoria, Simancha Patensis, Gregory de Valentia, Suarez, the Doctors of
Salamancha, Becanus, Bellarmine, with other Spanish Jesuits and Writers, who
most here^ically affirm, That even the Pope alone either with or without a
Counc^ll, for heresy ( as they deem it) and obstinacy against the Sea of Rome,
may excommunicate, censure, despose, kill, or murder any Christian Princes,
depose them from their thrones, dispose of their Crowns to others at their
pleasures, absolve their subjects wholly from their allegiance, and give
subjects power to rise up in arms against and murder them by open force or
secret treachery; Of Christian Sub^ection, etc. par. 3. p. 5^9, 520, 521.
which Bishop Bilson truly affirms to be far more dangerous and derogatory
to Princes, then to attribute such a power, not to any particular persons but
to their own whole Kingdoms and Parliaments only: who being many in number,
of the same Nation and Religion with, and having many dependances on, and many
engagements by oath, duty, favors, benefits to their Princes, less malice
against them, judging only according to the fundamental Laws of the Realm,
and former presidents of their An^cestors, and aiming at nothing but their
Kingdoms sa^ety, are like to be more just indifferent Judges of their Princes
actions when questioned, then the Pope, a mere enemy and forraigner; who
proceeds by no other authority, but what he has unjustly usurped from Kings,
and by no other rules but his own will, pride, malice, honor, or profit. I
have thus given you an account of the Kings of Spaines subordination to their
whole kingdoms and Laws in point of Thesis and positive Doctrine approved by
themselves, professed by their eminentest Wri^ers, I shall now procced to
Historical examples to confirm it in point of practice.

Munst. Cos. l. c. 20. p. 75. Roderici Archi^p. To^etani De Rebus hisp. l. 4.
2. l. 5. c. ^. ^. Genesis (...). of Spa. ^6
Ordogno the 14. king of Castile, summoned 4. Earls of Castile to appear
before him, who refused to go to the wars against the Saracens, promising
them safe conduct, notwithstanding he commanded them to be apprehended,
imprisoned and sl^in; for which bloody Treachery those of Castile rebelled
against him, rejecting his government, and providing for the ^afety of them and
theirs, Duos Milites, non de potentioribus, sed. de prudentioribus eligerunt,
quos and Indices statuerunt, etc. They elected two prudent Knights of their
own to be their Magistrates and Judges, to govern them, to manage their
wars, and administer justice to them: the one was named Fl^vius Calvus, the
other Nunius, surnamed de Rasura, whose Son G^ndesalvus after his Fathers
death, was substituted in his place, made General of the Militia; (
Principatum Militiae addiderunt) and his son after him, tam a Magnatibus and
Militibus, quam AB VNIVERSIS POPVLIS CAST LANIS, made Earl of Castile, and
all submitted themselves to his government, rejecting the Dominion both of
Ordogno and his brother King Froila after him, for their tyranny and treachery.
Rodericus Toletanus de Rebus Hisp. l. 4. c. 19.
Alphonso the great King of Gallecia about the year of Christ 918. imprisoning
his eldest son Garsias, laying him in irons and exercising other cruel^ies,
was by the practice of his own Queen Semena and his other sons and Nobles,
so prosecuted and put to such streights; that they enforced him to resig^ his
Crown to his son Garcias, and to deprive him self of his g^uernment in the
presence of his sons and the grandees of his Realm; after which he requested
his son to r^ise and grant him an Army to go against the S^razens, who
condescending thereto, he gained a glorious Victory ou^r them, and so dyed
R^der. Tol. l. ^. c. 4, 5. Mu^st. cos. l. 2. 6. 20. Genesis hist. of Spain. l. 7.
Alphonso son of Ord^gno, King of Castile, after 5. years reign, out of
levity rather then Religion, resigned his Crown to Ramire his younger Brother,
and then turned Monk about the year 939 but not long after, casting, off his
Coul and leaving his Monastery, he ^egan to ^aise forces, and to aspire to the
Crown again which he had resigned; whe^upon Ramir raised an Army against him,
and after 2. years wars took him prisoner, put cut his eyes, and thrust him
into a Monastery. (...) Cosmogr. l. 2. c. 20. p. 78. Genesis Hi^t of ^pain.
John the first, the 35 King of Castile after the death of Ferdinand King of
Portugal claimed that kingdom i^ right of Eleanor his wife and next Heir,
but the Portugals elected John, a bastard, a Knight of the blood Royal for
their King, and excluded Eleanor. Henry the 4. the 38. King of Castile, having
no children lawfully begotten, would have made Elizabeth his bastard daughter
heir to the Crown; but the Nobles would no ways permit it; and resisting him
with all their might, preferred his own sister Elizabeth to the Crown, and
married her to Ferdinand the 6* son to John King of Arragon, rejecting his
spurious daughter. And F^ier John de T^ixerai^ his Book of The Original of the
Kings of Portugal, affirms, that the Kings of Portugal, were usually ELECTED
BY THE SVFFRAGES AND FREE CHOICE OF THE PEOPLE, who had power to confer the
Kingdom on whom they pleased: averring, that Alfonso 1. 3. and 5. John the 1.
Emanuel and Antonio, Kings of Portugal, were thus elected, Which though
Censure in F. Ioseph^ Teixerae libellu^ c. 75. to 83. De vera. Regum
Portugalium Geneologia, lib. in the 2. Tom. of Icannis Pistorius Hispaniae
illustrat^e.
Duardus Nonius Leo, a Portugois Lawyer denies, and seems to resute; yet he
grants freely, that the Parliament or Assembly of the Estates in Portugal have
usually determined the Title, Right, and ordered the Succession of that Crown
in the Cases of these Princes, and determined of their Legitimate or spurious
birthes: That when the Kings of Portugal have dyed without Heirs, they have
BY THE LAW OF ALL NATIONS freely elected whom they thought meetest for their
King: And that after the death of King Ferd^nand, they put by John and
Ferdinand the ^onnes of King Peter, begotten of Agnes de Castro his Concubine,
from the Crown, because they were bastards; and moreover enemies to the name
and Realm of the Portugois, entering with Henry and Peter Kings of Castile, in
an hostile manner with an Army into the Confines of Portugal wasting them
every where, and doing great damages to, and committing many murders among
their Citizens; for which reason, the States assembled at Cotmbri, resolved,
that although they were legitimate, yet THEY COULD NOT OBTAIN THE SUCCESSION OF
THAT KINGDOM, quod se hosts and alienos a Portugalia declarassent, because
^HEY HAD THVS DECLARED THEMSELVES ENEMIES AND AL^ENS TO PORTVGALL. And
therefore believing the Kingdom to be void for want of a right heir to
succeed, in which case, BY THE LAW OF ALL NATIONS THEY MIGHT LAWFVLLY ELECT
THEM WHAT KING THEY PLEASED, they chose John the Bastard, King, After which he
shows, that Philip the 2. his Tide to the Crown, was long debated by, and
resolved in the Assembly of the States of Portugal in the life of king Henry,
who summoned all the Pretenders to the Crown to come and declare their Titles
to it in a Parliament held at Alm^erin, upon the Petition of the Senate and
People, who earnestly pressed him, that the Title of the crown might be settled
and discided during his life, to prevent division and c^vill wars after his
death: By which it is apparent, that the Assembly of the Estates of Portugal,
is the most Sovereign power and above their kings themselves.

It is clear, that the Gothish kings which reigned in Spain were not
hereditary, but elective, yea, censu^able, excommunicable, and desposable by
them for their Male-administrations. Lib 5. p. 146. I^annis Mariana, De Rebus
H^sp. l. 6. c. 4. 6. See Procopius, Vand 1. (...) l. 2. c. 20. l. ^. c. 35.
The General History of Spain is express, that among the Goths they did not
reign by right and succession from Father to Son, but those were chosen
Kings among them, which were held worthy; which election was made by the
Nobility and People, and if any one did affect that dignity by any other
unlawful means. he was excommunicated and rejected from the company of
christians; as appear^s by the 5. Council of Toledo. Thus Vallia the 1. king
of the Goths, An. 418. Agila the 11. king An. 546. Luiba the 13. king An. 5^5.
Gundamir the 18. king An. 610. Suintilla the 20. king An 621. Genesis hist. of
Spain, l. 5. p. 122. 140, 145, 146, 147, 149 Ro^san hist. Hisp^ pars 2. in
their lives, Joan Mariana de Rebus Hisp. l. 5. and 6.
Tul^^ the 23. King An. 642. Bamba the 26. king of Goths, an. 672. to omit
others, were elected by the Nobles and people, though now and then the Crown
went by succession through usurpation rather then right,

Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 5. p. 139 140. 145. Rod. sanct. hist. Hisp. part 2. c.
15. 22.
Theodiscle the tenth king of the Goths in Spain, giving himself to lusts and
adulteries, polluted great and honest families, corrupted Nobles wives, and
committed many murders; whereupon the chief of the Goths conspiring against
him, strangled him at Sevill rioting in his banquets, and elected Agila for
their king: So Victrix the 17. king of the Goths, a vicious base unworthy
Prince, was miserably slain by his own people for his vitiousnesse, as he sat
at Table. Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 5. p. 146.
Suin^illa the 20. king of the Goths, in the beginning was a good Prince, but
in the end he grew exceeding covetous and cruel; wherefore the Goths made him
resign his Kingdom about the year 630. and deprived him of the crown, he was
likewise excommunicated by the Bishops (whose power at that time began to
equal that of Kings) at the 4. Council of Toledo; which interdicted him, with
Geilands brother, their wives and children, the communion and fellowship of the
Church, and the possession of their goods gotten by violence and tyrannical
means; and Sisenand his adversary, with the consent of the people, obtained
the Kingdom. The 6. Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 5. p. 147 Council. Toletanum ^. c.
3. Surius Council. T^m. 2. p. 742.
Council of Toledo under Cinthilla the 22. king of Goths, about the year 686.
decreed, and by a perpetual law imposed on the Kings of Spain, not to suffer
any one to live within their Dominions, which was not a Catholic; the which
their kings should solemnly swear before they were crowned; and if any king
should go against that Law which he had thus s^orn, he should be excommunicate
and accursed in sight of the eternal God, and made the fuel of eternal fire:
which Canon was made, not only by the assent of this king and his Bishops but
likewise with the consent and deliberation of his Nobles and great men. In the
Surius Council. Tom. 2. p. 739. 740. Mariana de Reb. ^isp. l. ^. 6. 6.
5. Council of Toledo under this king it was decreed, C^n. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
That the kings children and faithful servants after their death^, should not
be deprived of the lands, honors, and just rewards by the succeeding kings,
which had been conferred on them in their lives; That no man should aspire to
the crown lice^^iously, under pain of excommunication and a divine Anathema,
whom neither THE ELECTION OF ALL, nor the Nobility of the Gothisn Nation had
no^ advanced to this top of honor. That none should, during the kings life,
endeavor or use means to succeed him after his death; nor yet revile the
Prince, under pain of excomunication. All which particulars were ra^ified by
new Surius Council. tom. 2. p. 744. ^45. Mariana de Rebus Hisp. l, 6. c. 9.
Canons in the 6. Council of Toledo under this king, Can. 14, 15, 15, 17, 18.
with this addition; That the king being dead, none should usu^p the kingdom by
tyrannical presumption; that none who had been shaven a Monk, or dishonestly
bald, or descended from a servile stock, or a m^n of a foreign Na^ion,
unless worthy both in respect of his Pedigree and manners, should be promoted
to the Throne of the Kingdom; nor no man attempt the Princes destruction,
life, or usurp his Crown tyrannically, under pain of being smitten with a
perpetual Anathema, and eternal condemnation, for breach of any the premises
These Councels, as Mariana observes, were in truth General Assemblies of the
Estates, where they handled not only matters of Religion, but likewise of the
Commonweal by common consent of all. Bamba the 26. king of the Goths (after
Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 5. p. 149. 150. Rod^^. san. hist Hisp. par. ^. 1. 32.
Surius Council. c^m. 3. p. 3. Mariana de Rebus hisp. l. 6. c. 12, 14, 17.
Jews de May^rn Turquets computation which I follow but 32. after Roderick
Sancho) was elected king by the Goths, as he was plowing with his Oxen in the
field, being a plain country man. Some say, that he would never have received
this honor and charge, but by constraint, and that refusing it absolut^ly, a
Noble man of the Goths drew his sword, and threatened to kill him if he did not
yield to the Goths intreat^es, and that his Goad wherewith he drove his Oxen
did suddenly in his hand bring forth leaves. fruit, and roots; whereupon he
took this dignity upon him, more for fear than for any desire to reign. Anno
672. After which Eruinge ambitious of command, poisoned king Bamba, so as he
became mad; for curing whereof many natural and superstitious medicines were
applied, but to small effect; so as Bamba coming a little to himself again, and
finding his disabilitie to govern, willingly quit the Crown, and retired
himself into a Monastery at Pampliga, where he lived seven years and one
month, and Surius Council. 3. p. 3, 4. Mariana de Reb. Hisp* l. 6. c. 17.
Eruinge was chosen king in his pl^ce, whose Election was confirmed and allowed
lawful in the 12 Council of Toledo, Can. 1. as Elected thereto by God, and
ALL THE PEOPLES DESIRES; whom this Council absolved from their Oath of
allegiance formerly made to King Bamba, whiles he held the Kingdom. In the
General Hist. of Spain, l. 5. p. 151.
thirteenth Council of Toledo under this King Eruinge. Anno 684. it was
decreed, That neither the King nor any other should marry the Widow of the
deceased King, upon pain of excommunication, and to be damned to Hell fire.

Vitiza Gen Hist. of Spain. l. 5. p. 1^2, 153. Rod Sanct. Hi^^. Hisp. pars. 2.
c. 35 Mariana de Rebus Hisp. l. 6. c. 19.
the nine and twentieth King of the Goths, at his first coming to the Crown,
showed himself mild, liberal and religious, but soon after became the infa^my
and dishonor of Kings, being full of all excess of Just, impiety, hypoerisie
and dissimulation, and exceeding in all vices without shame; he filled his
Palace with many Wives, which he married, and Concubines too; he publicly
allowed to all men, Nobles, Commons, Priests and Clergy, to marry as many
wives, and keep as many W^ores as they pleased; he used great cruelty to many:
flattered the Clergy, left by their censures they should draw the people from
obeying so filthy and unchaste a king. To prevent all rebellions (under the
color of peace which Spain did then enjoy) he caused all the Towns of Spain to
be dismantled, except Leon, Toledo, and Asturica; he disarmed the people,
disanulled all the immunities of the Church; he recalled the banished the Jews,
and granted them great privileges; he advanced a most ^icked wretch to great
honors, execrable to all the people, that so he might not say, himself was the
worst of men: Finally, as a presage of his future miseries, he showed (in all
sorts of excess and violence, contrary to the Laws of God and men) what
Princes ill instructed and ignorant of true piety could do: A Buffone asking
him me^rily, Why do you being a King and the son of a King, do thus, you may
lose your Kingdom? Hereplyed like another Dionysius, My Father left me his
kingdoms, not fortune. In fine, Genesis ^ist. of Spain, l. 5. p. 153, 154, 155
Rod. S^^ctius, Hist. Hisp. part. 2. ^. 37. Mariana de Rebu^, Hisp. l. 6. c. ^1,
22, 23. (...),
Rodorick with the aid of the Goths Nobility and of the Romans, chased this
in famous Monster out of the Throne, which he unworthily held, defeated, and
took him prisoner in a set battle, put out his eyes as he had put out others,
confined him to Cordova, where he spent his days in misery, without Title or
honor, and by suffrages of the people Genesis ^ist. of Spain, l. 5. p. 153, 154,
155 Rod. (...), Hist. Hisp. part. 2. c. 37. Mariana de Rebus, Hisp. l. 6. ^.
21, 22, 23. Ill^stratae,
Rodorick obtained the Crown; who soon after exceeded Vitiza in all manner of
vices, cruelty, and tyranny, and ravished the daughter of Julian Earl of Cava,
whiles he was in embassage in Afric for the affairs of the kingdom; Who to
revenge this indignity, and cast out this wicked Monster, Anno 713. called the
Mores into Spain, who overran and conquered the Kingdom, destroyed Rodorick
and put a Period to the Goths kingdom in Spain. Thus Tyrannical vicious
Princes ruin at last both themselves and their Realms.

Among the In (...) Hist. Tom. 3. p. (...) 860.
Laws of the Wisigothes, Lib. 2. c. 2. 6. I find not only an Act declaring
their Kings to be subject to their Laws as well as subjects, but likewise a
Law restraining their Kings excesses, and dis-inabling them to alien their
Crown lands or revenues to their own Children or others, but only the Lands
which themselves shall purchase; which was likewise decreed in the eighth
Surius Council. Tom. 2. p. 864, 865.
Council of Tolede, under king Recesuinthus, wherein there was this complaint
made. Quosdam conspeximus Reges, postquam fuerint regni gloriam assequuti,
extenuatis viribus populorum, rei propriae congerere lucrum; and obliti, quod
reges sunt vocati, defensionem in vastationem convertunt, qui vastationem
defensione pellere debuerunt; illud gravius innectentes, qu^d ea quae videntur
acquirere, non regni depistant honori, vel gloriae, sed it a malunt in suo jure
consundi, ut veluti ex debito descernant haec in liberourm posteritatem
transmitti: Resolving, that non personae sed potentiae haec subdi debere, non
habenda parentali successione, sed possidendaregali congressione; regem
terrenum jura faciunt, non persona, etc. I likewise find another Legis
Wisigoth. l. ^. c. 28. p. 869. and l. 6. c^^. p 936.
Law, nullifying all unjust judgments and sentences given by Judges through
fear or command of the King. And another Law, giving the King power over all
offenders against himself, but denying him power to pardon any. Delinquents
against the Nation or Country. All which considered, prove the whole State,
Kingdom and Councels among the Spanish Goths, to be above their kings, who
were liable to their restraints, excommunications, Laws, Procop. Vand. 1. Amon
l. ^. c. 20. l. ^ c. 35. (...). de Enc. Belli* l. 1. c. 3. Sect. 11.
Censures, Depositions, for their male-administrations, vicious lives, and not
successive but elected by them.

Gen, Hist of Spain, l. 6. p. ^69 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 177. Mariana de
r^bus, Hisp. l. 7.
Pelagius the first king of Oviedo, ^as elected king, and that kingdom erected
by the general consent of the people oppressed by the Moors, about the year,
618. during whose reign there were several Vice-royes of the Moors, in Spain,
as Alcazazin, and ^b^atan and others. His son king Fasila was slain by a Bear
which he pursued in the mountains: I doubt his Subjects would have resisted him
as well as the Bear, had the made war upon them. Froil^ the fourth king of
Ovedo treacherously slew his own brother Vtmaran a gallant Knight, generally
beloved, (out of jealousy) lest he should usurp the Crown; in revenge of
whose death he was soon after slain by his own brother A^relius, Anno 767. who
succeeded Froila in the Realm, notwithstanding he left a son called D Alphonso
the chaste; but the hatred that the Noblemen did bear unto his father, was the
cause of his r^j^ection, being then also very young; whereby it appears, that
the right of succession was not in those days practiced in Spain; Sillo his
brother-in-Law succeeded him; after whose death by general consent, the
kingdom was given to Alphons^. Gen Hist. of Spa l. ^. p. 183
Ramir the tenth king of Oviedo did that which all other Princes abhor, for he
received his son to be companion with him in his kingdom, and caused his
brother Garcia to reig^ with him, so as there were now two kings and Courts in
Oviedo, both agreeing well together. Anno 894. Froila dying without issue,
because his children were too young to reign, the Nobles conferred the kingdom
on Alphonso the fourth, who after five years turned Monk. Genesis Hist. of l. 7.
p. 211. 226. Mariana de rebus. Hisp. l. 8. c. 8.
Ramir the third, twentieth king, of Leon, abandoning himself to a voluptuous
life, contemned all good counsel, so as the Earls and Noblemen of Gallicia
seeing his folly, and discontented with his vices, scorned him, and would no
more acknowledge him to be their king, electing Bermund for their Sovereign,
and entitled him king of Gallicia, which title he enjoyed ten years Joan.
Vasaei Hisp Chron. An 899. p. 714.
About which time the Moors in Spain which had one king reigning at Cordova,
after the death of king. Mahomet, made so many petty kings, as there was scarce
any good town in. Spain, but had a particular King, which made strict alliances
among themselves for the preservation of their estates. Genesis Hist. of Spain, l.
8. p. 242. Mariana de rebus Hisp. l. 9. 6, 8, 9.
Anno 1071, Garcia king in Gallicia growing a tyrant, spoiled and ill entreated
his Subjects, governing himself after the appetite or a base woman, who put the
Nobility and Gentry in favor or disgrace with the king as she pleased, so as
in the end growing insupportable, certain Knights slew her in the kings
presence; His brother Sancho taking advantage of the peoples hearted, entered his
Realm with a great Army; who thereupon being deserted generally by his people,
sled to the Moors for aid, and fell to spoil his own Country, after which he
was defeated, taken prisoner, and so kept in the Castle of Lune with a good
Guard till his death.

I read in De rebus Hisp. l. 9 c. 5.
John Mariana, that in the Council of Florence under Pope Victor the second,
Anno 1055. Hildebrand a Cardinal Deacon Ambassador to Henry the second,
Emperor of Germany, complained in the Council against Ferdina^d king of
Spain, in the Emperors Name, That against the Custom of his Ancestors and
prescript of Laws, he did with incredible a^rogancy and levity hold himself
exempt from the power of the Roman Empire, which injury himself could gladly
suffer, if there were no other loss but of his own honor; But since the
estate of Chr^stendom could not well subsist, and the Pop^s Authority would
likewise be impaired, unless all Christian kingdoms were united and knit to
gether under one temporal head the Emperor, whom they should obey; they ought
to suppress the springing temerity in the Womb, lest by their neglect
spreading it self into other Provinces, animated with the sweet, and oft-times
deceitful name of liberty, the sacred Majesty of the Empire and Popedom
should be reduced to an empty title; wherefore he desired them to interdict all
Spain, and excommuniate the King; which if they did, he would be assistant to
the Churches honor and Republik^s safety then endangered: B^t if they refused
it out of fear, he would not be wanting to the honor of the Empire, and would
certainly look to himself in private. The Pope after some deliberation,
approved this motion as just, and thereupon sends Lega^s to Ferdinand in his
own and the Councils name, to satisfy the Emperors demands fourthwirth* under
pain of present excommunica^ion. The King doubtful and fearful whether to
obey or not, summons a general Assembly of the Estates of the Realm: The
Clergy and religious sort of men persuaded submission, for fear of the Popes
excommunication; the fearfuller sort concurring with them, by reason of the
Emperors power and their own we^knesse and destraction, and the Kings desires
of peace, inclined most to their opinion, But ^ome heroic spirits thought that
a most grievous yoke should thereby be laid on the liberty of Spain; Which
being once admitted on their ^ecks, they should hardly shake off again; that it
was better to die fighting, then that the Republike should be involved in so
great a mischief and indignity. Rodoricus Diacius, a noble Spaniards opinion
(then absent from the assembly) being required by the king and it, answered.
That this was no matter of Counsel: that what was gotten with Arms was to be
defended with Arms; that it seemed most unjust, that the fruit of others valor
should return to those who in their lost condition had not communicated in the
labor and danger which recovered it; a that it was better to die valiantly,
than to lose the liberty gained by their Ancestors, to become a mocking-stock
to a barbarous and cruel nation, who contemned all men bus. themselves; whose
ears were proud, whose speeches contumelious, whose access difficult, riotings
new, cruelty inhumane; Shall we who have yet hardly escaped the servitude of
Moors, undergo anew bondage prepared, from the Christians? They will deride
both us and ours. Does the whole world, as far as Christianity extends it
self, obey the German Emperors? Shall all the grace, power, honor, riches,
gained by ours, and our Ancessors blood, give place to the Germans? Shall they
leave dangers, repulses, iudgemen, want to us? Shall Germany again lay on us
the yoke of the Roman Empire, which our Ancestors have shaken off? Shall we be
a vulgar people without grace, without Empire, without authority, obnoxious to
those, to whom if we had vigorous minds, if we were men, we might be a
terror? But it is difficult to resist the Emperous endeavors, not to obey the
Roman Pontifs commands: verily it a basnesse of spirits, for an uncertain fear
of war, to involve the Commonwealth in most certain dangers: many things are
effected by trial, which seemed difficult to slothful men. I know not what
stupidity has seized on many, whom neither glory moves, nor the infamey of the
wretchedness, thinking it great liberty enough if they be freed from scourges.
I suppose the Popes ears will not be so averse to our affairs, that he will not
be moved with our most just prayers, and the equity of the cause; Let some now
be sent, who may boldly defend the cause of our liberty before him, and teach
him, that the Germans demand unjust things. Mine opinion is, that the liberty
gained by our Ancestors, it to be defended with arms against the attempts of
all men, and with this my sword I will maintain, THAT THEY ARE MOST WICKED
TRAITORS TO THEIR COUNTRY, who out of a simulation of a fond Religion, or show
of preposterous caution, shall give contrary advice, neither shall resolve,
that servitude is to be repudiated with greater care by us, then domination is
affected by them. So far forth as every one shall addict himself to the
liberty of his Coun^rey, so far shall I be a friend unto him, or a deadly
enemy. This opinion of Roderic prevailed, in pursuit where of they raise an
army of ten thousand men, whereof he was made General; they send Ambassadors
to the Pope and Council, whereof Roderic was chief; and upon a full hearing of
the cause before Rup^rt Cardinal of ^aint Sabria, the Popes Legate, at
Toulouse, judgment was pronounced for the liberty of Spain, and it was
decreed, That the German Emperors should from thenceforth have no power nor
jurisdiction over the Kings of Spain; which was afterward confirmed by the
customs of the people, the consent of other Nations, the public resolution
and judgment of Lawyers; as Iac^obus Valdesius in his Book de dignitate Regum
Hispaniae printed 1602. Cap. 18. proves at large.

Li^. ^. p. 240
The General History of Spain, records, that the Council of Florence
resolved, that seeing the Kings of Spain had defended and conq^ered their
Realms by Arms, without any aid from the Emperors, they were free and exempt
from all subjection and acknowledgement to the Emperors; whereof we may read
the Gloss upon the Chapter Adrianus Papa, distinct. 63. The like privilege
have the Kings of France, the State of Venice, the Kings of England, and some
others; Which clearly demonstrates, the Sovereign power of Kingdoms and Nations
even over their Kings and Princes, and that they may justly desend themselves,
and Elect other Princes, when they are deserted or destroyed by them.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 8. p. 243
Anno 1083. Sacho Ramires king of Aragon, to supply the charg^s of his wars
against the Moors, was sometimes forced to use the revenues of his Clergy, his
Treasure being not able to furn^sh so great a charge; but the Bishops of his
Country, who affected nothing more but to enrich their own Order and State,
opposed themselves against him, and afflicted him in such sort, as putting him
in a vain fear, that he was damned for this cause, They made him do Penance in
the Church of Roda before Saint Vincents Altar, in the presence and at the
pursuit of Raymund Dolmare, Bishop of that place, the Bishop of Jarca, and
others, and to confess publicly, that he had grievously offended. Thus those
good Fathers publicly insulted over their Sovereign.

Genesis hist. of Spain, l, 8. p. 256.
Anno 1091. king Alphonso granted this privilege, among other, to Toledo. That
the City of Toledo might never be alienated from the Crown, nor given upon any
Title whatsoever, to man, woman, or child.

Anno 1076. Sancho King of Na^arre was slain in battle by his brother Raymond
thinking to reign after him, but the Navarroyes expelled him out of their
confines, disdaining that he should reign over them, who had embrued his hands
in his kingly brothers blood, and sending to Sancho Ramires, Hyeron. Blancae
Arog^n. Rerum. Com. in S^nct. 4. p. 625. Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 8. p. 243.
4. king of Aragon, called him to reign over them, because their slain kings
sons were ^oo young to reign, and protect them from their enemies; by which
means the kingdoms of Arragon and Navarre were united. Genesis hist. l. 9. p.
274. to 279 ^oan Mariana de Rebus Hisp. l. 10. c. 8. Rod. sanct. hist. Hisp.
pars 3. c 30.
Veracha Queen of Castile, a most lascivious open Adultresse, by her unchaste
life so far provoked her husband Alphonso, that he was divorced from her,
made war against her and confined her: After which she still continuing in
her lewdness, the Nobility and States of Castile and Leon, revolt from her,
take arms against her, depose her from the Crown, and elect and crown her
son Alphonso the 8. king An. 1122. allowing her only a pension to support
her life. Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 9. p. 281, 282. to 287. Rod. Sancti ^ist Hisp
pa^s 3. c. 30. Mariana De Reb. Hi^p l. 10. c. 5.
Alphonso King of Arragon by his last Will and Testament, most solemnly
ratified, for the expiation of his sins, gave diverse crown Lands, Tenements,
Revenues, and Legacies to Religious houses and persons, An. 1132. but being
prejudicial to the Crown, his Will after his death was held void and not put
in execution: he being slain by the Moors An. 1134. the States of Arragon
elected one Peter Tares for their King: who growing exceeding proud of his new
dignity, began to despise the Nobles, and abrogate the Laws and customs of
the Country: And the Nobles (being assembled at a general Assembly of the
States) going to visit him, he commanded his Porter to shat them out, saying,
that Mounsieur was busy about matters of great importance, but they understood
afterward, that the great affairs causing him to exclude his friends were, his
Barbar was trimming him: which so incensed the Nobles and great men, that the
nex^ day they held their general Assembly of the Estates without the King;
where they first of all decreed to depose their new king, because being ^in
honor he had no understanding of himself, and because they found he would
grow more proud and insolent afterward: whereupon expelling Peter, the Estates
assembling at Borta. elected Ramier a Monk, brother to king Alphonso, for
their King; who was much derided of his Nobles for his Monkish simplicity, and
at last turned Monk again: But those of Navarre thinking a Monk to be better
acquainted with the matters of a Monastery then how to govern a Kingdom, and
being jealous that the Arragonoys by choosing a King of the blood Royal of
Arragon, would by this means aspire to the chief places of honor and favor
in Court, it was concluded, that the Estates of Navarre should assemble at
Pampelone, where they chose Garcia Remi^es their King of Navarre; and so the
Realms of Arragon and Navarre which had been u^ited 58. years, were separated
in these two Kings. The Kingdoms of Spain being often before and since this
time united and divided, as the people and Realms assented or dissented
thereunto. Genesis hist. of Spa. l. 10. p. 307. to 312. 315. 321. 326.
Not to mention the troubles of Castile by reason of the nonage of their king
Alphonso the fourth, of whose custody and tuition the assembly of the Estates
disposed; or how some Knights of Castile slew a Jew, with whom this king was so
enamoured, that he forgot his new Spouse, and almost lost h^s senses. A^no
1179. king. Alphonso assembled the Estates of Castile at Burgon, to leavie a
Text upon the people, whereto the Nob^litie, as well as the rest, should
contribute, imposing 5. Maravidis of gold for every person; but it took no
effect: for all the Gentlemen of Castile being discontented, that he sought to
inf^inge their Liberties, fell to arms, and being led by the Earl Don Pedro
de Lara, they were resolved to resist this tax, and defend their Liberties with
the hazard of their lives. Whereupon Alphonso changed his opinion, and let
them understand, that from thenceforth he would maintain their immunities; and
that whatsoever he had then propounded, was not to continue, but only to supply
the present necessity of affairs, which he would seek to furnish by some other
means. For the great resolution which Don Pedro de Lara showed in this action,
the Nobility of Castile did grant to him and his successors, a solemn
breakfast in testimony of his good endeavor in a business of so great
consequence, and thereby the Lords of Lara have the first voice for the
Nobility in the Court of Castile. G^n. Hist. of Spain, ^ 10, p. 339. Mariana de
Reb. hisp. l. 11. c. 2^.
An. 1204. King Alphonso the Noble called a Parliament of the Lords, Prelates
and Deputies of the Towns of his Realm at Toledo, to advise and assist him in
his wars against the Moors; where they concluded to crave aid from all
Christian Princes, and a Crossado from the Pope against the Moors, and made
diverse Laws to restrain the superfluities of the Realm in feasts, apparel,
and other things.

Genesis hist of Spain, l. 1^. p. 346. 347. l. 11. p. 3^0. 351. 352. 353. 35^.
355, 356.
James the 8. King of Arragon being young at the time of his Fathers death, it
was thereupon after ordained in the assemblies of the Estates of Mencon and
Lirida, that Don Sancho Earl of Roussilon should govern the Realm during the
Kings minority; but they gave him limitation: The Kings person they recommended
to Friar William of Moncedon, Mr. of the Templers: After which An. 1220. this
young kings Uncles seeking to wrest the Realm from him instead of governing it,
by the fidelity of the Estates and their authority, his interest was preserved,
and three Governors with a superintendent of his Provinces were appointed by
them; and to prevent the continual practices of the Earls of Roussillon and
Fernand the king Uncles, the states and justice of Arragon declared the King of
full age when he was but ten years old, and caused the Earl of Roussillon to
quit the Regencie; the authority of the justice of Arragon being then great for
the defense of the public liberty.

An. 1214. Asphonso the Noble king of Castile dying, his son Henry being but
11. year old, the Prelates, Nobles and Commons assembled at Burgon, having
declared him king, and taken the oath, made Queen Eleonorahis Mother,
Governesse of his Person and Realms: after whose death, the custody of him was
committed to the hands of the Lords of Lara: This king afterward playing with
other young children of Noble Hous^s at Palenca in the Bishops Palace, one of
them cast a tyle from the top of a Tower, which falling on the covering of an
house, heat down another tyle, which fell on the young kings head, wherewith he
was so grievously hurt, that he dyed the eleventh day after, An. 1217 yet this
his casual death (for ought I find) was neither r^puted Felony nor Treason in
the child that was the cause of it. After whose death Fernand the 3. was
proc^aimed and made King by the States of Castile, to prevent the pretentions
of the French: after which his Mother Queen Berenguela in the presence of the
Estates, renouncing all her right to the Crown, resigned it up t^ her son
Fernand: About this time the Moor^s in Spain rejected the Miralumims of A^rick,
and created them several Kings and Kingdoms in Spain, being never more united
under one Crown after this division, which they thought it lawful for them to
make. Genesis hist. of Spain, p. 363, 366, 367, 368.


An. 1228. the Estates of Arragon assembling at Barcelona, they consenting and
requiring it according to the custom of the Arragonians and Cattelans, (these
Estates having authority to make War and Peace, and Leagues) awarre was
resolved against the King of the Moors and Majorkins. Anno 1231. the Realm of
Navarre being very ill governed, by reason their King Sancho retired to his
chamber, did not speak with any man but his Household servants, and would not
hear of any public affairs; thereupon the State began to think of electing a
Regent to govern the Realm during his retiredness; to prevent which, Sancho
made an unjust accord with the king of Navarre, and confederated with James
King of Arragon, by the assents of the states of the Realm to leave his
Kingdom to him if he survived him; yet after his death Thibault Earl of
Champaigne was by the states of Navarre elected and proclaimed King. And anno
1236. The Estates of Arragon and Cateloigne assembled at Moncon for the
continuance of the war with the Moors and conquest of Valentia, without whom
it was not lawful for the King to undertake any matter of importance. For
maintenance of this war, a custom called Marebetine, and an exaction of
impost for cattle was by the Estates imposed on the People; it was likewise
decreed, that all pieces of Gold and silver coined should be of one goodness
and weight, to the observation of which Edict for coins, all were bound to
swear that were above 18. years of age.

Genesis hist. (...) Spain, l 1^. p. 370.
Anno 1236. James King of Arragon, revealing to his Confessor the Bishop of
Girone, that before his marriage with Queen Yolant he had passed a matrimonial
promise to Theresa of Bidame, she sued him thereupon before the Pope, who gave
sentence against her for want of sufficient witness, notwithstanding his
Confessors testimony: The King hereupon grew so angry with the Bishop for
revealing his secrets, that sending for him to his chamber, he caused his
tongue to be cut out: For which outrage committed on the Bishop, though
faulty, the Pope in the Council of Lions complained, and in the end
interdicted all the Realm of Arragon, and excommunicated the king. Hereupon to
take off this interdiction and excommunication, the king sent the Bishop of
Valentia with his excuse and humiliation to the Pope; wherewith he being some
what pacified, sent two Legates into Arragon; who having assembled a Synod of
Bishops at Lerida, they caused the King to come thither, and to confess his
fault upon his knees before these fathers, with great submission and tears,
who gave him absolution, upon condition he should cause the Monastery of
Boneface to be built, and endowed with an hundred and forty pounds of silver,
of annual rent; endow an Hospital for the poor with four hundred pounds
silver per annum, and give a Prebendary in the great Church of G^rone, for the
maintenance of a Mass Priest. About which time the Genesis hist. c^ Spain, l. 11.
p. 372. 408.
Moors in Spain erected many new Kings and Kingdoms by mutual consent, and
Mahumad Aben Alamar for his valor, was by the Inhabitants of Mariona, elected
and made first King of Granado.

Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 11. p. 377, 378.
Anno 1243. all was in combustion in Portugal by the negllgence and baseness
of their king Don Sancho Capello, who was wholly given to his wives humors,
hated of the Portugales, and himself disliked for her sake: for many
Malefactors and insolent persons were supported by her, who grew daily more
audacious in their excess, without fear of Justice, which was trodden under
foot, for their respect. For these considerations, and her barrenness too, all
the Noblemen of the kingdom desired to have the Queen (called Mencia)
separated and sent out of Portugal: for effecting whereof, they made a great
instance at Rome, but neither exhortation, admonition nor commandment, nor
censure could prevail, the king so doting on her, that he would not leave her:
Which the Portugals perceiving, some of them presumed to seize on her in the
City of Coimbra, and conducted her into Ga^llicia, from whence she never more
returned into Portugal. Not content herewith, they sought to depose the King
from his Royal dignity too, for his ill government, and to advance his Brother
Don Alphonso to the Regal Throne, in his place; whom the Estates assembled
made Regent of Portugal, leaving only the Title of King to his brother; which
fact of the Estates, the Pope in the Council of Lions, authorized by his
Apostolic power: with which the King being displeased, abandoned his Realm,
and retired into Castile.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 11. p. 379.
Anno 1247. The Laws and Customs of Arragon, were reduced into writing by
King James his appointment, and compacted into one body, having till that time
been observed only by tradition: which Volume was confirmed by the Estates
held at Huesca: And the same year the King of Castile erected a kind of
Chancery and standing Court of Parliament of 12. learned men, which followed
the Court.

Genesis hist. of Spain, ^. 12 p. 385, 386, 387.
Anno 1254. Thibald the 2. king of Navarre being but 15. years old at the
descent of the crown unto him, was at 25. years of age, declared of full age,
and crowned King in the great church of Pampelone, where he did swear, TO
PRESERVE AND AUGMENT THE PRIVILEGES OF THE COUNTRY: Afterward he doing homage
to the king of Castile for the Realm of Navarr^, as his predecessors had done
before him, and making such a peace with him as the prelates, Knights and
Commonalties of the Realm in the States had approved, yet diverse knights and
the Inhabitants of the Borough of S^. ^^rmin of Pampelone disallowed this
homage, this peace, and would not subscribe to it, as tending to the kings
dishonor; whereupon the king did punish them by sines* but his choler being
past, some few days after, considering they were good and faithful subjects,
loving his honor and greatness, and that they resisted his will out of true
love and zeal which they owed to the Crown and their Country, he caused
their F^nes to be restored.

Genesis hist. of Spain, l, 12. p. 390, 397.
Alphonso the 3. fifth King of Por^^gall putting away his (...) wife Mahauis
without cause after he had children by her, and marrying (...), hereupon when
by no entreaties of Friends or the Pope he would entertain his first wife
again, he was excommunicated by the Pope, and his Realm interdicted 10 or ^^,
yeerspace, continuing still obstinate till his first wife dyed, after which he
was absolved.

Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 12. p. 393, 40^, 401.
Anno 1260. and in some year following, there were diverse (...) concerning the
Crown Lands, and settling of Portions for the King of A^ragons younger children,
moved and determined in the Assembly of the Estates of Arragons and the
Nobility complaining, that their King James did b^^ake (...), made many Leagues
and Factions. This matter being debated (...) Saragossa, and then at Exea in
the year 1265. for pacifying these troubles they enacted, That no honors nor
military fees should be given to any but to Gentlemen of race, and born in the
Country. That no Gentleman should be subject to the (...) of Cattle: nor to
any other. That in all controversies which the Nobility might have against the
king or among themselves, the Magistrate called the Justice Ma^or of Arragon
should be Judge, being assisted by the Council. That the King should not give
the fees and Military rewards:, allotted to them that do him service, as are
co^peace of their virtue and valor, to any of his lawful children, who by
right have their portions in the Realm: Anno. 1274. James King of Arragon
coming to the Council of Lions, desirous thereto be crowned by the hands of
Pope Gregory; (a ceremony whereof he made great account:) the Pope refused him,
unless he would acknowledge himself vassal to the church of Rome, and pay
the arrerages of the rent which the deceased King Don Pedro his Father had
promised: the which King James would not do, holding it an unworthy thing so
to d^base the greatness of his Crown, and restrain the Liberty of his Realm
in any sort. And this year there were great and continual Tumults in Arragon,
the Nobility opposing themselves against the King: for composing which
differences the Estates of Arragon assembled in Parliament at Exea, where king
James took the government and managing of the affairs of the Realm from his
son Don Pedro: and diverse great Dons were there condemned of contumacy, and
their Lands confiscated by the Justice Major of Arragon: In this Assembly the
Nobility pleaded the Privileges of Catteloyne; That the Nobility might quit
the Kings obedience in case of controversies and suites, especially if there
were question of their Liberties, and to protest it publicly.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, ^. 13. p. 397, 398.
Anno 1265. Denis the infant King of Portugal desired his Grandfather Alphonso
King of Castile to discharge the Realm of Portugal of the homage and
vassallage it ought to the King of ^eon, who thinking it would be taken ill by
the Noblemen his Subjects, advised the infant to propound it in an open
Assembly, called to that end. The opinion of Don Nugno de Lara was, that by no
means he should diminish the authority and greatness of his Crown, which he
should doc, if he did quit this homage to the King of Portugal: For which
opinion the King growing angry with him, the residue fearing the kings
displeasure, advised him to do it: Whereupon the Realm of Portugal was freed
from all homage and subjection due to the Kings of Leon and Castile: For which
prodigality the other Nobles and D. Nugno were so much discontented, that they
made a League with the King of Granado against their own King, for dismembring
Portugal from the Crown of Leon; to pacify which differences the King used
many mediations, and at last called an Assembly of the Estates at Burgos, the
which was held without the Town for the safety of these Confederates.

That great Astronomer Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 1^. p. 412. to 426.
Alphonso King of Castile, (who presumed to control the Author of Nature,
saying; That if he had been at the Creation of the world, he should in many
things have been of another opinion, and amended Gods workmanship;) was a most
wilful, indiscreet, unfortunate Prince: for his eldest son Fernand dying in
his life time, leaving Alphonso and other issue males behind him, Don Sancho
his second son resolved to dispossess his Nephews of the kingdom, saying; That
it was fit, that he who was a Knight, and learned to govern a Realm, were it
in war or peace, should reign after his Father rather then his Nephews, sons
of his eldest brother who were very young, having need of Regents and
Governors, charges which were affected by great personages, who by reason
thereof grew into quarrels one with the other, to the oppression of the people,
and hazard of the Estate. After which, Don Lope Diaz of Haro pressed the King
to declare Don Sancho his son, his successor in the Realms of Castile,
Toledo, Leon, and other places, being his eldest son then living; to which he
giving a cold answer at first, having afterward assembled the Estates in
Segobia, he was by the King and the Estates consent declared and received as
heir to the Crown after his Fathers decease, Fernands children being
disinherited of their right, which fact was then excused and justified, because
there was no law at that time which did bind the King, much less the Estates,
to leave the Realm more to one son then to another: since which there was a
law made and received in the time of Fernand the 5. in the City of Taro; where
it was decreed by the Estates upon this difficulty, That the Children of the
elder brother deceased, representing their fathers person, should in that
respect be preferred before the Uncle: Hereupon Queen Violant, and Blanch
widow to Fernand were so much discontented with the Decree of the Estates,
disinheriting the eldest brothers sons, as taking the young children with
them, they departed out of Castile to Don Pedro King of Arragon; where Don
Sancho caused his Nephews to be imprisoned, whom king Alphonso laboring under
hand to get releas^d, Don Sancho advertised hereof, made a league with the
Moors of Granado, against his Father, and by assent of his confederates took
upon him the Title of Regency of the Kingdom of Castile and other his Fathers
dominions, refusing the Title of King, during his Fathers life time; who was
forced to pawn his royal Crown and Jewels to Jacob Abin Joseph a Moore, King
of Morocco, who aided him willingly against Don Sancho. After which in an
Assembly of the States at Cordova with the advice of the Noble men and knights
of Castile thereupon sent, by a Decree pronounced by the mouth of Don Manuel,
in the name of the whole Nobility, Alphonso was deprived of all his Realms,
for murdering his brother Don Frederick, and burning Don Rues unjustly without
any form of justice or orderly proceedings, the breach of the rights and
privileges of the Nobility, and the excessive wasting of the treasure of the
Realm. Upon this there arose bloody Warr^s between the Father and son; and
in the year 1282. Alphonso was so vexed with his sons proceedings, that he
pronounced in the presence of many men of rank both Clergy and Laity in the
City of Sevill, The curse of God and his upon Don Sancho, a son, said he,
disobedient, rebellious, and a paricide, declaring him incapable and unworthy
to reign, depriving him of his successions, inheritance, and discharging the
subjects, as much as in him lay, from all oath and homage which they had done
unto him. But these were but words which Don Sancho did not much esteem;
enjoying his Fathers kingdoms after his decease in Title, as he did before in
act, and dying king of Custile, his h^ires succeeded him in that Realm, as
lawful heirs thereunto.

H^ero^. Blanca. Rer. Arragon. Com. p. ^60. Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 12. ^. 419,
421, 422.
Don Pedro the third, king of Arragon about the year 1283. had many
controversies with his Nobles and knights who complained much of his sower
disposition, and tyrannous manner of Government, insulting over the greatest,
yea against his own blood, contrary to all Law and nature. Wherefore being ill
entreated by him in their freedoms, whereof the Towns and Commonalties of his
Countries did also complain, the Nobility, Knights and Gentry, for preservation
of their Liberties made a Union together among themselves and with the people;
promising and swearing to let the King and his son Don Alphonso (who was his
Lieutenant General) understand, that if they did not contain themselves within
the limits of the Laws of the Country, they would withdraw themselves from
their obedience, and declare themselves enemies, and pursue them by arms that
should seek to break them. The king hereupon called the Estates to Tarrasone,
and afterward to Saragossa, where he entreated, promised and did all what he
could to break this Union: but he was forced to yield, and granted to the
Arragonians the privilege they call General, whereby their Liberties which
had been somewhat restrained, were again restored, the ancient manners of the
Country, and customs of their ancestors put in practice. And moreover there
were Laws made for their Kings, which they should be bound to obey; and for
that they were in a mutiny in some places, by reason of certain Impositions
laid upon salt, the traffic thereof was made free by the Estates. And the
king refusing the judgment of the Justice Mayor of Arragon, deposing Pedro
Martines Artassone (who then exercised it) from his Office, the Estates soon
after at an assembly at Zutaria, fortified it with stronger Laws, deeming the
Justice of Arragon to be a lawful Judge, (whom the King himself could not
displace) even in Cases commenced against the King; who being cited and not
appearing, there were Decrees made against him in many instances. In the end
the King confirmed the Decrees of the Justice Mayor, and whatsoever should be
concluded by the Estates, the Deputies and Counselors having given their
suffrages.

I read in Rerum Arragonens. Comment. in Pet. 2. p. 650.
Hieronimus Blanca, that about the year 1212. the Arragonians taking it ill
that their Liberties gotten with their blood, should so many ways be
subverted, as then they were by King Pedro the first, raised up the Name and
forces of a Union, that with one force, and the consent of all, one mind as it
were being made out of all, they might more easily propulse so great injuries;
but what was then done hereupon, is not recorded; But the two memorable
Privileges of the Union under King Alphonso the third, are said to spring from
thence.

Don Alphonso Genesis Hist. of Spain, l, 13. p. 431. Hyeron. Blanca Arrag. Rerum
Com. in Apph. 3. p. 661. 662.
king of Aragon succeeding Pedro, Anno 1286. he was admonished by the Estates
Ambassadors, to come speedily to the Assembly at Saragossa; where having sworn
and promised the observation of the Customs, Rights and Privileges of the
Country, and received the Oath of fealty from the Deputies, he might lawfully
take upon him the Title of the King of Aragon; the which they said, he might
not use before this Act and Ceremony, according to the ancient customs of
Aragon. Upon these summons he came to the Assembly of the Estates to Saragossa,
took the Oath aforesaid, after which he was Crowned: Which done there grew in
this assembly a great contention, touching the reformation of the manors of
Courtiers, and the ordering of the Kings house; the Noblemen and Deputies of
the Estates of Aragon maintaining; that the conusance thereof was incident to
their charge; the King, and his household servants on the other side, denied,
that there was either Law or custom which tied the King or his followers to any
such subjection. In the end it was concluded, that the reformation of the Court
should be made by twelve of the principal Families, the like number of
Knights, four Deputies of Saragossa, and one of either of the other Cities, the
which should give their voices in that case. This Vn^on of Aragon obtained
likewise a Decree, that the King should have certain Counselors chosen, to
wit, four of the chief Nobility, four Knights of noble and ancient races; four
of his household servants, two Knights for the Realm of Valencia, two Citizens
of Saragossa, and one of either of the other Cities (whom they particularly
name) with a condition, that whilst the King should remain in Aragon,
Ribagorca, or Valencia, two of those Noblemen, two of his servants, two Knights
of Aragon, one of Valencia, and the four Deputies of the Realm of Aragon,
should follow and reside in his Court, AS COVNCELLORS APPOINTED BY THE UNION;
who protested by solemn Deputies sent to the King to that end, that if he did
not receive, observe, and maintain those orders, THEY WOULD SEIZE UPON ALL HIS
REVENVES, and on all the fees, Offices, and dignities of such Noblemen as
should contradict them. Thus were the Kings of Aragon entreated in those times
by their subjects, who entered into a Union between themselves, resolving, That
for the common cause of liberty Non verbis solum, SED ARMIS CONTENDERE LICERET;
that it was lawful for them to contend not only with words, BUT WITH ARMS TO;
and determined in this assembly of the States, A Comitijs intempestive
discedere REGI NEFAS ESSE, That it was unlawful (yea, a grand offense) for the
king to depart unseasonably from his Parliament, before it was determined. Our
present case.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 13. p. 436, 465.
James the second of Aragon being in Sicily at the death of King Alph^nso, Don
Pedro his brother assembled the Estates at Saragossa, to consult, left the
State in his absence would receive some prejudice; where James arriving, having
first (...) and promised the observation of the Rights and Privileges of the
Country, was received and crowned king. About the year 1320 James, by advice
of his Estates held at Tarragone, made a perpetual Union of the Realms of
Arragon and Valencia, and the Principal^ty of Catelone, the which from that
time should not for any occasion he disunited. In which assembly Don James
eldest son to the Crown, being ready to mary Leonora of Castile, suddenly, by a
strange affection, quitting both his wife and succession to the Realm of
Arragon, told his Father, That he had made a ^ow neither to marry, nor to
reign; so as notwithstanding all persuasions of the King and Noblemen. he quit
his Birthright to his Brother Don Alphonso, after the example of Esau:
discharged the Estates of the Oath they had made unto him, and presently put on
the habit of the Knights of Jerusalem; Whereupon his second brother, was by
the Estates of Arragon acknowledged and sworn heir of these Kingdoms, after the
decease of his father. At this time the Authority of the Justice of Aragon was
so great, That it might both censure the King, and the Estates, and appoint
them a place, and admit them that did assist, or reject them.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 13. p. 440, to 476.
Ferdinand the fourth, king of Castile, being but a child when his father
Sancho died, was in ward to his mother Queen Marry, his Protectresse; he had
two competitors to the Crown, Alphonso de la Cede, and Don John, who making a
strong confederacy, were both crowned Kings, against right, by several parts
of his Realm, which they shared between them. The States assembled at Zamora
granted great sums of money to Ferdinand to maintain the wars with his enemies,
and procure a dispensation of Legitimation and marriage from the Pope, who
would do nothing without great fees. After which he summoning an assembly of
the Estates at M^dina, they refused to meet without the express command of the
Queen Mother, who commanded them to assemble, and promised to be present, After
this diverse accords were made twixt him and his competitors; and at last
calling an assembly of the Estates to assist him in his wars against the
Moors; he soon after condemned two Knights, called Peter and John of Caravajal,
without any great proofs, for a murder, and caused them to be cast down
headlong from the top of the Rock of Martos; who professing their innocence at
the execution, they adjourned the king to appear at the Tribunal Seat of
Almighty God within thirty days after, to answer for their unjust deaths; who
thereupon fell sick and died, leaving his son Alphonso the 12, very young; for
whose Regency therebeing great competition, the inhabitants of Avila, and their
Bishop resolved, not to give the possession and government of the Kings person
to any one, that was not appointed by the assembly of the Estates; Whereupon
the Estates assembling at Palence, committed the government of his person to Q.
Mary his Grandmother and Queen Constance his mother; who dying, another
Assembly of the Estates was called at Burgos, Anno 1314. who decreed, that the
Government of the King, and Regencie of the Realm should be reduced all into
one body betwixt Q Marry, Don Pedro, and Don John, and if any one of them
should dye, it should remain to the two other that did survive, and to one if
two dyed. After this, Anno 1315. these Tutors and Governors of the Realm of
Castile were required by the Estates in an Assembly at Carrion to give caution
for their government, and to give an account what they had done. Who often
jarring and crossing one another; diverse Assemblies of Estates were often called
to accord them. Anno 1320. The Estates assembling, appointed new Governors of
the King and Realm, who discharging their trust very lewdely and oppressing
the People, Anno 1326. they were discharged of their Administration at a
Parliament held at Vailledolet: in which the king did swear, to observe the
fundamental Laws of the Realm, and to administer justice, maintaining every
one in his Estates. goods and honor: Which done, the Deputies of the Estates
swore him Fealty. Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 13. and 14. pass^^.
This King afterward proving very cruel and tyrannical, his Nobles and
Subjects of times successively took up defensive arms against him, his Tyranny
augmenting their obstinacy, and procuring him still new troubles; Whereupon at
last discerning his errors, he became more mild, and often assembled the
Estates in Parliament, who gave him large Subsidies to maintain his wars
against the Moors. Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 14. p. 487, 488, 489.
The Province of Alava had a custom to choose a Lord under the Sovereignty of
Castile, who did govern and enjoy the revenues appointed by the Lords of the
Country; for the election of whom they were accustomed to assemble in the
Field of Arriaga; those of this Election being called Brethren, and the
Assembly of the Brotherhood. Notwithstanding in the year 1332. the Brotherhood
and Estates of this Province sent to K. Alphonso diverse Articles, which they
beseeched him to confirm, promising for their part, that this should be their
last Assembly, and that the name and effect of their Brotherhood should remain
for ever extinct, and the Province be for ever united to the Crown of Castile,
if he would confirm those Articles to them, being 17. in number, which he did.
The chief were these, That the King nor his Successors should not alien any
place of his Demesnes. That the Gentlemen and their goods should be free and
exempt from all Subsidies as they had been heretofore. That they and others of
the Country should be governed according to the customs and rights of
Soportilla; And that diverse Towns and Villages therein specified should be
free from all Tributes and Impositions.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 13. p. 455, 460, 472.
About the year 1309. Mahumet King of Granado, becoming casually blind, was
soon after deposed by his own Brother, and the great men of his Realm, who
were discontented and disliked to be governed by a blind King, who could not
lead them to the wars in person. Which Kingdom went by Election commonly, as
is evident by his three next successors, and Mahumet the sixth King of Granado.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 13. p. 452, 462, l. 14 p. 477, 778.
Anno 1307. Jews Hutin was crowned King of Navarre at Pampelone, where he
swear, to observe the Laws and Rights of the Realm. After which, Anno 1315.
Philip the long was elected by the Estates of Navarre to be their king in right
of his wife, but it was upon conditions drawn in writing which they tendered to
him and the Queen to subscribe and swear to, before the solemnities of their
Coronation, in the Estates assembled at Pampelone, which they yielded willingly
unto; whereof the principal Articles were these:

1. First, to the Estates to maintain and keep the Rights, Laws, Customs,
Liberties, and privileges of the Realm, both written and not written, whereof
they were in possession, to them and their successors for ever, and not to
diminish, but rather augment them.

2. That they should disannull all that had been done to the prejudice thereof
by the kings their Predecessors, and by their Ministers, without delay,
notwithstanding any Let.

3. That for the term of 12. years to come they should not coin any money,
but such as was then current within the Realm, and that during their lives
they should not coin above one sort of money, and that they should distribute
part of the revenues, profits and commodities of the Realm unto the Subjects.

4. That they should not receive into their service above four strangers, but
should employ them of the Country.

5. That the Forts and Garrison of the Realm should be given unto Gentlemen
borne and dwelling in the Country, and not to any stranger, who should do
homage to the Queen, and promise for to hold them for her, and for the lawful
Heir of the Country.

6. That they should not exchange, nor engage the Realm for any other Estate
whatsoever.

7. That they should not sell nor engage any of the Revenues of the Crown,
neither should make any Law nor Statute against the Realm, nor against them
that should lawfully succeed therein.

8. That to the first son which God should give them, coming to the age of
twenty years, they should leave the kingdom free and without factions, upon
condition, that the Estates should pay unto them for their expenses an hundred
thousand Sanchets, or other French money equivalent.

9. That if God gave them no children, in that case they should leave the
Realm after them free, with the Forts, in the hands of the Estates, to invest
them to whom of right it should belong.

10. That if they infringe these Articles or any part of them, the Subjects
should be quit of their Oath of subjection which they ought them.

These Articles being promised and sworn by the king and Queen, they were
solemnly crowned, and the Deputies of the Estates, Noblemen and Officers of the
Crown took their obedience to them. Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 14. p. 497, 498.
Upon this agreement, all the Castles and places of strength in Navarre were
put into the hands of the Estates, who committed them unto the custody of
faithful knights, in whose keeping they continued; a Catalogue of which
Castles with the names of the knights that guarded them, by the Estates
appointment, in the year 1335. you may read at large in the General History
of Spain.

Before this Genesis hist. of Spain. l. 14. p. ^76.
Anno 1328. the Estates of Navarre assembled at Puentala Reyna, to resolve
without any respect, TO WHOM THE REALM OF NAVARRE BELONGED, whether to Edward
king of England, or to Jane Countess of Eureux. The Estates being adjourned to
Pampelone, the chief Town of the Realm, their opinions were diverse; many
holding that king Edward should have the Realm, as Granchilde (born of the
daughter) to Queen Jane, daughter to King Henry, rather then the Countess of
Eureux, in regard of the Sex; others, with more reason, held for the Countess,
who was in the same degree, but daughter to a Son, and Heir to Queen Jane.
These prevalled, drawing the rest to their opinion; whereupon the Countess was
declared true and lawful Queen of Navarre, the Realm having been vacant above
four Months. And until that she and Count Philip her husband should come and
take possession of the Realm, they declared the Regent and Viceroy Don John
Corberan of Leet, Standard bearer of the Realm, and John Martines of Medrado.
Lo here a Parliament of the Estates of Navarre, summoned by themselves, without
a King, determining the Right of succession to the Crown, appointing a
Vicegerent, and prescribing such an Oath and Articles to their king, as you
heard before.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 14. p. 479. l. 15. p. 539.
Anno 1331. king Philip of Navarre, to administer justice, erected a new Court
of Parliament in Navarre, which was called New, to distinguish it from the old;
HE AND THE THREE ESTATES of the Realm NAMING MEN WORTHY OF THAT CHARGE. Queen
Jane and Philip deceasing, their son Charles the second, surnamed the Bad, for
his cruelty and ill manners, was called by the three Estates of Navarre to
Pampelone, and there crowned in their Assembly after the manner of his
Ancestors, swearing to observe the Laws and Liberties of the Country. After
which a far Which you may read at large, Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 17. p. 625.
626.
stricter Oath was administered to Charles the 3, An. 1390.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 14. p. 480.
Anno. 1325. In a general assembly of all the Estates of Arragon, Don Pedro
son to the Infant Don Alphonso, was sworn presumptive Heir and Successor to the
Crown, after the decease of his Grandfather and Father, the which was there
decreed and practiced, for that Don Pedro Earl of Ribagorca did maintain, that
if his brother Don Alphonso should die before their Father, the Realm did
belong to him by right of propriety, being the third brother, rather then to
his Nephew the son of the second brother. In this Assembly the Articles of the
general privileges were confirmed; and it was ordained for a Law, That no
Freeman should be put to the Rack, and that confiscations should not be
allowed, but in Cases of Coining and High Treason.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 14. p. 483, 484, 485, 486, 493, to 498, 504. Dr Beards
Theater of Gods Judgments. Mariana and others.
Anno 1328. Alphonso King of Castile, treacherously murdering Don John the
blind, his Kinsman, in his own Court, when he had invited him to dinner on all
Saints day, and then condemning him for a Traitor. confiscating his lands (a
fact unseemly for a King, who should be the mirror of Justice:) Hereupon Don
John Manuell stood upon his Guard, fortified his Castles, revolted from the
King for this his Treachery, allied himself with the Kings of Arragon and
Granado, overran the Countries of C^stile, from Almanca unto P^gnafield; the
Prior of Saint John's, Don Fernand Rodrigues, hereupon caused the Cities of
Toro, Zamora, and Vailledolit, to rebel and shut their ga^es against the King;
and many others likewise re^olted from him: At last he was forced to call an
Assembly of the Estates, who gave him Subsidies to aid him in his wars against
the Moors) and to conclude a peace with Don Manuel and his other discontented
Subjects; whom he afterward spoiling of their lawful inheritances, and
pursuing them in their honors and lives by Tyrannous cruelty, extending his
outrageous disdain even to women of his own blood, he thereby so estranged most
of his Princes and Nobles from him. that they revolted from him, and j^yned
with Mahumet king of Granado, and the Moors in a war against him, which
lasted three or four years, putting him to infinite troubl^, exations and
expenses, enforcing him to make a dishonorable peace with the Moors, to
release the Tribute which they paid him formerly; and after much media^^on he
concluded a Peace thorowout all the Realm with his discontented Subjects. This
Prince thinking to reign more securely, had taken a course of extreme severity,
showing himself cruel and treacherous to his Nobility, whereby he was feared,
but withal he lost the love and respect of his subjects, so as he was no
sooner freed from one danger, but he fell into another worse then the first,
his Nobles holding this for a Maxim, That a Tyrant being offended will at some
time revenge himself, and therefore they must not trust him upon any
reconciliation, who to pacify the troubles which had grown by his own error,
had made no difficulty to sacrifice (upon the peoples spleen) his own Mignions,
degrading, and in the end murdering, condemning them as Traitors after their
death, yea, the Princes of his own blood, taking their goods, estates, and
depriving the lawful Heirs, seeking to reign over free men, and generous
Spirits as over beasts entreating them as base and effeminate slaves, who might
not speak their opinions freely in matters of State and Government, of which
they were held dead members and without feeling. Whereupon D. Manuel and other
Nobles, as men endued with understanding, reason, and not forgetting the nature
of Alphonso, who was proud, a contemner of all laws, and treacherous, they
proceeded so far as to withdraw themselves from his subjection by
protestation and public act, and entered into a league with the King of
Portugal, incensing him to take up Arms for their defense: Where upon King
Alphonso having some feeling, that cruelty was too violent remedy for men that
were Nobly borne, he sought by all mild and courreous means to divide them,
and to draw some of them to his service, which he effected, and so more easily
conquered, and reduced their companions.

Genesis Hist. of Spain, l. 14. p. 506.
An. 1337. was founded the Town of Alegria of Dulanci, in the Province of
Alava, and many Villages thereabout, the which obtained from the King the
privileges and Laws of the Realm, whereby the inhabitants should govern
themselves, with liberty to choose their own Judges.

Genesis Hist. of Spain. l. 15. p. 532 to 576.
Don Pedro the first, king of Castile, surnamed the cruel, most tyrannically
murdering and poisoning diverse of his Nobles and subjects without cause,
banishing others, quitting Blanch his espoused wife within three days after
his marriage, to enjoy the unchaste love of Doxna Maria de Paedilla, by whom
he was enchanted, which much troubled the whole Court; divorcing himself
without color, by the advice only of two Bishops, without the Popes assent,
from Blanch, and marrying Jane of Castro in her life time; Hanging up diverse
Burgesses of Toledo causlesly, for taking the Queens part too openly, and among
others a Goldsmiths son, who offered to be hanged to save his fathers life;
causing his own brother Don Frederick, and diverse Nobles else to be suddenly
slain, Anno 1358. poisoning and murdering likewise diverse Noble Ladies, among
others Don Leonora his own Aunt: after which Anno 1360. he murdering two more
of his own brethren, executing diverse Clergy men, and Knights of Castile,
banishing the Archbishop of Toledo, putting diverse Jews (as Samuel Levy his
High Treasurer, with his whole family) to death, to gain their Estates, and
causing his own Queen Blanch to be poisoned, after she had long been kept
prisoner by him. Anno 136^. Hereupon his cruelties, rapines and murders growing
excessive, and the Popes Legate denouncing him an utter Enemy to God and man,
Henry Earl of Transtamara, his brother, with other Fugitives getting aid from
the King of Navarre, entered Castile with an Army, where by the Nobles
importunity he took upon him the title of King of Castile and Leon; which
done, the whole Kingdom (long oppressed with D. Pedro his Tyranny) immediately
revolted from him, so that in few days Henry found himself King of a mighty
great Kingdom, almost without striking stroke, the people striving who should
first receive him, such was their hatred to the Tyrant Pedro: who being
doubtful what to do, fled with two and twenty Ships out of his Realm to
Bayon, craving aid of the English to revest him in his Kingdom; mean time king
Henry assembling the Estates at Burgon, they granted him the tenth penny of all
the Merchandise they should ^ell in the Realm, to maintain the wars against
Pedro; who getting aid from the English upon conditions, accompanied with the
valiant Black See Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, part 1 chap. 8. page 165. to
1^1.
Prince of Wales, entered with a great Army into Spain, where the Prince writing
to Henry, voluntarily to resign the Crown to Pedro his Brother, to avoid the
effusion of Christian blood; he made answer, That he could not hearken to any
accord with him, who had against the law of nature taken delight to murder so
many of the blood Royal and other great personages of Castile, who had not
respect of the Laws of the Country, and much less of God, falsifying his
Oaths and promises, having no other rule in his actions, but his Tyrannous
passions. Whereupon, battle being joined, Henry was conquered, and Pedro
restored; But he discontenting the English and others, who had reseated him in
his Kingdom, by his insolency and Tyranny, and the Biscaniers refusing to be
under the command of strangers, whom they would never consent to be put in
possession of their Country; and with all falling to his former cruelties, and
courses contrary to the advice of his friends and Astrologers; he so estranged
the hearts of all from him, that the English returning, and Henry receiving new
forces from the French, entered Castile, suddenly, and conquered the Tyrant; who
being betrayed into King Henry his hands as he was taking his flight by night,
King Henry stabbed him with dagger in the face, and at last getting him under
him, slew him with his dagger for his excess and tyranny, Anno 1368. and
reigned quietly in his steed.

I might prosecute and draw down the Histories of all the Spanish Kings and
Kingdoms from his days till this present, which are full fraught with
presidents of this nature, ^o prove all the Kings of Spain inferior to their
Kingdoms, Assemblies of the Estates, Laws, resistible, deprivable for their
Tyrannyes; but because those who desire satisfaction in this kind, may read
the Histories themselves more largely in the general History of Spain, in
Ioannis Pistorius, his Hispanie Illustratae, (where all their chief Historians
are collected into several volumnes:) and in Meteranus and Grimstons Histories
of the Netherlands: I shall for brevity sake pretermit them altogether,
concluding with one or two brief observations more touching the Gothish and
Arragonian Kings in Spain, which will give great light and confirmation to the
premises.

First, for the Ancient Kings of the Goths in Spain, Lib. 2. c. o^ l. 4. c. 35.
Aimoinius, De Iure belli and pa^ is, l. 1. c. 3. sect. 11. p. 58.
and Hugo Grotius out of him, Vandal. 1. Grotius, ibid.
confess; that they received the Kingdom from the people, revocable by them at
any time; and that the people might depose them as often as they displeased
them; and therefore their acts might be rescinded and nulled by the people who
gave them only a revocable power: which the premised Histories experimentally
evidence: such likewise were the Kings of the Vandales, removable at the
peoples pleasure as Procopius writes: such the Kings of the Precopius Goth. 2.
Heruli, Excerpt. Dionis, and Gretius, De lure Belli. l. 1. c. 3. Ad notata
sect. 11. p. 72.
Quadi, Iazyges, Paulus Wiarnafred l. 4. and 6.
Lombardes, Ammiannus lib. 28. Loanicus Chalcochondyles
Burgundians Joan, Leo li. 7
Moldavians General History of Spain, l. 7. to 20. passim.
Africans, the (l) Moors in Spain, the Solinus l. 1^. Groti^s de lure Belli
l. c. 3. sect. 9. p. 57
two annual Kings of Carthage, the Tacitus de mor. GermGretius Ibid. Dionis.
Hal l. 2. and ^.
ancient Germane Kings the Kings of Sparta; and most other Kings of Greece, as
Historians and Authors of best credit relate.

Secondly, for the Kings of Arragon, and original constitution of the Kingdom,
I find this memorable passage in Hieronymus Blanca his Rerum Arragonenfium
Commentarius, page 586. 587. 590. and 72^. 724. in the third Tom. of Ioannis
Pistorius his Hispaniae illustratae, Sancho the fourth King of Arragon dying
without issue, the Estates and people advising together what course they should
take for their security and future good administration of the Commonweal,
about the year of our Lord, 842. elected twelve principal men to whom they
committed the care and government of the Republike during the Inter-regnum.
These because they were very ancient men, were called Elders, from whence those
who by birth are styled Rici-men, drew their original; And this manner of
governing the Commonwealth continued long; But the great incursions of the
Arabians pressing them, they imagined it would not continue firm and stable:
Yet notwithstanding, taken with the sweetness of Liberty, they feared to
subject themselves to the Empire of one man; because verily they believed that
servitude would proceed from thence. Therefore having considered and rightly
pondered all things, and reasons, they made this the result of all their
Counsels; that they should consult with Pope Adrian the second, and the
Lombards; what course they should take by their advise, which should be most
meet for the perpetuating of the Empire: to whom, as reports go, they returned
this answer. That preordaining certain Rights and Laws, retified with the
previous religion of a cautionary oath, they should set up one King over them;
but yet should reject a foreign Dominion; and that they should take heed, that
he whom they adopted to be King, should be neither of the superiors, nor
inferiors; left, if superior, he should oppress inferiors, or lest, if
inferior, he should be derided by superiors; To which counsel and sentence
they submitting, founded that ancient Suprarbian Court: For according to the
answer given, all decreed, That they ought to elect one man excelling in virtue
for their King; But yet, lest the pleasures of Kings, like as in other Princes,
should likewise even among us become Laws, they first of all enacted some
Laws by which they might heal this inconvenience. These Laws they afterward
called the Suprarbian Court, which we should largely prosecute, but through the
injury of time, the knowledge of them is buried, and some fragments of them
only are extant, observed by Prince Charles himself, and some other Writers,
which we shall verily remember; because they are as the first elements of our
Republike, and contain in them, the institution of the Magistrate of the
Justice of Arragon, which is the chief thing of our institution; therefore in
the beginning of that Court it was provided, that the King which should be,
since the Kingdom, lately taken from the Moors, was freely and voluntarily
conferred on him, should be bound both by the Religion of an Oath, as likewise
by the force and power of Laws, to observe the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom; Now the Laws were these,

Govern thou the Kingdom in peace and righteousness, and give us better
Courts of justice.

The things which shall be gained from the Moors, let them be divided not
only between the Rich-men, but likewise between the soldiers and infantry; but
let a stranger receive nothing from thence.

Let it be unlawful (or a wicked act) for the King to enact Laws, unless it
be by the advice of his Subjects first given.

Let the King beware, that he begin no War, that he enter into no Peace,
conclude no T^uce, or handle any other thing of great moment, without the
concurring assent of the Elders.

Now lest that our Laws or Liberties should suffer any detriment, Let there be
a certain middle Judge at hand, to whom it may be lawful to appeal from the
King, if he shall wrong any one, and who may repel injuries, if peradventure
he shall offer any to the Commonweal.

With these Laws therefore and sanctions, those our Ancestors confirmed the
enterprise of new moulding and reforming the Commonwealth: But verily this was
the chiefest garrison for to retain their liberty, whereby they ordained the
Presidentship of a middle Judge; placing the power in such sort in the King,
that the temperating of it should be in the middle Judge: out of which things,
the moderate and musical state of the Commonweal which we enjoy, is molded
and made up. For from the very beginning of things even to these later times,
we see by force of this intermediate Magistrate, and by the goodness and
clemency of most peaceable Kings, that both our pristine liberty, and ancient
Privilege has been always retained, and due loyalty and reverence to the
Kings Majesty, observed: Neither has the Kingdom only emplored the help of
this Magistrate against Kings, but the Kings themselves oft-times against the
Kingdom; by which means, many intestine evils have been appeased without any
tumult, which unless they had been civilly suppressed, seemed verily to have
been likely to have broken out to the common destruction of all men; so as we
may rightly affirm, that in this alone, the sum of preserving civil concord
both to Kings and the Kingdom has consisted. This Magistrate was at first
called THE JUSTICE MAYOR; afterward assuming the name of the Kingdom it
self, it was called THE JUSTICE OF ARAGON: By these (formentioned) prescribed
Laws, the will of him who desired to be King of Aragon, was wholly to be
directed and formed; and unless he would first suffer his faith to be obliged
in most strick bonds for keeping of them, any future soliciting was to be
preposterous. Having therefore laid the foundations of their Countries liberty,
all of them began to dispute among themselves about electing a King: to which
end, they all assembled together at Arahvest to choose a King; where they were
suddenly besieged by the Arabians: which Iunicus Arista King of the
Pompelonians hearing of, came with an Army and rescued them; whereupon they
elected him for their King with unanimous consent, and calling him unto them,
showed him the Laws they had pre-established; on^ whereof, concerning the
middle Magistrate, seemed most hard unto him: But having more deligently
considered the matter, and that they voluntarily offered him the Kingdom
gained from the enemies; He not only ratified the Laws themselves, but
likewise added this new Law, or privilege to them: Si contra for as aut
libertates regnum a sepremi in suturum continger^^, alium sive sidelem, sive
insid^lem Regem ad (...) endum li^er ipsi Regno aditus, pa^^^ et.
That if the Kingdom should happen hereafter to be oppressed by him against
the LAWS, (Justice) or Liberties, the Kingdom it self should have free
liberty to elect another King, whether a Christian or an Infidel; which clause
of an Infidel King, they refused to have bestowed on them, because they judged
it shameful and dishonorable: After which Iunicus taking an oath to observe
the former Laws, was advanced to the Throne and made King of Aragon about the
year 868. Moreover, to establish all these Laws and Constitutions, our
Ancestors themselves adjoined the accession of a public Union; ordaining, that
it should be lawful and just for them, to meet all together, ET REGI OBSISTERE
ARMIS ET VI, and to resist the King with arms and force, as often as there
should be need to propulse any assault of him or his, made against the Laws;
which form of assembling together for the common cause of liberty, they called
a Union, (or Association:) Neither did they anciently less think all their
Liberties to be preserved by this Union, then humane bodies themselves are by
nervs and bones. And although it were not prescribed in that Suprarbian Forum,
yet they thought it deduced from the very beginnings of things, and deeply
fixed and impressed in the sense of all men, and to be established by our
common Law, as by another Law of Nature, and that its force was enough and more
then sufficiently known and discerned by use and reason. For they said, it
would be but a thing of little profit for them, to have good Laws enacted, and
the very Judiciary Presidentship of a middle Judge, if when there should be
need, AD EARVM DEFENSIONEM ARMA CAPERE NON LICERET, cum jam tunc satis non
esset pugnare consilliis; it should not be lawful for them to take up Arms in
their defense, when as then it would not be sufficient in such a case to fight
with Counsels.

Neither verily did that seem altogether impertinent from the matter, for if it
should be so, all things long ere this had been in the power of Kings
themselves. Whence our people reputed these two privileges of the Union
obtained from Alphonso the 3. (to wit, See Ioannis de Laet Hispan. Descr. p. c.
5. p. 107.
That it shall be lawful for the Estates of the Realm, i^ the King shall violate
the Laws of the Country, To create a new King in his place; and without the
crime of Treason, to make confederacies among themselves, and with Neighbor
Princes To defend their Liberty; which King Ferdinand, upon the petition of the
Castilians, refused to revoke, because he had taken a solemn Oath to observe
them.) not as new favors or benefits, but as things done out of Office, etc.
Therefore in those ancient Rulers of which we treat, the Liberty of our Country
was hedged about by our Ancestors with three most strong fences; namely, with
the Pretecture of this middle Judge, with the most ample power of the Rici-men
(or Palatines) and with this most fierce force of the Union; of which the first
seemed to be Legal and civil; the other domestical and of greatest moment;
the last warlike and popular. Neither ought it then to be enclosed with a
lesser hedge, that so we might rejoice, that it has thereby come safe and sound
to us now. But of these garrisons or fences the ancient inventers of them, and
those who next succeeded them, conferred more assistance and labor upon the
two last, namely the domestic and popular, then on that Court presidentship:
For they would always retain in themselves a power of moderating and governing
the most loose reins of the Royal Dignity, which they might restrain or
enlarge as there was need. Page 664, 665, 667, 716, to 812.
The^fore they assigned those 12 elders to him elected out of the greatest men,
by whose Counsels the Kings ought to be hedged in on every side: the place of
which Elders, the Rici-men afterward possessed; who were the chief of our
Nobles; who in times past were second to the Kings in such sort, that they
might seem to be their Peers and Companions. These called that public union to
the aid of Liberty, and out of them were chosen those who should always be
the prime and principal conservators of it: for thus they called the
presidents of the Union. Finally, they sustained on their necks all the Offices
and burdens of peace and war, if not with the same power as the Kings, yet I
may truly say with very little less; for the Rici-men, as long as they
flourished, relying on the Forces of the Union, did always hover over the
Royal Empire, and by the entire power of their offices, if the violence or
assaults of Kings were unjust, did from inordinate reduce them into order, and
as it were into a circle of Law and Justice. In which thing verily their grave
censorious and domestical authority had sufficient right and moment with our
ancient Kings, who were well mannered: but if peradventure they could not with
their fitting counsels bridle the exulting royal Forces, they did constantly
repel them from their necks with the force of the raised Union. Thus and much
more this Spanish Author, in whom you may read at large the Power and Authority
of the Justice of Arragon, of the General Assembly of the Estates or
Parliaments of that Kingdom, of their Rici men, Peers, Magistrates,
Counselors, and in Ioannis de Laet. his Descrip^io Hispaniae, cap. 5. cite.
Ioannis Mari. and De Rebus Hisp. l. 8. c. 1. and Genesis hist. of Spain, l. 17. p.
618.

To which l shall only add this most notable custom and ceremony used at the
Coronation of the Kings of Arragon, recorded (q) by Quaest. 3. p. 162, 163.
by Iunius Brutus, (r) Franciscus Hotomanus, Franco-gal. c. 10. p. 75. 76. De
Iure Magist. in s^bditos, p. 282, 283.
and others. The Arrogonians when as they create and crown their King in the
Assembly of the Estates (or Parliament) of Arragon, to put the King in mind,
that the Laws, the Justice of Arragon, and Assembly of Estates are above him,
act a kind of Play that he may remember it the better: they bring in a man on
whom they impose the name of the Justice of Arragon, whom by the common Decree
of the people, they enact to be greater and more powerful then the King: to
whom, sitting in an higher place, they make the King do homage; and then
having created the King upon certain Laws and conditions, they speak unto him
in these words, which show the Excellent and singular fortitude of that Nation
in bridling their Kings: NOS QVI VALEMOS TANTO COME VOS, Y PODEMOS MAS QVE VOS,
VOS ELEGIMOS REY, CON EST AS Y EST AS CONDITIONES INTRA VOS Y NOS UN QVE MANDA
MAS QVE VOS: that is, We who are as great as you, and are able to do more then
you, have chosen you King upon these and these conditions: Between you and us
there is one greater in command then you; to wit, the Justice of Arragon; Which
Ceremony (lest the King should forget it) is every three years repeated in the
General Assembly of the States of Arragon; which Assembly the King is bound by
Law to assemble, it being a part of the very Law of Nations, which sacred
Liberty of Parliaments, and Assemblies if any Kings by evil arts restrain or
suppress, as violaters of the Law of Nations, and void of humane Society, they
are no more to be reputed Kings, but Tyrants, as Hotoman hence determines.

I have now given you somewhat an over-large account of the two See Mr. Seldens
Titles of Hon. par. 1. c. 8. sect. 6. p. 256. to 271.
greatest and most absolute hereditary Kings in Christendom, France and Spain,
and proved them to be inferior to their Laws, Parliaments, Kingdoms, People,
out of their own Authors and Historians: in which points, if any desire
further satisfaction, I shall advise them to read but Iunius Brutus his
Vindiciae Contra Tyrannos, De jure Magistratus in ^ubditos, and Francisci
Hotomani his Franco-Gallia; and Controvers. Illust. for France: ^oannis
Mariana, de Rege and Regum Instit. l. 1. with his History of Spain, Hieronimus
Blanca, Rerum Arragonensium Commentarius, Ioannis de Laet Hispaniae descrip. c.
5. and Vasquius, Contr. illust. for Spain, at their leisure, and then both
their judgments and consciences will be abundantly satisfied herein.

I shall now very cursorily run over other foreign Kings and Kingdoms of
less power and Sovereignty with as much brevity as may be.

For the Kings of Hungary, Bohemia, Poland, Denmark, Sweden, as they have been
usually, and are at this day for the most part, not hereditary, but merely
ellective by the Nobles and people; so their Laws, which they take an Oath
inviolably to observe, and their Parliaments Nobles, people, are in Sovereign
power and jurisdiction paramount them, as much almost (if not altogether) as
the State of Venice is above their Duke, or the States of the Low Countries
superior to the Prince of Orange; and may upon just occasion not only
forcibly resist them with Arms, but likewise depose (if not adjudge them unto
death) for their Tyranny, as Commonweal, l. 1. c. 10. l. 2 c. 5.
John Bodin, the ^istories of Hungary, Poland, Bohemia, Denmark, Sweden,
Iunius Brutus, De Iure Magistratus in Subditos, Munster in his Cosmography, and
those who have compiled the Republikes of these Realms attest; who further
evidence, that most of these Realms have sometimes elected them Kings, other
times only Dukes, and made their republikes, Principalitis, Dukedoms or
Kingdoms at their pleasure. To give only some brief touches concerning these
Realms and their Kings.

Hungary.
THe Kings of Hungary are merely elective by the States and Senators, in their
Parliaments or assemblies of the Estates, without whom they can neither make
Laws, impose Taxes, leavie War, nor conclude Peace; and the grand Officer of
the Realm, to wit the great Palatine of Hungary (who has the chief Command
both in Peace and War and power to judge the King Himself in some cases) is
elected only in and by their Parliaments, as the Rerum Vngarica ^um
Scriptores, Nuholaus ^sthuansus de Rebus Vnga^ic. Hist. l. 6 p. 84, 85. Eodin.
de Rep. l. 1. c 10. Bonsinius; Decades rerum Vngar carum, Munst. Co^mog. 4. c.
418, 19. Respu^ and status Hungariae, An. 1634. De (...) Migist. ^ Subditos.
Marginall Writers manifest at large. For their Realms and peoples deportment
toward their ill Kings (since they became Christians) when they have
degenerated into Tyrants, and o^hewise misdeme^^ed themselves; take this brief
Epitome. Peter the second Christian King of Hungary, growing very insolent,
Tyrannical, and lascivious, ravishing ma^ds, matr^ns; in the third year of his
reign all the Nobles and people thereupon conspiring together, deposed and
banished him the Realm, electing Alba in his place; who growing more insolent
and Tyrannical then Peter, was in the third year of his reign slain in war,
and Peter restored to the Crown: who proceeding in his tyrannies, sacrilege,
and cruelty, he was the third year after his restitution, taken prisoner by his
subjects, his eyes put out, and imprisoned till he dy^d. Solomon the fif^ King
of Hungary, was twice deposed and thrust out of his Kingdom, first by King
Bela, next by King Gysa, ele^^ed Kings by the peoples general consent and
acclamation; after whose death the Hungarians refused to restore Solomon, and
elected Ladislaus for their King; whereupon Solomon became an Hermit, and so
dyed. Ladislaus dying, left two sons, Almus the younger, whom they elected King
and Coloman the eldest, to whom Almus out of simplicity surrendered the Crown,
because he was the elder brother, whom he would not deprive of his
primogeniture; but repenting afterward, by the instigation of some of his
friends, he raised war against his brother: But the Hungarians to prevent a
civil war^e and ^ffusion of blood, DE^REED that these two brethren should
fight it out between them in a single duel, and he who conquered in the duel,
they would repute their King; Which Combat Coloman being purblinde, lame and
crookback'd, refused; after which Coloman treacherously surprising his brother
Almus, contrary to agreement, put out his and Bela his sons eyes, and thrust
them into a Monastery. King Stephen the second son of Coloman, refusing to
marry a wife, and following Harlots, the Barons and Nobles grieving at the
desolation of the Kingdom, provided him a wife of a Noble family, and caused
him to marry her. After which making a war to aid Duk-Bezin^ John de T^wrocz.
Hungar. Chron. c. 36. p. 71.
without his Nobles consent in which Bezen was slain: the Nobles of Hungary
assembling themselves together in Council, said: Why, and wherefore dye we? if
we shall claim the Dukedom, which of us will the King make Duke? therefore
let it be decreed that none of us will assault the Castle, and sol^t us tell
the King, Because he both all this without the Council of his Nobles: They did
so, and added further, that if he would assault the Castle, he should do it
alone; but w^ (say they) will return unto Hungary and choose another King.
Whereupon, By the Command of the Princes, the Heralds procla^med in the Tents,
That all the Hungarians should speedily return into Hungary: wherefore the
King when he saw himself justly deserted of his subjects aid, returned into
Hungary. Stephen the third coming to the Crown, did nothing without the
Authority and advise of the Senate. Stephen the fourth son of Bela usurping
the Crown, was soon after expelled the Kingdom. Emericus being elected King,
was very likely to be deprived by the Nobles and people for his sloathfulnesse,
but that he appeased them with good words and promises. King Andrew going to
Jerusalem, his Queen, Elizabeth, in the mean time delivered the Wife of
Banch^u a Nobleman, being very beautiful to her brother who doated on her, to
be abused, which Bauchan hearing of, s^ew the Queen: the King upon his return
examining this business, acquitted Bauchan, and judged her murder just, being
for so lewd a fact. Ladislaus the fourth, giving himself to all effaeminacy,
luxury, and Harlots, became odious to his Barons, Nobles, People, for which he
was excommunicated by Firmanus the Popes Legate, that he might live Christianly
and Chastely; but he reforming not, was soon after (in the year 1290.) slain
by the Cumans and his Kingdom infested with civil wars. Mary the daughter
of K. Jews, being received as Queen by the Hungarians for her fathers merits,
after his decease, being yet young, was married to Sigismond, who was admitted
into partnership in the government of the Realm, and being governed by her
mother and Nicholas de Gara, who persuaded them to carry a strict hand over the
Nobles of the Realm, which they did: thereupon the Nobles seeing themselves
despised, sent for Cha^rles King of Naples into Hungary; forced Mary and her
Mother to resign their rights to the Crown, and crowned Charles King at Alba
Regalis. When he was crowned the Bishop of Strigonium, according to the
custom, demanded of the people thrice, with alowd voice; Whether if were their
pleasure that Charles should be crowned King? who answered, Yes: which done he
was crowned, and soon after murdered by the two Queens treachery; Who were
shortly after taken prisoners by John de Hornach, governor of Croatia^; the
Queen Mother Elizabeth drowned, Queen Mary kept prisoner, and at last released
upon oath given, not to revenge her Mothers death: who contrary to her oath
caused Hornach, and 32. Nobles more to be beheaded by Sigismond her husband,
whose kind^ed and children thereupon conspired against King Sigismond, took
and detained him prisoner Anno. 1401. till they should proceeds further against
him, and in the mean time the Nobles of Hungary elected Ladislaus King of
Apulia for their King, and at last deposed Sigismond for his misgovernment,
cruelty, love of women. After See Grimstons Imperial History, p. 606 Chytraeus
Chron. Saxoniae.
Sigismonds death, the Nobles and people were divided in the choice of their
King; one part electing and crowning Vladislaus King of Poland, the other party
Ladislaus an infant, for their King: but Vladislaus his party prevailing, he
was not long after ^laine in a battle against the Turks; and the government of
the Realm committed to that Noble Soldier Huniades, during the Minority of
Ladislaus, who at his ripe age, was received and declared King by all the
Hungarians. Ladislaus deceasing, the Hungarians elected the Emperor Frederick
King, who delaying to come and take the election, they thereupon chose Mathias
King, who enjoyed the dignity, notwithstanding the Emperors opposition. Anno.
1608. Mathias King of Hungary denied the Protestants in Grimston Imp. Hist. p.
730. 731.
Austria free exercise of their Religion, they thereupon were forced to take up
Arms, and assembling together at Honne made a Protestation, and sent to the
States of Hungary requiring them to assist them with the succors that were
promised by the offensive and defensive league: after which they obtained a
peace, and part of what they demanded. Grim. p. 739.
Anno 1613. In an Assembly of the Estates of Hungary, the differences
concerning the defense and Militia in the borders of Hungary against the Turk
were ordered and settled. And Grim. p. 748.
An. 1618. After many slow proceedings, they elected Ferdinand of Bohemia for
their King of Hungary; but with these conditions, That he should Religiously
observe, and cause to be immovably observed all the Liberties, Immunities,
Privileges, Statutes, Rights and Customs of the Kingdom, with the
Conclusions and Treaties of Vienna, and all the Articles comprehended therein,
and all other concluded both before and after the Coronation of the Emperors
Majesty, in the years 1608. and 1609. Which Articles being ratified by the
Emperor under his Letters Patents, they proceeded to the Coronation, according
to the accustomed manner. Such is the Sovereign power of the States of Hungary
to this very day. And in one word, so odious were Saxagra^uma ticus Danicae
Hist. l. 8. p. 140.
Tyrants anciently to the Slavonians and Hungarians, that by a public Law of
their Ancestors, he who slew a Tyrannical King, was to succeed him in the
Kingdom.

Bohemia.
For the Kings and Kingdom of Bohemia, M. Paulus Stranskins in his Respublica
Bo^emiae. c. 5. and 12. informs us out of the Fundamental Laws of Bohemiae
See Bartholdus Pontanus Bohemiae piae l. 5. 6. and Pauli Geschinii Majeas.
Carolina.
That the power of the Kings of Bohemia. who are Elected by the general Votes
of the States, is so far restrained in that Realm, that they can determine
nothing concerning the Kingdom or great Affairs of the Realm, but in their
Parliaments, or general Assemblies of the Estates, by the general consent of
the people; which are Summoned by the king himself and held (just like our
Parliaments) in the kings Regency, and during the Interregnum by the Senate of
the Realm, as often as there is occasion; there being this cla^se in the Writ
of Summons; That whether all those who, are sommoned come at the day or not,
the king with those who appear, will proceed to decree what shall be just and
b^neficall for the Republicke, and that those who neglect to appear shall be
bound thereby; all Laws and Acts are therein passed by public consent. The
King cannot alien or morgage any of the Crown Lands, nor release not diminish
the revenue^ and Liberties of the Realm, nor promote any strangers to the
custodies of Castles or public functions; impose no Taxes, charges; nor altar
the ancient manner of the Militia of the Realm, nor make war or peace,
without the Parliaments advise and consent And Pauli Stransbii. Respub.
Bohemioe c. 5. Sect. 14. 15. p. 174. 175. 178. 179.
before the king is Crowned, the Burgr^ve and Nobles, in the Name of all the
Realm, demand of him to confirm and ratify both with his especial Charter,
and public Oath, the Ancient and laudable Privileges, Immunities, Liberties,
Rights, Laws, Customs, and Institutions, as well private as public, of all
and singular the inhabitants of the Realm, and to govern them according to
the rule of the Laws after the example of his predecessors kings of Bohemi^.
Which done, he seals and delivers them a special Charter, takes such a
solemn Oath, and then is Crowned upon these Conditions. The Munst. Cos^^ l. 1.
3. c. 492. 499. Burcholdus Pontanus Bohemiae Piae. l. 1. 2.
Archbishop of Prague after the Letany ended, demands of the king, kneeling on
his knees: Will thou keep the holy faith delivered to thee from Catholiok men
and observe it in just works? He answering, I will: He proccedes, and says:
With thou Govern and defend the Kingdom granted thee from God, according to
the Justice of thy Fathers? He answers, I will; and by Gods Assistance promise
that I will do and performed it by all means. After this kneeling on his
knees, the Archbishop holding the New Testament open, and the Burgrave reading
the words first; the king takes this Oath in the Bohemian tongue We swear to
God (the mother of God and all Saints) upon this holy Gospel, that we will and
ought to keep immovably to the Barons, Knights, and Nobles, also to those of
Prague and the other Cities and to all the Comm^nalty of the Realm of Bohemia,
the Institutions, Laws, Privileges, Exemptions, Liberties, and Rights, and
also the ancient, good and laudable customs of the Realm; and not to alienate
or morgage any thing from the same Kingdom of Bohemia, but rather to our power
to augment and enlarge it; and to ^oe all things which may be good and
honorable to that Kingdom: So help me God (touching the book with two of
the fingers of his right hand) and all Saints. (The Kings of Navarre take the
like Oath.) Genesis Hist. of Spain. l. 17. p. 6^6.


How Paulus StransR^pub. Bohem. c. ^. de Principibus Regibusque (...)
this Realm has been altered from a Principality to a Dukedom, and from it
again to a Kingdom, having sometimes Kings, sometimes Dukes, both elected by
the free choice of the Estates, to whom they were inferior in Sovereign
power, accountable for their ^^is-government, and removeable from their Throne:
you may read in the Mu^^ter pontanus quis.
marginall Authors. Not to mention the Bohemians deposition of Libussa a Noble
Virago, who governed then for a season, reputing it a dishonor to the Nation
to be ruled by a woman, and electing Przemys^^s for their Prince; their
deposition and banishment of Prince Borzinogius, because he become a Christian,
and renounced their Pagan Religion, though they afterward twice restored him:
Of Boleslaus Rufus (...) Borzinogius the 2. thrice deposed banished by the
Nobles and people, or ^obeislaus, and other Princes. Wladislaus first King of
Bohemia in his old age, by the assent of the Estates associated his son
Fred^rick (Anno 1173) with him in the Regality Henry King of Bohemia using the
Council of the Germans rather then the Bohemians, and looking more after his
own private gain then the Kingdoms, was deposed in a general Assembly ^f
the Estates Anno 1310. and the son of the Emperor Henry the 7th. chosen
King, upon this condition, if he would marry the youngest daughter of King
Wenceslaus. King Wenceslaus the drunken, for his drunkenness, negl^gence and
cruelty, was twice imprisoned and severely handled by his Nobles, and upon
promise of amendment, restored to his liberty and dignity: in his and Sigismond
his successors raigns See Aeneas Silvius Hist. Bohem. Fox Acts and Monuments
vol. 1. p. 848. to 852. Pontanus Bohemiae piae, l. 1. 2.
Zizca and the Taborites in defense of their Religion against the Popish party,
who most unjustly against their promise and safe conduct, caused John Hus, and
Jerome of Prague to be put to death, waged great wars and obtained many
victories against the King and Emperor, and gained free liberty of professing
their religion publickely much against the Popes good will; which liberty they
have ever since maintained by the sword, both against the Popish Emperors and
Kings, by means of which civil wars, the kingdom suffered some Interregnums.
During the Minority of king c Ladislaus, Anno 1439. this kingdom was governed
by two Presidents, appointed by the Estates.

Grimstons Imperial Hist. p. 735.
Anno 1611. the Emperor Rodulph being willing to settle the kingdom of
Bohemia on his Brother Matthias in an assembly of the States of Bohemia called
for that purpose, the Estates thereupon drew many Articles which Matthias was
to swear to, before his Coronation, with 49. Articles of complaints and
grievances for which they craved redress: and the inhabitants of Pragne
required the confirmation of 8. Articles which concerned the private Government
of their City: All which the Emperor and Matthias were constrained to Grant
and swear to, before they would admit Matthias to be their King; who had
nothing in a manner but the Title, some of the flowers of the liberty of the
Crown, being parted with by his assenting the these. Articles. Grimstons
Imperial Hist. p. 744. 745.
Anno 1617. Matthias resigning the Crown of Bohemia, and renouncing his right
thereunto, recommended Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, to them or his
successor. The States would not admit him king but upon Conditions, the which
if he should infringe, The States should not be bound to yield him Obedience.
Moreover it was added, That he should confirm: to the States before his
Coronation, to maintain all the Privileges, Charters, Immunities, Municipall
Rights, Constitutions and Customs, of the Realm, and people, as the Emperor
and his predecessors had done, by his Oath, and Charter in Writing. All which
assented to, he was proclaimed and crowned king. Soon after the Archbishop of
Pragu^ causing some of the Protestant Churches to be ruined, and those who
complained of it to be put in prison; and plotting the extirpation of the
Protestand Religion, through the I^su^tes instigation, contrary to their
Liberties and the Provincial constitution; hereupon the Protestant States of
Bohemia assembled at Prague, fortified the Town, binding the three Towns of
Prague to them by an Oath; entered into a solemn League, promising to fight
against the Common enemies of God, the King and Religion, and in that cause to
live and dye: to which end they levied a great Army; banishing the J^suites out
of Bohemi^, as the Authors of all the miseries which had happened in that Realm,
and many other Realms and States of Christendom, and inciting murderes to
kill Kings who would not live after their manner, and meddling with affairs of
State, and who had drawn the whole Country into the hands of certain
perfidious Catholics, by whose practices the Country was in danger of ruin.
For which causes they banished them for ever out of the Realm of Bohemia,
enjoying them to depart within 8. days, never to return. After this, the
Protestants hearing that the Emperor and (...) party raised Forces against
them, possessed themselves of many Towns and places within the Realm, and
raised two Armies; All the Protestant Princes and States of Germany, Morauia
and S^lesia (except the Elector of Saxony) assisted them with men, money or
Council, publishing a Declaration to justify their action, being for the
Common cause of Religion, then endangered. The Prince of Oranges and States of
the united Provinces promised them assistance of men and money, other
Protestant Princes and the Protestant States of Lower Austria, did the like.
The Protestant Armies after this had many victorious incounters with the
Imperialists and Popish Forces, and took many Towns. King Ferdinand in the
mean time, being newly chosen Emperor, the States of Bohemia being assembled
together at Prague, which the Deputies of the incorporated Provinces, Anno.
1619. Concluded and protested by Oath, never to acknowledge Ferdina^d for their
King who had violated his first Covenants; resolving to proceed to a new
Election; and on the 26. of August Elected Frederick the Prince Elector
Palatine of Rhine to be their King; who accepted the dignity, and was afterward
Crowned king accordingly. After which the States of Bohemia in sundry
Declarations justified their rejection of Ferdinand, their Election of
Frederick, and his Title to be just and lawful, with their preceedent and
subsequent wars in defense of Religion. Yea Frederick himself by sundry
Declarations maintained his own Title: and the lawfulnes of these wars; which
passages and proceedings being yet fresh in memory, and at large related by
Grimston in his Page 745. to 250.
Imperial History, I shall forbear to mention them. By this brief account,
you may easily discern the Sovereign power of the Realm and States of Bohemia
over their kings and Princes, most of the Pauli Strankii Resp. Bohem. c. 10.
13. 14, 15.
great Offices of which Realm are hereditary, and not disposable by the king,
but States who Elect their Kings themselves, and their greatest Officer; too.

Polan^.
For the Kings and Kingdom of Poland. Martinus Chromerus in his Polonia lib.
2. De Republica et Magistratibus Poloniae, See Munst. Cosmog. l. 4. c. 2. 4. 5.
informs us; that the Princes and Dukes of Poland, before it was advanced unto
a Kingdom, and the Kings of it ever since it became a Realm, were always,
elected by the chiefest Nobles and States, unanimous suffrages; That after the
Kings of Poland, became Christians, their power began to be more restrained
then it was at first, the Clergy being wholly exempt from their royal
Jurisdiction: That the king cannot judge of the life or fame of a knight
(unless in some special cases) without it be in the assembly of the Estates
with the Senate, not yet publicly make War or Peace, with any, nor impose
Taxes or Tributes or new Customs, nor alienate any of the goods of the Realm,
nor yet do or decree any greater thing pertaining to the Commonwealth without
the Senates or Parliaments assent. Neither can he make new Laws, nor
publicly command money in an extraordinary manner, nor coin money, nor
nominate a Successor not with the Senate, without the consent of the Nobility,
whether of Knights or Gentlemen's Order; By, or out of whom all public
Magistrates and Senators almost are chosen: so as now the sum or chiefest
power of the Republicke is residing in them. So that the Kingdom and
Republicke of the Polonians does not much differ in reason from, that of the
Lecedae ^onians in ancient times, and of the Venetians now. An Oath is exacted
of the new King when he is crowned, to this effect. That he shall reign
according to the Laws and institutes of his Predecessors; and will safely
conserve to every order and man his right, privilege, and benefit, confirmed
by former Kings; nor will he diminish any of the borders or goods of the
Realm, but will according to his power recover those that are lost from
others: After all which the Senate swear fealty to him, etc. The Revenues,
Tributes, and Customs of the king are all reduced to a certainty; the Nobles
and Clergy are exempted from Taxes. The King by the Laws of King Alexander,
is prohibed to alien to any one the Lands of the Crown. No new Laws can be
made, nor old ones repealed but by the king, Senate and Nobles assembled in
Parliament. And because there is wont to be in highest power, a slippery and
ready degree to Tyranny, certain Senators and Councillors are adjoined to
the King, who may direct his Counsels And Actions to the safety of the
Commonwealth, and his judgments according to the Rule of justice and equity,
and with their wholesome monitions and Counsels, may as there shall be
occasion, as it were with certain living Laws, both inform his mind and
moderate his power. This Royal Sena^e, much greater now then in times past,
consists of a certain number of men, which we call the Senators or
Councillors of the REALM; who are not admitted to the Council without an
Oath: and this Office is perpetual during life, having certain Honors and
Magistracies thereto annexed, partly Ecclesiastical, partly Civil; It
consists of 96. persons in all, some of them Bishops, others Palatines,
Knights, Castellanes, and other Officers of the Realm. The Chancellor of the
Realm may s^gne many things without the Kings Privitie, and may deny to seal
those things which are contrary to Law, though the king command them. Most of
the great Officers and Magistrates are chosen in Parliament, and cannot be
displaced but in Parliament, and that for some great offense. Their Parliaments
or General Assemblies of the States are held (much like ours) once every year
at least, and some times every fifth or sixth month, if there be occasion; and
then they are kept constantly at one place, to wit at Pet^icow, or Warsavia in
the midst of the Kingdom, unless it be upon some extraordinary just occasion,
and then the king by advice of this Council may sommon the Parliament at
another place. It is provided by a Law within these 20 years; That it shall
not be lawful to the King to make a war without the assent of his Parliament
and Great Council; and that the Nobles as often as there is occasion, shall at
their own costs without wages defend the borders of the Realm, yet not
without the King, unless it be during the Interregnum; but they may not be
compelled to go out of the Realm to any Foreign war without wages: the
Soldiers wages are reduced to a certainety, and asseased by public consent
in Parliament, which Orders all Military and Civil Affairs. So Cromerus.

For their carriage toward their ill Kings, I shall give you only a short
account. Munst. Cosm. l. 4. c. 7. 1^. Martinus Chrom^us de Rebus Polonorum.
Heylins Geog. p 378 Gaguinus Chytraeus, and others.
Miesco their second King, being unfit to govern, a man given wholly to his
belly, ease, sleep, pleasure, and governed by his Queen, thereupon most of
his subjects revolted from him; and he dying the Polonians at first for many
years, refused to choose Cazimirus his Son King least he should follow his
fathers steps; till at last after a long Interregnum, when he had turned Monk,
they elected him King. Bolestaus his son, a man of a dissolute life, given to
lust, and the pest of the Realm, was excommunicated by the Bishop of Cracow
for his wickedness; for which cause he slew him: Whereupon the Pope deprived
him, and Poland of the Crown, and absolved his Subjects from their obedience
to him, who expelled and forced him to flee out of the Realm into Hungary,
where he became mad and died. My^zlaus the 10. King of Poland, exercising
tyranny every where upon his people by reason of his power and allies, was
deposed by his subjects, and Cazimirus elected King in his stead; He was three
or four times deposed and put by the Crown; Boleslaus who succeeded Henry,
was deprived of the Monarchy; Henry was surprised and most strictly imprisoned.
Boleslaus was slain by his Nobles; and Vladisiaus Locktect, elected King in
his stead, ravishing virgins, Matrons, and not reforming things according to
promise; the Nobles hereupon assembling together An. 1300. abrogated his
election, as pernicious, and chose Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, King in his
place: And not to recite more ancient histories of such like nature, David
Chytraeus, Chron. Sax. l. 23. p. 690. 693. 694. 695. 695. 696. Grimstens
Imperial history. p. 694. 695.
King Henry the third of Poland was elected and sworn King upon conditions
Which he was to perform Anno 1574. After which he secretly departing out of
Poland, without the assent of the Nobles, to take possession of the Crown of
France, within 3. months after his Coronation in Poland: the Polonians sent
Messergers after him to Ferrara, June 16. 1574. who denounced to him, that
unless he returned into Poland, before the 12 of May following, they would
depose him, and elect another King: Which he neglecting, they in a general
assembly of the Estates at Wa^sa^ia, deprived him of the Crown, and elected a
new King: the Chancellor and greatest part of the Counselors elected
Maximilian the Empero^r; Some others, with the greater part of the Nobility,
desiring to have one of the Polish blood, elected Anne sister of their deceased
King Sigismund, giving her for husband Stephen Battery Prince of Transylvania,
and proclaimed him King. The Emperor making mary delays, Stephen in the mean
time enters Poland, marries Anne, and is crowned King by general consent,
Febr^ary 8. 1576. who took this memorable Coronation Oath prescribed to him by
the Nobles. I Stephen by the grace of God elected King of Poland, great Duke of
Lithuania, etc. promise and sacredly swear to Almighty God, upon these holy
Evangelists of Jesus Christ, that I will hold, observe, def^rd and fulfill in
all conditions, articles, and points therein expressed, all Rights, Liberties,
Securitus, pri^^^^dges public and private, not contrary to the common Law, and
Liberties of both Nations, justly and lawfully given and granted to the
Ecclesiastickes and s^culars, Churches, Princes, Barons, Nobles, Citizens, in
h^bita^ts, and any other persons of what state and condition so ever by my
go^ly Predecessors, Kings, Princes or Lords of the Kingdom of Poland, and of
the great Dukedom of Lithuania, especially by Casim^r, Lewis the great, called
Loys, Vladislaus the first, called Iagiello and his brother Withold great Duke
of Lithuania, Vladislaus the 2. Casimyrth. 3. John Albert, Alexander, Sigism^nd
the first, and 2. Augustus, and Henry Kings of Poland and great Dukes of
Lathuania; or derived and granted from them, together with the Laws enacted,
and established or offered by all the States during the Interregnum, and the
pacts and agreements of my Orators, made with the States in my name. That I
will defend and maintain peace and tranquillity between those who differ about
Religion; neither by any means, either by Our Jurisdiction, or by any
authority o^ Our Officers or states, permit any to be troubled or oppressed,
neither will we our Self injure or oppress any by reason of Religion. All
things any way whatsoever unlawfully alienated, or distracted, either by war^e
or any other means, from the Kingdom of Poland, the great Dukedom and their
dominions, I will reunite to the propriety of the said Kingdom of Poland, and
great Duchy of Lithuania. I will not diminish the lands of the Kingdom and
great Dukedom, but defend and enlarge them. I will administer justice to all
the inhabitants of our Kingdom, and execute the public Laws constituted in
all my Dominions, without all delays and prorogations, having no respect of
any persons whatsoever. And if I shall violate my Oath in any thing (which God
forbid) the Inhabitants of my Realm, and of all my Dominions of what Nation
soever, shall not be bound to yield me any Obedience: Yea, I do Ipso facto
free them from all Faith and Obedience which then owe unto me as King. I will
demand no absolution from this my Oath of any one, neither will I receive any,
which shall be voluntarily offered, So help me God. To this notable Oath (an
unanswerable evidence of the States of Polands absolute Sovereignty over their
Kings) this King within 4. days after his Coronation, added a confirmation of
their Privileges, containing the same heads, enlarged with a few more words;
which he confirmed with his solemn deed and Royal Seal, and delivered the
same to the Chancellor, and Vice Chancellor of the Realm to give out Coppies
of them, under the great Seal to all the States of the Realm; who meeting s
afterward in a Parliaments, at Wansauia, Anno. 1562; there was much debate
about settling of the Premises, and nothing concluded.

Chytraeus Chron. Sax. l. 25. p. 765. 766. l. 27. p. 809. 810. and l. 28. 29.
etc. p. 948. 949.
Anno 1587, the States of Poland questioned and opposed K. Stephen, Chytraeus
Chron sax l. l. 28. 29, 30. Grimst. Imp. Hist. p. 698. 699.
for violating their Privileges, and those of Riga took up arms in defense
of them; refusing after his death to repair to the Assembly of the States at
Warsauia, Anno 1587. unless their Privileges might be preserved and
rectified, as you may read at large in Chytr^us. King Stephen dying the Estates
of Poland, and Lithua^ia, assembled at Warsauia, Anno 1587. where they made
Laws for preserving the Peace during the Inter regnum; and enacted, that no
new King should be elected, but by the unanimous consent and agreeing Suffrages
of all the Estates, and that he who shall nourish factions, or receive gifts or
rewards, or use any other practices about the election of a new King, should
be reputed an Enemy of his Country. After which they proceeding to an
Election; there were diverse competitors named: and after many debates; One part
chose Maximilian Duke of Austria, the other Sigismund the King of Swethland his
Son, both of them upon express articles and conditions, which they both
sealed and swore unto, the chief whereof were these; To preserve all their
Rights, Laws, Privileges, and Immunities public or private, inviolably, To
keep all former Leagues and Truces; To bestow no Offices upon strangers nor
harbor any about them, (except some few Private servants) but natives only,
and to be counseled and advised by them alone. To maintain a Navy, Garrisons,
and build diverse Castles in the Frontiers at their Own costs for the Kingdoms
preservation; To redress all grievances, maintain the Privileges, Rights and
Peace of those who differed in Religion; To procure and augment the weal,
peace, Privileges and safety of the Realm; and perform all Articles mentioned
in the Oaths of King Henry and Stephen; In fine, this competition coming to
be determined by the sword: Maximillian was taken prisoner by Sigismund, and
forced to release his right to obtain his liberty: And a Decree passed in
Parliament, That no man hereafter should in the Election of the King of Poland,
presume to name, or recommend any of the house of Austria to the Crown, and if
any did he should be ipso facto infamous: Which decree the Emp. Rodolph desired
might be abolished, as being a disparagement to that family, yet prevailed not.
After which this King managed all things concerning War, Peace, and the
Government of the Realm, by advice of his Parliament, as Chytraeus at large
relates; and his Successors to this present have done the like, taking the
Crown upon such conditions, and making such conditional Oaths at their
Coronations, as Steven did at his.

Denmark.
For the Kings of Denmark, I have Part 4. p. 1. 2. Henrisus Ranzovius,
Commenr. Bellicut. l. 1. c. 3.
formerly proved, That they can make no War, Peace, Laws, nor lay any
impositions on their subjects, but by common consent of the Estates in
Parliament; their Kings being elective by the people, and crowned Kings upon
such conditions, Oaths, Articles, as their States, (in whom the Sovereign power
resides,) shall prescribe unto them; who as Commonweal. l. 1. 4. 10. l. 2. c. 5.
Bodin clearly determines, have a lawful power to question, censure, and
depose them for their Tyranny and misgovernment, they having no greater
Authority then the Kings of Bohemia or Poland. To run over the Histories of all
their ill Kings would be overtedious, for which you may peruse Danicae. Hist.
Chytr: Chron: Saxoniae. Munsteri Cosmogr. l. 4. c. 8, 9, 10, to 19. Iohannis
Magnus, Hermoldi Chron. Slav^rum, 10, 1 sac. Pontanus Rerum Danicorum, Hist.
Saxogrammaticus and others; I shall give you a brief how some of their later
kings have been handled by their subjects for their Tyranny and misgovernment.
Not to mention the murders of Canutus in Iutland in the very Church, or of
Magnus or Nicholas, slain by their subjects; King Humblus was deprived of his
Crown: and king Harold deposed by his subjects for his insolency. Suano waxing
proud, Tyrannous and oppressive to his people, became so odious to them, that
his Nobles adjoined Canutus and Waldemar to him in the royal government, and
divided the kingdom between them; who thereupon being much displeased, slew
Canutus and wounded Waldemar, being impatient of any Peers in government; for
which being soon after vaquished by Waldemar, he was beheaded by the people.
Able slaying and beheading his brother king Ericus, and usurping his Crown, the
people rose up in arms against him, took him prisoner, and the Peasants in
Frisia slew him. King Christopher spo^ling Waldemar of his Dukedorn of
Schleswick, thereupon the Earls of Holsatia rose up in arm^^ against him, took
him prisoner, and detained him so at Hamburgh, till he paid a great ransom for
his liberty. King Ericus was slain by his own servants, Anno 1286. king
Waldemar was expelled the Realm by his Subjects, and afterward restored upon
his friends mediation; who not long after denying Merchants their ancient
liberties in the Realm, the maritine Cities conspiring against him, entered
Denmark with a great Army, expelled him the Realm, took his Castle of
Coppenhagen, and had the land of Scania assigned to them for 16. years, by the
Nobles, in recompense of their damages sustained. Ericus seeing his subjects
^very where rise up in Arms against him, sailed into Poland, An. 1438. and
deserted ^is Kingdom and Sovereignty, the people denying him liberty to name a
Successor, and electing Christopher Duke of (...) for their king. After whom,
they elected (...) the first king, against whom the Sweeds rebelling for want
of (...) of justice, and the oppression of his Officers, vanquished Christiern
(...) and (...) up a new king of their own, named Charles, who An. 1455.
abandoned the Royalty; the Swedes after that would neither create any new king,
nor obey Christierne, nor yet King John who succeeded him, whose Queen they
took and detained prisoner two years, and maintained war against him. Chytr.
Chr. Sax^l. ^0. 13 p, 30* to 312, 387 388, 389. O^aus Magnus, lib. 7. c. 8. p.
229. De ^ure Magist in Sub p. 2^5. ^ucanon de ^ure Regni apud S^otos Dr B^ards
Theater of Gods ludgements. l. 2. c. 10. p. 454, 455.
Christierne the second, King of Denmark, was thrust out of his kingdom for
his Tyranny, and breach of his subjects Privileges: which he endeavoring to
regain, was taken prisoner by his Uncle Frederick Duke of Scleswick and
Holstein, and committed prisoner to Sunderburge in Holsatia, where he dyed in
chains: Frederick was elected king in his place, (upon certain Articles and
conditions which he was sworn unto before his Coronation) in a general
assembly of the States held at Hafnia, An. 1524. in and by which assembly
Christierne was solemnly deposed, and a Declaration made, printed and published
in the name of all the States of Denmark, wherein they express the cause why
they renounced their faith and obedience to Christierne, sworn unto him upon
certain conditions which he had broken, and elected Frederick: Which
Declaration because it is not common perchance to every ordinary Shollar, and
contains many things touching the frame and liberty of the kingdom of Denmark,
the Articles to which the kings do usual swear at their Coronations, and the
Tyrannnies of Christierne, for which he was deprived. I shall here insert, as I
find it recorded in Chron, Sax. l, 10, p, 303, to 312.
David Chytraeus.

OMnibus Christianis Regnis, principatibus, regionibus and populis, notum est,
in orb Christiano, celebre regnum DANIAE situm esse, quod non secus ac caetera
regna, plurimis jam seculis, Regia sua praeeminentia, dignitate, ornamentis and
liberate praeditum fuerit, and adhuc sit; ita quidem ut Regnum Daniae, ejusque
legitime electi Reges nullum unquam superiorem magistratum aut Dominum
agnoverint. Omnibus quoque temporibus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Dynastis,
praelatis and nobilitati liberrimum fuit, regem, and Dominum aliquem suo
judicio and arbitrio designare, and in communem regni and Patriae consolationem
and salutem eligere, cujus gubernatione, exemplo, and ductu regnum supradictum,
Christianis statutis and ordinationibus, secundum leges suas scriptas and
antiquas consuetudines vigere, miseri and oppressi subditisublevari, viduae and
pupilli defendi possent. Qui quidem rex semper hactenus a prima electione
convenienti juramento and obligatione se huic regno devincire coactusest.
Etiamsi igitur nobis omnibus regni hujus ordinibus and consiliariis licuisset
post obitum potentissimi Regis quondam Daniae Iohannis laudatae memoriae
projure nostro, secundum antiquam, and multis seculis continuatam regni Danici
libertatem, regem aliquempro arbitrio nostro designare and eligere: tamen
virtute, justicia, magnanimitate, bonitate and beneficientia, eorum Daniae
regum, qui ex Holsatorum prosapia originem duxerant, moti; and bona spe freti
for^ utrex Christiernus e vestigus regiis avisui Regis Christierni, and R.
Iohannis patris sui non excederet: sed potius ad eorum similitudinem and
exemplum, gubernationem suam in^^itueret: supra-dictum R. Christiernum, II.
vivo adhuc patre Iohanne in Regem and Dominum totius Daniae designavimus and
elegimus.

Quo quidem ipso tempore celfitudo ipsius solemni IURAMENTO* verbis conceptis,
and Deo sanctisque testibus citatis, praestito, Archiepis. Episcopis, Dynastis,
praelatis, equitibus, civitatibus and populo regni Danici se devinxit and
obligavit, cujus juramenti inter alia haec quoque capita expressa fuerunt:
Debemus ante omnia Deum diligere and colere, and sanctam ecclesiam defendere
and amplificare. Omnia Episcoporum, Praelatorum and ministrorum status
ecclesiastici privilegia, a S. Ecclesia and regibus Christianis ipsis concessa,
inviolat^ conservare. Archi^piscopos quoque, L^ndensem et(...) Ni^rofiensem, et
praeterea Episcopos, praelatos, Equites auratos, and alios ordinis Equestris,
Regni Proceres and Consiliarios, convenienti observantia and honor, pro
cujusque condition and statu prosequi^ Si qua nobis controversia sit ^um
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, aut praelatis S. Ecclesiae, eorumque ministris, in
locis convenientibus, nimirum coram senatu regni, cognosci and transigi
oportebit. Si qua nobis ipsis, aut praefectis nostris, controversia, ^um aliquo
ex nobilitate, sive is senator regnisit, sive non, incidet; eum coram universo
regni senatu, hoc nomine compellare debemus, sive ea controversia sit defundis,
sive de aliis quibuscunque bonis aut negotiis.

Et sicuti tenemur unumquemque juvare, ut jus suum consequatur; Ita nos ipsi
quoque obnox^i esse debemus, unicuique coram senatu Regni nos accusanti
comparere, and ad ipsius postulata usitato Iudicio^um more respondere, and
quicquid a senatu regni super ea re decre^um and pronunciatum fuerit, idipsum
exequi, neque hujusmodi legitimas accusationes aut postulationes iuclementi
animo fe^re. Debemus etiam sine ullo praejudicio, gratia, aut muneribus, ex
aequo, tam pauperi quam diviti, tam hospiti quam indigenae, jus dicere and
administrare. Nullum etiam bellum incipere, aut externum militem in regnum
introducere debemus, commnni senatu Regni non praesciente and consentiente.
Literis quoque and Diplomatis vel nostro, vel etiam patris nostri Regis
Iohannis signo confirmatis, plenam and inviolatam fidem and authoritatem
relinquere, ejusque aes alienum, quod liquidum est, dissolvere deb^mus. Moneta
quoque, quam cusurisumus, proba and sufficiens esse debet, ita, ut dua marcae
aequivalentes sint uni aureo Rhenano. Item, Nos Christiernus and obligamus nos,
quod omnes and singulos articulos, in quos jurandum nobis est, incolis regnorum
Daniae and Norwegiae, constanter reipsa praestare velimus. Sicutietiam ex
adverso subditi obligati esse debent ad suum homagium, and auxilia militaria
inviolata servanda and praestanda.

Si vero ( quod Deus avertat) contra istos articulos agendo delinqueremus, and
senatorum regni admonitionibus nullo modo locum dare institueremus: tum omnes
regni incolae, (...)
ratione honoris and juramenti sui, conjuctis viribus, fideliter in hoc
incumbere debent, ut hoc avertant. Id faciendo, contra sua juramenta,
obligatione^, homagia, quo abstricti nobis sunt, nequaquam fecisse censeri
debebunt. Hujus generis plures alii articuli juramento inserti fuerant, qui hoc
loco brevitatis gratia praetermittuntur.

Vt etiam regia ipsius dignitas, post juratos hosce articulos vehementius and
ardentius ad virtutes regias, and Christianarum sanctionum hujus regni
conservationem incitaretur and inflammaretur, ^ommodas rations and vias
inivimus, tandemque perfecimus, ut illustrissima princeps D. Elizabetha, ex
Hispaniarum regum and Archiducum Austriae illustrissima prosapia oriunda,
matrimonio ipsi conj^ngeretur. Sperabamus enim dignitat^m ipsius regiam,
admonitionibus nobilissimae and excellentis virtute, and summa orbis Christiani
regum familia ortae reginae, and praeterea consideratis tantis and tam eximijs
ac sublimibus tot Regum ac Imperatorum affinitatibus, motum iri, ut omnibus
Christianis and regijs virtutibus, eum clementia and bonitate conjunctis, in
tota gubernatione ^ua^o diligentius incumberet.

Verum, statim post coronam acceptam, Regia illius Majestas animi acerbitatem,
tyrannidem, rapinas, immanitatem crudelem and sanguinariam, declaravit (quod
tamen non injuria ipsum afficiendi animo, sed extrema* necessitate, ad
defensionem honoris nostri compulsi, scribere and divulgare volumus, de quo
ips^ palam protestamur) imprimis autem amoris and fidei conjugalis nobilssimae
and omni virtute praestanti Reginae prastitae, oblitus est. Quaedam enim
turpis, infamis and peregrina vetula, Syburgis, omni pud^re and virtute
destituta, and ad omnem impuritatem projecta, propriam suam filiam, Regi
prostituit. Quam reginae conjugi suae nobilissimae, status condition,
dignitate and gubernatione Rex praetulit, e^que prae omnibus regni consiliariis
summam Imperii in Dania commisit, ex cujus perversa administratione and
mandatis, multae caedes, homicidia^ and injustae in causis tam capitalibus quam
civilibus condemnationes extiterunt: Et quamvis Regina (quam semper pro Regina
and dominatrice nostra deinceps quoque, agnoscere and habere cupimus) ab
honestiss. matrona, A^na Holgeria, Gynecei sui praefecta, moneretur, ut Dominum
and maritum suum amice hortaretur, ut a vita illa flagitiosa, quae Christianum
conjugem, and imprimis regiam dignitatem, nequaquam deceret, desisteret: tamen,
quam primum hoc rex and anus illa resciverunt statim illa, propter Christianam
admonitionem innocens ab officio suo remota, and miserabiliter regno expulsa,
et omnibus fortunis suis spoliata est.

Eodem modo Tobernum Ochsitum, de veneno, filiae Syburgis propinando, falso a
se insimulatum innocentemque deprehensum, et a senatu quoque regni eo nomine
absolutum, in ignominiam et contumeliam Germanicae nobilitatis, tantum
mendacibus turpissimae illius mulieris, sermonibus fidem habens, capite
truncarijussit.

Quamvis etiam R. ipsius Majestas ingens et publicum Bellum, contra datam
fidem, nobis, nobis inconsultis et inscijs, contra Suecos excitavit: tamen ut
animum nostrum fidelem, et regiam ipsius personam et nomen extollendi, imperium
amplificandi, et exteras nationes et regna subjugandicupidum, posset
deprehendere: nos omnes nostra corpora, fortunas, regiones et subditos, in
magna pericula conjecimus: quod bellum septennale, contra potentissimum regnum
Sueciae gessimus: et tandem cum effusione sanguinis nostri, et extrema fere cum
pernicie floris nobilitatis Danicae, auxilio Dei omnipotentis, contra regnum
jam dictum, victoriam obtinuimus, et Regiae ipsius Majestati Regnum subjicimus.
The Oath of the King of Su^den:
Vt autem regnum Sueviae in perpetua fide et obedientia Regiae ipsius
Majestatis maneret in ipsa coronatione SUECUS verbis conceptis, Deoque et
sanctis testibus citatis, juravit, se ipsis antiqua sua jura, immunitates, et
privilegia incolumia relicturum, et omnium quae in bello exorta sint
offensionum, et inimicitiarum memoriam, sempternaoblivione aboliturum esse.
Cumque ne ^um quidem satis Regiae ipsius M^i fiderent Sueci, necesse fuit
nonullis ex Episcopis, Praelatis, et Nobilibus Danicis, pro rege fidem suam
interponere, eamque diplomatibus eo nomine confertis et obsignatis, confirmare.
Quae quidem ipsa in red^esse illi noluimus.

Etiamsi autem Regna et populi armis subjugati, tatummod^ jure et justicia in
officio cotineantur: tamen Rex hoc ipso non satis been con^iderato, et maximis
gravissimisque juramentis posthabitis, tridu^ post coronatinem Suecicam,
Episcopos, Praelatos, Nobilitatem, una cum consulibus et aliis praefectis
(tanquam ad convivium regium and solennem de impetrata a Deo victoria
gratulationem) invitavit, qui etiam fide and invitatione regia ill^cti, una cum
amicis, uxoribus and liberis suis, reverenter compar^erunt. S^d tam amice
invitati, admodum ^ostiliter excepti sunt, ipsor^^que plausus in m^^sticiam
commutatus est. Ex livore enim tyra^^ico ipsis imputat^m est, quod pulvere
tor^^ntario arce^ ips^^s regiam passim conspersissent, us ita incendi^ (...)
medi^ tollerent. Cum tamen certissimis i^diciis compert^m sit, illud a R^g^
ips^, (...) praeterea sexaginta^ Equites aurati and viri Nobiles, aliqui etiam
Consules, Senatores, and cives uno die, sine ullo judicio, ex mera tyrannide,
contra datam fidem, decollati sunt. Quorum etiam cadavera, vestibus nudata, cum
in tertium usque diem in foro Stokhelmensi, miserabili alijs spestaculo
fuissent, tandem igne comburi jussit; ac etiamsi illi adhuc vivi more
Christiano Confessiones suas edendi cupidi essent, tamen hoc ipsis animo
prorsus male^olo denegatum est.

Eodem modo Reverendum and religiosum D. Abbatem Nyddalensem and quinque
fratres, quitum in honorem Dei Missas celebrarant, die purificationis Mariae,
sine ull^ judicio, aquis suffocari curavit, nullam aliam ob causam, quam quod
durante adhuc bello, una cum aliis se Regiopposuissent.

Sex praeterea ex nobilitate Suecica qui communis inter Daniam and Sueciam
pacificationis nomine, fide publica and regia, and quidem vocati antea
venerant, sibi-ipsi^bsides constituit, eosque in durissima vincula conjectos,
tamdiu apud se detinuit, donec regnum Sueciae sibi subjecisset.

Multos quoque nobiles, inter quos nonnulliex familia Ribbingia fuere^, una cum
duobus pueris adhuc teneris, qui fide and clementia ipsius freti, istuc
venerant, capite plesti: sicuti etiam Tonnum Erici filium, and Henrichum
Stichum, una cum multis alijs nobilibus in Finlandia, sine ullo judicio
decollari jussit.

Episcopo Finlandiae domum and possessiones suas per violentiam ademit, ita
quidem, ut ille sibi consulens, paulo p^st tempestate in mari exorta naufragio
Miserabiliter perierit. Brevitatis causamulta alia prava and tyrannica
facinora, in Regno Sueciae contra Deum and omnem aequitatem ab ipso perpetrata,
hic praetermittimus.

Quocirca Episcopi, Dynastae, Praelati, Nobilitas, Civitates and reliqui regni
Suecici incolae, qui cr^deles, impuras and sanguinolentas ipsius manus, vita
sua inc^lumi effugerant, contra eum insurrexerunt, satius et honestius esse
rati, potius in acie pro salute patriae, quam domisordis and turpissimis
suppliciis innocents exarnificatum, mori. Atque ita ( nostro quidem judicio
non immerito) sumptis armis and palam Bello contra Regem suscepto Tyrannicum
illius jugum excutere instituerunt.

Etiamsi igitur nos periculo corporum and fortunarum nostrarum, ipsi, post
auxilium Divinum in regno Sueciae subjugando adjumento fuerimus: tamen non
nostra sed sua ipsius culpa iterum eodem regno excidit. Quocirca denuo ab eo
interpellati, ut Sueci nostro auxilio ad priorem obedientiam adigerentur; ne id
quidem (quamvis nullo jure aut lege teneremur) facere recusavimus, ut vel hoc
modo fidelis animus and voluntas nostra, a Rege perspiceretur, quando quidem
fere supra quam vires nostrae ferrent (cum jam antea nostros equos, arma,
naves, aurum, argentum, Clinodia and insuper nostros amicos, affines and
propinquos in Suecia reliquissemus,) denuo terra marique magnis impenfis
militem and naves armare and instruere: propria corpora nostra, possessiones,
pecuniam and facultates omnes impendere: and una cum ipso totam belli molem, in
tertium usque annum sustinere non detrectaremus. Idque optima spefreti, futurum
ut fidelia h^c nostra servitia, tandem aliquando a regia ipsius dignitate cum
clementia agnoscere^tur.

Ver^^ his omnibus non consideratis, ille interea Episcopos, Praelatos,
Ecclesias, Coe^^bi^ Hospitalia, Sacerdotes, Matronas, virgins, Nobilitatem,
cives, viatores, neg^^i^t^res, and mis^ros d^nique Rusti^os, immod^ratis and
in^^ditis exactionibus, vestigal^b^^ and (...).

(...) and argento, exactionibus extorsit, ad se translatam adhuc retinet.
Monetam vero nullius momenti cupream, ex ahenis cerevisiaris usu detritis cusam
in regnum intrusit, quam aequo cum argenteis and aureis monetis precio, a
milite ipsius acceptare, and ut in toto regno usurparetur and valeret, coacti
sumus tolerare. Cum tamen illa in finitimis regnis, nationibus and civitatibus
nullius valoris esset, res nostra familiaris, cum omnibus commerciis jacerent:
regnum hoc nostrum antiquum cum suis incolis omnibus suis nervis and viribus
pl^ne exhauriretur, and ad extremam egestatem and inopiam conniiceretur. Et
quamvis haec quoque omnia, ut bello suscepto optatus tandem fin^s imponi
posset, submisse tol^raverimus: tamen ne haec quidem ratione quidquam apud
R^gem proficere potuimus, cum ille palam hominibus fide dignis audientibus
diceret, se and corporibus and fortunis imminutos ita nos debilitaturum, ut
passim omnibus contumeliae and ludibrio essemus. Cujus sui propositi statim
etiam exemplum reipsa nobis exhibuit.

Archiepiscopum enim Lundensem D. Georgium Schotburgum, quem secretarium
quondam suum hac spe ad dignitatis illius fastigium rex evexerat, ut quaedam
Archiepiscopatus illius praedia ad se transfer posset; cum regis cupiditati
postea non gratificaretur, quod diceret, juramento se illi ecclesiae praestito,
quod violari a se minime deceret, prohiberi seque potius turpissimam mortem
obire, aut vitae monasticae etiam durissimae in reliquum vitae tempus mancipare
se valle, quam in perjurii suspicionem vel minimam se conjicere. Cum igitur
aliquot poenarum, quae innocenti irrogabantur, optio illi concederetur; ad
vitam tandem monasticam a rege compulsus est. Quo facto, statim Praelatos and
Canonicos ecclesiae Lundensis per literas ad se accersivit, cumque illi
praestita obedientia compar^issent: jussit eos contra fidem regiam, in infamem
and foetentem carcerem compingi, iisdemque paulo post insulam Borneholman,
Ecclesiae illi Lundensi subjectam and propriam, cum omnibus arcibus, oppidis
and vicis, nullius excusationis ratione habita, vi metuque coactis, ademit.

Reverendissimus quoque Johannes Episcopus Fyoniae, cum literis regiis ad
juridicam vocatus comparuisset; eodem modo miserabiliter, and praeter omnem
culpam captus, and in carcerem conjectus est, and omni collegii illius
ecclesiae bona petulanter ad se transtulit.

Nemo etiam velex Senatoribus regni, vel aliis Daniae incolis sine corporis and
vitae suae peri^ulo ipsum convenire: aut si quis omnino fortunam suam haec in
part periclitari institueret; nequaquam id, nisi prius peccata sua sacerdoti
confessus esset, and ad mortem se praeparasset, tentare ausus est, cum
saepenumero in eas angustias coactos nonnullos constaret, ut ne confitendi
quidem specium illis concederetur. Ex quo ipso hoc quoque consecutum est, ut
regno huic, and communi patriae nostrae, consilio and consolatione nostra
auxilio esse non possemus. Eodem Praepositum Rotschildensem, and D. Nicolaum
Erici, multosque alios praelatos and viros ecclesiasticos, qui patri and matri
ipsius laudatae memoriae fideliter inservierant, absque ulla misericordia,
bonis suis spoliavit.

Politico quoque and equestriordini, reliquisque regni i^quilinis nequaquam
pepercit. Mandato enim ipsius, vir strenuus and nobilis Magnus Tamassenus, qui
toto vitae suae tempore, ab omnibus habitus est homo integer and probus, and
quem nemo unquam quidpiam, quod honestum and nobilem virum non deceret, gerere
aut facere animadvertit; quique etiam in fide Christiana pie mortuus erat, hic
inquam Tamassenus, ex terra iterum effossus est ipsius que cadaver, in foro
Arhusiano, in singular Daniae nobilitatis ludibrium and contumeliam, suspensum
est. and insuper Rex omnia illius, vid^aeque ipsius relictae, bona, cum omni
auro, argento, and clinodiis, sine ulla postulatione judiciali, ad se and in
suam potestatem redegit.

Strenuo quoque D. Iuggoni Krabbio, equiti aurato and Marescalco, qui ipsi
longo tempore in Dania, Norwegia, and Suecia horeste and fideliter, etiam cum
effusione sanguinis, and bonorum suorum jactura in servierat, unum ex pagis
suis Vischbecum novum una cum multis ad eum pertinentibus fundis and bonis,
apertavi, and contra religionem jurisjurandi, ademit, and sibi vindicavit, cum
interea ille multis modis ad legitimam causae cognitionem, sed tamen frustra,
provocaverat.

Cum ex ministris ipsius aulicis Nicolaus Daa, quodam vesperi in caupona and
symposio sedens, hospiti ex fenestrarhombos aliquot vitreos fortuito
excussisset; and temen e^ nomine statim sequenti die hospiti pro tantillo damno
abunde satisfecisset: nihilominus tamen, ob causam tam nihili, pater ipsius in
arcem Hafniensem violenter abductus, and tamdiu captivus est detentus, donec
praefectus regius missis in domum ejus satellitibns, omnes ipsius cistas
aperuisset, omne aurum and argentum inde exemisset, and ad quatuor Mar^arum
Danicarum millia vi metuque illi extorsisset.

Quin etiam contra juramentum and dotam fidem, Schlos Gelauben Ius electionis,
quod antea senatus regni proprium erat, post mortem ad suos haeredes
transtulit, quo ips^ antiquum nostrum and liberum regnum, haereditariae
oppressioni subjicitur, and nos libera nostra electione spoliati sumus.

Quid, quod a quolibet, etiam paup^rrimo hujus regni incola, binos in singulos
annos florenos, in perpetuum deinceps numerandos, ausus est exigere, cum tamen
multi ex ijs, vix binos solidos suis dominis quotannis exsolvere possent.

Nec tantum Danicae nobilitatis excidio, animusipsius sangainarius satiari non
potuit, sed in Germanos etiam nobiles ingratitudinem effunderet. Honestum enim
virum Stephanum Weberstedium, in Turingia loco equestri natum, qui longo
tempore, sicuti Ministrum fidelem and nobilem decet, pro supremo Capitaneo
peditum Danorum contra Suecos ipsi inservierat, and qui praeclara fortitudinis
suae specimina, cum Host usque ad sanguinis effusionem dimicans, ediderat, cui
etiam hoc nomine praefecturam Olandensem datis literis concesserat. Hunc inquam
Stephanum, cum diutius praefectura illa carere nollet, ex asylo Coenobij Sp. S.
ab ipsius avo fundati abreptum, decollari jussit, hoc praetextu, quod in domo
publica militicuidam vulnus inflixisset, cum quo tamen ille, amica transactione
interueniente, jampridem in gratiam redierat.

Eodem modo cum conjugis suae regiae cubulario Maximiliano egit, qui reginam in
regnum Daniae advenientem comitatus juerat: eum enim cum Regina ad Casaream
Majestatem, and Dominam Margaretam, ablegasset, Rex antequam Dania excessisset,
exitinere retrahi, and capitali supplicio affici jussit.

Adha^c cum fortissimus ipsius capitaneus N. von Hederstorff, nomine
praesidiariorum Stokholmensium, honestos aliquot milites, pro stipendio suo,
and quibusdam alijs conficiendis, Haffniam misisset; praefectus Haffniensis eo
exceptos Abrumstropum deduxit, quasi regem ibidem inventuri essent. Eo autem
cum venisset, loci praefectus* eos carceri mancipatos, paulo post sine ullo
judicio, una cum puero quopiam trucidari jussit.

Suum quoque Germanicum Secretarium Stephanum Hopsensteinerum, cujus opera in
gravissimi^ negociis apud Caesaream Maject. Electores and principes Imperij
Romani, usus fuerat, ad impudentissimae mulieris Syburgis mendacem delationem,
inclementer perfecutus, ipsius vitae and bonis insidiatus est. Qui tamen
evidentissimo Dei omnipotentis auxilio, manus ipsius cruentas ex Dania ^vasit,
and in Caesaream urbem Lubecam confugit, ubi nihil ominus a Ministro Regio,
ejus v^stigia insequente, accusatus, and in custodia aliquandiu detentus fuit,
donec tandem causa probe cognita, ab injusta ejus accusatione and
insimulatione, per sententiam absolutus est.

Praeterea multas quoque exteras nationes, Hollandos, Brabantos, Flandros,
Lubecenses, cum omnibus civitatibus maritimis, contra data privilegia, and
regia diplomata, pecuniis suis emunxit, and quotiescunque illi negociorum
suorum causa in hoc regnum appulerunt, statim navibus and mercibus suis
spoliati sunt.

Et quamvis Norvvegiae quoque regnum semper, ipsi fideliter fuerit subjectum,
and pro viribus omnia sua officia and auxilia praestiterit, et ejusque omnibus
edictis and interdictis cum obsequio paruerit: tamen neq Deo consecrati
Episcopi, neque Nobilitas, neque populus illius inclementem and immis^ricordem
animum effugere potuit. Episcopus enim Camerensis, licet innocens, in crudeli
admodum carcere captivus est detentus, ita quidem, ut ex foetido and impuro
aere, curis diuturnaque sessione, omnibus suis viribus consumptis, tandem
carcere liberatus, mox diem suum obierit.

Reverendissimus quoque Episcopus Ansloensis, Andreas eo compulsus est, ut
alteri suum Episcopatum cederet: quod si facere recusaret, submersionem illi
minabatur.

Reverendissimum quoque Archiepiscopum Nidrosiensem ab Ecclesia sua
Archiepiscopali in exilium expulit, qui postea Romam ad Papam confugiens,
ibidem in magna inopia and miseria mortuus est.

Nobilitati quoque ejus regni nequaquam pepercit, strenuum enim and
praestantissimum equitem auratum, Canutum, Canuti ficto and mentito quodam
praetextu, in carcerem redegit. Cumque ille in jus provocaretur, and causa in
senatu regni cognita and disceptata absolutus esset: tamen jure suo, a Deo and
aequitate sibi concesso, uti non potuit, cum paulo post miserime decollaretur,
and omnia ejus bona, contra omne jus a rege abriperentur.

Etiamsi vero multo plura ipsius impia and tyrannica facinora, and inprimis cum
honestis matronis and virginibus, viduis and orphanis passim in Dania, Suecia,
Norvvegia perpetrata, indicare possemus: tamen illa ipsa, respectu nominis and
dignitatis regiae habito, hoc quidem tempore, in nostra hac querela commemorare
non volumus.

Semper equidem speraveramus futurum, ut crebris, fidelibus and submissis
admonitionibus adductus, sese emendaret, and ab hujusmodi minime regiis aut
Christianis, sed potius tyrannicis inceptis, facinoribus, expilationibus,
vectigalibus, exactionibus, aliisque crudelibus institutis desisteret: sed
tamen admonitiones hae nostrae plane infructuosae aures regias personuerunt:
nostrae sententiae and consilia plane sunt repudiata, nulli ex sena^^ regni
locus apud regemfuit relictus, imo homines plane contempti and ad nullamrem
idonei habiti and reputatisumus. Atque ita ille in priori sua tyrannide,
seipsum induravit.

Et ut omnino crudeli suo erga nos animo and voluntati satisfieret, milites
peregrinos magno numero, tam pedites quam aequites, contra praestitum
juramentum, quod ex superioribus articulis patet, in regnum induxit, and
majoribus adhuc qu^m antehac factum est, oneribus and exactionibus nos gravare
instituit. Cum autem idnon injuria nobis grave esset, hoc tentat^m est, ut nos
una cum miseris rusticis, (qui tamen ipsi tempore belli septennalis pene omnem
substantiam nostram impenderamus) vi ad illas praestandas adigeret. Quocirca
missis literis tanquam ad juredicam Ahusium nos evocavit, eo consilio, ut nos
vi militis externi (si modo is ad tam impium facinus a rege perduci potuisset)
adoriretur, and pro libitu suo imperata facere cogeret. Compertum etiam nobis
est, Regem ad diem praestitutam duorum immanium carnificum, more suorum
satelli^um (ne scilicet res innotesceret) vestitorum operam conduxisse, in ^um
finem, si intolerabilibus ipsius edictis and voluntati non assentiremus, ut tum
in corpora and fortunas nostras impetum faceret, and forte non al^ud quam in
Suecia, Dynastis, Episcopis, praelatis, nobilitati and civitatibus factum est,
covivium nobis adornaret.

Quapropter justissimo (qui etiam in fortissimos viros cadere potest) metu
compulsi sumus, ut de tantis malis a nobis avertendis cogitationem aliquam
susciperemus, atque ita nostra corpora, vitam and possessiones (quod jure
naturae facere tenemur) def^nderemus. Compulsi igitur sumus, ut nostra
juramenta, homagia and auxilia militaria per literas illi renunciaremus, id
quod, etiam reipsa a nobis jam factam est, cum plane confideremus, neminem
fore, qui impiis tyrannicis ipsius delictis consideratis, vitio hoc vertere
nobis posset. Nota.
Nos enim status and consiliarios regni Danici, coram Deo and hominibus
obligatos agnoscimus, ut communi patriae, in extremis his^e periculis and
angustiis, consolationem aliquam offera^nus. Siquidem miserorum ejus regni
inquilinorum aeterna, ratione corporum and bonorum, pernicies, matronarumque
and virginum dedecus and contumelia potissimum ab eo quaeritur, a quo illa
omnia merito averti a nobis debebant. Neque ignotum est, propter similia, aut
saepe etiam leviora quam nos (proh dolor) perpessi sumus facinora tyrannica,
saepenumero Caesares Romanos, Reges Vngariae, Bahemiae, Angliae, and Scotiae,
ex suis imperiis and regnis dejectos, nonnullos principes ex ditionibus suis
haereditariis expulsos esse, sicuti id tam ex veteribus historiis, quam ^x
nostrae aetatis exemplis satis certo nobis innotuit. Et nisi gravissimis hisce,
quae hactenus commemoravimus, oneribus impelleremur, pigeret and taederet nos,
talem aliquam cogitati^nem in nostrum animum inducere, multo minus reipsae eam
exequ^, sed potius sicuti patri and avo ipsius, ita ipsi quoque libenter
addicti fuissemus.

Etiamsi vero ab electione externi alicujus and Christiani Regis aut Domi^i
cujus potentia and defensione regnum nostrum gubernaretur non plane fuimus
alieni: tamen confiderato diuturno and Christiano regimine, regiis virtutibus,
clementia, bonitate and justitia, quibus and illustriss, princeps and Dominus,
D. Fridericus, verus haeres Norwegiae, Dux Sleswici, Helsatiae, Stormariae, and
Dietmarsiae, Comes Oldenburgi and Delmenhorsti, erga Subditos suos statim a
gubernationis suis exordio pie and laudabiliter usus est: eum potissimum
unanimi consensu regem and Dominum nostrum supra totam Dani^m elegimus, eum
nimirum cogitaremus, cum ex inclyta regum Daniae prosapia originem ducere, and
praeterea regis filium natum esse, aetque ita jure prae omnibus aliis
principibus hunc honorem ipsi, praesertim cum patrimonium quoque ex regno
paterno suae Colsitudini debitum, ne nunc q^il^m accepisset, deberi.

Rogamus igitur unumquemque, cujuscunque conditionis aut ordinis sit, si for^e
supr dictus Rex Christiernus, aut alius quispiam nomine ipsius, vel Scriptis
vel alio modo, nos insimulet, quod contra datam fidem and juramanta hac in
part egerimus, ut illi, antequam vlteriorem nostram defensionem audiat, fidem
non habeat, sed potius nostras hasce difficultates, corporis and vitae
pericula, impias viduariem and pupillarum ^ ppressiones, matronarum and
virginum violationes, cum clementi, christiana; benevola and humana
commiseratione cognoscat* and nos (qui honorem and existimationem nostram, u^
pios nobiles dece^, erga regem illaesam ad huc conservavimus) excusato^ habeat.
S^mulque aliis quaque omnibus and singulis, ob causas jam supra dictas, and
alias complures (quas adhuc in honorem nominis regiiusque ad ulteriores nostras
apologias reticemus) benign nos excuset. Si etiam rex coram legitimo aliquo
judice nos accusandos esse c^^suerit hoc ipso scripto nos ad legitimam and
justam causae hujus cognitionem and decisionem offerimus; pollicem^r etiam nos
iis, quae hoc modo jure decernentur and sancientur, prompto animo parituros
esse. Nequs dubitamus, si vel sanctitas Pontificia, vel Romans Caesarea Majestas,
and Iudicium Camerae, vel alii quoque Christiani Reges, Electores, Principes,
Comites, Barons and Nobiles, vel inclytae and liberae Imperii civitates
petitionis hujus nostrae aequitatem, and ipsius impiam and Tyrannicam nostri
oppressionem cognoverint, quin factum hoc nostrum, ad quod extrema necessitas
nos compulit, nequaquam ^int improbaturi. Pro quo ipso singulis, proratione
ordinis and conditionis suae, nostra studia, officia, and gratitudlnem, omni
tempore praestandam, deferimus and pollicemur.

Swethland.
NOt to mention the Kings and Kingdom of Norway, long since incorporated into
Denmark, whose lives and Catalogue you may read in Cosmog. lib. 4. cap. 21,
24, 25.
Munster, Ioannis Magnus, Crantzius, and others: Gul. Ne^brig. lib. 3. cap. 6.
in which Realm not one King anciently died of age or diseases in above one
hundred years, but of violent deaths; there being this custom, That whosoever
slew a tyrant King, was thereby made a King. The Kings of Swethland have
always been elected upon certain conditions, and subordinate to the power and
censures of their whole States and Parliament, in such sort as the Kings of
Hungary, Bohemia, Poland, and Denmark have been; and often times this Kingdom
has been annexed to the Realm of Denmark, and subject to the Danish Kings,
as they saw occasion: The names and lives of the Swedish Kings before and since
their conversion to Christianity, you may read at large in Cosmog. lib. 4. cap
28, 29, 30, 31, 32.
Munster, Ioannis Magnus, Crantzius, Olaus Magnus, and others: I shall give you
a taste only of some of them out of those Authors. Halsten, Heyl. Geogr. page
430, 431. Chytraeus Chron. Sax. Hermold. Chron. Slau^rum. Ioannis Magnus hist.
Goth. Swedorumque. Guagn. compen. and Chron.
and Animander his successor were thrust out of their Thrones and Realms by
their Subjects. After whose death, the Swedes elected one King of their own
Nation, the Goths another, not enduring a foreign Prince to reign over them.
King Bugerius slaying his brother Ericus, who had imprisoned him at a banquet,
his Nobles de^esting this his treacherous act, rose up in Arms against him,
expelled him the Realm, and beheaded his Queen and Magnus his son, electing
Magnus the son of Ericus for their King. Magnus the seventh, betrothed his son
Aquin to a kinswoman of the Earl of Holstain upon this condition, That unless
Aquin should receive her a Virgin, all the Nobles of the Realm should be freed
from their Oath of Allegiance to him. The Virgin sailing into Swethland, was
taken prisoner by Waldamer King of Denmark, who betrothed his daughter
Margaret to Aquin: where^pon the Nobles of Sweden denied to yield any more
obedience to their King, deserted Magnus and chose Albert King: Magnus seeking
to regaine his Realm, was defeated in battle and died in exile. Queen
Margaret taking Albert prisoner, and conquering Sweden, left it and two
Kingdoms more to Ericus her adopted son. But the Swedes weary of a foreign
yoke, by the help of Engelbert, denied subjection to him, and waged war so
long with him, that he was forced to place Swedes in all the Castles by
agreement, and to receive only half the revenues of the Realm in his
absence, and at last (tired out with the wars) deserted both Crown and
Kingdom. After this the Swedes elected Charles for their King, who after seven
years reign, perceiving that he grew grievous and displeasing to the States of
Sweden, taking his own private goods only with him, and leaving the treasure
of the Realm in a safe place, left the Kingdom. Whereupon they elected
Christierne the first, the King of Denmark and Norway, for their King; against
whom they took up arms, because he had broken that paction prescribed to him
when he took the Crown; whereupon Anno 1499. Christierne came with a great
power to subdue the Swedes, but he was easily conquered, repulsed thence twice
one after another by the Swedes united forces: who elected them a Governor
whom they called a Marshall, which had power to call general Assemblies of the
States, and execute the Kings Office, and might have been elected King upon
such conditions as the States propounded, which he re^used to submit to. King
John thinking to subdue the Swedes after Christiernes death, was repulsed by
them, and his Queen taken prisoner. His son Christierne the second, King of
Denmark, by the treachery of Gustavus Archbishop of Vpsalis, after many
encounters, upon promise to continue their Laws, Liberties, and Privileges
inviolably, and to remit all offenses past by a solemn Oath, was elected by
the Swedes for their King: who swearing these Articles and confirming them by
his Charter, was upon this admitted into the Town and Castle of Holm^; Chy^.
Chron: Saxo. lib. 10. page 311.
where feasting all the Nobles and principal men of Swethland two days
together, suspecting no treachery, he suddenly apprehends them, imprisons,
murders all the Nobles, Gentry, Citizens, Commons, yea Bishops and Monks,
with extraordinary cruelty, spoils their wives and Orphans of all their goods,
and exercises more then barbarous tyranny over them; which Gustavus Erichson,
a noble Swede then in Denmark hearing of, escapes thence privily, and comes
into Swethland ^i^g^ised, raises an Army to revenge this butchery, delivers
his Country from this Tyrant, and for (...) noble service was by their
unanimous vote elected and crowned (...) of Sweden in his stead; the Swedes in
a public Declaration manifesting then expulsion and deprivation of Christierne
for his treachery and tyranny to be just and lawful. Chyt. Chron. Saxo. lib.
21, 22. p. 636, 637, 638, 647, 648, 649, etc.
Ericus the seventeenth King of Sweden, imprisoning his brother, murdering his
faithful Counselors, warring upon his Subjects, playing the tyrant, and
matching himself unworthily to a woman of mean condition, was for these his
misdemeanors taken prisoner, with his Queen, deposed, and his brother made
King in his stead, Anno 1599. And Heyl. Geog^. page 340.
Sigismund King of Sweden, taking upon him the Crown of Poland, after fourteen
years reign, was deposed and d^spossessed of his Kingdom Anno 1607. and
Charles his Uncle made King in his stead.

Assyria, Cyprus, Lombardy, Naples, Venice.
I Could now acquaint you with many such like passages and stories in the
Kingdoms of Assyria; as how effeminate Munst. Cosm. lib. 5. cap. 79.
Sardanapalus, for his vices and mis^government was deprived by his Subjects,
burned in his Palace, and Arbactus made King in his stead. In the kingdom of
Munst. Cosm. lib. 5. cap. 30.
Cyprus, where King Peter murdering his brother and those of Geneva, was soon
after taken prisoner and made a tributary Prince. King John governed by Helena
his wife, and she by his Nurse, which made the people weary of the government,
had a Regent by consent of the Nobles ( John of Portugal, whom they married to
his daughter Carlota) set over him and the Realm and all the royal power soon
after put into his hands, who being soon poisoned by Helena, Jews son to the
Duke of Savoy was sent for the crowned King by general assent, and John and
James his sons put by. Match. Hist. Heyl. Geogr. p. 193, 154.
Clephus the second King of Lombardy was so cruel, that after his death they
would have no more Kings, but chose thirty Dukes to govern them, who continued
this government eleven years. Desiderius the last King of Lombardy was taken
prisoner with all his children in Pavia by Charles the great, and so that
Kingdom ceased, Anno 774. Heyl. Geogr. p. 166, 167. General Hist. of Spain,
lib. 18. p. 686.
Tancred the fourth King of Naples was deposed by Pope Celestine the third*
with his peoples consent. Momfrey a Bastard, poisoning Conrade the seventh King
of Naples, and usurping the Crown, was deposed by Charles Earl of Aniou, who
enjoyed the Crown till Aragon seized on the Realm. Ione Queen of Naples
married Andrew second son to Charles King of Hungary, whom she hanged at her
window for insufficiency; after marrying James of Tarragon, she beheaded him
for lying with another woman, and was at last driven out of her Kingdom by
Jews of Hungary, and hanged at the same window where she hanged her first
husband. Joan. Crespin, L'estate de Leglise, page 277.
Peter Duke of Venice was for his tyranny and misgovernment besieged in his
palace by the people, The Venecian History.
which they fired, and then taking him his wife and son, dragged them unto
the butchery, where they chopped them in pieces, and threw him to the dogs to
be devoured, notwithstanding all their submissions and entreaties on their
knees, Anno 977. So Duke Falier, and many oath Dukes, have been condemned to
death and executed by the States of Venice, and that justly as Com. lib. 2. 6.
5. page 277.
Bodine grants. Multitudes of such like presidents occur, in most other
Dukedoms and Principalities, which I will not name, because they want the title
of Kings, though 4 Distinct. 49. quest. 1. Art. 3. qu. 5.
Aquinas truly holds, That a Kingdom is so called from ruling; therefore he
who has others under his government, is said to have a Kingdom; in reality,
though not in propriety of speech; and so are Kings in verity, though not in
title. I might add to these many more examples, manifesting what miseries and
untimely deaths tyrannical Kings and Princes have undergone in all ages and
States, being commonly deposed, poisoned, murdered; but I shall for brevity
pass over these examples, remitting the Readers to Pol^^. lib. 5. cap. 10, 11.
Aristotle, Variae hist.
Aelian, and Doctor Beard, his Theater of Gods Judgments, and come nearer home
to Scotland, as having nearest relation to England.

Scotland.
WHat sovereign power and jurisdiction the Realm, Parliaments and Nobles of
Scotland have claimed and exercised over their Kings, (who, says Bu^^anan, can
neither make Laws, War, Peace, nor conclude of any great affairs of the Realm
without a Parliament, which has there, and in Hungary, Poland, Denmark,
Swethland, been oft-times summoned, not only without, but against their Kings
consents;) and how frequently they have questioned, imprisoned, censured,
deposed, yea judicially sentenced their Kings for their tyrannies, oppressions,
whoredoms, murders, rapines, and evil administrations, you may read at large
in George Bucanan (King James his own Tutor) in his Book, De Iure Regni apud
Scotos, and his p. 100, 234, 257 292, 334, 691, 704, 756, 747, 748.
Rerum Scoticarum Historia. Where this their Sovereign power is so largely
vindicated, debated, demonstrated, and the chief objections against it cleared
so abundantly, that I shall not add one syllable to it, but present you with
some Historical examples which confirm it.

See 10. Mayor hist. Buchanan. Rerum Scot. l. 4. p. 100, 101. Hector Boethius ae
Rebus Scoticis Fordon. his Scoti. chrocicon, Polychronicon and Fabian; Mattheus
Westminster. Holinsheds history of Scotland.
Fergusius the first King of Scotland dying, and leaving two sons infants,
unable to govern the Realm; the Scots thereupon considering what dangers
might befall them both at home and abroad, during their infancy; at last
concluded after much debate; and settled this for a standing law; that when any
King died leaving his son under age and unfit to govern, the next of their
kindred, who should be esteemed fittest to reign, should enjoy the sovereign
power; and that he being dead, then the succession of the Crown should return
to the children of the deceased King, being of age to rule; which Law continued
constantly for many hundred years, until the reign of Kenreth the third. By
this Law Feritharis brother to Fergusius abtained the Crown and reigned
fifteen years with much justice and modesty; after which his Nephew Ferleg
desiring to reign, demanded his Fathers Kingdom of his Uncle, who being
willing to resign it to him, called an assembly of the estates, made an
Oration in praise of Ferleg, proffered to resign the Crown unto him. But such
was all the assemblies love to Feritharis and hatred to Ferleg for this his
preposterous affectation of the Crown, that they detested the act, and denied
the motion both with frowns and verbal reprehentions: Whereupon Ferleg
conspired his Uncles death, which being discovered, they thought him worthy of
death; but for Fergusius his fathers sake, his life was spared, and he only
imprisoned; after which making an escape he fled first to the Pi^ts, then to
the Britons, and in the mean time Feritharis dying, by the treachery of Ferleg
as was suspected, Ferleg by the unanimus sentence of all was condemned and put
from his Crown, being absent, and his brother Mainus created King. Buchanan.
l. 4. p. 101, 102, 103, 104, 105*
Dornadilla the fourth King of Scotland dying, leaving Reuther his son under
age and unfit to reign, the people made Notatus his brother King; who playing
the tyrant, banishing, murdering, and opp^essing the people, Donald of
Galloway raised an Army against him, expostulated with him for his tyranny, and
wished him to resign the Crown to Reuther; which he refusing to do, any
justifying his tyranny; hereupon Donald gave him batte^l, slew him, and made
Reuther King without the peoples suffrages: Upon which the Nobles being
offended, (because the power of the Parliament was by this means abolished,
and the election of the supreme Magistrate made only by one man,) took up
Arms both against Ruther and Donald, gave them battle twice in one day, and
took Ruther their new King prisoner: who afterward dying and leaving There
his son an infant, scarce ten years old, they, according to the Law formerly
made and received in this case, made his uncle Ruther King; who after
seventeene years reign voluntarily resigned his Crown to his Nephew There,
in whose commendation he made an Oration, the people hardly permitting it.
There soon after growing very vicious and flagitious, slaying the Nooles, and
filling the Realm with robberies, the Governors pi^tying the deplorable state
of the Realm, resolved to punish him for it; of which he being informed, fled
to the Britains, where he spent his days in contempt and ignominy, not daring
to return; Conan a prudent and discreet man, being elected Viceroy in the
mean time, which office he held almost twelve years till the death of There.
In the reign of Finnan the tenth King of Scotland, that the roots of tyranny
might be cut off, it was decreed, That Kings should command nothing of greater
moment to be done, but by the authority of the public Council. Durstus the
eleventh King, giving himself to all deboistnesse, first banished his fathers
friends from him as the troublesome reprehenders of his pleasures; and sending
for the most vicious young men to be his familiar companions, gave himself
wholly to luxury and venery. He prostituted his wife, (daughter to the King of
Britains) to his companions, and then banished her. At last the Nobles
conspiring against him, he awaking as it were cut out of sleep, considering
that he should find no place of safety, neither at home nor abroad, being
equally hated of strangers and subjects, thought best to counterfeit repentance
of his former li^e, Notable Dissimulation.
for so he might retain both his Crown, and in time inflict punishments on
his enemies. Wherefore recalling his wife from exile, he first of all
endeavored to reconcile him self to the Britains: then calling the chiefest
of his subjects to him, he ratified with a most solemn oath the oblivion of
his former courses; he committed every most wicked person to prison, as if he
reserved them for punishment, and religiously promised, that he would do
nothing hereafter, but by the advice of his Nobles. When by these things he had
given assurance of his sincere mind, he celebrated the agreement with pastimes,
banquets, and other signs of public gladness: and now all men's minds being
taken up with joy, he called most of the Nobility to a supper; where, when he
had shut them up (improvident and unarmed) in one room, sending in his
assasinates, he slew them every one. This calamity not so much terrifying as
exasperating the minds of the rest with new flames of anger, they gathered a
great army together, all men conspiring to take away this detested monster;
whom they slew in battle, together with his wicked confederates. After whose
slaughter, the Nobles putting by Durstus sons, lest they should imitate their
fathers vices, elected his brother Even King with unanimous consent; who hating
Durstus his tyranny had voluntarily banished himself among the Picts. Even
dying, leaving a bastard son called Gillo, he procured himself to be elected
Viceroy till a new King should be chosen, and got the Kingdom confirmed to
him; but yet not deeming himself secure as long as any of Durstus his family
remained, he treacherously slew Durstus his two eldest sons, with all his
kindred and familiars: With which the Nobles being much discontented, and
fearing worser things, privily raised an Army against him; who finding himself
generally deserted but by a few flagicious persons, who feared punishment, He
was forced to fly in a Fisherboat into Ireland: whereupon the Scots created
Cadvallus their Viceroy, and after that created Even their King, who
conquering Gillo in Ireland, he was forced to fly into a Cave, where he was
taken and his head cut off.

Buchan. l. 4. p. 109, 110, 111, 113, 114, 115, 116. Graf^on, part 6 p. 70, 71,
part. 7. p. 80, 81, 82, 84, 86, 87, 90.
King Even the third, not content with an hundred Concubines of the Nobility,
made a Law, That it should be lawful for every one to marry as many Wives as
he could keep; and that the King should have the mayd^n-head of Noble women,
and the Nobles of the Plebeans before they were married; and that the common
peoples Wives should be common for the Nobles. Be^ides, luxury, cruelty and
avarice were the companions of this his flagitious life; he murdering the rich
to get their wealth, and favoring thee^es to share in their robberies:
whereupon the Nobles and people conspiring against him and taking up Arms, he
discerned how unfaithful the society of ill men is; for being deserted by his
party as soon as the battle began, he come alive into his enemies hands: and
was committed t^ pe^petuall prison, his life being spared by the intercession
of Cad^lan, who was made Viceroy in his stead; but son after he was
strangled in the prison by one whom he had formerly injured. King Corbreds
son being within age at his death, the Assembly of the States made Dardan
King, who within three years space ^ushing into all kind of vices, bannished
all prudent and honest men out of hi^ Court, kept none but flatterers about
him, slew Cardorus, and diverse others virtuous men who advertised him of his
faults; and to take away the fear of succession, plotted the death of Corbred,
Galdus, and others: whereupon the Nobles and people by unanimous consent rose
up against him, slew his evil instruments, routed his Forces, took him
prisoner, whilst he was about to murder himself, cut off his head (which they
carried about for a laughing-stocke) and threw his corpse into a jakes, after he
had reigned four years. Luctacke the 22 King of Scots, giving himself wholly
to Wine and Harlots, sparing the chastity of none though never so near allied
to him, nor their husbands never so great, deflowring his own Sisters, Aunts,
Daughters, joining inhumane cruelty and insatiable avarice to his lust, and
depraving the youth of the Country corrupted by his example, when as no man
du^st resist him; was at last convented before an Assembly of the chief men;
where being more freely reprehended for those crimes, he commanded the chief
of them to be drawn away to punishment, as seditious, calling them old doting
fools. Whereupon the people assembling together, ^lew both him and the
instruments of his wickednesses, when he had scarce reigned three years space.
Mogaldus was elected King in his place, who carefully reforming all the abuses
and corruptions of Luctack in the beginning of his reign; yet fell at last
unto them in his old age, and grew (...) by his vices, to the Nobles and common
people, that they weary of him, rose up against him; he being unable to resist
them, wandered up and down with one or two Compani^ns, in secret places, seeking
to escape by flight; but was at last taken and slain. Conarus his son and
successor giving himself to all manner of luxury, and lust, brought the
Realm in short time to great penury; giving Lands and riches to most vile and
naughty persons, because they favored his corrupt living, and invented new
exactions upon his people. Whereupon summoning a Parliament, he demanded a
Tribute of them to support his State and Court in Honor; who taking time to
deliberate, and understanding at last, that this his hunting after money
proceeded not from his Nobles, but from the inventions of Court-flatterers,
they resolved to commit the King toward, as unfit to govern, until he
renouncing the Crown, they should elect another King. Whereupon the next day,
he who was first demanded his opinion, Declaimed sharply against the Kings
former life, his bauds and companions, as unprofi^able in war, troublesome in
peace, full of shame and disgrace: showed, that the Kings revenues were
sufficient to maintain him if he lived within compass; that the rest might be
supplied out of the estates and by the death of those on whom he had bestowed
the public patrimony; and that the King in the mean time should be committed
to custody, as unfit to rule, till they elected another, who might teach others
by his example to live sparingly and hardly, after their Country custom, and
might transmit the discipline received from their ancestors to posterity. With
which fre^ speech he growing very angry, instead of pacifying their
discontented minds, inflamed them more with his cruel threatenings; whereupon
the King being laid hands on by those who stood next him was shut up in a Hall
with a few attendants: his Courtiers, the authors of ill counsel were
presently brought to punishment, and Argarus a Nobleman made Viceroy till the
people should meet to elect a new King; after which Conare spent with g^iefe
and sickness, died in prison. King Ethodius his son being an infant his
brother T^trasell was chosen King, who murdering his nephew, cutting off
diverse of the Nobles, and spoiling the common people, to establish the Kingdom
in himself, he grew so odious and so much d^minished his authority in a short
time, that he stirred up diverse seditions; which he not daring to go abroad to
suppress, being generally hated, was at last strangled by his own followers in
the night, in his own House. Ethodius the 2. being a stupid man, and of a
duller wit then was suitable to the government of so fierce a people, the
Nobles hereupon assembling together out of their respect to the family of
Fergusius, would not wholly deprive him of the name of a King, though he were
slothful being guilty of no crime, but assigned Him governors to execute
Justice in every County: at last he was slain in a tumult of his familiars.
King Athirco his son degenerating from his former virtues, and growing
extremely covetous, angry, luxurious, sloathfull, and leaving the company of
all good men, was not ashamed to go openly in the sight of the people playing
upon a Flute, and rejoicing more to be a Fiddler, then a Prince; whereby he
became very odious to the people: at last ravishing the daughters of Nathalocus
a Noble man, and then whipping and prostiruting them to his lewd companions
lusts; thereupon the Nobles rising up in Arms against him, when he had in vain
endeavored to defend himself by force, being generally deserted by his own
people, who hated him for his wickedn^ss^ he murdered himself, and his brother
Donus was enforced to fly with his little ones to the ^icts to save his life.
Nathalicke succeeded in his Realm, governing it ill by indigent ordinary
persons, who would attempt any wickedness, and treachero^sly strangling diverse
of the Nobility, who were opposites to him, in the prison to which he commit^ed
them, to establish his Kingdom; thereupon their friends with others, being
more enraged against him, raised an Army to suppress him; which whiles he
endeavored to resist, he was slain by one of his own servants, or as some say,
by a Sorceresse with whom he consulted to know his end. King Findocke being
treacherously slain through the conspiracy of Car^^tius his second brother,
Donald his third brother was elected King. Donald of the Isles, usurping the
Realm by violence, so far oppressed the people by ^ll officers and discords
raised amongst them, that he durst seldom stir abroad; he never laughed but
when he heard of the discord and slaughter of his Nobles: for which he was at
last surprised and slain by Crathilinthus, who was unanimously elected King,
and ^lew all this tyrants children. After the death of Fircormarch there were
great divisions and wars for the Crown between Romach and Angusian, two
brethren; Ramach at last conquering his brother and chasing him into Ireland,
gained the Crown rather by force, then love of the people; which to preserve,
he showed himself very cruel to the adverse party, reduced capital causes to
his own at bitrement, and putting many to death, struck a general fear in
all good men: Upon thi^ he grew so generally odious to all estates, that they
conspired against, and suppressed him before he could collect his Forces; and
cutting off his head, carried it about on a Poll, as a joyful spectacle to the
people.

Buch. l* 5. p. 146. 147. 156. 160. 171* Graft* part. 7 p. 94. 125.
Constantine the first, of Scotland, as soon as he obtained the Crown, loosed
the reins to all Vices: he was cruel and covetous toward his Nobles, kept
company with men of the basest Rank; gave himself only to the rapes of
maids, matrons, and immoderate feasts, having fiddlers, Stage Players, and
ministers of all sorts of pleasures almost about him: with which vices the
Nobles of Scotland being offended, admonished him of his duty. But he proudly
centemning them, wished them to look after other matters, saying, he had
council enough from others, and that they should lay aside their false hope,
that they could reclaim the King by their Council. On the contrary he was of
so poor a dejected Spirit toward his enemies, that he not only granted them
peace, but remitted them injuries, and restored them Castles as soon as they
demanded them. Which caused the Picts and Scots to consult together to depose
him by force of Arms; from which Douglasse dissuaded them for the present, by
reason of their foreign wars with the Britans and Saxons: In the end, he was
slain for ravishing a Noblemans daughter in the 15. year of his Reign. King
Goran was slain by the people for favoring Tow^er chief Inquisitor or judge
of capital causes, who much oppressed the people; his children being young,
Hugonius succeeded to the Crown; and afterward his brothers Congalus and
Kumatel, after whom Ardan the son of King Goran reigned. Ferquhard the 52.
King of Scots a crafty man, desiring to turn the Kingdom into a tyranny,
nourished great divisions among the Nobles; but they discovering his malice
privilyenter into an accord among themselves, and calling a Parliament,
sommoned him thereunto: who refusing to appear, keeping within his Castle;
they thereupon took it by force, and brought him to judgment against his
will; where many and grievous crimes, among others, his cruelty and negligence
in the affairs of the Commonwealth; the Pelagian Heresy, with contempt of
Baptism, and the other Sacraments, were objected against him; of none whereof
he being able sufficiently to purge himself, was cast into prison; where, out
of shame and sorrow, he slew himself. Ferquhard the second, a man polluted
with all kind of wickedness, an unsatiable desirer of wine and money,
inhumanely cruel toward men, and impious toward God, when he had every where
vexed others with cruelty and rapines at last turned his fury against his own,
slaying his own wife, and ravishing his own daughters: for which wickednesses
he was excommunicated: but the Nobles willing to assemble together to punish
him, Gra^ton part 7. p. 125. 126. 130. 131. Buch. l. 5. p. 162. 163. 165. l. 6
p. 173. 175 176. 183. 184. 186. 187. 188. 189. 196. 197 198. etc. 200. 201.
were diswaded by holy Bishop Colman, who told the King openly, that some
Devine judgment would shortly seize upon him, which ^ell out accordingly, for
falling into a Fever, and not abstaining from his intemperance, he was eaten
up of lice. Maldwin 55. King of Scotland was strangled by his Queen, for
suspicion of Adultery with an Harlot; for which fact she her self was burned 4
days after. Amberkelethus a vicious wicked king, was slain by one of his own
men, with an arrow in the night, when he was marching against the Picts;
whereupon, lest the Army should be dissolved or left without a General,
Eugenius the 7th was presently chosen King in the Tents: who making peace with
the Picts, his wife being slain in his bed by two conspirators who sought his
life, the king being suspected of this murder was thereupon imprisoned; but
before his trial set at liberty, by the apprehension of the Murderers. King
Eug^nius the 8th, rushing into all Vices, and neither regarding the admonitions
of his Nobles or Clergy, was for his filthy lusts, covetousness, and cruelty,
slain in the assembly of his Lords by their general consent, and his
companions in wickedness and villainy hanged, which was a grateful spectacle
to the people. Fergusius the third succeeded him both in his Crown and Vices;
he was a foul drunken glutton, and so outragiously given to Harlots, that he
neglected his own wife, and brought her to such poverty, that she was forced
to serve other Noble women for her living; wherefore to expiate this disgrace,
she murdered him in his bed, and afterward slew her self also. Donald the 70
King of Scotland, gave himself wholly to his pleasures, keeping none but
Hunters, Hawkers, and inventors of new lusts about him, on whom he spent the
revenues of the Realm, by which he corrupted the youth of the kingdom: which
the ancients of the Realm discerning, assembled and went to the King,
admonishing him of his duty; which he notwithstanding neglected, till the wars
roused him up. Which being ended, he returned to his pristine courses;
Whereupon the Nobles fearing, lest this filthy and sloathfull man, who would
neither be amended by the councels of his friends, nor calamities of his
people, should lose the remainder of the Kingdom which was left, cast him into
prison; where for grief of his inhibited pleasures, or fear of public shame,
he laid violent hands upon himself. Constantine the second was inhibited by
his Senators to make war before he had reformed the corrupted youth of the
Realm by good Laws; after which he was slain in battle by the Danes. King
Ethus his brother and successor polluting himself with all vices, and drawing
all the youth of the Country (prone to wickedness) with him, he was thereupon
seized on by the Nobles; who making a long Oration to the people, wherein they
related the wickednesses of his whole life, he was forced to renounce his right
in the kingdom, and dyed in prison of grief, within three days after, Gregory
being made King in his stead. Constantin^ the third turning Monk, Malchombe
was elected king, who was slain by the conspiracy of thieves; whose son
Duffus being an infant, Indulfus enjoyed the Crown; to whom Duffus succeeding,
was murdered by Donald: whereupon a Parliament was assembled to choose a new
King, which elected Culenus: who at last degenerating into all licentiousness,
ravished Virgins, Nuns, yea his own sisters and daughters, and set up a
kind of public stews. For which being reprehended by the Nobles, he excused
part by reason of his youth, part by reason of ^eare, and acknowledgeing his
sorrow for the residue, promised amendment. But he not reforming upon their
adm^nitions, they departed from Court, that they might neither be witnesses no^
partakers of his vices: The king freed of their troublesome company gave
himself wholly to fea^^ing and venery, spending nights and days in dishonest
sports and pleasures with his dissolute companions; and to maintain his
luxury, he pillaged and oppressed his Subjects, especially those who were
rich; and by his disorders fell into a grievous sickness, which made him a
deformed carcass, fit for nothing but to suffer the penalties of his vicious
life, his Courtiers and companions spoiling the people every where in the mean
time. Whereupon the N^^les were enforced to summon a Parliament at Scone, where
the king was commanded to be present, that together with the rest he might
consult how to provide for the public safety in this precipitate State of
things: with which ^ommons being awaked, he began to consult with his
companions, what was best to be done for his own ^afety in these exigen^s:
being unable to resist or flee, he resolved to go to the Parliament, hoping to
find some mercy there for his good fathers sake, to preserve him from falling
into extreme misery* but in his way thither he was slain by the Thane of the
Country for his violent ravishment of his daughter; his death was acceptable to
all, because it freed them of such a monster with less labor then they
expected: and Kenneth the third was made King in his place: who poisoning his
Nephew Malcolme, heir to the crown after his decease, to settle it on his own
posterity, he caused the Lords in Parliament to repeal the ancient Law whereby
the Crown descended to the next of kin during the minority of the right heir;
and to enact, that the son should (...) thenceforth inherit the crown next
after his father, through a Minor; that the Realm during his Minority should
be governed by a Viceroy elected by the Parliament and Nobles till he came to
14 years of age; and after that by a Guardian elected by himself; that if the
Kings eldest son dyed having issue, the issue should inherit, before the
second brother, etc. After which, the King generally hated for the poisoning of
Malcolme, was slain by the practice and command of Fenella. He thus cut off
Const^ntine surnamed the bald, son of Culen, pretending the new Law
concerning the descent of the Crown to be unjust, obtained by force, and
contrary both to the public liberty and safety; to wit, that an in^ant
(commonly governed by a woman) being unable to govern, or repulse an enemy in
times of danger, yea a curse of God upon a Realm, and therefore not to be
endured or settled by a Law, especially in those time of war, when they had so
many enemies) should be preferred before a Kinsman of full age, fit to reign;
so ambitiously sought the Crown and made so many friends, that he procured
himself to be proclaimed King at Scone; which Malcolme son of Kenneth (for
whose sake this new Law was enacted) understanding, presently raised all the
Forces he could, which being conducted by his brother Kenneth, Constantine and
he in the second encounter were both slain one of another. After whose death
Grame the son of Duffus usurping the Crown, when he and Malcolme were ready
to encounter with their Arms, this agreement was made between them by
Forthred a Bishop, that Grame should retain the Kingdom, and the new Law of
succession be suspended during his life; and Malcolme succeed him after his
death. After which Grame giving himself to all dissoluteness, covetousness
and oppression, and warring upon those Nobles and Counselors, who advised him
to reform his evil courses, with greater cruelty than any foreign enemy,
destroying both men, towns, cattle, fields, and making all a common prey;
hereupon they called in Malcolme out of Northumberland to assist them, who
encountering Grame, on Ascension day, took him prisoner, being deserted of his
people, wounded in the head, and then put out his eyes; who soon after dying
of sorrow and his wounds; Malcholme thereupon summoned a Parliament at Scone,
and would not take the Crown till the Law concerning the succession made in his
fathers reign, was ratified by all their conse^ts: against which Law Buchanan
exceedingly inveighs in the beginning of his seventh Book, as the occasion and
increase of all those mischiefs both to King and Kingdom, which it was
purposely made to prevent. This Malcolme, after he had reigned long
victoriously with much honor, in his declining age, growing very covetous,
took away the lands he had formerly given to his Nobles for their good service
in the wars, and punished diverse of the wealthiest men so severely, that he
brought many of them to death, others to extreme poverty; which injuries lost
him all his love, honor, and so far exasperated the people* that partly out
of revenge, partly to prevent further oppressions and to provide for their own
security, corrupting his servants with money, they seat their agents into his
chamber in the night, and slew him. Not to mention the murder of King Buch. l.
7. p. 213. to 230.
Duncan by Machbed, who usurped his Crown through his pusillanimity; this
Machbed, omitting no kind of libidinousnesse, Heylins Geogr p. 507. 508.
cruelty, and tyrannizing over the people for 18 years soac^ together,
trusting to the predictions of certain wisards, that he should never be
overcome till Bernane wood did come to Dunsinane Castle, and that he should
never be slain by any man borne of a woman. At last Mackduffe governor of
Fiffe joining himself to some few patriots who had escaped this Tyrants sword,
met at Bernane wood, and early in the morning every man bearing a bough in his
hand, the better to keep them from discovery, took Dunsinane Castle by
scalado: whence Machbed escaping was pursued, overtaken, and urged to ^ight ^p
Mackduffe, to whom the Tyrant replied in scorn, that in vain he attempted
his death, for it was his destiny never to be slain by any man borne of a
woman: Now then said Mackduffe, is thy fatal hour come, for I never was borne
of a woman, but violently cut out of my mothers womb, she dying before I was
borne; which words so daunted the Tyrant, though otherwise valiant, that he was
easily slain, and Malcolme Conmer the true heir of the Crown, seated in the
Throne. King Donald being odious and cruel to his subjects, they sent for
Duncan Malcombes bastard, who expelled him the Realm, and was created King in
his steed; who proving harsh, cruel, and Imperious to his Subjects, fell into
their hatred, and was beheaded in the night by Marpender Earl of Murry,
corrupted with money by Donald to murder him. Donald permitting the Isles to
be taken and possessed by Magnus King of Norway, and suffering his Realm to be
wasted by a secret agreement; thereupon the Scots sent for Edgar Malcombes
son, to take possession of the Crown, who entering into Scotland with small
forces, Donald being deserted by his people, betook himself to flight, but
being apprehended and brought back to Edgar, he was cast into prison, and not
long after dyed. King Malcolm* the fourth, at a Parliament at York parting
with diverse of his Crowne-lands to King Henry without his peoples consents so
far incurred their hatred, that upon his return they beseiged him at
Barwick, and almost took him prisoner, but by the mediation of some of his
Council, who informed the Nobles, that the King was by violence and fraud
circumvented by the King of England, of the ancient patrimony of the Crown
land, they resolved to recover it by war: the Scottish Nobility affirming, that
the King had not any power to diminish or part with any lands appertaining to
the Crown without all their consents in Parliament. This King after some
encounters making a peace with the English upon unequal terms, wherein he
parted with some of his ancient territories, out of his pusilanimity, against
his Nobles consent; hereupon he grew so odious and contemptible to them, that
they were all weary of his government, and caused many to take up Arms and
Rebel against him.

Bu^h. l. 8. p. 250. Wal^ing. Mat. Westminster. Fabian Holin. Speed, Graft. Daniel in
the life of K. Edw. the 1. Wal^ingham Ypodigma p. 79.
After the death of King Alexander the third there was a Parliament summoned at
Scone to consult about the creating of a new King; and the government of the
Realm, during the Inter-regnum^ where first of all they appointed six men to
rule the Realm for the present, and then heard and discussed the several
Titles pretended to the Crown, the final determination whereof, they referred
to King Edward the first of England* as to the Supreme Sovereign Lord of the
Realm: who selecting 12. S^ottish, and 12. English Counselors to assist him;
After full hearing, by general consent of all, adjudged the Crown to John
Baylioll, husband to King Alexanders ^ighest Kinswoman: The Scots considering
his simplicity and unaptnes to govern them, and scarce confiding in him being
an Englishman, and elected by the K. of England, co^stituted them 12. Peers,
after the manner of France, to wit, 4. Bishops, 4. Earls, and 4. Lords, by
whose advise the King and all the affairs of the Realm, were to be governed
and directed: He was taken and kept prisoner by the English. Buchanan l. 9. 10.
11. 12. p. 291. 334. etc. 412. 413.
After the death of Robert Bruce, the Scots before their King was crowned,
created a Viceroy to govern the Realm, who suppressed the thieves, and
Robbers: Edward Bayliol son to John Bayliol succeding Bruce, was afterward
rejected and deposed by the Scots, for adhereing too closely to the English and
K. Edward, and David Bruce elected K. in his place. Robert the 2d. of Scotland
when a peace was propounded between France, England, and Scotland by the Pope,
willingly consented there unto, but his Nobles being against it, his assent
alone was in vain; because the King of Scotland alone, can make no firm peace
nor truce, nor promise which shall bind, but by public consent in Parliament.
King Robert the 3d. dying of grief, for the captivity and imprisonment of his
Son James, taken prisoner by our King Henry the 4th. as he was going into
France, the Scots hereupon appointed Robert his uncle, by common consent, for
their Viceroy, till James the (first of that name) right heir of the Cowne,
were enlarged. James being freed and Crowned, summoned a Parliament, wherein an
aid was granted him to pay his ransom, with much difficulty: he had many
Civil wars with his Subjects, and at last was murdered by Robert Grame and
his confederats, from whom he received 28. wounds in his Chamber in the night,
whereof he presently died. James the 2. his son, being but 7. years old at his
death, Alexander Leviston was chosen Protector, and William Crichton made
Chancellor by Parliament; Which the Earl Douglas storming at, committed many
insolences in a hostile manner. After which, Alexander and his faction
opposing the Chancellor, and commanding that none should obey him, the
Chancellor thereupon fortified Edenborough Castle, and as the King was hunting
early in the morning seized upon him with a troop of Horse, and brought him to
Edinburgh Castle, where he detained him from the Protector till the peace of
the Kingdom, and present divisions should be settled: which lasting very long by
reason of Earl Douglas his ambition, power, and covetousnes, who raised many
grievous civil wars, he was at last stabbed to death by the King himself,
Anno 1452. contrary to his promise of safe^ conduct to the Court, under the
Kings and Nobles hands and seals: Whereupon his brethren and Confederats,
meeting at Sterling, resolved to revenge his death, and tied the Kings and
Nobles writing of safe conduct to an horses tail, which they led through the
streets of Sterling, railing at the King and his Council as they went, and
when they came into the market place (where they had 500. trumpets sounding)
they by an Herald, proclaimed the King and all that were with him, fedifragus,
perjured, and enemis of all good men: and then spoiled and burned the Town,
Country, with all places else that were firm to the King; between whom and
the kings party, a bloody civil war (to the spoil of the Country)
continued above two years space with various success; till at last with much
difficulty this fire was extinguished and the King casually slain with the
breaking of a Cannon: whose son James the 3. being but 7. years old, was
proclaimed king in the Camp, and the Queen Mother made Regent, till a
Parliament might be called to settle the government; but when the Parliament
assembled, upon the Buchanan l. 12. p. 417. to 430. 441. to 456. Heylin p. 510.
Oration of Kenneth Archbishop of Saint Andrews showing the Inconveniences and
unfitness of a woman's Government, they Elected 6. Regents to govern the King
and Realm during his minority. After which Bodius was made Viceroy: This king
being seduced by ill Courtiers and Counselors which corrupted him, thereupon
diverse of the Nobles assembling together, resolved to go to the Court, to
demand these ill Counselors and seducers of the King and then to execute them;
which they did accordingly, and that with such fury, that when they wanted
cords to hang some of them, they made use of their horses bridles, and every
one strave who should be forwardest to do this execution. The king promising
reformation, was dismissed; but in steed of reforming he meditated nothing but
revenge, blood and slaughter in his mind; and plotting secretly to murder the
Nobles in Edenburg, by the help of Earl Duglasse; he detesting the fact and
revealing the Treachery, thereupon the Nobles who formerly desired only his
reformation, took up Arms to de^^roy him, as one incorrigible and implacable;
whereupon they made the Kings son Viceroy, and knowing the kings
perfidiousnesse, would yield to no terms of peace, unless he would resign up
his Crown to his son: which he refusing, thereupon they gave him battle and
slew him, as a common enemy. After which calling a Parliament, they created
his son James the fourth king; who coming under the power of the Duglasses,
rescued himself at last from them: and invading England, Anno. 1542 when he
proclaimed Oliver Sincleer his favorite, Gene^all, the Scottish Nobility took
it in such indignation, that they threw down their weapons and suffered
themselves to be taken prisoners; whereupon the king growing sick with grief
and anger, soon after dyed. Buch. l. 16. to the end of 20. Holin. Chytr.
Chron. Saxon. l. 21. p. 640. 641. 64^. 836. Speed, in the life of Queen Mary,
and Queen Elizabeth Cambdens Elizabeth, and others. See Knocks his History of
Scotland.
Anno. 1555. Mary the Daughter of king James the sixth of Scotland, and heir
to the Crown, being within age, her mother Queen Mary, by common consent was
made Regent, and she by common consent and council of the Nobles, married to
Francis Dolphine of France. In the mean time there happening some troubles and
wars about the reformed Religion, which many of the Nobles and people there
contended for; the Queen Mother, granting those of the Religion, a
confirmation of their liberties and Religion by way of Truce for 6 months, she
in the mean time sends for Soldiers out of France, wherewith she endeavored
to suppress Religion, with the remaining liberty of the Scots, and to subject
them to the French. Whereupon the Nobles of Scotland who stood for the defense
of their Religion and Liberties, by a common decree in Parliament, deprived the
Queen Mother of her Regencie, make a league with our Queen Elizabeth, being
of the reformed Religion, and receiving aid both of men and money from her,
besieged the Queen Mother in Edinburgh Castle, where she dyed of grief and
sickness. After which they expelled the French, and procured free exercise of
the Reformed Religion. In the mean time Francis dying, the Queen sends for
Henry Steward out of England, where he and his Father had been Exiles; marries
and proclaim him king, July 29. 1564. which done, she excluded the Nobility
from ^er Counsels, and was wholly advised by David Ritzius, a Suba^dian, whom
she brought with her out of France, and did all things by his Council;
wherewith the Nobles being much discontented, finding him supping with the
Queen in a little Chamber, commanded him to rise out of the place, which did
little become him, and drawing him out of the Chamber, stabbed him to death,
Anno. 1565. The Queen soon after was delivered of a son and heir, James
the 6. and then admits James Hepburne Earl of Bothwell into most intimate
familiarity with her, setting him over all affairs of the Realm, granting
nothing to any petitioner almost but by him; and her husband Steward being
dead, (whether of a natural death or poison is yet in controversy) she
married Bothwell openly, without the Lords and Parliaments consents. Hereupon
the Nobles took up arms against Bothwel and the Queen, bes^eged the Queen
till she rendered her self prisoner, upon this condition; that she should
abjure and resign her interest in the Crown and Kingdom to her infant son;
which they compelled her to perform, and appointed James Earl of Morton
Viceroy, and Protector during the Kings Minority. In the mean time the Queen
was committed prisoner to the Castle of the Isle of the Lake Leuine; where
corrupting Duglasse her keeper, the Earl of Mortons Nephew, and a shipmaster,
she escaped to the Hamilt^ns in safety, who having raised Forces to free her,
waited her coming on the shore: But the Viceroy scattering these forces
soon after, the Queen thereupon fled into England. Anno. 1568. Where Queen
Elizabeth taking her expulsion ill, labored that she might be restored to the
Crown, which could not be effected, but by Arms, or mediation; and neither of
them without knowledge of the cause. Whereupon the Queen sent for the Viceroy
and Council of Scotland into England, to answer the complaints of their
Queen against them; which they did in a writing, (composed by Buchanan, and
afterward Printed both in Latin and English,) wherein they showed the grounds
and order of their proceedings against their Queen; wherewith the Queen and
Council were satisfied, that they had proceeded rightly and orderly: yet to
keep both sides in suspense, she pronounced no definitive sentence: The
Viceroy departing into Scotland, was afterward murdered by the Hamiltons,
and Matthew Steward Earl of Len^ux made Viceroy in his steed. The Queen in
the interim treated with Thomas Howard Duke of Nerthfolke, about a match with
him, and to seize upon the Realm of Scotland, whereupon he was committed to the
Tower, and she restrained; after which she was solemnly arraigned and
condemned to death by the Parliament of England for conspiring Queen
Elizabeth's death, etc* and for it beheaded at Fotherringham Castle, Feb. 8.
1587* The History of which Queens life is more at large related by Rerum.
Scot. Hist. l. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.
Buchanan and others; and her imprisonment and Deposition professedly justified
as lawful by his Treatise, De Iure Regni apud Scotos (compiled for that
purpose) to which I shall refer the Reader.

What the Lords and Realm of Scotland have done within these 5. years last past
in defense of their Religion Laws, Liberties, by holding general Assemblies,
Parliaments, taking up arms, seizing the Forts and Ammunition of the Realm,
and marching into England, against the Kings consent and Proclamations, is so
fresh in memory, so fu^ly related in the Acts of Oblivion and Pacification,
made in both Parliaments of England and Scotland, ratified by the King
himself; and in particular Histories of this Subject, that I shall not spend
time to recite particulars, but will rather conclude from all the premises with
the words of Rerum Scot. l. 20. p. 746. 747.
Buchanan; The Ancient custom of our Ancestors in punishing their Kings,
suffers not our forcing of the Queen to renounce her right unto the Crown to
her son, to seem a Novelty; and the moderation of the punishment, shows it
proceeded not from envy: for so many Kings punished with death, bonds,
banishment by our Ancestors, voluntarily offer themselves in the ancient
Monuments of Histories, that we need no foreign examples to confirm our
own act: For the Scottish Nation, seeing it was free from the beginning,
created it self Kings upon this very Law, that the Empire being conferred on
them by the suffrages of the people, if the matter required it, they might take
it away again by the same suffrages; of which law many footsteps have remained
even to our age: for in the Islands which lie round about us, and in many
places of the Continent, wherein the Ancient language and constitutions have
continued, this very custom is yet observed in creating Governors: likewise
the Ceremonies which are used in the Kings inauguration have also an express
image of this Law; out of which it easily appears, that a Kingdom is nothing
else, but the mutual stipulation between the people and their Kings: the same
likewise may be most apparently understood out of the inoffensive tenor of the
ancient Law, preserved from the very beginning of reigning among the Scots even
unto our age; when as no man in the mean time has attempted, not only not to
abrogate this Law, but not so much as to shake it, or in any part to diminish
it: Yea, whereas our Ancestors have deprived so many Kings as would be tedious
to name, of their Realm; condemned them to banishment, restrained them in
prisons, and finally punished them with death, yet there was never any mention
made of abating the rigor of the Law; neither perchance undeservedly, since it
is not of that kind of Laws which are obno^ious to the changes of times, but
of those engraven in the minds of men in the first original of mankind, and
approved by the mutual consent well-nigh of all Nations, which continue
unbroken and sempiternall together with the Nature of things, and being subject
to the commands of no man; domineere and rule over all men. This law (which in
every action offers it self to our eyes and minds, and dwells in our breasts
will we, nill we) our Ancestors following, were always armed against violence,
and suppressed the unrulinesse of Tyrants. Neither is this Law proper only to
the Scots, but common to all well-ordered Nations and People: as the Athenians,
Lacaedemonians, Romans, Venetians, Germans, Danes: which he there manifests
by examples. So that I may hence infallibly determine, the Realm, Parliament,
and Nobles of Scotland, collectively considered, to be the Sovereign power in
that Realm, superior to the Kings themselves: from whom I shall proceed to
Scripture Presidents, in the Kings and Kingdoms of the Gentiles, Israel, and
Judah, recorded in Scripture.

The Kings of the Gentiles, Israel, and Judah.
Now least any should object, that all the forecited Examples and Authorities
are but humane, and no convincing evidences to satisfy the Conscience, That
whole Kingdoms, States, and Parliaments are above their kings, and of greater
power then they, I shall therefore (to close up this Posterne Gate of Evasion)
conclude with Scripture Presidents, ratifying this truth beyond all
contradiction. To begin with Heathen kings and States therein recorded. I read
in the 1 Samuel 29. and 1 Chro. 12. 19. That when David with his men offered to
go with Achish and the Philistines against King Saul (his Sovereign) and the
Israelites to Battle, and passed on in the rereward with Achish; the Princes
of the Philistines seeing it, said, What do these Hebrews here? To whom Achish
answered, Is not this David the servant of Saul King of Israel, which has been
with me these years, and I have found no fault in him since he fell unto me
unto this day? Hereupon the Princes of the Philistines were wroth with him, and
taking advice together, said to their King Achish, Make this fellow return
that he may go again to his place which thou have appointed him, and let him
not go down with us to Battle, lest in the Battle he be an adversary to us;
for wherewith should be reconcile himself to his Master? should it not be with
the Heads of these men? Is not this David, of whom they sang one to another in
dances, saying, Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands? Then
Achish called David, and said unto him, Surely as the Lord lives, thou have
been upright, and thy going out and coming in with me in the Host is right in
my sight, for I have not found evil in thee since the day of thy coming;
nevertheless the Lords favor thee not; wherefore now return and go in peace,
that thou displease not the Lords of the Philistines. And when David replied,
What have I done, etc. that I may not fight against the Enemies of my Lord the
King? Achish answered him, I know thou art good in my sight as an Angel of
God, notwithstanding the Princes of the Philistines have said, HE SHALL NOT GO
UP WITH US TO BATTLE; wherefore rise up early in the morning with thy Masters
servants that are come with thee, and as soon as ye have light, depart;
whereupon they returned. Here we see the Lords of the Philistines did
peremptorily overrule their king against his will, who durst not contradict
them; therefore they had a Power superior to his: as will further appear by 1 Samuel 5. 7* 8, 9, 10, 11. and chapter 6. 1, to 13. where when the Ark of God was
taken by the Philistines, the Lords and People of the Philistines (not the
King) met, consulted, and ordered, how it should be removed from place to
place, and at last sent it back again. So Ahasuerus the great Persian Monarch,
was advised, overruled by his Council of State, as appears by the case of
Queen Vashti, Ester 1. and what his Princes thought meet to be done, that he
decreed and proclaimed, verse 19, 20, 21, 22. So Artax^rxes king of Persia did
all things of moment, by the advice of his Counselors and Princes, Ezra 7. 28.
and Chap. 8. 25. Great Nabuchadnezzar King of Babylon, ( Dan 3. 2, 3. 24. chap.
4. 32, to 36.) was for his pride driven from men, put to eat grass with Oxen
for aspace, till he knew that the most High rules in the Kingdoms of men:
After which his understanding and reason returned to him, and the glory of his
Kingdom, and his Counselors and Lords sought unto him, and established him in
his Kingdom, he being overruled and counseled afterward by them. So Daniel
6. Darius King of the Medes and Persians, was overruled by his Lords and
Princes, even against his will, to Sign a Decree, and to cast Dauiel into the
Lions Den for breach of it; and though the King were sore displeased with
himself for Signing this Decree, and set his heart on Daniel, and labored till
the going down of the Sun to deliver him; yet the Princes assembling and
telling the King, Dan. 6. 14. to 20.
Know O King, that the Law of the Medes and Persians is, that no Decree nor
Statute which the King establishes, ( by the advice of his Nobles) may be
changed, ( to wit, by the king alone, without their advise: a clear evidence,
that the greatest Persian Monarchs were subject to the Laws of their Kingdoms,
as well as other Princes;) Whereupon the King commanded, and they brought
Daniel and cast him into the Den of Lions, and a stone was brought and laid
upon the mouth of the Den, and the King Sealed it with his own Signet, and with
the Signet of the Lords, THAT THE PVRPOSE MIGHT NOT BE CHANGED concerning
Dani^^. Here this great king was even against his will constrained to be
subject both to his Laws and Lords. The like we read of Pharaoh king of Egypt,
Exodus 1. 8, 9, 10, 11. who consulted with his people how to oppress the
Israelites, as being unable to do it without their consents. And Exodus 10.
Pharaohs Counselors and Lords, ( after sundry Plagues on the Land) said unto
him, How long shall this man ( Moses) be a snare unto us? Let the men go that
they may serve the Lord their God; Know thou not that Egypt is destroyed?
Whereupon Moses and Aaron were brought before Pharaoh, who said unto them, Go
serve the Lord your God. And Esaias 19. 11. to 16. Surely the Princes of Zoan are
fools, the counsel of the wise Counselors of Pharaoh is become brutish: They
have also seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay of the Tribes thereof.
They then had an overruling power above their kings. So the great King of
Nineveh, ^onah 3. 7, 8, 9. proclaimed and published a general fast thorowout
the City, by the Decree of the King, and of his great men, making no public
Laws, but by their advice and assents. In like manner we read in the 2 Samuel 5.
3, 4, 5. That the Princes of Hanun King of the Ammonites co^selled and
overruled him ( out of overmuch suspicion) to abuse David's messengers sent to
him in love. And in the 1 Kings 22. 47. There was then no King in Edom, a
Deputy was King; the kingdom appointing a Deputy then to rule them in stead of
a king, and giving him royal authority: And in the 2 Kings 8. 22. 2 Chronicles. 21.
8. In the days of Ioram, Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah (which had
conquered it) and MADE A KING OVER THEMSELVES: and though Ioram smote the
Edomites, who encompassed him, yet they revolted from under the hand of Judah
till this day: The electing and constituting of a king being in their own
power. See Genesis 23. 3. to 20. and c. 34. 20. to 25. to like purpose.

These being all Pagan Kings and States, I come to the Israelites themselves;
wherein for my more orderly proceeding, and refutation of the many gross
erroneous Assertions of * Court Doctors and Royallists touching the estate and
Sovereignty of their Kings, whom they would make the world believe to be
absolute Monarchs, subject to no Laws, to derive all their royal authority
from God alone, and no ways from the people; to be merely hereditary and
elective, to be above all their people, irresistible in their Tyrannical
wicked proceedings, and no ways subject to their Realms and Congregations
overruling control, much less to their defensive oppositition or deprivation;
I shall digest the whole History of their Kings and Kingdoms Jurisdictions and
power into these ensuing propositions, which I shall clearly make good out of
Scripture, as I propound them in their order.

First, That the original Creation and Institution of the Israelites Kings and
Kingdoms proceeded only from the power and authority of the people, and that
solely by Divine permission, rather then institu^ion; This is most apparent by
Deuter. 11. 14, 15. When thou art come unto the land which the Lord thy God
gives thee, and shall possess it and dwell therein, and shall say, I WILL SET
A KING OVER ME, like as ALL THE NATIONS THAT ARE ABOUT ME; THOU SHALL in any
wise SET HIM KING OVER THEE, whom the Lord thy God shall choose; one from among
thy brethren SHALL THOU SET OVER THEE, THOU MAY NOT SET A STRANGER OVER THEE,
which is not thy Brother. Where God himself by way of See Cunaeus de Repub.
Heb. l. 1, c. 14.
prophecy of what afterward should come to pass, expressly declares, first,
that the primary motion of changing the government of the Iew^ from Judges and
an Aristocracy into a Kingdom, should proceed from the peoples inclination, as
the words, and shall say, I will set a King over me, etc. import. Secondly,
that the authority to change the Government into a Regality, to creat and make
a King, resided in, and the authority of the King proceeded merely from the
people, as the words, I will set a King over me, Thou shall set him over thee;
(four times recited in two Verses;) manifest beyond dispute. Thirdly, that all
Nations about them who had Kings, had the like power to create and make their
kings, as the words, Like as all the Nations that are about me, witness. All
which is evicently confirmed by Josephus, Antiqu. Iudaeorum, l. 4. c. 8. by
Carolus Sigo^ius de Repub. Hebraeorum, l. 7. c. 3. Bertram, Cunaeus, Ius.
Regiu^^ Heb.
Schikardus, and See Steph. Iunius Brutus. Vindic. Contra Tyrannos, q 3. p. 83.
to. 92. De Iure Magistr. in Subditos, p. 272* 273.
diverse Commentators on this Text: The History of the change of their State
into a Kingdom, and of their Judges into kings^ added to this Prophecy and
precept, will leave no place for any scruple. We read in the 1 Samuel 8. that the
people growing weary of Samuels government who judged them, by reason of the
ill government of his sons, who took Bribes, and perverted judgment;
thereupon ALL THE ELDERS OF ISRAEL GATHERED THEMSELVES TOGETHER, and came to
Samuel unto Ramah, and said unto him, Behold, thou art old, and thy sons walk
not in thy ways, now MAKE US A KING TO IVDGE US LIKE ALL THE NATIONS: But the
thing displeased, Samuel, when they said, Give us a King to judge us; and
Samuel prayed unto the Lord; And the Lord said unto Samuel, HEARKEN UNTO THE
VOICE OF THE PEOPLE IN ALL THAT THEY SAY UNTO THEE; for they have not rejected
thee, but they have rejected me that I should not reign over them; According to
all the works that they have done since the day that I brought them out of
Egypt, even unto this day; wherewith they have forsaken me, and served other
gods, so do they also unto thee: Now therefore hearken to their voice; howbeit,
yet protest solemnly unto them, and show them the manner of the King that shall
reign over them. And Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the people that
asked of him a King; and he said, This will be (not ought to be) the manner of
the King that shall reign over you, he will take your sons, and appoint them
for himself, etc. and ye shall be his servants* and ye shall cry out in that
day because of YOUR KING WHICH YE SHALL HAVE CHOSEN YOU, and the Lord will not
^ear you in that day. Nevertheless, the people refused to obey the voice of
Samuel, and they said, Nay, BUT WE WILL HAVE A KING OVER US, that we also may
be like all the Nations, and that our King may judge us, and go out before us,
and fight our battles. And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and
rehearsed them in the ears of the Lord: And the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken
unto their voice, and make them a King. After which, when God had appointed
Saul to be their King, 1 Samuel 12* 12, 13, to 20*
Samuel called the people together unto the Lord in Mizpeh, and recapitulating
the great deliverances God had done for them, added, And ye have this day
rejected your God, who himself saved you out of all your adversities and
tribulations, and ye have said unto him, Nay, BUT SET A KING OVER US, etc. And
Samuel said unto all the people, See ye him whom the Lord has chosen, that
there is none like him among all the people? And all the people shouted and
said, God save the King. After which he 1 Samuel 12. 12, 13. to 20.
expostulated again with them thus, And when ye saw that Nahash King of the
Children of Ammon came against you, ye said unto me, Nay, BUT A KING SHALL
REIGN OVER US, when the Lord was your King; Now therefore behold the KING WHOM
YE HAVE CHOSEN, AND WHOM YE HAVE DESIRED, etc. that ye may perceive and see
that your WICKEDNESS is great which ye have done in the sight of the Lord, IN
ASKING YOU A KING. And all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants
unto the Lord thy God that we die not, for we have added unto all our sins this
evil, TO ASK A KING. Which compared, with Hos. 13. 10, 11. I will be thy King,
where is any other that may save thee in all thy Cities? and thy Judges of whom
thou said, GIVE ME A KING AND PRINCES? I gave thee a King in mine anger, and
took him away in my wrath: with Acts 13. 21. And afterward THEY DESIRED A
KING, and God gave them Saul the son of Cis, by the space of forty years. All
these concurring sacred Texts will infallibly demonstrate, that this change of
the Judges into Kings, and the original creation of their Kings and kingdoms
proceeded only from the importunity and authority of the people, who would not
be gainsaid herein, not from Gods institution, or Samuels approbation, who
censured and disavowed this their motion, though they at last condescended to
it; all which is elegantly related, confirmed by Josephus, Antique. Iudaeorum,
l. 6. c. 4, 5, 6, 7. By all this it is apparent, that the congregation and
people of the Jews had the Sovereign power in themselves, as well as other
Nations, because the authority to alter the whole frame of their former
Aristocraticall Government into a Monarchy, resided in them, though they were
taxed forchanging it in Samuels days, who had so justly, so uprightly judged
them.

Secondly, it is apparent, that the Judges and kings of the Israelites were not
properly hereditary, but often elective by the people: and though God did
sometimes immediately nominate the persons of those that should reign over
them, as is apparent by Saul, David, Jeroboam, Iehu, others; yet the people did
constantly confirm, make them kings, and gave them their royal authority, none
being made kings by Divine appointment, but such as they willingly accepted,
approved, confirmed for their kings; Gods previous designation being but a
preparative to their voluntary free ( not restrained or limited) election. The
first king among the Israelites ( though but over part of them) was Abimelech
the son of Ierubbaal, who was made king by the peoples election, Judges, 9. 1,
to 7. who having persuaded those of Sechem to elect him for their king,
thereupon ALL THE MEN of Sechem gathered together, and ALL THE HOUSE of Millo
went and MADE ABIMELECH KING: whence Iotham thus upbraided them and him, Verse
14. to 19: Then said all the trees unto the Bramble, come thou and reign over
us: And the Bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king over
you; then come and put your trust in my shadow, etc. Now therefore if ye have
done truly and sincerely in that YE HAVE MADE Abimelech KING, etc And that ye
have risen up against my fathers house this day, and have MADE Abimelech king,
etc. We read Judge. 8* 21, 23. that after Gideon had slain Zebab and Zalmunna,
with the Midianites, The men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us,
both thou and thy sons, and thy sons son also, for thou have delivered us from
the hand of Midia^. And Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you,
neither shall my son rule over you* the Lord shall rule over you. Where we
clearly see, the power and right to elect a Ruler, and to limit the government
to him and his Issue, for three Generations only, to reside in the peoples free
election. So Judges 10. 17, 18. and Chap. 11. 1. to 12. When the Children of
Ammon were gathered together and encamped against Gilead, the people and
Princes of Gilead said one to another, What man is he that will begin to fight
against the children of Ammon, he shall be Head over all the Inhabitants of
Gilead. And the Elders of Gilead went to fetch Iephthah out of the Land of Tob,
and said unto him, Come and be our Captain that we may fight with the Children
of Ammon, and be our Head over all the inhabitants of Gilead: Upon promise of
which dignity, he went with them to Gilead; and THE PEOPLE MADE HIM HEAD AND
CAPTAIN OVER THEM. That the election and making of their Kings belonged of
right to all the people, is past dispute, being so resolved by God himself,
Deuter. 17. 14, 15. When thou art come into the land, etc. and shall say, I
WILL SET A KING OVER ME, like as all the Nations that are about me, THOU shall
in any wise SET HIM KING OVER THEE whom the Lord thy God shall choose; one from
among thy Brethren shall THOU SET OVER THEE, THOU MAY NOT SET A STRANGER OVER
THEE: Where the power of creating and electing the King, is left wholly to the
peoples free choice, with these general restrictions, that he should be one of
their brethren, not a stranger, and particularly qualified as is there
expressed. And though God did sometime design and nominate their Kings, yet he
left the power of approbation and ratification of them free to the people, as
is apparent by 1 Sa. 8. 18. And ye shall cry in that day, because of the King
WHICH YE SHALL HAVE CHOSEN you. Hence Saul their first King, though nominated
and designed by God and Samuel, was yet approved, confirmed and made King by
the People, Who shouted and said, God save the King, when Samuel presented him
to them; 1 Samuel 10. 24. 1 San. 11, 12, 13, 14.
But the children of Belial despising and bringing him no presents, Verse 27.
after Saul had conquered the Ammonites, who besieged Iabesh Gilead; The people
said unto Samuel, who is he that said, Shall Saul R^ign over us? bring the men
that we may put them to death. Then Saul said, There shall not a man be put to
death this day; for this day the Lord ha^h wrought salvation in Israel. Then
said Samuel to the people, Come let us go to Gilgal, and renew the Kingdom
there. And ALL THE PEOPLE went to Gilgal, and there THEY MADE SAVL KING before
the Lord in Gilgal: Where Samuel uses this speech to the people, concerning
Saul, 1 Samuel 12. 13*
Now therefore behold THE KING WHOM YE HAVE CHOSEN, and whom Ye have desired,
the Lordhath set a King over you: (so that the choice and election of him, was
as well theirs as Gods:) And Verse 25. he calls him Your King, because chosen
and made by, as well as for the people.

Saul being slain by his own hands, the Crown descended not to his son by
way of descent, but David succeeded him by Gods designation, and the Peoples
election too, by whose authority he was made and crowned king, being formerly
1. Sam. 16. 1. to 14.
anointed by Samuel to succeed Saul. This is irrefragable by the 2 Samuel 2. 4.
Where David going up to Hebron by Gods direction, the men of Judah came, and
there They Anointed David King over the House of Judah. After which 2 Samuel.
5. 1. to 5. ALL THE TRIBES OF ISRAEL came to David to Hebron, and spoke saying,
Behold we are thy bone and thy flesh. Also in time past, when Saul was King
over us, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel; And the Lord
said to thee: Thou shall feed my people Israel, and thou shall be a Captain
over Israel. So ALL THE ELDERS of Israel came to the King at Hebron, and King
David made a League ( or Covenant) with them before the Lord; and THEY
ANOINTED DAVID KING OVER ISRAEL. And in the 1 Chronicles. 12. 23. to 40. We have a
particular recital of the numbers of the bands that were ready armed to the
War, and came to David to Hebron to TVRN the Kingdom of Saul TO HIM; and
came with a perfect heart to Hebron TO MAKE DAVID KING OVER ALL ISRAEL; and ALL
THE REST also of Israel were OF ONE HEART TO MAKE DAVID KING: Whose title to
the Crown being afterward* shaken by his son Absalom, who cunningly usurped
it, (and that by the election of the people too; as is evident by Hushai his
speech unto him, 2 Samuel 16. 18. Nay, but whom the Lord, and THIS PEOPLE, AND
ALL THE MEN OF ISRAEL CHOOSE, his will I be, and with him I will abide,
compared with 2. Sam. 29. 9, 10. And all THE PEOPLE were at strife through all
the Tribes of Israel, saying; Absalom whom WE ANOINTED OVER US is dead, etc. A
clear evidence the kingdom was then held elective, and that the people had
the Sovereign power of electing and creating their kings;) 2 Samuel 19. 9. to 43.
all the people throughout all the Tribes of Israel and the men of Judah, to
re-establish David in his Throne, being fled out of the Land, sent this Message
to him; Return thou and all thy servants: Whereupon the King returned, and all
the Tribes went as far as Jordan to meet and bring him back again to Gilgal.

David growing old, his son 1 King. 1. 5. to 13.
Adonijah, against his consent, accompanied with some great Officers and
Courtiers of his party, usurped the Crown, and was by them saluted King; but
David hearing of it, by Gods election and choice, commanded Solomon (though not
his eldest son) to be anointed and proclaimed King, and to sit upon his
Throne in his life time: As soon as he was anointed and the Trumpet blew; ALL
THE PEOPLE said, 1 Chronicles. 23. 1. c. 28. 5, 6, 7, 8. c. 29. 1, 2.
God save king Solomon. And ALL THE PEOPLE came up after him, and piped with
fluits, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the sound of
them; So that all Adonijah his company forthwith deserted him, and he and Ioab
were glad to flee to the horns of the Altar for shelter. After which, David
assembled all the Princes of Israel, the Princes of the Tribes, the Captains
of Companies, thousands and hundreds, the Stewards, Officers, and mighty men,
with all the valiant men of his kingdom, to Jerusalem; then he declared to all
the Congregation, that God had chosen Solomon to sit upon the Throne of the
kingdom of the Lord over Israel, 1 Chronicles. c. 28. and 29.
and to build him an house, etc. exhorting them to contribute liberally toward
this building, which they did; and when they had blessed the Lord, and offered
Sacrifices to him ALL THE CONGREGATION MADE Solomon the son of David KING THE
SECOND TIME, AND ANOINTED HIM unto the Lord, TO BE THE CHIEF GOVERNOR (his
first Coronation being but private without the presence and consent of the
whole Realm, 1 Chronicles. 29. 20. to 26.
but of those only then present in Jerusalem:) Then Solomon sat on the Throne
of the Lord, as king, instead of David his Father, and ALL ISRAEL OBEYED HIM;
and all the Princes, and mighty men, and likewise all the sons of David
submitted themselves to him as their king: after he was thus generally elected
and crowned king the 2. time by all the Congregation. And after David's death,
he was 2 Chronicles. 2. 1. 1 King. 2. 46.
established and strengthened in his kingdom by the peoples voluntary
admission and free submission to him. From which History of Solomon it is
clear. 1. That though David caused Solomon to be first crowned King privately
to prevent Adonijah his usurpation; yet he thought that title not sufficient
without a second Election, admission, and Coronation of him by all the People
and general Congregation. 2. That till this his second inauguration by all the
people, he was not generally acknowledged, nor obeyed by all as their lawful
king. 3. That Gods and David's designation of Solomon to the Crown, did not take
away the peoples liberty, right and power, freely to nominate, make, and choose
their kings; their preuious designation being thus accompanied with this tacit
condition, that the people likewise should freely elect, constitute, and crown
him for their king, else what need of this their subsequent concurrent
acceptance and second coronation of him for their king, by all the
congregation, if their consents and suffrages were not necessary? or how could
he have reigned over them as their lawful king, had not the people generally
chosen, accepted, admitted him for their Sovereign?

Solomon deceasing, 1 King. 12. 2 Chronicles. c. 10. v. 11.
Rehoboam his eldest son went up to Sechem: (what to do? not to claim the
crown by descent from his Father, but by election from the people, as the
following History manifests;) FOR ALL ISRAEL were come to Sechem TO MAKE HIM
kING: if to make him king, then he was no king before they had made him, as
many Divines most sottishly aver against the very letter of the Text Antiq,
Iud. l. 8. c. 3.
and Josephus; (who writes, That it pleased the Assembly of the Israelites
there held, that HE SHOULD RECEIVE THE kINGDOM BY THE IEOPLES CONSENT.) And
Jeroboam and ALL THE CONGREGATION OF ISRAEL came and spoke unto Rehoboam,
saying, Thy Father made our yoke grievous: now therefore make thou the
grievous service of thy Father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon us
lighter, AND WE WILL SERVE THEE: (because naturally subjects delight in mild
Kings, who will somewhat descend from their altitudes, says Antiq. Iud. l. 8.
c. 3.
Josephus.) This was the condition they propounded to him before they would
accept him for their king, and upon this condition only would they admit him to
reign over them; therefore doubtless the disposal of the Crown and
limitation of the kings royal power resided in all the congregation, who had
authority to prescribe their kings what equal and just conditions they
pleased. And he said unto them, depart yet for three days, then come again to
me; and the people departed. Hereupon Rehoboam consulted with the old men that
stood before Solomon his Father, while he lived, and said, how do you advise
that I may answer this people? And they spoke unto him, saying; If thou will be
A SERVANT unto this people this day, and wilt SERVE THEM and answer them, and
speak good words to them THEN THEY WILL BE THY SERVANTS FOR EVER; But he
forsook the Counsel of the old men, which they had given him, and consulted
with the young men that were grown up with him, and which stood before him, and
following their ill advise: when Jeroboam and all the People came to Rehoboam
the third day, as he had appointed; the King answered the people roughly; and
forsaking the old men's Counsel, he spoke unto them after the Counsel of the
young men, saying; My Father made your yoke heavy, and I will add to your
yoke; my Father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with
scorpions. Wherefore the King HEARKENED NOT UNTO THE PEOPLE, for the cause was
from the Lord, etc. SO WHEN ALL ISRAEL SAW THAT THE KING HEARKENED NOT UNTO THE
ME the People answered the King (through indegnation with one voice, writes
Josephus, saying; What portion have we in David; NEITHER HAVE WE INHERITANC)
IN THE SON OF IESSE, (that is, we have not intailed our Subjection nor the
inheritance of this our Realm to David and his seed for ever, but are still
free to elect what King we please;) to thy Tents O Israel. Now see to thine
House, David: so Israel departed to their Tent^. But as for the children of
Israel which dwelt in the Cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them: (the
Tribes of Judah and Benjamin CHOOSING HIM THEIR KING BY THEIR COMMON SVFFRAGES,
writes Josephus.) Then King Rehoboam sent Adoram who was over the Tribute (to
excuse says Josephus, the petulancy of his young tongue, and to appease the
minds of the enraged vulgar:) And all Israel stoned him with stones that he
dyed: therefore King Rehoboam (imagining truly, that himself was stoned in his
servant, and fearing lest the once conceived hatred should be poured out on his
own head, tremblingly getting up into his chariot, 2 King. 20. 1. to 7.
as hastily as he could) made speed to flee to Jerusalem. S^ Israel fell away
from the house of David unto this day. And it came to pass when ALL ISRAEL
heard that Jeroboam was come again, that they sent and called him unto the
Congregation, AND MADE HIM KING OVER ALL ISRAEL* etc. (it being so preordained
by God, 1 King. 12. 26. to 41.) Lo here the whole Congregation, or Parliament
of Israel, if I may so style it, had full and free power to reject Rehoboam
from the Crown, for refusing to subscribe to their conditions; to elect
Jeroboam for their lawful King, and erect a new Kingdom of their own,
divided ever after from that of Judah: which action I shall prove anon to be
lawful, warranted by Gods own divine authority, and no sin, nor rebellion
at all in the People; who never admitted Rehoboam for, or submitted to him as
their lawful Sovereign. So Iehu having slain King Ioram, Ahabs eldest son,
sent a Letter to Samaria where his other 70* sons were brought up, to the
Rulers and Elders there, wishing them to lookout THE BEST AND MEETEST of their
Masters sons, and set him on his Fathers throne, and fight for their Masters
bouse: But they being exceedingly afraid, said; two Kings ^ould not stand
before him, how then shall we stand? and sent word to Iehu, We are thy
servants, and will do all that thou shall bid us; WE WILL NOT MAKE ANY KING. A
clear evidence that the kingdom was then elective, and that they had power to
choose the meetest man (not eldest brother) for their king.

After this, 1 King. 16. 15, 16, 17, to 24.
Zimri slaying Baasha king of usrael, and usurping the Crown, the people then
encamped about Gibbethon hearing of it, that Zimri had conspired and also slain
the King; Wherefore ALL ISRAEL MADE OMRI Captain of the Host king over Israel
that day in the Camp, who burat Zimri in his Palace: then were the People
divided into two parts: half of the People followed Tibni to make him king,
and half followed Omri: But the people that followed Omri prevailed against
the people that followed Tibni; so Tibni dyed, and Omri Reigned, being made
king only by the peoples free election, without any divine designation. So 2
King. 11. 2 Chronicles. 22. 10. and 23. Iose Ius Antiq I^d. l. 9. c. 7.
Ioash the son of Ahaziah, when Athaliah had usurped the Crown and kingdom
of Judah near seven years space, was MADE KING, anointed and crowned by
Iehoiadah the High Priest, the Captains of hundreds, and ALL THE PEOPLE OF THE
LAND, (who rejoiced at it) when he was but 7. years old, and Athaliah was
apprehended, deposed, and murdered by them as an Vsurpresse.

2 Chronicles. 25 27. 28. c. 2. 61. 2 King. 14. 19. 20, 21.
So Amaziah King of Judah being slain by a Conspiracy at Lachish, ALL THE
PEOPLE OF IVDAH took Vzziah who was but 16. years old, and MADE HIM KING
instead of his Father. 2 King. 15. 2 Chronicles. 27. 21*
Vzziah king of Judah being smitten with Leprosy unto the day of his death,
dwelt in a several house, Iotham his son (in the mean time by common consent)
was over this house, judging the people of the Land: 2 king. 21. 23. 2 Chro.
35. ^5.
Ammon king of Judah being slain by his own servants, the people of the Land
slew all them that had conspired against Ammon: And THE PEOPLE OF THE LAND MADE
Josiah his son King in his stead. And after 2 Chronicles. 36. 1. 2 king. 23. 30.
Josiah his death, the PEOPLE OF THE LAND took Iehoahaz the son of Josiah and
MADE HIM KING in his Fathers stead in Jerusalem. From all which sacred Texts
and Presidents; as likewise from Hosea 8. 4. THEY HAVE SET UP KINGS, But not by
me; THEY HAVE MADE PRINCES, and I knew it not; it is most apparent, that the
kings of Israel and Judah, were usually elected by, and derived their Royal
authority from the people, who made them kings, and received not their
kingdoms and Crowns immediately from God himself by a divine right: which may
be further conmed by the 1. Macab. 9. 28. 29. 30. After the death of Judas
Maccabeus; all Judas his friends came unto Jonathan his brother, and said unto
him, since thy brother Judas dyed, we have none like to him to go forth
against our enemies: Now therefore WE HAVE CHOSEN THEE this day TO BE OUR
PRINCE and Captain in his stead, that thou may fight our battles. Upon this
Jonathan took the Government on him at that time. After Ionathans death, the
People said unto Simon his brother with a loud voice, 1 Mac. 13. 8. 9. Thou
shall be our Leader instead of Judas, and Jonathan thy brother; fight thou our
battles, and whatsoever thou command us, we will do. And the Jews and
Priests were well pleased that Simon should be their Governor, Captain, and
High Priest; and Simon accepted thereof, 1 Mac. 14. 41. to 49. Hence Carolus
Sigonius de Repub. Hebraeorum, l. 7. c. 3. writes, That the kings of the
Israelites were created by the Suffrages of the People; that the Kingdom of
Israel was translated to diverse Families for their idola^ry; that although the
kingdom of Judah were in some sort hereditary, yet it was confirmed by the
Suffrages of the People (which he proves by the example of Rehoboam and others)
and that they obtained the Royal dignity not only by inheritance, but
likewise by the Suffrages of the People, as every one may clearly know, who
shall but consider the Histories of their kings; Which plainly refutes the
wild, impudent, false assertion of the Author of An Appeal to thy Conscience,
newly published, p. 13. where thus he writes: Observable it is, that thorowout
the whole Scriptures we read not of Any King ( I doubt he never read the
Scriptures, else he could not be so grossly mistaken) THAT WAS CHOSEN BY THE
VOICE OF THE PEOPLE: Nor of an Aristocracy, that is, where the Nobles govern,
nor of a Democracy, that is where the people govern. And therefore let them
consider how they can answer it at the last day, who shall endeavor to change
an hereditary kingdom into an elective, or any other form of Government
whatsoever: that the people do properly and absolutely make a king is false,
etc. But had this illiterate ignoramus seriously perused the precedent or
subsequent Texts here cited, with the best Commentators on them, or read over
advisedly, Josh. 22. Judges 17. 6. c. 18. 1. c. 19. 1. c. 21. throughout; with
the Books of Ezra, Nehemiah, Judges, Esther, Maccabees, the four Evangelists
touching Christ's arraignment and death, Acts 4. 5. 22. 23. 24. and 25 chapters
or consulted with Josephus, Philo, Paul Eber, Godwin, Cunaeus, ^igonius,
Bertra^, or any others who have written of the Jewish Antiquities or Republike,
he could not have had the impudency to have published such gross untruths, and
should have found not only diverse kings in Scripture created by the voice of
the people, but an hereditary kingdom often changed into an elective, yea into an
Aristocraticall and no Royal government; and an Aristocracie and Democracy to,
even among the Jews themselves, whose government before their kings: was merely
Aristocraticall, as Josephus Antiqu. Iud. l. 4. c. 8. Carolus Sigonius de
Repub. Hebr. l. 1. c. 5. Cunaeus, S^hickardus, Bertram, Paul Eber, and all Dee.
^ure Ma^istratus in subditos: and ^unius Brutus Vindiciae contr. tyrannos qu.
1. 2. 3. passim.
others that I have seen, except this Animal irrationale risibile, punctually
determine, they having no kings of their own before Saul, nor any after
Zedekiah. Therefore I shall spend no more waste paper to refute this palpable
error, so confidently asserted by parisiticall Court Doctors, who make no
conscience of writing any, though the grossest untruths, which may advance the
absolute Sovereign Arbitrary tyrannical government of kings, to oppress and
inslave the people.

See ^^mius Brutus Vindic. Contr. Tyran. qu. 3. 4. p. 46. to 66. 194, 165, 166.
where this is largely manifested; and de Iure Magistratus in S^bditos qu. 6. p.
272. 273, 274.
no absolute Sovereign Princes, but took their Crown with and upon such Divine
conditions, for breach whereof they and their posterities were often times by
Gods command, just judgment, and special approbation deposed, disinherited,
destroyed, and the Crown translated to other families.

This is evident by direct Scriptures, Deuter. 17. 14. to the end. Thou shall
in any wise set him King over thee whom the Lord thy God shall choose; one from
among thy Brethren shall thou set King over thee; thou may not set a stranger
over thee, which is not thy Brother. Here is an express limitation and
condition in respect of the person of the King; the conditions in regard of his
royal administration follow, which are partly Negative, partly positive, But
he shall not multiply Horses to himself, nor cause the the people to return to
Egypt, etc. Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not
away; neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold. And it
shall be when he sits on the throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write him
a Copy of this Law in a Book, out of that which is before the Priests the
Levites; and it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of
his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of
this Law, and these Statutes to do them; That his heart be not lifted up above
his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the Commandment to the right hand
or to the left, to the end that he may prolong his days in his Kingdom, he and
his children in the midst of Israel. Here all the kings of the Israelites when
their kingdoms should be erected, are strictly bound by God himself to negative
and positive conditions, upon performance whereof, they and their children
should prolong their days in the kingdom, and perpetuate their thrones in the
midst of Israel, and upon breach whereof they and their posterity should lose
both their lives and kingdom to; as the last clause insinuates, and the
subsequent Texts in direct terms aver. But what if the king should violate
these conditions, might the people lawfully resist him? Antiqu. Iu. (...) c. 8.
Josephus in his paraphrase on this very text, which I shall cite at large,
resolves they might; Truly the government of the best me^ (or Aristocraticall
government) is best; and to live in a Republike thus administered, nor is there
cause why you should desire any other kind of government, but it is best, that
contenting y^^rselves with this, you continue with in the power of your Laws
and of your selves: But if the desire of a king shall possess you, let there
be none unless he be of your stock, and blood, and one to whom justice, with
other virtues, are cordial: He whosoever he shall be, let him attribute more
to the laws and unto God, than to his own wisdom, AND LET HIM DO NOTHING
WITHOUT THE HIGH PRIESTS AND S^NATES ADVICE; neither may he nourish many wives,
nor possess very much money, and many Horses, with the plenty of which things
he may easily become a contemner of the laws; and if he shall addict himself to
these things more then is meet, OBSTANDVM EST, ne potentior fiat quamrebus
vestris expedit, HE IS TO BE RESISTED, lest he become more potent then is
expedient for your affairs: So he. Yea Explanat. Artic. 42. Tom. 1. ^. 84.
Zuinglius with True Difference between Christian Subjection, etc. part. 3. p.
513, 514.
B. Bilson expressly resolve, that the people were bound to resist, question and
depose their kings for their idolatry, and breach of these conditions; and that
God himself justly punished them for Manasses sins and wickedness, because
they resisted and punished him not for them, as they were obliged to do; as I
have Part. 3 p. 99 100.
elsewhere manifested, to which I shall refer you.

This condition most clearly appears in other Texts; as in the 1 Samuel 12, 13,
14, 15, 25. Where when Saul the first king of the Israelites was crowned at
their earnest importunity, against Gods and Samuels approbation, Samuel used
these speeches to them, Now thereforebehold the King whom ye have chosen, and
whom ye have desired, etc. If ye will fear the Lord and serve him, and obey his
voice, and not rebel against the commandment of the Lord, then shall both ye
and also the King that reigns over you continue following the Lord your God.
But if ye will not obey the voice of the Lord, but will rebel against the
voice of the Lord, then shall the hand of the Lord be against you, as it was
against your fathers, etc. But IF ye shall do wickedly, ye shall be consumed
both ye and your King. After this Saul being distressed by the Philistines,
weary of staying for Samuel, and presuming to offer sacrifice without him,
hereupon 1 Samuel 13. 13, 14.
Samuel said to Saul, Thou have done foolishly, for thou have not kept the
Commandment of the Lord thy God, which he commanded thee, for now would the
Lord have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever; but NOW THY KINGDOM
SHALL NOT CONTINVE, for the Lord has chosen him a man after his own heart, and
the Lord has commanded him to be captain over his people, BECAUSE THOU HAVE
NOT KEPT THAT WHICH THE LORD COMMANDED THEE. Lo here the breach of Gods
conditions by king Saul, forfeited his Kingdom, and disinherited his posterity
of it. So when he performed not Gods command, in utterly destroying Amalck,
sparing Agag and the best of the things; Samuel sharply reprehending him for
this offense, said unto him, 1 Samuel 15. 22, 23, 26, 28, 29, 30.
Behold, to obey is better then sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Rams;
for Rebellion (namely, king Saul's rebellion against Gods command, not subjects
rebellion against their Prince, not so much as once dreamed off in this Text as
Court Doctors grossly mistake, and so miserably pervert this Scripture contrary
to the sense and meaning, translating it from kings to subjects, from king
rebellion against God, to subjects rebellion against men) is as the sin of
Witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and Idolatry. BECAUSE thou have
rejected the Word of the Lord, he has also REJECTED THEE FROM BEING KING: I
will not return with thee, for thou have rejected the word of the Lord, and the
Lord HAS REJECTED THEE FROM BEING KING over Israel; the Lord HAS RENT THE
KINGDOM of Israel FROM THEE this day, and has given it to a neighbor of
thine, that is better then thou. Also the strength of Israel will not lie nor
repent, for he is not as men, that he should repent; (to wit, of renting the
kingdom from him) though he repented that he had made Saul king over Israel,
because he turned back from following him, and performed not his Commandments,
1 Samuel 15. 11. 35. After which 1 Samuel* 16. to 14.
God said to Samuel, How long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected
him from Reigning over Israel? Fill thine horn with Oil, and I will send thee
to Iesse the Bethlemite, for I have provided me a king among his sons;
whereupon he went and anointed David, who succeeded him in the kingdom, Saul's
posterity being utterly disinherited for his recited sins.

After this when God settled the kingdom upon David and his seed after him, it
was upon condition of obedience, and threatening of corrections even by men, if
they transgressed: 2 Samuel 7. 11. to 17. Ps 89. 32. to 47. 1 King. 8. 20.
The Lord tells thee, that he will make thee an house; and when thy days be
fulfilled, and thou shall steep with thy fathers, then I will set up thy seed
after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish the
Throne of his kingdom for ever; I will be his father, and he shall be my son;
If he commit iniquity, I will chastise him with the Rod of men, and with the
Stripes of the Children of Men: ( that is, I will not chasten him immediately
by my self, but by men my instruments, even by Jeroboam, and his own subjects
the ten Tribes, or other enemies whom I will raise up against him and his
posterity, 1 Kings 11. 9, to 41.) But my mercy shall not depart away from him,
as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee: And thine house and thy
kingdom shall be established for ever before thee: yet still upon condition of
obedience, as is most apparent by David's speech to king Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.
5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And the Lord has chosen Solomon my son, to set him upon the
throne of the kingdom of the Lord, over all Israel; And he said to me, etc.
Moreover, I will establish his kingdom for ever, If he continue constant to do
my Commandments, and my judgments, as at this day. Now therefore in the sight
of all Israel, the Congregation of the Lord, and in the audience of our God,
keep, and seek for all the Commandmens of the Lord your God, that ye may
possosse the good land, and leave it for an inheritance for your Children after
you for ever. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the Lord God of thy father,
and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind; for the Lord
searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts,
If thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will
cast thee off for ever; notwithstanding the former Covenant and establishment,
which was but conditional, not absolute, as the renting of the ten Tribes from
his son, and the determining of the very 2 Chro. c. 10 and 11. and 36. (...) de
Repub. Hebr. l. 1. c. 9. 15. Joseph. Antiq. lud l. 10 and 11. Paul Eber.
Lestate de la. Religion and Repub. du peopl. Iudaeique.
kingdom of Judah it self in Zedekiah, (after which it never returned any more
to David's Line) infallibly evidence. Hence we read in the 1 Kings 11. that
Solomon's idolatrous wives, turning away his heart from following the Lord, and
drawing him to commit idolatry in his old age; hereupon the Lord grew angry
with Solomon; Wherefore the Lord said unto him; for as much as this is done of
thee, and thou have not kept my Covenant and my Statutes which I have commanded
thee, I will surely rend the Kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy
servant; Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it, for David thy fathers
sake; but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son: Howbeit I will not rend
away all the kingdom, but will give one Tribe to thy Son, for my servant
David's sake, and for Jerusalems sake which I have chosen. In pursuance whereof
the Prophet Ahijah rending I^roboams garment into 12 pieces, said to Jeroboam,
Take thee ten pieces, for thus says the Lord the God of Israel, Behold, I will
rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give t^n Tribes to thee;
BECAUSE THAT THEY HAVE FORSAKEN ME, and have worshipped the Goddess of the
Zidonians, etc. AND HAVE NOT WALKED IN MY WAYS, to do that which is right in
mine eyes, to keep my Statuts and my judgments, as did David his Father;
howbeit I will not take the whole Kingdom out of his hands; but I will make
him Prince all the days of his life, for David my servants sake whom I chose,
because he kept my Commandments and my Statutes: But I will take the Kingdom
out of his sons hand, and give it unto thee, even ten tribes. And unto his
son will I give one tribe, that David my servant may have a light always
before me in Jerusalem, the City which I have chosen to put my name there. And
I will take thee, and thou shall reign according to all that thy soul
desires, and shall be King over Israel. (But what, without any limitation or
condition at all think you? No such matter:) And it shall be IF THOU WILT
HEARKEN UNTO ALL THAT I COMMAND THEE, and wilt walk in my ways and do that is
right in my sight, to keep my Statutes and my Commandments, as David my
servant did, that I will be with thee, and build thee a sure house, as I built
for David, and will give Israel to thee: And I will for this afflict the seed
of David, but not for ever. Lo here both Kingdoms of Judah and Israel, are
given and entailed on David, Solomon, and Jeroboam only upon condition of good
behavior; which not performed, they shall be rent from either: And was this
only a vain idle condition, as some deem the Covenants and Coronation oaths of
Kings to God and their Kingdoms? Surely no, for we read experimental
verifications of them in King Rehoboam; 1 Kin. 12. 2. Chron. 10. and 11.
Who answering all the people and Jeroboam when they came to Sechem to make him
King, roughly, according to the Counsel of the young men, and threatening to
add to their yoke, instead of making it lighter; and harkening not unto the
people, (FOR THE CAUSE WAS FROM THE LORD, that he might perform his saying,
which he spoke by Abijah the Shilomite unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat;)
thereupon, when all Israel saw, that the King hearkened not unto them, the
people answered the king, saying; What portion have we in David; neither have
we inheritance in the son of Iesse; to your tents O Israel; now see to thine
own house David; so Israel departed to their tents, stoned Adoram who was over
the tribute, whom Rehoboam sent to appease them; Whereupon Rehoboam made speed
to get him into his Chariot to flee to Jerusalem; So all Israel fell away from
the house of David to this day; and calling Jeroboam unto the congregation,
made him King over all Israel: there was none that followed the house of David,
but the tribe of Judah only. Upon this revolt, when Rehoboam was come to
Jerusalem, he assembled all the House of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin, an
hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men which were Warriers to fight against
the house of Israel, to bring the Kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of
Solomon; But the Word of God came unto Shemaiah the man of God, saying, speak
unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon King of Judah, and unto all the house of
Judah and Benjamin, and to the remnant of the people, saying: Thus says the
Lord; Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren the children of
Israel: return every man to his house, For this thing is done by me. They
hearkened therefore unto the Word of the Lord, and returned to depart, according
to the Word of the Lord. Behold here an experimental forfeiture of a kingdom,
and translation of the major part of it to another family, for Solomon's
idolatry, executed by the people through Gods appointment; which being
fore-threatned in the general by God himself to David, and by David to
Solomon in case he transgressed, predicted by way of menace to Solomon and
Jeroboam, by God himself and his Prophets after Solomon's transgression,
executed by the people by Gods special direction and approbation; and thus
owned and justified by God in the peoples behalf after the execution, when
Rehoboam would have made war against them for this revolt, must certainly be
acknowledged, not only a ^ust and warrantable action in respect of God
himself, but likewise of the people, unless we will make God himself the
Author and approver of rebellion. By all which it is apparent, that Solomon and
Rehoboam held their Crowns only upon condition from God, the breach whereof
might and did forfeit them to the people in some measure: And so did Jeroboam
too, hold the kingdom of Israel newly erected by the people after this revolt,
upon the conditions of obedience, already mentioned, which being violated by
his 1 King. c. 12. and 13.
setting up 2 calves in Dan and Bethel, out of an unwarrantable policy to keep
the people from returning to Rehoboam if they went up to Jerusalem to worship;
this thing became sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off and destroy
it from off the face of the earth, 1 King. 13. 34. For Jeroboam committing
idolatry with the Calves, Ahijah the Prophet sent him this sharp message by his
wife, 1 K. 14. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Go tell Jeroboam, Thus says the Lord God of
Israel, for as much as I exalted thee from among the people, and made thee
prince over my people Israel, and rent the Kingdom away from the house of
David, and gave it thee, ye^ thou have not been as my servant David, who kept
my Commandments, and who followed me with all his heart, to do that only
which was right in mine eyes, but have done evil above all that were before
thee; for thou have gone and made thee other gods, and molten images, to
provoke me to anger, and have cast me behind thy back; Therefore behold I
will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam him
that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel, and
will take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man takes away dung
till it be gone: Him that dies of Jeroboam, in the the City shall the dogs
eat, and him that dies in the field shall the fowls of the air eat, for the
Lord has spoken it. Moreover, the Lord shall raise him up a King over Israel,
who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam in that day. Neither was this an
unexcuted commination, for Jeroboam dying, and 1 King. 15. 25. to 31.
Nadah his son succeeding him both in his kingdom and idolatries, wherewith
he made Israel to sin, Baasha ( by Gods just judgment) conspired against
him, slew him, reigned in his stead; and when he reigned he smote all the house
of Jeroboam, so that he left not to him any that breathed; according to the
saying of the Lord which he spoke by his servant Abijah; because of the sins of
Jeroboam which he sinned, and which he made Israel sin, by his provocation
wherewith he provoked the Lord God of Israel to anger. After which 1 King. 15.
34. c. 16. 1, to 14.
Baasha walking in the ways and sins of Jeroboam notwithstanding this
exemplary judgment of God on him and his posterity, the word of the Lord came
to Iehu son of Hannani, against Baasha, saying, Forasmuch as I exalted thee
out of the dust, and made thee Prince over my people Israel, and thou have
walked in the way of Jeroboam, and have made my people of Israel to sin, to
provoke me to anger with their sins; behold, I will take away the posterity of
Baasha, and the posterity of his house, and will make his house like the house
of Jeroboam the son of N^bat; him that dies of Baasha in the City shall the
dogs eat, and him that dies in the field shall the fowls of the Air eat:
which judgment was actually executed upon his evil son king Elah, whom
Zimri the Captain of his Chariots slew, as he was drinking himself drunk in the
house of Arza Steward of his House, and reigned in his stead; and as soon as he
sat in his Throne, he slew all the house of Baasha, he left him none that
pissed against the wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his friends. Thus did
Zimri destroy all the house of Baasha, according to the word of the Lord, which
he spoke against Baasha, by Iehu the Prophet, for all the sins of Baasha, and
the sins of Elah his son, by which they sinned, and by which they made Israel
to sin, in provoking the Lord God of Israel to anger witb their vanities. 1
King. c. 16. to 22.
King Om^i and Ahab his son going on in the sins of Jeroboam, serving Baal
to boot, persecuting Gods prophets, putting Naboth most injuriously to death
for his Vineyard, by Iezabels instigation, and setting himself to work evil in
the sight of the Lord, above all that were before him: Hereupon the Prophet
Elijah tells him, 1 King. 21. 19. to 25.
Thus says the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away
thy posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall,
and him that is shut up and left in Israel, and will make thine house like the
house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of
Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith thou have provoked me to anger, and made
Israel to sin: And of Iezabel also spoke the Lord, saying, The Dogs shall eat
Iezabel by the wall of Iezreel; him that dies of Ahab in the City the Dogs
shall eat, and him that dies in the field shall the Fowls of the Air eat.
Neither was this a vain threatening, for Ahab being slain at Ramoth Gilead, 1
King. 2^. 19. c. 22. 37. 38.
the dogs licked up his blood in the place where they licked the blood of
Naboth; and Iehoram his son succeeding him, both in his Throne and sins, 2 King
c. 9. and 10.
God himself anointed Iehu King over Israel, of purpose to execute this his
vengeance against the house of Ahab and Iezabel; who in execution thereof slew
both King Iehoram, Ahaziah King of Judah, Iezabel, and all Ahabs sons and
posterity, his great men, Nobles, with all the Priests and worshippers of
Baal, till he left none of them remaining: For which severe execution of Gods
Justice, the Lord said unto Iehu, 2 King. 10. 30.
Because thou have done well in executing that which is right in mine eyes, and
have done unto the house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy
children of the fourth generation, shall sit on the Throne of Israel. Which
action of Iehu being thus specially commanded, commended, and remunerated with
such a temporell reward by God himself, must questionless be lawful, and no
Treason nor Rebellion in Iehu, unless we will charge God to be both the
Author, Approver and Rewarder of those sins. After this 2 Kings c. 12, to 16.
Iehu walking in the sins of Jeroboam, though God deprived him not for it, yet
he stirred up Hazael to spoil and waste his Country, during all his reign,
and the reigns of King Iehoahaz his son and Ioash his Granchilde, who succeeded
him in his idolatries; and Zechariah the last king of Iehu's Race, going in his
Ancestors sins, was slain by Shallum, who reigned in his stead. 2 Kin. 16.
Shallum, Pekahiah, and Pekah three wicked idolatrous kings of Israel, were by
Gods just judgment, successively s^ain one of another, and by Hoshea. So that
all the Kings of Israel, who violated Gods Covenants and conditions annexed to
their Crowns, did for the most part lose their lives, Crowns, and underwent
the utter extirpation of their po^^erities, being totally cut off by the sword,
neither succeeding their Parents in their Crowns nor inheritances. And though
the royal Crown of Judah continned in David's Line till the Captivity of
Zedekiah, the last king of his Race; yet when ever they infringed the
conditions which God annexed to their Crowns, and turned Idolaters or
flagitious persons, God presently (by way of revenge) either brought in
foreign enemies upon them, which mastered, conquered them, and sometimes
deposed and carried them away Captives, or made them Tributaries, as the
examples of King 1 King 13. 21. to 31.
Rehoboam, afflicted by Shishak King of Egypt, for his sins and ^dolatry,
and by Jeroboam all his days* 1 King. 15. 3. 7.
of Ahijam, 2 Chronicles. 21
Iehoram, ^ Chron. 22.
Ahaziah, 2 Chro. 24. 17. to 27.
Ioash, 2 Chro. 25.
Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 28.
Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 33. 2 King. 23. and 24. and 25.
Manasseh, 2 Kin. 9. 27, 28. 2 Chronicles. 22. c. 24. 24. 26. c. 25 27. 28. 2 Chronicles.
33. 22, to 28.
Iehoahaz, Iehoiakim, Iehoiachin, and Zedechiah, (whose Histories, troubles,
captivities and punishments you may read at large) with others witness: or
else caused their own servants, subjects, enemies to rise up against them, to
slay them, as is evident by 2 Kin. 9. 27, 28. 2 Chronicles. 22. c. 24. 24. 26. c. 25
27. 28. 2 Chronicles. 33. 22, to 28.
King Ahaziah, Ioash; Amaziah, Ammon, and others. All which are unanswerable
evidences and experimental demonstrations, that the Kingdoms of Judah and
Israel were both held of God upon conditions, and that for the breach of these
conditions they might be, and often times were (by Gods Justice on them) both
lawfully deprived of their Crowns, and their posterities, disinherited, yea,
totally cut off for ever; and in conclusion, both these most eminent Kingdoms,
for the sins of kings and people, were invaded, destroyed, and both Kings with
people carried away captives by their enemies, into foreign Countries, from
whence the whole Nation never afterward returned, nor ever after attained to a
king and kingdom of their own: So fatal is it for Kings, or Kingdoms to break
those Covenants, Laws, Conditions which God himself has prescribed them; and
so far are any Kings from being exempted from all Laws, and left at liberty to
do what they please, that the breach of them proves destructive to them and
theirs.

I shall only add to this by way of Corollary, that all the Israelites
Rulers, Kings, People did jointly and severally for Deuteronomy. ^. 1. to 26. Josh 2^.
14, to 29. 2 Chr. 15. 9 to 17. 1 Samuel 12. 13. to 2^. 1 Chr. c* 28, and 29. 2
Chr. 23. 3. 16. 17.
themselves for the whole Nation in general, and every of them in particular,
frequently enter into solemn Vows and Covenants with God, to serve the Lord,
to be and conttnue his people; to seek the Lord God of their fathers with all
their heart, and with all their soul; that whosoever would not seek the Lord
God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great, whether Man or
Woman, ( not the King or Queen excepted;) and they swear unto the Lord with a
loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with Cornets, and all
rejoiced at the Oath, for they had sworn with all their hearts. Witness the 2
Chr. 15. 9. to ^7.
Covenant made by Joshua and all the people, To serve the Lord; by Samuel,
Saul, and all the people at Saul's Coronation, and by king Asa and all his
people, To seek the Lord, etc. (who in pursuance thereof removed his mother
Maacha from being Queen, because she had made an idol in a Grove, and cut down
her idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook Kidron, 2 Chronicles. 15. 16. of
King David, 1 Chr. ^. 28. and. 29.
Solomon, and all the people at Solomon's Coronation; between 2 Chr. 23. 16 17.
2 King. 11. 4 17. 18.
King Iehoash, Iehoiada and all the Congregation at his inauguration, that they
should be the Lords people: in pursuance whereof all the people went to the
house of Baal, and brake it down, and brake his altars and images in pieces,
and slew Mattan the Priest of Baal before the altars; between 2 Chr. 29. 10. c.
30. 19. to 27. c. 11. 1.
Hezekiah and all his subjects and God; between 2 Chr. 34. 30. 31. 32. 33.
Josiah and all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin and Gad, who made a
covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his Commandments,
and his Testimonies, and his Statutes, with all their heart, and with all their
soul, to perform the words of the Covenant formerly written in the Book of the
Covenant that was found in the house of the Lord; in execution whereof Josiah
took away all the abominations out of all the Country that pertained to the
children of Israel, and made all that were present in Israel to serve the Lord
their God, and not to depart from following the Lord God of their Fathers all
his days: Together with the like solemn public Covenants made by Ezra 10. 3.
4
Ezra, Nehem. 9. 38. c. 10. 1. to 39.
Nehemia^ and all the People unto God; which Covenant the Princes, Levites,
Priests and all the people sealed, and entered into a Curse and into an Oath to
walk in Gods Law, and to observe and do all the Commandments, judgments and
Statutes of the Lord, etc. And that God himself expressly commanded them, Deuteronomy
13. and 17.
That if any Prophet or Dreamer of dreams, or thy Brother or son of thy Mother,
or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own
soul, should secretly entice them to commit idolatry, or serve other gods, they
should neither consent nor hearken to, nor pity, nor spare, nor conceal him,
but shall surely kill him; thy hand shall be first upon him to put him to
death, and after the hand of all the people, and thou shall stone him with
stones, that he die, only for this secret inticement to idolatry: And all
Israel shall hear, and fear, and do no more such wickedness as this is. And if
they should hear, that the inhabitants of any City were seduced to serve other
gods, tben they must diligently search and inquire after it; and if it be truth
and the thing certain, that such abomination was wrought among them, then they
shall surely smite the inhabitants of that City with the edge of the sword,
destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the cattle thereof with
the edge of the sword; and gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the
street thereof, and burn the City with all the spoil thereof every whit for
the Lord their God, and it shall be an heap for ever, and shall not be built
again: In pursuance whereof the Josh. 22. 9. to 34.
ten tribes and a half, assembled to war against the Reubenites, Gadites, and
half Tribe of Manasseh, for their supposed idolatrous Alter; and Judge. 20, and
21.
all the children of Israel assembled together as one man, and made war
against the men of Gibeah and the Benjamites, for not punishing the gross Rape
of the Levites Concubine, destroying the City utterly, and the Tribe of
Benjamin too welnigh. And upon this ground, the City of 2 Chr. 21. 10 11.
Libnah revolted from under the hand of Iehoram the idolatrous King of Judah,
Because he had forsaken the Lord God of his Fathers. And as some learned men
conceive 2 King. 19. 20. 2 Chro. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
the people made a Conspiracy against King Amaziah in Jerusalem, and he fled
to Lachish, but they sent after him to Lachish and ^lew him there; De Iure in
Magistratus in subditos, p. 272. to 275.
not privately but openly, as acted by public authority, consent, and
meditated deliberation, not out of any private hatred, but for his impiety,
whereby he violated the chiefest part of his Oath and Covenant; whereupon we
read not of any complaint, or inquisition, or proceedings, or punishment
inflicted on those that slew him after his death, either by the people, or his
children, as there was upon those who slew King Ammon; but being slain, they
brought him back on horses, and he was buried at Jerusalem with his Fathers in
the City of David, out of reverence to his royal dignity and family; And All
the People of Judah took Azariah, and made him King in stead of his father
Amaziah; which plainly shows, that what was formerly done by the greater part
of the States at Jerusalem, was afterward confirmed by common consent, as done
upon a just cause, and executed by command of those who might lawfully do it.
Whence they conclude, That the Orders or States of the People of Israel had
right to choose what King they would themselves, out of the family of David; and
being elected* afterward to correct and punish him as there was cause: that
they were obliged by this Covenant made to God, both to reprehend, resist,
oppose, yea, depose, if not put to death their King for his open incorrigible
idolatries and sins, by common consent, as their king was obliged to punish and
put them to death for their idolatries and crimes, their kings being included
within their Covenants; and Gods inhibition of Idolatry under pain of capital
punishments, extending to Kings, as well as others, if not more then to any,
because their examples were most pernicious; and they were as far forth bound
by their joint Covenants made to God with their Kings to hinder their Kings
from, and to proceed against them for their idolatries, as their kings were to
impedite and punish them for their breach of Covenant, and because God himself
did punish them for their Kings idolatries, as is evedent by Ier. 15. 1, to 6.
and the History of the Kings, and Chronicles every where, which God would not
in justice have done, had not the people both just right and power to resist,
hinder, censure, punish, depose their Kings by public consent of the State and
people for their idolatries and breach of Covenant, as Explanatio Artic. 42.
and lib. 4. Epist. Zuing. and Oecol. f. 186.
Zuinglius, Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, quaest. 2. p. 43 ^0 70.
Stephanus Iunius Brutus, the author of the Treatise Page 271. to 275.
De Iure Magistratus in Subditos, with others, prove at large, and Instit. I.
4. c. 20. sect. 31.
Master Calvin, yea The True Difference, etc. part. 3. p. 513, 514.
Bishop Bilson himself, assents to. Such a Sovereign power had the whole State
and Congregation of Israel and Judah over their kings themselves, whose estates
in their Crowns and Kingdoms by Gods own institution, was not absolute, but
only conditional, and subject unto forfeiture, upon breach of these Covenants
and Conditions by which they did enjoy them.

Fourthly, The Kings of Judah and Israel were no absolute Sovereign Princes
paramount their whole Kingdoms, the general Congregation of the people, Senate
or Sanhedrin, but inferior to them in power, and not only counseled, but
overruled usually by them in matters of public concernment: This is evident
not only by Josh. 22. 11. to 34. and Judges 20. and 21. where the whole
Congregation of Israel, as the Sovereign power, in the days of Joshua and the
Judges assembled about the great causes of the Reubenites, Gadites, and half^
the Tribe of Manasseh, concerning their Altar, and of the Gibeonites and
Benjamites, concluding both matters of public war and peace; But likewise by
the peoples rescuing Jonathan out of the hands and power of King Saul his
father, that he died not, though Saul had twice vowed that he should be put to
death, 1 Samuel 14. 38. to 36. And the people said unto Saul, Shall Jonathan die
who has wrought this great salvation in Israel? God forbid; as the Lord lives
there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, for he has wrought
with God this day: So the people rescued Jonathan that he died not. By the 1 Chronicles. 13. 1. to 7. where thus we read: And David consulted with the Ca^tains
of thousands and hundreds, and with every Leader, and David said unto all the
Congregation of Israel, If it seem good unto you, and that it be of the Lord
our God, let us send abroad unto our brethren every where that are left in all
the land of Israel, and with them also to the Priests and Levites which are in
their Cities and Suburbs, that they may gather themselves unto us; and let us
bring again the Ark of our God to us, for we enquired not at it in the days of
Saul. And all the Congregation said, that they would do so, For the thing was
right in the eyes of all the people. And David went up and all Israel to
Baalah, to bring up thence the Ark of God the Lord. Compared with the 1 Samuel
18. 2, 3, 4. where when David sent out the people to battle against Absalon
under three Commanders, the King said unto the people, I will surely go forth
with you my self also: But the people answered,

So 2 Samuel 21. 17, 18. David being like to be slain by Ishb^^enoh the Giant
whom Abishai slew. The men of David swar^ to him, (...), Thou shall go no more
out with us to battle, that thou quench not the light of Israe*
Thou shall not go forth; for if we flee away, they will not care for us,
neither if half of us die will they care for us; but now thou art worth ten
thousand of us, therefore now is better that thou succor us out of the City:
And the king said unto them, Whatsoever seems you good that I will do; and
thereupon stayed behind in the City, as they advised him. So he likewise
followed Ioabs advice, to go forth and sit in the gate, and speak comfortably
to the People after his mourning for Absalons death, else not one of the People
would have tarried with him that night, 2 Samuel. 19. 1. to 20. and by this
means All the people came before him though they had formerly fled every man to
his tent; and he so engaged them to him, That all the people were at strife
thorowout all the Tribes of Israel, to bring the King back again to Gilgal,
whence Absalon had chased him. Add to this the 1 Kings 12. 1. to 25. and 2 Chronicles. c. 10. and 11. where we find, that after Solomon's death, All Israel
came to Sechem to make Rehoboam King; and all the Congregation of Israel spoke
unto Rehoboam, saying, Thy father made our yoke grievous, now therefore make
thou the grievous service of thy Father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon
us, lighter, and we will serve thee. And he said unto them, Depart ye for three
days, and then come again; and the people departed. In the mean time he
consulted first with the old men, after that with the young men about him, what
answer he should return; who giving contrary advice, Jeroboam and all the
people coming to him again the third day, the King answered the people roughly,
after the counsel of the young men, saying, My Father made your yoke heavy,
and I will add to your yoke; My Father chastised you with whips, but I will
chastise you with scorpions: So when all the people saw that the King hearkened
not to them, the people answered the King, saying, What portion have we in
David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Iesse, to your tents o Israel;
now see to thine own house David: So Israel departed to their Tents, and fell
away from the house of David unto this day: And all Israel called Jeroboam unto
the Congregation, and made him King over all I^rael: And the Text expressly
adds this memorable observation, Wherefore the King h^^rkned not unto the
people, for the cause was from the Lord, that he might p^rform his saying,
which the Lord spoke by Abijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat^
Where we see the Kings not harkening to the people and congregation of Israel
in their just request, and giving them an harsh answer, was a sufficient ground
and occasion for them, to cast off his government, and elect another King to
reign over them, and that with Divine approbation from God himself: Such was
the whole people^ and congregations Sovereign power over their Kings. We read
in the 1 Kings 20. 1. to 10. that when Benhadad king of Syria gathered a great
Host, and sent to A^ab king Israel, to resign up all his silver, gold, Wives,
Children, and pleasant things into the hand of his servants: Then the king of
Israel called all the Elders of the Lan^, and said, Hark, I pray you, and see
how this man seeks mischief, for he sent unto me for my Wives and for my
Children, for my silver, and for my gold, and I denied him not: And all the
El^ers, and all the people, said unto him, Hearken not unto him, nor consent.
Wherefore he said unto the messengers of Benhaded, tell my Lord the King, all
that thou did send for to thy servant at first, I will do, but this thing I
may not do. Where the Elders and people both advise and overruled the King in
this matter of great importance both to the Kingdom and King, who returned no
answer to this public case without the congregations publik advise. So 2 Chronicles. 30. 1, to 6.
Hezekiah king of Judah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote Letters also to
Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the Lord at
Jerusalem, to keep the Passover unto the Lord God of Israel; For Hezekiah had
taken counsel, and his Princes, and all the Congregation in Jerusalem, to keep
the Passover in the second month, for they could not keep it at that time,
because the people had not sanctified themselves sufficiently; neither had the
people gathered themselves together at Jerusalem; and the thing pleased the
King And all the Congregation, So they established a Decree, to make
Proclamation throughout all Israel, from Bersheba even to Dan, that they should
come to keep the Passover unto the Lord God of Israel at Jerusalem, for they
had not done it of a long time, in such sort as it was written. So the Posts
went with the Letters from the King and the Princes, throughout all Israel, and
Judah, etc. verse. 12. Also in Judah the hand of God was to give them one heart
to do the Commandment of the King and of the Princes, by the word of the
Lord; and verse. 23. And the whole Assembly took Counsel to keep other seven
days; and they kept other seven days with gladness; 2 Chronicles. 31. ^8. 1.
and All the Congregation of Judah and Israel rejoiced: verse. 25. When all this
was finished All Israel that were present, went to the Cities of Judah and
brake the images in pieces and cut down the Groves, and threw down the high
places and the Altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and
Manasseth, until they had utterly destroyed them all. Then all the Children of
Israel, returned every man to his possession into their own City: In the 2 Chronicles. 32. 3. When Hezekiah saw that Senacherib was come, and that he was
purposed to fight against Jerusalem; He took Council with his Princes and his
mighty men, to stop the waters of the Fountain which were without the City,
and they did help him, and there was gathered much people together, who stopped
all the Fountains, etc. Add hereunto that notable Text, Ier. 38. 4. to 28.
Where when the Prophet Jeremy had prophesied, that Jerusalem should be given
into the hands of the King of Babylons Army which should take it; Therefore the
Princes hereupon said unto the King; we beseech thee, let this man be put to
death; for thus he weakneth the hands of the men of War that remain in this
City, and the hands of all the people, in speaking such words unto them; for
this man seeks not the welfare of this people, but the hurt: Then Zedechiah
the King said; Behold he is in your hand; For the King is not he that can do
any thing against you. And Ier. 26. 8. to 29. Now it came to pass when
Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that the Lord had commanded him to
speak unto all the people, that the Priests, the Prophets, and all the people
took him, saying; thou shall surely dye, etc. So Ezra 10. 1. to 20. There
assembled unto Ezra, a very great Congregation of men, etc. And they said unto
Ezra, we have trespassed against our God, and have taken strange wives of the
people of the land; yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. Now
therefore let us make a Covenant with our God to put away all the strange wives,
etc. and let it be don according to the Law: and All I^rael said that they
would do according to this word. And they made Proclamation throughout Judah
and Jerusalem unto all the children of the Captivity, that they should gather
themselves unto Jerusalem; and that whosoever would not come within 3. days
According to the Council of the Princes and the Elders, all his substance
should be forfeited, and himself separated from the Congregation of those that
had been carried away: Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered
themselves together unto Jerusalem, within three days, and all the people sat
in the street of the house of God trembling, hecause of this matter and for the
great rain. And Ezra the Priest stood up and said unto them, Ye have
transgressed and taken strange wives to increase the trespass of Israel; Now
therefore make confession unto the Lord God of your fathers, and do his
pleasure, and separate your selves from the people of the Land, and from the
strange wives. Then All the Congregation answered, and said with a l^wd voice;
As thou have said, so must we do; but the people are many, and it is a time of
much rain, and we are not able to stand without, neither is this a work of
one day or two; for we are many that have transgressed in this thing: let now
our rulers of all the Congregation stand, and let them which have taken strange
wives in our Cities, come at appointed times, and with them the Elders of every
City and the Judges thereof, until the fierce wrath of our God for this
matter, be turned from us: And the Children of the Captivity did so. Where we
see the whole Congregation determine and direct all that was done in this grand
common business: And Esther 9. 17. to 32. the Jews ( upon Mordecaies and
Esthers Letters, after the slaughter of their Enemies) Ordained and took upon
them and upon their seed, and upon all such as joined themselves unto them, so
as it should not fail, that they would keep the 13. and 14. day of the month
Adar, and make it a day of feasting and gladness, according to their writing,
and according to their appointed time every year: And that these days should
be kept and remembered thorowout every generation, every Family, every Province,
and every City, and that these days of Purim should not fail from among the
Jews, nor the memorial of them perish from their seed: And the Decree of
Esther confirmed those matter of Purim, As they had decreed for themselves and
their seed.

From all these Texts (compared with Prove. 11. 14. c. 15. 22. c. 25. 5.) it is
most apparent: that the Kings of Judah and Israel were no absolute Sovereign
Princes paramount their whole Kingdoms, or the general Senate and
Congregation of the people, or their Sanhedrin, but inferior to them in power;
and not only counseled but overruled usually by them, in all matters of
public concernment. A truth so pregnant, that The third part of the True
difference between Christian Subjection, etc. p. 513. 514.
Bp. Bilson himself from some of these Texts confesses, That it is a question
among the learned; what Sovereignty the whole people of Israel had over their
Kings; And that these Scriptures have persuaded some, and might lead Zuinglius
to think, that the people of Israel, notwithstanding they called for a King,
Yet reserved to themselves sufficient Authority to overruled their King, in
those thiugs which seemed expedient and needful for the public welfare,
else God would not punish the people for their Kings iniquity, which they must
suffer and not redress. Hence that eminent ^ew Antique. lud. 1* 4. c. 8.
Josephus (a man best acquainted of any, with his own Nations Antiquities,
Laws, and the Prerogatives of their kings) resolves in direct terms; that
their King, whosoever he were, ought to attribute more to the Laws, and to
God, then to his own wisdom, And to do nothing without the advice of the
High Priest and Senate; and that if he multiplied horses, and many more then
was fitting They might resist him, lest he became more potent then was
expedient for their affairs. Hence Petrus Cunaeus de Repub. Hebr. l. 1. c. 12.
p. 101. 102. writes thus of the Sanhedrin or Parliament among the Jews. Thus
the Prophets, who grievously offended, were no where else punishable but in
this Assembly; which (Quod summae petestatis est) as it is an Argument of The
Supremest power) did both constitute the King: ac de Bello gerendo deque
hostibus profligandis and de proferend^ Imperio deliber ab^ut. Sed quoniam haec
ejusmodi erant in quibus salus omnium, and summae Reipublicae vertebatur,
Consultatum de his plerumque cum populo est; indictaeenim Comitiae sunt, in
quibus solis populus partem aliquam caperet regendae reipublicae, etc. De Rege
igitur deque Bello, ut dixi, decretafacta interdum Populi auctore sunt. Caetera
omnia Senatores Sanhedrin Per se expe^ivere. So that the Sanhedrin and
Congregation of the people were the highest Sovereign power, and principal
determiners of public matters concerning war and peace, by Cunaeus his
resolution: Who debating this weighty controversy, Cunaeus de Repub. Heb. 6.
1. c. 9. p. 75. 76. 77.
What the Scepter of Judah was (prophesied of Genesis 49. 10.) and what and whose
the Majesty of the Empire was? determines thus. I suppose the Scepter to be
nothing else, but the Majesty of the Empire or Government, to wit that, Qnae
ipsi Reipublicae assidet, which belong^ to the Republike it self. Wherefore
whose the Republike is, the Scepter ought to be said theirs. Now the Hebrew
Republike from Moses his time till the Kingdom of Rehoboam, was not of the
Jews (or tribe of Judah) but of the twelve Tribes, from whence it follows,
that even the Scepter for all those times was of all the Israelites. Now of
this Scepter, which was long common to all the twelve Tribes, the divine
Patriarch spoke not in that most famous Oracle: for he looked at latter years,
and future ages, when as the Tribe of Judah, the people being divided into
contrary parts, began to have its Republike apart from the Israelites, which
God approved and loved; and would have to be called Jewish, from the Tribe of
Judah alone, until he (to wit Christ) should be given to the assemblies of
men, to whom not only the Empire of the Jews, but Gentiles also was
destinated. And verily this Majesty of the Scepter, from the time it once began
to be of the Jews, we say continued to be theirs, although the state of the
Commonweal was sometimes changed, and the sovereignty of the Empire was
sometimes in the Elders and High Priests, sometimes in the Kings and Princes.
They do too foolishly, who here dance in a narrow compass, and suppose that
the honor of this name appertains not but to Kings? For what people soever,
uses its own Republike and its Laws, Is recte Glor^ari de Imperio deque
sceptro potest, it may rightly boast of Its Empire and Scepter. It is recorded,
that at Jerusalem even at that time, when not the Princes but the Elders
governed the people, in the midst of the great Council, which they called the
Sanhedrin, there hung a Scepter, which thing verily was a certain Ensign of its
Majesty; which Marcus Tullius in a particular Oration, says, Esse magnitudinem
quandam Populi, in ejus potestate ac jure retinendo, quae vertitur in imperio,
atque omnis populi dignitate. Not Kings, not Princes, but Consuls and the
Senate managed the Roman Commonwealth; whence this Law of Truce was given to
the Aetolians, which Livy reports, That they should conserve The Majesty of the
People of Rome without mal-engin: And the very same thing was commanded all
free People, who by any league, but not (...) would come into the frindship of
the Romans, as Proculus the Lawyer witnesses, in l. 7. F. de Captiu: and
Post. reversis. Neither think we it material to our purpose, of what Nation or
Tribe they were, who moderated and ruled the Jewish affairs; for although the
Hasmonaean L^vites held their Kingdom for many years, yet the Republike was
of the Jewish people. That most wise Master Seneca said to Nero Caesar, That
the Republike was not the Princes, (or of the Prince) But the Prince the
Republikes. Neither verily was the opinion of Vlpian the Lawyer otherwise; for
he at last says, that That is Treason, which is committed against the Roman
People, or against their safety, l. 1. s. 1. F. ad Legem Iul. Maj^st. Now
Vlpian lived in those times, when the people had neither command nor suffrages
left them, but the Emperors held the Empire and Principality; and yet he who
is wont most accurately to define all things, says, That Majesty is of the
People; From all which it is apparent, that not only in the Roman Empire and
other Kingdoms, but even among the Jews themselves; the Majesty, and
Sovereign Power, and Scepter resided not in the Kings, but in the whole State
and People. Hence Will. Schickardus in his Ius Regium Hebraeorum, Argent. 1625.
p. 7. determinesthus. The state of the Jewish Kingdom was not Monarchical (as
our Court Doctors falsely dream) but mixed with an Aristocracie for the King
without the assent of the Sanhedrin Could determine nothing in great causes.
They constituted not a King but in it, etc. attributing the Soveraignest power
to the Congregation and Sanhedrin, who had power to create, elect, and in some
cases to resist, and depose their Kings. Hence Explanio Artic. 42. Tom 1 Oper.
Tiguri, 1581. f. 84, 85.
Huldericus Zuinglius writes expressly, That the Kings of the Jews and others,
when they dealt perfidiously, contrary to the Law of God and the rule of
Christ, might be lawfully deposed by the People. This the example of Saul
manifestly teaches, whom God rejected, notwithstanding he had first elected
him King: Yea, whiles wicked Princes and Kings were not removed, all the people
were punished of God; as is evident by Ier. 15. 1. to 6. where they were
punished with four judgments and plagues for Manassehs sins. In sum, if
the Jews had not permitted their King to be so wicked without punishment, they
had not been so grievously punished by God. By what means he is to be removed
from his Office, is easily to conjecture; thou may not slay him, nor raise
any war or tumult to do it, but the thing is to be attempted by other means,
because God has called us in peace, 1 Cor. 7. If the King be created by common
suffrages, he may again be deprived by common Votes, unless they will be
punished with him; but if he be chosen by the election and consent of a few
Princes, the people may signify to them the flagitious life of the King, and
may tell them, that it is by no means to be endured, that so they may remove
him, who have inaugurated him. Here now is the difficulty for those that do
this, the Tyrant will proceed against them according to his lust, and slay whom
he pleases; but it is a glorious thing to die for justice and the truth of
God; and it is better to die for the defense of justice, then afterward to be
slain with the wicked by assenting to injustice, or by dissembling, Those who
cannot endure this, let them endure a lustful and insolent Tyrant, expecting
extreme punishment together with him; yet the hand of the Lord is stretched out
still, and threatens a stroke: But when with the consent and suffrage of the
whole, or certainly of the better part of the multitude a Tyrant is removed,
Deo ^it auspice, it is done by God approbation. If the Children of Israel had
thus deposed Manasseh, they had not been so grievously punished with him. So
Zuinglius. Hence Quaest. 3. p. 94, to 97.
Stephanus Iunius Brutus in his Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, in answer to
Machiavels Princeps (a most accursed mischievous Treatise) and justification of
the Protestants defensive wars in France to preserve their Religion and
Liberties. Anno 1589. determines positively, That as all the people are
Superior to the King, so are those Officers of State and Parliaments, who
represent them, Superior to Kings collectively considered, though every of
them apart be inferior to them. In the Kingdom of Israel, which by the
judgment of all Politicians was best instituted, by God, there was this order,
The King had not only private Officers who looked to his family, but the
Kingdom likewise had 71 Elders and Captains elected out of all the Tribes, who
had the care of the Commonweal both in time of peace and war, and likewise
their Magistrates in every Town, who defended their several Cities, as the
others did the whole kingdom. These when ever they were to deliberate of
greatest affairs, assembled together, neither could any thing be determined
without their advice, which much concerned the commonwealth: Therefore ^ Chro.
29. 1.
David called these all together when he desired to in v^st Solomon in the
Kingdom, when he desired the policy restored by him should be examined and
approved, 1 Chr. ^3. 1.
when the Ark was to be reduced, etc. And because they represented all the
people, all the people are then said to have assembled together. Finally, the
same 1 Samuel, 14. 45*
rescued Jonathan, condemned to death by Saul's sentence; from whence it
appears, that an appeal lay from the King to the people: But from the time the
Kingdom was divided, through the pride of Rehoboam, the Synedrin of Jerusalem
consisting of 71 men, seems to be of that authority, 1 Chronicles. 10. 1.
that they might judge the King in their assembly, as well as the King judge
them when they were apart. The Captain of the House of Judah was Neh. 11. 9.
President over this assembly, that is, some chief man chosen out of the Tribe
of Judah, as even the chief man for the City Jerusalem, was chosen out of the
Tribe of Benjamin: This will be made more evident by examples. Ier. 26. 9. 17
Jeremy being sent by God to denounce the overthrow of the City Jerusalem, is
for this, first condemned by the Priests and Prophets, that is, by the
Ecclesiastical judgment or Senate; after this, by all the People, that is, by
the ordinary Judges of the City, to wit, by the Captains of thousands and
hundreds; at last by the Princes of Judah, that is, by the 71 men sitting in
the new Porch of the Temple, his cause being made known, he is acquitted. Now
they in that very judgment expressly condemn King Iehoiakim, who a little
before had most cruelly slain the Prophet Uriah, threatening like things. Also
we read Ier. 37. and 38
elsewhere, that King Zedekiah, did so much reverence the Authority of this
Sanhedrin, that he durst not free the Prophet Jeremie, thrust by these 71 men
into a filthy prison, but likewise scarce dared to translate him into the Court
of the Prison from thence; yea, when they persuaded him to consent to Jeremiah
his death, he answered, that he was in their hands, and that he could not
contradict them in any thing; Yea, he fearing lest they should enquire into the
conference which he privately had with Jeremy, as if he were about to render
an account of the things which he had spoken, forgeth a lie. Therefore in this
Kingdom the States or Officers of the Kingdom were above the King; I say, in
this Kingdom which was instituted and ordaintd, not by Plato or Aristotle, but
by God himself, the Author of all order, and the chief institutor of all
Monarchy^ Such were the seven Magi in the Persian Empire, the Ephori in the
Spartan Kingdom, and the public Ministers in the Egyptian Kingdom, assigned
and associated to the King by the People to that only end, that He should not
commit any thing against the Laws. Thus, and much more this Author, together
with Con. Super antius Vasco, who published this Treatise to all pious and
faithful Princes of the Republike, giving large Encomiums of its worth; as
also the Author of the Treatise De Iure Magistratus in Subditos. p. 253, 254,
255, 256. 268, to 275. whose words for brevity I pretermit; Bp. Bilson in his
forecited passages: and Hugo Grotius De Iure Belli and pacis, l. 1, c, 3. sect.
20. p. 63, 64. where he confesses, That if the King of the Israelites offended
against the Laws written concerning the Office of a King, he was to be
scourged for it; and that the Sanhedrin had a power above their king in some
cases.

This is evident, not only by the premises, but by sundry impregnable Texts,
As Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 19. 20. where God himself in the very description of the
office and duty of their King, prescribes this in direct terms, as a part of
his duty. And it shall be when He sits on the Throne of this Kingdom, that
he shall write him a Copy of This Law in a Book, out of that before the
Priest^ and Levites: And it shall be with Him, and He shall read therein All
the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, To keep all
the words of the Law, and these Statutes to do them, that his heart be not
lifted up above his brethren; and that He turn not aside from the Commandment,
to the right hand or to the left: seconded by Josh. 7. 8. This Book of the
Law, shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and
night; that thou may observe to do according to all that is written therein:
turn not to it from the right hand, or to the left, for then thou shall make
thy way prosperous, and then thou shall have good success. Hence it was, that
as soon as ever Saul was elected and made King by Samuel and the people, he
being the first of their Kings) Samuel told the people the manner of the
Kingdom, and wrote it in a Book, and laid it up before the Lord: which Book,
contained not the exorbitances and oppressions that their Kings would exercise
over them, mentioned in the 1 Samuel 8. 11. to 19. as Josephus mistakes; but as
Petrus Curaeus and Iun. ^rutus Vindic. Contr. Tyrannos qu. 3. p. 121, 12^,
Albericus Gentilis de I^re Belli l. 3. c. 15. p. 612.
others more rightly observe, the Law of God concerning Kings, prescribed by
him, Deuteronomy. 17. 14. to the end; and such Laws which commanded Kings to use
Justice and equity; to govern the Commonwealth well, for the peoples benefit;
to abstain from fornication and lusts; to retain modesty in a great fortune,
etc. Hence Samuel enjoined both Saul and the People, to fear the Lord, and
serve him, and obey his voice, and follow him, and not rebel against his
Commandment, etc. 1 Samuel 12. 14, 15. 20. to 25. Hence King Ps. 1. 1, 2. Ps.
19. 10. Ps. 119 the oug^o^t.
David did always meditate in the Law of God, day and night, accounting it
more dear unto him then thousands of Gold and silver: And withal pronounces
from Gods own mouth; 2 Samuel 23. 3.
The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, he that rules over
men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Hence the 1 King. 10. 9. 2.
Chron. 9. 8.
Qu. of Sheeba used this speech to king Solomon, Because the Lord loved Israel
for ever, therefore made he thee King (what? to domineere at his pleasure? no
verily, but) To do Judgment and Justice. Upon this ground, 2 Chronicles 34. 31.
King Josiah made a covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, And to
keep his Commandments, and his testimonies and his statutes with all his
heart, and with all his soul; And King 2 Chronicles. 15. 12. to 17. Ezra 10. 3 etc.
Neh. 9. 38. c. 10. 1. to the end.
Asa, with other Princes and Governors did the like, as the premises evidence:
From all which, Isay 9. 7. c. 16. 5. c. 32. 2. 2 Samuel 5. 12. Ezekiel* 45. 8, 9.
and infinite other Scriptures, obliging Kings to reign in righteousness, to
do justice and judgment to all, and Isay 1. 23. c. 12. 14, 15. Zeph. 3 3.
Mi^^. 3. 9. to 12. Ezekiel. 22. 6. to 28. Isa. 14. 4. to 23.
reprehending them exceedingly for their injustice, tyranny, oppressions,
idolatries, and other sins; it is i^^efragable; that their kings were as
much, if not more obliged to keep both Gods and the kingdoms Laws, as the
Subjects; and had no arbitrary power to do what they pleased.

All that is, or can be colourably objected to the contrary, Object. 1.
to prove the kings of Israel absolute Monarchs, exempt from Laws, and
paramount their Sanhedrin or people collectively considered, is, First, that
passage of Psalm. 51. 4. where king David confessing his sins of Adultery and
Murder to God, uses this expression; Against thee, Thee only have I sinned,
and done this evil in thy sight: Of which Com. in Ps. 50. and Epist. ad
Rusticam.
Hierom renders this reason, Quod Rex erat and alium non timebat: alium non
habebat super se: which Ambrose thus seconds, Rex erat, Nullis ip^e legibus
tenebatur, quia liberi sunt Reges a vinculis delictorum: Neque enim ullis ad
poenam vocantur legibus, Tuti Imperii potestate, In Psalm. 50.
Homini ergo non peccavit, cui non tenebatur obnoxious In Psalm. 50.
Arnobius and Cassiodor, add, De populo si quis erraverit, and Deo peccat and
Regi: quando Rex delinquit, Grotius de Iure Belli and Pacis, l, 1. c. 3. sect.
20. p. 63, 64 77.
soli Deo reus est: Merito ergo Rex, Deo Tantum se dicit peccasse; quia solus
erat qui ejus potuisset admissa discutere. The like we find in Isiodor. Epist.
383. which some Jewish Rabbis back with this saying of Barnachmon, titulo de
Iudicibus Nulla creatura judicat Regem, sed Deus benedictus: Therefore the
Jewish kings were above all Laws, and not subject to the censures of their
Congregations, States, or Sanhedri^.

To this I answer Answ.
first, That no doubt, David by his adultry and murder (being sins against
the second Table) did sin not only against God, but 1 Samuel 2. 25. 2 Chronicles.
6. 22. Deuteronomy. 22. 23. 24. Ezekiel. 18. 6. 7. 11
against Vriah and his wife too, their children and kindred; yea Prove. 20. 2. 1
Cor. 6. 1^.
against his own soul and body, though he were a king; That of Iustus
Eccardus, De Lege Regia, being an irrefragable truth, granted by See Grotius de
Iure Belli, l. 2. c. 14. s. 20. Marius Salamonius de Principatulib. Rebuf
Praesat. ad Rubr de Collationibus, p. 583.
all Lawyers and Divines whatsoever, that the absolutest Emperors, Monarchs,
Kings, that be, are subject to the Laws of God, of Nature, of Nations, and
cannot justly do any thing against them to the hurt of piety, chastity, fame,
life, or what is contrary to good Manners. Secondly, No doubt every king is
bound in conscience by the Law of God and man, to give satisfaction and
recompense to his Subjects against whom he sins in this nature, as David
himself determines in this his own case, 2 Samuel 12. 5, 6, 7. Thirdly, For this
very sin against Vriah God threatens, that the sword should never depart from
David's house; that he would raise up evil against him out of his own house,
that be would take his wives before his eyes and give them unto his Neighbor,
who should lie with them in the sight of the Sun, before all Israel, 2 Samuel
12. 10, 11, 12. which was actually fulfilled in and by Absalom his son, 2 Samuel 16. 22. The gloss therefore of these Fathers, that David was exempt from
all Laws being a King, and that he could not sin against a Subject, is
point blank against the History, and Text it self; and manifested to be
apparently false by all the premised Scriptures and Authorities. Fourthly, the
true reason of this speech of David, Against thee, Thee only have I sinned,
and done this evil in thy sight, as Augustine In Ps. 50. Marlorat. Mollerus,
Musculus, Calvin, Bredenbachus, Brentius Bucunus, Brero, Bugenhag. Fernerius,
Haymo, Gu^lter, Roll^c, Savanoerola, Scul^etus, Oilbert cognatus, Westhemerus,
Zegodinus Wolfg. Seberius in Psalm. 51.
and others truly observe was: 1. Because David had plotted and contrived the
murder of Vriah, and abusing of his wife so closely, that no man did or could
take notice of it; whence Nathan the Prophet tells him, 2 Samuel 12. 12. Thou
did it Secretly, but I will do this before all Israel: sed forte erat quod
homines latebat, and non inveniebant illi quod erat quidem, sed mani^ estum
none erat, writes Augustine: 2. Because Vriah being slain, and his wife a party
consenting to David's sin, his sin now might in this sense he said, to be
against God alone. 3. sin, quatenus sin, and as it deserves eternal
punishment, is properly committed against none but God, whose Law and
prohibition only makes it sin; therefore in this regard, David now confessing
his sin to God himself, uses this expression and rhetorical ingemination,
Against thee, thee only have I sinned. 4. Because none was free from sin, and
so fit to be his Judge in that respect but God only. 5. Only, is many times
taken for principally or especially; as we usually say, such a one is the only
man; Romans 2. 12. 14. 15. c. 3. 20. ^. 5. 13. c. 7. 7. 1 Cer. 15. 56. 1 Ioh. 3.
4.
such a salve or medicine, is the only remedy; and the Scripture uses this
phrase in this sense in David's own ease, 1 King 15. 7. David did that which
was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing that he
commanded him all the days of his life, save ONLY in the matter of Vriah,
that is principally, for he committed diverse sins besides, 2 Samuel 24. 10. to 20.
as in numbering the people, in giving Mephibosheths land to Ziba upon a false
suggestion, Sam. 16. and 19. 28, 29.
himself confessing Psalm. 40. 12. Psalm. 38. 3, 4.
that his iniquities were gone over his head, and his ^innes more then the
hairs of his head: but yet this was his ONLY, to wit, his principal sin: so
in diverse others Texts, only is used for principally; as Josh. 1. 7. 18. Only
be thou strong; 1 Samuel 18. 17. Only be thou valiant: So here, against thee,
thee ^^ly have I sinned; that is, I have principally sinned against thee alone,
not excluding his sin against himself, Vriah, and others, whom he injured
thereby. 6. This sin against See De lure Magistratus in subditos. p. 301, 302.
Vriah was but a personal and private injury, into which David fell out of
humane frailty, it was the first and only sin of this kind that ever he
committed, for ought we read; he made no trade of it, he repented for it, and
never relapsed again into it: in this regard therefore these Fathers
interpretations may be Orthodox, that for such a private sin of infirmity
only, David was not responsible nor punishable by the Congregation or
Sanhedrin: But had he made a common trade of murdering his subjects, ravishing
their wives, and the like; or giving himself over to the open practice of
gross Idolatry, (a sin only against God himself) and not repented of, or
humbled himself solemnly for it, as he did for these sins here, no doubt the
Congregation or Sanhedrin might upon complaint, have questioned, reprehended,
and censured him for it, as the premises plentifully manifest, notwithstanding
the privilege of his regalitie, which, as it exempted him not from the guilt,
so not from the punishment due unto such Crimes, whether temporal or eternal:
not from the Isay 30. 33. Romans 6. 15. 16.
eternal, which is the greatest, that is certain, therefore not from the
temporal, which is the less. Finally, God himself threatens, that 2 Samuel 7.
14 Psa. 89. ^0, 31, 32.
If Solomon or any Kings of David's Seed should forsake his Law, and not keep
his Commandments, but commit iniquity against him, he would chasten them with
the Rod of Men, and the Stripes of the Children of Men; whence the Hugo Grotius
de lure Belli and paci^^. 1. c. 3 sect. 20; p. 64.
Rabbis write, That if their Kings transgressed against the Law of the King,
they were and might be scourged for it, without dishonor, by a man whom
themselves made choice of: Therefore they might be justly censured and punished
by men for their transgressions against God alone, notwithstanding this gloss
of these Fathers, true only in some sense in private cases, and sins of
infirmity against private men, not of public habitual transgressions.

The second Objection, Object.
is that Speech of Samuel to the people, 1 Samuel 8. 11. to 19. This will be the
manner of the King that shall reign over you; He will take your sons and
daughters, and appoint them for himself, etc. And he will take your fields, and
your Vineyards, and your Oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to
his servants. And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your Vineyards,
and give to his servants: And he will take your manservants, your maidservants,
your goodliest young men and your Asses, and put them to his service; he will
take the tenth of your sheep, and ye shall be his servants; And ye shall cry
out in that day, because of the King whom ye have chosen you, and the Lord
will not hear you in that day. Therefore their Kings were absolute Monarchs,
not bound to Laws, nor responsible to their subjects for their oppressions, not
yet resistible by them.

To which I answer, that this is a direct description of a Tyrant, and not of a
lawful King; as is evident,

First, Answ. 1.
by the very occasion of the words; Uttered purposely by Samuel to dissuade the
People from electing a King, and changing their former Aristocraticall
Government, into a Monarchical; because their kings would many of them prove
more oppressive, Tyrannical and burdensome to them then their Judges or his
sons were, whose bribery and perverting of judgment, moved the people thus
earnestly to affect a change of Government, as is evident by the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, and 9 Verses; Antiqu. Iud. l 6. c. 4.
Josephus, and the consent of all Expositors.

Secondly, by the introduction to, and the words themselves, This will be the
manner of He will take, and he will do thus and thus; not this ought to be the
manner, he ought to do, or lawfully may do thus and thus.

Thirdly, by the things themselves which he would do, which are directly
contrary to Deuter. 17. 14. to the end; and all other Scriptures, expressly
enjoining Kings 2 Samuel 23. 3 P s. 67. 4. Pro. 31 9. Isay. 32. 1. 2. Chron 9. 8.
to judge their people righteously, to do justice and judgment, and not any
ways to oppress or spoil them. I shall instance only in two particulars.

First, the law of Gods expressly prohibits Exodus 20. 17. Deuteronomy. 5. 21.
all men (and Kings as well as others) to covet their neighbors Houses, his
menservants, his maidservants, his Ox, or his Ass, or any thing that is his
Neighbors: If their Kings then might not lawfully so much as desire or covet,
much less might they lawfully take away their Houses, Sons, Daughters,
Manservants, Maidservants, Asses, Sheep, Corn, Vineyards, or any thing else
that was theirs, without their free consents, as Samuel tells them their King
would do; this therefore must need* be only a declaration of what their Kings
would Tyrannically do, not of what they might lawfully or justly execute.

Secondly, it is Gods express Edict, Ezekiel. 46. 18. The Prince shall not take
the Peoples inheritance by oppression, to thrust them out of their possessions,
but he shall give his Sons inheritance out of his own possession, that my
people be not scattered every one from his possession. And Ezekiel 45. 8, 9. The
Land shall be the Princes possession in Israel, and my Princes shall no more
oppress my people, and the rest of the Land shall they give to the house of
Israel according to their Tribes: Thus says the Lord God, Let it suffice you,
O Princes of Israel; remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and
justice; take away your exactions ( or expulsions) from my people, says the
Lord. Whence 1 King. 21. 2 to ^5.
Ahab King of Israel for coveting, and unjustly deprivi^g Naboth of his
Vineyard, which he refused to sell him, because it was the inheritance of his
Fathers, and taking possession thereof after his unjust condemnation, had a
most severe judgment d^nounced against him, even the utter extirpation of
himself, Q. Iezabel, and their posterity, afterward executed: Which punishment
God would never have inflicted on them, had it been lawful for the Kings of
Israel to take the peoples Fields, Vineyards, Oliveyards, etc. and possess or
give them to their servants, as Samuel here tells them their Kings will do: This
clause then of taking their Field, Vineyards, etc. from them, by the King,
without their consents, being thus d^ametrally contrary to these Texts of
Ezekiel, and such a capital Crime in King Ahab, ( yea, contrary to the
practice of Joseph, and the Egyptian Heathen King Pharaoh, who took not away,
but bought the Egyptians Cattle and Lands for Corn, Genesis 47. 14. to 27.) can
to ways, be warranted as a just royal prerogative lawful for their Kings to
use, but must needs be branded for a Tyrannical Oppression.

Fourthly, this is evident by the consequences of it, Ye shall be his servants,
(not subjects;) And ye shall cry in that day because of your King which ye
have chosen you, and the Lord will not hear you in that day, Verse 17, 18.
Certainly the people neither would not ought to cry to god against the
proceedings of a just upright King, but only of a Tyrant and Oppressor;
therefore this Text must needs be meant of such a one, who should be a scourge
and punishment to them, as Tyrants are, not a blessing as good Kings always be.

Fifthly, consult we with all Politicians whatsoever, this description suites
only with a Tyrant, not with any lawful King: and that it is meant of such a
one, we have the testimony of Antiqu. Iud. l. 6. c. 4. 5.
Josephus, the general concurring suffrage of all Commentators and Expositors
one the place (see Lyra, Hugo de Sancto Victore, Carthusian, Angelomus
Lexoviensis, Calvin, Brentius, Bugenhagius, Beda, Bertorius, Martin Borrhaeus,
Peter Martyr, Zanchius, Piscator, Serrarius, Strigelius, Doctor Willet,
Deodate* the English Bibles notes, with others) and of sundry who descant on
this Text in other writings; by name, of M. John Calvin, Instit. l. 4. c. 20.
sect. 26. Bishop Ponet his Political Government. p. 44. Iunius Brutus
Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, qu. 3. p. 121. 122. 134. 135. 153. 154. 155. 159. De
Iure Magistratus in Subditos, p, 270. 271. Bucholceri Chronichon. p. 208.
Petrus Cunaeus, de Repub. Hebraeor. l. 1. c. 14. Bertrami, Politia Iud^ic. p.
53. Shickardus jus Regium Iudae. p. 64. Albericus Gentilis de jure Belli, l. 3.
c. 15. p. 613. Hugo Grotius de jure Belli and Pacis, l. 1. c. 3. Adnotata. p.
72. Governado Christiano, p. 87. Georgius Bucananus de jure Regni apud Scotos,
p. 44. Dole^-man, p. 68. 70. Haenon. disp* polit. p 432. Weemse 2. Vol. 2.
Part. p. 14. Hotomani, Franco-Gallia, c. 10. Amesius de Casibus Conscienciae,
p. 306. and (to name no more in so plain a case) of Doctor Fern himself, in
his Resolving of Conscience, sect. 2. p. 10. where he writes, That Samuel here
tells the people, how they should be oppressed under Kings; yet all that
violence and injustice done unto them, is no cause of resistance, etc. This
Text then being clearly meant of their Kings Oppression, violence, injustice
against Law, right, and a clear descript on of a Tyrant, not a King; I may
safely conclude from all the premises, that even among the Israelites, and Jews
themselves, their Kings were subject to the Laws, and that the whole
Congregation, Kingdom, Senate, Sanhedrin, not their Kings, were the Supreme
Sovereign power, and Paramount their Kings themselves, whom they did thus
freely elect, constitute, and might in some cases justly censure, resist,
depose, (if not put to death) by common consent, for notorious gross
Idolatries and public multiplied crimes, as the forecited authors aver. All
which considered, eternally refu^es, subverts, confonnds the erroneous false
Positions and Paradoxes which Doctor Fern, Griffith Williams Bishop of Ossery,
the Author of The necessity of Subjection, with other late ignorant
Pamphletters, have broached to the contrary, without either ground or
presidents to warrant what they affirm, touching the absolute Sovereignty,
Monarchy, irresistibilitie, incorrigibility of the Kings of Judah and Israel by
their whole States, Congregations, Kingdoms general assents, and utterly takes
away those sandy fabulous foundations upon which their impertinent Pamphlets
against the Sovereign Power of Parliaments, Kingdoms, and the illegality of
Subjects taking up defensive Arms against Tyrannical Princes, bent to subvert
Religion, Laws, Liberties, the Republike, are founded; which must now needs
vanish into nothing, before this Catholic, irrefragable clear-shining verity,
abundantly ratifyed by innumerable presidents in all eminent Kingdoms, States,
Nations, that either have been in any former ages, or are yet extant in the
world; which must and will infinitely over-sway, swallow up the inconsiderable
contrary opinions of some few privadoes, who (either out of flattery, hopes of
getting, or keeping undemerited preferments, fear of displeasing greatness, or
inconsiderate following of other reputed learned men's mistakes, without due
examination of their erroneous Tenants) have engaged themselves in a Polemicall
blind Combat against these infragable transparent Verities; whose defense I
have here made good against all their misprisions, and bootlesse assaults.

Having now Historically ran over the most eminent Empires, Kingdoms of ancient
and present times, in a kind of confused method, their copious vastness and
variety being so boundless, and my time to collect them so small, that I
could hardly marshall them into any comely d^stinct Regiments, or reduce them
to the particular Heads debated in the premises; I shall therefore for a
conclusion deduce these distinct Conclusions from them, to which the substance
of all the recited Histories may be aptly reduced, and are in truth abundantly
confirmed by them beyond all contradiction, annexing, some new punctual
Authorities of note, to ratify and confirm them.

First, Observe. 1.
it is undeniably evident from all the premises, That all Monarchies, Empires,
Kingdoms, Emperors, Kings, Princes in the world, were originally created,
instituted, ordained, continued, limited, and received all their jurisdiction,
power, Authority both from, by, and for the people, whose Creatures,
Ministers, Servants they are, and ought to be. If we survey all the several
Lawful Monarchies, Empires, Principalities, Emperors, and Kings, that either
have been, or yet are extant in the world; we find all sacred and profane
Histories concur in this, that they had their original erections, creations
from, by, and for the People; Yea, we read the very times when, the most
Monarchies of note were instituted, the Names of those on whom the first
Monarchies were conferred, (by the peoples free election only) yet extant on
record in most Histories, and withal express relations, of many different
kinds of Kingdoms, Kings, in respect of succession, continuance, Power,
jurisdiction, scarce any two kingdoms, or their Kings, being alike in all
things in regard of Prerogatives and jurisdictions; all Histories and
Politicians concurring, resolving with ^ P*. 2, 13.
Peter, that Kings are humane Creatures or Ordinances, instituted, diversified
thus by men, and the people alone, out of Gods general or special providence,
not one of them all being immediately or directly ordained by God, as the only
efficient cause, without the free concurrence, consent and institution of the
people. This truth, is not only ratified by Lex Regia, whereby the Roman
Emperors were created, yea, invested with all their power; registered by Iustus
Eccardus de Lege Regia, and Marius Salamonius de Principatu, l. 6. Part. 3. p.
110, 111.
formerly transcribed; by Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon, Berosus, Polybius,
Cicero, Livy, Justin, Pliny, Strabo, Plutarch, Dionysius Hallicarnassaeus,
Diodorus Siculus, Pausanias, Solinus, Alexander ab Alexandro, Hermannus
Schedell, Herodotus, Boemus, Pomponius Mela; forecited, and generally by all
Historians, Chronologers, Antiquaries, Lawyers, Politians whatsoever; but
directly averred and proved by Franciscus Hotomanus (a famous Lawyer) in his
Franco-Gallia, c. 1. 6. 10, 13. the Author of De Iure Magistratus in subditos,
Quaest. 5. p. 239. 240, etc. Thomas Garzonius Emporij Emporiorum, Pars, 1.
Discursus 1. de Dom. p. 13. Vasquius Controvers. Illustrium, 12. n. 133. 59. n.
8. 61. n. 22. 80. n. 4. 108. n. 29. 141. n. 2. Covarunius, Quaest. Illust. T.
2. 396. n. 2. 4. Hugo Grotius de Iure Belli, l. 1. c. 4. sect. 7. l. 3. c. 14.
sect. 11. and elsewhere; Marius Salamonius de Principatu; Eccardus de lege
Regia, with others cited by them: Hookers Ecclesiastical Polity. l. 1. sect.
10. p. 69, 70, 71. (a pregnant place) Albericus Gentilis de Iure Belli, l. 2.
c. 10. 15. Ioannes Marianade Rege and Regum Instit. l. 1. c. 1. to 10. Sparsim,
and Iunius Brutus, Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, Quaest. 3. p. 83. to 94. with
whose words I shall close up this observation, (having Part 3. p. ^15, to 122.
elsewhere particularly proved the verity thereof, and answered all Objections
against it from misinterpreted Scriptures:)

We say now (writes he) that the people constitute Kings, deliver Kingdoms,
approve Kings elections, with their suffrages; which God would have to be thus,
that so whatsoever authority and power they should have, they should, next to
him, refer it to the people, and therefore should bestow all their care,
thoughts, industry for the people profit; neither verily should they think
themselves advanced above other men for their excellency of nature, no
otherwise then men are over Herds and Flocks, but should remember, that being
born in the same condition with others, they were lifted up from the ground
unto that condition by the suffrages, as it were, by the Shoulders of the
people, upon whose Shoulders the burden of the Commonweal should for a great
part rest. After which he proves by Deuteronomy. 17. and diverse forecited presidents
in Scripture, that God gave the Election and Constitution of the kings of
Israel to the people; and that notwithstanding the succession of the kingdom of
Judah was by God entailed afterward to the Lineage of David, yet the Kings
thereof actually reigned not before they were ordained by the people. Whence we
may conclude, that the Kingdom of Israel, if we respect the stock, was
certainly hereditary, but if we regard the persons, altogether elective. But to
what end was this, if the Election appear, as it is confessed, but that the
remembrance of so great a dignity conferred by the people, should make them
always mindful of their duty: So likewise among the Heathens we read, that
Kings were constituted by the people; for when they had wars abroad, or
contention at home, some one man, of whose fortitude and justice the multitude
had a great opinion, was by cammon consent assumed for King. And among the
Herod. l. 1. Cicero, l. 1. Offic*
Medes, says Cicero, Deioces was of an Arbitrator made a Iugde, of a Judge
created a King; and among the Romans the first Kings were elected. Therefore
when Romulus being taken away, the Inter-regnum of the hundred Senators was
displeasing to the Romans, they accorded, Livius, l. 1.
that afwards Kings should be chosen by the Suffrages of the people, the Senate
approving it: And Tarquin the proud was therefore reputed a Tyrant, for that
being created neither by the people nor Senate, he held the Empire only by
force and power: Wherefore Caesar although he invaded the Empire by force, yet
that he might cosen the people at least with some p^etext of Law, would seem to
have received the Empire from the Senate and people: But Augustus although he
was adopted by Caesar, yet he never bare himself as heir of the Empire, by
divise; but rather received it as from the Senate and people; as did also
Caligula, Tiberius, Claudius; whereas Nero, who first invaded the Empire by
force and wickedness without any color of Law, was condemned by the Senate.
Since then no man could be born an absolute King, no man can be a King by
himself, no man can reign without the people: Whereas on the contrary, the
people may both be, and are by themselves, and are in time before a King; it
most certainly appears, that all Kings were first constituted by the people.
Now albeit that from the time that Sons or Nephews imitated the virtues of
their parents, they seem to have made kingdoms as it were hereditary to
themselves in certain Countries, where the free power of Election may seem in
some sort to have ceased, yet that custom has continued in all well
constituted kingdoms, that the children of the deceased kings should not
succeed until they were as de n^no, newly constituted by the people, nor
should not be acknowledged as heir^s to their Fathers, but should only then at
length be reputed kings, when they had as it were received investiture of the
Realm from those who represent the Majesty of the people, by a Scepter and
Diadem. In Christian kingdoms which at this day are said to be conferd by
succession, there are extant most evident footsteps of this thing. For the
kings of France, Spain, See here, par. 1 p. 53. to 78.
England, and others are wont to be inaugurated, and as it were put into
possession of the Realm by the States, Senators, Nobles and great men of the
Realm, who represent the universality of the people, in the same manner as the
Emperors of Germany are by the Electors, and the kings of Poland by the
Vayuods or Palatines, where the entire right is only by election, neither is
royal Honor yielded to them in the Cities of the kingdoms, before they have
been duly inaugurated: Neither also heretofore did they compute the time of the
reign, but from the day of the inauguration, which computation was accurately
observed in France: And that we may not be deceived by reason of any continued
stories of succession; even in those very kingdoms, the States of the Realm
have often times preferred a kinsman before a son, the second son before the
eldest; as in France, Analas Gilly.
Lewis, the brother, before Robert Earl of Dreux; also Henry, the second
brother, before Robert Capet the Nephew, with others elsewhere: Yea, and the
same kingdom by Authority of the People, has been translated from one Nation
and Family to another, whiles there were lawful heirs extant; from the
Merouingi to the Carlingi, from the Carlingi to the Capets; which has been
likewise done in other Realms, as it sufficiently appears out of the truest
Histories. And that we may not recede from the kingdom of France, which has
ever been reputed the pattern of the rest, in which, I say, succession seems
to have obtained greatest strength: We read that Pharamond was elected, Anno
419. Pipen, An. 751. Pipens sons, Charles the great and Charlemain 768. not
having respect of the Father; Charlemain being at last taken away 771. the
Brothers part did not immediately accrue to Charles the Great, as is usually done
in inheritances, but by the determination of the people and public Council:
and by them Ludovicus pius was elected, An. 812* although he were the son of
Charles the great. Yea, in the very Testament o^ Charles, which is extant in
Nauclerus, he Entreats the People by the Common Council of the Realm to elect
one of his nephews who^ they pleased; as for hi, Uncles he bids the^ rest
satisfied with the Decrec of the people. Whence Charles the bald, Nephew by
Lewis the godly and Judith, professes himself An elected King in Aimoinius
the Historiographer. In sum, all kings whatsoever, from the beginning were
Elective; and those who at this day strive to come to the kingdom by
succession, must of necessity be First ordained by the people. Finally, albeit
the people by reason of certain egregious merits, has in certain Realms used
to choose kings out of the same stock, yet they choose the stock it self, nor the
branch; neither do they so choose it, but if it degenerates, They may elect
another: But even those who are nearest of that stock, are not so much born, as
made kings; are not so much accounted kings as the Attendants of kings; which
Franciscus Hotomanus in his Franco-Gallia, cap. 6. 7. and 10. prosecutes more
at large, and manifests by sundry pertinent Presidents and Authorities.

Observe. 2.
Secondly, that it is apparent by all the premised Histories; That in all
Empires, Monarchies, the whole Empire, State, Kingdom, with the Parliaments,
Senates, States, Diets, public Officers and general Assemblies which
represent them, are the Supreamest Sovereign power, superior to the Emperors,
Kings and Princes themselves; who are subordinate Ministers and servants to
them, elected, created by them for their common good; and not absolute
Sovereign Lords or Proprietors to rule and domineer over them at their
pleasure: Which conclusion you shall find abundantly ratified, and pro^essedly
maintained by Marius Salamonius, de Principatu, in six several Books; by John
Mariana, de Rege and Regis Instit. t. 1 c. 8. Stephanus Iunius Brutus, his
Vindicia contra Tyrannos, throughout, especially p. 91. to 110. the Treatise,
De Iure Magistratus in Subditos, throughout: Iustus Eccardus, de Lege Regia:
Henricus Ranz^vius; Commentarii Bellici, lib. 1. c. 3. and elsewhere: Georgius
Obrechtus (an eminent Civil Lawyer) Disputationes Iuridicae, de Principiis
Belli, sect. 115. to 200. where he thus resolves, Number. 127* 128, 129.
The inferior Magistrates, as in Germany the Electors, Princes, Earls,
Imperial Cities; in France the Peers of France, in Poland the Vayuodes or
Palatines, and in other Kingdoms the Nobles, Senators, and Delegates of the
Estates, as they are severally inferior to the Emperor or King, Ita Univers^
Superiores existunt, so collectively They are superior to them; as a General
Council is above the Pope, the Chapter above the Bishop, the University above
the Chancellor; The Prince, says Peneg. Tr^ian di^tus*
Pliny the second, even the greatest, is obliged to the Commonwealth by an
Oath, as its servant, ac ipsa Republica seu Regno Minor est, and is less then
the Republike or Kingdom it self:) by Franciscus Hotomanus a learned French
Lawyer, in his Franco-Gallia, c. 6, 7. 10, 11. 14, 15, 16, 18, 20. Aquinas, de
Regimine Principum, c. 6. by Hemingius Arnisaeus, De Auctoritate Principum in
populum, etc. and De Iure Majestatis, Sebastianus Foxius, De Regni Regisque
Institutione; Vasquius Controvers. Illustrium passim, Cavarnuius Contr.
Illustr. T. 2. 505. n. I. 399. n. 6. Haenon Disp. Polit. p. 179. etc. Alhusius
Polit. c. 4. p. 146. to 154. with John Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 20. sect. 31.
and Barclay l. 3^ adver. Monarc^ c. 8. l. 6. c. 23. 24. quoted by Grotius.
diverse others forecited: Hear Vindi^iae Contr. Tyrann^^ printed 1589. Quaest.
3. p. 9. 91* to 111.
Iunius Brutus instead of all the rest to this particular, being a Frenchman by
birth, and writing his mind herein both freely, accutely and ingeniously, in
these words:

Now verily, since Kings are constituted by the people, it seems necessarily to
follow, populum universum Rege potiorem esse, That all the people are better
and greater then the King. For such is the force of the word, that whoever is
constituted by another, is reputed less then him; he who receives authority
from another, is inferior to his Author. Genesis 39. 4.
Potipher the Egyptian appointed Joseph over his family; Dan. 2. 48.
Nebuchadonozer set Daniel over the Province of Babylon; Dan 6. 1.
Darius set an hundred and twenty Princes over the Kingdom. Verily Masters are
said to appoint servants; Kings Ministers; so likewise the people appoints the
King, as the Minister of the Commonweal; which title good Kings have not
contemned, and ill Kings have affected, so that ^or some ages, none of the
Roman Emperors, but an apparent Tyrant, such as Nero, Domitian, Caligula,
would be called LORD. Moreover it appears, that Kings were instituted for the
peoples sake; neither will thou say, that for an hundred Homunci^es more or
less, (for the most part far worse then the rest) all inferiors whatsoever
were created, rather then they for them. Now reason requires, that he for whose
sake another exists, is to be accounted lesser then he. Thus the Governor of a
Ship is instituted by the owner for the Ships sake, who sits at the Helm,
lest the Ship should be broken on the Rocks, or ill hold her course. And verily
whiles he intends this business, the other Mariners serve him, and the owner
himself obeyes him; and yet he is a servant of the Ship, as well as any
mariner, neither differs he from a mariner in gender, but in kind: In the
Republike, which is usually compared to a Ship, the King is in place of a
Master, the people of an Owner: Threfore to him seeking the public safety, the
people obey and submit; when notwithstanding he is, and ought no less to be
accounted a servant to the Republike, as well as any Judge or Captain, neither
differs he from those in any thing, but that he is bound to bear greater
burdens, and undergo more dangers: Wherefore verily what things soever the
King acquires in war, or when he gains adjoining Coasts by right of war
or by sentence of Law, as those things which are brought into the Eschequer, he
acquires to the Kingdom not to himself; to the people, I say, which constitute
the kingdom, no otherwise then as a servant (purchases) to his Lord; neither
can any obligation be contracted with him, but by their authority. Furthermore,
innumerable people live without a king, but thou can not conceive a King
without a people, so much as in thy mind. Neither have some attained a Royal
Dignity because they differed in kind from other men, and ought to rule over
others by a certain excellency of nature, as shepherds do over their Flo^ks;
but rather, the people created out of the same Mass, have advanced them to
that degree, that so if they enjoyed any authority, any power, they should
acknowledge it received from them, and possess it as during their pleasure;
which the ancient custom of the French aptly shows, who Hotomani
Franco-Gallia, c. 6.
lifting their King up on a Buckler, proclaimed him King. For why, I pray, are
Kings said to have innumerable eyes, many ears, long hands, most swift feet?
what, because they are like to Argus, Gerion, Midas, or to those whom fables
have feined? verily no, but indeed because all the people whom it concerns,
lend all their eyes, their ears, their hands, feet, and faculties to the king
for the use of the Republike. Let the people recede from the King, he who even
now seemed eyed, eared, strong and flourishing; will suddenly wax blind, deaf,
and fall to nothing; he who erewhile did magnificently triumph, will in one
moment become vile to all: he who even now was adored almost with divine
honors, will be compelled to play the Schoolmaster at Corinth: Over-turn only
the basis of this Giant-like heap, and like the Rhodian Colossus, it will of
necessity fall, and be broken into pieces. Since therefore a King exists by and
for the people, and cannot consist without the people; to whom may it seem
strange if we conclude, That the People are greater then the King.

Moreover, what we say of all the People, we will have spoken also, as in the
second Question, of those also who lawfully represent all the people in every
kingdom or City, who verily are commonly reputed the Officers of the Kingdom,
not King. The Officers of the King, are created or discharged by the King at
his pleasure; Moreover, when he dies they are out of place, and are in some
^ort accounted dead men. Contrarily, the Officers of the kingdom, receive
their a^thority from the people, to wit, In a public Council, or at least,
Heretofore were w^nt to receive it, neither can they be casheered without the
same. Therefore those depend on the King, these on the kingdom: they, from the
Supreme Officer of the kingdom, who is the king himself; these, From the
Supreme Dominion of the People, from whom the king himself, as well as they,
ought to depend. Their Office is, to take care of the king: these men's duty, to
take heed that the Commonwealth receive no detriment any where: Theirs to be
present and serve the King, as any domestic servants do their Masters; these
men's, to defend the rights and privileges of the people, and diligently to
provide, that the Prince himself commit, or omit nothing to their destruction.
Finally, those are the Kings servants, Ministers, domestics, instituted only
to obey him; these contrarily, are as the kings Assessors in judging according
to Law and Consorts of the Royal Empire; so as all these are bound to govern
the Commonweal, no otherwise then the king is; yet he, as a president among
them, may only hold the first place. Now as All the People are superior to
the King; so even these, although single, every of them be inferior to the
King, yet All of them are to be deemed superior to him. How great the power of
the first kings was, appears sufficiently from this; that Ephron king of the
Hittites, durst not grant the right of a sepulcher to Abraham without the
peoples consent; Genesis 23. and 34.
nor Hamor the Hiuite king of Sechem, make a league with Jacob, the more
weighty affairs being usually referred to the people. And ve^ily in those
kingdoms, which at that time were circumscribed almost with one City, this was
easy: But from that time kings began to enlarge their Territories, neither
could all the people assemble in one place without confusion, Officers of the
kingdom were appointed, who should ordinarily defend their rights; yet so, as
when there should be need, either all the people, or at least a certain Epitome
of them should be extraordinarily assembled. We see this order to have been in
the kingdom of Israel, which by the judgment almost of all politicians, was
best of all constituted. The king had his Bakers, Butlers, Cham^berlaines,
Masters and Stewards of his House, who overlooked his Family; the kingdom had
likewise its Officers, 71. Elders and Captains chosen out of every tribe, who
might take care of the Republike in time either of peace or war: and finally
its Magistrates in every Town, who were every one to defend their Rites, as the
others the whole kingdom (which he proves to be above their kings, and to
overruled them, in the Har. p. 143^ 144.
forecited passage.) Such were the 7. Esther 1.
Magi, or wise men in the Persian Empire, being as it were Consorts of the
Royal Honor, and who were called the kings eyes and ears, with whose
judgment we read the kings rested satisfied: Such were the Ephori in the
Spartan Realm, to whom they appealed from the king, and who did likewise judge
the kings themselves; as it is in Aristotle; In the Egyptian kingdom the
public Ministers were elected and assigned to the king by the people, only to
this end, that he should commit nothing against the Laws. Now as Arist. P^li^.
l. 5. c. 11. and 6. 3. c. 7.
Aristotle every where calls those lawful kings, to whom such Officers are
adjoined, so likewise he fears not to say, where they are wanting, that there
is not a Monarchy, but either pla^^ly a barbarous tyranny, or a domination
next to Tyranny. In the Roman State the Senators obtained this place, and the
Magistrates ufually chosen by the people, the Tribune of the Consuls, the
president of the City, and the rest, so as there lay an appeal from the king
to the people, which Seneca cites out of Tullies Book of the Republike, and the
History of Horatius Tergeminus, condemned by the Royal Judges for the murder
of his sister, and absolved by the people, sufficiently evidenceth: But under
the Emperors, the Senate, Consuls, Pretors, Pretorian Perfects, Presidents of
Provinces, which were given to the people and Senate, were therefore all called
the Magistrates of the people of Rome. Therefore when as by the Decree of the
Senate, Maximinus the Emperor was judged an enemy of the Republike, Herodian.
l. 8. in Orat Maximi and Albi^a^l Milites.
and Mazimus and Albinus were created Emperors by the Senate against him, the
Soldiers took an oath, that they would Fathfully obey the people of Rome, the
Senate and Emperor, howsoever this law might be violated under tyranny. As for
the Empires at this day (as the Turkish and Muscovitish, and others of this
kind, which are rather great Robberies, then Empires) there is not one of them,
which if not at this time, was not at least in times past governed in this
manner. But if it be come to pass through the Magistrates fault and
sloathfulnes, that in some places posterity have received a worser Common weal,
notwithstanding those who at this day possess these Offices, are bound as much
as in them is, to revoke all things to their ancient state. In the German
Empire which is conferred by election, there are Princes, and Electors, as well
Laics as Ecclesiastics, Earls, Barons, Cities, Ambassadors of Cities, who as
they have the care of the Commonweal in their several places, so likewise in
general Assemblies (or diets) whenthere is needs, they represent the Majesty
of the whole Empire, where they are bound to care, that the Republike sustain
no detriment by the private endeavors or hatreds of the Emperor. Therefore
there is one Chancellor of the Empire, another of the Emperor; other and
different Officers besides, both of the one, and other: diverse Exchequers,
diverse Treasurers; and therefore it is a common saying, that the Empire is
preferred before the Emperor, so as Sp^^^ulum Saxonicum.
the Emperor may be every where said to do homage to the Empire. Likewise in
the Realm of Poland, the Bishops, Palatines, Castellans, Nobles, Deputies of
Cities and Counties are extraordinarily assembled; in whose assembly only new
constitutions are made, and wars decreed. But ordinarily the councellers of the
Realm of Poland, the Chancellor of the Polish Repub. etc. although the King in
the mean time has his own Chamberlains, Stewards, Ministers and Domestics.
But he who will dispute among the Polonians, whether the King or the whole
people of the Kingdom, represented by the Estates of the Realm, be greater?
does just like him who should dispute at Venice, whether the Duke or the
Republike were the superior? But what shall we say of those kingdoms which are
wont to be carried by succession? Verily the thing is no otherwise there. The
Realm of France, which not long since was preferred before the rest both for
the excellency of Laws and Orders, was thus constituted in times past; and
although those who hold that place do not sufficiently discharge their duty,
yet they are not thereby the less obliged to do it: The king verily has his
great Master, or Arch-Steward, his Chamberlains, Hunters, Gua^d, Butlers, and
the rest, whose Offices heretofore did so depend on the King that he dying,
themselves seemed also to die in their Office; so that even yet, after the end
of the mourning royal, the great Master or Arch-Steward, is wont to pronounce
certain conceived words, wherewith he dismisseth the royal family, and bids
every one provide for himself: Yet notwithstanding the Kingdom of A^monius, l.
5. c. 6. in Ca^olo Caluo. S^e Holomani Franco gallia, ^. 5, 6, ^0. etc.
France has its Officers, the master of the Palace, who afterward was styled
the Earl of the Stable, the Marshals, Admiral, Chancellor, or great
Referendary, Secretaries, Treasurers, and Officers, who verily heretofore WERE
NOT CREATED, BUT IN THE GREAT PUBLIC COUNCIL of the three Orders of the
Clergy, Nobility and people; but since the standing Parliament was ordained
at Paris, they are not thought settled in their Offices, before they be received
and approved by the Senate of Paris, P. ^il^us. sam. Inst quibus ^mod. in
Patriae ^ot solvitur.
neither can they be casheer'd without their consent and authority: Now all
these, first plight their faith TO THE KINGDOM, that i^, to all the people,
after that to the King, as the Guardian thereof; which is perspicuous even from
the very form of the Oath. But especially the Earl of the Stable, when he is
girded by the King with the Liliated sword (as appears by the words which he
pronounces,) is girded to that purpose, THAT HE MAY DEFEND AND PROTECT THE
REPVBLIKE. Moreover the Realm of France has its Peers, as Consuls of the King,
or its Senators, as the Fathers of the Republike, every of them denominated
from the several Provinces of the Kingdom, to whom the King, being to be
crowned, is wont to plight his faith, as to the whole Kingdom: from whence it
appears, THAT THEY ARE SVPERIOR TO THE KING: These again likewise wear, that
they will defend, not the King, BUT THE ROYAL CROWN; that they will assist THE
REPVBLIKE with their council, and that for this end, they will be present in
the sacred Council of the Prince in time of Peace or War, as manifestly
appears out of the formulary of the Peership: Therefore by the Law of Reuatus,
^happinus.
Lombardy, in giving sentences, they did not only sit with the Lord of the Fee
as Peers, but likewise heard the Causes often times between the Superior Lord
and his Vassal. We likewise see these Senators of France to have often times
judged between the King and Subjects, so that when Charles the 6. would have
pronounced sentence against the Duke of Britain, they withstood him, and said,
THAT THE IVDGEMENT WAS NOT THE KINGS, BUT PEERS, FROM WHOSE AVTHORITY HE COVLD
DEROGATE NOTHING. Hence even at this day the Parliament at Paris, which is
called the Court of Peers or Senators, is in some sort constituted a Judge
between the King and People, yea, between the King and every private man, and
is bound, as with an obligation to right every one against the King Procurers,
if he invades any thing against Law; Besides, if the King determines any thing,
or makes any Edict at home, if he make any compact with neighbor Princes, if
any War be to be waged, if any Peace be to be made, as of late with Charles
the fifth, The Parliament ought to approve, and be Author of it, and all
things which appertain to the Commonwealth, ought to be registered among its
acts; which verily are not ratified, until they shall be approved by it. Now
that the Senators might not fear the King, heretofore none could be preferred
into that Order, but such who were nominated by the Senate, neither could they
Lawfully be removed, but by its Authority, for a lawful cause.

Finally, even the Kings Letters, unless they be subscribed by the Kings
Secretary, and rescripts, unless they be signed by the Chancellor, (who has
a power of cancelling) have no authority. There are likewise Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Vicounts, Barons, Castellanes; also in Cities* Majors, Deputies,
Consuls, in Sindeches, Auditors, and the like, to whom some particular Region
or City are severally commended, that they may defend the People so far forth
as their jurisdiction extends, although some of these dignities at this day
are reputed Hereditary: And besides this, yearly heretofore, at leastwise as
often as necessity required, there was held an Aimo i^ius.
Assembly of the three Estates, wherein all the Countries and Cities of any
note, did send their Deputies, namely Commons, Nobles, Ecclesiastics in each
of them apart; where they publicly determined of those things which
appertained to the Republike: Now such was evermore the authority of this
Assembly, that not only those things which were therein accorded, were reputed
sacred and holy, and whether Peace were to be concluded, or War to be waged, or
the Guardianship of the Realm to be committed to any one, or a Tax to be
imposed, was there concluded; but even Kings themselves for their luxury,
slothfulnes or tyranny, were thrust into Monasteries, and by their authority,
even all their Ofsprings deprived of the succession of the Kingdom, no
otherwise then at first, when as they were called to the kingdom, by the
peoples authority: verily those who^ consent had advanced, dissent did pull
down again; those whom imitation of paternall virtues had as it were called
into that inheritance, a degenerate and ungrateful mind, as it had made then
incapable and unworthy, so it did make them to be disinherited: From whence
verily it appears, that succession truly was tolerated to avoid competition,
succession, an interregnum, and other incommodities of Election; but truly
when grea^er damages would follow; where Tyranny should invade the Kingdom,
where a Tyrant the Throne of a King, the lawful Assembly of the people
Perpetually reserved to themselves an Authority of expelling a Tyrant or
slothful King, and of deducing him to his Kindred, and of substituting a good
King in his place. Verily peradventure the French received this from the Gauls,
Caesar, l. 5. and 7. de Bello Gallic^.
Caesar in the fifth Book of the Gallic War, being the Author; For Ambiorix
King of the Eburoni, confessed, that all that time the Empires of the Kings of
Gallia were such, that the people duly assembled, had no less authority over
the King, then the King over the people; which also appears in Vercingetorix,
who pleaded his cause before an assembly of the people. Note.
In the Kingdoms of Spain, especially in Valentia and Catteloigne of the
Arragonians it is even thus, for the Sovereignty of the Realm, is in the
Justice of Aragon, as they call it; therefore the great men, who represent the
people, fear not to tell the King in direct terms, both in his very Coronation
it self, and likewise every third year in the general assembly of their
Estates, Tantum valemus nos, quantum vos; We are as powerful as you, but the
Justice of Aragon is above us both, who rules more than you. Yea, oftentimes
what things the King has asked, what he has enjoined, the Justice has
prohibited; nay, he never dares to impose any tribute without the authority of
that Assembly. In the Realms of England and Scotland, the Supreme power is in
the Parliament, usually wont to be held almost every year. Now they call a
Parliament, the Assembly of the Estates of the Realm, where the Bishops,
Earls, Barons, Deputies of the Cities and Counties by common suffrage determine
of the Republikes affairs, whose authority is so sacred, that what things
soever it shall once establish, it is unlawful (or a wicked act) for the king
to abrogate. Likewise all the Officers of the Realm are wont to receive their
Offices from that Assembly, and those who ordinarily assist the King or Queen
in Council. In brief, other Christian Kingdoms, as Hungary, Bohemia, Denmark,
Sweden, and the rest, have all their Officers of the Realm, or Consuls of the
Royal Empire, who by their own Authority have sometimes used even to depose
their Kings themselves, as Histories teach, or fresh memory suffici^ntly
manifests: Neither is there verily any cause that we should think the Royal
Authority to be thereby deminished, or that Kings should hereby suffer as it
were a diminution of their heads; Truly, we deem not God the less potent for
this, because he cannot sin by himself, nor his Empire more restrained, because
it cannot be ruined, nor grow worse; therefore not a King, if that he who may
offend by himself, be sustained or kept from sinning by another help; or if
peradventure he had lost any Empire by his own negligence or fault, that he may
retain by another prudence. What? do you think any man less healthy, because
Physicians ^it round about him, who dehort him from intemperance, who interdict
him the eating of hurtful meats, who likewise oft-times purge him against his
will, and resisting? Or whether do thou think those Physicians who take care
of his health, or flatterers who obtrude the most unwholesome things, to be more
his friends? Therefore this distinction is altogether necessary to be
adhibited: Some are friends of the King, others of Caesar; those are friends of
Caesar, who serve Caesar; those friends of the King or Emperor, who serve the
Kingdom: For since any one is called a King, Note.
for the Kingdoms sake, and the Kingdom consists in the people; but the Kingdom
being lost or decayed, the King must altogether cease to be a King, or, at
least, be less a King: those verily who shall study the profit of the Kingdom,
are truly the Kings friends; those who neglect, or subvert the profit of the
Realm, are truly his Enemies: and as thou c^nst by no means separate the
Kingdom from the people, nor the King from the Kingdom; so neither the friends
of the King from the friends of the Kingdom or people; yea verily, as those who
truly love Caesar would rather have him to be a King then a private man, nor
can they have him a King without a Kingdom, in good ^ooth those shall be the
Kingdoms friends who are Caesar's; and those who would seem to be more the
friends of Caesar, then of the Kingdom or people, are truly to be reputed
Flatterers and most pernicious enemies. But and if they be truly friends, is
it not manifest, that the King will become more powerful and stable, (as
Theopompus said of the Ephori when instituted) by how much those shall be more,
and more powerful, to whom the profit of the people or Realm shall be
commanded and committed?

But perchance thou will say, You tell me of the Senators, Peers, and Officers
of the Realm, but I, on the contrary, see nothing but Ghosts, and as it were
ancient Cote-Arms in Tragedies, but I scarce any where discern any footsteps
of ancient liberty and authority. Finally, you may see most men every where
to look to their own affairs, to flatter kings, to cheat the people; scarce any
where may thou find one who takes pity of the mascerated people, much less
who will give help to the miserable; but if there be any who are truly of that
mind, or thought to be so, they are judged Rebels, or Traitors, they are
banished, and they are compelled to beg even their very food. What? the thing
is thus: It seems almost always and in every place the audacitie of Kings,
Note.
or partly the prevarication, partly the slothfulness of the Nobility has
been such, that kings may seem to have usurped that licentiousness wherewith
most of them at this day seem to wax insolent, by a long prescription of time,
but the people may seem to have determined their Authority, or to have lost it
by not using it: For so it happens for the most part, that no man takes care
for that which all are bound to take care of, that which is committed to all,
no man thinks it is commended to him. Yet notwithstanding, against the people,
neither this prescription nor prevarication does any thing. It is a vulgar
saying, that no prescription can hurt the king, or Exchequer, much less all
the people, who are potenter then the King, and for whose sake the Prince has
this privilege; for why else is the Prince only the administrator of the
Exchequer, but for the people, the true proprietors as shall be after proved?
Furthermore, is not this a known truth, that no violence, no not in the longest
lasting servitude, L. proponebatur, 76. D. de Iud^ciis, l. quires suas 98.
parag^. ult. de solation l^inter stipul. 93. parag. Sacram. D. de Verbor*
oblig. V^pian. de Reg. Iuris, l. 54.
can be prescribed against liberty? But and if thou objectest, that Kings were
constituted by the people, who perchance lived above five hundred year since,
not by the people extant at this day; I answer, that although kings do die,
the people in the mean time (as neither any other Universitie) never dies; for
as flowing waters make a perpetual river, so also the vicissitude of birth and
death an immortal people: Therefore as the Rheine, Seine, Tyber, is now the
same as it was above a thousand years ago, so likewise the Germane, French,
Roman people are the same, (unless Colonies shall have casually intervened)
neither can their right be any ways changed, either by the flux of water, or
change of individuals. Besides, if they attribute the Kingdom received, not to
their people, but to their Father* and he to his Grandfather, and so upwards,
could he transfer more right to another then himself first had? But and if he
could not, (as it is certain he could not) is it not manifest, whatsoever he
shall arrogate to himself besides, that he cannot any more usurp it then any
thief? But on the contrary the people have a right of perpetual eviction.
Therefore that the Nobles have been for a long space oppressed in any Kingdom,
can no way prejudice the people; but rather, as the servant should not be
heard, who in that he has a very long time detained his Lord captive, should
boast, that he was not only a Freeman, but would likewise arrogate to himself
a power of life and death over his Lord: nor yet a Thief, who because he has
robbed 30. years, or is the son of a Thief, should think himself to be
without fault, yea rather, by how much the longer he has been such a one, the
more severely should he be punished: So likewise a Prince is not to be heard or
endured, who because he has succeeded to a Tyrant, or has for a long time
used the people like a bondslave, from whom he has received his kingdom, or
has offered violence to the Nobles, should think that what ever he lusted
should be lawful to him, and ought to be granted of right. Neither do years
substract any thing from the peoples right, but add to the injury of the King.
But what, if the Nobles themselves have colluded with the King? what, if in
betraying the cause, they have betrayed the people as it were bound, into the
hands of a Tyrant? shall the authority of the people by this prevarication or
treason seem to be plainly transferred upon the King? whether I say, by this
fact is any thing taken away from the liberty of the people, or adjoined to the
licentiousness of the Prince? You will say, they may impute it to themselves,
who made choice of such men of perfidious faith. But yet these are as patrons
to patronize the public profit, and the peoples safety and liberty: Therefore
as when an Advocate shall make a compact with the adversary of his Client,
concerning the value of the suit as they speak, if he had betrayed his cause,
he should not hurt him at all; so this conspiracy of the Nobles, as it were
made to the damage and destruction of the people, cannot verily detract any
thing from their right; but even they themselves shall fall into the penalty of
the Law, which is promulged against prevaricators, and the Law permits the
people to choose another patron, and to prosecute their right again: For if the
Roman people condemned their Emperors to punishment, who at the Caudine
Gallows had dishonourably contracted with the enemies, although by compulsion,
and reduced to greatest straits; and judged that they were no ways obliged by
that paction; shall not the people be much less bound to suffer that yoke,
which not by force, but willingly; not for fear of death, but out of desire of
gain, has been thus treacherously put upon them? Or if those who ought to
shake it off shall impose it, or those who might do it, shall tolerate it?
Observe. 3.
He has many other pertinent passages to the same effect, which brevity
enjoynes me to omit; those that please may read them at their leisure in the
Author himself; whose opinion is fortified by Alphonsus Menesius his poems,
annexed to his Treatise.

Thirdly, it is abundantly manifest from all the premises; That Kings and
Emperors always have been, are, and ought to be subject to the Laws and
Customs of their Kingdoms, not above them, to violate, break, or alter them
at their pleasures, they being obliged by their very Coronation Oaths in all
ages and Kingdoms inviolably to observe them. This verily is confessed In his
speech in Parl, in his works, p 531 c 9
by K. James, by our A Collection, etc. p. 320, 321, and elsewhere.
K. Charles himself in his la^e Declarations to al his Subjects; resolved by l.
1 c. 8. l. 3. c. 9.
Bracton l. 1. c. 17.
Fleta, c. 9. to 15.
Fortescue, our See Cooks Epist. to the 5. Report. and Calvin's case.
Common and Statute Laws par. 1. and 2.
forecited; by the Year Book of 19. H. 6. 63. a. where Fray says, That the
Parliament is the highest Court which the King has, and the Law is the highest
inheritance which the King has, for by the Law he himself and all his
Subjects are ruled; and if the Law were not, there could be no King nor
inheritance; This is proved by Fox Act* and Mon. Edit. 1. in one Vol. p. 741.
Stephen Gardener Bp. of Winchester in his Letter to the Lord Protector; where
he writes, That when he was Ambassador in the Emperors Court he was feign
there, and with the Emperors Ambassador to defend and maintain, by
Commandment From Henry the eight and his Council.
in a case of Jewels, That the Kings of this Realm were not above the Order of
their Laws, and therefore the Ieweller although he had the kings Bill signed,
yet it would not be allowed in the Kings Court, because it was not obtained
according to the Law; and generally granted by all our own Ponet. P^lit.
Government. p. 22. Dolman. p. 72. and others.
English Writers, is copiously asserted, and professedly averred by Aristotle,
Polit. l. 3. c. 11. 13 Marius Salomonius de Principatu. in six special Books
to this purpose, by Iustus Eccardus de Lege Regia, Thomas Garzonius Emporii,
Plinius 2. Panegyr. Traiano, dict Eccardus, de Lege Regia.
Emporiorum, Pars 1. Discursus 1. de Dominiis sect. 6. p. 9, 10. Ioannis
Carnotensis Episc. lib. 4. Policrat. c. 1. Bochellus Decreta, Eccles. Gal. l.
5. Tit. 1. Cap. 6. 15, 16. Haenon. Disput. Polit. p. 428. to 442. Fenestella de
Magistratu, p. 149. Ioannis Mariana de Rege and Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 9. ( an
excellent discourse to this purpose) Petrus Rebuffus, Pr^fat. ad Rubr. de
Collationibus, p. 583, 584. Sebastianus Foxius de Rege, etc. part. 1 p. 108,
109 part. 2. 192 etc. Buchanon de Iure Regni apud Scotos passim, Iunius Brutus
Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, quaest. 3. p. 116. to 139. ( an accurate discouse to
this effect) Grimalius de Optimo Senatore, p. 33. 201, 205. Vasquius contr.
Illustr. 16. n. 15. 19. 21. 17. n. 1. 23. 20. n. 3. 44. n. 3. 73. n. 12. 13.
15. 72. n. 7. and elsewhere. De Iure Magistratus in subditos, passim, Polanus,
in Ezech p. 824. 854. Pareus in Romans 13. p. 138. Francis. Hotomani, Franco
Gallia* c. 6. to the end of Cap. 20. Sparsim, Governado Christiano, p. 108.
Cunaeus de Republ. Hebr. l. 1. c. 1. 14. Schickardus Ius Regium Hebrae p. 54.
Hugo Grotius de Iure Billi, l. 1. c. 4. s. 7. l. 2. c. 14. and elsewhere
thorowout his second Book, with infinite others of all sorts: This all good
Emperors and Kings in all ages have prof^ssed, as these Authors prove. Thus
the good Emperor Trajan practiced and professed; That the Prince was not above
the Laws; Hence In Philos^rato, l. S and Eccardus de L^ge Regia.
Apollonius Thyanaeus writing to the Emperor Domitian, says, These things have
I spoken concerning Laws, which if thou shall not think to reignover thee,
then thy self shall not reign: Hence Dionys. Hall car. l. 1* Eccardus de Lege
Regia* Iunius Brutus p. 122.
Antiochus the third, King of Asia is commended, that he writ to all the Cities
of his Kingdom, if there should be any thing in his Letters he should write,
which should seem contrary to the Laws, they should not obey them. And
Anastatius the Emperor made this wholesome sanction, admonishing all the
Judges of his whole Republike, that they should suffer no Rescript* no
pragmaticall sanction, no sacred adnotation which should seem repugnant to the
general Law or the public profit, to be produced in the pleading of any suite
or controversy; enough eternally to shame and silence those flattering
Courtiers, Lawyers, Divines, who dare impudently, yea, impiously suggest the
contrary into Princes Ears, to excite them to Tyrannize and oppress their
subjects against their express Oaths (inviolably to observe and keep the
Laws) their Duties, the very Laws of God and man; of which more in the seventh
and eight Observation.

Fourthly, Observe. 4.
That Kings and Emperors can neither anull, nor change the Laws of their
Realms, nor yet impose any new Laws, Taxes or Impositions on them, without the
consent of their People, and Parliamets: This I have largely manifested in the
first Part of this Discourse, and the premised Histories, with the Authors here
quoted in the three precedent Observations, attest and prove it fully; for if
the whole Kingdom, Parliament, and Laws themselves be above the King or
Emperor, and they receive Ioannis Mayor Distinct. 24. qu. 3. Lau. Bochellus
Decreta Eccles. Gall. l 5 Tit. 4. c. 3. p. 728*
their Sovereign Authority from the people, as their public servants: It
thence infallibly follows, that they cannot alter the old Laws which are above
them, nor impose new Laws or Taxes to bind the whole Kingdom, people, without
their assents, they being the Sovereign Power. This point being so clear in it
self, so plentifully proved in the premises, I shall only add this passage
out of Vindicae contra Tyrannos* qu 3. p. 12^* 125, 126.
Iunius Brutus, to ratify it; If Kings cannot by Law change or extenuate Laws
once approved without the consent of the Republike, Innoc^ntius ad Regen.
Tarrat. in c. quando de Iure Iurando.
much less can they make and create new Laws; therefore in the German Empire,
if the Emperor think any Law necessary, he first desires it in the general
assemblies; if it be approved, the Princes, Barons, and Deputies of Cities
subsigne it, and then it is wont to be a firm Law: Yea, he swears, that he
will keep the Laws Enacted, and that he will make no news Laws but by common
consent. In the Kingdom of Poland there is a Law, (renewed, An. 1454, and
1538.) That no new Laws or Constitutions shall be made, but only by public
consent, or in any place but in Parliament. In the Realm of France, where yet
commonly the authority of Kings is thought most ample, Laws were heretofore
enacted in the Assembly of the three Estates, or in the Kings ambulatory
Council; but since there has been a standing Parliament, all the Kings Edicts
are void, unless the Senate approve them; when as yet the Arrests of that
Senate of Parliament, if the law be wanting, even obtain the force of a Law: So
in the Kingdoms of England, Spain, Hungary, and the rest, there is, and of old
has been the same Law: For if Kingdoms depend upon the conservation of their
Laws, and the Laws themselves should depend upon the lust of one Homuncio,
would it not be certain, that the Estate of no Kingdom should ever be stable?
Would not the Kingdom necessarily stumble, and fall to ruin presently, or in a
short space? But if as we have showed, the Laws be better and greater than
Kings, if Kings be bound to obey the Laws, as servants are to obey their Lords*
who would not obey the Law rather then the King? who would obey the King
violating the Law? who will or can refuse to give any to the Law thus infringed?

Fifthly, Observe. 5.
that all public great Officers, Judges, Magistrates, and Ministers of all
Realms, are more the Officers and Ministers of the Kingdom than the Kings, and
anciently were, and now ought to be of right elected only by the Kingdom,
Parliament, people, and not removable but by them: which is largely proved by
Iunius Brutus Vindiciae contr. Tyrannos, qu. 1, 2, ^. De Iure Mag^stratus in
Subditos, qu. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. with others, the Histories forecited, and Hotomani
Francogallia, c. 6, 11, 12, 13, 14.

6. Observe. 6.
That Kings and Emperors have no absolute power over the lives, See H^nricus
Bocerus lib. 2. De Duello, c. 4. 5. that the Civil Law concerning Iusts, is
contrary, yet the Ca^^^ Law prohibiting Iusts, upon^ pain of excommunication,
accords with the common* Law.
liberties, goods, estates of their subjects, to dispose of them, murder,
imprison, or strip them of their possessions at their pleasure; but ought to
proceed against them in case of Delinquency according to the known Laws and
Statutes of their Realms: This truth is abundantly evidenced by all the
premises; by Magna Charta, c. 29. and all Statutes, Law Books in affirmance of
it; by resolution of the Judges in Henry 8. his reign, Brook, Corone 29. That
it is Felony to slay a man in justing, and the like, notwithstanding it be done
By command of the King, for the command is against the Law and of Judge
Fortescue, 19. H. 6. 63. That if the King grant to me, that if I kill such a
man, I shall not be impeached for it, this grant is void and against Law. By
Iunius Brutus, Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, Quaest. 3. p. 1^6, to 137. and the
Treatise De Iure Magistratus in subditos in sundry places, where this
undeniable verity is largely proved, confirmed, and by others forecited.

Seventhly, Observe. 7.
That Emperors, Kings, Princes are not the true Proprietory Lords or Owners of
the Lands, Revenues, Forts, Castles, Ships, Jewels, Ammunition, Treasure of
their Empires, Kingdoms, to alienate or dispose of them at their pleasures; But
only the Guardians, Trustees, ^Stewards, or Supervisors of them for their
Kingdoms use and benefit, from whom they cannot alien them, nor may without
their consents or privities lawfully dispose of them or any of them, to the
public prjudice; which if they do their grants are void and revocable. This
proposition Part. 1. p. ^02. part. 2. p. 1^. to 17.
formerly ratified by many reasons, authorities, and sundry Historical
Passages in this Appendix, is not only evident by the M^tropolitans usual
speech to all elected Kings, (prescribed by the Roman Pontifical, ratified by
the Bull of Pope Clement the eight, Romans 1611. f. 162. ^03. and trans^^i^in M.
Seldens Titles of Honor, first Part. Chap. 8. p. 197, 198.
where the Metropolitan, when any King is presented to him to be Crowned, first
demands of the Bishops, who present him; Do you know him to be worthy of and
profitable to this dignity? to which they answer, We know and believe him to
be worthy and profitable to the Churth of God, and for the Government of this
Realm: After which the Metropolitan among other things, uses this Speech unto
him, Thou shall undeniably administer Justice, without which no society can
continue toward all men, by rendering rewards to the good, punishment to the
evil, etc* and shall so carry thy self that thou may be seen to reign^ not
to thine own, but to all the peoples profit, and to expect a reward of thy good
deeds, not in earth but in heaven; which he immediately professes with a
solemn Oath, to perform to the uttermost of his power and knowledge;) but
likewise professedly maintained by Iustus Eccardus de Lege Regia, Marius
Salamonius de Principatu, Hugo Grotius de Iure Belli, and Pacis, l. 1. c. 4
sect. 10. Lib. 2 c. 13. 14. Hotomani Franco-Gallia, c. 6. 10. 14. Ruibingius,
l. 2. Class. 11. c. 8. n. 26. Ioannis Mariana, Hist. l. 10 c. 16. l. 27. c. 11
l. 35. c 16. Albericus Gentilis, de Iure Belli, l. 3. c. 15. Cuiacius, c 33. de
Iure Iurando, Decius, Cons. 564. 689. Cephalus, Council. 618. Alciatus, l. 3. de
v. s. l 15. C. de pact. Baldus Proaem. Digest. and by Iunius Brutus Vindiciae
contra Tyrannos, qu. 3. p. 136. to 256. who handles this question professedly,
Whether that the King be the proprietory Lord of the public Royal Patrimany
of his Kingdom, or the Vsufractuary of it? determining clearly that he is not.
I shall transcribe the most of his Dicourse;

This Head we must handle a little more accurately. This is first to be
observed, that the Patrimony of the Exchequer is one thing, of the Prince
another thing; I say, the things of the Emperor, King, Prince are one thing,
the things of Antonine, L^bene a Zenone c. de^quad. praest. l. vivis, de
quaest. Mag. l. 12 c. l. fiscus D. de Iure fisci.
Henry, Philip another: The things of the King are those, which he as king
possesses; the things of Antonine, those which he has as Antonine, and those
verily he received from the people, the other from his Parents. This
distinction is frequent in the Civil Law, wherein the patrimony of the Empire
is said to be one thing, of Caesar another, the Exchequer of Caesar one thing,
the Treasury of the Republike another, the Treasurer of Caesar one person, of
the Imperial Exchequer another, the Courts of sacred donations, others from
those of private things; so that he who as Emperor is preferred before a
private man in a pledge, may sometimes be placed after him as Antonine.
Likewise in the German Empire, things of Marimilian of Austria are one kind of
things, of Maximilian the Emperor another; the Treasurers of the Empire
others, and of himself other from them; Likewise by another Law, the hereditaty
possession of Princes are different, from those which are annexed to the
dignities of the Electorship. Yea, even among the Turks the Patrimoniall
Grounds or Gardens of Selymus are one thing, the fiscall Ground another; and
those verily are spent on the Princes Table, these only in sustentation of the
Empire. Yet there are Kingdoms, as the French, English, and the like, wherein
Kings have no private Patrimony, but only the Republike received from the
people, in which therefore this distinction is not used. Now as for the private
goods of Princes, if there be any, there is no doubt but they are the
proprietors of them, no otherwise then private Citizens; and by the civil Law
they may sell and divide them at their pleasure; L. Cum servis 39. to ^lt. D.
de Leg. ^. l. Vniversi 9 x. l. seq. C de fundo pa^rimon.
But verily of the Exchequer, Kingdom, Royal Patrimony, which is usually
called Demesnes, they can with no reason be cal^ed the proprietory Lords. For
what? whether because one has made thee a Shepherd for his Flocks sake, has
he delivered it thee to fley, divide, do with it, and strike it at thy
pleasure? whether because the people have constituted thee a Captain or Judge
of some City or County, have they given thee power of alienating, selling
destroying that City or County? And surely there is made an alienation of the
people together with the Region or County, have they therefore given thee
authority of severing, prostituting, enslaving them to whom thou will?
Furthermore, is the Royal dignity a possession, or rather a function? If a
function, what community has it with a propriety? If a possession, whether not
at least such an one, that the same people by whom it is delivered, may
perpetually retain the propriety to it self? Finally, if the patrimony of the
Eschequer, or demaines of the Republike, be truly called a Dower, and truly
such a Dower, by whose alienation or delapidation both the Republike it self
and Kingdom, and king himself finally perishes; by what law at last, shall it
be lawful to alienate this Dower? Therefore let Wenceslaus the Emperor be
infatuated, let Charles the sixth king of France be distracted, and give or
sell the kingdom or a part thereof to the English; let Malchom king of Scotland
prodigally spend the Crown land, and royal Treasure, what will follow? Those
who have chosen a king against the invasions of Forraigners, by the folly or
madness of the king shall be made the servants of Forraigners; those who by
this means would severally desire to secure their Estates, shall all of them
together be exposed to a prey; those things which every one shall take from
himself or from his pupils, as in Scotland, that he might endow the
Commonwealth, some Bawd shall riotously consume. But if, as we have already
often said, kings be created for the peoples use, what use at all shall there
be, if not only the use, but even the abuse be granted? To whose good are so
many evils? to whose benefit so many losses, so many perils? If, I say, whiles
I desire to look after my liberty or safety, I make my self a slave, I expose
my self to the lust of one man, I put my self into Fetters and Stocks?
Therefore we see this Law, as it is infused by nature, so likewise it is
approved by use almost among all Nations, that it is not lawful for the king
to diminish the Commonwealth at his pleasure; and he who does contrary, is
censured to play not the king, but Tyrant. Certainly where kings were created,
there was a necessity to give them some Revenues, by which they might both
support their Royal State, but most principally sustain the Royal burdens,
for so both honesty and profit seemed to require. It pertained to the Royal
Office to see Judges placed every where, who should not take gifts, and who
should not prostitute the Law to ^ale; Moreover, to provide a force ready at
hand which should assist the Law when ever there should be need; to preserve
the ways safe, Commerce safe, etc. but if war were feared; to fortify
Cities with a Garrison, to inviron them with a Trench against enemies, to
maintain an Army, to furnish Armories* Now this is a know proverb, that peace
cannot consist without war, nor war without soldiers, nor soldiers without
wages, nor wages without tribute: Therefore to sustain the burdens of Peace,
the demesne was instituted, (which among the Lawyers is called Canon) to defray
the charges of war, tribute; yet so, as if some more heavy charge should
accrue, an extraordinary aid given by Parliament should supply; the end of all
which verily, is the good of the Commonwealth, so as he that converts it to his
private use, Romans 13.
is plainly unworthy the name of a king. For a Prince, says Paul, is the
Minister of God for the peoples good, and Tributes and Customs are paid to
him, that he may continually attend thereto; And truly heretofore almost all
Customs of the Romans seem to have had this Original, that the precious
Merchandise used to be brought out of India, Pliny, l. 19. c. 4.
Arabia, Aethiopia might be secured against piraticall invasions, for which
cause a Navy was furnished; of which kind was the tribute of the Red Sea,
Archid. in Can. si quis Romipetas and peregr. 24. qu. 3. Baldus in c. 1. sect.
Commen. de paceiure infir. l. 2. D. ne quid in loco pub. Viarum l. magis puto
D. de rebus eorum.
Pedatica, Navigia, Portoria, and the rest; that the public ways, (which were
therefore called Pretorian, Consular, Royal) should be rendered safe from
thieves, plain and easy; which charge even now lies upon the kings Attorney;
that the public Bridges should be repaired, as appears out of the Constitution
of Jews the godly; twelve over Seyne; that Ships should be ready at hand to
transport men over Rivers, etc. There were no Tributes of Saltpits, yea, most
of them were in the Dominion of private men; because what things nature did
voluntarily give, they thought ought no more to be sold, then Light, Air,
water. And whereas a certain King named Lycurgus, had begun to impose a Tax on
Salt pits, as if nature would not suffer her liberality to be restrained, they
are said to have been presently dried up; although at this day, If we believe
Palphur or Armilot, Iuvenal.

Whatever good, or fair thing can be got
Out of the Whole Sea, in each Realm it flows,
Some custom to the Kings Exchequer owes.
He who first instituted this custom at Rome, was Livius Censor, whence he
obtained the surname of Salinator, which he did for the most present necessity
of the Commonwealth. For that very cause truly, King Philip obtained it only
for five years, whose continuation what commotions it has produced, every man
knows* Finally, that tributes were instituted to pay Soldiers wages in
wars, appears even from this, that to make a Province stipendary or
tributary, is the selfsame thing indeed. 2 King. 9. and 12. Postellus l, 3.
de Rep. T^r.
Thus Solomon imposed Tributes to fortify Cities, and to furnish a public
Armory, which because they were finished, the people under Rehoboam desired to
be eased thereof: Yea, the Turks themselves call the Tribute of Princes, The
sacred blood of the People, which profusely to spend, or to convert to any
other use, but to defend the people, is a cursed act. Therefore what things
soever a King acquires in wars in every Nation, because he gains it by the
common treasure, ^e acquires it to the people, not to himself, as a factor
does to his Master: Moreover if perchance he gain any thing by marriage (which
I say, is pure and simply his wives) he is thought to acquire it to the
Kingdom, because he was presumed to marry that wife, not as he is Philip or
Charles, but as he is King. On the contrary, as Queens have part of those
things which their husbands not yet co-opted into the Kingdom have gained
during the marriage; so plainly they have no part of those things they get
after they have obtained the Kingdom, because they are reputed gained to the
public Treasures, not to the private means of the King, which was judged in
the Realm of France, between Philip Valoyes and Joan of Burgundy his wife.
Now, lest the moneys should be extorted to some other use, the Emperor
swears, that he will impose no customs, nor enjoyne no taxes, but by the
Authority of a public Assembly. The Kings of Poland, Hungary, Denmark,
England do the like out of the Laws of Edward the first. The French Kings
heretofore demanded Tributes in the Assemblies of the three Estates; Hence also
is that Law of Philip Valoyes; That impositions should not be imposed but upon
great and urgent necessity, and that by the consent of the Three Estates:
Moreover in times past those taxes were laid up in Castles throughout every
Diocese, and delivered to selected men (they even now call them Elected) to be
kept, by whose hand the Soldiers enrolled in every Town, should receive their
wages, which was also usually done in other Countries, as in the Belgic; At
this day at least, whatsoever things are commanded, are not confirmed, unless
the Parliament consent. Now there are some Provinces, which are not bound by
covenant, but by the consent of the Estates, as Languedoc, Britain, Province,
Dolphenie, and some others; and in the Netherlands clearly all. Finally, lest
the Eschequer, swelling like the spleen, whereby all the other Members do pine
away, should draw all things to it self, every where a due proportion is
allotted to the Eschequer. Since therefore at last it appears, that the
tributes, customs, demesall, that which they call demesnes, (under which names
Portages, Imposts, Exposts, Royalties, wr^cks, forfeitures, and such like are
comprehended) which are ordinarily or extraordinarily given to Kings, were
conferred on them for the benefit of the people, and supportation of the
kingdom, and so verily; that if these nerves should be cut in sunder the
people would fall to decay, these ^oundation being under-mined, the Kingdom
must needs fall to the ground; it truly follows, that he who to the prejudice
of the people burdens the people, who reaps a gain out of the public loss,
and so cuts their throat with their own sword, is not a King, but a Tyrant:
contrarily, that a true King, as he is a survey or of the public affairs, so
likewise an Administrator of the public riches, but not a proprietary Lord,
who can no more alienate or dissipate the Royal Demesnes, then the kingdom it
self; but if he shall demene himself otherwise; verily as it is behoovefull
to the Republike, that every one should use his own proper goods well, much
more is it beneficial for the Commonweal, that every one should use the
public estate well. And therefore if a Lord who prodigally spends his Estate,
is by public authority deduced to the Wardship of his kinsmen, and Family and
compelled to abstain from his possessions; then truly much more justly, the
Guardian of the Republike, who converts the public Administration of all wealth
into the public destruction, or utterly subverts it, may justly be spoiled, by
those whom it concerns, and to whom it belongs out of Office, unless he
desists upon admonition. Now that a King in all lawful Empires is not a
proprietary Lord of the Royal patrimony, is easy to be manifested. That we
may not have recourse to those most ancient ages, whose Image we have in the
person of Ephron king of the Hittites, Genesis 23.
who durst not verily fell his field to Abraham, without the peoples consent;
that very law is at this day used in all Empires. The Emperor of Germany
before he is Crowned, Sleiden* l. 1. and Bulla aurea.
sacredly swears, That he will alienate, distract, or morgage nothing of those
things which appert un to the Empire, and the patrimony of the Empire; but if
he recovers or acquires any thing by the public Forces, that it shall come to
the Empire, not to himself. Therefore when Charles the fourth, that Wenceslaus
his son might be designed Emperor, had promised an 100000 Crowns to every one
of the Electors, and because he had no ready moneys, had obliged to them by way
of pawn to this end, the Imperial Customs, Tributes, Towns, Proprieties and
Rights; there arose a most sharp dispute about it, and the most judged the
morgage to be void; which verily had not availed, unless that morgage had been
gainful to those very men, who ought to defend the Empire, L. 1. and passim,
c* de Com. Rev. alienat. Nauclerus in Chron. Genesis 46. C. int^ll^cto de
I^^reiurando in Decret. Polydor Virgil. In Cod Hispan. par. 5 1. Consent* 9.
and principally to oppose that morgage: Yea, therefore Wenceslaus himself was
compelled, as incapable, to deprive himself of the Empire, because he had
suffered the Royal Rights, especially the Dukedom of Millain to be taken from
him. In the Polish kingdom there is an ancient Law, of not alienating the Lands
of the Kingdom of Poland, renewed An. M. CCCLXV by king Jews: There is the
same Law in the Realm of Hungary, where we read, that Andrew king of Poland,
about the year M. CCXXI. was accused before Pope Honorius the third, that
neglecting his Oath, he had alienated the Crown Lands. The like in England in
the Law of K. Edward, An. M. CCXCVIII. Likewise in Spain by the Constitution
made under Alphonso, renewed again MDLX in the Assembly at Toledo; which Laws
verily were enacted, when as custom for a long time before had obtained the
force of a Law. But verily in the kingdom of France, wherein, as in the
pattern of the rest, I shall longer insist, this Law was ever sacrosanct: It is
the most ancientest Law of the Realm, I say, the Law born with the Kingdom it
self, Of not alienating the Crown (or demesne) Lands, Papon Ar^stor. l. 5. Tit.
20. art. 4.
renewed in the year M, D, 66. although it be ill observed. Two cases only are
excepted, Panage or Apennage (aliments) to be exhibited to his children or
brethren, yet so as the clientelary right be always retained; again, if
warlike necessity require it, yet with a pact of reddition, Yet in the interim
both of them were heretofore reputed void, Paragr. 11. and 16. Legis Regiae
Latae. 15^6.
unless the Assembly of the three Estates had commanded it; but at this day,
since a standing Parliament was erected, it is likewise void, unless the
Parliament of Paris, which is the Senate of Peers, and the Chamber of public
accounts shall approve it, and the Presidents of the Eschequer also by the
Edict of Charles the 6 and 9. And this is so far forth true, Aimoi etc.
Aimoi. l. 4. ^. 4^.
that if the ancient Kings of France would endow any Church, although that
cause then seemed most favorable, they were bound to obtain the consent of the
Nobles; as king Childebert may be for an example, who without the consent of
the French and Normans, durst not endow the Monastery of S. Vincents in Paris,
as neither Clodovess the second, and the rest. Moreover, they cannot release
the Royalties, or the right of nominating Prelates to any Church; but if any
have done it, as Jews the eleventh in favor of the Church of Sennes, and
Philip the fourth of Augiers, Philip Augustus of Naverne, the Parliament has
pronounced it void. The king of France, when he is to be Crowned at Rheimes,
swears to this law, which if he shall violate, it avails as much as if he
contracted concerning the Turkish or Persian Empire. L. Petr. 69. parag.
praedsumi. D. de Oy. 2.
Hence the Constitutions, or as they call it, the Statutes of Philip the sixth,
John the 2d, Charles the fifth, sixth, eight, of resuming those things which were
alienated by their Ancesto^^ (of which resumptions there are many instances
cited by Hugo Grotius de Iure (...) and Pacis, l. 2. c. 14. n. 12. 13. and
Adnotata Ibid.) Hence in the Assembly of the three Estates at Towers (An. 1323.
1360. 1374. 1401. 1483.) in which Charles the eight was present, An. 1483.
1522. 1^31. Arestis^Curiae. 1^6^.
many Towns of the alienation of Jews the eleventh his Father, which he had by
his own Authority given to Tancred Castellan, who demerited well of him, were
taken from his Heirs; which even in the last assembly of the three Estates held
at Orange, was again decreed. Thus concerning public Lands. But that it may
the more evidently appear, that the kingdom is preferred before the king,
that he cannot by his private Authority diminish the Majesty which he has
received from the people, Paulus Aemil. l. 3.
nor exempt any one from his Empire, nor grant the right of the Sovereign
Dominion in any part of the Realm; Charles the great once endeavored to
subject the Realm of France to the German Empire; but the French vehemently
withstood it, An. 1195, 1200, 1269, 1297, 1303. 1325, 1330.
a certain Vascon Prince making the Oration: The matter had proceeded to Arms,
if Charles had proceeded further. Likewise, when some part of the Realm of
France was delivered to the English, the supreme right was almost perpetually
excepted; An 1360.
but if Force extorted it at any time, as in the British League, An. 1465. and
1525.
wherein king John released his Sovereign Right in Gascoigne and Poytiers, the
king neither kept his Contract, neither could or ought he more to keep it, then
a Captain, Tutor or Guardian, as then he was; who that he might redeem
himself, would oblige the goods of his Pupils. By the same Law the Parliament
of Paris rescinded the agreement of the Flusheners, wherein Charles of Burgundy
extorted Ambian, An 1420. Monstr^let c. 225.
and the neighbor Cities from the king; and in our time the agreement of of
Madrit, between Francis the first a Captive, and Charles the fifth the Emperor,
concerning the Dukedom of Burgundy was held void; and the Donation of Charles
the sixth of the kingdom of France by reason of death, conferred on Henry king
of England, may be one apt argument of his extreme madness, if others be
wanting. But that I may omit other things which might be said to this purpose,
by what right at last can a king give or sell his kingdom or any part thereof,
L. Liber homo 103. D. de verbo. obligat. l si Emp. 34. 1* D. de contra. Emp. l
pe^C* de oper^libert.
seeing they consist in the people, not in the walls? now there is no ^ale of
free men, when as Landlords cannot so much as constrain their free Tenants,
that they should settle their Household in any other place then where they
please; especially seeing they are not servants, but Brethren; neither only
are all kings Brethren, but even all within the Royal Dominion ought to be so
called.

But whether if the king be not the proprietorie of the Realm, An lex sit
Regni usis fructuarius?
may he not at least be called the usufructuary, or receiver of the profits of
the Crown Lands? Truly, not so much as an usufructuary. A usufructuary can
Pawn his lands, but we have proved, that kings cannot morgage the Patrimony of
the Crown. A fructuary can dispose or give the profits at his pleasure;
contrarily, the great gifts of the king are judged void, His unnecessary
expenses are rescinded, his superfluous cut off; what ever he shall convert
into any other but the Public use, he is thought to have violently usurped.
Neither verily is he less obliged by the Cincian Law, then any private Citizen
among the Romans, especially in France where no gifts are of force without the
consent of the Auditors of the Accounts. Hence the ordinary Annotations of the
Chamber under prodigal kings; This Donation is too great, and therefore let it
be revoked. Now this Chamber solemnly swears, that whatsoever rescript they
shall at any time receive from the king, that they will admit nothing which may
be hurtful to the kingdom and Commonweal. Finally, the Law cares not how a
Fructuary uses and enjoys his profits; contrarily, the Law prescribes the
king in what manner, and unto what use he ought to put them. Therefore the
ancient kings of France were bound to divide the Rents into four parts* one
part was spent in sustaining the Ministers of the Church, and the poor, another
upon the kings Table, the third on the Wages of his household servants, the last
in the repair of royal Castles, Bridges, Houses; Monstretus in Carolo 6.
the residue, if there were any, was laid up in the Treasury. Verily what stirs
there were about the year 1412 in the Assembly of the three Estates at Paris,
because Charles the sixth had converted all things into his and his Officers
lusts, and that the Domestic accounts, which before had not exceeded 94
thousand French Crowns in such a miserable estate of the republike, had
increased to the sum of five hundred and forty thousand Crowns, is sufficiently
evident out of Histories: Now as the rents of the Crown were thus lessened, so
also the oblations and subsidies were spent upon the War, as the taxes and
tallages were only destinated to the stipends of Soldiers. In other Realms
the King verily has not any more Authority, yea, in most he has less, as in
the Germane and Polish Empire: But we would therefore prove this to be so in
the Realm of France, lest by how much any man dares to do more injury, Ex
Council. Valent. in c. de his quae sinit. a Prelatis absque conscapit.
by so much also he might be thought to have more right. In sum, what we have
said before, the name of a King sounds not an inheritance, not a propriety, not
a perception of profits, but a function, a procuration. As a Bishop is
instituted for the cure and salvation of the soul, so the King of the body, in
those things which pertain to the public goods; as he is the dispenser of
sacred goods, so the King of profane, and what power he has in his
Episcopal, the same, and no greater has the King in his dominicall Lands; the
alienation of the Episcopal Lands without the consent of the Chapter, is of no
validity, so neither of the Crown Land without a public Parliament or Senate
of the Estates; Of sacred revenews one part is designed to aedifices, another
to the poor, a third to Companions, a fourth to the Bishop himself; the same
verily almost we see the King ought to do in dispensing the revenewes of the
Kingdom. It hinders not, that the contrary every where is at this day usurped:
For the duty of Bishops is not any way changed, because many Bishops sell those
things from the poor, which they spend upon Bawds, or wast all their Manors
and Woods; nor yet that some Emperors have attributed all kind of power to
themselves, for neither can any one be judge in his own Cause. But if any
Cararalla has said, That so long as his sword remains, he would want no money;
Adrianus Caesar will also be p^esent, who shall say, That he would manage the
Principality, so as all should know, Florus l. 2. (...) l. 70. Tacitus l, 14.
that it was the peoples goods, or inheritance, not his own; which one thing
almost distinguishes a King from a Tyrant: Not, that Attalus King of
Pergameni, ordained the people of Rome ^eirs of his Realm; that Alexander
bequeathed the kingdom of Egypt, ^tolomie of the Cyrenians, to the people of
Rome, or Prasutagus of the ^ceni to Caesar* verily this great power cannot
debilitate the force of the Law, yea, by how much the greater it is, by so much
the less it hurts our law; for what things the Romans seized upon by pretext
of law, they wou^^ notwithstanding have seized on by force, if that pretext had
been wanting: Yea, we see almost in our ^imes, the Venetians, by pretext of a
certain imaginary adoption, which without force had been plainly ridiculous,
Volater^m, (...) Greg. 3.
to have taken the Kingdom of Cyprus. Nor yet does the Donation of ^onstantine
to Pope Sylvester hinder, for this Chafe seemed absolete long since to
Gratian, and is damned to the fire. Not the donation of Jews the godly to
Pas^hall, to wit, of Rome, with part of Italy because Pius gave that which he
possessed not, and no man resisted; But Charles, his Father, willing to subject
the Realm of France to the German Empire, the French resisted him by law; 1
King c. 9.
and if he had gone further, they prepared to resi^^ by force Not, that Solomon
as we read, Chron. 6. 8.
delivered twenty cities to Hiram King of Tire, for he did not give them, but
pawned them as a Creditor till he paid him, and within a short time recovered
them, which appears out of the Text; Moreover also they were barren grounds,
tilled by Relics of the Heathens, which he receiving again from Hiram, gave
them at last to the Israelites to be tilled and inherited. Neither can this
more hinder, that in certain Kingdoms this condition perchance does not so
expressly intervene between the King and his people; L. 2. paragr. ius rei. D.
de administ. rer. ad cui. part. T. Luter 27. D. de admin. tutor. l. si Fundum.
parag. fi tutor D. depositi and express. Extrauag, dear Iudicat c. intellecto,
l. 2. and passim. C. de interdict. Com. rer. alien.
for albeit it were not at all, yet it appears by the law of Nations, that
Kings are not subverters, but Moderators of the Republike, that they cannot
change the right of the Commonwealth by their pactions; that they are Lords
only when they take care of their Pupils, that they are to be accounted no
other then Guardians; and that he is not to be esteemed a Lord, who spoils the
City with liberty, and sells it like a slave. Not finally, that certain
Kingdoms are gained by Kings themselves, for they acquired not Kingdoms by
their own, but by public hands, forces, treasures; now nothing is more
consonant to reason, then that those things which are gotten by the public
riches, and common dangers of the Citizens, should not be alienated without
common consent, which holds place even amongst Thieves themselves; he
destroys humane society, who does the contrary: Therefore though the French
have by force seized on the German Empire, and they also on the Realm of
France, yet the same law holds in both. In sum, at last we ought to determine,
that Kings are not Proprietors, nor Fructuaries, but only Administratours; and
since it is so, that verily they can much less attribute to themselves the
propriety and profits of every man's private Estate, or of the public wealth
which belongs to every Town.

Thus and much more this accute learned Lawyer, to the conviction and
refutation of all opposite Ignoramusses in this case of grand concernment,
which will put a period to our unhappy controversies concerning the Militia, (
Part. 2. p. 1. 10 41.
formerly discussed) without further debate.

Eighthly, Observe. 8.
That Emperors and Kings are most solemnly obliged by a Covenant and Oath,
usually made to, and before all the people at their Coronations, to preserve
their peoples laws, liberties, lives, estates; by breach whereof in a wilful
excessive manner, they become perjured Tyrants, and the people and Magistrates
are in some sort thereby absolved from their Allegiance, and all obedience to
them.

This is evidently and plentifully confirmed by the Part. 1. p. 51. to. 78.
forecited Coronation Oaths, and Covenants of our own English Kings to their
subjects, by De Iure Magistratus in Subdit^s, q^aest. 10. p. 321. 322. and
quaest 6. p. 260. to 300. Andrew Favine his Theater of Honor, lib. 2. c. 11.
24. Francisci Hotomani Franco-gallia, cap. 6. 10. etc. Hugo Grotius de Iure
Belli and Pacis, 1. 2. c. 13. 14. Pontifi^ale Romanum, Rome 1611. fol. 162.
163. Descriptio Coronationis Maximiliani Imperatoris, Anno 1486. inter rerum
German Scriptores, Tom. 3. p. 32. Olaus Magnus de Gent. Septentrionalibus Hist.
l. 14. c. 6. Laur, Bochellus decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae, l. 5. Tit. 2. c. 1.
p. 703. M. John Seldens Titles of Honor part. 1. chapter 8. sect. 5. p. 198. 214.
225. 226. (where the Coronation, Oaths of the Emperor, French King, of all
the Northern Kings, and of most Elective and Successive Kings and Queens to
their Subjects, are at large recorded:) Alhusius Polit. c. 4. Iustus Eccardus
de Lege Regia; Thomas Aquinas de Reg. Principis, c. 6. and 2. qu. 2ae. 12. art.
2. John Ponet Bishop of Winchester in his Political Government. Arnisaeus de
Authoritate Principum, p. 50. to 123. Sparsim. Vesquius contro. Illustr.
passim. Ioannis Mariana de Rege and Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 6. 7. 9. Georg.
Bnchanon de lure Regni apud Scotos. Simancha Pacensis de Catholica. Instit.
Tit. 23. n. 11 p. 98. Franciscus Tolletus in summa l. 5 c. 6. Huldericus
Zuinglius; Explan. Artic. 40. 41. 42. And, to omitall others, Iunius Brutus in
his Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, quaest. 3. p. 156. to 167. with whose words I
shall fortify and irradiate this position: We have said, that in constituting
a King a double Covenant is entered into; the first between God, the King and
people, of which before; the second, between the king and the people, of which
we are now to treat. Saul being ordained king, the royal law was delivered to
him, according to which he should rule. Deuteronomy 17. l Sa. 10. 25. 2 Samuel 5. 3. 1 Chronicles. 11. 3. 2 King. 11. 17. and 12.
David made a Covenant before the Lord in Hebron; that is, 2 Chronicles. 23. 3. 2
King. 23. 3.
calling God to Witness, with all the Elders of Israel, who represented all
the people, and then at last he was anointed king. Ioas also made a Covenant
with all the people of the land in the house of the Lord, Iehoiada the high
Priest going before them in words: Yea, the testimony is said to be imposed on
him together with the Crown; which most interpret the Law of God, which every
where is called by that name. Likewise Josiah promised, that he would observe
the Precepts, Testimonies and Statutes comprised in the book of the Covenant;
by which names we understand the Laws which appertained as well to piety as to
justice. In all which places of Scripture, a Covenant is said to be made with
all the people, the whole multitude, all the Elders, all the m^n of Judah; that
we may understand, which is likewise severally expressed, not only the Princes
of the Tribes, but likewise all the Chiliarkes, Centurions, and inferior
Magistrates were present, in the Name of the Cities, which every one a part by
themselves made a Covenant with the king. In that Covenant they consulted of
creating the king, for the people did make the king, not the king the people.
Therefore there is no doubt, but the people made the Covenant, and the King
promised to perform it. Now the part of him that makes the Covenant is reputed
the better Law: The people demanded of the King, whether he would not rule
justly and according to the Laws? He promised that he would do so: whereupon
the people answered, That he reigning justly, they would faithfully obey him.
Therefore the King promised obsolutely; the people, but upon condition; which
if it were not fulfilled, the people by the Law it self should be reputed
absolved from all obligation. In the first covenant or Pact, Piety comes into
the obligation, in the second, Justice: In that, the king promises, that he
will seriously obey God; in this, that he will justly rule the people: in that,
that he will take care of the glory of God; in this, of the benefit of the
people; in that there is this condition, If thou shall observe my Law; in this,
If thou shall render Justice to every one: Of that, if it be not fulfilled, God
properly is the avenger; of this, lawfully all the people, or the Peers of the
Realm, who have taken upon them to defend all the people. Now in all just
Empires, this has been perpetually observed. The Persians having duly
finished their sacrifices, Xenoph. lib. (...).
made this agreement with Cyrus, Thou first, O Cyrus, if any make war with
the Persians or violate the Laws, do thou promise to aid thy Country with
all thy might? And as soon as he had promised, We Persians, say they, will be
aiding to thee, if any will not obey thee, defending they Country: Xenophon
Xenophon. de Repub. Lacedaem.
calls this agreement (...) that is, a Confederation, as Socrates an Oration of
the duty of Subjects toward their Prince (...): Between the kings of Sparta
and the Ephori, a Covenant was renewed every month; and as the kings did swear,
Dionys. Ha^^^car lib. 1.
That they would reign according to the Laws of the Country; so the Ephori, If
they did so, that they would establish the Kingdom in their hand. Likewise in
the kingdom of the Romans, Romulus made this contract with the Senate and
people, That the People should make Laws, that the king himself would keep
the Laws made; That the People should decree War, himself wage it. And
although many Emperors obtained the Empire of the Romans rather by force and
ambition, then by any right, and by the Royal Law, as they call it, arrogated
all kinds of power to themselves; yet the* See Eccardus de Lege Regia and
Marius Salamonius de Principatu l. 6. where this Law is recorded.
fragments of that Law, which are extant as well in Books as in Roman
inscriptions, sufficiently reach; that a power was granted them, of caring for
and administering, not of subverting the Commonweal and oppressing it by
tyranny. Moreover, even good Emperors professed, that they were bound by the
Laws, and acknowledged their Empire received from the Senate, and referred all
the weigh^iest affairs to the Senate, and they judged it unlawful to
determine any thing of great public concernment without their advice. But if
we behold the present Empires, there is not one of them which may be thought
worthy of that name, wherein there is not some such Covenant intervening
between the Prince and Subjects. In the German Empire, not long since, the King
of Romans being to be crowned Emperor, was wont To make Fealty and Homage to
the Empire, no otherwise then a vassal (or tenant) to his Lord, when he
received investiture of his Lands. And although the conceived words, to which
he swear, be a little changed by Popes, yet the same thing remains perpetually.
Therefore we know that Charles the 5. of Austria was created Emperor upon
certain Laws and conditions, Speculum Saxon, l. 1. art. 54. See Descript.
Coronations Maximiliani lmper An. 1486. in Rerum Germ. scrip. Tom. 3 p. 31.
as likewise others, who have succeeded him; of which the sum was; That he
would keep the Laws enacted; That he would make no new Laws, without the
Electors consents; that he would determine public affairs in a public
Counsel; that he would altenate or pervert none of these things which
pertained to the Empire; with other things which are severally recited by
Historiagraphers: And when as the Emperor is crowned at Achen, the Archbishop
of Colen first demands of him; Whether he will not defend the Church,
administer justice, preserve the Empire, protect Widows, Orphans, and all
worthy of pity? which when he has solemnly sworn to perform before the Altar,
the Princes and those who represent the Empire, are demanded, whether they will
promise to fealty him? Neither yet is he first anointed, or receives a sword,
(of purpose to defend the Republike) or other Ensigns of the Empire, before
that he shall have taken that Oath. From whence verily it is manifest, that the
Emperor is purely obliged, the Princes of the Empire upon condition only. No
man will doubt but that the same is observed in the kingdom of Poland, See
Po^ti^ical Romanum Rome 1611. f. 161. 162. Mr. S^dens Titles of Hon. par. 1. c.
8. p. 1^6. to 106.
who shall understand the ceremonies very lately observed in the Election and
Coronation of Henry of Angiers: especially, the condition propounded to him of
conserving both Religions, as well the Evangelicall as Roman, which the Nobles
thrice demanding of him in set form of words, he thrice promised to perform.
In the Hungarian, Bohemian, and other kingdoms, which would be overlong to
recite, the very same is done. Neither only, where the right of Election has
continued yet entire hitherto, but likewise where mere succession is commonly
thought to take place, the very same stipulation is wont to intervene. When the
Se^ Bochellus. Decreta Eccles. Gallicanae l. 5. tit. 2. c. 1. and Mr. Seldens
Titles of Hon. par. 1. ^b. 8. p. ^^1* ^256.
King of France is crowned, the Bishops of Laudune and Belvace ecclesiastical
Peers, first demand of all the people that are present, Whether they desire and
command him to be King? Whence even in the very form it self of inauguration,
he is said To be elected by the People. When the people Seem to have consented,
he swears: That he will universally defend all the Laws, Privileges, and
Rights of France, that he will not alienate his demesnes, and the like (I shall
here insert the Oath out of Bochellus, Mr. Seldom, and others entirely, thus:
Archiepiscopt Ammonitio ad Regem dicendo it a ( in the name of all the Clergy.)

A vob is perdonari petimus, ut vnicuique de Nobis and Ecclesis nobis
Commissis, Canonicum privilegium, and debitam legem atque justitiam
conservatis, and defensionem exhibeatis, sicut Rex in Regno suo debet unicuique
Episcopo, and Ecclesiae sibi Commissae.

Responsio Regis ad Episcopos.
Promit to vobis and perdono, quia vnicuique de vobis and Ecclesiis vobis
commissis Canonicum privilegium, and debitam legem atque justitiam conservabo,
and defensionem quantum potuero exhibebo, Domino adjuanente, sicut Rex in suo
Regno unicuique Episcopo and ecclesiae sibi commissae per rectum exhibere debet.

Item^ haec dicit Rex, and p^omittit and firmat juramento.
Haec populo Christiano and mihi jubdito, in Christi nomine, promitto: In
primis, Vt Ecclesiae Dei, omnis Populus Christianus veram pacem nostro arbitrio
in omni tempore servet; and superioritatem, jura, and Nobilitates Coronae
Franciae inviolabiliter custodiam, ET ILLA NEC TRANSPORT ABO NEC ALIEN ABO.
Item, ut omnes repacitates and omnes iniquitates omnibus gradibus interdicam.
Item, ut in omnibus judiciis aequitatem and misericordiam praeoipiam, ut mihi
and vobis indulgeat persuam misericordiam cl^mens and misericors Dominus. Item,
de terra mea ac jurisdictione mihi subdita universos Haereticos Ecclesia
denotatos, pro viribus bona fide exterminare studebo. Haec omnia praedicta
firmo juramento.



Tum manum apponat Libro and librum osculetur) These things, though they have
been altered, and are far different from the ancient form of the Oath which
is extant in the Library of the Chapter of Belvace, to which Philip the first
is found to have sworn; yet notwithstanding they are plainly enough expressed:
Neither is the King girt with a sword, anointed, crowned by the Peers (who
even themselves are adorned with Coronets) or receives the Scepter or rod of
Justice, or is proclaimed King, See Hotoman. Franco-Gallia ^. 6. 7. 10.
before THE PEOPLE HAVE COMMANDED IT; Neither do the Peers themselves swear
fealty and homage to him, until he shall have given his faith unto them, That
he will exactly keep the Laws: Now those are, that he shall not waste the
public Patrimony: that he shall not impose nor enjoin customs, Taxes,
Tributes at his own pleasure, Nor deneunce war, or make peace; Finally, that
he shall determine nothing concerning the public affairs, but in a public
Council: Also, that the Senate, the Parliaments, the Officers of the Kingdom
shall constantly enjoy their several authorities; and other things which have
been always observed in the Realm of France. Yea verily, when he enters into
any Province or City, he is bound to confirm their privileges, and he binds
himself by Oath to preserve their Laws and Customs: Which custom takes
place by name among those of Toulouse Dolphenie, Britanny, Province and Rochel;
whose agreements with Kings are most express; all which should be frustrate
unless they should be thought to hold the place of a condition in the
contract. De Iure Magist. in Subditos 290, 19, 292. S^e the French Hist. in his
life.
Yea Charles the 7. made a peace with Philip Duke of Burgundy (whose Father
John he had ^reacherously slain) with this express clause contained in it,
Bodin Commonw. l. 5. c. ^. p. 632. 633.
confirmed with the Kings own Seal; That if he should break this Agreement,
his Tenants, feudataries; and subjects present and to come, should not be
thence forth bound either to obey or serve him, but rather the Duke of Burgundy
and his Successors, and that they should be freed and absolved from all the
fealty, Oaths, promises, obligations and duties whatsoever, under which they
were formerly obliged by Charles. The like we read between King Lewis and
Charles the Bald. Yea, Pope John the 22. in the Treaty between Philip the long
of France, and the Fl^mmings, caused it to be set down, That if the King did
infringe the Treaty, it might be lawful for his Subjects to take Arms against
him; And if was usual among the first Kings of France in their Treatises with
other Princes, to swear, that if they brake the Treaties made by them, their
Subjects shall be free from their obedience, as in the Treaty of Arras and
others. In Annal* Burg.
The Oath of the ancient kings of Burgundy is extant in these words, I will
conserve Law, justice, and protection to all men. In England, Scotland, Sweden,
Donmarke, there is almost the same custom as in France, and verily no where
more directly then in Spain. For in the Kingdom of Arragon, many ceremonies
being dispatched between him who represents the justice of Arragon, or public
Majesty, who sits in an higher Throne, and having read the Laws and
conditions, which he is to observe who is to be crowned King, Who both fealty
and homage to him, the Nobles at last speak thus to the King in their own
language; We, who are as powerful as you, (for so the Spanish Idiom imports)
and can do more then you* have chosen you King upon these and these
conditions, Between you and us there reigns one greater then you; (to wit, the
Justice of Arragon.) Now lest he should think he had sworn those things only
perfunctorily, or only for to observe the old custom, these very words are
wont to be repeated every third year in the public Assembly: But if he shall
grow insolent trusting to his Royal power, shall violate the public Laws,
finally, shall neglect the Oath he has taken; then verily by the Law it self,
he is deemed excommunicated with that grandest excommunication (or Anathema)
wherewith the Church in former times excommunicated Julian the Apostate; whose
force truly is such; that no more prayers may be conceined for him, but against
him; and they themselves are clearly absolved from their Oath and Obligation by
that Law, whereby a vassal out of duty ought not to obey an excommunicated
Lord, neither is bound to do it by his Oath; In Council. Tol. 4. c. 74. and Tol.
6. l. 2. feud. tit. 28. par. 1.
which is ratified among them by the Decree both of a Council, and of a
Parliament or public Assembly. Likewise in the kingdom of Castile, an
Assembly being summoned, the King that is to be crowned, is first publicly
admonished of his duty; after which, most express conditions are read, which
pertain to the profit of the Republike: Then the King swears, that he will
diligently and faithfully observe them; then at last the great Master of the
Knights binds himself to him by Oath, whom the other Princes and Deputies of
Cities afterward follow every one in his order; La ioyeuse en^^r.
which also is in like manner observed in Portugal, Leon, and the other
kingdoms of Spain. Neither verily, were lesser principalities instituted by
any other Law. There are extant most express agreements of the Brabanders, of
the other people of Belgia, Austria, Carintha, and other provinces, made with
their princes, which verily have the place of conditions; But the Brabanders
expressly, that place might not be left to any ambiguity, have expressed this
condition. For in inaugurating their Duke, in ancient conventions, wherein
there is almost nothing wanting for the preservation of the Republike, they
being all read over before the Duke, Ludovic. Guie.
they protest openly and plainly to him, that unless he shall observe them
all, That it shall be free for them to choose another Duke at their pleasure:
Which conditions he embracing and willingly acknowledging, he then binds
himself by Oath to observe them, which was also observed in the inauguration
of Philip the last King of Spain, In sum, no man can deny, but that there is a
mutual binding contract between the King and subjects, to wit, That he
reigning well, shall be well obeyed: Which verily is wont to be confirmed with
an Oath by the King first, afterward by the people. Now verily I demand here,
why any man should swear, but that he may show that he speaks from his heart
and seriously? whether truly is there any thing more agreeable to nature, then
that those things which have pleased us, should be observed? L. 1. D de pact.
l. non minorem. 20 D de transact.
Moreover, why does the King swear first, at the peoples stipulation or
request, but that he may receive either a tacit or express condition? But why
is a condition annexed to a contract, but only to this end, that if it be not
fulfilled, the contract should become void in Law it self? But if through
default of performing the condition, the contract be void in Law it self, who
may call the people perjured, who shall deny obedience to a King, neglecting
that condition which he might and ought to fulfill, and violating that law to
which he has sworn? Yea, who on the contrary would not account the King
faedifragous, perjurious and altogether unworthy of that benefit? Lib. 2.
feudor. 2. 26. 4. a. lit. 47.
For if the Law freeth the Vassal from the bond of his Tenure, against whom the
Lord has committed felony or perjury, although the Lord truly does not
properly give his faith to his Vassal, but his Vassal to him: if the Law of
the twelve Tables commands a Patron who defrauded his Client to be detestable:
if the civil laws permit a villain enfranchised an action against the
outrageous injury of his Lord; if in these cases they free a servant himself
from his Masters power, whereas yet there is only a natural not civil
obligation therein, (I shall add out of Dionys. Hal. l. 2 page 303. 304.
Dejure Magistratus in subditos. If in Matrimony, which is the nearest and
strictest obligation of all other between men, wherein God himself intervenes
as the chief Author of the contract, and by which those who were two are made
one flesh, 1 Cor 7. 15.
if the one party forsakes the other, the Apostle pronounces the party
forsaked to be free from all obligation, because the party deserting violates
the chief condition of marriage, etc.) Shall not the people be much more
absolved from their Allegiance which they have made to the King, if the King,
who first solemnly swears to them, as a Steward to his Lord, shall break his
faith? Yea verily whether if not these Rights, not these Solemnities, not these
Sacraments or Oaths should intervene, does not nature it self sufficiently
teach, that Kings are constituted by the people, upon this condition, that they
should reign well? Judges, that they shall pronounce Law? Captains of war,
that they should lead an Army against enemies? But and if so be they rage,
offer injury, so as themselves are made enemies, as they are no Kings, Cic. 1.
(...).
so neither ought they to be acknowledged by the people. What if thou shall
say, that some people subdued by force, the Prince has compelled to swear to
his commands? What, say I, if a Thief, a Pyrate, a Tyrant, with whom no
society of Law or Right is thought to be, should with a drawn sword violently
extort a deed from any one? Is it not known, that fealty extorted by force
binds not, especially if any thing be promised against good manners, against
the law of nature? Now what is more repugnant to nature, then that a people
should lay chains and fetters upon themselves, then that they should lay their
own throats to the sword? then that they should lay violent hands upon
themselves? (or which is verily the same thing) promise it to the Prince?
Therefore there is a mutual obligation between the King and people, which
whether it be only civil or natural, tacit, or in express words, can be
taken away by no agreements, violated by no Law, rescinded by no force: Whose
force only is so great, that the Prince who shall contemptuously break it, may
be truly called a Tyrant, the people who shall willingly infringe, it
seditious: So this grand accute Lawyer determines. I shall close up this with
the unanimous resolutions and notable decree of the United Netherland
Provinces. Anno Dom. 1581. declaring Philip King of Spain to be fallen from the
Seigniorie of the Netherlands for his Tyranny and breach of Oath, which is thus
recited by Grimstone, and recorded in his general History of the Netherlands,
page 658, to 667.

In the alterations which happen sometimes in an Estate betwixt the Sovereign
Prince and a people that is free and privileged, there are ordinarily two
points, which make them to aim at two diverse ends: The one is, when as the
Prince seeks to have a full subjection and obedience of the people, and the
people contrariwise require, that the Prince should maintain them in their
freedoms and liberties, which he has promised and sworn solemnly unto them,
before his reception to the principality. Thereupon quarrels grow: the Prince
will hold a hard hand, and will seek by force to be obeyed; and the subjects
rising against the Prince, oftentimes with dangerous tumults, rejecting his
authority, seek to embrace their full liberty.

In these first motions there happen sometimes conferences, at the instance of
neighbors, who may have interest therein, to quench this fire of division
betwixt the Prince and his subjects. And then if any one of the parties grows
obstinate, and will not yield, although he seem to be most in fault, it
follows of necessity, that they must come to more violent remedies, that is
to say to arms. The power of the Prince is great, when he is supported by
other Princes, which join with him for the consequence of the example, else it
is but small: but that of the people (which is the body, whereof the Prince is
the head) stirred up by conscience (especially if the question of Religion be
touched) the members ordained for their function, doing jointly their duties,
is far greater. Thereupon they wound they kill, they burn, they ruin, and
grow desperately mad: but what is the event? God (who is an enemy to all
tyranny and disobedience) judges quarrels, weighs them in his balance of
justice, helping the rightful cause, and either causes the Prince for his
rigor and tyranny to be chased away, and deprived of his estate and
principality; or the people for their contempt and rebellion are punished and
reduced unto reason; which causes the alterations to cease, and procures
apeace: whereof we could produce many examples, both ancient and modern, if
the relation of this history did not furnish us sufficiently.

So the general Estates of the united Provinces, See Meteranus Belg. ^rist. l.
11.
seeing that King Philip would not in any sort (through his wilfulness) yield
unto their humble suite and petitions; and notwithstanding all the offers they
could make to purchase a good, firm, and an assured, peace, (notwithstanding
all the intercessions both of the Emperor, the French King, the Queen of
England, and other great Princes and Potentates of Christendom) yet would he
not give ear to any other reason, but what himself did propound: the which
the said Estates did not only find unjust and unreasonable, directly repugnant
to their liberties, constitutions, and freedoms of the Country; but also
contrary to their consciences, and as it were so many snares laid to catch
them, which were in no sort to be allowed of, nor received, considering the
quality of their affair and his, according to the time. In the end, rejecting
all fear of his power and threats, seeing they were forced to enter into all
courses of extremity against a Prince, which held himself so hainously
offended, as no reconciliation could be expected, relying upon the justice and
equity of their cause, and sincerity of their consciences (which are two
brazen bulwarks) they were fully resolved (without dissembling) to take the
matter thus advanced in hand, and opposing force against force, means against
means, and practices against practices, to declare him quite fallen from the
Seigniorie, pre-eminence, and authority, which before the troubles, the breach
of their privileges, right, freedoms, and immunities, so often and so
solemnly sworn by him, and dispensation of his Oaths, he had or was wont to
have in the said Provinces respectively. Whereof they made open declaration by
a public Edict, the tenor whereof follows.

The General Estates of the united Provinces of the Netherlands, The Edict of
the general Estates declaring the King of Spain to be fallen from the
Seigniory of the Netherlands.
to all those that these presents shall see, read, or hear, greeting As it is
well known unto all men, that a Prince and Lord of a Country is ordained by
God, to be Sovereign and head over his subjects, and to preseveve and defend
them from all injuries, force, and violence, even as a shepherd for the
defense of his sheep, and that the subjects are not created by God for the
Prince, to obey him in all he shall command, be it with God, or against him,
reasonable or unreasonable, nor to serve him as slaves and bondmen; but rather
the Prince is ordained for his subjects (without the which he cannot be a
Prince) to govern them according unto equity and reason, See Meteranus and
others.
to take care for them, and to love them even as a father does his children, or
a shepherd his sheep, who puts both his body and life in danger, to defend
and preserve them. If the Prince therefore fails herein, and in stead of
preserving his subjects, does outrage and oppress them, depriveth them of
their privileges and ancient customs, commands them, and will be served of
them as of slaves, they are no longer bound to respect him as their Soveragn
Prince and Lord, but to esteem of him as a Tyrant; neither are the subjects
(according unto Law and Reason) bound to acknowledge him for their Prince; Note.
so as without any offense, being done with deliberation and the authority of
the Estates of the Country, they may freely abandon him, and in his place
choose another for their Prince and Lord, to defend them: especially, when as
the subjects by humble suit, entreaty, and admonitions, could never mollify
their Princes heart, nor divert him from his enterprises an tyrannous designs:
so as they have no other means left them to preserve their ancient liberty,
their wives, children and posterity, for the which (according to the laws of
nature) they are bound to expose both life and goods; as for the like
occasions, we have seen it to fall out often in diverse Countries, whereof the
examples are yet fresh in memory. The which ought especially to be of force in
these Countries, the which have always been and ought to be governed,
according, unto the oath taken by their Princes, when they receive them,
conformable to their privileges and ancient customs, having no power to
infringe them: besides that, most part of the said Provinces have always
received and admitted their Princes and Lords upon certain conditions, and by
sworn contracts; the which if the Prince shall violate, he is by right fallen
from the rule and superiority of the Country. So it is, that the King of
Spain (after the decease of the Emperor Charles the fifth, his father of
famous memory, from whom all these Countries were transported unto him)
forgetting the services, which as well his father as himself had received of
these Countries, and the inhabitants thereof, by the which especially the King
of Spain had obtained such glorious and memorable victories against his
enemies, as his name and power was renowned and feared throughout all the
world; forgetting also the admonitions which his said Imperial Majesty had
heretofore given him: and contrariwise, has given ear, belief, and credit
unto them of the Council of Spain which were about him; the said Council
having conceived a secret hatrrd against these Countries and their Liberties
(for that it was not lawful for them to command there, and to govern them, or
to merit among them the chief places and offices, as they do in the Realm of
Naples, Sicilie, Millaine, at the Indies, and in other Countries which are
subject to the Kings command, being also moved thereunto by the riches of the
said Countries, well known to the most of them:) the said council, or some of
the chief of them, have oftentimes given the King to understand, That for his
Majesty's reputation and greater authority, it were better to conquer the
Netherlands anew, and then to command absolutely at his pleasure, than to
govern them under such conditions, which he at his reception to the Seigni^ry
of the said Countries had sworn to observe. The King of Spain following this
counsel, has sought all means to reduce these countries (spoiling them of
their ancient Liberties) into servitude, under the government of Spaniards:
having under pretext of Religion sought first to thrust in new Bishops into the
chief and greatest Towns, indowing them with the richest Abbeyes, adding to
every Bishop nine Chanons to serve him as Counselors, whereof three should have
a special charge of the Inquisition. By which incorporation of the said
Bishops, being his creatures, and at his devotion (the which should happily
have been chosen as well of strangers, as of them which were born in the
Country) they should have the first place and the first voice in the assemblies
of the Estates of the Country. And by the adiunction of the said Chanons, had
brought in the Inquisition of Spain, the which had also bin so abhorred, and so
odious in these Countries, even as slavery it self, as all the world does well
know: So as his Imperial Majesty having once propounded it unto these
Countries, upon due information given unto His Majesty, ceased from any more
speech thereof, showing therein the great affection which he bare unto His
Subjects. Yet notwithstanding diverse Declarations which were made unto the King
of Spain, as well by the Provinces and Towns in particular, as by some other
of the chief Noblemen of the Country, namely, by the Baron of Montigny, and
afterward by the Earl of Egmont, who by the consent of the Duchess of Parma
(then Regent of the said Countries) by the advice of the Council of Estate,
and of the Generalty, had to that end been successively sent into Spain: And
notwithstanding that the king had by his own mouth given them hope, that
(according to their petitions) he would provide for the contentment of the
Country; yet that he had since by his letters done the contrary, commanding
expressly, and upon pain of his indignation, to receive the new Bishops
presently, and to put them in possession of their new Bishoprics and
incorporated Abbeyes, to effect the Inquisition, where they had begun to
practice it, and to observe the Decrees and Canons of the Council of Trent,
the which in diverse points do contradict the privileges of the Country. The
which being come to the knowledge of the Commons, has given just occasion of
so great an alteration among them, and greatly diminished the love and
affection, the which (as good subjects) they had always borne unto the King,
and to his predecessors. For they called chiefly into consideration, that the
King not only pretended to tyrannize over their persons and goods, but also
upon their consciences, whereon they held themselves not to be answerable, not
bound to give account to any one but to God only. For this cause and for the
pity they had of the poor people, the chief of the Nobility did in the year
1566. exhibit certain admonitions by way of a Petition, beseeching him, that
for the pacifying of the Commons, and to avoid all tumults and seditions, it
would please his Majesty, (showing the love and affection, which as a mild and
merciful Prince he bare unto his Subjects) to moderate the said points, and
especially those which concerned the rigorous Inquisition, and punishment for
matters of Religion. And to inform the King more particularly thereof, and
with more authority, and to let him understand, how necessary it was for the
good and prosperity of the Country, and for the maintenance of peace and
tranquillity, to abolish and disannull those innovations, and to moderate the
rigor of public Edicts, for matter of Religion; the said Marquess of Berges
and Baron of Montigny, at the request of the said Lady Regent, the Council of
Estate, and the General Estates of all the Countries, went into Spain as
Ambassadors: whereas the King, instead of giving them audience, and to prevent
the inconveniences delivered by them, (the which, for that they were not
redressed in time, as urgent necessity required, began in effect to discover
themselves throughout the whole Country) by the persuasion and advice of the
Council of Spain, he has caused all them to be proclaimed Rebels, and guilty
of high Treason, and to have forfeited body and goods, that presented the said
Petition. And moreover (thinking himself to be fully assured of the Country,
by the Forces of the Duke of Alva, and to have reduced them under his full
power and subjection) he had afterward, against the Laws of Nations, (the
which have been in all ages inviolably observed, yea among the most barbarous
and cruel Nations, and most tyrannous Princes) imprisoned, and caused the said
Noblemen Ambassadors to be put to death, confiscating all their goods* And
although that all this alteration (which had happened in the year 1566. upon the
foresaid occasion) was in a manner pacified by the Regent and her council, and
that the greatest part of them which had presented themselves unto her for the
Liberty of the Country, were retired, or chased away, and the rest brought
under obedience: yet not to lose the opportunity which the Council of Spain
had long expected (as it appeared plainly the same year 1566. by Letters
intercepted, which were written by the Ambassador Alana to the Duchess of
Parma) to have means under some pretext to overthrow all the privileges of
the Country, and to govern them tyrannously by the Spaniards (as they did the
Indies and other Countries which had been newly conquered by them) he by the
advice and council of the said Spaniards (showing therein the small affection
which he bare unto his Subjects of these countries, contrary unto that
whereunto he was bound, as their Prince, protector and good Shepherd) sent
into these countries the Duke of Alva, very famous for his rigor and cruelty,
and one of the chief enemies of these countries, with a council of the same
Humor and disposition. And although that the said Duke of Alva entered with his
Army into this country, without any let or opposition, and was received of the
poor Inhabitants with all reverence and Honor, expecting all mildness and
clemency, according unto that which the King had so often promised by His
Letters fainedly written; yea, that He was resolved to come himself in person
into the Country, and to order all things to every man's content; the said King
having besides all this (at the very instant of the Duke of Alva his departure)
caused a fleet of ships to be armed in Spain, to bring him hither, and another
in Zeeland to go and meet him (as the brute was) to the great charge of the
Country, the better to abuse his poor subjects, and to draw them more easily
into his snares: notwithstanding, the said Duke of Alva presently after his
arrival (although he were a stranger, and not any way of the blood Royal)
gave it out, that he had a Commission from the King, of Governor General of
the Country, the which was quite contrary to the privileges and ancient
Customs thereof: and discovering his designs plainly, he suddenly put
garrisons into the chief Towns and Forts of the Country, and then he built
Citadels in the richest and strongest Towns, to keep them in subjection. And
by commandment from the King (as they said) he friendly called unto him, as
well by letters, or otherwise, the chief Noblemen of the Country, pretending,
that he had need of their council and assistance, for the service of the King,
and the good of the Country: who (having given credit to his letters) were
come unto him, whom, contrary to the privileges, he caused to be carried
prisoners out of Brabant, where they had been apprehended, causing their
process to be informed before him and his Council (although they were no
competent Judges;) and before any due proofs were made, and the Noblemen that
were accused, fully heard in their defenses, they were condemned to have
committed Rebellion, causing them to be publicly and ignomiously put to death.
Others, who for that they were better acquainted with the Spaniards
dissembling, were retired and kept out of the Country, were declared Rebels,
and guilty of high treason, and to have forfeited bodies and goods: All which
was done, to the end the poor inhabitants should not aid themselves in the
just defense of their liberty, against the oppression of the Spaniards and
their forces, by the help and assistance of these Noblemen, and Princes.
Besides, an infinite number of Gentlemen and rich bourgers, whereof some he
has put to death, others he has chased away and forfeited their goods,
oppressing the rest of the good inhabitants, as well by the insolence of the
soldiers, as by other outrages in their wives, children, and goods; as also by
diverse exactions and taxes, forcing them to contribute for the building of new
Citadels and fortifications of towns, which he made to oppress them, and also
to pay the hundredth and the twintieth penny, for the payment of soldiers,
whereof some were brought by him, and others newly levied, to employ them
against their Countrymen, and themselves, who with the hazard of their lives
sought to defend the liberties of their Country: to the end that the subjects
being thus impoverished, there should be no means to frustrate his designs,
for the better effecting of the instructions which had been given him in Spain:
which was, to use the Country as newly conquered. To which end, in some places
and chief Towns, he changed their form of government, and of justice, and
erected new Consuls after the Spanish manner, directly contrary to the
privileges of the Country. And in the end (thinking himself free from all
fear) he sought to bring in by force a certain imposition of the tenth penny,
upon all merchandise and handi-works, to the absolute ruin of the Commons,
whose good and prosperity consists chiefly in traffic and handi-works;
notwithstanding many admonitions and persuasions made to the contrary, as well
by every one of the Provinces in particular, as by all in general. The which
he had effected by force, if it had not been that soon after by the means of
the Prince of Orange, (and a good number of Gentlemen, and others borne in
these Countries) banished by the Duke of Alva, following the party of the said
Prince, and being for the most part in his service, and other inhabitants
affected to the liberty of their Country, the Provinces of Holland and
Zeeland had not revolted, and put themselves under the Princes protection.
Against which two Provinces the Duke has since during his Government, and
after him the great Commander of Castile (sent in his place by the King, not to
moderate any thing of his Predecessors Tyranny, but to pursue it more covertly
and cunningly than he had done) forced those said Provinces, who by their
Garrisons and Citadels, were made subject to the Spanish Yoke, to employ their
persons and means to help to subdue them: yet no ways easing the said
Provinces, but entreating them like enemies, suffering the Spaniards under the
color of a mutiny, in view of the said Commander, to enter by force into the
Town of Antuerpe, and there to continue six weeks, living at discretion at the
poor Bourgers charge; forcing them moreover (to be freed from their
insolences) to furnish four hundred thousand florins, to pay the said
Spaniards: which done, the said Soldiers (growing more bold through the
sufferance of their Commanders) presumed to take Arms against the Country,
seeking first to surprise Brussels, and in the place of the ancient and
ordinary seat of Princes, to make it a nest and den of thieves. The which not
succeeding according to their design, they took Alost by force, and soon
after forced the Town of Maestricht. And since being violently entered into
Antuerpe, they spoiled it, sacked it, and wasted it with fire and fword, in
such sort, as the most barbarous and cruel enemies could not have done more,
to the unspeakable loss, not only of the poor inhabitants, but in a manner
of all the Nations of the world, who had their Merchandise, debts, and money
there. And although the said Spaniards by a Decree of the Council of Estate
(to whom the King by the death of the great Commander, had conferred the
general Government of the Country) were in the presence of Ieronimo de Rhoda,
proclaimed enemies to the Country: yet the said Rhoda of his own private
authority (or as it is to be presumed, by virtue of some secret instruction
which he had from Spain) took upon him to be the head of the said Spaniards,
and their adherents, so as without respect of the Council of Estate, he
usurped the kings Name and Authority, counterfeited his Seal, and carried
himself as a Governor, and the Kings Lieutenant in these Countries. The which
moved the Estates at the same instant to agree with the Prince of Orange, and
the Estates of Holland and Zeeland: which accord was allowed by the Council of
State (as lawful Governors) that they might jointly with their common forces,
make war against the Spaniards: Omitting not as good subjects, by diverse
humble petitions, to beseech the King to have regard unto the troubles,
oppressions and insolences which had happened, and were like to follow: and that
he would be pleased with all convenient speed possible, to command the
Spaniards to depart out of the Country, and especially those which had been
the cause of the sack and ruin of the chief Towns of his Country, and other
innumerable insolences and violences which his poor subjects had endured, to
the comfort and ease of them which had endured them, and to the example of all
others: yet notwithstanding; the King (although that he made show by words,
that what had happened, displeased him, and was against his will, and that he had
an intent to punish the heads and authors, and to provide for the quiet of the
Country with all clemency, as it behoved a merciful Prince) has not only
neglected to punish the said Heads and Authors: but contrariwise, (as it
appears) all was with his consent and former resolution of the council of
Spain, as certain letters of his, intercepted soon after, do plainly show: by
the which it was written unto Rhoda, and to the other Captains, authors of all
the mischief, That the King did not blame that action, but did allow thereof,
and commend it, promising to recompense them, especially the said Rhoda, as
having done him a singular service: The which, at his return into Spain, and
to all other ministers of the oppressions that were used in these Countries, he
did show by effect. At the same time, the King thinking the better to blind
the eyes of his subjects, sent into these Countries for Governor General, Don
John of Austria, his base brother, as being of his blood: who (making show unto
the Estates, that he did allow of the Pacification of Gant, promised to send
away the Spaniards, to punish the authors of all insolences and disorders
which had happened in the Country, and to take an order for the general peace,
and the restoring of their ancient liberties) sought to divide the Estates, and
to subdue one Country after another. By the permission and providence of God,
who is an enemy to all oppression, he was discovered by the intercepting of
certain letters, where he was commanded by the King to govern himself in these
Countries, according to the Instructions that should be given him by Rhoda: and
to cover this practice, the King had forbidden Don John to speak with him,
commanding him to carry himself unto the chief Noblemen with all mildness
and courtesy, to win their loves, until that by their assistance and
means, he might reduce Holland and Zeeland, and afterward work his will of
the other Provinces. Whereupon Don John, notwithstanding that he had solmnly
sworn in the presence of all the Estates of the Country, to observe the said
Pacification of Gant, yet contrary thereunto he sought by means of their
Colonels (whom he had already at his devotion) and great promises, to win the
Germane soldiers who were then in Garrison, and had the guard of the chief
Towns and Forts of the Country, whereof by that means he made himself
master, holding himself assured of those places they held, and so by that
means to force them that would not join with him, to make war against the
Prince of Orange, and them of Holland and Zeeland, and so to raise a more boody
and intestine war, then had been before. But as all things that are treated
cunningly and with dissimulation, cannot be long kept secret, Don John's
practices being discovered, before he could effect what he had designed, he
could not bring his conceptions and enterprises to the end that he pretended:
Yet he revived a new war, the which continues unto this day, in stead of rest
and an assured peace, whereof he did so much vaunt at his coming. Which
reasons have given us great occasion to forsake the King of Spain, and to seek
some other mighty and merciful Prince, to help to defend these Countries, and
to take them into his protection: and the rather for that these Countries have
endured such oppressions, received such wrongs, and have been forsaken and
abandoned by their Prince for the space of twenty years and more; duduring the
which the Inhabitants have been entreated not as subjects, but as enemies,
their natural Prince and Lord seeking to ruin them by arms, Moreover, after
the death of Don John, having sent the Baron of Selles, who (under color
propounding some means of an accord) declared sufficiently, That the king
would not avow the Pacification made a Gant (which Don John notwithstanding had
sworn to maintain) setting down more hard conditions. Yet for that we would
discharge our selves of our duties, we have not omitted to make humble suite
by writing, employing moreover the favor of the greatest Princes of
Christendom, seeking by all means without intermission, to reconcile our
selves unto the King; having also of late kept our deputies long at Cologne,
hoping there (by the intercession of his imperial Majesty, and some Princes
Electors) to have obtained an assured peace, with some moderate tolleration of
Religion (the which does chiefly concern God and men's consciences) as the
estate of the affairs of the Country did then require: But in the end we found
it by experience, that nothing was to be obtained from the King, by the
Conference at Cologne: and that it was practiced and did only serve to
disunite and divide the Provinces, that they might with the more facility
vanquish and subdue first one, and then another, and execute upon them their
first designs. The which has since plainly appeared, by a certain
proscription, which the King has caused to be published, whereby we and all
the Inhabitants of the united Provinces, and Officers that hold their party,
are proclaimed Rebels, and to have forfeited lives and goods: Promising
moreover, a great sum of money to him that should murder the said Prince,
and all to make the poor Inhabitants odious, to hinder their Navigation and
Traffic, and to bring them into extreme despair. So as despairing of all
means of reconciliation, and destitute of all other succors and aid we have
according to the Law of nature (for the defense of us and other Inhabitants,
the Rights, privileges, ancient customs, and liberty of the Country, and
the lives and honors of us, our wives, children, and posterity, to the end
they fall not into the slavery of the Spaniards, leaving upon just cause the
King of Spain) been forced to seek out some other means, such as for the
greater safety and preservation of our Rights, Privileges, and liberties, we
have thought most fit and convenient.

We therefore give all men to understand, That having duly considered all
these things, and being pressed by extreme necessity, We have by a general
resolution and consent, declared, and do declare by these presents, the King
of Spain, ipso jure, to be fallen from the Seigniory, Principality,
jurisdiction, and inheritance of these Countries: And that we are resolved,
never to acknowledge him any more, in any matter concerning the Prince,
jurisdictions or demeanes of these Netherlands, nor to use hereafter, neither
yet to suffer any other to use his Name as Sovereign Lord thereof. According
to the which we declare all Officers, private Noblemen, Vassels, and other
inhabitants of these Countries, of what condition or quality soever, to be
from henceforth discharged of the Oath which they have made in any manner
whatsoever, unto the King of Spain, as Lord of these countries, or of that
whereby they may be bound unto him. And for the above named reasons, the most
part of the said united Provinces, by a common accord and consent of their
Members, have submitted themselves under the command and government of the high
and mighty Prince, the Duke of Aniou and Alanson, etc. upon certain conditions
contracted and accorded with his Highness: and that the Archduke of Austria,
Mathias, has resigned into our hands the government general of these
Countries, the which has been accepted by us. We enjoin and command ali
Judges, Officers, and all others, to whom it shall appertain, That hereafter
they forbear to use any more, the name, titles, great seal, or signet of the
K. of Spain: and instead thereof, whilst that the Duke of Anjou, for his urgent
affairs, concerning the good and welfare of the Country, shall be yet absent,
for as much as shall concern the Provinces which have contracted with his
Highness, and touching the rest by way of provision, they shall use the title
and name of the chief and Counsel of the Country. And until that the said
heads and Counselors, shall be named, called, and really established in the
exercise of their charges, and offices, they shall use our name, except Holland
and Zeeland, where they shall use as they have formerly done, the name of the
Prince of Orange, and of the Estates of the said Provinces, until that the
said Council shall be in force, and then they shall govern themselves as it is
agreed, touching the instructions given for the said Counsel, and the accords
made with his Highness. And instead of the Kings seals, they shall hereafter
use our Great Seal, counter Seal, and Signet, in matters concerning the
government general, for the which the Council of the Country, according to
their instructions shall have authority. And in matters concerning the policy,
administration of Justice, and other private acts of every Province, the
Provincial Concels and others, shall respectively use the name and Seal of
the said Province, where the matter shall be in question, and no other, upon
pain of nullity of the said Letters, or Dispatches which shall be other wise
made or sealed. And to the end these things may be the better observed and
effected, we have enjoined and commanded, and do enjoin and command by these
presents, That all the King of Spaines Seals, which are at this present within
these united Provinces, shall be dilivered into the States hands, or to him
that shall have commission and authority from them, upon pain of arbitrary
punishment. Moreover, We ordain and command, that from henceforth the name and
arms of the King of Spain, shall not be put not stamped in any coins of these
united Provinces: but there shall be such a figure set upon them, as shall be
appointed for the coining of new pieces of Gold and Silver. In the like sort we
enjoin and command the president and Lords of the privy Council, and all other
Chancellors, presidents, Provincial Counsuls, and all Presidents and chief
Masters of accounts, and others of all chambers of accounts, being respectively
in these countries, and also all other Judges, and Officers (as holding them
discharged of the oath which they have made unto the King of Spain, according
to the tenor of their Commissions) that they shall take a new oath in the hands
of the Estates of the Province where they are, or to their Deputies, by the
which they shall swear to be faithful to us against the King of Spain, and his
adherents, according to the form set down by us: and there shall be given to
the said Counselors, Masters of accounts, Judges and Officers, remaining in
the Provinces which have contracted with the Duke of Anjou, in our name, an act
of continuance in their Offices, containing in stead of a new commissions, a
cessation or disannulling of their former, and that by way of provision, until
his coming. And to Counselors, Masters of accounts, Judges, and Officers,
being resident in Provinces, which have not contracted, with his Highness, a
new Commission shall be given under our name and Seal, if the petitioners were
not found faulty, to be of bad behavior, to have done against the privileges
of the Country, or to have committed some other disorder.

We also command the President and them of the privy Council, the Chancellor
and Council of Brabant, the Governor, Chancellor, and Council of Gueldres,
and the County of Zutphen, the President and council in Flanders, the
President and council in Holland, the Governor, President and Council in
Friseland, the President and Council at Vtricht, the Bailiff at Tournay and
Tournesis, the Receivors or chief Officer of Beoostercheldt and
Bewesterscheldt Zeeland, the scout of Macklyn, and all other Judges and
Officers whom it shall concern, their Lieutenants, and every of them,
presently without any delay, to publish this our Decree in all places of their
jurisdictions, and wheresoever they are accustomed to make proclamations, to
the end that no man may pretend any cause of ignorance: And that they may keep
and observe, and cause to be kept and observed inviolably this our Decree,
without any favor, support, or dissimulation; for we have so thought it fit
and convenient for the good of the Country. For the effecting whereof, we give
to every one whom it shall concern, full power and authority, and special
Commission. In witness whereof, we have caused our seal to be hereunto
annexed. Given at the Hage in out assembly the 26 of ^uly 1581. Underneath was
written, By the ordinance and decree of the said Estates, and signed ^. Tan
Asseliers.

According unto this declaration of the Estates, there was a new form of an
Oath drawn, in manner of an abjuration of the King of Spain, and promise of
duty and obedience which every one should owe unto the said Estates, by the
public Officers, and Magistrates of every Town and Province, as follows.

I swear, That hereafter I shall not serve nor yield obedience to Philip King
of Spain, The form of the oath of abjuration of the King of Spain.
nor acknowledge him for my Prince and Lord, whom I do renownce by these
presents, and do hold my self freed from all Oaths, and bonds, by the which I
might be formerly tied unto him: whereof finding my self presently delivered
I swear a new and bind my self to the united Provinces, and namely, to them
of Brabant, Gueldre, Holland, Zeeland, and their allies, and to the sovereign
Magistrates that are appointed, to be faithful and loyal unto them, to yield
them all obedience, aid, and comfort, with all my power and means, against
the King of Spain and his adherents, and against all the enemies of the
Country. Promising as a good vassal of the Country, to carry my self
faithfully and loyally, with show of all obedience to my superiors; So help me
the Almighty God.

This decree being thus proclaimed, all the seals, counter-seals, and secret
signets of the King of Spain, were broken and cancelled with solemnity, by all
the consuls of the said Provinces, and others new made, by order of the
general Estates, for that which concerned the Government, and the affairs of
the generality. And as for matters of justice and policy, they used the
seals, names, and titles of private governors, and Provincial consuls. From
that time there was no coins of gold, silver, or copper made with the name or
titles of the King of Spain, but upon stamps which the Estates had caused to
be made in every Povince. All governors, superintendents, Presidents*
Chancellours, Councillors, and others Officers, were discharged and absolved
from their precedent oaths, and did swear fidelity to the general Estates,
against the King of Spain and his adherents, according to the form above
mentioned, to whom an act was sent for the continuation of the Commissions.

Ninthly, it is evident from the premises; Observe. 9.
That is Emperors and Kings shall degenerate into Tyrants, violate their
Oaths and Covenants made unto the people, invade their Laws, Liberties,
persons with armed violence, and instead of protecting, make war upon them;
that the Nobles, Magistrates, Estates, Parliaments and people in such cases,
may without any guilt of Treason, Rebellion, Sedition, not only disobey, but
Lawfully resist them with force of Arms, both in point of Law and conscience,
and are obliged under pai^e of treachery and perfidiousnesse to their Country,
thus to resist; and in cases of incorrigibility for the public weal, and
preservation, may justly if they see it necessary, depose them from their
Royal Dignities as Enemies, or Traitors to their Kingdoms and people. De jure
Magistratus in subdito. p. 293. 294. 295. Hugo Gr^tius de Iure Belli ^* 1. c.
4. s 7. p. 85.
The reason is, Because no Kingdom or Nation under Heaven, ever elected or
voluntarily submitted themselves unto any Emperor or King whatsoever (for
ought can be proved or imagined) but upon this tacit condition; that they
should justly govern, defend and protect them for their good, not tyrranize
over, pillage, murder, oppress, or make war upon them at their pleasures,
contrary to the Laws of God, nature, nations; Nor yet actually obliged
themselves under pain of Treason, Rebellion, death, or damnation, not forcilly
to reobsist or deprive their Princes in any wise, though they with open
violence should set themselves to subvert their Religion, Laws, Liberties, and
Republike; to which unreasonable condition, no Natian certainty would have
consented, had it been propounded to them by their Kings at first, as Grotius
well observes. This point of greatest difficulty and concerment, I have largely
debated and confirmed already, in the third part of this Discourse, where all
contrary Objections against it, are refuted; Yet because it still seems a
feditious unchristian Paradox to many Malignants and Royallists, I shall
satifie it with such new Authorities, of all sorts, which may happily convince,
if not convert them from their inveterate wilful error.

My first Authority of this kind, is that passage of Sozomon ( an ancient
Ecclesiastical Historian) Eccles. Hist. l* 6. chapter 2. recited and approved by
Nicephorus Callistus Eccles hist. l. 10. chapter 34. where he thus writes of the
death of Julian the Emperor ( who turned both a Tyrant, Apostate, and
Persecutor of the Christians) reputed to be stain by a Christian Soldier of
his own Army, for his Tyranny and impiety. Whereas Libanius writes in this
manner; He seems to say, that the st^ayer of Julian the transgressor was a
Christian, which peradventure was true; Neither is it incredible, that some one
of the Soldiers who marched under his colors, had considered these things
thus in his mind: That not only the Heathens, but likewise ALL OTHERS are wont
to applaud those even unto our Age, who slew Tyrants heretofore, as those who
for the liberty of all, feared not to undergo the danger of death, and
likewise for the safety of their Citizens, Kindred and friends, with willing
minds. And verily he CANNOT WELL BE REPREHENDED BY ANY MAN, especially since
he should show himself so valiane and stenuous FOR GOD AND that RELIGION
which he did approve, etc. However it is certain that he was taken away by
Gods divine judgment. Ecc^es. His^^. (...). c. 35.
Nicepherus adds, that his death was predicted by the Christians, and that his
death WAS ACCEPTABLE AND PLEASANT TO ALL CHRISTIANS, especially to those of
Antioch, WHO FOR THIS HIS MVRTHER, INSTVTED A PVBLIKE TRIVMPH, Wherein they
also reproached Maximus the Philosopher, singing thus, Where are thy
divinations O foolish Maximus? A pregnant evidence, that even the Primitive
Christians (on whose examples and practice our Antagonists so much depend,
though to no purpose, as I have * elsewhere manifested) held it not only lawful
for them to resist, but even in some cases to slay a persecuting Apostatized
Tyrant, bent so subvert Religion, Laws, Liberties; as may be further evidenced
by Eusebius. lib. 2* vita Constan. and Ecclesist* Hist. l. 8. 9. 10. Socrat.
Scholast. Hist. l, 1. Sozomon. Niceph. Call. eccles. Hist. l^ 7. c. 29. 37. 39.
44. 45. Grimsion Eutropius Zonara Sabellicus Valatera^us in the Lives of
Constantine Maxim^nus and Maxentius.
Constantine the great his ayding the oppressed Christians, and Romans against
the Tyranny and Persecution of the Emperors Maxentius, Maximinus and Licinius,
even with force of Arms, with which he Conquered these Persecutors in sundry
open battles fought against them, at the Christians earnest importunity.

To descend to later Authoritities, it is the received Doctrine of all Popish
Schoolmen, Doctors, Lawyers, That tyrannical Princes who oppress and invade
their subjects persons, liberties, estates, or religion, may both lawfully with
good conscience be forcibly resisted by their Subjects, and likewise by the
major part of their People, Nobles, Parliament, for preservation of the
Republike and Religion, be justly deposed, and put to death; yea, as some of
them add, even murdered by private men, though the generality of their
Writers justly deny it. Their St. Thomas of Aquin, in his Book, De Regimine
Pricipum (dedicated to the King of Cyprus) Operum, Au^ verpiae. 1612. Tom. 17.
f. 163.
cha 6. determines thus, if it belong to the multitude to provide themselves of
a King; the King made by them, may not unjustly be removed, destroyed, or his
power restrained, if he abuse the power of the Realm tyrannically; Neither is
such a multitude to be esteemed, TO DEAL DISLOYALLY IN DEPOSING A TYRANT
ALTHOUGH THEY HAD PERPETUALLY SUB^ECTED THEMSELVES TO HIM BEFORE, BECAUSE
HIMSELF HAS DESERVED IT, in not carrying himself faithfully in the
Government of the people, as the Office of a King required, because herein he
kept not his Oath and Covenant with his subjects. And he further affirms, 2
Distinct. Art. 44. qu. 2. 2. 5m. 1. 2ae. Did. 44. qu. 2. 2. 5m. 1. 2ae. qu.
79. 4. 3m. 22ae. qu. 12. art. 2. and qu. 42. 2. 3m. Opusc. 10. l. 4. co. 1.
That in every Country, Cities are governed politikely; the power of Kings and
Emperors being circumscribed by the Laws and people, That a Tyrannical
Prince, if he invade his Subjects, may lawfully beresisted and lain even of
private persons in their own necessary defense, and in reference to the public
safety; but much more by the Nobles and peoples general consent: And that the
deposition or perturbation of the regiment of a Tyrant, HAS NOT THE REASON (or
nature) OF SEDITION, unle^se it be done by private persons, or so disorderly,
that a greater detriment should ensue, BUT IT IS THE TYRANT RATHER WHO IS
SEDITIOVS. The same Doctrine is taught by Dominicus Seto, de Iustitia. l. 5.
quaest. 1. art. 3. Ludovicus Molina. Tom. 4. De Iustitia and Inre Tract. 3.
disp. 6. to 20. Dominicus Bannes, 22. 2ae* quaest. 64. Art. 3. Dub. 2. Petrus
de Aragon. 2. 2ae. qu. 64. a^t. 3 Explicatio, art. p. 248. Michael
Bartholomaeus Salon, de Iustitia and Iure in 2. 2ae Tom. 1. qu. 64. art. 3.
cont. 1. page 385. Petrus de Lorca in 2. 2ae. D. Thomae quaest. 40. art. 3.
sect. 3. throughout, specially Disput. 50. n. 2. and Disp. 52. 53. Azorius,
Tom. 2. l. 21. disp. 5. qu. 8. and. 5. Franciscus Victoria. Relectio De Iure
Bell^. n. 9. 14. Alphonsus Salmeron in cap. 13. Epist. ad Romanos. Disp. 5.
Fran. Suarez. in Defensione fidei l. 3. cha. 3. and l. 6. chap. 4. throughout,
specially, number* 5. 6. 13. 14. 15. 16. Joan Gerson de Anferibilitate Papae;
where also he avers (consid. 6.) that one who is truly Pope may lawfully be
bound, imprisoned, and put to death for his offenses, (though the head of the
Church as Papists hold, as well as Kings the head of their Realms.) Dionysius
Cathusianus de Regim. Polit. Artic. 19. Francis^us T^llet, in summa, l. 5. c.
6. Leonardus Lessius de Iustit. and Iure, c. 9. dub. 4. Tannerus, Tom. 3. disp.
4. qu. 8. dub. 3. Emanuel Sa. in Aphorism. Verb. Tyrannus, n. 2. Iohannis
Mariana: De Rege and Regis Instit. l. 1. c. 5, 6, 7, 8. Alvarus Pelagius de
Plan. Eccles l. 1. c. 21. Simancha Pacensis, de Cathol. instit. tit. 23. ^. 11.
p. 98. tit. 45. n. 25. p. 209. Gregory de Valencia, Tom 3^ p. 444. Cardinal
Bellarmine, de Pontif Romans l. 5. c. 6. 7. 8. and Tract de Potest. Sum. Pontif.
advers. Gul. Barel. p. 97. Iac. Gretzerus Pharetras Tortulliana, and
Vespertilio Haeritico^Politicus, Ludovicus Richehom. Expostulatio Aplogetic^,
pro Societate Iesiis. Vincentius Filiucius Tra. 28. p. 2. dis. 4. prae. Dec. n.
12. Mart. Becanus Anglican^ de Potestate Regis and Pontificis, Caspar.
Schoppius. Alexi Pharmacum Regium, and Collyrium Regium. of Valentine Jacob.
An. 15^4. and John Tanquerel Anno. 1561. whose opinions are recorded by
Bochellus Decreta. Eccles. Gal. l. 5. tit 4. c. 6. 8. the Cardinal of Como his
Letter from Rome, 30. January, 1584. to Doctor Parrey to murder Queen
Elizabeth; Franciscus de Verona Constant. in Apolog. pro Io: Chastel, p. 133.
Bonarscius the Jesuit, Amphith p. 101. Barclay l. 3. advers. Monarch. c. 8. l.
6. c. 23. and 24. Serarius in c. 3. Iudicum. Hieronymus Blanca Rerum Aragonens.
Commentarius, passim. Cajetan: upon Aquinas his forecited Sums. the Doctors
of Sala^ancha in their Determination, Anno 1602. recorded by G. Blackwell, qu
Bip. p. 56. and Doctor John White his Defense of the Way, c. 6. p. 16.
Governado Christiano p. 43. Antonius Massa Tract. contra Duel. n. 78. 79.
Baldus 3. Consid. 313. Cavarruvias Quaest. Illustr. T. 2. 505. n. 1. 399. n. 6.
Vasquius contro. Illustr. 16. n. 15. 19. 21. 17. n. 1. 23. 20 n. 344. n. 3. 73.
n. 12. 13. 5. 72. n. 7. and elsewhere Hemingius Arnisaeus de Authoritate
Principum p. 18. 50. 77. 80. 83. 95. 122. Fran. Hotomani Franco-Gallia, c. 6.
7. 10. 13. 15. 18. 19. etc. To which I might add our English Priests and
Jesuits, as Doctor Nicholas Saunders, Visib. Monarch. p. 70. 71. Doctor Allen,
Parsons, Creswell, Philopater, Rossaeus, Doleman, p. 32. to 74. sparsim, with
sundry others, all professedly a verring Aquinas his Doctrine, and the
premises, yea, far exceeding them in sundry particulars; many or most of
them attributing sufficient Authority and power to the Pope and Prelates alone,
without the Parliament, Nobles, Peers, or Peoples assent, to depose, adjudge
Haereticall or tyrannical Kings to death, and devote them to assassination,
which all Protestants unanimously disclaim. But we need not fish in these
unwholesome Romish Streams of Tyber, or make use of these Popish Champions,
whom I have only named, to stop the mouths of all Papists, Priests, Jesuits,
who now much exclaim against the Parliaments present defensive War,
condemning all for Rebels and Traitors who assist the Parliament against their
invading trait^rous, Rebellious armed Forces both in Ireland and England, they
being in verity such themselves, yea, the original contrivers, fomenters, the
principal abettors of the present bloody, destructive, civil Wars in both our
Realms. And that which most confirms me in this belief, is a particular late
Discovery of the horrid Conspiracy of Con the Popes late Nuncio here, and his
Iesuited Popish Confederates, to undermine and extirpate the Protestant
Religion, to raise the Scottish, and succeeding Irish, and English Wars,
thereby to engage the King to resort to them for assistance; and under pretense
whereof to rise up in arms, and work him to their own conditions, or else to
poison him with a Indian poisoned Nut after the example of his Father, and then
seize upon the Prince, and train him up in their Antichristian Religion, as you
may read at large in Romes Masterpeece, to which I shall refer you for
fuller satisfaction, from one of the chief Conspirators own Confession. But
passing by all these, I shall proceed to Authorities of Lawyers and Divines,
professing the Protestant Religion. Georgi^s Obrectus, a public Professor of
Law, and Advocate to the City of Strasburge in his Disputatio Juridica, 1. De
Principiis Belli, lays down these several Positions for Law, Number. 125. to
139. That all the Inferior Magistrates in the Empire or other Kingdoms,
collectively considered, are above the Emperor and Kings themselves; that if
they be unjustly assaulted with unjust violence by any whomsoever, they may by
a necessary and just war, defend both themselves and theirs, and repel and
prosecute the unjust assailants. That if the Superior Magistrate neglect to do
his duty, (as if the Turk should invade any Country, and the Supreme
Magistrate would not resist him,) the inferior Magistrate may call the people
to Arms, raise an Army, and exercise all forces policy and devices against the
common enemy of Christians: Or if the Supreme Magistrate should exercise
manifest Tyranny, it is verily lawful to the Inferior to undertake the care
of the Republike, which he endeavors to oppress with all his power: That
those who represent all the people, as the Electors, Palatines, Nobles,
Parliament, may admonish the Prince of his duty, and ought to seek by all means
to divert him from his Tyrannical and impious purpose; but if he proceeds, and
repents not, being frequently admonished, but wilfully subverts the
Commonwealth, obstinately perverts Laws; has no care of faith, co^venants,
justice, piety; and tends only to this, that he may perpetrate any thing with
impunity, and impiously reign over men's consciences, then verily he is
accounted a Tyrant, that is, an enemy of God and man; whence, if he has
proceeded to that hight of malice, that he cannot be expelled but by armed
force, It is Lawful for the Electors, Palatines and others, to call the people
to Arms, and not only to defend themselves and others against such a one, but
plainly to deject him from his Throne: For the entire Government of the Realm
is not committed by the people to the Prince alone, as neither the Bishopprick
of the whole Church to the Pope, but to every one of the Nobles or Magistrates
according to his power: For the Nobles, as they are called into part of the
honor, so of the burden of the Commonwealth; which is committed to the
Prince, as to the Supreme Tutor, but to them as Fellow-tutors, he having the
first, they the second place in governing the Republike. The Prince swears that
he will seek the good of the Realm, and all the Nobles promise the same:
therefore if he does ill, they ought not to do so likewise; if the Republike go
to ruin, they shall not continue: For the Commonwealth is no less committed
to them, than to the King, so as they ought not only to do their duty, but
also to contain the Prince within the limits of his duty: For if the Prince
does ought against his Oath, they are not absolved from their Oaths, but rather
then especially ought to manifest their fidelity, when the Republike requires
it, because they were specially instituted for that end, as the Ephori, and
everything ought to be reputed just, when it attains its end. Hence B^utus the
Tribune, and Lucretius the Governor of the City, called the people to Arms
against Tarquin the proud, and by their authority expelled him the Ringdom. So
the Roman Senate judged Nero an enemy of the Republike, and condemned him to
the Gallows; punished Vitellius with death, ignominiously mutilat^ed and
dragged through the City, and spoiled Maximinus of the Empire, setting up
Albinus in his place. Thus the French by Authority of a public Council,
through the care of the Officers of the Realm deprived Childericke the first,
Sigebert, Theodoric, and Childericke the third of the government of the Realm.
Neither is it impertinent to pronounce the same sentence of such a one, as was
given of Manlius Capitulinus, Valerius Maxim. l. 6. c. 7.
Thou wast Manlius whiles thou did cast down the Senons headlong; Now
because thou art become one of the Senons, thou thy self art to be
precipitated from whence thou did cast them down. But if perchance most of
the Nobles collude and connive, and being unmindfull of their duty, take no
care of the people; let there at least be one who may admonish and detest the
invading Tyrant, and take care that the Republike sustain no detrimen^; For the
care of the Republike is no less committed to him, than to the Prince and his
Colleagues, and he has plighted his faith to the Republike no less than they.
If many have promised the same thing, the obligation of the one is not taken
away by the negligence or perjury of the other. If there be many Trustees,
Executors, or Guardians, the negligence default or fraud of some of them, does
not discharge or disingage the rest; yea, unless they to their power discharge
their trust and Oath, they become perfidious, yea guilty of the same crime, and
are subject unto actions for their neglect as well as the others: Therefore
those who are bound to the whole Kingdom and Empire, as the Peers of France,
the Electors, or to some certain Countey or City which makes a part of the
Realm, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Constables, Admirals, and the like, are
obliged to aid the whole Commonwealth, or that part committed to them,
against the tyranny of the Prince, if they be able, etc. Thus and much more
this Lawyer, almost verbatim out of Iunius Brutus.

I might add to him the like determinations of Henricus Bocerus, De jure
pugnae, hoc est, Belli and Duelli, Tractatus Methodicus, Tubingae, 1591. lib.
1. cap. 5. c 29. p. 141 Justus Eccardus, De Lege Regia, the last Edition.
Alhuseius Polit. c. 4. p. 146. to 153. Haenon, Disputat. polit. The Treatise De
Iure Magistratus in Subditos; (where this Position is largely and learnedly
debated, confirmed, both from Law, History, Theology, Reason) Hugo Grotius de
Iure Belli and pacis, lib. 1. c. 4. sect. 7. to the end, p. 87. etc. Albericus
Gentilis de Iure Belli, l. 1. c. 11. p. 84. c. 25. p. 205. l. 3. c. 9. 22. p.
546. 686. with others. But since Iunius Brutus compriseth the quintessence of
all the rest, I shall trouble you only with his Discourse. Vindiciae Contr.
Tyrannos, Quaest. 3. p. 177. to 106. To pass by his Discourse concerning the
resisting of Tyrants, who usurp a Dominion without any Title, whom every man
may justly resist and suppress, and are bound in duty so to do, as he there
proves at large; I shall only transcribe what concerns them who have a lawful
Title. First (says he) we ought to consider, that all Princes are born men. We
cannot therefore expect to have only perfect Princes, but rather we ought to
think it well with us, if we have gained but indifferent ones. Therefore the
Prince shall not presently be a Tyrant, if he keep not measure in some things,
if now and then he obey not reason; if he more slowly seek the public good;
if he be less diligent in administering Justice, or less fierce in propulsing
war. For seeing a man is not set over men, as if he were some God, as he is
over beasts; but as he is a man, born in the same condition with them; as that
Prince shall be proud, who will abuse men like Beasts, so that people shall be
unjust, who shall seek a God in a Prince, and a Divinity in this frail Nature.
But truly if he shall willingly subvert the Republike; if he shall wilfully
perve^t the Laws, if he shall have no care of his faith, none of his promises,
none of Justice, none of piety; if himself become an enemy of his people, or
shall use all or the chiefest notes we have mentioned, then verily he may be
judged a Tyrant, that is, an enemy of God and men. Therefore we treat not of a
Prince, less good; but of the worst; not of one less prudent, but of a
malicious and subtle one; not of one unskilful in Law, but of a contemner of
Law; not of an unwarlike one, but of an enemy of the people and waster of the
Realm. A Senate may assist him with prudence, a Judge with the knowledge of
the Law, a Captain in the skilfulnesse of war; but this man wishes the
Nobles, Senators, Captains of War one neck, that he might cut them off at one
stroke, neither hates he any more then them. The first verily, though he may
lawfully be removed, yet however he may be tolerated; the latter contrarily, by
how much the longer he is tolerated, the more intolerable he becomes.
Moreover, as every thing is not lawful to a Prince; so often times, that which
is lawful to the people, is not expedient. For frequently it may fall out,
that the remedy which is used, may be worse than the disease. Therefore it
becomes a wise man to try all things, before he use the hot Iron; and use all
remedies, before he take up arme^. If therefore those who represent the people
perceive any thing to be done against the Republike by force or fraud, let them
first admonish the Prince; neither may they expect, till the mischief grow
heavy, and acquire forces. Tyranny is like an heptick Fever, which at first
is easy to be cured, difficult to be discerned; afterward it becomes easy to
be known, but very difficult to be cured. Therefore they shall withstand the
beginnings, neither should they pretermit any thing, though the smallest. But
if he shall proceed, and not repent though frequently admonished, but tend
only to this, that he may commit any thing without punishment; then verily he
is really guilty of Tyranny, and they may act against him, whatsoever they may
use against a Tyrant, either by Law or just force. Tyranny is not only a
crime, but the head, and as it were, the heap of all crimes. A Tyrant subverts
the Republike, makes a prey of all, lies in wait for the life of all, violates
faith to all, contemnes all the Religion of a sacred Oath. Therefore is he so
much more wicked then any Thief, murderer, sacrilegious person, by how much
it is the more grievous, to offend many and all, then particular persons. Now
if all these be reputed enemies, if they be capitally punished, if they suffer
pains of death, can any one invent a punishment worthy so horrid a crime?
Moreover, we have proved, Not^
that all Kings receive their Royal Dignity from the people; that all the
people are better and higher then the King, that the King is only the
superior minister and Ruler of the kingdom, the Emperor of the Empire, but
the people are the true head. In Tractat. de Tyranno, and in Tract. de reg.
Civit.
Therefore it follows, that a Tyrant who commits felony against the people as
the Lord of the fee, hurts the sacred Majesty of the Realm and Empire, Becoms a
Rebel, and therefore falls into the danger of the same Laws, and demerits more
grievous punishments. Therefore, says Bartolus, he may be deposed by a
Superior; or be most justly punished by the Julian Law, for public violence.
Now all the people, or those who represent them, as Electors, Palatines, Nobles
the Assembly of the Estates, etc. are his Superior. But and if he shall
proceed so far, that he cannot be expelled but by armed violence, then verily
it shall be lawful for them, to call the people to Arms, to raise an Army,
and to practice force, policy, stratagems, as against an adjudged enemy of his
Country and of the Commonweal. Neither shall the Officers of the Realm in
this case fall into the crime OF SEDITION; For in a sedition there must needs
be two points, which when for the most part they contend about contradictories,
it follows, that the cause of one is just, the other unjust; That cause must
verily be just which defends the Law^, which protects the common good, which
shall preserve the Realm, especially by this means; contrarily, that cause is
unjust, which violates the Laws, defends the breakers of the Laws, protects
the subverters of the Country. Bartolus Tract. de Guelphis and Gibell Ang. l.
3.. cum igitur D. de vi and viar. Thom. Aquinas in 2. 2^ qu. 12. Art. 11. in
fine l. 1. D. ad leg. Iul. magist. Cit. Parid 4.
That is just which will destroy tyrannical government, that unjust which
would abolish just government. That lawful which tends to the public good,
that unlawful which tends to the private. Therefore, says Thomas, because a
tyrannical kingdom which is not ordained to the common good, but principally
for the benefit of the Governor, is most unjust; therefore the disturbance of
this Kingdom Has not the reason of Sedidition, nor do they fall into the
crime of Treason. This crime is committed against a lawful Prince; Now a
lawful Prince is nothing but a living Law: therefore he who kills the Law as
much as in him lies, cannot be called by that name; therefore those who take
up Arms against him shall not be guilty of that crime. It is likewise committed
against the Commonwealth, but because the Repub. is there only where the
authority of the Law prevails, not where the private ^ust of a Tyrant
swalloweth the Republike, a Tyrant shall be guilty of that crime which offends
the public Majesty, and those be Vindicators of the Republike, who shall
oppugn a Tyrant Ex Officio, supported with their own authority. Neither in
this case, I say, does every one, but all the Subjects, but the Lords seem to
require an account of the government from their agent: no more shall they be
accounted perfidious for doing it; there is every where between the Prince and
people a mutual and reciprocal Obligation; he promises, that he will be a
just Prince: they, that they will obey him, if he shall be such a one.
Therefore the people are obliged to the Prince under a condition: the Prince,
purely to the people: Therefore if the condition be not fulfilled, the people
are unbound, the Contract void, the Obligation null in Law it self: Therefore,
the King is perfidious if he reign uniustly; the people perfidious, if they
obey not him who reigns justly: But the people are free from all crime of
perfidiousnesse, if they publicly renounce him who reigns uniustly; or if
they endeavor to evict him with Arms who desires to retein the kingdom
unlawfully. L. 160. D. dereg. Iur.
Therefore it is lawful for all or many of the Officers of the Realm to
remove a Tyrant. Neither is it only lawful; but it ly^th so upon them of
duty, that unless they do it, they can no way be excused. Neither may
Electors, Palatines, Senators, and other Nobles think, that they were created
and instituted only for that end, that they should show themselves once
peradventure in the Kings inauguration, attired after the ancient manner, that
they might act a certain palliated Fable, or put on the person of Rowland,
Oliver, Ronald, and other Nobles on that day, as if in a Scene, they should in
some show represent the Round Table of Arthur, as they call it; so as after
that the multitude is dismissed, and Calliopus has said, Farewell, they should
think they had excellently played their parts. These things are not spoken in
jest, these things are not perfunctorily done; these things are not the
pastimes of children, who as it is in Horace, V^p. l. 3. D. de adm. and peric.
Tut. and curat.
created a King in a Play; but rather of Nobles, and Magistrates, who as they
are called unto part of that honor, so likewise of the burden, and show, that
the Republike is committed and commended to the King, as to the supreme and
chiefest Tutor, so also to them as fellow-Tutor^ (even Honorari) assigned to
him as observers of his actions who has the chief tutelage, who may daily
exact an account of him, and diligently take heed, L. 27. D. eodem.
in what manner he reverseth; so even these, that they might observe the King
(who, as to his tutelary providence, is only reputed in the place of a Lord)
that he do nothing to the detriment of the people. Therefore as the fact of
him who acts the Guardian, is imputed to the Co-gardians, unless where they
ought and are able, L. 14. D. de admin. and peri^. tut.
they suspect and likewise take care to remove him; to wit, when he
communicates not the administration with them, L 3. de suspect. tut. and cur.
if he do not faithfully manage the tutelage or care, if he admits fraud, if
he does any thing sordidly or perniciously to the Pupil, if he intercept any
of the Pupils goods, if he become an enemy to the Pupil; finally, if he be
over rude, sloathfull, unskilful, etc. So even the Nobles shall be held guilty
of the Princes deed, unless they remove, or prevent his tyranny, or supply his
sloathfulnesse, with their vigilance and diligence. Finally, as often as the
Guardian does not do in the name of the Pupil, that which any fit Master of a
family would do, he may not seem to be defended; but that he may be the
better defended, his Co-gardians are bound to foresee: So much more justly, if
the Prince does not act the householder but the Enemy, the Nobles may and ought
to act against him, L. 10. and 33. D. de admin. and peri^. tutor. and Curat.
since they are bound by his deed, no less then by their own. Moreover the
Nobles may consider, that the King in governing the Republike, holds the first
part, but they the second, third, and every one in his place. Therefore if he
does his part ill, they may not follow him: if he destroy the Republike, they
may not connive; for it is committed to them, as well as to him; and in such
sort truly, that not only they themselves ought rightly to execute their
office by themselves, but to contain the Prince within the bounds of his
office. Finally, as the King promises, that he will take care of the benefit
of the Commonweal, so also do they. Therefore if he breaks his oath, they
may not think, that they are absolved from theirs, no more then Bishops, if
the Pope should defend heresy or destroy the Church: yea, they should think
themselves so much the more obliged to perform their oaths, by how much the
more he shall violate his. Therefore if they collud^, they are reputed in the
number of prevaricators; if they connive, of desertors; and TRAITORS, if they
vindicate not the Republike from the tyranny of tyrants: as finally they become
Patrons, Defenders, little Kings, if they by all means protect and defend the
Republike, which they have undertaken to protect. Judge. 5.
These things, though they are sufficiently firm of themselves, yet they may
be demonstrated by examples. The Canaanitish Kings, who oppressed the people of
Israel with hard servitude, as well corporal as spiritual, (interdicting them
both commerce and arms) were true tyrants, I say in practice, yet not without
a title; for Eglon and Iabin reigned quietly almost twenty years: Now God
extraordinarily stirred up Ehud, who slew Eglon craftily; and Debora, who
routed the army of Iabin; and by that means freed the people from tyranny:
This was not verily, because it was less lawful to the ordinary Magistrates
and Princes of the Tribes, and the rest to do it, but Debora rather objecteth
their sloathfulnesse and carelessness to them, and curses some of them for
this cause. But truly God, pitying his people, extraordinarily supplied the
negligence of ordinary officers. 2 Chronicles. 10. and 11.
Rehoboam the son of Solomon, refuses to ease the people of unnecessary
Tributes, being entreated to do it in a general Assembly of all the people,
he grows insolent, and assisted with the counsel of flatterers, even
arrogantly threatens more grievous burdens; No man doubts, August. l. 1. 7. de
Civil. Dei c. 22.
but that according to the covenant first made between the King and people,
the Nobles might have restrained this pride: But the sin was in this, that
they did by secession, which was to be done in the Assembly; and did a just and
lawful thing unjustly. Frequent examples of this thing occur in other
Kingdoms: he instanceth in Tarquin the proud, expelled by Brutus and
Lucretius; who confiscated his goods, and would have publicly sentenced
himself, had they apprehended his person, because he consulted not with the
Senate as former Kings usually did, because he made war, peace, and truces at
his pleasure without the Senates and peoples advice, violated the Laws which
he should observe, and neglected the covenant established between the King and
people: in Nero the Emperor, publicly sentenced by the Senate, Vitellius,
Maximinus; and the speech of T^^jan (forecited): Likewise the Sea Hotoman.
Francogallia. c. 6. to 14.
French, by authority of a public Council through the care of the Kingdoms
officers, expelled Childericke the first, Sigibert, Theodoricke, Childericke
the third, from the Crown, for their tyranny, and set up others of another
stock in their places. Yea, for sloathfulnesse, negligence, madness, as also
for injuries to Forrainers, and yielding to the impotencie or lust of
flatterers, or women, they have deposed some, and as it were taken away the
reins from Phaeton, lest all men should be burnt with the same fire; as
Theodoricke for Ebroines sake, Dagobert of Plectrude, and Theobald his
Mignions, with others; reputing it to be all one, whether a woman or an
effeminate Prince reigned; or whether a tyrant, or petite tyrants under a
sloathfull Prince domineered: or finally, whether he himself were a Devil, or
possessed by the Devil himself. Thus not long since they compelled Jews the
eleventh, a most imperious Prince to receive 36. Governors, by whose counsel
he was bound to govern the Republike. Yea, what other right had either the
Carlingi, adopted into the Kingdom in place of the Meruingi; or the Cape^s who
at this day hold it, preferred before the Carlingi by the Decree of a public
Council; but from the people, represented as it were in an Epitome, Froissard.
l. 1. c. 1. and seq^. Ant. de But. Consil. quod positum inter Consil. Paul. de
Castra vol. Antiqu. nu 412 in^cip. Viso puncto. Martini. Laudensis in Tract. de
Cardin in 2. qu. 35. Phil. De in: quodam consilio, cujus verba f^erunt Andr.
Barbar. in D. cons. 1. l. 2. c. 6. Bald. in l. Olim. col. peri. de rescri. in
Decretal. Bonifac. 8. de May. and obed.
by the Council of the Realm, which they call an Assembly of the three
Estates, who might lawfully of right both depose those, and by their own
authority establish these in the Throne? In the same manner we read Adolphus
deprived of the German Empire, An. 1296. because corrupted with money, he had
made war with France, in favor of the English: and Wenceslaus, An. 1400.
although these may be called, not so well evil, as less good Princes. Thus in
the Realm of England, Edward the second, for his tyranny to his Subjects,
especially the Nobles, whom he destroyed without hearing their cause, was at
his Queens request, adjudged unworthy of his Crown by the Parliament. Not
long since, Christierne in Denmark, Ericus in Sweden, Queen Mary very lately
in Scotland, were deprived: which Histories worthy credit testfie, has been
frequently done in the Kingdom of Poland, Hungary, Spine, Portugal, Bohemia,
and the rest. But what concerning the Pope himself? The Cardinals, they say,
because they have chosen him, or if they do not their duty, the Patriarks, who
are Primates next after the Cardinals, may against his will, for certain
causes call a Council, and in it judge the Pope, if he shall scandalize the
Church by his notorious offenses; if he be incorrigible, if reformation be
necessary as well in the head as members; if contrary to his Oath he will not
assemble a Council, and the like; and de facto, we read that many Popes have
been deposed by authority of a Council. But if (says Baldus) they be
pertinaciously abused; at first they must use words, secondly, herbs, that is,
medicines; lastly, stones; and where the truth of virtue suffices not, there
the defense of weapons ought to prevail. But and if by the suffrages almost of
all learned men, the Decrees of Councels, and the Acts themselves done, it be
proved, that a Council, as they speak, may lawfully depose the Pope, who yet
boasts himself to be the King of Kings, and claims as much to be above the
Emperor, as the Sun is above the Moon; yea, also arrogates to himself an
authority of deposing Kings and Emperors at his pleasure; who at last can
doubt, but that by the public Council of every Realm, not only a tyrant,
but a King, pernicious to his Kingdom for his madness or folly, may be
deposed or removed?

Go to now, in this our politic Ship, the Master gluts himself with wine;
most of his assistants either asleep, or drunk with mutual cups sportingly
behold an imminent Rock. The Ship in the mean time, either holds not that
course which is expedient for the owner, or seems speedily to be wracked; what
think thou is here to be done under the Master, by one who is vigilant and
sollicitous? Shall he pull those by the ears who are asleep, or only jogge
them by the sides? but in the mean time, lest he should seem to do ought
without their command, Plato. l. 8. and 9. de Repub.
shall he not afford his help and assistance to the endangered Ship? Truly
what madness, or rather impiety will this be? Seeing then (as Plato says)
tyranny is a certain frenzy and drunkenness, the Prince may utterly subvert
the Republike, the most of the Nobles may collude, connive, or at least are
fast asleep: the people who are Lords of the Republike, by the fraud or
negligence of these ministers, which is their fault, are reduced into greatest
straights: in the mean time there is one of the Nobles which considers the
incroaching tyranny, and detests it from his soul, what think thou is now
to be done against him by this man? Shall he only admonish his Colleagues of
their duty, who themselves do as much hurt as they may? But, besides, as it is
perilous to admonish, and in that state of things it may be deemed a capital
crime, shall he do like those, who contemning other helps, casting away their
arms, shall cite Laws, and make an Oration concerning justice among thieves,
in the midst of a wood? but this truly, is that which is co^moly said, to be
madle with reason: L. 3. and l. omne delictum. Sect. ult D. de re milit.
What then? shall he grow deaf at the peoples groans? shall he be silent at
the entrance of thieves? or shall he finally grow lasie, and put his hands into
his bosom? But if the Laws appoint the punishment of a Traitor against one
wearing buskins on his legs, who counterfeits sickness for fear of the
enemies, with punishment at least shall we decree against him, who either
through malice, or sloathfulnesse, shall betray those whom he has undertaken
to protect? But rather he shall command those things that are needful to such
as are wary by a Mariners shout; he shall take care lest the Commonwealth
receive any detriment, and shall preserve the Kingdom even against the Kings
will and resistance, by which he himself becomes a King; and shall cure the
King himself as a frantic man, by binding his hands and feet, if he may not
otherwise do it. C. nullus in Carthagin. Council. Doctores Pentificii.
For, as we have said, the universal government of the Realm is not committed
by the people to the King, as neither the oversight of the whole Church to the
Pope, but to every one of the Nobles according to his power. But certainly,
because concord proceeds from unity, that there should be no emulation among
Peers, a King was instituted, who should hold the supreme place in the
administration of the Commonwealth. The King swears that he will seek the
safety of the Realm; the Nobles swear every one the same by himself: whether
therefore the King or most of the Nobles neglecting their oath, shall either
destroy the Commonweal, or desert it being in danger, ought the rest therefore
to desert the Republike, or at least be less bound to defend it, as if they
were absolved from their oath? But rather then especially they ought to show
their fidelity, when as others neglect it, especially since they were
principally instituted for that end, like the Ephori; and every thing may then
be reputed just, when it attaines its end: whether truly if many have promised
the same thing, is the obligation of the one dissolved by the perjury of the
other? whether if many be guilty of the same finne, are the rest freed by the
fraud of one? Whether, if many Co-gardians ill defend their Pupil, shall one
good man be less bound with the burden of the wardship through their default?
But rather, neither can they avoid the infamy of perjury, unless they
endeavor to satisfy their trust as much as in them lies; neither can those
exempt themselves from the danger and judgment of a Gardianship ill
administered, L. 3. D. de administ. and perie. tutor. and cur. l. 3. D.
desuspect. tut. and curat.
unless they implead the other Gardians suspected; when as verily one Guardian
may not only implead the rest suspected, and take care of those to be removed,
but also remove them. Therefore those who have promised their aid and
assistance to all the Realm or Empire; such as Earls of the stable, Marshals,
Senators, and the rest; or those who have done it specially to any County or
City which may make a part of the Realm; as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Majors,
and the rest, are bound to aid the whole Commonweal oppressed with tyranny,
or that part thereof, which the people have committed to them next after the
King. And thesetruly ought to vindicate the whole Commonweal from tyranny, if
they be able; those as Gardians assigned throughout Counties, that part of the
Realm whose defense they have undertaken: These I say, are bound to restaine a
tyrant, those to drive him out of their coasts. Macca^. lib. I. ^. 3. v. 45.
Therefore Mattathias as one of the Nobles, the rest partly conniving, partly
colluding; when Antiochus tyrannically oppressed the Kingdom of Judah, speaks
thus to the people ready to take up arms: Let us restore the state of our
people; let us fight for our people, and our holy places: whence it plainly
appears, that we may not only lawfully fight for Religion, but for our
Country; for an hearth I say, no lest justly then for our Altars, and take up
arms against such a tyrant as he was: neither are they blamed by any, for
recovering the Kingdom, but that they claimed the royal dignity to
themselves, Justin. l. I. Diodor. l. 2. c. 37.
which pertained to the Tribe of Judah. Many pertinent examples to this purpose
occur in Historians. Arbactus governor of Media, slew Sardanapalus spinning
among women, and spending the royal treasure among whores. Vindex President of
the French, and Galba of the Spaniards revolted from Nero, together with all
France and Spain, the Senate conniving at his tyranny. But especially that
Laconick judgment is observable, which verily proceeding from that Senate,
ought to pass into a thing adjudged among all Nations. When the Lacedaemonians
possessed Byzantium, they made Clearches Captain of the Army, Governor of the
City, who taking corn from the Citizens, distributed it to the foreign
soldiers; but in the mean time the families of the Citizens perished with
famine. An^xilaus therefore, one of the Magistrates of the City, moved with
that tyranny, agreed with Alcibiades about the yielding up of his Country to
him, and he soon after is received into the City. Anexilaus being accused at
Sparta for yielding up of Byzantium, pleaded his cause himself, the Spartanes
absolved the man; because they said, wars were to be waged with enemies, not
with the nature of things; now nothing is more repugnant to nature, then, if
those who are bound to defend a City, became more unjust then the enemies. Thus
the Lacedaemonians determined justly, to whom scarce any good Kings will not
assent; verily those who desire to rule well, care not at all what is
determined concerning tyrants, or what the Nobles or people themselves may do
by Law. But we must yet proceed further. Every one of the Mariners is bound, if
the Ship be endangered through the default or negligence of the Ship-master, to
put to his helping hand: every one of the Nobles is bound, if the Republike
perish by the wickedness or carelessness of the Prince and his Colleagues, to
help it, being like to fall, and to vindicate the whole Kingdom, or at least
that part thereof which is committed to him, from tyranny. But then shall it be
lawful for every ordinary slave to do the like? or peradventure shall it be
lawful to Herdonius Subinus, Euno Surianus, Spartacus the fencer, or, I say,
to any private man to enfranchise servants, to stir up Subjects to arms,
finally to combat with the Prince, if tyranny urge them? No verily. The
republike is not committed to single or private men, yea they themselves are
committed to the care of the Nobles and Magistrates no otherwise then Pupils.
Therefore they are not bound to defend the Republike, who cannot defend
themselves. L. 1. c. de Seditiosis.
The sword is not committed to every man neither by God, nor by the people;
therefore if they draw the sword without command, they are seditious, although
the cause may seem to be just. Finally, private men do not make the Prince,
but all. Therefore they ought to expect the command of all, or of those, I say,
who represent all in a Realm, Country or City, which may make a part of the
Realm, or at least of one of them, before they attempt any thing against the
Prince. For as a Pupil cannot bring an action without authority of his Tutor,
although the Pupil be truly a Lord, L. l. l. 9. D. de author. and consil*
tutor. and curat.
and the Tutor only is reputed for the Lord, as far forth as appertains to
his tutelary providence: So neither may the people do ought, but by the
authority of those, on whom they have transferred their authority and power;
whether they be ordinary Magistrates, or extraordinarily, created in a public
Assembly; whom, I say, they have guirded with the sword for this purpose, to
whom they have delivered themselves up to be governed and cared for; Seneca l.
8. de Benefi^.
who finally like that Praetor of Rome, who judged between servants and
masters, are truly constituted in that place, that if any contention arise
between King and Subjects, they may show themselves Judges and Redressors,
lest the Subjects themselves should pronounce sentence in their own cause.
Therefore if unjust customs or grievous taxes be imposed, if things be done
against pacts or fraudulently, and yet not one of the Nobles speaks against or
resists it, let them think they must then sit still, and think, that the best
Physicians to prevent or take away a disease, do oft-times prescribe the
opening of a vein; the evacuation of humors, yea and scarification. For such
is the nature of things, that scarce any mischief can be cured without
another; scarce any good may be acquired without diligent labor. They have the
example of the people under Solomen, who refused not the grievous tributes
imposed on them for the building of the Temple, and fortifying the Kingdom;
because they judged those things to be imposed by the public Council, to the
glory of God, the beauty and ornament of the Republike. They have likewise the
example of Christ our Savior, who although he were the King of Kings, yet
because he then sustained a private person, he paid tribute willingly. If the
Nobles and Magistrates themselves favor apparent tyranny, John 34. v. 30.
or at least oppose it not, they may remember, that for the sins of the
people, God suffers Hypocrites to reign; whom, unless they turn themselves
to God with all their heart, cannot be overturned with any engines. Therefore
there is no need of feet or hands, but bended knees. Finally, they must suffer
evil Princes, wish for better, and think, they must bear that tyranny with a
patient mind as they do hail, storms, tempests, and other natural
calamities, or change their habitations. David retired into the Mountains, and
spared Saul a tyrant, because he was none of the Nobles of the people: Christ,
because he was not of this world fled into Egypt, to avoid Herod's tyranny.
Paul, because he describes the office of private Christians, not of
Magistrates, teaches that they must obey Nero himself. But if all the Nobles,
or most of them, or at least one of them endeavor to restrain apparent
tyranny, or the Magistrate to drive it from that part of the Realm which is
committed to him, if he be such a one, as under pretext of expelling it, may
not introduce another tyranny; then verily assembling together, they may run
who shall go fastest to this choice man, they may earnestly assist with their
feet and hands, and as if God himself had given a sign from Heaven, of a
fight against tyrants, endeavor to free the Kingdom from tyranny. For as God
punishes and chastises the people by tyrants, so likewise tyrants by the
people: Eccles. 10.
and that is a perpetual truth which Syrach says; that Kingdoms are
translated from Nation to Nation, for the iniquities, injuries, and wickedness
of Princes; and that every tyranny continues but a short space. Thus the
Captains and soldiers carefully executed all the commands of Iehojada the
High Priest, in revenging the tyranny of Queen Athaliah: Thus all the godly
men of Israel went to the Maccabees, partly that they might defend the true
worship of God, partly that they might free the Republike against the impious
and unjust attempts of Antiochus; yea God favored their just endeavors, and
gave them prosperous success, What then? May not God likewise out of private
men themselves raise up some avenger of tyranny? Cannot the very same who
raises up tyrants out of the people, backed with no title, no pretext, to
punish the people, likewise raise up deliverers also out of the lowest of the
people? Cannot the same who enthralled the people to Iabin and Eglon, deliver
the same people by Ehud, Barac, Deborah, and as it were manumit them when they
were deserted by the Nobles? What therefore should now hinder, thou will say,
but that the same God who has sent Tyrants on us at this time, should likewise
extraodinarily send revengers of tyrants? Why, if Ahab rages againt good men,
if Iezabel suborne false witnesses against Naboth, shall not there be also a
Iehu, which may extirpate the family of Ahab, who may avenge the blood of
Naboth, who may cast down Iezabel to be torn in pieces of Dogs? Verily,
what I have answered before, as nothing has departed from the justice of God
at any time, so not from his mercy. But yet since those evident signs, by
which God was wont to confirm these extraordinary vocations of those Worthies,
are for the most part wanting to us in this age, let the people take heed, lest
whiles they seek to pass over Sea with a dry foot, some Impostor being
their Captain, they fall not headlong into a gulf, which we read sometimes to
have happened to the Jews: lest whiles they seek a revenger of tyranny, they
perchance follow one, who, that tyrant being expelled, will translate the
tyranny it self unto himself: lest finally whiles they seek to deserve well
of the Commonwealth, they militate to the private lust of any; so as that may
fall out which has happened to many Republikes, especially the Italian, whiles
that they endeavor to remove the present evil, they bring in a far greater.

I shall close up this with three Authorities more; the first, of Mr. John
Calvin, who pleads as much for obedience to Tyrants and unjust Magistrates as
any man: Instit. lib. 4. c. 20. sect. 31. I always speak of private men: For
if there be any popular Magistrates constituted to moderate the lust of Kings
(such as heretofore were the Ephori, who were opposed to the Lacedaemonian
Kings, or Tribunes of the people against the Roman Senate; or the Demarchi
against the Athenian Senate, and which power peradventure, as now things stand,
The three Estates in all Kingdoms enjoy, when they assemble) I am so far
from in^ibiting them to withstand the raging licentiousness of Kings,
according to their duty: that if they connive at Kings outragiously encroaching
upon, and insulting over the inferior common people, I shall affirm, that
their dissimulation wants not nefarious perfidiousnesse, because they
fraudulently betray the liberty of the people of which they know themselves
ordained protectors by Gods ordinance. The second is, Fuldericus Zuinglius:
Explanatio Artic. 42. Quando vero perfide and extra, Regulam Christi
(Principes) egerint, possint cum Deo deponi, consensu and suffragiis totius,
aut certe potioris partis multitudinis. Quaeris quando id fiet, ut major pars
populi bono consentiat? Ad hoc dico quod antea; si non consentiunt ut ma^um
tollant, ferant jugum Tyranni, and demum cum eo per^ant. Nec querantur sibi
fieri inju^iam, cum sua culpa id mereantur ut quidvis pati^^ntur. Quis ergo
miretur si populus ob flagitia and scelera Principum paenas luat? Primum, cur
non juxta naurae regulam cum proximo agimus? Sic enim omnes frat^es essemus,
and Principe nullo esset opus. Deinde, cur non summo studio justitiam sectamur,
and exosam habemus injustitiam omnes? Sic enim facile fieret ut unanimi
consensu tyrannunt officio moveremus. Nunc cum tam ^epidi sumus in tuenda
justitia publica, sinimus ut impune vitia Tyrannorum hodie regnent. Merito ergo
ab illis conterimur, and tandem cum illis luimus. Non ergo desunt viae per quas
tyranni tollantur, sed deest publica justitia. Cavete vobis, O Tyranni,
Evangelium enim Jesus Christi late sparsum vitam multorum innovabit ut
innocentiae and justitiae plurimi studeant, cui and si vos studueritis, summo
honor vos prosequantur, sin furere and vim facere perrexeritis, omnium pedibus
concul^abimini. So he

The last is the general Union of the States of the united Provinces, to
defend their Liberties and Religion, made at Brussels, the tenth of January
1577. thus related by Grimston in his History of the Netherlands l. 10. p. 492.
493.

The States seeing themselves engaged in war on all sides against the
Spaniards, (who were proclaimed enemies to the Country) fearing some disunion
amongst themselves, by the enticing persuasions of such as sought to dismember
them, they resolved, before that Don John should enter into the Country, to
make a general union among themselves, as well Prelates, Noblemen, and Towns,
as of others of the seventeene Provinces: which was allowed by the Lords of the
Council of State, deputed by the King, for the government general of the said
Countries; whereof the Original remains in the custody of the States of
Brabant. Of which Union, the Tenor follows.

A general Union of the States.
WE who have signed these presents; Prelates, Churchmen, Noblemen, Gentlemen,
Magistrates of the King, Towns, Castles, and others, making and representing
the States of the seventeene Provinces, being presently assembled in this Town
of Brussels, and others, being under the obedience of the most high, mighty,
and famous Prince, King Philip, our Sovereign Lord and natural Prince; we
give all men to understand, both present and to come, That seeing our common
Country afflicted by a more then barbarous and tyrannous oppression of
Spaniards, we have been forced and moved to unite our selves together, and
with Arms, Counsel, Men, and Money, to assist one another against the said
Spaniards, and their adherents; being declared Rebels to his Majesty, and our
enemies. And that this union and conjunction has been since confirmed by the
Pacification last made; and all by the authority and consent of the Council of
State, committed by his Majesty for the general government of the said
Countries: And as the pretended end of this Union requires all fidelity,
constancy, and natural assistance for ever; and that we would not by any
misprision have cause of jealousy or mistrust, and much less of any bad
affection or disposition of any of us; but contrariwise, to have the affairs
of the said Union effected with all the sincerity, fidelity, and diligence that
may be, so as not any of the subjects and inhabitants of the said Countries and
Province may have any just cause to be discontented, or to doubt of us:

For these considerations and reasons, and that nothing may be treacherously
done, to the prejudice of our common Country, and just defense; or that
omitted by negligence, which shall be necessary for our just and lawful
defense; We have by virtue of our power and commission respectively, and
otherwise for us and our successors, promised and do promise, by the faith of
Christians, of honest men and true Contrymen, to keep and entertain
inviolably for ever the said Union and Association; so as not any one of us may
break or fall from it, by dissimulation, secret intelligence, or in any sort
whatsoever. And that for the preservation of our holy, Catholic, and Romish
Faith, and the accomplishment of the Pacification, as also for the expulsion of
Spaniards and their adherents (with all due obedience to his Majesty) for the
good and quiet of our Country, and the maintenance of our Privileges, rights,
Freedoms, Statutes, Customs, and ancient uses: For the effecting whereof, we
will use all means possible; employing both Money, Men, Counsel, and goods,
yea and our lives, if it were necessary, And that none of us may in private
give any counsel, advice, or consent, nor have any secret conference with them
that are not of this Union, nor yet reveal unto them in any sort what has or
shall be treated of in this Assembly, o^ resolved; but shall wholly conform
himself according to our general and common resolution.

And in case, that any Province, Estate, Country, Town, Castle, or House,
were besieged, assaulted, invaded, or oppressed in any sort whatsoever: yea, if
any of us, or any others (having endeavored himself for his Country and the
just defense thereof, against the Spaniards, or for other causes depending
thereon, as well in general as particular) should be sought after, imprisoned,
ransomed, molested, or disquieted in his person, and goods, honor, and estate,
or otherwise; we promise to give him assistance by all the said means; yea,
and to procure the liberty of them that shall be imprisoned, either by force,
or otherwise; upon pain to be degraded of their Nobility, Name, Arms, and
Honor, and to be held perjured, disloyal, and enemies to our Country, before
God and men, and to incur the note of Infamy and cowardice for ever. And for
the strengthening of this our holy Union of Association, we have signed these
presents the tenth of January, 1577.

Underneath were the signatures of the Deputies of every Province, Prelates,
Noblemen, and Commissioners for Towns; and underneath them, was written the
agreation of the Council of State, as follows: The Deputies of the general
Estates here underwritten, having required them of the Council of State,
committed by his Majesty for the government of the Netherlands, to consent unto
and allow of that which is contained in the Union above written: The Council,
in regard of the said request, and the reasons therein contained, have as much
as in them lay, allowed, and do allow by these presents, the said Union,
according to the form and tenor. Made at Brussels in the State-house, in the
Assembly of the said States, the tenth of January, 1577. And underneath was
written:

By the commandment of the Lords of the Council of State: Signed; Berrii.

If any shall here object; Object. 1.
that Chassanaeus in con^ue, tud Burg. Rebuffus ad constit. Reg. Tom. 2. and
Bene^ic. ante vac. art. 2. Bodin. de repub. l. 1. c. 10
Kings are of divine institution; whence, Dei gratia, (By the grace of God) is
peculiarly annexed to their Titles; and not communicated unto Subjects.
Therefore though they prove never so flagitious or tyrannical, they may in no
wise be forcibly resisted, or questioned by their Nobles and Parliaments for
their crimes.

I answer briefly (because I have Part. 3. p. 115. to 123.
elsewhere largely dissipated this objection) First, that Kings are no more of
divine institution, then any other inferior Magistrates Officers, or Princes
what soever; as the Romans 13. 1, 2, 2, 4, 5, 6. Prove. 8. 15. 16.
Scriptures abundantly evidence. But all other inferior Magistrates, Officers,
and Princes whatsoever are resistible, questionable, censurable, and deposible
for their tyranny, wickedness, and misgovernment by the Parliaments censure,
as I Part. 2. p. 44. 45.
have proved, notwithstanding their divine institution; therefore such
degenerating Kings too, as well as they in such cases.

Secondly, all Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 28. c. 4. 1. 2 Cor. 3. 6. c. 11. 23. 2 Timothy 4. 6.
Ministers of the Gospel, are as much, (if not far more) Iure divino, and by
Gods own ordination, as Kings are; a truth undeniable confessed by all our
Kings in their ordinary Writs to Bishops as the words, See (f)
REX EADEM GRATIA, Episcopo, attest. But they for their offenses and
misdemeanors contrary to their function, may be both forcibly resisted,
censured, deprived, degraded, yea and executed, thnotith standing their divine
right and institution; as the Canons of most Councels, we practice of all ages,
yea, the express letter of the 26. Article of the Church of England, with all
our Episcopal Canons and Canonists attest: Therefore tyrannical degenerating
Kings may be so too, by the selfsame reason, in some cases.

Thirdly, this Title of Dei gratia, in Public Writs, anciently has been, and
yet is common to Bishops, Prelates, inferior Magistrates, and Subjects, as
well as to Kings; as sundry precedents Ragister. pars 2. f. 3. 23. 60 62 303.
7. 31. 33. 35. 38. 44. 54 55. Pars 1. 286. 302, 303. 305. 306, 307. Pars 3. f.
5. 22. 26. 29 31. 35. 42. 47. Fitz. Not. Bre. 132.
in our Law books, Willielmus Dei GRATIA Eliensis ^pisc. etc. Mattheus Pars.
p. 155.
Matthew Paris, Proaem. Relect. in leg. Taurin. 36. Object. 2.
Salon, with others attest, and Mr. John Seldom in his Titles of Honor, part.
1. chap. 7. Sect. 2, p. 123. professedly proves at large, to whom I shall
refer you: But these both lawfully may be, and always have been forcibly
resisted, questioned, convented, deprived, censured for their tyranny and
misdemeanors, notwithstanding this their style of Dei gratia, or pretense of
divine institution: yea, we know that Bishops have been lately thrust out of
many Churches, notwithstanding their long pretended Ius Divinum to support
their Hierarchy; and John Gerson a Papist, has writ a particular Treatise De
Auferibilitate Papae, notwithstanding the Popes pretended Divine Title to his
Monarchy, which may be now, and one day shall be totally abolished. Therefore
tyrannical degenerous Kings, may be justly resisted, censured, deprived, as
well as they, and royalties changed into other governments, by the peoples and
kingdoms common consents, if they see just cause.

If any secondly object: See Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, Part. 1. c. 8. sect.
1.
That Kings are anointed at their Coronation; Therefore their persons are
sacred, irresistible, unquestionable, unpunishable, for any tyrannical or
exorbitant actions whatsoever.

I briefly answer: first, that every Christians Baptism, (being a Sacrament
of Christ's own institution) at least his spiritual unction and
sanctification, (as I have Part. 3. p. 89. to 94.
formerly proved) makes a person as sacred, yea more holy, then Kings
annoynting (being no Sacrament) can, or does of it self make the person of any
King whatsoever. A truth which no Christian can without blasphemy deny. But
Baptism, and the inward unction of the spirit of grace and sanctification,
exempts no Christians from resistance, censure, punishments of all sorts, in
case they commit any exorbitant or capital crimes; as experience tells us:
Therefore Kings Coronation annoyntings cannot do it.

Secondly, Part. 3. p. 92. 93. Petrus Cunaeus de Republ. Hebrae. l. 1. c. 14.
Pontif. and Ceremoniale Romanum.
Priests anciently were and at this day too in the Roman Church, are anointed
as well as Kings; and so are children and si^ke persons (that I say not Altars,
Bells, etc.) with Chrisme and extreme Unction: But these Unctions confer no
such immunity to Priests, children, sick men, others, etc. Therefore neither
can this annoynting do it to Kings, especially now, being no divine
institution.

Thirdly, The annoynting of Kings, is not common to all Christian Kings (many
of them especially in former times, having been crowned without any annoynting
at all) but peculiar to Emperors, and to the Kings of Jerusalem, France,
England, and Sictly, the four anointed Kings, only, as Ad Tit. de Stat Ho^.
l. 1.
Albericus, De Imp qu. 18. and 19.
Restaurus Castaldus, De Potest. Regia. part. 4. Sect. 16.
Antonius Corsetus, Moral. Iustit. pars 2. ^. 10 c. 5.
Azorius, Catalogus Gloriae mundi, p. 5. Consid. 35.
Cassanaeus, and See Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, part. 1. c. 8. Sect. 1.
sundry others affirm, out of the old Roman Provincial: though some other
Kings have now and then been anointed when they were crowned, as Mr. Seldom
Proves. Since therefore all Kings persons are reputed sacred, as well as these
four who are anointed; and these Kings as soon as the Crown descended to
them, even before their Unctions and Coronations were deemed as sacred and
inviolable as before; it is certain, that their very enoyling of it self
makes no addition to their personal immunities from just resistance, public
censures, or deprivations for gross unsufferable public crimes.

Fourthly, the annoynting of Christian Emperors and Kings is not very ancient.
Charles the great being the first anointed Emperor it we Titles of Honor,
part. 1. c. 8. Sect. 1.
believe Mr. Seldom. The first anointed King in France, was Pipin about the
year 750. the annoynting of their See Seldom, Ibid. p. 148. 149.
Clovis the first, about they year 500. with that holy Vial of never-decaying
Oil (reserved at Rheimes to annoint their Kings) which they say a Dove brought
down from Heaven to annoint him with, (a ridiculous Monkish, fable, much
insisted on by Decreta Eccles. Gal. lib 5. Tit. 2. c. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Mr.
Seldom Ibid. p. 148. 149.
Bochellus and other Frenchmen, who relate the grand solemnity used in the
carrying and recarrying of this fabulous Vial, at the French Kings Coronations)
being not at his Coronation, as many fondly mistake, but only at his baptism,
as Mr. Seldom manifests by pregnant authorities; The annoynting of Kings is
far more ancient in England then in any other Realm, Ibid p. 149 150, 151,
152.
as Mr. Seldom notes out of Gildas; yet Egfert is the first of whose annoynting
there is any intimation in our Histories, about the year 790. To add to the
holiness of which ceremony, some of our Tho. Walsingham. in. Initio, H. 4. See
Seldom. Ibid. p. 153.
Monks in latter ages have forged a Legend ( as good as that of the holy Vial
at Rheimes) that the Virgin Mary gave to Thomas Becket, Archbishop of
Canterbury ( during his exile under Henry the second) a golden Eagle full of
precious Oil, enclosed in a stone vessel, commanding him to preserve it:
foretelling him, that the Kings of England anointed with this Oil, should be
Champions of the Church, and bountiful, and victorious as long as they had
^his Eagle, and oil. How late the Unction of Kings began in other Realms, you
may read at large in Titles of Honor, part. 1 c. 8. Sect. 11.
Mr. Seldom; and how the later Kings of Judah were anointed, and with what
unguent or Oil, the curious may read at leisure in De Republ. Hebrae. l. 1. c.
14.
Cunaeus. This annoynting therefore of Kings being not of divine institution,
of such puny date in most Realms, and no ways necessary nor essential to the
constitution or Inauguration of any Christian King; can add no immunity, or
privilege at all to the persons of Kings, much less exempt them from all
forcible resistance, just censures, or deprivation it self, if there be just
and real cause to proceed criminally against them in case of incorrigibility,
as I have elsewhere more fully demonstrated, and therefore shall no further
expatiate in this particular here: only I shall conclude with one notable
History which proves it.

I read in Rerum Anglicarum, l. 3. c. 6. See Saxo grammaticus Dan. Hist. l. 8.
p. 140.
Gulielmus Neubrigensis; that for an hundred years space and more, though
there were a numerous succession of Kings in Norway, yet none of them ended his
life by old age or sickness, but all of them perished by the sword, leaving
the sovereign power of the Realm to their murderers, as to their lawful
successors, so as to all those who are known to have reigned there for so long
a time, that which is written might seem to have reference; Have thou slain,
and also taken possession? The Nobles of this Land out of a pious endeavor,
desirous to heal this infamous mischief, obteining now the vigor of a Law as
it were through long custom, decreed, That the new King should be solemnly
anointed with a mystical unction, and crowned, so as no man should dare from
thenceforth to lay hands on the Lords anointed: For till that time none in
that Nation has ever been consecrated King after an Ecclesiastical manner,
but whosoever had Tyrannically slain a King, put on the person and power of a
King thereby, and left the same likewise after a little fortune to his
murderer, by a law of inveterate custom, which verily, out of acertaine
Christian simplicity, was thought by many to have been therefore so frequently
done, because none of the former Kings had deserved to be initiated with the
solemnity of a Royal Unction. Therefore Haco being slain who had succeeded
King J^ge slain by him, when the succession of the Crown seemed to belong to
one Magnus a child, Nephew to J^ge, the Wisemen and Nobles of the Realm by a
common Decree, caused the said child to be solemnly consecrated to be the Lords
anointed, and crowned with a Diadem. By which deed they thought that they had
a Prince made sacred to them, and that the disgrace of the ancient custom was
thereby abolished. But when Magnus had reigned some few years in great
prowess and happiness, a most infamous Priest Suerus, surnamed Birkebain,
usurped a Tyranny, twice defeated Magnus by warlike stratagems, and at last
utterly routed and slew him in battle; (notwithstanding his annoynting) and
usurping the Crown, renounced his holy orders, married a wife, and would have
been crowned by the Archbishop of that Land; but he being a great man, would
neither be moved with prayers nor threats, to annoint an execrable head with
sacred Unction, for which he was banished the Country: at last after two great
victories against two competitors who were slain, Suerus obtained the Royal
Crown, with mystical Unction, by the hands of a certain Bishop compelled
thereunto under pain of death, as it were secure by his frequent successes,
from the uncertain end of a long prospering tyranny, etc. By which History it
is evident, that it is but a childish simplicity to believe, that the ceremony
of annoynting Kings can of it self make Kings persons sacro-sanct, or preserve
them from violence or assassinations, since it no way prevented this mischief
in this Realm, (nor yet in any other) the very first King for whose personal
safety this ceremony of annoynting and crowning was introduced among the
Norwegians and Danes, being not long after slain by his Subjects and
competitor in battle.

I shall close up this with the notable sentence of deprivation solemnly given
and executed against Wenceslaus the Emperor, notwithstanding his annoynting.

The sentence of Degradation and Deprivation of the Emperor Wenceslaus King of
Romans, pronounced by the Electors of the Empire in the year of our Lord. 1400.
IN the name of God Amen: (...) Chronico Iacobi Congshumi, and Germaniae
Historicorum. Tom. 2. p. 180. ^81, 182.
We John by the grace of God, Archbishop of the Church of Mentz,
Arch-chancellor of the sacred Roman Empire throughout Germany, make known to
all men present and to come. What various, manifold, and grievous, as well
incommodities as discords, have for many years since been brought into the
holy Church continuing even to this present, and daily sprouting up more
abundantly to the most grievous convulsion, imminution, and dissipation of the
sacred Roman Empire, (which ought to be a Garrison to the Church of God and the
Christian world) as they cannot be all written, so the mischiefs daily
increasing do manifestly enough teach and confirm. And for this cause the
Lords Electors of the sacred Roman Empire, the ardent petitions of the holy
Church, Princes, Nobles, Cities, Provinces, and Subjects of the sacred Empire,
entreating, desiring a prudent Moderator, have long agone very often and
seriously, together with us admonished the most illustrious Prince Lord
Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, both by their own and their friends labor, and
finally by letters; and have diligently set before his eyes, privately and
publicly, his unbeseeming and detestable manners and actions in governing, as
also the defects, incommodities and discords of the said Church and Christian
world, likewise the most grievous avulsions and diminutions of the members of
the sacred Empire, hurtfully done, and permitted to be done, against the
dignity of his name: to wit, that he has not promoted peace in the Church,
although the great necessity of the Christian world, as likewise his office of
Advocate and Defendor of the Church, earnestly required it, and he has also
been frequently desired, required, and admonished to do it: he
notwithstanding perniciously mutilated the Empire, and permitted it to be
maimed in some members. In the number whereof are Millain, and the Province of
Lombardy, which were of the right of the same Roman Empire, most ample
emoluments returning thence to the Empire: in which Dominion the Millainer,
like a Minister, enjoyed it as a part of the Roman Empire; when as He, contrary
to that which became his sublimity and dignity, receiving money, created a Duke
of Millain, and an Earl of Papia. Moreover, he has alienated diverse Cities
and Lands belonging to the Empire, as well in Germany as in Italy, some whereof
had returned to the same, having little consideration, that he ought to retain
them with the sacred Empire.

Moreover, he has sold for money to his friends, very many naked and unwritten
Parchments, ratified notwithstanding with the Seal of his Majesty; wherein it
was lawful both for them and others into whose hands these Parchments came, to
write what things they pleased under the royal Seal. Out of which thing, for
the hurtful diminution and dissipation of the rights and emoluments of the
sacred Roman Empire, great complaints are risen up. Moreover he never had any
care of the controversies and wars, which (alas for grief!) have ^iserably
afflicted and ruined Germany, and other lands of the sacred Empire. Hence
spoylings, burnings, and robberies have sprung up, with such lamentable
increases even at this day, that none, neither Clarks nor Laics, neither
husbandmen nor Merchants, neither men nor women, whether by land or sea, may
converse in safety. Temples, Monasteries, and religious houses, which the
sacred Empire ought with its hand to assist and defend, are exposed to rapines,
and burnings, and reduced to destruction. Things are gone to this pass, that
every one might have handled, and may even now handle another at his pleasure,
against the reason of right and equity, without any fear of the sacred, and
long despised Imperial authority, so as even the place of conventing any one,
where the defense and patronage of right may be undertaken in the name of the
Empire, is altogether unknown. Finally, which is horrible and dreadful to be
spoken, both with his own hand, and the hand of other wicked instruments he
has with him, he has put to death, drowned in the waters, burned in the fire,
miserably and cruelly destroyed, the reverend Bishops of holy things, Priests,
and spiritual Pastors, likewise many other men of honest note, against the
rule of right, otherwise then became the King of Romans. Which mentioned things
verily, and many other grievous wickednesses and damages are so divulged and
openly known, that they can be no ways excused or concealed. Therefore we, as
we have fore-written, have frequently very earnestly beseeched, admonished, and
required him, that renouncing this unbeseeming kind of life, he would take the
study and labor to himself, whereby he might recover to the holy Church,
oft-times imploring his aid, as King of Romans, and her Advocate, peace and
tranquillity, and to the sacred Empire, its prestine honors, Dominions, and
finally its emoluments; to the assistance and consolation of the Christian
world, grievously debilitated and oppressed in this regard.

Now albeit we have most clearly explicated to the foresaid Lord Wenceslaus,
and exhibited to him in writing, these and other more grievous defects,
concerning him as King of Romans, and the Empire; yet having heard his answers,
and having reiterated our serious exhortations, moreover having communicated
the business to the sacred Roman Sea, we have never as yet found him, to have
amended his manners as became a King of Romans; namely to recover peace to the
Church, principally n^cessary to the Christian world; also to the sacred
Empire, its dignities, lands, and Dominions: a thing which is most notoriously
known throughout all the Provinces of the Empire.

Therefore because we could no longer neither conceal, nor endure the
remembered and many other defects, touching the sacred Church and Empire, with
grievous loss and mourning; by reason of the instant petitions of the persons
aforesaid, but especially by reason of the Oath wherewith we are obliged to the
same, as the next superior members of the sacred Empire; therefore as of
bounden duty, we were to advise and endeavor how the sacred Empire might be
more rightly and wholesomly provided for, (by whose mad and negligent
administration those inconveniences have crept in) to the safeguard and
consolation of the Christian world. And verily as He in obeying us, had
performed an acceptable thing, so we have sufficiently and seriously called and
cited him, so as we have signified to him; that unless he should be present
at the place and day appointed, it would come to pass, that both in respect of
the petitions exhibited to us, as likewise in respect of our Oath, we should be
compelled to take and enter into such counsels, whereby the sacred Empire might
be better settled: most clearly attesting it in our letters. For this purpose
we appeared at the place and time prescribed, together with our Coelectors
sufficiently summoned, also with the other Princes and of the sacred Empire,
expecting from day to day, whether the foresaid Lord Wenceslaus would appear,
to apply a remedy to the foresaid diseases, and from thenceforth more rightly
to consult about the affairs of the sacred Empire. But he neither vouchsafed
to appear, nor yet to send any one to us in the name of a Proctor. Wherefore
when as by reason of so many pregnant and pernicious defects, we had admonished
and reproved him very often in private and in friendly manner, but after that,
when we could do no good, before the Princes and Nobles, and Cities of the
Empire, in diverse Assemblies, not without great and grievous expenses, yet
without any fruit; therefore we referred all the forementioned things to the
sacred Roman Sea. But when as neither then, he no whit regarded all those
things, we could conjecture nothing else from thence, but that he had laid
down the care both of the Church and Christian world, but especially of the
sacred Empire. Therefore resolving, that this mischief, destructive to the
whole Christian Republike, was by no means to be any longer borne and
tolerated, with a mind well confirmed, after many and various debates and
consultations, both between our selves, as also with other Princes and Nobles
of the sacred Empire, seriously had, for the safety of the Church, the
consolation of the Christian world, the honor and profit of the sacred Empire,
we have thought meet, that the foresaid Lord Wenceslaus, should at this time be
wholly removed from the Roman sacred Empire and all its dignity, as one that is
negligent and a destroyer of the Empire, and unworthy of it.

Therefore we John, Archbish. in the name of the foresaid Lords Coelectors of
the sacred Empire, and our own, moved both with the commemorated, as also with
many other notable defects and causes, by this our sentence, which we give and
pronounce by this our present writing, DEPRIVE and REMOVE the foresaid Lord
Wenceslaus, as an unprofitable, negligent waster, and unworthy Defender of the
sacred Empire, from the foresaid Roman Empire, and from all his degree,
dignity, and Dominions appertaining to the same: denouncing to all the Princes,
Nobles, Knights, Gentlemen, Cities, Provinces and Subjects of the sacred Roman
Empire, that they are altogether free from all homage and Oath made to the
person of Wenceslaus in the name of the Empire: requiring and admonishing them
under the faith of the Oath, wherewith they are obliged to the sacred Empire,
that they do not henceforth, obey, and submit to the said Lord Wenceslaus, as
the King of Romans, nor exhibit or suffer to be exhibited to him any right,
obedience, tribute, rent, or any other revenue, by what name soever it may be
called; but reserve the said duties, for a profitable and idon^ous King of
Romans, hereafter to be substituted by Gods gracious assistance.

In assurance and testimony of all which things, We John Archbishop of Mentz,
have caused this present Instrument to be made by the subscribed Notaries, in
this patent form, and our great Seal to be affixed thereunto. This premised
sentence was read and pronounced by us John Archbishop of Mentz, in our name,
and the names of the Lords, Coelectors before remembered, under the Castle
Lonstein at the Rhene, in the Diocese of Triers, reaching toward Brubachium,
out of a public Throne, erected for the use of a Tribunal, the Lords
Coelectors sitting there in judgment, in the year of our Lords Incarnation,
1400. the eight indiction, on Saturday the twentieth day of the month of
August, a little before the time of the Nones; in the eleventh year of the
Papacy of our most holy Father and Lord in Christ, Lord Boniface the ninth,
Pope, by divine providence; in the presence of the most illustrious Princes and
Lords, John, son of the most illustrious Prince and Lord Rupert, Duke of
Bavaria and Count Palatine of Rheine, Frederick Burgrave of Norimberge, the
Noble Philip Lord of Nassau, and Sarbrucke, Emichon of Luringen, John of
Zigenhaim, Cunrade Burgrave, our Canon of Mentz, Earls: Bernhard of
Westerburg, John of Limpurge, Rinehard of Honowe, Barons: Mr. Nicholas Berwin
of the sacred Page, John of Witenburg, and Nicholas Burgman, of the Decrees;
Mr. Herman President of Saint Gerion of Colen, Doctors of the Law: likewise the
valiant Knight Sigfride of Lindow, our Vice-Commander in Ringaugia; John Bossen
of Waldeck, our Buggrave Beckelnheim; and our trusty Henry Rulman, of
Dadenberg, Gerard of Emerberg, Lord in Lantscron, Frederick of Sachenheim,
Culman of Con^ren, John of Dalburg, Rudolfe of Zei^^ikon, as also many other
Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, spiritual and secular, standing by in great
number, called and requested to the things above written.

And I Nicholas Berchtoldi Fridberg, Clerk, public Notary of the Diocese of
Mentz, by Episcopal and Imperial authority, and sworn Scribe of my foresaid
most gracious Lord, Lord John Archbishop of Mentz, because at that time I was
personally present when this sentence which we have fore-writ, was given and
pronounced, together with the public Notaries and witnesses commemorated, and
saw and heard all these things to be done; therefore at the command and request
of my foresaid most gracious Lord of Mentz; have reduced this public
instrument faithfully put in writing, into public form, and have subsigned
and ratified it with my accustomed sign of Notariship, having likewise annexed
the great Seal of my foresaid Lord of Mentz, in assurance and testimony of all
the premises.

The names of the Notaries are, Nicholaus Berchtoldi Fridburgensis. Ioannes
Meier junior Gasterveidensis. Conradus a Leiborn, Clerious, Padebornensis
diaecesis. Henricus S^alberg Rotenbergensis. Tilmannus a Honberg. Conradus
Coler Zus^ensis, Coloniensis diaecesis.


Finally, it is evident; Observe. 10.
that the Nobles, Magistrates, Parliament, and representative body of the
people, or some part of them in default of the rest, may lawfully take up
defensive arms to resist their Princes, endeavoring to abrogate the Law of
God, to waste the Church, and exti^pate the true Religion settled among them by
the Laws, and usher in Idolatry. And, that in such a case as this, neighbor
Princes and States lawfully may, yea and ought in point of conscience, to aid
the Subjects of other Princes, afflicted for the cause of pure Religion
professed by them, or oppressed by open Tyranny.

These propositions are largely and professedly debated by Iunius Brutus in his
Vindiciae contra Tyrannos: quaest. 1. 2. and. 4. throughout, in the Treatise
entitled De Iure Magistratus in Subditos, spent wholly in this Theme.
Georgius Obrectus: Disput. Iurid. de Principiis Belli. Number. 125. to 199. by
Vasquius. Contr. Illustr. 36. n. 30. and elsewhere, by Alhericus Gentilis, and
sundry others forecited: I shall only fortify the later part thereof, with
the observation of the Interest of Princes. p. 58. and 4. See Grimstons Hist.
of the Netherlands l. 12. p. 766. 767 etc. 782. Speed p. 1192: to 1197. 1238.
1237.
Duke of Rhoan, who acquaints us; that it is, and has been of later years
the very true interest, honor, and greatness of the Kings and Queens of
England, both in point of policy and Religion, to protect and assist with arms
all Princes of the Reformed Protestant Religion, in France, Germany, and other
parts; as it is the true interest of the Kings of Spain, to protect and
releeve all oppressed or grieved Roman Catholics under the Dominion of other
Princes: and that their honor, safety, and greatness principally consists in
the observation and maintenance of this their interest: and with the words of
Iunius Brutus; who thus states and debates the Question.

An Iure possint, Vindiciae contr. Tyrannos. qu. 4. p. 207. etc.
aut debeant Vicini Principes auxilium far aliorum principum subditis,
religionts causa afflictis, aut manifesta ty^annide oppressis?

In defining this question (says he) there is more need of conscience, then
science, which would be altogether idle, if charity obtained its place in this
world. But because as the manners of the times are now, there is nothing more
dear or rare among men, then charity it self, we think meet briefly to
discuss it. The Tyrants as well of souls as bodies; as well of the Church as
Commonwealth or Realm, may be restrained, expelled, and punished by the
people. Both these we have already proved by reasons. But, because such is the
fraud of Tyrants, or such the simplicity of subjects for the most part; that
they are scarce known before that they have spoiled; or these scarce think of
their safety, till they have almost perished, and are reduced into those
straits, out of which they cannot get out with their own forces, so as they
are compelled to implore the aid of other; it is questioned, Whether they
defending the cause of Religion or of the Commonwealth, of the Kingdom of
Christ, or of their own Kingdom, other Christian Princes may lawfully assist
them? And truly many, whiles they have hoped to increase their wealth by ayding
the afflicted, have presently judged it to be lawful. For thus the Romans,
Alexander the great, and many others, under pretext of suppressing Tyrants,
have frequently enlarged their Dominions: and not long since we have seen
Henry the second, King of France, to have made war with the Emperor Charles
the fifth: and that under pretext of succouring and defending the Princes of
the Empire, and of the Protestants too; as also Henry the eighth, King of
England, was ready to aid the Protestants in Germany, to make work for
Charles the fifth: But if any danger may be feared from thence, or little gain
may be expected, then verily they must hear most Princes disputing, whether it
be lawful or no? And as those under a pretext of piety, did cover either
ambition or gain; so these pretend justice for their sloathfulnesse; when as
verily neither did piety exhort them, which seeks only the good of others,
nor yet justice ought to dehort these, which looks wholly abroad, and is as it
were, cast out of its own doors. Therefore, discharging both these, let us
see first in the cause of Religion, what true piety, and what true justice may
persuade. First, let it be agreed, that there is but one Church, whose head is
Christ, and whose members so cohere and agree among themselves, that none of
them; even the smallest can suffer violence or hurt, but the rest are hurt and
suffer grief, as the whole Scripture teaches. Therefore the Church is
compared to a body. Now the body is oft-times affected not only with the hurt
of the arm, or leg, but even of the very least finger, or perishes with its
wound. Therefore in vain may any one boast, that he is cordially affected with
the safety of the body, who when he may defend the whole, yet suffers it to be
torn and mangled limb after limb. It is compared to a buildings Now, where
mines are made against any part of the building, the whole building oft-times
falls down to the ground; and the flame which invades any part thereof
en^^^gers gers the whole. Therefore he should be ridiculous, who because he
(...) in the calla^ perchance, should delay to drive the flame from the top of
the house. He should be scarce in his wits, who would not prevent mines with
countermines, because they are made against this wall, not against that. It is
also compared to a Ship: Now the whole Ship is endangered together, the whole
perishes together: Therefore those are equally safe who are in the fore part,
as those who are in the puppe; those who are in keel, as safe as those in the
shro^ds, if the storm rage: whence verily even in the common proverb, those
who are conversant in the same danger, are said to be in the same Ship: These
things laid down, verily he who is not moved with its grief, burning, to
ssing, is not of that body, is not accounted of the family of Christ, has no
place in the Arc. Yet he who is but a little moved, ought no more to doubt,
whether he ought to aid the afflicted members of the Church, then whether he
may help himself, since in the Church all are one; but rather every one is
bound in his place to afford his help and assistance to them; and so much the
more help, by how much the more riches he has received from God, not so much
to be possessed, as expended.

This Church as it is but one, so likewise it is universally and entirely
committed, commended to all Christian Princes severally: For because it had
been dangerous to commit the whole Church to any one; and to commit the
several parts thereof to particular persons, had been clearly contrary to
its unity; God has committed all of it to every of them, and its particular
parts to any of them: Nor yet so, as that they should only defend it; but
also, that they should have a care to propagate it, as much as they are able.
Therefore if the Prince of the Country, takes care of one part thereof,
perchance the German or English; but yet deserts and neglects the other
oppressed part, if he be able to relieve it; he is judged to have deserted the
Church, since the spouse of Christ verily is but one, which he ought to defend
and protect with all his might, lest it should be violated or corrupted any
where. The instauration of this universal Church as private men are bound to
promote with bended knees, so Magistrates, I say, are obliged to do it with
their feet, hands, and all their strength. Neither is the Ephesian Church one,
the Colossian auother, and the rest; but all these particular Churches are
parts of the universal; now the universal is the Kingdom of Christ, which
all private men ought to desire; but Kings, Princes, Magistrates, are bound to
amplify, dilate, defend, and propagate every where, and against all
whomsoever. Therefore among the Jews there was one only Temple built by
Solomon, which represented the unity of the Church. Now he should be a
ridiculous Churchwarden, and to be punished, who should take care only to
preserve one part safe and sound, but suffer the rest to fall to decay;
likewise all Christian Kings when they are inaugurated, receive a sword, of
purpose to defend the Catholic or universal Church; which taking into their
hand, they point out all the quarters of the world, and brandish it toward the
East, West, South and North, lest any part thereof should be thought excepted.
Since then they receive the protection of the Church in this manner, without
doubt they understand the true, not false Church. Therefore they ought to do
their endeavor to defend, 2 Chronicles. c. 31.
and to restore entirely, that Church, which they profess to be true and pure.
Now that thus it was observed by pious Princes, examples may teach us. In the
time of Hezekiah King of Judah, the Kingdom of Israel was long before
enthralled to the King of Assyria, to wit, from the time of King Hoshea:
therefore if that Church of God only which is in the Kingdom of Judah, and
not also the universal, had been committed to Hezekiah; and if the bounds of
the Realms had been to be kept in defending the Church, in the same manner as
they are in imposing tribute; without doubt Hezekiah, especially at that season
wherein the Assyrians enjoyed the Empire of the world, would have contained
himself: But we see that he invited by posts all Israel, the subjects, I say,
of the King of Assyria, to celebrate the passover in Jerusalem; and moreover
that the godly in Israel helped them in pulling down the high places, even in
the territories of Ephraim, Manasses, and the rest. So likewise we read that
King Josiah, a most godly Prince, purged not only his own Kingdom, but the
Realm of Israel likewise, then wholly subject to the King of Assyria, from the
worship of Idols. 2 King 2* 2. 2. Chron. 3. 4. 6* 7. and 35.
Verily where the glory of God, where the Kingdom of Christ are in question,
no limits, no bounds, no railes ought to exclude or keep off the zeal of
pious Princes. But if peradventure some greater fear hangs over their heads,
they may remember by the example of these, that those who truly fear the Lord,
can fear no man. These examples of pious Princes, since the time that the
Church, which was first circumscribed in Palestina, has been spread over all
the world, many Christian Princes have followed: Constantine and Licinius were
both Emperors, he of the East, this of the West: they were likewise colleagues
endued with equal power: Now it is known, what is commonly spoken; That one
equal has no Empire over another equal: Yet notwithstanding Constantine made
war with Licinius: who being vexed, slew the Christians, and among them many
of the Nobles, either for the cause, or for the pretext of Religion; by force
obtaines free profession of Religion for the Christians; and finally breaking
his faith, and reverting to his pristine cruelty, he commanded him to be put to
death at Thessalonica. This I say did Constantine the great, whose piety is so
much celebrated by the Divines of that age, that some of them will have that
spoken of him, written in the Prophet Esaias; That Kings should become nursing
fathers and Pastors of the Church. He being dead, the Roman Empire was divided
between both his sons by equal right, no prerogative being annexed to either
of them. Of them, Constans fostered the Orthodox, Constantius the elder, the
Arrians; and he verily expelled Athanasius the enemy of the Arrians, out of
Alexandria. Truly, if any rules of bounds ought to have been kept, it ought to
have been between brethren: Yet in the mean time Constans threatened his
brother, if he restored not Athanasius; being ready to do it by force, unless
Constantius had speedily restored him entirely; Now if so be he doubted not to
do this, only for the restoring of one Bishop, might he not much more justly
do it, where some part of the people is oppressed, when they implore
assistance, when they desire to defend their Religion by the Nobles
approbation? So likewise Theodosius, by the persuasion of Bishop Atticus
undertook a war against Chosroes King of Persia, Sozom. l. 7. e. 18
that he might releeve the Christians persecuted for Religion sake, although
they were truly private men, which surely those most just Princes, who enacted
so many Laws, and who had so great a care of Law, had never done, if they had
imagined, that by this their Act others territories and the Laws of Nations
had been violated. Yea, to what end were so many expeditions of Christian
Princes into Syria against the Saracens; to what end were those Saladinian
Dismes so often imposed; to what end so many sociall wars against the Turks,
so many Crossadoes indicted against them, if it be not lawful for any
Christian Princes, even the most remote, to free the Church from Tyranny, and
Christian captives from the yoke of bondage? Now with what arguments were they
impelled to the war, with what reasons were they urged? unless these, that
the Church was one? that Christ called all whatsoever from all quarters to this
service? that common dangers were to be repulsed with common arms? all which
likewise do plainly suite with this our cause. Now and if this were lawful
for them against Mahomet; yea, not only lawful, but likewise as a reward was
appointed to the industrious, so a punishment both to the sloathfull, and
delayers; why not also against the enemy of Christ? If I say, against the
Graecians be^ieging our Troy; why not also against Sinon the incendiary?
Finally, if it be a pious act to free Christians from bodily servitude, (for
the Turks compel no man to it) is it not much more so, to manumit the souls
of miserable men, and to restore them to liberty? And verily these so many
examples of pious Princes may be instead of a Law. But now hear what God
himself by the mouth of his Prophets does every where threaten against those,
who promote not the instauration of the Church, or neglect its affliction. The
Gadites, Reubenites, and half Tribe of Manasses, desire of Moses that their
portion might be given to them and their families on this side Jordan: Numb.
32. Josh. 4. 7 12. Deuteronomy. 3. 20.
and Moses truly gave it them; but with this Law and condition; that they
should not only help their brethren, the other Israelites, in conquering the
Land of Canaan, but, because they had first obtained their portion, that they
should go before them, and be placed in the forefront of them: Which if they
should not do, he accurseth them, smites them with anathema, and compares them
to those who had been judged Rebels at Cadesbernea: For what? says he, shall
your brethren go to war, and you in the mean time sit still here? But
rather you shall pass over Jordan, neither shall you return again hither to
your houses before that God has expelled his enemies from before his face, and
given rest to your brethren, as he has given unto you: Then verily you shall
be innocent before the Lord of Israel; verily those on whom the great and good
God has bestowed so great a benefit, unless they assisted their Brethren,
unless they were companions of their labors, unless they went before them,
should without doubt receive most grievous punishments.

Likewise, when under the conduct of Deborah, those of Nephthali and Zebulon
had taken up arms against the Tyrant Iabin, Judge. 5.
and in the mean time the Tribe of Reuben, which ought to be first in Arms,
delighted themselves with the Pipes among the Pastures of the flocks, Dan
boasted of the Empire of the Sea, Asher finally trusted in the asperity of
Mountains, all of them are most expressly condemned by the Spirit of God,
speaking by the Prophetess; Curse ye Meroz, says the Angel of the Lord, curse
ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the
Lord against the mighty. 2 Samuel 11. 11.
But blessed above women shall Iael the Wife of Heber the Kenite be, who
(although she might have pleaded a truce with the heathens) yet notwithstanding
she slew Sisera, the Captain of the enemies Host. Therefore piously spoke
Vriah, The Arc, and Israel, and Judah abide in tents, and often times pass the
night without sleep in the open fields; shall I then feast with my Wife, eat,
drink, and follow my pleasures? As the Lord lives, I will never do this.
Amos 8.
Contrarily the Princes of Israel did impiously, who trusting in the difficulty
of the mountains of Samaria, and in the munition of Sion, flowed with luxury,
feasted, drank, slept on beds of Ivory, anointed their heads; but in the mean
time wonderfully despised contrite, cruciated, afflicted Joseph, neither were
any way moved with his affliction. Therefore says the Lord of Hoasts, I
abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his palaces; I have sworn by my
soul that I will deliver up the City; and all that is therein, yea, these who
so greatly rioted shall soon go with the first into captivity. Impiously also
did the Ephramites, who did not only not gratulate Gideon and Iephtha, Judge.
8. and 12.
attaining the victory and triumphing, but likewise envyed them, though yet
they deserted them when they were in danger. Likewise the Israelites, who when
David reigned, cried out; saying: 2 Samuel 5.
Behold we are thy flesh and thy bones; when he was reduced into straites,
said: We have no part in David, nor in the Son of Iesse. Impiously do all
those Christians only in name, who will communicate in the sacred feasts of
the Church, and yet will not so much as taste the cup of bitterness with their
Brethren, who seek salvation in the Church, and yet take no care for the
salvation and safety of the Church and of its Members. Finally, they
acknowledge one Father, God; one Family, the Church; profess themselves to be
one body in Christ; yet neither yield any aid to Christ afflicted in his
Members, or bestow their wealth on him being poor. What think we shall be the
future punishment of their impiety? Numb. 31.
Moses compares the deserters of their Brethren, to the Rebels at Kadesbarnea:
now none of those by Gods own decree, entered into Canaan. Therefore they can
seek no place for themselves in the co^lestiall Canaan, who assist not Christ
most miserably crucified, and dying a thousand times every day, and implores as
it were their help from door to door. Christ himself condemns those to
eternal fire, who harbored him not when he was a stranger, who fostered him
notwhen he was a cold, who clothed him not when he was naked, who relieved him
not when he was poor, who freed him not when he was captive. Matthew. 25.
Therefore they ought to know, that eternal fire is prepared for them, who
pass him by with a deaf ear daily, suffering such things, although in the
mean time they may seem to work great miracles; and therefore verily it
shall be easier for certain insidels, than for them; For what do the Jews,
the Scribes and Pharisees properly cruci^ie Christ? Do the Ethnickes, Turks,
^inally some Christians, persecute, crucify, vex Christ in his Members? The
Jews profess and believe him an Imposter; the Ethnickes a malefactor; the
Turks an In^idell; others an Heretic. Therefore if they consider the mind
of them all, from whom we commonly measure the crime, they all seem to
persecute noxious, impious men deserving punishment, not properly to slay
Christ; But they only do truly persecute, truly slay him, who willingly
suffer him whom they profess their Messiah, Redeemer, God, to be tortured and
crucified in his Members, when they might hinder it. In sum; he who delivers
him not from death, when he may, is equally guilty with him that slayes him:
For because he would not help him, he willed he should be slain; Now in a
crime the will it self ought to be regarded. August. in Psalm. 82. A^br. l. 1.
de Offic. Gratian. in Decret.
But certainly, the murder, especially of Christian Princes, who help not
those who are persecuted for Religion, is so much the more grievous, by how
much the more they slay, whom they might set free, and by how much it is more
wicked to slay a brother, than any other person. A wickedness more horrid than
that of the Tyrants themselves; by how much it is worse to slay a good, just,
pious, innocent man, than a Thief, imposter, ^orcerer, Heretic; more
flagitious to assault God, than any man: and finally, by how much
perfidiousnesse in an equal fact exceeds ignorance.

But whether shall it be lawful to determine the same of those, who give no
assistance to those who are oppressed with Tyranny, or defend the Republicke
against Tyranny? since a reason cannot be given of so s^raite an alliance, of
so strict a Covenant; when as, I say, we do not here discourse of the Church,
which is but one of all men; which being one and universal, is committed to
every one; But of the Republicke, which may be different from that of others;
and being different, is committed severally to others? A Neighbor, says
Christ, is not a Jew to a Jew only, but to a Samaritan, and to any man. Now we
ought to love our Neighbors as our selves. Therefore a Jew, if he would
discharge his duty, is bound to deliver from a thief, if he be able, not a Jew
only, but likewise every stranger, yea likewise one unknown. Neither will any
one dispute, whether it be just to defend himself; seeing verily it is more
just to defend another than himself in this respect, wherein things are more
just, which mere charity does, than those which either anger, or revenge, or
other perturbation of the mind do: and no man holds a mean in revenging his
own injuries; but in other men's, although more grievous, even the most
immoderate may hold a mean. But we may learn from the heathens themselves,
what humane society, Gicero l. 1 and 3^. Offic.
and what the common nature of all men require of us in this thing. For Cicero
says, there is one nature of all men; that even nature it self prescribes
this, that a man ought to take care of a man, who ever he be, even for this
very cause, that he is a man. If otherwise, all humane consociation must
necessarily be dissolved. Therefore, as there are two foundations of justice:
first, that no hurt be done to any; next, that the profit of all, if it may be
done, be advanced: So also there are two kinds of injustice; one of those who
offer injury; the other of those who propulse not wrong from those to whom it
is offered, if they be able. For he who does unjustly against any one, incited
either by anger, or other perturbation, he seems as it were to offer violent
hands to his companion; but he who does not defend, or resist an injury if he
can, is as much in fault, as if he deserted either his Parents, or Friends, or
Country. So that what the one does, anger is judged to do, which is reputed a
short fury; what the other, an evil mind truly, which is a perpetual
tyranny. And however his fury may be excused, the others destinated counsel
can by no means be excused. Thou will say, I fear that while I repulse an
injury from him, I should do an injury to the other. Yea verily, thou will
cover thine injustice with a pretext of Justice; Whereas if thou consultest
with thy self, not justice moves thee to desert thy duty, but rather some
other cause. For, as he says in another place, either thou will not undertake
enmities, or labor, or cost; or else thou art so hindered with negligence,
sloathfulnesse, idleness, or with thy studies, or certain employments, that
thou suffer those to be deserted, whom thou ought to protect. But while
thou say, thou do thine own business, lest thou might seem to do
wrong to any, thou runnest into another kind of injustice. For thou desertest
the society of life, because thou bestowest on it nothing of thy study, nothing
of thy pains, nothing of thy goods. These things Ethnickes, Philosophers, and
Politicians hold, truly more piously than many Christians in this age. Diodor.
Sic. l. 2. c. 2.
Hence a neighbor is bound by the Laws of the Romans, to take away a servant
from a cruel Master. But among the Egyptians, he who had casually found a man
to be beaten by Thieves, or to suffer any injury, and had not rescued him, if
he could, was guilty of death: if not, he was bound to accuse the Thieves
before the Magistrate: Which if he had neglected, he was beaten with a certain
number of stripes, and punished with a three days fast. Now if this verily be
lawful in one neighbor toward another, yea, lies upon him out of duty to
assist every one he meets against a Thief; shall it not be much more lawful
to a good Prince, not only to aid and patronize servants against a raging
Master, or children against a furious Father; but a Kingdom against a Tyrant,
a Republike against the private lust of one man; a people, a Lord, I say,
against a public servant and agent? Yea, verily, if he shall neglect it, shall
not he merit the name and punishments of a Tyrant, Thu^yd. l. 2.
as the other of a thief? Hence Thucydides says, Not only those are tyrants
who reduce others into servitude, but much rather those who when they may
repulse that violence, take no care to do it: but especially those who will be
called the defenders of Greece and the Common Country, but yet help not their
oppressed Country: and rightly; for a Tyrant is in a sort compelled to retain
violently the Tyranny which he has violently invaded; because, as Tyberius
said, he seems to hold a Wolf by the ears, which he cannot retain without
force, nor yet let go without danger. Therefore that he may extinguish one
crime with another, he commits many wickednesses, and is compelled to injure
others, lest he should be injurious to himself. But that Prince who idly
beholds the wickednesses of a tyrant, and the ruin of the blood of innocents
which he may hinder, because he does as it were take pleasure in the gladiatory
sport, is by so much more criminous than the Tyrant, as he who sets
sword-players to fight, is guiltier than the man-slaying Gladiator; as much as
he who slayes a man for pleasure sake, is more criminous than he who does it
by constraint, or out of fear or necessity. Object.
If some oppose; But it is a fault for any to intermeddle with, or thrust
himself into another business: Answ.
Terentian Chremes may answer; I am a man, I think no humane thing strange
unto me. If others (that they may seek lurking holes for their impiety)
object; that there are distinct limits, distinct jurisdictions; Pompon de
reglur. leg. 36.
now it is not lawful to thrust a sickle into another Corn: Neither truly
do I advise, that by this pretense thou should invade another territories,
usurp another jurisdiction to thy self, draw thy neighbors corn into thine
own floor, which most do under this pretext. I do not say, that by the
example of that arbitrator, of whom Cicero, Cic. 2. Offic.
thou thy self should judge the thing controverted to thy self; but rather
that thou should restrain a Prince invading the Kingdom of Christ,
contain a tyrant within his limits, stretch out an helping hand to an
afflicted people, and a prostrated Commonweal; But thou must do it in such
sort, that thou may not look after thine own profit, but the good of
humane society altogether. For since Justice wholly looks abroad, injustice
only regards it self, thou shall at last do this justly, if thou shall have
no regard of thine own profits. Briefly, if a Prince violently passes over
the fixed limits of piety and justice, a neighbor may piously and justly leap
over his limits, not that he should invade another, but that he should bid him
be content with his own: yea, he shall be impious and unjust, if he neglect
it. If a Prince exercise tyranny over the people, he may no less, or less
slackly assist them, than him, if the people should move sedition: yea, he
ought to do it the more readily, by how much it is more miserable, that many
suffer, than one. If Porsena reduce Tarquin the proud to Rome, much more justly
may Constantine, sent for by the people and Senate of Rome, expel Maxentius
the Tyrant out of the City. Finally, if a man may become a Wolf to a man,
nothing truly forbids, but that a man may be a God to a man, as it is in the
Proverb. Therefore antiquity has enrolled Hercules among the number of the
gods, because he punished and tamed Procrustes, Busyris, and other Tyrants,
(the pests of mankind, and monsters of the world) in every place. Ci^. lib. 2.
Offic.
So also the Roman Empire, as long as it stood free, was often called, The
Patrocinie against the Robberies of Tyrants, because the Senate was the haven
and refuge of Kings, People, Nations. So Constantine sent for by the Romans
against Maxentius the Tyrant, had God the Captain of his Army, whose
expedition the Universal Church exalted with powerful praises; when yet
Maxentius had the same authority in the West, as Constantine in the East.
Likewise Charles the Great, undertook a War against the Lombardes, being
called by the Nobles of Italy to their aid, when as yet the Kingdom of the
Lombards was long before established, and he could claim no right to himself
over them. Likewise, when Charles the Bald King of France, had by Tyranny taken
away the President of that Country, Joan. Avent. in Anal. Boyor^n.
which lies between Seine and Liger, Duke Lambert, and Iamesius, and the
other Nobles of France had fled to Lewis King of Germany, Charles his Brother
by another mother, to crave aid against Charles and his mother Judith, a most
wicked Woman: He in a most ample Assembly of the Germane Princes, heard these
suppliants, by whose unanimous Counsel, a war was publickely decreed against
Charles, for to restore the exiles. Finally, as there have been some Tyrants
in every place, so likewise among all Historians there are every where examples
extant, of tyranny revenged, and people defended by neighbor Princes; which
the Princes now at this day ought to imitate, in curbing the tyrants both of
bodies and Souls of the Republicke, and of the Church of Christ, unless they
themselves will be named Tyrants, by a most deserved right. And (that we may at
last conclude this Treatise in one word) piety commands the Law of God to be
observed, and the Church to be defended justice, that Tyrants and the
subverters of Law and the Republike should be curbed; charity, that the
oppressed should be releeved, and have a helping hand extended. But those who
take away these things, take away piety, justice, charity from among men, and
desire them to be altogether extinguished. So he:

If this then be an irrefragable verity, that foreign States and Princes are
so far obliged to assist and relieve those of the same Religion, and all
others whose liberties, rights, privileges, are forcibly invaded See Speed and
(...) History of Queen Eliz. Metarenus and Grimstons Histories of the
Netherlands. The Noble Acts of Prince Maurice of ^assau, and the Bills of
Subsidies in Qu. Eliz. King James, and King Charles his reign.
(which our Parliament and State by their assistance, of the Netherlands and
other Protestant States, both in Quaene Elizabeth's, King James, and King
Charles his reign, approved and justified both by words, Acts of Parliament,
and real performances) then certainly those of the self-same Church, Nation,
Kingdom, and fellow Subjects, under the self-same Prince, between whom there
is a far nearer relation, much stricter obligation, and more strong
engagements, ought mutually to aid and assist each other to the uttermost of
their abilities, when their Religion, Laws, Liberties, be violently invaded,
their dearest native Country wasted, sacked, plundered, burned, ruined, in a
hostile warre-like manner, with open force of Arms, either by the King
himself, or a prevailing Malignant Popish faction, who have surreptitiously
possessed themselves both of his person and affections which they have gotten
into their own overruling power. How much then it now concerns every real
Protestant within this Realm of England, and all other his Majesty's Dominions
to unite all their common forces together, unannimously to protect, defend,
maintain, and propagate our established reformed Religion, fundamental Laws,
Liberties, the very Privileges of Parliaments, their estates, liberties,
lives, the peace, welfare, and common good of their dearest native Country,
and our three united Realms against all Popish Malignant forces now in arms
to invade, eclipse, impair, subvert, sack, ruin them; and how monstrously,
unnaturally, unchristianly, and detestably impious, treacherous, per^idious,
all those English, Irish, and Scottish Protestants proclaim themselves to the
present and future age, who now traitorously join their forces with the
Malignant Popish party, or prove uncordiall, false, treacherous, and perfidious
to their Religion, Liberties, Country, and the Parliment (who have not only
waged, employed, but confided in them) and contribute their uttermost
endeavors to betray, enslave, undermine, and to sack, burn, and totally
overturne them (as many we find have done to their eternal infamy) I here
refer to every man's judgment and conscience seriously to determine.
Certainly such unnatural monsters, such traiterous Judasses, such execrable
infamous Apostates as these, can expect no other real remuneration of this
their treachery and perfidiousnesse, but the ruin of their credits, the
detestation of their persons, memories; the confiscation of their estates, the
extirpation of their families, the execrations of all good men, the severest
judgments of God, and utter confusion with horrors of conscience tormenting
them constantly day and night, whiles they continue languishing under all these
miseries here, and the sharpest torments, the very largest punishments, the
hottest flames in hell for ever hereafter: and those Antichristian Papists who
now are and have been so faithful, active, zealous, courageous, industrious,
liberal, bountiful, if not prodigal to prosecute their own interests,
designs, to maintain and propagate their false, erroneous, detestable
Religion, superstitions, idolatries, both in England and Ireland with the
effusion of their blood, expense, and forfeiture of all their estates, and
never yet deserted, or became treacherous to their false execrable cause or
Religion in the least degree, shall all jointly rise up in judgment against
them, both here and hereafter, to their sempiternall infamy, reproach, and most
just condemnation. O consider this all ye who now so much forget, neglect,
betray both your God, your Christ, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Country,
Parliament, yea your very selves, your souls, bodies, estates, posterities;
Consider with your selves the bitter curse denounced by God himself against
Meroz, Judge. 5. 23. Consider the fatal, dismal end of treacherous Iud^s,
Matthew. 27. 3. 4, 5. Acts 1. 18. 19, 20. Consider that dreadful speech of our
Savior Christ, Mark 8. 35. 36, 37, 38. Whosoever will save his life shall
lose it, but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the Gospels shall
save it. For what shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world and
lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my word, in this adulterous
and sinful generation; of him also shall the son of man be ashamed when he
comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels.* 2 Timothy 2. 12.
If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he will
also deny us: If we be but fearful in the cause of Christ, we shall be sure to
have our part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21. 8. O
what then will be our portion, if we be unzealous, negligent, perfidious, to
it, or professed enemies (especially in open arms) against it, when it cries
out to us for our necessary assistance every where? If Jesus Christ will render
tribulation to them which do but trouble his people; yea, and shall be very
shortly revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on all them that (only) know not God, and that obey not the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2 These. 1. 6. to 10. O
where shall all those ungodly sinners, Rebels, and Traitors appear, who now
every where murder, plunder, persecute, extirpare Gods dearest Saints; and not
only refuse to own, but even desert, betray the cause of God and their
Country? who refuse not only cordially to maintain the very truth of God,
the Gospel of Christ, which themselves in show not only pretend to know, but
profess; but also join with Papists, and Malignants openly to fight against,
and totally to suppress it? Certainly if judgment shall begin at the house
of God it self, as now it does, and if the righteous who defend the cause of
God and the Kingdom shall scarcely be saved, what these men's dreadful end,
and judgment at last shall be, transcends my thoughts to conceive, my
expressions to relate; all I can say is this, it will be so superlatively
miserable and grievous, that an eternity of incomprehensible torments will
only be able to demonstrate the infinity and execrablenesse of their sin. O
then let all of all sorts consider seriously of this, and all the premises, and
the Lord give them understanding and grace to keep a good conscience, and
discharge their several trusts and bounden duties faithfully, cheerfully to
their God, Religion, King, Country, and the Parliament in all things, that so
they may enjoy the honor, comfort, benefit, of all their faithful endeavors
to defend, promote, propagate our Religion, Laws, liberties, and the public
welfare here; and the Crown, the full guerdon of them hereafter; and poor
bleeding, dying England and Ireland may now at last attain that speedy, holy,
lasting, honorable, blessed peace and unity, which all good men cordially pray
for and endeavor; which doubtless had been easily effected long ere this,
had we all been faithful, true, real to the public cause of God and our
Country in our several places, and not faithlessely betrayed, but sincerely
discharged the several trusts reposed in us to the uttermost of our powers:
the readiest mean to re-establish and perpetuate our pristine tranquillity:
which I humbly beseech the God and Prince of peace effectually to accomplish in
his own due season, before our whole three Realms become a desolate
Wilderness, an Accheldama, a Golgatha, as many places of them are already, and
more like to be, if the extraordinary mercy of our ever-gracious God, prevent
not the mischievous long plotted conspiracies, malice, rage, treachery, of
unnatural, and deceitful men.

FINIS.
This Oath should have come in the Appendix, page 73. line. 17.
The Oath of CHARLES, King of Navarre at his Coronation, An. 1390. recorded in
the general History of Spain, l. 17. p. 625. 626.
WED. CHARLES by the grace of God, King of Navarre, etc. do swear unto our
people of Navarre upon the holy Evangelists touched by us, and to the Prelates
and rich men of the Cities and good Towns, and to all the people of Navarre,
for all your Rights, Laws, Customs, Freedoms, Liberties, and Privileges,
that every one of them as they are, shall be maintained and kept to you and
your successors, all the time of Our life without corrupting them; bettering,
and not impairing them, in all, or in part: and that the violence and force
which has been done to your Predecessors, whom God pardon, and to you by Us,
or Our Officers, We shall hereafter command it to cease, and satisfaction to be
made according unto right as they shall be made manifest by good men of credit.
After which the Deputies of the State swore, in their own names, and for all
the Realm; faithfully to guard and defend the Kings person, and their
Country; and to aid him, to keep, defend, and maintain the Laws and
Customs, with all their power.

Errata, and Omissions in some Copies.
Part. 4. p. 1. l. 26. it, is, p. 9. l. 39. c. 33. p. 27. l. 13. private,
public, p. 28. l. 7 other 31. pugnae.

Appendix p. 2. l. 3 parallel, p. 4. l. 14. them, the people, l. 34 and p. 5.
l. 29. Maximus, p. 8. l. 1. Polieuctus, p. 39. l. 26. dele, in the, p. 41. l.
41. other, p. 44. l. 40 retired, p. 50. l. 44. the hand, p. 54. l. 1. Cara,
Lara, p. 55. l. 41. Pacensis, p. 59. l. 27 dele the, p. 66. l. 34. years, p.
79. l 12 dele (...), l. 3. Mariana, p. 129. l. 2. add 2 Chronicles. 22. 1. And the
inhabitants of Jerusalem made Aliaziah his youngest son King in his stead, l.
18. confirmed, p. 145. l. 2. not from it to, p. 147. l. 20. in some sense in
private cases, p. 150. l. 23. pem, patu, p. 153. l. 14. Cauarvius, p. 162. l.
7. received, renewed, p. 162. l. 28. Hotomani Francogal. 38. Vindiciae, p. 163.
^. 2. revocable, l. 3. Historical, l. 19. Cuiacius, l. 23. usufrvctuary, l. 35
dele the, p. 166. l. 14. to, do, l. 19. dele to, l. 21. foundations, p. 167.
l. 7. is an, p. 169. l. 26. Caracalla, p. 170. l. 41. 2. secun. qu. p. 171. l.
22. in Law, p. 172. l. 27. fealty to, p. 173. l. 8. adjuvante, l. 15.
rapacitates, p. 174 l. 4. if, it. p. 177. l. 15. preserve, l. 32. and. l. 35.
goods, p. 186. l. 15. 16. forcibly resist, p. 187. l. 2. so, to, p. 190. l. 31.
206. p. 193. l. 1. converseth, p. 196. l. 33. less.

In the Marg^. p. 42. l. 2. Daubeny, p. 60. l. 4. Leges, l. 9. Aimoin. l. 12.
Iure, p. 85. l. 2. 850. p. 152. l. 1. A^nales, Gil. p. 168. l. 19. Rex.

part 1. p. 12. l 15. third. read, second, p. 29. l. 44. through, p. 45. l. 24.
l. 3. p. 48. l. 15. Britanniae, l. 26. privatave, p. 56. l. 16. reputing them,
p. 75. l. 25* responsum, p. 93. l. 38. Duardus, p. 100. l. 33. Raynerius l. 3.
8 Albericus.

Part 2. p. 59. l. 3. perfidum.

Part 3. p. 143. l. 25. natural, national.


