A VINDICATION OF PSALM 105.15. (Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets
no harm) from some false Glosses lately obtruded on it by Royalists. PROVING,
That this Divine Inhibition was given to Kings, not Subjects; to restrain them
from injuring and oppressing Gods servants, and their Subjects; who are Gods
Anointed, as well as Kings: And that it is more unlawful for Kings to plunder
and make War upon their Subject^, by way of offense, then for Subjects to take
up Arms against Kings in such cases by way of defense. With a brief
exhortation to peace and unity.

2 Samuel 23.3. He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of
God.

Ecclesiastes 4.1, 2. I returned and considered all the Oppressions that are
done under the Sun; and behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they
had no Comforter: and on the side of their oppressors there was power, but they
had no Comforter. Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead, more
then the living which are yet alive.

Proverbs 28.15, 16. As a roaring Lion, and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked
Ruler over the poor people. The Prince that wants understanding is also a
great oppressor; but he that hates covetousness shall prolong his days.

Galathians 5.15. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be
not consumed one of another.

Printed, 1642.

THere is nothing more pernicious to the souls of men, or destructive to the
republique in distracted times, then Clergy-mens wresting of Scriptures from
their genuine sense to ensnare men's consciences, the better to accomplish some
sinister designs. How sundry sacred texts have been thus perverted of later
years, not by the 2 Pet. 2.16
unlearned and unstable vulgar, but by the greatest Seraphicall Doctors in our
Church, is too apparent unto all; and among As the 2 Samuel 15.24. For Rebellion
is as the sin of Witchcraft, and stubbornnes is as iniquity and idolatry: now
applied to subjects opposing their Princes unlawful commands, when it is meant
only of King Saul's rebellion against the command of God, as the content and
story manifest.
others that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 105.15^ (which is repeated 1 Chronicles. 16.22.)
Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; has not had the least
violence offered it, both in Press and Pulpit, to cry up the absolute
irresistible Prerogative of Kings in all their exorbitant proceedings; and beat
down the just liberties of the Subject, without the least defensive opposition;
when as this text, in real verity, is rather a direct precept given to Kings
themselves, not to oppress or injure their faithful subjects, then an
injunction given to subjects, not to defend themselves against the oppressive
destructive wars, and projects of their Princes. In which regard it will be no
unseasonable nor ungrateful work, to clear this text from all false Glosses,
and restore it to its proper construction.

In former ages when popery domineered, the popish Clergy grounded their
pretended exemption from all temporal jurisdiction on this Scripture;
suggesting, that they only, at least principally were Gods Anointed here
intended; and therefore ought not be touched nor apprehended by Kings or
temporal Judges for any crimes. But this false Gloss being long since
exploded, many Court Divines, not so much to secure as flatter Kings, have
applied it primarily unto Kings, and secundarily to Priests, as meant of them
alone, excluding their faithful Subjects out of its protection and limits;
when as the text is meant of none else but they in general and of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, with their families in particular.

1. To put this out of question: you must first observe, that this Psalm from
the 5 verse to the end, is merely historical. The 7 first verses of it are
but a gratulatory preamble (interlaced with some exhortations) to the
subsequent historical narration; as he that reads them advisedly will at first
acknowledge: In the 8, 9, 10, and 11. verses, the Psalmist begins his history,
with the covenant which God made to Abraham, and the oath which he swear to
Isaac; and confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an
everlasting testament: saying, unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the
lot of your inheritance. In the 12, 13, 14, and 15. verses, he expresses the
special care and protection of God over Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and their
several families after his covenant thus made unto them, in these words: When
they (to wit, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with their families) were but a few
men in number, yea very few, and strangers in it: When they went from one
Nation to another, from one Kingdom to another people (which cannot possibly be
expounded of Kings and Priests, but only of those Patriarcks) He suffered no
man to do them wrong, but reproved even Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch
not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Then in the very next verse to
the end of the Psalm, he proceeds with the story of the famine in Egypt, and of
Joseph's sending thither beforehand by God, etc. So that by the express words
and series of the story in this Psalm, these persons of whom God said, Touch
not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, were Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and their families, (as S. Augustine with sundry other Expositers of this Psalm
conclude;) who in truth were neither Kings nor Priests by office, but only
Gods peculiar people and servants: of whom he took special care. Whence I thus
reason, in the first place.

These words, Touch not mine anointed, etc. were originally spoken and intended
only of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and their families, who were neither actual
Kings nor Priests; and they were meant of them, not as they were Kings or
Priests, but only as they were the servants and chosen people of God; as is
evident by the 6 verse of this Psalm, O ye seed of Abraham his SERVANT, ye
children of Jacob his CHOSEN.

Therefore they are to be so interpreted; and to be applied not to Kings and
Priests, as they are such; but only to the faithful servants and chosen people
of God, though, and as subjects.

Secondly, Consider to whom these words were spoken; not to Subjects, but to
Kings themselves; a^ the Psalmist resolves in express terms, Verse. 14. He
suffered no man to do them wrong, but reproved even KINGS for their sakes;
saying, (even to Kings themselves) Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets
no harm. Now that these words were spoken to Kings themselves is apparent, by
those histories to which these words relate, recorded at large, Genes. 12.10.
to 20^ Genesis 2^. throughout, and Genesis 26.1. to 17. and verse. 29. Where when
Abraham by reason of the famine went down into Egypt, with Sarah his wife, and
King Pharaoh took her into his house, God first permitted neither Pharaoh nor
his servants to do either of them any injury ( though Abraham out of overmuch
fear, suspected they would have killed him, and therefore made Sarah say she
was his sister,) and likewise plagued Pharaoh, and his servants because of
Sarah Abraham's wife; whereupon they and all theirs went away in safety. After
which Abraham and his wife sojourning in Gerar, Abimelech king of Gerar sent
and took Sarah: But God said to Abimelech in a dream, behold thou art a dead
man for the woman that thou have taken, for she is a man's wife, etc. Therefore
I sufferred thee not to touch her: Now therefore restore the man his wife, for
he is a Prophet: (where, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm,
were literally fulfilled:) and he shall pray for thee, and thou shall live; and
if thou restore her not, know that thou shall surely die, thou and all that are
thine: whereupon Abimelech restor^d Abraham his wife, and gave him Sheep, Oxen,
Menservants, and Women-servants, and leave to dwell in the Land where he
pleased. After which Isaac and his wife dwelling in Gerar, and he telling the
men of the place that she was his sister, lest they should kill him for her,
because she was fair, king Abimelech discovering her to be his wife, charged
all his people, saying, he that touches this man or his wife shall surely be
put to death; yea he kindly entreated him, and did unto him nothing but good,
and sent her away in peace. To which we may add, the story of Gods prohibiting
and restraining both Laban and Esau (who were as potent as Kings) to hurt Jacob
when they came out maliciously against him. Genesis 31.24, 29, 52, 55. and chapter
33.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. This prohibition then, Touch not mine anoynte^, etc. being
given to Kings themselves, not to touch or hurt these Patriarchs whiles they
sojourned among them as forraigners and subjects (as all expositours grant) and
not to subjects touching their Kings; these two conclusions will hence
necessarily follow.

1. That this inhibition, given to Kings themselves with reference to subjects,
and the people of God, cannot properly be meant of Kings and Priests, but of
subjects fearing God. It is most apparent, that Kings, Princes and Rulers of
the earth have always been the greatest enemies and persecutors of Gods
anointed ones, to wit, of Christ and his chosen members; witness Ps. 2.2. and
Act. 4.26, 27. The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take
connsell together against the Lord, and against his anointed: For of a truth
against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israel were gathered together, etc. And
now Lord behold their threatenings. Which truth you may see exemplified by Ps.
119.23, 161. Ier. 26.21, 22, 23. c. 36.26. c. 37.15. c. 38.4, 5, 6. Ezekiel. 22.6,
7, 27, 28. Mich. 3.1. to 12 Zeph. 3 3. 1 Samuel 22.16. to 20. 2 Chronicles. 24 21. 1
King. 22.26, 27^ c. 29.2.10. Rev. 17.12, 13, 14^ c. 18 9, 10. c. 19.18, 19.
Math. 10.17, 18 Lu. 21.12. Iam: 2.6. Act. 12.1, 2, 3. with sundry other
Scriptures, and by all ecclesiastical histories since. In which regard God in
his infinite wisdom gave this divine inhibition, not to subjects and inferior
persons; but to King^, Princes and the greatest Potentates (who, deem their
wills a law, and think they may do what they Zech. 11.5.
please to their godly subjects,) Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets
no harm: which being spoken to Kings themselves; it cannot be meant of Kings
but subjects; unless you will make this nonsense exposition of it. That Kings
must not touch nor hurt themselves; and that it is unlawful for one King to
make war against, imprison, depose, or kill another: which the practice of all
age^, with infinite Read the 2 Chr. 36. Dan. 5^ 30, 31. Josh. 12. for all the
rest.
presidents in Scripture and story manifest to be lawful, and not prohibited by
this text; which can properly be applied to none but subjects fearing God. 2.
That all Gods faithful people are Gods anointed, as well as Kings: and
therefore as our Court Sycophants conclude from hence, That Subjects may in no
wise take up Arms (though merely defe^sive) against their Kings, because they
are Gods anointed: so by the self-same reason, the genuine proper meaning, and
express resolution of this text, Kings ought not to take up Arms against
their subjects, especially those professing the true fear of God, because they
are Gods anointed, to as well as Kings.
If any Court-Chaplaine here demand; how I prove believing Subjects fearing
God, to be his anointed, as well as Kings or P^iests?

I answer: first, the Scripture resolves expresl^: that all true Christians are
really (in a spiritual sense) both Rev. 6. c. 5.10. c. 20.6. Exodus 19.6 1 Pet.
2:5.
Kings and Pri^sts to God the Father, though they be but subjects in a
politic sense: yea, God has prepare^ a heavenly kingdome^ (with an eternal
Crown of glory) for them, where they shall reign with Christ for ever and
ever. M^th. 5.3. c. 25 34. Lu. 6.20. c 12.32. c. 22.29^ 30. Col. 1.13. 1 These.
2.12. Hebr. 12.28. ^im. 2.5. 2 P^t. ^.11. 2 Timothy 4.8. 1 Pet. 5.4. 1 Cor 9.25.
Reve. 22.5. 2 Timothy 2.12. Being t^ere^ore thus r^ally Kings and Pri^sts, and
having an heavenly Kingdom and Cro^n of glory, wherein they shall reign with
Christ for ever: in this regard they may as truly be called G^d^ ^n^int^d, a^
any Kings and Priests wh^tsoever.

Secondly, all true Christians are members of Christ and of his body, flesh and
bone; and made one with Christ, who dwells in them, and they in him, 1 Co^.
12.12, 17. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. c 3.17. c. 5.29, 30.32. John 6 51. c. 17.21^ 23. In
which respect they are not one^y styled Christians in Scripture, Act. 11.^6. c.
26.28. 1 Pet. 4.^6. But Christ himself, 1 Cor. 12.12. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. Now our
Savior himself is styled Christ in Scripture, in the abstract, by way of
excellency, only because he is the Lords anointed; anointed with the oil of
gladn^sse above his fellows. P^al. 45.7. Ps. 2.2. Esaias 61.1. Act. 4.23. c.
10.38. Lu. 4.18. Heb. 1.9. Christos in the G^eek, signifying anointed in
English, being derived from Chrio^ to anoint: An^ Christians had this very
title given them, because they are Christ's membe^s, and have a spiritual See
Ezekiel. 16.9. I anointed thee with oil, etc.
anoyntment in, by, and from Christ, and his Spirit, 1 John 2.27. B^t the
ANOINTING which ye have received of him abides in you, and ye need not any man
teach you, but as the same ANOINTING teaches you of all things. Therefore they
are r^ally and truly Gods anointed, and may be as properly so phrased, as any
Kings and Priests whatsoever.

Thirdly, the Scripture in direct terms often calls Gods people, (though subjects)
Gods anointed; as Psalm. 28.8 9. The Lord is their strength, and he is the
saving health o^ his anointed. Now who those are expressed in the following
words, Save thy people, bless thine inheritance, guide them and lift them up
forever. Gods people are here defined to be his anointed. So Psalm. 18.50. And
shows mercy to his anointed; (but who are they?) to David and to his seed for
evermore, that is, to Christ and his elect children, here called Gods anointed,
Habakuck 3.13. Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for
salvation with thine anointed. 2 Cor. 1.21. Now he which establishes us in
Christ, and has anointed us, is God, etc. 1 Ioh. 2.27. The anointing which ye
have received of him, abides in you^ etc. All these, with other Scriptures,
thus resolving Gods people (though subjects) to be his anointed ones; they may
be properly said to be the persons specified in this text. Touch ^ot mine
anointed; being an injunction given to Kings themselves, and not meant of
Kings, but of Gods people, as I have formerly manifested.

I shall willingly and cordially profess, that Kings in sacred writ, are
commonly called, Gods anointed; because they were usually anointed with Oil
upon their inauguration to their Throns, 1 Samuel 10.1. c^ 15, 17. c. 12.3, 5. c.
16.3. c. 12.13. c. 24.6, 10. c. 26.6, 11, 16^ 23. 2 Samuel 1.14 16. c. 2, 4.7. 1
King. 1.34, 39.45. 2 King. 9.3, 6, 12. 2 Chronicles. 6.42. Psalm. 20.6. Psalm. 89.20,
38^ 51. Psalm 92.12. Psalm. 132.10, 17. Esaias 45.1. Lam. 4.20. And in this regard
their persons are sacred, and no violence ought to be exercised upon their
persons, especially by their subjects, as is clear by the 1 Samuel 24.3. to 12,
17, 18, 19. chapter 26.7. to 25. 2 Samuel 1.2, to ^7. And hereupon this text, Touch
not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no ha^me, though not properly meant of
Kings, may yet be aptly applied to their personal safety. But then I say, on
the contrary part, That all Gods Saints and people, though subjects, are his
anointed ones as well as Kings; wherefore Kings must no more offer violence to
their persons or estates (without legal conviction and just cause) then they
offer violence to their Kings, which I shall thus make clear.

First, because God has given this express injunction even to Kings
themselves, Touch not mine anointed, (that is your subjects, my faithful
servants) and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.14.15. 1 Chro. 16.21, 12.
Prohibiting Abimelech, and he his subjects so much as to touch Abraham, Sarah,
or Isaac, Genesis 20.6. c. 26, 11, 29. and Number. 22^ and 23. and 24
B^laam to curse the Israelites at K. Balaks command. Secondly, because he that
touches them (to do them harm) touches the very apple of Gods eye. Zeph.
2.8. Psalm. 17.8 9. Deuteronomy. 32.9 10, 11. Yea, persecuteth God, nay, Christ
himself. Esaias 63.9 Math. 25.45. Act. 9.4, 5. And what Kings, how great soever,
may or da^e touch or persecute God and Christ, the King of Kings. Thirdly,
because God himself has quite extirpated See Esaias 40.23, 24^ 2 Kings 9.7, 8,
9.
Kings and their posterities, for offering violence to his servants, though
their subjects. Thus Ahab, Iezabel, and their posterity were destroyed, for
putting Nab^th to death, and s^izing on his Vineyard wrongfully with ut cause,
though under a pretext of law, 1 King. 21. and 22. 2 King 9. So King Ioash
exciting his people to stone the prophet Zachariah without good cause, which
they did at his commandment; the Princes and people who did it were soon after
destroyed by the Syrians; and the Kings own servants conspired against him for
the blood of Zachariah, and slew him on his bed, and then buried him
dishonourably, not in the Sepulcher of the Kings, So as his prayer at his death
( the Lord look upon it and require it) was fully executed on the King and
people. 2 Chronicles. 24.20 to 27. Thus King Ieh^ahaz, Iehoia^hin, and Iehoiachim
with all their Princes and people were carried away captive into Babylon, and
d^stroyed, for mocking, abusing, and despising Gods messengers, prophets, and
people, 2 Chronicles. 36.16, 17. Many such See Doct. Beards Theater of Gods
judgments, l. 2. c. 38, 39, 40 41.
instances might be added, but these may suffice; and that of the King of
Babylon, Esaias 14.4, 19, 20, 21, 22. But thou art cast out of thy grave as an
abominable branch, etc. as a carcass trodden under feet. Thou shall not be
joined with them in burial, BECAUSE THOU HAVE DESTROYED THY LAND, AND SLAIN
THY PEOPLE: the seed of evil doers shall never be renowned. Prepare ye
slaughter for his children, for the iniquity of their fathers, that they do not
rise, nor possess the Land, nor fill the face of the world with cities. For I
will rise up against them, says the Lord of Hosts, and cut off from Babylon
the name and remembrance, and sons, and nephews, says the Lord. A notable text
for oppressing Princes to meditate upon. Fourthly because God himself has
given an express command, Ezekiel. 44.15, 16 17. That the Prince shall not take
of the peoples inheritance by oppressi^n to thrust them out of their
possession, but he shall give his sons inheritance out of his own possession.
Which well interprets and fully answers that much abused text in the 1 Samuel
8.11, 12 19. and proves the Kings taking of their Fields, Vineyards,
Oliveyards, Seed and Sheep to give his servants there specified, to be a mere
oppression; which should make them cry out in that day because of their King,
verse. 18. and no lawful act, as some royalists gloss it. If then Kings may not
take away by violence or oppression their subjects lands or goods; muchles may
they offer violence to their persons, being God^ anointed, yea his Temple, 1
Cor. 6.19. c. 3.16. And if any man (be he King or Emperor) destroy the Temple
of God, him will God destroy; for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple they
are, 1 Cor. 3.17. Hence Ioab, David's General, coming to besiege Abel to which
Sheba fled, a woman of that place thus expostulated with him, thou se^k^st to
destroy a City and mother in Israel: why will thou swallow up the inheritance
of the Lord? Whereupon Ioab answered and said: far be it, far be it from me
that I should swallow up or destroy, 2 Samuel 20.19, 20. Fifthly, beeause no law
of God or man has given Nihil aliud potest Rex in terris cum sit Minister Dei
and ejus Vicarius, quam de jure potest. Itaque potesta^ ju^is sua est, and non
injuriae, etc. Bracton, l, 3. f. 107.
any authority to Kings to injure or oppress their subjects, in body lands or
goods, but only to feed, defend, protect them; and to fight their battles for
them, not to wage war against them. 2 Samuel 6.2. c. 23.3. Psalm. 78.72, 73, 74. 2 Chronicles. 9.8. Pro. 20.8, 26. c. 29, 4, 14. Esaias 49.23. 1 Timothy 2.3. Therefore
Kings having no right at all to injure or oppress their people, they Cooks 11:
Rep f. 72.86 Plowd. Com. f. 146, 147, 487. 21 E. 3.47.
neither lawfully can nor ought to do it, either by themselves or instruments;
there being nothing more severely prohibited and censured in Scripture then
Princes and Magistrates oppression of their Subjects, Prove. 28 15, 16. Zeph.
3.3. Michah 3, 9, to 12. Ezekiel. 22.6, 7, 27. Take but one text for many, Ezekiel.
45 8, 9. My Princes shall no more oppress my people, and the rest of the land
shall they give to the house of Israel according to their Tribes. Thus says the
Lord God, let it suffice you, O Princes of Israel, remove violence and spoil
(or plundering) and execute judgment and justice; take away your exactions from
my people, says the Lord, See Esa. 1.23. c. 3.12, 14, 15. Sixtly^ Because as
there is a solemn 1 Eliz. c. 2
Oath of allegiance, of the people to their Kings, to honor and defend their
persons; So there is the like oath from kings to their people, to protect their
rights and persons, goods, estates, lives, laws, and liberties, from all
violence and injustice, solemnly sworn at their Coronations. By virtue of which
oath Kings are as strictly tied not to wage war against their Subjects, nor to
oppress or offer violence to their persons, liberties, or estates; as their
subjects are by their oath of allegiance, not to rebel against them. And seeing
Kings were first created by and 2 Samuel 5.12 1 Pet. 2.13. Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. Esaias
45.4. 1 Samuel 8.19, 6, 20. 2 Chr. 9.8 1 Cor. 3.21 22. Romans 13.4.
for their subjects; and not their subjects by and for them; and are in verity
but public servants for their peoples welfare, their subjects not being so
much theirs, as they their subjects; from whom they Romans 13.6. Math. 22.17. to
22.
receive both their maintenance and royalties. There is as little (if not far
less) reason, for Kings to oppress and take up offensive arms against their
subjects though perchance more undutiful and refractory then they expect; as
there is for people to take up offensive arms against their Princes, in case
they become more oppressive and invasive on their persons, goods, laws,
liberties, then they should. The husband has no more right or authority to
injure or destroy the wife, or the master the servant, the head the inferior
members, then they have to destroy the husband, master, or head. And as the
lewdness of the King, husband, parent, master, must not cause the people,
wife, child, servant, to rebel against them, and utterly to reject their bonds
of duty^ so the undutifulnes or vices of the people, wife, child, or servant,
must not cause the King, husband, parent, or master, (as long as these
relations remain actually undissolved) to give over their care Nam Rex ad
tutelam legis, corporum and bonorum erectu^ est, Co. 7. Rep. Calvin's case, f.
4, to 12.
protection, and vigilance over them, or any ways injuriously to entreat them
1 Pet. 2.18. 2 Chro. 10. and 11. Finally, the Exo. 1.15 to 20.
Hebrew Midwives, notwithstanding K. Pharohs command, would by no means kill the
Israelites male children; (though but bondmen^ and no free subjects) and God
blessed, and built them houses for it: but Exodus 14.23. to 31. Psa. 106.11.
drowned Pharaoh and his host in the red sea, for drowning them, and
transgressing this inhibition, Touch not mine anointed: When 1 Samuel 22 17, 18.
K. Saul commanded his footmen and guard, to turn and slay the Priests of the
Lord at Nob, because their hand was with David (whom he deemed a traitor) and
knew when he fled, and did not show it him, they all refused (this his royal
unjust command, though not only his Subjects, but servants too) and would not
put their hand to fall upon them, being Gods anointed: And because Doeg the
Edemite slew them, by Saul's command, Saul himself was soon after slain by his
own hand, 1 Samuel 31.4. When 1 Samuel 14 38, to 46.
K. Saul had twice sol^mnly vowed to put his innocent son and subject Jonathan
causelessly to death, only for tasting a little honey; his subjects were so far
from as^isting him in this unjust action, that they presently said to their
King, Shall Jonathan die who has wrought so great salvation in Israel? God
forbid: As the Lord lives, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the
ground: So the people RESCVED Jonathan that he died not, notwithstanding Saul's
double vow to the contrary, and Ionathans being not only his subject, but son
too, which is more; neither are they taxed of disobedience or treason, but
commended for it. When 2 Chro. 10.
K. Rehoboam raised an army to fight against the ten tribes, who revolted from,
and rebelled against him, (for giving them harsh language by the advice of his
young Counselors;) electing a new King over them: God himself by his Prophet
Shemiah, spoke thus to Rehoboam and his army, 2 Chro. 11.4. 1 King. 11.21, 22,
23, 24.
Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren, return every man to his
house, for this thing is done of me: Whereupon they all obeyed the words of the
Lord, and returned: neither King nor subject daring to fight against them,
contrary to Gods express command, though rebels how much less then may Kings
wage war upon their innocent loyal subjects? When 2 King^ 31, 32, 33.
K. I^h^ram in his fury mad^ thi^ rash vow^ God d^ so, and more also to me, if
the head of Elisha (his subject) shall stand on him this day; and withal sent a
messenger to Elisha his house to take away his head. This Prophet was so far
from submitting to this his unjust design, that he commanded the Elders sitting
with him to look when the messenger come, and shut the door, and hold him
fast, though the sound of his masters (the Kings) feet were behind him^ which
they did; not suffering the messenger or King to do him violence. Yea the great
2 Kin. 1.9, to 16.
Prophet Eliah, when K. Ahaziah sent two Captains with their fif^ies one after
another to apprehend and bring him down to him by violence; was so far from
rendering himself into their hands; that in his own defense, he commanded fire
twice together to come down from heaven which consumed these two Captains and
their men; though sent by the King his Sovereign. Which divine miracle from
heaven wrought by God himself manifests, That it is lawful for subjects to
defend themselves against the unjust violence of their Kings; and that it is
dangerous for Kings themselves, or any of their officers by their commands to
offer violence or injury to their subjects. 1 Kings 13.6.
This may be further cleared by Gods exemplary judgment upon K. Jeroboam; who
stretching forth his hand to smite the Prophet, Dan. 6.
which prophesied against his idolatrous Altar, it dried up forthwith, so that
he could not pull it in again. Upon those Princes who caused Daniel to be
unjustly cast into the Lions den, where he was preserved safe from danger; but
they, their wives and children had there their bones broken in pieces by the
Lions er ever they came at the bottom of the den. And upon those Dan. 3.
mighty men in Nebuchadnezzars army, who bound Shadrach, Mesech, and Abednego,
and cast them into the burni^g fiery furnace, by the kings special command,
because they peremptorily refused to worship the golden image which he has set
up; who for executing this his unjust precept, were by Gods just vengence slain
by the flame of the fiery furnace; when as those three godly persons unjustly
cast into it by the Kings command, were miraculously preserved in the midst of
the fiery furnace, without any harm, there being not an hair of their heads
singed, neither their coats changed, nor the smell of fire passed upon them.
So safe is it for people to Acts 4^ 12 c. 5.28, 29, 40, 52. c. 11 1, to 19.
Este. 3.2, 3 John 7.33, to 48. Numb. 22. and 23. and 24.
obey God rather then men, then kings themselves in their unjust commands: so
dangerous and destructive is it for Kings, or others upon their unjust
commands, to offer any injury or violence to their subjects; or violate this
injunction, Touch not min^ anointed, etc. In a word, I read Ier. 22^ 3. to 12.
that God commanded King. Shallum, to execute judgment and righteousness, and
deliver the spoiled out of the hands of the oppressor; and do no wrong nor
violence to the stranger, fatherles, or widow, neither shed innocent blood in
this place. Adding, But if ye shall not hear these words, I swear by my self,
says the Lord, that this house (even the kings house of Judah) shall become a
desolation, I will make it a wilderness, and prepare destroyers against it,
every one with his we^pon, etc. And v. 15. to 30. in the same chap. God thus
speaks to K. Iehoiakim, Shall thou reign because thou closest thy self in
Cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then
it was well with him? etc. But thine eyes, and thine heart were not but for thy
covetousnes, and to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence
to do it. Therefore thus says the Lord concerning Iehoiakim K. of Judah; they
shall not lament for him saying, ah my brother, or ah sister; ah Lord, or ah his
glory; but he shall be buried with the burial of an ass drawn and cast forth
beyond the graves of Jerusalem. Neither does this judgment for oppressing and
slaying his sub^ects rest here, but extend to the utter extirpation of his
posterity, ver. 24.30. As I live, says the Lord, though Coniah the son of
Iehoiakim, K. of Judah, were the signet on my right hand, yet would I pluck
thee thence. Write ye this man childlesse, a man that shall not prosper in his
days, for no man of his seed shall prosper sitting upon the thron of David. So
fatal is it to Kings and their posterity to oppress and murder their
subjects. And as for those subjects who by their Kings commands shall take up
arms against their brethen to murder, plunder, or oppress them, I shall
desire them first to consider, that precept of John Baptist given to soldiers
themselves, Luke 3.14 D^ violence to no man, etc. muchles to your brethren and
fellow subjects: and next that of Obadiah v. 10. to 16 For thy violence against
thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever.
In the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the strangers
carried away his substance, and entered into his gates^ and cast lots upon
Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them. But thou should not have looked on
the day of thy brother, neither should thou have rejoiced over the children
of Judah in the day of their destruction; neither should thou have spoken
proudly in the day of distress. Thou should not have entered into the gate
of my people, nor have looked on their affliction, nor have laid hands on their
substance in the day of their calamity; Neither should thou have stood in
the cross way, to cut off those of his which did escape; neither should
thou have shut up those of his that did remain in the day of distres^^. As thou
have done it shall be done unto thee, thy sword shall return upon thine own
head. All which considered, I shall humbly submit it to every man's judgment,
whether the whole state in Parliament, and his Majesty's faithful subjects, may
not upon as good or better grounds of conscience, take up arms to defend and
preserve their persons, wives, houses, goods, estates, from unlawful violence,
rapine, plundering and destruction, now every where practiced by his Majesty's
Cavaleeres in a most See the Relation of Brainford business.
barbarous manner, to the utter ruin of many thousands for the present, and
whole kingdom in likelihood for the future, contrary to the fundamental laws
and liberties of the subject, his Majesty's Coronation oath, and frequent
protestations and Declarations; As his Majesty, by advice of ill counselors,
raise an army at home, and bring in foreign See the Letter from the Hague newly
printed.
forces from abroad, to make war upon his Parliament and people, to plunder,
murder, undo them, and bring the whole kingdom to utter desolation?
Certainly, if the subjects defensive war in this case be unlawful; as all
Royalists aver, against Scripture, reason, and the principles of nature, which
instruct all creatures to defend themselves against unjust violence and
oppession, as others have proved at large. Then the Kings offensive war upon
his loyal poor innocent subjects and Parliament, must much more be unjust and
unlawful, for the premised reasons, and Scripture authorities.
For my part, it is ^o far from my intention^ to foment this most unnatural
destructive war between King Parliament, and people, that the ^houghts of its
deplorable effects do make my very soul to bleed, and heart ^o tremble. For if
ever Christ, the Oracle of truth, uttered any verity truer than other, it was
this, Luke 11.17, 18, 19. Mark 3.24, 25, 26.
That a kingdom divided against it self cannot stand, but shall be brought to
desolation; Gal. 5.15
And if we bite and devour one another, we shall be consumed one of another. O
then (if God in his justice has not devoted us to a total and final
desolation for the sins and abuses of our long enjoyed former peace) if there
be any remainder of policy or prudence, any bowels of mercy or tender affection
left within us, toward our most dear native bleeding and also expiring
Country, Engand; to poor dying Ireland; to our religion, lives, wives,
children, parents, kindred, neighbors, goods, estates, liberties; or any ca^e
of our own safety, tranquillity or felicity; let all of all sides now at last,
(after so much sensible experience of the miseries of an intestine uncivil
war) with all convenient expedition lay down offensive and defensive arms, and
conclude such a sweet solid peace throughout our divided and distracted
kingdom, as may last forever without the least violation, upon such just and
honorable terms, as may stand with Gods glory, religions purity, his Majesty's
honor, the Parliaments privileges, the subjects liberty, the whole kingdoms
safety and felicity; least otherwise we become not only a scorn and derision,
but likewise a prey to our foreign enemies. Alas, why should the head and
members have any civil contestations, since both must perish if divided? See 1
Cor. 12^ 14: to 26.
neither subsist, but being united? why should the Kings prerogative, and the
subjects liberties, which seldom clashed heretofore, and ended all diffe^ences
in Courts of justice, be now at such irreconcilable e^mity, as to challenge
one another into the field, and admit no trial but by battle? when I read in 1
Chro. 13.1, 2, 3, 4 2 Chro. 23 3. c 13.1. to Judge. 20.1 to 12. 2 S^m. 18.4. c.
19.43, c. ^9.2. to 11. Jonah 3.7. Ester 1.13. to 2^ Ie^ 38.4^^.
Scripture, of sundry presidents where Kings, Princes, and people, have
unanimously concurred in their counsels heretofore; and consider how our King
and Parliament have most happily accorded till of late, I cannot but bewail
their present discords; which O that the God of peace and unity would speedily
reconcile.

I shall c^ose up all, with his Majesty's printed speech to both houses annexed
to the petition of right by his Royal command. I assure you my maxim is, That
the peoples Liberty strengthens the Kings Prerogative; and that the Kings
Prerogative is to defend the peoples Liberties: And with the Statute of Magna
Charta, chapter 29. No freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his
freehold, or liberties or free customs, or be outlawed or exiled, or any other
ways destroyed; nor we shall not pass upon him, nor cond^mn him, but by the
lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the law of the Land. We shall sell to no man,
we shall deny nor defer to no man justice or right: Which in effect is a most
exact paraphrase on this misconstrued text, Touch not min^ anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm.

FINIS.

