portrait in oval frame of Henry Purcell at age 37, in the year 1695. Engraving
by Robert White, after John Closterman. National Portrait Gallery, London, NPG
D32252. Henricus Purcell. AEtat Suae 37. 95.
uto keino

F Closterman pinx. R. White sculp.


ORPHEUS BRITANNICUS.

A COLLECTION OF ALL The Choicest SONGS FOR One, Two, and Three Uoices,
COMPOSED By Mr. Henry Purcell.

TOGETHER, With such Symphonies for Violins or Flutes, As were by Him designed
for any of them: AND A THROUGH-BASS to each Song; Figured for the Organ,
Harpsichord, or Theorbo-Lute.

All which are placed in their several Keys according to the Order of the Gamut.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for Henry Playford, in the Temple-Change,
in Fleet Street, MDCXCVIII.

To the Honorable, The Lady HOWARD.
MADAM,
WEre it in the power of Music to abate-those strong Impressions of Grief
which have continued upon me ever since the Loss of my dear lamented Husband,
there are few (I believe) who are furnished with larger or better supplies of
Comfort from this Science, than he has left me in his own Compositions, and in
the Satisfaction I find, that they are not more valued by me (who must own my
self fond to a Partiality of all that was his) than by those who are no less
Judges than Patrons of his Performances. I find, Madam, I have already said
enough to justify the Presumption of this Application to Your Ladyship, who
have added both these Characters to the many excellent Qualities, which make
You the Admiration of all that know You. Your Ladiship's extraordinary skill in
Music, beyond most of either Sex, and Your great Goodness to that dear Person,
whom You have sometimes been pleased to honor with the Title of Your Master,
makes it hard for me to judge whether he contributed more to the vast
Improvements You have made in that Science, or Your Ladyship to the Reputation
he gained in the Profession of it: For I have often heard him say, That as
several of his best Compositions were originally designed for Your Ladiship's
Entertainment, so the Pains he bestowed in fitting them for Your Ear, were
abundantly rewarded by the Satisfaction he has received from Your Approbation,
and admirable Performance of them, which has best recommended both them and
their Author to all that have had the happiness of hearing them from Your
Ladyship.

Another great advantage, to which my Husband has often imputed the success of
his Labors, and which may best plead for Your Ladiship's favorable Acceptance
of this Collection, has been the great Justness both of Thought and Numbers
which he found in the Poetry of our most refined Writers, and among them, of
that Honorable Gentleman, who has the dearest and most deserved Relation to
your Self, and whose Excellent Compositions were the Subject of his last and
best Performance in Music.

Thus, Madam, Your Ladyship has every way the justest Title to the Patronage of
this Book, the Publication of which, under the auspicious Influence of Your
Name, is the best (I had almost said the only) means I have left of Testifying
to the World, my desire to pay the last Honors to its dear Author, Your
Ladyship having generously prevented my intended Performance of the Duty I owe
to his Ashes, by erecting a fair Monument over them, and gracing it with an
Inscription which may perpetuate both the Marble and his Memory. Your
Generosity, which was too large to be confined either to his Life or his
Person, has also extended it self to his Posterity, on whom Your Ladyship has
been pleased to entail Your Favors, which must, with all Gratitude, be
acknowledged as the most valuable part of their Inheritance, both by them, and

YOUR LADISHIP's Most obliged, and most Humble Servant, Fr. Purcell.

THE Bookseller to the Reader.
WHereas this Excellent Collection was designed to have been Published some
considerable Time before now, the Reason of its delay, was to have it as
complete as possibly it could be made, both in regard to the Memory of that
great Master, and the Satisfaction of all that buy it. And to make amends to
those Gentlemen and Ladies who subscribed early to this Work, they will here
find an Addition of above Thirty Songs more than were at first proposed, which
(considering the extraordinary charge of Paper, etc. at this time) is an
additional Expense to me, though I hope the Compleatness of the Work will
recompense my Care and Trouble. The Author's extraordinary Talent in all sorts
of Music is sufficiently known, but he was especially admired for the Vocal,
having a peculiar Genius to express the Energy of English Words, whereby he
moved the Passions of all his Auditors. And I question not, but the Purchaser
will be very well pleased in the Choice of this Collection, which will be a
great Satisfaction to

Your Humble Servant, Hen. Playford.

An ODE on the Death of Mr. Henry Purcell. Written by Mr. Dryden.
I.
MArk how the Lark and Linnet Sing,
With rival Notes
They strain their warbling Throats,
To welcome in the Spring.
But in the close of Night,
When Philomel begins her Heavenly Lay,
They cease their mutual spite,
Drink in her Music with Delight,
And listening and silent, and silent and listening, and listening and silent
obey.
II.
So ceased the rival Crew when Purcell came,
They Sung no more, or only Sung his Fame.
Struck dumb they all admired the Godlike Man:
The God-like Man
Alas! too soon retired,
As he too late began.
We beg not Hell our Orpheus to restore;
Had he been there,
Their Sovereigns fear
Had sent him back before.
The power of Harmony too well they knew,
He long e're this had Tuned their jarring Sphere,
And left no Hell below.
III.
The Heavenly Quire, who heard his Notes from high,
Let down the Scale of Music from the Sky:
They handed him along,
And all the way He taught, and all the way they Sung.
Ye Brethren of the Lyre, and tunefull Voice,
Lament his lot, but at your own rejoice.
Now live secure and linger out your days,
The Gods are pleased alone with Purcell's Lays,
Nor know to mend their Choice.
This Ode is Set to Music by Dr. Blow, and may be bound up with this
Collection.

Another Ode on the same occasion. By a Person of Quality.
ACcord thy Blessing to my bold Design,
Thou best Inspirer of Harmonious Grief;
Thou, who among the tunefull Nine,
In mournful Melody art Chief.
In Music, winged with Sighs, I soar,
A second Orpheus to deplore;
Second in Time, but First in Fame;
To him blind Fiction gave a Name.
The truthless Tales, which srantick Poets tell
Of Thebes, and moving Stones, and Journeys down to Hell,
Were only Prophecies of Musick's force, which we
Have wonderfully seen fulfilled in Thee.
What mortal Harmony could do
No Mortal ever knew,
Till thy transcendent Genius came,
Whose strength surpassed the Praises of Poetic flame:
Whose Raptures will for ever want a Name.
Out of thy Orb awhile
(Content to wander here below)
Thou did vouchsafe to bless our Isle,
(With high Commands from Heaven, for ought we know)
To try seditious Jarrs to reconcile.
But Discord, in a frightfull form,
With all her Retinue of War,
The Drum, the Pulpit, and the Bar,
The croaking Crowds tumultuous noise,
And every hoarse Outlandish voice,
Proclaimed so loud the impending Storm,
That frighted hence, thou did for Refuge fly,
To reassume thy Station in the Sky:
There Heavenly Carols to compose and sing,
To Heavens harmonious King.
Where rapt in transports of Extatic Song,
Amidst the inspired Seraphic throng,
Crowned with Celestial ever-blooming Bays,
Thou sitt'st dissolved in Hallelulahs.
A Lamentation for the Death of Mr. Henry Purcell. Set to Music by his
Brother, Mr. Daniel Purcell. The Words by N. Tate, Esquire;
I.
A Gloomy Mist o'erspreads the Plains
More Gloomy Grief the Nymphs and Swains;
The Shepherd breaks his tunefull Reed,
His pining Flocks refuse to feed.
Silent are the Lawns and Glades,
The Hills, the Vales, the Groves, the Dales,
All silent as Elizian Shades.
No more they Sing, no more Rejoice,
Echo her self has lost her Voice.
II.
A Sighing Wind, a Murmuring Rill,
Our Ears with doleful Accents fill:
They are heard, and only they,
For sadly thus they seem to say,
The Joy, the Pride of Spring is Dead,
The Soul of Harmony is fled.
Pleasure's flown from Albion's Shore,
Wit and Mirth's bright Reign is over,
Strephon and Music are no more!
Since Nature thus pays Tribute to his Urn,
How should a sad, forsaken Brother mourn!
An Ode for the Consort at York-Buildings, upon the Death of Mr. Purcell. By J.
Talbot, Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge.
I.
WEep, all ye Muses, weep over Damon's Hearse,
And pay the grateful Honors of your Verse:
Each mournful Strain in saddest Accents dress,
His Praises, and your Sorrows to express.
Ye Sons of Art, lament your Learned Chief
With all the Skill and Harmony of Grief;
To Damon's Hearse your tunefull Tribute bring,
Who taught each Note to speak, and every Muse to sing.
II.
Hark! how the Warlike Trumpet groans,
The Warlike Trumpet sadly moans,
Instructed once by Damon's Art
To warm the active Soldier's Heart,
To soften Danger, sweeten Care,
And smooth the rugged Toils of War,
Now with shrill Grief, and melancholy Strains
Of Damon's Death, and Albion's Loss complains.
The sprightly Haut-boys, and gay Violin,
By Damon taught to charm the listening Ear,
To fill the ecchoing Theater,
And with rich Melody adorn each Scene;
Forget their native Cheerfulness,
Their wonted Air and Vigor to express,
And in dead doleful Sounds a tuneless Grief confess.
" Weep all ye Muses, weep over Damon's Hearse,
" And pay the grateful Honors of your Verse.
III.
Mark how the melancholy Flute,
Joins in sad Consort with the amorous Lute,
Lamenting Damon's hapless Fate:
From him they learned to tell the Lover's Care,
With soft Complaints to move the cruel Fair,
To calm her Anger, and to change her Hate.
The various Organ taught by Damon's hand
A holier Passion to command,
The roving Fancy to refine,
And fill the ravished Soul with Charms divine;
Now in loud Sighs employs its tuneful Breath,
And bids each secret Sound conspire
To mourn its darling Damon's Death,
And with consenting Grief to form one numerous Choir.
" Weep all ye Muses, weep over Damon's Hearse,
" And pay the grateful Honors of your Verse.
IV.
Cease, cease, ye Sons of Art, forbear
To aggravate your own Despair:
Cease to lament your Learned Chief
With fruitless Skill, and hopeless Grief;
For sure, if Mortals here below
Ought of Diviner Beings know,
Damon's large Mind informs some active Sphere,
And circles in melodious Raptures there;
Mixed with his Fellow-Choristers above,
In the bright Orbs of Harmony and Love.
The following Lines were designed for Mr. Purcell's Monument; which being
supplied by a better Hand, the Author of this Inscription, in veneration to the
Memory of that Great Master, prefixes it to his Golden Remains.
Memoriae Sacrum H. P.
En! Marmor loquax
(Vix, heu! prae dolor)
Lacrymas stillatim sudat;
Manes Purcelli sacros,
Quisquis es, Viator,
Siste ac venerare.
Eheu! quam subito Orbis Harmonici
Procubuit Columen!
Angliacus ille Amphion, Orpheus, Apollo,
Deus Harmoniae Italo-Anglus,
Certe Corellius;
Artis Musicae
Perquam difficilis
Facile Coryphaeus.
Per acuta Musicae victor ibat ovans.
Et placida Animam compede alligavit.
Eheu! quam brevi
Praecox marcescit ingenium!
Invida quippe Natura Juvenem,
Art senescentem, corripuit.
At -- desine tandem
Miserantis quaerimoniae:
Non Omnis moritur,
Vivunt Symphoniae immortales.
Angelorum Chori Purcellum stipantes,
Nectaris immemores,
Mellitiores istos bibunt Aure sonos:
Et plaudentes recinunt.
Vivent, in aeternum
Aeternumque placebunt.
Abi, viator, and, si Musicus, aemulare:
Sed calcibus humum leviter preme,
No nascentes atteras Rosas.
Johannes Gilbert A. M. Coll. Christ. Cantab.

To the Memory of my Dear Friend Mr. Henry Purcell.
MUSIC, the chiefest Good the Gods have given,
And what below still antedates our Heaven,
Just like a Spirit, by a lasting Spell,
Consigned to Italy, did Ages dwell.
Long there remained a pleased and welcome Guest,
Loved best to live where best she was expressed.
By Glory led, at length to France she came,
And there immortalized great Luly's Name;
As yet a Stranger to the British Shore,
Till Lock, and Blow, deep learned in all her Lore,
And happy artfull Gibbons, forced her over.
Where with young Humphries she acquainted grew,
(Our first reforming Music's Richelieu)
Who dying left the Goddess all to You.
There are, I own, a numerous tunefull Throng,
Composing still, though often in the wrong,
And with Old Air set forth a fine New Song.
These to thy juster Art have no pretense,
For if they make a Tune they mar the Sense.
If sparkling Air the taking Treble grace,
It Is murdered quite by the Ungodly Bass.
These to old Morly's Maxims counter run;
In Overtures rejoice, in Jiggs they mourn:
Whilst their too great Example, Mighty You,
That you might still impartial Justice do,
At once to Music, and the Muses too;
Each Syllable first weighed, or short, or long,
That it might too be Sense, as well as Song.
Where e're thy well known Name with theirs is found,
Is as if Cowley, up with Quarles were bound.
Purcell! the Pride and Wonder of the Age,
The Glory of the Temple, and the Stage.
When I thy happy Compositions view,
The Parts so proper find, the Air so new,
Your Cadence just, your Accent ever true;
How can I e're enough the Man admire,
Who Is raised the British over the Thracian Lyre!
That Bard could make the Savage-kind obey,
But thou have tamed yet greater Brutes than they:
Who e're like Purcell could our Passions move!
Who ever sang so feelingly of Love!
When Thyrsis does in dying Notes complain
His hapless Love, and Phillis cold Disdain;
Bribed by the magic Sounds that strike the Ear,
We Parties turn, and blame the cruel Fair;
But when you tune your Lyre to MartialLays,
In Songs Immortal, Mortal Hero's Praise;
Each Song its Hearers does to Hero's raise.
Hail! and for ever hail Harmonious Shade!
I loved thee Living, and admire thee Dead.
Apollo's Harp at once our Souls did strike,
We learnt together, but not learnt alike:
Though equal care our Master might bestow,
Yet only Purcell e're shall equal Blow:
For Thou, by Heaven for wondrous things designed,
Left'st thy Companion lagging far behind.
Sometimes a HERO in an Age appears;
But scarce a PURCELL in a Thousand Years.
By H. Hall, Organist of Hereford.

To the Memory of his much lamented Friend Mr. Henry Purcell. By H. P.
HArk! what deep Groans torment the Air,
Is Nature sunk into Despair;
Or does the trembling Earth descry
A fit of Falling Sickness nigh?
O my Prophetic Fears! he is gone!
'Twas Nature's diapason'd Groan.
Harmonious Soul! took'st thou offense
At Discords here, and fled'st from hence?
Or in thy Sacred Raptures hear
The Music of Heavens warbling Sphere?
Then mounted strait where Angels sing,
And Love does dance on every String.
For Balms thou need'st not rob the East,
Nor strip the Phoenix Spicy Nest:
For, O my Friend, thy charming Strains
Perfume the Skies with sweeter Grains.
Touch but thy Lyre the Stones will come,
And dance themselves into a Tomb.
A Table of the SONGS.
Note, That such Songs as are thus marked were never before Printed.
A.
AH how sweet it is to love Page. 3 Ah me, to many Deaths 179 Ah Belinda 193
And in each Track of Glory 208 As soon as the Chaos 228
B.
Bess of Bedlam 126 Bacchus is a Power Divine 174 Blow Boreas, blow 185 Behold
the Man 237
C.
Celia has a thousand Charms 1 Cease anxious World 12 Cinthia frowns when ever
I woe her 70 Come let us leave the Town 108 Celebrate this Festival 117
Celemene, pray tell me 216
D.
Dear, pretty Touth 79 Dulcibella 199
F.
For Love every Creature 45 Fairest Isle of Isles excelling 83 From Rosy
Bowers, where sleeps the God of Love 90 Fair Cloe my Breast so alarms 137 Fly
swift ye Hours 181 From folded Flocks 213
G.
Gentle Shepherds, you that know 72
H.
How pleasant is this flowery Plain 19 Here Is to thee Dick 57 Hark my Daridcar
148 Here the Deities approve 227
I.
If Music be the Food of Love 6 I looked and saw within the Book of Fate 10 I
see, I see she flies me 33 I came, and saw, and was undone 67 If Prayers and
Tears the Church of England 98 In vain, in vain against Love 102 I Will sail upon
the Dog Star 122 I attempt from Love-Sickness 226
L.
Leave these useless Arts 37 Love thou art best of humane Joys 39 Lucinda is
bewitching fair 88 Lost is my Quiet 110 Love arms himself in Celia's Eyes 131
Lovely Albina 133 Let Hector, Achilles 162 Let Caesar and Urania live 203 Love
thou can hear 219 Let the dreadful Engines 243
N.
No, Resistance is in vain 155 Nestor who did 210 Now the Maids and the Men 232
O.
Oh Lead me, lead me 84 Oh Solitude my sweetest Choice 95 O let me weep 194
S.
Soft Notes and gently raised 15 Seek not to know what must not be revealed 29
Sweeter than Roses 86 She loves and she confesses too 124 Stripped of their Green
129 Sing all ye Muses 141 Sound a Parley 159 Since the Times are so bad 168
Strike the Viol, touch the Lute 189 Since from my dear 190 See where repenting
Celia lies 191 See how the fading Glories 223
T.
The Cares of Lovers 9 Two Daughters of this aged Streams 35 Though my Mistress
be 42 Tell me why my charming Fair 62 They say you're angry 81 There never was
so wretched a Lover 112 This Poet sings the Trojan Wars 119 Thy Genius lo from
his sweet Bed of Rest 135 This Nature's Voice 177
W.
Whilst I with Grief did on you look 4 When Teucer from his Father fled 47 When
first I saw the bright Aurelia's Eyes 76 When Myra sings 104 What a sad Fate
165 Were I to choose the greatest Bliss 206
Y.
You twice Ten Hundred Deities 25 You say it is Love creates the Pain 52
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Henry Playford at the Temple-Change in
Fleetstreet.
ALL the Excellent Compositions of Mr. Henry Purcell, both Vocal and
Instrumental, that have been published (viz.) his First Book of Twelve Sonata's
in Four Parts, fairly engraved. Price stitched 12 s.

-- His Ayrs and Sonata's newly printed, in Four Parts, price of the Ayrs 15 s.
the Sonata's 10 s.

The Opera of Dioclesian, stitched 8 s.

Te Deum and Jubilate, in Score, price 2 s. 6 d.

A Choice Collection of Lessons for the Harpsichord or Spinett, with
Instructions for Beginners, fairly engraved. The Second Edition, price 3 s.

These Six printed for Madam Purcell, and sold for her by Henry Playford.

Harmonia Sacra, First and Second Book, price of both bound 16 s. together.

The Second Book (wherein are several excellent Songs of Mr. Henry Purcell's
not yet known to many) price stitched 4 s.

Orpheus Britannicus: or a choice Collection of his Songs, in One, Two and
Three Parts, with Symphonies for Flutes and Violins to some of them, price
bound 18 s.

Two Elegies on the Death of the late Queen, price stitched 1 s.

The Second Part of the Musical Companion, containing all Mr. Purcell's choice
Catches, to which is now added a Sheet more never printed in the former
Editions, price stitched 2 s. 6 d.

An Introduction to the Skill of Music, the Thirteenth Edition: to which is
added the whole Art of Composition, made more plain and easy, by Mr. Henry
Purcell, price 2 s.

Mr. Henry Purcell's Picture exactly engraved, by Mr. White, price in a Frame 1
s. 6 d.

A Pastoral on the Death of Mr. Henry Purcell, by J. G. M. A. price stitched 6
d.

An Ode on the Death of Mr. Purcell, the Words by Mr. Dryden, and Set to
Music by Dr. Blow, price stitched 2 s.

Next Term will be published Dr. Blow's First Book of Choice Songs. Also an
Addition of his Choice Lessons for the Harpsichord or Spinett, engraven on
Copper Plates, will be added to the Second Part of Musick's Handmaid: of which
timely notice will be given of its Publication.

The Whole Book of Psalms in Octavo, composed in Three Parts, by Mr. John
Playford, the Fourth Edition, is now in the Press and will be speedily
published: price 3 s. 6 d.

Miscellanea Sacra: Poems on Divine and Moral Subjects; the Second Edition,
with Additions of Poems, and Meditations in Prose, Collected by N. Tate,
Servant to his Majesty, price bound 2 s. 6 d.

Single Songs in the Opera of Brutus of Alba, or Augusta's Triumph: Set by Mr.
Daniel Purcell, price 1 s.

Single Songs in the Opera of the World in the Moon, price 6 d.

Europe's Revels: Three new Songs, Set by Mr. John Eccles, (viz.) the
Dialogue, the Raree-shew, and the Irish Howl, price 6 d.

The Parallel: an Essay on Friendship, Love and Marriage: by Sir H. S. price
stitched 6 d.

Oroonoko, a Tragedy: by Mr. Southern, price 1 s. 6 d.

The Lover's Luck, a Comedy: by Mr. Dilks, price 1 s.

The She Gallants, a Comedy: price 1 s. 6 d.

The last New Play called Heroic Love, a Tragedy: Acted at the New Theater in
Little Lincoln's-Inne Fields; both written by the Honorable Geo-Greenvill,
Esquire; price 1. s. 6 d.

The Second Part of the Dancing Master; to which is added a Sheet of 12 Dances,
beginning with a new Tune called Europe's Revells; in all 48 New Dances: price
st. 1 s.

A General Catalogue of all the Choicest Musick-Books these 20 years; also
Ruled Paper, and Books ruled of several sizes, with Books on all other Subjects.

* There will be speedily published a Second Edition of Mr. Lenton's last
Three-Part Consort, with an Additional Sheet for 2 Flutes, and a Through Bass,
etc.

A Song in the Rival-Sisters.
^ CE -- lia has a thousand, thousand, thou -- sand, Charms; it is Heaven, it is
Heaven to lie with -- in -- her Arms; while I stand gazing on her Face, some
new, and some resistless grace, fills with fresh Magic all the place: while I
stand gazing on her Face, some new, and some re -- sist -- less grace, fills
with fresh Magic a -- ll the place: ^ But while the Nymph I thus a -- door,
but while the Nymph I thus, I thus a -- door, I should my wretched, wretched,
wretched Fate deplore; for oh! Mir -- til -- lo, oh! Mir -- til -- lo, have a
care, have a care, her sweetness is a -- bove compare, but then she is false,
she is false, but then she is false, she is false as well as Fair; have a care,
have a care, have a care Mir -- til -- lo, have a care Mir -- til -- lo, have a
care, have a care, have a care, have a care.

A Song in Tyrannick Love, or the Royal Martyr.
^ AH! how sweet, ah! how sweet, how sweet it is to Love; Ah! ah! ah! how gay
is young de -- sire: And what plea -- sing pain, and what plea -- sing pain we
prove; when first, when first we feel a Lovers fire: pains of Love are sweet --
ter far, then all, all, all, all, all, all other pleasures are; pains of Love
are swee -- ter far, then all, all, all, all other plea -- sures are. are.

A Song on Mrs. Bracegirdle's Singing (I Burn etc.) In the Second part of
Don-Quixote.
^ WHilst I with grief did on you look, whilst I with grief did on you look,
when Love had tur -- n'd your Brain, from you, I, I, the con -- ta -- gion
took, from you, I, I, the con -- ta -- gion took, and for you, for you bor -- e
the pain, for you, for you bor -- e the pain: Mar -- cel -- la, then your Lo --
ver prize, and be not, be not ^ be not too se -- vere; use well, use well the
con -- quest of your Eyes, for Pride, Pride, Pride has cost you dear. Am -- bro
-- sio treates your Flames with scorn, and rack -- s your ten -- der mind,
withdraw your Smiles, withdraw your Smile -- s and Frowns re -- turn, and pay
him, pay him, pay him in his kind, and pay him, pay him, pay him in his kind. ^
IF Music, if Music be the foo -- d of Love, Sing on, sing on, sing on, sing
on, sing, si -- ng on, till I am filled with jo -- y, till I am filled with
joy; for then my listening Soul you mo --. -- ve, for then my listening Soul you
mo -- ve, you move, to plea -- sures that can never, ne -- ver ^ cloy; your
Eyes, your Mien, your Tongue de -- clare, that you are Mu -- sick ev' -- ry
where; your Eyes, your Mien, your Tongue de -- clare, that you are Mu -- sick
ev' -- ry where. Pleasures in -- vade both Eye and Ear, pleasures invade both
Eye and Ear, so fire -- ce, so fire -- ce ^the transports are, they wou -- nd,
so fire -- ce the transports are, they wound, and all my Sen -- ses feasted
are, and all my Sen -- ses feast -- ed are; though yet the Treat is on -- ly
Sound, though yet the Treat is on -- ly Sound, Sound, Sound, Sound, Sound, Sound,
is on -- ly Sound; sure I must perish, I must, I must pe -- rish by your
Charms, unless you sa -- ve me in your Arms.

A Song, in Timon of Athens.
^ THe Ca -- res, the Car -- es of Lo -- verse, their A -- lar -- mes, their
Sighs, their Tears have power -- full Charms, and if so sweet their Tor -- meant
is, ye Gods, ye Gods how Ravish -- ing, ye Gods how Ravish -- ing, how
Ravishing the bliss, so soft, so gen -- tle, so soft, so gen -- tle is their
pain; ^ it is even a plea -- sure to com -- plain.

A Song in the Indian Emperor.
^ I Looked, I looked, and saw within the Book of Fate, where ma -- ny Days did
Lower, when lo! when lo! one happy, happy Hour leapt up, leapt up, and smiled,
leapt up and smi -- l'd, to save thy sin -- king State. ^ A Day shall come,
when in thy power thy cru -- el Foes shall be; a Day shall come, when in thy
power thy cru -- el Foes shall be; then shall the Land be free, and thou in
Peace, and thou in Pea -- ce shall Reign, but take, Oh! oh! take that op --
portu -- ni -- ty, which once re -- fus'd, will never, never, never, come a --
gain; will never, never, never, never, never, never, never, come a -- gain.

A Song on a Ground, the Words by Sir George Ethridge.
^ CEase, anxious World, your fruit -- less Pain; cease, cease, cease anxious
World, your fruit -- less Pain, to gra -- sp for -- bidden Store; your studied
Labors shall prove vain, your Alchy -- my un -- blessed; whilst Seeds of far
more pre -- cious Ore, are ripened, are ri -- penned in my Breast: My Breast,
the Forge of happi -- er Love, where my Lu -- cin -- da, my Lu -- cin -- da
lies; and the rich Stock does so improve, as she her Art em -- ploys; that ev'
-- ry Smile and Touch she ^ gives, turns all to Golden Joys. Since then we can
such Treasures raise, let us no Expense re -- suse; in Love let us lay out all
our Days, how can we e're be Poor? How can we e're be Poor? How can we e're
be Poor, when ev' -- ry Blessing that we use, be -- gets a thousand more? When
e' -- ry Blessing that we use, be -- gets a thousand more? When ev' -- ry
Blessing that we use, be -- gets a thousand more.

A Seranading SONG.
^ SYmphony for two Flutes. ^ SO -- ft Notes, and gent -- ly raised, lest some
har -- sh sound the fair Co -- rinna's Rest do rude -- ly wound; dif -- suse a
peace -- full calmness through each Part, touch all the Springs of a so -- ft
Virgin's Heart: Tune ^ every Pulse, and kin -- dle all her Blood, and swell the
tor -- meant of the li -- ving Flood; gli -- de through her Dreams, and over her
Fan -- cy move, and stir up, stir up all the I -- mages of Love. Play the
Trible of the Symphony then go on.Thus fe -- ble Man does his advantage take,
to gain in Sleep what he must lose a -- wake; when Night and Shades shut up Co
-- rin -- na's Charms, then, then is the prop'rst time to take up Arms: But
Night and Shades her Beau -- ties cannot con -- ceal, Night has pe -- cu -- liar
Gra -- ces to re -- veal.

CHORUS. ^ (Flute.) Ten thousand thousand Rap -- tures de attend, ten thousand
thousand, ten thousand thousand Raptures, Ten thousand thousand Raptures do at
-- tend, ten thousand thousand Raptures de at -- tend, do do attend this time,
too strong for Fancy, too strong for Fancy and too full, and too at -- tend
this time, too strong for Fancy, too strong for Fancy, and too full, and full,
too full for Rhyme; too strong for Fan -- cy, and too full for Rhyme. too full,
too full for Rhyme; too strong for Fan -- cy, and too full for Rhyme. ^
SYmphony fo two FLUTES. ^ How plea -- sant is this flow -- ry Plain and Grove!
What perfect Scenes of In -- no -- cence and Love! As if the Gods, when all
things here below were cursed, reserved this place to ^ let us know, how beau
-- ti -- full the World at first was made, e're Mankind by Am -- bition was be
-- tray'd. The hap -- py Swain in these e -- na -- mell'd Fields, pos -- sesses
all the Good, possesses all, all the Good that Plenty yields; pure without
mixture, as it first did come, from the great Trea -- su -- ry of Nature's
Womb; free from Di -- sturbance here he lives at case, contented with a lit --
tle Flock's increase, and covered with the gen -- tle Wings of Peace. No Fears,
no Storms of War his Thoughts mo -- lest ^ Ambition is a stranger to his
Breast; his Sheep, his Crook, and Pipe, are all his Store, he needs not,
neither does he cover more. Often to the si -- lent Groves he does retreat, whose
Shades de -- fend him from the scor -- ching Heat: In these Re -- ces -- ses
unconcerned he lies, whilst through the Boughs the whisp' -- ring Zephire flies,
and the Woods Choristers on every Tree, lull him asleep, lull him asleep, with
their swee -- t Har -- money. ^

CHORUS in Five Parts. ^ Ah happy, happy, hap -- py Life! Ah happy, happy,
happy, ah hap -- py Life! Ah blessed Re -- Ah happy, happy, hap -- py Life! Ah
happy, happy, happy, ah hap -- py Life! Ah blessed Re -- -- treat, void of the
Troubles, the Troubles, that attend the Great! From Pride, and courtly Fol --
lies -- treat, void of the Troubles, the Troubles, that attend the Great! From
Pride, and courtly Follies ^ free, from all their gaudy, gau -- die Pomps, and
Va -- ni -- ty: No guilty Re -- free, from all their gau -- die Pomps, and Va --
ni -- ty: No guilty Re -- -- morse does their Pleasure an -- noy, nor di --
sturb the De -- lights of their in -- nocent Joy. Crowned -- morse does their
Pleasure an -- noy, nor di -- sturb the De -- lights of their in -- nocent Joy.
^ Monarchs, whom Ci -- ties and Kingdoms o -- bey, whom Ci -- ties and Kingdoms
o -- bey, are not Crowned Monarchs, whom Ci -- ties and Kingdoms o -- bey, whom
Kingdoms o -- bey, are not half so con -- ten -- ted, are not half so con --
ten -- ted, or hap -- py as they. half so con -- ten -- ted, are not half so
con -- ten -- ted, or hap -- py as they.

The Conjurers Song in the 3d. Act of the Indian-Queen.
^ YOU twice ten hundred De -- i -- ties, to whom, to whom we daily Sacrifice;
Ye powers, ye powers that dwell with Fates below, and see what Men are doomed
to do; where Elements in dis -- cord dwell, thou God of sleep a -- ri -- se
and tell; tell great Zempoalla, what strange, strange Fate must on her dis --
mall, dis -- mall Vi -- sion wait. By the croaking of the Toad, in their Caves
that make a -- bode; by the Croaking of the Toad, ^ in their Caves that make a
-- bode; Earthy Dun, Earthy Dun that pa -- nts for breath, with her swe -- ll'd
sides full, fu -- ll, fu -- ll of death; By the Crested Adders Pride, by the
Crested Adders Pride, that a -- long the Cliffs do gli -- de, by the Visage,
by thy Visage feir -- ce and black, by thy Deaths Head on thy ^ back; by thy
twis -- ted Ser -- pents placed, for a Girdle rou -- nd thy Wast; by the Hearts
of Gold that deck thy Breast, thy Shoulders and thy Neck; from thy Sleep -- ing
Mansion rise, and open, and open thy un -- will -- ing Eyes. While bubbling
Springs their Mu -- sick keep, while bubbling Springs their Mu -- sick keep,
that use to Lull thee, use to Lull thee, Lull thee in thy ^ Sleep, that use to
Lull thee, Lull thee, Lull thee, use to Lull thee, Lull thee in thy Sleep.

A Song with Hautboys.
SYmphony for HAUTBOYS. ^ ^ (Hautboy.) (Voice) SEEK not to know what must not,
what must not, must not be Re -- veal'd; Joy -- s on -- ly flo -- w where Fate
is most con -- ceal'd; too bu -- sy Man ^ too bu -- sy Man would find his sor
-- rows more, if fu -- ture For -- tunes he should know be -- fore: for by that
knowledge, for by that know -- ledge of his Destiny, he would not, would not
live at all, but al -- ways dye; Enquire not then, who, who shall from Bonds be
freed, who it is shall wear a ^ Crown, or who shall Bleed, shall Bleed: All, all
must sub -- mit, all must sub -- mit to their ap -- poin -- ted Doom, Fate and
mis* -- fortune will too, too quick, quick -- ly come; Let me no more, no more,
no more with power -- full Charms be pressed, I am forbid by Fate, ^ I am forbid
by Fate to tell, to tell the rest: Let me no more, no more, no more with power
-- full Charms be pressed, I am for -- bid by Fate, I am for -- bid by Fate to
tell, to tell the rest. ^ I See, I see she fly's me, she fly's me; I see, I see
she fly's me, she fly's me, fl -- y's me, she fly's me every where, she fly's
me every where; her Eyes, her Eyes, her Scorn, her Scorn dis -- covers, but
what is her Scorn, but what is her Scorn or my Des -- pair, since it is my Fate,
it is, it is my Fate, since it is, it is my Fate, since it is my Fate to Love her,
since it is my ^ Fate to Love her? Were she but kind, kind, were she but kind,
kind, whom I a -- door, I might live lon -- ger, but not Lo -- ve more; were
she but kind, kind, were she but kind, kind, whom I a -- door; I might live lon
-- ger, live lon -- ger, but not Lo -- ve her more.

A Two Part SONG in King Arthur.
^ TWo Daughters of this A -- ged stream are we, Two Daughters of this A -- ged
stream are we, Two Daughters two Daughters of this A -- ged strea -- m are we,
and of this A -- ged stream are we, two Daughters of this A -- ged stream are
we, both our Sea -- green Locks have combed, and both our Sea -- green Locks
have combed, have and both our Sea -- green Locks have combed for ye, and both
our Sea -- green Locks have combed for ye; come, come, come, come Bathe with
us an Hour or two, come, combed for ye; come, come Bathe with us an Hour or
two, come, ^ come, come, come Na -- ked in for we are so, what danger, what dan
-- ger come, come, come Na -- ked in for we are so, what dan -- ger fro -- m
from a Na -- ked Foe? come, come Bathe with us, come, come Bathe a Na -- ked
Foe? come, come, come, come Bathe with us, come, come Bathe and share what Plea
-- sures in the Floods ap -- pear; we'll and share what Plea -- sures in the
Floods ap -- pear; we'll beat the beat the Waters till they bound, we'll beat
the Waters till they bound, and cir -- cle Waters till they bound, we'll beat
the Waters till they bound, and cir -- cle ^roun -- d, and cir -- cle roun --
d, and cir -- cle roun -- d, and cir -- cle round. roun -- d, and cir -- cle
round.

A Two Part SONG, in Epsome-Wells.
^ LEave, leave these useless Arts, leave, leave these use -- less Arts in
loving; seeming Leave, leave these useless Arts, leave, leave these useless
Arts in loving; an -- ger and dis -- dain: seeming an -- ger and dis -- dain: ^
Trust, trust to Nature, gently, gently, gently mo -- ving, Nature Trust, trust
to Nature, gently, gently, gent -- ly mo -- ving, never, never, never, never,
never, never, never, never, never, never, ne -- ver pleads in Nature never,
never, never, never, never, never, ne -- ver, ne -- ver, ne -- ver pleads in
vain; nothing, nothing guides a Lovers passion, nothing guides a Lo -- verse
passion, like, vain; nothing, no -- thing guides a Lovers passion, nothing
guides a Lovers passion, like, like the Fair ones in -- cli -- nation, like the
Fair ones in -- cli -- na -- tion. like the Fair ones in -- cli -- nation, like
the Fair ones in -- cli -- na -- tion.

A Two Part SONG,
^ LOve, thou art best, Love thou art best, Love thou art best of Humane joys;
our Love, thou art best, Love thou art best, thou art best of Humane joys;
chief -- est, chief -- est, chief -- est hap -- pi -- ness be -- low; our chief
-- est, chief -- est hap -- pi -- ness be -- low; all, all, all, all, all o --
there Pleasures; all, all o -- there, all o -- there Pleasures are but Toys, all,
all o -- there Pleasures; all, all o -- there Pleasures, all, all o -- there
Pleasures are but Toys; all, all, all, all are but Toys, Music without that is
but Noi -- se; all, all, all are but Toys, Music with -- out ^ And Beauty,
that is but Noi -- se; And Beauty, Beauty, and Beauty, Beauty but an empty
show, but an empty show. Heaven who knew best what Men Beauty but an empty
show, but an emp -- ty show. Heaven who knew best what Men could mo -- ve,
could move, and raise his thoughts, and raise his could mo -- ve, could move,
and raise his thoughts, and raise his thoughts a -- bove the Brute; said let
him, let him be, said let him, let him be, and thoughts a -- bove the Brute;
said let him, let him be, said let him, let him be, and ^ let him Love; That,
that, that, that alone, that, that a -- lone, must his let him Love; That,
that, that, that a -- lone, that a -- lone, that, that alone, must his Soul
improve; How -- e're Phi -- lo -- so -- phers dis -- pute, that, that, that,
Soul improve; How -- e're Phi -- lo -- so -- phers dis -- pute, that, that,
that, that alone, that alone, must his Soul improve; How -- e're Phi -- that a
-- lone, that a -- lone, that a -- lone, must his Soul improve; How -- e're Phi
-- -- lo -- so -- phers dis -- pute -- lo -- so -- phers dis -- pute.

A Two Part SONG.
^ THough my Mistress be Fair, yet froward, yet froward she is too, then hang
the dull Though my Mistress be Fair, yet frow -- ard she is too, then Soul, then
hang the dull Soul, that will offer, will of -- fer to Woo; but it is Wine,
brave hang the dull Soul, then hang the dull Soul, that will offer to Woe; but
it is Wine, it is Liquor, it is Liquor, good Liquor, that is much more sublime,
much bris -- ker Wine, brave Wine, it is Liquor, good Liquor that is much more
sublime, much brisker and quicker, much, much, much bris -- ker and quicker; it
in Sparkles smiles on me, and quicker, much, much, much bris -- ker and
quicker; it in Sparkles smiles on me, ^ though she frown up -- on me: Then with
Laugh -- ing and though she frown up -- on me: Then with Laugh -- ing and
Quaffing, I Will Time and Age be -- guile, owe my Pimples and Wrinkles, owe my
Pimples and Quaffing, I Will Time and Age be -- guile, owe my Pimples and
Wrinkles, owe my Pimples and Wrinkles, to my Drink, and a Smile. Come fill up,
come fill up my Glass, and Wrinkles, to my Drink, and a Smile. Come fill up my
Glass, come fill up my Glass, and a -- pox on her Face; may it never want Scars
and Scratches, may it never want Scars and a -- pox on her Face; may it never,
may it never want Scars, want Scars and ^ Scratches, Wash, Paint and Patches:
Give me all my Drink -- ing Maga -- zine, Scratches, Wash, Paint and Patches:
Give me all my Drink -- ing Ma -- ga -- zine, I Will blo -- w up the Scornful
Queen; give me Bottles and Give me all, I Will blo -- w up the Scornful Queen;
give me Jugs, and Glass -- ses and Mugs, I Will hug 'em and tug 'em, I Will hug 'em
and Bottles and Jugs, and Glasses and Mugs, I Will hug 'em, I Will hug 'em and tug
them, and Court 'em much more, than e're I did the pee -- vish Girl be -- fore,
tug 'em, and Court 'em much more, than e're I did the pee -- vish Girl be --
fore, ^ than e're I did, than e're I did the pee -- vish than e're I did the pe
-- vish Gir -- l Girl be -- fore. be -- fore.

A Two Part SONG,
^ FOr Love every Creature is formed, for For Love every Creature is formed by
his Nature, for Love every Creature is Love every Creature, for Love every
Creature is formed by his Nature: formed, for Love ev -- 'ry Creature is
formed, is formed by his Nature: ^ No Joy -- es are a -- bove the plea -- sures
No, no, no, no Joys are a -- bove the plea -- sures of Love, no Joys are a --
bove the pleasures of Love, no of Love, no Joys are a -- bove the pleasures of
Love, Joy -- es are a -- bove, no, no, no, no, no no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no Joy -- es are a -- bove, Joys are above, no, no, no, no, no, no Joys are
above the pleasures, the pleasures, the no, no, no, no, no, no, no Joys are a
-- bove the pleasures, the pleasures, the ^ pleasures of Love. pleasures of
Love.

A Two Part SONG.
^ WHen Teucer from his Fa -- there fled, and from the Shore of Sa -- la --
mine; when When Teu -- cer from his Fa -- there fled, and from the Shore, and
Teu -- cer from his Fa -- there fled, and from the Shore of Sa -- la -- mine,
and from the Shore of Sa -- la -- mine; when Teucer from his Fa -- there fled,
and from the Shore of Sa -- la -- mine; with a Poplar Wreath he crowned his
from the Shore of Sa -- la -- mine; with a Poplar Wreath he ^ Head, that glowed
with the warmth of ge -- ne -- rous Wine; crowned his Head, that glowed with
the warmth of ge -- ne -- rous Wine; and thus to his and thus to his droo --
ping Friends he said, and thus to his droo -- ping Friends he said, and thus to
his droo -- ping droo -- ping Friends he said, Cheer up my Hearts, cheer up my
Friends he said, Cheer up my Hearts, Hearts, your Anchors weigh; though Fate our
Native Soil de -- bar, cheer up my Hearts, your Anchors weigh; though Fate our
Native Soil de -- bar, ^ Chance is a better, better Father far, Chance is a
better, better Father far; Chance is a better, better Father far, Chance is a
better, better and a bet -- ter Country, a bet -- ter, better Country is the
Sea: Father far; and a bet -- ter Country, a better Country is the Sea: Then
cheer up my Hearts, then cheer up my Hearts, your Anchors Then cheer up my
Hearts, then cheer up my Hearts, your Anchor. weigh. Come Plo -- w, my Mates,
come Plo -- w weigh. Come Plo -- w, my Mates, come Plo -- w, ^ my Mates, the wa
-- try, wa -- try way, and fear not, and fear not, fear not my Mates, the wa --
try, wa -- try way, and fear not, and fear not, fear not un -- der my Command;
we that have known, have known the worst, we that have under my Command; we
that have known, have known the worst, we that have known the worst at Land,
with the morrow's Dawn, with the morrow's Dawn, we'll An -- chor known the
worst at Land, with the morrow's Dawn, with the morrow's Dawn, we'll weigh: Let
us drink and drown our Cares a -- wa -- y, An -- chor weigh: Let us drink and
drown our Cares, let us ^ let us drink and drown our Cares a -- way, and drown
our drink and drown our Cares a -- way; let us drink, let us drink, let us
drink, let us Cares, and drown our Cares; let us drink, let us drink, let us
drink, let us drink, let us drink, let us drink, let us drink and drown, and
drown our Cares a -- way; les us drink and drown, and drown our Cares a -- way;
let us drink and drown, and drink and drown, and drown our Cares a -- way; let
us drink and drown, and drown our Cares a -- way. drown our Cares a -- way.

A DIALOGUE in King Arthur.
^ YOU say it is Love creates the pain, of which so sad -- ly you complain; and
yet would fain engage my Heart, in that un -- ea -- sy cru -- el, cru -- el
part; but how a -- las, how a -- las think you that I can bear the woun -- ds
of which you die? how a -- la -- s, how a -- las think you that I can bear the
wounds of which you die? It Is not my pas -- sion makes my care, but your
indifference gives de -- spair; the lu -- sty Sun, the lu -- sty Sun be -- gets
^ no Spring, till gen -- tle showers, till gen -- tle showers as -- sistance
bring, so Love that scorches and destroys, till kind -- ness aids, till kind --
ness aids can cause no joy; Love has a thousand, thousand, thousand, thou --
sand ways to please; Love has a thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand ways to
please, but more, more, more, more, more, more, more to rob us of our ease, but
more, more, more, more, more, more, more to rob us of our ease; for wak -- ing
nights ^ and care -- full days, from hours of plea -- sures he re -- pays; But
ab -- sense soon, or jea -- lous fears over -- flows the joy, over -- flows the
joys with floods of Tears; but ab -- sense soon or jea -- lous sears over --
flows the joys, over -- flows the joys with floods of Tears: But one soft
moment makes amends for all the tor -- meant that attends, one soft moment makes
a -- mends for all the tor -- meant that at -- tends.

CHORUS. ^ Let us Love, let us Love, and to hap -- piness have, have, have,
have, Let us Love, let us Love, and to hap -- piness have, have, have, have,
have; let us Love, let us Love and to happiness have, have, have, have, have;
let us Love, let us Love and to happiness have, have, have, have, have, Age and
Wis -- dom comes too fast; Youth for Lo -- ving was designed, Youth for have,
Age and Wis -- dom comes too fast; Youth for Lo -- ving was designed, Loving,
Youth for Lo -- ving was de -- signed; You be constant Youth for Loving, Lo --
ving was de -- signed; I Will be constant, you be kind, ^ I Will be kind, I Will be
kind, I Will be kind, kind, I Will, I Will be kind; Heaven can give no I Will be
constant, I Will be constant, I Will be constant, I Will be kind; Heaven can give no
grea -- ter grea -- ter bles -- sing than faithful Love, and kind, and king
pos blessing, no grea -- ter bles -- sing than faithful Love, and -- ses --
sing, than faithful Love, than faithful Love, and kind, and kind pos -- ses
-- sing, and kind, and kind pos -- ses -- sing, than faithful Love, and kind,
and kind pos -- ses -- sing, and kin -- d, and kind, and kind pos -- ses --
sing, kin -- d, and kind, and kind pos -- ses -- sing.

A Two Part SONG, the Words by Mr. Cowley,
^ HEre, here is to thee Dick, this whi -- ning Love de -- spise; here, Here,
here is to thee Dick, here, here is to thee Dick, this whi -- ning here is to thee
Dick, this whining, whining Love de -- spise; pledge me, pledge me, my Love de
-- spise, this whining, whi -- ning Love despise; pledge me, here is to thee
Friend, here, here is to thee Dick, pledge me, and drink, drink, till thou be'st
wise: It sparkles Dick, pledge me, my Friend, pledge me, and drink, drink, till
thou be'st, wise: It sparkles brigh -- ter far than she, it is pure, it is pure,
and right without de -- ceit, and brigh -- ter far than she, it is pure, it is
pure, and right, without de -- ceit, and ^ such, such, no Woman e're will be,
no, no, no, they are all so -- phi -- sti -- cate, such, such no Woman e're will
be: no, no, they are all so -- phi -- sti -- cate, they are all, all, all
sophisticate. With all thy servile pains, what can thou they are all, all,
all so -- phisticate. With all thy servile pains, what win, with all thy
servile pains, what can, what can thou win, but an ill favored, and un
-- clean -- ly can thou win, with all thy servile pains, what can thou
win, but an ill favored, and un -- clean -- ly Sin? A thing, a thing, so vile,
and so short -- lived, that Venus Joys, as well as Sin? A thing so vile, so
vile, and so short -- lived, that Ve -- nus Joys, as well as ^ she, with reason
may be said to be, from the neg -- le -- cted Foam derived. Follies they she,
with reason may be said to be, from the neg -- le -- cted Foam derived. Follies
they have, so number -- less in store, that on -- ly he who loves them can have
more; neither their have, so number -- ber -- less in store, that on -- ly he who
loves them can have more; neither their Sigh -- s, nor Tears are true, those id
-- ly blow, these id -- ly fall; Sigh -- s, nor Tears are true, neither their
Sigh -- s, nor Tears are true, neither their Sigh -- s nor Tears are true,
nothing like, nothing like to ours at those id -- ly blow, these id -- ly fall;
nothing like, nothing like to ours at ^ all, but Sighs and Tears, but Sighs and
Tears, have Sex -- es too. Hear's to thee a -- gain, all, but Sighs and Tears,
but Sighs and Tears, have Sex -- es too. Here Is here is to thee a -- gain, thy
senseless Sor -- rows drowned; here is to thee, thy to thee a -- gain, here is to
thee a -- gain, thy senseless Sor -- rows drowned, thy sense -- less Sor --
rows drowned, let the Glass walk, 'till all things too go rou -- nd, sense --
less Sor -- rows drown, let the Glass 'till all things too go rou -- nd, walk,
'till all things too go rou -- nd, 'till ^ 'till all things too go round:
Again, again, again, again, 'till these two Lights be all, all things too go
round: Again, again, again, again, 'till these two Lights be four, no Er -- ror
here can dan -- ge -- rous prove; thy Passion Man deceived thee more, none
four, no Er -- ror here can dan -- ge -- rous prove; thy Passion Man deceived
thee more, none dou -- ble see like Men in love; none dou -- ble see, none dou
-- ble dou -- ble see, none dou -- ble see like Men in Love; none dou -- ble
see like Men in love. see like Men in love.

A DIALOGUE in the Prophetess.
^ TEll me why, tell me why my Char -- ming Fair, tell me why, tell me why you
thus de -- ny me; can dis -- pair, can dis -- spair, or these sighs and looks
of care make Co -- rin -- na e -- ver fl -- y me, e -- ver fly me? tell me why,
tell me why my Char -- ming Fair, tell me why you thus de -- ny me. O! Mir --
til -- lo you're a -- bove me, I re -- spect but dare not Love ye. She who
hears in -- clines to sin, who par -- lies, half ^ gives up the Town, and ra --
ve -- nous Love soon en -- ters in, when once the Out -- work's bea -- ten
down: Then my Sighs and Tears will not move ye, no, no, no, no, no Mir -- til --
lo you're a -- bove me, I res -- pect, but dare not Love ye: no, no, no, no,
no, Mir -- til -- lo you're a -- bove me; I re -- spect, but dare not Love ye,
I re -- spect but dare not Love ye. Could this lovely Charming Maid think Mir
-- til -- lo ^ would deceive her? could Corin -- na be afraid, she by him
should be betrayed? No, no, no, no, too well, too well I Love her, therefore
can -- not be above her. Oh! oh! oh! oh! let Love with Love be paid: My Heart,
my Life, my Heart, my Life, my all I give her: Let me now, now, now, let me
now, now, now, ah! now, now, now, re -- ceive her. Oh! how glad -- ly we be --
leive, when the Heart is too too willing; can that look, that face deceive? can
he take de -- light ^ in Killing? Ah! I dye, ah! I dye, I dye if you deceive
me; yet I will, I will, yet I will, I will be -- lieve ye. Ah! I die, ah! I die
if you de -- ceive me; yet I will, I will, yet, yet I will, I will, yet, yet I
will, I will be -- lieve ye.

CHORUS. ^ Oh: how glad -- ly we be -- lieve, when the Heart is too too
willing; can that Oh! how glad -- ly we be -- lieve, when the Heart it too too
willing; can that ^ Look, that Face deceive? Can he take de -- light in
killing? ah! I dye, Look, that Face de -- ceive? Can he take de -- light in
killing? ah! I ah! I dye, I dye if you de -- ceive me; yet I will, I will, yet
I will, dye, ah! I dye if you de -- ceive me; yet I will, I I will be -- lieve
ye; ah! I dye, ah! I dye, if you de -- ceive me; will, I will be -- lieve ye;
ah! I dye, I dye if you de -- ceive me; yet I will, I will, yet, yet I will, I
will, yet, yet I will, I will, be -- lieve ye. yet I will, I will, yet, yet I
will, I will, yet I will, I will be -- lieve ye.

The Thraldom, the Words by Mr. Cowley.
^ I Came, I saw, and was undone, Lightning did through my Bones and Mar -- row
run; a pointed Pain pierced deep my Heart, a swift col -- d trem -- bling
seized on every part; my Head turn -- 'd round, nor could it bear the Poison
tha -- t was entered there: So a de -- stroying Angel's breath blo -- ws in the
Plague, and with it hasty Death; such was the pain, did so be -- gin, to the
poor wretch when Legion entered in: forgive me God I cried, for I flattered my
self I was to dye; but quickly to my ^ cost I found, I found 'twas cru -- el
Love, 'twas cruel Love not Death had made the wound; but quickly to my cost I
found, I found 'twas cru -- el Love, 'twas cru -- el Love not Death had made
the wound. Death a more generous rage does use, Quarter to all he Conquer's
does re -- fuse, whilst Love with Barbarous mercy saves the vanquished Lives to
make them slaves; whilst Love with Barbarous mercy saves the vanquished Li --
ves to make them slaves. I am thy slave, then let me know, hard Master, the
great ^ task I have to do; who Pride and Scorn do un -- der -- go, in Tem --
pests and rou -- gh Seas thy Galleys row, they Pant, and Groan, and Sigh, but
find their Sig -- hs increase the an -- gry Wind; like an E -- gyptian Tyrant,
some thou wea' -- riest out in buil -- ding but a Tomb; others with sad and ted
-- 'ous Art labor in the Quarries of a Sto -- ny Heart: Of all the works thou
do assign, to all the several Slaves of thine, employ me migh -- ty Love to
dig the Mine; of all the ^ works thou do as -- sign, to all the Several
Slaves of thine, employ me Migh -- ty Love to dig the Mine.

A SONG in the Double-Dealer.
^ CInthia frowns when e're I Woe her, yet she is vexed, she is vexed if I give o
-- ver; much, much she fears I should, I should undo her, but much more, but
much more, much mo -- re to lose her Lover; thus, thus in doubting she re -- fu
-- ses, and not Winning, and not Winning, thus, thus, ^ thus she looses; And
not Winning, and not Winning, thus, thus, thus, thus, thus, thus she looses;
Prithee Cinthia look be -- hind you prithee Cinthia look behind you, Age and
Wrinckles, Age and Wrinckles will overtake you; then, then too late, too late,
too late, then, then too late De -- sire will find you; when the po -- w'r does
for -- sake you; Think, think, oh! think, ^ think, think, oh! think, oh! sad
con -- dition, to be past, yet wish, yet wish fru -- ition; to be past, be
past, yet wish, wish, wish fru -- ition, yet wish, wish, wish fru -- ition.

An Elegy on the Death of Mr. John Playford. Words by Mr. Tate.
^ GEntle Shepherds, you that know the Charms of Tune -- full Breath, that
Harmony in Grie -- f can show, La -- meant, La -- meant, for Pi -- ous The --
ron's Death! Thereon, the good, the friend -- ly Theron's gone! Thereon, Thereon,
the good, the friend -- ly The -- ^ -- ron's gone! ren -- ding Mountains, weep
-- ing Fountains, groaning Dales, Soft. and ecchoing Vales, Loud. if you want
Skill, will teach you how to moan, to moa -- n; ren -- ding Mountains, weep --
ing Fountains, groaning Dales, Soft. and ecchoing Vales, Loud. if you want
Skill, will teach you how to moan, to moa -- n; will teach, will teach you how
to moan. Slow. Could Innocence or Pi -- e -- ty, ex -- pi -- ring Life main --
tain; or Art pre -- vail on De -- sti -- ny, Thereon still, still had graced the
Plain, beloved of Pan, and ^ dear to Phae -- bus Train; Thereon still had graced
the Plain, beloved of Pan, and dear to Phae -- bus Train. Muses, bring your To
-- ses hither, strew them gent -- ly on his Hearse; Muses, bring your To -- ses
hither, strew them gent -- ly on his Hearse; and when those short -- lived Glo
-- ries wither, crown it with a lasting Verse, crown it with a la -- sting
Verse; and when those short -- lived Glories wither, crown it with a last --
ing Verse. Roses soon will fade away, Verse and Tomb must both de -- cay; yet
Theron's Name in ^ spite of Fate's Decree, and end -- less Fame shall meet; no
Verse so du -- ra -- ble can be, nor To -- ses half so sweet, nor To -- ses
half so sweet.

CHORUS. ^ Then wast no more, no more; then wast no more in Sighs your Breath,
nor think his Then wast no more, no more; then wast no more in Sighs your
Breath, nor think his Fate was hard; there is no such thing as Sudden Death, to
those that al -- ways Fate was hard; there is no such thing as Sudden Death, to
those that al -- ways are pre -- pared: Prepared like him by Har -- mo -- ny
and Love, are pre -- pared: Prepared like him by Har -- mo -- ny and Love, ^ to
join at first ap -- proach, to join at first approach the Sa -- cred Quire a --
bove; to to join at first approach, at first approach the Sa -- cred Quire a --
bove; join at first approach, to join at first ap -- proach, at first approach
the Sa -- cred Quire a -- bove. to join at first approach, to join at first
approach the Sa -- cred Quire a -- bove.

A SONG in the 3d. Act of the Prophetess.
^ WHen first I saw the Bri -- ght Aure lia's Eyes, when first I saw the Bri --
ght Aure -- lia's Eyes, a sudden trem -- bling did my Limbs sur -- prize, in
every Vain, in every Vain I ^ felt a tin -- gling, ting -- ling smart, and a co
-- ld faintness, and a co -- ld faintness all a -- rou -- nd my Heart, all a --
rou -- nd my Heart. But oh! oh! oh! oh! the piercing, piercing, pier -- cing
joy, but oh! oh! oh! oh! the plea -- sing, plea -- sing ^ pain; and oh! and oh!
oh! oh! and oh! -- may both ten thou -- sand Years, ten thou -- sand Yea -- rs
re -- main, ten thou -- sand Years re -- main, ten thou -- sand Years re --
main.

A SONG in the Tempest, Sung by Mis Cross.
^ DEar, Dear, Pretty, Pretty, Prit -- ty Youth, Dear, Pretty, Pretty, Prit --
ty Youth, unvail, unvail your Eye, unvail, unvail your Eye; how can you, can
you Sleep, how can you, can you Sleep, how can you, can you Sleep, when I, when
I am by, when I, when I am by? Were I with you all Night to be, methinks I
could, methinks I could, I could from Sleep be free; me -- thinks I could,
methinks I could from Sleep, I could from Sleep be free: ^ a -- lass, a -- lass
my Dear, you are Cold, Cold as Stone; you must no longer, no, no longer, no, no
longer, no, no longer, longer lie a -- lone; but be with me my Dear, my Dear,
Dear, Dear, but be with me my Dear, and I in each Arm, and I in each Arm will
Hugg you, Hugg you close, will Hugg you, Hugg you close, Hugg you close and
keep you Warm, will Hugg you, Hugg you close, will Hugg you, Hugg you close,
Hugg you close and keep you warm.

The Rich RIVAL. Words out of Cowley.
^ THey say you're angry, and rant migh -- ti -- ly, because I Love the same as
you, a -- las! you're ve -- ry Rich it is true; but prithee Fool! what is that to
Love and me? Your Land and Money let that serve, and know you're more by that
than you de -- serve When next I see my Fair one, she shall know how worth --
less thou art of her Bed; and, Wretch, I Will strike thee dumb, and dead with no
-- ble Verse, not un -- der -- stood by you; while thy sole Rhet'rick shall be
Jointure and Jewels, and our Friends a -- gree. ^ Pox of your Friends that dote
and do -- mi -- near, Lovers are bet -- ter Friends than they, let us those in o
-- there things o -- bey, the Fates, and Stars, and Gods must go -- vern here:
Vain name of Blood! in Love, let none ad -- vise with a -- ny Blood, but with
their own; It Is that which bids me this bright Maid a -- door, no o -- there
Thought has had ac -- cess, did she now beg, I Would Love no less; and were she an
Empress, I should Love no more. Were she as just and true ^ to me, ah, sim --
ple Soul! what would become of thee.

A SONG in King Arthur.
^ FAirest Isle of Isles Ex -- cel -- ling, Seat of Plea -- sures and of Loves;
Ve -- nus here will choose her Dwelling, and for -- sake her Cy -- prian Groves.
Cu -- pid, from his Favorite Nation, Care and En -- vy will Remove; Jea -- lou
-- sie, that poy -- sons Passion, and De -- spair that dies for Love.

II.
Gentle Murmurs, sweet Complaining,
Sighs that blow the Fire of Love;
Soft Repulses, kind Disdaining,
Shall be all the Pains you prove.
Every Swain shall pay his Duty,
Grateful every Nymph shall prove;
And as these Excel in Beauty,
Those shall be Renowned for Love.
A SONG in Bonduca, Sung by Miss Cross.
^ OH! Oh! lead me, lead me to some peace -- full Gloom, where none but sigh --
ing, none but sigh -- ing, sigh -- ing Lo -- verse come; where the shrill, the
shrill Trumpets never sou -- nd; never, never, sound, but one E -- ter -- nal
Hush, one e -- ter -- nal Hush goes round. There let me sooth my plea -- sing
pain, there let me sooth my plea -- sing pain, and never, never think of War,
never, never think of ^ War, never, never think of War, never, never, never,
never, never, never think of War a -- gain: what glo -- ry, what glo -- ry,
what glo -- ry can, can a Lover have to Conquer, to Con -- quer, yet be still a
slave; what glo -- ry, what glo -- ry can a Lo -- ver have, to Conquer, to
Conquer, to Conquer, yet be still, still a Slave, yet, yet be still, yet, yet
be still, yet, yet be still, still a Slave?

Sweeter than Roses, a single SONG.
^ SWee -- ter then To -- ses, or cool, coo -- l Evening Breeze; Swee -- ter
then To -- ses, or cool, cool Ev' -- ning Breeze on a war -- m Flow -- ry
shore, was the Dear, the dear, the dear, dear, de -- ar Kiss; First tree -- m --
bling, first tree -- mbling made me, made me free -- ze, made me freeze; then
shot like Fire, all, all, all, all over, then ^ shot like Fire, all, all, all,
all, then shot like Fire, all, all, over. What Magic has Vic -- to -- rious
Love, what Magic has Vic -- to -- rious, Love for all, all, all I touch, all,
all, all, all I touch or see; since that dear, dear, Kiss I hourly, hour -- ly
^ prove, all, all, all, all is Love, all, all, all, all, all, all is Love, all,
all, all, all, all is Lo -- ve all, all, all, all, all, is Lo -- ve, is Love to
me.

SONG Sung by Jemmy Bowen, at the opening the Old Playhouse.
^ LU -- cin -- da is Be -- witch -- ing Fair, Lu -- cin -- da is Be -- witch
-- ing Fair, all over, a -- ll over in -- ga -- ing is her Air; all over, all
over, all over in -- ga -- ging is her Air; all over, all over in -- ga -- ging
is her Air: In ev -- 'ry Song Lu -- cin -- da, Lu -- cinda, ^ Lu -- cin -- da's
Famed, She is the Quee -- n of Love proclaimed, to all, to all She does, She
does a Flame im -- part, ex -- pi -- ring Victims, ex -- pi -- ring, ex -- pi
-- ring Vic -- tims feel her Dart; Lu -- etc. First Strain again. Strephon for
her has Love ex -- pressed, Phi -- lan -- der sighs, sighs, sighs too with the
rest; Wracked, Wracked with Despair each one complains, un -- mo -- v'd, un --
touched, She all, She all, She all dis -- dains. Lu -- etc. End with the the
first Strain from this mark.:S:

This was the last Song that Mr. Purcell Set, it being in his Sickness.
^ FRom Rosy Bowers where Sleep's the God of Love, hither, hither ye little
waiting Cupids fly, fl -- y, fl -- y hither ye lit -- tle waiting Cu -- pids
fly; teach me, teach me in soft Me -- lodious Songs, to move with ten -- der,
ten -- der Passion, my Heart's, my Heart's dar -- ling Joy: Ah! let the Soul of
Music Tune my Voice, to Win dear Strephon, ah! ah! let the Soul of Music Tune
my Voice to Win dear Strephon, dear, dear, dear Strephon who my Soul en --
joys. Or if more ^ in -- flu -- encing is to be brisk and Ai -- ry, with a Step
and a Bound, and a Frisk from the Ground, I will Trip like a -- ny Fairy; As
once on I -- da Dancing, were three Ce -- lestial Bodies, with an Air, and a
Face, and a Shape, and a Grace, let me Charm like Beauty's Goddess; with an
Air, and a Face, and a Shape, and a Grace let me Charm like Beauty's Goddess.
Slow. Ah! ah! it is in vain, it is all, it is all, all in Vain, Death and De --
spair must end the Fa -- tal pain; cold Despair, cold, cold, De -- spair
disguised like Snow and Rain, falls, falls, falls ^ on my Breast, Bleak Winds
in Tempests Blo -- w, in Tempests Blo -- w, my Veins all Shiver, and my Fingers
Glow, my Pulse beats a Dead, Dead March; my Pulse bea -- ts a Dead, Dead March
for lost re -- pose, and to a so -- lid lump of Ice, my poor, poor fond Heart
is froze. Or, say ye Powers, say, say ye Powers my Peace to Crown, shall I,
shall I, shall I Thaw my self or drown? shall I, shall I, shall I Thaw my self
or drown? a -- among ^ the foaming Billows in -- creasing, all with Tears I
shed on Beds of Ooze, and Crystal Pillows, lay down, down, down, lay down,
down, down my Love -- sick Head; say, say ye Powers, say, say ye Powers my
Peace to Crown, shall I, shall I, shall I Thaw my self or drown? shall I, shall
I, shall I Thaw my self, or drown? Quick. No, no, no, no, no, I Will straight run
Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad, that soon, that soon my Heart will warm, when once the
Sense is fled, is fled, Love, Love, has no power, no, no, no, ^ no, no power to
Charm; Love has no power, no, no, no, no, Love has no power, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no power to Charm: Wild thro'the Woods I Will fl -- y, Will -- d
thro'the Woods I Will fl -- y, Robes, Locks shall thus, thus, thus, thus be tore;
a Thousand, thousand deaths I Will dye, a thousand, thousand deaths I Will dye,
e're thus, thus in vain, e're thus, thus in vain, thus in vain a -- door.

A Song on a Ground, the Words by Madam Phillips.
^ H So -- li -- tude! my swee -- test Choice! Oh So -- li -- tude! Oh So -- li
-- tude! my swee -- test, sweetest Choice! Places de -- vo -- ted to the Night,
re -- mote from Tumult, and from Noise, how ye my Rest -- less Thoughts de --
light! Oh So -- li -- tude! Oh So -- li -- tude! my swee -- test, sweetest
Choice! Oh Heavens! what Con -- tent is mine, to see those Trees, which have
appeared, from the Na -- ti -- vi -- ty of ^ Time; and, which all A -- ges have
re -- ver'd, to look to day as fresh and green, to look to day as fresh and
green, as when their Beauty's first were seen? Oh! Oh how a -- gree -- a -- ble
a Sight these hanging Mountains do ap -- pear, which th'un -- hap -- py would
in -- vite, to fi -- nish all their Sorrows here; when their hard, their hard
Fate makes them endure, such Woes, such Woes, as on -- ly Death can Cure. Oh!
Oh how I So -- li -- tude a -- door! Oh! Oh how I ^ So -- li -- tude a -- door,
that E -- lement of no -- blessed Wit, where I have learned, where I have learned
A -- pollo's Love, without the pains, the pai -- ns, to study it: For thy sake
I in Love am grown, with what thy fancy, thy fancy does pursue; but when I
think upon my own, I hate it, I hate it, for that reason too; because it needs
must hinder me from seeing, from seeing, and from serving thee. Oh So -- li --
tude! Oh how I So -- li -- tude A -- door!

Sighs for our late Sovereign King Charles the Second.
^ IF Prayers and Tears, the Shields the Church of England on -- ly bears, in
some great Ex -- igence of State, could those, could those have warded off the
blows of Fate, we had not fallen, we had not sunk so low under the gre -- vous
heavy weight, the pressures of this day's sa -- d o -- verthrow. Oh! Oh! how
the first amazing Blow bowed down, bowed down each Loyal Head, and as we trem
-- bling stood, fixed like a standing Water all our Blood, in every Face you
might such ^ for -- rows Read, that what the Prophet Wished but could not show,
was in our mourn -- full Land made good; all Eyes as Rivers swell -- 'd, did
strangely o -- verflow, our weepings seemed increased in -- to a -- no -- there
Flood: Thus, thus Uni -- ver -- sal was our Grief, and in those Agonies of our
Souls, we lay till the kin -- d Heavens roll -- 'd the Cloud a -- way, and gave
us some faint, some faint glim'rings of re -- lief: The Waters then a -- bated
^ for a while, and welcome, well -- come joy -- s hung hov -- 'ring over our
drooping Isle, Oh! then, Oh! then, what Pi -- ous Groans, what Pi -- ous Sighs,
the Church sent up be -- yond the yielding Skies; Lord save our King, every
good Subject cries, whilst every bro -- ken Hearts Al -- tar and Sacrifice;
Lord save the King was never said, with greater fer -- vency than now, not in
the Chapel only, but the Streets, no sort of People could you meet, but did De
-- vout -- ly bow, and as Devoutly Prayed; and ^ yet no Pharisaick Hypocrites,
in corners with well guided Zeal their Orisons were made; Al -- bion is now
become a Holy Land, and wages Ho -- ly War to stay the threat' -- ning Hand;
Oh! Oh! that we might pre -- vail, such well ap -- pointed Numbers never used
to fail, Oh! Oh! that we might prevail, Numbers of Old by a Wise Prelate led,
with Arms stretched toward Heaven took the Field, no other Weapons did those
Champions weild, but leavy Boughs (and Prayers no doubt,) we Read to those a ^
mighty, a mighty Conqueror did yield, a -- lasswe'd Conquered too, but for our
former Crimes, Treasons, Rebellions, Perjury's, which all, with all the in -- i
-- quities of the Times, whole Legions do against us rise, these, these are
the powers that strike the Kingdom dead, and now the Crown is fallen, now the
Crown is fallen from our Jo -- si -- ah's Head.

A SONG in Henry the Second; Sung by Mrs. Dyer.
^ IN vain, in vain, in vain, in vai -- n against Love, in vai -- n I strove,
Reason nor Honor, Reason nor Honor could its for -- ce ^ re -- move; Though
Honor fresh objections brought, and each had won -- d'rous Sense I thought,
each had won -- d'rous Sense I thought: Yet Love, Love, Love more stro -- ng,
yet Love, Love, Love more stro -- ng, though not so wise, be -- lies my Tongue in
my fond, my fond, my fo -- nd Eyes. One an -- swers faint -- ly no, no, no, but
yes, oh yes, oh yes, yes, yes, oh yes, oh ^ yes, yes, yes, oh yes, the last
much lou -- der cry's.

A Two Part SONG.
^ WHen Myra Sing -- s, when Myra Sing -- s, When My -- ra Sing -- s, when Myra
Sing -- s, we seek thi'n -- chant -- ing we seek th'in -- chant -- ing Sound; ^
Sound, th'in -- chant -- ing Sound; and th'in -- chant -- ing Sound, bless the
Notes, and bless the Notes which do so sweet -- ly, so sweet -- ly, so and
bless the Notes, and bless the Notes that do so sweetly, so sweetly, so sweet
-- ly wound; what Mu -- sick, what Mu -- sick needs must sweet -- ly wound;
what Mu -- sick needs must dwell up -- on that Tongue, whose speech is
Tunefull, whose speech is Tunefull, is dwell up -- on that Tongue, whose speech
is Tunefull, whose speech is ^ Tune -- full as a -- no -- there Song: Tune --
full as a -- no -- there Song: Such Harmo -- ny, such Wit, such Harmo -- ny,
such Wit, such Such Harmony, such Wit, such Harmony, such Wit, a Face so Fair,
so many, so many pointed Arrows who, who can Wit, a Face so Fair, so many, so
many point -- ed Arrows who, who can bear? the slave that from her Wit, or Beau
-- ty flies, bear? the slave that from her Wit, or Beau -- ty flies, if she but
^ if she but reach him, but reach him with her Voice, reach him, but reach him
with her Voice, if she but reach him if she but reach him with her Voice; he
dies, he dies, he with her Voice; he dies, he dies, he dies, he dies, he dies,
he dies, he dies, he dies, he dies, he dies. dies, he dies, he dies, he dies,
he dies, he dies, he dies.

Come let us leave the Town, a two Part SONG.
^ COme, come, come, come let us leave, let us, let us leave the Town; Come,
come, Come, come, come, come let us leave, let us leave the Town; come, come,
come, come, come, come let us leave, let us, let us, let us leave Come, come,
come, come, come, come, come, come let us leave, let us, let us leave the Town;
And in some lonely place, where Crowds and Noise, where Crowds and the Town;
And in some lonely place, where Crowds, where Crowds and Noise were never,
never, never, ne -- ver known, re -- so -- lve Noise were never, never, never,
ne -- ver known, re -- so -- lve ^ to spend our days. In Pleasant, Pleasant Sha
-- des, in to spend our days. In Pleasant, Pleasant, Pleasant, in Pleasant,
Pleasant, Pleasant, Pleasant shades upon the Grass at Night our selves we'll
lay, our days in harmless Pleasant shades, up -- on the Grass at Night our
selves we'll lay, our sports shall pass, our days in harmless Sports, in
harmless Sports shall pass; thus days in harmless Sports shall pass, our days
in harmless Sports shall pass; thus Time shall sli -- de a -- way. Time shall
sli -- de a -- way.

A Two Part SONG.
^ LOst is my Quiet for e -- ver, lost is my Qui -- et for e -- ver, lost Lost
is my Quiet for e -- ver, e -- ver, lost is my Quiet for e -- ver, for e -- ver
lost; lost is my Qui -- et for e -- ver, e -- ver, for e -- ver, for e -- ver,
lost is my Quiet for e -- ver, for e -- ver, e -- ver, lost is Life's hap -- pi
-- est part; lost all, all, all my ten -- der En -- deavours lost is Life's hap
-- pi -- est part; lost all, all my ten -- der En -- deavours to tou -- ch an
in -- sen -- si -- ble to tou -- ch an in -- sen -- si -- ble ^ Heart. But though
my De -- spair is past curing, but though my De -- spair, Heart. But though my De
-- spair is past curing, but my De -- spair is past curing, and much unde --
served is my Fate; I Will show by a tho'my De -- spair is past curing, and much
undeserved is my Fate; patient en -- du -- ring my Love, I Will show by a patient
en -- du -- ring I Will show by a patient en -- during my Love is unmoved, I Will
show by a patient my Love is un -- mov -- 'd, is unmoved as her Hate. en -- du
-- ring my Love is unmoved as her Hate.

A Two Part SONG. The Words by Mr. Congreve.
^ THere never, never was so wretched a Lover as I, so wretched, so wretched,
so There never, never was so wretched a Lover as I; there never, never was so
wretched a Lover as I; wretched a Lover as I, so wretched, so wretched, so
wretched a Lover as I; whose whose hopes are for ever, for e -- ver, for e --
ver pre -- vented: hopes are for ever, for ever, for ever, for ever, for ever
pre -- vented: I Am neither at I Am nei -- there at re -- st re -- st ^ when A
-- minta looks Coy, nor when she looks kind, looks kind, looks kind, nor when
she looks when A -- minta looks Coy, nor when she looks kind, looks kind, looks
kind, nor when she looks kind am contented: Her frowns give a pain, her frowns
give a pain, a kind am con -- tented: Her frowns give a pain, her frowns give a
pa -- in I Am un -- a -- ble to bear, the thoughts of them set me a trem --
bling, pain, a pa -- in I Am un -- a -- ble to bear, the thoughts of them set me
a trem -- bling, they set me a they set me a ^ trembling, and her Smiles are a
jo -- y trembling, and her Smiles are a jo -- y so great, so great, so great,
so great, that I fear, that I so great, so great, so great, so great, that I
fear, that I fear, that I fear, that I fear lest they should be no more but dis
-- sembling, lest they should be no fear, that I fear lest they should be no
more but dissembling, lest they should be no more but dis -- sembling. Then
prithee A -- minta consent and be kind; more but dis -- sembling. A pox of this
troublesome, ^ A pox of this troublesome, troublesome Wooing, then prithee A --
minta con -- sent troublesome Wooing, then prithee A -- min -- ta consent and
be kind, a pox of this troublesome, and be kind, a pox of this troublesome,
troublesome Wooing, then prithee A -- minta troublesome Wooing, then prithee A
-- minta consent and be kind, a pox of this trouble -- some, consent and be
kind, a pox of this troublesome, troublesome Wooing, for I find I shall
troublesome Wooing, then prithee A -- minta consent and be kind, for I find I
shall never be at peace in my Mind, till once you and I have been do -- ing,
been do -- ing, been never be at peace in my Mind, till once you and I have
been do -- ing, been do -- ing, been ^ do -- ing, been do -- ing, been do --
ing, till once you and I have been do -- ing: for do -- ing, been doing, been
do -- ing, till once you and I have been do -- ing: for shame, for shame, for
shame let your Lover no lon -- ger com -- plain, complain, complain of shame
let your Lover no longer, no lon -- ger complain, complain, com -- plain of u
-- sage that is hard, hard, hard, of u -- sage that is hard, hard a -- bove
measure, but since I have u -- sage that is hard, hard, hard, of u -- sage
that is hard, hard a -- bove measure, but since I have carried, have carried
such loads of Love's pain, now let me, now let me, now let me, now carried,
have carried such loads of Love's pain, now let me, now let me, now ^ let me,
now let me take Toll, now let me, now let me, now let me take Toll of the
pleasure. let me, now let me take Toll, now let me, now let me take Toll of the
pleasure.

A SONG Sung before the Queen on Her Birth Day.
^ CE -- lebrate this Fe -- sti -- val, Ce -- lebrate this Fe -- stival, Ce --
lebrate this Festival; It Is Sa -- cred, bid the Trum -- pets cease, it is Sa --
cred, bid the Trum -- pets cease. Turn over,

^ Kind -- ly Treat Ma -- ri -- a's Day, and your Ho -- mage 'twill re -- pay;
Bequeathing Blessings on our Isle, the te -- dious Mi -- nutes to be -- guile;
Till Conquest, till Conquest, till Conquest to Ma -- ri -- a's Arms re --
store; Peace and her He -- to, Peace and her He -- to to de -- part no more,
no, no more, no, no more, no, no mo -- re, Peace and her He -- to, Peace and
her He -- to to de -- part no more, no, no more, no, no more.

ANACREON'S Defeat.
^ THis Po -- et si -- ngs the Tro -- jan Wars, a -- no -- there of the Theban
jarrs, in rat -- ling Numbers, in rat -- ling Numbers, Verse that da -- res;
this Po -- et Si -- ngs the Tro -- jan Wars, a -- another of the The -- ban
jarrs, in rat -- ling Numbers, in rat -- ling Numbers, Verse that dares. Whilst
I in ^ soft and hum -- ble Verse, my own, my own Cap -- ti -- vi -- ties re --
hearse; whilst I in soft, in so -- ft and hum -- ble Verse, my ow -- n Cap --
ti -- vities rehearse; I sing my own Defeats, which are not the E -- vents of
Common War; I sing my own Defeats, which are not the E -- vents of Common War,
which are not the E -- vents of Common War: Not Fleets at Sea have vanquished
me, nor Brigadeers, nor Ca -- val -- ry, nor Ranks and Files, nor Ranks and
Files of ^ In -- fan -- try; not Fleets at Sea have vanquished me, nor Bri --
gadeers, nor Ca -- val -- ry, nor Ranks and Files, nor Ranks and Files of In --
fan -- try: No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, A -- na -- cre --
on still de -- sies, all, all your Ar -- til -- le -- ry Com -- pa -- nies; save
those encamped in kill -- ling, kill -- ling Eyes, each Dart his Mistress shoots
he dies, each Dart his Mistress shoots he dies.

A SONG in the 4th. Act of the Fool's Preferment.
^ I Will Sail up -- on the Dog -- Star, I Will Sail up -- on the Dog -- Star, and
then pursue the Morning, and then pursue, and then pursue the Morning; I Will
chase the Moon till it be Noon, I Will chase the Moon till it be Noon, but I Will
make, I Will make her leave her Horning. I Will climb the Frosty Mountain, I Will
climb the Frosty Mountain, and there I Will Coin the Weather; I Will tea -- r the
Rain -- Bow from the Sky, I Will tea -- r the Rain -- Bow from the ^ Sky and T --
ye, and Tie both ends to -- ge -- there. The Stars pluck from their Orbs too,
the Stars pluck from their Orbs too, and crowd them in my Budget; And whether
I Am a Roar -- ing Boy, a Roar -- ing Boy, let a -- ll, let all the Nation
judge it.

A SONG upon a Ground.
^ SHE Loves, and she con -- fes -- ses too, there is then at last no more to
do; the hap -- py Work's en -- tire -- ly done, en -- ter the Town which thou
have won: The fruits of Conquest now, now, now be -- gin, I -- o, Tri -- umph,
en -- ter in. What Is this, ye Gods! what can it be! re -- mains there still an
E -- ne -- my! Bold Honor stands up in the Gate, and would yet ca -- pi -- tu
-- late. Have I overcome all re -- al Foes, and shall this Phantom me op --
pose? ^ Noi -- sy nothing, stalking Shade, by what Witchcraft were thou made,
thou emp -- ty cause of so -- lid Harms? But I shall find out Counter Charms,
thy Ai -- ry Devil -- ship to remove from this Cir -- cle here of Love: Sure I
shall rid my self of thee, by the Night's ob -- scurity, and ob -- scu -- rer
secre -- cy. Un -- like to ev -- ry o -- there Spright, thou at -- tempt'st not
Men to affright, nor appear'st, nor appear'st but in the Light.

BESS OF BEDLAM.
^FRom silent Shades and the E -- lizium Groves, where sad de -- parted Spirits
mou -- rn their Loves from Crystal streams, and from that Country where Jove
Crowns the Feilds with Flowers all the year, poor Sense -- less Bess, clothed
in her Rags and fol -- ly, is come to cure her Love -- sick Me -- lanchol --
ly: Bright Cyn -- thia kept her Re -- vells late, while Mab the Fai -- ry Queen
did Dance, and O -- be -- ron did sit in State, when Mars at Ve -- nus ran his
Lance; In yonder Cow -- slip lies my Dear, entombed in li -- quid Gemms of Dew,
each day I Will wa -- ter it with a Tear, its fa -- ding Blossom to re -- new:
For since my Love is dead, and all my Joys are gone; poor Bess for his sake a
Garland will make, my Mu -- sick shall be a Groan, I Will lay me down and dye
with -- in some hollow Tree, the Raven and Cat, the Owl and Bat, shall war --
ble for -- th my E -- le -- gy. Did you not see my Love as he past by you? His
two flaming Eyes, if he come nigh you, they will scorch up your Hearts; Ladies
be -- ware ye, lest he should dart a Glance that may ensnare ye; Hark! Hark! I
hear old Charon bawl, his Boat he will no longer stay, the Furies lash their
Whips and call, come, come a -- way; come, come a -- way. Poor Bess will return
to the place whence she came, since the World is so Mad she can hope for no
Cure; for Lov'es grown a Bubble, a Shadow, a Name, which Fools do ad -- mire,
and Wise Men en -- dure. Cold and Hungry am I grown, Am -- bro -- sia will I
feed up -- on, drink Nectar still and Sing; Who is con -- tent, does all Sorrow
pre -- vent: And ^ Bess in her Straw, whilst free from the Law, in her thoughts
is as great, great as a King.

A single SONG, the Words by Mr. Motteux.
^ Stripped of their green our Groves ap -- pear, our Vales lie bu -- ried deep
in Snow; the blow -- ing North controuls the Air, a nipping cold chills all be
-- low. The Frost has gla -- z'd our deep -- est streams, Phoebus withdraw --
's his kind -- ly Beams, Phoebus withdraw -- 's his kind -- ly Beams. Yet
Winter blessed be thy return, thou'st brought the Swain for whom I used to mourn;
and in thy Ice with plea -- sing flames we burn, and in thy Ice with plea --
sing Flames we burn.

2d. Verse. Too soon the Suns re -- vi -- ving heat will thaw thy Ice and melt
thy Snow; Trum -- pets will sound, and Drums will beat, and tell me the dear,
dear Youth must go: Then must my wea -- k un -- will -- ling Arms, resign him
up -- to stronger Charms, resign him up -- to stronger Charms: What Flowers,
what Sweets, what Beauteous thing, when Damon's gone, can ease or pleasure
bring? Win -- ter brings Damon, Win -- ter is my Sprin -- g; Win -- ter bring
Damon, Win -- ter is my Spring.

Love Arms himself, a single SONG.
^LOve Arm -- s him -- self in Celia's Eyes, when e're weak Rea -- son would re
-- bell; Love Arm -- s himself in Ce -- lia's Eyes, when e're wea -- k Rea --
son would re -- bell; and every time I dare, I da -- re be Wise, a -- las, a --
las, a -- las, a -- las, a deep -- er wound I feel, re -- peated thoughts, re
-- peated thoughts present the ill, which see -- ing I must still, which see --
ing I must still, I must still, still, still endure; They tell me, they tell
me, they tell me Love has Darts to kill, and Wisdom has no power, and Wisdom
has no power, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, and Wisdom has no power, no power
to cure. Then cruel, cruel Reason give me, give me, give me rest; quit, quit in
my Heart thy fe -- ble hold, go try thy Force, go try thy Force in Ce -- lia's
Breast, for that is disengaged and col -- d, that is dis -- in -- gagged and
cold; there all, all, all, there all, all thy Nicest Arts em -- ploy; Confess
thy self, confess thy self her Beau -- ty's Slave, and argue whilst she may de
-- stroy, how gre -- at, how gre -- at, how God -- like it is to save.

The last SONG Mr. Henry Purcell Set before his Sickness.
^ LOve -- ly, Lovely Al -- by -- na, LOve -- ly, Lovely Al -- by -- na's come,
co -- me a -- shore, to enter her just, just claim; Ten times more Char --
ming, Ten times more Char -- ming ^than be -- sore; To her Im -- mor -- tal
Fame. Fame. The Bell -- gick Ly -- on, as his brave, brave, brave, the Bell --
gick Ly -- on, as his brave, brave, brave, this Beauty, this Beauty will
relieve, this Beauty, this Beauty will re -- lieve, will, will relieve, for
nothing, nothing, nothing but a mean blind Slave, can live -- e, and let her
griev -- e, and let her grieve.

SONG, Sung in the Play called, The Massacre in Paris.
^ THy Genius lo! lo! from his sweet Bed of rest, adorned with Jessimin, and
with To -- ses dressed; the Powers Divine has raised to stop thy Fate, a true
Repentance never, never comes too late, a true Repentance never, never comes
too late: So soon as Born she made her self a Shroud, the fleecy Man -- tle of
a weep -- ing Cloud, and swift as thought her Ai -- ry Journey took, swi -- ft
as thought her Ai -- ry Journey took; her Hand Heavens Azure Gate with trem --
bling ^ Struck; the Stars did with a -- maze -- meant on her look, the Stars did
with a -- mazement on her look, did with a -- mazement on her look; She told
thy Story in so sad a Tone, She told thy Story in so sa -- d a Tone, the Angels
start from Bliss and ga -- ve a groan. But Charles be -- wate, Oh! dal -- ly
not, Oh! dal -- ly not, be -- ware, Oh! dal -- ly not with Heaven; for af --
ter this no Pardon, no, no, no Par -- don shall be given; Oh! dally not, Oh!
dal -- ly not ^ with Heavn'n, for af -- ter this, no, no, no Pardon shall be
given, no, no, no Pardon shall be given.

A Two Part SONG.
^ FAir Clo -- e my Breast so a -- lar -- ms, from her Power I no Fair Cloe my
Breast so a -- lar -- ms, from her Power, from her Power I no Refuge can find;
If a -- another I take in my Arms, yet my Clo -- e, yet my Clo -- e is Refuge
can find; If a -- another I take in my Arms, yet my Clo -- e is ^ then in my
Mind: Unblest with the Joy, still a Pleasure I want, still a Pleasure I then in
my Mind: Un -- blessed with the Joy, still a Pleasure I want, which none but my
Clo -- e, my Clo -- e can grant; let Clo -- e but want, which none but my Clo
-- e, my Clo -- e can grant; let Clo -- e but smi -- le, smi -- le, I grow ga
-- y, and I I grow ga -- y, and I feel my Heart spring with De -- light; on Clo
-- e I could gaze all the day, all, all the feel my Heart spring with De --
light; on Clo -- e I could gaze all the day, all ^ day, all, all, all, all the
day, all, all the day; on Clo -- e I could gaze all the all the day, all, all,
all, all the day, all, all the day; on Clo -- e I could gaze all the day, and
Clo -- e do wish for, and Clo -- e do wish for, and Clo -- e do wish for each
night. day, and Clo -- e do wish for, and Clo -- e do wish for, and Clo -- e do
wish for each night. Oh! Oh! did Clo -- e, Oh! Oh! did Clo -- e but Oh! Oh^ did
Clo -- e, Oh! Oh! did Clo -- e but know how I Love, and the Pleasure of Loving
a -- gain; my know how I Love, and the Pleasure of Loving a -- gain; my Pas --
sion her ^ Pas -- sion her Favor would mo -- ve, my Pas -- sion her Favor
would Fa -- vour would mo -- ve, my Pas -- sion her Fa -- vour would mo -- ve,
mo -- ve, and in Prudence she would pi -- ty my Pain: Good Nature and and in
Prudence she would pi -- ty my Pain: Good Nature and Int' -- rest should both make
her kind, for the Joy she might give, and the Int' -- rest should both make her
kind, for the Joy she might give, and the Joy she might find. Joy she might
find.

A SONG, Sung at the Knighting of Don-Quixote, in the 2d. Act.
^ Sing, Sin -- g, all ye Muses, Sin -- g, Sing, Sing, Sin -- g, all ye Mu --
ses, Sing, your Lutes strike, strike, strike a -- roun -- d, Sing, your Lutes
strike, strike, strike a -- roun -- d, your Lutes strike a -- round; when a
Soldier's the sto -- ry, when a your Lutes strike around; when a Soldier's the
sto -- ry, when a Soldier's the sto -- ry, what Tongue can want sound; when a
Soldier's the Sto -- ry, what Soldier's the sto -- ry, what Tongue can want
sound; when a Soldier's the sto -- ry, what ^ Tongue can want sound; who Danger
disdains, who Danger disdains, Wou -- nds, Wounds, Tongue can want sound; who
Danger disdains, who Danger disdains, Wou -- nds, Wounds, Bruises and Pains,
when the Honor of Fighting is all that he gains; Rich Bruises and Pains, when
the Honor of Fighting is all that he gains; Profit comes easy, comes, ea --
sy, ea -- sy in Ci -- ties of Store, but the Gold is earned hard where the Rich
Profit comes ea -- sy, ea -- sy in Ci -- ties of Store, Cannons do To -- ar,
but the Gold is earned hard where the Cannons do but the Gold is earned hard
where the Cannons do To -- ar, do ^ Roar; Brisk Time. Yet see how they run, how
they run, how they run, how they run at the Storming, the Roar; Yet see how
they run, how they run at the Storming, the Storming, the Storming, the
Storming, the Storming a Town, through Blood, and through Fire, to Storming, the
Storming, the Storming, the Storming a Town, through Blood, and through Fire, to
take the Half Moon, Soft. through Blood, and through Fire to take the Half Moon;
they take the Half Moon, through Blood, and through Fire to take the Half Moon; Sca
-- le the high Wall, they Sca -- le the high they Sca -- le the high Wall, the
high ^ Wall, whence they see others fall, fall, fall, fall, fall, whence they
see o -- there is Wall, whence they see others fall, fall, fall, fall, fall,
whence they see others fall; their Hearts precious Darling, bright Glo -- ry,
bright fall; their Hearts precious Darling, bright Glo -- ry, bright Glo -- ry
pur -- suing, though Death's Slow. un -- der Foot and the Glo -- ry pur -- suing,
though Death's under Foot and the Mine is just blowing, It springs, it springs,
it springs, it Mine is just blowing. Up they Fl -- y, it ^ springs up they fl
-- y, they fl -- y, yet springs, it springs, it springs, it springs, up they fl
-- y, more, more, more, more, more, yet more will sup -- ply, as Bridegrooms to
yet more, more, more, yet more still sup -- ply, as Bride -- grooms to Marry
they has -- ten to die, they hasten to die; till Fate claps, Marry they has --
ten, they hasten to die; till Fate claps, claps, claps her Wings, till Fate
claps, claps, claps her Wings, and the glad Tidings brings, of the claps, claps
her Wings, till Fate claps, claps, claps her Wings, and the glad Tidings
brings, of the ^ Breach being entered, and then, then, then, then, then, then,
then they are all Kings: Then Breach being entered, and then, then, then, then,
then, then, then they are all Kings: happy's She whose Face can win, then hap --
py's She whose Face can win, can win a Then happy's She, then happy's She whose
Face can win, can win a Soldier's Grace, they Range about in State, they Range
about in State, like Gods, like Soldier's Grace, they Range about in State,
they Range about in State, like Gods, like Gods dis -- posing Fate; no Lux -- u
-- ry in Peace, nor Pleasure in ex -- cess Gods dis -- posing Fate; no Lux -- u
-- ry in Peace, nor Pleasure in ex -- cess ^ can par -- ral -- lel the joys,
can pa -- ral -- lel the joys, the can par -- ral -- lel the joys, can pa --
ral -- lel the joys, the Mar -- tial, Martial He -- to Crown when flushed with
Ra -- ge, Mar -- tial He -- to Crown when flushed with and forced by want,
forced by want, he Stor -- ms, Ra -- ge, and forced by want, he Stor -- ms, he
he Stor -- ms a wealthy Town. Stor -- ms a wealthy Town.

A Dialogue in Tyrannick Love, or the Royal Martyr.
^ Let us go, let us go, let us HArk my Daridcar! hark we are called, we are
called, we are called be -- low; let us go, let us go, let us go, let us go,
let us go to relieve the care of lon -- ging go, let us go, let us go, let
us go, let us go; Lovers in de -- spair; let us go, let us go, let us go;
let us go, let us go, let us go, let us go, let us go, let us go, let us
go, let us go, let us, let us go: Merry, merry, merry, we let us go, let us
go, let us go, let us go, let us, let us go: Merry, merry, merry we ^ Sail
form the East; half Tippl'd at the Rainbow Feast; in the bright Moonshine
whilst the Sail from the East; half Tippl'd at the Rainbow Feast; Winds
whistle lou -- d; tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, in the bright Moonshine,
whilst the Winds whistle loud; tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy,
tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy; we mount, we mount, and we fl -- y, tivy, tivy,
tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy; we mount, we mount and we fl -- y, all racking a
-- long in a dawny white Cloud, and lest our leap all racking a -- long in a
dawny white Cloud, ^ from the Sky should prove too far, and lest our leap from
the Sky and lest our leap from the Sky should prove too far, and lest our leap
should prove too fa -- rr, we'll sli -- de, we'll slide on the back of a new
fall -- ling from the Sky should prove too far, we'll fli -- de, we'll slide on
the back of a new falling Starr, and drop, drop, drop from a -- bove, in a gel
-- ly, a gel -- ly, a gel -- ly of Starr, and drop, drop, drop from a -- bove,
in a gel -- ly, a gel -- ly, a gel -- ly of Love; and drop, drop, drop from a
-- bove, in a gel -- ly, a gel -- ly, a gel -- ly of Love. Love; and drop,
drop, drop from a -- bove, in a gel -- ly, a gel -- ly, a gel -- ly of Love. ^
But now the Sun's down, and the Element's Red, the Spirits of Fire against us
make Head; they muster, they muster, they muster like Gnats in the Air: a --
las I must leave thee my Oh stay! oh Fair, and to my light Horsemen re -- pair.
A -- las I must leave thee, stay! oh stay! stay, stay, oh stay, stay, stay; a
-- las I must leave thee, a -- las, a -- las I must leave thee, must leave thee
my Fair. ^ for you need not to fear'em, you need not to fear 'em to Night; the
Wind is for us and blo -- ws full in their sight, and over the wide Ocean we fi
-- ght; like leaves in the Autumn our Foes will fall down, and hiss in the
Water, and hiss in the Wa -- ter, and down: But their Men lie se -- curely
entrenched ^ in a Cloud, and a Trumpeter, Hornet, a Trumpeter, Hornet to
Battle, to Bat -- tle sounds lou -- d; no mortals that spy how we Tilt in the
Sky, with wonder will gaze and fear such e -- vents as will never come to pass,
stay Then call me a -- gen when the Battle is won. you to perform what the Man
would have done. Turn over to the CHO

CHORUS. ^ So ready, so ready and quick is a Spi -- rit of Air, to pi -- ty, to
pi -- ty the So realy, so ready and quick is a Spi -- rit of Air, to pity, to
pi -- ty the Lover, and succor the Fair; that si -- lent and swift, si -- lent
and swift, Lover, and succor the Fair; that si -- lent and swift, si -- lent
and swift the lit -- tle soft God, is here with a Wish, and is si -- lent and
swift the lit -- tle soft God, is here with a Wish, and is gone with a Nod, is
here with a Wish, and is gone with a Nod. gone with a Nod, is here with a Wish,
and is gone with a Nod.

A Two Part SONG.
^ NO, no, no, no, no, no, re -- sistance, re -- sistance is but No, no, no,
no, no, no, re -- sistance, re -- sistance, re -- sistance is but vain; no, no,
no, no, no, no, re -- sistance, re -- sistance is but vain, vain, vain; no, no;
no, no, no, no, re -- sistance, re -- sistance is but vain, vain, vain, vain,
vain, re -- sistance is but vain; and on -- ly adds new weight, and vain, vain,
re -- sistance is but vain; and on -- ly adds new on -- ly adds new weight, and
on -- ly adds new weight to Cu -- pid's weight, and on -- ly adds new weight,
new weight, new weight to Cu -- pid's ^ Chain; no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no, Chain; no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, re -- sistance is but vain; no, no, no, no, no, no, re
-- si -- stance no, no, no, no, resistance is but vain; no, no, no, no, no, no,
re -- si -- stance is but vain: A thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand ways;
is but vain: A thousand, a thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand ways; a
thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand ways; a thousand, thousand,
thousand, thousand ^ thousand, thousand Arts the Tyrant, the tyrant, the
tyrant, the tyrant knows to Cap -- ti -- vate ways, a thousand Arts, the
Tyrant, the tyrant, the tyrant knows to Cap -- ti -- vates our hearts; And
sometimes our hearts; Sometimes he sighs, he sigh -- s em -- ploys; tryes the U
-- niver -- sal Language of the Eyes; The fire -- ce with The solt with ten --
derness de -- coys, fierce -- ness he destroys. ^the soft with ten -- der --
ness de -- coys; He kills the stron -- g, He kills the stron -- g, he kills the
he kills the stron -- g with joy, with jo -- y, stron -- g with joy, with jo --
y, he kills the strong with joy; he kills the strong with joy; the weak with
the weak with pain, the weak with pain. No, no, no, pain, the weak with pain,
the weak with pain. No, no,

End with first Strain from this {vocal join} mark. A Two Part SONG, in King
Arthur.
^ SOund a Par -- ly ye Fair and sur -- ren -- der, sound, sound, sound, sound
a Par -- ly ye Sound, sound, sound, sound, a Par -- ly ye Fair and sur -- ren
-- der, sound a Fa -- ir, a Par -- ly ye Fair and Surrender; set your selves
and your Parley ye Fair, found a Par -- ly ye Fair and sur -- render; set your
selves and your Lovers at ease: He Is a grateful, a grateful Of -- fender who
plea -- sure Lovers at ease: He Is a grateful, a grateful Of -- fender who
pleasure, who plea -- sure dare seize, but the whining pre -- tender, the dare
seize, but the whining, the ^ whineing preten -- der is sure to displease:
Sound a Par -- ly ye Fair and sur -- ren -- der, whineing preten -- der is sure
to dis -- please: Sound, sound, sound, sound a Parley ye sound, sound, sound,
sound a Parley ye Fair, sou -- nd a Par -- ly ye Fair and sur -- ren -- der,
sound a Parley ye Fair, sound a Par -- ly ye Fair and sur -- render; since the
fruit of de -- sire is possessing, it is un -- man -- ly to sigh, it is un --
manly Fair and sur -- render; since the fruit of de -- sire is possessing, it is
un -- man -- ly to sigh, it is un -- manly to sigh and complain; When we kneel
for re -- dressing, when we kneel for re -- dressing, to sigh and com -- plain;
When we kneel for redressing, when we ^we mo -- ve your dis -- dain; Love was
made for a kneel for re -- dressing we mo -- ve your dis -- dain; Love was Bles
-- sing, a Bles -- sing, Love was made, Love was made for a Bles -- sing made,
Love was made, Love was made for a Bles -- sing, Love was made for a Bles --
sing, was and not for a Pain, Love was made for a Bles -- sing made for a Bles
-- sing and not for a Pain, Love was made for a and not for a Pain. Bles --
sing, was made for a Bles -- sing and not for a Pain.

Let Hector, Achilles, a two Part SONG.
^ LET Hector, A -- chil -- les, and each brave Com -- man -- der, let Hector A
-- chil -- les, Let Hector A -- chil -- les, and and each brave Commander, with
Caesar and Pompey, with Caesar and each brave Commander, and each brave
Commander, with Caesar and Pompey, with Pompey, and great, great, and great A
-- lex -- ander; all Nations and Kingdoms, all Nations and Caesar and Pompey,
and great, and great A -- lex -- ander; all Nations and Kingdoms, all Kingdoms
with Conquest subdue, with Conquest, with Conquest sub -- due, yet more than
all Nations and Kingdoms, with Conquest subdue, with Conquest, with Conquest
sub -- due, yet ^ this, more, more, more, yet more than all this, yet more than
all this, bright more than all this, yet more than all this, yet more than all
this, more, more, bright Celia can do. For one sin -- gle glance from her
conquering Eyes, will take 'em all Ce -- lia can do. For one sin -- gle glance
from her conquering Eyes, will take 'em all Captive by way of Sur -- prize; the
Trophies and Crowns of their powerful Arms, are sacri -- fic'd Captive by way
of Sur -- prize; the Trophies and Crowns of their powerful Arms, are sacri --
fic'd all to Ce -- lia's bright Charms; in Chains and in Tri -- umph, all to Ce
-- lia's bright Charms; in Ghains and in ^ in Chains and in Tri -- umph she
carries them all, and Tri -- umph she carries them all, and if she but frown,
then down, then down they all fall, down they fall, down they fall, if she but
frown, then down, then down they all fa -- ll, down they fall, dow -- n, down,
down they all fall; in Chains and in Tri -- umph down they fall, down, then
down they all fall; in Chains she carries them all, and if she but and in Tri
-- umph she carries them all, and if she but ^ frown, then down they all fall,
down they fall, down they fa -- ll, dow -- n, frown, then down they all fa --
ll, down they fall, down they all fa -- ll, down, down they all fall, down,
down, down, down, down, down they all fall. down, then down they all fall,
down, down, dow -- n they all fall.

What a sad Fate, a two Part SONG.
^ WHat a sad, sa -- d Fate is mine, is mine, is mine; what a sad, sa -- d Fate
is mine; my Love, my Love, my Love is my crime: ^ my Love, my Love, my Love is
my crime? what a sad, what a sad, sa -- d Fate is mine? or why, why should she
be, why, why should she be more ea -- sy, more ea -- sy, more ea -- sy, ea --
sy, and free to a -- ll, than to me, to a -- ll than to me, to a -- ll than to
me, to ^ a -- ll than to me? But if by dis -- dain, but if by dis -- dain she
can les -- sen my pain, it is all, it is all, all, I im -- plore; to make me Love
less, to make me Love less, or her self to Love more; more, more, to make me
Love less, or her self to Love more.

A Dialogue in the 4th. Act of the 2d. Part of Don-Quixote.
He. SInce Times are so bad, I must tell you sweet Heart, I Am thinking to leave
off my Plough and my Cart, and to the Fair Cit -- ty a Journey will go, to
better my Fortune as other folk do; Since some have from Ditches, and course
Leather Breeches, been raised, been raised to be Rulers and wallow'd in Riches,
prithee come, come, come, come from thy Wheel, prithee come, come, come, come
from thy Wheel, for if Gypsies don't lie, I shall, I shall be a Governor too
e're I dye.


She. Ah! Collin, ah! Collin, by all, by all thy late doings I find with ^
sorrow and trouble, with sorrow and trouble the Pri -- de of thy mind; our
Sheep now at random dis -- order -- ly run, and now, and now Sundays Jacket
goes e -- very day on: Ah! what do thou, what do thou, what do thou mean?
ah! what do thou, what do thou, what do thou mean?


He. To make my Shoos clean and foot it, and foot it to the Court, to the King
and the Queen; where showing my parts I pre -- serment shall win;


She. Fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, it is better, it is
better for us to Plough and to Spin; for ^ as to the Court when thou happen'st
to try, thou wilt find nothing got there unless thou can buy; For Money the
Devil, the Devil and all is to be found, but no good Parts minded, no, no, no,
no good Parts minded, without the good Pound.


He. Why then I Will take Arms, why then I Will take Arms, I Will take Arms, and
follow, and follow Allarms, hunt Honor that now a -- days plague -- ly Charms:


She. And so lose a Limb by a Shot or a Blow, and curse thy self af -- ter for
leaving, for leaving the Plough.


He. Sup -- pose I turn Gamester?


She. So Cheat and be Banged.


^ He. What think of the Road then?


She. The Highway to be Hanged.


He. Nice Pimping how -- e -- ver yields profit for Life, I Will help some fine
Lord to a -- nother's fine Wife:


She. That Is dangerous too, a -- among the Town Crew, for some of them will do
the same thing by you; and then I to Cuckold ye may be draw'n in, faith Collin
it is better I sit here and Spin, faith Collin it is better I sit here and Spin.


He. Will nothing prefer me, what think of the Law?


She. Oh! while you live Collin keep out of that Paw.


He. I Will Cant and I Will Pray.


She. Ah! there is naught got ^ ah! there is naught got that way; there is no one
minds now what those Black Cattle say; let all our whole care be our Farming af
-- fair,


He. To make our Corn grow, and our Ap -- ple Trees bear.


2 Voc. ^ Ambition's, Ambition's a Trade, a Trade no Contentment can show, so
I Will to my Distaff; Ambition's, Am -- bition's a Trade no Contentment can show,
and Ambition's, Ambition's a Trade, a Trade, a Trade no Contentment can show,
no, no, no, I to my Plough; Ambition's, Am -- bition's a Trade no Contentment
can show, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, ^ no, no, no contentment can show, no, no, no contentment can
show. no, no no, no, no contentment can show, no, no, no, no, no, no
contentment can show.


CHORUS. ^ Let all our whole care be our Farming affair, to make our Corn grow
and our Ap -- ple Trees bear; Let all our whole care be our Farming affair, to
make our Corn grow and our Ap -- ple Trees bear; Am -- bition's, Am -- bition's
a Trade, a Trade no Content -- meant can show, so I Will to my Distaff; Amb --
ition's, Am -- bition's a Trade no Con -- tentment can show, and Am --
bition's, Am -- bition's a Trade, a Trade no Con -- tent -- meant can show, no,
no, no, I to my Plough; Am -- bition's, Am -- bition's a Trade no Con --
tentment can show, no, ^ no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, contentment can show, no, no, no,
contentment can show. no, no, no, no, no contentment can show, no, no, no, no,
no, no, contentment can show.


Bacchus is a Power divine, a single SONG.
^ BAcchus is a Power di -- vine, for He no sooner fills my Head with migh --
ty Wine, but all my Caresresign, and droop, and droop, then sink, sink down
dead. Then, then the plea -- sing thoughts be -- gin, and I in Ri -- ches flow,
at ^ least I fancy so. And without thought of want I Sin -- g, I Sin -- g,
stretched on the Earth, my Head all a -- round, with Flowers Weav -- v'd in --
to a Garland Crowned; Then, then I be -- gin to live, and scorn what all the
world can show or give. Let the bra -- ve Fools that fondly think of Honor,
and delight to make a Noise, a noise and Fi -- ght, go seek out War, whilst I
seek Peace, seek ^ Peace, whilst I seek Peace, seek Peace and drink, whilst I
seek Peace, whilst I seek Peace, seek Peace and drink. Then fill my Glass,
fill, fill it high, some perhaps think it fit to fa -- ll and dye, but when the
Bottles ranged make War with me, the Fighting Fool shall see, when I am sunk,
the difference to lie dead, and lie dea -- d Drunk; the Fighting Fool shall
see, when I am sunk, the difference to lie dead, and l -- ye dead drunk.

It Is Nature's Voice, a single SONG.
^ It Is Nature's Voice, it is Nature's Voice, through all the move -- ing Wood of
Creatures un -- der -- stood; the U -- ni -- ver -- sal Tongue, the U -- ni --
ver -- sal Tongue to none of all her nume'rous Ra -- ce unknown, from her, from
her it learnt the migh -- ty, the migh -- ty, the migh -- ty Art to Cou -- rt
the Ear, or strike, or stri -- ke ^ the Heart, at once the Passions to express
and mo -- ve, at once the Passions to ex -- press, to ex -- press and mo -- ve;
we hear, and strait we grie -- ve or hate, and strait we grie -- ve or hate, re
-- joy -- ce or -- Love: in un -- seen Chains it does the Fan -- cy bin -- d,
it does, it does the ^ Fa -- cy bind, at once it Char -- ms the Sense and Cap
-- ti -- vates the Mind, at once it Char -- ms the Sense and Cap -- ti -- vates
the Mind.

Ah me too many Deaths, a single SONG by Mr. J. Crown.
^ AH -- me! Ah -- me! to many, many deaths, to many deaths decreed; to many,
ma -- ny deaths de -- creed; My Love to ^ War, to Wa -- r goes every day, my
Love to Wa -- r goes ev' -- ry day; In every Wound of his I bleed, I die -- e
the hour he goes a -- way; yet, yet I would, yet I would hate him should he
stay: Yet, yet I would, yet I would, yet I would, yet I would hate him should
he stay; yet, yet I would, yet I would, yet I would, yet I would hate him
should he stay.

II.
Ah me! to many Deaths decreed,
By Love or War, I hourly dye,
When I see not my Love I bleed;
Yet when I have him in my Eye,
He kills me with excess of Joy.
Fly swift ye Hours, a single SONG.
^ FLy -- swift ye Hours fl -- y swift ye Hours, make have, make have, fl -- y,
make have, make have, fl -- y, fl -- y swi -- ft, thou la -- zy, la -- zy, la
-- zY Sun, make have, make have, make have, and drive the te -- dious Minutes
on, the te -- dious Minutes on, on: Bring back my Bell -- vi -- de -- ra, my Bell
-- vi -- de -- ra to my sight, bring back my Bell -- vi -- de -- ra, my Bell --
vi -- de -- ra to my sight, ^ my Bell -- vi -- de -- ra, than thy self more
bright, make have, make have, make have, bring back my Bell -- vi -- de -- ra,
my Bell -- vi -- de -- ra to -- my sight, Swifter than Time my ea -- ger Wi --
shes mo -- ve, swifter than Time my ea -- ger Wi -- sher mo -- ve, my ea -- ger
Wishes move, and scorn the bea -- ten Paths, and scorn the bea -- ten Paths of
Vul -- gar Love, and scorn the be^^^^ ^ Paths, and scorn the beaten Pa -- ths
of Vul -- gar Love, and scorn the beaten pa -- ths of Vul -- gar Lo -- ve. Soft
Peace is banished from my tor -- tur'd Breast, soft Peace, soft Peace is
banished from my tor -- tur'd Breast, Love robs my Days of Ease, Love robs my
Days of Ease, my Nights of Rest; Love robs my Days of Ease, Love robs my Days
of Ease, my Nights, my Nigh -- ts of rest. Yet tho'her cru -- el Scorn pro --
vokes De -- spair, ^ yet though her cru -- el Scorn, her cru -- el Scorn pro --
vokes De -- spair, my Passion still is strong, my Passion still is stro -- ng,
my Passion still is stro -- ng, as she is fair; Still must I Love, still bless
the plea -- sing Pain, still ourt my Ruin, still, still court my Ru -- ine,
and em -- brace my Chain; still court my Ruin, still, still court my Ru --
ine, and em -- brace my Chain.

The STORM, a single SONG.
^ BLow, blow Boreas, blow, and let thy sur -- ly Winds make the Bil -- lows
foam and roar; thou can no Terror breed in valiant Minds, but spite of thee
we will live, but spite of thee we will live and find a Shore. Then cheer my Hearts,
and be not awed, but kee -- p the Gun Room clear; though Hell's broke loose, and
the Devils roar abroad, whilst we have Sea -- room here, Boys, never fear,
never, never fear. Hey! how she tosses up! how far the mounting Top -- mast
touched a Starr; the Meteors blazed as through the Clouds we came, and Sa -- la
-- mander ^ like, we li -- ve in Flame; but now, now we sink, now, now we go
down to the deep -- est Shades be -- low. A -- las! a -- las! where are we now!
who, who can tell! sure it is the low -- est Room of Hell, or where the Sea --
Gods dwell: With them we'll live, with them we'll live and reign, with them
we'll lau -- gh, and sing, and drink amain, with them we'll lau -- gh and sing,
and drink amain; but see, we mount, see, see, we rise a -- gain.

CHORUS. ^ Though Fla -- shes of Lightning and Tem -- pests of Rain, do fierce --
ly con -- tend Though Fla -- shes of Lightning and Tem -- pests of Rain, do
fierce -- ly con -- tend ^ which shall conquer the Maine; though the Captain does
swear, in -- stead of a Prayer, and the which shall conquer the Maine; though the
Captain does swear, in -- stead of a Prayer, and the Seas is all Fire by the
Demons of the Air; we'll drink and de -- fie, we'll drink and de -- fie Seas is
all Fire by the Demons of the Air; we'll drink and de -- fie, we'll the mad Spi
-- rits that fly from the Deep, to the Sky, that fly, fl -- y, from the drink
and de -- fie the mad Spi -- rits that fly from the Deep to the Sky, that fl --
y from the Deep to the Sky, and si -- ng whilst loud Thunder, and si -- ng
whilst loud Thunder does Deep to the Sky, and si -- ng whilst loud Thun -- der,
loud Thunder does ^ bellow; for Fate will still have a kind Fate for the Brave,
and never make his Grave of a bellow; for Fate will still have a kind Fate for
the Brave, and never make his Grave of a Salt -- water Wave, to drown, to
drown, no, never to drown a good Fellow; no, ne -- ver, Salt -- water Wave, to
drown, to drown, no, never to drown a good Fellow; no, ne -- ver, no, ne -- ver
to drown a good Fellow; no ne -- ver, ne -- ver to drown, -- ne -- ver to drown
a good Fellow; no, ne -- ver, no, ne -- ver to drown, No, ne -- ver, no, ne --
ver to drown a good Fellow. No, ne -- ver, ne -- ver to drown a good Fellow.

Strike the Viol, touch the Lute, a single SONG.
^ STrike the Vi -- ol, strike the Vi -- ol, touch, touch, touch, touch, touch,
touch the Lute; wake the Harp, wake the Harp, wake the Harp, In -- spi -- re
the Flute, wake the Harp, In -- spi -- re the Flute: Sing your Pa -- tro -- nes
-- se's Praise, sing your Pa -- tro -- nes -- se's Praise, sing, sing, sing,
sing, in cheer -- full and har -- mo -- nious Lays.

A SONG in the Prophetess, or the History of Dioclesian.
^ SInce from my Dear, my Dear, my Dear, since from my Dear, my Dear, my Dear,
my Dear, my Dear A -- stre -- a's sight I was so rude -- ly torn, my Soul has
never, never, never, has never, never, never known de -- light, un -- less it
were to mourn, to mourn, un -- less, un -- less, it were to mourn, mourn. But
oh! a -- las, a -- las, with weep -- ing Eyes, and bleeding, bleed -- ing Heart
I ^ lie; thinking on her, on her, whose absence it is that makes me wish to dye,
dye, dye, dye, makes me, makes me wish to dye, dye, dye.

A SONG in the Married Beau.
^ SEE, see, see, see where re -- pen -- ting, where re -- pen -- ting Ce --
lia lies, with blush -- ing Cheeks, with blush -- ing Cheeks, and mel -- ting
Eyes; be -- moaning, be -- moaning, in a mourn -- full, mourn -- full Shade,
the ruins, the ruins in her Heart and ^ Fame, which sin -- full, sin -- full
Love has made: Oh! Oh! Oh! let thy Tears, fair Ce -- lia flo -- w, let thy
Tears, fai -- r Ce -- lia flow, for, that Ce -- les -- tial wond -- 'rous, wond
-- 'rous, wond -- 'rous dew, more gra -- ces on thee will be -- flow, than all,
all, than all, all, than all, all, than all, all thy Dresses, and thy Ar -- ts
could do.

Ah! ah! ah! Belinda, a single SONG.
^ AH! ah! ah! ah! Be -- lin -- da, I am pressed with tor -- meant; Ah! ah! ah! Be
-- lin -- da I am pressed with tor -- meant not to be ex -- pressed: Ah! ah! ah!
Be -- lin -- da, I am pre -- st with tor -- meant; Ah! ah! ah! Be -- lin -- da I
am pres'd with tor -- ments not to be ex -- pressed. Peace and I are strangers
grown, Peace and I are strangers, strangers grown, I Lan -- guish ^ till my
grief be known, I Lan -- guish, till my grief be known, yet would not, yet
would not, would not have it gue -- st. Peace and I are stran -- gers grown,
Peace and I are stran -- gers, stran -- gers grown.

O, O let me Weep! a Two Part SONG.
^

VIOLIN. ^ O, o let me, O, O let me, let me weep! ^ O, O let me, O, O let me,
let me weep! O, O, O let me for ever, ever weep, for e -- ver, for e -- ver,
for e -- ver, for e -- ver weep! My Eyes no more, no more, no mo -- re, ^ no
more, no more shall well -- come sleep: I Will hide me, I Will hide me from the
sight of Day, and sigh, sigh, sigh my Soul a -- way. ^ O, O let me, O, O let
me, let me weep! O, O let me, O, O let me, let me weep! O, O, O let me for
ever, ever weep, for e -- ver, for e -- ver, for e -- ver, for ^ e -- ver weep!
He Is gone, he is gone, he is gone, his loss de -- plore; he is gone, he is gone,
he is gone, his loss deplore, and I shall never, never, never, never, never see
him more; I shall never, never, ^ never see him more, shall never, never, never
see him more; I shall never, shall never, shall never, shall never see him
more.

A Two Part SONG, the Words by Mr. Henly.
^ D -- Vl -- ci -- bell -- la, Dulci -- bell -- la, when e're I sue for a Kiss;
Dulci -- bell -- la, Dulci -- Dull -- ci -- bell -- la, Dulci -- bell -- la, --
bella, when e're I sue for a Kiss, re -- fusing the Bliss, cry's no, no, no,
Dull -- ci -- bella, when e're I sue for a Kiss, re -- fu -- sing the Bliss,
cry's ^ no, cry's no, no, no, no, leave me, leave me, leave me A -- lex -- is,
ah! what would you do, no, no, no, no, cry's no, no, no, no, leave me, leave me
A -- lex -- is, ah! what would you do, ah! what would you, ah! what would you,
what would you do? what would you, ah! what would you, what would you, what
would you do? when I when I tell her I Will go, still she cry's no, no, no, my A
-- lex -- is, no, tell her I Will go, still she cry's no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, my A -- lex -- is, no, no my A -- lex -- is, ah! tell me not, tell me not
so; ah! ah! ah! no, my A -- lex -- is, ah! tell me not, tell we not so; ah! ah!
ah! tell me not ^ tell me not, tell me not so. Tell me fair one, tell me fair
one, tell me why, why so so, ah! tell me not so. Tell me fair one, tell me fair
one, tell me why, why, coming, why, why, why so coming, why so com -- ing, why
so shy; why so why, why so coming, why, why, why so coming, why, why, why so
shy, why so kind, so kind, so kind, so kind, and why, and why so coy; tell me
fair one, tell me kind, so kind, and why so coy, and why so coy; tell me fair
one, tell me fair one, tell me, tell me why, you will neither let me Fig -- ht
fair one, tell me, tell me why, you will neither let me Fig -- ht ^ nor fly; tell
me nor fly: tell me fair one, tell me fair one, tell me why, you will neither let
me li -- ve, fair one, tell me fair one, tell me why, you will neither let me
you will li -- ve, you will neither let me neither let me li -- ve nor dye. li -- ve
nor dye.

Let Caesar and Urania live, a Two Part SONG.
^ LET Caesar and V -- ra -- nia Let Caesar and U -- ra -- nia live, live, let
all de -- ligh -- is the Stars can give, upon the Royal Pair let all de -- ligh
-- ts that Stars can give, descend, let all de -- ligh -- ts the Stars can
give, upon the upon the Royal Pair descend, let all de -- ligh -- ts the Stars
can give, upon the Royal Pair de -- scend: Let Caesar and U -- ra -- nia live,
let Ray -- al Pair descend: Let Caesar and U -- ra -- nia live, let all de --
ligh -- ts ^ all de -- ligh -- ts the Stars can give, upon the Royal Pair
descend; the Stars can give, upon the Roy -- al let all de -- ligh -- ts the
Stars can give, upon the Roy -- al Pair de -- scend; Pair descend, let all de
-- ligh -- ts the Stars can give, up -- on the Roy -- al Pair de -- scend; let
Discord to the shades be driven, let Discord to the shades be driven, while let
Discord to the shades be driven, let Dis -- cord to the shades be driven Earth
and Sky our Song at -- tend, and thus our Loy -- al Vows as -- cend, while
Earth and Sky our Song at -- tend, and thus our Loy -- al vows as -- cend, ^
and thus our Loy -- al Vows as -- cend; O, O, O Preserve 'em and thus our Loy
-- al Vows as -- cend; O, O, O Preserve 'em Pre -- serve 'em, Pre -- serve 'em,
Pre -- serve 'em, Pre -- serve 'em, Pre -- serve 'em, Pre -- serve 'em, Pre --
serve 'em, Pre -- serve 'em, Heaven; O, O, O, O Preserve them, Pre -- serve 'em,
Heaven; O, O O, O Preserve 'em Pre -- serve 'em, O, Pre -- serve 'em Heaven. O
Preserve 'em Heaven.

Were I to choose the greatest Bliss, a Two Part SONG.
^ WEre I to choose the grea -- test Bliss, were I to choose the grea -- test
Bliss, that Were I to choose, were I to choose the grea -- test Bliss, that
e're in Love was known; 'twou'd be the high -- est of my Wish, t'en -- jo -- y
e're in Love was known; 'twou'd be the high -- est of my Wish, t'en -- jo -- y
your Heart a -- lone: Kings might pos -- sess their King -- doms your Heart a
-- lone: Kings might pos -- sess their Kingdoms free, and Crowns un -- en --
vy'd wear; they should no Ri -- val have of free, and Crowns un -- en -- vy'd
wear; they should no ^ me, no, no, they should no Ri -- val have of me, might I
reign Ri -- val, they should no Ri -- val have of me, no, no, might I reign
Monarch there; they should no Ri -- val have of me, no, no, Monarch there; they
should no Ri -- val have of me, no, no, they they should no Ri -- val, they
should no Ri -- val have of me, might should no Rival, they should no Ri -- val
ha -- ve of me, might I reign Mo -- narch there. I reign Mo -- narch there.

And in each track of Glory, a Two Part SONG.
^ ANd in each track of Glo -- ry, since, And in each track of Glo -- ry, and
in each track of Glo -- ry, since, since, of Glo -- ry, since, for their loved
Coun -- try, or their Prince. Princes that for their loved Coun -- try or their
Prince. Princes that hate, that hate Rome's Ty -- ran -- ny and join the
Nations right, with their own hate, that hate Rome's Ty -- ran -- ny and join
the Nations right, with their own ^ Roy -- al -- ty; none were more rea -- die,
none were more rea -- die, none, none, Roy -- al -- ty, none, none, none, none,
none were more, none were more none, none, none were more rea -- die in di --
stress to save, no, none were more rea -- die, none were more ready in di --
stress to save, none were more Loy -- al, none, none, none, none, none, none,
none, none, none, none were more Loy -- al, none, none, none, none, none, none,
none, none, none were more Loy -- al, none, none more brave. Loy -- al none,
none more brave.

Nestor who did, a Two Part SONG.
^ N Estor, who did to thrice Man's Age at -- tain; Nestor, who did to thrice
Man's Nestor, who did to thrice Man's Age at -- tain; Age at -- tain, by vast
Fx -- pe -- rience sound, by vast Ex -- pe -- rience Nestor, who did to thrice
Man's Age at -- tain, by vast Ex -- pe -- rience sound, that found; that bu --
sie States -- men did Pro -- ject in vain, when Bumpers bu -- sie States -- men
did Pro -- ject in vain, passed not brisk -- ly round, when Bum -- pers passed
not brisk -- ly rou -- nd, when Bumpers passed not brisk -- ly round, when
Bumpers passed not briskly ^pass'd not brisk -- ly rou -- nd, rou -- nd, passed
not briskly, briskly round, when Bumpers brisk -- ly, brisk -- ly round: passed
not brisk -- ly round, brisk -- ly, brisk -- ly round: This Maxim then he to
his Ma -- ster gave, when he in Coun -- cil should de -- bate; This Maxim then
he to his Ma -- ster gave, when he in Council should de -- bate; not Tro -- jan
-- like, to sit morose, to sit morose and grave, but drink, drink, but not Tro
-- jan -- like, to sit morose, to sit morose and grave, and so support the ^
drink, drink, drink, but drink, and so support the State, and so support the
State, and State, and so support the State; but drink, drink, but drink, drink,
drink, and so support the so support the State, but drink, drink, drink, and so
support the State; but drink, but State; but drink, but drink, drink, drink,
and so support the State; but drink, drink, but drink, and so support the
State, and so support the State; but but drink, but drink, drink, and so
support the State, and so support the --, drink, an -- d so support the State.
State; but drink, and so sup -- port the State.

For folded Flocks, a Three Part SONG.
^ F -- Or fol -- did Flocks, and fruitful Plains, the For folded Flocks, and
fruitful Plains; the Shepherds and the Farmers Fair Bri -- tain all Shepherds
and the Farmers gains, the Shepherds and the Farmers gains, fair Britain all
gains, the Shepherds and the Far -- mers gains, fair Britain all, all, all,
all, all, a -- ll the World out -- vies: for folded Flocks and fruitful all,
all, all, all, all, a -- ll the World out -- vies: fair Britain all, all all,
all, all, all, all, all, all the World out -- vies: fair Britain all, all, all
^ Plains, the Shepherds and the Farmers gains; fair Britain, all, all, all,
all, all the all, all, all, all, all, all, all the World out -- vies, all, all,
all, all the all, all, all, all, all, all, all, all the World outvies, all,
all, all, all the World outvies: and Pan as in Ar -- ca -- dia reigns, and Pan
as in Ar -- ca -- dia reigns, where pleasure World outvies: and Pan as in Ar --
ca -- dia reigns, and Pan as in Ar -- ca -- dia reigns, where pleasure World
outvies: and Pan as in Ar -- ca -- dia reigns, and Pan as in Ar -- ca -- dia
reigns, where pleasure mixed with pro -- fit lies. Though Iason's Fleece was fa --
m'd, was famed of mixed with pro -- fit lies. Though Iason's Fleece was famed, was
famed of mixed with pro -- fit lies. Though Iason's Fleece was fa -- m'd, was
famed of ^ old, the British Wool, the British Wool, is growing, growing Gold;
no Mines can more, no, no, no, old, the British Wool, the British Wool is
growing, growing Gold; no, no, no, no, old, the British Wool, the British Wool,
is growing, growing Gold; no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no
Mines can more of Wealth sup -- ply, it keeps, it no, no, no Mines can more,
no, no, no, no Mines can more of Wealth sup -- ply, it keeps, it no, no, no,
no, no, no, no Mines can more, can more of Wealth sup -- ply, it keeps, it
keeps the Peasant from the cold, and takes, and takes for Kings the Tyrian die.
keeps the Peasant from the cold, and takes, and takes for Kings the Tyrian die.
keeps the Peasant from the cold, and takes, and takes for Kings the Tyrian die.

A Dialogue in Oroonoko, Sung by the Boy and Girl.
He. CE -- le -- me -- ne, pray tell me, pray, pray tell me Ce -- le -- me --
ne, when those pretty, prit -- ty, pretty Eyes I see; when my Heart beats,
beats, beats, beats, in my Breast; why, why it will not, it will not, why, why
it will not let me rest? Why this trem -- bling, why this trem -- bling too all
over? Pains I never, Pains I never, never, never felt be -- fore: And when thus
I touch, when thus I touch your Hand, why I wish, I ^ wish, I wish I was a Man?


She. How should I know more than you? Yet would be a Woman too. When you wash
your self and play, I methinks could look all day; Nay just now, nay, just now
am pleased, am pleased so well, should you, should you Kiss me I will not tell,
should you, should you Kiss me I will not tell; no, no I will not tell; no, no I
will not tell, no, no I will not tell; should you Kiss me I will not tell.


He. Though I could do that all day, and de -- sire no bet -- ter play; Sure,
sure in Love there is something more, which ^ makes Mam -- ma so bigg, so bigg
be -- fore.


She. Once by chance I heard it named; don't ask what, don't ask what for I Am
a -- shamed: Stay but till you are past Fi -- teen, then' you will know, then, then
you will know what it is I mean, then you will know, then, then you will know what
it is I mean.


He. How -- e -- ver, lose not pre -- sent Bliss; but now we are a -- lone let us
Kiss, but now we are a -- lone let us Kiss, let us Kiss.


She. My Breasts do so heave, so heave, so hea -- ve.


He. My Heart does so pant, pant, pant. ^


She. There Is something, something, something more we want, there is something,


He. There Is something, something, something more we want, there is something,
something, something more we want. something, something more we want.


Love thou can hear, a single SONG. Words by Sir Robert Howard.
^ L -- Ove thou can hea -- r, Love thou can hea -- r though thou art
blind; leave my Heart free, leave my Heart free, oh! pit -- ty me, oh! pit --
ty me, since Clo -- ris is un -- kind; leave my Heart free, oh! pit -- ty me,
oh! ^ pit -- ty me, oh! -- pit -- ty me, since Clo -- ris is un -- kind, oh! --
pit -- ty me, since Clo -- ris is un -- kind. She is un -- con -- stant, she is
un -- con -- stant, she is uncon -- stant as she is bright; she is un -- con --
stant she is un -- con -- stant, she is un -- con -- stant ^ as she is bright;
her smi -- les on ev -- 'ry Shep -- herd fall, her Smi -- les on every Shepherd
fall; And as the Sun, and as the Sun u -- ses his light, she vainly, she vain
-- ly Loves to shine, she vainly lo -- ves to shine on all; and as the Sun, and
as the Sun u -- ses his light, she vainly, she vain -- ly loves to shine, she ^
vainly lo -- ves to shine on all. I thought her fair like new fallen Snow, I
thought her fair like new fallen Snow, when white -- ness in -- nocence in --
closed. Like that she sul -- ly'd seems to shine, like that she sul -- ly'd
seems to show, when to Loves melting, melting heat ex -- posed; like that she
sul -- ly'd seems to show, when to Loves melting, melting heat ex -- posed;
when to Loves mel -- ting, melting heat ex -- posed. Love thou, etc. First
Strain again. ^ Brisk Time. The powerful Char -- ms shall now be tried, the
powerful Char -- ms shall now be tried; this Fu -- ry, this Fu -- ry from my
Breast to chase, I Will summon's scorn, revenge and pride; I Will summons, summons
scorn, revenge and pride; Slow. at least her Image, at least her Image, her
Image to desace.

See how the fading Glories, a single SONG.
^ SEE, see how the fa -- ding Glo -- ries of the Year, put on a youthful
Smile; see, see how the fa -- ding Glories of the Year, put on a youthful
Smile; ^ to welcome her Spite of the Dog -- Star's madness, her bright Eyes cre
-- ate a Spring of e -- ver bloom -- ing Joys, of ever bloom -- ing, bloom --
ing Joys; all Nature to her Charms fresh Tri -- bute yields, making where e're
she comes E -- li -- zian Fields; where Roses proudly breath out all their
Sweet, and blush out all their Beau -- ty at her Feet; where Nightingales their
own Love -- Songs lay by, and her un -- i -- mi -- ta -- ble Gra -- ces try;
while the ^ more wan -- ton Hills and Groves re -- joyce, faintly to ec -- cho
back her heaven -- ly Voice, faint -- ly to ec -- cho back her heaven -- ly ^
Voice.

CHORUS. But my Pains ra -- ge, but my Pains ra -- ge the But my Pains ra --
ge, but my Pains ra -- ge the more near Pa -- ra -- dise, Panthe -- a is to me
a burn -- ing Glass of Ice; Pan -- thea, more near Pa -- ra -- dise, Panthe --
a is to me, Pan -- the -- a Pan -- the -- a, is to me a burn -- ing Glass of
Ice. is to me, is to me a burn -- ing Glass of Ice.

I attempt from Love's sickness, a single SONG.
^ I Attempt from Love's sickness to fl -- y in vain, since I am my self my own
Fever, since I am my self my own Fea -- ver and Pain, No more now, no more now
fond Heart with Pride, no more swell, thou can not raise Forces, thou can
not raise Forces enough to re -- bell: First Strain again. For Love has more
Power, and less Mercy than Fate, to make us seek ru -- in, to make us seek ru
-- in, and love those that hate. End with the first Strain.

Here the Deities approve, a single SONG.
^ H -- Ere the De -- i -- ties ap -- prove, here, here the De -- i -- ties
approve the God of Mu -- sick and of Love, all the Talents they have lent you,
all the Blessings they have sent you, pleased to see, to see what they be --
stow, live and thrive, live and thrive so well be -- low; pleased to see, to
see what they be -- stow, live and thrive, live and thrive so well be -- low;
all the Talents they have lent you, all the Blessings they have ^ sent you
pleased to see, to see what they be -- stow, live and thrive, live and thrive
so well be -- low, pleased to see, to see what they be -- stow, live and
thrive, live and thrive so well be -- low.

A Two Part SONG.
^ AS soon as the Cha -- os, as soon as the As soon as the Cha -- -- os, Cha --
os was made in -- to form, and the first, the fi -- rst as soon as the Cha --
os wa -- s made in -- to form, and the first, the ^ race of Men knew a good,
knew a good from a harm; they quickly did join, they first race of Men knew a
good, knew a good from a harm; they quickly did join, they quickly, they
quickly did join, in a knowledge di -- vine, that the World's chiefest
Blessings were quickly, they quickly did join, in a knowledge di -- vine, that
the World's chiefest Blessings were Women and Wine, Women and Wine, Women and
Wine; that the World's chiefest Blessings were Women and Wine, Women and Wine,
Women and Wine; that the World's chiefest Blessings were Women and Wine: Since
when by ex -- ample, im -- proving de -- lights, since Women and Wine: Since
when by ex -- ample improving delights, since when by ex -- ample, since ^ when
by example im -- proving de -- ligh -- ts, improving de -- lights, when by ex
-- ample im -- pro -- ving de -- ligh -- ts, improving de -- lights, Wine
governs our Days, Love and Beauty our Nights. And drink, drink, drink, and Wine
governs our Days, Love and Beauty our Nights. Love on then, love on then,
drink, drink, drink; Love on then, love on then, and drink, drink, drink, and
drink, drink, drink, and drink, drink, drink, Love on then, and drink, and
drink, drink, drink, drink, drink, drink, Love on then and drink, it is a fol --
ly to think of a drink, drink, drink, drink, drink, drink, drink, drink, love
on then and drink; it is a fol -- ly to think of a ^ Mystery out of our reaches,
be moral in thought, be moral in thought, to be mer -- ry's Mystery out of our
reaches, be moral in thought, to be mer -- ry's no fault, though an Elder the
contra -- ry Preaches; for never, never, my no fault, though an Elder the contra
-- ry Preaches; for never, never my Friends, for never, never, never, never,
never, my Friends, was an Age of more Vice, than when Friends, for never,
never, never, never, never, my Friends, was an Age of more Vice, than when
Knaves would seem Pious, when Knaves would seem Pi -- ous, and Fools would seem
Wise. Knaves would seem Pious, when Knaves would seem Pious, and Fools would
seem Wise.

A Dialogue in the Fairy Queen, Sung by Mr. Reading, and Mrs. Ayliff.
He. NOW the Maids and the Men are making of Hay, we have left the dull Fools,
we have left the dull Fools and are stol -- len a -- way; then Mopsa no more be
coy as before, but let us merri -- ly, merri -- ly, merri -- ly, merri -- ly
play; and Kiss, and Kiss, and Kiss, and Kiss, and Kiss the sweet time a -- way.


She. Why how now Sir Clown, why how now, what makes you so bold? I Would have ye,
I Would have ye to know I Am not made of that mold; I tell you a -- gain, a -- gain
and a -- gain, Maids must never, must never Kiss no Men; no, no, no, no, ^ no,
no Kissing at all; no, no, no, no, no, no Kissing at all; I Will not Kiss, till I
Kiss you for good and all;


She. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,


He. Not Kiss you at all, not Kiss you at all, not at no Kissing at all, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no Kissing at all? not Kiss you at all; why
no, why no not at all? no, no, no, no, no, I Will not Kiss, till I Kiss you for
good and all. all, why no, no, no, no, no Kissing at all?


He. should you ^ give me a score, 'twou'd not les -- sen your store, then bid
me, bid me cheerful -- ly, cheerful -- ly Kiss and take my fill, and take my
fill, my fill of the Bliss;


She. I Will not trust you so far I know you too well, should I give you an Inch
you would soon, you would soon take an Ell; then Lord like you Rule and Lau -- gh, then
Lord like you Rule and Lau -- gh at the Fool; no, no, no, no, no, no Kissing at
all, no, no, no, no, no, no Kissing at all; I Will not Kiss, till I Kiss you for
good and all:


He. So ^ small a Re -- quest you must not, you cannot, you shall not de -- ny;
nor will I ad -- mit of a -- another, a -- no -- there re -- ply; you must not,
you shall not de -- ny; you must not, you can -- not, you shall not de -- ny.


She. Nay what do you mean? nay what do you mean? O


He. You must not, you shall not de -- ny; you must not, you shall not de --
Fie, fie, fie, fie; O fie, fie, fie, fie, nay what do you mean? Nay -- ny, you
must not de -- ny, you must not, you shall not de -- ny, you must not, you ^
nay nay nay, what do you, what do you can -- not, you shall not, you must not,
you can -- not, you shall not de -- ny, mean? O fie, fie, fie, fie, O fie, fie,
fie, fie, O fie, fie, you must not de -- ny, you must not, you shall not, you
fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, O fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, can -- not, you shall
not de -- ny; you must not, you can -- not, you fie, fie, fie. shall not de --
ny.


A Dialogue in the Richmond Heiress, Sung by Mr. Reading, and Mrs. Ayliff.
He. BEhold, behold the Man that with Gigan -- tick Might dares, dares, dares
Combat Heaven a -- gain sto -- rm, Joves bright Palace put the Gods to flig --
ht, Chaos renew and make perpe -- tu -- al Night; Come on, come on, come on,
come on ye Fighting, Fighting fools, come on, come on, come on, come on ye
Fighting, Fighting fools that petty, petty Jars maintain, that petty, petty
Jars main -- tain; I Have all, all the Wars of Europe, all the Wars of Europe in
my Brain; I Have all, all, ^ all the Wars of Europe in my Brain.


She. Who Is he that talks of War, when charming, charming Beau -- ty comes in,
who is sweet, sweet, sweet Face di -- vine -- ly fair, e -- ter -- nal plea --
sure, e -- ter -- nal plea -- sure, e -- ter -- nal plea -- sure comes; when I
appear, the Martial, Martial God a Conquered Victim lies; o -- beys each
glance, each awful nod, and dreads the ^ light -- ning of my killing Eyes;
more, more than the fiercest, the fiercest, the fiercest thun -- der in the
Skies.


He. Ha! ha! now, now, now, now we mount up high, now, now we mount up high,
the Sun's bright God and I, Charge, Charge, Charge on the Azure, Charge on the
Azure dawns of am -- ple Sky, See, see, see, see, see, see, see, see, see, see,
see, see, see, see, see, see, how th'im -- mortal spirits ru -- n; see, see,
see, see, see, see, see, see how th'im -- mortal ^ spirits ru -- n; pur -- sue,
pursue, pur -- sue, pursue, pursue, pursue, pursue, pursue, pursue, pursue,
Drive them over the burning Zone, drive them over the burning Zone, from thence
come row -- ling down, come row -- ling down, and search the Globe below, with
all the gulphy Main, to find my lost, my wan -- dring sense, my wan -- dring
Sense a -- gain.


She. By this disjoynted matter that crowds thy Pe -- ri -- cranium, ^ I nicely
have found, that thy Brain is not sound, and thou shall be, and thou shall be
my Companion.


He. Come, come, come, come, come, come, let us plague the World then; I em --
brace the blessed oc -- casion, for by instinct I find thou art one of the kind,
thou art one of the kind, that first brought in, that first brought in Dam --
nation.


III.
She. My Face has Heaven Enchanted,
With all the Sky-born Fellows.
Jose pressed to my Breast, and my Bosom he kissed,
Which made old Juno jealous.
IV.
He. I challenged Grisly Pluto.
But the God of Fire did shun me.
Witty Hermes I drub'd, round the Pole with my Club,
For breaking Jokes upon me.
Chorus of both.
Than Mad, very Mad, very Mad let us be,
For Europe does now with our Frenzy agree,
And all things in Nature are mad too as we.
V.
She. I found Apollo Singing,
The tune my Rage Increases;
I made him so blind, with a look that was kind,
That he broke his Lyre to pieces.
VI.
He. I drank a Health to Venus,
And the Mole on her white Shoulder.
Mars flinch'd at the Glass, and I threw't in his Face,
Was ever Hero bolder?
VII.
She. It Is true, my dear Alcides,
Things tend to dissolution,
The Charms of a Crown, and the Crafts of the Gown,
Have brought all to Confusion.
VIII.
He. The haughty French begun it,
The English Wite pursue it.
She. The German and Turk still go on with the Work,
He. And all in time will rue it.
Cho. Then mad, very mad, etc.
Turn over to the CHO CHORUS. ^ Then Mad ve -- ry Mad let us be, ve -- ry Mad,
very Mad let us be, ve -- ry Then Mad, very Mad, very Mad very Mad let us be,
ve -- ry Mad, very Mad, very Mad, very Mad, let us be, for Europe does now with
our Frenzy a -- gree; and Mad, very Mad, very Mad, very Mad, let us be, for
Europe does now with our Frenzy a -- gree; all things in Nature are Mad, Mad,
Mad, and all things in Nature are Mad, Mad, Mad, are and all things in Nature
are Mad, Mad, Mad, and all things in Nature are Mad, Mad, Mad, are Mad, Mad,
Mad, are Mad too as we, are Mad too as we. Mad, Mad, Mad, are Mad, Mad, Mad,
are Mad too as we, are Mad too as we.

A Two Part SONG.
^ LEt the dreadful Engines of e -- ter -- nal will, the Thun -- der To -- ar
and crook -- ed Lightning kill, my Rage is hot, is hot, is ho -- t as theirs,
as fa -- tall too, and dares as horrid, and dares as horrid, horrid ex -- e --
cu -- tion do: Or let the Frozen North its ran -- cour show, within my Breast,
sar, sar grea -- ter Tem -- pests grow; de -- spair's ^ more cold, more co --
ld than a -- ll the winds can blow. Can nothing, can no -- thing warm me, can
nothing, can no -- thing warm me? yes, yes, yes, yes, Lucinda's Eyes; yes, yes,
yes, yes, yes, yes, Lu -- cinda's Eyes; yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, Lucinda's
Eyes; there, there, there, there, there Et -- na, there, there, there, there
Ves -- suvio lies, to fur -- nish Hell with flames, that mount -- ing, mounting
reach the Skies; Can ^ nothing, can nothing warm me? can nothing, can nothing
warm me? yes, yes, yes, yes, Lucinda's Eyes; yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes,
Lucinda's Eyes; yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, Lucinda's Eyes. Ye powers I did but
use her name, and see how all, and see how all the Meteors flame blew lightning
flashes round the Court of Sol, and now the Globe more feircely burns than once
at Phaeton's fall. Ah! -- ah! -- ^ where, where are now, where are now, where
are now those flow -- 'ry Groves, where Zephir's fragrant Winds did play? ah!
where are now, where are now, where are now those flow -- 'ry Groves, where
Zephir's fragrant Winds did play? where guarded by a Troop of Loves, the fair,
the fair Lu -- cin -- da sleeping lay; there Sung the Nightingale, and Lark,
around us all was sweet and gay, we never grew sad till is grew dark, nor
nothing feared but short -- ning day. ^ I glow, I glow, I glow, but it is with
hate, why must I burn, why must I burn, why, why must I burn for this in --
grate? why, why must I burn for this in -- grate? Cool, coo -- le it then, coo
-- le it then, and rail, since nothing, no -- thing will pre -- veil. When a
Woman Love pretends, it is but till she gains her ends, and for Better, and for
Worse, is for Marrow of the Purse, where she Jilts you over and over, proves a
^ Slattern or a Whore; this hour will teize, will teize and vex, will teize,
will teize and vex, and will Cuckold ye the next; they were all contrived in
spite, to tor -- meant us, not de -- light, but to Scold, to Scold, and
Scratch, and Bite, and not one of them proves right; but all, all are Witches
by this light; And so I fair -- ly bid 'em, and the World good night, good
night, good night, good night, good night, good night.

FINIS.
ORPHEUS BRITANNICUS.

A COLLECTION OF The Choicest SONGS, FOR One, Two, and Three Uoices.

COMPOSED By Mr. Henry Purcell.

TOGETHER, With such Symphonies for Violins or Flutes, As were by Him designed
for any of them: AND A THROUGH-BASS to each SONG.

Figured for the Organ, Harpsichord, or Theorbo-Lute.

The Second BOOK, which renders the First Complete.

-- Primo Avulso non desicit Alter
Aureus, et simili frondescit Virga Metallo.
Virg. Lib. Aen. 6.

LONDON: Printed by William Pearson, for Henry Playford at His Shop in the
Temple-Change, Fleet Street. (...).

To the Right Honorable Charles, Lord Hallifax, Auditor of His Majesty's
Exchequer, etc.
MY LORD,
I Should be unjust to the Memory of the admired Purcell, and set too Small a
Value on His Works, should I put them under any Patronage but Your own. For
Your Lordship has a Double Title to these Papers, both as You are the best
Judge, as well as the Greatest Encourager of Poesy and Music. It Is but fit
this Great Master of the Age, that has stood the Test of Your Judgment, should
Claim Your Protection: Since no Greater Character can be given of any
Composition, than that it has pleased so Exquisite a Taste as Your Lordship's.

But I am not so vain, as to attempt a Panegyric on Your Lordship, nor to
Expatiate on the several Excellencies of this Celebrated Author: These are
Subjects for the Sublimest Pens, and are already transmitted to Posterity.

But my design here, is to pay my Gratitude to Your Lordship, for the many
Favors I have received; In a Present whose own Worth, is its Apology, and
whose Native Graces will render it Acceptable. And to add, if possible to the
Fame of Purcell, and Endear him more to the World: Which can be only done, by
prefixing the Name of Mountague to His Works.

My Lord, I am Your Lordships most Humble and Obliged Servant, HENRY PLAYFORD.

The Bookseller to the READER.
THe late Publication of these Excellent Performances in Music is sufficiently
atoned for, by the Care that has been taken in the Collection of 'em; and I
cannot but think I have made amends enough to the Purchaser in the Choice of
'em. The great Charge I have been at; the Diligence I have made use of to
obtain the Assistance of Friends, and the Dearness of Paper in which these
Admirable Composures are transmitted to the Public. are sufficient Excuses:
And I shall insist upon that Subject no farther, Than that as I have been
always employed in promoting the increase of things of this Nature, and
contributed to the utmost toward their Encouragement, so I shall still make it
my Endeavors to go on with so Laudable an Undertaking. I might indeed make my
Compliments in relation to the greatness of my Expenses in being Beneficial to
the Public, and Expose some People that build upon my Foundation; but as I
desire the Readers Candor, it is my Business to make use of it in Respect to
others, only I shall take notice, I have more than enough Discouragement to
drop the pursuit of Obliging my Country, since Foreigners meet with a reception
that is inconsistent with the Interest of one, that has the Honor to be a
Native. But let 'em Undersell me as long as they please, and Transplant their
Foreign Music into these Climates, the Judicious will be of my side, when they
make an Estimate of Mr. Purcell's Works, which are equal to those of the Best
Masters of Italy, and conclude, that I, who have now made a complete Collection
of all his Choicest Performances, deserve a better Entertainment from the Hands
of the Public, than any Pretenders whatsoever.

H. P.

On the DEATH of the late Famous Mr. HENRY PVRCELL, Author of the First and
Second Books of Orpheus Britannicus.
MAke room ye happy Natives of the Sky,
Room for a Soul, all Love and Harmony;
A Soul that rose to such Perfection here,
It scarce will be advanced by being there.
Whether (to us by Transmigration given)
He once was an Inhabitant of Heaven,
And formed for Music, with Diviner Fire
Endu'd, Composed for the Celestial Choir;
Not for the Vulgar Race of Light to hear,
But on High-days to glad the Immortal Ear.
So in some leisure hour was sent away,
(Their Hour is here a Life, a Thousand Years their Day.
Sent what the Aetherial Music was to show,
And teach the wonders of that Art below.
Whether this might not be, the Muse appeals
To his Composures, where such Magic dwells,
As Rivals Heavenly Skill, and human Power excels.
Vile as a Sign-post Dauber's Painting show's,
Compared with Titian's Work, or Angelo's;
Languid and low, as Modern Rhyme appears,
When Virgil's matchless Strain has tuned our Ears,
So seem to him the Masters of our Isle,
His Inspiration, theirs but Mortal Toil:
They to the Ear, he to the Soul does dive,
From Anger save, and from Despair revive:
Not the smooth Spheres in their Eternal Rounds,
The work of Angels, warble softer Sounds.
What is that Heaven of which so much we hear
(The happy Region gained with Praise and Prayer)
What but one unmolested Transport, which
No Notion, or Idea ever could reach?
As it appears in Vision, it is but this,
To be oppressed with Joy, and strive with Bliss!
Confounded with the Rays of ceaseless day,
We know not what we think, or see, or say!
Endless Profusion! Joy without decay!
So, when his Harmony arrests the Far,
We lose all thought of what, or how, or where!
Like Love, it warms, like Beauty, does control,
Like hidden Magic seizes on the whole,
And while we hear, the Body turns to Soul!
From what blessed Spring did he derive the Art,
To sooth our Cares, and thus command the Heart!
Time listening stands to hear his artful Strain,
And Death does at the Dying, throw his shafts in vain;
Fast to the Immortal part the Mortal cleaves,
Nor, till he leave to Charm, the Body leaves.
Less Harmony than his, did raise of Old
The Theban Wall, and made an Age of Gold.
How in that Mystic order could he join
So different Notes! make Contraries combine,
And out of Discord, cull such Sounds Divine.
How did the Seeds ly quickening in his Brain!
How were they born without a Parent's Pain?
He did but Think, and Music would arise,
Dilating Joy, as Light o'erspreads the Skies;
From an Immortal Source, like that, it came;
But Light we know, -- this Wonder wants a Name!
What art thou? From what Causes do thou spring
O Music! thou Divine Mysterious thing?
Let me but know, and knowing, give me Voice to Sing.
Art thou the warmth in Spring that Zephire breaths,
Painting the Meads, and whistling through the Leaves?
The happy Season that all Grief exiles,
When God is Pleased, and the Creation smiles?
Or ar't thou Love, that Mind to Mind imparts,
The endless Concord of agreeing Hearts?
Or ar't thou Friendship, yet a nobler Flame,
That can a dearer way make Souls the same?
Or ar't thou rather, which dos all transcend,
The Center where at last the Blessed ascend;
The Seat where Halelujah's never end?
Corporeal Eyes will not let us clearly view,
But either thou art Heaven, or Heaven is you!
And thou my Muse (how ever the Critics blame)
Pleased with his Worth, and faithful to his Fame,
Art Music while you are hallowing Purcell's Name.
On other Subjects you Applause might miss,
But Envy will it self be Charmd with this.
How often has Envy at his Ayrs been found
TO admire, enchanted with the Blissful sound?
Ah! could you quite forget his early Doom,
I would not from the Rapture call you home:
But gently from your steepy height descend,
You Have praised the Artist, and now mourn the Friend!
Ah most unworthy! should we leave unsung
Such wondrous Goodness in a Life so young.
In spite of Practice, he this Truth has shown,
That Harmony and Virtue should be one.
So true to Nature, and so just to Wit,
His Music was the very Sense you Writ.
Nor were his Beauties to his Art confined;
So justly were his Soul and Body joined,
You Would think his Form the Product of his Mind.
A Conquering sweetness in his Vizage dwelt,
His Eyes would warm, his Wit like Lightning melt,
But those no more must now be seen, and that no more be felt.
Pride was the sole aversion of his Eye,
Himself as Humble as his Art was High.
Ah! let him Heaven (in Life so much adored)
Be now as universally Deplored!
The Muses Sighed at his approaching Doom,
Amazed and raving, as their own were come!
Art tried the last Efforts, but could not save --
But sleep, O sleep, in an unenvied Grave!
In Life and Death the noblest Fate you share;
Poets and Princes thy Companions are,
And both of 'em were thy Admirers here.
There rest thy Ashes -- but thy nobler Name
Shall soar aloft, and last as long as Fame.
Nor shall thy Worth be to our Isle confined,
But fly and leave the lagging day behind.
Rome that did once extend its Arms so far,
You Have conquered in a nobler Art than War:
To its proud Sons but only Earth was given,
But thou have triumphed both in Earth and Heaven.
And now Farewell! nor Fame, nor Love, nor Art,
Nor Tears avail! -- we must for ever part!
For ever! dismal Accent! what alone!
But that can tell our Loss, or reach our Moan!
What term of Sorrow Preference dare contend?
What? but the tenderest dearest name of -- Friend!
Hail him ye Angels to the Elisian Shore,
The noblest Freight that ever Charon bore,
Tho Orpheus and Amphion passed before.
His Skill as far exceeds, as had his Name
Been known as long, he would have done in Fame.
Tho the wide Globe for tuneful Souls you cull,
Hope no more such, -- the happy Quire is full.
The Sacred Art can here arrive no higher,
And Heaven it self no further will Inspire.
R. G.

To my Friend, Mr. Henry Playford, on his Publication of Mr. Henry Purcell's
Orpheus Britannicus; Which is now rendered Complete, by the addition of this
Second Book
AS when the God of Numbers charms the Throng,
And gives Melodious Tunes to every Song,
The Voice deals Inspiration and Desire
To every Muse, to fill the Sacred Choir;
Each of the Nine, appears with her Applause,
And justifies the God and Musick's Cause;
As every tender Accent gently moves,
And shows their Duty, as it shows their Loves;
Even so must I with Infant Notes repair,
And wanting Judgment, prove I want no Care.
What Great Apollo does to us deny,
He let this Chosen Son of his enjoy:
We Poets sow the seed of Fame in vain,
TO expect a Crop while we alive remain;
He puts us off till Death, and then will give,
When we are not permitted to receive.
Ah! who'd be pleased to have these Temples Crowned
Whose Brains are lost, and Heads are under ground.
But Purcell's Privilege was vastly more,
He planted all the Laurels which he wore,
And heard his wide Applause fly all around,
For still his Fame did with his Music sound.
All this to Purcell, but there is something due
To Purcell's and Apollo's Friend, to you,
From injuries of Time you save his Lays,
And rescue him from Fate, to claim our Praise.
Oh! could you but the like return receive,
And have our Gratitude for what you give,
Rewarded for your Toil, exchange your Pains,
Not only for our Thanks, but for your Gains,
While Interloping French and Dutch oppose,
And show themselves both your and Musick's Foes.
But it is in vain to hope, we are all abused,
Fond of the Riff-raff, which the World tefus'd:
Each Foreign Fool sits wheedling in his Shop,
And Grinning entertains the thoughtless Fop,
Whose love for Trifles, makes him rove from Home,
And even hug Diseases brought from Rome.
Let these, my Friend, a while pursue their Trade.
Your Province and your Right alone Invade,
Their feeble Malice but your Fame secures,
And Publishes both Purcell's Works and Tours.
P. K.

To Mr. Henry Playford, on his Publishing the Second Part of Orpheus
Britannicus.
NExt to the Man who so Divinely Sung,
Our Praise, kind Playsord, does to thee belong,
For what you gave us of the Bard's before,
Vast Thanks were due, and now you merit more.
Though Purcell living, had our utmost Praise,
And dead, almost does Adoration raise,
Yet He, even He, had scarce preserved a Name,
Did not your Press perpetuate his Fame,
And showed the coming Age as in a Glass,
What our all-pleasing Britain's Orpheus was.
Go on my Friend, nor spare no Pains nor Cost,
Let not the least Motett of his be lost;
Whose meanest Labors your Collections show,
Excells our very best Performance now.
Duly each day, our young Composers Bait us,
With most insipid Songs, and sad Sonato's.
Well were it, if the World woul'd lay Embargo's
On such Allegro's and such Poco Largo's:
And would Enact it, There presume not any,
To Teize Correlli, or Burlesque Bassani;
Nor with Division, and ungainly Graces,
Eclipse good Sense, as weighty Wiggs do Faces.
Then honest Cross might Copper cut in vain,
And half our Sonnet-sellers Starve again:
Thus while they Print their Prick'd-Lampoons to live,
Do you the World some piece of Purcell's give,
Such as the nicest Critic must Commend,
For none dare Censure that which none can Mend.
By this my Friend, you will get immortal Fame,
When still with Purcell we read Playford's Name.
H. Hall, Organist of Hereford.

BOOKS lately Printed, and Reprinted, for Henry Playford, at his Shop in the
Temple-Change Fleet Street.
AMphion Anglicus. A choice Collection of Songs for One, Two and Three Voices,
in Fol. By Dr. John Blow. Price Bound, 1 l. 1 s. 6 d.

Orpheus Britannicus. A Collection of the late Mr. Henry Purcell's Songs, for
One Two, and Three Voices, most of them Printed from his own Copies, in Two
Books; which makes the Collection Complete. The 1st Vol. Price 1 l. The 2d.
Vol. 12 s. Or Bound both together, 1 l. 10 s.

Harmonia Sacra. A Collection of Divine Hymns, most of them Composed by the
late Mr. Henry Purcell, with an addition of two Divine Hymns, by Mr. Jer. Clark
and Mr. Crofts. Price of the second Book, 4 s.

The whole Book of Psalms in Three Parts, as they are Sung in Parish Churches.
Piece 3 s. 6 d.

The Divine Companion. A Collection of Hymns and Anthems, for One, Two, and
Three Voices; Composed for the Instruction of young Beginners, fit to be Bound
up with Playford's Psalms in Three Parts. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Introduction to the Skill of Music, the Fourteenth Edition with large
Additions, by John Playford, to which is added the whole Art of Composition by
the late Mr. Henry Purcell being done on the New Tied Note, and more complete
than ever before. Price Bound 2 s.

The Dancing Master, newly Re printed on the New Tied Note, with the Additions;
and made Complete, having above 100 more Dances than the former Editions. Price
Bound, 3 s.

The Division Violin, the first and second Books, containing the Choicest
Divisions and Grounds; Engraven upon Copper Plates, newly Printed. Price of the
first, 2 s. 6 d. the Second, 1 s. 6 d.

Ap^llo's Banquet, newly Revived; containing the New and easiest Instructions
for the Treble-Violin; variety of the Best and Choicest Ayrs Jiggs, Minuetts,
Sarabrands, Chacones, and Cibels, and ontains six times so many Tunes as the
little Engraved Books, it being the only Book for that Instrument. Price
Stitched, 1 s. 6 d.

Original Scotch Tunes, full of the Highlander Humor. The second Edition,
Corrected and Enlarged. price Stitched, 6 d.

Wit and Mirth: Or Pills to Purge Melancholy; the first and second Books,
containing all the Humors of the Town for several Reigns, in Ballads and
single Songs; the whole being Delightful, entertaining, and Diverting. Price
bound together, 5 s. or single, 2 s. 6 d.

The second Book of the Pleasant Musical Companion: Being a choice Collection
of Catches; containing the Most of the late Mr. Henry Purcell's, and some other
Eminent Masters. Price Stitched. 2 s. Or Bound up with the first Books, 7 s.

The Treasury of Music, Old and New, in Folio, being the Best Collection of
Song-Books for these Thirty Years last past.

Mercurious Musicus: Or the Monthly Collection of new Teaching Sons, for the
Year, 1699. Price 3 s. 6 d.

The whle Collection for the Year 1701. Price 3 s. 6 d.

With all the Monthly Collections to July and August, for the Year, 1701.
September and October will be speedily Published.

Mr. Morley's Ayrs in Three Parts. Price Stitched, 2 s. 6 d.

Miscellanea Sacra. A Collection of Choice Poems on Divine Subjects. Collected
by N. Tate, Esquire; Price Bound, 2 s.

The Parallel: An Essay on Friendship.

Love and Marriage By Sir H. Shears. Price Stitched, 6 d.

A Sheet Engraven on Copper, being Directions for the Bass-Viol. Price 6 d.

Books in the Press, and will be speedily Published.
THe Third Book of Wit and Mirth: Or Pills to Purge Melancholy. Being a
Collection of the best old and New Songs and Ballads, with the Tunes to each.
Price bound, 1 s. 6 d.

Dr. Blow's Choice Collection of Lessons for the Harpsichord or Spinett, fairly
Engraven. Price Stitched, 1 s. 6 d.

Twenty four New Country Dances' never before Printed. Price Stitched, 6 d.

Likewise all sorts of Ruled Paper, and Books of all Sizes, may be had Bound,
or sold in Quires. With Books on all other Subjects.

A Table of the SONGS Contained in this BOOK.
A.
AH! cruel Nymph, Page. 4 April who till now has mourned, 28 As Amoret and
Thirsis lay, 50 Ah! how hapyy are we, 60 A Prince of glorious Race descended,
69 And Lo a Sacred fury sweell'd her breast, 135
B.
Britain now thy Cares beguile, 32 Beneath a Poplers shadow lay me, 47 But Ah!
how much are our Delights, 82 Brigantium Honored with a Race divine, 99
C.
Crown the Year and Crown the day, 1 Crown the Altar Deck the Shrine, 6 Come
all ye Songsters of the Sky, 8 Come all to me, 87 Come let us agree, 91
F.
For though the Sun has all the Summers Glory 67 Fair Iris and her Swain, 153
G.
Genius of England, 121
H.
Hark! how all Things in one Sound Rejoice, 17 Hark! the Ecchoing Air a Triumph
Sings, 18 Here Is the Summer sprightly Gay, 24 Hark! how the Songsters of the
Grove, 76 Hence with your triffling Deity, 80 Here ye Gods of Britain, 93 Hark
each Tree it is silence breaks, 157
I.
I Loved fair Celia, 150 I spy Celia, 166 Julia, Julia, your unjust disdain,
145
L.
Let the Fises and the Clarions, 20 Love in their little Veins Inspires, 81 Let
us Dance, let us Sing, 152
M.
May the God of Wit Inspire the sacred Nine, 9 My Prayers are heard, 48 Music
for a while, shall all our cares beguile, 126 Many, many Days may She behold,
137 May her blessed Example Chase, 151
N.
Next Winter comes Slowly, Pale Meager and Old, 26
O.
On the Brow of Richmond Hill, 128 Oh! Fair Cedaria, 147 Oh! the sweet delights
of Love, 175
P.
Pious Celinda goes to Prayers, 63
R.
Return Revolting Rebels, 88
S.
Scorned Envy Here Is nothing that thou constable blast, 57 Sound the Trumpet beat
the Warlike Drum, 73 See my many Colored Feilds, 25 Sing ye Druids, all your
Voices raise, 96 So when the Glittering queen of Night 110 Sound Fame thy
Brazen Trumpet sound 129
T.
Thrice happy Lovers, 2 Thus the Gloomy world began to shine, 11 Thus the ever
grateful spring, 22 The fatal hour comes on a pace, 30 To Arms, Heroic Prince,
39 Their looks are such that mercy flows, 58 They tell us that you mighty
Powers above, 56 The Father Brave as e're was Dane, 70 The Bashful Thames, 102
The Pale and the Purple Rose, 107 It Is Wine was made to rule the Day, 171
V.
Underneath this Myrtle shade, 141
W.
What can we poor Females do, 46 Wake Quivera, Wake, 52 Why should Men quarrel
here, 54 When a cruel long Winter has frozen the Earth, 64 Who can from Joy
refrain, 66 When my Acmelia Smiles She Wounds me, 113 When Lovely Phillis thou
art kind, 114 Wondrous Machine, 115 Why my Daphne, why complaining, 131
Y.
Young Thyrsis Fate ye Hills and Groves, 35 Ye gentle Spirits of the Air, 43
Yes Daphne in your Face, 16
The end of the Table.
Advertisement.
HAving a Collection of the Best Prints both Foreign and Domestic, as also
several Curious Paintings for Closets, and Adornments of other Rooms: I design
for the future, to Sell at my Shop in the Temple-Change; where all Persons may
be Accomodated at reasonable Rates with all the New Prints as they come forth.
The Effigies of Dr. Blow, the late Mr Henry Purcell, and Mr. Dryden in Frames
at 1 s. 6 d. each, and 6 d. a piece in Sheets.

ORPHEUS BRITANNICUS. The Second BOOK.
(Crown the Year.) A single SONG.
^ CRown the Year, Crown the Year, and Crown the Day, while di -- stant shoars,
while di -- stant shoars, the Tri -- bute pay; while ne -- ver fail -- ing
Thames shall glide, while never, never, never fail -- ing Thames shall glide,
with Treasures, and Pleasures; with Treasures, and Pleasures renewed with each
Tide; with Plea -- sures, and Trea -- sures renewed with each Tide.

An EPITHALAMIUM.
^ THrice Happy, Thrice happy, Thrice happy, happy, happy Lovers, may you be
for ever, ever, ever, ever free; may you be, for ever, ever, ever, ever free,
from the torment -- ing Devil Jealousy; from all the anxious ca -- res and
stri -- se that at -- ten -- ds a Married life. Thrice happy, thrice happy,
thrice happy, happy, happy, hap -- py, hap -- py Lovers, may you be, for ^
ever, ever, ever, ever, ever free: Be to one a -- another true, Be to one a --
another true, kind to her, kind, kind to her as she is to you; and since the
errors, since the er -- rors of the Night are past, may he be e -- ver, may he
be e -- ver, may he be e -- ver, e -- ver con -- stant, she be e -- ver, she be
e -- ver, e -- ver, e -- ver Chaste; may he be ever, e -- ver Con -- stant, she
be e -- ver, she be e -- ver, e -- ver, e -- ver Chaste.

(Ah! cruel Nymph.) A single SONG.
^ AH! cruel, cruel, ah! cruel Nymph, ah! ah! cruel Nymph! you give despair,
when with de -- li -- ght I should approach thee, still, still with Sil -- via
you reproach me; Ah! cruel Nymph, ah! cruel Nymph, still, still, still with
Silvia you re -- proach me, still, still, still, still with the de -- luding
Fair: Too long, too long I own, I own, too lon -- g she has maintained her
Conquest when her Love was seign'd, but Charming ^ Ai -- ry, Humorous and Gay,
Humorous, Humorous, Humorous, Humorous and Ga -- y, and Ga -- y; you from my
Eyes, you from my Eyes have dri -- ven the Mist away; Charming, Ai -- ry,
Humorous, Humorous, Humorous and Ga -- y, and Ga -- y, and Ga -- y, you from my
Eyes, you from my Eyes have dri -- ven the Mist a -- way.

(Crown the Altar, Deck the Shrine.) A single SONG.
^ CRown the Al -- tar, Deck the Shrine, Crown the Al -- tar, Deck -- the
Shrine, Deck -- the Shrine; Be -- hold, be -- hold the Bright Se -- ra -- phick
throng, the bright Seraphick throng, prepare our Har -- mo -- ny to join, our
Har -- mo -- ny to join; the Sa -- cred Quire attend too long: -- Be -- hold,
be -- hold the ^ Bright Se -- ra -- phick throng, the Bright Seraphick throng,
pre -- pare our Har -- money to join, our Har -- money to joi -- n, the Sa --
cred Quire attend to long -- Crown the al -- tar Deck the Shrine, Crown the Al
-- tar Deck -- the Shrine, Deck -- the Shrine, Deck -- the Shrine.

A SONG in the 2d. Act of the Fairy-Queen.
^ COme all, come all, all, all, come all ye Song -- sters of the Sky, Wake and
assemble, Wake and as -- sem -- ble in this Wood; Come all, all, all, come all,
all, all ye Songsters of the Sky, Wake -- and as -- semble, Wake and as --
semble in this Wood: But no ill bo -- ding Bird be nigh, no, none but the harm
-- less and the good; but no ill bo -- ding Bird be nigh, no, ^ none but the
Harm -- less and the Good, no, none, no, none but the Harmless, none but the
Harmless and the Good, no, none, but the Harmless, and the Good.

A SONG for Three Voices, in the Fairy Queen.
^ MAy the God of Wit in -- spire the Sacred Nine, to bear a May the God of Wit
in -- spire the Sacred Nine, to bear a May the God of Wit in -- spire the
Sacred Nine, to bear a Part, and the Blessed Heavenly Quire, show the ut --
most of their Art; Part, and the Blessed Heavenly Quire, show the ut -- most of
their Art; Part, and the Blessed Heavn'ly Quire, show the ut -- most of they.
Art; Whilst Echo, whilst Echo shall in sounds remote, repeat each Note, Ecco.
repeat each Note, Softer. each Note; Whilst Echo, whilst Echo shall in sounds
remote, repeat each Note, repeat each Note, each Note; Whilst Echo, whlst
Echo, shall in sounds remote, repeat each Note, repeat each Note, each Note;
Verse. whilst Echo, Ecco. whilst Echo, Softer Echo, Verse whilst Echo, Ecco.
whilst Echo, Softer. Echo, Verse. shall in sounds re -- mote, whilst Echo,
whilst Echo, Echo, whilst Echo, whilst Echo, Echo, shall in sounds re --
mote, whilst Echo, whilst Echo, Echo, whilst Echo, whilst Echo, Echo
shall in sounds re -- mote, Ecco. sounds re -- mote, Softer, remote, Verse.
repeat each Note, Ecco. repeat each Note, Softer. each Note, Verse. repeat each
sounds re -- mote, remote, repeat each Note, repeat each Note, each Note,
repeat each sounds remote, remote, repeat each Note, repeat each Note, each
Note, repeat each Ecco. Softer. Note, Ecco. re -- peat each Note, Softer.each
Note. Note, re -- peat each Note, each Note. Note, re -- peat each Note, each
Note.

A SONG in the 5th. Act of the Fairy Queen.
^ Trumpet. THus, thus, thus thus the Gloo -- my World, at first be -- began to
Shine; Thus, thus, thus, thus the ^ Gloo -- my World at first began to Shine;
And from the Pow' -- r De -- vine, and from a Pow' -- r Devine, a glory roun --
d, a glory roun -- d a -- bout it bur -- l'd; which made it bright, which made
it bright, and gave it ^ gav -- e it birth in light; which made it bright,
which made it bright, and gave it, gav -- e it birth in light: Violin. Then,
then were all minds as pure, as pure as those E -- the -- rial streams; ^ In In
-- nocence se -- cure, In In -- nocence se -- cure, not sub -- ject to
Extremes; there was no place then, no place then for emp -- ty Fame, no cause
for Pride, no cause for Pride, Am -- by -- tion want -- ed Aim, Am -- by --
tion wanted Aim; there was no ^ place then, no place then for emp -- ty Fame;
no cause for Pride, no cause for Pride, Am -- by -- tion want -- ed, Aim, Am --
by -- tion Trumpet. wanted Aim. Thus, thus, etc. (as before-)

SOLO. A single SONG.
^ YEs Daphne, yes Daphne, in -- your Face I find those Charm -- s by which my
Heart's betrayed, then let not your disdain un -- bind the Prisoner, the
Prisoner that your Eyes have made: She that in Love makes least defense, woun
-- ds c -- ver with the su -- rest Dart, Beauty may Cap -- tivate the Sense,
but Kindness, but Kind -- ness only gains the Heart, Heart.

II.
It Is mildness, Daphne, must maintain,
the Empire that you once have won;
When Beauty does like Tyrants reign,
Their Subjects from their Duty run:
Then force me not to be untrue,
Lest I compelled by generous shame,
Cast off my Loyalty to you,
To gain a glorious Rebel's name.
SOLO. A single SONG.
^ HArk! hark! how all things in one soun -- d re -- joyce, re -- joyce, re --
joy -- ce re -- joy -- ce, re -- joyce. Hark! -- joyce. and the World seems to
have one Voice, the World seems to have one Voi -- ce, to have one Voice; Hark!
hark! how all things in one soun -- d re -- joyce, re -- joyce, ^ re -- joy --
ce, re -- ce rejoice; rejoy -- ce, re -- joyce.

SOLO. A single SONG.
^ HArk! hark! the ecch'ing Air a tri -- umph sings, hark! the ecch'ing Air a
tri -- umph sings, a tri -- umph, a tri -- umph, tri -- umph sing -- s ^ a tri
-- umph, triumph sings, sings. And all a -- round, and all a -- round plea --
s'd Cupids clap their wings, clap, clap, clap, clap their wings; pleas' -- d
Cupids clap their wings; and all around, and all around plea -- s'd Cupids
clap, clap, clap, clap, clap their wings; clap, clap, clap, clap, clap, clap,
clap their wings, plea -- s'd Cupids clap their wings, and all a -- wings.

A SONG for Two Voices, in the Fairy Queen.
^ LEt the Fifes and the Clarions, and shrill Trumpets sound; let the Fifes and
the Let the Fifes and the Clarions and shrill Trumpets Clarions, and shrill
Trumpets sound, sound, -- sound, sound, sound, sound, -- sound; Let the Eises
and the Clarions, and shrill Trumpets sound, sound, -- sound, sound, sound,
sound: And the Arch of high sound, sound, sound, sound, sound, sound: And the
Arch of high Heaven the Clangor re -- sound, Heaven, the Clangor resound, and
the Arch of high Heaven, the Clangor re -- soun -- d, and the Arch of high
Heaven the Clangor resound -- d, ^ resoun -- d, the Arch of high Heaven, the
resoun -- d, the Arch of high Heaven, the Clangor resound, re -- soun -- d, the
Arch of high Clangor resound, re -- soun -- d, the Arch of high Heaven the
Clangor resound. Heaven the Clangor resound.

The Four SEASONS in the Fairy-Queen.
Spring.
^ Thus the ever grate -- full, Spring, Thus the ever grateful Spring, does her
yearly Tri -- bute bring, does her yearly Tri -- bute bring does, her yearly
Tri -- bute bring, does her yearly Tri -- bute bring; all your sweets before
him lay, all your sweets before him lay, then round his Al -- tar sing and
play, all, all, all, all, all, all, all, your ^ sweets before him lay, then
round his Al -- tar sing and play; then roun -- d his Al -- tar sing and play;
Thus the e -- ver grateful Spring, does her yearly Tri -- bute bring, does her
yearly Tri -- bute bring, does her yearly Tribute bring, does her yearly Tri --
bute bring.

Summer.
^ ^ Here Is the Summer Sprightly Gay, Smi -- ling Wanton Fresh and Fair, adorned
with all the Flowr's of May, whose various Sweets Persume the Air; adorned with
all the Flowr's of May, Whose various Sweets Per -- fume the Air.

Autum
^ ^ See, see my many couler'd Fields, see, see my many couler'd Fields, and
Loaded Trees my will o -- bey; -- bey. All the Fruit that Autumn yields, all
the Fruit that Au -- tumn yields, I of -- fer to the God of Da -- y; all the
Fruit that Autumn yields, I of -- fer to the God of Day; ^ all the Fruit that
Autum yields, all the Fruit that Autum yields, I Offer to the God of Day; All
the Fruit that Autum yields, I Offer to the God of Day;

Winter
^ Next Winter comes slawly pale meager and old, thus ^ trembling with Age, and
thus qui've -- ring with cold; benumbed with hard Frosts, and with Snow cov'rd
over, benumbed with hard Frosts, and with Snow cov'rd over; prays the ^ Sun to
restore him, pray's the Sun to re -- store him, and sin -- gs as be -- fore.

SOLO in the late Queen's Birthday.
^ A -- Pril who till now, who till now, now, now, now, now, now, now; has
mourned, has mourned, claps, claps, claps for jo -- y his Sable Win -- gs; to
see, to see, to see, to see within his Orb return, the choicest ^ Blessings he
could bring, Maria's Birth -- day, Maria's, Birth -- day, Maria's Birth -- day,
Ma -- ri -- a's Birth -- day and the Spring; To see, to see, to see, to see
with -- in his Orb re -- turn, the Choicest Bles -- sings he could bring:
Maria's Birth -- day, Maria's Birth -- day, Maria's Birth -- day, Mari -- a's
Birth -- day and the Spring.

A single SONG.
^ THe Fa -- tal Hour, the Fa -- tal Hour comes on, comes on a -- pace, which I
had rather di -- e than see; for when Fate ca -- lls you from this place, you
go to cer -- tain Mi -- sery, you go to certain, cer -- tain Mi -- sery. The
thought does stab me to the Heart, and gives me pan -- gs no word can speak, it
Wracks me, it Wracks me in each Vi -- tal part; sure, sure when you go, sure
when you go, my ^ Heart will break; sure, sure my Heart will break; since I for
you so much, for you so much en -- dure, may I not, may I not hope you will,
you will believe, it is you a -- lone, it is you a -- lone these Wounds, these
Wounds, these Wounds can Cure, which are the Fountains of my Grief; it is you
alone, you alone, you a -- lone these Wounds can cure, which are the Fountains,
are the Fountains of my Grief.

A SONG for Two Voices, on the Late Queens Birthday.
^ Britain now, BRi -- tain now, now, now, now, now, now, now thy Cares
beguile; now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now thy Cares beguile; Britain now,
Britain now, now, now, now, now, now, no -- w now, now, now, now, now, now thy
Cares beguile, now, now, now, now, now, no -- w thy Cares beguile, now, now,
now, now thy Cares beguile, now, now, now, now, now no -- w thy Cares beguile:
Bless the Day, Bless the Day, Bless the Day, the Day, the Day, thy Cares
beguile: Bless the Day, Bless the Day, Bless the Day, the Day, the ^ the Day,
Bless the Day, Bless the Day, the Day that Bless our Isle, Bless, Bless; Day,
Bless the Day, Bless the Day, Bless the Day, that Bless our Isle, Bless, Bless,
Bless, the Day that Ble -- ss our Isle. Bless the Day that Bless our Isle. End
with the first strain.

An ELOGY upon the Death of Mr. Thomas Farmer, B. M.
^ YOung Their -- sis Fate ye Hills and Gro -- ves deplore, Thirsis, Thirsis,
the Pride of all the Plains, the Joy -- of Nymphs, and En -- vy, and En -- vy
of the Swains, the gentle Their -- sis is no more, the gen -- tle Their -- sis is
no ^ more, no more, Oh! no more, the gen -- tle Their -- sis is no more. What,
what makes the Spring re -- tire, what, what, what, what makes the Spring re --
tire, and Groves their Songs de -- cline? What, what, what, what makes the
Spring re -- tire, what, what, what, what makes the Spring re -- tire, and
Groves their Songs de -- cline? Soft. What, what! Nature for her loved Their --
sis seems to pine, for her Loud. loved Their -- sis seems to pine; whose are --
full Strains, and tune -- full Lyre, made the Spring ^ bloom, and did the Groves
in -- spire, and did the Groves in -- spire; whose art -- full Strains, and tune
-- full Lyre, made the Spring bloom, and did -- the Soft. Groves in -- spire,
and did -- the Groves in -- spire. What, what can the droop -- ing Sons of Art,
from this sad hour, what, what can the drooping Sons of Art, from this sad hour
impart, to cha -- rm the Cares of Life, and ea -- se the Lover's smart, and
CHORUS. ea -- se the Lo -- ver's smart? While thus, thus in dis -- mal Notes we
mourn, and While thus, thus in dismal Notes we mour -- n, ^ dis -- mal Notes
we mourn, in dis -- mal Notes we mourn, the skilful Shepherd's while thus in
dis -- mal Notes we mourn, the skilful Shepherd's Urn; to the gla -- d, Skies,
to the gla -- d, the gla -- d Skies, his Urn; to the gla -- d Skies, his
Harmony he bears, and as he charmed the Earth, and as he charmed the Earth, as
he charmed Harmony he bears, and as he charmed the Earth, and as he charmed, as
he charmed the Earth, transports, transports the Spheres; and as he charmed the
Earth, transports, * the Spheres the Earth, transport's, transports the
Spheres; and as he charmed the Earth, transports, * the Spheres.

A Trumpet Song, Sung by Mr. Bowen, in the (Libertine destroyed.)
^ TO Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms Hero -- ick Prince; to
Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to ^ Arms, to Arms, to Arms He -- to -- ick Prince; to
Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms; Glo -- ry, like Love, has power --
full Charms, Glo -- ry, like Love, has ^ power -- full Charms; let Glo -- ry, let
Glo -- ry now thy Soul ingross, and recompense its Ri -- vals loss: bid
Trumpets sound, bid Trumpets sound, sou -- nd; and nothing, nothing name but
Battles, but Battles, but Bat -- tles, ^ Con -- quests, Tri -- umphs, Tri --
umphs Fame, Tri -- umphs, ^ Tri -- umphs Fame.

A single SONG.
^ YE gen -- tle Spirits of the Air, ye gen -- tle Spirits of the Air; appear,
appear, appear, appear; prepare, prepare, -- prepare, pre -- pare; ^ and join
your ten -- der Voices here, appear, appear, appear, appear, prepa -- re,
prepare, pre -- pare and join your ten -- der Voices here. Catch, catch a
repeat, repeat, repeat, repeat, repeat the trem -- bling sounds a -- new
repeat, repeat the trem -- bling soun -- ds a -- new: Soft, soft, ^ soft as her
sighs and sw -- eet as Pearly dew, and sw -- eet as Pearly dew; run, -- run --
new Di -- vi -- sion, run new Di -- vi -- sion, and such Measure keep, as when
you lull, you lull the God of Love a -- sleep, -- as when you lull, you lull
the God of Love a -- sleep. Da Capo.

A SONG for Two Voices.
^ WHat can we, what can we poor Fe -- males do; when What can we, can we poor
Fa -- males do; when Pressing, Teasing, Pressing, Teasing Lovers sue? What can
we, what can Pressing, Teasing, Pressing, Teasing Lovers sue? What can we, what
can we poor, poor Females do? Fate affords no o -- there way, but De -- ny --
ing, we poor, poor Females do? Fate affords no o -- there way, but De -- ny --
ing, or Com -- ply -- ing, but De -- ny -- ing, or Com -- ply -- ing; First
Strain again. or Comyly -- ing, but De -- ny -- ing, or Com -- ply -- ing; ^
And Resenting, or Consenting, and Resenting, or consenting, does a -- like --
our Hopes betray. And Resenting, or Consenting, or Consenting does a -- like --
our Hopes betray. End with the first strain.

A Mad SONG.
^ BEneath a Poplar's shadow lay me, no ra -- ging Fires will there dis -- may
Soft. me; near some silver Current lying, near some silver Current lying; Oh!
oh! under slay -- py Poppies dying: I swell -- and am bigger, I swell -- and am
bigger than Typhon e're was; with a strong band of Brass oh! bind me, oh! ^
bind me about! lest my Bosom should burst, for the secret to pass, and the Fu
-- ry get out, I cannot, I will not, I cannot, I will not be vex't any longer,
while I ra -- ge I grow weak, while I ra -- ge, while I ra -- ge I grow weak,
and the Goddess grows stronger.

A Verse out of the late Queen's Birthday SONG.
^ MY Prayers over heard, Heaven has at last bestowed the mighty, mighty --
Blessing which it long has owed; at length the Bount'ous Gods have sent us
down, a Brightness second ^ on -- ly to their own; I see the rou -- nd years
successive -- ly mo -- ve, to Ripen her Beauty, and Crown them with Love: A
Hero re -- nown'd in Virtue and Arms, shall wear the soft Chain and submit to
her Charms; and Hy -- men and Hebe, and Hy -- men and Hebe shall make it their
Care, to pour all their joys -- on the Val'ant and Fair. ^ AS A -- mo -- ret
and Their -- sis lay, as A -- mo -- ret, as A -- mo -- ret and As A -- mo -- ret
and Their -- sis lay as A -- mo -- ret and Their -- sis lay; Melting, melting,
melting, melt -- ing the hours in gen -- tle Their -- sis lay; Melting, melting,
melt -- ing the hours in gen -- tle play; Joining, joining, joining Fa -- ces;
Mingling Kis -- ses, mingling Kis -- ses, play; Joining, joining, joining Fa --
ces; Mingling Kis -- ses, mingling mingling Kis -- ses, and ex -- chang -- ing
harmless Blis -- ses: Kis -- ses, mingling Kis -- ses, and ex -- chang -- ing
harmless Blis -- ses: ^ He trem -- bling cried, with eager, ea -- ger have; let
me, let me, He trem -- bling cried, with eager, eager have; oh! let me Feed;
oh! oh! let me, let me, let me, let me Feed; oh! oh! let me, let me, let me,
oh! oh! oh! oh! oh! let me oh! oh! oh! let me, let me, let me, let me, Feed as
well as Taste; I dye, let me, let me, ho! oh! oh! oh! let me Feed as well as
Taste; die, die, I die, die, I die, I die if I Am not wholly Blessed. I die, die,
die, I die, I die if I Am not wholly Blessed.

A single SONG in the Indian Queen.
^ WAke, wake, wake Qui -- ve -- ra, wake, our soft -- rest must cease; Wake,
wake, wake, Qui -- ve -- ra, wake, -- our soft -- rest must cease, and fly --
to -- gether, and fly -- to -- ge -- there with our Country's ^ peace; no more,
no more, no more, no more, no more, no more, no more, no more, no, -- no more
must we sleep, must we sleep under Plan -- tain shade, which neither Heat could
pierce, nor Cold in -- vade; where bount'ous Nature never, never, never, never,
never, never fells de -- cay, and op' -- ning Buds, and op' -- ning Buds drive
-- fall -- ing Fruits a -- way.

A SONG in the Indian Queen, Sung by Mr. Bowen.
^ Why, why, why, should men quarrel, why, why should men quarrel here, where
all, all, all, where all -- pos -- sess as much as they can hope for by suc --
cess; ^ none; none can have most, none can have most where Nature is so kind,
as to exceed, as to exceed -- Man's use though not his Mind; why, why, why should
Men quarrel, why, why should Men quarrel here, where all, all, ^ all, where all
-- pos -- sess as much as they can hope for by suc -- cess, as much as they can
hope for by suc -- cess as much as they can hope, as much as they can hope for
by suc -- cess. ^

A SONG in the Indian Queen, Sung by Mr. Freeman.
^ Scorned Envy here is nothing, here is nothing that thou, that thou can
blast; Her glo -- ries, her glo -- ries are too bright, to be over -- cast; her
glo -- ries, her glo -- ries are too brigh -- t to be over -- cast.

A SONG in the Indian Queen, Sung by Mr. Freeman.
^ THeir looks are such that Mercy flow -- s from thence, more gen -- tle, gen
-- tle then our Na -- tive innocence: By their pro -- tec -- tion let us, let
us, let us beg to live, they come not here to con -- quer but for -- give; by
their pro -- tec -- tion let us, let us, let us beg to live, they come not here
to con -- quer but for -- give, they come not here no con -- quer but for --
give.

A SONG in the Indian Queen, Sung by Mrs. Cross.
^ THey tell us that you migh -- ty powers above, make Perfect your Joys and
your Blessings by Love; Ah! Why do you suffer, ah! why do you suffer the
Blessing that is there; to give a poor Lover such sad torments here, yet though
for my pas -- sion such grief I en -- dure, my Love shall like yours, still be
con -- stant and pure.

II.
To suffer for him gives an ease to my Pains,
There Is joy in my Grief, and there is freedom in Chains.
If I were Divine, he could Love me no more,
And I in return, my Adorer Adore;
Oh! Let his dear life then (kind Gods) be your care,
For I in your Blessings have no other share.
A SONG in the Indian Queen, Sung by Mr. Freeman and Mr. Church.
^ AH! ah! how hap -- py are we, are we, are we, ah! Ah! ah! ah! how hap -- py
are we, are we, are we, ah! ah! how hap -- py are we, from humane passions,
from humane pas -- sions ah! how hay -- py are we, from humane pas -- sions
free: Ah! ah! free: Ah! ah! ah! how hap -- py are we, those will -- d ah! ah!
how hap -- py are we, those will -- d ^ Tenants of the Breast; no never, never,
no never, Tenants of the Breast; no never, never, no never, never, never can
disturb our rest; ah! never, no never, never, never can disturb our rest; ah!
ah! ah! how happy are we, are we, are we, ah! ah! how happy are ah! how happy
are we, are we, are we, ah! ah! how hap -- py are we: Yet we pit -- ty, we pit
-- ty, we pity, tender Souls whom the Tyrant we: Yet we pit -- ty, we pit --
ty, tender Souls whom the ^ Love, whom the Tyrant Love, whom the Tyrant Love
con -- trouls; Tyrant Love, whom the Tyrant Love, whom the Tyrant Love con --
trouls; Ah! ah! how hap -- py are we, from humane Ah! ah! ah! how hap -- py are
we, Passion, from humane Pas -- sion from humane Pas -- sion free. free.

A single SONG, the Words by Mr. Congreve.
^ PI -- ous Ce -- lin -- da goes to Prayers, if I but ask if I but ask the
Favor; and yet the ten -- der, ten -- der Fool's in Tears, when she believes,
when she be -- lieves I Will leave her: Would I were, would I were free from this
restraint, or else had hopes, or else had ho -- pes to win her; would she
could, would she could make of me a Saint, or I of her, or I of he -- r a
Sinner; would I could, would I could, oh! would I could make of her a Sinner.

A SONG by Phoebus in the Fairy-Queen, which should have been put before the
Four Seasons of the Year, in Page 21.
Phoebus Soft. When a Cru -- el Long Winter has Fro -- zen the Earth, and
Nature imprisoned, seeks in vain to be Free; and ^ Nature imprisoned seeks --
in vain to be Free: I Dart forth my Beams to give all things a Breath, make --
ing Spring for the Plants, ev' -- ry Flower and each Tree. It Is I who give Life
-- warmth and Vigor to all; even Love who rules all things in Earth Air and
Sea, would Languish and fade and to nothing, nothing would fall; the World to
its Chaos would re -- turn, but for me.


The following Five Verses, are taken out of one of the Duke of Gloucester's
Birthday SONGS.
^ WHo, who can from Joy -- refrain? Who, who can from Joy -- refrain, this
Gay, -- this pleas -- ing, shining Wondrous Day? Who; Who can from Joy --
refrain, this Gay. -- this ^ pleasing, pleasing shining wondrous day; wond' --
rous, wond' -- rous, wondrous, wondrous, wond' -- rous, wond' -- rous day,
wond' -- rous, wond' -- rous day.

The Second SONG for Two Voices.
^ FOr though the Sun has all, has all his Summers Glo -- ries For though the Sun
has all, has all his Summers Glo -- ries on, has all, all, all, has all, all,
all his Summers Glories on; on, has all, all, all, all, all his Summers Glories
on; ^ This day has brighter, brigh -- ter splendors, this day has brighter,
brigh -- ter This day has brighter, brigh -- ter Splendors, this day has
brighter, splendors, has brigh -- ter, brighter splendors brigh -- ter
splendors, has brigh -- ter, brighter splendors far, from a lit -- tle rising
Star, from a lit -- tle, lit -- tle ri -- sing Star -- far, from a lit -- tle
ri -- sing Star, from a lit -- tle ri -- sing Star, from a lit -- tle, lit --
tle --, a lit -- tle ri -- sing Star. ri -- sing Star.

SOLO. The Third SONG.
^ A Prince, a Prince of Glo -- rious Race descend -- ed, at his hap -- py, hap
-- py Birth, at his hap -- py, hap -- py, hap -- py Birth at -- tend -- ed; A
Prince, a Prince of Glo -- rious race descended, at his happy happy Birth, at
his hap -- py happy, hap -- py Birth attended; With To -- sy Smi -- ling hours,
with To -- sy Smi -- ling hours to show, he will Golden Days be -- stows, ^ he
will, he will, he will, he will Golden days be -- stow, he will, he will, he
will, he will Golden Days be -- stow.

The Fourth SONG with VIOLINS.
^ THe Father Brave, the Father Brave as e're was Dane, as e're was Dane; Whose
Thundering, ^ Thundering; Thundering, Thundering Sword, whose Thundering, Thundering,
Thundering, Thundering Sword, has Thousands, thousands, has thousands, thousands,
thousands, thousands Slain, has thousands, thousands, has thousands, thousands
Slain, and made him, and ^ made him over half, over half Europe Reign; And made
him, and made him over half Europe Reign. The Father Brave, the Father Brave as
ever was Dane, as ever was Dane, as ever was Dane.

The Fifth SONG, with a Trumpet.
^ SOun -- d the Trumpet, soun -- d, soun -- d, soun -- d the Trumpet Sound;
And beat the War -- like Drums, and beat the War -- like Drums; The Prince will
be with Laurels Crowned, the Prince will ^ be with Laurels Crown -- d, be --
fore his Manhood comes; Ah! Ah! how pleased he is and Gay, Ah! Ah! How pleased
he is and Ga -- y, when the Trumpet Strikes his Ear, when the Trumpet Strikes
his Ear; Ah! Ah! how -- pleas -- 'd he ^ is and gay; His hands like shak -- ing
Lillies play; his hands like shake -- ing Lillies play, and catch, and catch,
and catch, and catch at ev -- 'ry Sphere, and catch -- at ev -- 'ry Sphere.

MUSIC in Timon of Athens. The First SONG, with Flutes.
^ HArk! hark how the Song -- sters, hark! how the Songsters, how the Hark!
hark! hark! how the Song -- sters, hark how the ^ Song -- sters of the Grove;
Sin -- g, Sin -- g Song -- sters of the Grove; Sin -- g, Sin -- g, Anthems to
the God of Love. Hark! hark! hark! Anthems to the God of Love. Hark! hark!
hark! hark! ^ hark! hark! hark how each Am -- arous winged pair, with Love's
great Praises, hark! hark how each Am -- arous winged pair, with Love's great
with Love's great Prai -- ses fill the Air; On ev -- 'ry side the Praises, with
Love's great Praises fill the Air; On ev -- 'ry side the Char -- ing ^ Charm --
ing sound does from the hollow Woods, does from the hollow Woods, the sound
does from the hollow Woods, does from the hollow Charming sound does from the
hallow, hollow, hollow Woods re -- boun -- d; Woods, the Charming sound does
from the hollow Woods reboun -- d; ^ Does from the hollow, hol -- how Woods re
-- bound, does from the hollow, hollow, hollow, hol -- low Woods rebound, re --
bound, rebound. re -- bound. ^ LOve in their little Veins in -- spires, Love in
their lit -- tle Veins inspires, their Cher -- full Notes their soft de --
sire, Love in their little -- sire while heat, while heat make Budds and
Blossoms spring; those pretty, pretty Couples love and sing; But Winter puts
out, puts out their desire, and half the year they want, they want Loves Fire;
But Winter puts out, puts out their desires, and half the year they want, they
want Loves Fire. But Fire. ^ BUt ah! but ah! how much are our delights more
dear, more, more, more dear; But But ah! but ah! how much are our delights more
dear, more, more, more dear; But But ah! but ah! how much are our delights more
dear, more, more more dear; But ah! but ah! how much are our delights more,
more, more dear; For ah! but ah! how much are our delights more, more, more
dear; For ah! but ah! how much are our delights more, more, more dear; for on
-- ly human ^ Only Human kind, for on -- ly Human kind, For on -- ly Human
kind; love, On -- ly Human kind, for on -- ly Human kind, For on -- ly Human
kind; love kind, for only Human kind, for only Human kind; Love, love, love all
the year, all, all, all, all, all, all the year; For only all the year, all,
all, all, all, all, all the year; For on -- ly, only all the year, all, all,
all, all, all, all the year; For only, Human kind, love all the year. Human
kind, love all -- the year. human kind, love all the year.

HAUTBOYS.
^ Hence, hence, hence with your trifling Deity; a grea -- ter, grea -- ter
grea -- ter we a -- door; Bacchus, Bacchus, Bacchus, Bacchus who ^ allways,
allways keeps us Free; -- from that blind Childish Power -- that allways,
allways keeps us free, -- Slow. from that blind Childish Power: Love makes you
languish and look pale, and sneak and ^ Sigh, sigh, sigh and whine, Brisk. but
over us no griefs prevail, No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no griefs prevail, while we have lu -- sty Wine; no, no, no, no,
no, no, no griefs prevail, while we have lu -- sty Wine, while we have lu --
sty Wine.

A single SONG with a SIMPHOMY.
^ COme all, come all, come all, come all, come all to me, make haste, make
haste, make haste, make haste, make haste, make haste the sweets of mu -- tual
pas -- sions taste; Come all, come all, come all to me, come all, come all to
me and wear my Chains; ^ the joys of Love, the joys -- of Love without its
pains; The joys of Love, the joy -- s of Love without its pains.

A SONG with Instruments.
^ Return, return, revolting Rebels; return, where do you go, where do you go,
where do you go, do you ^ know? Do You know, do you know, what Phantism it is misleads
you so: Return, return, re -- volting Rebels return; Where do you go, where do you
go, where do you go do you know? Do You know, do you know what Phantism it is m^sleads
you so, to grieve and to care, to grieve and to ^ care; To Tyrannous Chains, to
Tyrannous Chains, to doubt and despair; To Barbarous Jea -- lou -- sy,
Barbarous jea -- lou -- sy, mi -- se -- ry, Slavery; To Torments and pains,
Return, as before. to Torments, Torments and pains. Return, as before.

A Two Part SONG between Cupid and Bacchus.
^ COme let us a -- gree, come let us a -- gree, come let us a -- gree, come,
come, come, Come let us agree, come let us a -- gree, come let us a -- gree,
come, come, come, come, come, come, come let us agree; come, come, come, come,
come, come, come come, come, come, come, come, come let us agree; come, come,
come, come, come, come, come let us a -- gree; There are pleasures di -- vine,
there are pleasures di -- vine, let us a -- gree; There are pleasures di --
vine, in in Love and in Wine, in Love and in Wine, there are pleasures di --
vine, Wine and in Love, in Wine and in Love, there are pleasures, are pleasures
di -- vine, ^ in Wine and in Love, in Love and in Wine, in Wine and in in Wine
and in Love, in Love and in Wine, in Wine and in Love, in Love and in Wine.
Love, in Love and in Wine.

SONGS in Bonduca.
^ Here ye Gods of Britain, here ye Gods of Britain; Here us this day; ^ Let us
not fall, let us not fall the Roman Eagles prey, clip, clip their wings, clip,
clip their wings clip, clip their Wings, or cha -- se 'em home; And check the ^
Towering pride of Rome; And check the Towering pride of Rome, of Rome, of Rome,
clip their wings, or chase'em home, clip their wings or chase'em home, clip,
clip their wings ^ or chase'em home, and check the Towering pride of Rome, of
Rome, of Rome, of Rome.

A Symphony for Flutes to the following SONG.
^

First Flute. ^

Second Flute. ^ ^ Sing, sing, sing, sing ye Druids; sing, sing, sing, Sing,
sing, sing, ^ sing, ye Druids; All, all, all, all your Voi -- ces raise; All,
all, all, all your sing, ye Druids; All, all, all, all your Voi -- ces raise;
All, all all, all your Voi -- ces raise; Sing, sing, sing, sing, all, all your
Voi -- ces raise -- to Voi -- ces raise; Sing, sing, sing, sing, sing all your
Voi -- ces raise -- to Celebrate, to Celebrate di -- vine An da -- tes Praise;
To Celebrate, to Celebrate di -- -- vine Celebrate, to Celebrate di -- vine An
-- da -- tes Praise; To Celebrate, to Celebrate di -- vine An -- da -- tes
Praise; Sing, sing, sing, sing, sing, sing, sing, sing di -- vine An -- da --
tes, An -- da -- tes Praise; Sing, sing, sing, sing, sing, sing di -- vine An
-- da -- tes, di -- vine ^ di -- vine, di -- vine An -- da -- tes Praise; An --
da -- tes, di -- vine An -- da -- tes Praise; sing, sing, sing ye Druids; sing,
sing, sing ye Druids; sing, sing di -- vine sing, sing, sing ye Druids: sing,
sing, sing ye Druids; sing sing di -- vine -- An -- da -- tes Praise; di --
vine -- An -- da -- tes Praise; An -- da -- tes, di -- vine An -- da -- tes, di
-- vine An -- da -- tes Praise; di -- vine An -- da -- tes, di -- vine, di --
vine An -- da -- tes Praise; ^ Sing, Sing, Sing ye Dru -- ids; Sing, Sing, Sing
ye Dru -- ids, Sing, Sing di -- vine -- Sing, Sing, Sing ye Dru -- ids; Sing,
Sing, Sing ye Dru -- ids, Sing, Sing di -- vine -- An -- da -- tes Praise. --
An -- da -- tes Praise.

A VERSE for Two Voices in the Yorkshire-Feast-Song.
^ BRigantium Honored with a Race di -- vine, Brigantium Honored with a
Brigantium Honored with a Race di -- vine; gave Birth to the Vic -- rious Race
di -- vine, Brigantium Honored with a Race di -- vine; ^ Constantine, gave
Birth to the Vic -- to -- rious to the Vic -- to -- ri -- ous Con stan -- tine:
Whose Collony, whilst planted there, Con -- stan -- tine: Whose fresh blooming
Glo -- ries, still, still -- re -- new'd Collony, whilst planted there, fresh
blooming Glo -- ries still re -- new'd the Year; whose Col -- lo -- ny, whose
Col -- lo -- ny, whilst the Year; whose Col -- lo -- ny, whilst plant -- ed
there, ^ plant -- ed there, fresh Bloom -- ing Glo -- ries fresh Bloom -- ing
Glo -- ries still re -- new'd the Year. still renewed the Year.

A VERSE with Flutes in the Yorkshire Feast-Song.
^ FLVTES. ^

^ THe Bashful Thames for Beauty so renowned, in have ran by her pu -- ny Town;
and poor, and poor Augusta was a shamed to own. The Bashful Thames, for Beauty
so renowned, in have ran by her pu -- ny Town; and ^ poor, and poor Augusta was
a shamed to own; Au gu -- sta then did droo -- ping lie, did drooping,
drooping, droop -- ing lie; though now she rears her Towering Front so high; though
now she rears her Towering Front so high, her ^ Tow' -- ring Front so high; Au
-- gusta then did droop -- ing lie, did drooping, drooping, drooping lie; though
now she rears her Towering Front so high; though now she rears her Towering Front
so high, her ^ Tow' -- ring Front so high, her Tow' -- ring Front so high.

A VERSE with Violins in the Yorkshire Feast-Song.
^

VIOLINS. ^ ^ ^ The pale and the pur -- ple Rose, that af -- ter cost so many,
ma -- ny Blows, so many, many Blows, so many, many Blows, when Eng -- lish Ba
-- rons sought a Price ^ so dear -- ly bought: By the Bold -- Worthies of the
Shire, still best by Sword and Shield, defended were; by the Bold -- Worthies ^
of that Shire, still best by Sword and Shield, de -- fend -- ed were, were.

A VERSE with Violins in the Yorkshire-Feast-Song.
^ SO when the glit'ring Queen of Night, with black E -- clipse is shadowed, is
^ shadowed ore, ore. The Globe that Swell -- s with Sullen Pride, her Daz --
ling Beams to hide; does but a ^ little, a little, a little, a little time a --
bide, and then each Ray, and then each Ray is Bright -- er, is Bright -- er
than be -- fore, fore.

A single SONG.
^ WHen my Ac -- me -- lia Smile -- s she wounds me with a smooth Shaft that I
embrace; when she speaks, when she speaks, yet more con -- sounds me, her Words
does sli -- de with such a Grace: From that soft Voice what can defend me? Such
live -- ly Sense does from it flow, all others Wit does now of -- fend me,
since by kind, since by kind Whis -- pers hers I know.

A SONG for Two Voices.
^ WHen love -- ly Phil lis thou art kind, naught but Raptures fill my Mind;
it is Hen love -- ly Phillis thou art kind, naught but Raptures fill my Mind;
it is then I think thee so Divine, t'excell the migh -- ty Power of Wine: But
when thou in -- sult'st, then I think thee so Divine, t'excell the mighty Power
of Wine: But but when thou in -- sult'st, and lau -- ghs at my Pain, I wash
thee a when thou insult'st, and lau -- ghs at my Pain, I wash thee a way with
sparkling Champaign; so bravely contemn both the Boy and his Mother, and drive
out one way with sparkling Champaign; so bravely contemn both the Boy and his
Mother, and ^ God, and drive out one God by the Power, by the Power of another.
drive out one God, and drive out, and drive out one God by the Power of
another.

II.
When Pity in thy Looks I see,
I frailly quit my Friends for thee;
Persuasive Love so charms me then,
My Freedom l'd not wish again.
But when thou art cruel, and heeds not my Care,
Straight with a Bumper I banish Despair;
So bravely contemn both the Boy and his Mother,
And drive out one God by the Power of another.
A SONG with Hautboys, on St. Cecilia's day 1692.
^ Hautboys. Wondrous, wondrous, wondrous, Ma -- chine; ^ Wondrous,
wondrous, wondrous, wondrous Ma -- chine, to thee, the warb -- ling Lute,
though used to Conquest must be forced, must be forced, must be forced to ^
yield; must be forced, must be forced, must be forced to yield, must be forced,
must be forced to yield, must be forced, must be forced, must be forced to
yield: With thee una -- ble, with thee un -- a -- ble, with the un -- a -- ble
^ to di -- spute; Though used to Con -- quest, though used to Conquest, is with
thee un -- a -- ble to dis -- pute. ^ Wondrous, wand'rous, wand'rous,
wondrous Ma -- chine, to thee, the warb -- ling Lute, though used to Conquest
must be forced, must be forced, must be forced to ^ yield; must be forced, must
be forced, must be forced to yield, must be forced, must be forced to yield,
must be forced, must be forced must be forced to yield.

A SONG in Donquixote, Sung by Mr. Freeman and Mrs. Cibber.
^ Trumpet. Genius of England from thy pleasant Bower of Bliss a -- ri -- se,
and sprea -- d thy sa -- cred Wings; Guard, guard from Foes the British State,
thou on whose smile does wait, the -- uncertain hap -- py Fate, of Monarchies
and Kings.

Mrs. Cibber. Then follow brave Boys, then follow brave Boys to the Wars,
follow, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow brave
Boys to the War -- s, ^ follow, follow, follow brave Boys to the War -- s' the
Laurel you know's the prize, the Laurel you know's the prize: Who brings home
the noblest, the no -- blessed, the no -- blessed Scars, looks fine -- est ^ in Ce
-- lia's Eyes; then sha -- ke off the slothful Ease, let Glory, let Glory, let
Glo -- ry in -- spi -- re your Hearts; Re -- member a Soldier in War and in ^
Peace, remember a Soldier in War, in War and in Peace, is the no -- blessed of
all other Arts: Re -- member, a Soldier in War and in Peace, re -- member a
Soldier in War, in War and in Peace, is the ^ no -- blessed of all other Arts.


A single SONG in Edipus.
^ MUSIC, Mu -- sick for a while, shall all your Cares beguile; shall all,
all, all, shall all, all, all, shall all, your Cares beguile; wond -- 'ring,
wond -- 'ring how your Pains were eased, eased, eased, and dis -- dain -- ing ^
to be pleased, till A -- lec -- to free the Dead, till A -- lec -- to free the
Dead, from their E -- ter -- nal, E -- ter -- nal Band; till the Snakes drop,
drop, drop, drop, drop, drop, drop, drop, drop from her Head; and the Whip, and
the Whip from out her Hand; Music, Music for a while shall all your cares
beguile; shall all, all, all, all, all, all, all, shall all your cares be --
guile; all, all, all, all, all, all, all, all, shall all, your cares be --
guile.

A single SONG.
^ ON the Brow of Richmond Hill which Europe scarce can pa -- ral -- lel, ev'
-- ry Eye such Wonders fill, to view the Prospect round; where the Silver
Thames does gilde, and stately Courts are E -- di -- fi'd, Meadows decked in
Summer's Pride, with verdant Beauties Crowned: Lovely Cynthia pas -- sing by,
with brighter Glo -- ries blessed my Eye, Ah! then in vain, in vain, said I, the
Fields and Flowers do shine; Nature in this Charming Place, cre -- a -- ted
Pleasure in Excess, but all are Poor to Cynthia's Face, whose Features are
Divine.

A SONG with a Trumpet in Dioclesion.
^ SOu -- nd Fame thy Brazen Trumpet sound, sound, sound, soun -- d thy Brazen
Trumpet sound: Stand, stand in the Center, stand in the Center of the U -- ni
-- verse; and call, and ca -- ll the listening ^ World a -- round; while we in
-- joy -- full Notes re -- hearse, in Art -- full Numbers, in Artfull Numbers
and well cho -- sen Verse; Great Di -- oclesian's, Gre -- at Di -- o -- cle --
sian's Glory, ^ Great Dioclesian's, Gre -- at Di -- o -- cle -- sian's Glory,
Gre -- at Di -- o -- cle -- sian's Glory.

A DIALOGUE between Thirsis, and Daphne.
Thirsis.^ WHY my Daphne, why complaining, and my Sghs and Tears disdaining,
since not many hours are past; when with hands lift up to Heaven, then our
plighted Faith was given vowing they should ever last, should ever e -- ver, e
-- ver last, should ever, e -- ver, e -- ver last.


Daphne. Oh! ungrateful sly Deceiver, and I, ea -- sie, ea -- sie fond
Believer, to think, that Man could e're be true! This to Eg -- la was a Token,
witness all your Vows are broken, and I, poor I, and I, poo -- r I Am undone by
you.


Thirsis. Could that false ma -- licious Creature, work up -- on your ea -- sie
Nature; could she say, That Gift was mine; No, that Garland Eg -- la gave me,
but her Arts could never enslave me; No, no, my Life, my All, is thine, my All,
All, All, my All is thine.


Daphne.^ Oh! how quick my Heart is beat -- ing! Oh! how quick, how quick, my
Heart is beat -- ing, ev' -- ry Pulse the Joy re -- peating, the Joy re --
peating, the Joy re -- peat -- ing; pleased to find my Swain so true, pleased
to find my Swain so true: Their -- sis is my on -- ly Treasure, Their -- sis is
my on -- ly Treasure, Oh! I Love, Oh! I Love be -- yond all measure, and would
quit the World for you.


CHORUS. CHORUS. ^ Oh! how quick my Heart is beat -- ing! Oh! how quick, how
quick, my Oh! how quick my Heart is beat -- ing! Oh! how quick my Heart is beat
-- ing, ev' -- ry Pulse the Joy re -- peating, the Joy re -- peating, the Heart
is beating, ev' -- ry Pulse the Joy, the Joy re -- peating, the Joy, the Joy re
-- peat -- ing; pleased to find my Swain so true, pleased to Joy re -- peat --
ing; pleased to find my Nymph so true, pleased to find, to find my Swain so
true: Thirsis is my on -- ly Treasure, Thirsis is my find, my Nymph so true:
Daphne is my on -- ly Treasure, my on -- ly, on -- ly ^ on -- ly Treasure, Oh!
I love, Oh! I love, beyond all measure, Treasure, Oh! I love, Oh! I love, I
love, beyond all measure, and would quit the World for you. and would quit the
World for you.


A VERSE out of the late Queen's Birthday SONG.
^ ANd low a sacred Fu -- ry sweel'd -- her breast, and the whole God her lab'
-- ring Soul pos -- sest; to lof -- ty Strains, to lof -- ty Strains, her tune
-- full Lyre she ^ Strung, thus, thus, thus, thus, thus the Goddess Played, and
thus she Sung: To lof -- ty Strains, to lof -- ty Strains her tuneful Lyre she
Strung; and thus, thus, thus the God -- dess Played; and thus she Sung; to lof
-- ty Strains her tuneful Lyre she Strung; and thus, thus, thus, the God --
dess Played, and thus, she Sung.

A VERSE out of the late Queen's Birthday-SONG.
^ MA -- ny, many, many such Days may she be -- hold; many, many, Many, many,
many such Days may she be -- hold; many such Days may she behold; many, many,
many, many, many, many, many such many, many, many such Days may she behold;
many, many, many, many, many, many Days may she be -- hold; like the gla -- d
such may she behold; like the gla -- d Sun without de -- cay; ^ Sun without de
-- cay; without, with -- out de -- cay. Many, many, like the gla -- d Sun
without de -- cay. many such Days may she be -- hold; many, many, Many, many,
many such Days may she be -- hold; many such Days may she behold; many, many,
many, many, many, many, many such many, many, many such Days may she behold;
many, many, many, many, many, many Days may she be -- hold; like the gla -- d
such may she behold; like the gla -- d Sun without de -- cay; ^ Sun with -- out
de -- cay; with -- out, with -- out de -- cay: Like the gla -- d Sun with --
out de -- cay; May Time that tear -- s, may Time that tear -- s, May Time that
tear -- s, may Time that tear -- s, where he lay's hold; On -- ly Sa -- lute
her, on -- ly Sa -- lute her, where he lay's hold; On -- ly Sa -- lute her, on
-- ly sa -- lute her, on -- ly Sa -- lute on -- ly Sa -- lute her in his way;
May Time that tear -- s, her, Sa -- lute her in his way; May Time that ^ may
Time that tear -- s, where he -- lay's hold; tear -- s, may Time that tear --
s, where he lay's hold; On -- ly Sa -- lute -- On -- ly Sa -- lute her, on --
ly Sa -- lute her, on -- ly Sa -- lute her in his way; Sa -- lute her, on -- ly
Sa -- lute her, only Sa -- lute her, Sa -- lute her in his way; Sa -- lute --
her in his way. her in his way.

The EPICURE.
^ UN -- der -- neath this Myrtle Shade, on Flow' -- ry Beds Su -- pine -- ly N
-- der -- neath this Myrtle Shade, on Flow' -- ry Beds Su -- pine -- ly laid;
with Odorous Oils my Head overflowing, and a -- rou -- nd it Roses laid; with
Odorous Oils my Head overflow -- ing, and a -- rou -- nd it Roses growing: What
should I do but drink a -- way, what should I do but drink a -- way, growing:
What should I do but drink, drink what should I do but drink, drink a -- way,
the Heat and Trou -- bles of the day, the Heat and drink, drink, drink a --
way, the Heat and Trou -- bles of the day, the Heat and ^ Troubles of the day.
In this more than Kingly State, Love himself shall on me wait; Troubles of the
day. In this more than Kingly State, Love himself shall on me wait; Fill to me,
Love, nay fill it up, and mingled, ca -- st, cast in -- to the Fill to me,
Love, nay fill it up, and mingled ca -- st in -- to the Cup, Wit and Mirth
Vigorous Health, Vigorous Health, and Gay Desires. The Cup, and Noble Fires,
Vigorous Health, Vigorous Health, and Gay Desires. The Wheel of Life no less
will stay, in a smooth than rugged Way; since it Wheel of Life no less will
stay, in a smoo -- th than rugged Way; since it, ^ e -- qual -- ly does flee,
let the Mo -- tion pleasant be, let the Mo -- tion e -- qual -- ly does flee,
let the Mo -- tion pleasant be, let the pleasant be, let the Mo -- tion plea --
sant be. Mo -- tion plea -- sant be, let it plea -- sant be. Solus. Why do we
precious Ointments shower? Nobler Wines why do -- we pour? Beauteous Flowers
why do we spread, up -- on the Mo -- nu -- ments of the Dead? Nothing they but
Dust can show, or Bones that ha -- sten to be so.

CHORUS CHORUS. ^ Crown me with To -- ses whilst I live, now, now your Wine and
Ointments give: Crown me with To -- ses whilst I live, now, now your Wine and
Ointments give: Af -- ter Death I nothing crave, I nothing crave, let me a --
live my Pleasure have; Af -- ter Death I nothing, nothing crave, let me a --
live my Pleasure have; all, all are Sto -- icks, all, all are Sto -- icks in
the Grave; all, all are all, all are Stoics, all all are Stoics in the Grave;
all, all are Sto -- icks in the Grave. Stoics in the Grave.

A SONG for Two Voices.
^ JUlia, Julia your un -- just dis -- dain, moves, mo -- ves me, to com --
plain; Julia, Julia, your unjust disdain, moves, mo -- ves me to com -- plain;
you, you, you that Vowed to be so true; a -- las, a -- las, a -- las, a -- las,
a -- you, you, you that Vowed to be so true; a -- las, a -- las, a -- las, a --
las is false and Mar -- ri'd too; could I dri -- ve those thoughts a -- las, is
false and Married too; could I dri -- ve those thoughts a -- way; that rack me,
rack me ev' -- ry day, by your, by your un -- just In -- way; that rack me,
rack me ev' -- ry day, by your, by your un -- just In -- con -- stan -- cy; ^
Oh! oh! how happy, oh! oh! how happy, how -- con -- stan -- cy; Oh! oh! oh! how
happy, how happy, oh! happy, oh! oh! how happy, how happy, should I be; oh! oh!
oh! how happy, how happy, how hap -- py should I be; oh! oh! oh! how happy,
happy, happy, happy, happy, should I be; Oh! oh! oh! how oh! how happy, happy,
happy, happy, happy, should I be; Oh! oh! oh! how happy, happy, happy, happy,
happy should I be. happy, happy, happy, happy, happy should I be.

A single SONG.
^ OH! fair Cedaria, Oh! -- fair Cedaria hide those Eyes, that Hearts Enough
have won; for who -- so -- ever sees them die -- s; oh! -- fair Ce -- da -- ria
hide those Eyes, for who -- so -- ever sees them die -- s, hide those Eyes, for
who -- so -- ever, who -- so -- ever sees them die -- s; and cannot, and
cannot, cannot ruin shun: Such Beauty and Cha -- rms are seen u -- ni -- ted
in your face; ^ Such Beauty and Cha -- rms are seen u -- ni -- ted in your
face, the prou -- dest, the prou -- dest cannot but own you, cannot but own you
Queen of Beauty; of Beauty, Wit and Grace; Such Beauty and Cha -- rms are seen
u -- ni -- ted in your face; the Proudest, the Prou -- dest cannot but own you,
the Prou -- dest cannot but own you, cannot but own you Queen of Beau -- ty, Wit,
and Grace; The Proudest cannot but own you, Quee -- n ^ of Beau -- ty Wit, and
Grace; then pi -- ty me, then pi -- ty me, who am your Slave; then pi -- ty me,
then pi -- ty pi -- ty me who am your Slave; and grant me, grant me a Re --
prive, un -- less I may your Favor have, I cannot, I cannot one moment live; I
cannot, I cannot un -- less I may your Favor have, I cannot, I cannot one Mo --
meant Live.

A single SONG.
^ I Loved fair Ce -- lia, I Loved fair Ce -- lia, many, many, many years
before she show -- 'd her Art, -- her Art; Her Beauty first, her Humor next, by
tur -- ns; her Beauty first, her Humor next, by tur -- ns engaged my Heart. And
when to these, when to these she Friendship joined, her Char -- ms, her Char --
ms were so entire, that with -- out ^ being Dull, and Blind, I could none else,
none, none, none, none, I could none else, no, none, no, none, no, none, none
else ad -- mire.

A SONG on the late Queen.
^ MAy her Blessed ex -- am -- ple, chase Vice in troops out of the Land; Fly --
ing from her aw -- full Face, like trembling Ghosts when day's at hand: May her
He -- to bring us Peace, won with Ho -- nour in the Field; And our home -- bred
Factions cease, He still our Sword, and She our Shield:

A single SONG.
^ LET us Dance, let us Sing, let us si -- ng, whilst our Life's in the Spring;
and give all, and give all, all, all, all, all to the great God of Love: Let us
Love. Let us Re -- vel, let us re -- vel and play, let us, let us re -- vel and
play, and re -- joy -- ce whilst we may: Since old Time, since old Time these
de -- light -- ts will re -- move.

A DIALOGUE between Thyrsis, and Iris.
^ FAir I -- ris and her Swain, were in a shady Bower, where Thyrsis long in
vain had sought the hap -- py hour; at length his hand advancing upon her Snowy
Breast, he said; O kiss me lon -- ger, and lon -- ger yet, and lon -- ger if
you will make me blessed. An ea -- sy yiedling Maid, by trusting is undone; our
Sex is often betrayed by grant -- ing Love too soon; if you desire to gain me,
your sufferings to redress, pre -- pare to Love me longer, and lon -- ger yet
and lon -- ger, before you ^ shall pos -- sess: [Thyrsis.] The little care you
show, of all my sorrows past, makes Death appear too slow, and Life too long to
last; Fair I -- ris kiss me kind -- ly, in pi -- ty of my Fate, and kind -- ly
still, and kind -- ly still before it be too late. [Iris.] You fondly court
your Bliss, and no advances make it is not for Maids to give, but it is for Men
to take: So you may kiss me kind -- ly, and kind -- ly still and kind -- ly,
and I will not re -- bell; but do not kiss and tell, but do not kiss and tell,
no ne -- ver kiss and tell. And may I kiss you ^ Yes you may kiss me kindly,
and kindly still, and kindly still, and kindly, and kind -- ly, and kindly
still, and kindly, and will you not re -- bell? I will not rebel. Yes you may
kiss me kindly still, and kindly still, and I will not re -- bell? And may I
kiss you kindly, and kindly still, and kindly still, and you will not re --
bell; but do not kiss and tell, but do not kiss and tell, no, no, no, no, no,
No, no, no, no, no, no, I Will never kiss and tell, no, no, I Will no, no, no, no,
no, no, no I Will never, never, never, no, never, never, never, no, never kiss
and tell. never kiss and tell, no, no no, no, no, no, no, no, I Will never,
never, never I Will never, never, never kiss and tell.

CHORUS. ^ Thus at the height we Love and live and fear not, fear not to be
Thus at the height we Love and live and fear not, fear not to be poor: We give,
and we give, we give and we give, we give and we poor; We give and we give, we
give and we give, and give, till we can give no more: But what to day, will
take a -- way, to give, till we can give no more: But what to day, will take a
-- way to morrow, to mor -- row will re -- store. morrow, to mor -- row will re
-- store.

End with the first Strain. A SONG on St. Cecilia's Day 1692.
^ Flutes. Violins. High Countratenor ^ Hark! hark! each Tree its Hark! hark!
each Tree its si -- lence breaks; si -- lence breaks; Hark! hark! each Tree its
si -- lence Hark! each Tree its si -- lence ^ breaks; breaks; Hark! hark! each
Tree its Hark! hark! each Tree its si -- lence si -- lence breaks; Hark! ^
breaks, hark! hark! each Tree its si -- lence breaks; the Box and hark! each
Tree its si -- lence breaks; the Firr, to tal -- k, to talk, to talk, to Box
and Firr, to tal -- k, to talk, to talk, to tal -- k ^ talk be -- gin; Hark!
hark! hark! hark! be -- gin; Hark! hark! hark! hark! hark! hark! hark! this in
the spright -- ly Vi -- o -- lin, ^ That in the Flute distinctly, di -- stinct
-- ly speaks, distinctly, di -- stinct -- ly speaks; That in the This in the
Spright -- ly Vi -- o -- lin; ^ Flute di -- stinct -- ly, distinct -- ly di --
stinct -- ly speaks; This in the spright -- ly Vi -- olin, di -- stinct -- ly
speaks; Instruments Rest. 'Twas 'Twas Sympathy, 'twas ^ Sympathy their
listening Brethren drew, 'twas Sym -- pathy, their Sympathy, 'twas Sympathy,
'twas Sym -- pa -- thy their list' -- ning list' -- ning Brethren drew; when to
the Thracian Lyre with lea -- fie wings they Brethren drew; fle -- w; when to
the Thracian Lyre, when to the Thracian Lyre with lea -- fie wings they When to
the Thra -- cian Lyre with lea -- fie wings they fle -- fle -- w, with leafy
wings they fl -- ^ with lea -- fie wings they flew, when to the Thracian Lvre
with lea -- fie -- with leafy wings they flew, when to the Thracian Lyre, with
lea -- fie wings they fle -- w, with leafy wings they flew, with wings they fle
-- w, with lea -- fie wings they flew, with leafy wings they flew. lea -- fie
wings they flew. Flutes. Violins. ^

A SONG for Two Voices.
^ I Celia Eyes me, Celia Eyes me, I approach her, but she spy Celia, I spy
Celia, I approach her, I approach her, but she fly -- 's me, I pursue, I
pursue, I pursue, I pursue, I per -- sue; fly -- 's me; I pursue, I pursue, I
per -- sue; ^ I pursue, I pursue; More coy, more coy, more, more coy I find
her; I seem I pursue, I pursue; More coy, more coy, more, more coy I find her;
I seem Colder, colder, colder, then, then, then she is kinder, she is kinder;
then, then, then she is Colder, colder, colder, then, then, then she is kinder,
she is kinder; then, then, then she is kinder, she is kinder, then, then, then,
then she is kinder: My words kinder, she is kinder, then, then, then, then, she is
kinder: Her Eyes Charm me, mov -- e her, and I love her, and I love her, I
love her, I she Esteems me, and I love her, I love her, I ^ love her; In not
Blessing most, most she Blesses; In not Blessing love her; In not Blessing
most, most she Blesses, In not Blessing most, most she most, most she Blesses,
and not pos -- ses -- sing, and not possessing, and not -- Blesses, most she
Blesses, and not possessing, and not posses -- sing, and not -- possessing,
each, each, each possesses; each, each possesses, each, each, each pos -- --
sesses, possesing, each, each, each possesses; each, each, each possesses,
each, each, each pos -- sesses, each, each possesses: End here. Now, now she
Blushes, now, now, now she each, each, each possesses: ^ Blushes; she would
leave me, but I ho -- ld her, I I grows bol -- der, but I ho -- ld her, I hold
her, I hold her, ho -- ld her; She grows ho -- ld her, I hold her; She grows an
-- gry, grows an -- gry, grows an -- gry, grows an -- gry, grows an -- gry; an
-- gry, grows an -- gry, grows an -- gry, grows an -- gry, grows an -- gry; I
ap -- pease her, I appease her, I appease her; I ap -- pease her, I appease
her, I appease her; I am red -- er, ^ Then, then, then I please her, then,
then, then I please her, then, then, then, then, then I please her, then, then,
then I please her, then, then, then, then, then I please her, then, then, then
I please her: then, then, then, then, then I please her, then, then, then I
please her: Her Eyes My words mo -- ve her, and I love her, and I love her,
Charm me, she Esteems me, and I Love her, I love her, I love her. In etc. I
love her, I love her. In not Blessing etc.

End with the part, (Each possesses etc.) A Drinking SONG, With a Chorus for
Three Voices.
^ It Is Wine was made to Rule the Day, it is Wine, it is Wine, it is Wine; it is
Wine was made to Rule the Day, and not the sla'ring Sun; it is Love that should
over Night bear sway, and not the sil -- ly, sil -- ly Moon; and not the sil --
ly, sil -- ly Moon: Wine is the amazement of the Old, that Bliss would fain re
-- trieve, and love the business of the bold, that can Both joys re -- ceive:

CHORUS. Turn over. CHORUS. ^ Let my Queen live for e -- ver, for e -- ver, Let
my Queen live for e -- ver, for e -- ver, Let my Queen live for e -- ver, for e
-- ver, for e -- ver, for e -- ver, for for e -- ver, for e -- ver, for for e
-- ver, for e -- ver, and let us still drink, drink, and let us still drink,
drink French Wine; let my e -- ver, and let us still drink, drink, and let us
still etc. e -- ver, and let us still drink, drink, and let us still drink, drink
French Wine; Rage be Im -- mortal, let my Rage be Im -- mortal, let my Rage be
Im -- mor -- tal, let my Rage be Im -- mortal, let my Rage be Im -- mortal, let
my let my Rage be Immortal, let my Rage be Im -- mortal, ^ let my Rage be Im --
mortal, and my Li -- quer di -- vine; let my Ra -- ge be Im -- mortal, and my
Li -- quer di -- vine; let my let my Rage be Im -- mortal, and my Li -- quer di
-- vine; Rage be Im -- mor -- tal, my Rage be Im -- mor -- tal, Rage be Im --
mortal, let my Rage be Im -- mor -- tal, let my Ra -- ge be Im -- mortal, let
my Rage be Im -- mortal and my Li -- quer di -- vine. and my Li -- quer di --
vine. and my Li -- quer di -- vine. Insus'd in Wine, let us sink to rest, and
Dream of what we Love; ^ Infused in Wine, let us sink to rest, and dream of what
we Love: And since she may not be possessed let us thus our wants improve; and
since she may not be possessed, let us thus our wants improve. Chorus again. Oh!
lull me, Oh! lull me couched in soft re -- pose; Oh! lull me, Oh! lull me,
couched in soft re -- pose; and sleep, sleep never from me take; Ex -- cept the
Gods will in -- ter -- pose, and let me en -- jo -- y a -- wake. End with the
Chorus.

A SONG for Two Voices.
^ OH! the sweet delights of Love, oh! oh! oh! oh! oh! the Oh! the sweet
delights of Love, oh! oh! oh! oh! oh! the sweet de -- lights of Love, Who, who
would live, who, who would live and sweet de -- lights of Love, Who would live,
who, who would live, would live and not enjoy them? I Would refuse the Throne of
Jove, should power -- or Ma -- jesty, should not enjoy them? I Would refuse the
Throne of Jove, should pow -- er pow -- er or Ma -- je -- sty destroy them. or
Ma -- je -- sty destroy them. First strain again. ^ Give me, give me, give me
doubts, or give me, give me fears, give me, give me, give me jealou -- sies
Give me, give me, give me, doubts, or give me, give me fears, give me, give me,
give me jealou -- sies and Cares: But let Love, let Love remove them, but let
Love remove them, I ap -- prove and Cares: But let Love, but let Love -- remove
them, I approve them, them, I approve them, I approve them. I approve them, I --
approve them.

End with the first strain. FINIS.

