THE QVESTION CONCERNING The Divine Right OF EPISCOPACIE truly stated.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock, 1641.

To the most Reverend and Gracious Father in God, my Lord Primate of IRELAND.
MY LORD,
IN a discourse lately written concerning Puritans, I had occasion offered me to
declare my opinion against the Divine right of Episcopacie. Those reasons which
I then urged, seemed weak to your Grace, as I have heard, which was a great
discouragement to me: but I thought it not fit to desert so well a seeming
cause, and to resign my judgment presently upon a mere discouragement. I
have since summoned up some more deep and retired thoughts, that I might gain a
more just cause to retract my error, or to clear the truth, and persist in my
assurance. The question of Episcopacie, I think, I have now rightly stated, and
if I am not deceived, I have let in such light upon it, that judicious men will
now more easily ransack the profundity of it. Certainly the matter of it self
is of great difficulty, and of great moment in these times, and it was not any
confidence in my own wit that first engaged me in it, but the knowledge of my
candor, and freedom from private respects. No man living, I conceive, can be
more dispassionate, or more disinteressed in this case then I am, The heat of
my own mind could never yet thrust me into any faction, or make me turbulent in
the world, neither has any impression from without either by hope of gain, or
fear of damage stirred up sleeping passion in me. Of my self I rather wish
well then ill to Episcopacie, because it is so ancient a government; and for my
own interest I have found more friendship then enmity from Bishops, so that I
am certain, there is nothing but the simple love of truth, as it is truth, is
the bias of my actions at this time. As for the Presbyteriall discipline also,
I have so laid open my opinion concerning that, that if I have erred therein, I
am sure the world can charge me of nothing else but error. Had all men which
have formerly treated of this subject, been as unswayde by private interests as
I am, this controversy had not bin so long protracted as it is; but your Grace
knows well, that scarce any but Bishops have maintained Bishops hitherto; nor
scarce any opposed them, but such as have found some opposition from them; My
Lord, I now beg your gracious favor to lay aside your Palle, and to put on
the same impartial man in perusing these papers, as I now am whilst my pen is
upon them: for I know there is none has a more clear Spirit, and less liable
to the gross dampe of worldly respects then your self. Let this my humble
address be a testimony at this time that I am not a prejudging, factious enemy
to all Bishops, and let your gracious acceptance of the same be as strong a
crisis that your Grace is not a prejudging factious enemy to all which
maintain not Bishops.

Your Graces in all observance most humbly devoted, H. P.


The Question concerning the Divine right of Episcopacie truly stated.
THe question about Episcopacie has never yet been truly stated, nor the chief
points of it methodically distributed, and this is the cause that it is now
become so intricate and involved to the great disturbance of the world; for
satisfaction therefore herein, the first thing to be questioned is the Quid
esse of Episcopacy, and what is separable from the Order of it, as it is now
constituted in England.

According to Bishop Bilson, there are four things necessary in Religion.

1. Dispensing of the word. 2. Administering of the Sacraments. 3. Imposing of
hands in Ordination. 4. Guiding of the keys.
The first two of these being the ordinary means of Salvation, he attributes
generally to all Ministers: the other two respect the clensing and governing of
the Church, and are committed (as he says) to Bishops only, and not; to all
Presbyters equally, least by a parity of rule confusion follow, and ruin upon
confusion. It seems then, that the end of Religion is, that God be duly served,
and the end of Churchpolicie, that Religion be wisely maintained. And for the
wise maintenance of Religion, it behooveth not only that some peculiar chosen
men be separated and dedicated to officiate before God, and to direct and
assist others in the offices of Devotion, but also that all Anarchy and
confusion be avoided amongst those that are so chosen into the Priesthood. Thus
far there needs no dispute: the main branches then of this controversy are
three.

1. Who are designed by God to be governors over the Priesthood for avoiding
of confusion.

2. What proportion of Honor, Revenue, Power in Ecclesiastical and in
temporal affairs is due to those Governors.

3. What are the proper, distinct offices of that government to be executed and
undergone.

As to the first main branch, the first question is, who is supreme Head of the
Church under Christ: whether the Prince as Bishop Gardener first held under H.
8. or the Bishop of Rome, as Sir Thomas More held, or the Aristocracy of
Bishops, as Dr. Downing holds, or the Democracie of Presbyters and Lay Elders,
as Calvin taught; if Scripture be express in any precept to this purpose, or
any Canon extending to all places and times, we must look no farther: but if no
such express rule be, nor no necessity of any such, nor Divines were ever yet
agreed upon any such, it seems that under the King, that Junto of Divines,
Statesmen, and Lawyers in Parliament, which has a Legislative power over the
State, has the same over the Church. And if the King have not the same supreme
power in spiritual as in temporal things, it is either for want of sanctity
in his person, or for want of capacity in his judgment: but that the Prince is
more then temporal, and of sanctity competent for supremacy of rule in the
Church is sufficiently evinced by Bilson, Hooker, etc. against Calvin, and the
Papists, and Presbyterians both; and that defect of judgment is no bar in the
Church more then in the State, is apparent; for if the King be unlearned, yea,
an infant, Lunatic, etc. yet by his Counsels and Courts of Law, war and
policy, he may govern the Commonwealth well enough; and it little skilleth
whether he be Lawyer, Soldier, or Politician: and there is the same reason in
the Church. And if we admit the King to be supreme head of the Church, I think
no man will deny but that the fittest policy for him to govern the Church by,
will be the same pattern by which he governs the State, making as little
difference between them as may be; for it is the same body of men now, of which
both State and Church are compacted, and so it was not in the Apostles times;
and the same body has the same head now, as it had not in the beginning: for
Tiberius was then the head of the Christians, but the enemy of Christian
Religion. So the main (...) remaining is, whether the King having power to
choose subordinate officers and Counselors in the Church, may or ought to choose
such as are merely spiritual or merely temporal, or a mixture of both. The
Papists hold no Governors over the Clergy competent, neither supreme, nor
subordinate, but such as are merely spiritual: The Protestants every where
almost but in England, incline to a mixed government in the Church, though they
exclude the King quatenus King: in the mean while, we in England admit of the
King for our supreme governor, but doubt of any subordinate mixed government.
It Is not my task at this present to dispute the convenience of a mixed
government, and an association of Spiritual and Lay rulers: but I think the
Presbyterians have sufficiently asserted it though to another purpose. And it
seems to me, that the Apostolical form of government, as to the supremacy of
it, is not now in force, because there is not the same reason, that head being
then wanting in the Church which is since supplied; but as to any constitution
in the subordinate wheels of government, if the Laity had then any motion or
influence therein, I think the same reason still remains, and the same form
ought still to be in force.

In the second branch: Be the subordinate governors of the Church mixed or
simple, either according to the Popish or Presbyterian discipline: the question
is, whether or no, such Ecclesiastical governors ought to be vested, and
dignified with temporal honors above the Judges of the Land, and equal with
the Peers of the Realm, and whether or no they ought to enjoy temporal
revenues proportionable to that Honor, and power in secular affairs
correspondent to those revenues; and if so, whether by divine or humane
constitution. Also if these differences were added (as Bishop Bilson
acknowledges) rather for the honor of the calling, then for any necessity of
Gods Law, it is next to be questioned, whether or no a Parliament has not now
power and cause to reduce these additions of Episcopacy into more modest
limits, for it seems that from Adam till Christ, no such grandour and splendour
was in Churchmen, nor from Christ to Constantine, and from Constantine to the
Reformation, we know how they were abused to the mischief of the Church, and
decay of Religion; and in the reformation, we know all Nations besides us did
utterly remove them: and we know that the Church in England is now much
impoverished by many impropriations and commendams, etc. now detained by
Bishops and Cathedrals, besides that which it suffers by Laymen; and it seems
strange that the Pastors of the flock should be starved, that Prelates should
abound, and swim in too great excess: and that the mere livelihood of holy
preachers should be held less necessary then the proud pomp of unusefull (nay
as some think) mischievous dominators.

As to the third branch: if the end of Episcopacy (as Bishop Bilson holds) be
to prevent the confusion of parity in the Church, we are first to question,
whether Ordination by imposition of hands, and guiding of the keys be
necessary to Episcopacy, and so necessary, as that confusion cannot be
prevented without them: All wise men will allow some authority requisite,
whereby Ministers may be duly elected, and their true qualifications of
learning and integrity tried, and that being rightly elected, they may be
further consecrated by prayer and the solemnity of hands, and being
consecrated, that they may be further instituted, and designed to some
particular charge. The Presbyterians do not dislike such authority, nor are
negligent in the same: the question is therefore only, to whom this authority
may be committed, whether to Bishops only, or to some such judicatory as the
Presbyterians use, or some other of humane institution. As for example, if the
Universities, or some select Committee therein, be entrusted to try the
sufficiency of Scholars, and to give Orders, and upon the vacancy of a Rectory
to present three, etc. to the King, and the King out of those three to present
two, etc. to the parish, and the parish out of two to choose one for their
Pastor, the question only is, whether such election, ordination,
presentation, and induction, be not as legal, and religious, as if it were by
Bishops, and be not far more politic in preventing simony, and in better
satisfying the right of the flock, whose souls are mainly concerned, and whose
tithes are to that purpose contributed. And now it seems S. Jerome allows no
further use of Bishops to have been of old: for he says plainly, that a Bishop
differs from a Presbyter in no act excepta ordinatione: and as for the power of
the keys, that has been always held common to the whole Clergy: but we will
not stand upon this, we will freely grant an authority necessary as well to
superintend over Ministers in their charges, as to place them therein, and when
B. Bilson appropriates to Bishops the guiding of the keys, we will understand
not the mere power of them, but the government of that power: we will admit
also under this term of guiding the keys to be comprehended

1. The power of making Ecclesiastical Canons.

2. Of giving judgment, and executing according thereto.

3. Of issuing the sentence of excommunication.

4. Of deciding controversies.

And the question now is, whether the keys may not be so guided by some other
Ecclesiastical judges and magistrates besides Bishops, if the King think fit
to design them, for

First, the Legislative power of the Church was never yet only committed to
Bishops, the whole Clergy, and the King were never yet excluded from Synods,
and Councels, neither are the acts of Synods and Councels binding to any Nation
unless the secular states ratify them. And I think, there is no question of
the validity of such Canons as are now made in those Protestant Countries,
where Bishops have no command, or being at all.

And secondly, spiritual jurisdiction is not only appropriated to Bishops, but
to Laymen under Bishops, Canonists and Civilians are held more able and
knowing herein than Bishops, and Bishops are held less fit by reason of their
more sacred employments: so the question here will be only this, Whether or no
the jurisdiction of Lawyers, and such like, as now execute justice in the
spiritual Courts under Bishops will be as competent under the King without
Bishops as it is now under Bishops immediately. Some say, that Chancellours
etc. are not mere Laymen, no matter: For by the same reason any others to
whom such Ecclesiastical jurisdiction shall be committed by the King shall be
held sacred, and if they are not mere Laymen, yet they are not mere Bishops;
if they are preferred to some equality with the Clergy, yet they are not
preferred above the Clergy, and this preferment is no other, but such as may
be bestowed upon any other Layman, that is not otherwise insufficient. And
even amongst Presbyterians there is a form of Jurisdiction, and I think not
held vain, or unlawful by any: and even in cases of heresy, blasphemy, etc.
which are most spiritual, if none can so rightly judge what is heresy,
blasphemy, etc. as spiritual governors, yet this proves not any necessity of
Bishops, for the fact may be tried, and execution awarded by others, and
nothing but an assistance of Council from spiritual men will be needful. In
the third place also, if Excommunication be still held of necessity, and all
other temporal authority defective without it, if it be concluded to be
perpetual, notwithstanding the decay of Prophecy, and the supply of other
Christian jurisdiction, and if it be to be extended also to all persons in all
cases as our Christian Court now extends it (which seems to me a strange,
obscure, unproved thing) yet the only question is, Whether it may not continue
in the Church, and be still ordered and guided without Episcopacy: For it
seems that the Presbyterians, though they use not Excommunication for such
violent, rigorous purposes as the Papists do, yet they are more severe in it
then ever the Fathers were before the Law or under the Law: and yet
notwithstanding, their authority of using it, is not excepted against by their
enemies. And fo^rthly, if it be granted that Bishops were first introduced for
the preventing of schisms and factions in the Church, as being held the
fittest means for to procure the decision of controversies, and the
determination of disputes in Religion: yet the question is whether discord and
division may not be prevented, and difficulties of dispute as conveniently
resolved by some other as by Episcopal authority: for it seems there is great
difference inter Ecclesiam constitutam, and Ecclesiam constituendam, and
between a Church whose supreme governor is ill affected to it, and a Church
whose Prince is an indulgent Father to it: so that Episcopacy cannot be now of
the same use, as it was at first in the infancy of the persecuted Church. And
it seems that amongst all other Protestants both Calvinists and Lutherans
where Bishops rule not, controversies are not so manifold, nor innovations in
Religion so easy to be induced, nor factions in the Church so dangerously
maintained, as they are in England under the sway of Bishops. It seems also in
all great emergent occasions of division and dissension in points of doctrine,
that if our two famous Universities were consulted, and in case of disagreement
there, if London, as our third Oracle should arbitrate by a Junto of all her
Divines, the decision would be far more honorable and satisfying to all, than
if any one Bishop, or any Province, or Nation of Bishops should attempt to give
the like. And to conclude this point, the solemn use of Synods, Councels, and
Parliaments does not at all depend upon Episcopacy, so that it seems as to
this purpose no necessity can be alleged for the government of Bishops, as
Bishops are now qualified in England.

These branches if they were thus orderly discussed by moderate, conscionable,
and learned Divines, many incomparable advantages in probability would arise
thereby: for first, the very foundations of Popery would be laid open and
naked, the very center of that tyrannous united Empire which has subjugated the
world so long under such base slavery, would be ripped up, and all its infernal
mysteries discovered to the sun. Secondly, that unpolitike axiom, No Bishop,
no King, whereby Bishops have always imbarqued Princes in their wars, would
appear to be sophisticate, and a mere color without all substance of reason.
Thirdly, many great fruits of peace and unity both Ecclesiastical and Civil
would redound to our whole Nation. Those many mischiefs which attend
Episcopacy, against which the complaints are so grievous and universal would
be remedied. That new module of government which so many have so variously
phansied, and proposed in these latter times would open it self, and offer it
self to us of its own accord. The pattern of the State would be sufficient to
present to us a fit and harmonious pattern for the Church: and the body and
head of both Church and State would appear to be the self same. The King
should be the same in both, and Councels and Courts govern under him by the
same commission in both. A power to ordain fit Ministers, and to put a final
end to controversies and dissentions might be committed to the Universities,
and some gentle influence by votes affirmative or negative might be also
allowed therein to the Laytie. The power of making Articles and Orders for
decency and peace in the Church might remain unaltered in the Kings Clergy,
and Parliament: Able civil and canon Lawyers might still sit in their
tribunals taking cognizance of such cases, as are truly Ecclesiastical, and
have not been by usurpation of the Hierarchy wrongfully wrested out of the
Temporal Courts: and the spiritual sword of Excommunication might still be
gently weelded in the same hands as it has been, when it is necessary. An
assistance of godly Divines in all cases of Conscience might be allotted to the
K. and all his Judges and Magistrates upon occasion, without wholly drawing
them from their charges, and this would be no less effectual, then that of
the greatest Prelates. The inconveniences of the Presbyterian Discipline also
which is not so adequate and conformable to Monarchy would be rectified. And
lastly, the bleeding Church which had so great a part of her Patrimony torn
from her by Hen. 8. by the addition of Episcopal and Cathedral livings might
be healed up, and restored to her ancient grace and vigor.

FINIS.

