Summary Reasons, humbly tendered to the most Honorable House of Peers by some
Citizens and Members of London, and other Cities, Boroughs, Corporations, and
Ports, against the new intended Bill for Governing and Reforming CORPORATIONS.
FIrst, this Bill deprives all Cities, Boroughs, Corporations, Ports of England
and Wales (8. times particularly named and comprised in the Act of Oblivion and
Indemnity) with all their Magistrates, Officers and Members, of the common
benefit, pardon, grace therein intended, and equally granted to them, as well
as to other Subjects, without discrimination, by the Kings Most Gracious
Majesty, who in his successive printed Messages, Declarations, Speeches to the
last and present Parliament, has solemnly promised in his own Royal Person and
Ministers, and conjured all his Subjects, and this present Parliament in their
proceedings, most religiously and inviolably to observe the same, and every
part and branch thereof, without the least infringement: By reviving not only
the former marks and names of distinction between his Subjects, but also the
memory, infamy, reproach and punishment of all their formerly remitted and
forgotten Crimes, even unto the un-magistrating, dis-officing, dis-franchising
and dis-membring of them in the respective Cities, Boroughs, Ports, and
Corporations where they live, to their own and their Posterities obloquy and
disgrace, even since his Majesty's and this Parliaments fresh confirmation of
that Act, and his Royal advice and command to Both Houses of Parliament on
Monday last, only to look forwards, but not back to any thing that was past.

2ly. It is directly contrary to the Great Charter of the Liberties of England,
made in the 9th year of King Henry the third, c. 9 (since ra^ified by Sir
Edward Cooks Preface to his 2. Institutes.
near forty other Parliaments and special Acts) Cooks 2. Institutes on Mag.
char. c. 9.
That the City of London, and all other Cities, Boroughs, Towns, the Barons of
the Cinque Ports, and all other Ports, shall have all their old Liberties and
free Customs, whereof this is one principal branch, freely to elect, place and
displace their own Magistrates, Officers, Members, and not to be visited,
placed or displaced by any Foreiners, Visiters, Commissioners, as is evident by
their respective Charters, the Statute of 3. Ed. 1. cap. 5 the Customs of
London, and Ash his Repertory, Tit. London,Sect. 6.38, 39, 40, etc.

3ly. It invalidates, rescinds, annulls all the particular Charters of former
Kings, and all private Acts of Parliament confirming them, formerly granted to
London and other Cities, Boroughs, Corporations, Ports; which all our Kings by
their Tottles Magna Charta Juramentum Regis quando Coronatur. cl. 1 R. 2. m.
44. 1 H. 4. Rot. Parl. numero 70. The Form of the Kings Coronation.
Coronation Oaths, (and his Majesty at his late Coronation) have sworn to
grant, ratify, and maintain to their Power.

4ly. It gives the numerous Commissioners named in the Bill, or any five of
them (who are all Commoners) an absolute arbitrary power over the greatest
Peers of the Realm (as the Dukes of York and Ormond, the Lord Chancellor, Lord
Treasurer, Earls of Pembroke, Salisbury, and other Lords who are Officers,
Stewards, Wardens of several Cities, Boroughs, Ports, Corporations of this
Realm) to remove and displace them at their pleasure and discretion, without
any legal trial, contrary to Magna Charta, their Peerage and privilege of
Parliament; And it likewise impowers them, or any five of them, though no
Members, to remove and displace all the Members of the Commons House, who are
Magistrates, Officers or Members of any City, Borough, or Port, (as diverse of
them are) notwithstanding their Privilege of Parliament, and so by consequence
to make them no Members of this Parliament, there being no exception nor
provision for the Peers or Members in this Act, to exempt them from this new
Visitation.

5ly. It enables these Commissioners, or any five of them, jointly and
severally by their Warrants, to summon all Magistrates, Officers and Members of
every City, Corporation, Borough and Port of England and Wales, from out os
their respective Precincts, to what place soever they shall sit, within the
County where they are situated, though 20, 30, 40, or 50. miles distant, if
they please to call them thither, the Act confining them to no certain place or
distance: which how vexatious, chargeable, injurious it may prove to the
Persons summoned, and how destructive to many Cities, Boroughs, Ports and
Corporations Charters, prohibiting any to draw them out of their own Cities and
Corporations for any matter or offense relating thereunto, Chapter 29. Cooks 2.
Institutes.
We humbly refer to your Lordships serious consideration.

6ly. It authorizeth the Commissioners appointed for the Cities and
Corporations of York, Gloucester, Exeter, Bristol, Newcastle, Canterbury,
Lincoln, Pool, etc. (which are Counties within themselves) to summon all their
Magistrates, Officers and Members to appear before them out of the limits of
their particular Counties, at any place of the Shire wherein they are situated,
contrary to their ancient Charers and privileges, the Law of the Land, and
Reason of the Statutes enacting, 1 E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 5. H. 1.
That no man shall be compelled to go out of his own County, for the public
defense and safety of the Realm, unless in case of Necessity, by reason of
foreign Enemies coming into the Realm, 29 H. 8. c. 9.
nor cited out of his own Diocese, to answer any particular offense, much less
then to go out of his own County and Precincts thereof, upon such a strange,
unnecessarie Visitation and Occasion as this, which has neither president nor
parallel in any Record or History that can be produced.

7ly. It utterly subverts, annulls and extirpates the grand fundamental Law of
England, the Great Charter, and all Acts of Parliaments, anciently and lately
made for the security of the Subjects Freeholds, Liberties, Franchises, and
free Customs against Arbitrarie and Tyrannical invasions; particularly the
Statutes of Magna Charta, cap. 29.25 Edw. 1. cap. 1, 2.28 Edw. 1. cap. 1. and
near 40. other Acts of Parliament for confirmation of the Great Charter in
general, 5 Ed. 3. c. 9.15 Ed. Parl 2. c. 5.23 Ed. 3. c. 4.28 Ed. 3. c. 3.38 Ed.
3. c. 9.42 Ed. 3. c. 2, 3.2 H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 60.20 H. 6. c. 6. the Petition
of Right, 3 Car. And the Act for regulating the Privy Counsel, etc. 17 Car. c
10. All which declare and enact, Cooks 2. Instit, on Magna Charta, c. 29. Cooks
11. Rep. f. 99.
That no Freeman shall be disseised or put out of his Freehold, Franchises,
Liberties, free Customs, Lands or Tenements, nor put to answer for the same,
unless he be brought in to answer by due process of Law, according to the old
Law of the Land, or fore-judged of the same by matter of Record in due Course
of Law, by the lawful Trial and Judgment of his Peers, and Law of the Land;
and if any thing be done to the contrary it shall be void and naught in Law,
and holden for error. Now this Act authorizeth the Commissioners, or any five
of them, to displace, disseise, out all and every Magistrate, Officer, Freeman,
Citizen, Burgess, Member of any City, Borough, Port or Corporation aforesaid,
both of his Office, Franchise and Liberty, (wherein he has as absolute and
good a Freehold in Law as any Lord, Knight, Member of Parliament, or other
Freeman of England has in his Lands, Tenements, Offices or Honors) without
any legal Process, original Writ, Endictment, Declaration, Trial, Jurie, Oath
of Witnesses, Legal Process or Judgment, at their mere Arbitrary discretion;
An Injustice, Arbitrary proceeding and tyranny, often provided against and
condemned by all former English Parliaments; therefore not to be approved or
countenanced in the least degree by this Parliament and your Lordships, who so
much condemn the late arbitrary powers, proceedings of Sequestrators,
Decimators, and Committee Men during our Wars, and sad confusions; which these
Proceedings not only imitate but exceed in some degree, being without oath, or
legal accusation.

8ly. The Commissioners appointed by this Act, as they have a more absolute,
arbitrary, boundless power, to displace all Magistrates, Officers, Members of
Cities, Boroughs, Ports and Corporations, without any distinction of persons,
or rules of Law, then was ever granted to any sort of Judges, Justices or
Commissioners in former ages; so they have no Oath at all prescribed to them
before they Act, to prevent the Abuses and Extravagancies which may happen in
the Execution thereof, as all other Rastal Justices in Air, cap. 4.18, and 20
Ed. 3. Rastal Justices 2.23 H. 8. c. 6.32 H. 5. c. 46.27 Eliz. c. 12.
Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Ministers, and Officers of Justice, Commissioners
of the Peace, of Rastal Justices in Air, cap. 4.18, and 20 Ed. 3. Rastal
Justices 2.23 H. 8. c. 6.32 H. 5. c. 46.27 Eliz. c. 12.
Sewers, Forts, Castles, Policies of Assurance, etc. have always had by Acts
of Parliament erecting them, to this effect; That to your Cunning, Wit and
Power, you shall truly and indifferently execue the Authority to you given by
this Commission, without any Favor, Corrupti^n, Dread or Malice to be borne to
any manner of Person or Persons, and as Occasion shall require for your part
you shall endeavor to make such wholesome, just, equal, and indifferent
Judgments and Decrees, as shall be devised by the most discreet and
indifferent number of your Fellows, being in Commission with you, for the due
Redress, Reformation and Amendment of all and every such things as are
contained in the said Commission, and the same to your Cunning, Wit and Power,
cause to be put in due Execution without favor, meed, dread, malice or
affections, as God you help; which Oath will be far more requisite in this Case
then any other, to prevent all Corruption, Malice, Rancor and Revenge in
Commissioners and Informers, after our many years Wars, Discords and
Resen^ments of former injuries, not yet buried in Oblivion, over-apt to be
remembered upon all occasions.

9ly. There is no appeal provided in this Act from any five of the
Commissioners sentence, and removal of any Magistrate, Officer or Member
aforesaid, (though never so injurious) either to the Major part of the
Commissioners of each County, or to the Justices of the peace in their
Quarter Sessions, Judges of Assize, Kings Bench, or other his Majesty's Courts
at Westminster, or to the Lord Chancellor of England, or Lords in Parliament,
as is 23 H. 8 c. 5.2, and 3 Phil. and Mar. c. 1.43 Eliz. c. 12.
usual in all Cases of Dis-franchisement, other Judgments and Decrees made by
Commissioners, and all inferior Courts of Justice; If any erroneous Judgment
or Dis-franchisement be given in any Corporation or inferior Court, the party
grieved is relievable by a Writ of Error in the Kings Courts at Westminster, 43
Eliz. c. 4.24 H. 8. c. 12. Brook Error. Baggs Case. Cook 11 Report. f. 94, 98,
99.
and erroneous Judgments in the Kings own Courts there, are remediable in the
Exchequer Chamber, and Lords House, by Writ of Error or Appeal; All erroneous
Acts, and unjust Judgments in one Parliament, are reversable in another,
because all Commissioners, Courts, Judges, and Parliaments too may err, and it
is most just and reasonable that parties injured by one Judicature, should be
righted and relieved by another, not left remediless: Much more therefore in
this Case, where the proceedings are merely arbitrary, without any Rules of
Law, to which other Judicatures are confined.

10ly. It gives the Commissioners power to destroy all the Cities, Buroughs,
Corporations, Ports of England and Wales, and their respective Charters, under
pretext of confirming them, For the Commissioners or any five of them may put
out and displace all, or so many of their Magistrates, Aldermen,
Common-counsell men, and Members at their discretion, if they please, as there
will not be left a Competent number to elect others in their places, according
to their Charters, whereby the 20 H. 6, 7, 8.3 H. 6.23. Brook Corporation, 78.
Extinguishment. c. 30.
Corporations and their Charters will be destroyed, and their Election of
Members to serve in Parliament, together with them. A thing of dangerous
consequence, extremely prejudicial to his Majesty and the Kingdom, and
destructive to his Majesty's Customs and Excise, arising principally out of
Corporations and their Members.

11ly. It puts all Corporations, and their Magistrates, Officers, Ministers,
Members into a far worse Condition, in some respects, then if no Act of
Oblivion and Indemnity had been passed by his Majesty and the Parliament; For
if they had been questioned for any offense for which they shall now be
Displaced and Dis-franchised, either by a Quo Warranto, Indictment or
Proceedings in any Court of Justice, they should have had a Legal Trial by
their Peers, a Liberty to Challenge their Juries, (who are Judges of the matter
of Fact charged against them,) the benefit and advice of Counsel, all just and
legal Exceptions to their Indictments, Presentiments, Declarations, and
Witnesses produced against them upon Oath face to face, with the benefit of
their own Witnesses upon Oath, for their Vindication and Acquittal: of all
which they are totally deprived by this Act, and left only to the Commissioners
arbitrary discretion and mercy, without any legal defense of their Innocence
and Loyalty too.

12ly. The passing of this Act, as it is altogether needless in respect of its
restoring part, since all Magistrates, Officers and Members of Corporations,
formerly ejected for their Loyalty, are already restored, or may be restored
upon request, or by a Cook 11. Rep. f. 98, 99.
Writ of Restitution in the Kings Bench, without the help of this Act; so the
removing part, must needs revive the memory and Examination of former injuries,
and stir up new Divisions, Contentions, Factions and Parties, both ^etween the
Commissioners themselves, and the Magistrates, Officers and Members of every
City, Borough, Corporation and Port, dividing them one from and against each
other, to the great disturbance of the Public Peace, Mat. 12.25.
their own rain, the diminution of his Majesty's Revenew, decay of Trade,
obstruction of the Free and voluntary Supply now granted to his Majesty, and
frustration of those pious, gracious, healing, uniting ends expressed in the
Act of Indemnity and Oblivion: At the best it will prove a remedy far worse
than any disease it pretends to cure; and this one President of mere Arbitrary
power and proceedings, made by a Parliament of England, against the Franchises,
Liberties, Freeholds Privileges, of all Cities, Buroughs, Ports and
Corporations in England and Wales, and their Magistrates, Officers, Members,
may in after ages prove fatal and destructive to the Inheritances, Franchises
and Freeholds of all the Nobility, Gentry, and other Freemen of England, who
may be deprived of them by like Arbitrary Commissioners and Proceedings,
without any legal Trial or Conviction, if they consent to this new Bill, and to
the Promoters of it, against their Oaths and Trusts to the Cities, Buroughs,
Corporations, Ports, who made them Freemen, and entrusted them to maintain
their Liberties and Common Utility by their best Counsel and Advice,
especially in Parliament.

All which we humbly submit to your Lordships grave and prudent Considerations,
for our own, and the King and Kingdoms public benefit, safety and
tranquillity, not doubting of your Justice, nor of his Majesty's grace and
goodness for our relief in all the premises, against this Bill, so fatal to
all our Cities, Buroughs, Corporations Charters, Liberties, Tranquillity,
Unity, and Prosperity.


