The poor man's progress and rest, Or, the way of God with man passing through
the wilderness to CANAAN. In answer to a grand question demanded of the
Author whilst a prisoner in Jameses. Viz. What the manner of Gods dealing was
with him in the several dispensations that he had gone through, and also the
(...) of his practice, directed to one of the Council. And now published for
the prevention of false suggestions against the said prisoner during his
captivity.

Where it is clearly demonstrated.

First, the false foundations that many thousands in this generation build
upon. Secondly, What the true foundation is with the ill consequences and
absurdities of the contrary. Thirdly, The infallibility of this true
foundation. Fourthly, The difference between living to Christ and living by
him. Fifthly, What God gives to man absolutely, and what upon condition
distinguished. Sixthly, The abilities that God gives and who may claim them
right. Seventhly, The extent of Christ's enlightening man, and also how the soul
is put in a capacity to pray. Eighthly, How the soul lays steadfast hold on
the promises. Ninthly, Some reasons in brief for opposing the Clergy in what is
erroneous. Tenthly, Some reasons to induce submission to imposition of hands,
All made plain by Scripture reason and experience.

By WILLIAM PRYER, a poor despised servant of Jesus, late prisoner at Jameses.

Isai. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony, If they spoke not according to
the word, it is because there is no light in them.

Printed for the Author. 1655.

To the Reader.
The reason why I present this following Epistle to your view, is partly from a
sensibility of my undergoing the censures of some in reference to my late
captivity, and partly from the consideration of the ignorance of many thousands
of the true foundation, and the better enmity of others, by reason of which
men's hearts are stuffed with divisions without profits in things of greatest
concernment, and supposing this small Epistle might be advantageous to the
settleing the thoughts of some that yet remain unstable, and the particulars in
it, may as well be profitable to thee as to me, being witnessed (in me) by the
eternal light, and confirmed both by Scripture and reason, I judged it my duty
not to keep it secret, especially being so eminently called to the work it
self: Now that which I only crave of thee, is to read it with deliberation and
without prejudice with the noble Bereans search the Scripture whether those
things be so, and if I speak not according to that word, if it be a contrary
doctrine, receive it not, but if agreeable, then despise it not, because of the
unworthiness of the instrument, and for what good thou gainest give God the
glory, which is all present from the unworthiest of the Lords servants, and
thine for the truths sake,

William Pryer.

Honored Sir.
HEaring that something had been suggested, to your honor as to my judgment
and practice, from the consideration of the appearances of old light in you, I
was engaged to give in this epitomie, humbly craving your favorable
construction, and judgment, as you find it consonant with truth, I dare not
say my former trading in those several forms, that I manifested to your
honor I had been in, was not the products of divine light, for Gods way of
manifestation is by degrees, and he brings his people through the wilderness
of trials and temptations to Canaan, yea many times through by ways, that so
their experience may cause them to break forth into admiration, at his wonder
bringing them through the belly of hell etc. I shall therefore God willing
manifest to your honor, the manner of Gods dealing with me, more particularly
in every form.

My manner of education in my youth I believe was not unknown to you, which was
after the strictest manner of the then times, with those commonly called
puritans, whose word was then to me, as the prophet speaks, as a very lovely
song, which begat in me a desire to teach, and to know the way that the Lord
has excorpted; which I was ignorant of, and in my enquiring, I had then
presented that the holy spirit was the evidence of that way; But when by a
particular application, I came to enquire whether I had this evidence yea or
no, and what was the tokens of it; it was presented unto me by some that desire
to pray, and to be instant therein, and to refrain from bad company and vices,
was certain tokens of it; and thus I rested satisfied in such actions done, and
as my qualifications eb'd and flowed, so my comforts eb'd and flowed, and when
clouded by sins, I immediately questioned my condition, ruminating upon a text
that the foundation of God stands sure, by which I was brought to conclude that
I was not upon that foundation, but upon my own righteousness, which was
filthy rags, because so wanting, which cast me into a sad condition, to know
the true foundation I desired; But to pray for it I was averse, yet frequent in
reasoning according to my weak abilities, and desirous to reason with all that
seemed any whit religious, amongst whom I received as I thought some glimps of
comfort for a time, from that of the Apostle, viz. by this we know that we are
translated from death to life, because we love the brethren, when I was
confident I loved, which bore me until I began to consider, who they were in
whom the Apostle concludes that knowledge of translation, and who the brethren
were, and then could easily conclude that I had not in my condition one dram of
interest in that text, not knowing by an infallible testimony the brethren, nor
my self qualified as the parties speaking, and so by some instruments, was
carried to a text in John, he that believes shall be saved, If I believed it
was a certain testimony, this I laid hold of until my God was pleased to cast
me upon the serious consideration of that wonderful place of Paul, 1 Cor.
5.11. For other foundations can no man lay, save that which is laid, which is
Jesus Christ, and if any man build upon that foundation, etc. from whence
through goodness I came seriously to reason thus, If I must build upon Christ
only, then my building upon my own believeing, was matter for the fire, for the
day of trial would declare it, which put me upon a serious consideration, what
was the true way of building upon Christ, to petition the Father for the
discovery of it, I trust not, though I earnestly thirsted after it, for I could
not with confidence call God Father, whilst contemplating upon this, my God was
pleased to let me hear, that still voice of his, directing me the way in
general, that the only way of building upon Christ, was to build upon his
words, which must judge us at the last day, which set my cogitations on work,
what scripture told me I was of that number for whom Christ died, it was
presented to me that he died for sinners, and I was one, and in confirmation. 1 Timothy 1.15. was alleged, that Christ Came into the world to save sinners, but
then reasoning with some that he came to save some sinners not all, considering
which I was at as great a loss as before, not knowing by an infallible
testimony that I was of that number for whom Christ died, which led me to a
universal proposition for comfort, which I was altogether averse to, it being
so contrary to that I had been taught, and especially considering two texts of
scripture, the one the 2 Timothy, 3.15, 16, 17, that the holy scripture is able to
make wise to salvation through believing, and is so profitable, that the man of
God may be perfect thoroughly finished, etc. the other the 1 These. 4.5. That the
gospel comes with much assurance, which necessarily must be from the word of
God, and not from the wisdom of man, which induced me through grace to lay
hold on the general doctrine, especially considering the ill consequences of
the particular doctrine then presented unto me* As

First, If Christ has not died for all then thus, no gospel for some men,
contrary to Luke 2.10. Isai. 49.6. Jud. 3.

Secondly, then infidelity is not the condemning sin contrary to Mark. 16.16.
John 3.18, 19.

Thirdly, then the servants of the Lord are commanded to preach lies to some
men, Mark 16.15. 1 Timothy 2.7. in being commanded to declare Christ's death for
all, when it were but for some. see 1 Timothy 4.10, 11.

Fourthly, Then the Apostles did not speak truth, when they said, God would
have all men to be saved. 1. Tim. 2.4. and for that end ordered remission of
sins to be preached, Luk, 24.47. Act. 10.36. Act, 13.38. That Christ took away
the sins of the world, Ioh. 1.29. that he tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9.
that he is the savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10. that he gave himself a ransom
for all. 1 Timothy 2.6. that he bought false prophets and false teachers, that
bring in damnable heresies, and upon themselves destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1. that
he sanctified those that trample under foot the son of God, and count the blood
of the covenant an unholy thing, all which scriptures must be raised out of the
book of God, and counted as fables if Christ has not died for all men.

Fifthly, If he died not for all men, then his rendering vengeance in flaming
fire at the great and dreadful day, shall not be, for not believing the
gospel, but because there was none for them to believe, contrary to 2 These. 1.8.

Sixthly, If he died not for all men then it is no sin, but a virtue, for some
men not to believe it, because if they should believe that he died for them,
when he did not, they would believe a lie.

Seventhly, To deny Christ's death for all men, is to call in question Christ's
own words, Rev. 22.17. in his general inviting poor lost man.

The serious consideration of those absurdities, with many others presented to
me, clearly following a limited gospel, and knowing assuredly, that no
absurdities followed upon the truth, I through the goodness of my dear Lord,
cloased with that despised doctrine of his, despised indeed of men, but chosen
of himself, that the riches of his love, and goodness might be manifested
without respect of persons, in which my heart was presently established, having
his word to testify to my conscience, then my building was upon him the rock,
against which I am sure no storms nor floods can prevail, if I make use of
those sweet givings forth of himself, in holding fast my confidence firm to the
end, for I have not the reasonings of men, nor no inherent qualifications, but
his own word, in and from which I have a cloud of witnesses, of his dying for
me, it that he dyed for all men, and his end therein declared. 2 Cor. 5.15.
that he died for all, that those which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him that died for them, and rose again. And this is the
condemnation under the gosel, not because Christ has not died for man, nor
because man does not live by Christ, but because man does not live to Christ,
there is this difference betwixt living by Christ, and living to him; all men
live by Christ, for by him all things consist, Col. 1.17. yet none live to him,
but such as are alive in their obedience, and such only he accounts his
friends. Joh. 15.14. and promises his presence. Ioh. 14.21. and his and the
Fathers abode. Joh. 14.23. to such he promises further discoveries of himself,
and makes known whatsoever the Father has made known unto him. Ioh. 15.15. the
making forth of which love I have in some measure enjoyed, and if I had been
more obedient, I believe I should have enjoyed more, yet not for my obedience,
but because God has promised who has said, I will do this for the house of
Israel, yet not for your sakes, yet will I be sought unto by you, and has also
promised, that he that will do my will shall know my doctrine; yet not as a
recompense for his doing, God has no more said he will save any people for
doing, then he has said he will save them without doing, for he himself will
have all the glory of man's salvation, and of man's doing, because God himself
finds all the matter, he is the author of our salvation, and the author of
our abilities by which we do, it is he that gives us in the behalf of Christ,
not only to enable us to believe, but also to suffer for his sake, which
promise of abilities no man can claim that suffers as an evil doer, though
many times he is nearer then his promise, which through the riches of his
grace, I have had experience of, by which grace I have obtained an assurance of
mercy, who am least in all my Fathers house, not worthy of the crumbs that fall
from his table, much less of those sweet smiles from himself, speaking peace
to my poor soul, sweetning all conditions unto me, with freenes of satisfaction
in all sufferings, though I have been a backslider, and thereby have occasioned
the way of truth to be evil spoken of, and brought the people of God under
shame and reproach, yet have obtained mercy, though I was with Asap, envious at
the prosperity of the wicked, seeing no bands in their death, but had more then
heart could wish, though the righteous wanted, and were troubled every morning,
I concluded I had changed my heart in vain, thus was my temptations, yet from
those the Lord has delivered me, by revealing his Son in me, and by him
discovering to me, as to the prophet, Psalm. 73.17, 18. both the end of the
righteous and the wicked, and now through the eternal light guiding me in that
which some call heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all
things recorded in the law, and the prophets, in which are the reasons of my
believing.

First, That Christ took upon him the iniquity of all that went astray, Isai.
53.6. Romans 3.23, 24. which was the first doctrine that Peter preached, Act.
10.34, 35, 36. and that Paul and Barnabas preached, Act. 13.47. 1 Cor. 15.3. The
Apostle when he came to the Corinthians, which were Idolaters, he did not tell
them Christ died for an elect number, and if they were of that number, Christ
died for them, but he tells them first of all that Christ died for them.

Secondly, I find this Christ appointed by the Father, for a light to the world
to the Gentiles, to them that sit in darkness.

Thirdly, I find that he does enlighten every man that comes into the world.
Ioh. 1.9. he that denies that Christ enlightens every man, does in effect deny
Christ to be the true light, as compared with verse the 8. besides every man's
experience in this particular, there no man that sins but immediately after, if
not at present, he has a kind of secret tincture in his breast, telling him
what he ought not to do or have done which discovers that the light has been
there.

The next particular considerable is what this light has taught me, First,
What God is in himself, Secondly, what he is in the manifestations of himself.

First, That he is infinite in himself which is considerable, in the
unsearcheablenesse of his wisdom and way, The manifestations of himself are
clearly seen, by the things that are made, that they could not be without a
beginner, that this beginner is wise, in his orderly placing things, and
powerful, which is manifested by thunder, and lightening, and dreadful
appearances of that nature, besides altering and changing, throwing down and
setting up, beyond the reach of reason, even to admiration, and that he is
loving in causing the rain to fall, and the sun to shine, and fruitful
seasons, filling man's heart with joy and gladness, the consideration of this
infiniteness discovered in his works, demonstrates to poor creatures, their
own nothingnesse, which begets in them a holy reverence of the majesty of God,
from the sight of his fullness seriously considered, carries the soul to a
consideration of its own wants, and of what God has promised, comparing which
promises, (viz.) what he has manifested begetts a confidence that this
infinite God is faithful, which puts a poor soul into a capacity to pray,
without which no man can do without sin, and to lay steadfast hold on the
promises of love, of life, of liberty, of privileges, of mutual relation, of
divine communion, all which are manifested in the promises of the Father of
mercies, and God of all Consolation.

Of love, in giving his Son, and by him manifesting an open door into the
holiest.

Of life, to those that go in by that door opened.

Of liberty, of walking into that new and living way, into the holiest.

Of privileges, of knowing their being freed from the hand writing of
ordinances that were against them who walk in that way opened, and of having
God with them, Christ with them, abiding with them. Joh. 14.23. Simpathizing
with them in sufferings, and comforting them by the Angel of his presence,
revealing the mind of the Father to them, opening living fountains of water,
with a manifestation of liberty to draw with joy, out of the wells of
salvation, which makes the faithful of the Lord joyful above their fellows,
wiser then the Rabies of the world, though fools for Christ's sake, yet
instruments of salvation to them that believe, see the freenes of those living
fountains bears up their heads above all troubles and fears, causing them to
mount up like eagles, to run and not be weary, to labor and not faint.

Of mutual relation, having God for their Father by promise, and Christ our
elder brother.

And of divine communion, in enjoying fellowship with the Father, and the Son
Jesus Christ, 1 Ioh. 1.3. which all men may enjoy, that in love receive what is
declared of and by those divine beings, the consideration of these promises in
which are contained those divine manifestations, leads poor souls to a clear
sight of the conditions, upon which these graces promised are intended.

His love, in giving his Son, and manifesting through him a door of life opened
is absolute, his manifestation of liberty, of privilege, of mutual relation,
of divine communion; all upon conditions of obedience of universal obedience,
for such only know Christ that so obey him, 1 Ioh. 2.4. And such only love him,
that yield a universal obedience to him, Ioh. 14.21, 23. and such only he
accounts his friends. Joh. 15.14. this begets a serious consideration what
Christ has commanded, which carries us to the counsel of God for direction,
and as we desire to manifest love to God, and to the Son Jesus Christ, who has
loved us, if God requires us to speak often one to another, we ought not to
neglect it, and if God gives us the spirit of discerning thereupon, as he
promises between the righteous and the wicked, Mal. the 3.18. then in duty we
ought to praise him, and if God requires us to separate from those that are not
his people, and to join with those that are his people, in whom God dwells,
Isa. 57.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. then we ought not to neglect it, and if God manifests
himself a Father thereupon, as he promises, still we ought to sound forth his
praise, which is our reasonable service, and if God manifests unto us, that
baptism of believers justifies him, and the resecters of it rejects Gods
counsel against themselves, Luke 7.29.30. who can forbid water that they
should not be baptized, Act. 10.48. and so likewise for walking in all the
ordinances of the Lord, with reference and godly fear, we ought with comfort
and confidence make our request known unto God, who to the comfort of poor
despised creatures, is in heaven, and sees all the actions of men, from whose
presence there is nothing hid, not a hair of the head of any of his people
falls to the ground without his providence, their sufferings and the reason of
their sufferings, whether for righteousness sake, or as evil doers, and to
the comfort of the righteous will ere long make all naked, when the Son is
manifested and acknowledged, so he the only potentate the king of kings, and
lord of lords, who only has mortality, dwelling in the light, where no mortal
eyes can approach, whom God will send to refresh his people, at the times of
the restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his
prophets, since the world began, Act. 3.19.20, 21. which through grace fills me
with inward comfort, though I bestript of all outward enjoyments, yet I have an
assurance of an eternal inheritance, which the world can neither give, nor
take away, which the Lord the righteous judge will give me at his appearing,
when his poor despised ones shall be made full and complete participators of
what the Lord has promised by his servants the prophets and Apostles, by whose
writings, the mystery hid from ages and generations is manifested in such
legible characters, whereby when men read, they may understand. Ephesians. 3.4. which
comforts the hearts of the Lords servants, filling them with all riches, of
assurance, of understanding, in their acknowledging the mystery of God, and of
the Father, and of Christ, to the which acknowledgement. the God of praise, and
love, bring all those that set their faces Sion ward, that in the rich enjoying
of assurance, may finish their course with joy, he coming the earnest of their
inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, when the
righteous shall receive the end of their hope, the salvation of their souls*
And so much in brief, I was solicited to signify unto your honor, touching
the manner of Gods dealing with my poor soul, now humbly craving your serious
consideration of the particulars herein, being willing to receive information,
wherein I see either in judgment or practice, and the God of peace, and love,
give you understanding in all his ways which are pleasanter then all that this
world can afford.

I shall only give you an account in a word or two of my practice in opposing
the Clergy, which I am sure you have had various reports of.

First, I never spoke to any of them by way of question, until they had done,
except two: and what I said to those two, was in vindication of present
ordinances, openly violated by them.

Nor I never laid hands upon any, nor abetted any that did, though I have heard
so much has been suggested, to your honor, but always on the contrary,
desired peace and peaceable reasoning, yet strongly endeavoring by reason to
vindicate that which I apprehended to be truth.

The reasons of this my practice, may it please your honor was these.

First, I am commanded to follow the example of my dear Savior, and the
example of his servants, so far as they followed him, I find him disputing
amongst the Doctors, and asking them questions, and taking his opportunities
of speaking amongst multitudes, I find the servants, as Stephen, and Apollo,
and Silas, and Peter, following his example, and it was Paul's manner, Act.
17.2. to go in the Synogogues on the Sabbath day; and reason with them (...) of
the Scripture, which God is my witness, besides many hundreds, I have
practiced with much meekness though I have received many taunts and reproaches
from them, unbecoming men of their profession, besides sundry of their
endeavors to set the tumultuous about my ears, as I am able to manifest, yet I
rendered them not evil, though I have by their occasion often undergone
strokes, buffetings, and stoning, and my garments torn from me, all which I
value not, because I know my God has registered my sufferings, I gave no manner
of unbeseeming retorts at O^ndle, when Mr Resbury came into the public place,
and called to Mr Morley, a gentleman of Northamptonshire, whilst preaching
(being then in the pulpit, which was at that time free by act of Parliament,)
uttering with a loud voice contumelious threatenings uncomely to be mentioned by
any that profess the name of Christ, but a patient suffering is comely to, and
amongst the people of God an adorning to the gospel of their profession, to
bear about always in their bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus, is their
treasure in earthen vessels, and therefore shall commit these the series of my
understanding and practice to your serious consideration, being willing through
grace to go through good report and evil, and to suffer any thing that God may
have the glory, and what of it deserves the light to let it have it: which is
all at present from him who is the unworthiest of truths lovers, yet shall take
leave to subscribe my self:

Your Honors servant for the truths sake. William Pryer.

I know I shall be the wonder of the Churches abroad, and of all others that
have been witnesses to my opposing the doctrine of imposition of hands, when
they hear of my entering into the practice of it, it may be some will censure me
as unstable: be it so, I had rather be accounted unstable, then stable in
opposing truth, and therefore shall briefly give to serious consideration the
reasons of my submitting to imposition of hands, now practiced in many places
upon all baptized believers.

First, Because ever since I opposed it, I have found a coldness growing upon
me as to the things of God.

Secondly, I have found a greater debility in my self to withstand temptations.

Thirdly, because I could find no other way to claim that great promise of the
gift of the spirit, by which is convaid the assurance of all the other
promises, but by following the example of the holy men of God in that which did
immediately proceed the enjoyment of the spirit.

Fourthly, Because I find imposition of hands joined to the doctrine of
baptismes by a Conjunction copulative. Heb. 6. and according to the practice of
the Apostles, immediately to proceed the enjoyment of the promise intealed upon
the cheerful reception of the doctrine of baptismes of water and afflictions.

Fifthly, I find it an interposed practice of the Apostles immediately after
baptism, before the saints enjoying the spirit promised.

Sixthly, Because mortification of sin guidance in the way of truth, helps to
prophecy directions to prayer, all convai'd through the spirit which leads into
all truth.

Seventhly, Though I find some had the spirit without it, yet I have no grounds
to expect it but in Gods ordinary way of communication.

Eighthly, Because I find imposition of hands kept alive successively from the
Apostle through the darkest mists of popery even after baptism was changed, as
to the right subjects by the subtilty of Fidus the priest, this practice has
been ever since kept alive by the Bishops hands upon their couzened babes.

Ninthly, Because I find a greater experience of the indwelling of God in those
that practice it upon baptized believers, then in the opposers of it, more
frequent in duties both at home and abroad, more love in them one toward
another, more watchful over one another, more zealous for truth, more
sympathying one with another in sufferings, If I had no other reasons to
convince me of truth in the present practice of imposition of hands then I have
experienced in these latter, These only would have engaged me no longer to have
opposed it.

Vale. William Pryer.

FINIS.

