THE Time-serving Proteus, AND Ambidexter Divine, Uncased to the World:

Containing two Letters of M. John Dury (the great Champion for the New
Engagement, faithfully extracted out of the Originalls under his own hand.)

The first, to Joseph Hall, late Bishop of Exeter;

The second, to William Lawd, late Archbishop of Canterbury.

WHEREIN

He expresses the Reasons which moved him, not only to scruple and dislike,
but in some sort to renounce his Ecclesiastical Orders, and Ministerial
Function formerly conferred on him in the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas;
because not given by a Dioecesan Bishop, but by particular men, whereof none is
above the degree of a Priest, and in point of conscience to crave and receive a
Reordination, and new Orders from our English Bishops; that so he might enter
by the door into the sheepfold. Whose superiority in degree over other
Ministers, and sole jurisdiction in conferring Orders, he asserts to be jure
divino; professing withal, his conscientious observance of, and submission to
all their Canons and Constitutions, and testifying to all the world that he was
the Prelates and this Archbishops most humbly devoted servant in all obedience;
and so he actually was till their fall; and then he quite deserted them, and
turned a zealous Presbyterian again, until the late change of affairs
metamorphosed him into an Independent: and since, into the first printed
Advocate for the New Engagement, proving a Divine of as many various Editions,
as there are several impressions of his inconsiderate Considerations.

Jam. 1. 8. A double minded man is unstable in all his ways. Jude 12. 13.
Clouds they are without water, carried about of winds; Trees whose fruit
withers, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots: raging waves of
the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever. Printed in the Year 1650:

A Copy of a Letter presented to the Reverend Father in God, JOSEPH Lord Bishop
of Exeter, by John Dury.
Wherein he sets down the reasons which moved him to crave Orders in the
Church of England, after he had gotten a presentation to a Cure; although
elsewhere beyond seas he had been formerly called to a Pastoral charge in one
of the Protestant Churches.

Right reverend Father in God:
IT does import every one who is called to a Pastoral charge in the Church, to
satisfy his own conscience in all things belonging thereunto, and be sure,
that he Did you enter thus into your present Living and Pastoral charge,
without institution, admission or induction of a Bishop?
enters in by the door into the Sheepfold, least if he enter in another way,
he be counted a thief, and a robber. Now I was lately called by my Archbishops
preferments made Mr. Dury an Episcopal Proselite, and marred his
Presbyterianship.
Lords Grace of Canterbury to such a charge in this Church of England; whereof
I never was heretofore a member in the Clergy. Therefore I thought it my duty
to consider with my self, whether or no I could lawfully take such a charge
upon me, except I were first received and admitted unto the Ministry as others
are in this Church of England; which after ripe deliberation, I found I could
not do, either lawfully, in respect of the Church in which I am to have a
charge; or conveniently, in respect of the duties to be discharged in it; or
safely, in respect of the tranquillity of my own conscience concerning both:
For which cause I found it requisite to He voluntarily sues to the Bishops for
new Orders, without their motion or instigation.
request, among other favors, this at your Lordships hands, that you would be
pleased to grant me the orders which are appointed by the Canons of this
Church, to be received after a presentation or title is granted, and before
institution and induction may be given to any, who is to have a charge of
souls. It is therefore my humble desire and entreaty, that I may have the
privilege and right which others have by [d] No Ordination lawful with him
but that of Bishops.
lawful ordination into the Ministry, to discharge the office unto which I am
called in this Church. And least this request should seem to be without ground
and motives sufficient to persuade my His conscience is very tender, yet
stretching and mutable with times and preferments.
conscience to desire it, I will shortly set down the reasons which induce me
to sue for this favor.

1. I cannot find in conscience, that I am a true member of the Clergy in this
Church, except I have the orders which others have in it, and as it is
appointed by the Law that every one should have. For the His former Ordination
by Presbyters made him no Minister nor Member of the Clergy in his judgment.
Ordination of the Church gives one the right to be a member of the Ministry
in it: and he is none of the members that is not ordained as the Church
appoints. Now it is so with me; therefore I think my self obliged to seek for
your Ordination, that I may have the previledge of a true member of the Clergy,
and The Bishops Ordination only, not the Presbyters, is the door whereby all
must enter into the Sheepfold.
enter in by the door into the Sheepfold.

2. A Minister must be We have much failed herein of late years.
careful before all things to be without blemish, and occasion of offense,
both in respect of the Church wherein he is to follow his calling, and in
respect of a good conscience whereby he must walk and be conversant in his
calling: But except I receive Ordination by Bishops alone he calls Gods
Ordinance, but not by Presbyters.
Orders appointed by God in the Church, I conceive that I cannot be blameless
in either of these respects. For first, in respect of the Church, I should not
be blameless because the Law of the Church does admit none to be a Curate or
Minister, except he be ordained by some Bishop of this Church. Secondly, I
should not be blameless in respect of my own conscience, because I must He
intends and promises exact Canonical obedience beforehand.
intend to observe and submit my self to all the Canons and Constitutions of
the Church agreeable, or not contrary to the Word of God: Now I know, that this
Canon touching the Ordination of Ministers, is one of the chief and important
Constitutions, and Ordination by Bishops most agreeable to Gods Commandments.
most agreeable to Gods Commandment; therefore I acknowledge my self bound to
observe it.

3. Although I have been admitted els-where unto the Ministry, yet I think not
that Ordination by Presbyters insufficient in his judgment, which nulls and
makes void the Ministers and Ministry of the reformed Church.
Ordination sufficient to authorize me to discharge a Pastoral office in this
Church. 1. Because the Church where I was formerly admitted, is not the same
with the Church of England, as being different in Government from it. 2.
Because the orders which I received formerly were not given by persons of the
same degree and authority, by which these of the Church of England are
conferred: For those are given by particular men, whereof none is above the
Bishops and Ministers different in degree in his judgment.
degree of a Priest; but these are given by a Diocesax or Bishop.

4. Because in my His Ordination by Presbyters much troubles his conscience.
former calling to the Ministry, I have been heretofore interrupted and
perplexed in conscience about it: For a year after I was ordained, I fell in
trouble of mind concerning my calling, and was once resolved to have left it
wholly: The cause of my doubt was, a Does not the present Engagement put a
greater restraint and confinement upon Ministers, and the Ministry then this
you mention.
certain restraint and confinement of my Ministry, to certain conditions not
agreeable to the freedom of a good conscience in professing the Gospel, which
were laid upon me both by those that sent me, and those to whom I was to
minister the Word: When I found this, I fell in a deep trouble of mind;
whereupon I went back again to those that had sent me thither, and got a He
could not in conscience accept of a Pastoral charge in a Presbyterian Church,
yet he can do it with a good conscience in a Prelaticall; belike the revenues
of the one were small, but the other so great that it easily overpoised his
conscience and judgment to accept it.
discharge from them out of that place, and permission to go to my Country:
There I stayed a long while before I could find a resolution to continue in the
Ministry; which at last by the persuasion of learned and godly friends, I
found so far, that I thought it not lawful for me to ronounce altogether that
calling, whereunto from my youth I had sincerely dedicated my studies; to which
I had been publicly chosen by a Church, to which I was approved fit by the
judgment of many, and to which I had obliged my self by solemn promise toward
God. So being afterward called to a Noblemans family, I returned to the
function of a Lecturer, and would never take upon me the charge of souls; and
thus have continued till now in ministerial employments of such a nature, as
did not bind me to any particular Church. But now finding my self called in
another Church, otherwise ordered, to a particular cure, and finding the A
Parochial Cure under our late Bishops is agreeable to Gods Word, but not a
Pastoral charge under a Presbyter? Therefore I must renounce his present cure
upon this ground as well as his first.
nature of this cure agreeable to the Word of God, and my self disposed in due
time to discharge it, I think that, seeing the former Ordination has been
heretofore troubled with doubts, and interrupted; to the end I may go about
this charge to which I am now called with a A call from a Bishop gives a
faithful assurance to him of a blessing from God, to his Ministry, but not
from a Presb^tery.
full resolution, and a faithful assurance of a blessing from God, I ought to
enter by the door, and crave such inabling as the Church can give me by Gods
Ordinance, not neglecting the The power of Ordination bestowed of God on
Bishops only in his opinion, not on inferior Ministers.
Power which God has bestowed upon the Rulers thereof, whereby they can give
Orders unto their subordinate Ministers, whereof I am appointed to be one; And
therefore to quench, and prevent all further doubts, of my calling to the
Ministry, I find my self He is bound in conscience to seek a Reordination from
the Bishop, whom he Courts and flatters with all his Lordly Titles.
bound in conscience to crave and receive Orders in this Church of England,
which for these, besides other causes, right Reverend Father in God, I humbly
desire your Lordship to confer upon me, if I shall be found capable of them,
after trial and examination: For which favor and benefit I have cause to
praise God, and be bound to pray for your Lordships perpetual increase, in all
spiritual and temporal happiness: remaining always,

Exeter 22. Feb. Anno 1634. Your Lordships most humble and devoted servant in
Christ, John Dury.

Mr. Dury was so far in love with these reasons of his, wherein he manifested
himself not only an absolute Episcopal Proselite, but Parasite, both in his
conscience, judgment and practice beyond all former presidents, by Archbishop
Lawds presentation of him to a good benefice in Devonshire, which wrought these
strange alterations and miraculous effects therein expressed, that he sent the
copy of them, written with his own hand, indorsed by him as aforesaid, unto
this Archbishop of Canterbury enclosed in this ensuing Letter, written with his
own hand, and thus indorsed by the Archbishop himself, Rece. Mar. 10. 1633.
Comp. Aug.

To the He Courts this Archbishop to the full with all his Lordly Titles.
most Reverend Father in God, my most gracious, Lord William, by Gods
Providence Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; Primate of all England and
Metropolitan, Chancellor of Oxford, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's
most honorable Privy Counsel, my most Noble Lord, and ever-honored Patron.
Most reverend Father in God;
SEeing I ought to be jealous over my self in all things that concern the
public, least I give just occasion to any body (but chiefly unto your Grace)
of conceiving any thing of my actions, (but chiefly of that which does concern
my taking Orders in this Church) otherwise then might be Your Reordination,
Reasons, and frequent changes are little for your credit.
for my credit; as if either formerly I had without sufficient cause delayed a
thing of so great moment, or now lately had rushed upon it unadvisedly; neither
considering the nature of the work in it self, nor the offense which Forrainers
might take at me if they Your Reasons, Reordination and mutations have given
them just offense and scandal too.
should come to know it; I did think good for all these respects to present
this Letter, first in the original to my Lord of Exeter, and now in the Copy
unto your Grace; that all sinistrous and doubtful opinions might be prevented,
and the true cause might appear, wherefore I did now and never heretofore
intend this matter; therefore I beseech your Grace to take this also in good
part, and keep me in the favor of your good opinion, as one that desires
nothing more, then to live and behave my self so, that I may He desires to
testify to all the world that he was this Archbishops most humbly devoted
servant, which will now make little for his credit.
testify to all the world that I am your Grace his

Most humbly devoted servant in all obedience. John Dury.
Westminster 10. March 1634.
BY the serious consideration of these two Letters, and the marginal
animadversions on them, Mr. John Dury his seduced engaging Patrons and
Disciples, (comparing them with his subsequent changes and wheelings about with
the times and thriving Party) may take an exact Character, as well of his
inward as outward complexion, which S. James thus characteirzeth, Jam. 1. 6.
8. He that wavereth is like a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind and tossed:
A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways. We shall say no more of him
at present, but recommend these three sacred texts to him and his followers,
most serious considerations and second thoughts.

Prove. 24. 21, 22. My son, fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not
with them that are given to change; for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and
who knows the ruin of them both?

Jer. 2. 36, 37, Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? thou also
shall be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria. Yea, thou shall go
forth from him, and thine hands upon thy head: for the Lord has rejected thy
confidences, and thou shall not prosper in them.

Romans 1. 35. Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served
the creature more then the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen.

Isai. 9. 16, 17. For the leaders of this people cause them to err, and they
that are led of them are destroyed. Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in
their young men, neither shall have mercy on their fatherless and widows: for
every one is in hypocrite, and an evil doer, and every month speaks folly
(or villainy) for all this his anget is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still.

FINIS.

