THE MANIFOLD MISERIES OF CIVIL WAR AND DISCORD IN A KINGDOM: BY The
Examples of Germany, France, Ireland, and other places. With some memorable
Examples of Gods Justice, in punishing the Authors and Causers of Rebellion and
Treason.

BY H. P.

LONDON Printed for George Lindsey, July the second. 1642.

THE MANIFOLD MISERIES OF CIVIL WAR and Discord in a Kingdom.
SO many are the Miseries of a Land embroiled in Civil War, and so
interwoven one with another, that like fine shaddows in a piece of rich
Tapistry, they deceive our sight, and pass our imagination, as by woeful
experience Germany, France, and other Neighbor Countries has been tried and
proved. And to begin with Germany, who can be ignorant how much that Empire
has suffered formerly in Civil Dissension among themselves in matter of
Religion, and since, yea at this present in the wars between the Sweeds and
themselves, that goodly and most fertile Country wasted with famine, fire, and
sword, now lying like a Wilderness, in many places desolate and uninhabited,
so that not only men, women, and children have dyed for very hunger, but also
wild beasts in Woods and Forests for want of food have perished. Let me give
you one only example, which a follower of the right Honorable the Earl of
Arundell related unto me (presently after my Lords return from his Embassage
in Germany) at Alburie in Surrey, which is this, A poor man barefoot and
bare-legd followed my Lords Coach to beg bread or other sustenance of him,
while an hunger-starved Fox followed this poor soul close, to get a piece of
the calf of his leg to satisfy his hunger, which my Lord seeing he relieved
the man, and caused the Fox to be taken up (for so weak he was grown with
hunger) and to have something given him, but he dyed presently after,
notwithstanding his belly was filled.

Many men and women in woods, fields, and high ways were found dead, with
grass in their mouths; so that what the sword could not devour, famine did.
Now though ambition in general, and private ends in particular, as Title and
supposed right in Princes, sometimes malice and revenge, yet generally all is
cloked under the cause or reformation of Religion, as we may read in Sleidan of
those bloody wars in Germany made by the Boores and the frantic Anabaptists,
and their fellows in Munster. David, George, Knipperdoling, against the Princes
there, and their Lords; But of all other let us cast an eye upon our Neighbor
France, and take a view of that flourishing Kingdom, see how it has been rent
and torn in pieces (as the Willow-tree complained in the Fable of her bows
and branches, which were lopt off to make wedges to rend her body) by her own
childien, and the fruit may say of her body, what bloody Battles have been
fought between the Protestants and Papists, the King and the Guisians. But I
will relate in brief some particulars, as I find them recorded in their own
Histories, and by their own Writers, beginning from the year 1572, when that
great and horrible Massacre was committed upon the poor Protestants by the
King himself, the Duke of Guise, and the then Queen Mother, of whom was then
made that true and witty Anagram;

Catharina de Medicis Regina Matter,
In me regnat Thais, dira Medaea Circe.
And whom Th. Beza in a witty Epigram in Latin in all respects compares with
Jezabell, saving that whereas the dogs eate-up and devoured Jezabell, he
thought verily she was so bad that no dog would touch her; Vel canes ipsi
respuant Catharinam, be his words, but to our purpose, but take a view of some
of her sons and the Guise his prankes, for they were all of a knot.

A marriage was pretended between the young K: of Navarre and the Lady Margaret
the Kings Sister, which was performed by the Cardinal of Burbon 1572. upon the
18. of August in our Lady Church in Paris, in the presence of the King, the
Queen Mother, the Dukes of Anjou and Alenson, the Prince of Conde, and all the
principal Protestants: at what time was nothing seen but banqueting, tilting,
feasting, nothing heard but music So friendly salutations, all old rancor and
malice between Protestant and Papist seeming utterly to be forgotten and
buried; and to this end the Protestants were solemnly invited by Letters and
most loving Messages from all places, by the King and his Mother, a general
peace being before proclaimed. The Admiral was sent for from Rochell, where he
was (dissemblingly) entertained by the K: in a most loving and friendly manner,
who called him Father at every word; when the Admiral kneeled, the King took
him up, protesting and deeply swearing, he was the welcomest man in the world,
and no day could happen so joyful as that, wherein he enjoyed his company,
etc. The Citizens from all places flocked, from all parts to behold him (for
his wisdom, valor, and experience, he was of all wonderfully beloved and
honored) his Son Teligni was much honored and presented with great gifts, to
the joy of the Protestants, and the (seeming) grief of the Catholics. But
this fair day was quickly over-clouded, with the hellish and black Clouds of
Murder and Mischief, for as the Admiral was going from the Court to his
Lodging, he was shot and sore wounded with three Bullets, as he went softly in
the street, (from a house where Villemus stood, Master to the Duke of Guises
Children lodged) reading of a Supplication.

The King, being at Tennis, threw down his Racket, seeming to be extremely
grieved, and taking with him his Mother and two Brethren, went to visit him,
looked upon his wounds, (for his forefinger was shot off, and with another
Bullet he was wounded in his left arm) and told him, though he had the hurt
and felt the pain, the dishonor was his, because he upon his faith and
promise, had sent for him, vowing to secure him from all danger, and whosoever
had done it or consented thereunto, should be severely punished; The Admiral
answered, he knew the Authors well enough, but left the revenge unto God, and
because he knew not how long he had to live, he desired to speak with the King
in private of matters of great importance, the King seemed to listen a while,
but the Queen Mother cunningly brake off their discourse, and upon Saturday
which was the 23. of August, the Kings Council sat to examine the fact,
seeming to take great pains to boult out the truth, but all in dissimulation,
for the King seeing he had the Admiral and Protestants in a trap, in the dead
of the night at the sound of a Bell from the Louure, Harguebuziers were sent
out and commanded to kill all that came in their way, Cossy being their
Captain, and breaking into the Admirals chamber, one Besme a ruffian finding
him at his prayers upon his knees, asked him, if he were the Admiral, he
answered so I am called, with that he ran him through, another shot him into
the breast with a Pistol, and the rest stabbed him with their daggers, and
after threw his body out at a window into the street, this was the Religion and
fidelity of the Queen Mother and her son to the Protestants. An Italian cut
off the Admirals head, and sent it for a present to the Pope; others cut off
his hands and privy members, trailing his body up and down the street,
hanging it up after at Mountfaulcon their Tyburne. This Noble Gentleman was,
for his wisdom, policy, courage and constancy in professing Gods truth one
of the most excellent and famous men that ever were bred or brought up in
France.

Now with this noble Admiral were murdered in most cruel manner of Protestant
Nobility, the Count Rochfaucout, a complete witty and learned Gentleman,
dearly beloved for his witty and conceited humor of Hen. the 2. Teligny de
Montrevill the Amirals son in law, whose widow named Lois, afterward William of
Nassau Prince of Orange, and father to Henry now Prince of Orange married, and
by which Lady he had him. Besides the Baron of Pardaillon; of Pills; Soubiza;
and Puviant all brave men, and all Commanders: But to see the butcherie they
made in the streets of men, women and young children, would have made an heart
of marble to have melted, all the streets being paved with carcasses, nothing
but weeping and wailing, and a woeful out-crie through the whole City: There
being slain above 10000. persons, as well Noblemen as Gentlemen, Presidents of
Courts, Counselors, Scholars, Praetors, Preachers, Physicians, Merchents,
Handicrafts men, women, maids, and children, the King and Queen with their
brethren went in the evening to behold the dead bodies, amongst others, the
honest Queen mother would behold the body of Soubiza stark naked, because she
had heard (she said) that he was not able to get a child; this most cruel and
bloody maffacre, plotted by her the Duke of Guise and her son then Charles
the ninth, was acted upon Bartholomew day being the 24 of August, Anno 1572.
and it is worthy of observation, that this King so led by his mother was not
past 29. years of age when he died, and dying, abundance of blood issued from
all the open parts of his body, no question but by the just judgment of God,
for the blood which he formerly had in such abundance shed.

From Paris let us go to Sancerre, and after the Sword show the horror and
misery of Famine.

Sancerre after it was besieged by the Marshall Danville, Lieutenant for the
King in Languedoc La Chastre, and the Catholics was brought in the beginning
of the fourth Civil war to that extreme necessity, that after they had
eaten up all their Horses, Asses, Dogs, Cats, and the like, they were
constrained to make meat of their skins, rosting, seething and broyling them
upon gridirons like tripes, mice and rats were great dainties, and happy was
he that could get them; And yet more pressed with hunger, they made meat of
their old shoes, horns, horses, and bullocks hoofs which had many years lien
in the dunghill, and little children would broil and roast their leather girdles
to fill their hungry bellies; roots, herbs, grass and bark of trees were
accounted for dainties. The father and the mother eat their own child which was
starved to death, and for so horrible a fact were both burned.

The famine in Rochel was also very sore, but God did miraculously help them in
their extremity, being even ready for want of food to yield up their Town to
the enemy, for he sent into their Haven (never seen among them before)
exceeding multitudes of Muscles, Cockles and small fishes, whereby they
plentifully stored themselves in despite of the Romish Catholics their
enemies, for hereby the women, maids and children took courage and exposed
themselves to all hazards, animating such as sought by cheerful words and
hardy examples, and one among the rest adventuring in the hottest of the
skirmish, and seeing one of the Catholics slain, ran and took away his sword
and harguebuz, which she carried in triumph into the Town, saying, she had
furnished her self with the spoils of her enemies. But we will leave France,
and come home to the modern miseries of Ireland, occasioned by their Rebellion.

The Rebellion began in Ireland upon the 23. of October last past, when the
Romish priests (with whom the country abounds) swore all the people to
banish and drive all the Protestants out of the Land, if they resisted to kill
them though they were their next neighbors and friends. In the North of
Ireland they killed man, woman and child, they arose at once in nine Provinces
of Vlster, and at Longhall they cut a bridge in two, and then took an hundred
Protestants English and Scots, with women and children, and bound them two and
two back to back, and then threw them into the Rivers. Within two miles of
Dungannon, which is the seat or dwelling of Sir Philemio (or Philip) Oneale,
there dwelt a Scottish Minister whose name was Maders, into whose house they
brake in the night, and finding him within with his wife and children, they cut
off his head and threw it into his wives lap, telling her there was a New-yeers
gift for her. A Scot walking upon the high way in the same County with his
wife and six children, they murdered the man and all his children, and his
wife falling upon her knees, and with tears and prayers entreating they would
spare her that she might bury them: they stabbed her to the heart with their
skeines (which are thick and long sharp pointed daggers, with dudgeon hefts
much like unto Cooks knives) and threw her upon the top of the rest.

In the Town of Machera in the County of London-Derrie, they killed a Parish
Clerk and his five children, after they cut off his wives ears, whereupon she
ran mad.

If they met with any English, men or women traveling on the ways, or in the
woods, they would make holes under their chinnes, and hang them up on boughs of
trees cut off and sharpened.

Young children and infants, they will tear quarter from quarter, as hounds
would do a wild-cat, or the like vermin. They cut of Mr. Rowlcie a Justice of
Peace his head in the County of London-Derrie, then turning up the back of the
body, they stuck upon a stick the head in his fundament, and after set it upon
a stake.

With their Darts, and before named Skeines half a yard long, they stab and rip
up the bellies of women with child, and then will not suffer them to be buried,
but leave them for the woolves and fowls of the air to devour.

Some come from them that have the fairest quarter and mercy showed them, with
their hands, some with their ears, cut off, cleft down the shoulder, or with
one of their eyes put out: silly women and young children, they will put into
some old thatcht house, and then set it on fire, keeping them in till they be
consumed to ashes.

To relate all the cruel murders and villainies of these base villains, would
astonish and terrify the hardest and most inhumane heart (I am persuaded) of
the veriest Turk or Jew in the world, neither can any beastly villainy be
thought whatsoever, but it is committed among them, and these forsooth must be
accounted the best of your Roman Catholics, but I leave their punishment to
God, and the valor of our English and Scots now serving amongst them; neither
has any Country in the world been more plentiful in Treasons then this,
though we our selves have had Traitors enough, whom God has evermore cut off
almost in the very execution of their Treasons, I cannot stand to particularize
the men, nor the manners of their several plots. Queen Elizabeth had plotted
against her 35. several Treasons, yet God delivered her out of all. Let me
conclude with the just reward of a Traitor who betrayed the Isle of Rhodes to
Soliman, being so long and so bravely defended by Lisleadam and the Christians;
this Traitor being a gentleman and a Commander in that service, sent privily
word to the Turk, if he would advance him, he would help him to the possession
of the whole Island and Castle. Soliman promised him he would, nay more, he
would give him his daughter in marriage with three millions of Barbary Ducats
for a portion: by his means the whole Isle, Town and Castle were taken. He then
being brought before Soliman, was graciously entertained, Soliman sent for his
daughter most gloriously dressed with gold and jewels of inestimable value;
Daughter, quoth Soliman, I have chosen this gentleman for your husband,
therefore I charge you to love him, embrace him with all dutiful respect. And
son, quoth Soliman, because you shall see that I am every way as good as my
word, in those chests (which stood by) there is the gold I promised you, and
some four days hence your marriage shall be solemnized; no Bashaw was in more
honor then was this Traitor throughout the Turks whole Army. Upon the third
day Soliman calls for his son in law, and tells him that he was a Christian, and
his daughter a Musulman, or right believer, and he feared they would not agree;
therefore, son quoth he, you must be stripped of your baptized and uncircumcised
skin, and laid all night upon a bed of salt, and if by the morning you can find
in your heart to turn to her Religion, she shall come to bed to you, otherwise
you must lie as quietly as you can by your self. But he being fleied, and laid
tumbling without a skin upon the bed of salt, which was a most cruel torment,
died within an hour after: If all Traitors to their Princes and Countries were
served with the like sauce (especially those in Ireland) the world would be at
a far better pass then it is; which God in his appointed time will accomplish.
And so I end this discourse.

FINIS.

