British and Outlandish PROPHESIES: MOST Of above a 1000 years Antiquity, the
rest very Ancient;

FORETELLING The several Revolutions which has and shall befall the Scepter
of ENGLAND; the Coming in of the Normans, Continuance and Extirpation; the late
Wars; the late Kings death; his Highness's Conquest and arrival to the
Scepter, Sovereigntie and Government of Great Britain; the fall of the Turk,
Pope, Emperor of Germany, and most of the great Princes of the world by their
particular names; and that his Highness that now is shall Conquer most of them:

ALSO, His Highness's lineal descent from the ancient Princes of Britain,
clearly manifesting that He is the Conqueror they so long prophesi^d of.
Also, a short account of the late Kings Original; published in Welsh and
English for the satisfaction of the Intelligent in either TONGUE.

By THOMAS PUGH, Gentleman.

LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by Lodowick Lloyd at his Shop next to the
Castle in Cornhill. 1658.

CYMMRODORION 1820
modern bookplate

To the Right Honorable John Glynn, Lord Chief Justice of England.
MY Lord, I might justly incur your just Reprehension for presuming to prefix
your Name to patronize so rude and indigested Collection, which in testimony of
the innate affection I ever bore my Native Country, I have essayed; spurred
thereunto with the longing desire of manifesting a pittance (as Interest) of
that principle Service I had devoted to attend your Honors commands: How
seasonable it may accest to ataque your Lordships perusal I can better wish
then pretend cognizance of. I presume, many fresh pallats, not seasoned with
mature deliberation, cannot well relish nor resent these old superannuated
relicts, who nothing dandle but their own misshapen prodigies and abortive
bratts: My Lord, I have gleaned the Remains of our British Bards, which time
has honored with such hoary Hair, that most of them writes above a 1000
years, from whose mouths you may please to recieve an account of all the
revolutions and vicissitudes that has, and may befall, the Scepter of England,
the late wars, the Kings death, his Highness Inauguration, and now they
having given your Honor an account in their Mother tongue, they address
themselves to your Lordship for shelter from envies darts, and though I have
exposed my self to the public view and censure of all that can read English,
yet having the influence of your Lordships name, I value not what darts malice
may or can ejaculate against me; for indeed I could not expect (treating upon a
subject of this nature) to please all, and so having discharged my conscience
in rendering these Gleanings as well as I was capable into English (without
favor or affection) beg license to style (as I ever hope to approve) my self,

Your Lordships faithfully devoted Servant THO. PUGH.

To the READER.
REader, thou art here presented with many ancient Prophesies; some of 11, and
others of 1200 years antiquity: the rest very ancient; but for want of a
Corrector sufficiently intelligent in the British tongue, that part of the
Book (viz. the Welsh) has not escaped the Press free from Errata's. The
language these Prophesies were delivered in is so very ancient, that it differs
much from what is now spoken; and upon that account I could not for the present
(the Collector of these Prophesies living very remote) procure any so
intelligent in that Tongue, as to have warranted it free from Errata's: but as
the faults will easily appear to those that understand the Language, so they
will (by them) as soon be corrected; and for those who only understand the
English, they are to them of no concernment: but if opportunity hereafter offer
it self, and the complexion of the time deserve it, those faults will not only
be corrected (for a further satisfaction to those who understand the British
tongue,) but some marginal Notes will be added for their more easy
understanding: but I doubt not but they will meet with many Opposers, who
oftentimes resist the apparentest Truth with a sturdie defiance, because it
makes not for their espoused interest; and those kind of men reckon the most
currentest Coin. (where the very finger of heaven is p^rceptible) but as
counterfeit, because it has not the Image of their Caesar impressed upon it;
however, if thou will spend so much time as to look them over, thou will find
their Language strange, as to the late King and his Family, his Highness and
Posterity. What was then delivered by them, has been ever since preserved and
conveyed from age to age, and now brought to public view: and though they seem
great strangers to most men, by reason of their hoary hair, yet there are many
Persons living (both of Honor and Integrity) who have converst with them in
ancient manuscripts many years before the breaking out of the late Wars,
besides many Outlandish Authors for many hundred of years past, made use of
their names and prophesies upon several occasions; but it is true, many foreign
ancient Writers judged Taliesin rather a Magician then an Angel, (as the
ancient Britains termed him) in regard of those wonderful things which he
did, when he lived amongst them 1200 years since; and forasmuch as no account
could be given of his exstraction and Genealogy. But my purpose is not to
Apologize for him in either respects, but leave him to be judged by them that
read him; only I thought good to acquaint thee, That the passage concerning
the original and descent of the late King, made use of in these Prophesies,
thou shall find at large in Holingsheds History of Scotland, page 246. This I
thought good to mention, least the Reader be possessed with prejudice against the
Collector of these Prophesies, who quotes that passage out of Powels Chronicle,
which is very rare or not to be had.

Vale.
The substance of some of the Prophesies, by way of Question and Answer,
beginning at Henry the Eighth.
Quest. HOw ma^y Children shall Henry have?

Answ. Four Children.

Qu. How many of them shall reign?

An. Three.

Qu. Which of them will first reign?

An. The fourth B^anch; or Edward the Six^.

Qu. Who will be the second?

An. Mary; or woe and misery, with sour sauce, to the Protestants.

Qu. Who will be the third?

An. Elizabeth; or a tender Dame, which will bemoan the former miseries of the
Protestants.

Qu. Who will succeed her?

An. King James; a new Sovereign, a Lion, or a Lamb.

Qu. Who will succed this new Sovereign?

An. King Charles; or a Mould-warp, a red Lion, white King, or Flower de Luce.

Qu. How shall he reign?

An. With peace at the beginning, and wars toward the latter end of his reign.

Qu. What shall become of him?

An. Driven to fly, taken and censured to death.

Qu. Will he be put to death?

An. Yes: and shall be the last crowned King that shall reign in Britain of
that race.

Qu. By whom shall he be put to death?

An. By a Council from the Army.

Qu. Who will be chief of that Council?

An. Fairfax; or a man with the l^tter X in his name.

Qu. By what death and Instrument will he dye?

An. His head cut off with an Axe.

Qu. What will befall to his Party, or them which side with him.

An. Woe (...) loss of lives, or Estates, or both.

Qu. Shall any of the Children of the Mould warp, red Lion, or white King
succeed him in the Regal Government?

An. No.

Qu. Who will succeed the Mould warp in the Government of Great Britain?

An. A Branch out a further Beam, or from the body of Blethin ap Cynvin,
sometimes Prince of Powis and North Wales; and also from Eysyllt, daughter to
Conan Dindaethwy, son to Rodri Molwynog, son to Idwall Iurch, son to
Cadwallader; and likewise from Angharad, mother of the said Blethin ap Cynvin;
or a black Lion, or a red subtle Fox, or an Eagle.

Qu. What will this Branch do in Great Britain, and elsewhere abroad?

An. Conquer England, Wales, Scotland and Ireland, shake the Ant christ of
Rom^, and the Kingdoms of Europe, or force them to a peaceable Associat^on.

Qu. How will it fall to the Church in his tim^?

An. Bring the Church to a Reformation according to its primitive purity.

Qu. In answer to the seventh Question, thou have spoken of Wars in the lat^er
end ^f the Mouldwarps reign, tell us how and what will be the cause of such
war?

An. D^vision in a Parliament between Lords, which is called a Red Parliament.

Qu. What Number will the Prime be in the year of that Red Parliament?

An. The Prime will be 9.

Qu. According to your Prophesies, who will get the Crown, the King or his
Subjects?

An. The Crown will be from thence forwards disposed at the will and command of
the Subjects.

Qu. How is the eldest Son of the Mould-warp laid out?

An. A white King, the Flower of the Rose.

Qu. How will it fare with him?

An. Be forced to fly out of England toward Spain and the rising of the Sun.

Qu. How many attempts will he make against England?

An. Two attempts.

Qu. What will become of him in that attempt?

An. Fall in the storm.

Qu. What will become of the rest of the Children of the Mould-warp?

An. Vanish away, and live in strange Land for evermore.

Q. What shall become of she Queen of the first white King?

An. The Rose female and her Flowers shall for ever van^sh away.

Qu. What shall become of the posterity or race o^ 2 Henry's?

An. They will be wholly extirpated of the Kingly Government.

Qu. Having done with the Temporality, what will become of the Clergy both at
home and abroad, and first what will become of the Pope of Rome?

An. Fall to the ground.

Qu. By whom shall he have his fall?

An. By the great Turk and the British Branch.

Qu. What will become of Bishops here in Great Britain?

An. Fall likewise with their Hiera^chie.

Qu. What will become of the Clergy of the Mould-warp, or white King?

An. Fall in like manner to contempt and misery, and be barred of their
temporal Livings.

Qu. What will become of Crosses, Images, and superstitious Rites and
Ceremonies?

An. Demolished, abrogated, and taken away for ever.

Qu. By whose means will this come to pass?

An. By means of the Reformed Prince or Conqueror of the British blood,
mentioned in the 15 Question before.

Qu. Whether the ancient forms of Ma^riages, Baptism, the Sacrament and Burials
will stand or no?

An. None of these will stand, but altered into other forms more wise and
agreeable to Gods Word.

Qu. Shall the Church and State here in Great Britain be free from trouble and
invasion of foreign Nations after the year 1656.

An. No; but shall be further tried with troubles both from its own bosom, and
from enemies abroad.

Qu. How long will such trouble continue to the Church and State after the year
56?

An. Look not for settlement till the year 63.

Qu. Shall there be unity, peace and concord after that year here in Grrat
Britain.

An. Yes assuredly.

Qu. Shall Beirdhth and Poets be yet in esteem?

An. Yes: Foddaw Paredraeth i bob Prydidd.

Q. What shall be the chief grounds of the falling out between the Mould warp,
red Lion, or white King, and his Parliament?

An. The chief cause or grounds thereof will be about the old or Romish
Religion.

Qu. Thou have spoken of a Conqueror, tell us of his Birth and Parentage.

An. He shall be a Britain by descent from the fathers side, and an Englishman
born.

Qu. When shall such Conqueror appear with his warlike Actions?

An. He shall be the first after E. the young King, or E. which will dye in his
youth, viz Edward the Sixth.

Q. Whose Standard shall this British Conqueror beat down?

An. The Standard of C. or Charles.

A Bright Northern STAR: Discovering the Fate of GREAT BRITAIN.
IN the year of Christ, 540. In the time of Maelgwyn ^winnedd, in Latin
Maglocunus, King of the Britains; there lived in North Wales, a Prince called
Gwiddno Garranir, which had a Weere, or a design to take variety of fish in
great abundance, especially at some seasons of the year; and upon the Eve of
St. John Baptist, Elphin, eldest Son of the said Gwiddno, a prodigal youth,
begged of his Father the fortune of the said Weere for that night, the which
was kindly granted; next morning Elphin went very early to view the fortune
destinated for him; then the Nets were taken up, but no mann^r of fish, only a
close leather bagg, in, or entaogled about the said Net; the which was taken up
and ripe open; the first object that appeared, was a forehead of a lively
child; upon sight thereof Elphin said, O! Jessu wnned ydiw i ^alken, Behold O
Jesu how white is his forehead* thereupon the child replied and said, Well ti
am henwaist i, Taliesin in ge w^r, Thou have given me a name which shall be
Taliesin; but prodigal Elpnin began to be so rowful at his hard fortune, seeing
that he had no manner of fish, when his father had them in great abundance,
esp^cially at such a season of the year; Then the young child finding E^ph^n
discontented for his hard fortune, began to solace him wi^h most divine
Exhortations; to trust in the living God, which never fails his; after these
as follows,

Then the child was brought along with Elphin to his father house, where he was
nourished and brought up a Scholar, and after few years he became Master of all
Languages, Arts and Learning; and also, absolute perfect in the knowledge of
holy Writs, and excellent in the gift of Poetry, which he delivered most
sweetly in way of Traethiawd, wawd, or owdwle^, in high and elegant phrase: A
Champion for the Protestant Religion, which he professed and maintained, as
appears by his Creed, and other writings herein incerted; And an enemy to the
Church of Rome, vehemently exhorting the Clergy and Layety of of the Britains
to take heed and beware of the corrupt Doctrine thereof; he was a great
Prophet, as is already expressed. This Taliesin made former appearances, and
bore several names; at the first time called Gwin bath, the second time
Merthin, and lastly Taliesin; the manner of these former appearances I have
omitted, least my Narration prove too tedious to the friendly Reader: Merlin
Amboorse that l^ved in his time, gave him reverend and respective Titles.

Now to Taliesins first Language, which he delivered in an Exhortative way to
the said Elphin ap Gweddno.
1.
Ephin degrees tawath wylo
Na Chabled neb e eiddo
Ni wnales it ddrwg obeithio
Nid a will dun ai Portho
Ni their dvwrr Addawo
Ni bidd, koeg gweddi kynlo: or first born

Ni chaed yngoced widdno
E, ioed kystall a heno.
The Translation, Toliesin finding Elphin sorrowful for his hard fortune, began
to exhort and to solace him, and said; Fair Elphin leave off thy weeping, be
not discouraged at thy loss, nor contemn what thou have received, it will not
avail thee to be hopeless, man is not sustained with what he sees, God will
not break his promise; the prayer of Kynllo will not be fruitless; there was
never had in the Weer of Gwiedno, so good a fortune as this.

2.
Elphin d^g ssuch die ddeyvdd
I^th wared fod in brvdd
Ni wna les gormod kystydd
Kvc tybbiaist na che faist fvdd
Nag Ammav weithiav dofvdd
Kvd bwyf fycha^e wife golfvdd
O for ag o fynvdd, oeigiawnafonvrdd
I dewfin dvw dda ir dedwvdd.
The Translation: Fare Elphin wipe off the tears from thy face, it will not
avail thee to be pensive, neither will it profit thee to be too sortowful, thou
think thou have no gain, mis-doubt not the works of God, for from the Sea
and Land will he send riches to the happy or just man.

3.
Elphin Cynneddfav diddan
Anfil wraidd yw die Amkan
Kid bwf eiddil a bychan
Hr fodd garw firw mordnilan
Ind rhaid it ddirfawr gwvfau
Gwell dvw na drwg ddarogau
Im A wnaf it in invdd kyssran
Well na thrychan Maran.
The Translation, Well quallified Elphin, thy purpose and hopes are not
Warrior like, while I am small and tender; After such sort thou need not
desperately complain, better trust in God then mistrust his mercies, in the
time of necessity, I will be beter unto then than 300. Salmons.

4.
Elphin gynneddfav hynod
Nascr wothdy gaffaciliod
Kyd bwyf wan ar lawr yngod
Mae rhinwedd ar synbafod
Ind rhaid it ddirsawr ofnod
Cnd Koff^rv henwer dwndad
Niddichon ueb ay orsod
The Translation: Elphin of known virtues, be not displeased with the fortune
thou have received of God, while I am weak and under thy protection, there is a
gift on my tongue, thou needst not be terrified with too much fear; do but name
or crave the assistance of the Trini^y, and ^hou can not be overcome.

Now follows his Confession, or an exact Account of what he was, and of his
sojourning since the Creation, to that very time of his appear^ng.
Part 1.
Prif fardd ^yffred in ydwyfi i Elphin
Am gwalad gynefio ymmeo goribblu
Jonas ddewn am gelwis Merddin
Bebach Pob Brenmam geilw Tal^esin.
The Translation: I am now chief Bardth, or Prophet to Elphin, but my lest
abode was in the Country of the Cherubims: Jonas the Prophet called me Merddin,
but hereafter all Kings shall name me Taliesin.

2.
Mi fvm gidam N r yngor vwch der
Elder pan gwvmpodd lvmcisa ivffern ddwsndir
Mifvm Mewn Mauner o flaen Alexander*
Mi wn rify ser or Gogledd hid Auster.
The Translation: I was with my Lord God in the highest Heavens, when Lucifer
fell to the bottom of Hell, I have been in a Banner, (leading) before
Alexander; I know the number of the Stars from the North to the South.

3.
Mi fvm in Arka gida Noe ag Alpha
Mi Awelais ddifa Sodom a Gomorha
Mi fvm in Affricka kin a deiladv, Roma
M^ a ddeithim hid ymmaat weddillion Troya.
The Translation: I was in the A^k with Noah and Alpha I saw the destruction of
Sod^m and Gomorrah; I have been at Affricka, before the building of Rome; I
came to the Remnant of the Trojans.

4.
Mi fvm Bedcog i Eli ag Enog
Mi fvm ymman krvgmabdvwtagarog
Mi fvm ben kaidiog yngaruth twr Nebog
Mi fvm dri chyfnodynghaer Arian chog.
The Translation: I have been a Protector to Elias and Enoch, I have been at
the place where the merciful Son of God suffered; I have been chief keeper or
conductor at the building of the Tower of Babel; I have been three seasons in
the City of Arianchog.

5.
Mi Addeithim ir heon i lawrglyn Ebron
Mi fvm in Canan Paulas Absolon
Mi fvm in llus dion, kyn geni Gwvddion
Mi fvm ynghaer salon ymmvsgr Apostolion.
The Translation: I came to the Plain, in the Valley of Hebron: I was at Canaan
when Absalom was killed; I was at the Palace or Court o^ Dyon, before the
birth of Giants: I have been at the City of peace, Caersalon, or Jerusalem,
amongst the Apostles.

6.
Mifvm fardd teleulu i Lion lychlin
Mi a gefais Newin Am faby forwym
Mifvm in ygwpn frinyn Llis Kynfelin
Mewa ky ff^g effin vndvdd abwiddin.
The Translation: I have been chief Berdth to Lion, King of Armorico; I
sustained hunger for the Son of the Virgins sake, (meaning Christ) I have been
at the Court of Kynvelin (King of the Britains) and have sustained prison at
the Tower for a year and a day.

7.
Mi a fvm gidamrhiaen ym meressebe Assen
Mi a Nerthes Moyseu trwy for ^rddonea
My a fvm in rwybren gida mairfadlen
Mi a gefais a wen o bair Garidwen.
The Translation: I have been with my Virgin at the Asses Crib; I have
conducted Moses through the Sea of Jordan; I have bin in the air with Mary
Magdalin; I have received the gift of Poe^ry from the boiling furnace of
Caridwin, a she Giant that lived in North Wales.

8.
Mi a wn ddysgv gwawd
Ir holl fedayth dawd
Mi a f^dda hid ddvdd brawd
Ar vey n^b daivr dawd
Ni wyddvs bethyw fyngnhawd
Ai kvg ai ypsgawd.
The Translation: I know how to teach the making of Songs to all the Masters of
Poetry; I will be upon the face of the earth, till the day of judgment; It is
not known whether my body be fish or flesh.

And so ends a Declaration of his progress since the Creation.

Now follows his Creed.
Krvst Iessv grovwcha iti ynving ikredat
Die fodyn dri agynun, agynvnia wnith goili af
Iawn die Alwyn dad chad chwyth bennaf
Iawn die Alwyn dad pobplant Addaf
Iawn die Alwyn ysbrvd in liniwvd mal Efaf
Iawn it helpv kymrv hvff y dwed
Pau fvch trigens mlwydd cbwydd ynehaf
Dros ben pedwarkaut saut sauteiddiaf
Dros ben mil hefud, btddbod gownaf
Yno gwraudawer ner fie Naf
Yna i chenir tir y wyr glanaf
A phen fvch ddevgain Affedair ynehaf
Dros ben mvl chwechant m 1 l alphaf
Troude hod ar die blaut kieiniaf
Fie ner helper Owen Clazi golev af
Yno i kau ka mber halelvwi af
The Translation: Christ Jesus the most High, in thee only do I believe, which
art three, and yet one, and in that one do I rightly believe, with all right
art thou to be called a f^ee, w^lling and supreme Father; worthy to be called
the Father of all the children of Adam; wor^hy to be called a Spirit, not
created like Eve, w^ll may thou help the Britains, with boldness and
humility I speak it; thou that art the Holy of Holies, when thou come to the
age of one thousand four hundred and threescore, then let my Lord hear my
request, for then will the lands of the fairest be parted: And when thou son of
Alpha come to the age of one thousand six hundred forty and four, then let
the wheel turn to the benefit of thy most miserable children; my Lord, help
thou the most bright and visible Owen, then shall Kamber sin Halelnjah.

Y drydvdd owd wl Awnaeth Taliesin i osod allau y dialedd a ddigwydd i
bachadiried am Amrw bechode rgweithtedvedd dew.
1. Gwae a gymerth sedved A chred a chrefvd. [Onis tevstha

2. Gwae hwy Benaetheav Adir dafodav [Agai difethair

3. Gwae ofieiriaud mvd Nir Angreffitia gwvd [Agni phregetha.

4. Gwae ni cheidw i gail Ag of ynfvgail. [Agnis Areilia.

5. Gwae in cheidw i dd^saud Chag bleidduo [Aifonguwpa.

6. Gwae a gais bressen Mewntrais trawsdilen. [Trafoyma.

7. Gwae ddegassog samt Ni chat woe i scamt. [Agnis Adola.

8. Gwae eulin Angev, A wnel bechidev. [Onis kyffessa.

9. Gwae a ysso fwyd Twysegir fwd. [Agni laficia.

10. Gwae a gasglo olvd Trafoyna bvd. [Odraifa thraha.

11. Gwae erbin didd brawd Ni ^hospo i gnawd. [Agnis gweddia.

12. Gwae a foyn bengwlad Ag afo kirdwad. [Ag wnel traha.

13. Gwae in chredir drindawd Gwae ni rudd gardawd. [Onistrigarha.

14. Gwae a ddyko dreftad Y wrddwar ymddifad. [Onis ky A ana.

15. Gwae a occhfydo egwan Ag a ddygo i ram. [Onis ky siowna.

16. Gwae a ddyg o far. Yni galon wethi gar. [Ag ai kassha.

17. Gwae brechen Ky footh Ag a welo lednoeth. [Onis k ddia.

18. Gwae a to gwenwing Gwae a wvlfychedig. [Oni estirya.

19. Gwae in ymwel ^r kleision. Ar karcarcharorian [Onis gobrwha.

20. Gwae in roddo let^v A bwvd a gwelv. [I B^rerinia.

21. Gwae of oi eni yma Os i ddrwg weithceda. [Ai dwgi ^^fferna.

22. Gwae hwnt y gethren A wl^dy cha vffern. [Bvthuerdy yma.

23. Man i mae wbain Main i mae llefam. [A llawer pla.

24. Man i mae Guzdd fam. Man i mae poeth fan [Heb. escorv.

25. Man nid oes ddolwch Man nid oes ed^ firrweh. [Buth wedy yma.

26. M o i mae denikevd Man i mae Anwyd. [Ecc^ Agfa:

27. Man i mae krioe Man i mae vddo. [Bvth hedisin wvthdra.

His Woes against manifold sin and sinners.
1. Woe be unto all that enter into covenant by Baptism, if they will not
perform.

2. Woe be unto Rul^rs that destroy Towns.

3. Woe be unto dumb Priests that slight their she^p, and will not preach.

4. Woe be unto those Shepherds that will not defend their fold always.

5, Woe be unto him that will not preserve his sheep with weapon, though from
Romish Wolves.

6. Woe be unto them that seek gain by tyranny and oppression.

7. Woe be unto the odious Saints that will not keep his birthright, and not
worship.

8. Woe be unto all mortals that commit sin will not confess them and repent.

9. Woe be unto them that eat their bread through idleness, and will not work.

10. Woe be unto them that gather riches while they are here by oppression and
impiety.

11. Woe be unto them against the judgment day, that will not mortify their
members and pray.

12. Woe be unto the chief Rulers and Magistrates that do injustice.

14. Woe be unto them that will not believe in the Trinity, and that will not
give Alms.

14. Woe be unto him that defraudeth the fatherless and the widow, if he will
not make restitution.

15. Woe be unto them that oppresses the weak, and takes his right from him,
and will not satisfy him.

16. Woe be unto him that hates his brother to death.

17. Woe be unto rich men that will not commiserate and cloth the poor and
naked.

18. Woe be unto them that are poisoned with envy and malice, and releeveth not
the thirsly.

19. Woe be unto them that visit not the sick and prisoners in disterss.

20. Woe be unto them that deny the sojourners of rest and relief.

21. Woe be un^o him born here if his (...) w^ll s^^k him to Hell.

22. Woe be unto those Fiends that sh^^ ^o^ ever be confined to the torments of
Hell.

23. A place full of howling, crying, and intol^rable plagues.

24. A place full of groanings and ardent heat, without hopes of recovery.

25. A place void of satisfaction (for sins) and repent^nce for eternity.

26. A place where is shivering and quaking for the coldness of frost and snow:

27. A place where is crying and howling for eternity without case.

R. Gwdwl fraith hyna in kan llin e hon fvdd in gosvd Allau gwneithvriad Addu
ag evah a llawer o bethav eraul fell i mae i ddaugvs gerllaw, ag yndi weed ar
bruffwi dolieth ir saefon ar Britanienid.
1.
Of a wnaeth Panton ar draeth Glinn Ebron
Ai ddwilo gwnion gnawd hvmana
A phumkan mylyneddyn ddi ymgvledd
I bv in gorwedd kin kael Amma
The Translation, Taliesin said that Panton made humane body with his white
hands on the sandy Velleys of Hebron, and that this humanity respited five
hundred years on that sands before he was made a living soul.

2.
Of a wnaeth eilwis in llvs Baradwvs
O assen asswy, Essni Femina
Seithawr i bvan in kidwir berllan
Kin kwffwed a satan temytiwr hvladda.
The Translation, That the same Panton in the Court of Paradise made again a
Femina out of a left rib, and that they, or Adam and Eve, stood but seven hours
before they met with Satan, Tempter of the posterity of Adam.

3.
Oddiyno i gyrwyd trwy gvr ag Anwyd
I gneli lowid ir bid yma
Iddwyvn trwy lvdded feibion amerched
Chag kael esmwvthder yma.
The Translation, That they were driven from thence to get their living here,
through the extremity of cold and labor, and to get men and maid children
through pain and grief, and not to live at ^ase here on earth.

4.
I Addaf ai gymar i chodded chawbalar
I dorri e ddayar i gael bara
Engylawl genad gave vcheldad
A ddvg had lifiad gidag efa.
The Translation, That a Spade was given to Adam and his fellow to dig the
earth, and to get their bread; that an Angel presented from the most high
Father, all manner of seeds to Eve for Adam.

5.
Hithe A giddiaod y ddegfed chau or chodd
Hid na Chwpwlhaod e holl Balfa
Yuo llei^ heywxd e had a golkvwyd
Men Sam nvel Brvffwydb offessna.
The Translation, But Eve c^nveyed away, and did hide from Adam the tenth part
of these se^ds, so that the remainder were not sufficient to ^ow the Ti^lage;
then wh^^e the seeds were sown, it proved d^ceit^ul, as witnesses Samuel the
Prophet.

6.
R^ug dv a gafad in lle Gwenith had
Er dangos afrad ar l^d^atta
Am hyny off^lfddrwg chaud medd e Athrwg
Roi pob rh^w ddegwm i ddvw yrdnna.
The Translation, This wasting of the seeds by the every produced Rye where
Wheat was sown, and this falsehood brought in the payment of the tenth part of
all the Tillage to the Lord God.

7.
Or Gwenith cowraint, ar Gwvn rhved Rhwvdd fraint
I gwneir kooph kowraint krvst sab Alpha
Y Gwenith ywr knawd, ar Gwn ywy Gwaddrawd
A geirie e drindawd ai bendiga.
The Translation, That of the purest Wheat, and tawny pleasant wine is made a
body of Christ, the son of Alpha; The Wheat a Type of the body, the Wine of the
natur^l blood, and these are consecrated with the words of the Trinity.

8.
Lly srav pob dirgol of a ddvg Laphael
O law Emmanvwel vw choi i Adda
Pan oedd ymcheffen hid droff i ddwien
In nwfwe Irddonen ynhir weftfa.
The Translation, Books of all Mysteries, Arts and Scienc^s, were brought by
Raphael the Archangel from the han^s of Emmanuel to be given un o Adam, when
he was at the River of Jordan in the Western parts, up to his cheeks

9.
Devddeg Engylion pedwar Gweryddon
Addan fvnoth lef on i du Adda
Er daug^s i nerth chag pobrh w drafferth,
Pan oedd Aughy fnerh in benna,
The Translation, Twelve Angels and four Books were sent by Lefon to the house
of Adam, to demonstrate his power, and against all manner of miseries, when
weakness bore sway, and befoje strength came in.

10.
Mawr fvo falon ar y bobt ddymon
Kim kael Arwiddion miserecordia,
The Translation, Great war the care and fear of the sons of men, before they
received sign^ and promises of mercy and redemption.

11.
Pymtheg degrees dudd briw
Dros vwchder pob rhiw
I bv dwfe dilwyndwyu Arka.
The Translation, That the deluge boar the Ark over the tops of all hills for
fifteen term destroying days.

12.
Or Gwvn sinoblrvdd blanwud weth hoelddidd
Ar nos nanos gynvdd, ar Gwyn Alpha.
13.
Fo gafas moesen i dair gwialen
R^ag dirfowr Angev ar dominicha
Fo gafas Alon o dwr Babylon
Ddirgele digion Arf a Pheira
The Translation, Moses had his three Rods on the Lords day against the eminent
danger of death: Alon likewise had from the Tower of Babel a misterious weapon.

14.
Ag a gefais inn in fymmrud lytre
Holl gelfyddiadav gwlad Europia
Ochfi mor drvan trwy ddirfawer gwinfau
I dawr darogau i lvn Troya.
The Translation, I had (likewise) in my Prophecy Books, the misterious
knowledge of the Country of Europe, woe is me, and I do very much bemoan the
misery and calami^y that shall fall upon the Race of the Trojans.

15.
Eyfarffes gadwvnog falch Auchigarog
Ageskill eskithrogo sermania
Hono a o^eskin gymrv a phrydein
Olan Morllychlin hid in saprina.
The Translation, For a Serpent will come in with chained wings most te^rilbe
from Germane, and this will overcome and conquer Wales and Britain, from the
Norway Seas to Civern.

17.
Yna i bidd Brithon mul karcharvrion
Ymrain Alltidwn i ogaxonia
I ner a folant, i faith a gadwant
I Braint a gollant and wyllt walia
The Translation, Then will the Britains be in the condition of slaves to the
Saxons; notwithstanding this Tyrannical ^xtremity the Britains will continue in
^he worshipping of their true God, preserve their Relig^on, but lose their
lawful Rights and Inheritances except wild Wales.

17*
Oni ddel chiv fvd wedy her bouvd
I bo gogihvd y ddax draba
Yuo i kaiff Brithon i Tir ai koron
Ar bobl estaonion a dduvlanna.
The Translation, Until such time (after long suffering) that that the sins of
both be had in equal balance: Then shall the Britains reinjoy their
Territories and Crown, and the ands;^range Nations shall vanish away.

After a long progress of the Creation, of the f^ll of man, and his expulsion
out of P^^adice, to get their bread and c^ildren through swet and ^abou^; Of
^ves ^hee^ery, and ^^aping of Rye where Wheat had b^^n (...); of the S^crament
under the figure of Bread and Win^; of the Books of all Mysteries brought to
Adam by the Angel Raphael, of the twelve Angels, and f^ur Books sent by Lefon
to the house of Adam; of the fearful danger of man before the promise of a
Redeemer; of ^he Deluge, of Moses his three Rods, and Alon his mysterious
weapon, and many particulars besid^s, then worth the nothing.

Then he proceeds and ends in prophecy of the Co^q^est of the Britains by the
Saxons, and stranger Nation of their expulsion out of England into Wales, yet
retaining their native Language, and faith in their true God; and of a certain
time when the sins of both comes to an equal height, that then the stranger
Nation will vanish away: and this Prophecy is fully accomplished to this very
last Point: I could wish that England may look narrowly to their public
domestique sins, and observe how many changes and alterations come to this
Island since Brutus his arrival.

First, Brutus entered in Anno Mundi 2781 Then the Scots, Picts, and Danes,
Anno Christi Then the Saxons, English etc. 450 Then the Danes 1013 Then the
Normans 1066 Then the Scots 2602 And now his Highness the Lord Protector.


Well, do but observe and acknowledge the i^resistable will and power of the
Ruler of Heaven and Earth, and let them that stand take heed lest they fall.

Kynghorav Taliesin i Elphin ^p Gwiddno, gwedy ir Birdh diwatha eghirhave e
Jaweth.
Nag ym ddiried ir neboth fwgythio.
Na chais groeso dan wg
Na chais lewenvdd heb wen
Ga chais chware a Chlwyfvshen
Fachais Elwo eskelyter
Na chais esmwvth der addigter
Na chais her n^ges gau goled asrounog
Na chais ddiolcham nag
Na chais barcho ddryg fves
Na cha I vrddas o ff alster
Na chais gvllwair athgas
Nag ymrysson othwell
Nid oes gair gwir heb folianter drindod
Nid oes gair kelwy d hebyntho bechod
Nid oes weithred dda heb dalwyn barad
Nid oes weithered ddrwg heb ddialddidd brawd
Na chymellar ywfvd na diskna chyugar
Na chwfg fvhesni chag rhewsis yenawr
Na fvdd ddw faboni lerwichhy skibor
Na fynag i leide lle i body dryssor
Nagym ddiried ownod i leide vnaniser
Na fvdd chv soethos llei gallerdy hepkor
Na fegir oath fvdd oni delvchardy Elor
Nag Amharcha die dad nabvgeilvd Allor
Na ddyro fwvd i y^kymhi nag i kybiddanger
Nag ym ddiried and i ddvw ar heb Tymmor
A garv gael kyug er gefynedir doetha
A garo foliant molianedy Pena
A garo gael golvd kyfarched ir kyfethoka
A garo ymbil ymqilied ar haela
A garo gael yechvd kyforched ir gochucha
A gael trigaredd gveddiedar Alpha.
Englished.
COnfide not in him that threatens thee; seek not welcome from a dogged
countenance. Seek not mirth from the Churl: Play not, jest not, with an old
sickly person: Seek not profit from carelessn^ss, not ease from sorrow: Se^k
not ^urte^es from a (...) if: R^^urn not thanks for denyals: Se^k no respect
for abusive words: Se^k no credit from fa^shood: J^st not with thine enemy:
Strive not with thy betters: No^ a word of truth without praise to T^i^ity; Nor
a word of a lie without sin: Good works have their reward; and wicked works
their pu^ishment: Offer not to a fo^l learning nor advice: Sleep not in June
least January frost make thee repen: Be not careless till thou fill up thy
ba^n: Discover not thy treasure to a thief; trust not a thief: Be not too nice
where thou can be spared, nor idle by thy good will, till thou go on thy
B^^r.

He that wants advice, or gives praise to God, seeks riches, or makes
request, or seeks health, or forgiveness, let him p^ay to A^pha.

Now follows a Song of Taliesin, in the very langu^ge that he delivered it,
as may very well be g^anted, in respect of the harshness of it, the Translating
whereof, verbatim, I will not assume to give you.
1.
Ym Petwar prif gas eivioet,
Yt gyver uydynt in un oet,
Pas a henemt, haint a hoet,
2
Wife hen, wife vner wife anelwic,
Were gwedy gwely kerinnic,
Wife trvan wife Tridyblic.
3.
Wife Trydiblic, hen, wife auwdal,
Drvt, wife ehvt, wyf^anwar,
Y fawl am Garawd nim car.
4.
Mym Car chiened nym kyniret
Neb ne allof darymret
Wy Augev nam digret
Nym digret nahvn nahoen,
Englished.
He says that the prime 4. has been always ominous, and so is the consumption
of the lungs, old age, the plague, etc.

I am old, I am alone, and without Parentage or Consanguinity, cold after a
bed, etc.

I am poor, I am of a Triplicite nature.

Again, I am of a Triplicite nature, old, unconstant, dear, free, wildy, those
that loved me, loves me not. I am not beloved amongst the daughters of men: I
cannot transform and convey here and there: I am a spirit, misdoubt it not,
neither sleep nor joy will misdoubt me; by sleep is meant Mortals, by joy, the
blessed Angels; dishonor not thy Parents, nor the Shepherd of the Church; give
no alms to the ^roward nor miser, confide not in any creature or thing many
seasons, but in God.

YR. Owdwl gynta o waith Taliesin.
This Song is altogether prophetical, wherein his Highness is clearly
prophesied out of the body of Angharwd, mother to Blethin op Cynvni, and most
of his Acts are here foretold.

1.
Ameodwy chwyf nef chwyf^ Audyrdavd kerd
Nym gwnel Cardo nebawd
Y folly Mab duw di bechawd
Dibeth, do^th, kyfveth, kyfundawd.
The Translation, I am resolved through the assistance of Heaven, and authority
of Poetry, and shall not be withdrawn by any friend, to laud and praise the Son
of God without sin; yea, that sinned not, only wise, rich, and unanimity of
concord.

2.
Arb digabl parabl parthawd
Piy Awen parhavs hydsrawd
Ar lles llawr, llyw slafnawr llwy prawd
Ar llwybyr Jawn or dawn ym daerawd.
The Translation, without guile or deceit in thy eternal and ready speech, most
sweet and lasting for ever, and this I will do for the benefit of men here
below, where I find the color or sight of a path of weapons; and a just path
of gift in recompense for the dead.

3.
Delw ym bo er bod ir drindawd
Trvgared tros wared tros wawd
Y Adrawd ar cslawd eve flawd
Y is gwyd mal ysgwyt chwyt rahawd.
The Translation, Gain will it be unto me as to the Trinity, Mercy for delivery
and Poetry, in demonstrating a golden deliverer, and unresistable and lawful
Heir, whose shaking will be as the shaking of a multitude.

4.
Mvr Mawegor Tries ytor tra tqvwd
Traeth om brvn trathantra thyvawd
Mvr Mawrdyr Mawrdoryf amgy frawd
Mvr Mavr dvd vch medyd medwawd.
The Translation, Thou that art strong in thy walls and Castles, predictions
shall be predicted unto thee; nay, I will out of heart predict unto th^e, near as
many in number as the sands of the Sea: Thou wall most strong, shall be
strongly broken down for r dear brothers sake.

5.
Mvr Mavr daryf mawr dorf gorsydawe
Mvr Mawr dreis, Mawr draws gynefawd
Ith gyfer unkwprolheir, nit kenais Cablawd
Nis kenais kauof die folawd.
The Translation, Thou strong wall, an invincible Army shall batter thee, thou
walls of wrongs and oppression, oeing thy wedded qualities, before thee shall
we be restored; I have not sung to thy dispraise, but have sung and sing to thy
l^ud and praise.

6.
Molaf wr cludwr olydawd
Y ^rchion y eirchiet ar blanhawd
Y E^^r in w^lir Moes medrawd
Ni w^lau in w^lir kydvrawd.
The Translation, I will sing praise unto a warm man, full of ki^dn^ss and
temporal blessings, whose requests and actions a^e de^^inated by the influence
of the planets; let us praise with manners this fai^ Eagle, the like whereof
has not, nor shall not be s^en.

7.
Gwelaisvd nym gwarthevd gwrthrawd
Wath frwydyr crwydyr crevlawn dybydawd
Gweleis wl^dic dic d^ofnawg
A o fyn y ofyn i ofen y efvsgywdawd.
The Translation, I have foreseen that the terror of an enemy shall not
discourage him, when he shall set his face against the cruel Arms of
Fugatives; I have foreseen a frowning and cour^gious Native, tha^ shall recover
his own, whose presence shall be a terror amongst his enemies.

8.
Gwel^is gleis, a threis a thrallawd
Cledy fall dywarlev dywarnawd
Gweleis gled^ chod a chawd
O beleidyr a cheeydyr rhvdo gnawd.
The Translation, I have seen hacking, hewing, and black blows, with
tribulation, oppression, and sub-plan^ations: I have seen likewise praise,
gif^s and multitudes of men in battails, after a tedious and long continuance
in bondage.

9.
Gweleis hael ohil Augharawd
Ai giveles, gwelei Ryfed^wd
Mal Cadarn in Cadwi^briawd
Mal Cadwr, Cat wei a dyfavd.
The Transl^tion, I desire the Reader to take especial notice of this, where
the Ang^l points a Conqueror out of the body of Angharad mentioned bef^^e, and
of the sure keeping of what he g^^s. Said the Angel, I have seen a liberal
Person of ^he ^ace of Angarad, and if I saw him, I saw a wounder like a mighty
strong keeping his Spouse, as a sure keeper will he keep what ^e g^ts or
recovers.

10.
Ket wys kynghaws mavs maiestawd
Dehev dvw o nef ae gwarawd
Gwr gwrtbaw gwrthryth is defawd
Gwr vthyr gwrthrychied is gnawd.
The Translation, he shall keep with g^od reason his Terri^ories with the
strength of Armies rightly, for the God of Heaven shall defend him, which will
be a man that will resist his ^nemies with a customary and strong defense, in
an admirable ^ay.

11.
Gwrth eurdrv gno gnydhawd
Gwrth eurdal bual bugvnawd
Buelyn or euryn wir awd
Bu^^th llad llonyd o fragawd.
This and the rest that follows runs on the valourous Acts of ^is Co^queror,
and of his fortunate keepi^g of his Conquest; ^e harshness of the Language
p^even^ed a Translation, f^r the ^ords ars not to be found in our Welsh
Dictionaries.

12.
Buches kerd ke^dorion wosgawd
Buched glyw, gloew, yftriw, austrawd
Burchiad kad, kyrch hynawd
Bid Beirdon Barddeir am tafawd.
The last part of this foretells that this Conqueror will make ^^able Assaults
against his enemies, and that the place of his ^^itation (here called a fold,)
will be made a fold or prison for Armies, and that Berdthes will then rejoice,
and that as sure as he foretells with his tongue.

13.
Briwgoch brig ougyr broth Brithawd
Breith gad wyr boyd llyr lloegyr divrawod
Brv Brython bremt saefon saghawd
Bre brond r brom deu^dor durdawd.
The English may do very well to find out an Interpretor for the last, I assure
you it threatens them fearfully; but to their comfort, it is partly
accompl^shed, and the last stage not yet seen.

14.
Brpd, Gryd, Gryn, Grauwyn, Great wrgraud,
Breisc, Risc, riev, rad, bavawd,
Brwysc, rwysc, rau gymman gymhendawd,
Brwydyr, eurgrwydyr, eurgreyr bedyffyawd.
He goes on in foretelling of broyls, miseries, insurrections, slaughter:
flying away, and banishments.

15.
Braw, Bryneith, branar ev bedrawd
Bro bveugyl bramgoel if bydawd
Bwlch i lafyn o lafue ffossawd
Bwlch y gled balch y gleddyfawd.
The Prophet concludes with high and mighty praise to this conqueror, as also
to his sword, whose weight shall make heavy breaches with proud strokes.

The second Part to the same Tune.
16.
Cludy fdrud, gwrawd gwr a deffry
Clud gwrawl rod Rodawdawg by
Gwr kyrchwn ^ fawr dali sowrdy
Mawrdal kerdd, nid Cardd y felly
He prosecutes the praising and extolling the Valor and good success of the
same Conqueror, and says that he shall revive from death with his long and
sharp sword, which shall make his habitation in a large sumptuous house.

17.
Gwr gwael rwyf gwlad un Rwyf un chy
Gwr gweed lawn, nyd gwr gwawn gwekry
Gwr golud gwaet knvd gwaetkny
Lalanedy, kelennic a dyry*
This man will abound of high blood, his Country and Tribe will be of the same;
a potent man that will bestow gifts of sl^ughtered bloody wolves.

18.
Gwr krehlau ai kyffry
Kyffro Cad Cadellig wely
Gwr a wyr in dydfwyr nafy
Gwr a wn a hwn yw hpuny^
The Translation, A furious man to his enemy, a man of perfect knowledge in
Arms, a man I know, and this is he.

19.
In twry^ in toryf ar hyly
Gwr in taryf in Tec vysc wedy
Gwr y gryt, gwyr gw^hyt gwrhy
Mal gray dyawl, Mal greyt vab Ery.
The Translation, In battles he will cu^ boldly to death; a man that will strike
dead, and no trouble after; a confident and a bold man, that will confine his
enemies to their graves; a man like Greydyawl and Greyt, the son of Ery.

20.
Treis dreon, tryn heyon, Nyw try
Traws trydar trydid haeyarnnlly
Gredyf eygawn, ny grawn ny grynny
Gormodo lafood ^lyfry.
This is a trebble twisted knot.

Here he points cut a date of a perrilous time, in a mystical number, as Trei
dreon, Try^eyon, Rywtry: I refer it to be unfolded by the ingenious Reader.

21.
Gryn, erdrym acrdric ^edyly
Glyw vyget gl^v wgeil kymry.
The Third Part.
1.
Kymry dyffrediat kymrwyn
Y gwlat kymr^y Catcas Wenwyn
Ky^d wadawl kerd ganmawl ganmwyn
Ke^ gyff^^t gyfryev gat wyn.
The way to interpret is not free.
2.
Kadeir Cor Cadev dar, dyrr wyn
Kar kerdev, kerdorion worcester llwyn
Gwr lliw glyw gleudraws maws medgwyn
Gwr llwrw llv lloegrwys die gyflwyn.
The Prophet begins with hearty prayers for this British Conqueror, and then
runs on in desplaying his exploits, and set^i^g forth his deserving praise.

3.
Gwr gwrdwan am Advan Adwyn
Gwervan gawr gwrdvar vawr wenwyn
Of gorev ual gwryn adwyu
Na threi llafyn vch afyn vch afwyn.
He goes on still with praises, comparing his strength to Gwrvan the Giant, and
that he will be the best of all Conquerors that ever he saw, and that the
strength of his weapons shall not decay, which shall both get and keep.

4.
A llyf crev a llyw ffrew ar ffrvwyn
Ll dei dreic, ar dragon drylwyn
Tryllyw coch tryllew droth drach
Am eur srwydyr am eur grwydyr eurgwyn.
The Translation, That cruel streams of blood shall run on h^s enemies sides,
which shall leave a scarlet hue on his Bridle; he shall utterly destroy both
the Serpent, and the nimble Dragon, likewise the three Red Lions, whose
destruction shall be bemoaned, and there shall be a cond^ling of former
miseries, tyranny and oppression.

5.
Am evr vro evrvron Tirwyn
Toryf Anwar trydar toydol wyn
Rwyf faerfeith godeith gwanwyn
Eevlva thevlu a thevlwn.
The Translation, The former destruction shall come to pass as also the breaking
off the treble unworthy Lions, for detaining the rich, precious, just, and
lawful rights from the owners thereof, and as the burni^g of dry grass in the
spring, shall the head Ruler, with three families by force of destiny be
destroyed.

Gwae wawr, a gwyr Mawr ymasswyno
Fyrf derfysc, ffysc didysc dydwyn
Fwyr ffysgiat Flenniat Flamdwyn
Frwyth wellig well vaeth ffraeth fraudwyn.
The Translation, Then woe be unto small and great, which failed to bless
themselves, when they shall be brought to the ways of tribulation, as people
without advice; then shall the Race of the Picts (meaning all strangers) like
the burning of a hot furious flame of fire shall vanish away, and then better
fruit and of better qualities shall possess the land.

Frawd wallaw a naw Anyfyn
Llwr Milevird mylv^irch di gyflwyn
^lwy byr moliant Medpaut, Medaukwyn
Lliw keneis oath godeis yth gwyn.
Dlew Cannawn kymer y dywyn
Llaw fryded am dvc am ^wyn
Y wethyt Lloegyr, ervpt rraulyt brwyn.
Y Bedwevdd Rhau.
B^ wide Ascen brwyse Nenn baciscadef
Brevi borthiat a Coryfrat a chr^f
Bradv ysgwyd bryd ysgein wrthlaf
Brydev tau trelwan ^^in wodef.
Is Ar glwydy^ Arwpd is of
Is Ca^fyrd, yscarfyd kyfl flef
Gwledic degaut orif a deccautref
Rhif ar vgeint ky^adef.
Bvd barawd Rarau gwynt hydref
Bugeil byd^uw, gymryt gymryt gymref
Goryf kein doryf con dothyadref
Y^h Edryd ith ad rawd is nef.
Par evrglawr ^rglyw ym ^ardlef
Pen Prydein proffwn in taugnef.
The fifth part.
Tyngnefed am nawd am niferwch
Chi chiallv die hevd ^ch
Nit a thar llachar llafarwch
Nit Achl^s afles arafwch.
Nit Achlvd eveglvd argelwch
Argel Card kerdorion wolwch.
Dor yscor ys^wyt^v Amdrwch
Do^th a drvdam dvd amdegwch.
Taryf Aergawd a^r gwl gadarnwch
Tory^ evrgoryf eurgwyn gysedwch
Kyfedach v^r ch vy chynnwch
Kyfedwalch kyfedw^ilch elwch.
Elyf dre^c d^agon dygryw^h
A^af low lueed angelwch
Amgel^d Bri hon brithwch
Tyrnon tyrnas A^i^lwch.
B^ird w^gawn bard vrdawn vrdwch
Vrdawl kerd cau edifeirwch
Ant gvd bv^ bewaneyt gyfradwch
Ongyr ued Angerd Malolwch.
Anger d^wl gred^awl gredyf unwch
Die wall am dywef llo^yddwch
Caudad vyf a dig^irydwch
Na dala jar cas nar cas heddwch.
Nam gwethawd omgwnawd om gwarwch
Nam gwethrvn granwyn greyt wolwch
Nam gwrthod eryf draff^d aayf drwch
Ni wrthyd mabdvw dadelwch.
The sixth Part.
Dodolwch llachar llace gyvarpar
In aervar in orvev
Llydv yscor ys^wy^ bydmev
Llyt ysgun asg vnys gorev.
Y gymryt ankyt kyn barev
Y gymod nudyfed in d^v
Die v^oi vilwr hyd Angev
Die uolawd is tauwawd is tev
Die fard da dodwy ith o deu
Die var gwed gordyfyn yfadev
T^ hebef ind hebv ^ed tev
Did he bad ny hybaf ^ynhev.
Her ith ardrethyr ar drethev
O bell hill Cadel kell kerdev
Hill Coeling perging pennaethev
Hy dyr am dadyl kynadev,
Hyl Rodri gwesti gwystyl verev
Gw^stad gryt gwystlon byt boet tev
Hill Rvffvd awyf rwydfud radev
Chwysg rynuawd morgymlad mawrglev.
Hill Maelgwyn milcaut adodev
Hill Tewdwr dywedwr dehev
Brwydyr orchwyd in orchud tlyffev
Nag ariaut nag eur in adneu.
Brwysc rhwysc rhwyf brolw yd brobrev
Seith ben dyvet breisc am gedam gadev
Priodawr Prydein prem preydev
Preid preidwyr preidwalch gyfreyev.
Preslen fur pryssur pres olev
Presswy lyawa vrrchawg veiach gwinev
Gwynfydic gwrvrydic vrydev
Gwyn wyd k^ad keinfyrd kysedev.
Gwyn fyd gwyr ywrawl devodev
Gwyn fyd keirdd beirniat wife synnev
Gwr glewfyd in evgrydaergreu
Gwr gole dic vyae ar wl^doedd indgev.
Gwrd varav kyfcan kyfreidiev
Gwrd vauyar gward var Gweudolev
Gwr o ddeugys lladd a llasnev
Rhudion llew dragon eywdreigev.
The seventh Part.
Dreir ehosyn ehaug y derfyn
Dragon rwyf rhwyd waith Gynselyn
Drogon vard dragou valeh fydyn
Dragonawl dragomoyf o din.
Kanaf wawd ir priawd a^ pryn
Prif Arglwyd brolwyd bronheylyn
Breisc atlloed beird, borthloed berthyn
Brwysc hrwydev brwydyr deehrevdychrano
Brad bryneich braues ai Caullyn
Brawd a chwed gymyned gymyn
Gwrys of nis dechrys dechryn
Y ougyr, y augerd nyt edwyn.
Gnawd vch knawe knydoed argolchyn
Ar llwybyr llawr neve llawr blwydyn
Llew llyffoed llysseid y dervyn
Llys ehorth, llyw y dorne llewyn.
Gwynt wossud llofrud lloegyr dylyn
Gwyr wosco wescord diergryn
Gwyrd wascar o wysraed keynmyn
Gwyn wyd kyrd keinfyrd kysedev.
Gwedy Medu a med Gooewyn
Am her wled am hylwlat y hyn
Am gedawl am gadev debyn
Am gyrd wawr am gyrn mawr melyn.
Gorpo hael hxelonaeth wobryn
Haul wedr^d hill mawrwud Merwyn
Gwawr gwe^ d^yf gwendyt oe gylch^n
^ wenwlad n^f gwyr adef gwyryn
Ag folly y Tirvni

Another Welsh Prophecy of the same, ovt of a very ancient Manuscript,
poi^ting out the Norman Conquest, and of their continuance till the coming in
of King James, whose coming is laid out by an exact number of years, likewise
of the miser^es that shall ^ollow.
Advyd Engyl ar gychwn, chag lluedd llchlin a ffelydyr gosgordd am geglew
penrodd, a dygyf^r o b^l^, a C^roes Ch^^st in kymell, a p^lav Bethlem^a
Chaers^l^m, a gorvoda fvddar genedl vedydd, a dwy flynedd ddy^edd a hanuer y
drydydd, advyd traiss^ lledrad ag ymhell garriad, a ff^b ff^ls vwriad yngwlad
vrvwtws, adfvd dial gau dduw am na wyr neb pavn ywhyd na bo newor ^r rha^
beyvsyu svw, as kowir y senit, Gwaith y b^irdh a biry, adfvd, Rhufain ymhobiu a
rhyfel gwedi: a phau fo T. Blwyddin ar bym h^c a chrvgai^ a C. C. C. A thrt no
mis gwedi couqu st bastar, y dyveir y Normans, advydar d^irned havl, advyd drvd
halen, advyd Chyalyd yd advyd bid Bohwman.

The Traansltion
Woe and misery unto the English, for they shall be driven to fly and forsake
Britain, by force of the Norman Armies and the Lion with his Commanders
H^lters and Bridels; then shall they sometim^s fight, som^times fly away then
will the Cross of Christ, meaning the Church, be ready to forsake Britain,
then shall Bethleh^m and Jerusal^m be pu^ished then the right Christians,
meaning the B^ittains, shall be overcome; then shall the Normans and the
English fight by fi^s and turns: woe then for oppression and theevery, and for
want of love, and for false and malicious designs in the land of Brutus; Woe
and revenge from God because they contend about another man's right, if the
condition of the Saints and Beirdles be true: Woe, when Ro^e enters into every
house, then shall be wars: And when T. 76. years, and 300 and 3. nine Months
comes; after the Conquest of a Bastard, meaning the Norman Duke, then the Race
of the Normans in the Kingly Government rooted out, and extinct, then shall the
malice of both (meaning the Normans and the Saxons) equally meet: Woe then for
the Armies that shall sometimes fight, sometimes give over, sometimes here,
sometimes there.

Here are three remarkable passag^s laid out: First the Norman Conquest:
Secondly, the coming in of King James in a prefixed time: Thirdly, the wars
that shall follow: And now to the time; first you have the letter T. which by
the ancient customary number of the Britains stood for 160

Being added to the tormer number of 378 makes 538

Now this number of 538. with the 3 odd Months above, is the very distance
within a few Months between the Conqueror, and the coming in of King James.

In respect of convenience and Concordance, I will annex one short prophecy of
Merl n Ambrose, although out of its proper pl^ce.

Middywed of Arredeg, am gyfriwar ddammeg, Egni dav harry in bvdd her i
trwydded.

The Translation, I will deliver in a swift manner touching some, mystically,
that the Race of two Henrys* shall not long continue in the regal Gov^rnm^nt;
read the Prophesies following, and you shall know who these Henry's were.

Gweles hael o kul Anghawrawd
Ai gwelet gwelei ryfedawd
Mal Cada^n in Cadwi bryawd
Mal Cadwr latwey a dyfawd.
That is, I have seen a liberal person, of the body of Angharawd, and as I saw
him I have seen a wonder, like a mighty strong man keeping his Spouse, as a
fierce keeper will he keep what he gets or recovers.

The second shall be Areverend Debyn, and Prophet, sometimes Bishop of St
Davies in South Wales, and the first Patron thereof.
A hausso heb yffro gwyllt
Hael oesawl o hill Ey^yllt
Gwerin yw o goron Owam
Vwch Ehod a dder charham.
The Translation, A well advised and wary Branch, liberal and well struck in
years, which may challenge his descent from the Race of Eyffyllt shall set his
own hand above the Wheel, fol.

The Third shall be Robin ddv, sometimes of Anglesey, a Bardh, Prophet and
excellent Poet.
Ag in y olyn cheoli, Ni biddvn Meddin i mi,
Nes kwni o Ais kynan, dindoethy riwai^au
Egnini or himpni hen, i daro agwaed yren,
Hwn a daw draw heb dra, o achoedd henynycha.
The Translation, And after him, meaning the red Lion (as by the Kowyddi may
appear) there shall none rule until one arise out of the Race of Conan
dindaethwy, which Prince will be of his Consanguinity and share, and this will
be a branch out of the ancient graft, which will meet and strike with the blood
of Ierien; and this will come there (meaning to England) very merci^ul of the
anci^nt Race to be highest.

Robin Ddv.

The fourth shall be A^dafras, a Barah, Prophet, and a Poet. fol.
Talweithog Owain dan Arvav llifam
Gore unmabgau ddvw wit ith ddamwam
Had lvwn hill Cynvn hwyliaut ynhervin
Ind rhaid in achwyn rh^g i go^vd
Llewddawg fydduat, lle a vresk ynaut
Ar loegewys diroedd y Tervynaut.
The Translation, Princely Owen with his sharp Arms, to predict of such will
be most dear and pleasing to the Son of God, in the end of times, they (meaning
strangers) shall make their soits and requests to the Race of Cynwyn; but we
need not complain for their miseries, their Armies will be very powerful, plac^s
will they Conque^, or come to by oppression, but in England they shall have an
end, or vanish: This Prophet is very provident to t^ke off scruples, that else
might be suggested about Owen, lays him of Cynvyn.

Addafras.

The fifth shall be Merthin Ambrose, a great Prophet
O hill Gynfyn gadaan balade a gedwi erchwyn Pau fo Gwinedd ydghyfedd, M^ad
go^ewyn, Gwynfyded^g fvddo brvdd a Phrysaenyn kad kerdw dir kynvyn.

The Translation, From the Race of Cynvin the strong stump or tree, will come a
man that will win and preserve h^s rights; at such time when North -Wales is in
a weak condition, he shall be a happy and first Prince: a Prince which will
kindle and gather together an Army to recover and keep the Lands of Cynvyn.

The sixth shall be Mernhin Silvestris, which is clear and full, a famous
Prophet.
P^u dyfv dav fred r or un kyrnas, brvd ar wneithvr dial^m dir trwy dorf ynwyr
am her Alonas, Pon fo gwyr he^ pen, a marchagion in rhvdd, ag in flaen llym
frwgon, a figlo kaer R^vfam, a Chynwr in y Twr gwyn in llyndaiu, a llyndam mewn
pychrin.

Taleithwg frenin a ddaw, ai fouedd or Aber fraw, Ag yno Arth ir kymrv sed in
fodlon, fe ar Goron wrth gyngor gweision.

The Translation, When two Brothers born in the same Kingdom comes to England,
with purpose to be revenged for Lands by force of Arms, as also for the death
of their friend or kinsman; and this will come to pass when the Nation is
without a Head or King, and Knights abroad, the tops of Ashes or Pikes very
sharp; and when Rome trembles, combustion in the while Tower in London, and
London in fear.

Then shall come to England a King from a Princely Race, with his noble descent
from Alerfrow in Anglesey, the ancient Seat of the Princes of North -Wales,
then, or in such time when this comes to pass let the Britains sit still at
home and be quiet, while the great ones of England contend, for the Crown shall
go at the dispose of the Subjects.

The seventh shall be Kilfardh, or Heinyn fardh, called by both names, who
lived in the days of Taliesin, in North -Wales, an admirable Prophet.
Miath ofynaf pwy a fvdd Penaf Naf or Nawedigion, Iir gwedi krust hawl bennaf
oc haeleon, hill gynawon fr^ink in Eglwys difn doethon, Engil in England gyfar
gwynon, hyllt mal fydyll gweddill Brithon, Prvdor Alan, Pvmed gofyn oath
ofynnongwed E. Hedin frenin Anfraint hirion addileyir i dyledogwinoir tir ag
ynwir Gwyn fydy gwyr pau gyfarron, a gwae hwynt dwyll wyr dall or Modd on, in
wyby^ i q. vd pa fyd fyddon yw kowir Yon.

The Translation, My question is, who will b^ chief Ruler of the nin^h Lord or
Ruler: a Lord after the most liberal Christ will be chief or Head of all the
Liber^ls. Examne his Highness disc^nt from Alan, the son of Owen ap Cadwgan,
and you shall find it in the ninth degree.

The Rate of the F^ench comes to destr^y the Church, and the Engli^h in England
will be equal with them, and the remnant of the Britains will turn l^ke a
wheel: Quest. If it be demanded, when shall the Pawn of Alan be redeemed, then
make Answer, it will come to pass in the time of the fif^ after E. the young, or
childish King with the large Territories, but unjustly possessed thereof: That
which will come from the bottom of North -Wales, shall bring woe to the
Tennants or owners of estates, then shall right take place, happy are men when
this com^s to pass, but woe be unto all blind, treach^rous and deceitful
people, their hearts shall not imagine what miseries shall fall upon them, for
their falsho^d to their true and faithful Lord. Examine further, and you shall
find his Highness to be the fifth after Edward the sixth that dyed in his tender
years.

Ag am weddillo^ Troya traws gynheniedd,
Ago adigrain, yby^d yllew in gechwaed
Kwyn fan a brvs a a^ y^ Ang^yfed
A Choronar Ei on mon mam wynedd
I farch in arfog in erbin Cadav
Ai law o hill manaw miniaug arsav
Telienhiog Aberffraw hy^^rtbi longav
Efa wysgir alma^n er ymlud ladav.
A llychlin ac gychwyn ir dehav
O Gwam ir ^enwant, hwy a gyrehaut girch arddifino
Ag y na in wir i darogeme y darogenav.
The Translation, The remnant of the Trojans shall receive wrongful bickerings,
and the Lion shall be colored with blood hrough the mistake or error of his
sword, then shall be morning and cond^ling, with nimble expedition to summon in
new (but weak) supplies, and the Crown in command of the Stagg of Angles^y the
Mother of North -Wales, whose Horse will be completely fu^nished with Arms to
rout his enemies Army, and his Hand likewise will b^ furnished with sharp edged
Sword and Weapons; and this person from the Princely Seat oi Aberffraw in North
-Wales pursue his enemies at Sea with his g^llant Sh^ps as fa^ as Germany; then
shall Norway be in their flight toward the North; from Owen this Stagg will be
derived or descended, they shall make an Assault on Thurseday, then shall the
Prophesies and Predictions be spoken of, and manifested.

Our ninth shall be David Gorlleth, an excellent Poet, and Master of Arts, that
lived 190 years ago, and his Songs are grounded on Taliesin and Merthins
Prophesies.
Tir a fini Tarwofon, Tyrrav Cerrig y tair koron, a phair ganerr offireu, eauf
ug y pvcredig bren gwr kyffrawn ar groghefyd, a their y baedd a throy bid.

That the Bull of North Wales shall and will get or conquer both the Lands and
sumptuous Buildings belonging to the three Crowns; and this will come to pass
when God shall be served under the pure and growing Tree: This Bull or person will
be a just man, which will own and bear the Cross, and get the Lands of the Boar,
and turn the world.

Observe, least the Reader should cavil about the Bull and Conquest, here it is
said (as a sure note) that the preaching of the painful Anabaptists will be
under growing trees; and when were such seen in England before? look again to
the Cross in his Highness Arms, likewise foretold.

Our tenth shall be Doiud Nanmor, Bardh and Poet.
Madws in wrth Ammodav, lygrv gw^r osewn lle^girgav ag ynill heb fawr genad, i
tir hwynt oedd drefyu tad gwilliwch waith gwelwch weithi n, eychinachvbi Rhin
ni ad hwn onid hyny, un sais yny bias i by.

Rhavl a gaiff e helint, llew Bloddin o Gynvin gynt, Manner goch in mytv e
gwaith, ar M^linor Moreil waith kad wala dcc a ddvwed cef, wythriw ddawnoi
we^thcred of ych o gymrv in gyrrvr gad, ar llewa ddifa e ll^vad.

The Translation, The time appoinnted by Proph^sies is at hand, to spoil and
destroy men of false England, and to get without leave, or conquer their Lands,
formerly our rights, and here ofter behold and observe the work of the Ox,
snatching and rec^vering h^s share: This Ox will put the English in new habi^s,
the Sun sh^l have the Conquest and Glory; yet the Lion of Bleddin ap Cynvin of
old, with his red Bann^r, gaining the work, and the yellow from the Sea again:
Kadwalader the happy will revive by the coming and Conquest of this Lion, an Ox
from Wales, driving and commanding the Army; and a Lion which will destroy the
Moon: fol.

There needs no Parraphrase on so clear a Prophecy do but read it, and thou
have the real meaning of this Prophet ^n pla^n words.

Our eleventh, whose name I have not met with, but his verdict is full and
clear, and out of dispute.
Korcnog fabau a din ir morvedd
O waylod lloeigir hia y gogledd.
Of ^wevn Asgella gyfvdoiomedd
I ynill prydam, hyny fvdd chyfedd.
The Translation, C^ronig fabau will draw to the Seas from the heart of E^gland
to the part of the w^rld, and he will be that one wing which will arise from
North -Wales to Conquer great Britain, and that shall be wonderful.

Coronog fabau gaif dir Britain
I enw a dweinir ymhacla^ent llvndain,
Try gyng^r says Iaith a faith vgain
Gwaer sois ai klvw onid ar ddamwain.
The Translation, Coronog fabau, will possess the Land of Britain, his name will
be famous and known in the Parl^ament at London, by consent of innumerable
Languages; woe be unto an English man that shall hear of him, unless from
P^ophesies.

Coronog sabaa kredwch in ddiav
Y grves feud gea ai fauctieddrwydd,
Ag yni er b^n in lydd din aflwydd,
Pau ymddengvs in wir agyn ebrwydd.
The Translation, Coronog fabau will take the sign of the holy and blessed
Cross, there shall a stop prevent his enterprise when he shall nimbly start up
and appear.

Coronog f^bau kredwch in ddiav
A ddenfin lynges i aberdavgleddiav
Ag a gryn llengir pau glowr chwdlaw
Nis bawdd dwr dvr nis Mayddav
The Trans. Coronog fabau, as you may infall^bly bele^ve, will send a Navy to
Milford Haven, when the English enemy will hear of it they shall quake; the power
of water or Arms shall not destroy his life.

Our twelvth concludes with a Prophecy foretelling that the British Conqueror
hitherto agreed upon, shall be a Britain by the Paternal descent, and an English
man born, with a Narration of his Conquest, both in great Britain, and
elsewhere
This Conqueror will be a Britain by the father side, and an English man born,
and in his time will be the greatest Armies of men then ever has been heard of
before In Britain, through the strength of which he will challenge his enemies
to the field at the borders of Rivers and waters; and by strength of such
Armies he will drive Armies of Pagans to be drowned, he shall be a wolf with a
open and devouring mouth to the strong which shall resist him, and as innocent
as a Lamb to the weak and harmless: see further, and there you have this
Pr^phesie at large.

Now follows other very eminent Prophesies in the behalf of the Plaintiff
herein set out under these names, The Mould-warppe, the Flower de Luce, the Red
Lion, the Wolf, the White King, the Red Rose, fol. And these are the ancientest
of all the rest, and therefore more worthy of credit.
The first shall be Gwyon Bath, a great Prophet, and the antientest of all the
rest, fol.
A llyf Crev, a lliw ffrev or ffrwyn,
Lladei dreig, ar dragon prylwyn,
Try llyw Coch, try llew dr^ch drachwyn,
Am evr frwydyr, am evr grwyd, r evrgwyn.
The Translation, That cruel str^ams of blood shall run on his enemies sides,
which sh^l leave a scarlet hue on his B^idle; he shall u^terly destroy both the
Serpent and the D^^gon, l^kewise the three R^d Lions, whose destruction shall be
be^oaned; and then shall be a condoling of former sustained miserys, tyranny and
oppressions, fol.

The second shall be Merlin Silvestris, who flourished in the time of King
Arthur, and upon demand of the King who should be the last King that should
Reign in Britain: Merlin laid out the six last King, with their par^icular
destin^es; and the last of these six is set out and called by the name of the
Mould-warpp, of him at present in short, till you meet with him at large. Fol.
In the the time of wars and troubles, and troubles, and when the Moula-warpp,
and his people shall fall to a great straight, The Mould-warp and the Dragon
will be pursued by the Lion and his party so violent, tha^ he and they will be
driven for want of aid, to convey himself very poor in^o a Ship, and then here
and there upon the Sea, at l^st will l^nd in a place that the Sea deserted, and
then will this Mould-warp offer two parts of his Dominions to them that will
recover his Dominions to him and his people, afterward he shall dye for sorrow,
and afterward his children shall be fatherless, and live in a strange Land for
evermor^; and this Mould-warp shall be the last King that shall reign in
Britain of the Saxon or Norman Race. fol.

The third shall be Merlin Ambrose of C^er Merthin, who flourished in the days
of King Vortigern. This Prophecy runs on two white Kings that should in the the
latter times reign in this Island of Britain.
In the latter days of the white Dragon, there shall arise in great Britain a
white King, and then will the race of Strangers divide themselves in three
parts through discord and wars, this white King shall run with peace at the
beginning, and wars at the latter end of his reign, and after this will be
driven to ride and fly, and in his flight will he fall, and in his fall he
will fall headlong in the bird-lime, afterward will it be said in mockery of
him, where is your white King.

Afterward will arise a second white King, who will steer his course toward the
rising of the Sun, and to the Country of the other Sun, in whose time, it will
be said through great Britain, he is a King, he is not, shortly after will he
lift up his head and make apparent that he will be a King of many
Principalites, unconstant and false unto him, afterward will this white King
gather together an Army, and j^yn with the Eagle of the North, whose army will
be triangle-wise divided, then will he strike against the Eagle that keeps
Britain; then will this white King be surrounded or besieged, and after a sharp
dispute, this white King will fall.

The whole Nation will justify this verdict to be upright and true, as far as
it is accomplished.

Our fourth shall be Johannis de R^perissa.
When the greatest estate be cast down, then shall a man arise out of the
North-west in a cloud, as black as the bil of a Crow, then shall the Lion be
loosed out of his bands, the best that ever was since Sampsons time, four
battles shall be fought, etc.

Vske shall run of blood, and Brecknock water shall do the same, the beast shall
mark at Brecknock water, the Lion shall roat at Lemster Hill, and shall weep for
these Skirmishes, then streams of blood shall run, afterward the Rose female
and her flowers for ever shall fail, then Kent shall laugh and Essex mighty shall
make the Cross of Canterbury bow.

Our fifth shall be Friar Bacon a notable and substantial Prophet, who
prophesied of the destiny of the Mould-warp.
Gweddich chag kyngoc y Twckys kymniedig
Chag mynuvi geudfyned in augeed
A thaoi oc wadd kythveilige, somgar,
E hon a wahir ddir oc Fvdd gatholig,
Gwae a gotto gidag of a Gwaeynte
Ar nisiv a so yni amfer kymcva saeson
Nafvd estconion, kodwch in i ecbib gida maby din,
Chwi agewch weled y gooes sendigud
A chwiyn bena ach krudiniaeth in dda
Ar Twrk auianol, in torri yni gauol
A gyrror kythreiliaid or tir bendigaid
A chuelcigaredd Jusswai fowredd
Ally wenydd gwlad net, ich eneidie
A hedd which tragwyddol a fydd in ol
In ddi and lawd, oni chotto pawb in i gnawd.
The Translation, Pray against the wicked ways and practice of the Turk, left
you of Believers shall become infidels, and turn the divilish sour Mould-warp
the same way, who shall depart from the true Catholic Faith, woe shall come to
him and to those which will arise to take his part: I exh^rt both English and
Welsh that will live in his time, to rise against him and to side and fight with
the Son of man, with whom you shall see the h^ly Cross, and you chiefly having
strong faith shall see the great Turk breaking in the middle, then the Devils
shall be scoured away from the holy Land, then shall you receive the rich
mercies of Jesus, and the Joy of Heaven to your Souls, then, or afterward shall
be everlasting peace in great plenty, until the last Resurrection.

Our sixth shall be Rees Gochoryri, a Prophet and an excellent Poet.
Endrvcb r hagr ddcvch hen
Am x Malhenne Maxen
Llythycen r ychendid
A laddy fflam wadd ai fflaid
Kigyddion hwn gwn ganmil
A gwewir ai gyr ar gil
Arffo idda or Fair ddig
In ecys ni ddaw orig,
Kunsel in y sattela fvdd
Abode tau i bacwydvdd
Elud fwytwy ai fwyall
In y ddar fall kysarkall.
The Translation, Look to the black and grim Prophecy (here called
Looking-glass) and there thou shall find a name with the Letter x in it like
Maxen. This letter will procure heaviness and sorrow, and will destroy the fiery
Mould-warp and his party; the persecutors of this Mould-warp will chase and
force him to flight, and he will fly cut of the angry fire, but will not tarry
nor return in haste, then a Council will come from the Army, and his destruction
or death shall be between his houses, and this great Oak shall be destroyed with
an Ax.

Our seventh will be Jollo Goch a Prophet and Poet.
Flow-delows mel dilvs du
Mal d^en i blodevu
Keingkiav Amal in Amlwg
Heasiayd odd vwkiaid a dwg
Ni bvdd hen wydd o hown
Bcenhinol ceyol r un.
The Translation, That the Flower Deluce like the Daysies will blossom very
fair, and will put out long and visible branches of Dukes, but none of them shall
become old trees to enjoy a royal Crown.

Our eight shall be David Gorleth a Master of Arts, and an excellent Poet.
Rhwnaddaw draw irdcni, A seydir in y fyddni, i sevd a fvdd kynvddkwyn, coi i
facw civy forwyn, in ol hin anial hannes, y wadd a ladder nadlles, y twrch
dayar au war eind, Daw o bethyn diwino bid melldigedig ddig ddygvi, o enav
dowyn anad un.

The Translation, He that will come there to the battle, will be destroyed in the
same, whose purpose will be to put the race of the Virgin to death: after this
the Mould-warp shall kill but to no purpose; this unruly Mould-warp for a time
will prove the bane and destruction of the Nation, being the most unhappy of all
his Predecessors, as is testified by the mouth of God.

Our ninth shall be John de Beidlington, a notable Prophet, that sets out the
destiny of the red Lion, whose name is said to begin with the Letter C.
A Beernsul Borle there shall blow
Under a Mountain upon a bow
Asplayed Eagle there men do know
Shall make a C. standard to sweat and fow
There shall fretfulness splay fawl
Of them shall win the mount
Daughty Knights there shall cry and cawl
And many one man that day shall dee
A Bull a bastard together meet
Shall fight in field full manfully
The red blood shall run his race in the strife
And many a Daughty that day shall dee
The red Lion shall made be micken,
And come down from Monntain hye
B^leeve befawl under the feet
And in yernes brink slayen shall he be
When the Albanats blood begins full to flee
They shall be driven down into a valley
The fairest flower there left shall he.
Our tenth shall be a Prophet of a clear verdict.
Mi ddyweday ac cedeg am gyscio ar ddamcg
Egin davharri ni bidd her i tnwydded.
The Translation, I will deliver in a short way touching some mystically, that
the race of two Henrys shall not long continue in the Regal Government.

This verdict proved too true for their

unhappy Race. Hen. 7, 8.

The eleventh shall be Taliesin.
Then the Allegiance of the Normans will be cut off and the Crown will slip to
the Eagle of Wales, and this will produce ^ happy word, and new Laws.

When this Belinus our great Conqueror will appear, times of thraldom and
perplexity will vanish, then the two whelps will be dismissed of their seized
dens, and these two will be crowned, and their Armies will be full of jealousies,
two Keepers which will not k^ep their Meares and Territo^ies, two which will be
c^owned, but fierce and of large dimensions, liberal and of the race of
Griffith, and these two Kings shall call the loyal and faithful, false and
treacherous; and these will not divide and share.

And surely there shall be eighteen years of peace, and after this feasting
time, there will succeed twelve years of wars, and this will come to pass very
cunning and politic according to Predictions, and then will Lands be conquered
from the Sea, and the Eagle of Britain with advice of his wise Council and
strength of his Army, and sharp Arms, will surely overcome and conquer.

These that follow under the name of Koronog Fabau belong to the conquering
Prince spoken of throughout this book, this word Coronog Fabau may be taken in
a double sense, and of a double application by the ignorant in the scope of
Prophecies, as it was applied to King Charles, being the Son of Anne, but clean
contrary to the scope of this Prophecy, as it shall be made apparent, the second
application, that it alludes to a person that may challenge a lawful interest
to a Crown by ancient descent, or right of succession, as herein is manifest.
1.
Koronog fabau Medd Taliesin
A hyny a ddavll enir in llysce Merthin
Yng hanoli ous i Rhuthur yw elin
Ag yni ddiwedd i bydd brenin.
The Translation, Koronog fabau says Taliesin, and these are read in the books
of Merthin, in his mid age will run furious to his enemy, and in his latter
days will be a King.

2.
Koronog fabau dyma beth chyfedd
Chag ofn kafad, i kilia ir gogledd
Af a gill in ll^eigir Argliwyddi amowridd
Ag uto brenni fvdd in i ddiwedd.
The Translation, Koronog fabau wonderfully will betake himself to the (...) to
avoid a storm, he shall lose in England, Lordships and greatness, and yet he
shall be a King before his end.

3.
Koronog fabau Meddhen
Proffwyd or Almaen in Abe^gass^s
A gill in i fiemgtid y Goron adyl^dis
Agyn i henauit i bidd gwrdownis.
The Translation, Koronog fabau, says an ancient Prophet from Almaxia, in his
youth will lose the Crown due unto him, but in his old age will be a man of might
and greatness.

4.
Koronog fabau Medd proffwyd Acall
Estodiws Esgob a fvdd Angall
Pau el in i henamt i ladd a bwyall
Ag in i swing tid in farwnr Angall.
The Translation, Koronog fabau (says Estodius a Prophet and Bishop, w^l be
unwise, when he shall go in his old age to kill with an Ax, and in his youthful
years an unwise Judge.

5.
Koronog fabau a gyfid lynges
Medd Sibli ddoeth a fv scenhnines
Ag ir Twrkiaed fe a wneif atles
Foi chag hwow indous Neges
The Translation, Koronog fabau (says wise Sibil the Queen) will prepare a
Navy, which will be very hurtful to the Turks, and it will not avail to fly from
him.

6.
Koronog fabau meddr Apostolion
A wna oysuddodymysg r Iddewon
Par iddino gredv fall gristnogion
I Grvst a gvlles ir waed i galon.
The Translation, Koronog fabau (says the Apostles) will do a wonder amongst
the Jews, he will convert them Christians, and draw them to believe in Christ
that lost his pure blood for them.

7.
Koronog Fabau medd lfyfrav Rhvfain
Of a dvos sorweddi dir y dwyravi
I ddwyn koronav ynoly damvain
Ag i dwyn vcddas i d ir Pcydain.
The Translation, Koronog fabau (says the Prophecy book of Rome, will go over
Seas toward the Land of the To conquer Crowns according to such Prophecies,
and to bring honor to the Land of Britain.

8.
Koronog fabau a gaiff sawr vrd^as
Medd hen proffwy laelwyd Gildas
Ag in R^nsein d^e fe a wn^iff Barkas
Ai gasogion fyvt^ mewn Antchos.
The Translation, Koronog fabau (says ancient Gildas) will b^come to high
esteem and honor, in the Territories of Rome he will make a purchase, and his
enemies will fall into misery.

9.
Coronog Faban kovdwch in ddiav
In hur Babylon i kysid Eglwysav
Brenin Koronog fiddyn ddiamav
Gwae r Twrkiai^ pau ddvl^ wdifav.
The Translation, Koronog Fabau (believe assuredly) will raise Churches in
Babylon: A crowned King will he be without doubt, woe be unto the Turks, when he
comes to destroy them.

10.
Koronog Fabnu a gysld ddvdd gweuer
In erbin Gog a Magog ai hannifer
Ag a cvd i fattel dau i fauer
Gwaer Sarasemaid pau ddelr Anifer.
The Translation, Koronog Fabau on a friday will give a battle to Gog and Magog
and their multitudes, and then woe be unto the Sarazens, when he will appear
against them.

11.
Koronog Fabaa medd doethion Rhnfain
In ol amser Jessvmab rhvain
Mil Pvmkaut degrees a ffedwar vgain
A ddieliff dracha g wyr tree llmdain.
The Translation, Koronog Fabau (says the wisemen of Rome) after the year of
Jesus the Son of the Virgin 1590 will render vengeance on the Londoners for
their merciless contempt and cruelty.

12.
Koronog Fabau pau ddeli henaint
Trwy nevth s^sso pen r holl saint
A fin gyfiownder yw hollgiraint
Er i svd heddiw in salw ddiscaint.
The Translation, Koronog Fabau when he becomes aged, through the assistance of
Christ (head of all his Saints) will procure Justice and Equity to his own,
although at present of small account.

13.
Koronog Fabau medd Merddin Emris
Ar gwra elwir J^hannis Colosencis
In i sieug id ^ bidd gwrofn^s
Ag in i benaint i biddgwr grymis.
The Translation, Coronog Fab^u (says Merthin Ambros and the Prophet called
Johannis Coll scencis) in his youthful years will be a fearful man, but in his
latter days will be mighty powerful.

15.
Coronog Fabav a ddensin dau yrgill
At y gwr a foyn kadw r kestill
Ag yna choddir manneravyni fefyll.
Gwae Arglwydd Rhaglan pau welor pebill.
The Translation, Co^onog Fabau will convey private messages to the Keepers of
Castles and G^rrisons, then shall Banners be set up, and woe be unto the Lord of
Rhaglau at the sight of these terrors.

16.
Coronog Fabau Medd Rhees er yri
A dd^nfni lynges i Abertifi
Ag in sswydd be^sco i bidd gweiddl
P^u ddeli wyr i die heb b^lli.
The Translation, Coronog Fabau (says Rees Goch of Snod^n hill) will send a
Navy to Cardigan, and in Pembroke-shire will be lamentable crying, when his men
will ente^ in by force. see p. 17.

17.
Coronog Fabau a gaiff i gyfarch
Er iddo in lloegir gaffael Amarch
Of a ddianike o ddwylo hill llowarch
Fall i dienig us Jonas o folar Morfarch.
The Translation, Coronog Fabau shall have high respect and honor, although in
England slighted for a time, he shall escape the Stratagems plo^ted against him
by the race of Llowarch, as Jonah from the belly of the whale. see the 19, 20.
in p.

21.
Coronog Fabau wedi mawr Amrafael
Ar foroedd a thirvedd a chwerwryfel
Efai kleddir medd r Archangel
In nyffrin Jehosaphat in ytiryssel.
The Translation, Coronog Fabau after his great Conquest and troub^es by Sea
and Land, he shall b^ buried (says the Archangel) in the bottom of the valley
of Jehosaphat.

Here follows the Principal of, or these names given by the Ancient Prophets
to know the Coronog Fabau or the prophesied British Conqueror, which will win
the holy Cross through Christendom.
Pymthag enwarweini awg ar hwn ad weinir r hawg Mae ith gwmpas ail Josswy fill e
henwe Amroy, Rob. Ddv.
Says Robin Ddv this Conqueror bears 15 chief names, but a thousand names
besides belong unto him.

The 15 names are these.
1. The Sibils called him the second Lion of great Britain, whose ^ays will be
distinguished into three notable times, the first time will be impatient, weak
and angry with him. The second time he will dest^oy and burn. The third time he
will build Churches and Towns, and convert Jews and Pagans to the Christian
Faith. 2. The Angel Taliesin called him the Bull with the large Territories. 3.
Merlin Ambros called him the King of the weak Nation. 4, Merlin Silvestris
called him the Bull of a triplicite nature. 5. St. David called him, the Son of
the Man. 6. St. Thomas called him the King of Virgi^ity. 7. Evan Feidwy called
him the King of the black Stags. 8. Ban^ster called him the King of the Foord
of Tyfoddvon. 9. Beder called him the Eagle of the Race of the clear Language.
10. Mr. Talktan called him the Unicorn. 11. St. Jerman called him the faithful
Serpent, which will conquer the Kingdom of the Saxons. 12. Alan the Monk called
him the Golden Lion, which will take the wing of a Dragon and fly to Rome. 13.
Moluigail Abbot of Ireland called him the sixth of Ireland which will not submit
to no man's Ordinance, but to God. 14. Arpheus a Patriark called him, the best
of the who will destroy his enemies of England, conquer most part of the world,
subdue the Turk and the Pope in whose time shall be wonders heard, and the fall
of Princes.


Manifest signs and tokens to know and discern the prophesied Conqueror when he
comes.
This Conqueror by consent of P^ophets, will be meek and lowly, without pride
or wilful contempt, That he will keep and preserve his bod^ in his youthful
years in capacity of warlike affairs, till he takes that great charge in hand,
and will hold on in that car^ful preservation til he makes an end of his
Conquest, both in great Britain, and elsewhere, and until he makes a full
Conquest of his enemies, and win the holy Cross.

This Conqueror will be a Britain by the fa^hers side, but an Engl^sh-man
born, and in his time will be the greatest Armies of m^n, that ever was heard of
before in Britain, with which he will chall^nge his enemies to the field at the
borders of Rivers and waters, and by strength of his great Armies he will drive
Armies of Pagans to be drowned. That he will be a Wolf with open and devouring
mouth to the strong that will resist him, and as innocent as a Lamb to the weak
and harmless.

Further, the Prophets have foretold that he will be Emperor of Rome, and that
he will conquer Africa, and from thenceforth will he be called the Cock of the
Britains, and he will be the sixth, which will make his way from Ireland to the
holy Land.

A notable Prophecy written in English 200 years ago in ancient Court-hand,
setting out the Kingly Government successively from Henry the eight to his
Highness the Lord Protector that now is: And also what shall follow in the
future, fathered on John de Brittlington.
Barneys ne battles Brittaint shall be
And barnes on bellys bloo
The fourth Branch of the tree shall dee
That lost has bows mo,
The Exposition. Here the Prophet begins at Henry the eight by the name of a
Tree: And that Edward the sixth here set out by the fourth branch shall succeed:
and dye without Issue.

War shall wake and woe begin
But wisdom shall hi^ were
Cities shall not see for sin
How sour is their Supper.
Expo. In the reign of this subtle Queen is foretold that the Protestants shall
be subject to woeful misery, that the sins of the Romish Persecutors shall cry
for vengeance through the Cities, and that the supper or life of the faithful
Servants of God shall be made sour and bitter.

A Dame shall deame and make great aim
And do no other air
For bliss shall breed: Bale shall blyme
Through bounty of the Bear.
Expo. After a storm comes fair weather; here a tender Dame is brought in, that
will lament and condole the former miseries of the Church and faithful Members
thereof, and do them no other dire or harm, in whose reign blessedness shall
breed and grow, and the Jefuites, the Priests of Baal, shall be scowred and
scourged away through the goodness and bounty of this Queen, which will prove as
fierce as a Bear to the enemies of God and his Church.

When all the boughs are waxen black*
The Bole is set at naught
Then wrong wis death waits after wrack
For work unwisely wrought.
Expo. When all the Children of King Henry the eight wither away and dye
without Issue, the Bole or old Henry will be set at na^ght, or out of memory,
then death waits for destruction, for works unwisely wrought, meaning the
electing of the Scottish Race for the Kingly Government.

Intercessions for a new Sovereigns sake
Old soars shall be upper sought
The lettur X lasses big in lake
The beast on lost be brought.
Expo. Then when the new Sovereign comes into England old sores and quarrels will
he revived, which will pl^ng the Letter C Lasses or Presbyterian Ministers in a
Lake of confusion, and that on beast King James brought in shall be left or dye.

A red Lion shall ramp and rush
Whose rules shall rue that Race
The Twyborn foalk of out a pace
Graceless shall decrease.
Expo. King Charles is here set out by the name of the red Lion: Red in respect
of bloodshed in his time rud within his Dominions, this red Lion shall ramp and
rush, or rule and act unadvisedly, whose rules shall rue that race of the Scots,
and their graceless highway men called into his wars shall be destroyed.

Then holy Church shall hearme hent
And four years stand in strife
And meet and feitcht over about
As though they seclere were.
Expo. In the time of the red Lion aforesaid wat shall arise, when both parties
shall sometimes meet and fight, and sometimes fetch supplies over, about, or from
beyond Seas, which will shrewdly trouble the holy Church for four years.

The Christian Rose shall rufully be rent
With sin and Sinmoneys assent
Vnbeset over sides sore.
Exposition. In the Precedent Prophecy the Prophet tells us that the holy
Church shall be troubled during the war, but here he tells us that the same
shall be woefully rent, and that in the time of Calmenes Oraster the fury of the
wars, the author hereof did very well foresee our present divisions
occasioned by the cavilling humor of our Sectaries, which will beset the Church
over every side sore, the Prophet tells us further that Church Livings will be
sold or taken away from the Ministers.

A well shall rise with rhyme and reme
That Reme shall into Room.
And keuse of Care by Creed and Cream
The keys of Christendom.
Expo. A Well or fountain of trouble shall rise in the Church: which shall fall
into the Popes Palace at Rome, so likewise over all Europe, which will continue
by consent of all Prophecies until a reformed Princes comes with his key of
uniformity to compose the difference in the Church according to in primive
purimitive purity. vide fol.

A Branch out of a farther Bea^
Shall big his bower in Broom
Crowns at Callice Colen Jerusalem
Incline to his shall come.
Expo. Take notice that the red Lion was the last King here spoken of, and next
to him in succession comes in a branch out of a further beam, both the red Lion
and this branch is here employed to come by descent from the race of the
Britane, the red Lion from Owen Tudor or Prince Griffith ap Llewallis, and this
Branch from a further Beam, as from Owen ap Cadwgan ap Blethin, ap Cynvin
Prince of Powis, being further or far before the time of Owen Tudor, to this
Branch shall Callice, Colen, and Jerusalem come and incline by their
Ambassadors.

That Branch the Monks son has said
Shall win all that is l^st
Men full in folly arrayed
He all bring into rest.
Both the Author hereof and Merlin Ambros the Monks son harmoniously consent
that that Branch formerly spoken of shall win all the ancient right, liberty,
f^eedom and Territories which the Britains formerly enjoyed, and the great
ones here said to be fully arrayed in folly, this Branch shall bring into rest,
and that by power of the Sword.

Then a battle shall be brayed
Where Kings shall down be cast
And Eagle with Banners broad
Shall bear down of best.
All is not yet done in Israel, nor on the borders of Britain it seems,
another bat^le is yet to be expected, and a great one too (if this be true)
where Kings in their own person will appear, and be heads of the slaughter, but
to the encouragement of this Commonwealth, in the next place it is said that
an Eagle with Banners broad will bear down of best, this Eagle will be the
British Conqueror that will stand for the Ca^holick Faith spoken of before,
which will be the chief instrument of beating down the said Kings.

This Eagle gives us gifts three
That none could give before
In Babylon this brine boure shall be
With bellyes and Banners born.
This Eagle gives us (I say to us of this Island of Brittany) gifts three, viz.
liberty, peace, and victory, which none could give before whose Banners shall
extend to Babylon, and shake the power of that grand enemy of Christians.

A sign of peace there men shall see
That long time has belorne
Of Europe Afric and Asia
He shall hold up the Horn.
Notwithstanding the broils and distractions both at home and abroad (being
preparations for settlement and reformation, yet will shortly appear to the face
of the world, and that by the means of the said Eagle, as the chief Instrument
thereof under God) that this Eagle I say, will be Conqu^rour and only Emperor
of Europe, Afric, and Asia, and a Reformer of Controversies both in Church
and State.

Take no^ice of the Branch lately spoken of, who is said to win all that is
lost, and to bring the great ones into rest; and of this Eagle it is said that
of Europe, Afric, and Asia he shall hold up the horn, both do the same work
therefore but one person, in this beginning of his progress, a branch, in the
end, or in his full Conquest and subduing of Kingdoms and Nations, then an
Eagle, and of this Eagle read more in fol.: And now you have an end of this
Prophecy, delivered without Riddles but in harsh Language.

A welsh Prophecy delivered by Merlin Ambrose of Caermenthin, written in old
manu-script many years ago, of two white Kings that shall arise in Brittany in
these latter times, showing that the first of the said Kings shall fall in a
snare, that the second will be driven to fly away, and afterward bring an
Eagle with him to attempt the conquering of Brittany, but this white King shall
fall in a storm, and the Eagle his Comrade shall be driven to fly away by the
Eagle of B^ittany.
In nivedd a in^er y ddraig wen, i derchre kymrv law^^ have in llawen, o Archos
gweled i llvn in mined un dritharian.

1. un or Tair chan a dinne i bwll r hon a gyforth ager ag ysswalt y dwyrain.
2. r ail chan a din oddiyma ir werddon r bwn a ddigrifir in llaweno Arddymir y
Gorllewn. 3. A thrydydd chan y llvn a drig in ywlad in ddifvdd, a Gorwag a
diystir i kymer pawb y hi.
The Translation, Toward the latter end of the time of the white Dragon, the
Britains will begin to cheer up themselves, and to take courage, when they
find the race of the said Dragon dividing themselves in three parts.

1. The first part whereof will betake herself to a Bottom, which will be
enriched with the household Treasures of the 2. The second part will withdraw
from hence to Ireland, the which will joyfully rejoice with the possessions of
the 3. The third part of the said race will continue here in Britain, in great
distress, the which will be stighted and of no repute amongst men.
Now take the whole of this Prophecy according to its Translation.
A fiery Bale will come from the North which will swallow Scotland in her
mantle, and by the glympse and light of this Bale, will the Island fly
together, and after this, the wings of the great ones will be plucked off, and
then, shall these great ones fall to perdition.

And from this fiery Bale shall proceed a spark, and from the sedition of this
spark the Islands will start, and then will a Court Parl or Council be called
in the sight of the chiefest, or head, which will cause the second distemper or
falling out to be worse then the first.

And after the death of the Lion of peace, shall arise in great Britain a
white King of royal descent, who will fly in peace the beginning of his reign,
and after that he will ride, and then fly in sway the second time, and in his
flight he will fall, and in that fall, he will fall he adlong in the Bird-lime
or snare.

And from thenceforth, it will be said in contempt and meckery, where is your
white King?

And after this will arise another white King, who will go and travel toward the
rising of the Sun, and where the other Sun lies, in which time, will it be said
through great Britain, he is King, he is not King, and shortly after this,
this white King will lift up his head, and make it apparent, that he is a King
of many Dukedoms and Principalities, yet false and treacherous unto him, and in
this time will be the time of the Kites, and a time of sadness to the Doves, and
then the Ravens will be ravenous, for what men can get to their hands by hook
and by crook they count as their own.

And this miserable time will continue for seven years, within which time, will
the weak and poor be oppressed, and shedding of blood within places
consecrated, and the Clergy shall fall and fail in places many, that which one
man sows, another will reap, and enjoy, and then will death prevail against the
lives of the poor, and yet for all this misery, there will be but few that shall
perfectly love one another, for what truce soever will be made in the evening,
will be broken in the morning.

After this the Chicken of the Eagle will come in from the North, upon horse of
trees, and through the rough and stormy Sea will fail, and make his level
toward great Britain, and then will he give a touch to the Eagle that keeps
the Island, and after this, there will be wars within great Britain for a
year and a half, within which space buying and selling will fail; for every man
will study how to keep his own, whatsoever one man will commit to his purse,
another shall possess and enjoy.

And then will the white King with all his Army, betake himself to the old place
hard by a cunning stream, where his enemies will give him the meeting, and then
will he be surrounded or besieged in three places like the model of a Target, by
the several parties, and then will he strike at his enemies, and and so assault
and defend himself as well as he can, and then after a long fight this white
King will fall and have his end in the storm or ba^tle, and after this the Eagle
will nest or root himself the rocks or st^ength of great Britain; th^s will not
fall in his youth, nor come in his old age, and he shall maintain peace within
the Kingdom.

Reader, you may dive into the mystery of this prophecy without an Interpreter.

A Prophecy of Merlin Ambros directly pointing out these times, part whereof
you have delivered by the fourth Juror in the last Enquest.
When the greatest estate be cast, then shall a man rise out of the North-west,
in a cloud as black as the bil of a Crow, then shall the Lion be loosed out of
his bands, the best that ever was since Sampsons time.

Four battles shall be fought
1. The first at Gloucester and Wales, then shall Sword come over the Sea with
spear and shield, and the red Lion with many Knights of the North shall come to
the Battle.

2. L. M. shall come to the second battle of Gladsmore, whenever it shall be, a
Guest at Milford haven shall land.

3. The third battle at R^sse and Barnslay Moor before Camarthen.

4. The fourth, in Florswen, a proud skirmish shall be, Vsk shall run of blood,
and Brecknock-water shall do the same, and beast shall mark at Brecknock water.

The Lion shall roar at Lemster-hill, and shall weep for these Skirmishes.
1. At the headless Cross besides Gloucester shall many thousand be slain.

2. At St. Donnes, the Cock of the North shall cry alas that ever he was Lord.

3. At Werborn proud skirmish shall be

4. At Colbrook this Guest his banners shall spread, and in Honslo heath betwixt
a Park and a Bridge of tree, the unbridled horse d^ubtless shall dye.

Streams shall run of blood, and the Rose Female and her Flowers for ever
shall fail.
A Dragon out of the Tower shall destroy the falsest of the City, then Kent
shall laugh.

And Essex mighty shall make the Cross of Canterbury bow, and a Clerk of
Cambridge shall it crave.

A red Fox shall come out of a wall, with as many crafty wyles as he can
devise, I read or told you, Masters all, defend you, for odds shall sit in
your Assize, then the Towns shall swim against the stream, when the dead man
sit in his room, then shall the world turn up side down, and grace shall grow
to every man that walks in his way, all men shall enjoy the main
resurrection, but especially men of Religion, namely all men that have been
true, and false men then shall run and truth shall rest in every man, and in
joy and mirth shall and their lives.

After the coming of the red Fox, or dead man you see what happiness is
promised to loyal and religious men, with a happy reformation to the Church.
nay a golden Age if you consider it with diligence:

Now follows an account of Merlin Silvestris (or of the wood) commonly called
Merlin Wilt and also Merlin Callidonius, and so called from the forest of
Callidon in Scotland where (as some have suggested) he lived most part of his
life.
But (on the contrary) by consent of credible ancient Histories left in
writing, This Merlin was the Son of Morvrin, who lived in Nankonwy in
Caernarvonssire, North Wales. Merlin had a sister called Gwendolina, or
Gwenddidd in wel^^*

This Merlin Wilt was sometimes distempered in his wi^^, especially in May,
June, July, at which time and season, he would betake himself to the Rocks and
Woods of both side^ of Nankonwy, and there he made for himself Summer-houses of
green bought, and was carefully looked unto and fed (during his fits) by his
kind sister Gwendolina, unto whom out of his fits he would deliver his
prophecies which she carefully wrot^ and safely kept.

Gwendolina saw five notable Rev. lations touching the (...) of great Britain,
which she delivered to her Brother Merlin to be expounded, these Revelations
with their Exposition^ you have as follows.

The first Revelation of Gwendhvdd.
My dear and most loving brother, as I slept on a night in my bed, I supposed
my self to be waking, then and there I saw my self walking in a fair and large
field wherein I saw numerous small heaps of stones, and amongst these small
heaps, I saw few and thin great heaps of stones likewise, then I saw a
multitude of people carrying away the stones from the small heaps, and pouring
these stones unto the great heaps, and for all this carriage I have not seen
the small heaps diminished, nor the great heaps increasing or augmented, the
wonder of this Revelation has troubled my mind to this hour.

The Interpretation whereof delivered by her brother Merlin.
Gwendolina my dearly beloved Sister, be not thou discouraged at thy
revelation; for it tends to thy comfort, and be thou confident that the field
which thou saw signifies this Island of great Britain, and the small heaps
of stones signifies the Commonalty of all sorts which get their living through
the Industry of their labor, and which do put their whole trust and confidence
for their sustenance in the Almighty God.

The great heaps which thou saw, signifies the whole nobility and great ones
of this Island, the multi ude of people which thou saw carrying away the
stones from the small heaps and pouring of them into the great heaps, signifi^s
the Servants, Bailiffs, and Stewards of the nobility and great ones, which are
and which will be hereafter: These, by fraud, oppression, and sinister ways and
means will squeeze the poor and weak, sometimes by color or pretense of
Offices, sometimes in color of the Legal power, sometimes by fraud and
oppression, and sometimes by Robbery and Thievery. And whereas thou saw the
great heaps not i^creasing or growing bigger by the carriage of the small heaps
into them, that signifies the wrath of God against fraud and oppression, which
prevents the prospering of such wicked heaping up of riches with the doers and
their posterity, and whereas thou saw the small heaps not lessened or
diminished, notwithstanding such carriage away from them, that signifies that
the Servants and Retainers of the great Ones will defraud the poor, yet that
God will (out of his infinite goodness) and treasury add unto their estates,
and provide for the oppressed from time to time, for what they shall lose by
oppression, God will add to them another way, especially if they will s^ff^r
their oppression with patience and thankfulness, referring the revenge un^o the
Father of Heaven, unto whom only belongs to punish the wicked; for it is he
that ordained the strong and weak, notwithstanding the sufferings of the just
in this world, God will provide for them both in this world, and in the world
to come. And verily my sister, this is the right Interpretation of thy
Revelation.

The second Revelation of Gwendolina delivered to be interpreted to her brother
Merlin.
Wise Merlin and dearly beloved Brother, I have seen a second Revelation in his
manner: As I slept on a night in my bed, I saw my self standing in a Grove of
the fairest and tallest Ollars, that the heart of man could imagine or his eyes
behold, to which place I saw a great multitude of people entering and coming
in, with hatchets and Axes in their hands, with which they h^ve cut down and
destroyed this whole Grove down to the ground: and suddenly I saw another young
Grove far exceeding the former both for straitness, smoothness and
extraordinary length, starting up from the stumps of the former Grove, and of
the wonder of this Revelation I awaked, and from that hour to this day I cannot
forget the strangeness of it.

The Interpretation of the same delivered by Merlin.
Gwendolina, my advice is that thou harbor neither care nor sorrow by reason
of thy Revelation; for no harm will come unto thee by it; for the Grove which
thou saw signifies the Island of Britain, which will be mightily clipped of
her nobility and great Personages, signified by the cutting down of the fair
and stately Ollars, and these shall be totally destroyed, even as thou have seen
the destruction of the Ollars, yet for all this, in the same manner as thou
saw a new Grove sprouting and starting up from the stumps of Ollars, shall
grow again a stately Grove of powerful men from the stock and root of the
former: In which time or age no kind of Riches will stand in the possession of
the great Ones or Nobility, for it shall be taken away by the children of the
meaner sort or Commonalty, and of, or out of these shall grow men of renown,
honor, and command; and these shall continue in such estate, degree, and
calling for a long time; and this is the true and perfect Interpretation of thy
Revelation.

The third Revelation of Gwendolina delivered to be interpreted to her Brother
Merlin.
My dearly beloved Brother, I have seen a third Revelation, as I was in my bed
and sleep, where I thought my self to stand on the Top of a very high round
Hill with a flat and plain top, on which I saw many small Hills and green Banks
very high; then I saw a great Earthquake ushering on upon a sudden, by force
whereof these Banks or Hills would suddenly fall and become level to the Plain
or bottom, and immediately should arise in the place or room of these high and
green Hills, a multitude of Muck-hills, upon, or out of which sprouted up and
grew upon a sudden variable sorts of fragant herbs, and plants full of fair
Blossoms: And to this hour I wonder at this Revelation.

The Interpretation of Merlin of the third Revelation.
Fair Gwendolina, be not sad nor sorrowful for what thou saw, thy Revelation
will do thee no harm, the Green which thou saw signifies this Island of
great Britain, and the Hills signify the Nobility and chief Rulers of the
same: And the Earth quake signifies a great war that shall fall in this Island,
wherein shall the Nobility and great Ones be levelled and destroyed in the same
mauner as thou saw the H^lls, falling and vanishing away: And the Hillocks
which thou saw suddenly arising in the places of the Hills, si^nifies that
the riches and estates of these great Ones shall be given to men of small
degrees end repute; the fair blossoms which thou saw, signifi^s that the
young child en of these will become men of renown and of great estates, but
hardly will the fi^t generation of these hold the estates and possessions of
their A^cestors; for they will fade away, even as the Plants planted in the
Muck. And this is the signification of thy d^eam.

The fourth Revelation of Gwendolina.
My dear Broth^r Merlin, I saw in my sleep on a night that I stood in the
fairest field of wheat that the eyes of man ever saw, the ears of the wheat I
saw to be full ripe, hut the straw of the same was as green as green grass, and
I saw a great multitude of Swine breaking the hedge, and entering into the
field of wheat, which devoured and destroyed the wheat, and made it plu^p and
level to the ground, and on a sudden I saw an innumerable pack of white
Greyhounds entering in, and runn^ng furiously toward the Swine, and then I saw
the whole company of Swine killed and destroyed by these Greyhounds, and I
much wonder after this Revelation.

The Interpretation of the fourth Revelation.
Fair Gwendolina, let not this Revelation trouble thee; for the field of wheat
signifies this Island of Britain, and the wheat signifies the Inhabi^ants of
the same. The ripe ears and the green straw foretells, that in such time
hereafter, young men will have white hoary heads, which will be so strange to
behold, as to see ripe ears of wheat on green stalks: The Swine which thou
saw bre^king the hedge and entering into the field of wheat, signifies, That
an innumerable company of strangers will enter into this Island, which will
destroy the Inhabi^ants thereof, after the same manner as thou saw the Swine
destroying the whea^: And the Greyhounds do signify, that there will come
white Greyhounds, which will ^evenge the blood of the white-headed youths, on
the swine, and these Swine will be ch^sed away and destroyed by the Greyhounds,
viz. the remnant that will be left undestroyed, and this is the Interpretation
of thy Revelation.

Now follows the fifth and last Revelation of Gwendolina.
My Brother, I have seen the fifth Revelation, I saw my self standing in a large
and spacious Church yard, which I saw full of young Damsels, and all these I
saw great with child, and near to the time of their lying in, and childbirth;
and I heard the children speaking and discoursing one with another out of their
Mothers wombs: and this is to me a great wonder, as often as I think of this
Revelation.

The Interpretation of the fi^t and last Revelation, delivered by Merlin.
Then Merlin said, Let not thy thoughts trouble thee for this Revelation. The
Churchyard which thou saw, signifies this Island of Great Britain; the
Damsels foretells, that there will come an age, wherein Marriage will be made
between Ladds and Damsels under their Head-laces, yea, and all, for the most
Part, will be married in that age very young, and the Children which will be
begotten in that Age, between these will be full of lewdness and wicked policy,
and whereas thou saw or heardest the Children speaking one with another in
the^r Mothers Wombes, that sigoifies, that a child of fifteen years of ag^, in
that age will be wiser than a man of forty years of age in this present age; and
thus ends the five Revelations of Gwendolina, with Merlins Interpretatio^s
upon them, which are v^ry rema^kable and in part suitable to these timer.

A vindication of both Merlines, especially Merlin Ambrose, commonly called
Merlin of Wales, against the Calumnies and Assertion of ignorant Writers, that
wrote against their Prophesies, merely by hear-saying, rather then by trial of
their works.
Whereas, That Martin Delcio treating of Prophets and Prophetesses, in his 4
Book, 1 cap. and 3 ques. rejects Merlin Ambrose of Wales, as a Magician, and
that his Predictions be condemned in the Council of Trent, yet he reckons
Merlinus Callidonius (as he says out of his ignorance) from Scotland.

Also Trevisa speaking of these two Merlins in his histories, prefers the
Caledonian or Scottish Merlin before him of Wales, affirming, that the
Caledonians Predictions are more full, perspicuous and plain than the others.

Johannes Major makes mention of Merlin of Wales, in diverse places of his
history of Scotland, especially in the second and fifth Books, and affirms
that he was a Magician, and calls his Predictions doubtful and dark.

Johannes Balleus in his Century of British Writers, does mention both the
Merlins, preferres him of Wales before the Caledonian.

James Maxwell of Scotland (that deserves laudable respects for his pains and
industry in traveling through Europe for collections of this nature) renders
his favou^able judgment in the behalf of Merlin Ambros, and says that he
conceived that he was not a diabolical, but only a natural Magician, well seen
in the admirable secrets of nature, and especially in Astrology, and that his
Horoscope or Constellation did incline him to aim at the f^re-knowledg and
foretelling of things to come.

But Gulielmus Newbrig^ensis and Polidor Virgil, are of the former Faction
against our Merlin Ambros.

Now the truth is that their b^re Averment against Merlin Ambros, proceeded
with some out of ignorance, with others out of malice and policy; why should
either of their Prophecies be ratified by the Trent C^uncil, especially seeing
they thunder out the ruin and subversion of the Pope of Rome, with his
abominable Hierarchy, as is clear by these Collections, but as to this deciding
of this Controversy, I refer the Reader to the Judgment of their Prophesies
hard by, where he may be his own Judge, touching the persons and their
Prophesies.

A Prophecy of Merlin Silvest is* alias Merlin Wylt, cited by Gildas the Son of
Kawe of great Britain, and the first Writer of the Britains.
Pan ddoter gwerth dwy fvwrh Am un, a chrogir Ave yna y try y llew in
waddfelldigedig, yr hwn a gyfid ystroniaid ar i gesn, ag a istwng i waed i hvn,
agynobydd diris o dd^^wg ymisg y Britanied, yrhaufwyaf o homnt, ind Amgen, yr
ynis heb gyngor, Ar Eglewyssi heb bregethe, ar preladiaid heb fvdd, ar kedirn
heb galonnav, ar Esgyb heb Audvrdod, ar krysyddwyr ar gil, Ar keifiaud in her
wy^, ar kowir in gr^gadwy, ar sswyddogion in Anvdonvs, ag Hadron in fradyrchvs,
a lliwiav ar y ll^drad.

Ag yno y kysid kyffredin kysiwrh ar Alban, o ym pir ir God l^dd, ag yna y
plenir y lili in her y try didd ytiseddnag yno kyfid Gwiber danllvd o fynwes y
llews yr hwn a eilio kyffeswyr llo^gir y wadd fvlld^g^dig, kanis in erbir
Sene^d wr Rh^fain ^tryy hwn, in orfydair nes da^^roi y wiber danllvd
yngwrthwyneb y llew, ag ynay dengys y w^ber in ddirgel y wada felldigedig, ag
yna i kysed kerhri Eglwyssig in erbin holl loegir, ag in rail k^ffro y tynnir
Esgiil y w^ber danllvd ag a gyffrv r Alban began Anad y lltw, yn^ gefnyno y gwisg
y wiber groen llew glass Amdain, ag a din ^t^i dri N^ssiwn genedl, ind Amgen,
Frankvd, yskotted a Gwiddil, ag y n y llew ko^onog agymer y Gwynfin arno trwy
grngory krair korh, began faint fvase y tried dd dial.

Ag yno y kymer y llew kormog ydenvdd Alarch, ag a gymer hedfa rhyngtho Amor
llvdaw, ag a ddiskin ari ^ynvdd Normandi, ag ynoy krfod r Gwial^n las ar ben
mine y dd y Paladr, yno y geil wy llew atto i y^gel dd o bob tv, agi i daw i
loegir ar wialen las in i law, ag mwy nag un a orfyddaut rbyngtho ar Baglogion
lloegir, ynghwir^l gwyr Rovfain.

imae diwedd hon in eifie.

The Translation. When one Cow bears the rate of two kinn^, and when the Gold
is hanged, then will the Lion turn himself to a cursed Mould-warpp, who will rise
on his back stranger Nations, and will bring low h^s own family, posterity, and
blood, then will be innumerable mischief amongst the Britains, or the greatest
part of them: Then will Britain be without a Council or Parliament, Churches
without preaching, Prelates without profit, or liveings: The great men without
hearts, Bishops cl^p^ of their authority and office, men of devotion lost; and
Seekers turned Robbers, true men condemned. Officers corrupted with perjury,
Thiefs treacherous, and Robbery excused.

Then will the Commons rise as high as Scotland, of fresh grast to the North,
and then will the Lilly be planted in the Lands of the third heir, then will
arise a fiery Viper, from the bosom of the Lion, the which will be called (by
the Confessors of England) the cursed Mould-warpp, against the Senator of Rome
will this turn, there shall be no Conquest till the fiery. Viper winds her self
back again against the Lion; then the Viper will privily discover the cursed
Mould-warp, then divilish plots from the Church will arise against all England,
and in the second rising the wings of the fiery Viper will be taken off, then
Scotland shall start, through the breath of the Lion: Then behind his back the
Viper will wear the skin of a green Lion about her, and shall withdraw unto her
three Nations of Consanguinity, that is to say, French, Scots, and Irish, then
the crowned Lion will take for his refuge the white Tower, through the advice
of the red or bloody Papists, by reason of the hot persute the third time.

Then the crowned Lion will take the wings of a Swan, and will take a flight
toward the French Seas, and will light upon a hill of Normandy, then will a
green Rod be taken up to the top of Mount Palludor, then the Lion will call
unto him his Succourers of every side, and will come to England with the green
Rod in his hand, then more then one will overcome between him and the Club men
of England in the behalf of the men of Rome.

The latter and of this Prophecy came not to my hands, the first part of it is
very clear and pl^able to the late times, but the conclusion some what mistical.

More than one, signifies a third party which will gain the Bale both from this
crowned Lion, and from his party.

A Prophecy of Merlin Wilt, alias Silvestris, discovering unto his Sister
Gwendolina the prophesied Conqueror or Coronog Fabau, with manif st signs and
tokens, as forerunners of the same, first in Welsh, as it was delivered, then
the Translation.
Quest. Gwendolina demanded when shall the glory come to the Race of the
Britains.
An. Pan fo Pobl a gwaith Reiel, a^ bydyn ddigon ol, yna i megir gw^rwyn, ag y
tyf kensigen chwng moibion arglwy ddi, ag yna yr ennynir Ffagal er hur i hani,
a honno a wen wyna ll^bo Amla rtrefi.

Qu. Said Gwendolina, when will that be?
An. Pan fo kymru in orchain, a dirfawr dalu, a dadle b^ ynudd, yna s kyfid
llew kryf a gred a fudd, ag Owain ^i flaen in aflonudd.

Pau fo mel in y genevau, ar llesrith ynigwefussau, ar bisi il in i kalonau,
yna i bidd Twyll in agos.

Pau for r Gath in y dwyraia a llo sgwru sarph iddi, a honno a gospa h^ll
fleiddie lloegir, in r Amser hwnw, y mab a laddo i fem i hun a elwir y Tywysog
darogau, ar Koronog Fabau, ar amser hwnwy kaiff y Britaiued y Goruwrhafwth.

Pan for llwynog in preguthu, a Chynafon Chrust in kyfarch ym nol e i mame.

Ag yna i try duw i law a^ y ganllaw dei lyngat, ag yr himpir in y graddau
gynawon Troyaf, ag i daw o Gwain Glain golevaf, i ddial ar ssais, i drais ai
her drigfa, in ol hin Cymrofudd prchon r ynys gudarnaf.

Gwendolina demanded as aforesaid.

The Transla. An. When the Nation has a royal work, with peace and plenty of
all things, th^n shall the poison of discord breed, and sprout up or break
forth with unity between the Son^ of Lords, and then, the faggot will be set on
fire, for a wages unto Henry, and the same will be poisonous to the Cities and
Towns.

Qu. Gwendolina d^manded, when shall that come to pass.
An. When the Britains will be groaning, with unmeasurable ^ intolerable
payments; then will be daily Consultations and pleadings: Then will arise a
mighty strong Lion in confifidence and says, and Owen before him in
disquietness, when honey be in the mouths, sweet milk on the lips, and gawl in
the hearts; then Treachery will be near at hand, when the Cat be in the East
with the Train of a Serpent after her, and this will chastise all the Wolves of
England.

And in that time, the Son which will d^stroy his own mother, will be called,
the prophesied Prince, and Koronog Fabau.

And in that time the Britains shall have the glory, when the Fox preaches
and the whelps of Christ preaching in their Mothers belly^s: Then will God turn
his helping hand to the most deserving side; then the whelps of the Trojans
shall be grafted in honorable degrees; Then will come from or out of Owen the
bright Pearl, one which will revenge an English man's long continuance and
oppression.

Who can deny his Highness descent from Owen ap Cadwgau, take notice that the
revenging of an Englishman is spoken in the singular number, therefore alluded
to the late King.

A noteable Prophecy of Merlin Ambros, wherein is set out more signs and tokens
before the appearance of the British Conqueror, with pretty, knotty, small
number of 7 in the cluse.
Pau fo lyffro ar y myndd kywarthog, y byddllawn rynys o bobl Ang henawg,
agenwir swyddawg, a newin kerniog ai ohael in ddiog, a Chadarn in Anrhigarog,
ag wedi glybwr gwynt gogleddog. a thlawd gwarth cudd og, a Fjubl newnog, a gwen
wyn mwlawg ar hudd in llidiaug, ai wyr in Arfawg, ag in miwedd says, Gwaith
Anrhigar^wg.

The Translation. When there is an uproar or tumult upon the rich Mountain,
this Island then will be full of miserable people, and dishonest Officers,
starving for silver, and hardly, or few to be had: and the strong, merciless,
and after a wet Northern wind, the poor in vile contempt, the people starving,
poison dark, the Stag furious, his men armed, and in the end of seven,
merciless work.

The Stag may be applied either to the Earl of Essex, or to his Highness the
Lord Protector; for that Ensign belongs to both, and b^th of them were of the
same side, and strong with forces and Arms.

But the question is about this number of 7, which carries a trebble
Application.

First whether it alludes to the final destruction of the race of the seventh
Henry, by the death of the late King.

Secondly, whether the said King was beheaded in the seventh year after the
breach between him and his Parliament.

Thirdly, whether it may point out some odd number of years, as 57, wherein
merciless execution shall be made.

But my advice is, that the Royal party may take car^ful notice of this last
Conjecture, and of my Advertisements to the Inhabitants in general, lest they
fall within the compass of this merciless work; they are fairly warned
throughout these Prophecies, but these Prophecies cannot be fully accomplished,
till some unadvised heads suffer a little further yet.

A Prophecy of Merlin Ambros, laying out manifest signs and tokens before the
approaching of wars to Great Britain.
Qu. Paciw fud a fudd.
An. Bid brith Pen Gwenith y Gwenwyn ar dafo dau, y skim ni kirn keirw ar
draethawd, gwaglaw bardd, ha^dd yffrriad, trust fvd k^nddawr ar lawr gwlad,
drvd fvdd bvgail a geilwad, fe ddaw bydav w^di bid, ind ymg ar na char na
chylvd ar glwydd pob gwas ar i svdd, dedwydd or brren a brydera i fvd.

The Translation, Qu. What manner of world shall come to pass.

Ans. A pide world, or a world tempered of hoidge poidge st^ff, where poison
will be co^tched in the highest degree of dec^it and falsehood on tongues, Stags
horns by Predict^ons desperate, Beirdhs out of esteem, and without rewards, the
Clergy gallant in Apparrels, H^rpers and Poets will be pensive and hear less,
Sh^phe^ds and Oxen drivers will be scarce and deer: And after this will follow
a world, that fellowship and kindness will be wa^ing with Kinsmen and Misers;
every man will be a Lord in conceit, happy will he be that will provide for
himself.

A Proph^cy of Addafras to the Raven, wherein is foretold the coming and
Conquest of his Highness the Lord Protector, with the fall of Bishops and their
Ministers.
Trwy orthrwn llymder i bewinedd i chybiddia her wen ol^ Ai gwroledd a geidw
anrhydedd ir Goron 15 myluedd, in, i k fud llew du ym misc estrunniad
geuedlpedd, Pau so Bugail kaerefrog in rheoli ar Anwiredd, y Gigfrau a sarchoka
gesn y birlhion, ag a hetta ar fon, ag an lan Aberuedd i ^ren illia i hadar ar
Amrafa olion lwedd, y Bvgail a gwymp dar draed o falchedd, An mam An rhitha ov
trethoedd, of a syr^k^stell y llew tau y glue gledd, ^f a rbrain ar vrddas, ai
Pylassa av in cbysedd, ag efamgredicka korn wall aih yr helsonnedd, ag a hetta y
Gigfrau o lyndain i dir dyfed, in hed^ yrhawl heniaut a braint mowredd i
^irfyno y Gigfrau in lanh diwedd, in ol hyn^y y kyfyd dreigiav a llongav Allan
ar sor ag y tes^r saeson dro Ason ryfedd, ag a O wain Britain ar brain ar
fowredd, ag i kaiff y Brittaniaid y llwyr Anrbydedd.

The Translation, That the Raven through the sharpness of her claws will
privily forew^rn the Swallow, and her valor shall p^eserve the Crown in honor
for 15 years. Then shall arise a black Lion amongst a stranger Nation: And then
will the Shepherd or Bishop of York be a Ruler of falsehood or unighteousness;
then the Raven will ride on the backs of the proud, and will fly to Anglesey,
and at the borders and mouth of harbors will her chickens range for their
prey, and upon div^rs Armies, the Bishops and Clergy will fall under feet of
p^ide and our Mother will free us of our Taxations. The Castle of the Lion will
fall under the active and warlike Sword, the Crows will get the honor and
Palaces; and Cornwall shall embrace their high blo^d and Gentility, and the
Raven will fly from London to Dimetia, or South Wales: Then the Raven will and
her days very old with peace and honor: After this will arise Dragons and
Ships which will take the Sea: And English will steer their navigable Course
over a wonderful River: And Owen the Britain with the Crows shall get the
Conquest, then shall Britains have admirable honor.

A short Prophecy of Merlin Ambros, fore-shewing three Course of wars here in
Great Britain, that the Romish Religion shall have the overruling power here,
and that the same shall be the impulsive cause of great wars, concluding with
an odd, remarkable and fatal number.
Pan wncler tri Chysodiad, rg enkiliaid ddwywaith ag in y dry didd y bydd bid,
a Gwenddidd in llawn gobaith, os kowir gwai^h y beirdd a b^ry byth.

A dysud Rhufaui i bob tn a rhysel gwedi, a Phau so un flwyddin ar xv a
davgain, iiii n^w niav in derfyn, disre Normandi.

The Translation, When 3 risings will come to pass, and two sl^ghts or
retreats, and in the third* will be a merry world, and Gwendolina in full hope,
it the Prophecies be true, which are to endure for ever: and when Rome comes to
each house, then will wars come, and when 56 years and forty nine days come to
be a Period, or odd year^, then shall Normandy or the Normans be destroyed.

When the odd number of 56 years and forty nine days come about, Normandy or
the Norman race here in England shall come to confusion. Let un dvised heads
take notice of this fatal number.

A Prophecy of Taliesin predicting of Owen with the red hand the prophesied
Conqueror, and his noteable Feats and Conquests, with a fatal number in the
Conclusion.
Owen hul dardan, Owen farchog bvan, Owen wyr Owen Owen y mab darogan, Pan ddel
gwyr llyrhlin, ai bwyill owrhlin, yna i k lian fall morh rhag Owen lowgorh a
Bristow heb borthor, a ll^ndain in gyf^r, a llefain hyd ddofor, a fl^m havl
gwyn, ar ja, llyna draba ar droed, ag amal kri ar fon kro^s, llyna r oes flin,
ar vii wythnos heb hindda, ar ddeg ar hrgein in rhegedfa, llynar Amser in rgos,
i ddangos a ddigona.

The Translation, Owen of Dardans stock, Owen the nimble Knight, Owen from Owen
the propheeyed Conqueror, when the men of Norway will come with their sharp
Axes, then will they retreat like Swine for fear of Owen with the red hand:
Bristol will be without a Porter, London in open fear, and crying to Dover,
fl^mes of the white Sun, and ^rost, then pitiful deeds are a foot, with much
crying at the foot of Crosses, then will be the tedious age, and the seventh
week without fair weather, and 30 in posting and running, then the time is at
hand, to manifest it, will be very irksom and wearisom.

A Prophecy of Merlin Ambros foretelling the reigning sins of this Island by
means of the Bishops of Great Britain: And that the Kingly Government shall
fall upon the earth, lastly that the Bull shall bear the Imperial rule at Sea,
who will be both just and invincible.
Yr Esgobion a lwybrant i ddrwg weirhredoedd, ag yna y gollyngir gwaed ar y
ddayar, ag yr halogir y Temlav, ag i bidd ffyrn grwydd gorthrwm, a fferhud
sodom, yna i bydd treyswyr a d^mon a gasaant gyfwwnder, ag a gar aut y kam, a
bradwyn Rhutaui a Amkan^ut o heddiw hid y forn i farnu rkam, ag i ado rwwn er
kael da.

Ag in y die ddiav hyny y bidd dyniou ysklyfaid, in udonol a garan^ i gobrau er
kadaru have y kelwydd, ag i dileyia kyfraith a gwirionedd, yna i b dd kwnw f ar
y ddayar mewn llawer o levedd ag in r ynysoedd.

Ar brenhinavthav a balla ar ddymon ag ar y ddayar, ar ddayar adewir in
ddifaeth, ag yna i bidd newin Mawr yny Gristnogaeth, ag ni all un dd^llin
ddiddanv ywgilida yna i bidd Tyrnas ddrudlawn, a Phobl dra feilchiou a ffawb in
gorllwyn, yna i bidd Anarlloes, y kiw ar Tarw a gerdda, a Chryfder y morvedd a
sathra, ag in chait neb or fud ar ddin tra for Tarw in dwyn i fowyd, Trigarog
fudd of a Chadarn gyfion.

The Translation. The Bishops shall lead to wicked deeds; then will be ^ffusion
of blood upon the earth, Temples will be vilified and contemned, cruel
oppression shall reign, with the sins of Sodom, then will be wrongful doers and
people which will hate righteousness, and Lovers of wrong; then the treacherous
people of Rome will comb^ne and plot from day to day for lucre sake to maintain
the wrong, and seize the right, and in these days people will be Perjurers,
wildy, and without Conscience, Lovers of rewards for strengthening of lies and
falsehood, and then Justice and the righteousness of the Law will be delayed,
then will be combustion and distraction upon the earth, in diverse places, and
in the Islands.

And Kingly Governments will fall amongst men and upon the earth, and the earth
will be left desolate, then will be a great Famine in Christ^ndom, so that no
man can help or relieve another; then, there will be a full and a deer Kingdom,
then people will hardly recover this misery.

The Chicken and the Bull will go with freedom, who shall trample the strength
of the Sea, there shall be no oppression made while the Bull lives, who will
be merciful, strong and just.

By the Chicken and Bull is meant the Protector.

A Prophecy of Taliesin, pretending a discourse with the Coronog Faban, the
British Conqueror, wherein he foretells what kind of world will follow.
Koronog Fabau, daw bid Priddfawr, daw bid chvdd bron Tarrian, daw bid briw
bron Tibr, daw bid y bydd argyffwr, daw bid y bydd says wraggedd am r un gwr,
daw bid, pride wrth ddillad, gwaglaw ba^dd, hardd yffeiriad, drvd pob Bvgail a
g^ilwad, in farcha mab may fam nai dad, daw bid pridwrth gymni, brevddwydiol
pawb trwy i bvn gnawd, kau eidion ir un din, a devddeg un heb r un daw bid pride
wrth or llwyn hidl ddeigr wybyr ar llwybyr llwyn, a ddy mvno pobl pawbai kwyn.

The Translation, Coronog Fabau, There will come a very sad and sorrowful time,
there will come a time, when the breasts of Targets be free, there will come a
time, when the breasts of Towers be bruised, there will come a time, that there
shall be bickering; There will come a time, that there shall be seven women for
one man; there will come a time, that people shall want clothing, Beirdhes not
respected, and the Clergy in sumptu us habits, Shepherds and Ox-drivers
precious, children will not honor and respect Father and Mother, there will
come a time, that the Sacrament will scarcely be had, and that people will be
moved to dream in their sleep of mere fear and terror, one man shall possess a
100 beasts, and 12 men without none: There will come a time that people will be
weeping and mourning in woods and bushes, and people will repent of their own
requests.

Another short (but mistical) Prophecy of Taliesin, concluding upon the late
Conquest.
1. bid s. wyddeles in w^ddillion. 2. bid ffrwy^h^gy fall bid ball ar seeson.
3. bid M. ar grwydir wedi brwydir union. 4. bid h. in rhychor ynghor eugylion.
5. bid l. ddig wyn a ddwyn gelynion. 6. bid nawyn osbarth ar arth Aughyfwn. 7.
b^v yno Gymro in kymrvd Alltidion.
The Translation, Let S. the Irish be the leavings.

The children of Belial will be fruitful, and the English in want.

Let M. be wandering after a right distraction.

Let H. be chiefest in the seat of Angels.

Let L. without commiseration carry enemies.

Let 9. be Controler of the unrighteous Bear.

Let a Welchman then be taking of the Lame.

A Prophecy of Merlin Silvestris, setting forth by way of discourse with his
sister Gwendilina, many noteable signs and manifest tokens already past, as
also the British Conqueror.
Qu. Gwenddidd in gofin, Beth a dderfedd minav drvau Genedl gilledigawl.
An. Ateb. Diamav se ddaw gwr Arh gwerid i guel yrh kyfiownder, ag a ddengis i
saeson i gwaith ai hau ag am i twyll l koll^ut i haur hydedd.

Qu. Pa brid fidd hyny.
An. Pau gympor delway ar padrevav, ag in auamal lloswyrav a gweddiav.

Qu. Pa brid fidd hyny.
An. Pau fo r od, ar glaw, ar vd in Ffaeli^w, y drvd svd a ddaw in ddiogel.

Qu. Pa brid sydd hyny.
An. Pau fo r Croesav wedi kolli i h^nway, a hanner y frwyn av, ag in fawr i
eisiav, y tlawd mewn dadlev am d^n un, ag in fawr kri y kyfoethog, a llaw er a
ym gyraut i gael gormoddiaut, yna i daw Pregethwyr britbwn digllon i diodd^.

Qu. Pa brid fidd hyny.
An. Pau fo r tlawd mewn an obaith o gassael kowaeth i bidd gwell bwa a saeth
na biwrch i roi llaeth.

Qu. Pa bidd fvdd hynny.
An. Pau fo Prif in bvm rhau a Phob mau ar gyrhwyn, yna idaw gwres ifyn was fie
myddir yri, ag i daw y Tiroedd Arawydir un llaw in Porthi, ag Aberth drwy
ddyfin, in ddifai oi berchi, a bwrwkadkenedl y gwaethlin waeth waeth drwy i
Amherchi, yna i daw bran in ddiomav ymisg mynidd yr yri, ag oi nerthi chwarddwn
ag i byddwn ddigri.

The Translation, Gwendolina demanded of her Brother Merlin, what shall become
of us poor, miserable, and lost Nation?

An. Without all doubt, there will come a man that will relieve you from your
bondage, and will manifest unto English their unrighteous works, and will repay
to the great Ones of England their falsehood, and for their Treachery will lose
their honor.

Qu. When will that be?
An. When Images and Beads will fall, and when a Ave-Maries and Prayers to
Saints be grown thin.

Qu. When will that come to pass?
An. When Snow, Rain and Corn falls, then questionless a deer time will come.

Qu. When will that be?
An. When Crosses lose their names, the earth yield but half her cropp and
fruit, and great want of the same, the poor in great distress for it, and the
rich likewise grumbling, then many will strive to get overmuch, but for their
Covetousness they shall lose all, then will come pide Preachers, whose coming
will be very irksom and troublesome to suffer.

Qu. When will that be?
An, When the poor be without hopes of getting riches, then it will be better
to have a Bow and Arrow than a Cow to give milk.

Qu. When will that come to pass?
An. When the prime be the fifth part, and every place in going, there will come
a heat to the bosom of my world at Snoden, and then will all the Lands which was
divided, come to one hand to seed us, and offering through summons justly to
reverence, and slighting the Army of the enemy more and more. Then (out of all
doubt) will come a Raven from the Borders of Snoden hill, through whose
strength we shall rejoice and be glad.

Another Prophecy of the same Merlin Silvestris, setting out a dissenting
Parliament, which will be the grounds of wars, with manifest Predictions and
Progress of such war.
Am ffydd Bethlem a Chaorselem, gorfvd fvddi genedl bedidd, dwy flynedd di
hedd, a hanner y drydidd, hinon i winedd, koel kyn kdlanedd, Parliament
kynddeiriog brad pau i gwneler, yno i bidd derhce rhwng devlv olo^gir, y na ^
bidd rhwng gwy a hofren niferav, yna i bidd llevad a llew mewn glue hyder, yna
i bid llougav balrh bvchedd ynghonlau, yno i bidd gwiddil in dyfvd am ben
rhuddla^, yna i bidd llawenarh rhianeda oherwydd i dwedau Amgilch ffrydie
kaswennan, a di^ ster ar y lau yna i hidd treiswyr yngwistlon, yna i bidd
swyddog yng harchar, yna a bidil gwall ar saeson, a thrais a lled rad ag ymm
hell gariad yngwlad Brithon.

Yna i bidd haf gwnawg, a Chy nhayaf basolawg, a gaiaf ydawg, yna i biddr havl
yni ddevwres, yna i bidd y badd in oeici, yna i bidd Rhvs ap Rhvs a ddyf in
gwys, a chyfel ar frvs hid fookaer, yna i bidd chwng Aber peryddon a chvdy
Tysod dvon y mae^ ar y saeson, yna kin pen y flwyddn kad kocsfochn^, yno i bidd
gweddi wyr Jesso heb ormessiaid, yna i bidd en kill ar hill sexbardiaid, yna i
bidd talam wa^w^r in dar par Owen, ynoi gwaeir tri chyfodiad, ag enkiliad
ddwywaith, ag in y dvydiddi bidd bid brith wrthfodd ynghalon.

The Translation. That the Baptized Christians (meaning the Britains) shall
have the conquest of the faith of Be^hlehem and Jerusalem (meaning the faith of
Christ and his Apostles) at the beginning of war, the first two years and
moyetie of the third will be sometimes war sometimes peace, and then a
slaughter will follow, that a dissenting Parliament will be seen, then
treachery will be seen when it is made, then will England divide themselxes,
and with two armies fight together, then will be armies between Wye and Seve^^,
then will a Moon and a Lion have a strong confidence, then will be ships with
proud lines at Camlan, then will the Irish trot by Rvddlan, then maids will
make good sport at the streams-issuing at Caswennan, upon whose borders will be
slaughter, then oppressors will be in bondage, and yawn, then a Ruler will be
confined, then English will be in extremity, then fraud and thee very and want
of love will be in the land of Britain.

Then will be a white summer a sorry harvest, and morn-winter, then a
contribution will be assessed, which will never be levied, and the party that
will order it will never recover; then the sun will be in its double heat, and
the hot Bath wax cold, and Rees ap Rees w^ll summon Tennants, sudden wars
shall be to the borders of Chester or some other City.

Then the English will have battles from Aperper yddon to the foord of
Tyfoddvon, and then before a twelve mon^h comes about will a battle at
Kocksfochno, then the humble suitors of Jesus will be free of devourers, then
will the race of Saxons and Normans be forced no flight.

Then our mock^ng for our predicting of Owen will be homely revenged, then will
three risings be made, and a retreat twice, and in the third a merry world
according to my hearts desire.

A prophecy to take notice of.
Gwilia Pau welich rue gwilie a chilurg a chalau ar ddifie a gwauwyn llwm ymhob
lle a phr^fi pimp or prifie.

When a frostie Christmas comes, and New Years day on Thursday, a barren spring
and the prime V.

Take notic of this year 57.

A song of Taliesiu, against ignorant Beirdhes and Musicians.
Ni wyddoch thwithav padraethach, tafodav, nadosparth
Diav chwng y chwirach gave beirddion bychain brain bro
Braidd nadewchi arffo, Bar^hmin gostego gosteg nis
Kaffa in i el dau grothoo doddaiar agro;
Ar sawl am grandawo, Mab dvwai kano
Elphin ap Rwyddno synnat Artkeco
Dan dri ar ddeklo, am gau moli At hco
Myfi yw Taliesin ben Beirddy Gorllewin
Aga Adwen bob gorsin yngoger gorllewin
Ag Aollwng elffin oi hval evrin.
First he rebukes the unskilful Poets and Harpers, and says that the Bardh
which cannot control him should be put to silence, but pours forth his
prayers to God for such that observe his counsel and directions, and says that
Elphin ap Gwiddn^ was murdered for landing his Tutor, and interred in the earth
of Arthtro, and that he was Taliesin chief of the western Beirdhs, and that he
would set Elphin at liberty from his p^ecious bonds, surely he alludes at the
resurrection, by the sound of the trumpet of an Angel.

A prophecy of both the Merlines of the coming of Owen the Conqueror after
the year 1640.
Pau fo oedc^n mab duw in vil a 6 C a lx mylyn edd, yno i daw Owain in wir, i
gleduv dd^r, dir i daw, agyn ^ber Tawe y llevad o lau hafren, O wain ar i law,
ag i dir katwg Rhysel byth n^dd iddi Rhag llaw. gwilied pawb ramser.

The Translation. When the year of Christ comes to 1660, then verily Owen will
come with his sword of his steel; will he come? with the moon from Civern bank,
and Owen on his hand, and then wars shall never come to the land of Katwg. Let
the time be observed.

A prophecy of Taliesin of great wars, wherein the French and English will
confederate together, and then Castles shall be destroyed; but a Britain shall
overcome them, and then a good world will follow.
Y Tyrrav kadarn in wan a wnant
Llafaraf, gwelaf, golav foliant
I gymrv in hv pau hwyliant
Frank llen a saeson bid enbyd Awnant
Am Dalfa Tyrfa Twr min^nt
Am gyfrank un did^ Rhif y mirdd syrthiant
A moroedd ky edd dofvdd ai disant
Brithon ai toeblia ywna fyddant
Bri^hfyd a ddyfyd o ddikter karant
A saiff hid llawen pau chedant.
The Translation. Behold I do clearly forsee and prophecy the advance of
Britains, at such time when English and French will join together with arms
and armies, then strong Castles and Towers shall be made weak, and then will be
a dangerous time, then will these English and French seek Towers and Castles,
in the behalf of him which will be possessor (or owner) of multitudes, or
armies, then will be sharp fightings at sea but a gracious person will come,
who through his own free motion shall destroy (or overcome them) and then
Britains will wear them out and be chief, and then from a bad world will
become, stand, and continue, a good and merry world.

A prophecy of one of the ten Sybils, setting out the destruction of many
Countries and Isles by the Turk, the Calamity of the Church and State through
all Europe, the fall of Emperors, Kings, Princes, Pope, Bishops and Cl^rgie,
with several punishments, and signs of the same, of a British Conqueror and
Reformer of the world.
The Turks shall destroy many Christian Isles nigh unto them, the Countries of
Armony, Phrygia, Denmark; Norway shall be sore debatled, so that many good
Countries in Christendom (without help or victory) shall be destroyed, the
Castles standing upon the river of Tyber at Rome, upon the river of Ridonya in
France, and upon the river of Danubia in Almayn, or Germany shall be subverted
and cast down; so likewise in Spain, by reason of mavelous great floods which
shall come to the said Rivers; the Countries of Dardania shall be brought to
great ruin, because of great and mavelous earthquakes which shall happen
there.

Between the Arroganes and the Spaniards shall be great debate and tribulation,
and then there shall be no peace or love amongst them, until such time, that
their Countries and Kingdoms be utterly destroyed; the Country of Gasgoyne
shall bewail their great calamity.

After the year of our Lord God 1647 shall come, the universal Church of all
the world shall lament and be sorrowful.

Shortly after shall be great destruction, robbing and extreme wasting of the
most noble and the most famous City, which is the Lady and head of all
Christendom.

Every Church throughout all the would shall be spoiled and deprived of their
temporalities, under the signs and motion of Saturn and Venus in the tail of
the Dragon.

And then there shall not be so great a man in the Church, but he shall be weary
of his life, Churches shall be befouled and made profane places.

All manner of Religi^ns shall be put unto violence, for very fear and fright of
the most cruel Ire.

The He^dmen and the Heads of all Churches shall be expulsed and put from their
dignities.

Prelates shall be st^iken with the rod or scourge of punishment, and shall fly
from their houses, and shall so remain despised in sundry places, and shall
likewise remain still without any Leaders or Governors.

The Governor of all Churches shall role and fly, and find no place of refuge
or security, and the temporal men shall be turned from the Church, and there
shall be no defense or resistance for the space of 22 months.

Neither the Bishop of Rome, nor the Emperor, neither a rightful King in
France by the space of three years.

The wrath of God f^r sin shall fall upon the world, and for man fold sins and
false judgment, all Elements shall be changed, fear and dread shall remain.

Castles and strong Towers shall fall down, and be subverted by fear of
earthquake that shall happen.

The fruit of the earth shall fail, the roots of plants shall putrify, and wax
deaf and rotten, seeds will fall.

The sea shall roar and cry against the world, and shall overflow and swallow
diverse and many ships.

The Air shall be pestilentious and noisome, for the malice and iniquity ^f men.

The heavens shall show diverse and manifold marvelous signs and tokens.

The sun shall wax dark, and also shall appear red of color, many stars shall
fight together, which shall be a sign of destruction and killing of men.

Two moons shall be seen at once, almost by the space of four hours, diverse
passions, sorrows, and deadly sicknesses, and also sudden deaths shall be as
well in men as in bruit beasts.

Pestilential sickness and miserable deaths shall be in the most part of the
world, as was never heard of.

All the Country of Bononia shall loose all the company and flower of its
Clergy and Learning.

The Country of Lotheringe shall lament and bewail the great spoiling, robbery
and losses.

The Country of Campaigne shall lament and bewail, and require help of the
Neighbors adjoining, of whom they shall have none, but shall be utterly robbed,
wasted and consumed.

Ireland and Scotland shall be invaded by more Britains, and shall convert part
of the country there:

To whom shall come in aided a young Captain, or Knight, and convert the crown
of the L^l^e and have dominion throughout the universal world, and he shall be
an offspring and branch of the children of Brute, and the memory of them shall
remain for ^ver.

After these manifold tribulations, miseries and chastisements, will the God of
heaven send a Reformer of the Church and State, which will be an Emperor, and
this shall reform the Church after the rule and order of the disciples of
Christ, and all men shall him dread and follow; he shall revocate and call again
the people from their great errors and evil lives, and bring them to the faith
of the holy Church.

Many Infidels he shall convert, and bring them to the faith of Christ, by whose
help, the world shall be brought to rest and peace the displeasure, wrath and
punishment of God shall cease, then shall be one perfect faith, men then shall
love together faithfully, and so the world shall endure and continue, etc.

Agreeable to the last prophecy of Sibylla, is the judgment of the famous
Doctor in Astrology, Master John Cip^ian, as also of Tarquatus Vandrivus
student in the Art Magic.
Oxford, Cambridge, Wittemberg, and Padua, you glorious Universities of
Christendom, take truce for a season, with your deep inspiring sciences, and
vouchsafe to fix your ingenious judgment upon this wonderful prophecy of
Doctor John Ciprian, who said out of his deep ju^gment,

That the angry heavens, by fearful visions, fore-dooming comets and strange
comminations of planets, does p^ogn^sticate to the sinful world, the
alterations of Christian Kingdoms, fall of Princes, overthrow of
Commonwealths, defolation of Countries, and ruin of Cities, Towns and
Villages, earth quakes, floods, and mighty tempests, whereby the whole world
will be annoyed.

Also by the variable course of the Elements, all Nations under the circuit of
the sun will be vexed with bloody wars, famine, death, scarcity, with many
other strange and fearful accidents, as well in Europe as Africa and Asia; all
which will come to pass for the manifold sins of the world, wherein all the
earth is drowned, as in a gulf, past all recovery, except the Majesty of God
out of his mere mercy prevent it by our timely repentance.

This Judgment is mystically laid down for a Glass to them that understand, and
a reproof for the obstinate.
In the North borders of the earth is situated a Forest triangle wise,
environed with a wall of brass; from which Forest shall fly a fortunate Fowl,
that shall swim over to the borders of Africa, and there light upon a golden
Tree, from whence she shall pluck 3 branches of gold, and so triumphantly
return back to the Forest again; at which there shall an Eagle, which built her
nest upon a golden Steeple, so much repine, and send forth secret fires, to
burn and waste the said Forest, but every one shall be quenched before the
blast be kindled, many Princes of the earth shall seek by policy to hunt
therein, but at the gates thereof they shall take a great repulse: So fortunate
and fruitful shall this F^rrest be, and so invincible her Towrs of brass, that
all the Kingdoms of the earth shall admire her fortitude and prosperity, and
grace her with that title of Blessed Paradise, which God gave Adam at the
worlds creation; after this, the Sea shall be mightier than the Land, for the
corners of the earth shall meet and fight a terrible battle, wherein a mighty
man shall be overthrown.

In the West shall lurck a bloody Serpent in a den, which has not seen the
light these many years, but yet this bloody Serpent shall not prevail against
this blessed Forest. A leaf of octo is wanting, which makes the prophecy
curtayled.

A Dove shall be lifted up to great honor, by two golden Lions, and receive a
crown of Gold, but after all these things shall the end of the world approach,
therefore there shall be heavy and pitiful days, with much wars, and
alteration of the world, etc.

Out of the same Bo^k.
A Bird of a noble Nest shall be brought to England on a horse of Tree, and
shall change from Army to Army.

In those days shall a King be slain, of Saudiford in Albion, and the Leyth
shall he be, and in his own Garden sociated, a stout Knight in that storm, a
Bugle horn shall blow, and raise up his rayses to run with open mouth, to slay
him that was never born of the blacked Crow: Flanders and England shall fall at
dissension, because of the falseness of Traitors untrue, therefore a Dragon
shall be their confusion.

When the dead man shall set on his Crown

Then shall the world turn up side down,

And Troy on truth, shall tremble that day

For dread of the dead man, when they hear him say,

A dead man shall rise, that will be wonder,

This man shall settle right and good order.

Out of Heaven many tokens and wonders shall be seen, the Sun shall be darkened
and lose his light, and shall rain blood in diverse Countries, after shall
appear many tribulations and miseries over all the world.

Then he that will be Protector in England, shall be crowned King in London,
with great solemnity amongst his Peers, and he shall reign over England 55
years.

Rhan o Broffwydolieth Jevau o drwch y darau, foretelling of the fall of
Ministers, and of great wars.
Pob chiw lygaid a wyla, pob rhiw dasod a orha, poh rhiw galon a fydd Chwern
kanis kariad a balla, a Chenfigen ar d^pgioni a amtha, in bidd mwy yna dora
kysegr na thorry bvarth gwarth^g, yr Eglwys wyr a sethrir in harger, ag a
litlir i hirddas, gwsnaethwyr dvw a drvisir in ddibrid, yr skolheigion ar gwyr
lleu a allivdir, ag in rheir digon odreisw Armin, y llvgwn a gymeraus gyfoeth
yr Eglwyss in Anghyfreith lon heb gydwybed, neb rhiw an rhydeddir Eglwys ins
gwelir.

Phav dderhrever destrowior ynys hon, mal y dowad eryro gaer Septon, yna y
Brittained a dyruasa, ar Albau a gymmeraut in i kymdeithus, a hefyd Britauaid
gida r ^kotiaid a dyrnassa dref i Tad.

The Translation. Every eye shall weep, every heart shall groan, and tongues
shall moan; for Love will fall, envy and malice will grow; Then holy Churches
will be defiled and vilified, of no better account than Sheeps-fold, the Clergy
will be shrowdly trampled under seet, and their Hierarchy will fail and fall,
the Servants of God will be oppressed without mercy: The great Scholars and
Preachers will be clipped and lamed, and never enough of such game, and the great
and powerful men will unjustly and without mercy possess themselves of the
g^ods and rights of the Church, and then the Church will be without honor or
respect.

The when this Island will fall to destruction by the sword (according to the
Prophecy of the Eagle of Caersepton) the Britains will possess and rule, and
will be associated with the Scots, then Britains and Scots will enjoy their
own.

A Prophecy of Taliesin, showing that the prophesied Conqueror should be of the
race of the Britains, and of the late war exactly.
Mi a dysti^f yngyntaf am r haf her Sedin.
A ff^b dyffrin in llawn or grawn di newin:
A gor oskin llydon began hvdol llwydwyn
Lle dawai Arfe, ai blaid or Gorllewin.
Llew gorywrhel Rhyfel, in Goroskin.
Gobaith Rhag llaw y daw i lywendd, a ffob devnvdd in y^gweiriaw, gwyr a meirch
marthogion llyrh in in ar gyr^wyn, Allynges ar d^aws in hwil^aw ir wen ynys a
ddaw, emys llydaw llwydwn fdirh ogion ymmon a ddaw, Pau ddel dihavarch lvobarth
Gledd, i Aherhodin die i devaut, ll^ tramvwrhel tonnav glau Teifi tri brevddwyd
a brofir i for in wir, Tair Rhaudir in ymrysson, Tair blynedd blaen wy^^ y
glowir, Tair naw a ddwg Frwyth, wediyr With y Gwysceir, Tair Asgell well a
gynhelir, Tair Bvwch mewn b^ch mewn bvches in Welir, Tair in mine efgorav
gwasgorav pob rhaudir, Tair Gwraig ar lawr, Maeyn gowir, un y^ lle y ddwy a
gynhelir, kyn vllawg ywr Amfer, lloegir yr llew gostyngir.

Mi a ddanfon af vaen a thri Mor ynddaw, ag awnaf gafad a main brwdith
ddestrowiaw, mi a wnaf Baladr o lydaw mi a Anfonaf A^ lodav kwn yrh bwyfaw, mi
a Ansonaf Enwir ir lle i daw, Mi anfonaf wledd or sygnedd ir N^bai haeddaw, mi
anfonaf wiail i flodevaw, mi anfonaf ddiweddir anghowirion, mi Rad in y Morar
don.

Mi Assoda ffynon in rvchelion, mi asoda Rysel in r he^ elynyon, mi assoda laww
mewn says Aberon, mi Anfonaf mifer in berchnogion, fall y bor bid in y nrysson,
mi asod^ blvar y rhai Noethion, ag a to Jechyd yr rhai kyfwn, mi asoda y
kowaith in ryon, Pvm naw a ddeholant estrouron, Pvm tri in ymryson bleidiav,
Gracia Tempora terra, Tarw Maen Mawrir llawr a ollyngof, llynges ar foroedd am
diroedd a dram wyas.

The Translation, Says Taliesin, I will first speak of the long and hot
Summer, when the Plains be plenty of the nourishing Grain, and of the broad
Conquest of the gray and nimble Buck, where he will come armed with this party
from the West, being the chief conquering Warrior, with everlasting hopes,
that he shall enjoy mirth and happiness, and that all preparations shall be in
a readiness, Men, horses and Knights from Brittanie in France in preparation: A
Navy will sail to the white Island (or Britain) which will land in Anglesey,
when a mighty strong Army comes from Milford, and the parts adjacent to wards
an Army which shall control the waves of Cardigan Seas and Streams, in
accomplishment of the three dreams.

You shall see three Kingdoms in Contestion, Bickerings and threatenings of
wars for three years, three nines will produce a fruitful Issue: after eight
they shall wear, three of the best wings will be maintained up, three kines
together shall not be seen, three irrecoverable routed wings, and dispersed
here and there to all parts, three women down, it will prove true, that one
will be supported up instead of the rest: That time will be a time of
gathering, England will be subdued to the Lion.

Says Taliesin, I will send a Pearl with three Seas in it, and will make a
shower with a ^o^ fiery perl to destroy thee, I will make a Beam from little
Britain, I will send members of dogs to eat thee, I will send falsehood to the
Land, where it comes, I will send a feast from the main Ocean to them that
deserve it, I will send a Tree that shall hold on his leaves, I will send Rods
to blossom, I will send an end to the false, I will send a blessing to the Sea
and its waves.

I will set a Fountain in the highest, I will set wars amongst the old enemies, I
will fill up seven harbors, I will send many to bear rule and own, that the
world may be in strife, I will set plumes on the naked, and will send health to
the just, I will put the riches in variance, 5 nines will make a partition of
strangers, 5 threes the Wolves will be in Contestion, Gratia, tempora, terra:
The great pearled Bull I will let fall to the earth, and will sail a Navy over
Seas to conquer Kingdoms.

A Prophecy of Taliesin, wherein is showed the progress of the late wars,
Mountgomery fight, the demolishing of Mountgomery Castle, the late Kings
treaties, A victory of the British Conqueror over the said King and his Son.
Llyn ghessoeddo bedwar banvedd, kaero dl dorri
A Church Powys diffwyss drefi
A llafnav korch ag orh vyd ynddi
Ag in y lle ma Rhiw, Rhvdd, digowain iddi, a gwragedd ll^egir in rhoi llefain,
i loegir y devant, Rhan terfynav a fynaut gwedi amyl gynborav mawr, a mynch
dorri, a brad a brwydrav rhng trofi, a North i Eskyrn saint, a brain ar gefn
gweilgi, a thorrv gwarrogaeth Normandi, ar Goron a lithir i Eryr o Gymrv, ag a
gyfyd a bid daioni, a chyfcithie Newydd, Pau ^wilio Beli, diergryd bid ar
gyrhwyn, dav ge nav in Rhydd or un Gofin, dav Goronog eiddiog Sydd n, dav gadyr
ni obeidw i terfin, Koronawg lli diawg llydan i ter, ha^l o hvl Griffith, a
enwir i gal wau gytau kywie ni chyfr anna din,

Ag ynwye aevnaw mylynedd in hedd, gwedi gwledd dev ddeg in rhyfel diargul, a
ddyfi, daiargryd tir oddiar for heli, llv in ar fog ar faeth Eryr brithon
Tirion taer a orfydd.

The Translation. A powerful Navy from four quarten will batter down castles
and citi^s, and furiously run to Powys and destroying of cities, and then in
Powys will be red arms with much woe and crying; and the place upon a sleepie
hill will be made without habitation and concourse of people, then English women
will make an out-crie and lamentation, from thence the conquering party will
march to England, and will be possessed of their share by meats and bounds, and
this will come to pass after many great counsels and diverse breaches of truce,
and after much treachery and distraction between cities and citizens, and the
discovering of the bones of saints, and crows and ravens on the ocean sea.

Then the Allegiance to the Normans will be cut off, and the Crown will sl^p to
the Eagle of Wales, and this will arise and produce a happy world, and new Laws.

When this Belinus or great Conqueror will appear, times of thraledom,
perplexity, will begin to vanish, then the 2 Whelps will be dismiss^d of their
se^zed dens and these two will be crowned, and their Armies will be full of
jealousies, 2 keepers which will not keep their meares and territories, two
which will be crowned, but fierce and of large dimensions, liberal, and of the
race of Griffith; and these two Kings shall call the faithful and loyal false and
treacherous, and these will not divide and share. And surely there shall be
eighteen years of peace, and after this feasting time there will succeed twelve
years of wars, and this will come to pass very cunning and politic according
to predictions, and then will Lands be conquered from the sea, and the Eagle of
Britain with advice of his wise Council, and strength of his army and sharp
arms, will fairly overcome and conquer.

Take notice that the two crowned Whelps are said to be of the race of
Griffith; to satisfy the Reader herein, I must borrow a piece of history from
Doctor Powels Chronicle, fol. 97.
In the year of Christ 1050, and in the time of Griffith ap Llewelin Prince of
Wales, Makbeth King of Scotland caused a noble man of his, named Baucho, to be
cruelly murdered, where upon Fleance the son of the said Baucho, escaping the
hands of Makbeth, fl^d to Griffith ap Llewelin Prince of Wales, where being
courteously entertained, and within few years after fell in love with the
Princ^s daughter, and got her with child, and was delivered of a son named
Walter, who in few years proved a courageous Spark; this Walter on a time fell
^ur with one of his companions for calling him a B^stard, and slew him; and to
avoid the danger of the Law, fled to Scotland, and was there entertained. and
came at last to such favor with the Scottish King, that he was made steward of
the Kings revenue; and this steward from Griffith is the original of stewards,
the late Kings of Scotland, etc.

A Prophecy of a Prophet called the Bergam of Maelor in Denbigh-shire, wherein
notable things are foretold, with the Conquerours descent from the principality
of Powis, and North Wales.
Traethas a ddywodwyf, Rhyddyd Marchogedd o hyd dydd, avr byddyd kyngor i a
for, y kyfyd Gwynedd ar soloch much, dibechod minav ymhyradwys, gwys synghynau
lleision fie marchyma chwydd erwau, tithev syngemad ganvad gwynfau, devno da dvw
ev hvnau.

Pau gottolero Priodawe k^nau, gwae sais ynaros trais, gwedi traws goronon,
llidiog Taleithiawg, a Thaleith law mon, diegryd ar fryd bryd Priodorion, llew
llidiawg am gaer lleon, mal Rhod gorfod am kad koed meirion, hwn ywr amser y
Terfin Eilon, or dehev Rhyfig arson, llyvyrawg in arson ar Erhwydd, Pau vo
Gwinedd ynghy fedd gwedi hedd a goffwy.

Pau so kysauedd Gwinedd hinon, a chyladdfau kwynfau meiddion, haf tossog
eiddiwg brinhon ffrwytog, 7 fall a Phall ar sa^fon, brigawg blaen kwys dwys ym
dr^chon, a Felider dan draed a gwaed am Goron, ag Anfad in Rhod rheon.

The Translation. I will declare and speak, that the daily riding of a Knight
will be marvelous, when wary advice will be as precious as gold to a seaman, then
molestation from North Wales will arise to the swines, then will we be in
Paradise without offense, by force of summons and large horses of Kynau,
notwithstanding their weak grumbling, and thou, my message, make the cursed
groan at the act of our good God.

When the lawful owner of the rights and inheritances of Kynau will arise and
appear, who be unto an English, which will be in the time of death coming, after
his wrongful coronation. This frowning Prince and Lord of Anglesey, Lordships
will go on with his purpose for his lawful patrimony, and he shall be a fierce
Lion for Chester, and the Oak of Merioneth and their strength will be turned
like a wheel; this is the time that will bring a period to strangers, and with
proper right relieve Anglesey, when the cowardly enemy in arms peeps
Caernarvon, and when North Wales be in a straight and troubles, then will peace
and happiness appear; and then will they boldly dare, bury their former miseries
and troubles, then shall be seen a hot and stormy summer, which will produce
fruitful trees, and misery to some English, fair issues will follow their
breaches, and their contestion will be very hot and sharp, then the Church will
be trampled, streams of blood for a crown, and a mighty great one ruling the
freedom.

A prophecy of the same Bergam for showing great wars in behalf of a crown,
and that the race of Kynvn will get the conquest according to the will of God.
Traethaf it sardd daf, kau wit kyfauedd am gof diergit bid, bryd ar hvnnaw,
ddedd y bydd hydd am fro ar gyn ydd ddifiav kaled.

Pau Frwy, ho in koed a chad ymryn Gwyn, Meibion am Goron Amgyserfydd, Pau
cnwarddo ovydd, Gwaith am sylv dav Gwydd, ag in ddiffaith maith ymdaith mynydd.

Arth o Gyufin, Rhin chyddid, Powis a ddewis nis Adewis, a fyno dvw diav a
fydd, un dan kysau kyfar a fydd bid.

The Translation. I will declare unto thee, skilful Bardh, that shall remember
the intolerable misery of old, to them which pass away the same in slumber, but
when will a Stagg be in a prospering way for lawful Territories, and when will
that hard Thursday come?

When Trees and Woods begins to flourish and bear, and when an Army be about
the Tower, then Lads will meet for a crown, when the distressed and sad takes
heart and laughs, then will be work about the flowers of a forest, then it will
be dangerous to travel over wide and large mountains.

A Bear from Kynvin will give deliverance, whom Powis shall choose, and never
forsake; whatsoever God purposes, d^ubtless shall come ^o pass; one shall bear
rule for all, and the world shall be kind and peaceable.

A prophecy of the same, presenting news to North and South Wales, of the
British Conqueror, and very notable passages.
Pe gwybyddai Gwynedd ar dehev, a wnio Ryvig dau Rwysev, in byddam ar ddyrain
hidlon ddagrav, i byddain Anobaith ir maith chwedlav, ar Enkillir ail genavet
ddigwydd, kaen wybodav, Traetha iti eto, ymron kad ath fad enav, y kysano lloer
llemsin kleede, Ac^ol a ddenant kad blaen blodev, Arsog Arvthir kadav mon, in
Aros llios llongav, gwae sais in aros trin tri d siav.

Tra^tha di i wynedd wirion wedd, gwedi tral lawd hid frawd ynhiw fvd a ddyfi
sal Taran gwynsau ynglau llywein, gwedi. Talaith maith, mabogydwybawe a rvdd
Achwyn in trefi, ag yngwyn fryn llwe llawer orhi.

The Translation: If North and South Wales knew what I foresee and know, of
liberty from thraldom, they should not be troubled with bitter tea^es in their
expectations, neither would they be doub^ful of our promises predicted of long
time; for the second Whel^ will be forced to flight, as they may be assured
the^eof by our predictions: I will tell thee yet, that near the approaching of a
warlick enemy, and before the change of a moon, a sharp edg^d sword will
appear, at the borders of both brooks, an Army will appear before blossom time,
then the Army of Angl^sey will be very well accoutered in expectation of a well
ordered Navy; woe be unto an English being forced to expect the fa^e of 3 I
hu^sdaies: Foretell thou to harmless North Wales of upright intents, that after
a long and tedious perplexity, a certain sudden and unexpected time will come
on, like whi^lewinde or thunderclap, which will produce much groaning and
heaviness: the prayer of a principality lost long ago, will bring in a
conscientious man, which will move his enemies to be sensible of his invinc^ble
power within towns and cities, and about the white Tower will do the like.

A prophecy of Taliesin predicting wars in the time of the Lion of the race
of Llewelin, and of the appearance of the Eagle of North Wales in such time.
Rhyfel Crv yngan Llewelyn lew, Pan ddiwedd Rhwyfan Eryr Rhwyfawe, Tynye,
Tylodawe Annedd ghost began saason, Rhvthro brithon braith gadwynedd, Pau so grian
fa kad gamlan gwaeddsau gwragodd, Gwerin in gryd, a Chreveu gwa^d ar hyd
kryssed^, a braw llafnav, a Chas Angav Arvan Arvadd a berav garew, a gwye in
feiro o faieddi hedd, a diwedd y dydd kymro a orfydd, ag Engil ar ffordissaeth
fro heb fren hinedd, a moeo lydan i bob maban mad i sonedd, oes fodd i bob
dedwydd dibe^h bychedd; b chawd wyledd, Archant ar wawd ir hael drindawd can
trigaredd.

The Translation. That the Lion of Llewelin will be an instrument of wars and
outcries, but after the travels and sojourning of an Eagle, the sumptuous and
costly building of the English will be impoverished and demolished, and an Army
of linsey winsey will trouble and vex the Britains in North Wales; then the
women shall howl and cry for fear and terror of the unruly multitude, who will
show themselves very terrible and cruel, and shed innocent blood in streams,
then the sight of swords and weapons will terrify, and then they which the
sword will hate shall be put to lie on their ground, the harbors will be filled
up with fearful storms, and the long continuance of war will cause a mavelous
sl^ughter of men; and by the end of the day, a Welsh will overcome and conquer,
and then the English enemy w^l be without a King, and forced to fly away, and
in such time complements will be most fine, and care to the Poorest vassals and
to all degrees of persons, from such dissembling and counterfeit age let every
righteous soul bless himself, and pray unto the liberal Trini^y for mercy and
deliverance.

A prophecy of Taliesin of great warts in Britain, and of the conquest of a
Britain, and the white harvest after such wars, as also of an Englishm^n^
last period.
I ddvw yr Archaf er i groes lettaf, nef ir enaid yr hynchri tiof, daroganaf yr
hin a garaf, a gyrry in ddysie yr dwse lletaf, ar y meirch lercennav in e hyn
brinnaf, Garfydded Brithon or brathkrntaf, o hytre eylon hyd hyfre ganon, y
kynhaiaf Gwyn gwedi drvd ymladdon, bid anamyl er wain bid amal kelain, bed Bran
or Gogledd, bid llv ar eochwydd, bid Gwynt ar hint garllaw Rhod wydd, bid sais
ar drank, bid di gynvdd ar frank, bid kymry in rhvdd rhwydd diaink, bid Rhysel
in dersin, bid pawbyn gweiddi, bid Pobl in gryd rhag osa Engil y.

The Translation. Unto God I pour forth my prayer, for his sake that bare the
large and free cross, that the righteous souls may enjoy heavenly bliss, which
is the chief and most necessary wish: next I will predict of that which is most
dear unto me, that is, that there may be a merry sending away to the broad
ocean, on horses of trees, when there is most necessity, and that a Britain
with his Britains may overcome the first a^tempt; then the white harvest will
follow after their dear fighting, the slaughter shall be much, and the dead
carcasses in heaps, a raven shall be from the North, an army shall be in going,
let violent winds arise about the enemy to his destruction, then an English
will be near to destruction, and the French from such a day fall to decay and
ruin; then the Welsh will escape free from allegiance, and then such wars will
bring a period, then will be a general complaint and feeling of the smart of
war, and the people delivered from the fear of an English by force of
continual warlick posture.

A prophecy of Taliesin, foretelling, that after the raising of the graves
and carcasses in the Churchyard of Corboe Church, a lamentable time will
follow, with signs and tokens of such troubles.
Gwedi kyfoder y Beddav ym mynwent axrbow ynoi bydd die i daw diabodde, ag
Ellmin dreisiaw, a Gwendid you lleisiaw llais orvoledd, llawer Vewiu a vydd,
llawer dydd diliyr, llawer sais heb pais mewn pris kowir, llawer gwaiw llisaid,
llawer gwr mewn llaid, llawer gwaed mewn dwr, a chynnwr ymmaus y goes, llawer
kymro llawen, llawer sais hebi ben, llawer llen in vnig, llawer kysrwy in wag,
llawer march in chydd, llawen Gwyndodydd, ar llew in Gorfod, a chymry in dysod
a ball in lladd, a gwr o Angladd, ag ynlef ynghaer, el llefain in daer, bid
dydd llawen wedi Nodolig ymhob gradd.

The Translation. After the breaking up of the graves in Corboe Churchyard,
then will be days of trouble and revenge, the strangers of Germany will commit
fraud and oppression, the cries and groans of the poor shall break forth, then
there shall be much hunger, and sorry days, many English tumbling in coats most
dear and true unto them, many deadly wounds by weapons, many a man grovelling at
the point of death, much effusion of blood in water, and an uproar in Maes y
Groes, or field of the Cross, many a Welshman rejoicing, many English without
he^ds, many pulpits destitute of Teachers, many saddles without their Riders,
many horses without their owners; then the friendly party in North Wales will
rejoice at the victory and conquest of the Lion, then Britains will be in
advance, and he that shall loose will murder; and the dead shall rise again, then
will be howling cities, cozening will be common, and shortly after Christmas will
be a merry world to all degrees. The beheading of the King.

A prophecy of Taliesin, foretelling the strange removal of mavelous great
stones in North Wales, from the bottom to the top of Aheigh, steepy and
inaccessible hills, which came to pass some seventy years ago, and of changes,
dissanting Parliament, and heavy wars that should follow.
Pau gyfoder main Gwynedd oi Gorweddfa
A ffawbyn kyfarch Parch ir Pena
Yna i bydd krevlon ffalster a thwaha
A chwnsel briwedig a dig affla
Ar kam ar i farch ur kowir in yssa
Ag ymladd ymhob gradd heb lueddu
A laddo kolain a fvdd Pena
A ddy wetoyn vchel a ekwir in ddoetha
A ffoinder of wnai a digon o sara
A meir wyn ddrvd heby mvd mwa
Yna i chiser Gynedd drawag yma
Ag yna i syrth yni plith y chwith gymausa
Ar P. ai kymell ir fordd bella
Pau ddel e lwddi fynvddr assa
Gwyn i fyd ymmhowys y kysrwyssa
Gwystlon Rhv drychion agyrchiridrowa
Y, P. o lan ell ai kymell ir ddalfa
Gwiddel ar y tir a welir yna
Ag o faelawr sawr yr ymgweiria
Yno i bydd dedwydd mynyddy widdfa
Ag o hyny allan saeson a ddiflanna.
The Translation. When great and heavy stones be raised in North Wales, lifted
up and removed from their ancient seats, and when all people and persons will be
honoring the chiefest, then will be cruel falsehood and contempt, a bruised
Council, anger and sharp punishment; then the unjust shill be on horse, and the
just and the innocent down, and fightings amongst all degrees, but not
handsomely in ^he field; he that will kill dead, will be counted the bravest man;
the loudest and biggest in speech will be held the wisest, and then will be
scarcity of money, but sufficient of bread; and the dead will make a dear and
sorry barga^n, but without their chief treasure with them.

Then North Wales will be divided here and there, but an univ^r^al and
unexpected slaughter will fall amongst them, and P. will labor to send them
afarr away, when the Stagg comes to the mountain of Assag, happy will the wisest
be then in Powis, violent and strong h^ stages will be fetched to London; the P.
from Llanelli will entic^^h^m to the su^e hold, then Irish will be seen in
Britain land, and in Maelor the Great will be preparations; then shall Snouden
mountain be happy, and thenceforth the enemy of the English party shall fail.

Now to the Stones; which is very remarkable.
In accomplishment of this Prophecy, about years ago, in a place called Kw^
Kowny in the County of Caernarvon, between two great hills there lies a Pond of
standing water, at the edg of which lied two great Stones of admirable
greatness and weight, yea so huge in greatness that a thousand yoke of Ox^n
could not move them; but suddenly about the time aforesaid, these Stones were
conveyed from the edg of the said Pool, toward the top of a very high, steep
and inaccessible hill, above the said Pool, in distance 12 score, of
perpendicular height, where they (and their first seats where they formerly
stood) are to be seen to this day, and old people yet living which will
justify all this.

The removal of such Stones (I hope) will be granted miraculous, and if so,
surely it pretended some strange event, for God showed none in vainet
1. We find that this came to pass about King Jumes his coronation in
England. 2. That the Stones were in number two, and neither more nor less. 3.
That they were removed from a barren bottom to a very high fertile hill. 4.
That they were put to rest on the side of the top of the said hill, in a
slippery place, and subject to tumble down.
To the first observation, it is vey probable, that seeing this came to pass
before the coronation of King James, that is p^rtended his coming from a barren
Country to wear a triplicite Crown.

To the second, that the Stones were in number two, did signify that two and
no more of that race should hold and e^joy the said triplicite Crown.

To the th^rd, that they were removed from a foggy and barren soil, to the
side of a wholesome fertile banck, did portend barren Sco^land, and fertile
England.

To the fourth, that they were settled to rest in a slippery plane subject to
role away, did portend what afterward came to pass, that there was a
possibil^ty to cast them down, or depose them.

And whereas, that they were seated over a perpendicular place, and in case
they should be removed or rolled downwards, that then it was impossible
(without the like miracle) they should again be brough^ up.

That likewise portended, that if these Kings should be deposed, that there was
a like impossibility they should never after be re-enthroned.

Well, this Prophet did foresee some wonderful passage, seeing it was
foretold, and that for the space of near 1100 years before this came to pass.

A prophecy of Taliesin, fore-^elling the coming of a mighty strong Conqueror
to rule and heal the Britains, and of great wars in such time, with promise
of peace.
Pau d^el y kada^n i gaer sal ves frau, i suddianv kymrv ^ydd ygawl, amk^n i
by^d brwyd r ar frys megis kad gamlan, ag ar ^ry y bydd gwyl gwaiwa tharrian,
^g o hyny all^n gwae sau o drais a gais her deigsa.

The Translation. When the strong comes to the City, to heal and possess the
distempered B^ittains, in possib^lity, there will be then c^nfusion, cross
meeti^gs and fightings shortl^ after will be a holy day for P^kes, Targets and
Arm^s, and from thence forth woe be unto an English for his opp^ession and
continuance.

The Bergam.
Pallv in y ffodd, ag ynil y Goron ar holl Geveved.

The Translation. That the Catholic Faith shall be eclipsed and fall, and that
the Crown and all the Cities, Castles and Towns shall be conquered.

A prophecy of the Bergam, setting out the beginning of great wars, the
d^vision of Armies, the death and confining of the late King, and of
d^liverance by the B^ittish Conqueror.
Pau gauer kirn, kynwr ymchissyrdd, gwae gweled gwraig diosnawg, ym wvdd
ymphirtl girth gythrwfwl, a gwidd il mal kwiaid h^^aid dvarydwl, ar amrawd
ymchau gweiddi, ymberi in deirchau digwyl ar lwybyn, a llawer llwybyr arvor
llydon, ag or tri niv r ner y neidian.

1. Un ddehevbath gyfarth gyfan. 2. Ar ail ir Berfedawlad or wlad erwan 3. Ar
drydidd i England argladd gwynfau.
Ag fall drvdwy drvd ymladdan, saeson nevr orfod yngod, ag yman kymrv anhvnawg
chwanawg i kyfrau, Paboth a gersi an, ne anghysan, oni so marwy Tarw Torvoedd
llydan, ynhwr gostynger, a hedd meddir gyfau, Erddwch Pryderwch a Ghynhevwch
dau, a gweddrioch ddw in ddysal, y gwrach gwyr ach gweryd etto, daw llew llaw
Owain darogan pob traha taeithid dvw i hvnan.

The Translation. When the Trumpet is blown, then will be uproar in the
highways, woe be unto the innocent women, or such who want policy to escape
the fury, unruly actions and distractions in the gates and entrances by sudden
and furious approach, then the Irish will be like Ducks crossing of boggs, and
crying ou^, Brother Branach help.

The warlick Army will be d^vided into three parts, the paths will keep
h^ly-dayes, or without concourse of travelers, and then will be many paths on
the sea, and the three Armies will leap.

1. One with an eager and sharp bark to South Wales; 2. The other to
Denbighshire and the bottoms;
The third to England, which will produce death, slaughter, and great mourning,
and like steers will be their dear and bloody sights: the English will make
hard confl^cts, Wales will be restless and apt to share or divide.

But it is to no purpose for them to seek peace or truce, till the death of a
Bull with large territories, and owner of great multitudes, who will be
confined in a strong Prison, and brought low, and afterward will plenty of
peace be obtained, then fall to your prayers, tillage and husbandry, and serve
God constantly, giving him the only land and praise; for he that knows your
sufferings, will yet send you deliverance; for the heavy head of the Lion,
which is Owen the prophesied Conqueror, he shall deliver you from your all your
miseries, as God himself has appointed.

A prophecy of Adda fras, a Prophet and a Poet, as you are told already,
wherein is foretold the late Wars, with a conquering of foreign enemies.
Diargel Rhyfel am ddwylan konwy, ar kyuwr a ddaw i gaer deganwy, a llynrges ar
des ar draws mowedwy, a llwrwf a llawn, hmyl chwyl Rhywelwyf, Ped war kernt a
devkin a Pher dair, a mil mwy, gida thrigain, llynged kaui, kylhwy yw dvw
kyfarfod a wnan, a lloegir or diwedd a dawaw ynboeth a^ ardal gowarth in die
gysan, i Owain ben draig bier darogou, in wir gwe biefydd tir Terfynav kynnan.

The Translation. Fierce wars is pred^cted to the borders of both sides of
the river of Conway, tumult and uproar to Towns, and a Navy in summer time
will cross both seas, then violent sailings, hasty preparations and continual
storms. When the year 1664 comes about, a Navy will be in a readiness to be
sent, God is true in his promise, then at last the said Navy will sail from
England, then England will be entirely assigned to Owen, the head Dragon, unto
whom belongs the predictions. And verily he is the only man that will own and
possess the ancient Rights and Liberties of Kynan.

A prophecy of Adda fras, foretelling of wars, of short trouble to the
British Conqueror of the race of Owen ap Cadwgau, of the starting up of Sects
and Sectaries to trouble the Church, but at last Sectaries and Plotters shall
vanish.
Disgogan awen ffwn ffawydd gvl blaen blodev, bid a flonvdd, kad ymhowys, koed
a gyrchant, ag in y kad lliaws a ddywedin, l^vdd in lloegrwys llydan froedd, ag
a awy boloch och a fvdd, Pendefig Powys ar hydd, Pawbai kyfarth gwarth a
ddiffidd, mi wn i daw^r naw n^v nydd, Esgor i lvdd d Pennaeth fydd, a lerth
malhelin^ hydd diav in i fro frei^iog ^eb ffydd, G^erin in in crm^s Pres y ^
ynydd.

The Transl. I will search a prophecy, so freely as out of cup: at the
breaking out of blossoms, a troubles^m time, an A^my in Powis, which will
betake them^^l^es to the woods; and in the woods many will say, that th^re is
great sl^ughter in England, with their broad and larg^ border. An hour of
trouble will be to the Stagg and the worthy own^r of Powis, who shall be
respected and ho^oured of all, whose dishonor shall vanish; and I know he w^ll
come of the nineth Ancester, he shall reco^er his troubles and we^^isome course
of war-^are, and b^come chief or head Ruler, and he shall be as a nimble Stagg,
but his kingly Country will be one day without the true Faith, and some people
will be seditious and troublesome.

A prophecy of Merlin Silvestris, setting forth the late War; the Lion and
Dragon from Wales, with future peace.
Darogan Merdlin Panaeth drevin, ar bawl egorvd y bv i dynged Mal Rbod in troi.

Tra maith hwilie, tra^lawd maith, tra chymell trothe, traws ofyn dr^ig mynwyn
in mynv trin, ynghyech a Phyerh am borthva^v gw^nwyn gyn rhioin gaurhiav, At^aw
ffrac^h y devant ddifiav, ag am gwyn Rhiaui Rhy felvedd afydd a d^ffaeth
elfydd, ^ll mine heb Allvkir rhv, gwynfyd Gwenddyed or gwavio o wander sais ai
hinseliav, ai llwgwr maith ar i kysrwithlav a llaeihir in briddwn, brad hob
chiav, a gwaith F^aink Aissrawd ar longav, a gwaith dovyr in ddibyrys Angav,
Ecosed oes fawr a Giglew gelwyf a d far Bleiddi^ drai^ dywyll, Towyll a gole,
an choddoyn chvdd, Adnevrau o wledd, oesawled h^b ^isiav.

The Translation* Merthin toward his latter days, and while his b^east laid
on a sharp stake, turning thereon like a wheel, said, That sails shall ride
afarr way, that troubles will be of long continuance, that Texa^i^ns shall be
imposed, and that the while D^agon will wrongfully se^k to rule and ord^r,
shrewd tugging and poisonous bemo^ni^g in and abouts the ha^b^urs, and also
much slaughter to them which shall side with the woman, on a Thur^day.

And wars shall be in behalf of the woman, a sorry and false Coun^rey, the
Germans failing, not daring to appear; happy and glad is Gwendelina of their
misery, and of the failings and weakness of the English, and also for breaking
and renewing of their Laws, and for the sorrow and heaviness of England;
treachery without number will they attempt, and the work at Dover will be
without feeling or account of death, but a wondrous, a good and fierce L^on
will destroy the Wolves; a d^rk Dragon, yea, dark and clear, will set us at
liberty, and feast us with feasts for ages without want or end.

A prophecy of Merlin Ambrose, predicting the com^ng of an E^gle of the
B^it^ish race in a certain ag^, and this Eagle he calls the prophesied
Corquerour, or fiery D^agon of invincible strength, in whose time will be great
slaughter.
Eryr, a Gyfvd, bryd ymmrithon, draig darogan tau yng^ wnfan, of a ddaw kadarn
fall haiarn er saru a vfnon trymiad mal i gwelon, of a dra digwydd or gwydd
gwnion, of a ddwg i gr^d y gwydion, ag yna i gw^lir ar y t^r tirr^on, meibion
ymddisa^d, a gwragedd heb a gerain.

The Translation. Tha^ an Eagle shall arise at a certain time from the race of
the Britains, and this will be the prophesied fiery Dragon, which will be an
instrument of loss, and this will come with invincible strength as strong as
iron to the Judgment, who will terrify his fugitive enemies when he app^ars;
he shall h^avily fall in from the white Roses, he shall bring Infidelss to
believe, and in his time will be seen on the land fatherless children, and
women without their husbands.

A prophecy of Merlin Ambrose, by way of questions, wherein is set out a
Conqueror, of the late wars punctually and exactly foretold, and of a
peaceable time that shall follow.
Qu. Mi Athofynaf Merddin Emris, Pawr a orfydd, Pa d e a geysid, Pa fyd a dowys
Marchog na farthog Rhieiddiog in llys a dyer, ar hya Gwynedd Gwyndodydd, lvav
d^hedd, dyhvnaut, arseiddiant gadav kadarnsal haparn barn pwy orav, Pau fo
brwydyr am gyfrwng a than golav, Gwae offeiriad llau, gwae agol o i ran or hin
gorav, gwae gadarn enwir, gwae of Aughyfiawn engil, gwae ddigassog Arglwydd ai
werin hylwydd or hill orav, diav yar ddyhor kyngor king vav, gwae a ddotto i
fryd ar frad golav, Gwyn blaen blod av, krin kaugav gwydd, kethin llwn, gegawn
mynydd, llym gwaiw, gwae nis arhovdd, dalhalmal a mynych lvydd, dadkvdd Llew or
llin yr gallvt dythrin, bid bod heb benne, darogan y daw rhag llaw, llai fydd y
trethav, a thwyllwyr bradwyr ymrad yw rbiaw, rhiav a thwyll, in ymarser ni
wybyddie karait e chwant chwedlav, k^foaaut, kieiddiaut, Pawb a ddaw mawr vddi
Pridder, difiav ebolydd heb vedd av, ag in i house y kyvd kadav, ag y bydd
gwynfyd worth y bid gorav, a ffobl ddrvd o vcher Ammav, gwedi gor modder gorwyn
chiav, gwnewch a archaf a erchais mathv, na fyddwch an y hvn, bob un bod dav,
na wn which gam gyfraith, na wnewch chewedlau, narowch ychenaid ymhylaid kassav.

The Translation. I will demand of Merlin Ambrose, what manner of man will the
Conqueror b^, what lands will he conquer, what kind of world will a Knight
and no Knight lead? A person possessed with too much Jealousy will dissent in
a broken Counsel, then A^mies will cross fair North Wales to and fro, where
much effusion of blood will be made, which will make North Wales rouse them, to
put themselves in posture of defense to with stand the enemy, and their Army
will be as strong as iron; and then will be a great question, which of either
party will carry the Conquest, and then when distraction be for the mid-land
with open fire or war, woe be unto Ministers of Churches, who be unto their
which shall loose the best share, woe be unto the strong and false, woe be unto
the unjust English, woe be unto the odious and chief Lord, which shall loose his
gallant men of the best rank, for one day will make a separation between him
and his Council; woe be unto him that will hatch open treachery, when blossoms
break out, and when boughs be brittle, and dangerous walking amongst shrubs,
and scandalous traveling of moun^ains, and when Pikes be sharp, then woe be
unto the fugitive, and when they fall to bickering, with pursuit and flying,
with showing of Armies and little fighting, a Lion will start up and be
discovered, and this will be of a race that might put them in fear and terror,
and he shall cause men to want their heads; and I do prophecy that he shall
come, and that heavy taxations shall be lessened, and that the false and
^r^acherous shall study nothing but manifold treachery, and these shall make a
common practice of such treacherous plots till they be destroyed, and they
shall love and covet news of lies and inventions; and after such plots they will
rise in arms, grow cruel, all shall be enj^yned, but great will their sorrow be
on a Thursday, but by and by without graves; and while these plotters live, will
armies be in a readiness to suppress and destroy them, and then will be a good
world next unto a better, and diffident people shall rue their incredulity; and
after a sufficient war will follow manifold blessings and good days; and then
let them do as I bid, viz. let them fall to their coynings, and let them not be
divided by one and two; let them m^ke no exact no unjust Laws; let them not
suggest lies and fancies, neither let them be heartless, nor firm with the
odious party.

Taliesins Creed in another way out of another book.
Krist Jessv ke i ti y koiliaf, die fod in dri ag in un ag iawn gviliaf, ^awn die
alwd^ in fab plant Addaf, Jawn die Alw in ysl yd fymwyd naf, Jawn die Alw in
greawdwr Emmerawdwr Penaf, Jawn dyalw in wir ddin ag in wir ddvw gorvwchaf, it
helpv kymrvhif y dywedaf, Ti agysodaist i fiw o sedd dai arfa, Ti a ddygi r
kymrv a k^m ddausan yna, Ti a himpiyn y gerdd^ gynawon Troya, fe ddaw Brithon
in llawn ky^rwysrda, yna i diwreiddir kyffion for mania, ag ir ynill^r Tyrnas
Brittania, Maranedd gwledd gamber a ganaut haleluiah, Na Bardd na di furdd
eythr dvw dofvdd, Ne serddin, ne gywaid o gader sidin, or have i ddaiar, o
dowyn hid er chydd, ondmi Taliesin nid oes gyfarwyddni.

The Translation. Christ Jesus, in thee w^ll I believe, who art three, and yet
but one according to my right belief; worthy art thou to be called a son of
the children of Adam; worthy art thou called a spirit, which art my Lord and
life; worthy art thou called a Creator and head Emperor, worthy art thou
called perfect Man and perfect God the highest; worthy may thou help the
Britains, with boldness I speak it; thou have risen from thy earthly grave,
wh^re thou have been laid; thou will (in thy appointed time) exalt the
Britains from their trembling conditions; and thou will engraft the Trojan
race in the rich garders; yea, the Britains (yet) will become a politic
N^tion. Then the great Oaks of the Germane race shall be rooted up, and the
kingdom of Britain shall be conquered; then the dark and mystical feast of the
race of Kamber shall sing haleluiah; neither Bardh or Poet, nor Merlin, nor any
which shall arise from the chair of Sidin, nor any else from the solary element
to the terrestrial orb, nor from darkness to light, has perfect knowledge, but
God the chief Conqueror.

Here you may observe, That the Angel delivers his Confession of the sacred
Trinity in Unity, in a most reverend manner of speech.
Then he proce^ds with a prophecy of what shall befall to Great Britain,
wherein is to be noted his humility and reverence attributed to the blessed
Trinity, saying, With boldness I speak let such and such happiness and
restoration come to pass; where in the rest of his prophesies de^ivered in way
of discourse with men, he says peremptorily, Such and such things shall come
to pass.

And whereas he says, that the Britains will become a politic Nation, he
altogether in this and the rest of his prophecy alludes to their politic
perseverance in the service of the true God, and that they (or the Inhabitants
of Britain) will be the first and chief politic Instruments to reform the
Church of God amongst themselves first, then among^t the dissenting Christians
and Jews, according to the platform doctrine and original pu^ity of Christ and
his Apostles.

Then, to dash the arrogance of man, he says, That the perfect gift of
prophecy proceeds only from God the fountain, and that the gift lies not in
the power of Merlin, Angels nor Mortals within the circle of the Sphere, but
only in himself, or such that receive it from above.

A Revelation of Gro^wddv of Angl^sey, wherein an Angel revealed unto him the
kingly succession in the regal Government, until the coming of the British
Conqueror, who is clearly set out, and that the said Conqueror should appear
222 years after the same revelation, or in the year 1642.
Y dywedodde Angel,
Mae a bair dervin gelin gilant
Gwr llydan i gledd, balch i fonedd kysedd karant
A ddawi ostwng son saeson trychion trachwant
A neirif bob kant i gwskarant,
1, Qu. Pa brid fydd hynny,

An. Pau ddell llynges ir werddon a dav Amrafael ddynion, kymrv di eiddilon, a
ddaw in wyr i ynyll tir brithon, yna i dywaid y de winion gwyn^fyd brithon, a
gwaer saeson.

2. Qu. Pa brid fydd hyny,

An. Pau dd^l aneirif o rif i cyfeddv ar glawr tair gwawe trin kymro taliethwg
freinog frenin, y ynwy ai gariad ymysg i wtrin, llydan i gledd Pell i derfin,
Gwenwyn awg llidiawg in llad i elyn.

4. Qu. Pa brid fydd hyny.

An.
Pau fo ar loegir ddiefawr ddychrynv
Ag ymlaen kad kafod o re we oerddv
I daw i loegir lydan dan o bob tv
A chai o honint i hinan yni llygrv.
5. Qu. Pa brid sydd hyny.

An. Pau fo gy gwalkog agwragedd kribog ar meibion in if kellog, ag ysgaln
seigie, ag ^ssara bev nvdd, a chetddawr gwaglav, a diffarth fynwentoedd a
diffig ar y deiled, a chwymp. ar y delwav, ar Bryniav in gostwng, ar tommenid
in kod, abrith fyd ky flown drift, achwgi r avr, a chl-fyd ar racian, a bradog
kybillach, a Marsolaeth heb gwyn, a d drvdaineth heb eisle.

The Translation. Said the Angel in this Revelation to Gro^wddv,

It will come to pass, that a person will start up to put a period to the
fugitive enemy, who will be a man with a broad sword, of a noble descent, and
which will join in feasting and familiarity with his own.

And he will come to subdue the height of the English enemy, and will also
disperse them by hundreds and multitudes, to a forlorn condition.

1. Qu. Said Gronwddv, when will that come to pass?

An. When a Navy comes to Ireland with two several dissenting Nations;
Britains then (casting off their weakness) will conquer the land of
Britain; then will Beirdhs say, Happy are the Britains, and woe to the English
enemy.

2. Q. When will that be?

An. When a liberal person of the race of Llewelin comes from his Country with
purpose to overcome, having his Banner of red and yellow, he shall possess the
territories and extents of Kynvyn.

3. Q When will that be?

An. When a mavelous great number will be forthcoming, and divided in three
several battalioes at the command of an heroical Spirit, which will be a
Princ^ly Britain, and a King of Kingdoms, surpassing all in the love and
obedience of his Army, of a bro^d sword and far extents, who shall run
furiously to destroy his enemy.

4. When will that be?

An. When England be in a terrible fear, and before an Army a shower of cloudy
and cold frost, then will come to England fire from either side, and some of
themselves, or from their own bosoms, betraying them.

5. Q. When will that be?

An. When men wear locks, and women with dressings like wings about their
ears, and curled hair, the lads with flying wings, slight dishes, and daily in
arms, musicians without reward, and of empty hands, Churchyards vil fied,
Tenants in distress, and when Crosses and Images fall, when the hills descend
and hillocks ascend, then will be a sorry world of sullenness and heaviness,
gold hanged and silver buried, fellowship deceitful and treacherous, death
without moan, and dearth without want.

A prophesis of Taliesin, exhorting all to confide in Jesus for help; then
proceeds to foretell of the Dragon of the race of Blethin ap Cyinvin, and of
his warlike actions.
Kyfaddav r drindawd kyfoethev
Kyfoethawg llvossawg llew yr oesev,
Kyfarwaith r Jessv ind eisiev,
Kyfarchawn kanwn k^rn ddifiev,
Rhag llef korn dovydd diamev,
Ergrynant rhag pechant pechodev,
Gwadau lv elyflv warthredev,
Awnaethant rhag goomawdd keryddev,
Gwadant blant awnaethant o Annoe^hev,
Rhag vthurder maint prydder barnev,
C^er in glaer ir glan eneidiev,
M^t ^anet a gano ir caerev,
Adfid kvr a meth kymell trethev,
Adfid chysel dvdd a dial v,
Adfid draig Powys yng^ochwys graev,
Adfid brain Gwynedd yngikleddev,
Adfid arthdiwarth o Barthdehev,
Dygyrchir i ysgar car canedev,
Adfid saeson taer wedy yrnev,
Adfid tra^^ws efgvs maerv^ Cornev,
Adfid kl^w kerniw rhag kamwyev,
In ^ordd kyni yngn^f llafnev,
Adfid clef cletfrwydd in llawu ffrydiev,
Adfid gwaed a ^hra^d in eisiev
Apfid Amfro dorres mre^ by ddimiev
A bidd i gymry or hit gyr chev,
Adfid karthar sais wedi treisiev
A chwres heb fydd am hagredir klydwyr klwydev
A chyn diben choyf plwyf in eisiev
Ag oesawr maelawr ae gorfawd gorav
Ag yssig ellmyn ar gryn wrth goev
Ag am gesynr ais kofiawdyr treisiev
O draffedd kymrv kymro dadiev
A throssi hasren i hounienrv
A threiswyr prydain rhag kigweiniev
Pob kant i kadwant i tir fydev
Twrwf ag anhedd gwedi gwleddev
Tarif Alltvd ar fvd rhag kythriddiev
Athro pob athro a olevo lyfrev
Athro nef addef heddwch biev
Dibechawd i wawd brawd eneidiev
Digervdd dafvdd dvwyn cheidiev
Ednebydd awydd a wyddiev
A wyddev hid frawd traeth solawd
Sal diamev.
The Translation.
Let us make our confession to the blessed and rich Trinity, who is riches it
self, a warm supporter and ruler of ages, wherein the righteous works of Jesus
are abundantly manif^sted unto the sons of men without want; unto whom we
should prefer our humble petitions, and blow every Thursday a Trumpe^, least
we be terrified with the nois of the Lords Trumpet that certainly shall sound,
let sinners quake and tremble for their sins present and past.

A Nation have denied the confession of their manifold sins committed like
streams of Rivers; and ^his they have done for the terror of their deserved
punishment; nay, they will deny the making bare of inn^cent children, least the
terror of judgment should dishearten them.

Let the pure souls lovingly enj^y the cities, and let them prosper which
sings out the prosperity of cities, and walls, which shall enjoy misery,
heaviness and payment of Taxations, woe and misery will fall unto them when
wars and revenge will come amongst them, woe and misery unto them when a D^agon
from Powis appears amongst them, whose warlike actions will produce streams of
^list^ring blood from his enemies, misery when the Ravens of North W^l^s will
begin their slaughtered feast, misery when the worthy Bear from the borders of
the South will appear, and when men are fetched to separate a predicted kinsman
from his own; misery to the active English after their loss of a kingdom,
misery for merciless excuses, misery to Cornw^ll when it shall hear of their
wrongful doings, where blades of swords shall hack and hew for their sins;
misery when man^f^ld and cruel bloody streams shall run, and when feet and legs
shall ^e wanting, misery shall fall from the violent heat of Armies; and let
all these miseries and slaughter prove advantageous to the Britains; misery
to an English, confined, after his wrongful proceedings, and then a she-Gyant
will be without gain; and before the end of the plague a parish will be
wanting, and the aged from Maelor by such a time w^ll g^t the best conquest,
and the bruised Germans shall lament their miserable loss^, with bloody
stro^ks about their ribs in remembrance of their oppression, in oppressing a
man paternally from the Britains, the oppressors of Britain with their
ravening claws turned of.

Then shall be tumults and insurrections after slaughters, but the impotent
shall afte^wards be suppressed with violence, to prevent their plottings and
insurrections.

He that shall discover these miseries to great Britain, shall be counted a
Teacher of teachers, and the wise teacher of heaven guide and bless him with
pe^ce; his innocent work will be of the nature of spiritual godly souls, and
let the Lord God relieve his wants and plead for him, and such shall understand
the gift of his knowledge, and I will deliver with praise that his knowledge may
never fail him him.

A prophecy of the Bergam beginning with exhortations to observe prophesies,
promising a Conqueror under the name of Owen of the Bri^tish race, and of the
late Kings death.
Byddawd clav clowed chwedlev gau thwedlievidd,
Llo gwyn ar gynnyd mal tan melt malltraeth dygyrchydd,
A chymry oi kymell agysbell fydd,
Tair nos ag wythnos ni ddihvnydd,
Tair kad ymhoniat ynlidiat hydd,
Nos ar sordir ches evry fedd,
Ni ery neb n^^ gohebydd, Merich garhirion, ar gwyr tobyr twion, ar bwyill
eilon pen boned kylauedd kvlion, Gwae sais oi drais deahon, Gwir ddvw gwyr ar
dylon, mal blaen kawn in kwynaw yr llawe pau ddother gawr yngrawydd arson peayt
in gryt a phyt marchogion, gwyr O ^ain goralwon, gwaet dres draet gwedi drvd
ymladdon, wynt bievdd dydd or diweddon, ag a yr or phasev Rhig as rhigolion.

The Translation. Let the declaring and publishing of these predictions be
kindly accepted from the Publisher; there will come a thriving and prosperous
person, who shall nimbly start up like the fire from lightening, then the
Britains will be inveigl^d to take arms and to match a far distance from their
abode, which shall keep them awake for a week and three nights, then will the
Stagg have three armies upon the borders of seas to chase and pursue his
enemies with a loud outcry; God will not assault any, but such that shall resist
him, who shall have nimble and stout horses and courageous men with sharp axes;
and this Stagg will be of the best royal race by descent, who will make a great
sl^ughter of the flying and fugitive enemy, then woe be to a fraudulent
English; the true God knows their defects; they shall be scattered away with
the wind like chaff, when a great and strong man shall be put down by a river
side, from thence forwards w^l their m^aning be remediless, and their gallant
Knig^ts lying in cold earth; and after their dear fighting and bloody
slaughter, the courageous men of Owen will get the conquest and the glory of the
day, and shall drive away from the Palaces and Castl^s the odious to swim.

A prophecy of Merlin Silvestris, but cited by Addafras, wherein is set out
terrible threatenings against the late Royal party; also of a Conqueror of the
race of Cynvin.
Y Meibion moel on a fydd altid on, ir garth in grwn in hwr y saeson, mawr fyd^
i chyddit, Pau gaffant gau ddvw ddial i llvd Geiri^v a glowant, hwyntai de
hallan^, trwm fydd i dial p^u i talwynt.

T^li ithawg Owain dan arfav llisain, gore un ^ab gau d^vw, wy^ ith ddamwain,
ha^ lawn hvl (ynvin hwiliant in Tervin, in^ rhaid un gevyn er i g^fid,
llveddawg fyddant, ^^e a or^sk^n ut, ar loeg^r wys diroedd y T^rsy^^ut, darogan
Merddin pau a ethar dersin, ar b^wl egored y bv i dy^g^d.

The Translation. The bare and plumed L^ds shall be made impotent, and pend up
in heaps in the English towers; great will their sway be, when Gods heavy wrath
and ind^gnation falls upon them; words shall come amongst them, which will be
understood, but great will their punishment be when it comes.

For Owen of a Princely race with his sharp arms, which is the most beloved of
the son of God to be predicted of, and he shall be of the race and lineal
descent of Cynvin, and shall sail forth to public view in the end or appointed
time; we need not look to their troubles, for they will be possessed of mighty
strong armies, and will conquer places; they shall have full power to dispose of
the Country of England: and this is the prophesis of Merlin Silvestris in his
latter days, when his naked breast laid on a sharp stake.

The Reader may do well to take especial notice how the Prophet delivers his
mind in the plural number, and says, That they of the race of Cynvin shall
sail forth, their trouble, they will be possessed, they will conquer places,
they shall have full power to dispose of the Country of England: part of this
is alleged in the verdict of the fourth Jur. fol. 35.

A prophecy of Addafras, wherein is foretold our late Wars, the frowning
Parliament, and a Conquest by a person descending from the Prince North Wales.
Daroganaf y Rhy wynt a hint i Ogledd,
A Rhiallv a ddaw a Rhyforthoedd,
A Phan, ddel karedig i eredig Gwynedd,
Y bydd diheddwch a chyffrwch Tyrnedd,
A chyngor y gygain, a gwerin gorfoledd.
Ag ar ddiniant a ddaw wedi ar ddvedd
Hint ar kint ar kantor dihedd,
Agar fraint Talaith Gobaith Gwynedd.
The Translation.
I will predict a violent wind that shall for a short space molest a Northern
person, who shall come with invinc^ble strength and mighty tempest; when this
kind person comes to plough North Wales, the Scepter shall be disturbed with
commotions, and a Council d^sturbed likewise with frowning Members; then a
triumphant Army will be seen, which will produce honor after a long suffering;
at first there shall be disturbance and bickerings which will annoy Musicians,
and the lawful and hopeful care of the Prince of North-Wal^s.

Here follows a prophetical Discourse which past between Taliesin and Merl^n.
Merlin speaks. Mor drvau gennyf, mor drvan Adderyw am gedwiw a Chadfau oedd
llachar kyflofar kyfle fanoedd yfygw^d odref rhwyd odryfaus.


Taliesin. Oedd maelgwyn awelwn in ymwau i devlv r hag tory fli in chatfau.


Me^lin. Rhag devwr yni Twr y Tyrrau rhag errich a gwrth yar welygau meinwinev
in ddiev a ddygan, Mor Weler y niser g^u elgau, orh oi leith mawr a derth y
devthau.


Taliesin. Rhvs vndaut oedd rhyrhwant y Tarrian hid atfady ddaeth rhad
gyflafau, llas kyndwr, kyndar ^ra messvr y kwynau, llas haylon a dynion tra
fvau, trowyr nod usawr ev klod began Elgan.


Merliu. Trwy a thowy Rhwy arwy y doythau, Traw a thraw ym does braw am Elgan,
lladd dysel oi diwedd kyfflosau, f^b Erbin ai werin a wnevthan.


Tariesin. Llv Maegwyn bvyfgwn y garthau oyr wyr kad trymlen dyed gwaethan,
n^vwaith a ryf deydd pau fvdd y desnydd o hydd yvrhit darparau.


Merlin. Lliaws Peleidrad gwaed sadd gwaed lau lliaws ayrwyr briw brevawl
vydiau, lliaws baner briwer lliaws baner ffos, lliaws ev hymchwel yni hymwau.


Taliesin. Seith meib Elifer, seith wyr pau brafer, seith waywin ochel in ev
seith ran.


Merlin. Seith dau fv^lin seith gad gyferbin, seithfed kynselin ymhob kynwau.


Taliesin. Seith gwaiw genawon seith loned ars^n o waed kyurennyon y d lanwan.


Merlin. Seith vgein haylon a aethant in y gwyllon in ghoed kelyddon y
darfvant, kanis in forddin wedi Taliesin bydd ed kyffred in fie rarogan, ag
folly y diw^dd y kinv brith r hwng Merthin a Thaliesin.


A Chronology and prophecy of Merlin Silvestris, wherein is foretold several
Conquests and changes in the Regal Government of Great Britain since the
Norman Conquest till this very time; as also the successful Acts of his
HIGHNESS that now rules, who is foretold to conquer and b^^r rule both in
Britain and elsewhere.
Y Gwr a lefoyr in y bed, disgwyct kyn seith my kyned March Marw Avr deyrn
Gogledd yr yseys wyro Gawg began rhiev Rhyfel eglag, Merddin fie henw am heyddug
yr eseys win o wydyr Gwin i began Rhiev Rhyfel, dygyn Merddin fie henw fab M^rfryn.

1. Pau ddel Gwr gwrthrin yar olwyn dv i ladd lloegir, llwybyr wehyn, chwer
wgwen wyn, in am mwyn Gwyn fryn, Gwyn fryn eyssydd in erhy eyr nevedd kymry, in
bydd diogel awr yng hellawr Ardvdwy, ar Adal hwy kymry rhag ardderchawg Twrch
tvryf hy.

2. Pau ddyfo coch Normandi I holy lloegrwys travl ddi ffwys, Traethefi bob
darogan die derby, Castellyn Aberhodin.

3. Pau ddyfo y brith cadarn hid in rhvd Pen, karn, llifant Gwyr trevlant karn
Pendefig Prydain Pen barn.

4. Pau ddyfo Henry 1. hoh mvr kastell y Ryri, garlao r gormes tra gw^ili.

5. Pau ddyfo y Gwyn gwan i holy llvn lain Jar feirch nid kain, ni cheidw
Tyrnas kaer gain Ten^v y mes Tew r yd.

6. Pau ddyfo in dd^ssyfyd Brenni gwas, gwae ai kr^d, mab a fydd, mawr i vrddas
a oreskyn mil dynas, hoy dyl egin Brenni gwas, kadarnwrthwna wau gwlad Adfot
gwau gwau gwau, wrth gadarn gordyr^t pen naeth hands, gwaeth i ddys^t.

Then Merlin proceeds with manifest notions of notable passages of what shall
follow from the time he lived till the present and hereafter.
Bid a fydd bryd wrthfowr des byddant, gwragend heynt llaeth bvches byddant llv
meibion ein ev kyffes.

Bid a fydd in gorffen oed Jesemr rhag a doet, may marw kogev rhag Anwyt.

Bid a fydd bryd wrth errhwys ydd adeihawr in dyrys, heb weoth mawr in chaffawr
kryt.

Bid a fydd bryd wrth lyev lyw mall a gwall ar lannev torrethwr gair, a
chrieriev dyfau fawa llechant gev gwan ffydd, pobaildydd dad ev.

Bid a fydd bryd wrth ddillad, kyhaws Arglwydd mayr chwifiad, difanawy gwyr,
llechant gwad, gwaglaw Bardd, hardd effeiriad.

Bid a fydd heb wynt heb law, heb ormodd o eredig, heb tra thr^iliaw, Tyr
digon, un Erw i naw.

Pau ddyser gwyr hebwrhyt, ag in lle r koed r vd, ym heb hedd gwledd a gyfyd.

Pau fo kyfel^n kymyrhedd, y gwr ae gweryt in ommedd, gwrthfyd yd y myny ddoedd.

Pau fydd ynsyrh gwydd, gwanwyn a fydd gwedi i Pen aeth gwen wyn byddant gwaeth
bvddelw norhrywyn, dvw mercher dydd ky orffon y trevlawr llafynawr ar pen
kwyddant tev in Crev kynnen ir Aber sor yt fydd garw gyngor ar gwyr gwedy
Trevlhettor, glv vw gwynllyw in un eskor in Aber Avon y bydd llymion Engyl
gwedy hyn fyddon, her gwerydar derhyt vord on, in Aber dwyr nwy dvg a fv a
gnoho gwedys, a gwedy kad kyffaa blvg, a chad a fv ar Bythy Auon, a Brithon
dygorpy, gwnaut gwyr gwhyr grwhydry in Aber perydd^n pe^yttor kad a phelyd yr
ag hymmon, a gwed rhvdd saeson gwassawg, aywit ti i wwen ddydd wenddydd am die
wawd y Gwyllon mynydd in Aberkrafnaut krefydd, a gwedy kyrn kloer a fydd, a mi
ddisgoganaf ereill kyrn a llefkwn, Peu ^il frvr dyphla yghoet y peyll Gwenddydd
gwrandaw in ddiev in y ddaw Teisi o lynnev a adoer yw fie er dyrn.

Mi ddisgog anaf messyrn ar deyfi, a llef kloer wedy kyrn Pau dyffo Gwynedd in
oyean ev bryt in pssran yskythrawr, churrio gyfnod clod y garaewr, karrawr in
yr comyned kymyn lli kymyn lleedd llithiant kwn ar galamedd karrawr ynyr garw
Annwyt y Bryt garw eskyll in y mry, llihiant brain ar ysperi.

Disgog^n tyd orh terydd die rbag karrawg kynaw dydd Gwynfyd am Ryd fawy llrn,
disgogan Tydoch terydd die in Aber milhwr, byddant Teyfi a fo trwch, disgogan
Teyfi llestri lli ar llyry a B^ythwyr oe thorri llan dydoch mynechi.

Disgogan dyfet Arglwydd Jaw di Brythwyr dvo fanaw, Tydach llan trwm dydd
addaw, disgoganaf, i llaan dydoch na b^dd na chlorh namyn gwrwyfa gwydd forch,
Pen Trevlho Prydein Teyr nedd bychegn gwled feibvn in gwerin or mes, in wyr
namyer dawn Argen h^fynt in y ddol gwynt ar tes.

A prophetical Chronology of Merlin Silvestris, by way of Questions and
Answers between Merlin and his sister Gwendolina, wherein is laid out most of
the Kings successively that should reign in great Britain from the time
wherein he lived, till the time of the coming of the British Conqueror, and
that such and his race shall imperially reign for ever, both in great Britain
and elsewhere; but in respect of the tediousness of it, I b^gan at Queen
Elisabeth.
Qu. Cyfarchef im ehelaeth frawd a welais in fedd saeth, Pwy wledich o
ddiynaeth.
An. Pau dyfo dylad dylied, vchaf owawr hyd ddiwedd Rhiain, or phen bid.

Qu. Cyfarchaf ym ehelaeth frawd etriw. Ne gwedi dylad dylied vrbaf, pwy fvt
Adref nawr, a fi llawn Afynaf: a Ran periglawr.

An. Na Ran na Periglawr, na cherddawr ni bit, nag ackitwedid allan any digwyd
vch yr llawr.

Qu. Lla allawg, cau am Attebit Merddin fab Morfrin gelvydd, trv o chwedl a
dywedit.

An. As dywedas i wenddydd, Canis dwys ym kyferth it, dylad diwedd chiain fydd.

Qu. Kyfarchaf ym ehelaeth frawd, a welais i in fedd faeth, pwy a wledych o
ddrynaeth.

An. Rhydywedais it hin, i wenddydd waesaf vnbin die derbit gymeint di mynn.
Lloallawg ym dyderbit, nof yr eneid die frodyr.

Qu. Pa bennaeth ynaeth a sydd. etc.

An. Gwenddydd wen pen mynegi, as dywed af in ddif ri, na bydd Pennaeth byth
gwedi.

Qu. Och Anwyl or o^r yfgar gwedi dysed in drydar gau vnbin dewr di archar,
divlo di o dau daear.

An. Gwasgarawg awel Amwyr, Pwyll drvd a dwyll Pegredir gadaifi fard hyd frawd
yr dir.

Qu. Oath le as dyfeddfaeth ney e ym die Amvnaeth hoed dyadoed Pan dyngir k^od
vrno, pwy draet tho gwir.

An. Olochvyd cyfod a theasod llyfrev, a gwen heb ar swyd a a chwedl bvn a lwn
brevddwyd.

Qu. Marw morgenav, Marw kywrenlim Morial Marw Morien Mvr trin, trymaf hoed i
m^ die adoed di ferddin.

An. Digones dofyt digwet Arnaf Marw Morgenav, Ma^w Mordaf, Marw Morien Mawr
Agaraf.

Qu. Fie un hrawd nv chwdrit ar naf, er gwaith arderydd wife glaf i ddvwith orch
mynaf.

An. Ath orchmynaf dithe i Ben y kreadiriav Gwenddydd wen Adlam kerddev.

Qu. Y kerddev a drigasant, odyfod klod bedrvant och ddvw mor ymg y devant.

An. Gwenddydd na fydd Anhalar never cheddet i llwyth daear i diowrit obawb a
gar, im byw nith ddioferaf hyd frawd, ith gaffai die fossawd tromaf, Eskat
gorwydd her wydd gwynt amlon ar dev vyrdvl hynt it, af in il a aethant.

Qu. Gorchmynaf y ^irivo frawd ^r Rhiev Rhwy gorev, kymin kyn Angev.

An. Nichymeraf gymyn gau y kymin feneich ag av Trvygen ar i klvn, am kymvno
dvw i hvn.

Qu. Gorchmynaf fie eirioes frawd in y Gaer werthevyn Gogledd dvw ferddin.

An. Gorchmynaf fie eiroes chwaer in y Gaer ni wesgerit Gogledd dvw o wenddydd.

The Translation.
Qu. Gw^ndolin faluting her brother Merlin, demanded who should reign after
such, as by the rest of this prophecy is expressed?
An. When the wages of the dull people comes to be paid, which will come to
pass after the reign of a Virgin, then an end is at hand.

Qu. I demand of my kind and wife Brother, after the wages of the dull people
comes to be paid, who will be ordained to rule? I will ye^ fully demand, will
Churchmen share?

An. Churchmen will not share, neither will Beirdhes, Poets and Harpers be in
esteem; but I will not have thee openly to publish, that there shall be an Ox
born, which shall fall to the ground.

Qu. Liberal Merlin the son of Morvrin, be pleased to yield me an answer to
three questions.

An. I will resolve Gwendolina, who art very importunate with me for thy
request; the wages will be paid, when a virgin Queen it come and gone.

Qu. I will demand of my kind and wise Brother, who will reign aft^r that?

An. Thou foolish and naughty Gwend lina, I have told thee already, and yet
thou are endless in thy proposals, A powerful and mighty Army will come with a
strong hand, who shall bear rule and continue, and then Paradise to thy
brethren the Brittaine^.

Qu. What kind of Ruler will be then?

An. Fair Gwendolina, I do show and tell thee in sobriety, That there shall be
no other Ruler for ever after.

Qu. Woe is one my dear, of such cold separation, and to be deprived of a
valiant and courageous brother, and of his kind discourse, when thou art put
to banishment under earth.

An. An impatient storm shall make separation of men, which will prove a dear
bargain, and a sore plague to the strong, but let us betake our selves away
till the judgment day under ground.

Qu. When thy weakness fails, or thy life gone, which will be sorrowful unto
me, then who shall predict and deliver truth after thee?

An. There will arise woe and misery yet after a certain world, with suppressing
of books, but Gwendolina will be without feeling of these; so like wise thy
Discourse and Revelations for a while, without esteem.

Qu. Morgenav, Kowrenin, Moriab and Morien the Mason all dead; but to be
deprived of my kind brother Merlin will be a loss more sorrowful to me then
all the rest.

An. The Lord God was displeased with me, when he took from me my dear
Morgenav, Mordaf and Morien most dear unto me.

Gwendolina. My brother check me not, notwithstanding my unpleasing humor,
for I am very weak and sick; therefore I commend thy body and soul to the Lord
God.


Merlin. And I commend thee likewise to the head of the Creatures; yea, thou
fair Gwendolina, which art to leap off from thy Songs.


Gwendolina. After thee my brother wages shall fail, laud and praise shall grow
to the vile people; but woe, how straight will their conditions be yet?


Merlin. Gwendolina, be not hopeless but faithful, nor sorrowful, but
comfortable; thou that art dust and ashes, take thy farewell from the world,
while I live I will not forget thee, I will remember thy tender care and
trouble with me; but now I must be gone away after the race of the sons of men
which are gone from hence in peace, and shall be carried away swifter then the
race of a horse or blowing of the wind.


Gwendolina. I commend my fair and delectable brother to the tuition of the
free and best King of Kings. But take thou the Sacrament of our Lord, before
thou art surprised by death.


Merlin. I will not take the sacrament from the hands of the wicked and
execrable Monks, with the white vestures, but will confide in the Sacrament of
God himself.


Gwendolina. I commend my kind and fair Brother to be interred in the City of
Gwrthenyn at the North -- whom God take to his blessed rest.


Merlin. I do commend my kind and fair sister to the tuition of the City
which shall never be scattered, which is the North City or Throne of God.


I desire the faithful and learned of the Church of England to take especial
notice from this discourse, and elsewhere in these Collections, of the faithful
and sound Protestant Christians which flourished in this Island of Britain
1100 years ago; and how detestable the Monks and doctrine of the Church of Rome
were unto them; which may be an invincible argument to prove the plantation and
rooting of our Church before Luther, against the assertion of the common enemy
of Rome.

This was the last prophecy and delivery of Merlin Wyllt or Silvestris, and
commonly the words of a dying Prophet were effectual and worthy of credit.

A prophecy of John de Britlington.
Britlington said, That the Saxons should choose them a Lord, that should bring
them all under a dead man, which should make a record, and that shall be right
much under; he that dead shall be, and buried in sight, shall rise again and
live in laud.

Through the comfort of a young Knight that fortune shall choose to her
husband, the wheel shall turn to him right, That fortune has chosen to be her
fear, in Surrey shall he show his sight, in Babylon bring many a one bare 15
days journey from Jerusalem; the holy Cross winn shall he; the same Bore
shall bear the Beam at Sandyford that wanne the degree; fortune has granted
him the better, sithence first he his arms shall bear, without treason or
treachery destiny shall never dare, tell kind of Age to him draw for which
among his worms see; but he shall end in God his Law, in Jehosophat shall he
be buried be.

A piece of a prophecy of an ancient Prophet called Evan of Trwch y Darau,
wherein is foretold, that the Eagle and Son of Man shall subdue the Pope, and
most part of the world, and also reform the Church and settle peace.
Pen y bid a ddig wydd ir llawr, Mab y din ar Ewr o hynny allan a seddian r
chau fwaf or bid, yno i bydd tyngnhesedd a ffob daioni ar y ddayar.

The Translation. Says Evan, The Head of the world shall fall to the ground,
who shall be subdued by the Eagle and Son of Man, and these also shall subdue
the most part of the world; then shall be peace and tranquillity upon the earth
for ever.

A short prophecy of the same Evan or John.
Y Tiroedd gwastadill a fothrir
Llad ron a threiswyr a ddestrowir
Yno y bydd terfysg in y bid nr bobl a Alldidir
Ar bobl ofidiog a espeili^
Ag a gyfyd brenin owenedd Avrddaffir
Ag a fin i bawb dyny r un Jav, a hwn a fydd sen
Digedig.
The Translation. All the bottoms and plain lands shall be trampled, Thieves
and Robbers shall be destroy^d; then there will be uproar and combustion
amongst men upon the earth, and the Inhabitants of the earth will be clipped, and
the Userers shall be spoiled of their worldly Mammon.

Then will arise a King from the North, which shall be exalted to honor, and
will reduce all to his obedience; and this King will be a happy and a
prosperous man.

A prophecy of Merlin Silvestris, predicting of wars and slaughter to the
Town of Shrewsbury and the adjacent parts; the fall of Bish^ps, as also of an
Eagle, Corquerour or Ruler, which should be from Powis by descent, and son of
Elisabeth.
Sefwch allan forwynwn a seilioch weridre
Kyndylan llys Pengw rnind kamdre
Gwae Jeveink a eiddein y frodirdre.
The Translation. You fair Damsels stand out of the princely Town of Pengwern,
the lawful Town of a Prince, Kyndylan; woe be unto the young which shall own
the borders of the same.

Un pren o goedwydd a gyfyd arnyn
O diaink i osodiad ail yw i fys dvw kadarmin
Kyndylan kalon Jaen gaiaf a ganllin.
The Translation. One of the Trees of the forest will arise to bear rule over
them, if his first setting or youthful days shall not fail; and he shall be
as the finger of God in strength, Kyndylan with the ^rozen heart, a winter will
follow.

Y want ner Twrch trwy r Pen Talaith
Kyndylan galon goddaith o goflwyn Aughyfiaeth
I Amwyn trom tref ddiffaeth.
The Translation. Kyndylan with the dry and burning heart, a mould-warp
thorough the chief princely City, who will be a stranger with his Arms loaded,
will come to defend and secure the visage of a base Town.

Eglwisav Bassav killant i braint
Ai difa o loegr wys meddaint
Ag elf an Powys in ol i gydsaint.
The Translation. Church-Bishops shall loose their Hierarchy, and suppressed in
England; then the popish Lord of Powys shall go after his fellow-saints.

Y dref wen in y dyfrin llawen a fydd in
Wrth gyfarsed kad a Gwerin
Ner Ederin, Eryr Eli.
The Translation. Thou white City in the Valley, happy will thou be, when thou
shall meet with Armies and valiant men of the Lordly Eagle and Bird of Ely.

Gorthrymed hwnw ddyffryn Meissir
Mygedawg dir i frodyr
Eryr Pengwern peu karn llwyd a ofinr.
The Translation. The same Eagle shall conquer Hills and Dales, with the
Territories of his renowned Brethren; yea, this Eagle of Pengwern will be the
choice handling weapon of awe and terror.

A prophecy of Merlin Silvestris set forth in way of discourse with a Prophet
which lived in his days, called by the name of Parchell, in English a Pigge;
wherein is fore told a Conquest of Britain, and the fall of Bishops.
Hoean b^rchellan mor chyfedd, na byddvn enid y bid in un wedd, Pelled son
saeson sail kyfr wysdded, ar frith on haylon ^^l kynchwydd, ami ddisgoganaf kyn
fynivedd Brithon drvs sae son brithwyr aimedd, ag yna i daw nit ddawn
gorfoledd, gwed bod in her, in lwyr frydedd.

The Translation.

Hoean Pigge, how strange it is, nay how unconstant the world is, that it will
not continue one minute in the same mind or temper? and how the subtle
foundation of the English be far spread abroad? whose race will Lord it over
the liberal Britains; but I will predict before my end, that Britains shall
overruled English, and be possessed of Bri^tain, and then shall they come to
perfect honor after their long bondage.

Hoean Barchellan bydan a fydd, mor drvan i ddyfodag i dyffidd, morwynion
moelion gwragedd chiwydd, hieant in ffarchant i karenidd, chwyddin'bydd
digyfewd wrth i gilidd, Esgob Anghyfiaeth diffaeth, diffidd.

The Translation.

Hoean Pigge, A little world will come, but behold how miserable will its
coming be, and so likewise its vanishing away; bad women and maids will not
respect but join in love with men near of kin; Nuptial promises will be freely
made amongst them, but the Bishops with their strange language and hierarchy
shall be extinct.

Hoean Barchellan, n^ni daw y kyngid, wrthglowed llais adar mordiargrid, tene
gwallt fynhen, syllen nid klyd, golvd fie skubawr i hid, fyngrawn haf fi
mingwerid a mi ddisgoganaf kyn diwedd bid, gwraged heb wledd, gwyr heb weryd.

The Translation.

Hoean Pigge, the long expected time will at last come to pass by the noise of
Birds, which shall be heard at sea in a sad warlike manner; by such time the
hair of my head will be thin, and my skull will become cold; the treasure of my
barn is but short, my summer crop of grain cannot save me; but I will predict,
that, before the end of times, women shall be without feast and men without
graves.

Hoean Barchellan a pharchell chyni, tene yw fie llen, ind llo nyddimi, er
gwaith arderydd mi mi darfv, kin fyrthio Awir Allvr enlli.

The Translation.

Hoean Pigge, and a Pigge ready to starve for cold, my skull is but thin, and
there is no hopes of rest unto me, yet all these shall come to pass before
the dissolution of heaven and earth.

The Judgment or rather prophecy of learned Brightman, drawn from his
compendious and elaborate exposition on the Apocalypse of St John, where he
comments on the 7 Churches of Asia, Typifying Philadelphia to Scotland, and
lukewarm Laodicea to the Church of England; wherein he concludes the fall of
Bishops.
Of Philadelphia, or the Scottish Church.
And the Scottish Church that little seems and low,
Shall in the end be their Bishops overthrow:
By whose example England shall be drawn
To question Miters, Copes, and Sleeves of Lawn.
Then these with others shall combine in one,
To extirpate the Pope from of his Throne.
Of lukewarm Laodicea, or the Church of England, Typified by the learned
Brightman.
The Counter pain of Laodicea stands
As third in rank in its Church of Englands hands;
And by the Angel of the Church is meant
The Pastor of the same or President.
Of whom it is said of her, (no little blot)
I know thy works, that art neither cold nor hot.
What art thou then? some medley stuff composed
Of hodg podg temper, fit to be disclosed.
Thou art not cold, thy Doctrine sound and pure,
Such as a fiery trial can endure:
Nor art thou hot, thy zeal is of no price,
Lo sing its heat, it falls as cold as ice.
How else could a Reformed Church admit
Of Popish Superstitions mixed with it?
They, thy insaniated senses charm
To be nor one, nor either, but luke warm:
It Is equal with thee to be Romish all,
Not one of those which we Refo^med call.
If on this weak point thou thy judgment stay,
To know Gods truth and serve him the wrong way.
If Baal be God, before his fires appear;
If God be God, follow him with fear.
He is justly taxed of spiritual sloth,
Who is a neuter and halteth between both.
We of Laodicea further find,
The Text says, Thou ar^ naked, poor, and blind.
Not poor of suit, that were a blessed thing;
For some did write, I and my King;
Yet beggars too, but not of pence, but pounds,
And besides Clergy Tithes of spiritual grounds.
Dark art thou in thy Cannons long since past,
As in those future, which will come on fast;
Which thoroughly shifted, and in every part
It will app^ar to all how blind thou art.
These, with thy Innovatious cruel doomes,
And Popish Trinkals, all which (once) were Romes,
Uncover shall thy skirts, and (as I guess)
Before the Nations show thy nakedness:
Which shall a double San^drine invite,
To clip thy wings or plume thee quite.
Yr owdwl fraith, or a Song made by Rees Nanmor a Poet, unto Henry the Eighth,
grounded on the Prophesies of Talieson and both the Merlines, wherein is
exactly set forth the Kingly race from the English to the Scots, by the coming
in of King James, whose Reign is foretold to be peaceable, and of a red
Parliament in the time of the late King, and of the Wars that should follow,
with many notable passages besides.
1.
Chrvst kadwr wythfed frenin dyledog
Kenav tad eysyl t kawn e^to dwyfog
Kymrv bydd llawen megis gwlad enwog
Kornwal kaer lleong alwenam geiliog,
The Translation. Christ preserve Henry the Eighth, the lawful heir of the
Crown; we shall have yet a Prince from the Whelp and father of Eysyllt; Wales
be glad and rejoice like a renowned Country; let Cornwall and Chester call for
a Cock.

2.
Kadwalader a Chynau in draianog
Kwrets y dragwn brv Ragwn brigog
Kowir o rinwedd y Bvall koronog
Ker began Taliesin k rdd began liofog.
The Translation. We shall have Kadwallader and Kynan in a treble division;
the courage of the Dragon will be full sha^p and prosperous in his Country;
yea, the crowned Ox of faithful descent, of whom Taliesin sang melodious and
sweet songs.

3.
Kerdd Chrvst ar i ben, kerdd kroes daer bannog
Kerddy din ai lwyth kerdd Edn Talieithog
Kadwi gerdd ai dalaith ar koed gwyr dd^iliog
Kawn wyr gogyfiwch o ddvk hid farchog.
The Translation. The Song of Christ be on his head and strength; yea, the
thrice notable Song or Cross of the Trinity defend him and his Principality,
as also his green flourishing Wood. We shall have men of equal honor from
Knights to Dukes.

4.
Kawn fa^dd kyfnewid kawn fyd odidag
Kawn ddadredeg r afon rydedog
Kawn frithill ffrvwill a wna ffraiog
Kawn Arth Arwi spagav a wna wrthie spigog.
The Translation. We shall have a Bore in change, in whose reign we shall have
a peaceable and happy time, we shall likewise turn the stream contrary to its
natural course, for we shall have a froward Trout which will make wars, who
will prove a Bear with rough claws and incredible sharpness.

5.
Kawn roddog Adrodd dav fodd an foddiog
Kawn o ddav Arwydd Parl ament ky^ddeiriog
Kawn bawbir gad, kawn bob Avr gadwynog
Kawn bwio a Chrab began y Bwch arfog,
The Translation. We shall have a gift, and afterward a restitution clean
contrary, which will be two several ways of different and displeasing nature;
we shall have of two tokens a dissenting and a violent Parliament; we shall
have all to the wars and battles, and shall overcome the rich chained Lords;
we shall find the Crabs beaten and subdued by the armed Stagg.

6.
Kawn y llv gloiw ddv, ar llew gogleddog
Kawn y Marw ar Tarw ar Eryr Tiriog
Kawn y Brin Gwyn in llawn brain ag ynllidiog
Kawn Bowls tir ywedd kan plas tiriog.
The Translation. We shall have the right black Army under the command of the
Lion from the North; we shall have the dead revived again, which will be the
Bull and the Eagle with the large Territories; we shall have the white hill
^ull of wrathful crowds; we shall have Powles with the Territories, and a
hundred sumptuous Palaces of the Mould-warp.

7.
Kawn gaer lvdd in chvdd ag in chvdd ag in channog
Kawn gystoar fynyad ar gwledidd golvdog
Kawn frys began Jeithoedd* kawn faes Gwenithog
Kawn kyn kymodi gwyn began gymmydog.
The Translation. W^e shall have London divided, with fierceness unto it; we
shall have uproar upon the mountains and rich valleys; we shall find the
neighbour-Nations bestirring themselves for offensive and defensive wars, and
in the end we shall be possessed of a valley abounding with wheat, and before
a settlement we shall find a Neighbor that will condole ^ur troubles.

8.
Kawn frad a Chynmor kawn fwriad chwanog
Kawn ddrwg Arwyddion kawn ddery gorweiddiog
Kawn Rysyel Morwyn yna Gwanwyn gwnog
Kawn began lilidwyll am and ym bwyllog.
The Translation. We shall have uproar and treacherous attempts, with willing
prepensed plots and combinations, we shall have sorry tokens of the heaving
down of great Oaks; and after a white Spring we shall have wars from the
woman; for want of patience, we shall have deceitful troubles from the L^lie.

9.
Koed Rhos nag ares in llyndain Gayrog
Krank ag anghyfiaeth affobl ymdeithwg
Kawn Alarram a haf Elorog
Kawn lychlyn ar gychwyn in crew girhiog.
The Translation. You Rose-trees continue not within the walls of London; the
strange languisht Crabb with his people shall be in a forelorn condition in a
strange Country; we shall have Alarums and a slaughtered Summer; we shall
have the Normans in a preparation to depart, in a frowning and discontented
manner.

10.
Kawn drwy faes a gill, kawn drefi ysgollog
Kawn Nerthv o chawn kawn fryeheiniog
Kawn frwydir a therfin mab kryswyn krvesog
King or karcharor saly gwynt ocriog.
The Translation. We shall gain by the loss of one field, strongly armed and
fortified Cities, and when we begin to carry the conquest, we shall obtain
Brecknock,; we shall have heavy troubles and distractions from the man with
the white robes, crossed in his proceedings and enterprises, who shall come to
his end; and then the council of a prisoner will be as unconstant as the wind.

11.
Kynh^yant y magl wrthy tan ffag log
Kawn yfgar kynar os kowir keniog
Kilio lloegr wis dowis blodevog
Kath a Gwenki kewch in hafog.
The Translation. They will hatch a snare from the open flaming fire, but we
shall have a timely separation as true as the penny is round, and then the chief
Flowers of England will vanish and decay, and also the Cat and Weesel will be
in havoc.

12.
Kiwr Eryr dvafyd gallvog
Kwnsel in gadel and in griw odiog
Kywirdebr Eryn davwynebog
Kystalymddiried ar wyn ir llwynog.
The Translation. The Chicken of the black Eagle will be m^ghty, invincible and
powerful, who will not come to his full age, if counsels and plots can
prevail; the unstability of the Eagle with the two faces under a hood, can be
no better confided in then the Lambs to the Fox.

13.
Koffav hen ddrcigiav kid ffor ddragiog
Kraff ll^w haw ar fwng korff llew kryfangag
Kwyn ch eniaid a gawn ^^rkw in rhawg
Kylenig a gawn began wr mawr kalonog,
The Transl^tion. The remembrance of old Dragons will be disputed by force of
sharp pointed weapons; the Lion with the strong and sure grapling, will bridle
the body of the clawed Lion by the maun, then shall we have the b^moaning of a
divided race, but we shall have a gift from a migh^y powerful man.

14.
Kawn ymdrechv Pinacl began y Twvrch pannog
Eskyllr alban in lliw tan llidiog
Kenais lin o lin ir kwnfel mwlog
Kymell in chyb^ll awnar hebeg.
The Translation. We shall have hot contestion with the vanquished Mould-warp
about Castles and Forts, then the wings of the Scots will appear like a violent
burning fire. I have sung a line of prophecy from the ancient prophesies to
the dark and cloudy Council, and that the hawk shall challenge too sarre.

15.
Kigfran a Gwenol gwnan wrtholnerthog
Kyfyd or dehav gleddav avr glog
Kawn hvdd ar geyrvdd yngadarnarfog
Kawn y kyrn evraid kawn y karwo^diog.
The Translation. A Raven and a Swallow will make a stout and valiant chase,
there will arise from the South a sword with a golden cloak, we shall have a
Stagg that will conquer and keep Towns and Castles with mighty strength, we
shall have the golden Horns and aged Stagg.

16.
Kawn naw or un henw, kawn wyr e Anhonog
Kawn wybir in gloi wi kawn frenin Gweliog
Kawn ddrivedd kirn, kawn ddidd koronog
Kawn y mis, gwelir kin y may gwialog.
The Translation. We shall have nine of the same name, and shall have
watchful men, we shall have fair weather after a storm, for clouds or the
nois^ of wars will vanish away, and we shall have a renowned King; the noise
of Trumpers will likewise vanish, and then we shall have a day of Coronation,
which will be in the chastising month before the month of May.

17.
Kawn wilgi r vu haf kawn loegir in hfog
Kawn ynill e l waith y gwyr ant^i^^eog
Kawn ar siak a sion gweision digaffog
Kawn ai gir ar darf un gwyn barf^g.
The Translation. We shall have a Summer overflown with blood, and England in
havoc, and shall be possessed of the Territories and treasutes of the unhappy
conqu^r^d enemy, and shall have an aged and white bearded Conqueror that shall
bear rule over Jack and John, and shall scatter them to a wandering condition.

18.
Kawn gaullin y din mabedeiniog
Kawn y llew in i groen kawn ynill y Grog
Kawn thware tabler ar I rell kolerog
Kawn ger llaw e eigiawn y gwyr llargog.
The Translation. We shall follow the Man, whose strong and complete wings
shall lead him to fa^r Co^ntries; we sh^ve this Lion in his well-fo^tified
skinn, who will winn the holy Cross, and then we shall be made fit
play-fellows at ^abl^s with the best Lords and E^^ls; and lastly the unhappy
discontented Plotters will be forced over the Ocean sea.

19.
Krist nef it Arthwn y nawfed Torchag
Krist dercha well well, Krist Avcholliog
The Translation. The Poet after his long progress in discovering what shall
befall England after Herry the Eighth, poures his hearty prayer to Christ for
the British Conqueror, as also of the Ninth Henry, and that Christ (for his
passions sake) may preserve, protect and exalt them more and more in their
glorious Conquests.

Reader,

You find by the last a clear and plain Prophecy; make good use of it, and
thou will thereby prevent thine own ruin.

Now follows certain dates of prefixed times and years foretold, first of
the coming in of King James, or of his Coronation in England, of our Bickerings
with the Scots, of the beginning of the late Wars and its continuance, and
also when further Attempts shall be expected, till a full settlement, collected
together in brief for the satisfaction of the friendly Reader.
1. Pau fo T. blwyddin ar bymtheg athevgain a C C C a thri now mis gwedi
Conquest Bastard, y diseyir y Norusans, ag ar ol hyny y bydd bid Bohwman.

The Translation. That in the year 538 after the Conquest of a Bastard, the
Norman race shall fail, and wars shall follow; about the end of so many years
after the Norman Conquest, you may find that K. James was crowned King of
England. 538

2.
Kin del chyfel daw chyfeddod
Mawr yw nerth y drindod
Y Prif ar naw profwchynod
Gwae ynys y Gwiddonod.
The Translation. That God shall produce wonderful signs and tokens before
the approaching of wars, and then woe be to the Island of Giants when the prime
of the year be 9

3.
Mil chwechant ai wrantv
A devgain o oed can r J^ssv
Y Daw in ddiogel heb gelv
Am r hen ffvdy dydd dv.
The Translation. When the year of Christ comes to be 1640, then will be a
black and fatal day ab^ut the old or Romish Religion. 1640

4.
Pau ddel pedair kowair kerdd
Gida devgain hoiwgani hardd
Oed can Jessv ynnev tvr Nordd
Diwedd saeso moelion merdd.
The Translation. When the year of Christ comes to be 1644, then will be a
heavy slaughter amongst the English. 1644

5.
Pan fo oedran Mab dvw in gyfau dango
Mill llawn in llyndain i bydd y kyffro
Devgain a chwechant treiglant ir tro
Am y Goron y bydd mawr ym gvrrv.
The Translation. When the year of the Son of God comes to be 1640, then will
be an uproar in London, with con^estion and hot dispute about the Crown. 1640

Hitherto of what has been past: Now follows the like dates or years,
wherein some notable passages will be acted or attempted, to the glory of the
innocent, and destruction of the common enemy of Peace.
6.
Rhis dria lwstra ar law
Os myni ysmoneth kin glaw
Yna i gweli and gwiliaw
Fid in o Pvmp wedi naw.
The Translation. Count 3 on thy fingers end, if thou will be provident to
p^event the danger of a storm then thou shall see (but take heed) a dangerous
world at the end of 5 after 9. Now sum up the whole, and you have 17, which is
the odd number of the year of Christ. 1657

7.
Pan fo un flwvddin ar bymtheg a devgain a ffedwar naw niav in derfin, difre
Normandi.
The Trans. When the odd number of the year. of Christ comes to be 56 and 4
nine days, then the race of the Normans will fall to cruel destruction, or
forced to give over their plottings; bu^ which of these will fall out, can
hardly be distinguished by the sense of the words. 1656: add to it 4 9 days.

The Language of an Angel.
8.
Treis dreon, Trinheon, nyw Try.
The interpretation (although formerly denied) here you have 3 Trayes, 3 Nines,
and 9 Trayes; the which being summed, makes up 63; and when the number comes to
be the odd of the year of our Lord, the randezvouz and heavy task of our
British Conqueror amongst the neighbor enemies and horns of the Beast of
Rome, will be at an end; and by this time look for a reformation and calling of
the Jews. 1663

9.
Fol i darffo Treio maas wrth gledde glasagarsie
Wedi hyny fol y dis i daw uowmis y kybyste
Daw naw erillar olhin, and blin oedd hin osiwvne
Hen ag Jevankar i gwen in trwssior hen Eglwysse.
The Translation. After the conclusion of the wars by strength of sword and
arms, then, or after all field battles the 9 halter months will peep in as
right as the dice; and when these nine months of destruction are come and
gone, then will young and old fall very merrily to mend and repair the ruin of
the Church; and then, and not till then, a Reformation.

That the Reader may the better satisfy his memory touching the two grand
prophesies, or the Plaintiff and Defendant formerly mentioned in the two grand
trials, and their particular descents, and evident demonstrations of either, I
will reduce in brief from what has been said by prophesies, and then proceed
to some outlandish prophesies in confirmation of what has been said.
1. The Defendant or British Conqueror is foretold to have his descent from
North Wales. 2. from Alan. 3. from Owen. 4. from Bleddin. 5. from Cynvin. 6.
from Bledding ap Cynvin, Prince of Pow^s. 7. from Angh^rad. 8. from Eysyllt. 9.
from Conaud in Darthwy. 10. said to be the first after Edward the Sixth. 11.
foretold to strike with and beat down the standard of C. or Charles. 12. when
such a one comes, Kadwallader is revived. 13. that such a one shall get by
conquest what the Britains formerly possessed or owned. 14. the same
foretold to be a Britain by the fathers side, and an Englishman born. 15.
that this Conqueror shall strike with the blood of Vrien.
The Plaintiff and late King are said to be a new Sovereign as from Scotland.
Foretold to be of the race of Grissith, of the race of Llewelin, of the blood
of Vrien.

The lineal descent of His Higness, OLIVER, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth
of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc. out of the body of Blethin ap Cynvin
Prince of Powis in former times, as also from Cadwallader Fendiged the last
King of the Britains.
OLIVER, Lord Protector, Son to Robert Cromwell Esquire, Son to Sir Richard
Cromwell, Son to Sir Richard Williams, alias Cromwell, begotten on a daugh^er
of Walter Cromwell; which Sir Richard was Son to Morgan Williams, Son to
William Morgan of New-Church in Glamorganshire, and one of the Privy Chamber to
Henry the Seventh; Son to John, Son to Morgan, Son to Howel, Son to Madog, Lord
of Kibion, Son to Alan Lord of Kibion, Son to Owen Lord of Kibion, Son to
Cadwgan, Son to Blethin ap Cynvin, Prince of Powis and North -- Wales. BLETHIN
Prince of Powis aforesaid, Son to Cynvin, Son to Gwenystan, Son to Gwaith
Foedfawr, etc. the Great, Prince of Wales. ANHARAD Mother to Blethin ap Cynvin,
was the Daughter of Meredith, Son to Owen, Son to Howel dda, (or the Good) unto
Cadell, Son to Roderick the Great, Blethin ap Cynvin Prince of Powis, and
Griffith ap Llewelin Prince of North Wales were half brethren, by Angharad
aforesaid, only daughter to Meredith ap Owen ap Howel dda, Prince of Wales.
EYSYLLT mother to the said Roderick was the daughter of Conan din daethwy, Son
to Roderick Molwynog, Son to Idwell Iwrth, Son to Cadwallader fendiged the last
King of Britain. This Blethin ap Cynvin was the first that carried the
Principality of Powis, from the posterity of Brochwell yskithrog, Prince of
Wales.

A prophecy of Merlin Silvestris, of the Bore or late King, of the late Wars,
the Kings flight, Worcester fight, and of the Conquest of the black Lion.
Ni ffor r Baedd in ddy gyffro onid enid awr, kanis Tair Ewin a gyfyd in er bin
y Baedd, ag un or talr Ewin a ddaw o Scotland, r ailo brydain, ar drydydd o
gymev, a phan ddechrevo r tair Ewin hiu ddigio, hwy Awnant ir Baed lawer Twrn
Atkas. yr hwn in r Amfer yna, a gyffrv in dramynych, ag yna i gwna of kyreh
krevlon in erbin i elynion, either in bydd elwor un oisiwrn eiav of, or Achos i
kymer y Baedd goevlondeb a llid mawr wrtho hvn, agwrth lawero bobl y dyrnas, ar
Baedd a kynill lawer o b^bl, r hain drwy lid a dywyssaef ir dehevdir, or man ni
ddaw ganthaw of ddimbydd yw dyrnas, namyn in vnig All^idion, ofe a be^y yr
Anghhariad hwn chyngtho ai dyrnas in hi o Amser ynol.

Ag of fewn y Barkvtanod Amser hwn, i kyfyd Scotland, a phrydain a Chymrv in
erkiny baedd er dig iddoef, ag hefyd talm or Gwidd^^ a gwyr Almaen assaiff in
gadarn in erbin y Badd in ol hyn y Rhydd brenin y Gogledd wife dyfwn, ar y bobl
dier th i ddyfod ar feirch breniav i dyrnas y Baedd, a ffwyso awnant hwy in
grevlon in erbin y Saxonia^d, ag yna i kilia r Baeddir movais bycn^u oi bobl
gi^ag of, ag ar fyrder ar oll i fynedef ir mor, i chenir y dyrnas in dair chau,
agynol llawer o fateloed a byrion ym^addav, i kyfid Parckell o weddill kenedl,
ag awna sialens am y fflowr de lvws ai dyrnas.

Kais hin ofewn amser y llew dv, diame ydiw na chaisy Baedd heddwch yny dyrnas,
kanis aml ymladdav a fyd o fewn r ynys hon trabar hathoi ll^w hi, o fewn r
Amser hwn wi bydd tra Amal y Barkvtanad, ag in ol bin y bydd maes, in y ^^n a
destrowir a dwyl^w, ar llew av ai gledd ^ yny y ^y ^as a^ Go^^n.

The Translation: That the Bore shall not continue in peace but a short time,
for 3 sharp N^yl^s or Armies will ^s^ against him; one from Scotland, the
second from Britain, the third from Wales; and when these three begins to
fr^wn, they will work shrewd turns to the Bore, who, in those times will be
often moved; then will he furiously assault his enemies, ^ut shall not carry
the glory or gain from any of his Ba^tels or Fields; which losses will
exasperate the Bore with cruelty against his enemies; then the Bore will gather
a great multitude of people, and will command them to South Wales, from whenc^
they will return without glory or conquest, but lame and m^i^^ed soldiers; and
this rent, hatred or division will for a long while after continue b^tween him
and his kingdom, and within this time of the Kites, will Scotland, England an^
Wales arise against the Bore, with much wrath and hatred; l^kewise a party of
the Irish and men of the German race will strongly and st^utly rise up against
the Bore; then will a King of the No^th give sharp summons to stranger people
to come by sea to the kingdom of the Bore; then will the Saxons be heavily
pressed with the strength of these stranger enemy.

Then will the Bore be forced to fly to the sea with a very small company with
him? and shortly after that he will betake himself to sea, will his kingdom be
ruled by three, and after many battles and short fightings, will arise a Pigge
of the remnant of a family and while he be sucking at his mothers breast, he
shall make a challenge to the Flower de Luce, and his Kingdom seek out for this
time when the Black Lion shall appear and stand up; for then without doubt the
Bore shall have neither rest nor peace in his kingdom, for there will be in
h^s time manifold Battles in this Island of Britain while her Lion endures; in
which time will Kites be num^rous, and afterward will be on field of Battle,
wherein will be a great destruction of both sides; and the Black Lion by the
power of the sword will conquer and get both the K^ngdom and Crown.

BOOK II. Europes Calamity, Englands Glory.
Now follow certain Prophesies out of Maxwels Collections, delivered by
Outlandish Prophets and Prophetesses, to confirm what has been said by our
own, touching the downfall of the Church of Rome, the reformation of the
Church, and also of the Person or Instrument which shall bring these glorious
works to pass.
Out of Maxwels 5 section, fol. 31.
THere is a certain prediction written about 600 years ago, had out of the
Library of S. Victor, which begins, Vae tibi Civitas septicolis, etc. Woe
unto thee thou seven-hilled City, when the letter R shall threaten thy walls;
for then the fall and destruction of thy mighty men is at hand. Woe unto the
City of blood, full of lying, falsehood and violence; the voice of the scourge,
of the wheel, and of the warlike horse, the voice of viol^nce and spoil shall
not depart from thee; the gold of Gods word is obscu^ed, and Religion, which is
the worshipping of God according to his word, is pi^ifu^ly corrup^ed: the first
Woe is past, behold another woe is at hand; let us fly away secretly from before
his face, because the afflictions of our faces do begin; let us run, and let us
not look behind us, because from the North all Plagues are displayed: I
beseech thee, good Lord, send him whom thou art to send.

Out of his 15 section, fol. 83.
Johannes Wolfius, in the second Tome of his memorable things, which begins
thus: A certain Wight, equitable and upright, born in Europe, shall be the
chief Pastor or Bishop of Christendom; such a one as shall manage and govern
the Keys of the kingdom of heaven, and not the Scepters of the kingdoms of the
earth, then there shall be peace and concord in the whole world, one faith and
religion, and one Prince imperially reigning over all.

Out of his 16 section, fol. 84, 85, 86, 87.
According to the confession of the Italian Jesuit Hieronymus Platus, in his
second book of the Religious Life, and 30 Chap. England has been more fertile
of Converters of Countries, and Nations to the Christian faith, then any other
Land else: so is it not unlikely, but that God will have the same Country to
be more fertile of Reformers of other corrupt Churches, especially of that of
Rome, then any other Land whatsoever; and that as there is in no Country or
Nation of the world to be found so many complete Divines, for Judiciousness,
Ingeniousness, and moderation, and for fitness to deserve well of the peace of
the Church, as there is in England: so it may well be, that God will honor
this same Island with the reformation of the Church of Rome, and her daughters,
by sending forth from thence such godly, judicious, zealous, and moderate men,
as shall reclaim them from their abuses and corruption, and restore unto them
their primitive purity and integrity, such as it was in the days of
Constantine the Great, born in Great Britain.

And so much seems to be imported by that prediction of Nostrodamus, which
bears that Rome shall be ruled by the Brittonish head.

In his first Century he says, That the new King that joins the lower and
Northern Countries of Europe, shall be the instrument of loss to the Church of
Rome; and that the Bishop of Rome, together with his Clergy (except they show
themselves willing to be reformed) shall be made to spit blood, when the Rose
shall flourish.

And in his 8 and 10 Centuries, That the ruin of Rome draws near, not of her
walls, but of her substance and blood, by the means of a learned Prince of
sharp understanding: And, to be short,

He promises in his 5 Century, That of the Trojan blood shall spring a Prince
of a daughty-Dutch heart, who shall attain unto so high a degree, that he shall
both chase far away the Arabic or Mahumetane multitudes, and likewise return
to the Church her ancient eminency and sincerity.

Likewise out of the Library of S. Victor, there is a prediction ci^ed by the
Abbot of Cluny, attributed to Abbot Ioachim, which says, That the Red Roses
should send forth the sweet water that shall purify and cleanse the Church
from her corruptions.

To which agrees another prophecy of Paracelsus, foretelling, how that among
the Roses should spring up one who should change the sandy foundation into a
Rock; a thing (says he) that shall make many a one to wonder. Agreeable to the
same is a certain prognostical verse, found in an old manuscrips, imparted to
Mr James Maxwell by Mr S. George Norrey King at Arms.

Iesse Rosa sanguis Bruti
Portat crucem Iesv Christi.
That is to say, The Rose of England bears and b^ingeth the Cross of Christ
to foreign Lands. Hereunto likewise may be referred that voice, as William of
Malmsbury affirms in his second book of the Kings, which was uttered in a
Vision to holy Brithwald Bishop of Winchester, who lived in the Confessors
days, saying, Regnum Anglorum est Dei, the kingdom of England is Gods;
meaning that the Kingdom and Country of England should prove a chief
instrument of the propagation of the Gospel and faith of Christ unto foreign
Lands.

So that by that which has been said, it would seem, that from the Rose of
England shall proceed or spring the reformation and purgation of the Church of
Rome, like as the same City once received from the same Country the first
authoriz^d profession of the Christian says, by the blessed means of
Constantine the Great, a Britain born. Paulus secundus Grebnerus the Germane
Astrologian, in his seritum mundi filum, delivers, That the Lion having the
Rose and Lilies in his Arms, shall utterly destroy the Pope, so that there
shall be none after that time.

The holy Bishop and Martyr S. Methodius, in his book entitled, Of the last
times, has foretold, that God shall punish the corrupters of his Church,
purge his house, and restore her purity.

For in the last Age of the world, that is (says he) in the last thousand of
six, the sons of Ishma^l shall come forth out of the desert, and their coming
shall be chastisement without measure, and without mercy; and God shall g^ve
over into their hands all the kingdoms of the wicked; and further says, That
Spain shall perish by the sword, and that the Inhabitants thereof shall be led
Captive.

Philippus Boskierus, a learned Franciscan Friar, in his 9 Phil^pp^ck for the
holy Land, writes, That the kingdom of Spain is in great danger of desolation
and destruction at the hands of the Turks and Moors, for their cruelty used
against the Americans.

Likewise Nostrodamus in diverse of his predictions fore-telleth, that the Turks
shall overrun Hungary and Italy; yea, (says Antonius Torquatus) France shall
not be free from the Turkish fury, nor yet Germany: and Reynardus Lolardus
says, that the Agarens shall yet once again gather themselves together, and
come out of the deserts in troops into Germany, and that they shall obtain the
land of the Moon for the space of eight years, they shall subvert Kingdoms and
Cities, kill the Priests in the holy places, prof^ne the holy vess^l, d^fl^ur
Christian women, turn the Chu^che^ in^o Stables, and tie their Steeds to the
monuments of the Saints, because of the wickedness of Christian people in th^se
d^^e^, an^ in end they shall be destroyed, near unto the golden Appl^ of
Agr^pp^ne, when as there shall be few Christian Princes left to make
resistance, and almost none (al^^^!) saving a cer^ain most inv^ncible King of
Spain, who in th^se days shall k^ll the last Successor of the Mahometane
Duglossius.

So shall the lofty pr^de of the Turks have a fall, their Kingdoms shall b^
brough^ to the Church; the Turkish Empire of Trapezond shall be br^ught back
again to the Patrimony or Empire of our crucified Lord, by the hands of the
Cross bearing servants and soldiers, and then shall the Church grow again into
a new sta^e of everlasting Charity, Concord and Peace, for there shall be a
reformation, a new kind of l^w or religion, better t^an the old, together with
honesty of conversation both in Clergy and Laytie.

And again says Reynardus* if the Princes of Germany do not agree with the
great Eagle, but fall to the kindling of civil wars amongst themselves.
Duglossius their shall not fail to come, even the fifteenth branch of the
Turkish tyrannical tree, and waste Poland, M^sia, Thuring, Hesse, Pruten,
P^cardie, Braban^, Flanders, and surp^^sse far in cru^lty and rage the
fiercest beasts against the Christians of the North W^st, but he shall be
killed besides the golden Apple of Agrippine, according to the prediction of
Merl^n.

Out of his 8 section, from the Prophecy of St VINCENT.
Then there shall enter into Italy three ^ost puiss^nt Armies one from the
West, another from the East, and the third from the North, which shall fight to
get her, and there shall be such blood sh^d as the l^ke has not been seen in
Ital^ si^c^ the world began; and then the Eagle shall tak^ the counterfeit
King, and all things sha^lbe subdued and made obedient unto him, and there
shall be a new reformation in the world, but woe and woe again shall be then to
the shaven Order, for the sect of divisers and attempters shall cease.

Again, says the same St Vincent, because the understanding of holy Scripture
has borrowed a strange color from Philosophers; for the most part of
preachers now adays preach not the simplicity of the Gosp^l, but the subtilty
of Aristotle; in which words the holy man t^xeth the nice and subtle kind of
divinity devised by the Schoolmen: We have likewise (says he) drunk water
for money; that is to say, we have been made to buy with our money the holy
Sacraments, which are the instruments of Gods free grace signified by the
water; for now all our Priests are guilty of Simony.

Out of his 10 section, fol. 44.
S. Brigide foretells, how that out of the Western part of the world shall
spring a Lily, which shall grow to a thousand thousands in the Virgin land, and
shall be strong^r than the Cedar, and recover the things that are lost, and
with his odor or sweet smell perfume, and as it were bewater the infected and
poisoned parts of the world.

S. Cataldus Finius likewise fore-telleth, that among the Lilies shall arise a
comely Prince, having a near name amongst the Kings of that Country, and whose
nature and nation shall have a resemblance with his name, unto whom the whole
world shall do homage, when the high O^e is fallen, and when he has stricken
down the prickly Bear, (meaning the Turk) happy and blessed shall his years be
from the West to the East; from the East to the cold Quarter, and from the
North to the warm South.

This flourishing or flowery Prince bearing the new name, shall plant the Vine
of our Savior: unto whom all Nations shall submit themselves, and the Crown of
the East shall be given him to keep.

Out of his 12 secti^n, fol. 55.
S. Methodius foretold, that the Ish^aelite^ shall possess from East to West,
and from South to North, their yoke shall be heavy upon the neck of all
Nations, and that none shall be able to resist them, until a certain
determinate time be past, that they shall come forth of the desert in the sixth
thousand years and vex mightily with war Spain, France, and Germany, and put
the Romans to flight and to the ^dg of the sword. But, says Reynardus
Lolardus, and also J^ven^s Anglicus, the Turk shall in the end be overcome and
killed at the Golden Apple of Agrippine.

Paracelsus fore-tells, that when a certain terrible Eclipse of the Sun is
past, together with great inundation or overflowing of waters, that then diverse
tumults, seditions, battles, burnings, and blood-shedings shall mightily molest
the Northern Nations, namely Brabant, Flanders, Zeland and Holland: in those
days (says he) the ^^ly shall wither.

Johannes Wolfus in his 16 Century alleges a p^ediction, That when King Henry
shall reign, twice made King, beloved both in word and deed, a certain strong
man shall pluck the Lilies out of the French Garden; the King himself shall
fall, and his people; both Clergy and Layty shall perish by the sword, the
pl^gue famine, and fire.

Nostradamus in his 1 Century and 49 quadrin, fore-telleth, that the Oriental
Nations shall about the year 1700, subdue almost all the Northern corner or
quarter of the world; and in his 5 Century and 94 quadrin says, that the great
Duke of Armenie shall assault Vienna and Collen; and in his 2 Century and 78
q^ad in he says, that the chief of Scotland, together with six of Germany,
shall be taken captive of the Orientals at sea, and carrid through Spain into
Persia, and there presented to their new King.

That in the end (says Nostradamus) the Northern Nations being confederated
together, shall prevail over the Eastern, and that certain Princes of the
Trojane, French, and German land, (especially two) whom he c^lleth brothers,
not brothers, shall practice such prowess and martial feats, in bringing down
the Turkish Turbants, with all the Arabian Troops, that the Isle of Rhodes and
the City of Constantinople shall be seen to overflow with Barbarian blood.

A notable prophecy of the Abbot of Werde in Calabris, found in his Sepulcher
some 300 years and more after his burial.
In the year 1593, in the mean time that his Masons were casting down an old
wall, in his Monastery, and digging deep to lay a new foundation; there they
found a Sepulcher of Stone, and therein a Corpse almost all consumed, holding in
the hand a plate of silver with this inscription:

Cum sancta Civitas fulgebit splendore stella,
Sol iterum me vide bit.
Englished, When the holy City shall be enlightened by a bright Starr, then
shall the Sun see me again; this is the body of the Abbot of Hydruntum, buried
the 27 of October in the year of our Lord 1279; and under the head thereof was
found a little marble Chest, and therein a leaden Box containing a certain
parchment, wherein was written a prophecy in old characters; a part whereof is
thus in English:

In those days many famous Cities shall p^rish by spoil both within and
without, especially in Italy, and both in the Kingdom of Naples and in
Toscany, fearful and terrible things, more than one would believe should come
to pass; my native Country of Hydruntum shall be destroyed again, and made
d^solate by the Mahometane Dragon; Rome shall be shaken in a notable manner, so
shall Florence, expecting a revenge under her Apostate Duke: the nest of
Philosophers (meaning Padua) shall be likewise shaken, and Genua shall incurr
tribulation at the enemies hands, for lo has the Lord revealed unto me.

The Turks with their tongues of fury shall pollute Venice; the whole Kingdom
of Sicily shall perish; many Monasteries shall fall through the poison of the
Northern Eagle, and much blood shall be shed because of the two battles of the
French and Hollanders.

The Oracle of Sibyll of Cuma foretells, that there shall be no peace in the
Virginal Land, to wit, in Italy, and in the Roman Church; and the Nation
without an head shall bear rule in those days, and afterward shall adhere
unto the Great Eagle.

That the Turk shall prevail so far upon divided Christians, that he shall
take unto himself the style of Emperor of Romanies, together with the Eagle
ensign of the Empire, aye ^ntil the Lion of the Tribe of Judais send forth from
the wood the roaring Lion to accuse, condemn and destroy the foresaid
tyrannical Eagle for his manifold iniquities and cruelties practiced upon Gods
people. According to the Vision of 4 Esdras 11, 12. the Erythrean Sibyll
alleged by Abbot Joachim, seems to condescend herein; whereas she says,
that after the first Eagle shall come a second with one head (for he shall be
Emperor o^ East and West united in one) having threescore feet; for his Empire
shall consist of 60 Kingdoms, with the color and spite of a Panther, the
subtilty and craft of a Fox, with the terror and fierceness of a Lion.

The Eagle then which should be overcome of the Lion, is either the Turk,
having through the discord of Christians got into his hands the residue of the
Roman Empire, or else it is that Roman Emperor whom the Pope shall create of
his own accord, whom Severus calls the black Eagle of Ligurgit, or he of whom
Nostradamus fore-telleth, that shall be born near Italy.

Another Oracle of Sibylla aforesaid, fol. 69.
Which bears, that God shall send into the world an Emperor or King, that
shall refresh all the world from bloody war, having rooted out some, and
c^ntracted a league of Amity with other some; neither shall be dispose of
things according to his own private fancy, but in his proc^edings he shall
follow the venerable Decrees and Ordinances of the Lord, and then shall the
beloved people of the great God flourish again.

Another old Prophecy agreeable to the same, had out of the Library of the
Abbet of Cluneis in France, written near 600 years ago, fol. 70.
In the latter days, highly shall ascend a certain weight prevented with
double honor, a lover of our crucified Lord, an entertainer and cherisher of
peace, and of an excellent wit, and yet those excellent things which he does
intend, shall not be brought to pass; he shall make high things to fall, and
low things to be exalted; h^ shall b^autifie the heaven, (to wit the Church)
shall cut d^wn woods and groves, reach forth hi^ hands to the poor, and be as a
husband to the widows.

And then take heed thou black turning Sphere, (meaning the corrupt Church of
Rom^) least thou be vexed with a wind from the North; in thy tribulation
defend thy self with the Cross.

The man coming from the obscure Center, that is, from a certain Country of
small account, behold, he ascends to double honors, even he that brings to
concord and union such as are at discord and division, that turns about the
moon.

And again, O thou Prince of ripe understanding, thou art called unto high
things, why art thou thus in an agony within thy self? be strong, kill Nero, to
wit, the tyrannical Turk, and thou shall be without fear; heal the wounded,
take a scourge into thy hands, and kill the flies, cast such as do sell, out of
Gods Temple, t^ke un^o thee the clear enlightened doctrine, preach the Just
one, (meaning Ghrist Jesus unto the Jews) invite the circumcised ones, direct
the Dove, and slaken those that be athirst.

Another out of the Abbot of Cluneis Library, fol. 72.
A certain Prince shall call a general Council, for the clearing of the
obscured truth, and the reforming of the Church.

And the red Flowers shall distill or drop down a sweet savoury water, (meaning
from the Isle of Brittany) especially from the most happy Country of England,
whose royal Ensign is the united White Red-Rose, and as it were from the
moderate and judicious heads and hearts of her reverend Prelates and D^ctors,
shall flow and spring the sweet water of sound doctrine and discipline, and
that shall purify and cleanse the Church of Rome from all her c^rruptions and
spots.

A prediction of Parac^lsus touching the renovat^on of the Church, in such a
time when some 60 may be numbered from such a year, fol. 76.
A great alteration and renovation shall be made, when some 60 may be numbered
from such a year; then he points at a certain Prince exceedingly affected
toward the concord of Christians, and the reformation of the Church in these
words: Thou have taken great pains to make a golden age, and therefore having
fin^sh^d my task, take thy test; no man shall overcome thee, yea, there shall
be no man to stir thee up, or to awake thee from the sleep of thy rest or
peace; so long as the number of years i^ not doubled, which thine enemies have
numbered from thy nest.

A Vision of Hieronymus Savanacola the Dominican Friar, out of the same sect.
14. fol. 81.
Savanacola saw in a Vision in the year of our Lord 1482, two Crosses; the one
was black, planted in the midst of the City of Rome, spreading (as it were) the
Arms over the whole earth, and with the top touching the heaven, whereon was
written these words, Crux Irae Dei, the Cross of Gods anger or wrath: which
having seen, behold (says he) incontinent I beheld and saw the air darkened
and trouble^ with tempestuous clouds, winde^, lightening, darts, swords, fire,
and hail; and me thought I saw innumerable number of men destr^yed through the
force and violence thereof, so that few were lest beh^nde unsl^i^.

Afterward, I saw a sweet, fair, an^ a clear time ensuing; and lo, I beheld
and saw (as it were) a golden Cross in the midst of Jerusalem, of the bigness
and height of the former, so bright, that it d^d enlighten the whole world, and
filled the same with new gladness and joy, and it had written upon it, Crux
Misericordiae Dei, the Cross of the mercy and favor of God.

And lo, incontinent and on a sudden all the Nations of the world of both sexes
came in troops from all parts to b^hold and embrace it; by the which the holy
man was forewarned of the future cast^gation and renovation of the Church of
Rome, and how that the A^osto^ical sea should be removed from thence to
Jerusalem; which is likewise according to the prediction of the Franciscan
Friar Johannes de Rupe scissa.

Where unto may be referred the prediction of Merlin Caledonius, which is thus,
I rejoiced of those things that were revealed unto me; for after a long
tribulation of Christians, and an exceeding effusion or spilling of innocent
blood, the prosperity and peace of God shall come to a desolate Nation; for God
will send a Reformer and Conqueror, who shall rectify and redress all things
amiss both in the East and West Church, and bring all things according to the
form of the primitive Church; then one Faith or Religion will be in force, then
there shall be one Pastor, and one Law; for Christ Jesus shall redress and
bring into good order all things amiss.

Out of the Appendix of the same, fol. 117.
The Rev^lation of Reynardus says, That after ten years past in aftertimes, a
great Eagle shall arise, which shall chastise many, and make the inhabitants of
the seas to mourn. Who can resist him (says he) seeing he has power from the
most High? he shall carry away with him 3 kingdoms, and the people shall cry
Alas, alas, woe, woe: the same is the great Eagle, which after 5 years sleep
shall begin to talk familiarly with the Lily, and afterward shall make it to
tremble, together with other lofty mountains; Cities and Castles he shall
astonish with the noise of his wings, and there shall be a great and bitter
mourning, such as has not been heard of of old, amongst the Inhabitants of the
West sea, and in the Virginal land, he shall spoil the L^lies.

In the which predictions, the great Eagle seems to be the Turk, who should
subdue the rest of the Empire, and mightily subdue the Countries of the West,
especially the most noble Country of France, according to some other
predictions formerly alleged.

A prophecy of S. Bridgide out of the same, fol. 118.
Surgat Rex pudicus f^ri, etc. that is to say, There shall arise a King of a
shamefast countenance, who shall reign over all; and entering into the h^use
of the mother Eagle, shall hold the Monarchy from East to West.

Reynardus again fore-telleth, That the children of the low Countries of
Dutch-land shall be a prey to the Fowls of heaven, and to the beasts of the
earth; so shall those under the heart of Virgo, and of Scorpio; they shall fall
before the mouth of the sword, and the habitation of the Western people and of
the Scorpionists shall be desert.

The Lord (says he) shall unsheath the sword of war and of extreme desolation
upon those of Picardie, Flanders, and the neighboring Countries; afterward
those of Bavier shall be brought under his Scepter, and many beams of the
Church shall be dark^ned both in Germany and France, because the coming of that
King shall be sudden and unexpected, in the midst of security and peace.

It is not amiss, for memories sake, to give you a brief sum of the principal
subjects handled in these prophet^cal Collections.
First, you have two grand Trials, and the Defendant or British Conqueror
maintained by prophecy to be a Britain by the Paternal line or descent, and
an Englishman born.

2. Said to come in the firstborn after Edward the Sixth.

3. Said to descend from 7 Ancestors by express names.

4. Said to strike or maintain wars with he blood of Vrien.

5. Said to beat down the standard of a Scottish C. or Charles.

6. Said to have his descent from Blethin ap Cynvin Prince of Powis.

7. Said to make a full Conquest of what the Britains formerly enjoyed.

The Plaintiff likewise is maintained to be of the Sco^tish race.

2. Of the race of Griffith.

3. Of ^he race of Llewelin.

4. Of the race of Vrien.

5. To bear the name of a Charles.

Now follows the Judgwents of learned and famous Divines, Astrologers, and
Astronomers, touching a great change in the world amongst Ki^gs, Princes, and
Emperors, at certain times and years probably to fall out.
In the year of the World 3665, Ptolomaeus Ph^ladelphus reigning in Egypt, some
469 years after the building of Rome, there lived one Hiparchus, a famous
Astrologer, who reports, That in his time the Starr, commonly called Stella
Polaris, which is in the Tail of the lesser Bear, was 12 degrees and 2 firsts
distant from the Poles of the Equator.

This Starr from age has insensibly still crept nearer to the Pole; whence it
appears, that the Poles of the Equator are moveable. It was not in the time of
Peter du Moulin (the observer hereof) past 3 degrees distant from the Poses of
the Equator.

When this Starr therefore shall come to touch the Pole, there being no further
space left for it to go forward (which may well enough come to pass within 5
or 600 years) it seems that then there shall be a great change of things,
and that this time is the period which God has prefixed to Nature. Du Moulin
in his accomplishment of Prophesies, fol. 251.

Learned Brightman in his exposition of the 12th Chapter of Daniel, ver. 12.
concludes, That the two grand enemies of Christ (viz. the Turk and the Pope)
shall be destroyed, and the dispersed Jews called in to the Christian faith,
with a flourishing time of Christianity, by the year of Christ 1

Henricus Alstedius concludes these happy and desired events, together with
Christ's personal reign on earth in Anno 1694

Nicholas Culpepper his Annotations and Predictions upon the eclipse of the
Sun, March 29. 1652.
It is a remarkable thing, the two superior bodies Saturn and Jupiter, who
always use to make a Conjunction in one and the same triplicity, should the
last time anticipate and make the third in the watery triplicity, having made
but two in the fiery, their last being in the weakest and meanest sign of the
Z^d^ack.

This I can neither read nor believe they did since the creation of the world,
until these our days; for we are brought forth to live in those days, in
which the kingdoms of the world shall become the kingdoms of our God and of
our Lord Christ, blessed be his holy name for it.

However, by this conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, God manifests by the
book of the Scripture, That he will pu^l down the lofty, and exalt the humble
and meek; and this you may read in them and the time when, without a pair of
Spectacles, if you are of the number of the men of Issachar, 1 Chronicles. 12. or of
their spirit, to anoint your spiritual David King, who had skill to teach
Israel what to do: I tell you, and I tell you but the truth, the year 1655
shall not pass over your heads but you shall acknowledge one knowing man of
Issachar to be of more worth then all Sion College, and King Henry's the
Seventh Chapel to boot.

Yea, so indulgent is the great God of heaven and earth over p^oud, insulting,
and domineering Kings and Priests, that he will give them more significations
then one or two by the book of the Creatures, even those great Ecclipses of the
Sun: this I now handle, and that other, An. 1654 upon the second of August;
then which, to our eyes, nor the eyes of our Fathers, Grandfathers, nor great
Grandfath^rs, never saw gr^ater nor more terrible.

Johannes Henricus Alstedius, taking occasion to speak of the last conjunction
of Saturn and Jup^t^r, says, It would bring a new Government into the world,
d^fferent from Kingly Government; prognosticating the ruin of Kings, Princes,
all Governors, even from the Emperor to the Constable, G^neral of Arms, etc.
and that all the Princes of Europe, nay all those of the world are threatened
by it.

Hitherto you have heard by sundry Prophesies, both foreign and domestic, how
that the Turk and Pope shall come to their end, as well as the rest of the
Kings, Princes and Emperors of the earth, and that by power of the sword. Now
you shall have learned Brightmans judgment of the last period of the Turkish
Empire.

Brightmans Commentary on chap. 9. Apoc. fol. 104. How long time this power
that is here given to the Turks should last, it is declared in the n^xt words,
which were prepared at an hour and a day, a month and a year; the which so
exquisite a description serves to comfort the godly, to whom the holy Ghost
would have it known, that this most grievous calamity has his appointed terms
and limits, even to the last moment, beyond which it should not be prolonged;
the which sp^ce seems to be for 396 years, every day being taken for a year,
after that manner as we did interpret the months before. Now a year here put
simply is understood to be a vulgar and usual Julian year, that consists of 365
days, and some hours; all which time being numbered from the year 1300, shall
expire at last about the year 1696, which is the last term of the Turkish name,
as other Scriptures also do prove with a mavelous consent; in the mean time
we must know, that the strength of the Turks shall not stand entire, and
unshaken during this term, but shall ^o^ter, and wax toward the ruin thereof
about 40 years before that their utter destruct on shall come.

Now follows a Prophecy of St Hildegard a devout and religious Abbatesse,
uttered about the year of Christ 1146, 60 years before the begging Friars were
born; clearly foretelling their manifold abuses, yea, so l^vely as if she had
lived in their days.

You shall have it verbitim out of the Commentary of learned Brightman on Dan.
9. fol. 101.
The preamble of learned Brightman, I have a good mind (says he) to add to
all that has been said, in stead of a conclusion, the Prophecy of Hildegard
the Abbatesse; both because I have often made mention of it, as also because I
think it is not easily come by, and it does serve to give much light to the
matter in hand. That worthy man John Fox, and Countreyman of blessed memory,
has set this same down in his book of the Acts and Monuments of the Church.

The Prophecy.
In those days there shall rise up a sort of blockish fellows, proud,
covetous, perfidious, and crafty, that shall eat up the sins of the common
people, carrying a certain show of foolish superstion, under a feigned
coverture of beggary; preferring themselves before all other men, by reason of
a counterfeit religion.

Men of an arrogant disposition and feigned holiness, void of all shame, or
fear of God, in inventing many new mischiefs, strong and stout; but all prudent
men and faithful Christians shall curse this pestilent order. Men who will
shun labor, and give themselves holy to idleness, rather choosing to get
their living by flattery and beggary, and that will bend themselves with all
t^eir might every way they can, perversely to resist the teachers of the truth,
and hinder them; and for this end they will fl^tter Noblemen, that may assist
them in this purpose. They shall also deceive the Nobles, and draw them into
error, that they may furnish them with all necessaries, yea with all the
delights and pleasures of this world; for the devil shall engraft these four
principal vices into their minds, Flattery, Envy, Hypocrisy and Slander;
flattery, where with to purchase great matters to themselves; envy, when they
shall see benefits bestowed upon others besides themselves; hypocrisy, whereby
they shall se^k to please men by means of a counterfeit dissembling; slander,
whereby they shall ex^oll and set out themselves with praises, by derogating
from others, that they alone might be renowned among men, speci^lly the simpler
sort that are deceived by them.

They shall preach indeed diligently, but without all sense of piety, and not
after the manner of the holy Martyrs of old; they shall derogate from the
secular Princes, they shall take away the Sacraments from the true Pastors, and
shall take alms of those that are very sick and miserable, insinuating and by
little and little winding themselves into the hearts of the common people.

They shall have familiarity with women, teaching them how to deceive their
husbands and friends with sugered and dissembling words; how to rob them of
their goods, and then to give the same, being thus purloyned, unto these their
teachers; for they shall lay hold on whatsoever men get, or howsoever it be
gotten, by stealth, robbery, or by any legerdemain; and will say to them, Give
it unto us, and we will pray for you; so that laboring to cover other men's
sins, they shall quite forget their own.

And (alas!) they shall receive any thing from rogues, filchers, thieves,
robbers that steal by the highway side, sacrilegious persons, userers,
adulterers, heretics, schismatic, apostats, where is and bawds of Noblemen,
perjured merchants, corrupt Judges, soldiers, Tyrants, or from any that live
contr^ry to Gods law.

Perverse and wick^d men they shall be, embracing the persuasion of the devil,
the sweetness of sin, a soft and d^licate life; and a certain fullness and
abundance of all worldly things, though it be to their own eternal damnati^n:
and all these things shall manifestly appear to be in them, and they shall
every day wax more wick^d, and that with minds more and m^re obdurate.

But, when as once their crafty conveyances shall be found out and all their
other wickedness, then shall their large gi^^s cease, and they shall go from
house like hunger-bitten and m^d dogs, looking down upon the earth, and drawing
in their necks like doves, and all to get their fill of bread.

Then shall the people pursue them with this outcry, Woe be unto you miserable
wretches, that are ordained to sorrow; the the world has deceived you, the
devil has guided you with his reins hitherto, your flesh i^ frail, your heart
is altogether without wit, graces or wisdom, you^ minds are unstable and
wavering, and your eyes are blinded with much vanity and folly, your idle
bellies have lusted after delicate d^shes of meat, and your feet have been
swift to wickedness.

Remember the time when you were in fight happy, yet privily envious; poor
abroad, but ^ich at home; cou^teous in show, but great flatterers in deed;
unfaithful, treachetous, perverse, back-biters, holy hypocrites, supplanters
of the truth, immoderately just, proud, unchaste, unconstant teachers,
delicate martyrs, gain-thirsty confessors; gentle, but yet slanderers;
religious, but yet covetous; humble, but yet proud; merciful, but yet impudent
liars; pleasant fla^terers, peacemaking persecutors, oppressors of the poor,
bringers in of mensects devised by your selves; mrn that were counted
merciful, but are found out to be wicked wretches, lovers of the world,
conjurers, drunkards, ambitious, patrones of wicked facts, the polers and
pillars of the whole world; unsatiable preachers, that seek to please men, and
to deceive women; sowers of discord, of whom that famous Prophet Moses spoke
wisely in his Song, A people without counsel and understanding; would to God
they had knowledge and understanding, and could have foreseen their latter end.

Ye have built your nests on high indeed; and when ye could rise up no
higher, ye fell down like as did Simon Magus, whom God destroyed and smote wi^h
a mighty plague; so shall you be thrown down upon the earth out of the clouds,
and that by means of your false doctrines, your wickedness, lies, slanders,
and detestable facts.

Then the people shall say unto them, Out upon you, get ye packing hence, you
Captains of mischief, over-turners of truth. ye Shunamitish brethren, fathers
of heresies, false Apostles, that counterfeited the lives of the Apostles,
whereof ye have not been imitators by no means: you sons of iniqu^ty, we will
not follow the manner of your ways.

For Pride and arrogance have seduced you, and insatiable covetousness has
entangled your erring minds; and seeing that you would needs ascend up higher
then was meet and equal for you, ye are fallen back headlong into everlasting
shame and reproach by Gods just judgment.

And so far Hildegards Prophecy of the abominable abuses of the Church of
Rome, and her wicked and counterfeit crew of Jesuits and Friars; which learned
Brightman brought in to clear his exposi^ion aforesaid: whereby it may appear
in what high esteem and credit prophesies were and are still amongst the
learned.

From which Prophecy may be gathered, first the corruption of the said Church
and Priests; secondly, the downfall of both predicted in plain terms:

The Turks have a prophecy amongst themselves, That their Emperor should win
the Red A^ple of Constantinople; and in the sixth year after, if they did not
defend th^mselves bravely, the Christians should overcome them; but howsoever
i^ the twelfth, they should at furthest be overcomed by the Christians, then
their fatal destruction not to pass the twelfth year, makes them in the mean
while use the Christians as their future destroyers, with much hostilicy, as a
revenge anticipate.

Sibylla Tiburtina 's Prophecy of the Birth of our Savior Christ.
God touched my tongue with a propheti^k spirit,
Infallability to speak of a Virgins merit.
In Nazareth she shall conceive a Son,
Bethlem shall behold with admiration.
O heavenly Maid! happy beyand all measure,
Whose fruitful breasts bring up so rich a treasure:
More of the Oracles of Sibylla (according to Castalio) against Rome and her
pretended holy Father the Pope.
There shall of men the tenth age then arise,
When God who did the heavens high devise:
At whose presence the earth does quake and move,
Of Imagerie extinquish shall the love.
And shall of Rome raised on her hills seven,
The People shake: then be is the strength down driven
Of her riches, while Vulcane in his ire
Often shall on her send furious flames of fire.
Out of her first book at this part: De Coelo veniet Sidus magnum in mare
magnum, etc.
From heaven there fell a great Starr in the Sie,
And burnt it up although both great and hie,
So Be^^ burnt up, and shall no longer stand,
T^ou B^bylon of Italy the Land,
Who mu^thereth Saints, and many faithful Jew,
Temples tread down that did the truth avow.
Yet thou O mischant suffer shall great pain,
As thou deservest, desert shall thou remain;
Remain shall thou desert for evermore,
Thy native soil henceforth thou shall abhore,
For thou in poison has delighted thee,
Mother of whoredom and adultery.
As wi^ow hood, and viper venomous,
Upon thy banks thou shall sit dolorous;
And Tyber flood for thee his Spouse shall mourn.
Thy mind is mad, thy heart for blood does burn.
Thou do misknow Gods mind and might; for why,
On^y I am (say thou) and who but I?
Eternal God now wrack shall thee and thine,
In all the earth shall not resist but ruin,
A monument, or yet a mark of thee,
Which thou ha^st when God gave prosperity;
Thou mischant now sit solitar alone,
Hu^ld fine to hell with many grievous groan:
Where thou shall bide burning both bone and lyre
Into that lake of furious flaming fire.
Out of the same fifth book at this part: Italia infelix, deserta, infleta
manebis, etc.
O cursed and unhappy Italy.
Vnmeind or mournd for, barren shall thou be,
To ground as green, as wilderness unwrought,
To wood^ wild and bushes beis thou brought.
Out of the seventh Book.
Rome, when thou think thee in thy highest hight,
God shall tread down thy sturdy strength and might.
The second time (O Rome) again to thee
Hereafter yet I will speak secondle.
Out of the eighth Book.
O Rome up raised now with thy Tops high,
The like ruin from heaven shall fall on thee:
Plain beis thou made, down shall thy tops turn,
And flaming fire all wholely shall thee burn.
Far shall thou slyt into an uncouht land,
Thy riches shall be reft out of thine hand.
In thy wall steeds shall wolves and toads convent,
Waste shall thou be, as thou had never been,
Where then shall be thy Oracles divine?
What golden Gads shall keep or save thee fine?
What God (I say) of Copper or of Stone,
Where then shall be thy consultation
Of thy Senate? what helps thy noble case,
Of Saturn, Jove, or Rhea in this case,
Whose senseless souls or idols thou before
Religiously did worship and adore:
Of whose green graves, unhappy Creet avants,
Their figures dead, up d^st thou set like s^nts.
Then follows immediately of the Pope.
When Ru^g in thee has fifteen Emperors,
Of all the world that has been Conquerours,
Then comes a King, a manifold Crown to bear,
Whose name shall be to Ponti very near.
His wicked foot the world shall visitate,
Great gifts and goods then shall he impetrate,
Discovered things he shall loose and remit,
Of Magic art well shall he know and wit,
The Mysteries and secret Sorcery,
The mighty God he makes a babe to be,
And down he shall tread all true wo^ship in,
And at chief heads of Errors first begin.
His Mysteries to all he shall expone,
Then comes the time of mourning and of moan;
For in a Rope his ending shall he make,
The potent people, and the town shall wrack:
Thus shall they say, we know, and hope a day,
Sometime on us should come this bitter day.
The Fathers old, and Babes shall mourn for thee,
Beholding then thy dolorous destiny.
On Tyber bank lamenting sore thy case,
Sad shall they sit, within any loud alase.
And shortly after follows, out of the same.
Lament shall you and mourn, laying aside
Thy purple weed, Imperial robes of Pride,
And into sackcloth, siting sarrowfull,
Repeat shall thou thy plaintes pitiful,
O Royal Rome, thou bragging Prince but Peer,
Of late in land, the only daughter deer;
Thy pride but pomp, ruined shall remain,
Thou once trod down, shall never rise again;
For gone shall be the glory of that Army,
That bears the Eagles in their Ensignie:
To whence then shall thy forces forward fair?
What Land with Arms shall help thee any mair?
Then follows,
Then ends the world, then comes the later light,
Then God shall come to judge his folk aright,
But first shall fall on Rome but resistance,
Of Gods wrath the woeful vengeance,
A woeful life, a bloody time shall be,
Oh, people rude! oh, Land of cruelty!
Thou little look, nor do regard aright,
How poor and bare thou first came in the light,
That to the like again you should return,
And last before a dreadful judge should mirn.
Furtherance to the scope of Prophesies.
REnowned Inhabitants of Great Britain, both Welsh and English, you have
presented to your view Collections of Prophesies, both foreign and domestic,
touching the fate of most (if not all) of the Kingdoms of the earth.

Wherein you may take notice of two wonderful observations: First, that all
the Kings and Kingdoms of the world are terribly threatened and forewarned of
their subversions, destructions, and desolations, and wholly to be subdued and
conquered; except Great Britain and Ireland, against whom there is not the
least menacing of danger to be any further conquered or made desolate.

Secondly, all these prophesies (as well foreign and domestic) with unanimous
voice and harmonious consent, cry out a Conqueror and Reformer of the
universal Church of Christ, from the Britains or Island of Great Britain;
who, by the foreseen and general consent, is agreed upon to be the Instrument
or instrumental cause of subduing and conquering of most of the Kingdoms of
the world.

Suppose that some, both of foreign and domestic Prophets, might be seduced
and misled, either by their own fancies, or spirit of lying; I hope you will
not conclude thereby, that all are seduced and m^sled; nay, rather you will
grant, that some of them might be free from suspicion, and guided by the spirit
of truth, as the real accomplishment of what they foretold c^n bear witness;
your due observation of which, and of their viva voce in their particularities,
(I presume) will oblige you to esteem of these Coll^ctions as of truths;
otherwise, as to injure the just, can be no less then great impiety.

According to the real in^ention and hearts integrity of these Prophesies, I
make bold to mind you, day and night to square your lives as becomes chosen
Instruments for bringing to pass the glorious works here destinated for you,
and likewise yield laud praise to the Lord of hosts for his favorable
acceptance of you to advance his glory, above all the rest of the children of
men, which is a privilege that former ages have not enjoyed.

True it is, you may find in our British Prophesies, herein collected,
terrible threatenings against the Land of Britain, especially the English
Nation, which were all in force till the late extirpating and suppressing of
Papists and Popery, with their idolatrous and superstitious rites and
ceremonies, the downfall of Bishops, the ejecting of lazy drones and scandalous
Ministers from the ministry, especially till the late starting up of a
British Conqueror, the ushering in of the late Wars between the divided
Nations of Great Britain, together with the heavy slaughter of both sides; all
which (I say) have put a period unto their menacings against the English.

The accomplishment of which heads have brought in a perfect atonement,
reconc^liation and union between the Nation of England, bearing the name of
English, and the race of the ancient Britains, so that formerly they were in
the esteem of proyh^sies, like two divided streams of rivers, running at a
distance, till their meeting in a bottom of a valley, then run their natural
race in one entire body and individual course to the Ocean.

So the English and Welsh, after the accomplishment of the aforesaid heads, are
from thenceforth repu^ed by our proph^sies as one body ordained by a decree
from heaven to steer their course with mutual love, and are made instruments to
perform and bring to pass the glorious works of Christ and his Kingdom, in
subduing of his enemies and reforming of his Church; we are told by holy
writs, that all these Kings and Kingdoms of the world that set themselves
against the Lord Christ and his kingdom, shall be bruised with a rod of iron,
and broken to pieces in the end; and these prophesies tell you, that this end,
or their destruction is not far off from this present generation.

Your diligent perusal of these will tell you, That there is not the least
menacing of danger (I mean by any future conquest) to this Nation, but rather
proclaimed (as you are already told) to be made Conquerours and Subduers of
Kings and Kingdoms: I confess that this Nation (without Gods providence) shall
be further troubled and molested for a short while, with disturbing enemies
both within and without; the enemies without shall be sure of loss and
repulse; the enemies within, as sure of condign punishment, for their
unadvised and treacherous attempts, yet those unadvised courses shall shortly
vanish; for one brother will be awed by another punishment, and all of you
shall be made sensible, That Plots, Combinations and Confederacies shall not
prevail against the decree and ordinance of heaven.

Behold, how the Lord of hosts began his judgments at his own house; I mean
with his beloved Spouse here in England; and how well she is purged by this
time of her Romish Wolves and their Idolatrous Rites and Ceremonies, of her
haughty and corrupt Bishops, and also of her lazy drones and scandalous
ministers: the next works of the mighty Lord amongst you by consent of
prophesies, will be the work of Reformation in his Church here amongst us of
Britain.

And then ere it be long, you shall find that this lovely Spouse will spread
her tender wings over the misty and darksom Kingdoms of Europe, and make them
shine with the glory of her brightness and innocence, far surpassing the
light of Torches in the darkest night, which shall likewise extend to the
terrestrial Jerusalem, the abode of the holy Apostles of old: Holy Writs tell
us, that the despised and dispersed Jews, the natu^al branches of the
Olive-^ree, shall be called or grafted in again; Shall we call the whole
Nation here to England to be converted? a blessed deed, if there were a
possibility for it; but I conclude that that will not or cannot be. Then I
demand by whom will they be converted? will the Great Turk do it? or will that
holy Father, the Pope, take them in hand? Surely none of these. But these
Prophesies tell us plainly, that those two Grand Enemies must first fall to
destruction, and then will the appointed time appear for their grafting in
again to their own Olive, and that by means of English Divines, which shall
preach Christ crucified to their ears, (whose mollified hearts (although now
obdurate) shall willingly receive; and then shall they weep family by family,
and turn to the Lord. So much from the very scope of Prophesies.

The chief Heads of foam of the Prophecies in the foregoing Book.
A Full verdict of substantial Jury past against a Plaintiff, set out under
these names, viz. The Mould-warp, the Flower de-luce, the Red Lion, the Wolf,
the white King, the red Rose. A greater trial never happened in great Britain
before, but the verdict is delivered up long ago, and lately revived.

A second, and full verdict, yielded up by a complete, impartial, and
substantial Jury, for a Defendant in a great trial, nay, the greatest that have
been seen or observed in this Island before, this Defendant is set out under
the names of the Branch.

A short Prophecy of Me^lin Ambrose, crying down the Race of two Henry's.

Three several Advertisements, the first to the Reader, the second to the
Inhabitants in general, the third to the Reverend Devines, Ministers, and
Teachers, fore-warning them of their dangers, with wholesome advice to unite
themselves in unity and love, and to yield obedience to the higher powers, or
else to be destroyed.

An Apology in defense of Heathenish and Christian Prophets.

A Dialogue between the Star and the Collector of the Prophesies, wherein is
handled, propounded and expounded -- questions of great and wonderful
consequence, and of weighty affairs.

His Highness descent laid out from Bl^thin ap Cynwin sometimes Prince of
Powis, as also from Augharad Daughter to Rodri Rhangeat, and from Eysyllt
daughter to Konau D^ndaethwy.

The discovery of the Angel Taliesin, by Elphin ap Gwiddno in his Fathers
fishing net.

The Angel Taliesin's first language of dostrine exhortations to Elphin.

This Angels Confession to Elphin, or an exact account of what he was, with a
particular recital of his progress since the creation.

This Angels Creed, set out agreeable to holy Writs.

His excellent Hymn or Song in praise of Jesus Christ, wherein is set forth
much Learning and Divinity, with an account of memorable passages since the
Creation, set forth in several Languages.

A second Hymn or Song, he made to the same Jesus, setting out his miracles,
ascension, and redemption of mankind.

His third Hymn or Song, setting out terrible punishments due without
repentance to several sorts of sinners.

One of the first Songs that he made, calledr Owdwl fraich the eldest, wherein
is laid out the creation of Adam and Eve, of their seduction, and expulsion out
of Paradise, with notable discourse about the Sacrament, and other weighty
matters; also a Prophecy in the Conclusion.

Remarkable passages in the revolution of years.

Certain divine exhortations of the Angel Taliesin to Elphin ap Gwiddno.

A Song of Taliesin, wherein he delivers himself to be an Angel.

The first Odl or Song of Taliesin, wherein he begins with laud and praise
unto Christ, the Son of God, then proceeds with terrible prophecies against the
walls and Castles of England.

In the same Odl, he prophecyeth of a Conqueror out of the body of Angharad,
and sets out his valorous works, with laud and mighty praise.

His third Song of laud and praise to the same Conqueror, who as he says will
kill or destroy the Serpent, Dragon, and three red Lions.

His fo^rth Song of the same Conqueror, and his notable acts, valor and
prosperity.

His sixth and seventh Song to the same purpose.

A Prophecy in welsh of Taliesin, pointing out the Norman Conquest, and of
their Continuance till the coming of King James, whose coming is laid out by an
exact number of years, likewise of the miseries which shall follow.

A Song to the Coronog F^bau, wherein is set out his descent, and progress in
his warlike Acts, both in Great Britain and in Rome, Turkey, and the Kingdoms
adjac^nt.

The principal Names given by the ancient Prophets to know and discern the
Coronog Fabau or the British Conqueror, which will conquer great Britain,
subdue the Turk and the Pope, and convert Jews and Pagans to the Christian
faith.

Manifest signs and tokens to know him when he comes.

A not eable Prophecy written in English 200 years ago, setting out the Kingly
Government, successively from Henry the eight, to his Highness the Lord
Protector that now is, as also what shall follow in the future:

A Proph^cy of Merlin Ambros, of two white Kings which shall arise in Great
Britain, in these latter times, showing that the first of the said Kings shall
fall in a snare, that the second will be forced to fly, and upon his second
coming and return he shall fall in a storm, or be killed.

A Prophecy of Merlin Ambros, directly pointing out these times the subversion
of the late Monarchy, the late wars, the Kings loss, the flight of the Queen
and her children, as also of his Highness the Lord Protector laid out by a red
Fox.

An account of Merlin Wilt, otherwise called Merlin S^lvestris, or Calidonius,
of his distempered fits, where and how he lived, and of his kind Sister
Gwendolina.

5 Noteable Revelations of Gwendolina, with Me^lins wise and discreet
resolution to each of them; directly pointing out this present age, the late
wars, the fall of great Lords, and advance of the Commons.

A vindication of both Merlins, esp^cially Merlin Ambros against the assertion
of Mar^in D^lcio, Johannes Major, Pollidor Virgil and others.

A Prophecy of Merlin Silvestris cited by Gildas, the Son of Caw, the first
British Writer, wherein the late King an the late wars is clearly por^rayed.

A Prophecy of Merlin Silvestris, discovering unto his Sister Gwendolina the
prophesied British Conqueror, the Koronog Fabau, or cradled King, the
division between the late King and his Parliament, the late King^ tri^l, the
extirpating of the race of Henry the seventh from the Kingly Government, and of
a British Conqueror.

A noteabl^ Prophecy of Merlin Ambros, wherein are foretold m^nifest signs and
tokens to discern the British Conqueror when he comes, and also of the Earl
of Essex laid out by the Stag, with a pretty mistical and knotty number of 7
with an exposition upon it.

A Prophecy of Merlin Ambros, foretelling manifest signs and tokens, before the
approaching of wars; likewise the sugered Complements late in use, with a check
to the gallant Bishops and late Ministers.

A Prophecy of Adda fras to the Raven, foretelling the British Conqueror and
fall of Bishops.

A Prophecy of Merlin Ambros, foretelling of three several course of wars in
great Britain, that the Romish R^l^gion shall have the overruling power, and
in the end should be the impulsive cause of great wars, concluding with a fatal
number of 56 and 49 days.

A Prophecy of Merlin Ambros foretelling the reigning sins of this Land of
great Britain, that the Kingly Government shall fall upon the earth, that the
Bull shall bear the Imperial rule at Sea, who will be both just and invincible.

A Prophecy of the Angel Taliesin, predicting of Owen with the red hand, the
prophesied Conqueror, and of his noteable feats and Conquest, who will force
the Norman ^a^e to retreat, concluding with an odd m^stical number.

A Pr^phecy of Tal^esin pretending a discourse with the Co^onog Fabau, or
cradled King, the British Conqueror, wherein he foretells what kind of
world will f^llow.

A short, but mistical Prophecy of Taliesin, in the Conclusion foretelling of a
British Conqueror.

A Prophecy of Merlin Silvestris, setting forth by way of discourse with his
Sister Gwendolins, noteable signs and manifest tokens already past, as also the
British Conqueror.

A Prophecy of Merlin Silvestris, foretelling of a dissenting Parliament, which
will be the grounds of wars, with manifest predictions and progress of such war.

A Song of Taliesin against ignorant Beirdhes and Harpers, with his hearty
prayer for such as observe his counsel and directions, showing further that
Elphin ap Gwiddno was murdered for commending his Teacher, and interred at
Artro, he was chief of the Western Prophets, and that he would set Elphin at
liberty from his precious bonds.

A Prophecy of Taliesin, foretelling of great war when the French and English
should join together, Castles then destroyed, but a Britain should overcome
them, then a good world.

A Prophecy of one of the ten Sibils, foretelling the subduing of many Kingdoms
and Isles by their several names; by the invasion of the great Turk, the
calamity of the Church through all Europe, the downfull of the Emperor, Kings,
Princes, Pope, Bishops and Clergy, with several punishments and signs of the
same; and of a British Conqueror that shall reform the world.

Agreeable to the same of Sibills, is the judgment of the famous Doctor in
Astrology, Mr. John Cyprian, Tarquatus Vandrivus Student in the Art Magic.

A noteable Prophecy of John from Trwch y darau, foretelling tee miserable
condition of negligent Ministers and of great war in Britain, and that a
Britain shall conquer in the end.

A marvelous Prophecy of Taliesin, foretelling of wars and conquest by a
Conqueror of the British race, his good success at Sea, with the time of the
beginning, continuance of the late war. Reader pass not by it slightly.

Reader, now tell me if Taliesin proved not a true Prophet who foretells thee a
large progress of the late wars, Mountgomery fight, the demolishing of
Mountgomery Castle, the treaties between the late King and his Parliament, the
flight of the Kings party to Sea, and that the Lion of the British race shall
conquer and subdue both the Charles.

A Prophecy of a Prophet called the Bergam of Maelor in Denbighshire, wherein
noteable things are foretold concerning these times, with a Conqueroures
descent from the Principality of North Wales or Pewis.

A Prophecy of the same, foreshewing great wars in Great B^ittain in the behalf
of a Crown, and that the Race of Cynwin will get the Conquest, according to the
will of God.

A Prophecy of the same, presenting happy news to North and South Wales, of the
appearance of a Conqueror, with remarkable passages besides.

A Prophecy of Tal^esin, foretelling of wars in the time of the Lion of the
Race of Llewelin Prince of Wales, and of the appearance of the Eagle of
North Wales in such time.

A Prophecy of the same of great wars in Great Britain, of a Conqueror, and
of a white Harvest after such wars, as also of an overthrow to an English Ruler.

A Prophecy of the same, foretelling that after the raising or discovery of
the graves in Corbre Churchyard, a lamentable time will follow, with signs and
tokens of such troubles.

A Prophecy of the same, foretelling the strange removal of marvelous great
stones from a bottom to the top of a high steep, and inaccessible Hill, which
came so pass about King James Coronation, and of dissension and changes a in a
Parliament, with heavy wars that should follow.

A Prophecy of the same, foretelling the coming of a migh^y strong and
invincible Conqueror to rule the Britains, and of great wars in such time,
with a promise of a peaceable time to succeed.

A Prophecy of the Bergam of Maelor, setting out the beginning of great wars,
the division of Armies, the confinement and death of the late King, and of
deliverance by a Conqueror of the British Race.

A Proyhecy of Adda fras, wherein is foretold, the late wars, with a
conquering or subduing of foreign enemies.

A Prophecy of Adda fras foretelling of wars, of short trouble to the
British Conqueror, of the Race of Alau or Owen ap Cadwgau. of the starting up
of Sects and Sectaries to trouble the true Church, but at last that Sects and
Sectaries and Plotters shall vanish away.

A Prophecy of Merlin Silvestris, predicting of the late wars of the Lion and
Dragon from Wales, and of future peace.

A Prophecy of Merlin Ambros, foretelling the coming of an Eagle of the Race of
the B^ittains, in a certain age, and this Eagle he calls the prophesied
Conqueror, or fiery Dragon of invincible strength, in whose time will be great
slaughter.

A Prophecy of the same by way of questions, wherein is set out a Conqueror,
also the late wars exactly foretold, and of a peaceable time that shall follow.

Taliesins Creed different in words from that in page 6. 7. yet agreeable in
substance.

A Revelation of Gronw ddu of Anglesey, wherein an Angel revealed unto him the
Kingly succession in the Regal Government, until the appearance of a
Conqueror, who is clearly portrayed, and that the same should appear 2^2 years
after the revealing of the said revelation, or in the year 1644.

A Prophecy of Taliesin, exhorting all to confide in Jesus for help, then he
proceeds to foretell of a dragon of the Race of Blethin ap Cynwin, and of his
warlike actions.

A Prophecy of the Bergam, beginning with exhortations to observe prophesies,
promising a Conqueror under the name of Owen of the British Race, as also of
the late Kings death.

A Prophecy of Merlin Silvestris, wherein is set out terrible threatenings
against the late Royal party, also of a Conqueror of the Race of Cynwin.

A Prophecy of Adda fras, wherein is foretold our late wars, the late
dissenting Parliament, and a Conquest by a person descending from the Princely
Race of North Wales.

Here follows certain Prophetical discourses which p^st between Taliesin and
Merlin.

A prophetical Chronology of Merlin Silvestr's, wherein is foretold several
Conquests and changes in the Regal Government of Great Britain since the
Norman Conquest till this very time, as also the Heroical and successful acts
of his Highness that now rules, who is here foretold to conquer and bear rule
both in Great Britain and elsewhere.

Merlins further predictions of noteable passages from the time he lived till
the present, and what shall btfall hereafter.

A prophetical Chronology of Merlin Silvestris, Dialogue wise between Merlin
and his Sister Gwendolina, wherein is laid out most of the Kings successively
that should reign in great Britain, from the time wherein Merlin lived, till
the appearance of a Conqueror of the race of the Britains, and that such and
his race shall imperially rule for ever, both in great Britain and elsewhere,
but in respect of the tediousness of the some I curta^led it, and began at
Queen El^z^beth.

A Proph^cy of John de Beidlington, setting out the valorous acts of his
Highness the Lord Protector, who shall be a Reformer of the Church of Christ,
and that treacherous plots shall not prevail against him.

A Prophecy of Evau de Trwch y darau, wherein is foretold that the Eagle and
Son of man shall subdue the Pope, and most part of the world, and also reform
the Church, and settle peace.

A short Prophecy of the same, wherein is foretold the late wars and the like
divisions and troubles through the Christian world, as also a Conqueror by
descent from Powis.

A Prophecy of Merlin Silvestris predicting war and slaughter to the Town of
Shrewsbury, formerly called Pengwern Powis; the like threatened against the
adjacent parts; the fall of Bishops, as also of an Eagle Conqueror or Ruler,
whose descent should be from Powis, or Son of Eliz^b^th.

A Prophecy of M^rlin Silvestris (set forth by way of discourse with another
Prophet) wherein is foretold a Conquest of Britain, and the fall of Bishops.

The judgment, or rather a prophecy of learned Brightman of the Church of
England tipified by Laodicea.

A Song called yr owdwlfrai^h made and composed by Rees Nanmor, grounded upon
the whole scope of prophecies, wherein are predicted most noteable passages
since Henry the eight in the regal Government till this year 1657; as also what
shall befall in the future.

Certain dates of prefixed times and years foretold; first, of the coming in of
King James, or of his Coronation in England, as also of our bickerings with the
Sects, of the beginning of the late wars, and its continuance; also when
further attempts shall be expected, till a full settlement.

Noteable Abridgment of Prophecies pointing out his Highness out of several of
his Ancestors by particular names, and his appearance likewise within a
prefixed time.

A Prophecy of Merlin Silvestris of the Boar, or late King of the late wars,
the Kings flight, Worcester fight, and of the Gonquest of the black Lion.

FINIS.

