The Substance of a SPEECH Made in the House of Commons BY WILL. PRYNN of
LINCOLN'S INN, Esquire; On Monday the Fourth of December, 1648, TOUCHING The
Kings ANSWER to the Propositions of both Houses upon the whole TREATY, Whether
they were satisfactory, or not satisfactory. Wherein the Satisfactorinesse of
the Kings Answers to the Propositions for settlement of a firm lasting Peace,
and future security of the Subjects against all feared Regal Invasions and
encroachments whatsoever is clearly demonstrated. As likewise, That there is no
other probable or possible way to settle a speedy, firm and lasting Peace, but
by the Houses embracing and proceeding upon the large extraordinary Concessions
of the King in this Treaty, for the Kingdoms present weal and future Security.
And that the Armies Remonstrance, Nov. 20. is a way to speedy and certain
ruin; and a mere Plot of the Jesuits to defame and destroy us. Put into
Writing, and Published by him at the importunate request of diverse Members, for
the satisfaction of the whole Kingdom, touching the Houses Vote upon this
Debate. The third Edition.

MATTHEW, 5. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers; for they shall be called the
children of God. PSALM 68. 30. Rebuke the company of Spearmen: scatter thou the
people that delight in War. London, Printed for Mich, Spark at the blew-bible
in Green-arbor, 1649.



All flesh is Grass, the best men vanity!
This, but a shadow, here before thine eye,
Of him, whose wondrous changes clearly show,
That GOD, not men, swayes all things here below.
TO THE Christian Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THE importunity of diverse eminent Members of the House, and the multitude of
false and scandalous Aspersions publicly cast upon my self, and other secluded
Members, not only in common Discourses, and John Goodwin Right and might well
met: The Moderate: A word to M. William Prynne, (a Libellous empty New-nothing.)
News-books, but in sundry Libellous pamphlets, published by the Officers of
the Army, and their Confederates, since their late Treasonable unparalleld
violence to our persons, and the Houses and our privileges and freedom,
without the least pretext of Authority; have necessitated me to put this Speech
into writing, and publish it to the whole Kingdom and world, which else had
expired within those walls where it was spok^n, with that breath that uttered
it.

The scandals wherewith they have publicly aspersed the secured and secluded
Members in print, are these; The humble Answer of the General Council of
Officers of the Army, etc. Ian. 3. 1648.
That we are a corrupt Majority, and apostatizing party; selfe-seeking men;
old Royalists; New-malignants; Neuters; Traitors; Men biased from the common
Cause, powerfully carrying on their own designs to secure themselves, and work
their own advantage, by a corrupt closure with the King; and by subtle
endeavors making way for the bringing him in on TERMS DESTRUCTIVE to the
Public; a corrupt Majority, designing the establishment of a lasting Dominion
between the King and themselves in a perpetual Parliament (...) No wonder
those Saints d^generated so far to act the Rev. 2. 10.
Devils part, as to carry and cast us prisoners into hell it self, and there
keep us waking upon the bare boards all night without any accommodations, when
they seized us; were we such persidious Judasses or incarnate Devils, as they
would render us to the Kingdom, and those for whom we serve, before ever they
vouchsafed particularly thus to charge us, or bear our just defense, either as
Members, or Freemen of England. However, were we every way as vile as they
would make us, yet it is as clear as the Noonday Sun, That these very
Officers, and the Army, being not our Masters but Servants, particularly A
Collection, etc. page 224 425, 599, 623, 694^ 705, 227, 267, 300, 380, 464,
537, 686, Appendix, p. 4. 23.

Exact Collection, p. 35. to 42.


raised, waged, and engaged by solemn Leacue and Covenant, among other things,
to protect and defend the Parliaments and Members Rights, privileges, and
persons from all Force and violence whatsoever, in such manner as both Houses
and the Committee of both Kingdoms should approve, cannot pretend the least
shadow of reason or authority from the Law of God or man, thus traitorously to
seized, imprison and seclude us, without the Houses license, before any
particular charge against us; it being a far more detestable and inexcusable
Treason and Rebellion, then Exact Collection, p. 18, 200, etc.

A Collection, p. 705.


Jermins or Percies attempt to bring up the Northern Army to over awe the
Houses, or the Exact Collection, p. 35. to 40. 48, to 57, 215, to 232, etc,
Kings coming to the Commons House to demand the five Members, only (formerly
impeached of High Treason,) without seizing or secluding them the Hause or any
other Members; or A collection, p. 201, etc.
Wallers, Tompkins and Chaloners Treason, to seize several Members of both
Houses, and bring them to a legal Trial, as they pretended, and to awe and
master the Parliament ( for which they were cond^mned and executed as Traitors,
though never actually attempted:) or the Reformadoes or Apprentices unarmed
violence for a few hours, without seizing or secluding any Member; which yet
the The Generals Letters from Bedford, July 30, 1, 647. and his and the Armies
Remon^^rance. August, 18. ^c 4.
General, Officers, and Army in their Remonstrances, Letters, and papers,
declared to be Treasonable, and pressed for speedy and exemplary Justice
against the chief Actors and Abettors of it, to prevent the like attempts and
force for the future.

But what is the true and only ground of all this outcry? Surely the General
Conncell of the O^ffi^rs of the Army in their Answer of Ian. 3, 1648. Page 7,
8. 9, 10. ingenuvsly conf^ss; (...) it was no^hin^, but our vote upon the long
nights debate, on the fisth of December last; That the Answers of the King to
the Propositions of both Houses were a ground for the House to proceed upon for
the set^lement of the peace of the Kingdom; being the largest, the safest, and
benefioiallest ever yet granted by any King to his Subjects since the Creation:
and that we resolved to settle a speedy and well grounded peace, upon most
honorable and secure terms for the Kingdoms public interest and felicity,
not our own particular advantages, after seven years bloody expensive wars;
and refused to follow the p^rnicious treasonable Jesuitical advice of these
Enemies of peace, ( who intend to make a lasting trade of war) in breaking off
the Treaty with the King, upon the first tender of their Treasonable
Remonstrance, N^vemb. 20. (some few days before the Treaty expired) contrary
to our public Engagement both to the King and Kingdom: and would not directly
contrary to our Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, our See Exact c^llect ^ons:
And a Coll^^c^cti^on of al orders, etc. passim, And the At (...),
Solemn Protestation, League and Covenant, our multiplied Remonstrances,
Declarations', Petitions, Propositions, and Engagements to the King, Kingdom,
People, Scotland, Ireland; all foreign Protestant States and the World,
immediately imprison, arraigne, condemn, depose and execute the King;
dis-inherit and banish the Prince, and Royal line as Traitors, dispose of all
the Crown revenues toward their arrears; dissolve the present Parliament
forthwith, subvert all future Parliaments, and the ancient Government of the
Kingdom by King, Lords, Knights, Citizens and Burgesses duly elected, and
alter all the fundamental Laws and Statutes of the Realm, set up a new
Utopian Representative, and supreme Anarchicall Tyranny of the people, to
destroy both ^ Magistracy, Ministry, Government, Peace, Religion and Liberty
at once; betray bleeding, dying Ireland ( then near its ruin) to the bloody,
Popish, Irish Rebels; and bring speedy inevitable destruction on our three
Kingdoms, and those respective Counties, Cities and Buroughs for which we
serve; the only contradictory ways to peace and settlement, which they
prescribed in their long-winded Remonstrance, and the only The humble Answer,
etc. Ian. 3, 1648. p. 2.
good intentions ( though the worst that ever entered into the hearts of Saints)
to justify their unparalleld force upon our persons, and our false
imprisonment ever since, which they confess in it self to be irregular and not
Justifiable.

1 do^ therefore here in my own behalf (there being nothing case that can be
objected against me but this Speech and vote, which was carried clearly in the
House without any Division at all, and by 140. voices to 104. that the question
should be then put, (though I be not obliged to render any account or reason
of anything I spoke or voted in the House to any mortals but the House alone)
appeal to the great and righteous judge of Heaven and Earth, (to whom the Army
and Officers have so often appealed in this cause) to the Borough of New-port in
Cornwall, and all the free Burgesses in it, (who without any privity or desire
elected me for their Trustee and Burgess) to all the Counties, Cities,
Buroughs, and Freemen of England and Wales, to the united Kingdoms of
Scotland and Ireland, to all the Protestant Churches, Kingdoms and States in
foreign parts, yea to the Judgments and Consciences of the General,
Officers and Soldiers of the Army, and to all the rest of the world who shall
peruse this Speech, and the Reasons inducing me cordially to consent to the
former Vote, and dissent from the Armies Remonstrance; whether I, and the rest
of the secured or secluded Members, whom they so often term, THE CORRVPT MAIORITY
OF THE HOUSE; or the GARBLED MINORITY who dissented from us and the General,
and General Council of Officers in the Army, be the greatest Apostates and
Renegadoes from our public trust and duties; the greatest Betrayers and
Renowncers of the Law and doctrine of the peoples Liberties and Freedom; the
greatest boils and plague-sores of the Kingdom; the greatest madmen struck
with a Pestilentiall Phrensy, the greatest self-seekers of our own particular
corrupt interests, the reallest re-imbroylers of this miserable wasted Nation
in war, blood, oppression and Tyranny. And whether we or they be most guilty
all those Calumnies and Censures they have thus rashly and censoriously
published and cast upon us, before any proof, hearing, or conviction of us, to
wound us, and render us odious to the present and all future ages? And whether
our d^ryed Vote, The humole Answer, p. 9.
till the passing whereof, they affirm, they said or acted nothing in relation
to the Parliament, or any Member of it, (as if their Remonstrance of Nov. 20.
their High Declaration full of Menaest against the dissenting numbers, November.
30. their removing the Houses former guards, and marching up to London against
the Houses command, December. 1. to overawe the Members in their debate before
the Vote passed, were nothing to the House or any Member) or their undutifull
Remonstrance, November. 20. be the more honorable, safe, just, conscientious,
speedy and certain way to settle a firm and lasting Peace in all three
Kingdoms, with most security and advantage to the Kingdoms, and all honest
men's public interest, both for the present, and all succeeding Generations?

And if upon the serious perusal and consideration of the entire Treaty, and
of this my ensuing Speech, comprehending the principal graunds and reasons of
that Vote (though much more was spoken by many worthy and more able Members in
that most solemn debate, which I leave to them to publish if they please,) the
Borough for which I serve, and all others to whom I have here appealed, shall
give up their verdict for me, and the other secured and secluded Members, that
I and they have herein faithfully discharged our Trusts and duties to God and
Man, to the King, Kingdoms, Church, people, and Army too, (as we have sincerely
done it to our own consciences, in the uprightness of our hearts and
spirits;) we shall then hope, that all these 2 Per. 2. 11. Jude. 9.
railing accusations against us, [and their violence offered to our persons and
priviledges] will vanish into smoke, and return upon their own pates with
highest infamy and dishon^ur, as being most really guilty themselves of all
these false Calumnies against us and that we shall appear spotless and
innocent from these great pretended transgressions both before God and Men.
Howsoever, seeing our own consciences pronounce us innocent, we shall cheer
up our hearts with this sacred Cordial, Matthew. 5. 10, 11, 13. Blessed shall
you be when men revile you Luke 6 22.
AND SEPARATE YOU FROM THEIR COMPANY, and say all manner of evil against you
falsely for my name sake; rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your
reward in Heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you:
till God in his own due time and way Psalm. 37. 6.
shall bring forth our righteousness as the light, and our judgment as the
noon day, in this present world, or acquit us of them at his own tribunal in
the world to come, at the great day of judgment, when the secrets of all
learis shall be revealed, and every man condemned or absolved before the
Angels, and all mankind by Christ himself I Per: 1. 17. Rev. 20. 13.
according to his works, not good or evil intentions, or Hypocritical
pretentions, which may delude the world for a time, but never God nor Christ
Heba 4.13.
before whose all-seeing eyes, all things are bare and unridged, appearing in
their proper colors.

In the mean time, Christian Reader, I submit this plaine-dealing Rude speech
to thine impartial censure, by which I desire to be acquitted or condemned,
justified or impeached of the good or evil of the forementioned Vote (the only
crime I am guilty of) against all these calumnies and the Armies violence to my
person: who have only two pleas to justify their treasonable violence upon the
secured and secluded Members, which I shall here briefly examine.

The first is The humble answer, p. 2.
their honest intentions of public good.

To which I answer, First, that no pious nor ^onest intentions can justify or
excuse any irregular actions, though neither scandalous nor prejudicial unto
men, but seemingly pious and devout, as is clear by the examples of the 1 Samuel
6, 14. 15. 19. 20.
Bethsheemites, 1 Samuel 15. 13. 14. etc. c. 13. 68 to 15.
Vzza, 1 Chronicles. 13 9. 10.
Saul and Matthew, 6. 7. c. 15. 9.
others, much less can they excuse or justify any treasonable, scandalous and
flagitious acts of violence and oppression (as yours are both against the King
and Members) against your Oaths, Trusts, Covenants, which are moral sins and
evils against many Romans 13. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 2. 3 Tit. 3. 1. 1 Tit. 2. 13, 14, 15.
Genesis 6. 11, 12. Psalm. 11. 15. Psalm. 55. 9. Isay 59. 6. Romans 1. 29, 30, 31. 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4.
express Scriptures and that very devine charge to Soldiers Luke 3. 14. Do
violence to no man, etc. 2 That Christians must in no case do evil that good
may come of it: Rom 3. 8. their damnation being just that do it, Therefore not
so great an evil, so many complicated evils as you now act upon any intents of
public good. Thirdly, Christians 1 These. 5. 22. 1 Cor. 8. 21. Romans 12. 17.
must abstain from all appearance of evil: provide things honest in the fight
of all men; and Mat. 18. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 10. 32. Rom 4. 20. 2 Cor. 6. 3. 1 Cor.
8. 13. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 11. c. 3. 12.
give no offense to the Gentiles, Churches of Christ, or any others whatsoever,
to the scandal of Religion, under pain of severe condemnation. Therefore no
pretenses of honest intentions for public good can justify, or extenuate your
present irregular and most scandalous actions, which offend all sorts of
conscientious, moral and carnal men, and the worst of Turk^ and beathens will
condemn.

4. Your pretended honest intentions for public good are nothing ilse but the
most. Treasonable destructive designs and irreligious Projects against all
public good, peace and settlement, that ever entered into the Hearts of
Christians, expressed at large in your Remonsteance and Declaration of Nov. 20.
and 30. to which you refer; as, the disposing and murdering the King etc.
the^evils and wickedness whereof I have here and elsewhere demonstrated at
large; and to justify your horrid force on us, by such detestable intentions,
is the very hight of wickedness and atheism; which highly aggravates not
extenuates your violence and crimes.

5. If intentions or pre^entions of public good, may be pleaded to justify
this force of yours, the gunpowder Traitors, Jermin, Percy, the Apprentices,
Challoner, Jack Cade, Jack Straw, all Rebels, and Cavaliers, who all pleaded
their honest intentions of public good: yea, every Idolater under Heaven who
worshippeth any Idol or Devil with a religious and pious intention, as the
true and only God, and those bloody persecutors, John 16. 2. who thought they
did God service in killing the Apostles and Saints of CHRIST, shall by this new
Army Divinity, justify their Idolatry and persecution to be no sin nor
crime at all: For shame then let not such an absurd irreligious and wicked
excuse and justification as this^ be ever henceforth named nor owned among
Saints, which very Pagans would blush to ^vow.

The second and chief excuse and justification, is, an An humble answer p. 2.
etc.
extraordinary necessity for public good leading them thereunto: This they
endeavor to manifest by sundry particulars: which as they are apparently false
and scandalous is themselves, over tedious to re^u^e, and waved by them in
their ^ixt head of necessity, reducing all the grounds of our seizure and
sequestration from the House to our vote of December. 5. So it is but a mere
false pretense, and no justification at all if true.

But to take away this ple^ of necessity altogether, it stands but upon these
two general feet. First, that the Members secured, and secluded, were a
corrupt Majority of the House, Secondly, That if they had not thus secured and
secluded them, they would have proceeded to the settlement of a speedy peace
with the King in pursuance of this their Vote: Ergo the Army were
extraordinarily necessitated to secure and seclude them. This is the Logic of
the whole answer, all surmises concerning forepast miscariages in the House,
and packing of New Elections [in which themselves and their own party are most
peccant, few of their Elections being due or fair, and diverse of them voted
void, as Mr. Fryes, Blagraves, and others who now sit and vote] and all
miscariages concerning Irel. which are false, [specified only without verity or
proof against any of us] relating nothing at all to our present seclusion of
which they confess the vote of December. 5. to be the only impulsive cause. The
plain English of the first ground of their Necessity is this. The Majority of
the House of Commons [which in all debates is and always has been the house]
over-voted the Minority or lesser part. Ergo there is a necessity, that the
Army should s^^lude them, that so the smaller Number might sit alone without
them and vote what they please, [as now they doe] and null and repeal what ever
the Major part had voted repugnant to the Armies designs.

This new Utopian necessity [never heard of nor pretended in the world till
now] ought to be eternally exploded, as the horriddest distructive Monster to
Government, and States, ever yet produced in the world, as I shall clear by
these particulars.

FIRST, It utterly subverts, the undoubted rights, privileges, and
constitutions of all Parliaments or Counsels whatsoever. from the beginning of
the world till now, whether civil, military, or Ecclesiastical, wherein the
Majority of voices upon the question, ever carries the Vote, and is still
reputed the act of the whole Council or Parliament^ adly, It overthrowes the
legal form and proceedings in all popular Elections of Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses, Mayors, Bailiffs, Coroners, Verderers, Wardens of Companies,
Common-Councell-men and all others, ever carried and determined by the
plurality of voices, of those who have right to elect. 3dly, It overturnes
their New Babble, to wit the Agreement of the people, and new Representative, in
which themselves resolve, the Majority of the Electors ought to choose their new
Representatives, and the Votes of the Major part of them who meet, ought to
bind all the rest, and not the minor part to seclude or sway the rest. 4thly,
It will soon dissolve their new erected strange general Council of the
Officers of the Army, where all matters are yet concluded by plurality of
voices, where if the major part should vote against the Kings traiterous
beheading, or the agreement of the people, the Levellers, being the lesser
part, upon this pretended n^oessity, that they are a corrupt Majority, may
forthwith forcibly soize on and secure them, and make themselves the only
General Council though the fewest, and act what they please, when the others
are secluded. 5ly, It subverts all rules of Judicature and Justice in all Courts
of. Justice, where there are more Judges and Justices then one, where the
majority of voices (as likewise at Commitees) overruled the minority: who upon
the pretense of necessity, and being a corrupt majority, may be kept forcibly
from or pulled off the Bench, by any persons who suspect they will incline or
give judgment against them, in any cause depending before them. 6ly, It lays a
foundation for all the Tyranny, villainy and oppression that can be imagined,
which the Levellers begin in some places to pursue, and the Army too. For
example. The King (say they) if he and monarchy continue, will in time grow too
strong for the people. Ergo there is a necessity we should pull down monarchy
and him now, and have no more Kings to rule over us. The house of Lords will be
too potent for the Commons and have a negative voice to cross what they shall
Vote. Ergo we are now necessitated whiles we have power in our hands, to pull
down the house of Lords and lay their honor in the Dust. The City of London
was too powerful, rich and wealthy for the Country and us heretofore, and
kept down Sectaries from public Offices, Ergo whiles we have the power in our
hands, we must break down all their out works, divide and lay aside all their
Militia, empty their bags, pull down their pride, throw out their old
Officers, put in new ones of our own faction, take away their Liberties and
freedom of Elections contrary to their Charters, and sundry Acts of
Parliament, dispense with Common-councel-mens Oaths; and so inslave the City
to our vassalage. This is their present practice. The Land-lord^ and Rich men
in the Country are too potent for their Tenant^, and the poor, Ergo we must by
force of Arms out of extraordinary necessity, now abate the Tenants Rents,
alter their Tenures and Customs, share their Lands and wealth amongst our
selves and the poor: and if any poor man by forging an Act of Parliament or
otherwise, pretend a Title to any rich man's Lands, turn the rich man out of
possession, and put the poor into it: as some Levellers and Soldiers have
lately done in Essex in the case between Sir Adam Littleton and one Pointz:
against all rules of righteousnesse^ Law and conscience, Such a Monster is this
plea of necessity for public good, already grown unto through the Armies
power, and how soon it will proceed to draw the blood of many gallant
Gentlemen, Lords, and Members now secluded (for fear they should prove the
stronger as well as the major number, and therefore must lose their heads to
prevent al future dangers and revenge) God only knows.

The second ground for the necessity of our seizure and seclusion is this: that
the pretended corrupt majority of the House would have closed with the King,
and settled the Kingdoms peace before this time had they not been secured. Erg^
the Officers and Army were necessitated to secure them as Apostates from, and
infringers of their trusts.

I answer: This is very ill Logic, and worse Divinity. For first, is not the
2. Sam. 10. 19. Deur. 20. 10. 1 Kings 22. 41.
end of all just wars whatsoever, naught else but peace? 2. Is it not Gods
command and every Saints and Christians duty Psalm. 122. 6. 8. Ier. 29. 7.
to pray for peace? Heb. 12. 14.
to follow peace with all men^ to Psalm. 4. 14. Ier. 29. 7. 1. Pet. 3. 11.
seek peace and pursue it? to 1 These. 4. 11. Cor. 10. 36.
study to be quiet and live in peace? to Romans 12. 18. 1. Tim. 22.
live peaceably with all men, as much as in us ^yeth? And is not our God a God
Romans 15. 33. 2 Cor. 13. 11. 1. Per. 4. 9. 1. These. 5. 16.
of Peace? our Savior Jesus Christ I say 9. 6, 7. Heb. 13. 20.
the Prince of peace? the holy Ghost Gal. 5. 22. Ephesians. 4. 3.
a Spirit of Peace? the Gaspell it self Rom^ 10. 15. Ephesians. 5. 16.
a Gospel of peace? and can, or dare^ any Saints then pretend a necessity to
levy war even against the Parliament and Members themselves (which is high
Treason) only upon this pretended necessity, that they desire and endeavor to
settle peace in our Kingdom?

Thirdly, Is not peace the greatest Earthly blessing that God can bestow upon
us? and Lev. 26. 6. Numb. 5. 26. 2 Kings 4. 20. 19. Psalm. 128. 6. Psalm. 147. 4.
I say 26. 12. Ier. 14. 13.
has promised out of his love to give us as a most SIGNAL favor? is it not
the thing we have all paid for, fasted for, fought for, paid for, longed for
and earnestly desirid for many years? do not all Counties, Cities, Villages,
Families, yea every sort [except those who make a trade of War to enrich
themselves by the Kingdoms ruines] but more especially distressed Ireland, cry
all out unto us with one unanimous cordial and continual clamar, Peace,
Peace, for the Lords sake, No more Wars, no more blood shed, no more
plundering, no more free quarter, no more taxes, but Peace, Peace, or else we
perish? And if so, the generality of the people and Kingdom, being by the
Armies principles, the original and fountain of all just power, there is an
absolute necessity lies upon us, who are their trustees to make and setlle.
Peace, but no necessity for the army to hinder or secure us from effecting it,
yes a necessity for them to assist us in it, and release us to accomplish it,
which by Gods blessing we had done ere this.

Object All that they can object, is; That we would have made an unsafe and
dishonorable peace with the King, upon his own terms, to the peoples
prejudice and enstaving.

Answ. To which I answer: 1. It is the foulest, falsest, and most malicious
scandal that ever man could invent, which the ensuing Speech will abundantly
refute, to the shame of those who dare to aver it in print. 2. Admit it true:
yet an unjust and unequal peace, is better, safer, and more honorable for us,
(now we are quite exhausted, and can manage war no longer, and Ireland so
near its ruin) then the justest War; which ought not to be undertaken at
first without absolute necessity, and nes to continue one hour longer then
that necessity endures, especially if it be a Civil War between those of the
same Nation, blood, Religion; or a defensive War, as our War is, who have
now no armed Enemies to encounter; and so there can be no pretense of necessity
to continue a War, or so great a recruited Army, unless it be to enslave us
to martial Law and Tyranny, in stead of peace and Liberty. 3. Neither God, nor
the Kingdom, nor Majority of the people, ever made the Army Judges of the
goodness or badnesse of the intended peace, but the Parliament only; the
only proper Judges likewise of the necessity of peace or War: And therefore
for them thus forcibly to wrest this Iudicatory out of the Houses bands,
without a lawful calling to it, and to imprison those who are Judges of it, is
neither Luke 12. 13, 14. 1 Per. 4. 15. These. 4, 11. 2 These. 3. 11. Heb. 5. 4.
Christian, nor warrantable, but the highest insolency and Rebellion ever
offered to any Parliament in any age: And upon this account, every Soldier who
has a cause depending in Parliament, or in any Court of Justice, may by as
good Justice and reason pull all the Members out of the Houses, and Judges from
the Benches, that would not give Judgment for him, be his cause never so
unjust, and make himself, or the General Council of the Army his only
Judges, who may proceed to Judgment on his side, before any hearing or
appearance before them by his adversary, in such sort as they have proceeded
against us.

But admit there were an extraordinary necessity for public good, as is
pretended; yet to make necessity a plea for to justify any m^rall sin or
evil, is monstrous in an Army of Saints. Tertul. Apologia.
Nulla est necessitas delinquendi quibus una est necessitas non delinquendi,
was the Primitive Christians Maxim; who chose rather to die the cruellest
deaths, then commit the smallest sin: Had Hugh Peter's, John Goodwin, and
these Army-Counsellors lived in our Saviors days, they could have taught St.
Peter how to Matthew. 26. etc.
have denied his Lord and Master thrice together with Oaths and curses, (as
the Army have denied and imprisoned their Lords and Masters, and cast them into
bell, with Oaths and curses too;) and to have justified it, in stead of going
forth and weeping bitterly for it, as he did: because be did it only out of
necessity, to save his life when he was in danger. If these Army-Saints had
lived in Julian the Apostate's days, they could have instructed his Soldiers
how to have sacrificed to his] Idols, by throwing but a branch into the Fire,
out of necessity to sare many precious Soldiers lives, rather then to be
mariyred for refusing it: And had Catesby, Faux, Winter, and Piercy wanted an
advocate or Ghostly father to encourage them to blow up the Parliament House,
King, Nobles and Commons at once, and justify it when they had done it; the
General officers, and Council of this Army, and their two ^ore-named
Chaplains, (had they been called to that Confederacy at they are to this) would
have justified not only the contriving but the effecting of it, with their
plea of extraordinary necessity for the public good: there being no
difference between the Armies proceedings and theirs; but, that they would have
blonn up the King, Lords and Parliament with Gunpowder; and the Army has now
pulled and battered them down with Gunpowder and arms violence; and what they
did only attempt modestly and covertly in a Vault, (for which they were
condemned and executed as Traitors; though they had no Engagements on them to
protect the Parliament;) the Army has done impudently, in attempting and
affecting it in the open view of all the World: against their trusts, duties,
covenants. And whereas some of them repented and were sorry for it, these
Saints do not only not repent of it but persevere in and justify this
Treason in print, Therefore those very powder-Traytors shall condemn them, as
being more modest and less sinful then they, who have so many obligations and
Vows upon them not to do it, but detest it.

2. This plea of necessity for public good, is the very Justification and
Foundation of Joan Mariana: de Rege et Regum Instit. l. 1. c. 5. 6. 7. 8.
Bellarmin. De pontif. Romans 8. 5. 1. 6. 78. Ludovicus Richehom Apol. pro
societate Jesus. Franciscus de Verona. Apol. pro Ioanne Castle. Aphorismi
Doctrinae Iesuitarum.
the Jesuits treacherous practices to murder, stab, poison all Christian
Kings and Princes whom they deem heretical or obstructive to their designs;
to equivocate, lie, dissemble subvert whole Kingdoms, blow up Parliaments, and
act any kind of villainies. If you interrogate them, why they do it? or what
arguments they use to engage others in that service? they will inform you; That
necessity of public good, and honest intentions to promote the Catholic cause
and Popes authority, are the only grounds and warrant for such irregular and
extraordinary proceedings. And for the General Council of the Officers to
take up this very Jesuits plea, as the only argument to justify their last
Jesuitical force and powder plot upon the Houses; is an infallible argument
unto me, that they are swayed and steered by Jesuits in all their late
Councels and proceedings.

3. This plea of necessity, if admitted, will be a perpetual president from
the Armies practice and rebellion, to justify and encourage all kind of
factious and discontented people in all suture ages, be they Papists,
Malignants, Neuters, Jack Cades v^lgar Rabble, or Royalists and Cavaliers, when
ever they have sufficient power in their hands, to seize upon, or secure and
exclude any Members in all succeeding Parliaments, who vote not what they
please, as a corrupt Majority, who have betrayed their Trusts; since an Army of
Saints, specially raised, waged by both Houses to defend and protect them from
any violence, and engaged by a solemn League and covenant to preserve them
from it; have publicly justified it upon these grounds to the Members now
sitting, and to all the world, and their Chaplain John Goodwin The Tit. Page,.
in his Right and Might well- (he should have then said ill-) met, vindicates
THE EQVITY and REGVLARNES of the ARMIES PROCEEDINGS against us, VPONVNDENIABLE
PRINCIPLES, (as ^e styles them) as well of REASON AS RELIGION, (o monstrous
Divinity worthy to be burnt by the hands of the Hangman) which will totally
subvert the privileges, freedom, honor and power of Parliaments in all times
to come, if not vindicated by some exemplary Act of justice, and a professed
law and declaration against such insolences, as in the Exa^^ Collect. p. 31,
to 48.
five Members cases. And so much the rather because the Members now sitting
under the Armies force, on Thursday the 11. of January, 1648. passed this
stupendous Vote, destructive to the privileges, freedom, honor, safety and
being of the present and all future Parliaments and most injurious and
scandalous to the secured and secluded Members, prejudged and condemned both by
them and the Army, without ever being heard, or any proofs or witnesses
produced, to make good any general or particular charge against all or any of
them; which vote we must totally disclaim, and publicly protest against, as
the most dishonorable that ever passed within the Houses Walls, being repugnant
to the Protestation of both Houses, the solemn League and Covenant and many
Declarations of the House, inviolably to maintain the Rights, Privileges, and
freedom of Parliament; and the highest breach of Privilege ever offered by
Members to their Fellow Members since there were Parliaments in the world. The
Vote is this, That THE HOUSE DOES APPROVE OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE ANSWER of the
General Council of Officers of the Army, to the demand of this House,
touching the SECURING and SECLUDING SOME (to wit, above 200 besides those
frighted thence, being half as many more) MEMBERS THEREOF; And appointing a
Committee of 24, (whereof most are new elected Members and Mr. Fry, whose
election is voted void) or any five of them, to consider what is fit further to
be done upon the said answer of the General Council of the Officers of the
Army, and present the same TO THIS HOUSE; and the Committee to meet this
afternoon in the Exchequer Chamber. The injustice of this vote (beside the
breach of Privilege) will appear by these particulars.

First, in justifying the most horrid and treasonable force of these Officers
of the Army that ever was offered to any Parliament or Members in any age
contrary to the express Statute of Rastal Armor. 1.
7 E. 1. which the Houses heretofore so deeply resented that they often declared
against it in case of the King, who did only come and demand but Exact.
Collect. p. 34 to 4g. etc.
five Members, A Colcon-lect. p. 201:
but feixed neither of them; and Impeached Jermin and Piercy of High Treason,
only for tampering to bring up the Northern Army; And executed Chaloner and
Tomkins for Traitors for conspiring to force the Houses, and seize some Members
under a pretext to bring them to justice.

Yea, the Parliament in 4 E. 3. n. 1. among other charges, condemned and
executed Roger Mortimer, as a Traitor and Enemy to the King and Kingdom, for
offering violence to some few Members of Parliament sitting at Salisbury; and
forcing others thence. And the Parliament of 21 R. 2. cap. 12. condemned the
Earls of Arundel and Warwick, and Duke of Gloucester as Traitors for forcing
the King and Parliament, by a power of armed men arrayed in warlike manner, to
consent to Bile against their wills; and to adjudg some of the Kings liege
people therein, (much more them, if the King himself, as now) to death and to
forfeit their Lands and Goods: in the Parliament of 11 R. 2. Tea the Parliament
of 1. H. 4. ^. 21. 22. articled against Richard the second, that he held the
Parliament of 21. R. 2. Viris armatis and sagittariis immensis, and kept an
extraordinary Guard of armed men brought out of Cheshire, (who forced, abused,
and took free quarter on the people) the better to over-aw the Parliament, and
take away the lives of some Noblemen. And the Parliament of 31 H. 6. cap. 1.
adjudged and declared Jack Cade, to be a most horrible, odious, and errant
false TRAITOR, for forcing the King and Parliament held at Westminster, in 29
H. 6. to grant some Petitions, and stirring an Insurrection, and Rebellion
UNDER COLOR OF JUSTICE FOR REF ORMATION OF THE LAWS; And proceeding upon the
same grounds in such manner as the Officers and Army now do; and made void, an
nulled all judgments and proceeding whatsoever made under the power of his
Tyranny; Which the Officers and Army have far exceeded; in seizing,
imprisoning and securing so many Members; (and having the King himself to an
illegal trial for his life) which Jack Cade, and his Levellers and Reformers
never did. And therefore for them to approve this Act and Answer of theirs,
against so many Presidents, declaring it high Treason, must be an unexpiable
offense.

Secondly, In prejudging, scandalizing, and condemning above two hundred
Members at once, without any proof, evidence, or hearing; when as they ought in
Justice to have been heard, and some particular impeachment against them by
name, before thus censured.

Thirdly, In approving the many false calumnies. laid and suggested against
them only in the Condemned by the Houses in the King. Exact Collect. p. 10^
20.^ 3.
general; the falsity whereof is well known to themselves and the world, and
tacitly confessed by the release of above twenty of them by the General and
Officers, without any cause assigned for their restraint or particular charge
against them; they confessing some of their restraints to be injurious and
mistakes.

Fourthly, In being Judges in their own cases, and accusers and witnesses too
against the secluded Members; sundry Members of the Commons House, being both
Members of the General Council and Army (contrary to the A Collection p. 634.
self-denying Ordinance) as Cromwell, Skippon, Ireton, Harrison, Ingoldesby,
Sir William Constable, Henry Martin, etc. and sitting and acting in both;
hammering all things they design in the General Council first, (as the
Agreement of the people, and the like) and then presenting them to pass for
current in the House, and penning their Declarations, Remonstrances, etc.
against the Privileges and Members of the House; A thing never practiced by
any Members till these: who make the Council in the Army the principal engine
to carry on all their projects in the House. From which intolerable abuse all
the late distempers of the Army, and mutinies against the Houses have for the
most part proceeded.

Fifthly, In that they being but between 40 and 60 Members only, have presumed
by this vote and a Declaration of Ian. 15. to censure above 200; and to consent
to their long restraint and seclusion, in stead of righting and releasing them;
and impeaching or committing the chief Authors of and actions in their securing
and secluding, and bringing them to speedy Justice according to their Covenant
and Exact Collect. p. 34. to 46. 156; 162. 201. 206.
Declarations against seizing any Members.

Sixthly, In presuming to pass such a Vote as this, whiles under a visible
armed force; when as this House adjourned and refused to sit upon the Kings
demand of the five Members, till they were righted. And Mr. Speaker, and most
of the Members now sitting, deserted and fled away from the House, upon a far
smaller force then this; even after the force was ever, refusing to sit till
the Houses were restored to a condition of honor, freedom and safety; and
declared all Votes, Ordinances, Orders and proceedings merely null and void,
during their absence; though not made under any such apparent force as is now
upon the House, and when there were at least twice as many Members sitting as
now, and not one secured nor secluded from coming freely to it without fear.

Seventhly, In justifying these two Jesuitical and destructive grounds and
pretenses of this violence upon the House and Members of honest public
intentions, and necessity for public ends, which I have proved so absurd,
impious and dangerous in sundry respects, and such as by any armed Party
whatsoever may be made use of upon all occasions to force and destroy all
future Parliaments.

Upon all which considerations, I shall now take out the Solemn League and
Covenant, these Members of the House, and Officers of the Army have so solemnly
taken and made to God, with hands lifted up to heaven, and most apparently
violated in this and other particulars of late; and (in case they proceed still
obstinately in these violent and perfidious ways) shall use the same words as
Knols Twkish history, p. 297. 298.
Amurath the second (sixth King of the Turks) once uttered in the great battle
of Varna, when Uladislaus King of Hungary broke the truce he had made, sealed
and sworn to him in the name of Christ, and gave him battle and was like to
rout him; Upon which occasion and extreme danger, Amurath beholding the picture
of the Crucifix in the displayed Ensigns of the Christians, plukt the Writing
out of his ^osome, wherein the late League was comprised; and holding it up in
his hand, with his eyes cast up to heaven, said. Behold thou crucified Christ,
this is the League thy Christians, in thy name, made with me, which they have
without any cause violated. Now if thou be a God, as they say thou art, and as
we dream', REVENGE THE WRONG NOW DONE UNTO THY NAME and ME, and SHOW THY POWER
UPON THY PERJURIOUS PEOPLE, WHO IN THEIR DEEDS DENY THEE THEIR GOD. Upon the
uttering of which words, the Battle presently turned, the perjured King
Uladislaus, Cardinal Julian, and many other Bishops and others, (the principal
Authors of this scandalous and detestable perjury and breach of Covenant) were
slain; with many thousand common Soldiers, and the whole Army routed and
sattered. The like exemplary punishment or divine Vengeance these perfidious
Rom, ^. 3^.
Covenant-breakers cannot but expect will speedily befall them, (now they have
the fervent prayers of most godly Ministers and people against them, as they
had formerly for them) unless they seriously repent, reform, and retract all
their late perjurious, scandalous actings and proceedings against their
multiplied Oaths, Protestations, Covenants, Votes, Remonstrances, Declarations,
Promises, Engagements, and Public Faith both to God and men, at which
conscientious Christians and profane persons every where stand amazed, and I
hold my self in duty and conscience obliged. to Levi^^ 19, 17^1 Timothy 1. 20. T^^
1. 13.
reprove them for it in public, that they may be ashamed, and brought the
sooner to reform their detestable exorbitances in this kind; to the Kingdoms,
Parliaments, Kings, Armies ruin, and their own.

Before I conclude, Object
I shall answer only two Scripture-Texts, Right and Might, p. 20. 21.
produced by John Godwin, and others, to justifi the force upon us. sThe first
is, David's eating of the Shewbread, which was lawful only for the Priests to
eat; which yet was lawful for him and his men to eat in case of necessity to
preserve life, there being no other bread, 1 Samuel 21. 4, 5, 6. Matthew. 12. 4.
And that to save the life of a man, ox, or beast fallen into a ditch; a man in
such a case of necessity may break the Sabbath, Luke 14. 4. Ergo, The Army in
case of necessity may lawfully imprison and seclude the Members. The sum of a
his Book.

I answer, Answ.
That the Argument is a mere inconsequent, if granted: I or, first, The eating
of Shewbread in it self was no moral evil; nor the saving of a Man's, ^x, or
Asses life, but a thing lawful and commendable: But the resisting of lawful
Authority contrary to Duty, Oath, Covenant, and offering unjust violence to the
persons of those whom the Army are obliged to protect, and have no authority by
the law of God or Man to seize or imprison; is a moral sin against the Fifth
Commandment, and many express Texts fore-quoted. Therefore the cases are no
ways parallel.

Secondly, The eating ^of Shewbread, in case of necessity to preserve life
only, is neither within the intention nor meaning of Exodus 25. 30. 31. as
Abimelech himself acknowledged to David in these words, The Bread IS IN A
MANNER COMMON, etc. 1 Samuel 21. 5. And our Savior himself seems to intimate,
Matthew. 12. 4. That the pulling out of an Ox or Ass on the Sabbath day, being
an extraordinary act of mercy and necessity too, was not within the intent of
the Fourth Commandment, though within the words. Whereas the violence done to
our persons and the Houses is both within the words and intention of the
forecited Texts.

Thirdly, These two necessities were present, absolute, certain, and that only
to save the life of a hungry or sick person; or of a perishing beast. But the
Officers and Armies lives were not now in any imminent danger of death for want
of bread; nor their Horses of Asses cast into a ditch by us: and the
imprisonment of our persons was neither to preserve their own, nor their horses
lives from present death; but to hinder us from preserving the lives of three
dying Kingdoms. Therefore these examples and Texts are very extravagant.

Fourthly, Though David and his Young Men did eat the Shewbread; yet it is
observable, that they did not take it away violently from the Priests, though
it were to save their lives, (as soldiers now take free quarter against men's
wills) nor offered any violence to Abimelech's person, nor put him by his
Priests Office, (as some Soldiers now forcibly enter into our Ministers
Pulpits, when there is no necessity:) But they staid, till they had his opinion
in point of conscience, whether they might take it, and till the Priest 1 Sa^^^
21. 6.
GAVE HIM THE HALLOWED BREAD: So as the Argument from hence must be; David and
his men, even in case of necessity to save their lives, would not take so much
as a loaf of bread, till the Priest voluntarily gave it them: Ergo, the
Officers and Army may lawfully take Free Quarter upon, and forcibly seclude and
imprison the Members of Parliament against their duties, Covenant, and their
consents. Is not this pretty Logic and Divinity from John Goodwin, who deems
himself the only complete Disputant and Divine in the Kingdom? Does not the
contrary directly follow from the Text: Ergo, they ought not to take
Free Quarter, nor offer the least violence to their persons without their
consents; according to John Baptists Doctrine to Soldiers, Luke 3. 14. Do
violence to no man.

Fifthly, The other Argument is as absurd. It is lawful to pull an Ox or an
Ass on the Sabbath day out of a ditch, to save their lives: Ergo, It is
lawful for the Officers and Army forcibly to imprison and seclude 200
Commoners out of the House, and keep a force upon the House; (yea, to send
armed Regiments of Morse upon the Sabbath day round about London streets and
the Country when there is no necessity) to destroy men's lives and liberties,
and three Kingdoms too.

Sixthly, Could Oxen and Asses fallen into a ditch speak, as well as men in a
ditch, they would call for help to draw them forth to preserve their lives. So
that this Act of Charity, (not Violence in pulling them out on the Sabbath day,
is with their full and free consents and desires. Then set the comparison
right, and the Argument thence must be this: A man on the Sabbath day) out of
mere charity and necessity may lawfully pull a Man, Ox, or Ass out of a deep
ditch at their requests and desire, (where as the Jew at Teukesbury perished in
the Iakes, out of which he would not be pulled on his Sabbath;) Ergo, the
Officers and Army may lawfully cast the Members of Parliament by force and
violence into Hell, prison and use them worse then any Ox or Ass, without and
against their consents and privileges. I hope 2 Pet. 2. 16.
Balaam's Ass with a man's voice, will rebuke the iniquity and madness of this
false Prophet, and absurd disputer; who is like to Ps.^. 3 2. 9.
David's Horse and Mule, without understanding, whose mouth must be held in
with bit and bridle, lest he fall upon us hereafter, in such foul scurrilous
language as he has done already, in his Might overcoming Right, which will
vanquish Might at last, in despite of all the Forces on Earth.

I have no more to add, but only this, That if holy David himself had now been
a Member of the Commons-house, or King of England, he had certainly been
seized, secured and secluded the House by the Officers of the Army, and
condemned by some sitting Members for this one Divine sentence of his, All
Pet^oners for Peace are now disabled to be, or elect Officers, by some late
votes since out seclusion. Mat. 26. 52.
Psalm 120. 6, 7. My soul has long dwelt with him that hates Peace: I am for
peace; but when I speak thereof, they are for War: This is my only crime, and
those secluded with me, That we passed a Vote for the settlement of Peace upon
the Treaty. But let me speak to these Members, Officers of the Army, and their
Chaplain Peter's, who are such Enemies to our Peace, (which had by Gods blessing
been firmly settled and secured before this, had not the Army thus violently
interrupted us, and put us upon Jesuitical dangerous new ways of new Wars and
certain ruin instead of peace) in the words of our Savior unto Peter, when he
drew his sword, and smote off the Highpriests servants ear: Put up thy sword
into the scabberd, for all they that take the Sword, shall perish by the Sword:
He that will causlesly lengthen out a War to the ruin of Kingdoms, when he
may have Peace upon safe, just, and honorable terms, shall be sure to perish by
the sword of War, or Justice upon earth; (The true meaning of that Text, Genesis
9. 6. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; more properly
applyable to Soldiers in the letter, who have slain men in the Wars, then to
the King himself, who never actually shed any man's blood; who is none of those
Heathen Kings within Hugh Peter's Text, Psalm 149. 7, 8. Whom the Army-Saints
have not only bound in These chains are only Metaphorical, the chains of Gods
Law and Word, (nor real) Ps. 2. 3. Is. 45. 14. Romans 20. 1, 2.
Chains, but intend to Execute, not with the two-edged sword of the word of God
according to the words of the sense of the Text, but with the A^ and Sword of
Justice, contrary to the Text, without and against all President, Law, and
Justice, to the eternal infamy of our Religion, which detest such Jesuitism:)
And shall never enjoy temporal, spiritual, or eternal peace in earth or
heaven, nor any blessing or protection from the God of Peace, who in his own
due time, i^ despite of all the Devils in hell, and Jesuits, Forces or Armies
upon Earth, will create peace for, and settle it amongst us to our own hearts
content: The speedy accomplishment whereof, as it always has been, so it ever
shall be the constant prayer and endeavor of

Thine and his Countries wel-wisher, and the Armies Captive, William Prynne.
From the sign of the King's Head, June 22. 1648.
Mr. PRYNNES LETTER To The Borough of NEWPORT in Cornwall, for which he serves
in PARLIAMENT.
GENTLEMEN,
BEING freely and unanimously elected by you (without my privity or seeking) to
serve as one of your Purgesies in this Parliament, I have since my entrance
into the Commons House (the 7th of Nevem. last)endeavored to the best of my
skill and judgment, faithfully to discharge that trust and duty you reposed in
me, (according to my Conscience) to put a speedy and happy period to our
unnatural long-lasting bloody Wars, and settle a firm well-grounded peace,
upon such terms of honor, freedom, safety, and advantage, as no Subjects under
Heaven ever yet enjoyed from the Creation till this present. What my
indefatigable endeavors were herein, in drawing up all the Bills upon the Kings
Concessions in thellate Treaty, is well known to most of the Members then
sitting, and what I delivered in the House upon the Debate of the Kings Answers
to our Propesitions upon the whole Treaty (with a sincere and public spirit,
aiming at nothing but yours and the whole Kingdoms felicity and prosperity, not
any private interest of mine own) I have sent you here in print, being falsely
charged by a new erected General Council of Officers of the Army (who have
traitorously usurped to themselves the supreme Authority of the Kingdom, and
against the known Privileges of Parlia. the Liberty of the Subjects, and the
Law of the Land forcibly seized on my self, and diverse other eminent Members
going to the House to discharge our duties, on the 6th. and 7th. of December.
last, in pursuance of the Treaty, and secluded me and them from sitting there
ever since, to yours and the whole kingdoms prejudice) among other secured
Members in the gross, for an Apostate from the public trust which you reposed
in me, only for this SPEECH, and the VOTE of the whole House; for the
settlement of the kingdom^ peace, made in pursuance of it; they having no
particular matter ^else to charge me with (had they any just power to impeach
or seclude-me, which they have not) but this alone. How perfidiously and
injuriously they have dealt with, and how scandalously they have traduced and
libelled against me, and the other restrained Members in print, upon this
occasion only, you may read in the Epistle to the Reader, though mine and the
other Members innocence be so perspicuous, that they confess, they have yet no
particular matters of impeachment against us, after above 7 weeks imprisonment,
but promise shortly to produce some [if they can:) whereas their own
Treasonable Rebellions, violences, perjuries, and crimes written with Sunbeams
in their very forcheads, are visible to all the world, and need no witnesses to
prove their guilt; their late unparalled exorbitances and proceedings both
against the King, Parliament, Lords, Members, City and Country being known and
apparent unto all I shall therefore appeal from these usurpers, (who have no
more Authority to question or restrain me, for any real or pretended breach of
my Trust, as a Member, were I guilty of it, then the meanest servant has to
call his Master to account for mis-governing his family or to shut him out of
doors:] unto you alone, who elected me, and are best able to know and judge of
your own Trust; desiring your speedy resolution of this question, Whether in
that herein spoken or voted by me, I have any ways violated the trust or faith
which you and every of you reposed in me? For which Speech and Vote, though I
am judicially accountable only to the Commons House, which knows the true
grounds upon which I went, and can only truly judge of what was there spoken
and voted (none being Si judicas, cognosc^. Scneca.
fit to judge any thing but those who know and hear it too) the majority of
which House concurred with me in the vote, without any division: yet, I hold my
self in some sort ministerially accomp^able unto you for whom I serve, as the
properest Judges, without the House doors, of what I spoke or voted in your
behalf. From whom I shall humbly request so much right and justice, upon the
perusal of the enclosed Speech and papers, (which I desire may be read openly
before all my Electors at your next public meeting) as to testify to the
world under your hands and seais (which you set to the return of my Election)
your own judgments and opinions, whether I have betrayed or broken the Trust you
reposed in me or not, by what I spoke or voted in this debate? and what sense
you have of the Armies forcible secluding and imprisoning me [your Burgesse]
from the House, among other Members, above seven weeks space together, contrary
to mine and your undoubted Privilege; how far you conceive your selves obliged
by ought that has been or shall be concluded, or voted in the House during the
Armies force upon it; and your Burgesses [and most other Members] violent
seclusion thence, against all Law and President, and what reparations you
expect for this high Injustice to your selves and me: With what else you-think
fit to determine touching the premises: And if you deem it necessary, to
return your results herein to me, with all convenient speed: who shall make
the best advantage thereof for yours, mine own and the kingdoms benefit: whose
peace by (Gods blessing) had been fully settled to your hearts content before
this time, had not the Enemies of Peace (who gain their livings by the Wars)
interrupted our proceedings, by imprisoning and s^^luding the greatest part of
the Members, and particularly

From the Kings Head in the Strand Ian. 26. 1648. Your most affectionate Friend
and faithful Servant and Burgess WILLIAM PRYNNE.

To his honored Friends the Vianders and free Burgesses of the Borough of
Newport in Cornwall, these present.
The substance of a Speech made in the House of Commons, by William Prynne of
Lincolns Inn Esquire, on Monday the 4th. of December. 1648. touching the Kings
Answers to the Propositions of both Houses upon the whole Treaty, whether they
were satisfactory or not satisfactory?
Mr. Speaker,
BEing called to be a Member of this House without my privity or seeking and
against my judgment (having formerly refused many places freely tendered to me)
by the unanimous election (without one dissenting voice) of that Borough for
which I serve, and by a divine providence entering within these doors in this
great conjuncture of the highest public affairs that ever came within these
walls, wherein the very life or death, the weal or ruin of this Kingdom, (if
not of Scotland and Ireland too) consist in our Ay or No, upon the question now
debating, I shall with the greater boldness, crave liberty to discharge my
conscience toward God, and duty to my dying country, which now lies at stake:
and so much the rather because [for ought I know]it may be the last time I
shall have freedom to speak my mind within this House.

That I may, in this great debate more sincerely speak my very heart and soul
without any prejudice, I shall humbly crave leave, briefly to remove two
seeming prejudices, which may (perchance) in some members opinions inervate the
strength of those reasons I shall humbly represent unto you, to make good my
conclusion touching the satisfactorinesse of the Kings answers to the Houses
Propositions.

The first, is that wherewith some Members have upon another occasion The^
first prejudicet
the last week, and now again tacitly aspersed me, That I am a Royal Favorite
[alluding to the title of one of my books, out of which some have collected an
abstract in nature of a charge against the King, and this day published it in
my name]and am now turned an Apostate to the Kings party and interest.

To which I shall return this short answer, [I hope without any The Answer
there^ unto.
vainglory or boasting, being thus provoked thereunto.] That I have opposed
and written against the King and his Prelates Arbitrary power and illegal
proccedings more then any man. That I have suffered from the King and Prelates
for this my opposition, more then any man. That if the King and Prelates be
ever restored to their pristine Arbitrary power and illegal prerogative, I
must expect to suffer from them as much, if not more then any man.

That all the Royal favor I ever yet received from his Majesty or his Party,
was the cutting off both my ears, two several times one after another, in a
most barbarous manner; the setting me upon three several pillories at
Westminster and in Cheapside, in a disgraceful manner, each time for two hours
space together: stigmatizing on both cheeks: the burning of my licenced books
before my face by the hand of the hangman: the imposing of two fines upon me of
50001.2 piece; expulsion out of the Innes of Court and University of Oxford,
and degradation in both, the loss of my calling almost nine years space, the
seizure of my Books and Estate, above eight years imprisonment in several
prisons, at least 4 of these years spent in close imprisoment and exile in
CARNARV AN in Northwales, and in the lsle of IERSEY, where I was debarred the
use of pen, ink, paper, and all books, almost but the Bible, with the least
access of any friend, without any allowance of diet for my support. And all
this for my good service to the State in opposing Popery and Regal Tyranny;
for all which sufferings and losses, I never yet received one farthing
recompense from the King or any other, though I have waited above 8 years, at
your doors for justice and reparations, and neglecting my own private calling
and affairs employed most of my time, studies, and expended many hundred pounds
out of my purse, since my enlargement, to maintain your cause against the King,
his Popish and Prelaticall party. For all which cost and labor, I never yet
demanded nor received one farthing from the Houses, nor the least office or
preferment whatsoever, though they have bestowed diverse places of honor upon
persons of less, or no desert nor did I ever yet receive so much as your
public thanks for any public service ^on you, (which every preacher usually
receives for every Sermon preached before you, and most others have received
for the meanest services) though I have brought you off with honor in the cases
of Cant. and Macg. when you were at a loss in both; and cleared the justness of
your cause when it was at the lowest ebb to most reformed Churches abroad, (who
received such Learned Giber^^s Voc^ius in his Letter to Mr Walter Strickland,
Agent fos the Parliament at the Hague Feb. 2 1644. writes thus of my Sovereign
Power of Parliaments etc. Accept nuperrime commodato adhoras aliquot librum
Guil, Prynne jam diu mi^i desideratum, and rations cum respensionibus tam
solid and^ru. dite pro Parliamentto (...) adversarios instructas atque
explicatas deprehendi, ut non videam quid ultra desiderari possit. Debebat
Tractaus ille Latin and Gallice extare, ut a Reformatis Theologi (...)
Politicis in Europa legi possit.
satisfaction fro my books, that they translated them into several languages,)
and engaged many thousands for you at home by my writings, who were formely
dubious and unsatisfied. Now if any Member or old Courtier whatsoever shall envy
my happiness for being such a royal or State favorite as this, I wish he may
receive no other badges of Royal favor from his Majesty, nor greater reward
or honor from the Houses then I have done; and then I believe he will no more
causlesly asperse or suspect me, for being now a Royal favorite, or Apostate
from the public cause.

True it is (which it behooves me now to touch) that about 4 years since I
published a Book, entitled, The Royal Popish Favorite; wherein [as likewise in
my Hidden works of Darkness brought to public light; published a year after
it] I did, with no little labor and expense, discover to the world, the
several plots and proceedings of the Jesuits, Papists, and their foreign and
domesticke confederates, to introduce and set up Popery throughout England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and how far they had inveagled the K. not only to
connive at, but to countenance and assist them in a great measure, more fully
and evidently then any else had done. And those worthy Members of this House
who drew up that Declaration whereupon they voted, No more Addresses to the
King, plowed but with my heyfer, borrowing all or most of their real materials
from my writings; A convincing evidence, that I am yet no more a Royal
favorite then themselves. Yet this I must add withal, to take off that
aspersion, of being an Apostate from my first principles, that I never
published those Books (as I then professed in them, and now again protest) to
scandalize or defame the King, or alienate the peoples affections from him,
much less to depose or lay him quite aside, though I am clear of opinion, that
Kings are accountable for their Actions to their Parliaments and whole
kingdoms, and in case of absolute necessity, where Religion, Laws, Liberties,
and their kingdoms will else be inevitably destroyed by their Tyrannical and
flagitious practices, be deposed by them, if there be no special oaths nor
obligations upon their consciences to the contrary, (which is our present
case:) much less did I it out of any malice or revenge for the injustice I
received from him in the executions done upon my person and estate, which I
have long since cordially forgiven, and do now again forgive him from my soul,
beseeching God to forgive him likewise: but merely to discover his former
errors in this kind unto himself, that he might seriously repent of them for
the present, and more carefully avoid, and detest them for time to come: and
that the Parliament and whole kingdom might more clearly discern the great
danger our Religion was in before we publicly discerned it, and the several
ways and stratagems by which Popery got such head and growth among us, that
they might thereby the better prevent the like plots and dangers for the future
by wholesome Laws and edicts, as I have more largely declared in the books
themselves.

This grand prejudice against me being thus removed, The second prejudice.
I proceed to the the second, to wit, that I am an enemy to the Army; and
therefore what I shall speak, may be interpreted to proceed only from
opposition against them, and their Remonstrance, The Answer to it.
concerning which I freely uttered my sudden thoughts immediately after its
reading in the House.

To this I answer, that I have always been a real friend, and welwisher to
this Army from their first modelling til now, in what ever they have acted in
their sphere, as Soldiers for the public safety. When they were first formed
into a body, the Committee of Accounts (whereof I was a Member) and those they
engaged, advanced about thirty thousand pounds of the fourscore thousand, to
set them out. Since that, I have freely contributed toward their pay, prayed
constantly for their good success, joined in all public thanksgivings for the
Victories obtained by them; made honorable mention of them and their heroic
actions in some of my writings, and particularly dedicated one Book, I since
compiled, to the General himself, (as I had done former Books to others of your
Generals) for to do him all the honor that possibly I could, for his renowned
Actions. Besides I have lately signed Warrants to get in their Arrears, and
promoted an Ordinance for that purpose, all I could since my entrance into this
House. All which considered, with this addition, that some of them have bin my
ancient intimate friends, and never did me the least injury, I hope no Member
can be so partial, as to report me such a professed enemy to them, as in this
grand debate to go against my judgment or conscience in opposition only unto
their desires. True it is when the Army have forgot their duty, or offered
violence to the privileges, Members, freedom or proceedings of Parl. or
endeavored to engage them to break their public faith to the King or kingdom,
in breaking off the Treaty, contrary to their votes and engagement, or to
infringe their solemn League and Covenant, or to enforce them to subvert the
fundamental Government, Laws, and Liberties of the kingdom, or the very freedom
and being of Parl. as they have done in their late Remonstrance, and
Declaration, and some other printed papers since, and heretofore, I have then
(in discharge of my covenant, conscience, and duty) opposed and spoken against
these their exorbitances, as much as any, not out of malice, but out of love,
to reclaim them from their evil destructive courses and counsels, according to
Gods own precept Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but
shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. And seeing
I have always with like freedom opposed and written against the exorbitances
and error of the King, Court, Prelates, Parliament, Committees, Presbyterians,
Independents, Lawyers, and all other sorts of men in reference to the public
good, the Army and their friends have no cause at all to censure me as their
enemy, but rather to esteem me as their friend, for using the like freedom
toward them, and their exorbitances, especially in this House.

Having removed these two prejudices, I shall now address my self to the
question in debate, which has been thus propounded,

Whether the Kings answers to the Propositions of both Houses taken altogether
upon the whole Treaty, The Question.
be satisfactory or unsatisfactory?

This being an equivocall question not hitherto clearly stated and debated by
those who have spoken to it, most of them being much mistaken in it, I must
crave leave to give you the true state of it, The Question truly stated.
before I shall debate it; for which purpose I must distinguish, in what sense
it is not satisfactory to any in this House, and yet in what respect it will
appear satisfactory to all or most of us, who are not blinded with passion or
prejudice agaisnt the King, or misled by affection merely to please the Army,
which many have made their principal argument, wherefore it is not satisfactory.

If the question be propounded and intended in this sense, Whether the Kings
answers to all the Propositions be satisfactory? that is, whether the King has
granted all the Propositions sent unto him in as large and ample manner as both
Houses did propound them? then it is certain, his Answers are not satisfactory,
in tha which concerns Delinquents, Bishops and Bishops Lands, and the Covenant,
though they are voted satisfactory as to all the rest by both Houses. And in
this sense only, those who have concluded them not satisfactory, have stated
and disputed the Question.

But this, under favor, neither is, nor can be the state or sense of the
question, for these reasons.

First, because these Propositions were sent by the Houses to the King, not as
Bills of Parliament, to be granted in terminis without debate or alteration,
but only as Propositions to be debated and treated upon personally with the
King, as the Votes of both Houses, and instructions to the Commissioners sent
to the Isle of Wight, resolve past all dispute: now it is directly contrary to
the nature of all treaties, especially such as are personal, to tie up the
parties of either side so precisely, that they shall have no liberty to vary
from their first proposals in any particular, or if they condescend not to what
ever was at first demanded by the stronger party, that the condescensions
should not be satisfactory though they yield to all just things, and fall short
only in some few of least concernment.

This is evident by all Treaties heretofore between England, France, Spain, and
other foreign Nations, if you peruse their first demands, which were never
condescended to, but always receded from, and qualified in some particulars on
either fide, Iniquum petas, ut justum fer as, being a rule in Treaties amongst
Statesmen. There have been many Treaties during these Wars, between the
Officers of the Parliament and Kings party about surrenders of diverse Cities
and Garrisons, wherein the first Propositions on either side have been
moderated or changed, and yet agreed and accepted at last as satisfactory to
both sides. In all ordinary Treaties concerning Marriages, purchases, and
ordinary bargains in Fairs, Markets or Shops, there are usually greater sums of
money demanded at first on the one, and less proferred on the other side, then
is accepted and given at last, and yet both parts close, agree and are full
satisfied: so may we do now with the King upon the whole Treaty, though the
King grants not fully all that we at first proposed.

Secondly, because the Houses have already voted, the Kings Concessions of the
Great Offices of England and Ireland to be at their disposal for 20. years, to
be satisfactory; though their demand was for perpetuity: which they would not
have done, had the satisfactorinesse of the Kings answers depended upon the
full concession of that Proposition as amply as it is penned.

Thirdly, because the Houses in their last propositions demand far more then
ever they did in most former Treaties, and the King has granted them more now
in this then they have demanded heretofore; And therefore having granted more
then what would have fully satisfied them in former Treaties, his Concessions
in this may be fully satisfactory to us, so far as to close with him, to settle
a firm peace in the Kingdom (now at the brink of ruin) though they fall short
in somethings which we now propounded.) which do not much concern our security,
as I shall prove anon. The true state then and sense of this Question must be
this, and no other.

Whether the Kings final Answers to the Propositions of both Houses in this
Treaty, The Question truly stated.
considered and weighed all together, be not so full and satisfactory in
themselves, that this House may and ought to accept of and proceed upon them,
for the speedy settlement of a safe and wel-grounded Peace, both in Church and
Commonwealth, rather then reject them as unsatisfactorie, and so hazard the
life of all, and the perpetuating of our wars and miseries?

In this sense, I humbly conceive and hope to evidence them so clearly and
fully satisfactory, that we can neither in point of duty, prudence, justice and
honor, or conscience reject them as unsatisfactory, but ought to embrace them,
as the only safe and ready way to our peace and settlement, though they come
not up so fully to some of our Propositions, as I could have heartily desired,
for the avoiding of this hazardous debate. For my clearer progress in this
grand debate I shall observe this method.

First, I shall clearly manifest, that the King in this Treaty has granted us
whatsoever we can well desire for the present settlement and future security of
the Commonwealth or state, when ratified by Acts and a regal oath, as is
intended; yea, far more then ever our Ancestors, or any Subjects in the
christian world enjoyed or desired of their Ks. for their security and
preservation against their armed power, or legal prerogatives.

Secondly, That the King has granted as much in this Treaty, as will settle
and secure the Peace and Government of our Church and Religion against Popery
and prelacy on the one hand, and profaneness on the other hand; and more then
we or any Protestant Churches ever enjoyed, or demanded heretofore for their
security and settlement.

When I have made good these particulars and answered the Objections made
against them; I hope every one of us, who have any ingenuity, reason, or
conscience in their breasts, and are not transported with passion, or private
engagements to the contrary; will, and must of necessity vote these Answers
satisfactory in the sense forestated.

I shall begin with the first of these; namely, the Kings Answers to all these
Propositions which concern the present settlement, and future security of the
State and Republike against any armed force, or invasions of the Regal
Prerogative, to the enslaving or prejudicing of the Subject; which in my poor
judgment are so full and satisfactory, that little or nothing can be added to
them; and if we well consider them, we have cause to say; O fortunati nimium
bona si sua norin^! I shall give you a full view of them all, because many of
them have not been so much as once remembered in this debate, and apply them to
our present settlement, and future safety, as I mention them.

The first Proposition, for the settlement of a safe and wel-grounded Peace,
The first Proposition fully granted; and the benefits ac^^ing to us ther^^ by.
is that which concerns the justification of the Parliaments War, declaring it
by an Act of Parliament to be passed, to be in their just and lawful defense:
justifying the Solemn League and Covenant in prosecution thereof: and repealing
all Oaths, Declarations, and Proclamations heretofore had, or hereafter to be
had against both or either Houses of Parliament, their Ordinances or
proceedings, or against any for adhering unto, or executing any Office, Place,
or Charge under them, and all Judgments, Indictments, Outlawries, Attainders,
and Inquisitions in any of the said causes, and all Grants thereupon made, had,
or to be made or had, to be declared null, suppressed, forbidden, and never put
into execution. And this to be published within all Parish Churches, and all
other places needful within his Majesty's Dominions.

To this proemiall and advantageous proposition, the King has fully and
readily condescended at first, in every tittle, as was desired.

By this concession, the Parliament has gained sundry considerable advantages,
tending to their present honor and future security.

First, a full public acknowledgment of the justness of their War and
Cause, to be ratified and perpetuated to posterity by the highest record that
can be, an Act of Parliament, and that to be read in all Parish Churches
throughout England, Ireland, and other the Kings Dominions; and proclaimed in
all Counties, Cities, Corporations, and at Assizes and Sessions of the peace;
that so all men may take public notice of it. Which is such an honor to, and
justification of them and their Cause, as was never condescended to by any King
that took up arms against his Subjects since the creation to this present: and
so low a humiliation and Legal disclaimer in the King of his War against the
Parliament, and disavowing of his Cause and Party, as could possibly be
imagined or expected.

Secondly, It secures the Lives, Liberties and Estates of all the Members of
both Houses engaged in these Wars, and of all persons whatsoever that have
adhered to, or acted for them, against all former, present, and future
Impeachments, Prosecutions and Judgments whatsoever; and makes void and null,
what ever has been, is, or may be objected against them. Which coupled with
the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, proposed by the King, and agreed to by the
Houses, will extraordinarily secure, pacify, and content all well-affected
Members, and persons who have adhered to them in this Cause, and preserve them
from the danger of 25 E. 3. and other Laws concerning Treasons, which otherwise
upon any revolution of times and affairs, might by corrupt Judges and
Instruments be extended and rested to their prejudice and undoing.

Thirdly, it lays a foundation for the lawfulness of a defensive War by
Authority of both Houses, upon the like occasion, in all future ages, without
incurring the guilt of Treason or Rebellion; which will be a great
encouragement and security to the Subjects, and engagement to them to adhere to
the Parliament in aftertimes.

Fourthly, It will very much discourage and deter all kind of men from taking up
Arms in the Kings, His Heirs and Successors behalf, against the Houses of
Parliament, when they shall cast their eyes upon this Act and behold the King
himself passing such a censure upon all his own proceedings, and retracting
his own Oaths, Proclamations, Commissions, Inditements, Grants, against such
Members and all others who have now taken up arms against him, for the Houses
and Kingdoms defense.

So as this very first Proposition only, if well weighed, without any others
added thereunto, being so fully and freely consented unto by the King, tends
very far toward our present settlement and future safety, being more then was
ever thought of, or desired in the Treaty of Peace, in February and March, 1642.

The second Proposition fully granted by the King for the settling and securing
of the State and Religion too, The Militia fully consented to, and the Kingdoms
advantage and security thereby.
against the Kings armed power, is the settling of the whole Militia by Sea and
Land, and Navy of England, Ireland, and the Isles and Dominions thereunto
belonging, by Act of Parliament, in the hands and disposal of both Houses, and
such as they shall appoint, for the space of twenty years: with power to raise
moneys for all forces raised by them for Land or Sea service, during that space
or time; which forces are authorized to suppress all forces raised or to be
raised in, or any foreign forces which shall invade the Realms of Engl.
Ireland, or the Dominions and Isles thereunto belonging, without Authority and
consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament: And it further provides, that
after the expiration of the said 20. years, neither the King, his heirs and
successors, nor any person or persons, by color or pretense of any Commission,
power, Deputation or Authority to be derived from the King, his Heirs or
Successors, or any of them, shall raise, array, train, employ or dispose of any
of the forces by Sea or Land of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, the
Dominion of Wales, Isles of G^ernsep and Iersey; or of Barwick upon Tweed, nor
execute any power or authority touching the same, invested in the two Houses
during the space of twenty years, nor do any thing or Act concerning the
execution thereof, without the consent of the Lords and Commons first had and
obtained. And that after the expiration of the said twenty years, in all cases
wherein the Lords and Commons shall declare, the safety of the Kingdom to be
concerned, and shall thereupon paffe any Bill for the raising, arming, training
and disposing of the forces by Sea and Land of the Kingdoms, Dominions, Isles
and places aforesaid, or concerning the leavying of moneys for the same, if the
King, his Heirs and successors shall not give the Royal assent thereto, within
such time as both Houses should think conveent, that then such Bil or Bills
after Declaration made by the Lords and Commons in that behalf, shall have the
force and strength of an Act or Acts of Parliament, and be as valid to all
intents and purposes, as if the Royal assent had been given thereunto.

After which it disables any Sheriff, Justice of the Peace, Majors or other
Officers of Justice, to leavy, conduct, and employ any forces whatsoever, by
color or pretense of any Commission of Array, or extraordinary command from
the King, His Heirs or Successors, without consent of both Houses. And
concludes, That if any persons to the number^ of 30 shall be gathered together
in warlike manner, or otherwise, and not forthwith disband themselves, being
thereunto required by the Lords and Commons, or command from them, or any other
specially authorized by them, that then such person or persons not so
disbanding, shall be guilty and incur the pains of High Treason: any Commission
under the great Seal, or other Warrant to the contrary notwithstanding, and be
incapable of any pardon from His Majesty. His Heirs and Successors, and their
estates disposed of as the Lords and Commons shall think fit.

To all this new grand principle security of our present and future peace and
settlement, the King has given his full and free consent in terminis. And what
greater security then this we can imagine or demand against the Kings armed
power and sword of War, transcends my capacity to imagine. Therefore if we have
not lost our brains and consciences too, we cannot but vote and conclude it
satisfactory, and restabundantly contented with, yea exceeding thankful for it.
And that upon all these ensuing considerations.

First, both Houses in their Treaty with the King in February, and March, 1642.
An Exact Collection, p. 88, 89, 9^, 909. etc.
demanded only the Militia of England not of Ireland, yet so, as they did leave
the Nomination and disposing of the chief Commanders, Officers, and Governors
of the Militia, Forts and Navy of the Kingdom, to the King: provided only they
might be such persons of honor and trust as both Houses might confide in: A
Collection of all the publik Ordinances, etc pa. 49, 50, 51, 57, 58, 77, 84.
and likewise promise restitution of all Moneys, Forts, Garrisons, Arms and
Ammunition of the Kings which they had seized upon, or to give him present
satisfaction for the same; which being granted and performed, they professed,
it should be their hopeful endeavor, that His Majesty and His people might
enjoy the blessing of Peace, etc. and be derived to Him, and to His Royal
Posterity, and the future Generations in this Kingdom for ever. Whereas in
this Treaty the King denudeth himself of the Militia of England, and Ireland
too, and of the Nomination and approbation of all Officers, Commanders,
Governors of the Militia, or forces by Sea or Land; and leaves all the Forts,
Navy and Magazines only to the Houses disposal, without any compensation for
his Magazines or Arms formerly seized by them. And if far less was deemed
sufficient for our settlement and security then, much more will all this be
thought so now.

Secondly, Because the King has wholly stripped Himself, His Heirs and
Successors for ever, of all that power and interest which His Predecessors
always enjoined in the Militia forces, forts, Navy, not only of England, but
Ireland, Wales Iersey, Garnsey, and Berwick too, so as He and they can neither^
raise nor arm one man, nor introduce any foreign forces into any of them, by
virtue of any Commission, Deputation, or authority, without consent of both
Houses of Parliament, and has vested the sole power and disposition of the
Militia, Forts and Navy of all these, in both Houses in such ample manner, that
they shall never part with it to any King of England, unless they please
themselves. So as the King and His Heirs, have no military power or authority
at all left, to injure or oppress the meanest Subject, much less the whole
Kingdom, or Houses of Parliament, had they wills to do it; and the Houses
having all the Militia by Land and Sea, not only of England, but even of
Ireland, Wales, Garnsey, Iersey and Berwick, to assist and secure them in case
He or His Heirs should attempt to raise any domestic, or introduce any
foreign force against them, is so grand, so firm a security in all
probability, for insuring and preserving of our Peace, Religion, Laws,
Liberties, Lives, and Estates, against regal force and tyranny, that none of
our Ancestors ever demanded or enjoyed the like, nor no other Kingdom
whatsoever since the Creation, for ought that I can find in Histories or
Republics (who have perused most now extant to do you service) and such a
selfe-denying cond^sconsion in the King to His People, in this particular, as
no age can president.

In the 17 year of King John, the Barons having by force of Arms, See Matthew
Paris, Matthew Westminster, Hollinshead, Speed, Daniel in his life.
compelled him to confirm the great Charter at Runningmead, near Windsor,
thought this their greatest security, that 25 of the eminentest Barons should
be made Conservators of the Magna Char. and that all the rest of the Barons and
people should take an Oath to be aiding and assisting to them in their
preservation thereof; and that the King should surrender into their hands his
four principal Castles, that so it he infringed his Charter, they might
compel him to observe it. This was the highest Militia, and security of that
kind our Ancestors ever demanded or enjoyed; (which is nothing comparable unto
that now granted us by the King,) who rested satisfied therewith.

3. Because the King and his successors are hereby not only totally disabled to
raise any forces to oppress the people, or disturb their peace, and
settlement, but all persons discouraged from aiding or assisting them by any
Commission or authority whatsoever, under pain of high Treason, and loss both
of life and estate, at the pleasure of both Houses, without any benefit of
pardon from the KING, disabled for to grant it. So great a discouragement for
any persons of fortune or quality, to appear for the King or his party in the
Field for time to come, that in all humane probability, none ever will or dare
to appear in arms hereafter for the King, against the Parliament, being sure to
forfeit all without any hopes of pardon. And if this Act had been passed as a
Law before our Wars, I dare presume not any one English Lord, or Gentleman
durst once to have appeared in the Field for the King, and we had never felt
the miseries of a civil War.

Fourthly, Because the Militia of Ireland, Ier^y, Guernsey, and Wales as well
as England, is wholly transferred from the King, to the Houses, so as we need
fear no danger thence; and the Militia of Scotland being in their Parliaments
disposal, if we hold a Brotherly correspondency with them, I know no other
enemies we need to fear; for the Navy being in the Houses power, we need not
fear any foreign invasion that can hurt us, if we can agree at home.

All which considered, I dare assert, we have now the greatest security of any
people under Heaven against all armed regal force and power, the King having
given up all his Military power into the Houses actual possission, The King
has granted the Houses for 20 years the disposing of all great Offices,
Civil, Judicial, and Military for twenty years both in England and Ireland.
The security and consequences thereof.
and resigned his Sword and Arms into their hands. And if we refuse to accept
it now he so freely resignes it, we may fight till doomesday, but never win nor
hope for the like security or advantage; yea the present age and all posterity
will curse and abhor us, for not embracing, and resting satisfied with such
unparalleld security.

But is this all the security the King has granted us in this Treaty? No
verily: there is yet much more behind, which has not yet been opened. The
Kings of England, have always held two swords in their hands, which when ill
managed, have hurt and destroyed their Subjects. The first is the sword of
Mars, in times of War, which is already sheathed, and resigned into the Houses
hands by the precedent concessions, so as it can never wound them more. The
other is the sword of Justice in times of Peace; and this likewise the King
has wholly given up into the Houses power, for twenty years, as he has the
Militia; so, that it can never hurt them nor any English man or other Subject
hereafter, at least for twenty years.

This sword was formerly entrusted by the King in the Judges and great Officers
hands^ had they been so courageous, so upright as they should, the King could
never have wounded or ruined the meanest of his Subjects with this Sword.
Shipmoney, Kingh^hood, with other Grievances and Monoplies, neither would nor
could have been imposed on the people by the Kings Prerogative or power, had
the Judges, according to Law and duty, declared them illegal. The Kingdom can
do no injustice to any, it his Judges be so just and stout as to do justice.
Whereupon this House impeached only the Judges, not blamed the King, for the
project of Shipmony, to which their opinions in Mr. Hampdens Case, gave life
and vigor. Now the King in this Treaty, has for twenty years at least,
granted to both Houses the nomination and appointment of all the Great
Officers, Civil or Military, and of all the Judges and Barons of his Courts
and Exchequers within England and Ireland, to continue in their places only,
quom diu been se gesserint. So as these great Officers and Judges having now no
dependence at all upon the King, who can neither place nor displace any of
them, but wholly upon the Houses of Parliament, and such as they shall appoint
to nominate them in the Intervals of Parliament; if the Houses have a care to
make good Officers and Judges in all Courts at first; and to displease and
punish them (as they may and ought to do) when they degenerate, or misdemean
themselves, the King with all his legal power now left him, can neither injure
nor oppress the poorest Subject in body, goods or, Estate; nor protect the
greatest malefactor from justice. And what more can we desire to expect for the
security of our lives, liberties, or estates than this?

Besides, as the^ King has entrusted you with the Sword and Courts of Justice
and Revenue, so has he with his Conscience and Courts of Equity too: You have
the nomination of the Lord Chancellours, Lord Keepers, and Commissioners of his
great Seals of England and Ireland, of the Chancellours of the Exchequer and
Duchy, and Masters of the Rolls, as well in Ireland as England, who are the
Dispensers of his Equity and Conscience to his Subjects, the Issuers of al his
Commissions, Writs, Patents, and keepers of all his public Records. If this
be not enough, you have the disposal of his purse, and Treasure too: The
nomination of the Lord Treasurers both of England and Ireland, of the
Chancellours and Barons of the Exchequers in both, and of the Vice-Treasurer
and Treasurer of Wars in Ireland. Would you have yet more? You have the
nomination of the Lord Deputy, and chief Governor of Ireland, and of all the
Presidents of the several Provinces of that Kingdom for twenty years, and of
all other forenamed great Officers, Judges and Treasurers there; a great
strength and real addition to the Militia of that Kingdom, which can never
do us harm, if we accept of these concessions, which invest us in such power
there, as no Parl. of England ever yet expected nor laid claim to. What is
there yet remaining for your safety? Perchance you will suspect, the King may
have many secret designs and intercourses with foreign enemies and States, and
grand Malignants at home, to undo all, which we shall never discover without
some further provisions then yet we have made. Truly no: you have a remedy
already provided and granted for this; The nomination and appointing of the
Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, the principal gates to let in, or keep out
Foreign Enemies or Spies; and of the Secretaries of State, who will be privy
to all his Maj. secrets and transactions of public concernment, receive all
letters of intelligence directed to him, and most commonly return all Answers
to them. There is now but one thing more wanting to make this security complete
and firm, the Kings Great Seals of England and Ireland, the greatest Regal
Assurance and confirmation he can give you; and of these you have both the
custody and disposal, having the nomination and appointment both of the L.
Chancellors, L. Keepers, and Commissioners of the Great Seal in England and
Ireland. To sum up all these Grants together; Some Parliaments in former
times have had the nomination of the Lord Chancellor, some of the Lord
Treasurer, some of the great Iusticiar or some few Judges of England only: But
never any Parliament of England claimed or enjoyed, the nomination and
appointment of any the Great Officers, Barons, Judges, or Treasurers places in
Ireland, nor yet of the L. Warden of the Cinque Ports, Chancellors of the
Exchequer and Dutcby, Secretaries of State, Master of the Rolls, or Bar^ns of
the Exchequer of England; yet all these the King for peace sake has parted
with to us; and shall we be yet so froward and peevish, as not to be satisfied
with all those Offices? We have a long time mocked and abused the world, with a
self-denying Ordinance, disabling any Member to retain or receive any Civil or
Military Office, by grant from the Houses, whiles he continces a Member; though
there is scarce one day, or week at least does pass, but we are still
bestowing some place or Office upon Members, for which we are weekly censured
and reviled in printed Pamphlets, and become odious to the Kingdom. But here
is a self-denying Act and Ordinance in good earnest, in the King, in parting
with so many Offices, (of which He and his Predecessors have had the sole
disposal for some Ages without interruption,) to the Houses; and shall we not
yet rest satisfied? If not, what will the whole Kingdom, what will all
foreign Kingdoms and Nations report of us? but that we are so foolish, so
unreasonable, that nothing can or will content us, because we are resolved not
to be content with any thing that the King shall grant us, be it never so
advantageous for our present or future safety, and settlement.

But seeing we have the disposal of all these Officers in England and Ireland,
both Military and Civil, of his Sword of War and Peace, his Justice, his
Conscience, his Purse, his Treasury, his Papers, his public Records, his
Cabinet, his Great Seal, more then ever we at first expected or desired: I must
really for my own part, profess my self abundantly satisfied with these
Concessions, and so must every one who has so much judgment, as to understand
the latitude and consequences of them for the whole Kingdoms, and dying
Irelands safety, settlement, especially at this season, when they are so near
their ruin.

To this I shall add another grant of great concernment for the Peace and
safety of this Nation, which the King has fully consented to in this Treaty,
and I presume no Member of this House will rest unsatisfied therewith, when he
fully understands it.

Both Houses of Parliament upon the Lord Keeper Littl^tons deserting of the
House, and conveying away the Great Seal; The King has confirmed the new Oreat
Seal, and all that has passed under it, nulled the old, and what ever passed
under its authority since its carrying from the Houses.
were pleased for the better distribution of Justice, and transaction of the
great Affairs of the Realm, to appoint a new Great Seal to be made. The
Ordinance for its approbation and use sticking long in the Lords House, who
were somewhat doubtful in point of Law, I thereupon compiled and published a
Treatise, entitled The opening of the Great Seal of England, which fully
satisfied them, and opened the doors to let it out, for public use, though
some who have had the custody of it (as Mr. Speaker knows) have but ill
requited Me for this my pains and good service. Many Grants, Commissions,
Presentations, Writs, Process, Proceedings, and other things have passed under
this Great Seal, (and some Patens for Offices and Bishops Lands, to Members of
this House, who differ in opinion from me, and yet would be glad to have their
Patents confirmed by an Act of Parliament.) The King in this Treaty, has not
only consented to ratify all the Grants etc. that have passed under this new
Seal, by Act of Parliament; and to enact them, to be as effectual to all
intents and purposes as if they had passed under any other Great Seal of
England heretofore used, but to continue it to be used hereafter for the Great
Seal of England, and has likewise so far disclaimed his old Great Seal from
the day it was carried from the Parliament, that he is content, to make and
declare all Grants, Commissions, Presentations, Writs, Process, Proceedings
and other things whatsoever passed under, or by any Authority of any other
Great Seal, since the 22 of May 1642. To be invalid and of no effect, to all
intents and purposes; except one grant to Mr. Justice Racon, to be Judge of
the Kings Bench, and some other Writs, Process and Commissions mentioned in
that proposition: And he has further yielded, That all Grants of Offices,
Lands, Tenements, or hereditaments, made or passed under the great Seal of
Ireland, unto any person, persons, or body politic, since the Cessation in
Ireland, the 15 September. 1642. shall be null and void, with all Honors and
Titles conferred on any person or persons in that Realm since that Cessation.

By this Concession the Houses of Parliament and their adherents, have gained
these extra ordinary advantages, most of them not to be paralleld in any Age of
King, from Adom till this present.

First, an acknowledgement of both Houses Authority to make and use a new great
Seal of England, without the King, in cases of extraordinary necessity.

Secondly, a power in the Houses to null and void the Kings usual Great Seal
upon the making of their New, and conveying the old Seal from the Houses
without their consent.

Thirdly, a ratification of all Judicial and Ministerial Acts, Writs,
Process, presentations, Grants, Decrees, Commissions and other things which
have passed under the New Seal since its making till this present; which tends
much to the qulet and settlement of many men's Estates; to the confirmation and
justification of all legal proceedings in all Courts of Justice, and at all
Assizes and Sesstons of Peace, held by virtue of Commissions under this Seal,
and of Justices appointed by it (whose authority and proceedings might else
hereafter prove disputable, and be drawn into Question:) and to the fight
constitution of the Parliament it self, many Members of this House being
elected, and some Members and Assistants of the Lords House being called
thither, by Writs under this New Seal.

Fourthly, an absolute disavowing and repeall of all Commissions whatsoever, or
other things passed under the old Great Seal, against the Parliament or its
proceedings, and an exposing of all those of the Kings Party, who have acted
any thing by any Commission or Authority under the Seal against the Parliament,
to public Justice, who cannot plead it in Bar or excuse in any Court, after
it shall be nulled and repealed by an Act.

Fifthly, a great disparagement, dishonor, and disadvantage to the English
Cavaliers, Irish Rebels, and their cause and proceedings, with a future
disingaging of them and al their Party from the King and his interest, who has
so far dishonored, deserted, and disclaimed them, as thus to null and repeal
all Honors, Titles, Grants of Offices, Lands, or Tenements bestowed on any of
them, for any services done, or Assistance given by them to the King in his
Wars against the Parliament: A very high point of humiliation and
self-denial in the King, and such a blow to his Popish and Malignant party,
that I dare presume they will never engage in his behalf, nor trust him for
the future: which will much conduce to the settlement of a firm and lasting
peace, and prevent new Wars, if accepted of.

6ly. Indemnity and security for all the Commissioners of the new Great Seal,
against all scruples which may arise upon the Statute of 25. E. 3. for using
and sealing with it, if ever the times alter: which every prudent man will
readily embrace, where it is freely offered, and not peevishly reject, in such
an age of danger and incertainty as this, in which no man is secure of his
life, liberty, or estate on either side.

The next Concession of the King in this Treaty is this: The Repeal of new
Peers and other Honors granted by the King, with the consequence thereof.
That by Act of Parliament, all Peers made since Edward Lord Littleton
deserted the Parliament, and convey^d away the Great Seal on the one and
twentieth day of May 1642. shall be Vn-Peer'd and set by. And all other titles
of honor, and precedence ( as Lordship, Knighthood, and the like) conferred on
any without consent of both Houses of Parliament since the twentieth of May,
1642. shall be revoked and declared null and void to all intents, and never
hereafter put in use. And that no Peer who shall be hereafter made by the
King, his heirs or successors, shall sit or vote in the Parliament of England
without consent of both Houses of Parliament; This Concession of the Kings is
of great concernment to the Kingdom, and I conceive, without president, or
example in any age or King in the Christian world.

First, it secures us from our formerly feared danger of a design in the King,
by new created Peers, to make an overruling party at any time, in the Lords
House, wherein the Iudicatory of the Parliament principally consists: which
danger and inconvenience, by secluding the Bishops out of that House by an Act
already passed, and by this disabling all new Peers hereafter to be made, to
sit in that House without consent of both Houses, is for ever totally prevented.

Secondly, It gives such an extraordinary new power to the House of Commons, as
they never formerly enjoyed or pretended to; to wit, that no Peer created by
the King himself, or by the King or Lords in Parliament, (who usually created
Peers in Parliament without the Commons privity or consent in former times)
shall be henceforth inaabled. to sit or vote as Peers of Parliament, but by
consent of the House of Commons as well as of the King and Lords. By which
provision, the Commons are made not only, in some sense, the Judges of Peers
themselves (which they could not try or judge beforeby the express letter of
Magna Charta chap. 29. and the Sec Cook! n^stitures on Mag. Cha. cap. 29.
Common Law) but seven their very Creators too.

Thirdly, It is an extraordinary prejudice and blemish on the Kings cause, and
an extreme dishonor, dissatisfaction and disengagement upon his own party,
then which a greater cannot be imagined. For what higher affront or disgrace
could the King put upon those Nobles, Gent. and others who have spent their
estates, lost their blood, limbs and adventured their very lives in this cause
against the Parliament, and received no other reward for it but an empty title
of honor [perchance a Kightship, Lordship, or the bare title of a Marquess,
Earl, or Viscount, which they have enjoyed but a year or two, with little
benefit and less content,] to be thus by Act of Parliament with the Kings own
Royal assent, (who conferred those titles on them for their gallant services
in his behalf) thus suddenly degraded and divested of them all, as if they had
never been? A perpetual brand to them and their posterity, who must be
enforced to give place to such of whom they have had precedence and place by
virtue of these dignities. Which high affront and scorn, I am verily
persuaded, will pierce and break many of their own, at least their Ladies
hearts, and for ever disoblige them in the highest degree.

4thly, It will make all the ancient and new Nobility and Peers of England
less dependent on the King, and less complying to serve his ends upon all
occasions, being never able to gratisie or reward them (though never so
ambitious) with any new Honors or Peerships, without consent of both Houses of
Parliament, whom they dare not displease, or disoblige, for fear of crossing
them in their desired dignities and titles, as well as in their great Offices,
which are both now in their disposal not in the Kings alone.

In brief, the King in his Concession, has manifested the greatest humiliation
and self-denial, that any King since there was a Kingdom in the world has
done. It is, and has been the ancient and undoubted prerogative of all Kings
in the world, but especially of the Kings of England, to confer honors and
dignities of all sorts (especially Knighthood) on whom they shall think meet,
and more principally on those who have merited it by their gallantry in the
field; as Mr. Seldom proves at large in his Titles of honor, and others who
have written of that Subject. Now for the King out of a desire only of a happy
peace and settlement, not only to part with much of the Royal Prerogative
which all other Kings in the world enjoy for the future, but to repeal the
Honors and Titles conferred by him on his adherents, for reward of their
services in times past, during all these wars, is such a miracle and high
degree of self-denial, as no age has produced the like, and that which most
of this house, had the King prevailed, would have rather lost their lives (had
they conferred any such Titles on their Generals and Commanders) then have
condescended to, should the King require it: And therefore I cannot agree with
those over-censorious Gentlemen, who so often inculcate this, that they can see
no humiliation at al or change of heart in the King, when I find so great a
change, and deep a humiliation in Him in this, and all other forementioned free
Concessions, without any or little hesitation; and I heartily wish their own
hearts were as much humbled as his, and then I doubt on: but they would
thankfully embrace, and rest fully satisfied with his concessions for their
own and the Kingdoms benefit. The next proposition tending to the peace and
settlement of the Kingdom is this.

That the King do give his Royal assent to such Act or Acts for the raising of
moneys for the Parliament, The proposition for raising moneys for payment of
public debts, artears, etc. granted; with its benefits
and satisfying of the public Debts and Damages of the Kingdom, and other
public uses as shall hereafter be agreed on by both Houses of Parliament. And
if the King do not give his assent thereto, then it being done by both Houses,
the same shall be as valid to all intents and purposes, as if the Royal assent
had been given thereunto. To this Proposition the King has condescended, so as
those Acts be passed within two years after the Treaty ended: which the Houses
have now voted to be satisfactory.

This Proposition secures all moneys lent upon the public faith: all arrears
due to Officers and soldiers, yea all moneys advanced by any who have
purchased Bishops lands, for their losses by reversions after 99 years or any
present rents, to be reserved to the Crown for the use of the Church, (with
which those Members who have purchased such lands or advanced moneys upon them,
declare themselves most unsatisfied) and all those who have sustained public
losses. Yea, if the King denies his royal assent thereto, it enables both
Houses, to make a valid Act of Parliament without the King in this case, and in
case of the Militia likewise, which was never challenged by, nor granted to
both Houses in any Kings Reign before; and takes away the Kings Negative voice
as to these particulars: which those who conclude the Kings answers
unsatisfatory, have so much contended for, yet now stand in their own light, in
not accepting of these Concessions as satisfactory, and striking at the
Negative voice.

The next Concession of the Kings for the settlement of the State, The court of
Wards and Tenures in Capite etc. abolished: with the advantages.
is the taking away of the Court of Words, and of all Wardships and Tenures in
Capite, or by Knights service, which draw on Wardships, Primer seisures,
liveries, and such like incombrances, to the intolerable vassalage and
prejudice of the Nobility and Gentry of England, and great landed persons, and
that only upon giving the King and his successors one hundred thousand pounds
yearly for compensations, being one principal part of his Royal Revenue.

This Concession is of so vast consequence to the Kingdom, to enfranchise the
Subjects from the Norman yoke of bondage (as some style VVardships and Tenures
in Capite, though others deem them more ancient then William the Conqueror)
that our Ancestors never enjoyed the like: It exempts men's heits under age, and
their estates from being made a prey for hungry Courtiers, or overreaching
Committees of them and their estates: It exempts them from being married to any
against their free consents, without any single or double forfeiture of the
values of their marriages, to which they were formerly liable; from marriages
to persons of small, or no, or broken fortunes, and different dispositions,
which have ruined many families, from many chargeable suits, expenses, and
excessive fees and gratuities to Escheators, Feodaries and all sorts of griping
Officers in the Court of Wards, and from vast expenses and extraordinary
vexation in finding, and traversing Offices, suing out Liveries etc. and many
suits and questions arising thereupon, which have undone too many: And it
deprives the King of such an over-awing Prerogative over the persons and
E^tates of the Nobility and Gentry, which usually fell into his custody after
every Tenants decease, as will very much weaken his interest in, and their over
much dependence on him, and make them less subject to engage for, or with him
against the Parliaments or Kingdoms common interest.

The next Proposition relating to the Kingdoms safety and settlement, The
Proposition concerning Delinquents how sarre granted even to satisfaction.
not so immediately and directly as any of the former, is that which concerns
Delinquents: in which alone (as to the State) the Kings answers are pretended
unsatisfactory, not in all, but only in some particulars, of no extraordinary
concernment in my apprehension, though so much insisted on by many, as to vote
all the Treaty unsatisfactory. In opening the state of the Kings Answers to
this proposition, I shall do these 3. things: First I shall show how far the
King and you are both agreed. 2dly, In what particulars you really or seemingly
differ. 3dly, I shall examine, whether these differences herein be of any such
moment, as to induce the House to vote, the answers to this and the other
Propositions upon the whole Treaty unsatisfactory, and so reject and lose
whatever the King has granted in the rest, because he has not satisfied our
demands in this one, and two others concerning the Church.

For the first, both Houses by their Votes, have thought this Proposition
touching Delinquents, so needless to beinfisted on in every punctilio, for the
public settlement [which will certainly more obstruct then promote it, merey
and moderation being the nearest way to peace, and union] that you have
reduced, since the Treaty, the persons excepted in the first qualification both
from life and composition, from 37 to 7 only: six of those are beyond the Seas,
quite out of your power, the 7th, aged, scarce worth your Execution. The King
consents that they should be banished during the pleasure of both Houses, which
is a civil death, banishment being next to death, the severest punishment, and
to some men, more grievous then present Execution. But if that will not
satisfy, then he leaves them wholly to your justice, to proceed against them,
if you please, according to Law, and promises not to interpose, nor pardon any
of them if legally condemned; only he adds ex abundanti, that he cannot in
justice or honor, assent to any Act, to take away their lives by a mere
Legislative Power, ex post facto, if they have done nothing that was formerly
capital by the known Laws of the Land, by which He leaves them to be tried.
This Answer many Gentlemen who have spoken, have coucluded very unsatisfactory,
and made many large descants on it, because they did not rightly weigh nor
understand it; when as in truth, it Answers the very Proposition in terminis:
as I shall clearly manifest to all who understand what Law is.

First, it is apparent that one of the first quarrels and cause of taking up
Arms on our parts, was to bring Delinquents to condign punishent, according to
the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, as you have declared to the Kingdom in many
printed Declarations, and in your Petitions to the King, you always desired
him, Exact collection p. 464. 585 619. 631. 633. 908.
to leave Delinquents to the course of Justice; not to cut them off by a mere
Legislative Power, when as you could not do it by any known Law.

Secondly, you have professed to all the World, and to the King and Delinquents
themselves, that you have taken up Arms to defend and preserve the Ancient
fundamental Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and to oppose the introduction
of any Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power; Yea, your selves and the Army likewise,
have declared against all extraordinary proceedings and trials in the Lords
House to fine or imprison without any indictment, or legal trial by Jury or
Verdict according to Magna Charta, and the Common Law. Therefore your bringing
Delinquents to punishment for Life and Estates, which in the first branch of
this Proposition must be intended only of a just and Legal TRIAL (as your
selves have always professed) not by a new Law in the post: And if so, then
the King, in case you will not rest satisfied with the seven excepted persons
banishment, is content to leave them to your Justice, even for Life and Estate,
according to the known Laws of the Realm, and will no ways interrupt your
proceedings therein, nor pardon them. Therefore in this he fully consents to
the Proposition.

But it has been objected, Object.
First, that the King denies to yield them up to Justice, or to have any hand
in their prosecution; and therefore his Answer is unsatisfactory. Secondly.
That this expression, That he ca^ neither in Justice nor honor consent to any
Act for to take away their Lives or Estates, is as high a justification of them
and his own cause, as possible, and contradictory to the first Proposition, and
declares the Kings heart to be still in the same and unchanged.

To which I Answer: Answ.
First, both these are so gross mistakes and inconsequences, that I wonder how
any intelligent man can insist upon them: For first, the King in positives
terms, if you will not accept of their banishment, yields them up to a Legal
trial, in which himself must be the Prosecutor, the Indictment being in his
name, the prosecution at his suit by his Counsel at Law, and the Witnesses
produced on his behalf, as all men know, who understands what belongs to a
Legal trial. Therefore to infer from the Kings Answer, that he disclaims all
prosecution of them, is direct contradiction and falsehood.

Secondly, the Kings very condesconsion to their banishment and forfeiture of
their Estates for adhering to his Cause and putting them upon their legal
trial, is an express disavowing of his own cause as just, and an
acknowledgment of its badnesse and illegality; and if the Parliament should
yield up those who have acted for and adhered to them to banishment,
confiscation of Estate, and legal trial for their lives, I am certain the
Objectors themselves would protest, that therein they had betrayed their
righteous Cause, and deserted their best affected friends. Thirdly, Expressum
facit cessare tacitum: the King having in direct terms, justified your Cause
and War as just, in the first Proposition, acknowledged those persons exempted
in this, and treated for under the very name and notion of Delinquents, to be
such, in this very Proposition, and consented to their banishment and loss of
Estate, cannot without apparcht absundity be averred to justify them and their
Cause in this his Answer, which yields them up to the strictest legal Justice,
as Delinquents. 5ly, Those words of the King [so much excepted against] that he
can neither in honor nor justice, consent to any act to take away their lives,
who have acted any thing by his command, used and intended by him only in
relation to his regal consent to a new Law to condemn them, ex post facto,
where there was no Law before, are so far from any exception, that for my
part I should have held him neither just nor honorable had he omitted this
expression. For can it be just or honorable for a King, to engage men in his
service by special Commission or Command, when there is no known Law to make
their obedience criminal, and yet afterward to give his Royal consent to a
subsequent Law to take away their lives, and forfeit their estates for obeying
his own Royal commands? Suppose we were now in the Kings condition and he in
ours, and he should press you to consent to a new Law, to make all those who
have acted for you and by your Commission in this war, Traitors, and to lose
their lives and estates for it, when there was no former Law to punish them,
would you not all give the self same answer as he does, that you could neither
in honor, nor justice (nor yet in point of conscience) consent to such a Law?
and would not your selves and all other protest, you had neither justice nor
honesty in you, should you be so base and persidious as to condescend unto it
to betray all those you had engaged, and to give them such a requital for
their services? Would any person ever after honor, serve or trust you, should
you do it? or could you or any other honor, trust or serve the K. in any
dubious employment after this, if he should thus unworthily ex post facto
betray his own party now? This answer therefore of his clearly discovers to us,
that there is yet so much justice and honor in him, as by no fear or danger to
consent to such an unjust and unworthy Act, as by a new Law to cut off the
heads of those himself engaged in his service, when there was no Law extant
then to do it, makes it more satisfactory unto me, then otherwise, and shows he
does not dissemble but is real in his answers; and I shall sooner trust and
believe him now, then if he had consented to such an unworthy act. 6ly, This
answer is both just and honorable, because if the King should assent to a new
Act to forfeit their lives and Estates, he should condemn them rashly and
unjustly without hearing their defense or evidence.

And for the King to condemn any for Traitors by a Bil without hearing the
cause or evidence against them, or to make men Traitors by a law subsequent to
their offenses, is neither just nor honorable in every just man's judgment, and
of very dangerous president, as 4. Instir. ^. 1. p. 37. 38.
Sir Edw. Cook, informs us, the Lord Cromwell, the inventer of such Acts of
Attainder, being the first that lost his head by this new invention. All which
considered, there is no rational man but must conclude, the Kings Answer unto
this branch touching Delinquents, to be fully satisfactory even to your own
demands, as well in words as substance, notwithstanding the Objections against
it.

But admit the answer as bad as any have made it, shall we therefore conclude
it so unsatisfactory as to break off the Treaty upon it, and involve the
Kingdom in another War of which no man can know the end or issue? God forbid we
should ever be so unadvised. The persons whose lives you desire for a Sacrifice
to public Justice, are but seven in number, fix of them out of your power in
foreign parts, where a new war will not reach them: the 7th an aged man, who
may chance to dye before judgment or execution pass against him: you have all
their whole estates at your disposal already, and their persons too by way of
banishment, during both Houses pleasure: And will you adventure another seven
years war, and the loss perchance of seventy thousand men's lives, and as many
millions of Treasure to the ruin of the Kingdom, for the bare lives of seven
Delinquents only, or in truth of one alone, who is fully in your power, which
you may take away by a legal trial without a war? will not all the Kingdom,
nay all the three Kingdoms, and whole world cry out upon you for such a
frantic unadvised act as this? yea and for such an unjust and wicked
resolution, to hazard the lives and shed the blood of many thousand Innocents,
and gallant men to take away the head of one or only of 7. vile Delinquents?
the sparing of whose lives will Sec 2 Chronicles. 28. 2. 10. 16.
more conduce to settlement, and real unity, then their deaths by the axe of
Justice. For shame then let us not vote the Kings answer to this branch of
Delinquents so unsatisfactory, as to break off and lose all upon it, since I
have proved it fully satisfactory in all things to your own last demands.

As to the Delinquents specified in the 2d. and 3d. Qualification, the King and
you are fully agreed. Besides, the King consents to the exclusion of the
Delinquents specified in the first qualification from sitting in Parliament,
being of his Counsels, coming within the verge of his court, bearing any
office, or having any employment in the State, during the pleasure of both
Houses. Thus far you are both agreed: only he desires this mitigation of their
penalty in case they shall offend herein, that they may not be guilty of high
Treason and incapable of any pardon, and forfeit all their estates, nor that
those who shall return from banishment without leave may incur so high a
penalty, but a more moderate, suitable to the Law they shall offend. And to
break only upon this excess and extremity of punishment (too high even in many
wise men's opinions for such offenses, and of dangerous president to posterity,
it being the wisdom of our Ancestors, to make as few See Rastalls Abridgment,
Tit. Treason.
new treasons as possible, being only for the Kings advantage and peoples
prejudice) when as a lesser penalty may as well, and sooner too, prevent the
mischief, is neither safe nor prudent.

As for the compositions of such persons, the King only desires their
moderation, if you think fit, even to such proportions as the Army it self in
their proposals to him in Aug. 1647. thought reasonable; and if you please not
to grant it, then he leaves them to compound at such rates as you and they
shall agree: and those are only such as you have already fixed on in former
compositions, from which you will not vary; and in case they will not compound
at your rates, you have then the benefit of all their sequestered estates till
their composition be made, which is your benefit and their loss. Therefore in
this [though some have pleased without any color of reason to assert the
contrary] you are both fully accorded.

To the Delinquents in the fifth Qualification, the King consents to all your
desires, with this exception only: That such Delinquent Ministers who are not
scandalous in their lives or Doctrine, and are already sequestered, may enjoy
the third part of the profits of their Livings, for the support of them and
their families, and be capable of future preferments if they be thought fit to
enjoy them. This some have concluded very unsatisfactory, because it craves
some little favor for Malignant Ministers: But I beseech you consider, how
inconsiderable the difference is, and how just and charitable the Kings request
is in their behalf. Your selves, both by Ordinance and common practice, grant
the full fifth of the profits of sequestered Livings to the Wives and Children of
sequestered Ministers, as well in case of scandal and insufficiency, as
Mulignity: the King desires only, that such who have bin sequestered merely for
Malignancy, and are not scandalous, may receive a third part in stead of a
fifth, and for their future encouragement, having spent their time in fitting
themselves for a Ministry, and being fit for no other calling, and having lost
their former livings, he requests only, that in this scarcity of able
Ministers, they may be capable merely of future preferments, for which they
shall be adjudged meet in such way as you shall appoint, not he or they. A
just, a charitable request, and that which your selves have done, there being
many able godly Ministers of eminent parts and exemplary life who have not been
so clearly convinced in point of conscience, as to concur with you in the late
Wars, for which they have been sequestered, and have since been better
satisfied: and God forbid that such should be made utterly incapable of the
Ministry, and they and their families starve for want of bread. I beseech you
therefore, of al other things let us not break with the King upon this Act of
Charity, of Piety, lest all the world condemn us for uncharitableness, and
judge the King to be more pious and charitable then we. And no doubt it will be
the greatest charity to our selves, to our Church, our Religion, our Kingdom at
this time, rather to close with the King in this particular, then hazard all
for a few third parts, and to be as charitable as his Majesty. The more charity
we show, the greater unity, peace, amity, and better settlement we may expect.

But the greatest dissatisfaction of all (referred to this head of Delinquents)
is in the Kings answers concerning his present recalling of Marquess Ormonds
Commission, to Treat with, and unite the Irish Rebels.

To which I answer: first, that this was no part of the propositions first
sent, but a collateral emergement discovered since the Treaty upon Col. Jones
his letter, and so the unsatisfactorinesse of the Kings Answer as to this
alone, can be no just cause or ground, to vote the other Answers
unsatisfactory, or break off the Treaty.

2dly, The Kings granting of this Commission to Ormond at the time he did it,
is no such heinous thing as many have made it, al circumstances considered. The
King when the Army would not close with him upon their own terms the last year
who treated with him without your privity, and against your Orders, even then
when they unjustly impeached the eleven Members for holding secret intelligence
with him and his party (of which themselves were only culpable;) was shut up
close Prisoner in Carisbrooke Castle in the Isle of Wight by their procurement,
and by the Votes of both Houses (proceeding originally from the Officers and
the Armies projection, promoted by their Declaration, and engagement to join
with the Houses in settling the Kingdom without and against the K. and forcibly
passed the Lords House by the Armies garrisoning White Hall, and billeting a
Regiment of Horse in the Muse to terrify them to a concurrence with the
Commons) quite laid aside like a dead man out of mind, and no more addresses
to be made to him by the Houses, or from him to them, and no access of any to
him under pain of high Treason, without both Houses license: the King in these
extremities, the better to procure his own enlargement and the Kingdoms
settlement by a Treaty, grants a Commission to Marquess Ormond to unite the
Irish forces then divided for the foresaid ends. Extremities certainly put
honest and wisemen too [as the Armies friends grant] upon hard shifts for
self-preservation, and this extremity put the King upon this of Ormond.

The King is flesh and blood as well as we, and nature teaches him to use the
best means he may for his own preservation, and deliverance in such a strait:
The Army the last Summer refused to disband or suffer any of their forces to go
for Ireland; to preserve and secure that Kingdom, only from this ground of
self-preservation, upon which they would now enforce you by their REMONSTRANCE,
and marching up to your doors with their forces, to break off the Treaty, or
vote it wholly unsatisfactory^ whence most Gent. that differ in opinion from me
have made this their sole or chief argument that the Kings answers are
unsatisfactory, because the Army else will not be satisfied. If then your own
Army may thus disobey your votes, and force your consents, only upon a pretense
of self-preservations and defense, when they are in no visible danger, the King
by as good or better reason in this extremity of danger, might justly make use
of Ormonds endeavors for his better safety and enlargement. And if some
Members have affirmed in the House, (as has been alleged in this debate)
that they would join with Turks or the worst of Nations, and call them in to
their assistance rather then the King should come in by conquest: then the King
by like reason might join with Ormond and the Irish, rather then be thus laid
aside and destroyed. And what we our selves would do in his or the like
condition, we cannot justly blame in him. Thirdly, The King did never
absolutely deny the recalling of Ormonds Commission, but only suspended it til
the Treaty ended, and if you then close with him, you have his engagement
presently to recall it: if then you agree with him upon this^ Treaty, your
demand in this is granted, and danger prevented, but if you will not agree at
all, it is very hard measure to press the King to a present disadvantage, who
is like to receive no advantage by you, nothing being obligatory on either side
til all be concluded. In fine, the King has so far condescended to satisfy
you in his final answer, as to write a letter to Ormond, to suspend the
Execution of his Commission for the present, and engaged to revoke it so soon
as you and he agree in future, and more then this, as the case stands, we
cannot well in justice require, and we should hardly grant so much were it our
case as it is the Kings: and seeing all our dangers may be prevented by our
agreement with the King, and this demand then fully granted, there is no reason
to vote this unsatisfactory, when we may have all we desire if we please our
selves. However: I see no such differences between the King and Us, in this of
ORMOND and that of Delinquents, as to vote the final answer to them and all
the rest unsatisfactory and so to lose England, distressed Ireland, and all the
former Concessions for an unconsiderable dissatisfaction in these two
particulars.

The last Proposition relating to the security of the State, That Propositions
concerning London fully granted, and the Consequences of it.
is. That the City of London shall enjoy all their Rights, Liberties,
Franchises, and usages in raising and employing the forces thereof, for its
defense; in as full and ample manner as they used and enjoyed it heretofore.
That the Militia and City and Liberties thereof, shall be in the Ordering and
Government of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council, or such as they
shall appoint, and be employed and directed as both Houses shall direct; so as
no Citizen, or forces of the City shall be compelled to go out of the City or
Liberties for Military service without their own free consent. That an Act
shall be passed for the granting and confirming of the Cities Charters,
Customs, and Franchises, notwithstanding any Non-user, Misuser, or abuser, and
for confirmation of all Bylaws and Ordinances made or to be made by the Lord
Major, Aldermen, and common council concerning the calling, convening and
regulating their Common Council: That the Tower of London may be in the
Government of the City, and the chief Governor thereof nominated and
removeable by the Common-Councell^ and all Propositions, which shall be further
made and approved by both Houses consent, for the future welfare, and
Government of the City, confirmed by Act of Parliament. To all which the King
has fully confented; so as his Answer thereto cannot be Voted unsatisfactory
by any, but such who envy the Cities weal and security, that themselves may the
better seize and trample on it, to its enslaving and ruin.

This Concession is, First, A great Honor to, and justification of your cause;
the Exact Collection p. 45. a Collection^ etc. p. 33. 495. 496.
City having been more cordial to, active for, and bountiful toward you
upon all occasions and exigencies then all other parts of the Kingdom, the
harbourers, and relievers of all who have fled from the Enemies tyranny
thither, for safety or relief, yea the only Treasury to advance moneys upon
all exigencies, and those to whom (under God) you pricipally owe your victories
and preservation. Now for the King to honor the City with such concessions as
these, which has been most hurtful to, and deepest engaged against him in
this War, is almost as high and full (if not a greater) justification of, and
countenance to your cause, as this consent to the first Proposition.

2dly, A great satisfaction to the City for all their services and expenses,
and a firm security against all future fears and sufferings for engaging so
deeply in your Cause.

3dly, An extraordinary Engagement to the City, faithfully to adhere to you and
all succeeding Parliaments, upon the like cause and occasion, and to other
Corporations to do the like.

4thly, A great security and advantage to the whole Kingdom, whose weal and
safety principally consists in Londons welfare, its principal Magazine, Mart,
Bulwark, Refuge, and Military security both by Sea and Land, wherewith the
whole Kingdom stands or falls: had the King once gained London in these
Wars, the Parliament, and all England had been quickly lost, without hope of
recovery, which will be in a secure or recoverable condition at all times, if
it be safe and true to the public interest, from which some have studied of
late to disengage it, to ruin it, and the Parliament too, which were always
free from eminent danger whiles cordially united, and near to both their ruins
being now disjointed.

I have thus as briefly as I could, (with discharge of my conscience and duty)
run through all the propositions which concern the security and settlement of
our State against the KINGS armed violence, or Exorbitant civil Sword or
Prerogative, and other particulars relating to its peace and safety, with the
Kings respective Answers thereunto.

And for mine own opinion, I humbly conceive them so fully satisfactory, and
abundantly sufficient for our Weal and safety, against all future Dangers, and
Encroachments on our Liberties: that if we conjoyn them with those other acts,
the KING has already consented to this Parliament, We can neither desire nor
expect any additions to make us more completely happy and secure then any
people or Kingdom under Heaven.

The KING has already by Acts of Parliament condemned and suppressed
Ship Money, his own Monopoly of making Gunpowder and Saltpetre, Fines for
Knighthood, Impositions upon Merchants goods, Tonnage and Poundage, without
grant by Parliament, Coat and Conduct money, Forest bounds and Laws, the grand
grievances under which we groaned, heretofore, so as we need never fear their
revivals, nor any others of that nature: Especially since we have the
Nomination of all great Officers and Judges, the chief promoters of them.
Besides, by Act of Parliament, he has for ever suppressed the Bishops sitting
and voting in Parliament, (a great disadvantage to him, they commonly voting
what he pleased, and being wholly at his devotion) together with the three
Grand Oppressive Courts and shops of Tyranny, Oppression, and Injustice in the
Kingdom, the great Terrors of Men's Spirits, the Invaders of their Rights,
Members, Liberties, the chief inlargers and maintainers of an unlimited
prerogative, and Authors of all our late illegal projects, pressures, the
Starchamber, the HIGH COMMISSION, and COUNCIL TABLE: the Kings chief Engines
to scrue up his Prerogative to the highest, and lay his Subjects lowest; to
which a fourth is since added in this Treaty, the Court of Wards. All which
being totally abolished, the KING has now no Court nor instrument left (that I
can think of) whereby to injure, or oppress his people as in former times.
The oppressions likewise and extortions of the stannary Courts, and of Clerks
of the Market, are rectified by acts this Session, yea this Parliament by Act
perpetuated, without any power in the KING to adjourne and dissolve it, till
all concur to dissolve it by an Act of Parliament: and when this shall be so
determined, for our future security and redress of all growing mischiefs which
may endanger us, there is a provision by another Law for a Triennall Parl. with
power to summon it, in case of the Kings refusal, without him or his writ, and
authority for the Houses to sit for a convenient time (sufficient to redress
all grievances, punish all public Offenders and settle useful Laws) without
dissolution or adjournment.

To which I may add, the Act of Oblivion, Pacification, and union with our
Brethren of Scotland: Upon granting of four of which Acts alone, the House of
Commons in their An exact Collection p. 6.
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, 15 December 1641, did with much
thankfulness, acknowledge, that His Majesty had passed more good Bills at that
time, to the advantage of the Subjects, then have been passed in many ages. And
if he shall now accumulate all the forementioned Propositions turned into
Acts, to those already enacted; with some few Laws more for the regulating of
some grievances and corruptions in the Common Law: the punishing and
restraining of some public mischiefs and crimes, and punishment of Extortions,
(which will be readily assented to, there being no loss or prejudice to the
Crown in passing them) We may through Gods blessing, in all humane
probability, (if our sins deprive us not of so great a felicity) be the freest,
happiest, securest, most flourishing and best ordered Kingdom, and People in
the World, and enjoy such privileges, and immunities, as our Ancestors never
so much as once imagined, much less aspired after. And if we will not now rest
satisfied, and thankfully contented with all these large extraordinary
Concessions, and bless God for this tender of them to our hands, the present,
and all future ages, will Chronicle us, for the most unreasonable and
ungrateful Creatures that ever sat within these walls, or the world produced
since the Creation.

Having now at large demonstrated (I hope to every rational and honest man's
conviction) the satisfactorinesse of the Kings Answers to all our Propositions
relating to the safety and settlement of our State: The satisfactoriness of the
Kings answers to the Propositions concerning the Church and Religion.
I shall in the next place proceed to those Propositions and Concessions which
concern the Peace, Settlement, and Security of our Church and Religion,
wherein there appears the greatest difficulty; the most whereof I shall
dispatch with greater brevity then the former.

There are three things especially which may endanger and disturb the Peace and
settlement of our Church and Religion, 1. Popery, Popish corruptions and
innovations, introduced by Jesuits, Papists, and superstitious Clergymen
Popishly addicted; 2. Profaneness; 3 Prelacy: and one chief thing to promote
Religion and the Churches happiness; the propagation of the Gospel, by settling
preaching Ministers throughout the Kingdom, and establishing the public
Worship and Church Government in such sort, as is most agreeable to Gods word.
For all these there is sufficient ground in the Kings answers to our
Propositions concerning them, to vote them satisfactory, as I humbly apprehend,
and hope to manifest.

For the first of these dangers to our Church and Religion, there is as good
security and provision granted us by the King, as we did or could desire, even
in our own terms. First, he has fully consented to pass an Act for the more
effectual disabling of Jesuits, Papists, Propositions and Concessions against
Papist, Popery and Popish Innovations.
and Popish Recusants, from disturbing the State, and deluding the Laws; and
for the prescribing of a New Oath for the more speedy discovery and conviction
of Recusants. Secondly, to an Act of Parliament, for the Education of the
children of Papists by Protestants, in the Protestant Religion. Thirdly, to an
Act for the due levying of the penalties against Recusants, and disposing of
them as both Houses shall appoint. Fourthly, to an Act, whereby the practices
of the Papists against the State may be prevented, the Laws against them duly
executed, and a stricter course taken to prevent the saying or hearing of Mass
in the Court, or any other part of the Kingdom; whereby it is made Treason for
any Priests to say Mass in the Court or Queens own Chapel; and so no place
left for the suying of Mass throughout the Kingdom, no not in the Queens own
Chamber. Fifthly, to an Act for abolishing all Innovations, Popish
Superstitions, Ceremonies, Altars, Rayles, Crucifixes, Images, Pictures, Copes,
Crosses, Surplices, Vestments, bowings at the name of Jesus, or toward the
Altar, etc. out of the Church, and to prevent the introduction of them for the
future. By all which Acts added to our former Laws against Recusants. I dare
affirm, we have now far better provision, and security against Papists,
Jesuits, Popish Recusants, their Popish pictures, Innovations, Superstitions,
and Ceremonies, both for our Churches and Religions safety, and States too,
then any Protestant Church, State, or Kingdom whatsoever; So as we need not
fear any future danger from Papists or Popery, if we be careful to see those
Concessions duly put into execution, when turned into Acts, and our former Laws.

Secondly, against the growth and danger of Profaneness, His Majesty has
condescended to an Act of Parliament, Propositions and Concessions against
Profaneness.
as large as can be drawn, against all Prophanations whatsoever of the Lords
day, with severe punishment for the prophaners of it in any kind; and against
all such who shall write or preach against its morality, and due observation.
And likewise to an Act to be framed and agreed upon by both Houses of
Parliament, for the reforming and regulating both Universities, and of the
Colleges of Westminster, Winchester, and Eaton, the seminaries of Learning and
Education of youth, to serve and rule in our Church and State. By which two
Grants, if duly executed, all impiety and profaneness which can endanger our
Church and Religion, will easily be suppressed for the present, and prevented
for the future.

Thirdly, Against the danger and revivall of Episcopacy, and the appendances
thereunto belonging, the King has clearly condescended to these particulars in
terminis. First, to an Act for the abolition of all Archbishops, Chancellors,
Commissaries, Deanes and Sub-Deans, Deans ard Chapters, Archdeacons, Canons,
Prebendaries, etc. and all other Episcopal, Cathedral or Collegiate Officers
both in England, Wales and Ireland: and to the disposal of all their Lands and
Possessions for such uses as the Houses shall think meet: So as there is no
fear at all of their resurrection to disturb our Church. All the question and
difference now between the King and Houses, is only concerning the Office and
power of Bishops, and their Lands and Possessions; in which two I find most
Members declare themselves to be unsatisfied, especially, those who have
purchased Bishops Lands, who are very zealous in that point for their own
Interests.

For the clearing of these two scruples, I shall examine and debate these two
particulars.

First, how far the K. has consented to the Houses Propositions for the
abolishing of the office and jurisdiction of Bishops in the Church?

Secondly, how far He has condescended, to the sale and disposal of their
Lands and Possessions? And whether his Concessions in both these be not
sufficiently satisfactory, in the sense I have stated the question in the
beginning of my debate of it?

For the first of these; It is clear, that the King in his two last Papers has
abolished and extirpated that Episcopacy and Prelacy which we intended, and
have so earnestly contested against; and contends now for no other but an
Apostolical Bishop, which is but the same in all things with an ordinary
Minister or Presbyter; which Bishop being Apostolical, and of divine
Institution, we neither may, nor can, nor ever intended to abolish by our
Covenant. To make this evident to all men's consciences: 1 The King has yielded
to take away all the power and jurisdiction whatsoever exercised by our Bishops
in point of censure or discipline, in his former answer: and contends for
nothing now but their power of Ordination only: and that not solely vested in
the Bishop, but in him and other Presbyters jointly: yet so as the Bishop
should have a negative Voice in Ordinations. But the Houses voting this
unsatisfactory, because that the Bishops for three years, during the
continuance of the Presbyterian government, should have the chief power of
Ordination; and after those three years the sole power, there being no others
vested or entrusted with that power after the three years expired; so as
Bishops might by this means creep in, and get up again by degrees as high as
ever. Thereupon the King in his final Answer hereunto, though not fully
satisfied in point of conscience, but that the power of Ordination is
principally vested only in Bishops by Divine Authority, has yet for our
satisfaction, thus far condescended to us: First, that for three years next
ensuing, during the Presbyteriall Government, no Bishops shall at all exercise
this power of Ordination in the Church. Secondly, That if he can be satisfied
in point of Conscience within that time, upon conference with Divines, That
this power of Ordination, so far as to have a Negative voice in it, belongs not
only unto Apostolical Bishops by a divine Right; then he will fully consent to
the utter abolition even of this power of Ordination in the Bishops. Thirdly,
That after the three years are expired, if the King can neither satisfy his
Houses in point of conscience, nor they him upon debate, That this power of
Ordination belongs Iure Divino to Bishops; that yet the exercise of that power
shall be totally suspended in them till He and both Houses shall agree upon a
Government, and by Act of Parliament settle a Form of Ordination. So as if both
Houses never consent that Bishops shall hereafter have a hand or negative voice
in Ordination, this power of Bishops is perpetuaily suspended, and as to the
exercise of it, perpetually abolished even by this Concession, so as it can
never be revived again without both Houses concurring assents. And by this
means, Episcopacy is totally extirpated root and branch, according to the
Covenant, which has been so much pressed in this debate, though the words of
it have been somewhat mistaken, that we therein absolutely covenant to
extirpate Episcopacy; when as the words are only, That we shall endeavor the
extirpation of Prelacy, that is, of Archbishops and Bishops, etc. And that
certainly we have done, and in a great measure accomplished, so far as to
satisfy both the words and intention of the Covenant, though a concurrent
power of Ordination be left in Bishops, which yet is now totally suspended: For
as we covenant in the same clause to endeavor to root out Popery,
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to
be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; in the extirpation
of which, I am certain we have not proceeded by an hundred degrees, so far as
we have actually done in the extirpation of Episcopacy, there being no
Proposition at all in the Treaty for the extirpation of Heresy, Schism and
Errors, as there is of Episcopacy;) and yet the Gentlemen who are so zealous
for the Covenant, persuade themselves, they and we have not violated it in
these particulars: therefore much less in the point of Prelacy and Bishops,
since we have left them nothing at all but a mere power of Ordination, actually
suspended from any future execution, but by both Houses assents. Fourthly, the
King by abolishing Archbishops, and Deans and Chapters, has also therein
actually abolished all Bishops too for the future, except those who are already
made. For by the Laws and custom of the Realm See the Book of Ordination of
Ministers, and Bishops, etc. 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. c. 8.
No Bishop can be consecrated but by an Archbishop, or some deputation from
him, in case of sickness; nor any Bishop made or consecrated, unless he be
first elected by the Dean and Chapter, upon a Conge deslier issued out to them
to choose one. Now there being no Deanes and Chapters left to elect, nor
Archbishop to consecrate any Bishop for the future, there can be no Bishop at
all hereafter made in England or Ireland: and so the Bishop being thereby
abolished and extirpated, his power of Ordination must be destroyed with his
Function, as well as suspended. All which considered, I cannot but conclude,
the Kings final Answer as to the Office of, and Ordination by Bishops, to be
completely satisfactory to our demands.

And so much the rather, because the King in this particular of Ordination,
pleads only dissatisfaction in polnt of Conscience for closing with us in this
seeming punctilio; and if it were not merely Conscience (though some have over
rashly censured it for a mere pretense to keep up Bishops still) he that has
granted and yielded us the greater, would never contest with us for the lesser,
nor go so far in the abolition of Episcopacy as he has done. And truly, I
doubt not, but His Majesty by conference may soon be satisfied in this point:
Nay, had his own Divines dealt faithfully with him, in the Isle of Wight, He
might have been easily satisfied in this particular: in which I doubt not by
Gods blessing to undertake to satisfy him both in point of Episcopacy, that it
is in all things the same with Presbytery; and that the ordination of
Presbyters and Ministers by divine Right, belongs only to Presbyters as such,
and not to Bishops as Bishops; who for above a thousand years after Christ
claimed the chief, but not the sole interest in it, not by divine Right and
Authority, but merely by Canons and Custom long after the Apostles time; which
I have proved at large long since, in my Vnbishoping of Timothy and Titus,
which none of the Bishops or their Patrons ever yet attempted to answer, though
I particularly challenged them to do it.

Only this, I shall now say in brief, for some satisfaction in the point to
other Members.

1. That there is no one Text of Scripture to prove, that Bishops Iure divine
are distinct from Presbyters in any thing, much less in this particular of
having a negative Voice, or sole, or principal interest, as Bishops (so
distinguished) in the power of Ordination^ but a direct Text to the contrary, 1 Timothy 4. 14 to omit others.

2 That the pretense of impropriating Ordination to Bishops distinct from
Presbyters by divine Right, is grounded upon these two gross mistakes, that
Timothy and Titus were Bishops properly so called; the one of Ephesus, the
other of Crete; and that this power of ordaining Elders, was vested in them
quatenus Bishops only, and not otherwise by divine institution; for proof of
the first, the Postscript^ of Paul's Epistles to them (and no one Text of
Scripture) are cited; and the 1 Timothy 5. 22. Tit. 1. 5. relating only to
Ordination, for the latter. But it is clear as the noonday Sun, by Scripture,
that Timothy was never a Bishop properly so called, much less the first or
sole Bishop of Ephesus, as is evident by sundry texts, especially by Act. 20.
4, 5, 6, 15, 17, 18, 21, 29, 30, 31. compared together; nor Titus a Bishop
properly so termed, distinct from a Presbyter; much less the first or sole
Bishop of Crete: nor do either of those texts prove, that they had the power of
Ordination by divine Right vested in them two, merely as Bishops distinct from,
or superior to Presbyters, as I have undenyably manifested in my Vnbishoping
of Timothy and Titus. And as for the Postscripts to these Epistles, terming
Timothy ordained first Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Crete, they are no part
of the text, first extant in, and invented by This I have fully proved in my
Vnbishoping of Timothy and Titus. And of the Antipathy of English Prelacy to
Unity and Monarchy, par 1. 2. c. 9.
Occumenius (none of the authentickst Authors) above 1050 years after Christ,
and annexed only to the end of his Commentary on those Epistles, not adjoined
to the Text; and they are not only, omitted in most Manuscripts and printed
Editions and Translations of these Epistles, but apparently false in
themselves, as I have at large demonstrated in some printed Books. Therefore
this point of conscience may soon be satisfied.

3 That no Bishops for 1200 years after Christ, did ever claim the chief power
in Ordination by any Divine Right as Bishops, but merely by Canons or Custom
long after the Apostles; and that in the Primitive times, before any
re^^riction by Councels, Presbyters in many places did not only See my
Vnbishoping of Tim. and Titus, where this is largely proved.
ordain Ministers and Deacous without Bishops, and Bishops never but jointly
with Presbyters; but likewise ordain Bishops themselves, as Jerome,
Epiphanius, Augustine and others assure us; and sometimes joined in the
consecration and enstallment of Popes themselves and Archbishops, for defect of
Bishops.

4. That it is the Sea this largely proved in my Vnbishoping of Timothy and
Titus, and in Gersom. Bucerus de Gubernat. Ecclesiae.
constant tenent of all the eminentest Protestant Divines (and some learned
Papists too) and the practice of all the reformed Churches, that the Divine
right of Ordination belongs originally to the whole Church; but ministerially
to Presbyters as such, not to Bishops as Bishops: and that which undeniably
clears it up to me, is this. That in the New Testament we find both Apostles,
some of the 70 Disciples, Evangelists and Presbyters equally ordaining Elders
or Presbyters: but not any one who is once in Scripture styled a Bishop, either
conferring orders upon any, much less eonomine and jure, as a Bishop. And
since the Apostles time we find in point of use and practice, Popes,
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Metropolitans, Cardinals, Abbots, in some places (who
are not Iure Divino, nor Bishops properly so called, but distinguished from
them in degree) ordaining Presbyters and Ministers as well as Bishops quatenus
Bishops; and that never by themselves, but all by the Presbyters joint
concurrence then present, who by the fourth Council of Carthage, the Canon
law, the very Canons of Trent also, and our own book of Ordination and our
Canons ought also to join with them in the Ordination: Now all these distinct
Orders and Degrees, claiming and exercising this power by a Divine Right, and
many of their Functions being confessed not to be of Divine Right, (as Popes,
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Metropolitans, Abbots and Chorall Bishops) who yet
ordain; and these always necessarily calling Presbyters (who are clearly of
Divine Right) to join with them in their Ordination, and not doing it alone, is
an unanswerable proof to me, that they all concur in this action in no other
right or notion at all, but merely as they are Presbyters, in which they all
accord, and have one and the same authority; not in their own capacities,
wherein they are all discriminated, and are not all of Divine, but only of
humane institution; Presbyters, qua Presbyters, being the properest persons to
ordain others of their own degree and function; as Doctors of Divinity, law
and Physic in the Universities, create Doctors of their several Professions;
and Bishops consecrate Bishops and Archbishops; even as a man begets a man of
his own quality and degree; and all other creatures generate those of their own
kind, without the concurrence of any her distinct species paramount them.

As for the Angel of the Church of Ephesus (much insisted on in the Isle of
Wight, to prove an Episcopacy Iure Divino distinct from Presbytery) I never
read that this Angel ordained any Presbyters; eit^er quatenus Angel or Bishop:
nor find I the name of a Bishop in any of St. John's Writings, but the title of
a Presbyter or Elder very frequent, by which himself is styled. And I wonder
much the King or his Bishops should now so much insist upon this Angel, and
assert him to be a Lord Bishop, not an ordinary Minister.

For first, See my Antipathy of the English prelacy, part. 2. page 479. to 484.
King James himself, and all the Bishops of Engl. with those learned men
employed by them in the last Translation of the Bible, in the very contents
prefixed to this Chap. Rev. 2. resolve the Angels of those Churches to be
Ministers, in these very words: What is commanded to be written to the Angels,
THAT IS THE MINISTERS (not Bishop) of the Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. If
then the Angels, by their joint confessions, when these Contents were first
composed and prefixed, were only the Ministers (not Bishops) of these Churches,
and have ever since been constantly admitted, confessed, and this published to
be so even in our authorized Bibles used in all Churches, Chapels, Families,
and printed cum privilegio five or six times a year, without any alteration or
disallowance of this Exposition: I marvel much how the Bishops now dare inform
the King, That these Angels certainly were only Bishops but not Ministers,
diametrally contrary to these authorized Contents of their own or Predecessors
affixing, with learned King James his approbation; or how his Majesty when He
knows it can believe them, though they should averr it, against His own
Fathers, and the whole Church of Englands resolution, which has so long
received and approved this Translation (excluding all others in public) and
these Contents thereto prefixed.

Secondly, Admit this Angel of Ephesus to be a Diocesan Bishop, distinct: from
an ordinary Presbyter, yet he was but an Apostate, who had lost his first love,
ver. 4. And if Timothy (as they affirm) was sole Bishop of Ephesus, he must be
the Apostate (being at that time living) unless he resigned his office to some
other, which is improbable. And for our Bishops to father that divine Right of
their Prelacy upon an Apostate Angel, is no good Divinity, and less Policy at
this instant. And this their rotten foundation upon an Apostate, may probably
be the ground, why so many Prelates in this and former ages have turned
Apostates after they were created Bishops.

Thirdly, if those Angels in the Revelation were really Lord Bishops, then
certainly the Elders therein mentioned can be no other then Presbyters, not
Bishops, as the Prelates themselves will grant: And if so, then verily the
Presbyter is the supreme of the two, both in point of Dignity, Ministry, and
precedence; which is very observable. For first, I find the 24 Elders there
mentioned, sitting upon twenty four seats round about Christ's Throne (and
nearest to it) Rev. 4. 4. c. 11. 16. but the Angels standing (not sitting)
round about it and them, without any seats at all provided for them (as
inferior attendants,) Rev. 5. 11. c. 7. 11. Secondly, I find these Elders not
only sitting on seats next Christ's throne; but likewise clothed with white
raiment and having on their heads Crowns of Gold the emblem of supreme
Authority, power and honor) Rev. 4. 4. 10. whereas the Angels had neither
white raiment nor Crowns; so it seems Bishops had no lawn sleeves, nor Rochets,
nor Miters then, though they have since usurped and robbed the Presbyters of them.

Thirdly, These Elders, not the Angels, are there always introduced Rev. 4.
10, 11. c. 5. 8, 9. c. 11. 16, 17, 18.
worshipping and falling down before Christ's Throne; holding harps and golden
viols in their hands full of odors, representing the prayers of the Saints, and
singing the new song to him; as the principal Officers and Ministers of Christ)
when as the Angels standing by, act or speak little in these kinds, like our
late dumb unpreaching and rare-praying Prelates.

Fourthly, the 24 Elders (not the Angels) sing this new Song of praise to
Christ, 1 Rev. 5. 9. 10. Worthy art thou to take the book, etc. And have made
us Kings and Priests (not Angels or Bishops) to God the Father; and we (not
the Angels) that REIGN on the Earth, therefore in all these respects, if the
Angels in the Apocalypse be Bishops, as our Prelates dream; the Elders must
of necessity jure divino, be their Superiors and Lords paramount in point of
dignity, honor, Sovereignty, Ministry, and they inferior in jurisdiction and
power unto Presbyters, not superior, as they would really make themselves. When
his Majesty shall be informed of these, and many other particulars of this
kind, I doubt not but his conscience will be so much satisfied, as wholly to
forgo and lay aside his pretended Apostolical Bishops, both in point of
function and ordination too, as being the same with Presbyters. And since in
his last paper but one, he has professed to retain no other Bishops, but such
as are Apostolical; he must presently quit all those about him, and their
possessions too, since neither of them are Apostolical, Acts 20. 17. 28. Phil.
1. 1. Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7.
the Apostolical Bishops being many always over one Church and Congregation,
not one over many Churches, or an whole Diocese, as ours are: and having no
Palaces, Manors, Lands and Possessions: as I shall prove in the next
particular, which comes to be now debated, having fully cleared this to be
satisfactory.

For the second question concerning the sale of Bishops lands, how far the King
has condescended to it? And whether the Kings answers to the first branch of
that Proposition be satisfactory in the premised sense?

I confess I find this the grand and most swaying Argument of all others used
by those who differ from me in the Treaty, as not satisfactory, because the
King absolutely refuses to agree to the sale of Bishops Lands, for the
satisfaction of those public debts, for which they are engaged by both Houses,
whereby purchasers and lenders upon that assurance, will be not only defrauded
but cheated of their debts and purchases, many of them quite undone and ruined,
and the honor and public faith of both Houses for ever forfeited and laid in
the dust. And indeed this is a very sensible argument, especially to such
Members who have either purchased Bishops lands, or advanced moneys upon their
security, very fit to be fully answered; which I shall endeavor to do, I
hope to their full satisfaction and content.

I confess it to be most just and equal, that all who have purchased Bishops
Lands, or advanced moneys to the State upon them, should receive full
satisfaction, and be no losers by it, but rather gainers: And I could have as
heartily desired as any Member in this House, that the King in this particular
of Bishops lands had given us plenary satisfaction; the rather because I was
employed by the Houses as one of the Contractors (though without my seeking,
and to my prejudice, by neglecting my calling, and receiving as yet not one
farthing salary for it, though I have spent and lost some hundred of pounds in
and by that employment) and had he really done it, I presume few Members of
this House now of a different opinion, would have voted the Kings Answers to
the whole Treaty unsatisfactory. But to take them as they are.

First, the King has so far condescended to their sale and disposal, made or
to be made; as that the purchasers shall by Act of Parliament enjoy a lease of
them, not from the Bishops themselves but from the Crown for 99. years space,
reserving only the reversions afterward to the Crown, and that for the use of
the Church in general terms.

Secondly, The King will be content with the reservation only of the old, or
some other moderate rent to Him and His Heirs, to be employed only for the
Churches use and benefit.

Thirdly, That for the absolute sale or alienation of them, he cannot in point
of conscience consent unto it, being Sacrilege, and an unlawful Act in the
opinion of all Divines, as well in foreign Reformed Churches as Domestic.

This (I remember and conceive) is the sum of his final answer to this
Proposition.

To examine these particulars a little in the general, and then by parts.

First, I must make bold to inform you in the general; That the King and His
Predecessors, Kings of this Realm, were the Sea Goodwin, Catalogue of English
Bishops. Rastalls abridgement, Tit. Bishops sust fruits and (...),
Original founders of all our Bishoprieks, and patrons of them. That all their
Lands, Rent and Revenues whatsoever, originally proceeded from the Crown and
Kings of England, of whom they are bolden; and that in times of vacancy, the
King enjoyes the profits of their temperalities, as a part of His Royal
Revenue, and receives both tenths and first fruits out of them upon every death
or translation of the Bishops. And therefore there is very great reason and
Justice too, they should be still held of the Crown, and not totally
translated out of it, and that the King and His successors should receive some
reasonable Revenue or compensation out of them, parting with such an interest
in recompense for them.

Secondly, That in the several Treaties with the King, Februar. 1. 1641. and
July 11. 1646. All the Lands, Possessions, Rents and Reversions both of
Archbishops and Bishops, and likewise of Deans and Chapters, and other Officers
of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, were by Act of Parliament to be settled
in the very real and actual possession of the King, His Heirs and Successors
for ever, to their own proper use, except only their Impropriations, Advowsons,
Tithes, and Pensions which are not now to be sold. And, that the A Colllection
etc. p. 124^ 125. 902.
Ordinances for settling of Bishops Lands, Rents and Possessions in Fe^ffees, A
Collection, etc. ^. 922, 23, etc.
and engaging and selling them for the moneys lent upon the Public says and
doubled, to raise 200000. l. for disbanding of the Scotch Army, passed on the
Houses till October and November, 1646: till which time there was no thought
nor intent at all, to sell or alienate them from the Crown. If then the King
in two or three former Treaties, by both Houses full and free consent, and a A
Colllection p. 124, 125.
Bill passed by them for that purpose; was to enjoy to himself, his Heirs and
Successors all the demesne Lands, Manors, Possessions, Reversions, Rents,
Inheritances and Revenues of Archbishops and Bishops; and likewise of Deans and
Chapters, Prebends, and the like, it seems to me very just and reasonable, that
he should demand and enjoy the Reversions of them after ninety nine years, and
such a moderate Rent as he and both Houses shall agree on. And that this Answer
of the Kings, wherein he demands so little now, only for the Churches use and
benefit, not his own should be fully satisfactory, because we were very well
content in former Treaties, He and his Heirs should enjoy the whole, only to
their own use.

Thirdly, That near one moiety of the Archbishops and Bishops possessions and
revenues, consists in Impropriations, Tithes, Pensions, and the like, which the
King is content wholly to part with for the increase of Ministers means, and
the benefit of the Church, without any Reservation or Recompense: And with all
Deans and Chapters Lands and Revenues to boot. Therefore it should be
unsatisfactory, or unreasonable in no man's judgment, for the King to reserve
some interest in the Reversions and Rents only of their demesne lands.

Fourthly, The King demands the Riversions of the Lands after ninety nine
years, and some present moderate Rent, not for the use and support of the
Bishops, and to keep a root for them to grow up again in our Church, (as has
been mistaken by some;) Archbishops and Bishops too, being extirpated root and
branch by the Kings former Answers (as I have manifested;) but only for the use
of the Church, in such manner as the King and we shall agree to settle them who
shall take care that no Bishop shall be a sharer in them, all being to be
settled in the CROWN alone, and nothing in Reversion or Possession to, in or
upon the Bishops.

Fifthly, The King consents, that the Purchasers of Bishops Lands shall by Act
of Parliament have a Lease of them for ninety nine years, reserving the
Reversion only after that term: which I conceive is no ill, but a very good
bargain for the Purchasers; such a Lease by Act of Parliament, being far better
then the whole Inheritance by a bare Ordinance of both Houses, which for ought
I know, if not confirmed by a subsequent Act of Parliament, will prove little
better then a Tenancy at Will, or a Lease so long only as this Parliament
continues; Ordinances of both Houses only without the Kings Royal assent
thereto being a new device of this present Parliament; to supply some present
necessities for our necessary defense and preservation, during the Kings
absence and hostility, never known nor used in any former Parliaments, what
ever has been conceived to the contrary. Therefore this offer of the K. is no
prejudice at all, but a great advantage to the Purchasers, wherewith they
should rest fully satisfied. But admit it be any loss at all to them, and not
rather a gain (as things now stand in our tottering condition,) yet it is only
of the reversion of these lands after ninety nine years, worth not above one
quarter or half a years purchase at the utmost; which considering the low
values at which Bishops lands are sold, and the cheap rate now that most
purchasers gave for Bills of Public faith, with which they bought them, they
may be well content to lose, to secure their purchases for ninety nine years,
in these tumultuous and fluctuating times; when some wise men who have made
such purchases, would very gladly give two or three years purchase, if not
more, at the assurance Office, to any who will ensure their estates in Bishops
lands for so long a term, and think they had a good bargain too, at leastwise
far better then the Bishops in case they should revive again, as some fear, who
must be kept starving for 99 years, in expectation of a dry Reversion. All
which considered, the Kings Answers touching such Reversions, I humbly conceive
will be very satisfactory to the purchasers of Bishops lands themselves; who
are most displeased with it.

As to that which has been objected, Object.
that some have purchased Reversions of Bishops Lands after 99 years in being,
who must absolutely lose their purchase money after this rate, which is neither
just nor honorable for the Parliament.

I answer, Answer.
that this is but the case of three or four only: that their purchases are of
no considerable value: nor bought fingly by themselves, but jointly with Lands
or Rents in possession of good value; in which they had the cheaper purchase to
take off the Reversion after so long a term, which loss in the Reversion they
may contentedly undergo to purchase their own and the Kingdoms peace, and
enjoy what they have purchased with these Reversions in possession, without
trouble or eviction by Act of Parliament for 99, years space, or receive other
satisfaction from the King and Parliament to their contentment in such manner
as I shall presently inform you.

Sixthly, To that concerning the present Rents which the Kingdemands out of
Bishops Lands which sticks most with Purchasers: many of them having purchased
nothing but Rents, and others more rents then Lands in possession, which Rents
must all be lost, if they must pay their old rents over to the King to their
undoing, which would be both unjust, unconscionable, and dishonorable to the
Houses, upon whose assurance and engagement to enjoy their bargains, they were
induced both to lend money on, and to purchase these Lands afterward, and
would be no better then plain cheating, and render them odious to all the
world, as some have objected.

I will not answer it with Caveat emptor, but desire them to observe that the
King in his answer, does not peremptorily require the Bishops old rents during
the 99. years, but only disjunctively, either the old Rent, or some other
moderate Rent to be agreed on, and if only a moderate proportion of the old
rent be paid to the King, the Purchaser is sure to enjoy, the residue during
the 99 years, and so his purchase money not totally lost, as is objected.
Besides, the King will not reserve these Rents to the use of himself, or the
Crown, but only to the Church, and maintenance of the Ministers, in such manner
as He and his Houses shall agree in the Bill for settling these Lands, in the
way propounded by him. Which offer opens this just and honorable way for the
Houses to give all Purchasers of Bishops Land and Rents full satisfaction both
for the loss of their reversions after 99 years, and for the present rents
which shall be reserved to the Crown out of Bishops Lands to the Churches use,
which I believe the King and Houses will readily consent to; and that is, to
settle by Act of Parliament, so much of the Dean and Chapters demein Lands and
Rents, upon the Purchasers, as the loss of their Reversions after 99. years,
and present Rent to the Crown shall amount unto, upon a just computation. By
which means the Purchasers, by way of Exchange of Deans and Chapters Lands and
Rents for their Bishops, shall have such full and satisfactory content, even in
kind, as will clear the Honor, justice, and Reputation of the Houses fair
dealings in this particular, throughout all the world, and give the Ministers
full satisfaction likewise, for the augmentation of whose livings and
maintenance the Deanes and Chapters Lands and Rents are designed; by settling
the reversion and Rents reserved to the Crown out of the Bishops Lands, for the
Churches use, upon those who should have enjoyed the Deans and Chapters Lands
thus settled on the Purchasers by exchange, which being of equal value, can be
no loss nor prejudice to any.

This is such a visible and real satisfaction to all purchasers, as none of
them can justly open their mouths against, being both for their own security
and advantage, and the Kingdoms settlement. But if any of them dislike this
real satisfaction (which the King no doubt will yield to) there is an other
means provided by this very Treaty for their satisfaction; and that is, by
ready money, for what ever they shall lose by Bishops Lands in possession or
reversion, by this Reservation to the Crown, which I am sure they never will
nor can refuse in Justice or equity; they having the Bishops Lands conveyed to
them only, by way of Morgage or security for Moneys lent upon the public
faith. And the houses by the 12th. Article of this Treaty have time within two
years space by Act or Acts, to raise any sums of money for the payment of the
public debts of the Kingdom, whereof the moneys lent upon Bishops Lands and
the public faith, are a principal part; and the same Justice of the Houses
which has already provided by several Ordinances, a sufficient recompense and
satisfaction for purchasers of Bishops Lands in cases of eviction, or of
emergent charges and encumbrances discovered after the purchases made, may be a
sufficient assurance to them of the Houses Justice, that they will give them as
good or better satisfaction by one of these two ways I have here propounded,
for any thing they shall part with to the King or Church for the settlement of
the Kingdoms peace.

Seventhly, it has been the solemn Protestation and Declaration of both
Houses of Parliament, in all their Remonstrances to the King, Kingdom and
foreign States, that they have taken up defensive Arms against the Kings
Party, only for the maintenance of Religion, Laws, Liberties, etc. and to
bring Delinquents to condign punishment. Now Bishops Lands and Rents, I am
certain, are neither our Religion, Lawers, nor Liberties; and I think they
are no Delinquents, though most Bishops are. And shall we now after seven
years Wars, and sixty days Treaty, make Bishops Lands, which for five
years time or more of our Wars were never thought of, the sole or principal
cause at least of our present breach with the King, and the only ground of a
new War? God forbid: will not the world then justly censure us for notoriou^s
hypocrites and impostors, pretend^ng one thing, and intending another? will
they not then say, that Bishops Palaces and Lands were the only Religion and
Liberty we have fought for, the only Delinquents we have brought to public
Justice and execution? that we would never have suppressed Archbishops and
Bishops, nor entered into a solemn League and Covenant, with bands listed up to
heaven, to endeavor to extirpate them as Antichristian, but only to gain and
retain all their Lands and Revenues, and never condemned their Functions, but
only to seize on their Possessions? And that we must now maintain an Army
upon their exhausted Purses and Estates, only to defend these Parchasers Titles
to the Bishops Inheritances? If so, for shame let us never break off this
Treaty, nor ruin two or three Kingdoms upon such an absurd dissatisfaction as
this: And if our Parchasers of Bishops Lands shall still refuse to rest
satisfied with that twofold recompense I have formerly mentioned, and keep up
an Army to maintain their Purchases, rather then yield to any reason, I shall
humbly move, that not the whole Kingdom, but themselves may defray the Armies
Taxes and Quarters, and then I am certain they will have a dearer bargain
then what the King or I have proposed for their satisfaction.

And the better to persuade them to embrace this compensation I have only this
more to offer both to them and you; That if you break off with the King upon
this point, or close with the Army, they are most certain to lose all for a
bare Ordinance of both Houses in no legal Title, nor good security aganst King
or Bishops, without the Kings concurrence and Royal assent unto it, and valid
no longer then maintained by the Sword, the worst and most hazardous Title of
all others, which will quickly cost the Purchasers and Kingdom treble the
value of all the Bishops Revenues: and if they close with the Army to break the
Treaty, they tell them in direct terms in print, in The Case of the Army truly
stated (presented to the General by the Agitators of the Army at Hampstead,
October, 15. 1647.) page 16. That whereas the times were wholly corrupt, when
persons were appointed to make sale of Bishops Lands; and whereas
Parliament Men, Committee Men, and Kin^folks were the only buyers, and much is
sold, and yet it is presended, that little or no money is received: And whereas
Lords, Parliament Men, and some other rich men, have vast sums of Arrears
allowed them in their Purchase, and all their moneys lent to the State paid
them, while others are left in necessity, to whom the State is much indebted,
and so present Money that might be for the equal advantage of all, is not
brought into the public Treasury by those sales: Its therefore to bea insisted
on, that the sale of Bishops Lands be reviewed, and that they may be sold to
their worth; and for present Moneys for the public use, and that the sale of
all such be recalled as have not been sold to their worth, or for present money.

This particular among others, they profess they have entered into a solemn
engagement to prosecute, and are now marched up to London accordingly to pursue
it, as their late Remonstrance and Declaration intimates, and themselves
profess by word of mouth; which I desire the Members who have purchased
Bishops Lands (who are generally most unsatisfied with the Kings answers,
especially in this particular) seriously to consider, and then to make their
Election; Whether they will now close with the Kings Concessions, and what I
have here propounded for satisfaction of their Reversions after 99. years, and
present Rents they may chance to part with, and so secure their purchases for
this term by Act of Parliament, and have full compensation for what they part
with, either in ready money, or Deans and Chapters Lands and Rents, and so be
no losers, but great gainers by the bargain; or else break with the King to
please the Army, and so be certain to lose all between them, not only once,
but twice over: for the Agitators in the Army tell them plainly, That all
their Purchases shall be reviewed; and if they have purchased them to an under
rate, or not for ready Money (which not one of them has done, but by Tickets
of their own, or bought at very low values of others, which it is like they
will also examine) that then their sales shall be absolutely recalled, and sold
to others at full values for ready money, and so all is lost in good earnest;
or else they must re-purchase them for ready moneys at higher values, without
any assurance from the King by Act of Parliament, and so lose them again the
second time, if ever He or his Prelaticall party should prevail, and yet be
enforced to answer and restore all the mean Profits they have taken to boot. A
very hard chapter and bargain to digest, if they advisedly consider it, which
by accepting the Kings offer is most certainly prevented: Who perchance in
shore time, upon second thoughts, and conference with learned men for the
satisfaction of his conscience in the point of sacrilege, if he should consent
to the total alienation of these Lands from the Church, may come up fully to
our desires, and part with the very inheritance to the purchasers, as amply a^
they have purchased it, rather then leave his own and the Kingdoms interest
wholly unsettled.

And for my part, I make little question, that had the Prelates and Clergymen
with the King at the Isle of Wight, dealt heartily and clearly with him in this
particular, of the sale of Bishops Lands, that might have easily satisfied his
conscience in this very thing, as well as in others; from these grounds and
matters of fact, which I shall but point at, to satisfy others, who perchance
are scrupulous herein (even in point of conscience) as well as the King.

First, the King in his last Paper (...), in express terms protesseth, That he
has abalished all but the Apostolical Bishops, invested with a Negative Vay^e
or Power in point of Ordination: And if so, then I am certain, he has likewise
abolished all Bishops Palaces, Lordships, Revenues, Rents and Possessions; it
being most certain, that neither the Apo^ls themselves, not any Apostolical
Bishops of their Ordination, in their days, or for above 300. years after, had
any Lands or Possessions annexed to their Apostleships, or Bishoprics, but
lived merely upon the Mat. 8. 22. Luke 8. 2. Acts 3. 6. c. 4. 34. 35. 36. 37.
c. 10. 10 5. c. 20. 34. 1 Cor. 4. 12. 1 These. 2. 9. Phil. 4. 10. 10. 20. 1 Cor.
11. 7, 8, 9. Gal. 1. 8.
a^ms and voluntary contributions of the people, (as Christ himself, Paul and
the other Apostles did) as all See M. Seldens Hist. of Tithes.
Historiant accord If then his Majesty will retain none but Apostolical
Bishops, he must necessarily take away their temporal, Lands and possessions
annexed to then Bishoprics, to make them such, if he has not already done is
by his final Answer to this proposition, as I conceive he has.

Secondly, it is generally agreed by Historians, that Constantine the great,
(our own Countryman borne, and first Crowned Emperor at York, Polychron. l.
4. c. 26. See. D. Crakenthorp of Constable. Donat. Eusebius. de. v^^a Constamin.
to the eternal honor of our Island, he being the first Christian Emperor,
and greatest advancer of the Christian Religion, and destroyer of Paganism) was
the first who endowed the Church and Bishops with any temporal Possessions,
about 350. years after Christ, though his pretended donation to the Pope, be
but a mere fable; as Doctor Crakenthorp and others have manifested at large.
Now c. 22. in vita Sylvestri.
Ioannes Parisiensis, Nauclerus Hist. l. 4. c. 26:
Polychronicon, our English Apostle Dialog. l. 4. c. 15, 16, 17. 26.
John Wickliffe, our noble Martyr the Fox Acts and Monu. p. 517. 522.
Lord Cobham, Answer to the Preface of M Moors Book, p 116.
John Frith a Martyr, learned Ser. on Hag. 1 p. 176. Defense of the Apology.
part 6. c. 9. divis. 3.
Bishop Jewel, and Tho. Becons Reports of certain men, vol. 3. f 341.
others out of them record, That when Constantine endowed the Church and
Bishops with temporal Lands and possessions, the voice of an Angel was heard
in the Air, crying out; Hodie venenum insunditur in Ecclesiam, this day is
poison powered into the whele Church of God: And from that time, say they,
because of the great Riches the Church had, she was made the more secular; and
had more worldly business, then spiritual devotion; and more pomp and boast
outward, then holiness inward: Religio peperit divilias, and filia devoravit
matrem, which our Bishops and Translators of the Bible likewise mention in
their Epistle prefixed to it. And Opus 90. Dierun, c. 124.
Ockam says, and others observe, That whereas all or most of the Bishops of
Rome before that time were Martyrs, scarce one of them proved a Martyr
afterward; but in stead of being Martyrs, fell a persecuting and making
Martyrs. And if this voice of the Angel (perchance a Bishop, since our Prelates
will needs have the Angels in Rev. 2. to be Bishops) weretrue, and subsequent
experience has found it so, That Bishops and Church-mens Temporal Lands,
Possessions and endowments, are no other but poison to the Church, and his
Majesty be convinced of the truth of this story, I hope he will be satisfied in
point of Conscience, that it is no sacrilege, but wholesome Physic, to take
away this poison from the Church, which has so much infected, corrupted, and
would in fine destroy it and the Bishops too, and eat out all their piety and
devotion.

Thirdly, most Bishops long after Constantines time, had very small or no
Revenues, Lands, and no other Palaces to reside in, but poor little Cottages;
it being all men's opinion in those days, Fox Acts and Monu. vol. 2. p. 609.
610.
That stately Palaces belonged only unto Emperors and Princes, and Cottages
and Churches unto Bishops. The Gra. did. 41.
fourth council of Carthage, about the year of our Lord 390. decreed, That
the Bishop should have HOSPITIOLVM, ali^tle COTTAGE or Hospital to dwell in,
near the Church, not a Palace. And in the Spel. Council. tom. 1. p. 261. 263.
Excerptions of Egbert Archbishop of York, An. 750. I find the same Canon
renewed among us, as the Canon Law of this Realm, That Bishops and Presbyters
should have Hospitiolum, a small Cottageneer the Church to live in; not a
stately Mansion. So as our Bishops in those days had no great Palaces,
Mannours, Temporalities, and their very Cathedrals were built only with
Wattle, or a few boards pieced together, and covered but with reed;
Stone-Churches covered over with Slat or Lead, being not in use among the
Britians, Scots or Irish for many hundred years, as De Brit. Eccl. Primordiis
c. 4. p. 661. 736. 737. 13. 14.
Bishop Usher himself asserts out of Beda, Eccles. hist. l. 3. c. 4. 5. and
Bernard in the life of Malachy: And if their Cathedral Churches were so mean,
their Palaces certainly were but answerable (poor little Cottages) and their
revenues little or nothing^ but the peoples Alms. Saint Augustine that
renowned Bishop of Hippo, had but a mean house to live in, his Dishes and
Trenchers were all Earthen, Stone, or Wood, his Table furnished with Pulse,
Herbs and a little Pottage only, for the most part, seldom with Flesh: he
had no Plate, but five or fix Spoones, and when he dyed he made no Will at all,
because the poor Saint of Christ had nothing to bequeath; as c. 21, 22. etc.
Possidonius records in his life. See his Life before his Works, ho. 33. in
Matthew. 21. in 1 Cor.
Saint Chrysostom the Great famous Patriarch of Constantinople,^ and Gregory
Nazianzen his Predecessor, had no stately Palace, Furniture, Household stuff,
train of Attendance, nor any goods or Revenues at all, nor Niceph. Eccl. hist.
l. 18. c. 39. n Niceph. l. 8. c. 42. Socra. eccl. hist. l. 1. c. 12.
John the Almoner that succeeded them, nor that famous Naz. ora^ 35.
Spiridion, who kept a stock as a mean Shepherd, though a Bishop: and eminent
Saint Hierom (though no Bishop, yet the learned and famous Scholar in his
age, or any after, and of great repute, Epist. 2.
writes of himself, that he lived in pa^peri Tuguriolo, in a poor little
cottage, having scarce clothes to cover his nakedness. So M. Wheten. p 44, 45,
46.
Saint Ambrose, Bishop of Millaine, was very poor, brake the Chalices in
pieces to relieve poor people, and used this Maxim, Gloriosa in Sacerdotibus
Domini paupertas. And if these great Lights, Bishops and Fathers of the Church
(in whose Names our Prelates so much triumph) were so poor, that they had no
Palaces, Houses and temporal Possessions, as our Archbishops and Bishops had;
I can yet discern no matter of concience in it, why our Bishops should have
more then these Pillars of the Church, either enjoyed or desired, they being
content with food and raiment as Paul was, and desiring no more. It is
Sulpitius Scverus sacr. hist. l. 2. Vssertus de Brit. Ec. Primordiis, p. 196.
storied of our ancientest Bishops that I read of, present at the Council of
Ariminum, Anno Domini 379. That they were so poor, that inopia preprii,
publico ust sunt, they were maintained at the Emperors public cost, for want
of private maintenance of their own; yet they were eminent both for Piety and
Learning. And if their Predecessors were anciently so poor, it is no point of
conscience to deprive our Lord Bishops, not only of their Lands, but Function
too, for the peace and settlement of three Kingdoms, now at the point of ruin.
When the Church of Christ was miserably rent and torn in Africa by the
schismatic Donatists, who would have no Prelates and Bishops; that eminent
Bishop of Hippo Saint Augustine, and almost three hundred Affrican Bishops
more, were content to lay down their Bishoprics wholly for that Churches
peace: and thereupon Saint August. de Gestis (...) Emeri^a, Dona^. Tom. 7.
parl. 1. p. 772.
Augustine uttered these memorable words, which I heartily with all our Bishops
would consider, and then they would lay down both their Lands and Bishoprics
too, for our three Kingdoms present peace. An vero Redemptor noster, etc? What
verily did our Redeemer descend from Heaven it self into humane members, that
we should be made his members, and do we fear to descend out of our Chaires,
left ^is very members should be torn in pieces with cruel divisions? We are
ordained Bishops for Christian people; that therefore which profitith Christian
people to Christian peace, that let us do concerning our Episcopacy. What I
am, I am for thee, if it profit thee; I am not if it hurt thee. If we be
profitable Servants, why do we envy the eternal gains of our Lord for our
temporal sublimities? Our Episcopal dignity will be more fruitful to us, if
being laid down, it shall more unite the flock of Christ, then if it shall
desperse it being retained. If when I shall retain my Bishopric, I shall
disperse the flock of Christ, how is this damage of the flock the honor of
the Pastor? for with what forehead shall we hope for the honor promised in
the world to come from Christ, if our honor in this world hinder Christian
Unity? They had no Bishops Lands then to part with, but yet for Peace and Unity
sake, they were thus content to part with their very Bishopdoms themselves. And
will not the King then in point of conscience part with the Bishops Lands for
our present Peace, when he shall know or be truly informed of all this?

Fourthly, for the Judgment of Divines, I could produce diverse against the
great Possessions of Bishops in all ages; as making them secular, proud,
vicious, lasie, which I have ^n my breviate of the Prelares Vsur-Pations Epist.
Dedicatory and Appendix; The antipathy of English Prelacy, par. 2.
formerly published at large: but I shall only at present inform you, that
our famous Dialogo^um, l. 4 c. 15, 16, 17, 18. 26, 27. Walsing. hist. p. 305.
302 to 307. Fox Acts and Monuments 398. 414. 431. 434.
John Wickliffe professedly maintained, That the King and temporal Lords
grievously sinned, in endowing the Bishops with large temperall possessions,
which has reversed Christ's Ordinances, and procreated Antichrist; and that
they were bound in conscience to take away their Lands and Temporalties from
them, which they had abused to Pride, Ambition, Discord etc. His Disciples, or
noble Martyrs, William Swinderby, John Purvey, Sir John Oldcastle; and after
them, Pierce Plowman, Geffrey Chaucer, Mr. Tyndall, Doctor Barnes, John Firth,
Sir John Borthwike, (a Martyr) the Author of a Supplication to King Henry the
eight, the Author of the Image of a very Christian Bishop, and of a Counterfeit
Bishop: William VVraughton, in his Hunting of the Remish Fox; Mr. Fish, in his
Supplication of Beggars; Henry Stalbridge, in his exhortatory Epistle, and
others, are of the like judgment; and Roderick Mors, in his Supplication to
the Parliament, (in Henry the eight his Reign;) to omit Penry, and others, in
Queen Elizabeth's Reign. And why there should be more Sacrilege in taking
away Bishops Lands in England then in Scotland, or Abbey Lands heretofore from
Abbeys and Priories, I cannot yet discern. All which considered, I hope his
Majesty's conscience may and will be rectified in this particular, before the
Treaty be absolutely confirmed by Acts of Parliament; so as this of Bishops
Lands shall make no breach between us: In clearing which, I have been the more
prolix, because it is most insisted on of any thing, in point of
dis-satisfaction, both by the King and us.

As for all our other Propositions, relating to the Peace and settlement of the
Church, the King has fully assented to them interminis: as namely, to the Bill
for the better advancement of the preaching of Gods word, and setting godly
Ministers in all parts of the Kingdom: To a Bill against Pluralities, and Non
residencie: To an Act of Confirmation for the calling and settling of the
Assembly of Divines: To an Act for the confirmation of the Directory, and
abolishing the Book of Common Prayer throughout the Kingdom, and in the Kings
own Chapel too (yielded unto in the Kings final answer, though formerly
stuck upon;) to an Act for taking the covenant throughout the Realm, only the
King sticks at it (as yet unsatisfied in conscience) as to the taking of it
himself without some qualifications in it, which a Committee were appointed to
consider of, but have not yet reported ought to the House. Besides, he has
approved the lesser Catechism as far as you desired, who rest satisfied with
his answer concerning it: And as for the Presbyteriall Government, he has
absolutely consented to settle it for three years.

But it has been much insisted on by many, Object.
That the Kings Grant of the Presbyterian Government is no wayes^ satisfactory,
because only for three years; And therefore they will break off the Treaty for
this reason, and vote the Kings answers upon the whole unsatisfactory, because
too short in this particular.

To which I answer, Answ.
That the King in terminis has granted as much as we desired. We desired its
settlement but for three years, and many who most pretend dissatisfaction in
this point now did, and do indeed desire no settled Government at all, no not
for three years space: Therefore if there be any default in this, it was in the
Houses Proposition only, not in the Kings answer, who was not obliged to grant
us in this particular, or any other, more than we desired. Secondly, after the
three years expiration the Presbyterian Government must remain till a new be
agreed upon by consent of the King and both Houses, upon conference and advice
with the Assembly of Divines, or that further established if found best and
most suitable in the interim.

So as now upon all the branches of this Treaty, and the Kings answers
thereunto, I conceive the Kings answers to be completely satisfactory in that
sense I have stated and debated the question, as well for the safety and
settlement of our Church and Religion as Kingdom; though the Kings Answers come
not up fully to the Propositions in some two or three particulars only.

It is storied of Plut. Apop^th.
Alexander the Great, that one demanding of him to give him a penny, he
returned him this answer; That it was too little for Alexander to give:
Whereupon he demanded a Talent of him; whereunto he replied, It was too much
for a beggar to receive. We have demanded of the King in our own and the
Kingdoms behalf in former Treaties, but a penny in comparison, and then the
King refused to grant it, though we would have been heartily contented with it,
or less: But now we have in this Treatty demanded a Talent, and the King has
not thought it overmuch for him to grant, or for us to receive, and if we shall
now ungratefully reject it, we know not why our selves, unless it be that God
has infatuated, and designed us unto speedy ruin for our sins; I must needs
take up our Saviors Lamentation over dying Ierussalem, in relation unto
England: Luk 19 42.
O that thou had known in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy
Peace; but now they are hid from thine eyes. And I pray God they be not so far
hid, that we shall never live to see any peace or settlement at all in Church
or State, if we embrace not those Concessions now; the best, the largest, the
honourablest, the safest, and most beneficial that ever was tendered to any
People by a King; and if we now reject, we shall never have the moity of them
granted us again, no though we soek them carefully with tears, as Esau did his
last blessing, when he had overslipt his time but a very little.

For mine own part, I value no men's bare opinions in this debate, but their
reasons which enforce them; and if I have not quite lost my reason and senses
too, I have not heard one solid reason given by any Gentleman that differs from
me, why the Kings Concessions upon the whole Treaty should be so unsatisfactory
as utterly to reject them, and proceed no further. Most of the reasons to the
contrary have been either clear mistakes, both of the question, and Kings
Answers, or our Propositions; (and mistakes are no reasons, but irrational;)
or a fear in some Purchasers of Bishops Lands of an ill bargain, which I
presume I have fully satisfied, Object.
or that which is to me the most unreasonable (though many Gentlemen's chief and
only reason) the Armies discontent and dissatisfaction, in case we vote it
satisfactory: to which I shall give this Answer:

That though I honor the Army for their good services heretofore in the Field
and Wars, Answ.
and should as readily gratify all their just desires as Soldiers, as any
man; yet I must with just disdain and censure look upon their Magisteriall
encroachments upon our Councels, and prescriptions to us, what to vote in our
debates, or else they will be incensed, as the highest violation to the
Freedom, ^ Honor and Privileges of Parliament, not to be Presidented in
former times, nor now to be endured. We all sit here, freely to speak our own
Minds, not the Armies pleasure; to follow our own consciences and judgments,
not their imperious dictates; to satisfy the whole Kingdom, and those who have
entrusted and sent us hither, whose Representatives and servants we are (not
the Armies) by pitching upon that which is most conducing to their welfare and
our own too; not to satisfy the Army in all their unreasonable extravagant
demands, (who are but ours and the Kingdoms servants, not Masters) to the
Kingdoms, Peoples, our own ruin, and the Armies too. And so much the rather,
because I have observed a dangerous practice in some Officers and Members only
of the Army, to make use of the whole Armies name, (without their privity or
consents) forcibly to drive on their own private pernicious Designs in the
House, and to fright and cudgel us into Votes (as some say we were cudgelled
into a Treaty) with the very name of the Army, without any reason at all; and
if that will not do the feat, then they presently mutiny, and bring up the
Army it self to or near the Houses doors against them, contrary to our express
commands (as heretofore and now they have done) to force us to Vote against our
judgments, consciences, reason, and the public safety, what ever they shall
dictate, be it never so absurd, dishonorable to our selves, or destructive to
the Kingdom; and though the Army, and those who usurp their name be not present
at our debates (as they seldom are, though some of them are Members) yet if
they suit not with their foreplotted Designs, they will presently censure them
and those that pass them, without hearing or weighing of their reasons: And
though they contend most earnestly for Liberty of Conscience for themselves,
and all others of their confederacy out of the House, and for a Liberty for
their own Party, to enter Remonstrance of the General and Officers, November.
20. 1648: p. 6, 7 69.
their particular Protestations and Dissents to the House to any Vote they like
not; yet they will admit no Liberty of Conscience, nor Freedom of dissenting
unto us, nor us to be Masters of our own reason, Votes or discretions in the
House it self, where we should have most freedom, (as is evident by sundry
Magisteriall, overruling, censorious Passages in their late Page 62. to 70.
ibid. Their Declaration, November. 3. and Answ. Ian. 3.
Remonstrance, November 20.) and if we vote not fully with them, they presently
take us for Apostates and violaters of our trust, fit, not only to be secluded
the House for the present, but not to be entrusted for the future; to such an
height of insolency are they grown. Therefore for any Members to make their
pleasing, or displeasing of the Army, whom they thus abuse, the sole or
principal reason of their Ay, or No, is such a Solecism and breach of
Privilege, as ought not now to be named, much less pressed as a reason,
without some severe censure or exclusion from the House; especially in this
instant debate, for the settlement of our Peace, to which those who make a
Trade of War, will certainly be most averse, having little else to live on, or
support their present greatness, if the wars be ended.

Yea, but they further object, Object.
That if we discontent the Army by voting the Answers satisfactory, we are
undone, they will all lay down their Arm (as one Commander of eminency has
here openly told you he must do) and serve us no longer, and then what will
become of us, and all our faithful friends?

I Answer, Answ.
That I hope the Army will not be so sullen, as to desert or turn against us,
for voting what our consciences and judgments prompt us, is most for theirs,
ours, and the Kingdoms safety; and that without hearing or scanning our
debates: If they be, I shall not much value the protection of such unconstant,
mutinous, and unreasonable servants; and I doubt not but if they desert us on
so slight a ground, God himself and the whole Kingdom will stand by us who
else I fear will both unanimously rise up against us, to ours, and the Armies
destruction: And if the King and we shall happily close upon this Treaty, I
hope we shall have no great need of their future service. However, fiat
justitia, ruat coelum, Let us do our duty, and leave the issue to God. It is
better for us to perish doing our own duties, then to be justly destroyed by
following other men's wills against our duties and consciences too. He that
thinks to save himself or the Kingdom, by such a sinful and unworthy
compliance, shall be certain to lose both himself and it in conclusion.

However, both the Arguments of displeasing the Army, and the ill consequents
of it, are altogether extraneous and impertinent to the question, and amount
but to this Non sequitur. The Army will not have us proceed further upon the
Treaty to settle peace; Ergo, the Kings Answers are unsatisfactory. What will
all wise men, what will the Kingdom, what will Scotland, Ireland, and our
friends abroad (whose eyes are all intent upon the result of the Treaty, and
must be satisfied in the reasons of our breach upon it lest they all fall foul
upon us) think of such absurd Nonsense as this? Had the Treaty been only
between the King and the Army, not him and the Houses, this reason might have
contented some men; without expressing any grounds of their dissatisfaction (of
which they think the Army more competent Judges then the Parliament:) but the
Treaty being only between the King and both Houses, not the Army; that we who
are the only Parties to the Treaty, and Judges of the satisfactorinesse
thereof, should set aside our own reasons, consciences, judgments, and make
the Armies absolute peremptory will, the only principal reason of our
dissatisfactorinesse with the Kings Concessions, (which I am confident not ten
men in the Army ever heard of, but by report alone and never seriously scanned,
as we have done) is such an absurdity, as will render us for ever both
ridiculousand odious to all our friends and foes, to present, to future Ages.
For shame therefore let us no more insist upon such extravagancies.

Having answered these two Iron Arguments, against the unsatisfactorinesse of
the Kings Answers, and all others hitherto insisted on: I humbly conceive, I
have fully satisfied every rational man's conscience, that the King has
granted us all we have demanded, that is really necessary or conducing to the
speedy settlement of a lasting and well-grounded Peace, and the future security
of our State, Kingdom, Church, Religion, against all feared dangers from the
King or any others; and I shall challenge and put it to the conscience of any
Gentleman dissenting from me, whether he can propound any one thing more
(except an Oath which is intended when all is concluded) essential, for the
fuller and firmer settling of our Laws, Liberties, Privileges, Lives, Estates,
Religion, Kingdoms, Parliaments, Army, and satisfying of all public interests,
then what have been already propounded and the King completely granted in this
Treaty: If then the King has granted us every thing, our selves during seven
years advice and consultation could possibly think of for our security and
settlement, far more then we our selves demanded in two or three former
Treaties, and would have bin glad with the moity of it within these few months,
and ten thousand times more then we can gain by a breach with the King upon
such disadvantages; why should we not all rest thankfully contented, and bless
our God, that he has at last inclined the Kings heart to grant so much,
whereas heretofore he refused to condescend to the tithe of that he has
granted now^ Doubtless we can never answer such a peevish absurd ingratitude
either to God or men, and those Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, who sent us
hither in their steads, will conne us little thanks, for refusing Peace, upon
such honorable, beneficial and safe Concessions, as neither they nor we can
ever hereafter hope for, if rejected now; upon no grounds of reason, but
peevishness and will.

If any object Object.
(as some have done) that the King indeed has granted all we can desire; yet
he is so perfidious in his Oaths and Promises (as we have found by sad
experience, in all his Reign) that we cannot trust him; and therefore all he
has granted, is to little purpose.

I answer, Answ.
That if all he has granted were still in his own power to dissolve or recall
at pleasure, this Argument were material: But since he has put all our
desired security in our hands alone, and such as our selves shall appoint, and
left nothing unto his sole or joint disposal with us, the objection is but
weak, and recoils upon our selves, that we dare not trust our selves with our
safety. It a Sha^k come to borrow some money of a Usurer, whose word and hand
he dares not take; yet if he give him a Pawn or Morgage of his Lands in hand,
he will then trust him without any scruple: The King has given such a
sufficient Pawn, Morgage, and put it into our own hand, therefore we need not
doubt him now.

Besides, if we cannot trust him for what he has granted, it was a mockery of
him and the Kingdom to treat with him to grant it: and if so, the Kingdom will
say, they have little cause hereafter to trust us for such palpable
dissimulation, as the King. For my part, I have seen so much experience in the
world, that I dare trust none with my own or the Kingdoms safety, but God^
alone. Psalm. 145. 3. P^al. 118. 8, 9.
Put not your trust in Princes, nor in any son of man in whom there is no help:
It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in men or Princes,
have been my Maxims, and we have seen such strange Mutabilities and
perfidiousnesse in men of all sorts since our troubles, that we cannot trust
neither the King, nor Prince, City nor Country, this General, nor that
General; this Army, nor those that were before it, nor yet our selves who are
jealous one of another, treacherous one to another, distrustful of all; and now
distrusted by all, ever since we began to confide in men, and found out a new
generation of confiding men: Let us begin to trust in God alone in the first
place, and then we need not distrust the King for time to come any more then
others, or our selves, whose dear bought experience of breach of former trust
and promises, will make him more careful of violating his present Concessions
for the future, especially having put such security^ unto our own hands to bind
him to an exact performance.

But it has been objected by the General and Officers in the Army, in their
late Object. Nov. 20. p. 32, 33, 34, 35.
Remonstrance, and by some who have spoken in this debate (who would teach the
King before hand how to elude and vacat all his grants and promises) that all
the Kings Concessions are and will be void, because made by duresse of
imprisonment whiles under restraint.

I answer, Answ.
That the King during all this Treaty has been in such a condition of honor,
freedom, and safety, and had such free liberty of consultation and debate upon
his own earnest desire and his parties too, as well as the Houses; that he can
neither with honor nor justice avoid those. Concessions by any pretext of
Duresse; especially since he has denied some things, and had the same liberty
not to have granted other things, had he been pleased not to grant them.
Besides, the King is to confirm the whole Treaty by Acts of Parliament, to
which he is to give his Royal assent (and Oath too) when all is concluded, and
that in a free condition; and then no Duresse can avoid them, nor more then
Magna Charta it self first gained by the sword, and often confirmed in Parliament
by our Kings against their wills. In the year of our Lord 1222 Matthew. Paris, p.
305. Speed, p. 597.
The Barons demanding of King Henry the third, the confirmation of the great
Charter, and their Liberties according to his Oath upon the conclusion of the
Peace with Lewis of France: William Brewer one of his (evil) Council,
answered; That the Liberties they demanded were not to be observed nor
confirmed, because they were forcibly extorted: Whereupon words growing between
the Barons, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Brewer; the King closed up the
strife with this honorable Answer: All of us have sworn to these Liberties,
and that which we have assented and sworn to, ALL OF US ARE BOUND TO OBSERVE.
We to this day enjoy these Liberties, being confirmed by Act of Parliament, and
sworn to by our Kings, though forcibly extorted at the first. And so may we
much more enjoy the Kings Concessions when turned into Acts, and sealed with a
sacred Oath, superadded to a Royal assent.

Mr. Speaker, I have now waded through the whole Treaty, and given you the best
reasons I can out of every parcel of it to prove the satisfactorinesse of the
Kings Answers, and answered all Objections hitherto made against my conclusion,
I shall now, by your patience and leave, proceed a step or two further, to
evidence by clear demonstrations and reasons to your consciences.

First, that our closing with the King upon these Concessions, is the only, the
speediest, best, loyallest, safest and certainest way to settle a firm and
lasting Peace, between the King, Parliament, and his three Kingdoms.

Secondly, that the new way to Peace and settlement proposed and prosecuted by
the General, the Officers of the Army, and their friends in the House, is a
most desperate, dishonorable, unsafe course, and certain way to speedy ruin,
both of our King, Parliaments, Army, City, Country, and three Kingdoms too;
yea, a ^eer project of the Jesuits, to destroy the King, dissolve this
present, and all future Parliaments, betray Ireland to the Popish Rebels,
subvert our Religion, Reformation, Laws, Liberties, Kingdoms, introduce Popery,
Tyranny, slavery, and makes us a prey to our foreign Enemies: and if I make
this clearly appear to all your consciences and reasons, I beseech you lay all
your hands upon your hearts, and consider what you vote in this debate, lest
you become isntrumental to the Jesuits, and accomplish these their designs, in
stead of settling a safe and well grounded Peace upon their newfangled
foundations of liberty and safety, but indeed of slavery and ruin.

To begin with the first branch of the first of these assertions; That our
closing with the King upon these Concessions, is the only way to settle a firm
and lasting Peace between the King, the Parliament, and his three Kingdoms. Not
to insist upon this general; that Treaties in all Ages have been the usual
and only way to conclude and settle Peace and Unity between Kings and their
People, and all dissenting Kingdoms, States, Persons, and therefore this
Treaty now is the only way to our pr^sent Peace and settlement: I shall pitch
only upon particulars.

First, that your selves in this House, and the Lords in their House, have
severally and jointly voted and resolved over and over heretofore, and
published to all the world from time to time in sundry Declarations,
Remonstrances, and other printed Papers since the Kings departure from the
Houses, and the late Wars: Exact Collect. p. 607, 911. A Collection of all
Orders, p. 49. 51, 57, 58, 91. 446. 463, 879. 900.
That it has been, is, and always shall be their cordial desire, and sincere
unwearied endeavor to settle a speedy, firm and well grounded Peace between
His Majesty, his People, and three Kingdoms; and that this has been the only
end they have aimed at in all their Wars and Treaties with the King. Exact
Collection p. 102, 103 114, 115.
That the Kings presence with, and Residence near his Parliament, is of so
great necessity and importance toward the removal of our Distractions,
Fears, Iealousies, the happy beginning of contentment between the KING and
His People, and the settlement and preservation of the Peace and Safety of the
Kingdom, and KINGS Person. That they thought they had not discharged their
duties until they had declared and backed it with some Reasons. That those
persons who advised His MAJESTY to absent Himself from His Parliament, are an
Obstruction, and Enemies to the Peace of this Kingdom, and justly suspected to
be favorers to the Rebellion in Ireland. Exact Col. p. 907. etc. A Col. of all
public Orders, etc., of both Houses, p. 49, 53, 58, 71, 72. etc. 61, 118.
456, 463, 879, 900.
That the sending of Propositions, and a Treaty with the KING, and a good close
with Him and His Commissioners thereupon, is the only way to settle a firm,
safe, and lasting Peace. And this is the only way and means you have hitherto
pursued to obtain such a Peace and settlement.

Secondly, the Parliament of Scotland and their Commissioners here employed,
have voted and resolved this, the only way and means to such a A Coll. p. 900.
Peace and Settlement, both for this kingdom, and their own too, and have
joined with us in all former Treaties, and promoted this.

Thirdly, the generality of the People, and all the wisest and most cordial to
the Public Interest both of the Parliament and kingdom, have approved and
desired a Treaty and close with the KING, as the only means of Peace and
settlement, as is evident, by their frequent and multiplied Petitions to both
Houses.

Fourthly, the Exact Col. p. 911. 912, 913. A Coll. p. 51, 52, 110, etc.
KING himself and all his party, when tired out with the miseries of War, have
desired and embraced a Treaty, as the only means to close our bleeding wounds,
and make a firm Union between the King, Parliament and three Kingdoms.

Fifthly, the General, Officers, and Council of the Army themselves, when in
their right senses, and not intoxicated with selfeconceit and Jesuitical
Principles, have Publicly declared, that compliance by a Treaty with the KING,
and restitution of Him to a condition of Honor, Freedom, and Safety, was the
only way to a lasting Peace and settlement; yea, the Grandees of the Army were
so over forward to comply, treat, and close with Him upon terms more
dishonorable, Note this.
and less safe then these we are now a closing with him in this Treaty; that
when they falsely impeached the eleven Members the last Summer in the House of
Commons, for holding secret intelligence and correspondence only with Him,
without consent of the House; themselves at that very instant, without and
against consent of the Houses were secretly treating and complying with him
upon proposals framed by themselves, and persuade the King to reject the Houses
Proposition sent to his Maj. See Putnery Projects Animadve^sion^ upon the
Arm^es Remonstrance. The Army for a Treaty. The Kings Answer to the
P^opositions sent to him, to Hampton Court. 7. Sept. 1647
to Hampton Court, to treat upon those they had tendered to him privately,
without the Houses privity, as more advantageous to him, and his party, then
the Parliaments, declaring to all the world; that they were as cordial to the
King, as desirous to bring him up to London, and to restore him to a condition
of honor, freedom, and saftey, and more favorable to Delinquents in mitigating
their fines and punishments, then the Houses. All which they are not ashamed to
acknowledge in their last Remonstrance November. 20. p. 43. 44. yet with this
det^stable brand upon themselves, That their compliances with him were but
negative: Secondly what we declared of Moderation, was but Hypotheticall: with
careful caution, and saving for the ^publique interest, according to OUR THEN
UNDERSTANDING OF IT, etc. Yet however, in that degree of compliance admitted in
that kind, we find matter of acknowledgment before the Lord, concerning OUR
ERROR, FRAILTY, UNBELIEF, and CARNAL COUNCELS THEREIN, and we bless him that
preserved us from worse. If their compliance and Treaty with the King etc. was
but Hypotheticall [as I fear this very Remonstrance and their acting since all
are, or at least wise Jesuitical,] I hope our Treaty shall be real, and not
in their power to make it Hypocritical, as they have attempted, by endeavoring
to force us, by this Remostrance and their subsequent advance to London to
break it off, to render us odious to our King and kingdoms, God and all good
men, and translate the Odium of it from themselves to us. And because
themselves may discover their own Apostasy from their former principles,
which they would falsely father upon us, and how justifiable and advantageous to
the kingdom our closing with the King upon these Propositions, are before all
the world, be pleased to take notice of these following passages in their own
Letters, Declarations, and Remonstrances: made upon mature advice a year before
this Treaty.

In the humble Remonstrance from his Excellency and the Army under his command,
presented to the Commissioners at St. Albans, June 23. 1647 p. 12. they print.
Whereas there has been scandalous informations presented to the Houses and
industriously published in print, importing, as if his Majesty were kept as
prisoner amongst us, barbarously and uncivilly used, We cannot but declare,
that the same and all other suggestions of that sort, are most false,
scandalous and absolutely contrary not only to our declared desires, but also
to our principls, which are most clearly, for a general Right and just freedom
to all. And therefore, upon this occasion, we cannot but declare particularly,
that we desire the same for the King and others of his party, (so far as can
consist with common right and freedom, and with the security of the same for
the future) And we do further clearly confess, Note.
we do not see how there can be any peace to the kingdom firm or lasting,
without a due consideration of, and provision for the Rights, quiet and
immunity of his Majesty's royal Family, and his late partakers: And herein we
think that tender and equitable dealing [as supposing their cause had been
ours] and a spirit of common love and justice, diffusing it self to the good
and preservation of al, will make up the most glorious conquest over their
hearts [if God in mercy see it good] to make them, and the whole people of the
land lasting friends. And in the Representation of the Army, June 14 1647.
there are the like expressions of their judgments, in relation to the King and
his party too.

In a Letter of St. T. Fairfax to both Houses of Parliament, giving an account
of some transactions between his Majesty and the Army, dated from Redding July
6. 1647. there is this passage [which he there declares to be the general
sense of all or most part of the Officers in the Army.] In general, we humbly
conceive, that to avoid all harsh^ness, and afford all kind usage to his
Majesty's person, in things consisting with the peace and safety of the
kingdom, is the most Christian, honorable, and prudent way: and in all things
we think, that tender, equitable and moderate dealing, both toward his Majesty
and his Royal family, and late party, so far as may stand with the safety of
the kingdom, and security to our common rights and liberties, Note.
is the most hopeful course to take away the seeds of war, or future seeds
amongst us, for posterity; and to procure a lasting peace and a government, in
this distracted Nation.

Since this: the Officers and Army in their proposals 1 Aug. 1647. for the
settlement of a firm peace: have this for one, That His Majesty's person, Note.
Queen and Royal issue, may be restored to a condition of safety, honor, and
freedom in this Nation, without diminution of their personal Rights, or
further limitation to the exercise of the regal power, then according to the
particulars aforegoing.

These proposals of the Army, were so pleasing to His Majesty, that in his
answer to the propositions presented to him at Hampton Court the 7 of September.
1647. by the Commissioners of both Houses and of the kingdom of Scotland, he
refused to grant the Propositions by them tendered, as being destructive to many
principal interests of the Army, and of all those whose affections concurred
with them. And he gave this further answer to them. That his Majesty having
seen the proposals of the Army to the Commissioners from his 2 Houses residing
with them, and with them to be treated in order to the clearing and securing
the Rights and liberties of the kingdom, as to the settling of a just and
lasting peace. To which proposals, as he conceives, his two Houses not to be
strangers, so he believes they will think with him, that theymore conduce to
the satisfaction of all interests, and may be a fitter foundation for a lasting
peace then the propositions which at this time are tendered to him. He therefore
propounds (as the best way in his judgment in order to peace) that his two
Houses would instantly take into consideration those proposals upon which there
may be a personal Treaty with his Majesty, and such other proposals as his
Majesty shall make, hoping that the said proposals may be so moderated in the
said Treaty, as to render them the more capable of his Majesty's full
concessions, wherein he resolves to give full satisfaction to his people, for
whatsoever shall concern the settling of the Protestant profession, with
liberty to tender consciences and the securing of the laws, liberties, and
properties of all his subjects, and the just privileges of Parliament for the
future etc. In which Treaty, his Majesty will be pleased (if it be thought sit)
that Commissioners from the Army, whose the proposals are, may likewise be
admitted.

^oe, here we have the General, Officers, and Army it self so zealous of a
personal Treaty with the King, for settlement of this kingdoms peace, and the
carrying on of their own interests, that themselves draw up proposals for a
Treaty with him, without the Houses privity: yea, prevail See Putneyy Projects.
with him to lay aside the Houses Propositions to treat upon theirs, as more
advantageous to him and his, and less beneficial to the kingdoms interest.

In which Treaty he desires, that Commissioners from the Army (whose the
proposals were) might likewise be admitted: and yet these Zealots for a Treaty
then, are most furious to break off our Treaty now, even by open force and
violence, almost upon the very close, though they never made any opposition
against it during From July 30. till Nov: 20.
all its Agitation; perchance to bring on another Treaty with the King upon
their own proposals; wherein the King and they will be the only Treatours, and
the Houses but idle Spectators, to rob them of the honor and benefit expected
by our present Treaty and of settling of the kingdoms peace, on so good terms
for the public interest.

In fine, the General and Army under his command, in their Remonstrance, of
the 18 of August, 1647. [approved and printed by Order of the House of Peers,]
p. 14. do thus express their readiness and desire for the Parliaments closing
with the King, upon good grounds, and his bringing up to LONDON [though now
they cry out for nothing bu^ Justice and execution to be done upon him, as
their capital Enemy;] For our parts, we shall rejoice as much as any, to see
the King brought back to his Parliament, [and that] not so much in place, as in
affection and agreement, on such found terms and grounds as may render both
him, and the kingdom safe, quiet, and happy. And shall be as ready as they to
bring his Majesty to LONDON, when his being there may be likely to produce (not
greater disturbances or distractions, but) a peace indeed, and that such, as
may not [with the Shipwreck of the public interest] be shaped and molded only
to the private advantages of a particular party or faction, but bottomed
chiefly on grounds of common and public welfare and security.

The General, Officers and Army therefore, being so zealous for a Treaty and
close with the King, in all these several Remonstrances, Papers, and
Proposalls, as the only hopeful way of settling and securing the kingdoms
peace, cannot without the highest injury, and most detestable juggling,
Hypocrisy, and Apostasy from their own engagements and principles (wherewith
they do now falsely charge the House) dislike our present proceedings in the
selt same way, upon his Majesty's Concessions in this Treaty; which by all
these particular resolutions, and the Armies own acknowledgments, is the only
way of Peace and settlement.

Secondly, As it is the only, so the speediest way of all other: if we now
accept of these Concessions, (the most whereof I have turned into Bills already,
and shall turn all the rest into Bills by our next sitting) I see no reason but
we may in one fortnight, at least by the first of Ian. next, have fully settled
and concluded all things in difference between the King and us, to the general
content and safety of all honest men: and so end the old and begin the new year
with peace. Whereas if we now break off and let go all the King has granted, I
see no end of our Wars and miseries, nor any probable means of peace and
settlement in many years at least, if ever in this or the succeeding
Generation. And the speediest remedy in this case (especially considering the
kingdom is so far exhausted, that we know neither how to pay our public debts,
our Fleet, or Army their present Arrears, much less their future) must needs
be the best, and be preferred before all others that will require more time,
and expense, and be more hazardous and contingent in the event.

Thirdly, As it is the speediest: so the best, and legallest, safest and
certainest way of all others.

First, there is no danger nor hazard at all in it, nor any expense of money or
effusion of blood: it is but accept, and then confirm by Acts and Oaths, and the
work is presently done: If we think of settlement in any other way, we must
fight again, and that will be both costly and hazardous: and when all is done,
we must Treat again, perchance upon worse terms, else there will be no peace
nor settlement.

Secondly, This is the way we have ever formerly pitched upon, the way all
parties have consented to and approved, but those alone who desire neither
peace nor settlement: Therefore best, safest, and durablest.

Thirdly, It is the legallest, certainest, because a peace and settlement by
Acts of Parliament the highest security to English men under heaven, to which
King, Lord, Commons, and in them the whole kingdom consent, and will all
acquiesce in what is done, without question or future dispute: What peace
soever is settled otherwise, either by a bare Order or Ordinance of the Houses,
or by the Sword and power alone: will neither be sure, safe, nor lasting, no
longer then maintained by the Sword, and every man will be sure to question and
unsettle all again upon the least advantage given. The highest security that
England ever had, was Magna Charta, and the Charter of the Forest: these were
gained by the Sword, but not held by it.

That which has kept and perpetuated these since their making was those Acts
of Parliament which confirmed them, These are only security for what ever we
enjoy, which will survive all other we can think of, Nullum violentum est
diuturnum: Whereas privileges kept and held by public Acts will last for
ever, and be entailed to us and our posterities, with peace and happiness
attending them. This was the way of settling peace between Kings and Subjects
heretofore in Henry the 3. Edward the 2. Richard the 2. Henry the 6. Raigns,
and an Act of Pacification and Oblivion was the only safe and usual way the
Parliaments both of England and Scotland lately fixed on, to settle a firm and
lasting peace between both Nations, kingdoms. All other settlements will be but
like an ul^^r skinned over, which will soon break out again, with greater pain
and danger then before.

2dly, For the new way proposed by the Army, for a firm peace and settlement,
it is certainly the most desperate, dishonorable, dangerous and destructive
that can possibly be imagined, and such as we can neither in honor, justice,
conscience nor prudence embrace. To examine it a little by parts:

The first way to peace and settlement propounded by them, is presently to
break off the Treaty: and that, contrary to our public faith to the King and
kingdom, yea, to our own votes, before the Treaty was fully ended: this is the
drift of their whole Remonstrance. Which as it will totally, if not finally
deprive us of the fruit and benefit of all the K. Concessions in the Treaty,
[all which are by mutual agreement no ways obligatory to either party in any
particular unless all be agreed] being all that we can possibly think of for
our safety and advantage, and more then any Nation under heaven yet injoied, so
it will inevitably cast us upon present ways of new distractions, confusions
and civil wars, now we are quite exhausted, and end at last in our absolute
destruction, instead of a wel-grounded peace, and those blessings we may forth
with enjoy for the very accepting, without further charge or trouble. But if
God, beyond our hopes, should after any new embroylments give us peace, yet it
must be upon a new Treaty, and that perchance upon far worse terms then now are
offered. Therefore it must needs be dangerous to reject a safe way, to follow a
hazardous or destructive one.

The next thing proposed by them for a speedy peace and settlement, is the
bringing of the Remonstrance p. 60. to 64.
King to speedy justice for all his treasons and bloodshed in the late wars,
and then to depose and execute him as the greatest capital malefactor in the
kingdom^

This certainly is a very dangerous aund unlikely way to peace and settlement,
First of all, Zech. 13. 7. 1 King. 22. 17.
The smiting of the Shepherd, is the way to scatter, not unite the sheep. The
slaying of the King or General in the field, Zech. 13. 7. 1 King. 22. 17.
scatters and dissolves the Army, not secures them. To cut off an aching head,
is the next way to destroy, not cure a diseased body: such kind of State policy
may destroy, or disturb, but never settle us in perfect peace: The Prince, his
next heir, the Queen, the Duke of York, all his Children, and Allies both at
home and abroad, will certainly meditate revenge, and all Kings in Christendom
will assist them, even for their own interest and safety, lest it should become
a president for themselves. And will this then secure or be a likely way to
peace or settlement?

2. The greatest part of the Members in both Houses, the Lords, Gentlemen, and
all sorts of people throughout the kingdom, the whole kingdoms of Scotland
and Ireland, (who have as great an interest in the Kings person being their
lawful King, as we have, and are obliged by Allegiance and Covenant to protect
his person and Crown from violence) will unanimously, as one man oppose and
protest against it, and by force of Arms, endeavor to bring those to execution
who shall presume to advise, or attempt to depose or destroy the King in any
kind, contrary to their Allegiance and solemn Covenant: Yea all Protestant
Realms, Churches, States in foreign parts will abhor both the fact, and
adjudge it contrary to their principles and Religion, and that which may
irritate Popish Kings and Princes to take up arms to ruin them, lest they
should fall into the like Jesuiticall practice. And can this be a safe or
speedy way to peace and settlement, especially when we know not what Government
shall succeed upon it, and can expect nothing but bloody consequences from such
a bloody Jesuiticall advice?

Thirdly, I never read of any peace or settlement in any kingdom, where
King-killing was practiced or approved. When the Roman Armies began once to
kill their Emperors, and cut off their heads, See Eutropius and Grimstones
Imperial History.
they were scarce ever free from civil wars. One Army set up one Emperor,
another Army another, the Senate a third, who always warred till they had cut
off one another heads. Most of those Emperors had very short reigns, few of
them above a year or two, and some of them scarce two months, but most of them
untimely deaths. In Sclavonia and Norway, where they had a Law, that he that
slew a Tyrant King, should suceed him in the Throne: They had almost every year
a new King, perpetual wars and discords, and not one of all their Kings for
above one hundred years together ever came to a natural death, but was
murdered as a Tyrant, and succeeded by a worse and greater tyrant: as Danicae
Histor. l. 8. p. 120.
Saxo grammaticus and Nubrigensis testify.

And in the sacred story it self, * Rerum Anglicarum l. 3. c. 6. 2 Chronicles. 5.
5, 6. 2 Kings c. 1. to cap. 25.
it is very observable, that after the ten Tribes revolted from Rehoboam,
though by Gods Justice and approbation for Solomon's sins; they had never any
peace or settlement, but perpetual Wars with one Kingdom or another, or
between themselves; Their Kings, or most of them were all Tyrants and
Idolaters, and by the just hand of God, for the most part tumultuously slain
and murdered one of and by another, who succeeded them: he that murdered his
Predecessor, being usually slain by his Successor, or his Predecessors Sons,
Servants, or by the People of the Land, in a tumltuous way: In the 2 Kings 15.
We read in that one Chapter of no less then 4 of those Kings slain one by
another: and as for the people under these Kings they had never any rest,
peace, settlement, or freedom, but lived under the greatest misery and
oppression that ever any Subjects under Heaven did, as the sacred History
records. This King-killing certainly can be then no probable way at all to
peace, safety, settlement, freedom, but the Jesuits policy to deprive us
eternally of all these, and of God, and Religion to boot; as it did the ten
Tribes heretofore.

Fourthly this way to peace and settlement, is directly contrary to all the
former Engagements, Oaths, and several Petitions, Declarations, Remonstrances,
Protestations, and professions of both Houses of Parliament to the King,
Kingdome^ people, wherein were have always protested and held forth unto them
both before and since the Wars. Exact Collection, p. 1, 21, 644, 100, 101, 102,
103, 125, 214, 281, 307, 458, 464, 466, 474, 584, 587, 588, 605, 631, 632, 637,
641, 642, 661, 16, etc.
That we will preserve and protect the Kings person from danger, support his
Royal estate with honor and plenty at home, with power and reputation abroad,
and by our, loyal affections, actions and advice, lay a sure and lasting
foundation of the greatness and prosperity of his Majesty, and his Royal
posterity in future times. That we are still resolved, to keep our selves
within we bounds of faithfulness and allegiance to His sacred Person and
Crown. That we will with our lives, fortunes, estates, and with the last drop
of our blood endeavor to support His Majesty, and his just Sovereignty and
power over us^ and to prevent all dangers to His Majesty's Person.

That we took up arms as well for Defense of His Majesty, to protect^ His
Person, as the Kingdom and Parliament; without any intent to burt or injure
His Majesty's person or power: professing in the presence of Almighty God, That
we would receive Him with all honor, yield him all due obedience and
subjection, and faithfully endeavor to secure His person and estate from all
danger; and to uttermost of our power to procure and establish to Him and His
People, all the blessings of a glorious and happy reign; which both Houses
several times professed and remonstrated to the world. Ibid. page 657, 648, 645,
687, 617, 621.
That the allegation that the Army raised by the Parliament, was TO MURDER and
DEPOSE THE KING, was such a scandal, as any that professed the name of a
Christian could not have so little charity as to raise it; especially when they
must needs know, the Protestation taken by every Member of both Houses; whereby
they promise in the presence of Almighty God, to defend His Majesty's person;
and all their addresses and Petitions to him expressing the contrary: That they
never suffered it to enter into their thoughts to depose the KING, abhorring
the very thought of it, much more the intent. That they never suffered the word
DEPOSING the King, to go out of their mouths, nor the thing to enter into
their thoughts, That they rest assured, both God and Man will abominate that
monstrous and most injurious Charge laid upon the Representative Body of this
whole Kingdom by the Malignant party, against the KING^ as designing not only
the ruin of His MAJESTY'S person, but of MONARCHY it self: The Authors of
which malicious horrid scandal, they profess to make the Instances of their
Exemplary Justice, so soon as they shall be discovered. Now for Us after all
these multiplied reiterated Protestations, Promises, Engagements, Declarations,
Remonstrances to all the World, from the beginning of the differences and wars
till now, to think or talk of deposing and destroying of the King, and altering
the Government, as the only safe and speedy way to peace and settlement, as the
Army-Remonstrants prescribe; would be such a most detestable breach of Public
Faith; such a most perfidious, treacherous, unrighteous and wicked act, as not
only God, Angels, and good men; but the very worst of Turks and Devils would
abhor: and therefore its a miracle to me, that these, precious Saints should
thus impudently, before all the World propose to the House, and force you to
pursue it, to stain your reputation, and make you exerable to God and Men.

Fifthly, the very Oath of Allegiance, which every one of us has taken, upon
our first admission to be Members, engages us in positive terms, Not to offer
any violence or hurt-to His MAJESTY'S Royal Person, State, or Government, to
bear faith and true Allegiance to His MAJESTY, His Heirs and Successors; and
Him and Them to defend to the uttermost of our power, against all Conspiracies
and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against His: or Their PERSONS,
CROWN, or DIGNITY: And from our hearts to abhor, detest, and abjure as
impious and heretical, this Jesuiticall and Popish Doctrine, That Princes
excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, (as it seems the KINGS is now for
extirpating Episcopacy, Popery, Mass, and Prelacy out of His Dominions by His
present Concessions, without any possibility or hopes of replanting) may be
deposed or murdered by their Subjects or any other whatsoever. Which
Jesuiticall contrivance and practice as our whole State and Parliament, in the
Statutes of 3^ Ia^ cap. 1^ 4, 5, 35. Eliz. cap. 1. and other Acts resolve, is
the only way to unsettle, ruin and subvert, not to settle and establish the
Peace and government of our Realm. And both Houses since this Parliament, have
by a Solemn Protestation first, and by a Solemn League and Covenant since,
with Hands listed up to the most High God, engaged both themselves and the
three kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by a most sacred and serious
vow and protestation (purposely made and prescribed by them, For the Honor and
Happiness of the King and his Posterity, and the true public Liberty, safety
and peace of the three Kingdoms, as the Title and Preface declare) sincerely,
really, and constantly to endeavor with their estates and lives, TO PRESERVE
AND DEFEND THE KINGS MAJESTY'S PERSON AND AUTHORITY, in the preservation and
defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom, ( which he has now
fully and actually performed by his Concessions in this Treaty) That the World
may bear witness with our Consciences, OF OUR LOYALTY, and that WE HAVE NO
THOUGHTS OR INTENTIONS TO DIMINISH HIS MAJESTY'S JUST POWER AND GREATNESS. And
shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as shall
be Incendiaries or evil instruments, by DIVIDING THE KING FROM HIS PEOPLE:
That they may be brought to speedy trial, and receive condign punishment. And
shall not suffer themselves directly, or indirectly by whatsoever combination
or terror, to be withdrawn or make defection from this Covenant; but shall
all the days of their lives really and constantly continue therein against all
opposition, and promote the same against all lets and impediments whatsoever.
And this Covenant we all made in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of
all Hearts; WITH A REAL INTENTION TO PERFORM THE SAME, as we shall answer at
that great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed.

Now how we, who are Members of this House, or any who are subjects of our
three kingdoms, or Officers and Soldiers in the Army who have taken this Oath
of Allegiance, Protestation, League or Covenant, or any of them, (as some of
them have done, all or two of them at least, sundry times over) can, without
the highest perjury to God, Treachery to the King, perfidiousnesse to the
kingdom, Infamy to the World, Scandal to the Protestant Religion, and
eternal dishonor to the Parliament and themselves, Atheistically break
through or elude all those most Sacred and Religious ties upon our souls; by a
speedy public dethroning and decolling of the KING, and dis-inheriting his
Posterity; (as the Army Remostrants advise,) and ^that in the open view of the
World, and that Al-seeing God, to whom we have thus appealed and sworn, by
that Jesuitical equivocations or distinstions, (of which the Armies
Remonstrance is full or professions of our damnable hypoc^isie in the breaking
of them, transcends my understanding. And for those who style themselves
SAINTS, and charge this as one of the Highest Crimes against the King, His
frequent breach of Oaths and Promises, to transcend him and Jesuits in this
very sin, is such a monster of impiety as I conceive could never have entered
into the hearts of Infidells, or the worst of Men or Devils, And to act this
under a pretext to preserve and settle the Peace of the Kingdom, A Collection
of all the public Orders, etc^ p. 422, 423.
is such a solecisme, as militates point blank against the very words and scope
both of this Oath, Protestation, League and Covenant, which crosses not the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, but more strongly engages all men to
preserve and defend the Kings Person and Authority; in the preservation and
defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom; as the Assembly of
Divines, and both Houses affirm in their Exhortation to take the Covenant,
which prescribes this as the only means of securing and preserving peace in
all the three Kingdoms; to preserve the Person and Honor of the King, his
Crown and Dignity, from any such violence and invasion as is now suggested by
the Army; which all three of them engage us, and all three Kingdoms, with our
lives and fortunes really and constantly to oppose, against all lets and
impediments, etc. and to bring those to condign punishment as Incendiaries and
evil Instruments who suggest it. So as if the Army will proceed in this
Jesuiticall destructive way, of Treason and ruin; We, and all three Kingdoms
are solemnly engaged with our estates and lives unanimously to oppose and bring
them to Justice. And is this then the way to public peace and settlement, to
raise another new War to murder one another in this new Quarrel, wherein the
Army and their adherents, must be the sole Malignants and enemies we must fight
with, etc? No verily, but the highway to the Kingdoms and Armies ruin, whose
Commissions we are obliged to revoke; whose Contributions we must in
conscience withdraw; and whose power we must with our own lives resist,
unless we will be perjured, and guilty of breach of Covenant in the highest
degree, if they persist in these anti-Covenant Demands.

7. Both Houses having held a Personal Treaty with the King so lately, and he
having granted us in that Treaty whatsoever we have or can demand for the
safety and preservation of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties; and both Houses
engaged themselves by Vote in answer to the Kings Propositions, to restore him
to a condition of Freedom, Honor, and Safety, according to the Laws of the
Realm (which was the Armies own proposals in his behalf in August, 1647.) We
can neither in honesty, honor, justice nor conscience (were he ten thousand
times worse then the Army would render him) depose and bring him to execution.
It being against all the rules of Justice, and honor between two professed
enemies, who had no relations one to another; much more between King and
Subjects in a civil War, and a thing without president in any ages. To this the
P. 61, 62.
Army Remonstrance answers, That this would be thought an unreasonable and
unbeseeming demand in a personal Treaty, between persons standing both free,
and in equal balance of power; but not when one party is wholly subdued,
captivated, imprisoned, and in the others power. But this certainly is a
difference spun with a Jesuiticall thread; For to treat with any King in our
power, or out of it, on articles of Peace, upon these terms; That if he consent
to them, We will restore him to his Throne with Honor, Freedom, Safety; and
when he has yielded us our Demands, then to depose and out off his head, is
the highest breach of Faith, Truth, Honor, and Justice, that can be imagined:
and those who dare justify such perfidious and unchristian dealing deserve
rather the style of Turks and equivocating Jesuits, then pious Saints.

8. There is no president in Scripture, that the General Assembly, or
Sanhed^in of the Jews or Isrealites, did ever judicially imprison, depose or
execute any one of the Kings of Judah or Israel, though many of them were the
grossest Idolaters, and wickedest Princes under heaven; who shed much innocent
blood, and oppressed the people sundry ways. We know that David himself
committed adultery with Vriah his wife, a faithful Servant and Soldier,
whiles he was with his General Ioab in the field: and then afterward caused
him to be treachero^sly slain. Yet neither the Assembly of the Elders, nor Ioab
and the Army under him, did impeach or crave Justice against him for these
sins, though he lived impeniently in them. And when he numbered the people
afterward, for which sin seventy thousand of his Subjects lost their lives;
yet was he not arraigned nor deposed for it: and God who is Soveraignly just,
though David was the principal malefactor in this case, i^ not the sole; 2 Samuel 24. 27
and thereupon when he saw the Angel that smote the people, cried out; Lo, I
have sinned and done wickedly; but these Sheep, what have they done? Let thy
hand be against me and my Fathers house: Yet God spared him and his household,
though the principalls, and punished the people only with death, for this sin
of his. After him Solomon his son, a man eminent for wisdom and piety at
first, apostatized to most gross Idolatry of all sorts, to please his
idolatrous Wives, and became a great oppressor of his people, making their
burdens very heavy; yet his Subjects or Soldiers did neither impeach nor
depose him for it; 1 King. 11 and 12.
and though he were the principal offender, yet God spared him for David's
sake, in not taking the ten Tribes from him for these sins, during his life;
though he rent them from his son Rhehoboam, who was at most but accessory, for
his Fathers sins, not his. True it is, some of the Idolatrous Kings of Israel,
by the just avenging hand of God were slain by private conspiracies, and
popular tumults, in an illegal way; but not deposed nor arraigned by their
Sanhedrins, or General Congregations; and those who slew them, were sometimes
stain by others who aspired to the Crown, or by the people of the Land, or by
their children who succeeded them; and came to untimely tragical ends.

9. Though there be some Presidents of Popish States and Parliaments deposing
their Popish Kings and Emperors at home, and in foreign parts, in an
extraordinary way, by power of an armed party: Yet there is no president of any
one Protestant Kingdom or State, that did ever yet judicially depose or bring
to execution, any of their Kings and Princes, though never so bad, whether
Protestants or Papists; and the Protestants in France, though some of their
Kings, when they had invested them in their Thrones, became Apostates to Popery
and persecuters of their people; albeit they resisted them by force of arms in
the field to preserve their lives; did never once attempt to pull them from
their Thrones, or bring their persons unto Justice: And I hope our Protestant
Parliament will never make the first president in this kind, nor stain their
Honor or Religion with the blood of a Protestant King, against so many Oaths,
Protestations, Covenants, Declarations, and Remonstrances made and published by
them to the contrary.

10. For the presidents of Edward the Second, and Richard the Second in times
of Popery, they were rather forcible resignations by power of an Army, then
judicial deprivations, neither of them being ever legally arraigned and
brought to trial in Parliament. And Mortimer who had the chief hand in
deposing King Edward the Second, in the Parliament of 1 E. 3. was in the
Parliament of 4 E. 3. impeached, condemned, and executed as a Traitor, and
guilty of high Treason, for murdering Edward the second after he was deposed,
at Berkley-castle, and Sir Simon Bereford, (together with Thomas Gurney and
William Ocle) were adjudged Traitors for assisting him therein; one of them
executed, and great rewards promised to the apprehenders of the other two. And
as for Richard the second though he was deposed after Henry the Fourth was
crowned by pretense in Parliament; yet this deposition after his resignation
only, not before it: and without any formal trial or arraignment, or any
capital judgment of death against him; for which I find no president in any
Parliament of England, Scotland, France, nor yet in Denmark it self, though an
elective Kingdom; who, though they justly deposed Christiern the second, for
his most abominable Tyrannies and Cruelties, yet they never adjudged, or p^t
him to death, but only restrained him as a prisoner. I shall only add this,
that though the elective Kingdoms of Hungary, Bohemia, Poland, Denmark, and
Sweden, have in their Parliaments and Diets deposed sundry of their Kings for
their wickednesses and tyranny yet they never judicially condemned any one of
them to death, though Papists, And for a Protestant Parliament (to please an
Army only, acted by Jesuits in this particular; to render both Parliament,
Army, and our Religion too for ever execrable throughout the world; and set all
men's pens and hands against them to their ruin) to begin such a bloody
president as this, upon a most false pretext, of settling peace; contrary to the
express command of God himself; who commands Christians To pray for Kings, and
all in authority, that they may live a quiet and peaceable life under them in
all godliness and honesty, (not to depose or cut of their heads; as the only
way to peace and settlement; will not only be scandalous but monstrous.

The next thing they propose for a present peace and settlement; it the
executing of the Prince if he come not over upon summons at a short day, and
give not satisfaction to the Houses: or else to declare him and the Duke of
York, if they appear not upon summons, to be incapable of any Trust or
Government in this Kingdom, or any Dominions thereunto belonging, and thence to
stand exiled for ever as Enemies and Traitors, to die without mercy, if ever
taken or found therein. A Jesuiticall inevitable way to civil Wars and ruin.
For the King being deposed and cut off; the Prince no doubt is next heir to the
Crown, both by the common Law, and the statute of 1. Iacobi cap. 1. to which I
doubt a Vote or Ordinance of both Houses only, will be no such legal bar in
any Lawyers or Wisemans Judgment, but that he will claim his right; and the
generallity of the Kingdom (at least ten thousand to one proclaim and embrace
him for their lawful King, and assist him with their lives and fortunes, both
to regain and retain his right, being bound by their Oath of Supremacy and
Allegiance, and their Solemn League and Covenant so to do. And must not this of
necessity beget a present lasting War; in stead of a speedy settled peace?
undoubtedly it will. But consider further, that the Prince is not only Heir
apparent to the Crown of England, but of Scotland and Ireland too: and though
we reject; yet undoubtedly Scotland and Ireland will readily embrace him as
their lawful King, notwithstanding any Votes of ours; and will both
unanimously assist him with their lives and fortunes to recover his right to
the Crown of England: and those two Kingdoms falling off wholly from us, and
proclaiming War against us, and joining with that potent party here, which
certainly will appear in his behalf, out of a natural inclination to the
right undoubted Heir, or hopes of favor and preferment (since Plures solemn
orientem quam occidentem adorantur) and with all his friends and allies Forces
from abroad; whether this will not be an unavoidable occasion, not only of a
present war, but of certain destructions and desolation to this poor Kingdom,
and more especially to the Army and their adherents in this desperate advice,
(who must stand or fall upon their own bottom, without the least aid or
contribution from any other,) I desire them, and all others who have either
eyes or brains in their heads most seriously to consider. But that which makes
me most of all detest this desperate advice, is this, That it is the only way
that can be thought upon to accomplish the Popes and Jesuits designs, to set
up Popery, and subvert the Protestant Religion, and professors of it in all our
three Kingdoms, and in all foreign Realms beyond the Seas. For if this
reforming Parliament, which has pretended so much to the extirpation of
Popery, shall so far play the Popes and Jesuits (the undoubted contrivers of
this Armies New-model of our peace and settlement) as to depose and behead the
King his father, and forever disinherit him of the Crown, and bring him as a
Traitor to die without mercy, if he come hither: It will so far provoke and
exasperate him and the Duke, being both young and of generous spirits, not
thoroughly grounded in our Religion; and under the Queens tuition, and in the
power of this popish party abroad, who will aggravate these high affronts and
injuries put upon them to the utmost, and on whose protection they will be in
this case necessitated to cast themselves; that there is great fear and
probability, they will immediately renounce such a bloody and detestable
Religion, as shall ins^igate us to such horrid actions and Councels, and
abominate all the professors of it, so as totally to abandon them, and turn
Roman Catholics in good earnest; and then match themselves to great potent
popish Alliances: and by their purses, forces, and assistance; and of the
Popes, and all his Catholic sons in Foreign parts for the advancement of
the Catholic cause; and of the popish, Malignants, and discontented parties in
England, Scotland, and Ireland (which will questionless receive and assist the
Prince as their Sovereign Lord and King) invade our poor, impoverished,
divided and distressed kingdom with such a power, as in all humane probability
would speedily over-runne and destroy this mutinous Army, and the Houses too,
put them with their adherents to the Sword, without mercy or quarter, and
disinherit them and their heirs for ever, to revenge their Fathers blood, and
their dis-inherison of the Crown, etc. And then Popery and Prelacy will both
return with greater authority, power, and approbation then ever; overspread
our whole three kingdoms, and extirpate our Religion, and the professors of it,
as the most anti-Monarchical, treacherous and perfidious bloody Miscreants
under heaven; and excite all other foreign States and kingdoms to do the like
to prevent the springing up of a new generation of treacherous King-killing,
State-subverting Agitators, and Hypocritical and perfidious Army-Saints; and
engage all Protestant kingdoms, Churches, and States, for their own security
and vindication to disclaim and declare against us.

This questionless will be the sad inevitable issue of this Jesuiticall advice
if ever the Houses or Army shall put it into actual execution, and not
speedily prevent it; it being long since fore-plotted by the Jesuits, as I
shall prove anon, at the beginning of the late War against the Scots.

But if the Prince and Duke be set aside; I would gladly learn of these
Statists, who, and what King they would set up? Not any of the Kings posterity
certainly, since they dis-inherit two at a blow; and the blood being corrupted
by the Kings and their attainders, no other heir can inherit it by descent; it
must escheat to the Houses or Armies disposal, and become no kingdom at all but
an Elective one, if any: And is this the next way to peace and settlement? If
so, I have certainly lost my reason and senses too. No, it will be a seminary
of lasting Wars; of which few elective Kingdoms are long free, every new
election producing commonly a new War, where there is no pretense of an
hereditary succession, much more where a right heir is forcibly and unjustly
dis-inherited: I shall give you but one instance, (though I could name you
diverse) and that is a memorable one at home in our own kingdom.

King Henry the first, having one only daughter Mat: Paris, Speed, Daniel in
the (...) of King Stephen.
Maud, to reserve the Crown unto her after his death, caused her to be crowned,
and made all the Prelates and Nobles swear to receive her as their Queen and
Princess after his decease. But she marrying afterward to the Emperor; and
being out of the Realm when King Henry died: The Archbishop of Canterbury with
the rest of the Prelates and Nobles (contrary to their Oath and agreement)
elected Stephen Earl of Bloyes for their King, and put by Maud the right heir;
Stephen taking an Oath to grant and confirm those Laws and Liberties for the
kingdoms peace and settlement, as they propounded to him before his Coronation:
A very likely means to settle Peace and prosperity as they imagined. But was
the event answerable? No verily; this cursed perjury and policy brought all
the chief contrivers of it to great calamity and miserable ends; and engendered
a bloody civil War in the bowels of this kingdom, which continued no less
then seventeene years together, with interchangeable successes; till the whole
kingdom was laid waste and desolate, most Houses, Towns, and Villages burned to
the ground; their Gardens and Orchards quite destroyed, their moneys and
estates exhausted and plundered; their Cattle and flocks consumed and eaten up,
their Fields over grown with weeds in stead of Corn, most of the people
devoured by the Sword, Famine and Pestilence, and eleven hundred Castles,
Holds, and Garrisons erected, which were no other but dens of Thieves and
Plunderers. This was the peace and settlement this policy produced. At last
both Parties weary of the Wars, out of pure necessity, came to a Personal
Treaty, and in conclusion made this agreement, That Stephen having no issue of
his body, should enjoy the Crown during his life; and Henry, son and heir to
Maud, and next heir also to Stephen, should succeed him, after his death, and
in some sort officiate with him in the kingdoms Govenment during his life. And
so these long lasting Wars concluded; after which there were at least eleven
hundred Castles demolished by order of Parliament crected during these wars, to
the Countries utter undoing. But if we dis-inherit the Prince and Duke, for
ought I discern, if they suddenly recover not their possession of the Crown of
England, after one seven years of War already elapsed, we may have seventeen
years more, and seventeen after that again, and be reduced to a more miserable
condition then our Ancestors were in King Stephens days: And that upon these
two grounds. First, the contest then, was only between two Competitors for
this one kingdom, who had no other kingdoms of their own to side with them. But
the Prince and Duke being successively heirs as well to the Crowns of Scotland
and Ireland, as England; will have their aid and assistance, and of their
foreign Friends too, to carry on the wars, till they have got possession of
the Crown of England, upon better terms then ever they are like to enjoy it,
if we accept of the K. Concessions, which we can never expect from them, if we
depose and kill the King, and dis-inherit and banish them for Traitors.
Secondly, Stephen the actual King then had no issue at all, and Henry was next
heir to the Crown, both to Maud and him, so as both Titles meeting in him, the
controversy and wars must needs cease. But if we shall now set up a new King
by Election, either of the Kings line or otherwise; as long as there is either
an Elective King, or hereditary, to exclude this Prince or Duke, or either of
their heirs to whom the inheritance of the Crown belongs of right, we can
neither hope for, nor expect either peace or settlement in this kingdom, as the
bloody and long lived wars between the two Houses of Lancaster and York will
inform us, which never ended till they were both united in King Henry the
seventh.

The Armies next proposal to settle the kingdoms peace, is as bad as any of
the former; to wit, Remon: Nov: 20. 1648. page: 65, 66, 68, 69, 70
the speedy dissolving of this present Parliament: which if not presently
consented to, for ought I discern by their last Declaration, they are resolved
to dissolve it by open violence on the Houses, which they threaten. A Tempest
(certainly) of the Jesuits raising, to blow down this Parliament, as they
would have blown up that of 3 Iacobi with Gunpowder. But is this a way to
safety and settlement, to dissolve the only visible means of both? If the
King, Prince, Duke, Parliament be all dissolved, and quite laid aside, what
means or hopes at all of peace, of safety, of settlement, can any man in his
right senses rationally see or imagine? Is the overturning of the very
Foundations and Pillars of our Church and Kingdom, the best and safest way to
settle and preserve them? Is it not the only certain way to subvert and ruin
them? Such ways of peace and settlement a^ these are fitter for Bedlam, then a
Parliament house.

Yea, but they have one infallible way more (to which all the rest are but
preparatory) to settle peace and safety in our Kingdoms, which they idolize,
almost; to wit, Remonst. pa 14, 1E, 16, 66, 67.
A new Representative, or mo^k-Parliament, to be immediately subscribed to and
set up in post haste, constituted neither of King, nor Lords, (the brats of
Tyranny and the Norman Conquest, as some of themselves pretend, as this
Representative is of the Armies,) nor yet of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
duly elected, but of a selected company of politic Mechanics, pragmaticall
Levellers, and Statesmen of the General Council of the Army, (as they style
themselves, by what Commissiom I know not) who have usurped the whole Power
both of King, Parliament, Assembly, and all Courts of Justice before their
Representative be settled, as a true pattern of it, which they are to imitate. A
mere Whimsicall Vtopia and Babel of confusion, invented by the Jesuits to
please the vulgar rabhle, and stir them up to mutinies against King, Lords,
Commons, Gentlemen, and their Superiors of all ranks, that they alone may
possess and sway the reins of Government, Magistracy and Ministry, to which
they have now prepared their tumultuous spirits. Much See Mr. Ashl^ursts
reason^ against it.
might be said against it; but I shall contract my self, because nothing can be
so much as probably pretended for it.

First, It is a new Jesuiticall, popish Gunpowder Treason with a witness,
which blows up and destroys at once the King, Prince, Duke, Lords, Knights of
Shires, Citizens, Burgesses, this present and all future Parliaments, and
noblest, ancientest Cities and Boroughs of England. It not this a blessed
invention to settle peace and safety?

Secondly, It blows up both our Magistracy, Ministry, Laws, Liberties, Judges
and Courts of Justice at one crack, and breaks them all in pieces, to raise up
this new Bab^^ out of all their ruins. And is not this a blessed new invention
of Jesuits and Saints to settle peace?

Thirdly, It blows up all our Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance; Protestations,
solemn Leagues and Covenants, all former numerous Declarations, Remonstrances,
Votes and Resolutions of one or both Houses of Parliament, A Collecti. etc. p
425, 698 700, 877, 878.
not to alter the present form of Government by King, Lords, Commons and other
ordinary Magistrates and ministers of public Justice; or^^e^ loose the golden
reins of government to Blasphemies, Heresies, Errors, Libertinisme,
Pr^phanenesse, Schism, and all sorts of Religions. It unsettles all things, to
settle that which is worse then nothing. And is this the way to safety,
tranquillity or settlement?

Fourthly, it enforces a^ Remon. p. 64. 66. And Agreement of the People,
formerly Printed, and of late new modelied.
Subscription more unjust, unreasonable, illegal, tyrannical and penal then
ever the Bishops or Pope invented: invents and sets up the very worst of
Monopolies, a Monopoly of Electors of Elections, and of Representatives
elected; engrossing all men's ancient Rights, Liberties, privileges of election
without consent or title, into the hands of those who never had a right unto
them, the people; who are no Freeholders, no Free-Burgesses, free-Citizens, or
men capable of Votes by Law: and these people no other then the Army themselves
and some of their levelling Confederates: who must possess, judge, rule, usurp
the Rights and Privileges of the whole Kingdom, in point of electing
Parliament Members, without Charter or Title: A cursed Monopoly, which will
discontent all men who are thus injuriously deprived of their Rights, and
produce naught else but infinite animosities, factions, fractions and tumuls
throughout the Kingdom, and discontent all wise, all honest men; who will
rather die, then not oppose it unto death, as carrying the death and funeral
of al peace, settlement, Parliaments, and the Kingdom in its bowels. And is
this a fit tool to piece and unite our shattred Kingdom, and settle peace
amongst us?

Fifthly, It no way extends to Ireland or our Islands, but to England only; it
will require many years time and trial to settle and secure its own being,
privilege and power, and gain any general obedience to its new erected
Sovereignty: so that our Church and State will be sunk and drowned, and Ireland
inevitably lost, before this Ark will or can be prepared for their safety.

Sixthly, This New^ Representative in this new Remonstrance is (in terminis)
naught else, but the very Agreement of the people, presented to the House by
the Agitators, accompanied with some Jesuits, on the 9. of November. 1647. (then
and in that very month twice, by two express Votes upon solemn debate, and an
Ordinance of both Houses in December following; resolved, to be destructive to
the being of Parliaments, and to the fundamental Government of the Kingdom;
and a signal brand of disability and imprisonment imposed on the contrivers
and presenters of it; and then condemned by the General and his Council of
War, who shot one White to death for abetting it; of which more a non.)
Therefore it seems a miracle to me, that they should be now so virtiginous,
rash, and audacious as to tander this to the House again with such post-hast
and violence, as the readiest, safest, and speedyest course to settle peace and
safety, and set aside the only means of settlement, the Treaty. O the
inconstancy and strange intoxications of these new Saints and Statists, who
would make the Houses as unconstant as themselves!

Since then I have clearly manifested, that all these Proposals of peace and
settlement in the Army's late Remonstrance, are all and every of them most
apparent precipices, Jesuiticall contrivances and labyrinthes of speedy,
imminent, unavoidable ruin and confusion to our King, Prince, Kingdoms,
Magistracy, Ministry, Church, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Government, the
present and all succeeding Parliaments, and the Army too, it must needs be the
very extremity of madness to let go that speedy, safe and sure way to certain
peace, security and settlement I have propounded, by accepting of the Kings
Concessions, to catch at such a false deceitful shadow of settlement as this,
which will eng^l^e us in endless wars and miseries. It is a Rule in Policy and
Divinity, Ex duobus malis minimum eligendum. But of these, one being a most
certain destructive evil, and the other a certain good and advantage of the
highest nature, it can admit of no deliberation, which of them to embrace: And
so much the rather, if we sadly consider of our deplorable and almost desperate
condition both at home and abroad, pertinent to the point in hand.

We are all weary of a long and costly War (and yet God has so infatuated
many, that though in words they desire, yet in deeds they reject always of
Peace, and cast them out of their hands when put into them; as if they
delighted to have our Wars spun out (like Amaleck's) from generation to
generation. We are unable any longer to maintain a War, and yet are
unwilling to give it over. But I beseech you now seriously to consider into
what great straights and difficulties you are already brought, and how the true
state of your Affairs stands in relation to your Forces and Friends, both at
home and abroad.

There are many thousands of Reformadoes who have formerly served you in your
Wars, who lie daily clamouring at your doors for Arrears, complaining they
are ready to starve, and some of them to ^ot in prison, desiring but some
inconsiderable Sum to satisfy their present necessities, and you return
them answer, you are unable to raise it; and after many debates upon their
general Ordinance, you cannot in diverse months pich upon any probable means
to secure their Arreares, amounting (as is conceived) to above two hundred
thousand pounds. The Arreares alleged to be due to the Army (who now take free
quarter, and eat up the Countries where they lie) amount to above three hundred
thousand pounds: and how to raise money to discharge this debt, or so much as
to disband the supernumeraries, and reduce the Army into their Winter Quarters,
has put you to a stand for many weeks, and as yet you know not how to do it:
So as free quarter must still continue to ruin us on the one hand, and your
debts and arrears be daily multiplied to undo us on the other hand. Your Navy
is now coming in to harbors, and your Mariners expect a present considerable
Sum, amounting to many thousands, to pay them off; and you have not yet one
penny in your Treasury to satisfy their arrears, and can pitch upon no way to
raise any present moneys but only by the Earl of Arundels Composition;
amounting in all but to six thousand pounds, and the moity of it not to be paid
till three months end at least. What your other debts of the Navy are, and how
many thousand pounds you owe to Mariners, Masters, and Tradesmen, the Committee
of the Navy can best inform you. Your debts to your Artificers, Waggonars,
and such who have advanced moneys upon the Public Faith, amount to two or
three Millions at least: Besides, your debts to Plimmouth and other Garrisons
are so great, that they are all ready to mutiny and disband for want of pay.
Your Debts to the Soldiers and Officers in Ireland are vaste; and if speedy
and large supplies of Men, Provision and Moneys arrive not there within one
month, Colonel Jones, and your other Officers there profess, the whole
Kingdom will be utterly lost: and you (for ought I sinde) have no possible
means to supply them with either.

If then your Debts are already so great, to Reformadoes, Tradesmen, the Army,
Navy, Garrisons, and those who have lent you Moneys, that you know not how to
satisfy any one of them: If you have not money to pay your Army or Navy at
the present, nor to maintain them for the future why do you now refuse that
Peace which is tendered you upon such great advantages, and choose a War which
you know not how to maintain, and must needs break yours and the Kingdoms
backs in few months more? Your credits are quite lost and broken in all places,
in City, Country, and the Houses too; You cannot now borrow ten thousand pounds
(for ought I know) upon any sudden occasion, were it to serve the Kingdom:
Your breaches of Faith and security heretofore, and clashes with the City, have
made you almost Bankrupts, if not altogether. Goldsmiths Hall, the Excise,
Camb^en-House and Custom-house are already charged with more Debts then are
likely to be paid in many years: Compositions are almost at a stand or end:
Sequestrations generally disposed of to each particular County, or other uses:
Bishops Lands engaged for far more then they are really worth: You have
nothing of your own or the Publick's left to rais^ either present moneys, or
credit whereon^ to borrow them Besides, the City, Country, and whole Kingdom
are how quite exhausted, and almost as poor as naked Job was. Many Countries
of the Kingdom are so impoverished and exhausted with the last Wars,
(especially the four Northern Shires next to Scotland) that (as their Knights
and Burgesses assure you) they are so far unable to pay any Taxes, that they
already starve and perish in most places for want of food, and are petitioners
to you for some reparation toward their great losses, and present support to
keep them from starving. The rich Associated Counties have been harressed and
undone by the last Summers Wars, that they are grown poor, unable to lend
or contribute to you any more force or assistance. The excessive dearth of corn
and provisions the last year, the great destruction of corn by unseasonable
weather this present year, which makes that which is wholesome exceeding deer;
The extraordinary rot among sheep, and murraine among cattle (which should
raise moneys) (...) Counties; the general scarcity and decay of Trade by Land,
of Merchandise by sea, and apparent probability of their decaying every day
more and more, by reason of the revolted Ships and Irish Men-of-warre; and the
Sequestrations of the Malignant, and plunderings and losses of the well-affected
Nobility and Gentry have so impoverished all sorts of men, (but the Soldier
and Army; and some fow Treasurers and Officers) that they know not how to live
or subsist almost, much less to lend or contribute to maintain such a
numerous Army by Land and Sea, and supply Irelands pressing necessities. If you
cannot tell how to pay your present Debts, what folly is it to augment them for
the future? If you cannot pay your Army or Navy now, how will you be able to
do it hereafter?

If then you will have no peace with the King upon the Treaty, but break it
off, and keep up a War and Army still without color or reason in this your
impoverished and exhausted condition, then mark the consequences: Your Forces
being not duly paid, will live upon free quarter still, and that will undo the
Country, and make them desperate: And when they have eaten out all the poor,
then they will mutiny, and fall on all that are rich, put them to present Fines
and Ransoms at their pleasure, eat them out of House and home, share their
Estates and Offices, which many of them already profess to be thei^s by
Conquest; and then the longest sword will be the only true Judge and measure of
al men's properties, and divider of their Estates, as well in this as former
ages; of which we already begin to feel some sad experiments. And as the
Soldier on the one hand, so the penurious poor people in every place, for want
of work and employment, and bread to put into their head, encouraged by the
Soldiers uncontrolled insolences, will fall to plunder and level all rich
men on the other side. And if the Army Remonstrance and Agreement of the People
(now in hot persuit) take place, Ministers shall receive no Tithes, Landlords
no Rents, Creditors no Debts, and oppressed ruined persons no Law not Justice.
Kings must go down, Princes and Peers quite down, Parliaments down, Judges,
Justices, Magistrates, Laws, Tenures, Enclosures down, all rich and landed
persons down; their very wealth and estates will be sufficient cause to make
them Malignants to a starved Peasantry and al-conquering unpaid Army; and then
what follows but immediate and irrecoverable ruin? I beseech you therefore
consider in what a desperate, hazardous condition we and the whole Kingdom now
stand at present; how near we and Ireland are to the very brink of ruin. If we
will now put into that safe and sure harbor of Peace which the present Treaty
invites us into, without any further cost, or fear of shipwreck, we may yet
through Gods blessing be safe and happy: But if we now wilfully put forth to
Sea again, among so many rocks, shelves and quick sands which surround us on
every side, and will yet choose War instead of Peace when the golden and silver
nerves that formerly maintained it are quite shrunk up, we can expect naught
else but drowning, and sudden shipwreck of all our Kingdoms, Parliaments,
Liberties, Estates, and of our Church and Religion too.

Yea, But (say some) though all this be truth, we must not displease the Army,
Object.
who are our present strength and safety; for then we are are lost indeed.

I have answered this Objection once before in one sense, in relation to the
Treaties satisfactorinesse; I shall here answer it in another. I say then,

1. That we have a God to please, who will be displeased, if we please the Army
in their unjust demands: And better is it to please God, then to please any
Army whatsoever: If God be with us, who can be against us? We need no Armies
protections, if the Lord of Hosts be our Guardian.

2. We have a conscience to please, as well as an Army; and we must satsifie
that, though the Army, (who pretend so much for liberty of conscience, yet will
allow us none, or very little) be never so unsatisfied with it.

3. We have a Kingdom, nay three Kingdoms to please, and to save too: And we
must rather please and save them, by rejecting the Armies Proposals, which will
inevitably ruin them, then please the Army in being any way isntrumental for
their destruction, by embracing their destructive counsels: If our Kingdoms be
preserved, we may have another Army, though this be disbanded, dissolved, yea
destroyed; but if the Kingdoms perish by our pursuing their rash Proposals, we
shall neither have Kingdoms: nor yet an Army, nor this Army, who must certainly
perish in and with the Kingdoms ruin.

4. We have a Navy to please as well as an Army; and which is more
considerable to us then an Army: A new Army may soon be raised, though the old
be disbanded; but a Navy being once lost, Ships will not grow again, nor
another Navy built in many years. And will not the pleasing of the Army in
this, displease and lose the Navy now, as it did the last Summer, to your great
loss and danger? And can the Army guard the Kingdom against any Forreign^
Invasions if the Navy be lost? No nor treble their number. Look then you please
your Navy as well as Army.

5. We have many See the Remonstrance of the Northern Associations, printed
1647.

The humble Petition, serious Suggestions, etc. of the Gentlem^n, Yeomen and
Freeholders of the Eastern^ Association.


hundred thousands of well-affected and cordial Christians and Covenanters to
please, who have adventured their estates, lives, limbs, in the present Cause,
and done as gallant Services (many of them) in the Field, both this last Summer
and before, as any in this Army, and are considerable for number, quality,
estate, wisdom parts, and real piety and love to the public Interest, then
the Army: all which (I am certain) we shall ^ghly discontent, and grieve, nay
palpably overreach and cheat to their very faces, if we should please the Army
in their present demands, to their prejudices, and scandal, and our Religions
too. There was no man of public Spirit that engaged with, contributed toward,
or took up Arms in the Parliaments service or Cause at first, but merely upon
these five grounds, expressed in all the Houses Remonstraces, Declarations,
Petitions, Protestations, and in the Solemn League and Covenant: 1. To defend
and maintain the true Protestant Religion, against Popery, Error, and
Superstition. 2. To defend the Kings Royal Person, Dignity, and legal
Authority, against violence, treachery, and usurpation. 3. To maintain the
Privileges, Rights and Freedom of Parliaments, and the Fundamental Laws and
Government of the Kingdom, against State-Innovations, and Tyranny. Fourthly, to
rescue the Kings person from evil Counselors; and bring such Incendiaries and
Delinquents to condign punishment, Fifthly, to settle the Kingdom in freedom,
safety, and peace, against Cruelty, Dangers, and imminent Wars and tumults.

Upon these grounds, and for these ends only, did both Houses, and all who
adhered to them, or took up Arms for them, by their Commissions, engage, and so
did this A Collection, page 599. 623.
very Army. I appeal then to every man's Conscience, Whether the Houses, or any
who engaged with them, did ever contribute any Moneys, Plate, Horse, Atms, or
march out as an Officer or Soldier under them in these Wars, with any such
intention as this, to depose and bring the King to Justice; disinherit the
Princes, and Kings posterity; dissolve the present Parliament, and pull all
future Parliaments, and' their Privileges up by the roots, subvert the
Fundamental Government of the Realm, and set up a new representative to dash
all these in pieces, and destroy Religion, Magistracy and Ministry? Did they
not all abhor and disclaim in Public all such thoughts and intentition as
these? and when objected by the King and his party out of jealousy amd fear;
did not the Exact Collection. p. 298. 657. 658. 695, 696, A Collection, p. 117.
Houses presently resent and remonstrate against it as the grossest scandal,
and their adherents too? Or would ever a man have engaged with the Houses, or
the Houses with them in this War, or enrolled his name even in this New Modeled
Army, had he been told at first, That he must fight to depose and bring the
King to execution, to dis-inherit his posterity, dissolve this Parliament, and
the very Rights, Privileges, and being of all future Parliaments, to set up a
new Government and representative in our Church and State, to alter and change
all things at their fancies, and to break every clauses and article of the
Solemn League and Conant? If not one of these was the true end of our Wars and
Engagement against the King at first, and all along till now, but the clean
contrary to them; then how can they now be propounded as the only fruits of our
wars, and means or conditions of our Peace and Settlement? Will they not all
say, (if the Houses or Army proceed in their Proposals for Peace and
Settlement, mentioned in their last Remonstrance) that they engaged and took up
Arms to do quite contrary to what they now propose to the Houses, and
endeavor to enforce them to put it in punctual execution? And will they not
now say, That they are by their original Engagement and Covenants obliged with
their lives and estates to oppose and oppugn the Army in all these particulars;
that having thus declared and resolved, they cannot pray for, but against the
Armies late successes herein; that they cannot henceforth contribute toward
their future pay and support in point of conscience or prudence, but must
withdraw and withhold their contributions, and resist them to their Faces,
declare their Commissions null, and not look on, or take them as an Army, but
as a tumultnous rout of persons, assembled without Commission, to act over Jack
Cades Treasons again, and quite pull down that frame of Government and Order
which they have been building up and supporting these many years, with such
vast expense of Treasure and blood? Better then displease the ARMY, then that
all these Covenanters and Engagers should suffer, to theirs, the three Kingdoms
hazard, Ireland's certain loss, and this very Armies overthrow, which these
Jesuiticall designs will certainly destroy in a very short space, if they
Iehu-like, drive on so furiously in prosecution and execution of them, as they
have done of late.

Consider I beseech you of the desperateness and excessive unavoidable
destructivenesse of these monstrous ways to the speedy peace and settlement of
our Church and State, and of the safety and security of the things your selves
have pitched on for Peace and Settlement in and by the Treaty; and Lord guide
our Hearts and Votes a right therein, that we choose not death in stead of
life; the ways of misery and destruction in stead of the way of Peace, which
Armies seldom know, or prescribe to themselves or others.

Mr. Speaker, HAving thus demonstrated to you the unavoydable destructivenesse
and confusion of those Counsels, and pretended ways of settlement which the
Officers of the Army have propounded, and would imperiously and forcibly thrust
you upon to the Kings, Kingdoms, Parliaments, Religions, their own, our and
Irelands certain and most speedy ruin; I must now crave leave with much
sadness of heart to unbosome my very soul unto you, and discover you that
secret which God has so clearly manifested to my understanding, that I dare
not (under the highest penalty) but acquaint you with; That the Jesuits, and
Roman Priests and Catholics are the original contrivers and principal
somenters of the late and present distempers, and undutifull mutinous
proceedings and counsels of the Officers and Army, and chief contrivers of the
new Babel, or model of confusion which they have tendered to you in their late
Remonstrance as the only way to peace and settlement. And if I shall clearly
demonstrate this unto the House, I hope every Member present, and the whole
Army and Kingdom, when they know it, will eternally abhor and renounce it, and
never henceforth countenance or promote this Jesuiticall and Romish design:
which I am persuaded the General, and most of the Officers and Soldiers in
the Army, in the simplicity of their hearts (with honest and public intentions
of Justice and common Freedom) have been ignorantly drawn into, by
overreaching pates and Machiavilian Policies of these cunning Jesuits, who
can metamorphose themselves into any shapes, and invisibly infinuate themselves
into their counsels and actings, to promote their own interest and our
destruction.

I do not prosesse my self to be any great Statesman, or exactly to know what
ever is secretly transacted among us: But this I can say, without disparagement
to others, or vainglory to my self, That I have for many years last past been
as curious an observer of all the great transactions of Affairs in Church or
State, and of the instruments and means by which they have been covertly
contrived and carried on, as any man in this House or Kingdom: and that God
has honored me in being one of the first discoverers and opposers of the
Jesuits and Papists plots to undermine our Religion, and usher in Popery by
degrees into our Church, by making use of our Popish and Arminian Prelates and
Clergymen as their Instruments, and broaching one Arminian and Popish Doctrine
and introducing one Popish Superstition and Innovation after another; of which
I have given this House and the Kingdom the fullest and clearest discoveries
of any man; and likewise of introducing Tyranny, Arbitrary power and civil
combustions in our State, of which I likewise made seasonable discoveries and
opposition, the ground of all my sufferings, close imprisonment and banishent,
to prevent the like detections and oppositions. And since my return from exile,
I have in my ROME'S MASTERPIECE, The ROYAL POPISH FAVOVRITE, HIDDEN WORKS OF
DARKNESS BROVGHT TO PVBLICK LIGHT, The ANTIPATHY OF ENGLISH PRELACY TO UNITY
and MONARCHY, and The HISTORY OF THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRY's TRY ALL, and
other Writings, given the World such an exact account of the Jesuits and
Papists plots and influences upon our Church, State, Court, Councels, Prelates,
corrupt Clergy, and all sorts of people to reduce us back to Rome, supplant
Religion, subvert Parliaments, set up tyranny and involve us in civil Wars
both in England, Scotland, and Ireland, (concealed from most, and scarce known
to any before these discoveries) as none else before or since me have done;
all which both Houses have since approved and made use of in several
Declarations and Remonstrance And therefore I may with greater confidence and
better grounds adventure on this discovery, of which most here present (who are
little acquainted with mysteries of State or Politicks' and trouble not their
heads with such inquiries after them as I have done) are utterly ignorant, and
so apt to be deluded, and easily overreached; the plainest open-hearted men
being easiest to be over-witted by Jesuits and their Instruments; especially
when they transform themselves into Angels of Light, or become new lights, to
broach new strange opinions, or revive old errors under the notion of
New-light; as they have lately done, to lead captive silly people.

To make out this discovery so clearly evident that none can rationally deny,
but be sufficiently convinced of its truth, I must mind you of these
particulars of undoubted truth and certainty which this House and the House of
Lords have jointly and severally published and remonstrated to the whole
Kingdom, King, and World in several Declarations and Remonstrances, and other
printed papers.

1. That the This is in terminis asserted by the Commons in their Petition to
the King at Hampton Court, And, Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom,
presented with it 15. Dec. 1641. Exact Collect.
Jesuits, and other Engineeres and Factors for Rome, for the alreration of
Religion, the setting up of Popery and Tyranny in this Kingdom, and subversion
of the fundamental Laws and Government of it; did long before the beginning
of this Parliament, compose and set up a corrupt, malignant, ill-affected
party, consisting of corrupt Bishops and Clergymen, some great Officers and
Counselors of State and others of trust and neernesse about the King, his
Children and Court, to carry on these their designs, who were acted by their
subtle practices: and that by this means those Jesuits and Romish Engineers
had a very powerful operation upon his Majesty's Counsels, * page 1 to 20
and the most important Affairs and proceedings of his Government both in
Church and State.

2. That the most dangerous divisions, preparations and Armies to make a War
between England and Scotland, were made and carried on by the practice and
counsel of the Jesuits, Papists, and their Confederates, (...) Scottish
Jesuits being sent from London into Scotland not foment the divisions there;
and a General Convention of all the principal Roman Catholics in this
Kingdom, and of sundry Priests and Jesuits (whereof Con the Popes Nuncio was
President) being held in London; wherein great Sums of money were granted
toward the raising of the Army against the Scots, and Treasurers and
Collectors appointed by them in every County; and Popish Commanders sent for
over and employed in that Service, as was apparently proved before a Committee,
and reported to this House soon after the beginning of this Parliament, as your
own Journal manifests. And it furthers appears by one who was privy to that
plot, sent from Rome as an assistant to Con; who out of conscience revealed all
the secrets of it to Andreas ab Habernfeld (Physician to the Queen of Bohemia
at the Hague) under an Oath of secrecy, and he to Sir William Boswel and the
King, the Originals whereof are in my custody, and published by me (at your
appointment) in my See Rome's Masters-piece. p. 13. to 26.
Romes Masterpiece,) that the ^end of he Scottish Wars was to engage the King
to cast himself wholly on the Papists and their party, (the Puritans and
Protestant party, being averse to this War, and inclining to the Scots, who
would not engage to assist him, unless he would condition with them, to grant
an universal toleration of Popery, and free exercise of that Religion to the
Papists, if their party prevailed: To which if he should show himself unwilling
or averse, then they would presently dispatch him out of the way, and poison
him with an Indian nut, which they had prepared (kept in Con's custody) as they
had poisoned his Father King James: Not^^.
And the Prince being next Heir to the Crown, educated near his Mother,
accustomed to the Popish party, and easy to be perverted in his Religion,
being but young and under age, they would get him into their power, educate him
in their Religion, and match him to a Papist; and so all their work
accomplished, Popery set up, and the Protestants and their Religion so (...)
extirpated both in England, Scotland, and Irelands In which d^scovery he
further relates, that there were under the command of Cardinal Barbarino the
Popes Nephew, protector of the English Catholics, and Con the Nuncio resident
in London, four several Orders of Jasuites most active in these designs and
wars, and disturbers of Christian kingdoms.

The first, Ecclesiastics, whose office it is to take care of things promoting
Religion. The second politicians, whose employment it is, by any means
whatsoever to shake, troube, reform, and alter the state of Kingdoms and
Republiks. The third Seculars, whose property it is, to intrude themselves into
offices and places about Kings and Princes; and to insinuate and thrust
themselves into civil affairs, bargains, contracts, and such like civil
business. The and fourth, Spies or Intilligencers, men of inferior condition,
who submit and become household servants to Princes, Barons, Noblemen, Great
men, Gentlemen, Citizens, and others of all protessions, to discover their
minds, and make use of them to prom^te their designs. That these Jesuits
usually met at one Captain Reads (a Scotch-man, a Soldier and Lay Jesuit,
^^ing in Long Acre) in the habits Gentlemen^ Soldiers, and Laymen: and many of
them followed the Camp as Soldiers in those intended Wars. That there were
near as many of all these several Sorts of Jesuits residing and lurking
privily in and about London, in September 1640. (where were then above 50
Scottish Jesui^s^as were in all Spain, Frat. c: and Italy; who have ever since
been promoting the same designs and devisions among us all these Wars, as that
which follows will demonstrate. 3 dly. That the dissolving and breaking up all the Parliaments in this Kings Reign in discontent, proceeded from the
councels, and practices of the Jesuits and their Popish confederats to
disaffect the King against them, and prevent the calling of Parliaments for the
future, the principal obstacle to prevent and counter-worke all their
designs, to promote Popry, and subvert our Religion laws, and Government.

4thly. That the Jesuits, Popish Priests, Papists and their Confederats ever
since this Parliament, have by policy and power endeavored to dissolve, and
put an end to this present Parliament, as the only basis and support of our
Religion and Liberty, the only Bulwark between and Tyranny, Popery and
superstition, ready to overrun the three Kingdoms, the dissolution whereof
would not only deprive us and our posterities of the present, but of the hopes
and capacity of any future Parliament: Exact collections, p. 1. 10. 20. 195 to
230. 265. etc. 661. to 666. 907, etc.
and that they have indefatigably used and left no means unattempted to
dissolve this Parliament: the continuance and close whereof with the King in a
happy Peace and settelment, would frustrate all their hopes and
Popish-designes; as the Lords and Commons both have most fully declared in
their Remonstrance of May, 19. and 26. 1642. in their Declaration of March, 23.
1643. in their propositions of Feb. 1. 1742. and May, 11. 1642. and often since.
That to effect this they have: first standered and traduced this Parliaments
proceedings both to the King and people, to render them odious to both.

2. Endeavored to bring up the Northern Army to overawe and force the Houses
to act according to their dictates and interests, or else for to dissolve and
destroy them.

3. Persuaded the King to impeach the Lord Kimbolion and the five Members, and
then to come personally with a strong armed guard to demand and seiz upon their
persons, which was first plotted in France.

4. Raised up a Rebellion of all the Papists in Ireland, to destroy the
Protestants there, and dissolve the Parlia, here, against whom they have
publicly declared, and sent over forces to the King to assist him in this war,
to suppress the Parliament by forse of arms.

5. Persuaded the King and many Lords and Commons to desert his Houses of Parl.
to dissolve and destroy the Parliament, and then to raise war against them, in
w^^ the Jesuits and^ Papists at home and abroad have bin most active, and
deepest engaged both in purse and person: they being the principle contrivers,
abettors and somenters of this war, to subvert our Religion, Liber. etc. set up
Popery and tyranny.

9. Plotted the A Collect etc. p^ 95. 97. 101. 203. 204. 205. 227. 252. 253.
287. 457. 148. 704. 705. 752.
seizing and apprehendig of some eminent leading Members by a confederacy and
commission here in London, for which Tomkins and others were executed, as the
Lords and Commons in their Declaration of October 22. 1642. and March. 23.
1643. and humble de^^^es, Feb. 1. 1642. with other Declarations since,
remonstrate.

7. That these Jesuits and their party have Appendix page 1.
obstructed, diverted, prevented the relief and supply of the Protestants in
Ireland, with men and money, to betroy us into the power of the Irish Rebel^s,
and extirpate the Protestants and their Religion there.

All these are remonstrated and cleared to all the world by near one hundred of
your own Exact (...) lect^o. etc. p 28 and^ Exact col^ lect. p. 10 to 20 61.
65. 69 70. 78^ 8. 84. 88^ 89^ 93^ 94. 95.
Declarations, and every man's real experience. All w^^ the army in their late
proceedings have punctually persued and exceeded and therefore certainly are
acted by the selse same counsels and principles contrarily, it is as evident by
your own Declarations: That this army and all your other forces, were purposely
raised and engaged both by Commission, Oath, Covenant, and their own sol^mn
Protestations and Remonstrances, A Collection, etc^ p 30. 49. 79. 167. 169.
181. 187. ^03. 204. 211. 216. 217. 218. 227. 244. to 267. 275. 283. 3^9. 313.
354. 360. 363. 370. 379. 412. 4^7. 424. 412. 457. 458. 470. 489. 504. 5^6. 537.
548. 576. 627. 620. 20^. 64. 87. 624. 666. 704. 7^5. 70^. 724. 7^0 etc. 795.
8^2. 803. 806. 811:. to 829. 832. 873. 882. 883. Appendix p. 7. ^1. 15.
To defend the Kings person, in the maintenance of our Religion, Laws and
Liberties; to maintain the ancient A Collect on, etc. p 8. 13. 34. 41. 43. 44,
49. 51. 61. 64 75 96. 97 99. 18^^ 187. 201. 204. 205. 210. 227. 257. 300. 32^.
310. 458. 424. 425. 496. 537. 599. 623. 686. 696. 807. 808. 879.
Government of this Kongdome, by King, Lords, and Commons, The Right and
Privilege, and Members of Parliament, against all force and violence to them,
and the Fundamental laws of the Realm, and to exterpate (as much as in them
lay) all Popery, idolatry, error, superstition, schism, and what ever is
contrary to sound Doctrine.

This engagement they really performed in the field till all the Kings Popish
and Prelaticall party in arms were utterly routed and broken in pieces, and
their garrisons reduced to the Parliament, till which time the Prists, Jesuits,
and Papists, joined all the focre and power they could raise, with the Kings
forces against the houses and this Army to conquer and distroy them. But their
hopes and designs being wholly frustrated by the Kings total defeat, these
Jesuits and their Engineers who transform themselves into all shapes and leave
no means unattempted to compass their ends, then faced about from the Kings
party, and secretly insinuated themselves into the Parliaments Army, to mutiny
and deboyst them against the Parliament, Appendix p. ^ 15. 23.
and engage them to put a speedy period and dessolution to it. To this end they
attempt to hinder and dissuade them from disbanding and going over to relieve
distressed Ireland, according to the Houses votes, and to engage them against
the houses in March, April and May, was twelvemoneth, till which time the Army
had ever showed themselves most dutiful and obedient to the Houses commands.
But then to divert and hinder all relief of the Protestaant party in Ireland,
then broughtlow, and ready to be swallowed up, when we had no need at all of
above seven or eight thousand standing forces in England, where there was no
visible enemy, and might have spared ten thousand men for Ireland, who would
soon have quelled the Robles and Papists there. These Jesuits and their popish
instruments at that very instant (which is very observable) of porpose to
preserve their party in Ireland, and destroy the protestants there, not only
diswaded those of the Army who were engaged and drawn off for Ireland from
going thither, but discouraged and enforced them to desert that service, yea
hindered other forces from going over for their relief, persuading the Army,
that this dividing of them was but a plot of Mr. Hillis and other Members to
distroy them: and then by somenting this jealousy, and raising up a new order
and Council of Agitators of the Army (some whereof were verily suspected, if
not known to be Jesuits) they caused the Army at a general randezvous to
enter into a soleme^ engagement not to disband, but to march up to London to
force the the houses to alter, null, repeal diverse Votes and ordinances they
had passed; published diverse scandalous Declarations and Papers against their
proceedings, to disingage and draw off the City and Country from their
defense: impeached no less then eleven of their MEMBERS at once (when as the
KING impeached only five) demanded their present suspention from the House
before any legal charge or evidence, else they would march up to the Houses
doors, and pull them out by violence; as the King would have done: After which,
they fall to seclude and drive away more Members by a New ex officio
proceeding, enforcing them now at last to accuse themselves, and draw up their
own cases; and in Aug. 1647 drive away most of the house by their open force
and The Generals and Armies Remonstrance, Aug 8. 1647.
high Menaces. Then they set up several Counsels of Sat in the Army: and
waving their demands as Soulders, formerly insisted on, fell to new modle the
State (contrary to their former engagements) to set up a New modle of
Government, to put a speedy and limited time for the period of this
Parliament, and a new and more equal election of Members and representatives,
and beginning and ending of Parliaments for the future; receive Petitions,
order all matters of Church and State without the Parliament, who must only
ratify and confirm their Votes! and fell to treat with, and tender proposalls
of their own to the King, without the houses privity. Besides, to pick a
quarrel with the City of London (who had first raised, and were so cordial to
the Army and Parliament) and make a irreconcilable breach between the City
and Houses, to destroy them both by degrees: they caused the houses on a
sudden, upon a Letter from the General, in one afternoon, without having the
City or giveing them the least notice of it, to recall the New Ordinance for
settling their Militia: wherewith they being justly offended, thereupon on July
26. 1647. the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Counsel, presented a Petition to
both Houses, to resettle their Militia as before, being in a full and free house
settled withont any dissenting Votes, by all their consents; which was seconded
by a Petition from the Apprentises; who being over-earnest, offered some
unarmed violence to the Houses; and got the Ordinance of repeal nulled, and the
Militia resetled as formerly: Hereupon, they persuaded the Army to March up
speedily, to London (not only without, but against the Houses Order, not to
Quarter within forty miles of the City) to protect the Houses from any further
violence; to bring the Authors of this force to speedy and exemplary
punishment, and See their Remonstrance, Aug. 18. 1647.
restpre the Houses to a condition of honor, freedom and safety: and that by
offering a greater force to the Members, who continued sitting in the absence
of those who repaired to, and engaged with them, then that of the Aps
prentises: driving the eleven Members formerly impeached out of the House and
Kingdom, expelling them, and others out of the House, forceing away most of the
Commons, nulling al Votes, Orders and Ordinances, from July 26. to August 6.
and after that marched through London in Triumph, broke down all their Forts
and works about the City, took the Tower out of their possession, divided the
Militia of Westminster and Southwarke from them, impeached and imprisoned
sundry Aldermen and others, who appeared most active for the Parliament from
the beginning, impeached, suspended and imprisoned seven Lords at once for
sundry months together; afterward released without any prosecution. And by
this means raised such a breach between the City and Houses, sets the Members
one against another, and put such a stand to their proceedings, by these
disturbances in the Parliaments Army, as they could never effect before by all
their military power and forces. Now lay al these distempers and procedings
together, and compare them with the Armies late Remonstrance, Declaration,
Menaces and present March to London, to force and levy War against the Houses,
and their Members, in case they concurred not with them, in their Jesuiticall
whimsies and desingnes: and we shall find them all so opposite and repugnant to
the Armies former obedience, professions and principles, so suitable to the
Jesuits practices in every particular; al tending only to force and dissolve
this present Parliament, to null and invalid its proceedings, and weaken al its
interest, both in the City and Country: And then every rational man must needs
acknowledge, they all originally spurng from Jesuitical suggestions and
Counsels? and that Ignatius Loyala then and now rode in an open and triumphall
Chariot in the Van of these, and all their late actions of this nature.

Add to this, that the Monstrous opinions broached publicly and privately in
the Army, See Mr. Edwards Gangrena, etc.
and their quarters, against the Divinity of the Scriptures, the Trinity, the
D^ity of our Savior; That Antichrist is only within us: That conscience ought
to be free, and all Religions tolerated: That every man is a Minister, and may
lawfully preach without ordination: That the civil Majestrate has no
legislative nor coercive power in matters of Religion; That titles are
Antichristian, and the like, seconded with public affronts to our Ministers,
climing up into their Pulpits interruping them publicly in their Sermons, and
making our Churches common Stables in some places, and receptacles of their
excrements, their open revilings at the proceedings of Parliam, and their
Members, and all to render our Religion and the professors of it odious to the
people, to make them readier and better inclined nnto Popery, disgrace and
undo our Ministers, and render them and their preaching in effectual: subvert
the power of our Magistracy, make the houses odious to all, and put all things
into a present confusion; I am confident all these were nothing else but the
projects and practices of Jesuits and their agents, who crept into the Army to
feduce and distemper them, being so diametrically contrary to the Generals,
Officers and Soldiers former practices, principles, professions, and that piety
they have professed.

But that which further demonstrates it is this; That after the General and
Officers of the Army had confessed their error *in meddling with *State
affairs, and settling and reforming the Commonwealth, in the *General
Council at Putney [where they voted and acted more like a Parliam. then a
Council of War) and promised to proceed no futher in it, but acquiesce with
the houses determinations: these Jesuits, by the help of their instruments the
Agitators, to carry on their design of putting a speedy period to the present
and all future Parliaments, draw up a moddle of a new Representive, which they
entitled The Agreement of the people, subscribed by diverse Regiments of the
Army (9 of horse and 7 of foot) and then caused it to be presented to the house
of Commons in November 1647. The matter end, and time of it conpared together,
and the houses votes upon it, are very considerable; and discover a Jesuit in
the front and rear of it: We all know, that the Jesuits and their popish
confederats, ever since Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when so many strict laws were
made against, have had an aching tooth against Parliaments, Their first and most
disperate attempt was in the third year of King James, to blow up the K. and
both houses of Parliament with Gunpowder, the orginall plotters of this horrid
Treason, were the Pope and Jesuits: as is clear by, Del Roi. his book, and
other printed papers almost a year before: the chief actors in it, were
discontented Gentlemen and Soldiers, Catesby, Percy, Winter. Faux, and others,
as our stories See the arraignment of Traitors, Mr. Vicars History, Speeds
Chronicle and others
relate, fit instruments to blow up Parliaments: The day when this was to be
executed, was the fifth of November: but this treason, being through Gods great
mercy discovered on that day, the King and Parliament adjudged these Jesuits,
and Popish Traitors to be executed, and that day by Act of Parliament to be
perpetually observed for a Thanksgiving day of this happy deliverance from that
treason. The Jesuits who have broken off all former Parliaments in this Kings
reign till this, and would eternally dissolve this, and all succeeding
Parliaments, by way of revenge for their ill successes then, have these two
last years together, in this very month of November, conspired to blow up or
pull down this and all other Parliaments; so as the very circumstance of the
month and time, discovers in my apprehension, the Jesuits to be chief actors
in this tragedy. The first attempt of this kind was on the fifth of November,
1647. the very day of the powder plot, but by the Houses occasions put off till
the 9th. Then the Agreement of the People was ushered into the House of
Commons, with a Petition by the Agitators: when this Agreement of the people
and Petition was presented, Gifford a Staffordshire Gent. and a Jesuit (a
year before sent from beyond the Seas, who at first seigned himself a convert
to our Religion) was present in the lobby with the Agitators, and promoted it
all he could, expressing his approbation of it, being gotten into the Generals
own life Guard, and the next man to him, when he came to bring the Speaker
unto the House of Commons, August, 6. 1647. He was afterward very active to
persuade the Staffordshire supernumerarie forces not to disband, and prevailed
so much with them, that there were several orders from the house and General
ere they would obey: therefore its propable he and they persuaded the Army at
first not to disband, or to go for Ireland After which he was taken this
summer at a meeting in Ramme-alley to raise a new War, and being carried
prisoner to the Committee of safety, made an escape from thence, by bribing his
Keepers, as is conceived, having offered fifty pieces to a Captain to suffer
him to escape. This Petition and Agreement of the People, thus presented by the
Agitators, and this Jesuit, Upou reading and debate thereof this House passed
these Votes against it.

Die Martis 9. November. 1647. A paper directed, To the supreme authority of the
Nation, The Commons in Parliament assembeld, and styled, The just and earnest
Petition of those whose names are subscribed, in behalf of themselves, and all
the free born people of England, together with a printed paper annexed,
entitled, All Agreement of the People for future and present peace, upon
grounds of common right, avowed.

Resolved etc.

That the matters contained in these papers ARE DESTRUCTIVE TO THE BEING OF
PARLIAMENTS, NOTA.
and TO THE FUNDAMENTAL GOVERNMENT OF THE KINGDOM.

Resolved, etc.

That a letter should be sent to the General, and those papers enclosed,
together with the Vote of this house upon them, and that he be desired to
examine the proceeding of this business in the Army, and return an account
hereof to this House.

By which Votes is apparent, That the house then deemed this Agreement of the
people, a second Gunpouder Treason, Destructive to the being of Parliaments:
That some Jesuits, or ill affected persons in the Army, had put these
Agitators upon it, and therefore desired the General to examine and give them
an account of it.

The General and Council of War in pursuance of this vote, condemned one of
the Agitators who fomented it, and shot him to death at Ware: wherewith they
acquainted the house, and by this means this Jesuits brat and Engine to blow
up this and future Parliaments, was no further prosecuted in the Army, but some
of their confederates in the City, on the 23. of the same November, most
audatiously sent it into the house, to the Speaker, enclosed in a Letter with a
petition: whereupon the House unanimously passed these votes concerning this
agreement, for the committing and prosecuting those who presented it, and
giving the General thanks, for the Execution done at Ware, and desiring him
to prosecute the business further, to the bottom, where they thought they
should find a litter of Jesuits, and a Garnet, a Catesby and Faux, together in
the Vault.

Die Martis, 23. Novemberis 1647. A Petition directed, to the Supreme
Authority of England. A Title now owned by them though then disclaimed
The Commons in Parliament assembled, and entitled, The numble Petition of
many free borne People of England, sent in a Letter, directed to Mr. Speaker,
and opened by a Commitee thereunto appointed, was read the first and second
time.

Resolved upon the question

That this Petition is a seditious and contemptuous avowing, and prosecution of
a former Petition and paper annexed, styled an Agreement of the people,
formerly adjudged by the House to be distructive to the being of Parliaments,
and fundamental government of the Kingdoms.

Resolved, etc.

That Thomas Prince Cheesemonger, and Samuel Chidly, be forthwith commtted
prisoners to the prison of the Gate House, there to remain prisoners during
the pleasure of this House, for a seditious and contemptuous avowing and
prosecution of a former petition, and paper annexed, styled An Agreement of the
people formerly adjudged by this House, to be Distructive to the being of
Parliaments and fundamental Government of the Kingdom.

Resolved, etc.

That Jeremy Ives, Thomas Tailor, any William Larner, be forthwith committed to
the prison at Newgate, there to remain prisoners during the pleasure of this
House, for a seditious and contemptuous avowing, and prosecution of a former
petition and paper annexed, styled, An Agreement of the People, formerly
adjudged by this House to be Destructive to the being of Parliaments, and
fundamental Government of the Kingdom.

Resolved etc.

That a letter be prepared and sent to the General, taking notice of his
proceedings in the execution according to the rules of War [of a mutinous
person] at their Randezvouze near Ware, and to give him thanks for it, and to
desire him to prosecute the examination of that business to the bottom, and
to bring such guilty persons as he shall think fit, to condign and exemplary
punishment.

Resolved etc.

That the Vots upon the former Petition and Agreement annexed, and likewise the
Vots and proceedings upon this Petition, be forthwith printed and published.

Yea, the houses were so sensible of the treasonablenes and danger of this
agreement, that in an Ordinance of the 17. of December. 1647. For electing of
Common Council men, and other Officers in London, they expressly ordained, that
person who has contrived, abetted, persuaded, or entered into that engagement
entitled, The agreement of the people declared to BE DESTRUCTIVE TO THE BEING
OF PARLIAMENTS, AND FUNDAMENTAL GOVERNMENT OF THE KINGDOM be elected, chosen,
or put into the Office or place of the Lord Mayor of the City of London,
Sheriff or Alderman, Deputy of a Ward, or Common Council man of the said
City, nor shall have any voice in the electing of any such Officers for the
spase af one whole year, and be made incapable of any of the said places. Upon
this treable sentence of condemnation that passed against this Agreement of the
people by these Votes and Ordinances, this stratagem of the Jesuits to blow up
this and future Parliaments, by putting a certanperiod to this Parlaments
dissolution on the last of Sept. 1648. and settling a more equal Representative
for the future, with a fixed time for its beginning and ending, and of a new
Parliament of Commons alone without King or Lord [the substance of this whole
agreement] was for that year trustrated, and totally laid aside till the
beginning of Novem. last. At which time the Jesuits and the Agitators, to
hinder Irelands relief, and our settlement, prosecuted it again a fresh in
the Army, and the better to disguise and carry it on more closely, they
inserted it verbatim into their Remonstrance to break off the Treaty with the
King, and prevailed so far with the General and his general Council of
Officers [who formerly condemned it, and shot one to death for abetting it but
in November. before] as unanimously to approve it, at St Albans the sixtenth of
November 1648. and sent it to this House the twentieth of that month to break
of the Treaty presently, and to be forthwith considered and confirmed, and
which is most observable; ushered it in with this Jesuitical preface, and
these disloyal popish demands.

Remonst. p. 62, 63. etc.
That the Capital and grand Author of our troubles, the person of the King by
whse commission, commands or procurement and in whose behalf, and for whose
interest only [of will and power] all our wars and troubles have been, with
all the miseries attending them, may be speedily brought to Justice, for the
Treason, blood and mischief he is therein guilty of.

That a timely and peremptory day may beset for the Prince of Wales, and Duke
of York to come in, and render themselves, or else immediately made incapable of
any Government, or trust in this Kingdom, or the Dominions thereof, or of any
right within the same, and thenceforth to stand exiled for ever, as Enemies and
Traitors, and to dye without mercy, if ever hereafter found therein, or if they
render themselves, then to be proceeded against for their Capital Deli^quency,
in justice, or remitted upon satisfaction given. But however the land and
revenue of the Crown to be presently sequestered etc.

Then follows this Agreement of the People, for setting some reasonable and
certain period to this Parliament, to be assigned as short, as may be, with
safety to the Kingdom and public interest thereof, and for feeling the new
Representative etc.

And because it was twice voted down in November 1648. by the house, it is
twice repeated and insisted on in this long-winded Iemonstrance page 14, 15,
16. and page, 65, 66, 67. (so much are they in love with the Jesuits Dalila)
that so it might now be twice confirmed and settled by the house, in approving
this Remonstrance.

Now compare this third gunpowder plot with the two former in November last, to
blow up King, Prince, Duke, Lords, Commons, this present and all future
Parliaments at one attempt, to destroy the King, and Parliament disinherit his
royal posterity, unpeer all the Lords and level them with the dust, to root
up them and all Parliaments root and branch at once, against all our Oaths,
our Covenats, our Remonstrances, our Declarations, our Lawos, our Protestant
Religion, all here devoted to ruin together, as the only safe and speedy way
to settell peace and safety in Church and State [to omit the horrid
equivocations, dispensations with oaths and Covenants, and Ieuiticall
distinctions, in that Remonstrance, they are such clear visible Characters of a
Jesuits pensill, hand and head in this Remonstrance, so abounding with their
bloody disloyal Tenants and parctises of killing and deposing Christian Kings
who will not do homage to their Roman Pontif: and blowing up Protestant Stats,
Kingdoms, Parliaments] so abhorent to al See the Homilies against rebellion,
Deus and Rex John Whites Defense of the way, c. 6. 10. Dr. Bilson of Christian
subjection and unchristian Rebellion pat 3. Bishop Ic^els View of a seditious
Bull
Protestant Principals, Professions practices, who never yet embrued their
hands in, nor stained their religion with the blood of any King or actual
deposition of any Protestant or Popish Pr. who was their lawful King, or
disinheriting of his lawful heirs, or puling down a Protestant Reforming
Parliament, that none but Jesuits and Jesuited Papists could possibly invent,
or spur on the General, Officers and Army so violently and madly to prosecute
them, as they do by a subsequent high Declaration discovering a very Jesuitical
spirit in the penman, distinguishing the Memb. of the house dissenting from
them in these Treasonable practices into a treasonable brach of trust, and
usurping to themselves a power to judge, censure, and exclude them, and make
those Members who shall confedrate with them herein, though never so few,
materially a Parliment, though formerly and essentially no Parliament at all,
and mooving them to depart the house and join with them in these Jesuiticall
designs. Which they have since agravated and backed by their disobedyent march
to Westminster and London against our commands, by force and open violence to
overawe us, and by our votes in Parliament to put all their treasonable Romish
demands in present execution, to justify these very traitorous doctrines and
practices of theirs, which our Parliaments have in direct terms in ^Iac. 1. 4.
5.
sundry Acts condemned, and every one of us solemnly abjured in the oath of
allegiance, which he must take immediately before his sitting in the house, and
without taking whereof he neither is nor can be enabled to sit as a Member. I
shall further offer this to your consideration, that as soon as ever this
Agreement of the people was suppressed in Novem. 1647. and the king persuaded
to reject the propositions tendered him by both Houses, by some officers in the
army, of purpose to treat on their proposals: The agitators and Jesuits in the
army, opposed these Proposals and threating to offer some violence to the Kings
person, caused him secretly to withdraw himself from Hampton Court, into the
Isle of Wight, where they shut him up close prisoner, without the Houses
privity: which done, they caused their confederates (when most of the Members
were sent into the Country to disband the supernume^aries) to pass a vote in
the Commons house, to make no more addresses to the King, not to set him aside,
(as they then professed to many dissenting members) but only to induce the K.
to seck first to them; without, which protestation, they had never carried this
vote; which passed, and most of the Membrs departing, the 2. ensuing Votes were
set on foot, and passed at an unseasonable hour, and gotten by surprise. The
very next morning there came a Declaration from Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the
Gen: Council of the Army, Ian. 11. 1647. signifying their resolutions, to
adhere to the Houses, for settling and securing the parliament and kingdom,
without the King and against him, or any other that shall hereafter partake
with him. But the Lgrds sticking at these Votes, there was a regement or two of
foot sent from the Army to garrison White hall; and a regiment of horse bilited
in the Mues, to fright and force the Lords to a Concurrence. And some few days
after, a Book written by Dolman, (alyas Parsons the Jesuit) against King James
his Title to the Crown; and concerning the lawfulness of Subjects and
Parliaments deposing and chastising of their Kings for their misgouernment, and
the good and prosperous secceesse that God commonly has given to the same
[printed out of Dolmans own printed Copy verbatim, except the word Parliament
added to it now and then, was published to the world, with this Title: Several
Speeches delivered at a conference, concerning the power of Parliaments, to
proceed against their King for misgovernment: which Book with this false new
title published at this season, intemated to the world, that this discourse of
a lesuite (for which he was condemned of high treason) was nothing else, but
speeches mad by some Members of the Commons house, at a conference with the
Lords, The highest dishonor and affront ever put upon a protestant Parliament,
to have the book and doctrine of a lesuit thus falsely fathered on them: of
which, though I may self and others complained, there was nothing done to
vindicate the houses from this gross imputation: And about the same time,
there was another book entitled, Royal tyranny discovered: Discovering the
tyranny of the Kings, of England from William the invader and robber and
Tyrant, alias the Conqueror, to this present King Charles; who is plainly
proved, to be worse and more tyrannical then any of his predecessors, and
deserves a more severe punishment from the hands of this present Parliament,
then either of the dethroned Kings, Ed. 2 or Rich. 2. had from former
Parliaments which they are bound by duty and Oath, without equivocation or
collution, to inflict upon him, he being the greatest delinquent in the three
kingdoms, and the head of the rest; so the title. In the Table, there are these
passages amongst others, Charles Steward guilty of this treason. p. 92, 93, 94,
95, 97. C. R (Charles Rex) Ought to be executed, p. 57. where the houses are not
only pressed to depose and execute him but his execution [in their neglect]
foretold, and that in An exemplary manner, in dispite of all his protectors and
defendors. Which Iesuitical books and counsels published at that instant,
discovered clearly to my apprehension, their votes for laying the King then
aside, and the deposing and executing of him to be then intended, [only
interrupted by the Scots invasion and the last summers commotion, occasioned by
those votes of Non addresses] and the forceing on of them then and now by the
army, with the violence they use, to be no other but a very plot and project of
the Jesuits to ruin and distroy the King and us.

I shall only add to this, what I manifested but now, that it was the Jesuits
plot when they engaged and assisted the King in his war against the Scots, to
dash the protestants in both nations in pieces one against another, and so be
masters of both kingdoms, and extirpate our religion in both; and that if the
King consented not to grant them a general free exercise of their religion
throughout all his realms and Dominions, or did but stick at it, that then
they would presently poison and dispatch him, possess themselves of the
Prince, next heir to the Crown, and then by flattery or menaces draw him to
their Religion, match him to a Papist, and then all three Kingdoms would soon
turn Papists, and all Protestants be murdered, or burnt for Heretics. Now
these Papists and Jesuits understanding, that the King [beyond and contrary to
their expectatio^] bath granted all or most of our Propositions in the Isle of
Wight, and fully condescended to five New bills, for the extirpation of Mass,
Popery, and Popish innovations out of his Dominions, and putting all Laws in
execution against them, and for a speedier discovery and conviction of them
then formerly, and that their good friends and Confederats our Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and other branches of the hierarchy, are tobe
wholly routted out, both in England and Ireland, so as they are never likely to
have any more footing in them again, after all their late wars, charges,
hazards, plots and designs, to set up their Catholic Religion and party are
so enraged with the King, and so inexorably incensed against him both at home
and abroad [as I am credibly informed] that now they are mad against him, and
thirst for nothing but his blood; which they think they cannot advantagiously
and effectually accomplish, but by engaging the Army to dessolve the Treaty,
and force the Parliament, in case they vote his answers satisfactory: and then
by themselves, are a confederate party in the House, to depose and cut off his
head. Which done, the Prince being now beyond Seas in their power, destitute of
his hopes of succession to this Crown, banished, and declared a Traitor and to
dye without mercy if he return hither, and to lose his head as well as his
father, upon such high affronts put upon his Father and himself, and that by a
Protestant Parliament, and Army of Saints, will be so enraged against all
professors of our religion that he will probably profess himself a Roman
Catholic (and his brother too) match with a Catholic Princes, and then
engage all the Papists in foreign parts, England, Scotland and Ireland, to
unite their forces, purses and councels by way of revenge, to cut all the
Protestants throats in all three Kingdoms, who have adhered to the Parliament,
and hew the Army it self in pieces, when they have thus accomplished their
designs: which will render them and the Parliament execrable and infamous to
all posterity, and then farewell all Parliaments, and our Protestant religion
for ever, not only here, but throughout all Christendom, where the Popish
Princes will presently massacre the Protestants, lest they should fill to the
like perfidious practices. This I am most confident is their design, by what I
have met with in their papers, and in the Jesuit Con^zens politiques and
others, who have chalked out a way by degrees insensibly to crew Popery into
any Protestant Church: by those very steps which our Prelates followed, who
were directed by them, and to alter and subvert any Protestant State and
Kingdom, by this new modelling of them into such a popular Anarchy, as is now
suggested and presented in the Armies Remonstrance. This I am assured will be
the unavoydable, desperate and deplorable issue, if we comply with them and the
Army in it, unless God in his infinite mercy shall hold off their hands, and
turn their hearts, from prosecuting their present designs.

I shall only add one thing more, and so conclude. That many of the Agitators
and Armies papers, [especially Putney projects, and some late Declarations]
savor of a Jesuits style or spirit. That I have been credibly informed, that
not only Gifford a Jesuit, was one of the Generals own Life-gard, and a very
active man in the Army, but one Thomas Budds, alias Peto (the last Popish
Priest, condemned at Newgate) was a Trooper in this Army, and by influence of
some great Officers in it, obtained a Reprieve instead of an Execution: That
the Papists beyond Seas wish very well to the Army, iu whom now is their
chiefest hopes; and that the Jesuits Cells and Colleges in foreign parts, are
of late very empty; that many Popish Priests and Jesuits are now in England,
not saying Mass, crying up the Pope and Popish Tenants as heretofore [that
were to gross, and they easily discovered:] but using all manner of mechanic
Trades, preaching in private corners, as Sectaries, Anabaptists, Seekers,
broachers of new Light, or as gifted brethren, that many of them are turned
Troopers, Agitators, if not some of them Officers in the Army, or at leastwise
have so insinuated themselves into the leading Officers there, [who are much
taken with their parts, their new Designs and Tenants to alter and unsettle
States] that they have as powerful an influence now upon the Armies Councils
and Officers, as formerly they had upon the King and his Councels, and have now
thus deeply engaged them (beyond all expectation) to accomplish these
Jesuitical designs of theirs, to depose and destry the King^ dissolve this
Parliament, subvert our Magistracy, Ministry, Religion, Laws, Liberties,
Government, and establish their Vtopian New modale of confusion, in lieu of
Parliaments and regal power, thereby to accomplish that now, which all their
Popish conspiracies, armies and confederates from the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's reign, could never yet effect by all their treachery, policy, power:
and how far they have proceeded and engaged the Army and Officers unwillingly
in it, out of honest intentions, we all now sadly behold to our great
amazement, even in this instant of time when Ireland is in such eminent danger
of being utterly lost, to ^eep off all Supplies from thence.

I beseech you Mr. Speaker, let us all lay this speedily to our hearts, and go
about to prevent it, ere it be too late. If we Vote the Kings Answer now
unsatisfactory, and so break off the Treaty with him, our only means of peace
and settlement; we have all our hopes and all these large concessions which the
King has granted both for our present and future security; our Monarchy,
Magistracy, Ministry, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Kingdoms, and that which is
dearest to us, our Religion also endangered, yea lost at once, and such a
certain foundation laid to carry on all these Jesuitical designs I have here
discovered, and that by authority of this House, as will stain the honor of
this most glorious and renowned Parliam. to all Posterity, and put a
dishonorable speedy period to this and all future Parliam. for ever. But if we
Vote it so far satisfactory, as I have stated it (and humbly conceive proved it
substantially to every rational man's understanding and conscience) as that we
may lay present hold upon it, and proceed therein without delay, to turn all
the Kings Concessio^s into Bills (which I have for the most part already drawn)
and get the Kings Royal assent unto them, I doubt not but by Gods blessing on
our endeavors, we may before this Month be ended, settle such a firm and well
grounded Peace between the King and all his People and kingdom; upon such
honorable, safe, and advantageous terms for the Public interest, and such
strong securities, as no State, or Kingdom ever yet enjoyed the like since the
Creation.

And therefore Mr. Speaker, upon this long and tedious debate (for which I must
humbly beg pardon of the House, being a business of such infinite
concernment to our present weal or ruin) I must and do conclude, That the
Kings Answers to the Propositions of both Houses, are so far Satisfactory, at
the least, as that this House may upon safe and firm grounds, and great
advantages, forthwith accept of, and immediately proceed upon them, to the
speedy settlement of the Peace of the Kingdom; and are bound both in honor,
prudence, justice, and Conscience so to do, to preserve themselves, our three
Kingdoms and the Army too, from perpetual bloody wars, and inevitable
impendent desolation and confusion.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX. For the Kingdoms better satisfaction of some occurrences since
this SPEECH.
THis Speech, uttered with much pathetique seriousness, and heard with great
attention, gave such a general satisfaction to the House that many Members,
formerly of a contrary opinion, professed, they were both convinced and
converted; others who were dubious in the point of satisfaction, that they were
now fully confirmed, most of different opinion put to a stand: and the Majority
of the House, declared both by their cheerful Countenances and Speeches [the
Speaker going into the withdrawing Room to refresh himself, so soon as the
Speech was ended) that they were abundantly satisfied by what had been thus
spoken. After which the Speaker resuming the Chair, this Speech was Seconded by
many able Gentlemen, and the debate continuing Saturday, and all Monday and
Monday night till about nine of the Clock on Tuesday morning; and 244 Members
staying quite out to the end, though the House doors were not shut up (a thing
never seen or known before in Parliament) the question was at last put, and
notwithstanding the Generals and whole Armies march to Westminster, and Menaces
against the Members, in case they Voted for the Treaty, and did not utterly
eject it as unsatisfactory, carried in the affirmative by 140 Voices (with the
four Tellers) against 104 that the question should be put, and then without any
division of the House it was,

Resolved on the question, That the Answers of the King to the Propositions of
both Houses, are a ground for the House to proceed upon for the settlement of
the Peace of the Kingdom.

And to give the General Officers and Soldiers satisfaction, and keep a fair
correspondency between the house and them, they so far condescended, as
likewise further to vote at the same time

That Mr. Peirpoint, Sir John Evelyn of Wilts, Mr. Solicitor, Col. Birch, M.
Ashurst, Sir Thomas Witherington, and Mr. Maynard, are appointed to repair to
the headquarters this afternoon, to confer with the Lord General and his
Officers, to keep a Right understanding and a good correspondency between the
House and the General and the Army.

Which done, the House who sat up all the day and night before, adjourned until
Wensday morning; At which time the General and Officers of the Army highly
displeased with the vote and those Members who assented to it, sent two or
three whole Regiments of Foot and Horse to Westminster; set a strong guard at
the Houses doors, in the lobby, stairs, and at every passage leading toward
the house, admitting none but Parliament men themselves to enter into
Westminster Hall, or the back stairs leading to the Court of Requests, and
excluding their servants who attended them; Col. Pride, Col. Hewson, and Sir
Hardress Waller seized upon diverse Members of the Commons house, some at the
House doors, other in the Lobby, others on the stairs near the House, without
any warrant, or reason alleged, but their sword and power, as they were going
to sit and discharge their duties. Among others, Col. Pride, seized upon Mr.
Prynne going up the stairs next the house, and told him, Mr. Prynne, you must
not go into the House, but must go along with me; M. Prynne returned this
answer, That he was a Member of the House and was going into it to discharge
his duty, from which no man should or ought to hinder him, whether he would go,
and he should not keep him back, and thereupon thrust up a step or two more.
Whereupon Pride thrusting him down before, and Sir Hardress Waller, and others
laying hands on, and pulling him down forcibly behind to the Court of Requests
great door, Mr. Prynne thereupon demanded by what Authority and Commission, and
for what cause they did thus violently seize on, and pull him from the house?
to which Pride and Waller showing him their armed Soldiers standing round
about him with swords, muskets, and matches lighted, told him that there was
their Commission: to which Mr. Pryme answered, that they were no legal
commission, nor cause for them to seize upon him being a Member, and openly
protested, that it was an high breach of the Privileges of Parliament and
affront to the house, and desired the standers by to bear witness of this
violence and his Protestation against it, and that they being more and stronger
then he, and all armd and he unarmed, they might forcibly carry him whether
they pleased, but stir he would not thence of his own accord, whereupon they
forcibly pushed him into the Queens Court, where some other Members a little
before seized, were kept Prisoners by them.

The house bein informed by Mr. Dodridge, a member who came along with Mr.
Prynne, of this violence upon him and high breach of privilege in seizing him
and other Members, sent the Sergeant of the House, to demand them of the
Captain that guarded them, and to command their present attendance in the
House: which message though delivered by him, and the prisoners thereupon
requiring obedience, that they might accordingly attend the House: was yet
slighted and disobeyed, whereupon the House ordered the Sergeant the second
time to go with his mace and demand the Members, and bring them unto the house
forthwith; the house refusing to do any business till their Members were
restored, but Pride and his confederates stayed the Serj^ent in the lobby, and
would not suffer him to go to the members; whereupon he returning into the
House, acquainted them with the contempt, which was entered into the Journall.
Thereupon the House concluded, not to proceed till their Members were restored,
and sent a Committee to the General to demand them, Mr. Edward Stephens and
Colonel Birch being in the house were sent for to the door by some of the
Officers by false tickets, and pulled out from the house doors by violence,
Col. Birch putting his head within the door, and crying out to the Speaker,
whether they would suffer their members to be pulled out thus violently before
their faces, and yet sit still?

When night approached St. Peter's (who now keeps the prison door keys of hell
and Purgatory) released two of the imprisoned Members (Sir Benjamin Ruddiard,
and Mr. Nath. Fiennes) by the same power of the Sword (as he said) that had
taken and held them captive: belike they were all prisoners of War, and so
their marching up to Westminster was a leavying open war against the
Parliament, and so Treason by their own Declarations and Remonstrance, in as
high or higher degree, as that for which they demand the King to be brought to
speedy justice and execution. Soon after, he and some other other Officers,
promised the imprisoned Members, that they should be removed to Wallingford
house, where the General and Lieutenant General would come and confer with
them, and they should have all sitting accommodations, there provided for them;
and that Coaches were provided to carry them thither; whereupon they all took
Coach to go thither: but coming to Hell back gate, the Coaches were all there
stayed, and the Members thrust all prisoners into Hell, where they were kept
all that cold night, without either bedding or other needful accommodations,
though some of them aged and infirm, and there enforced to lie upon the bare
flower and Benches instead of Beds, few of them taking any rest at all that
night. The next morning a little before Dinner, they were all carried fasting
to White Hall, by the Generals order guarded with foot and horse, before and
behind, and on every side, like so many Traitors to attend the General, and his
Council, who desired presently to speak with them, as the Marshall informed
them under whose custody they were put. But when they came there, they waited
on their more then Royal new Excellencies till six a clock at night, without
eating or drinking: and then received this cold Message, without being admitted
to the Generals or Counsels presence. That the General and Officers were now
so busy in consultation about other important affairs, that they could not
speak with them that night, but had given order for their accommodation at the
Kings Head, and Swan in the Strand, whither they should be carried that night,
and the next morning some Officers would wait on them with Propositions: Which
done they were guarded every man with his musqueteer at his back, and others by
his side, and horse and foot before and behind their persons, like so many
Rogues or felons, and so sent on foot through the dirty street, except six who
were lame, who got a Coach) to these two Inns; and there kept prisoners
several days till some were after by degrees without any condition, or cause
assigned of their commitment, and others not released, removed elsewhere. The
next day after those Members were thus violently seized, Mr. Gewen was seized
at the House, and Mr. Vahghan at his Lodging, and sent Prisoners to the other
Members: Sir William Litten was likewise seized that day, and kept Prisoner in
White Hall: but after released by Sir William Constables Order: That day and
five or six days following, above one hundred and sixty Members more, whose
names were listed by the officers and soldiers that stood at the house Doors,
who kept back every one that was so listed, were forcibly secluded and driven
away from the House, which could hardly get above 45. or 50. (most confederates
with the army to carry on their designs) and Vote their Counsels Imperial
Dictates, as the houses votes and not above 3. or 4. Lords at most attended and
made up that Honorable house: all of them still sitting under the armies armed
violence and over-awing terror. These 45. or 50. only whiles under this horrid
force, during the restraint and forcible seclusion of above 200 members by the
army, (and so all their Votes, Orders, and proceedings merely null and void,
by their own Ordinance of August 20. 1647. which declared, all Votes,
Ordinances and proceedings during the members absence in the army, though not
above 40. at most to be null and void, from July 26. to August six, though the
houses were then almost treble the number they are now, and no one member
secluded or actually forced away from either house) have assumed to themselves
the name and power of the house, and presumed to repeal all Votes concerning
the Treaty as dishonorable and destructive: and among others the Vote made upon
this solemn and long debate when there were 244 Members present at the
Question, and above 340 at the debate when fullest through age and infirmity
could not hold out all night til the question put, and some members contrary to
the course of all former Parliam. after these Votes passed, have presumed to
draw up and enter particular protestations against it: for which other members
in former times have bin suspended the house, and sent prisoners to the tower.
The list of those who have entered their dissents and protests against it,
follow: because the secluded Members and those who concurred in that Vote,
being above three times their number, expect they will give the Kingdom and
world some solid and satisfactory reasons of this their dissent, against which
there is so great reason in the premises, dissents without reasons to back
them, being no ways satisfactory to any man.

20 December 1648.
Col. Bosvill, Lord Gray, Peregrine Pelham, Col. Jones, Col. Temple, Col. Ven,
Sir Tho. Malivory, Sir John Bouchier, Col. Peter Temple, Humphry Edwards,
(whose elect. is void, Mr. Tho. Challoner. Sir Gregory Norton, Michael
Oldesworth Augustine Garland, Sir John Danvers. Mr. Dove. Mr. Hen. Smith. Mr.
Fry, (whose election, is long since voted void) Mr. Serle, Nicholas Love, John
Lisle. Col. Rigby, Cornelius Holland Col. Ludlow Gregory Clement Col. Puretoy
Col. Stapely Mr. Dunch Mr. Cawley Col. Downs John Carey John Blackstone Thomas
Scot
December 21
Col. Hutchinson Sir Henry Mildmay Sir Jam. Harrington
25 December.
Col. Edward Harvey Alderman Pennington Alderman Atkin Dan. Blagrave (voted out
of the house. Colonel Moor Gilbert Millington
In a Letter from Paris, writ by an Independent Agent there, to an Independent
Member of the House of Commons, a great friend of the Armies, dated Paris Nov.
28. 1648, there is this passage: I am fallen into the acquaintance of three or
four Catholics of great ingenuity, and in their way, of much Religion:
undoubtedly, it is an error to look at all Papists through the same
prospective; for they are more to be differenced then English Protestants can
be. I find their opinion of, and dependence upon the Pope, little or nothing
what we imagined it to be, and better principled To make Members of a free
Commonwealth, then the most English. Their opposition to the King is not to be
reconciled. Note.
Their hopes now are upon the Army, to whom they wish all prosperity as to the
settling of a Representative, being extremely distasted with Regal hereditary
Power through the world.

This Letter compared with the close of the fore going Speech, the Armies late
force upon both Houses and their Members to dissolve them, their imprisoning
and removing the King to bring him to trial, their voting at their general
Council of War at White Hall the 23 of December last [carryed by two voyces]
That all Papists should have free liberty and toleration of conscience, and all
Sequestrations and forfeitures as Papists only, taken off. Their earnest
prosecution of the new Jesuiticall Representative, to divide the whole kingdom
into bloody feuds and factions to destroy one another, and make way for the
common foreign Popish Enemies, to invade and conquer us in our present low
condition, without any opposition, and lose Ireland past all recovery; their
casting of the eminent imprisoned Members into hell it self in highest contempt
and scorn; their setting up a new Parliament of State, and a Convocation too at
White Hall, as the supreme Council, to vote, settle and determine all affairs
of Church and State, and new mould the whole Government of this Kingdom; with
the Petition of Robert de Luke to the General within these few days, for him
and his fellow-Messengers, authorized by the State to apprehend Priests and
Jesuits, for his Warrant to apprehend the Jesuits and Priests in his Army and
Quarters without any Officers disturbance, where they have discovered many of
them since their march to London; their present compliance with Sir John Winter
the archest Jesuited Papist (a person excepted in the Propositions) and using
him and Sir Toby Matthews that pragmaticall Jesuit, to draw Owen Roh Oneal,
and the bloody Popish Rebels in Ireland, to join with them against Monarchy and
the Princes Title; with their late extraordinary favors to Priests and
Papists, of which they boast; the repealing of the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance (made principally against the Pope, Papists, and their Jesuiticall
Usurpations, Innovations and Antimonarchicall practices of excommunicating,
deposing, dis-inheriting and murdering our Protestant Princes; and their
manifold Treasons, Conspiracies and attempts upon their Persons, Crowns and
Kingdoms.) Their late illegal and treasonable murdering and beheading of the
King, and the late Petition of the Army that all imprisoned for their
conscience, or Religion, may be released, extending unto Popish Priests and
Jesuits, and purposely intended for their benefit, there being none else but
such restrained, and but few of them: And their present actings are a clear
evidence to every rational man's conscience, that all the Armies present
councels, designs, force, and proceedings against the King, Prince,
Parliament, Members and their new pretended Representative, are but the Jesuits
and Roman Catholics Brats Impostures and undermining Projects, to accomplish
their own ends; and that they have already got the greatest sway in all their
consultations and proceedings, of purpose to work our speedy ruin, if the
Officers and Army will neither timely discern nor repent of it, and be no
longer spurred on and ridden with a full career by these Jesuiticall Furies,
who fear a discovery ere they have completed their work, and therefore make
such post haste to accomplish it by the Armies present distempers, incapable
yet of better council, or timely informations, to recall them from their own
approaching speedy ruin, their ears being so deafned, and their brains so
intoxicated with their Jesuiticall Enchantments, which all the Kingdom and
world will now clearly discover, and I hope the Officers and Army will do so
too by this discovery of them, and thereupon repent of all their violence and
late proceedings, at which the Papists at ROME and in foreign parts do much
rejoice and triumph.

I shall close up all with these words of both Houses of Parliament in their
Ordinance of the 1 of April 1643, A Collection page 1^.
That nothing but RUIN AND DESOLATION CAN BE EXPECTED, unless God in mercy
prevent it, and incline his Majesty's heart to the faithful advice of his
great Council of Parliament (as now he has done in this Treaty) which has
ever been, and is [under God] the chief support of his royal Dignity, and the
security of all we have, or can enjoy.

FINIS.

