Sad and serious Political CONSIDERATIONS, Touching the invasive War against
our Presbyterian Protestant Brethren in Scotland, their late great Overthrow,
and the probable dangerous consequences thereof to both Nations and the
Prorestant Religion. Which may serve as a SATISFACTORY APOLOGY for such
Ministers and People, who out of Conscience did not observe the public
Thanksgiving, against their Covenant, for the great slaughter of those their
Brethren in Covenant.

Printed in the Year 1650.

Sad and Serious Political Considerations.
THE English Independents new invasive War against their Presbyterian
Protestant Brethren of Scotland, and late great rout and slaughter of their
Army, meeting with variety of censures and constructions, according to the
dive^sity of men's inclinations and interests, some prudent Christians, engaged
to no parties, whose interest is only the preservation, propagation and safety
of the reformed Protestant Religion against the common Enemies and Underminers
thereof, have these sad melancholy apprehensions thereof; That it is a doleful
Prologue and tragical Scene, not only to the approaching ruin and desolation
of both Kingdoms for their manifold crying sins, but likewise to the speedy
subversion of the true Protestant Religion, and extirpation of all zealous
Professors thereof through our three Kingdoms, and in foreign parts, upon
these ensuing considerations.

1. That the Kingdoms of England and Scotland make up the greatest Body of the
Protestant Religion in Christendom, being best able to defend themselves, and
succor other Reformed Churches, when endangered and designed to ruin by
Popish Enemies, as the Lords and Commons declared long since in their Exact
Collection p. 663.666. A Collection of Orders and Ordinances, p. 354.
Protestation to this Kingdom and the whole world, 22. October. 1642. and in
their Order of the seventh of October 1643. And therefore the ruin of the
Protestant Party in these Kingdoms, is the readiest way to endanger, conquer,
ruin all other Reformed Churches in the world, and extirpate the Protestant
Religion in all other Countries; as they there likewise Declare.

2. That the Pope of Rome, Jesuits, Priests, Papists, and their Confederates,
upon this ground, have for many years last past, by open force, and secret
practices, endeavo^red the extirpation of the Protestant Religion and most
zealous Professors thereof throughout these Kingdoms, and made it their
chiefest design to reduce them to their pristine obedience to the Sea of Rome,
which by the Popish Negotiations with Spain, the Papisticall Match with France,
the Agency of the Popes Nuncio's, the practices of Priests and Jesuits in
England (countenanced and protected against the force of Laws) and the
confederacy of Popish Prelates, Clergymen and Courtiers with them in these
Designs, Exact Collection, p. 4. to 14.97.98.508.
they had almost totally accomplished and brought to full perfection in all our
Realms; as the whole House of Commons in their Remonstrance of the state of the
Kingdom, 15. December. 1641. and other subsequent Declarations; and they and the
Scottish Commissioners in their Impeachments against the Archbishop of
Canterbury, largely remonstrate.

3. That the most zealous Protestants, then branded with the name of Puritans
and Presbyterians in England and Scotland, were the principal and only
obstacles to the finishing of this their near completed Work. Whereupon the
Exact Collection, p. 10.199 492, 493.
Jesuiticall, Popish and Prelaticall prevailing F^ction resolved to root them
out of this Kingdom by force, or drive them out with fear, and rid them all out
of the way. For the better effecting whereof, they thought it necessary to
reduce Scotland to such Popish Superstitions and Innovations, as might make
them apt to join with England in that great change which was intended:
Whereupon new Popish Canons and a Liturgy reformed much after the model of the
Papists Mis^alls, were pressed upon them; and all the Arminian and Popish
Doctrines broached, maintained, and new Popish Ceremonies practiced in England,
were in deavoured to be planted and set up in M. Baylies Canterburians
Self-conviction.

The Scots Impeachment against ^Ar^hbishop Lawd.


Scotland.

4. That this their dangerous ripened Design finding no public, but only
private opposition in England by particular persons, who were ^ined, Exact
Collection, p. 10.11.12.492.
pillori'd, stigmatized, deprived of their ears, close imprisoned, banished and
ruined by the Star Chamber and High Commission, to the public terror of all
others; thereupon the Scottish Puritans and Presbyters were the first visible
Instruments raised by God to give a public check to their successful
design, beyond their or our expectations.

5. That hereupon the Exact. C^^l^ction, p. 10.11.12^ ^3 97.492.508.894.595 A
Coll^^^ion, p. 308.309.354.417.419.457.458.
Jesuiticall and Prelaticall Popish Party raised two several Armies
successively to suppress and extirpate the Puritan and Presbyterian Party in
Scotland, as the only remo^a's to their design; and were most active and
forwards in their leavies and contributions against them; endeavoring to
engage the Protestant Party in both Nations in a bloody civil War^e to their
mutual ruin; to which the Puritan and Religious party in England were most
averse. First privately murmuring, and afterward publicly protesting against
this War, as dishonorable and dangerous to Religion and both Kingdoms in
the Parliament, in April 1640. purposely summoned to raise moneys to carry on
that War, which they refused to grant to so ill a purpose, and did all they
could to blast their malicious designs and war against Scotland; whereupon
the Popish party caused that Parliament to be dissolved, and did all they could
by violent arbitrary courses, and illegal Loanes and Taxes, to raise Forces
and moneys to maintain a war against them; imprisoning and prosecuting those,
who resisted or refused to assist them in this war, in the self-same manner
as those in present power have done, diverse of their Christian Brethren for
manifesting their dislike and backwardness to assist them in this ungodly
invasive war against their Protestant Brethren in Covenant against many
public Ingag^ments, and not giving public thanks to God for their late
overthrow.

6. That the Scotti^h Puritans and Presbyterians advance with their Army into
England, in the year 1640. of purpose to preserve the Religion, and protect
themselves and their English Brethren from slavery and ruin; was the Exact
Collection, p. 11.12.13.199.492.493.508.
pri^cicipall and only means under God, of preventing their own and our
thraldom to no p^ry and Tyranny, of frustrating all the Jesuits, Papists and
Prela^es designs, of securing Religion, Laws, Liberties, and conve^ing the last
Parliament; which through Gods blessing on their endeavors, through the
assistance of the Scottish Commissioners, and countenance of their Army,
overpowered the Popish and Prelaticall Faction, brake all their former
Projects in pieces, suppressed all their Popish Innovations, Doctrinall and
Ceremonial, reconciled the differences between both Nations, settled a firm
unity and amity between them, by an Act of Oblivion and Pacification, abolished
the High Commission, Star Chamber, Extravagances of the Councell-Table, the
Bishops Courts, and Votes in Parliament, Ship Money, Impositions, and all other
illegal Taxes; quickened the Laws against Jesuits, Priests and Popish
Recusants; passed a Law for Triennuall Parliaments, and another against the
untimely adjourning, proroguing and dissolving of themselves at the Kings own
pleasure, and thereby put our Religion, Laws, Liberties and Properti^s in a
far better condition of security, and the Popish and Prelaticall party into a
far worse, and more hopeless and desperate condition then ever heretofore.

7. That to prevent and frustrate these Laws and this security, the Exact
Collection, p. 17.18.98.229.493.
Jesuiticall and Prelaticall party whilst they were in agitation, endeavored
all they could by subtle practices, slanders, and private solicitations, to
raise jealousies and divisions between the Scottish Commissioners and Army, and
the Parliament, to engage the Scottish and English Armies each against other,
or to make the Scots stand neutrall to the Parliament, that so they might bring
up the English Army from the North to London to overawe and suppress them,
and hinder the Union between both Kingdoms; which through the fidelity of the
Scots, and of some Officers in the English Army, was timely discovered,
prevented, and a firm Union between both Kingdoms settled by Acts of
Parliament, passed in the Parliaments of both Nations.

8. That these Acts of Pacification and Union between both Kingdoms, and the
Religious party of both Nations, the extirpation of Prelacy and the Popish
Hierarchy, and the establishing of a Presbyterian Government and Uniformity in
Doctrine, Worship and Discipline in both Kingdoms were apprehended, prosecuted
and resolved upon by the most religious Protestant party and Exact Collection
p. 594. (...) 605. A Coll^ction, p. 309. to 313 327.358.359.3^0.399
404.41^.420. to 428.458.453.
Parliaments of both Nations, as the readiest, probablest, and most effectual
means under God to preserve and secure their Religion, Laws, Liberties,
against all future invasions, and to frustrate all Popish and Prelaticall
Design^s against them, and were accordingly Exact Collection. p. 97, 98 218.564.
esteemed and looked upon by the adve^se Popish and Prelaticall party, who
thereupon attempted with all their policy and power, to uphold Prelacy, and
retard and prevent the establishment of ^resbytery, as fatal to all their
hopes and Designs; and thereupon improved all their int^rest both at home, and
with foreign ^rinces, to raise what Forces they could, to break this D^signe
and the ^arliament too, before they should accomplish it.

9. That when the Jesuiticall, Popish and Prelaticall party in England,
Ireland, Scotland, and foreign parts, had taken up Arms, and raised great
Forces to hinder the settlement of the Presbyterian Government^, suppress the
late Parliament, subvert the Protestant Religion, introduce Popery and Tyranny,
ext^rpate the Puritan and Religious party in England and Ireland, and were
grown very strong and p^evalent in both, the Exact Col. p. 56.57.58.666 564 to
605. A Collection, p. 308. ^o 312.354.355.363.371.372.428.441.467.677. etc.
66^.711.767.798. to 810.933.
Scottish Presbyterians (now invaded and defeated) out of their brotherly love,
and Christian affection, in this extremity of danger, for the preservation of
our Religion, Liberties, Laws, Parliament, and the godly party in England and
Ireland, at both Hous^s earnest solicitatio^, did readily and cheerfully assist
us with their Forces in both Kingdoms, and thereby, through Gods b^essing, were
a great means of weak^ning and subduing our Enemies, and prese^ving our
Religion, Laws, Liberties, Lives, from utter destruction; which brotherly
assistance, with so powerful an A^my of above twenty thousand Horse and Foot
in our greatest dangers, was so welcome to us, that the House of Commons on the
second of February 1643. A Collection, p. 428.
Ordered, public thanks should be given in all Churches for the aid and
assi^tance come in by our Brethren of Scotland: And when the malignant party
there, in their absence for our preservation, had p^ev^iled and routed only
some few of their Force^ (nothing considerable in comparison of those lately
slain and defeated) left behind for their defense, both Houses were so sensible
thereof, that they appointed a special D^y of Humiliation for the miseries of
Scotland throughout all the Parliaments Q^arters by their A (...), p. 721.
Order of 2. September 1645. which was accordingly observed; so much did they
and we then condole the least overthrow and misery of our Scottish Brethren in
Covenant ^being members of the self^same Body of Christ) as if it had been our
own: Whereas now on the contrary, we invade, slay, d^stroy and ruin these our
brotherly Assistants, rejoice and triumph at their misery, appoint public
Da^es of Thanksgiving throughout the whole Nation for their great slaughter and
overthrow, and hang up the Ensigns taken from them in Westminster Hall, as
public trophies and testimonies to succeeding ages of our gratitude and
brotherly kindness toward them, and of our religious observation of our
solemn National League and Covenant with them, not long since made and entered
into upon their coming in to our assistance.

10. That in the extremity of our dangers, by the prevailing Popish party, the
A Collectio^, p. 309.310 311.312.327.358.359.39^.399.404.416.42^^ to^
428.458.459.694.751.768.769.798.802.806. etc. 878.879.889.
Parliaments, Ministers, and religious people both of Scotland and England did
resolve it most nec^ssary, and essential for Gods glory and their s^fety, to
enter into a more sacred and stricter union then formerly, for defense of their
Religion, King, Parliament, Laws, Liberties, the extirpation of Popery, of
Prelacy, and the bringing of all our Kingdoms to uniformity in Doctrine,
Worship and Discipline, by a solemn National League and Covenant, as the
only means under God, to prevent all future differences and breaches between
all the godly people of both Nations, to preserve and secure Religion, Laws,
Liberties, and privileges of Parliament, against all present and future
attempts whatsoever, and dash in pieces all the designs, practices, hopes of
the Jesuiticall and Prelaticall Faction in all our Kingdoms: which League and
Covenant was accordingly agreed upon by the Parliament, and Assemblies of
Divines in both Kingdoms, and after that most cheerfully and solemnly taken
and subscribed, not only by the Scottish Parliament, Army, Clergy, and
Generality of that Nation, but by all the Members of both Houses of our
Parliament, the genera^ity of all the godly Ministers and people in England and
Ireland; and by all, or most Officers and Soldiers in the Parliaments Armies;
who many of them carried it in their hats, hands, and fixed to their pikes as
they marched, and amongst others it was taken and subscribed by A Collection of
Ordinances, p. 426.
Oliver Cromwell himself and Ireton; and every man by Ordinances of both
Houses, was disabled to enjoy or exercise any Civil or Military Office, or
place of Trust whatsoever in the State or Army, who did not solemnly take and
subscribe it^ whereupon it was almost universally^ taken and subscribed in a
most sacred and solemn manner throughout the Kingdom, and followed with many
glorious Victories and Successes, till the Popish and Prelaticall Malignant
party in England were totally subdued; all Counties, and Garrisons fully
reduced to the Parliaments Command; and a happy Peace and settlement of our
Reliigion, Laws, Liberties upon most safe and honorable terms, endeavored,
expected^ and almost accomplished by a personal Treaty^, with the KING in the
Isle of Wight.

11. That to prevent this Peace and Settlement; the The History of Indep^nd^ncy.
Officers of the Army (who love to make a Trade of War, thereby to gain and
keep all Civil and Ecclesiastical power in their own hands, and to enrich
themselves with our three Kingdoms spoils and ruin) confederating with some
few Members of the Commons House against their Trust, duty, Oaths,
Protestations, the very Letter of this solemn League and Covenant, and all the
ends thereof; forcibly seized, condemned and beheaded the late King, secured
and secluded the greatest part of the Commons House addicted to the
Presbyterian Government, suppressed the whole House of Lords, disinherited the
Kings Posterity of the Crown, subverted the fundamental Government of the
Kingdom; usurped all Regal and Parliamentall Authority to themselves; and by
color thereof, now trample all Laws, Liberties, and Privileges of Parliament
under feet; remove all or most zealous Presbyterians (though never so eminent
Actors and sufferers for Religion and the public weal) out of all Offices and
places of power and Trust throughout the Nation; discourage and discountenance
all or most Pr^sbyterian Ministers, especially the most pious; banish some,
imprison others, recall the Sequestrations, and substract the A^gmentations,
and Tithes of all or most of them, to starve and ruin them; withdraw
themselves from their Ministry, suborn or tolerate their monthly
Prognosticators, and Diurnalists to revile and rail openly against them in
print, without the least control, and to prognosticate their and their
Presbyterian Governments downfall, to incense the people against them and it;
invent and prescribe new Oaths, Engagements, Publications, Observations of
Thanksgivings, and Humiliations, and other snares and engines, thereby to
ensnare either their Consciences, or endanger their Estat^s, Liberties,
Ministry, Persons in their plundring Committees, and new Arbitary
Judicatories; declare against the solemn League and Covenant as expired,
abolished, yea, and dangerous and unlawful to be kept, set up and enforce an
Anti-Covenant Engagement to frustrate, null, and abjure it, debar all from all
public Offices, Pref^rments, Augmentations, degrees of Learning, the practice
of the Law, and the very benefit of the Laws of England, (for which we have so
long contested with the Kings Party) who will not out of conscience or Loyalty
subscribe it; oppose and traduce the Presbyterian Government, as Papal,
Antichristian and Tyrannical; exempt all S^ctaries whatsoever from all Penal
Laws, in not repairing to any public Ordinances or Churches; Authorize them
freely to meet when and where they please in private Conventicles, (where
running Priests and Jesuits may and will easily seduce them) without the least
danger or disturbance: and because their brethren of Scotland stick close to
their Presbyterian Government and Covenant, and have closed with their King at
last, according to their Covenant and Allegiance, and will not disinherit him
as they have done; they thereupon have recalled Cromwell out of Ireland from
prosecuting the Irish Papists and Royalists, made him their General instead of
the Lord F^irfax, and sent him in to Scotland, without any real provocation on
their part, to invade them with an Army, where he entered without the least
resistance, seized some of their Towns and Garrisons, provoked them often times
to fight, when they declined fighting, and at last gave them battle in their
own Country, routed their whole Army, and though he lost not forty men in the
fight^ yet he and his Forces, out of their Christian charity cut down near
4000. of them in the pursuit, maimed and wounded above 5000. more, whereof many
are since dead, and more like to die; took 10000. of them prisoners, 5000.
whereof are sent Captives into England; since which he has taken Edenborough
and Leith, prosecutes his Victory with all vigor, sends up all the Scots
Colors to Westminster, where they are publicly hung up in the Hall for
triumph. And for this great slaughter and overthrow of our Presbyterian
Brethren, a solemn public day of Thanksgiving has been prescribed to be
strictly observed throughout the Nation, and celebrated in many places
accordingly, to involve the whole Nation in a double guilt of their blood:
First by their Contributions to pay the Army sent against them, next by public
Thanksgiving to God for their destruction, and that in those very Churches and
places, where we not long since lifted up our hands and subscribed our Names,
when we took the forementioned Leaga^ and Covenant in the presence of God
himself, Angels and men, A Collect^on, of Ordinances, p. 424.425.426.
sincerely, really. and constantly to preserve their Religion in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, Government, and with our Estates and lives mutually to
preserve the Right and Privileges of their Kingdom and Parliam^nt, and to
bring all to condign punishment, as Malignants, Incendiaries, and evil
Instruments, who should endeavor the dividing of one of the Kingdoms from
another, and each one of us, according to our place and Interest, to endeavor
that both Kingdoms may remain conjoined in a firm peace and Union to all
posterity; and that we shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by
whatsoever combination, persuasion, or terror, to be divided or withdrawn from
this blessed Union, which so much concerns the glory of God, and good of the
Kingdoms, but shall all the days of our lives zealously and constantly
continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same according to our
power against all lets and impediments whatsoever, etc. which how well and
really we have performed, let that Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts^ in
whose presence and Name we made and subscribed this Covenant, judge, and our
own consciences, as we shall answer the contrary at that great day, if we
seriously repent not of it now, whilst we have time, and space of repentance
given us.

13. That upon the due consideration of all these Premises, we shall not
conclude as some rigid Presbyterians do, perchance not without good grounds;
That this invasive War with our Brethren of Scotland is an apparent violation
of every clause and branch of the solemn Brotherly League and Covenant, and a
very strange Act of Ingratitude and Injustice in invading their Kingdom,
because they will have a King, according to their Ancient Constitution,
Government, Laws, Covenant; and in endeavoring to deprive their King of the
Kingdom of Scotland, because they have injuriously and per^idiously
dispossessed him of his two Kingdoms of Engl^nd and Ireland, against their
National League and Covenant, and other oaths, for fear his possession of that
his Hereditary Kingdom should be a means to regain the other two, (which is as
unconscionable and unreasonable, as if a great Statesman or Commander should
wrongfully deprive his Neighbor of all his Lands and goods in a third Parish
or County, because he has forcibly dispossessed him of all his Lands and Goods
in two other Parishes or Counties, that so he might never be able to recover
them by suit of Law, having no means left to maintain his suit against him) but
rather infer from thence,

First, that this War with Scotland is not only exe^eding scandalous,
dishonorable, and disadvantagious to all the Professors of the reformed
Protestant Religion in both Kingdoms, and throughout the Christian world, to
behold Protestant Brethren in Covenant thus invading, slaughtering and
destroying each other upon such slender unchristian carnal grounds, but 2
Chro. 11.4. c. 28.6, 7.8, 9, 10.11. 2 Samuel 26, 27. Acts 7.26. Gal 5.14, 15.
Obad. 10. etc. 1 Cor. 6.1.6 7, 8. 1 John 3.12.
ungodly too.

Secondly, That this invasive war, and great slaughter of the most zealous
Scottish Presbyters, is a matter of greatest joy, triumph and advantage to the
Jesuiticall, Popish and Prelaticall party, and tending much to the present
promotion and future accomplishment of all their former frustrated,
successelesse, and almost hopeless malicious designs against the Puritanicall
and Religious party in both Kingdoms, and the intended accomplishment of the
Presbyterian Government, and R^formation of Religion in them, which they so
much feared, and opposed by open force of Arms and secret policies, who will
now endeavor to continue and heighten our open divisions (first plotted by
them) till we have weakened and destroyed each other by our civil wars, and
made our selves fit to be suddenly surprised and destroyed by their party,
when we have consumed and undone each other.

Thirdly, That in these respects, the Successes, great Victories, and
slaughters in this unnatural and unchristian War against our Protestant
Brethren in Covenant, are no matter of public joy, thanksgiving and triumph to
the Conquerours, as some vainly conceive, but of greatest public lamentation,
Humiliation and mourning, (it being both unnatural, uncharitable, and
unchristian for Members of the same body of Christ, and sworn Christian
Brethren, engaged by Covenant, and God himself, to protect and John 13.34, 35.
c. 15.12. Romans 12.9, 10. c. 13.8, 9, 10. Gal. 5.13, 14. Ephesians. 1.15. Col. 2.2.
1 These. 3.12. c..4.9. Heb. 13.1. James 2.8. 1 Pet. 1.12. c. 2.17. c. 3.8. 1
John 3.11.14 16, 17, 18.23. c. 4.7.11.12.16.20.21. c. 5.2. 2 John 5.
love each other with a pure heart fervently, to murder and destroy each
other) an argument of Gods heavy wrath against us^ tending to our desolations,
as the sacred Tex^s and Presidents compared together, will fully resolve the
conscientious perusers of them. Judge. 21.1. to 18. 2 Samuel 1.12.17, 18, etc. 2 Samuel 2.12. to 29. to 3.30. c. 39. c. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. c. 19.1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Chronicles. 28.5. to 16. Ezekiel. 19.12.2.33.14. Ezekiel. 35.1. to the end. Obad. 1. to
the end. Amos 1.9, 10, 11, 12. Genesis 37.26, 27. 1 Samuel 14.7.7. 1 Kings 13.30.
Psalm. 35.14. Isay 9.19, 20, 11. c. 19.2.3. 2 Chronicles. 15.5, 6. Ier. 22.17, 18.
Ezekiel. 38. 21, 22. Mich. 1.2. etc. Zech. 7.9. to the end. Mal. 2.10. Mat. 10.21.
etc. 1 John 3.10, 21, 12. Exodus 2.11, 12. Judge. 9.5. to the end, a sad story, 1
Kings 12, 14.15. 2 Chronicles. 11.4. c. 21.4.12, 13, 14. etc. Neh. 5.1. to 10. Job
6.14, 15. Prove. 6.16.19. Isay 66.5. Acts 7.26. Mat 12.25. Mar. 3.24, 25, 26.
Gal. 5.14, 15. Iam. 3.14, 15, 16, 18, 18. c. 4.1. 9, 10, 11.

Fourthly, that the continuance of this unbrotherly War with Scotland, will
be the utter ruin of all the Presbyterian godly Party in that Nation^ if God
shall frown upon them; and the utter subvertion of the Presbyterian Government
there, where the Prelaticall and Malignant party will soon get head and sway
all, to the strengthening and reviving of their numerous party in England: or in
case God give them after some overthrows, a glorious Victory over the English
Independent Forces (as he did to the defeated Israelites over the Benj^mites,
Judge. 20.) it will certainly ruin all the Independent party in England, who
have so cheated and tyrannized over all sorts of men, that they will never be
able to make head again, if once defeated, and find all men's hearts and hands
against them, for their manifold extravagances and tyrannical proceedings
against all ranks and degrees of men, and subverting the whole frame of our
civil and Ecclesiastical Government. And if the Presbyterian party in
Scotland be much weakened and impoverished by the Victory, and the Presbyteriall
Ministers and Gentry of England discountenanced, and thrust out of all power
and reputation in the interim, as they are through their cowardice and folly;
how far this may endanger and expose them to the Popish and Prelaticall parties
power and malice hereafter, is very considerable; and how far their present
Contributions (though not voluntary) without distress or forcible coaction
against their King and Brethren of Scotland, and sitting still like idle
neutrall Spectators, without contributing the least visible assistance to
either of them, may be interpreted by their King and them, to be a b^each of
their National League and Covenant, and of their Allegiance to their
Sovereign, in case they should prevail, and restore the King to the Crown of
England by their own Forces only, without the English Presbyterians assistance,
to the indangering of their persons and Estates, and the loss of all that
favor and respect from either (which their actual conjunction with them might
procure) to the ruin of the Presbyterian, as well as Independent party in
England, and setting up of the Popish and Prelaticall Malignant party in
Supreme power and favor in this Realm, is very considerable.

Fifthly, that if the Scottish Presbyters, and the Kings party in Scotland
shall be both conquered by the English Independent Forces, and unable to defend
themselves, or their King, and to settle him in his Kingdoms, then greater
dangers are like to ensue to our Religion and Kingdoms, then otherwise in some
wise men's judgments; because the Independents (as their present violent
proceedings manifest) will probably use their Presbyterian Brethren in England,
no better then those in Scotland, and extirpate them if they can; and the King
then will be necessitated to cast himself wholly upon the assistance of
foreign States, and Kings, and their Forces, as his last refuge; which he has
hitherto declined as dangerous both to himself and his people. If he in this
extremity throw himself upon any Forraigners, they must be either Papis^s only,
or Protestants alone, or both of them jointly.

If on Papists only, which some think most probable; First, in regard of his
Queen Mothers great interest in that party, both in France and Italy, being of
that Religion: Secondly, in respect of the open differences and Wars already
between us, and France, and Portugal, two Popish Kingdoms, which are like, to
continue and grow greater every d^y: Thirdly, in respect of that parties
constancy and fidelity to the King and his Father: Fourthly, because that party
is most powerful, and most likely to close with the King for the advantage of
the Catholic cause, and reducing of England to it is former obedience to the Sea of Rome; so that without Gods infinite mercy, it will necessi^ate him for a
full compliance with them: First, to match into some great Popish Family, upon
the same and harder A^ticles, then were enforced on his Fathes by Spain or
France: Secondly, to alter his Religion, and profess himself a Roman
Catholic, and obedient son to the Roman Pontife, as King Henry the fourth of
France did: Thirdly, to Covenant and engage with them for an utter extirpation
of the Protestant Religion; and of all Independents and Presbyterians, as not
only Heretics in Religion, but Regicides, Traitors, Rebels, Covenant
breakers, p^rjured persons, who make no conscience of Oaths, Vows,
Protestations, Declarations, and professed enemies to Monarchy, who have
murdered his Father, banished his Mother, disinherited him of three Crowns;
and endeavor to imbroil and subvert all Monarchies and Kingdoms in
Christendom: Fourthly, to swear and engage to set up and tolerate none but the
Roman Religion in his Kingdoms, when he shall be restored to them by their
assistance and Forces: Fifthly, to promise satisfaction of the greatest part of
their expenses in this war, out of the Puritans and Protestants estates, who
have been in Arms, or any ways acted, or contributed assistance of moneys
against his Father or him, and to make full reparations of all damages to such
Papists, who have left their estates and fortunes to assist his Father or him.
Upon these terms he may easily gain the joint assistance of all Popish Kings,
Kingdoms, and States in Europe, through the Popes powerful mediation. And if
hereupon, through their aid, he should so far prevail as to get into actual
possession of his Thrones and Kingdoms by the mere power of the sword, without
any terms or conditions by way of Treaty, of which there will be little
probability; we can then expect naught else but these dismal consequences.
First a total ^radication of our reformed Religion, and of all zealous
professors thereof, especially such who have acted any ways against the King
or his Father, a full repeal of all penal Laws, against Jesuits, Priests,
Papists, and a public profession and practice of the Romish Religion, and of
that only throughout our Kingdoms. Secondly, a total subversion of all our
former Laws and Liberties, and a full exercise of all arbitrary and tyrannical
power over our lives and estates. Thirdly, an absolute confiscation of all our
Lands and Estates, together with our lives, to satisfy the Kings debts,
gratify his Assistants, and repair the losses of his faithful Catholics,
whom we have undone by adhering to his party. Fourthly, an absolute inslaving
of our whole Nation to these foreign Conquerours; if not a total banishment,
and extirpation of them out of their native soil; the case of the Ancient
Gildas. de excidio Britanniae. Fox Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1.
Britains, when conquered and driven out of this their Country by Saxons, and
the extraordinary Pestilence and Famine sent amongst them for their sins, and
then a dieu both to our Religion and Nation. But in case the King should not
prevail to conquer us by their power, the least we can expect is, First, a
continual long lasting War, and open hostility by Land and Sea with all
Romish Kings and States, the very charge whereof, now we are almost quite
undone and beggered already, which will utterly ruin and undo us. Secondly,
loss of Trade and Commerce with all those Kingdoms and States, with whom we
are in hostility; which will utterly break us in one year or two for want of
venting our Native commodities, our chiefest inablement to maintain the Wars.
Thirdly, intolerable uncessant Taxes of all sorts, which will every month grow
heavier and greater then other, which accompanied with want of Trade, will
cause a general Insurrection at last both of poor and rich against those in
power, and put all into confusion, to the enemies great advantage. Fourthly, a
necessity of seizing and selling all Colleges, Corporations, Companies,
Hospitalls and Gleab-Lands throughout the Realm; and of new Projects to make
new Delinquents, of purpose to raise moneys to defray the extraordinary
expenses of the Armies and Navies: And what garboils this will produce, all
prudent persons may easily conjecture. Fifthly, a general decay of Religion,
Piety, Learning, Law, and all Arts, Sciences, Trades. Sixthly, an extraordinary
new effusion of Christian blood. Seventhly, an inundation of all kind of sin,
wickedness, Atheism, Heresy, Blasphemy, Murders, Rapes, Robberies,
Oppressions, Whoredom, Drunkenness, Dissoluteness, Barbarousnesse, and
disobedience to Laws, Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, and other disorders.
Eighthly, Free Quarter, insolences of Soldiers, spoiling, plundring, if not
pestilence and famine, the usual Concomitants of War, which will reduce us
to a condition worse then nothing in conclusion.

If he cast himself upon Foreign Protestant Kings, Princes and States alone,
the far better, though unlikelier of the two; yet this will certainly prove, 1.
A great dishonor to God, and scandal to reformed Religion, to see them so
unnatural and unchristian as to imbrue their hands in one another blood. 2.
An extraordinary ground of joy and triumph to the Pope and his Confederates, to
behold their enemies thus murdering, invading, and destroying each other by
their mutual dissentions; when they by all their power and policy were unable
to accomplish their ruin, and do them so great mischief. 3. A great
indangering of all the Protestant Churches and States in Europe, by encouraging
their Popish Adversaries to invade and ruin them, whilst thus engaged in an
unbrotherly and unchristian War between themselves, and weakening,
impoverishing and destroying each other. 5. An effusion of much precious
Protestant blood, which will Genesis 4.10, 11. Jer. 51.35. Ezekiel. 35, 5.6, 7, 8, 9.
cry for vengeance to heaven against the original Authors and Occasioners of
such a War. 6. If the King shall inthrone himself, and regain his Kingdoms
by their assistance; though the profession of the Protestant Religion may still
be continued, yet we may justly fear, 1. That the purity and power of Religion
will be much abated. 2. That our Laws and Liberties will be much endangered
and Eclipsed. 3. Our estates confiscated to make them reparations, and satisfy
the Kings Engagements. 4. Their removal hence will be disputable, when once
possessed of our Country; as the history of the Danes invasions of this Island
heretofore, and the Saxons full possession thereof, with the Britains
expulsion, will manifest. 5. If the King and they be repulsed by us, yet this
will prove a seminary of lasting wars and breaches between us and most
Protestant Kingdoms and States; It will hinder all commerce between them and
us, to the destruction of Merchandise and Trade; destroy the Protestants
strength and interest; impoverish us through Taxes, fill us with d^scontents,
augment our divisions, if not conclude in our beggary and ruin.

If he throw himself upon foreign Papists and Protestants jointly, then,
First, the Wars are like to be more general, dangerous and costly to us, and
of longer continuance. Secondly, The divisions and dangers from at home are
like to prove the greater, since all discontented and oppressed Protestants and
Papists will then be apt upon all occasions and advantages to join with that
foreign party they best affect, and from whom they may expect the most favor
and the best conditions. Thirdly, If the King prevail, then both Parties must
be satisfied, and his debts defrayed out of our estates; both gratified with a
free toleration and exercise of that Religion throughout his Realms as both
sides profess: and between them both all will be plundered, impoverished,
ruined, and perchance enforced to quit the whole Kingdom to one or both of
them, who will challenge an interest therein by conquest and the longest sword,
and hardly part with it when once possessed thereof. Fourthly, If the King and
they should be foiled by us, yet the wars and differences would survive, all
commerce and trading lost, Armies and Navies must still be maintained, and
Garrisons in all our Kingdoms to secure us; taxes, oppressions, and all public
grievances continued and mul^iplied, and thereby new intestine commotions
raised; which of themselves alone will destroy us without any other enemy,

And suppose the King himself should miscarry in these Wars, yet the Title
and Right of the Crowns of our thre^ Kingdoms s^rviving to his Brothers, or if
they miscarry, to his Sister, matched to the Prince of Aurenge; or if they all
should fail, descending to the Queen of Bohemia, and Prince Elector Palattine;
their several new Titles and Interests will find means to infest us with new
Wars, till they have either obtained their rights, or rui^ed both themselves
and us. So that unless God put so much wi^dome, and spirit to the English
Nation, as to restore the King to his just Rights upon safe and honorable
terms, according to their Oaths, Covenant, Protestations, Declarations to all
the world, and Principles of their Religion; we can in humane proba^ility
expect naught else, but the utter ruin, both of our Religion, Nation,
Kingdoms, and total extirpation by Foreign enemies.

And certainly if we seriously consider, 1. The infinite divisions,
discontents, and oppressions that are every where amongst us. 2. The Heresies,
Blasphemies, Sects, and Schisms that are lately broached, and publicly
countenanced by us. 3. The General contempt and neglect of the public
Ordinances of God, and free toleration granted to all to withdraw themselves
from them, without the least censure or punishment. 4. The general contempt,
hatred, discountenancing, reviling, and persecuting of godly and faithfu^l
M^nisters throughout the Nation, and the snares that are daily laid to entrap
and ruin them. 5. The extraordinary Apostasy of many Professors, from the
truth, purity, and power of Religion, almost to professed Atheism, contempt of
the Word, Prayer, Preaching, Sacraments, and all other O^dinances, to mere
licentiousness, lukewarmnesse, and Profaneness. 6. The general inclination
of the people to errors, E^thusiasmes, and seducing spirits. 7. The little
cordial real love and affection between Professors of Religion, and the great
animosities, hatreds and divisions amongst them, both in Opinion^ Practice and
affection. 8. The little conscience of Oaths, Protestations, Covenants,
Promises; and great hypocrisy, covetousness, oppression, self-seeking, envy,
hatred, and malice that is in the Nation, and amongst those especially, who
profess themselves Saints of the highest form. 9. The universal inundation of
all kind of sin and wickedness, and open profession thereof in all places. 10.
The extraordinary Injustice, Tyranny, Cruelty and Mercilesnesse that all parts
of the Land complain of, and groan under. 11. The great effusion of Christian
blood, and of the blood of our Christian Brethren in Covenant, that our whole
Land is polluted with; and our rejoicing in this bloud-guiltinesse, instead of
repenting and mourning for it. 12. Our present decay of Trade and Merchandise.
13. Our intolerable Taxes and Impositions o^ all sorts. 14. The extreme poverty
of our Kingdom, and increase of poor people in all parts, which have little
work or none, and will not sta^ve. 15. The divisions of our Forces into Ireland
and Scotland, where standing Armies and Garrisons must be constantly maintained
for fear of revolt. 16. Our great breaches with France and Portugal, and no
good quarter with any Foreign States or Kingdoms, which as yet will neither
own, nor hold full and open correspondency with our new Governors or
Government. 17. The revolt of most of our Foreign plantations from us, and the
late Declaration against them, as Traitors, and Rebels, who count us such. 18.
The Negotiations with the Pope and Popish Kingdoms, and most Protestant
Princes and States to incense them all against us, as enemies to all Magistracy
and public Government, and to mankind it self, as Salmatius has published us
in print. 19. The spreading the pestlence in many places, and the feared famine
throughout the Realm. 20. The manifold injuries and afronts offered to all the
Nobility, and most of the Gentry of the Na^ion, and the whole Nation it self,
in the change of the Government, without and against their consent, in
contin^ing and increasing their burdens, Taxes, and out-lawing many of them,
because they will not subscribe the Engagement, in erecting new High Courts to
take away their lives, without any legal Trial by their Peers, for offenses
punishable by no common Law. 21. The Ex^cution of so many Protestants, and not
of one Papist whatsoever by these or other Courts of Justice, though the chief
contrivers of our late unhappy Wars, and discontinuance of all Capital
proceedings against Priests and Jesuits, since the abolishing of the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, made principally against them and the Popes
Usurpations and practices. 22. The injustice of our present cause and War,
merely against Monarchy, Presbytery, and old English Peers and Parliaments,
purposely to support the present Government, set up by the mere power of the
sword, yea founded on the blood of a Protestant King, and ruin of the very
best of Parliamen^s, to prevent a settlement of peace and Religion by an
unbloudy Treaty. And then compare them with the Premises, and Cardinal
Richelieu his Instructions and advice to the late French King, a little before
his death, (published by an Italian of good note, and printed in Italy. Anno.
1645.) to foment the late differences between the late King and Parliament all
he could; and if possible by the solicitation of his instruments, to draw the
Commons to change our Monarchy into a mere Republike, thereby to imbroil all
our Kingdoms in civil Wars against each other, as the only and best policy
of all, to weaken and destroy both our power and Religion, and advance the
interest of France and Catholic Religion, which we see now accomplished
according to his advice; and then we have just cause to fear an inevitable
approaching ruin, both of our Religion and Nation, notwithstanding our late
Victories and Successes; which do but weaken, impoverish, destroy our selves,
and promote the designs of our common enemies, unless God give us a timely
sight and Reformation of this our impolitick oversight, and incline our hearts
to a general peace and unity th^oughout our Kingdom, by restoring every man
to his just right and inheritance, from the highest to the low^st, and
abolishing all future seeds and occasions of our intestine Wars: The serious
consideration of all which Premises, are a sufficient satisfactory Apology for
all Ministers or others, now questioned for the Non-observance of the late
Thanksgiving day, ^or the great rout and slaughter of our Protestant
Presbyterian Brethren of Scotland, against all their persecutors. We shall
therefore close up all with Abners Speech to Ioab, in case of the civil Wars
between the House of David and Saul; wherein the Is^aelites (of the same
Religion and Nation) unnaturally fought and slew each other, Ioabs soldiers
pursuing and slaughtering Abners, whom they had discomfited in battle,
addressing to those in present power, 2 Samuel 2.26, 27, 28. Then Abner called to
Ioab, and said, shall the sword devour for ever? know thou not that it will
be bitterness in the latter end? how long shall it be then ere thou bid the
people return from following their Brethren? And Ioab said, as God lives,
unless thou had spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up
every one from following their Brethren. So Ioab blew a trumpet, and all the
people stood still, AND PURSUED AFTER ISRAEL NO MORE, NEITHER FOUGHT THEY ANY
MORE: which we heartily pray may be the fruit and issue of these sad and
serious Meditations of those who drive on no other design, but the preservation
of Religion and their native Country from total and final desolation.

FINIS.
A brief DESCRIPTION Of the future History of Europe, from Anno 1650 to An.
1710.

Treating principally Of those grand and famous Mutations yet expected in the
World, as, The ruin of the Popish Hierarchy, the final annihilation of the
Turkish Empire, the Conversion of the Eastern and Western Jews, and their
Restoration to their ancient Inheritances in the holy Land, and the FIFTH
MONARCHY of the universal Reign of the Gospel of Christ upon Earth.

With principal Passages upon every of these, out of that famous Manuscript of
PAVL GREBNER extant in Trinity-Colledge Library in Cambridge.

Composed upon the Occasion of the young KINGS Arrival into Scotland, to show
what will in probability be the Event of the present Affairs in ENGLAND and
SCOTLAND.

Ludit in humanis (...)

Printed in the (...)

TO THE Ingenuous and well-affected Readers.
GENTLEMEN,
I Here present you with a misshapen Embryo, having neither had time for
Perfection, nor life to actuate Acception. A mere Chaos and disordered
Discourse is it, yet for matter treating of wonderful and famous Events, which
i^ this European world are quickly to be performed. It is true, that Primi
foetus sunt horridiores, a^ commonly defective in mature Conceptions and
ripeness of judgment. Yet they that read this Pamphlet seriously, will find
those Passages opened (I will not say fully explained) in Scripture, which
Commentator never yet disclosed^ nor Divine unfolded. In such a^ intricate
La^^rinth it is easy to stray: therefore I am confident, Charity will usher
your Judgments, and your love cover mine Infirmities. I know I have slipped in
many places, but for the present can neither tell where, nor how^ Some Ariadne
might do well to lead the way, and I shall be as ready to follow: Secundae
cogitationes sunt meliores: If I find those Non-entities to be accepted with,
but as much respect as worse ware every day is, it shall not irk me to bestow a
week or two in licking it over into a better form and putting a handsomer Coat
upon it is back. There are several passages in it, which (I know) will not
resent with our Great Ones: but Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, yet Magis amica
veritas, which shall prevail, though all the world gather in battalia against
it. I must confess it is too too abortive: for it came into the world in fewer
hours, then Tostatus bestowed in translating the five first Chapters of Genesis
out of Greek into Latin. I wish it may obtain the end for which I made it:
that is, to move us all with repentance to meet God in these great Mutations
and Changes he is bringing upon us in this Land; that every one would strive to
reform one from Here^ies, Sects and Schisms, to suffer the Scriptures to be our
Rule, and the holy Ghost our Guide both in Faith, Religion and Discipline, that
so God may put out his hand in amending the Body^ Politic in the whole, that
judgment may depart from us, destruction flee far from us; that Peace may
dwell within our walls and plenteousness within our Palaces.

I study multum in parvo, and hope to give satisfaction to all, but such as are
wedded more to their wills then reasons. For these I have no more but this, A
good wind at their backs to the Anticyra's, that they may drink Hellebor
lustily to purge their Brains, that they may be more quick, and their Eyesight
clearer. I quote strange Authors in this Work; and good Reason, for the Work it
self is strange. Yet they in whose hands these Authors are (and they are not in
every Library) shall find I have both dealt with them truly, and cited them
faithfully. And for the Tractate it self, it will with the learned be either
Laudatus aut saltem excusatus; either of which shall content me at this time.
Farewell.

A brief DESCRIPTION OF THE Future History of EUROPE, from Anno 1650, to An.
1710.
1.
HAving with silence and admiration beheld these ten years, The Occasion of
writing this Trea^is^.
the horrid Broyls and civil Tumults in these Western Coasts of Europe, I
cannot but adore the Justice of God upon his enemies, and his paternall
chastisements upon his Church for sin. It has made me oft^n wonder, to behold
how virulently and barbarously Protestants could oppose and massacre one
another, when the Romish Froggs can live in an established amity among
themselves, and laugh at our follies. I will not say, it is Jesuiticall
projects which sets us by the ears together, so much as our own Seditious and
Schismatic spirits, and want of Charity. If we would but ponder, how much
Popery has won upon us by these Wars and Divisions, what fearful occasions
we have given to the professed enemies of Christ to blaspheme his Name, and
deride our Religion, it would much provoke us to end our Controversies, and
band against the common Enemy. The Empire has got but a woeful Booty, by her
30 years Wars, having weakened her self with the loss of Six Millions of
valiant Soldiers, and enticed that Imp of Mahomet to prepare an Army of
200000, now in the Field, and ready to march within the bowels of Germany. We
in England have gained no better by our civil Warre^ but in stead of one Tyrant
to advance a douzen over us, and from the height of Liberty to run the broad
way up the next hill, to the height of Slavery. Our Western Sun is set, on whom
the eyes of all Protestants were ^ixt, to have composed their differences, and
united them into a mutual League against the Romish Dragon, and the false
Prophet. Nor was any insufficiency in him to the performance of so glorious an
Enterprise, had not the sins of his own Subjects, hastened his untimely Fate.
Behold then what profits our War has brought us! and what a blessing our
sins have deprived us of! How fearful are the Judgments of God and his anger
against sin, when the Church is dilacerated, the Commonwealth disjoynted and
dismembered in every part thereof, the lust of Tyrants, the pleasure of Pesants,
the barbarousnes of Soldiers, dissentions of Churchmen, sad and tragical ends
of Nobles, confusions in Families, countenancing of Heresies, and applauding of
Blasphemies are so rife and ripe amongst men! On the contrary, how happy are
Kingdoms, how blessed be Commonwealths, when Princes, Magistrates, and other
subordinate Officers, each in their sever^ll place and calling, strive to
promote the glory of God, with the Liberty, Honor and Tranquillity of
Subjects; where the Ministry is encouraged, Universities countenanced, Courts
of Judicature upholden, Subjects be unanimous and accustomed to the Exercise of
Piety and Godliness: lastly when both Prince and people aim jointly at the
advancement of the Gospel and mutual commodity of one another, so that there
be no decay, no leading into Captivity, nor complaining in their streets!

II.
The subject ^^tt^r of ^^is ensuing Discourse.
The disparity of these two contradictory conditions, and the fearful effects,
which they in all ages have wrought in the Consciences of men, have made me at
length after a long time of silence put Pen to Paper, and through the intricate
Labyrinth of those portions of Scripture which never Commentator yet ever
meddled with (I mean, the twelve last Chapters of Ez^kiel, the three last of the
Revelation, the last of Daniel, with some passages in Hosea and Zech^ry) to
descry when We People of England with all Protestants in Europe shall see an
end of these our Wars and Tumults, what shall be the Estate of our Churches,
States and Kingdoms, from this present year 1650, to the beginning of the
Fifth and last universal MONARCHY of the Gospel of Christ upon Earth, which
shall begin in the year of our Lord 1710; and in what year we may expect the
downfals of the Beast of Rome, the Red Dragon of Constantinople, the total
Conversion and restoration both of the Eastern and Western Jews within their
holy Land of Jury: all which must most certainly be fulfilled before the end of
the World. Of these high Points and Mysteries, I find nothing in any
Commentator upon the last of Daniel and the Revelations, save only Brightman,
who being acquainted in Leiden with Joseph Scaliger, got some (but those very
imperfect) notes of Grebner concerning those Numbers in Ezekiel and Daniel. But
that excellent Manuscript, which Johannes Bauden^is writ of the Life and
Writings of Grebner, declares all these things most plainly and punctually,
how that greater Troubles, fe^rfulle^ Combustions, direfuller Devastations
shall come upon the Western Kingdoms of Europe, then yet ever did, before they
can expect the downfall either of Turk or Pope, or the universal Monarchy of
the Gospel of Christ upon Earth. In which incomparable Work the Learned
Astrologer brings Divine and Heavenly Reasons, why Europe (for the space of
thirty seven years, after that fearful blazing Comet in 1618.) should with
amazed eyes behold the infinite and sudden mutations and downfals of
flourishing States and potent Kingdoms, the deformity of Empires, and
mournful faces of Commonwealths (as is lately happened in England, Portugal,
Swethland, Bohemia, and Denmark) the Devastations of whole Kingdoms at a clap,
and burning six or seven Nations at once in their ashes and cinders (as of late
in Germany) not to make them ask whether there be a God, Heaven and Providence,
or not? or whether Empires and States depend wholly upon the will and power of
man, or upon secret and hidden causes beyond the thoughts and expectations of
the World? but to praise God for his paternall corrections, seeing by this they
know he remembers them, and that through this Fire and Water of Affliction he
will bring his Church to a final Conquest ove^ her Enemies, and both the
Congregations of Jews and Gentiles to an universal Monarchy over the face of
the whole Earth. Several passages of which Manuscript I will insert here and
there in this ensuing Discourse, as Method and Matter shall require.

III.
Since the spiritual sword was sheathed in England (which lopt off the
serpentine Heads of Heresy and Schism, The Confutation of the wicked Opinions
of the Millenaries of the Personal Reign of Christ upon Earth after An. 1700.
while they were yet growing) it is a wonder to see how all Sects and
Schismatic Opinions in the world have (like devouring Weed) overgrown and
choked the seed of the Word. Above the rest, the Millenaries have exalted
themselves, whose abominable Pamphlets have flown abroad like Atoms, wherein
they dream of a Personal Reign of Christ upon Earth, how he shall descend from
Heaven An. 1666, destroy all the works of darkness in every corner of the
Earth, make an easy passage to men from Earth to Heaven, so that they may
ascend into Heaven, and leap down to Earth again, as often as they list: how he
shall keep a Quarter Sessions or Jail-delivery in his own Person upon Mount
Olivet, call all Nations before him, rebuke them of sin face to face, and shall
cut out of them their stony hearts, and shall sew in their bellies hearts of
flesh in stead thereof: that An. Dom. 1700 shall be the day of Judgment, and
that the Judgment shall last other 1700 years, because otherwise the glorious
Attributes of Christ's Mercy and Justice cannot be sufficiently explained to
the World and the Consciences of men. All which Fopperies with many mo too
horrid to relate, are contained in M. Archers Personal Reign of Christ upon
Earth, Rich. Stirreys Kingdom of King Jesus, and in A.R. his Caelestis
Jerusalem, Printed A. 1642, 1644, and 1645. Now having unmasked the vanity of
this Error (ut contraria juxta se posita magis elucescant) I will epitomize in
this Section the truth of the future estate of the World, from this time to the
end, which afterward I intend (God willing) further to dilate and prosecute in
this Treatise. This year 1650 all Europe are in civil Wars. These civil
wars shall not cease till they have mustered out a great Army of the true
worshippers of God to ruin Rome, which shall be about Anno 1666. Rome thus
destroyed, the Western Jews shall begin to learn the ways of God, and believe
his Gospel (which they cannot do so long as Rome stands) and shall Anno 1683.
enter upon the conversion of their Eastern brethren (the 10. Tribes now
invisibly hid in Tartaria and India) and they two (none else) shall ruin the
Mahumetan Empire about An. School. and so shall be restored to the holy Land to
reinhabit Jerusalem. Then must begin a comparative felicity of the Church of
God upon earth, because after these times both Turk and Pope shall be
destroyed. Nevertheless this felicity must be mingled with internal troubles
and persecutions, within the bowels of the Church, because the Church shall
never be wholly at rest, while the world stands. Lo, here the difference
betwixt Truth and Heresy, betwixt the opinions of the Millenaries and right
sense of Scriptures. The Millenaries say, Christ must descend personally from
heaven: The Scriptures on the contrary say, he shall not come from Heaven
personally till the last day, when he shall descend with his holy Angels in
flaming fire to judge the quick and the dead. He shall send power and strength
from heaven to his true Worshipppers (as he has done hitherto) to destroy Tu^k
and Pope, from Heaven he shall give power to his ancient people the Jews, to
regain their ancient Land of Judea, and not by his corporeal presence upon
Earth: from Heaven about An. 1700. he shall transfer his Gospel from Europe,
as he has done from Asia, and raise up and inspire godly Ministers after his
own will, who shall implant his holy word in all and every of the Kingdoms and
Provinces of America, and in all countries of the Southern and Eastern India,
China, Tartaria, and in all the regions of the North unto the worlds end, and
make it shine in as great purity and glory as ever it has done in England or
Germany. This is the felicity of the Church, the fifth Monarchy in
Nebuchadnezzars Image, the ministerial (not personal) Reign and Kingdom of
Christ upon ^arth, which must not endure for ever (as Archer would have it) nor
for a 1000 years (as Alsted dreams) but for a very short time, that all Nations
(none excepted) may profess Gods worship, and none plead ignorance before his
Tribunal, presently after which the dissolution of the world shall come, after
which time shall be no more.

IV.
This Digression made, I return to my purposed method.

That fearful and ominous Night-torch, A D^clara^ion o^ the e^fects of the
blaving Comet, Anno 16^8.
which prognosticated all that misery to Germany and great Britain, which they
have now suffered, was the forerunner of all our evils. This Comet
Longomontanus and D. Bambridge say appeared but 28. days, indeed it was
neither observed in Denmark nor at London before November. 18. or 21. but Erycius
Puteanus observed it November. 11. the first time, as he testifies in the first
book of his learned Paradoxologie, page 33.38. so it appeared for the space of
37. or 38. days, foreshewing that first Germany, Livonia, Swethland, with
other North-parts of Europe, then Scotland, England and Ireland, should feel
the terrible effects thereof in war and famine, for the space of 37. or 38.
years, even from An. 1618. till An. 1656. This Comet was strengthened by a
fearful conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, An. 1616. July 18. The effects of
both which were not to be confined in those terrible concomitants of war
perpetrated in Germany (which L.B. and D. Vincent so pathetically delineate)
but were to end in the judgments of God upon Europe for neglecting the
downfall of Antichrist, ruin of Rome, annihilation of the Sodomiticall Order
of the Society of Jesuits, and in the extirpation of all Kingdoms and free
States of Papists, to make way for the Lion of the North to erect his FIFTH
MONARCHY in the ashes of Germany, wherein shall be established the eternal
felicity of the Church, by the conversion of the Jews and fullness of the
Gentiles.

M. Shirley Fellow of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, once showed me a Letter
from his learned friend Buxtorf, dated An. 1624. May 3. wherein was contained a
Prognostique Prophecy of the beforementioned Comet and Conjunction, sent him
from that incomparable Astrologer, Johannes Baudensis Nephew to Paul Grebner,
which for the strangeness and rarity of it, I will here insert.

Caeterum, quod de patriae nostrae afflictissimae statu consilesco, indignaris;
nihil profecto scribendum nunc hab^o, nisi omnia (ut Poetae verbis utor) in
pejus ruere, and retro sublapsa referri. Tam Danus quam Caesar ^nixe laborant,
ut miseram Germaniam quamprimum p^ssum iri spectem: Nec milites utriusque
quiequam aliud meditan^nr, nisi strages and vastitatem. Accepi nudiustertius a
Johanne Baudensi (amico mihi multimodis charissimo) sententias nostratium
Astrologorum de horribili illo Comet^, qui Anno 1618. apparuit, and nuperrima
Saturni and Iovis Conjunctione. En tibi vaticinium, si no^ Apostolicum, at
long (ni fallor) plusquam Astrologicum. Surrexit Deus and gladium eduxit.
Clades magnorum Imperatorum, strages populorum, regum funcra, rerum-publicarum
eversiones, monarchiarum mutationes, assassinationes principum and ducum
illustriorum, violenta and superba consilia, proditiones and rebelliones inter
Subditos in hoc coelo nostro Europico exorientur. Exporientur religiosi a
potentioribus Legum and institutorum Ecclesiasti^orum mutationem, a plebeijs
novarum rerum inexplebilem cupiditatem. Boreales Europae parts ferro, morbo
and peste laborabunt, depauperabuntur divites, Principes Dominijs exuti erunt,
exulabunt patres and filij post longum turb^rum intercapedinem in integrum
restituentur. Hic quoque Cometa terribilem Romae ruinam, singulisque Europae
civitatibus incendia minitatur^ Clerici Papicolae praecipue Cardinales de
gradibus suis dejicientur, Loiolistae ubique ad mortem rapientur, nec Gallis
aut Hispanis animus erit carnificum l^queos evitare. Quinimo cernimus etiam in
terra sanct^ a veteribus incolis^ oriturum Regnum, quod ^rit Christianis
miraculum, and Orbi terriculamentum. Novique Imperij Revolutio istis succedet,
sub quo generale gaudium, laetitia and voluptas humano generi subministrabitur,
improbis ubique de medio sublatis. Haec omnia per Regem quendam Borealem
peragentur, qui pacem, Religionem, and Securitatem per totum Orbem miraculose
stabilibit.

Whereas you are angry that I keep silence concerning the esta^e of our most
distressed Country. Truly I have nothing now to write, but that all things
(that I may use the words of the Poet) grow worse and woese. As well the King
of Denmark as the Emperor earnestly endeavor to see miserable Germany
destroyed as soon as may be; neither do the soldiers of either of them, think
of any other thing then slaughter and desolation.

I received the other day, from my dear Friend John Baudensis, the opinions of
our Astrologers concerning that terrible Comet which appeared Anno 1618, and
about the later Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter. Behold thou then a Prophecy
(if not Apostolical) yet (if I mistake not) far beyond Astrological. GOD has
arisen and drawn his sword: There shall happen in these our European Regions,
the destruction of great Emperors, the slaughter of people, Funerals of Kings,
subversions of Commonwealths, mutations of Monarchies, massacres of Princes and
illustrious Commanders, violent and proud Counsels, Treasons and Rebellions
amongst Subjects: Clergymen shall find a change of Laws and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, by those of greater power, and an insatiable desire of new
things amongst common people. The Northern parts of Europe shall be greatly
oppressed with War, Sickness and Pestilence. Rich men shall be impoverished,
Princes cast out of their Dominions; The fathers shall be banished, and after a
long space of trouble their children shall be restored to their former
condition. This Comet also threatens the terrible ruin of Rome and burnings
in all the Cities of Europe. The Papistical Clergy, especially the Cardinals,
shall be cast down from their Dignities, the Jesuits every where shall be
drawn to death, neither shall the Frenchmen or Spaniards have courage to save
their necks from the halters. Furthermore, We discern a Kingdom to arise of the
most ancient Inhabitants in the holy Land, which to Christians shall be a
Miracle, and to the World a terror; and these shall obtain the Revolution of a
new Empire, under which shall be administered universal Gladnesse^ Joy and
Delight to mankind (the wicked being every where taken away.) All these things
shall be effected by a certain Northern King who shall miraculously establish
Peace, Religion and Security throughout the whole world.

Thus far the words of this Letter. And how punctually all these things are
come to pass, let the world judge. We in England have felt the misery of the
one, and are ready stripped to suffer the calamities of the other, having for the
present lost what is impossible to be regained, and seeing a new storm of
Devastations hanging over our heads by the young Kings late arrival in Scotland
(where he is received as absolute Sovereign) which fil^ men's hearts with
pensive thoughts and doub^ings what will be the end of these woeful beginnings.
For my part, I am a zealous adorer of a Parliament, nor deserve I to censure
the Actions of our Representatives, yet will I not promise the Term of an Age
to our novel Government, but think ve^ily, a change to the old Model is nigh at
hand. It is casual to the best Kingdoms to have Interregnums, but as we stand
now, we shall neither be for six years together a Body Politic, nor a true
Church of God. That excellent Astrologer of Misnia, Paul Grebner, was more then
an Inquisitour into the Effects of Stars, being questionless endued from
above with a Prophetic spirit, not to be desired, much less expected of all.
He plainly affirms, That as England ever was a Monarchy within it self, since
it was discovered by the Romans, so shall it so continue and remain, even then
when all other Kingdoms and States in Europe are swallowed up of the FIFTH
MONARCHY of the Lion of the North. His Prophecy of our Civil Wars, of the
Fate of our late King, and the Restoration of his Son to his Fathers
Dominions, runs thus in Ban. 72.

Per idem tempus Rex quidam Borcalis (nomine Carolus) Mariam ex Papistic^
religione sibi assumptam in matrimonium conjunxerit, Grebners Prophecy of our
la^e King, and his Son now King.
ex quo evidet regum infelicissimus. Unde populus ejus, ipso abdicato, Comitem
quendam perantiquae Familiae regno praeponet, qui tres annos, aut circiter
durabit; and hoc quoque remoto, Equitem quendam bellicosum in ejus locum
assumet, qui paulo amplius regnabit. Post hunc eliget nullum. Interea, unus e
stirpe Caroli in littore regni patres sui cum Gallicis, Suevicis, Danicis,
Hollandicis, Burgurdicis and Germanicis auxiliis stabit, omnes inimicos suos
cruentissimo praelio superabit, and postea regnum suum felicissime
administrabit, eritque Carolo magno major. And in Ban. 74. he says, Circa Anno
1663 Brittaniarum Rex antiquum cum Belgarum Ordinibus foedus and amicitiam
rumpet, ob ereptas sibi ab ipsorum piratis naviculas quasdam, qui pertrepidi ad
novum Danorum Regem ( nomine Christiernum) confugient, qui utrosque primo
compositissimis orationibus, deinde muneribus in concordiam alliciet.

About the same time a certain Northern King (named Charles) who shall marry
Mary of the Popish Religion to his great unhappiness, so that his people
(rejecting him) shall set up an Earl of a very ancient Family, who shall
continue three years or thereabouts, he dying they shall elect in his stead a
warlike Knight, who shall rule a little longer: after him they elect none; But
in the mean one of Charles his Stock shall land on the Seacoasts of his
Fathers Kingdom, and with French, Swedish, Danish, Hollandian, Burgonian and
German Forces, in a most cruel battle shall vanquish all his Enemies, and
afterward most happily govern his Kingdom, and be greater then Charles the
Great. And about the year 1663, the King of the most ancient Britains for the
loss of some Ships at Sea shall break his League and Amity with the States of
Holland, who fearing, shall to the new King of Danes (named Christiernu^) for
succor, and he by fair Entreaties and large Gifts shall win either side to
Agreement.

Nor ever does he speak of England in all that famous manuscript, but as of the
most warlike and potent Kingdom in Europe. Therefore all good Christians ought
to wish the new War were concluded rather by an happy Agreement and
Composition, then by Sword and Musket, and the King placed on his Throne rather
with the hands of his loving and and rejoycefull Subjects, than with the swords
of Foreigners. For if the beginning of his Restoration be in blood, and
tumbling of garments in blood, the Accomplishment of it will be with burning
and fuel of fire.

That this future History of Europe, may be more fully and clearly understood,
I intend to set it down by way of Chronology upon the principal passages in
Ezekiel and the Revelations, as I lately collected it out of the two MSS. of
Grebner and Ioannes Baudensis, and afterward subscribed certain Notes and
Animadversions upon the same.
THe woman travelleth, viz. The Jewish Synagogue brings forth Christ,
whereupon ensues the battle between Michael and the Dragon (Christ and the
Devil) Herod in his Infancy, flies into Egypt, in his appointed time of 34
years, suffers and ascends into Heaven; The Devil enraged Nero and others,
Revel. 12. per tot.

Revel. 6.2.

Revel. 20.2.8.

A^no 65, to An. 330. Revel. 6.3, 4.

Simon Magus, Ebion and Corinthus Revel. 6.9, 6.

Revel. 6.7, 8.

Caesar's, Pertinax, and ending at Licinius, slain by Constantine the Great,
Revel. 6.9, 10, 11.

Dioclesian and Maximilian give over Constantine strengthened with their Armies
and Provinces, warreth upon Licinius, slays him, destroys the
Pretorian-Camp, abolisheth Heathenism, and sets up the true Worship of God,
Revel. 6.12. to the end.

The seventh Seal opened, And silence in Heaven for half an hour, viz. The
Church enjoys rest thirty years, all the time that Constantine Revel. 8.1.
Yet clouds of persecution Constantines three sons, Revel. 8.2, 3.

Julian that wretched Apostata bending his utmost endeavors to Jerusalem to
rebuild their Temple; but God destroys them all by Lightnings and
Pestilences: Horrible Earthquakes cast up into the Air the foundations which
had been buried in rubbish till then. Therefore Daniels compute of the Temples
final ruin must but begin then; there begin his two Numbers ( Chap. 12. ver.
11, 12.) of 1290, and 1335, which in all must but make 1335 years, which added
to 363, make up and point to Anno Christi School, the joyful Jubilee of the
Churches Deliverance from all Adversity.

Valentinian, and the succeeding Emperors, until the end of the
Western-Empire, The savage Inundations of Goths, Huns, Vandals and Bulgarians
into Italy, Revel. 8.7.

Boniface that Mountain of fiery Phocas the Popish Supremacy. Hence wars
betwixt the Emperors and Popes, Revel. 8.8, 9.

Revel. 8.10, 11.

Sylvester II, Revel. 8.12, 13.

Gregory VII Revel. 20.4.

John most graphically, Revel. 9.9. to 13.

Ottoman Empire arises, invadeth Constantinople, and wins it: then flies
upon the Germane Emperor with barbarous millions of invincible Armies, Revel.
9.13. to the end.

The saying, Revel. 9.15. of the Turks preparation for a day, a month, and a
year, begins now. Which Number allegorically taken makes 398 years:
which added to A. 1300, the year of the original of the Turkish Empire,
shows that A. School. shall be the final down^al of the same.

Luther, and other Sons of Thunder to vindicate the quarrel thereof against the
Romish Antichrist to the ruin of his Kingdom, Revel. 11. from ver. 15. to the
end.

By eating of the Book,
Chap. 10. Measuring the Temple and slaying the Witnesses, Chap. 11. is
understood the Reformation by Luther, and downfall of the Papacy under Charles
the fifth.

England, Scotland and Ireland by Elizabeth, renounce the Papacy; which
generates the ulcers of spite and malice in the Romish Church against England,
Revel. 16.2.

Martin Chemnitius and others, pronounce Trent, Revel. 18.3.

Anno 1588. Revel. 16.5, 6, 7.

Pareus, King James and others, pour light upon the Sun of the Gospel, in
writing against Bellarmine, Stapleton, Campian, and other Papists, Revel. 16.8,
9.

Swedes in Germany, 1632. The English in England, 1640, combine against the
Papists, Jesuits proscribed in Poland and Swethland, Anno 1648. This Vial
shall end in the ruin of Rome, Anno 1666. Revel. 16.10, 11.

Hydruntum in Apulia, made enrodes into the Eastern Coasts of Italy, and sack
them with fire and sword. Factions and Massacres in Rome and Tuskany. The Pope
contemned and invaded, The Western Christians make an Army, and fire Rome in
the 2419 year after Romulus laid the foundation thereof, as Sibylla prophesied.
Oracul. lib. 4. Revel. 16. from ver. 12. to 17.

descends from heaven with his Soldiers riding upon white horses, to fight
against the enemies of his Church. The Angel in the Sun calls to all the
fowls of heaven, to come to the feast of God, to eat the flesh of Kings,
Captains, mighty Men and horses. Rev. 19.11, 17, 18. And I saw the beast and
the Kings of the earth, and the Warriors gathered together, to war against
him that sat on the horse, and against his Soldiers. But the beast was taken,
and with him the false Prophet, that works miracles before him, whereby he
deceived them that have received the beasts mark, and them that worship his
image: These two were cast alive into the lake burning with fire and brimstone,
etc. Ibid. 19, 20.


Destruiturque armis gens scelerata suis.
Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, nor receive of
her plagues. Forasmuch (O Rome) as thou glorifiedst thy self, and livedst in
pleasure, saying, I sit a Queen, am no widow, and shall see no sorrow:
therefore shall thy plagues come upon thee in one day, death, sorrow and
famine, and thou shall be burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord God that
judges thee. The Kings of the earth shall bewail thee, and thou shall never
more be inhabited, the light of a candle shall shine no more in thee, and the
voice of the Bridegroom and of the Bride shall be heard no more in thee.
Rejoice (O heavens!) for righteous are Gods judgments, He has condemned the
great Whore. Then they sung Hallelujah, and her smoke arose up for evermore.
Rev. 18.7, 8, 20. and 19.3.

Rome being destroyed, Jews dwell amongst Protestants, and begin

Saturn and Jupiter in Leo. The Jews

Rev. 19.5, 6, 7.

The dreadful and terrible Battle of the Jews with the enraged Ezech. 38. and
39. chap. all.

Gog and Magog, ( viz. Turks and Tartarians) gather themselves together to
battle, whose Number is as the sand of the Sea, and they went up into the
plain of the Earth, and encompassed the Tents of the Saints abo^t, even the
beloved City, but fire came down from God out of Heaven, and destroyed them
Revelat. 20.8, 9.


Rev. 21.1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

Germany, no more any Western Empire or any footstep


Exoriturque atris Lucifer albus equis.
Ezech. 12. last chap. per tot.

Rev. 21.5.

Ezech. 46. per. tot.



Thus far reaches the Observations of Grebner and Baudensis.

VI.
BEfore I come to comment upon this Chronologicall Index, it will not be amiss
to deliver that saying, A true Explication of the Number in Rev. 20.8.
Revel. 20.8. (And the Saints shall reign with Christ a thousand years) from
all those false Interpretations which have been fastened upon it, by Papias,
Bucholcherus, Scaliger, Brightman, Alsted and others, and declare the true
sense of it, as remotest from Innovation, and coming nearest the intention of
the H. Ghost. There is in this 20 Chap. two several Epoches of a 1000 years,
which are two several ways to be interpreted. The first is in verse. 2. of
Satan being bound for a 1000 years; which must begin either at the Instant of
our Saviors Incarnation, and end at An. 1000, in the 2^ year of the Popedom
of Sylvester II, that infamous Sodomite, Necromancer, and Conjurer, under whom
the filthiness and Idolatry of the Romish Church was brought to the height: or
rather they must begin at the Destruction of the 2d Temple by Titus, which was
An. 71, and end in An. 1071, in the Popedom of Gregory VII, alias Hildebrand,
who first broke bonds of Allegiance with Henry the Emperor, excommunicated
him, set the Gospel in a total Eclipse, and Europe in the mournful Flames of
a civil War: but of this in the Chronology. But this in the 8 verse. of the
Saints reigning with Christ a 1000 years, Alsted, Bucholcherus and others
expound of a Comparative Felicity of the Church on this Earth, for a 1000
years, beginning An. 1694, when they say all visible Enemies of the Church
shall be overthrown, and must end An. Chapter 2694. after which shall be the War
of Gog and Magog against the Church, which shall be prevented by the coming of
Christ to judgment. But in this Alsted is wide from the right mark: for this
number must begin An. 1072, at the expiration of the former, and must be
interpreted for all that time that the World shall last after the aforesaid An.
1072. And the holy Ghost does term this indefinite and unlimited time by the
Number of a 1000 years, for three special Reasons: 1 Because a 1000 years are
the Number of Perfection and of Eternity, and does most aptly serve to express
the End of these Earthly Troubles, and the beginning of that Time which never
shall have end. 2 Because those things which the holy Ghost in the Scriptures
affirms are yet to come, must not be plenarily accomplished till after An.
1830, it may please God that the glorious and flourishing estate of the Church
and Gospel here upon Earth, may continue much of 200 years longer, to increase
the number of them who shall be saved, and to amplify more the heavenly
Attributes of Gods Mercy, Righteousness, Truth, Holiness and Omnipotency in
the Salvation of the Just: and his Equity, Judgment and Uprightness in the
firebrands of destruction. 3 Because a vicissitudinary time of Affliction and
Ease, Persecution and rest, pure Doctrine and Heresies, is signified to be the
whole continuance or most part of a 1000 years, wherein those who are to suffer
for the Testimony of the Word of God, and the truth of Jesus Christ, shall have
their reward after the expiration of that time, which cannot be till after the
last general Judgment. The fearful and ^errible War of Gog and Magog (
viz. the bloody War of Turks and Tartarians with the Jews newly converted in
the Land of Jury, in which the very name of Turks shall be rooted from off the
Earth) must be before the beginning of this glorious Estate and Felicity of the
Church of God here upon Earth, and therefore the 7, 8, 9, and 10 verses, are in
order of time before the 5 and the 6. The Devil and Antichristianity must be
chained up in the dungeon of Hell for the space of a 1000 years after the
Incarnation of Christ. An. 1000 must the Devil and Romish Idolatry by the
Popedom of Sylvester the second, be let loose to range upon Earth, and
tyrannize over the Church for the most part of another 1000, ever till An. School
( numerus completus being put here pro incompleto) before an happy and
comfortable Estate of the Gospel can be brought forth to the World. The estate
of England with other Pr^vinces of Europe from Anno 1650. to An. School.
herefore all Christendom from this year 1650, must expect very sad and woeful
days, much persecution, bloodshed and savadge ty^anny in every Kingdom of
Europe (especially in France, Spain, Italy, Swethland, Germany and England)
until An. School. Some of those Kingdoms which have abandoned the superstition
of the beast, shall by subtle allurements be persuaded to readmit and
reestablish the same. Woeful and unsupportable Afflictions shall befall both
the European Jews (which are the two Tribes of Benjamin and Judah, now resident
in Christendom and Turkey) as likewise the ten Tribes, the Kingdom of Israel
(who shall insensibly and miraculously arise out of the bowels of Tartaria and
India, about An. 1669.) who nevertheless shall be so extraordinarily supported
by God, that they shall stand in little or no need at all of the Christians.
Because from this time of the Conversion of the Israelites for the spac^ of 30
years, these 12 Tribes shall suffer much trouble, Heathens, Papists and
Mahometans, shall strive to eradicate their name from under heaven, and yet all
in vain; for an illustrious and heroic Prince (e Tribu Nephtali oriundus)
shall be their valiant and fortunate Commander, called Michael, not proprio
nomine, but because he Dan. 12.1. shall stand up and show himself the Assertor
and Protector of their Religion and Liberty. In which time shall be such
troubles as never were, no, nor ever shall be to the end of the world. For like
as the Christians had rest 30. years from the Ascension of Christ, and now have
endured the fiery trial almost these 1600. years, since that time from the
Heathen Emperors, and the Beast; so the Israeli^es, which shall 1600. years
till Anno 1668. live without Prince, Law, Temple, Sacrifice, and true Religion
(as Hosea prophesied chapter 3. v. 4, 5.) beginning now to be converted to Christ,
Certain remarkable Numbers in Scripture, whereby ^he Epoch'^ of the ruin of
Tu^k, Po^e, and the conversion of the Jews are more ^ully strengthened.
shall have savage times of affliction and Butcheries for other 30. years (to
welcome their conversion withal) till Anno^ School. when God shall grant rest
from their enemies, and begin a peaceable estate of the Church.

VII.
Entering at length upon my Notes on the aforesaid Chronology, I think it meet
first to strengthen the former Epoch's of the ruin of Rome, downfall of the
Turk and Tartar, and the Conversion of the Jews by the Conduct of certain
memorable Numbers in holy Scriptures. Grave and judicious Authors have with
wonder and admiration observed the heavenly and inimitable Method of holy
Scrjptures, how all the Mysteries and memorable Occurrences in the same are
comprised in Numbers, how within the compass of such a Quantity of years, God
always divulged his Counsels, and manifested what he purposed should be
wrought among the children of men. So that in considering the admirable consent
and agreement of Times by Anno Christi 1656, let the Church of God expect with
joy and comfort, the acting of the first Scene of the Tragedies of all those
European Kingdoms, which have been implacable Persecutours of the Gospel of
Moses (who was a second Noah to the Church) is a shadow of the Kingdom of
Christ. The Law continued in force 1529 years to the Passion of Christ: But
1598 years to the Destruction of the Temple by Titus: The Destruction of the
Temple by Titus was according to the account of Dionysius Exiguus, A. C. 69.
From thence reckon the Number of 1598 years, and you come to A. 1667; which is
the year which shall smoke with the ascending up of the Flames which consume
Luther and other eminent Ministers are 1517 years: And from the beginning of
the Reign of the Maccabees until the Birth of Christ are 169 years: Put these
two sums together, and you come to Anno 1686, in which God having 18 years
before enlightened the eyes of those who for almost 2000 years have sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, and having laid the Kingdom of the Beast
and the false Prophet in the lowest dust, shall bring that people into the
bosom of the true Church, which within 13 years after shall deliver his
children from all Nebuchadnezzar beleaguering Jerusalem are numbered School
years: So likewise from the Birth of the King of Kings unto the final
Consummation of the Miseries, and restoration of the Felicity of the Church by
the Destruction of Gog and Magog, shall be reckoned the very same Number of
School years. From the Babel to the return of the Jews from Babel, are 1666
years: and from profane Pompey's spoiling of the Temple at Jerusalem (when the
Kingdom was taken from the house of David, and Superstition and Gentilism began
to spring up amongst the Jews) to the Birth of of Antichrist and Apostasy in
the Church of God are 666 years; from thence ^eckon a 1000 years wherein the
Saints must suffer Persecution and Martyrdom for the Testimony of Jesus Christ,
and the truth of a good Conscience, Revel. 20.4. and you come to A. 1666, in
which shall be fulfilled all those things which are mentioned, Revel. 18, and
the 19 Chapter. Egypt, until the Death of Christ, are numbered 1542 years: to
these add those 169 years, which are from ^he beginning of the Reign of the
Assomonaei or Macchabees to the Birth of Christ, and you come to Anno 1711;
which year shall be wonderful and terrible to all the world, because that in
the year next going before ( viz. Anno 1710.) the abominable Names and mention
of Papists, Turks and Tartars being eradicated from the memories of men, the
glorious Estate of the Gospel, and the terrestial Felicity of the Church of God
shall begin over the face of the whole Earth. From the Birth of Moses until
the Destruction Jerusalem by Titus (which typifies the end of the world) are
1646 years: so many from the Incarnation of our Savior, denoted that year,
whose influence has begun, and shall prove fatal to most of the Kingdoms of
Europ^: add to these 20 years to come after, from that time (which 980 years
ago were prophesied of, to be those years, in which the Kingdom and the
Dominion, and the greatness of Kingdoms under the whole Heaven, shall be given
to the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and
all Dominions shall serve and obey him, Dan. 7.17.) and it will amount to the
year of the fatal Ruin of the Beast, Anno 1666. From these few Particulars of
the Consent and Agreement of times in the holy Scriptures, I infer thus much. A
Pr^gnostick of the Estates of c^^tain years Of An. 1657
About the year 1657 shall be great Changes and Alterations in Government in
every Kingdom in Europe, as well Protestant as Papist, attended and accompanied
with such horrid Combustions and Massacres, as has not been before since the
memory of man. This shall make way (as I said before) for the Protestants to
unite in a general Combination to send Forces under the Conduct of an
invincible Cyrus over the Alps to harrow Italy with fire and sword, and after
level the walls of ^ome with the lowest dust, Anno 1666. For as in the year of
Grace 666, Popery was brought to a full maturity in the Womb by Vitalian (who
ordained Latin-Service in the Church, contrary to Christ's Institution, and the
precedent Primitive times) and as 1000 the Number of Perfection and Eternity is
seldom used in our ordinary Computes, but left out for brevity sake (as we use
to say, The Spanish-Armado was in 588 for 1588, and the Powder Plot in 605 for
1605.) so it is most certain and indubitable, that as the Birth of Antichrist
was in Anno 666, so the death of it shall be Anno 1666, though the Carcass of
it may lie unburied for 30 years after, yet questionless it shall with Gog and
Magog b^ cast into the Lake of Gods wrath at one and the same time. This ruin
of Rome shall make way within ten years after to the Conversion of the Jews:
For seeing the Kingdom of Antichrist (as now it is) is the only Let to their
Conversion (for all the Jews that now are, live within the Papacy, and are
prohibited from turning Christians, partly because of the Idolatry they see
amongst the Papists in their worshipping of Images (the Jews being Zealots in
the second Commandment) partly because at their Conversion with the Papists
they must renounce all their goods as ill gotten, which rigid Condition a
worldly people will never yield to) therefore till the very name and power of
Popery be destroyed, and they admitted amongst Protestant Kingdoms, there can
be small hope of their Conversion. But now Antichrist totally destroyed, they
begin to see into their Errors and Ignorances, endeavou^ to learn the ways of
God, and that the Savior of the world (whom they so long expected) is come so
many years since and suffered. This Conversion of the Western Jews shall be
completed in that fatal and terrible year 1683. And six years after that
shall they be united with their Eastern-Brethren the 10 Tribes captivated by
Salmanasser, who have for 2433 years lien invisible in the bowels of the
Kingdoms of Turks and Tartarians. The Christian world neither must nor ought to
enquire, how this people which have lien hid and obscured so long a space,
shall in so small a time as a year and an half, so visibly, so powerfully, and
so magnificently arise to the Terror and Conquest of the whole Earth. The holy
Ghost declares, Ezekiel. 37.8. by the dry bones, fleshed and endued with life in
an instant, so that they stood upon their feet, and became a great Army; what a
strange, horrid and wonderful thing this shall be, and how terrible it shall
appear to the sight of the world in that year; which within 15 years after (
viz. Anno School.) shall fight that famous and fearful pitcht-field with the
united For^s of Turks and Tartarians, which shall prove the Deliverance of the
Church of God from all adversity. Thrice shall Europe within this time strive
to establish that power, which Superstition and Tyranny first pro^reated:
Thrice shall the children of this world raise innumerable Forces to destroy the
Saints of the most high: Thrice shall the Power of Godliness prevail in the
hearts and arms of those, who shall make the Land thrice drunk with the blood
of the Enemies of Christ; and whose grand Ancestors stewed it so often with the
blood of the Prophets and Apostles. Preparatives to these fearful Wonders
shall be those horrid and ominous Eclipses preceding the year 1660, fatal and
conspicuous to Europe; signs both of God's paternal Chastizements for Sects and
Schisms in the Church, and of his consuming Judgments impending upon the
implacable Enemies thereof.

In the year 1654, August 2. shall happen a fearful and lamentable total
Eclipse of the Sun in the 39 Degree of Leo, Of the Eclipse in An. 1654.
about half an hour before high Noon, where shall be seen the mighty hand of
God working Wonders in Italy, Sicily, Bohemia, Greece, Armenia and Syria, the
Kingdoms subject to Leo. The body of the Sun in this Eclipse will be totally
darkened for the space of two hours and 29 Minutes: it will be so great, the
like has not been before, nor after shall be: greater then that Eclipse of the
Sun which was Feb. 25. 1597. commonly called the dark Saturday. Of this Eclipse
thus Baudensis M.S. fol. 105. Exercit. 59. Papa, Baudensis Prognostication of
Anno 165^, 1658, 1661, 1663.
dum Petri patrimonium dilaturus, Italicum quendam Ducem possessionibus
spoliabit avitis, etc. The Pope attempting to enlarge Peter's Patrimony by
seizing upon the ancient Estate of an Italian Duke deceased without Issue, sets
his own Nest on fire, and Rome in a Combustion. This year shall a new Sect of
Sodomitical Monks arise, which being tolerated by the Pope, sets that Quarrel
betwixt him and the Duke of Florence, which shall prove the downfall of both in
a few years. This is affirmed likewise by Grebner, Ban. 75. Yet in the interim
(says Baudensis) God shall promote the happiness of Jerusalem, Peace shall be
within her walls, and plenteousness within her Palaces. And fol. 134. Exerc. 67.
he says, The years 1657, 1658, 1661, 1663, shall be formidable to Austria,
Silesia, Hungary, Holland, France and Portugal, because that every one of those
years shall be attended with four Eclipses apiece, portending the Mutations of
all those several States, and that the Revolution of time is come, wherein they
must give place to the Lion of the North, whose Scepter shall bruise their
power to nothing, and his Gauntlet lay their Forces prostrate at his feet. At
which time all Europe shall sing this mournful Ditty; Heu mala progenies fatis
servata nefandis,
Gensque nefandarum domitrix altrixque ferarum,
Quid fueras, quid ^isque vide: tua prima propago
Bella gerit, ^ibolemque petet lues atra secundam.
At Leo terribilis Borealibus editus oris
Fammiferam ex Orco and pelagi plangentibus undis
Educens aciem, pecudes^ urbesque virosque
Sternet, and antiquis Solemn Lunamque movebit
Sedibus; ille etiam pacrio jure infima summa
Reddet, and Occasum sub leges mittet inermem.


Thus Englished.

Alas ill race, to dismal Fates reserved,
By whom dire Beasts are tamed and preserved,
See what thou were and art: Thy first issue
Inclines to War, Plague does the next subdue.
But Lion fierce sprung from the Northern shore
Shall bring from deepest Hell and waves that rore
A blasing Army, he shall men o'rerun,
Cities and cattle, yea the Moon and Sun
Shall he remove; and Father-like the least
Make highest, and give Laws to the weak West.
Yet he that returns back in reviewall of the conjunctions and fiery
Triplicities, A Description of the 7 ^iery Triplicities.
may see how they have in part prognosticated the present troubles and and
distractions of Europe, with the Commonwealths of England and Scotland. Anno
1603 in the first great conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in the fiery
triplicity, K. James came to the Crown of England, and so was fulfilled that
Prophecy which an holy Anchoret made 890 years ago, English men for that they
wonneth them to drunkeinesse, to treakson, and rechlesenesse of Got's house,
firsten by Dancs, thenth by Nortmans, and the third time by Scots, whom they
holden lest worthen of all, they shallen be overcompn. Then the world shallen
be unstable, and so various and diversable, that the unstablenesse of thoughts
shallen b^ betookeineid by many manner diversity of clothing. This could never
be fulfilled but by a Scottish King swaying the English-scepter; and therefore
never came to pass till the Union of the two Kingdoms under the said King. As
the second Conjunction, Anno 1623. found Germany and most of the West involved
in civil Wars, and as the third An. 1643. found the King and Subjects of
England in the field one against the other; so the fourth Conjunction, An. 1663
in Sagitarius shall begin those destructive Combustions in Italy, which shall
allure the Protestant Armies to make a third all-conquering Party in the same;
and the fifth An. 1683 in Leo shall bring forth the Conversion of the Jews: but
the sixth Conjunction happening in Taurus, An. 1703, shall behold that which
many glorious Saints and children of God have read of, and ^ejoyced and desired
to see, and yet could not see them. For now Revel. 22.1. shall the Sea (that
is, the miserable estate of the World by Wars, Desolations and Sicknesses) be
destroyed, and no more extant. Now shall the time of Tribulation, War and
desolation, the time of torments, temptation, heresy and persecution be
utterly abolished from the memory of men For a new Heaven and a new Earth, a
renovated Church, purified Saints shall succeed in the room of those Wolves,
who in sheeps-cloathing devoured the Flock of Christ. These are the days, for
the hope of which the stones of ^ion cry day by day, though little esteeming
seven thousand deaths in regard of that precious assurance g^aven in their
Breasts, that they shall then, and in that day behold the Lord, which has
mercifully gathered them from all Nations, and has so wonderfully preserved
them from the sorcery of Babylon (which has destroyed all the Earth) that
leads them in and out before Pagans, Heretics and Idolaters, before the
covetous and foolish-wise of this world, so prudently and so invisibly, that
they seeing are not seen, and living are not known.

The Exposition of Nebuchadnezzar^ Image, in Dan. 2.
But from these low things let us ascend up to Scripture further to prove the
certainty thereof. Daniels Image as it gave the first, so it gave the fullest
Knowledge of this great Mystery of the Church of God, Dan. 2. per tot. In which
Image is described in brief the Estate of the World, from the very day God
revealed this to Daniel, and he to Nebuchadnezzar, to the full and final End
and Conclusion of time. By the golden Head, silver Arms, brazen Belly, and iron
Legs, we must understand the Chaldean, Persian, Macedonian and Roman
Monarchies, which successively one after another, tyrannized over mankind by
cruelty, and by cruelty came to as miserable Destructions in the end. The feet
part of Iron, and part of Clay, denoted the declining Estate of the Roman
Empire (after that indiscreet Division of it under Charles the Great into the
Eastern and Western) under the present Papacy, and now-vulturizing house of
Austria, which hitherto does and shall continue until An. 1694. Therefore the
Stone cut without hands (in the 34 verse) ( which smote the Image on his feet,
that were part of Iron, part of Clay, and so brake them to pieces, that the
Iron, Brass, Clay, Silver and Gold became as chaff of the Summer-flowers that
the wind carried them away, and no more place was found for them; And the
Stone that smote the Image became a great Mountain, and filled the Earth) must
needs be understood of a glorious Monarchy of the Church of God upon Earth,
which by the Conversion of the Universal Nation of the Jews shall overcome all
her Enemies, and reign triumphantly in all Nations under Heaven, in
universality, uniformity, integrity and inn^cency of life and conversation.

This blessed and happy estate of Christ's Church upon Earth (after the
aforesaid battle of Gog and Magog described Ezech. 38. and 39 Chap. of which
enough before) is graphically deciphered in the nine last Chapters of the same
Prophet, The Exposition of the 12 last chapters of Ezeckiel.
beginning at the 40; where under a specious and large type of restoring the
old Jewish Temple with the Sacrifices ( chap. 40.) the measuring, ordering and
disposing of it in every thing thereto belonging ( chap. 41.) as the chambers
of the Priests in the Temple, the holy Utensils ( chap. 42.) the glory of God
filling the house ( chap. 43.) his paternall upbraiding the Israelites for
their ancient Idolatry, and demonstrating his great and affectionate love to
them for the present ( chap. 44.) is contained (as I said before) a pithy
discourse how powerful and magnificent these new converted Christians shall
be; how holy, learned and unanimous their Ministers should be, how ardent and
studious they shall be in communicating the Gospel of Christ to such as yet sit
in darkness and in the shadow of death ( chap. 45.) how vigilant their Princes
and Magistrates shall be in being keepers of the house of God, that is in
encouraging the Ministers, tam praemio quam paena, to instruct the people in
the knowledge of the truth, that so both Ministers and people may render due
obedience to their common Savior, in love to God, and charity toward men. And
again, the reserved portions of Land for the Temple, City, Priests and Princes
all in just measures and dimensions, the waters issuing out of the Temple, ever
increasing in Latitude and Profundity, the several divisions of the particular
lots of Priests, Temple, Levites, the City and the Princes secondarily repeated
in the 45, 46, 47, and the last Chapters, evidently declare the undoubted
certainty and verity of this wonderful mystery, that the Jews shall repossesse
their ancient possessions and several inheritances in the Land of Judea; how
devout, pious and cheerful they shall be in the worship and service of God,
intimated by the frequent performing of spiritual Sacrifices and Oblations:
how potent and spacious their Church shall be, how great and infinite the
Privileges, and never decreasing Graces of God shall be to it, signified by
the depth and latitude of the spiritual waters of Life.

Thirdly, The Exposition of the end of D^ni^ls 11 chap. ^
Daniel in the end of his 11 Chap. does above all other, most plainly and
specifiquely picture the two grand preparations to this spiritual Monarchy of
Christ's Church in the end of the World: viz. 1 the (...) of the enemies of God,
and 2 the Conversion of the Jews. For in the 40, 41, 42, and 43 verses of the
said 11 Chapter, declaring first, what Victories, the Saracens should get over
the Roman Empire, by saying, that the King of the South should push at him (
viz. the Saracens should invade the Emperor) and secondly, what lamentable
havoc the Turk should make of the Roman Monarchy by conquering and subduing
from them all the Eastern Empire of Constantinople, in these words, And the
King of the North shall come against him like a whirlwinde, with charets and
horsemen and many ships, and shall enter into the Countries, and shall overflow
and pass through; which was verified in the Turks conque^ing all Greece,
Scythia, Moldavia, Servia, Asia, Syria, Mesopotamia and the Isles of the Aegean
sea: And he shall enter into the pleasant Land, and many Countries shall be
overthrown, but these shall escape out of his hands, Edom and Moab, and the
chief of the Children of Ammon, which also came to pass when Selimus I.
invaded Egypt, slew Tomumbey the Sultan thereof, eradicated the very name of
the Mamalucks, and so got all the wealth and treasures of Memphis and
Grand-Cairo, and added also Judea as a member of Egypt to the Turkish Empire,
An. 1517. His son Solymon the Magnificent, awed India and Ethiopia, and his
Grandchilde Selimus II. conquered Tunis and Algiers in Afrique, yet neither of
them meddled with the Arabians, Edomites or Moabites, as thinking them a people
not worth conquering. In the 44 verse, Daniel says, But tidings out of the
East and West shall trouble him; the conversion of the Eastern and Western
Jews, shall so inrage the Turk, that he shall levy innumerable Forces, and
march forth in great fury to destroy and root them out: And he shall pitch the
Tabernacle of his Palace between the seas in the glorious and holy Mountain,
shall fight a most terrible and bloody pitched Field with them in their own Land
of Jury, and yet shall he come to his end, his power, by God's Providence,
shall be overthrown, and totally eradicated by them from off the Earth, and
none shall help him.

The Exposition of Rev. 9.15.
Lastly, S. John in Revel. 9.15. sets down in plain and evident numbers, the
very beginning, increase and downfall of this hellish generation. For in saying
the Turkish Armies shall be prepared at an hour, a day, a month, and a year,
he analogically declares the very time of their birth, and the year when they
shall come to a final annihilation. Here a Day is to be taken prophetically
for a year, a Month for 31 days, which likewise make so many years, and a
year for the days of a bissextile Julian year (which are 366) making in the
same manner as many prophetical years as in the former Epoch's of Daniel and
Ezekiel^ So the sum's of 366, 31 and 1, make a complete Product of 398 years,
which added to An. 1300 (the year in which the Ottoman Empire first saw light
in the world) plainly demonstrates, that as the Turkish Empire began An.
Christi 1300, so in An. School shall be the fatal end and final downfall of the
same. Thus it is evident, that as the downfall and captivity of the Jewish
Nation fell in the building and birth of that City, which was afterward the
fourth Monarchy; so in the burial and ruin of the same City and Monarchy
shall be their conversion to the Gospel of truth, and the institution of the
Fifth Monarchy; in which all power, and earthly magnificence must submit to the
Kingdom of the Saints of God, and all Scepters bow to the Authority of the
Church of Christ.

VIII.
The common Objection of Divines against the V. Monarchy and the universal
kingdom of the Gospel here upon Earth, drawn from the badnesse of the Times,
Answered.
Against these former Assertions it is thus objected: That these are but the
Dreams of idle-headedmen, considering the sad Method of the World in the
continual increase of sin and wickedness, and degeneration of all sublunary
things daily more and more to worse; and because our Savior said, at his
second coming he should scarce find faith upon Earth. But to this I answer; No
time is God's time for the propogation of the Gospel, and enlargement of his
Church, but in the Deluge of sin and inundation of impiety: then is his Power
most manifest, when man is weakest; his Decrees most effectible, when we think
him the furthest off; and his Providence nearest execution, then, when the
world is most irregular, and incapable of a Reformation. When the Abominations
and Paganismes of the old World had destroyed all true worship of God, and an
120 years of repentance did no good, then was God's time to separate the Wheat
from the Chafe, and by saving of Noah's family to preserve a seed for the
implantation of a new. So in the n^w World, when Idolatry had overspread all,
the Judgment and Mercy of God most appeared in Abraham's Vocation, by selecting
his Church from the rest of mankind, and continuing it above 2000 years in the
House of Heber, the true Heir to Grace and Salvation. Thus was it in the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, in the Babylonish Captivity, in the
Reformation by Luther, when all the world were become Apostates, God's
Providence shone out brightest, and was most conspicuous in propagating
Religion, maugre all the opposition the devil and the world could invent or
de^ise: So shall it be in this prefixed time: though the world must degenerate
more and more in civility and humanity; Christianity be eclipsed in a higher
measure, and the true Worshippers of God decrease above what ever yet has been
done: though Protestantisme in many Coasts and Kingdom^ shall be totally
swallowed up of Popery and Mahumetanisme; more lamentable Wars and fearful
Massacres rage through England, Germany, France, Spain, Italy, and all European
Monarchies, then we have yet beheld; and though some of these Kingdoms wholly
revolt to Popery, others be lukewarm and at a stand, until An. 1686; yet all
these shall but make way for the final Eradication of the enemies of the
Church, and the glorious and wonderful Birth, and erection of the FIFTH
MONARCHY UNIVERSAL, which by these pangs and sorrows of Christendom shall be
brought forth about the time of the total conversion of the Jews. For the
season is now come, when Judgment must begin (not at the Temple of Antichrist)
but at the House of God; and what blood soever is shed upon the soil of the
Church, shall be no other then fruitful showers and warm seasons, to make the
Field of Christ more pregnant in production of that glorious Harvest of Saints,
which shall cover the Earth. For as it shall be in the end of the World, this
old, decrepit, and corrupt world must be purged and refined with the fire of
the Lord, before there can be placed in stead thereof a new Heaven and a new
Earth: So in the final Conclusion of the troubles of the Church, wars,
Apostasies, alterations and changes in Kingdoms and States, the (...) of Gog
and Magog, and all the enemies of Christ, the amputation of unprofitable Trees,
and eradication of noxious Weeds out of the Garden of the Church, shall
facilitate and prepare the way for the ingresse of the Monarchy of the Gospel
into the eyes of the world. Far wide therefore is the Surmise of those
Christians, how this doctrine of the universal Regiment of the Church upon
earth is a vainglorious and fantastic dream, considering the hopes of it now
are small, and like to be lesser, because charity and devotion daily
decreaseth: Nay rather this is the most evident sign that it speedily
approaches, because the malice of the devil with the corruption of mankind,
hourly augmenteth and strives to stifle and prevent it. If God be known to be
God by bringing light out of darkness, and manifesting his power in weakness;
then certainly shall these wars and schisms among Christians, the barbarous
invasions and conquests of Turks and Tartars, the increasing Idolatry of the
Western and Eastern Indians, be an Axe in the hand of God, to lop off all
superfluous branches from his Vine, to make it overspread with nourishing
fruit, the Globe of the whole Earth.

IX.
Certain Epigrams of Petrus Damiani of ^he ruin of Tu^k and Pope, etc. never
yet before printed.
And that these are no novell Opinions, these following Testimonies may give
sufficient evidence, Petrus Damiani flourished Anno 1060. a laborious Divine,
an acute Philosopher, and a witty Poet. Gesner and other Bibliothecaries say
nothing of him is extant. Yet I have seen in the Library of Trinity-Colledge in
Cambridge certain Latin Epigrams of his, Of the conversion of the Jews, Of the
destruction of the world by fire in the last day, Of the ruin of Rome, and Of
the last Judgment, which Latin Epigrams I find translated into English
Stanza's in an old Manuscript of L. B. entitled The Dove.

1. Of the Burning of the world by fire.
Primum foedavit mundum scelcrata libido,
Cujus quam ad coelum flammea massa venit,
Diluvium immissum est, immensumque obruit orbem,
Vt mala tanta pijs eluerentur aquis:
O dira Ebrietas mundi faex prima secundi,
Te opposita interiment atque elementa prement.
Iustitiam Domini in cunctis sic cernimus actis,
Vnda lavat venerem, pocula flamma bibet.
Thus Englished.

As the first world did first by lust offend,
Whose burning rage to such a height did win,
That God to quench the same a Flood did send,
O Drunkenness, the second world's first sin!
The course of Vice that Element must end,
Which is opposed to that which did begin.
In every thing Gods justice we may spy,
As Floods drown Lust, Flames Drunkenness must dry.
2. Of the ruin of Rome.
Effuge, Grex Christi, peccati a Gurgite diro.
Cui meretrix odio est, atque corona triplex,
Effuge, dum Tempus datur, and fera praelia cessane;
Ne ut tu delitias, sic sua damna feras.
Quum jam funestos Agnus superaverit hosts.
Pingue gregique epulum militibusque dabit.
Se mentem metet haec meretrix, quam sevit, eandem:
Iam Sathanae seeds, quae Domina orbis erat.
Thus Englished.

Fly, Faithful Christians, from that Sea of sin,
Who hate the Whore, and the two-horned Beast;
Fly, fly, in time before their griefs begin,
Lest as their pleasures, so their plagues you taste.
When once the Lamb the victory does win,
He of fat things will make his Flock a Feast.
Who as she sowed, so shall she reap those evils,
Once the worlds Mistress, now a Cage of devils.
3. Of the conversion of the Jews.
Postquam Evangelium toto narretur in orb,
Fulget and ignotis nostris genitoribus oris,
Quum Gentes Christum agnoscunt generalit^r (...).
Qu^s Deus aeter^^im aetherea dignabitur aula^.
Tunc amplectetur verum Solynaea propago,
Quod prius invidid tam aversabatur iniqua^:
Vltima Evangelium, Legem quae prima recepit.
Quos d^cuit primos, postremos Christus habebit.
Thus Englished.

The Gospel once being preached in every place^
To lands of which our Fathers could not tell,
And when the Gentiles all are drawn to Grace,
Which in the new Jerusalem should dwell.
Then shall the stubborn Jews the Truth embrace^
From which with such disdain they did rebel:
Who first the Law, last shall the Gospel have,
Christ whom he first did call, shall last receiv^.
4. Of the last judgment.
Indictum Tempus, quod totum territet orbem,
Per praedicta homines signa monere solet.
Praelia, Evangelium mundo vulgatur, adorant
Iudaei Christum, cognita jam meretrix:
Zelus hebet, Stellaeque cadunt, fera crimina regnant,
Aegra fides languet, Daemonis ira furit:
Vltima jam genus omne malorum buccina clangit,
Supremamque diem signa tremenda notant.
Thus Englished.

That threatened time which must the world appall,
Is that all may amend by signs foreshown.
Wars rumor'd are, the Gospel preached over all,
The Jews convert, the Antichrist is known.
Devils rage, Vice reigns, Zeal cools, Faith fails, Stars fall,
All sorts of plagues has the last Trumpet blown.
And by prodigious signs 'tmay plain appear,
That of the Son of man the time draws near.
Prophesies of Hieronymus Savanatola.
Thus by this great Divine living in the mistiest times of Popery, it may plain
appear, that it was a received opinion that the total destruction of Rome, the
conversion of the Jews, and the fifth Monarchy should precede the end of the
world. And this is also confirmed by Hieronymus Savanarola (who died a Martyr
at Florence, A. 1498.) whose Prophesies are extant in the works of Franciscus
Mirandula. That in the last times Jews, Turks and Moors should be converted to
Christ, a man like Cyrus with a numerous Army of true professors should come
over the Alps and destroy Rome, and ruinate all the Kingdoms and States of
Italy. That grievous Wars, Bloud-sheddings and Massacres should arise in the
world by a Northern King for a happy Reformation, who should carry the Gospel
out of Europe into a vast and unknown world in the end of time. That an Eastern
King should blow the Trumpet of God from Tartaria, which should reform all the
Islands of the Indian Infidels. He likewise prophesied in particular of Iulio
the second, of the troubles of the Duke of Mirandula, Of Luthers Reformation,
Of the Persecutions of Merindol, Chabriers, Angrogne, the Valtolin^, and other
places of France, all which most evidently came to pass.

A Prophecy lately found in France, of the future ^st^te of the world till An.
1710.
Thirdly, A Prophecy of the estate and condition of the times unto the end of
the world, was found written in Hebrew under the Foundation of the Church of S.
Denis in France, A. 1616. by the Sexton of the place, as he dug for the
erecting of a Monument for the Lord Teligni. He gave it unto the Popes Nuncio
(who rewarded him with 200 dollars for his pains) from him it was sent to the
Cardinal of Bruges, who presented it unto the young K. Lewis XIII. It was
written in parchment, and wrapped in lead in the form of an Heart: Hebrew
numericall letters were set at the side of every Line, signifying in what Year
of our Lord every accident should come to pass, and be manifested to the
world. Out of Hebrew it was translated into Latin by Johannes Parmarino
Secretary to the said Cardinal.

The Prophecy runs thus.











3 Alephs.



The heat of war does Italy surround,
Let Christ's pasture be one, his sheep and ground.
Gods wrath and terror does the world confound.
But few that God do reverence.
A Prince shall rise of eminence.
Asia does tremble, Europe shake.
Now is a general Earthquake.
All Nations Gods knowledge partake.
Rivers are dried every where.
Pastor and Church only one are.
By this Prophecy great troubles must arise in Italy within this small time,
cruel wars afflicting every State thereof, which must be preparations to the
eternal destruction and ruin of Rome the head City thereof: Rome can never be
destroyed except Protestants lay aside their unnecessary civil contentions,
which may (God so disposing) come to them about Anno 1665. After which great
commotions are like to aris^ in Europe, till a noble Hero arise, which shall
quench those evils by employing Christians in mutual Leagues against the Turk.
Suddenly after which comes troublesome days in Asia and Africa. Then follows
universal peace and quietness of Nations, prophesied of by Ezechiel and S.
John in the Revelations, which must bring forth the purity and perfection of
the Gospel over the whole Earth.

X.
The true Explanation of the Prophecy o^ the co^tinu^nce of ^he Turkish Empire,
found in M. Fox's Act^ and Mon^ment^, pag^ 746.
Of how large an extent the Turki^h Empire should be, how far it should prevail
against Christendom, when it should be at the height, and when Christians
should begin to cry quits with them by victories and conquests, is long since
ex^ant in ancient Prophesies. One whereof M. Fox in his first Volume of Acts
and Monuments, page 746. antiq. edit. relates he found in the Persian language
in a Manuscript of Bartholomary Georgienitz: the substance whereof in Latin is
this.

Imperator noster veniet, Ethnici Principes Regnum capiet, rubrum quoque pomum
capiet, inque suam potestatem rediget.

Quod si in septimum usque annum Christianorum gladius no^ insurrexerit, u^que
ad duodecimum annum eis dominabitur. Domos aedificabit, vineas plantabit,
hortos sepibus muniet, liberos procreabit, and post duodecimum a^num
Christianorum gladiu^ apparebit, and Turcam quaque versum in fugam aget.

Our Emperor shall come, he shall take the Kingdom of a heathen Prince, he
shall also take the red apple, and subdue it to himself.

But if the Christians sword shall not arise by the seventh year, he shall
reign over them to the twelfth year, he shall build houses, plant vineyards,
hedg^ in Orchards, and beget children, and after the twelfth year shall the
Christians sword appear, and put the Turk to flight on every side.

M. Fox expounds these 12 years to be 12 Turkish Emperors prevailing against
Christians, beginning at the first Emperor Ottoman An. 1300. and so Solomon
the magnificent to be the twelfth Emperor, and the last that should prevail
against Christians; who began his reign An. 1519. and died An. 1567. But I
think rather it must begin at Mahomet the II. winning of Constantinople (called
here rubrum pomum) An. 1452. and must end at the late Emperor Mahomet the IV.
his death the last August, 1649. My reason is this: Other Emperors have
prevailed against Christians, since Solomon the magnificent. For Selimus the
II. his son wan Cyprus from the Venetians. Armurath III. took the Fort Guiermo
from the Hungarians, and his son Mahomet III. took Agria in Hungary, and had he
pursued his victory, had won that whole Kingdom in less then a year: So the
late Mahomet is the 12 Emperor from Mahomet the II. and now after his death
shall the Turks prevail no more against Christians. For forty years ago that
Kingdom was at a stand, and is declining to an eternal destruction. The sword
of the Christians shall now arise and prevail against the Turks ^ill An. 1696.
when the converted Jews shall gather head to overcome them in a bloody pitched
field, and root out their name from off the Earth. By this young Emperors
decease without issue, the Ottoman Line is extinct, and none left. One Sultan
Hali (a Persian by birth) is now Steward of the Ottoman house, and the
Crim-Tartar by old composition and agreement lays claim to the Turkish
Empire, which at present is in combustion because of this. And though above
200000 Turks are in the Field, with an intent (as is thought) to invade
Germany, yet if Christians could but leave o^^ their unnecessary divisions,
they might soon ruinate the Turkish Empire. For since Armurath IV. his death,
An. 1642. (who began to reign, An. 1623.) all the time of this late Mahomet's
reign, since there has been continual contentions and massacres amongst the
Turks, the Jannizaries eluding and despising the young and weak Emperor, which
terrified the Mufti and the Bassa's sore, because they had a prophecy, that as
a Mahomet wan Constantinople, so a Mahomet should lose it again to the
Christians. However the matter goes for the present, A Prophecy of the year
1^98, found in the study of Iust^^ Lypsi^^^
the year School shall be fatal both to them and to the Pope in both their
ruins, and the beginning of the comparative felicity of the Church of God, as
may be further manifested by an excellent Prophecy, which the learned Erasmus
received from Reuchliuus, and was found in the study of Iustus Lypsius by Ianus
Douza the younger, running thus.

Post mill expl^tos a partu Virginis annos,
Et post sexcentos rursus ab orb datos,
Nonagefimus octavus mirabilis annus
Ingruet, is secum gaudia laeta faeret.
Corruet hoc anno Turcarum i^visa propago;
Roma, tuum in libris fabula nomen ^rit.
Omnia tunc mundi sursum ibunt atque retrorsum
Imperiae, ut populus sceptra novella premant:
Vtque suum cunct as Verbum diffundat in oras.
Christus, and imperitet nomine ubique suo.
Thus Englished.

Six thousand years from Virgins birth expired,
Six hundred after that acquired,
The famous ninety eighth year shall come on,
Full of great Contentation.
This year the Turkish hateful race shall rue,
Rome shall a fable be, not true.
Then shall be tossed all Kingdoms of the World,
And into a new Kingdom hurled:
That into all coasts Christ his Word may spread,
And be alone the Peoples Head.
XI.
The two Books of Esdras are thought (and that by none of the least learned, A
true Exposition of a Esdr. 11. c^^.
as Augustine, Hierome, Ambrose, Tostatus, Scaliger the elder, Melan^thon,
Arrias Montanus, Bucer, and Bibliander) to be Canonical, because of the most
evident fulfilling of many predictions in them contained. In the 11 chap. of
the second of those Books, there is under the type of an Eagle, a manifest
prophecy both of the Roman Heathenish Empire, as likewise of the Papacy with
her chief Leagurers to this present time throughout the whole Chapter. This
Eagle is that Roman Heathenish Empire; her twelve feathered wings are the
twelve first Emperors from Julius Caesar to Nerva Cocceius. The three Heads are
the three Kingdoms of France, Spain and Germany, preordained of God to uphold
and maintain the power of her pride, when all her wings (her heathenish and
tyrannical Cesars) should fail her. Nevertheless, under her 12 first Cesars
are comprehended in general all the Emperors which reigned in her from Julius
Caesar (who first cracked the strings of her liberty) to Augustulus Momyllus (her
last Roman Caesar) for the space of 474 years. Her 8 contrary feathers are the 8
terrible Inundations of several Nations from the North (God's scourges) which
overwhelmed her fairest Provinces, sunk her State in blood, and by fire and
sword humbled her as low as the dust she trod on; viz. 1 Alaricus and his
West-Gothes, 2 Attilas and his Hunnes, 3 Gensericus and his Vandals, 4 Odoacer,
5 Theodoricus and his East-Goths, 6 Totilas and his Spaniards, 7 Alboinus and
his Longobards (who deposed her diminitive Caesar Augustulus Momyllus) 8 and
lastly, the intestine homebred Faction and Conspiracy, which proved more
pernicious then the rest (as all included diseases are the worst) which in the
reigns of Otho the Great, Otho III, and Frederique II, so often strove to
eradicate the Papal Superiority, and reedifie her S.P.Q.R. buried so many ages
ago out of the ruins of the City. The Head in the midst is the Germane Empire,
begun An. 801 on Christmas day, by Charles the Great, which though verse. 32. it
long did and yet does put the Earth in great fear, yet verse. 33. must vanish in
an instant, as did the Wings, and come to naught. The Germane Empire thus
destroyed, verse. 35. The Head on the right side (the Kingdom of Spain) must
devour the Head on the left side, which is the Kingdom of France. Therefore it
is manifest, That the Kingdom of France, though now it flourishes in what
Glory and Magnificence Earth can afford, must ere long be humbled by the power
of Spain, with many Discomfitures, and brought to doleful streights and great
perplexities. I my self have observed one remarkable Adjunct of that Kingdom
in particular, how that year (in which the Figures of the Golden Number were
equal to the Figures of the year of Christ) has ever proved fatal to that
Monarchy for War, Bloodshed, Pestilence and Famine. It was so with them from
An. 1570 to An. 1576. in all which seven years, the Guisian faction made
lamentable havoc of the Church of God and the Kingdom; so shall it be in that
year in which the final Tragedy of that Kingdom shall be acted, six years
after which France shall be no more. But when that shall be, no sign of Europe
shall remain, nor remembrance where the walls of Rome stood. The LION (which
verse. 37. and chap. 12. v. 31. came roaring out of the Wood speaking to the
Eagle, and rebuking her for her wickedness) is the WIND which the most high
God has kept for Rome and her wickedness till the end, even the LION OF THE
NORTH (of which you shall hear anon a Prophecy of the true Merlin) which shall
reprove the Roman Empire, and cast before her her spoils; he shall set her
alive in Judgment, rebuke and correct her, and deliver the residue of Gods
people by Afflicton which are preserved upon his borders and make them joyful
until the day of Judgment. In the 13 Chapter, Esdras beholds a vision of a
man rising out of the Sea, and devouring the multitudes of fighters that came
against him, neither with sword, spear nor any instrument of War, but only
with the fire and storm that came out of his mouth; which is Christ the son of
man, who through a sea of bloody persecutions and tribulations propagated his
Gospel over the Earth, confounding and devouring the multitudinous Pagans and
Idolaters fighting against Christians, by the invincible force of the Gospel.
After a long time of the obstinate wilfulness and fullness of the Gentiles, he
shall call to himself another peaceable multitude, verse. 12, 40. even the whole
Nation of the Jews, out of Armenia, Tartaria, and the Eastern India, whom God
shall defend and convert to the Gospel, when he shall destroy all other Nations
upon Earth. These are called the peaceable People, because after the conversion
of the Jews, shall come that Ministerial Monarchy of the Church over the whole
World; that peaceable and still Time, when all Kingdoms under heaven shall
forget fighting one against another, Wars shall cease in all the World, and
swords and spears shall be beaten into Plowshares and pruning hooks. When the
seventh Angel blew the Trumpet, Luther began his Reformation, then it is, when
the Multitude stood before the Lamb, and sung the new song of Moses; and then
nevertheless is but the vail only of the Tabernacle opened in heaven, and a
great cloud and smoke covered that Glory. But it must be 180 years after, when
the Kingdoms of this World become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ,
and those be destroyed that destroyed the Earth. For then and not till then
shall the Temple of God be fully opened in Heaven, and the Ark of his Testament
(the very same model, which God showed to Moses in the Mount) shall be seen in
Jerusalem, not in a Tabernacle, but in that Temple, which the power of God
shall make. Then shall lastly, the four Beasts, the Elders, with all the Angels
of Heaven, and all the creatures of Heaven and Earth, and of the Sea and under
the Earth fall down before the Throne, and give glory, honor, blessing and
praise unto him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever, and the
four Beasts shall say, Amen.

XII.
I have heard many Jews discoursing of this their glorious Restoration and
Religion to come. Evidences out of Scripture that the ten Tribes shall be
brought out of Tartaria and India, and converted to the Gospel, as well as our
Western Jews.
They say, they never possessed (no not in the time of David and Solomon, when
their Kingdom was largest) an half of that which God promised in Deuteronomy
and Joshua. Indeed it is said in Joshua, No good thing failed of what God
promised, but this is to be understood of their peaceable settlement in what
Joshua then conquered, not of the utmost boundders of what they were to
possess toward the end of Time. From Euphrates to the red Sea, all the Coasts
on the West to the great Mediterranean Sea, with Tyrus and Sydon, on the North
Hemath and Cel^syria, even in length from L^banon to Egypt, was to be the
confines of this sacred Commonwealth. Now if we consider, what a Moity of this
was possessed by Lot, Ammon, Esau, the Kings of Tyrus and Sidon, the
Philistines with Syria, we may plainly see, that more then an half was never
their own, of what God promised. In confidence of possessing which, and all the
world beside in time to come, in their great Hosanna they shake Palms in their
hands, in triumph toward the four coasts of heaven, to intimate that in their
universal Empire every tree of the wood shall clap hands, and sing for joy. It
is strange, and makes me give more credit to Esdras then otherwise I would, to
see how pat he goes with our Savior Christ, in affirming the second Captivity
of the Jews to be long, and that their return should be about the ruin of the
Roman Empire. He relates how the ten Tribes (soon after their Captivity by
Salmanasser) traveled through a great River or strait (perhaps the Streits of
Anian) in a long journey of many months or years to a Country not inhabited.
Yea many good Authors, who write of the Histories of America, relate how the
Maxicans have a Tradition (delivered from father to son, time out of mind) of
a great multitude coming a great journey into those parts with an Ark carried
before them on men's shoulders, with their God enclosed therein. These people
certainly were Jews, from whom they learned Circumcision (which our travelers
find in most of their Coasts) with other Rites of Tribes, Heads of Tribes and
Families, with some handsome Ceremonies of Marriages, Funerals and Washings,
directly the same with the Jews or Israelites. But to prove, that the
Israelites were first placed in Media and Carmania, and from thence removed
into India, A large Discourse of a probable co^jecture that the ten Tribes of
Israel were placed by Salmanasser in Arme^ia and Media, and that from thence
they passed into Tartaria, and so into India.
let us return a little back, and survey Scriptures and some approved Authors.
When Salmanasser King of Assyria carried the ten Tribes into Captivity (in the
fifth year of the reign of Hezekiah King of Judah) he was a Prince of spacious
Dominions and invincible forces, as comprizing within his Empire all Media and
Persia, Mesepotamia, Assyria, all Arabia and Ethiopia inferior to the confines
of Egypt, all Syria and Palestine (save only the poor exhausted Kingdom of
Judah) and lastly Armenia with all the Coasts bordering upon the Caspian and
Euxine sea, as far as Tartaria. By this it will be hard to define in which
Province of his Empire he placed them, out of his Dominions we may well think
he would not abandon them. In the 2 King. 17.6. it is said that he placed them
in Hala and Habor by the River of Gozan, and in the Cities of the Medes. Which
Hala (or rather Chala) and Habor by affinity of pronuntiation, can be no other
then Col^hies and Iberia, two Provinces of Armenia, the first bordering upon
the Euxine, the latter upon the Caspian sea and the confines of the Tartars.
East of Armenia lies Media, in the Cities of which, a great part of the
Israelites were likewise placed to inhabit. North of Armenia is the entrance
into those immense and indiscoverable Nations of Muscovites and Tartars, the
utmost limits of whose Kingdoms were never yet fully known. The chief River of
which Countries arising far beyond the Hyperborian Territories, after a
wearisome travel through many Nations and Provinces, disburthens it self at
last into the Caspian sea, at the very entrance into Armenia, where it is
called Zolga (though our Mariners call it Wolga) which is nothing else but a
Metathesis or a bad pronunciation of the word Gozan. So that that saying of
Ben-Gorion is true (if that Manuscript be his which Gallo-Belgicus fathers upon
him, yet visible in Bibliotheca Florentina) Salbumadzar (says he) rex
Assyrius, exciso Samariae regno, december illas Tribus, quae a divino cultu tandiu
ante desciverant ad Idololatriam, abductas in Captivitatem conlocavit in Fasso,
Alvati, Loride, and Bascapante civitatibus Colchidos and Iberiae Arm^nicarum
provinciarum, and in Ecbatan^ and Bocchu urbibus Mediae juxta Pontum Euxinum,
and mare Caspium. Thus by the testimony of this great Rabbi it is manifest that
the Opinion of those men is fond who think the ten Tribes to be utterly lost;
thus likewise is it plain that the Jews Conversion must first a^ise out of the
East, and that Fassum, Alvatis, Loris, and Bascapan Cities of Colchis and
Iberia, and Ecbatana and Bocchu Cities of Media were the places, where
Salmanasser (called here Salbumadzar) placed these Israelites in name, but
Pagans in nature. And John Lunclay in his Pandects of the Turkish History, fol.
769. writes, how there are certain Hoords (Troops or Families) of people near
the more Northern parts of Tartaria, which retain the names of Dan, Z^bulun and
Nepthali, and in the vicinity of Rega there is a certain barbarous Nation of
Letti, which for three months in the year perpetually wander up and down the
fields, having these words Iure-shel^-mashalom continually in their mouth, as a
kind of lamentable tune or mournful Ditty: by which words Authors credibly
suppose are meant Jerusalem and Damascus the two head cities of Judah and
Israel. He that diligen^ly reads the history of these X. Tribes in Scripture,
after their revolt from the house of David, and combination with I^roboam in
erecting Idolatry, may see that they were a Nation quickly overgrown with
Heathenism, cruelty, and barbarousnesse, wholly become abominable Pagans in
nature, manners, life, condition and conversations; as if they had had Numa
Pomphilius to their Father, and not Abraham the faithful: they only kept
Circumcision and the names of their Progenitors in remembrance, but had quite
forgotten the Stories of their religion and piety, thence it came to pass that
in this their Captivity, being transported and implanted among those Nations,
they quickly conjoined and counited with them in marriage and affinity (being
already long before coupled with them in Idolatry) and so ceased to be called
Israelites, but being now all one people, were called by the names of Armenians
and Medes. That these Israeltes likewise inhabited part of Tartaria, and from
thence spread into India and the East, and that they likewise possessed a part
of the Caucasian Mountains mingled with a people, which Herodotus calls (...)
(a word not unakin to Turks) is manifest by these undeniable Reasons.

1. Because the Colchians, Iberians, and a great part of Tartaria used
Circumcision in most ancient times, long before the building of Rome, which
they could not have received from any people else but from these Israelites,
who 30. years before the foundation of Rome were sent to inhabit among them.

2. The Crim-Tartars derive their Progeny from Sampson (hence so many of them
have been called Camson, an obscure Notion of Sampson) and in imitation of him
wear long hair; which could not have been, except they had had their Original
from those people from whom they had the memory of Sampson.

3. The names likewise of Moses, Aharon, Cham, Selim, or Solomon (a vicious
Pronunciation of Shlemo or Solomon) were proper names of men amongst the Turks
long before ever they broke into Asia. Now what times the Turks first broke
into Asia, Chronologers agree not among themselves: Some say they broke through
the Caspian Streits into Armenia major (now Turcomannia) An. 844. But I rather
suppose their first Irr^ption into Asia was 20. years after the death of
Alexander the great, about An. M. 3718. when the Parthians shook off the
Macedonian yoke, and began their Empire: for in those times we read in Mela,
Pliny and Herodotus, that a ba^barous and savage people from the North had
invaded and possessed Carmania, which could be no other then this Nation of the
Turks. Thus it is plainly manifest, that when these Israelites passed into
America, they left a great part of their Brethren behind them in Asia,
Tartaria, and India. Millions of them are in Persia, and their domineering at
this present day in Carmania, is rightly observed by Benjamin the Jew in Air,
by M^rcator, Ortelius, and other Geographers.

XIII.
Other excellent Proofs of the future conversion and Monarchy of the Jews,
Abraham was told in Genesis, His seed must thrice be like Dust, and then
afterward like Stars (Stars not for multitude, but for Piety and Glory) onc^ in
Egypt; secondly in Babel; thirdly throughout the world in the Roman Empire,
and afterward in the beginning of the FIFTH MONARCHY must enlighten the whole
world with the Glory of God. And the Jews themselves have an ancient tradition,
That they must have two Messiahs; From Abraham^
The first should come about what time the Government was taken from Judah; he
should lay the Foundation of their Redemption, afterward be betrayed,
crucified, and die by their own hands, and leave them in a doleful plight in
the jaws of destruction by the Gentiles: him they called Ben-Ioseph or
Ben-Ephraim, alluding to sorrowful Joseph, who endured so much hardship, being
sold by his brethren into Egypt, and estranged from his fathers house; and to
the unfortunate Attempt of the Tribe of Ephraim (soon after that barbarous
Edict of murdering male Infants came forth) to deliver themselves and the
Israelites by force of Arms from Pharaoh some 12 years before the Birth of
Moses; when Pharaoh levying an huge Army, made fearful slaughters of them,
forcing them to return to their old obedience, of which you may read in Psalm.
78.9. In this doleful misery they should remain so long till their second
Messiah came and delivered them from the hands of all their enemies, restored
them to their native Land of Judea, and reigned over them in equal fame and
prosperity with David their father. Him therefore they call Ben-David.

From Isaac.
Secondly, Isaac was mo^ ways then in his Immolation a figure of Christ. He had
two sons Esa^ and Jacob, of whom it is said, The Elder shall serve the younger^
Edom (which Jews interpret to be the Roman Christian Church, the Firstborn to
Christ from Isaac) must come to serve the younger, The Jewish converted Church
in the end of time, when it is once come up.

Thirdly, From Jacob.
Jacob a Type of Christ in his Descent to Egypt had two wives, Leah a Type of
the visible Church of carnal Jews using and leaning upon ceremonious shadows in
stead of the true sacrifice from Moses to the end of the second Temple: as
likewise of the Church of the Gentiles, which from the Ascension of Christ was
to continue in vicissitudinary fortune to it is end, full 1668 years. Thus Leah
was blear-eyed, but fruitful in her posterity, yet not so acceptable and
lovely in the eyes of her husband as Rachel (a Type of the glorious Jewish
Church in the end of Monarchies) who was to be many days barren, even from the
end of the second Temple, till Anno 1683, then brings forth Joseph, leaves her
fathers idolatrous house, within a few years after travels again, and brings
forth the staff of Jacobs old age with the loss of her own life.

Fourthly, From the New Testament, Act. 1.
That the Jews were to have a temporal Monarchy in the end of the Roman Empire,
is evident likewise out of the New Testament. In the first of Acts our Savior
Christ's Disciples showed how greatly the Jews expected for this time, when
their Messiah should deliver them from the yoke of the Romans, and restore them
to their temporal Kingdom in Judea; as likewise how near they thought the
season and period to be in our Saviors time, when they came to him, saying,
Lord, will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? Our Savior in his
Answer does not deny but that such a time was to be, when the Jews should be
restored to their temporal Kingdom in their own Land (which should exceed
David's and Solomon's in magnificence, and should extend over the whole world)
but only blames and checks his Apostles for enquiring of that which neither was
needful for them to know, neither should be in their days; as likewise for
being too inquisitive in the times and seasons when it should be, and was to
begin, Which (said he) the Father has put in his own power. And whosoever reads
Hos. 3.4, 5. the four last Chapters of Zechary, Mich. 7.15, 16, 17. Esa. 2.2,
3, 4. and Chapter 27. 12, 13. with Ier. 24.6, 7. with diverse other passages in
Scripture, may plainly see that neither Solomon's house nor the Maccabees ever
obtained their full propriety, nor were those Prophecies of their universal
Sovereignty ever fulfilled in the Old Testament.

Fifthly, From Moses Song, Deuteronomy. 32.
The Song of Moses in the 32. of Deuteronomy, is clear, that many and great
afflictions shall befall them in the latter days, even all the time of their
first Messiah, and the Roman Empire. No Jew in the world ever expounded
otherwise from the 36. verse to the 43. of that Song. And to this place they
refer their afflictions which they have, and shall suffer all the time of the
Roman Empire till their Restoration. There is but few of them now, but will
confess that their Messiah Ben-Ioseph, is come already, but their Ben-David is
yet hid in the depth of the Sea, and will arise from thence about the final
end of the destruction of the Gentiles.

Sixthly, From the history and life of Joseph
The life of Joseph in Genesis has in it more then History. At 17. years of
age he was sold by his Brethren, and stood before Pharaoh to expound him his
Dreams at thirty. So he lived above 12. years in misery and irons. And for
those 12. years God rewarded him with 80. years of government in and over all
the land of Egypt. His brethren came and bowed to him according to his Dream
of the sheaves; his father also was inferior and subjected to him as he was
Viceroy in the government of Egypt: and was nourished and maintained by him
according to his second D^eam of the Sun, Moon, and the eleven Stars crouching
and making obeisance. Though his Brethren pitied him not in the anguish of his
soul, yet he forgiveth and preserves them in Egypt, and at their deliverance
thence marches triumphantly before them to Canaan in his Coffin. But yet
nevertheless Jacob was to stay in Canaan, and Joseph was to be unknown to his
Brethren till Egypt be destroyed by Famine, and yield if self to Joseph. And
the bon^s of Joseph too must stay in Egypt till 600000 men besides women and
children be delivered them by the hands of Moses and Aaron. No departure from
Egypt, no passage through the Red Sea without the bones of Joseph. Edom in the
days of Moses, and Babylon in Daniels time suffered the severest punishments
God could inflict upon a people, and all for afflicting Eber. And here is a
mystery not so observed as observable in Scripture. As Egypt was broken before
the first Tabernacle was set up by Moses: as Edom was harrowed by David before
the first Temple was erected by Solomon: and thirdly, as Babel was Brought to
nothing by Cyrus before the second Temple was built by Zorubbabel and
I^hoshuah: so shall both Edom and Babel, Turk, Pope, and all Monarchies in the
Earth be brought to dust, before the third Temple be built by the converted
Jews in their native Land of Judea and Jerusalem. Jerusalem now inhabited by
Turks and heretical Christians shall at that time be purged from filth, and be
the only Receptacle of the children of God. But when that time shall be, I have
abundantly shown in the Sections before. And in that season shall Benjamin be
sent down from his good father in the power of his right arm, and Joseph (even
Ben-Ioseph) shall make himself known to his Brethren, who did hate him, shoot
at him, cast him into the pir, and delivered him to the Gentiles. Which
excellent Parallels of Joseph and Christ are fully explained in the Massorch,
Zoar, and in Rabbi-Asse, besides Ezechiel and S. John in the Revelations.
Notwithstanding in citing these Jewish Traditions, I would not be mistaken, as
if I maintained a second descention of our Savior Christ from Heaven, as the
Millenaries do; or that the Jews must have him come personally dowm from heaven
to destroy the whole world, and restore them to their Land of Judea, I mean no
such thing. God has other means to bring his purposes to pass then, by
sending his Son Christ to sojourn the second time upon earth. A second Moses,
yet a King, must work all this for them: yet not a Moses of their own blood,
but a Captain from the North; who shall work the works of God in
righteousness, and make peace like a mighty stream overflow the whole earth.
What uses Protestants ought to make of this blessing of the conversion of the
Iews^


XIV.
The consideration of these future great blessings of God toward this Nation
of the Jews, and in them to all the world in the advancement of the Gospel; as
likewise the laying to heart the grievous calamities which have so long tossed
the Kingdoms and Free-states of Europe, Description of the four Monarchies.
should move all men with repentance to prepare themselves to meet those great
and fearful mutations which God is bringing upon all the European Coasts of
the world. Historians have made their four Monarchies according to the rise or
fall of several particular Nations. 1. Assyrians. 2. Persians. 3. Grecians.
and 4. Romans: but this is a lame Division, and comes far short of that
transcendent Metamorphosis of humane affairs, which (by comparing of Histories,
observation of new Stars and Comets of late, with the consideration of the
manners and conditions of the sons of men) we may easily perceive must within
these few years be brought upon the world. The learned Mathematicians and
Philosophers (who have more thoroughly searched into the secrets of Astrology)
rightlier place their four Monarchies according to the four coasts of Heaven.
1. The Eastern Monarchy of the Assyrians. 2. The two Southern Monarchies of the
Persians and Grecians, bounded within the circumference of 3600 miles, or 11
degrees of latitude. 3. The Western Monarchy of the Romans. 4. and lastly, the
Northern Monarchy (but in right account the fifth) must be of the Northern
LION, which to the amazement of Christendom, shall arise from the Northern
Sea, and pitch his Tents in the ashes of the Eastern and Western Monarchies.
But now having made mention so often of this V. Monarchy in this Pamphlet,
Reasons of the V. Monarchy.
I think it meet to produce two or three Reasons of the truth and certainty of
it, deduced out of the holy Scriptures and humane Authority.

First, The Jews have a Tenet among them, That their Messiah must not Daniel,
which is the Roman: and so will not believe Christians professing him to be
come already: but say, this coming is deferred till the Roman Empire be totally
abolished; which because it is not nor must be yet, they will not believe he
has appeared. But the Jews are deceived in this, for Dan. 2.44. and 7.9, 22.
the Incarnation of our Savior Christ was promised to be in the very nick of
the constitution and establishment of the Roman Empire, and not after the ruin
of it (which was performed accordingly) else should there have been six
Monarchies before the end of the world. For the dispersion and rejection of the
Jews, the revelation of Antichrist with the Fullness of the Gentiles, was
prophesied to be accomplished in the fourth Monarchy, all which we see are
punctually fulfilled. None of which should yet have come to pass, if our
Savior Christ was not to be incarnate before the end of the Roman Empire.
Therefore as the rejection of the Jews with these other signs and things was to
be in the fourth Monarchy; so their conversion and remission into the Church,
and the glorious estate of the Gospel upon earth must be in another fifth
Monarchy, which is yet to come.

Secondly, So many Empires as are comprised in Nebuchadnezzars Image Dan. 2.)
must come to pass before the end of the World: But five Monarchies are
comprehended in that Image, Erg^. The major is manifest, The minor is thus
proved: Nebuchadnezzar himself was the Golden Head of this Image, as he was in
another respect the Feet of the old decrepit Assyrian Monarchy, which by his
Chaldean Empire and the ruin thereof (which was approaching) should totally be
annihilated. The Arms and Breasts of Silver are the Empire of the Medes and
Persians. The Belly of brass is the Empire of the Grecians by Alexander the
Great. Lastly, the Iron Legs and the Clay Toes depictured the Roman Empire,
with the present declining House of Austria, and the breathless Papacy.
Therefore the Stone cut without Hands which brake this Image in pieces, and
became a Mountain and filled the Earth, must be understood (as I touched
before) of a Fifth Monarchy yet to come, in which, by the Conversion of the
Jews and fullness of the Gentiles the Gospel shall shine in majesty over all
Kingdoms upon Earth.

Genesis 49.10. and Numb. 24.24. then was their conversion not to be till the
beginning of the fifth, and toward the end of the World, as is manifest by the
Apostle, Romans 11.25. But the first is true and therefore the latter also.

Ezekiel has so largely described in his twelve last Chapters) and the
glorious felicity of the Gospel of Christ proceeding from their conversion,
must either be in the fourth Monarchy, or not until the fifth. But in the
fourth Monarchy it cannot be, for among the Turks the Jews are kept in extreme
slavery, Idolatry and ignorance: and under the Papacy they are not permitted to
use the new Testament (by which only they must be saved) and besides they are
so enraged against Christianity, by the Papists Image Worship, that there is a
flat impossibility (much less any hopes) of their conversion, so long as
either the Turkish Empire or the Papacy stands in force. Ergo their conversion
and restoration cannot be, till both Turk and Pope eternally be destroyed, and
so the fourth Monarchy finally ended.

Prophecies of the LION of the North.
Thus having delivered the reasons of a fifth Monarchy, I come to describe the
LION of the North, as I find it in an ancient Prophecy of the true Merlin,
and by Grebner.

Of the true Merlin in K. Lucius days, An. Chapter 130.
First of Merlin. Many Scholars have often disputed what Merlin should be, who
he was, what time he lived in, whether those Prophecies be true, and his, which
go under his name, or not: how he came by them, and lastly, what reckoning is
to be made of them. Of every of which somewhat. It has fared with Merlin, as
with Tostatus in Spain, and many Learned in our times; who for the eminency of
their Learning, and approbation of their writings, became so famous, that
Pedlar Authors fathered bastar'd ware upon them in every corner for easier
vent. Merlins there were several of old; one a Welsh-man in the days of Edgar
the Monarch, of an austere living and Monkish conversation. He lived for the
most part in the Isle of Anglesey, where he had familiarity and acquaintance
with the Bards and Druides then not wholly extinct, who had incomparable skill
in Divination by Birds, and other kind of Magique. He was an excellent
Astrologer and a great Chemist: so that many think those Prophecies, that are
like his, to be deducted from no more then natural reason. All those
Prophecies which I have seen of his (some of which I have) I cannot see how
they smell any whit of a prophetique spirit; they speak him a great Scholar in
Astrology, but no Prophet. But there was living in K. Lucius days another
Merlin (called the first) a Scottish man, and he is the true Merlin, and if any
Prophecies could be found of his, great credit was to be given to them. He was
a great friend of K. Lucius himself, and his daily companion. Of his there is
but one Prophecy extant, which I found in that ancient Chronicle of Nennius of
Bangor of the Saxons (who yet lives in Manuscript) K. Lucius being as yet
unconverted from Paganism to Christianity, would needs join in confederacy
with Santoline a King of the Scutti (now Scots) to raise war against the
Roman Emperor; to which purpose he asked council of Merlin what he should do
in this matter; who earnestly dehorted him from his purpose; and in the end
prevailed. Merlin prophesied to him, That within less then a sesquidecumane
period of time, the Eagles head should be cloven in two; one part whereof Agar
should burn with fire, and Iaphet the other after the grand revolution of
days. Mark (O King) says he, and consider, Samothea shall be quickly
overflown with a vagabond Army of an unknown Original, spued out of a land
toward the East, which a flood from the North shall quickly possess. I know
thy thoughts and the intents of thy heart; thou seek Friendship from a
people, whose weakness shall be thy glory, and their greatness thy ruin. A
squadron of Fishers are risen up from the East, which shall ascend unarmed upon
the world without spear and shield, to whom all Nations shall in time obey.
They shall destroy the Temples of thy Gods (O Lucius) and convert them to the
service of their eternal King, who only can rescue from the grave, and deliver
from the snares of death. Behold I see a great Sun arise i^sensibly upon us
Brittanes! But (woe is me!) what black seas of darkness, and rivers of blood
pursu^ after it? Have thou not heard of the valiant Angles, of barbarous
Neustria, of yonder terrible Picts thy perfidious enemies? These shall overflow
thy Land, and possess the Cities thereof, till the old age of Empires, and
Government shall flow upon the world. Illis autem temporibus revolutis, Cauda
Virginis Leonem intrabit, and Sagittarii dorsum Scorpius ascendet. Borcalia
Regna a Messoribus obterentur, Australes Principatus in statum pulvereum
d^^ine^t, and insulanarum Monarchiarum potestates sine fraeno aut milite
ephippiabuntur; bella atrocia ventis dissipabuntur, and pessum ibunt judiciali
grandine, quae per baculum ortum habuerunt, per spuri^s juventutem. Sol ipse
tympanizabit miniato clamyde indutus, and Luna cineritiis cothur^is ad nundinas
tolutabit. Rides, O Rex? At quibus haec supervenient, luctu and maerore
contabescent. Haec omnia vix plene peragentur, qu^m Princeps regali origin
coronatus ex Borealibus plagis proveniet, suis inexpectatus, alienigenis
desideratus; qui ^o quod L^one feroci^nte in^ignietur, Leo nuncupabitur, Non
conquiescet, donec Synodo per eum convocat^ minisque dissoluta, victricia arma
in hosts transferat, and lamentabili successu vicinorum Principum ditiones
pessundet. Alexandrum Magnum virtute, Cyrum felicitate superabit: freta
transnavigabit; a multis regibus Imperator sal^tabitur; and Urbem quandam
vetustam solo aequabit. Interea ex Orient Princeps bellipotens illum praelio
lacesse^, contra quem Leo cum omnibus copiis procedet, and ^is Euphratem
positis castris illum expectabit. Si Princeps flumen transibit, Leo
superabitur; at ipse exercitu fluvium transducto hostem cruento conflictu
superabit, and universum Orientem in potestatem rediget. Dum haec agentur,
complures Reguli ex India in Suriam cum ingentibus irrumpent excercitibus, and
circa vallem Iehosaphat praeliabundi Leonem opperibunt, ubi ab ipso ad
internecionem omnes delebuntur. Nec multo post, Leo ipse fatis concedet,
postquam regnum Transfugarum mirand^ pietate in perpetuum fundavit. Those times
being past, the tail of the Virgin shall enter the Lion, and Scorpio shall
ascend the back of Sagittary: The Northern Kingdoms shall be wasted by Reapers,
the Southern Principalities shall end in dust, and the powers of the
Iland-Monarchies without either bridle or soldier shall be harnessed. Cruel
wars shall be scattered by the winds, and quelled by a revengefull hail,
whose beginning were by a staff, their growth and continuance by bastards. The
Sun it self shall play on the timbrell clad with a vermilion coat, and the Moon
with dunne buskins shall amble to the fair. Laugh'st thou, O King? But those on
whom these things shall come, for grief and sorrow shall pine away. All these
things shall scarce be accomplished, when a Prince of royal stock shall come
forth crowned from the Northern parts, as to his own people unexpected, but
desired by foreigners, who because he shall bear a Rampant Lion, shall
therefore be called a Lion. He shall not rest, till having called a Synod and
after dissolved it by threats, he shall advance his conquering arms against his
enemies, and by woeful success shall harrase the territories of neighbor
Princes. He shall exceed Alexander the Great in virtue, and Cyrus in success.
He shall pass the seas and be saluted Emperor by many Kings: A certain
ancient City shall he lay even with the ground. In the mean while a powerful
Prince out of the East shall provoke him to battle, against whom the Lion shall
march with all his forces, and pitching his Camp on this side Euphrates, shall
expect him. If the Prince shall come over the river, the Lion shall be
overcome: but he shall pass his army over the river, and give his Enemy a
bloody defeat, and be master of all the East. While these things are in action,
diverse petty Kings from India shall break into Syria with mighty armies, and
provided for battle shall wait for the Lion about the valley of Iehoshaphat,
where they shall by him be all wholly cut off. Not long after shall the Lion
himself decease, after that with eminent piety he shall have established the
Kingdom of fugitives. This is all that is extant of this former Merlin, whose
glorious works and inestimable Prophecies are utterly lost to the great
detriment of learning.

Of Greb^er^
Not much unlike this, is that of Greb^er, Ban. 73. Europae labes and
imbecillitas singulorum ejusdem Regnorum sedem mirabiliter struet QVINTAE
MONARCHIAE, quae sub tempus exitii Imperii Romani ad terrorem totius mundi ex
ruinis Germaniae refulgebit. Haec triennii spatio caetera Europae regna aut vi
perdomitabit, aut belli metu ad soci^tatem perpellet: quo universalem Ligam and
Unionem omnium Protestantium e^^ici^t sub specie bellum Poloniae inferendi, re
autem vera Imperium Austriacum Italiamque invadendi. Nec eum spes fefellerit.
Nam circa hoc tempus SECTA quaedam manachorum adeo abominabilis, obscaena, and
seditiosa in Papat^s si^^ orictur; ut compellet tam Protetestantes quam Italiae
Principes extremum Romae exitium moliri.

The corruption of Europe, and the weakness of her several Kingdoms shall
strangely make way for the FIFTH MONARCHY, which about the time of the fall of
the Roman Empire to the terror of the whole world shall appear out of the
ruins of Germany. She within three years shall either subdue by force the rest
of the Kingdoms of Asia, or for fear of war shall bring them to a league,
whereby she shall conclude an universal confederacy, under color of making
war against Polonia, but in deed to invade the Austrian Empire and Italy.
Neither shall her hope fail her: For about this time a certain SECT of Monks
shall arise in the bosom of the Papacy, so abominable, obscene and seditious;
that it shall urge both the Protestants and Princes of Italy to endeavor the
utter subversion of Rome.

Thus having showed the Seat and Certainty of this V. Monarchy; I come to
declare what People or Kingdom in Europe shall obtain and rule it, Who shall be
King of this V Mona^chy.
and whose it shall soly be. Of the European Christians two several Kingdoms
long since, and of late have mainly striven for the FIFTH MONARCHY.

First, Not the Spaniard.
The Kingdom of Spain has always for a matter of 170 years ago by
incorporating it self with the House of Austria, and the most potent Families
of Germany and Italy by strange Marriages and odd medlies labored extremely
to bring all Europe under her Wings, that so she might become the glorious Sun
of the West. On the other side, the Swede of late by keeping an high hand over
the King of Poland, and fixing his glorious Trophies of Conquest in all corners
of Germany; has brought the Emperor to so low an ebb, and has of late become
so terrible to the Pope and Spaniard: and lastly can in an instant enleague
himself with all Protestant Kingdoms and States, either for fear or favor upon
any necessary occasion, that many account him the man that both goes the
directest way, and whom heaven has ordained to sway the Imperial Scepter
within the limits of the Church. But neither of these are they who are ordained
to the Empire of the fifth Monarchy. Not the Spaniard, because he is for his
inhumane cruelty so generally hated of Christians, all men avoiding him and
flying from him, as the Serpent from the Ash: His Indian Plantations both
thrive nor, and likewise for their barbarousnesse are so detested of the
savages worse than vipers, and upon opportunities are accordingly massacred.
Yea, those places^ of Italy which are under his Protection, as Florence, Genoa,
Millain and other Cities afford him as much affection, as the Spider does the
Serpent. Thus is He the universal Odium of all the world, thrives in no place,
and like oil over-swiming all other liquids, and can hardly incorporate with
any; so seldom is he conjoined but in natural Antipathy with all Nations. Add
hereunto the austerity and unpleasantnesse of his Government, choosing rather to
domineer over subdued Countries by rapine and cruelty, than to govern them by
Love and Piety. And lastly, his Governors in every Province aim at their own
ends, pilling and squeezing the Subjects, so that his Name and Government is
every where abominated, no Province continuing loyal any longer then they can
get arms and stoutly rebel. The injustice of which has caused Portugal to be
rent from him, which while the world stands shall never be his again. And
moreover the Oracle tells him, that Naples, Navar, his reconciled Provinces in
Belgia, with his Indian Plantations (the best Jewels he has) shall be plucked
within 30 years to come from his ambitious Crown, never to be recovered again.

Nor the Swede.
Secondly, The Swede cannot be Paramount in this Monarchy, because of the
various Sects and Schisms he is pestered with, so inveterate and so
predominant, that no Reformation can purge him of them. The male Line of that
Royal Pedigree is extinct, and only a weak young Princess surviving; the whole
Kingdom shared and governed by factious Nobles and covetous Generals, and while
every one sucks from the veins of the Body Politic to cram his own, it will
be soon evacuated, both of life and nourishment. Besides, it has been since
prophesied to Sweden, that he shall not be so much as a tributary Kingdom to
this great Sovereignty, but shall be the first, that shall be made a slave to
that famous Northern Lion, who shall wear the Crown of that transcendent
Monarchy. As for France, Denmark, England, and the free Cantons of Germany,
they make account for the present they d^ valiantly if they can well husband
what is got already. And for England in particular, if it chance that she make
war upon any neighbor Enemy, and enlarge their Dominions by Conquest, it is
more to secure her self, and prevent the Invasion of the great Eagle, and her
chief feathers, then any gre^dinesse of extending her Bounders by the Conquest
and ruin of others. If she keep her ancient soil and possessions in those
times, it is as much as heaven has ordained her, Object.
and more she shall not have. Who then must be Lord of this Monarchy? Or what
people shall be parts and members thereof? Even a Nation which at this day is
hid invisibly within the bowels of Europe, Answ.
which seeing are not seen, and living are not known: Which shall by a
miraculous Resurrection (like the Jews from India and Tartaria) be raised to
destroy all Idolatry and abomination out of every corner of the North, with the
weapons of an holy warfare tending to the glory of God, and the Honor of their
King. His Sword shall be Religion, and his Ensigns Righteousness and Piety.
All the godly in every Kingdom and State in Europe, the converted Jews
conjoined and united with them in spirit and habitation, shall (as I said
before) root out all names of Iniquity, and be this Monarchy, which shall only
consist of, and subsist by Holiness, and an unquenchable desire of propagating
the Glory and Gospel of God: according to that of Daniel, Chap. 7. ver. 27. And
the Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
Heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High, Of the
Effects of that fatal Star, which appeared in the head of Cassiopea, An. ^^72.
whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and
obey him. The first preparation to the Birth of which, was that ominous and
fatal Star which appeared in the head of Cassiopea, An. 1572, the effects of
which shall begin to operate upon Europe, and the Eastern Coasts of America,
An. 1699, in bringing a Mystery to light which all the sons of Adam are not
able to effect. Of this fat^l and ominous Star (or Comet, choose you whether)
I find several Tractates written.

One Nuntius Propheticus in Print: Magell de quinta Monarchia, and Openheims
Ephemeris Caelica, both Manuscripts, both excellently discoursing of the
Effects thereof: How that, Quo tempore accidet septima and ultima-maxima
superiorum Planetarum Conjunctio, princeps erit Monarchia prima, quae caput ex
ruinis quarti Imperii erexerit. Currus Lunae Zodiacum perturbabit, Cauda
Draconis coget Pl^iades in fletum prorumpere, dorsum Delphini ascendet, and
flores Virgineos obfuscabit: continuae turbae, seditiones, bella civilia,
strages, panolethriae luctuosissimae omnia illa regna and illustres Familias
persequentur, ex quibus ista Monarchia orta est, aut ei ullo modo obviabunt.
Burgundiae domus fi^em accipiet, Sile^iae libertas Gallico Neroni prostituetur.
Belgarum Ordines potentiae and Aristocratiae suae finem videbunt, etc. Openheim
fol. 86.

But Magel is most plain above all three, fol. 67. col. 8. Fateor majorum
Luminarium deliquia sine insigni hominum pernicie pecorumque strage nunquam
extitisse: Regnorum mutationes etiam, populorum clades, regum fun^ra, bella and
incendia in ipsorum Deliquiorum Articulis, aut paulo post evidenter apparuisse.
Fateor etiam superiorum erronum coitum malorum ut plurimum Iliade comitari:
atque hanc stellam ( quae hoc An. 1572 in vertice Cassiopeae illuxit) supra
omnem elementarem regionem collocatam novi Imperij Revolutionem Dominiumque
significasse. Quae tamen effecta haec aetas nostra minime perspiciet:
reservanda nihilominus in gentem quandam etiamnum invi^ibilem, cujus
magnitudinis radij in universum caeli terraeque ambitum extende^tur.

At what time the 7th, the last and greatest Conjunction of the chief Planets
shall happen, the first Monarchy shall reign, which shall lift up her head out
of the ruins of the IV Empire. The Chariot of the Moon shall disturb the
Zodiac. The Tail of the Dragon shall force the Pleiades to break out into
weeping, shall ascend the back of the Dolphin, and shall darken the luster of
the Virgin: Daily troubles, seditions, civil wars, slaughters, and most
lamentable universal Destructions shall vex all those Kingdoms and eminent
Families, from whence that Monarchy sprang, or which shall any way cross it.
The house of Burgundy shall be at an End: the Liberty of Silesia shall be
prostituted to a French Nero. The Estates of Belgia shall see an end of their
Power and Aristocracy.

I confess Eclipses of the great Luminaries never happened without the notable
Destruction of men and slaughter of Cattle: the Changes also of Kingdoms, the
Deaths of People, Funerals of Kings, Wars and fires have broke forth either in
the very time of their Eclipses, or within a little after. I confess also the
Conjunction of the higher wandering Stars is for the most part attended with
an Iliad of mischiefs: and that this Star (which this year 1572 appeared on the
top of Ca^^iopaea) being placed above the whole Elementary Region, did signify
the Revolution and Dominion of a new Empire. Which effects shall not yet be
seen by this our age; yet are they reserved for a certain Nation, as yet
invisible, the beams of whose greatness shall be extended through the whole
verge of Heaven and Earth.

The Description of the flourishing Monarchy of the Gospel in America and India
about Anno 1710, and A. 1763.
In that same year shall the kingdom^ of salvation be preached by the Ministry
of the Saints the most High, to those immense and unknown American Coasts, to
whom as yet the Name of Christ was never yet revealed. And that people^ who
from the Creation till that time were the Empire of Satan, shall be called the
specious and spacious Church of God. The gates of which shall be open
continually, neither day nor night shall they be shut, that men may bring unto
them the riches of the Gentiles, and the treasures of the Kings of the Earth.
All Nations and Kingdoms, that will not serve her, shall perish and be
destroyed for ever. Within whose land shall be heard no violence nor
destruction, nor desolation within her Borders, but Salvation shall be her
walls, and praise her gates. Her Government shall be peace, and her Exaactors
Righteousness. Her Sun shall never go down, nor her Moon ever be hid, for the
Lord shall be her everlasting light, and the days of her sorrow shall be
ended. The people within her shall be all righteous; for ever shall they
possess their proper inheritances, for God shall make them an everlasting
Glory, and a Joy from Generation to Generation. Therefore ought no man to be
sorrowful for the Calamities of Europe, or the afflictions of the times; nor
grieved with the mutations and Downfals of Kingdoms and Empires, neither should
he be afraid because Wars and miseries rage in all Coasts of the world. For
this is the eternal Law of Creatures (which the Creator imposed upon them at
first) that the Birth of one thing should be the Death of another, and that the
order of Nature should be preserved by the vicissitudinary course of alternate
Mutability. And why should we be offended at wars amongst men, when there are
daily and continual Conflicts between the Elements themselves? Cities,
Republiques, Empires and Families are mortal as men, have their states of
Birth, Infamy, Growth and Old Age as well as they. Glory, Majesty, Arts and
Sovereignty began in Asia by the Assyrians; from them departed to the Medes and
Persians; and from them (before they had well tasted the sweetness of them)
translated to the Grecians, and next to the Romans: The Glory of the Roman
Empire was eclipsed and humbled by the barbarous Inundations of Goths, Huns,
Vandals, and other savage Nations, who being themselves once civilized and
mollified by the Effeminacies of Italy and the West, were in 560 years space
overthrown by the Potency of Charlemain and the Germans. Germany has now fully
possessed the Imperial dignity 790 years; and before fifty years more be past,
shall be made a scorned Servitor of the King of the North, whose Power and
Religion shall transcend the utmost Confines of East and West. In the beginning
of which Empire, Venice shall not brag of being inaccessible by the
circumfluent Ocean, and London, Paris, Antwerp and Prague, the IV Ladies of
Europe shall be humbled to sit in the dust of eternal Destruction. The
consideration of this must teach men humility in prosperity, carfulness to
know God and keep his Commandments, seeing every Plant which he has not
planted shall be plucked up, and nothing can be permanent but by his favor and
protection.

XV.
Thou therefore the eternal and incomprehensible Father of lights, A Praye^ to
God to u^ite his Church, end the afflictions of it, and to hasten the
conversion of the Jews, with the monarchy of the Gospel.
the indivisible God of peace and unity, look down at length upon the afflicted
estate of thy Gospel and mournful face of thy Church, clouded with sects and
schisms, rent by civil combustions, dying by the wounds which her sons have
given, and wallowing in that gore which was shed by the hands of her own
children. Though our sins have deserved that we should for ever be cast out of
the sight of thy countenance, yet respect thou the blood of thy Son, crying
better things then that of Abel, and be once at one again with thy inheritance^
Abraham knows us not, Israel is ignorant of us, but thou art our Father, and in
thee shall be all our a^fiance, with whom even the worst of men have found
mercy. Extend the light of thy loving-kindenes to the Tribes of Jacob, and
return to the many thousands of Israel, for the time to build up Zion is come,
and the days of restoring Jerusalem cannot be prolonged. For why? Thy servants
think upon her stones, and favor the very dust thereof. But remember Edom, O
Lord, as thou remembredst Babel, which have cried so often, Down with it, down
with it to the very earth. Pour thy-vengeance down upon the Beast of Rome, and
the red Dragon of Constantinople, who never knew thy name, that so the
sorrowful sighings of the Prisoners may come before thee^ and thy servants be
preserved that are appointed to die. Let thy work be upon the MAN of thy right
hand, and upon the Son of man whom thou have made so strong for thy self, that
Pharaoh, Elam, Mesheck, with the sons of Tubal may fall in the midst of them
that are slain by the sword, and may descend into the midst of hell with all
that help them, even the whole multitude of the Uncircumcised, whose Lot is to
go into the nether parts of the Earth. There shall they have their beds with
the Uncircumcised near those Valiants, which are gone down to the grave, with
their weapons of war, and have laid their swords under their heads, because
they were the fear of the mighty in the Land of the Living. But what shall be
said to the Captain of the Nations, or to the Angel destroying Edom and
Babylon? Even this, That the Lord has founded Zion, and the poor of his people
shall trust in it. He will leave an afflicted people, and they shall trust in
the name of the Lord: He shall give them a pure Law, that they may pray to him
with one consent. He shall open the doors of darkness, the gates of obscurity
shall he break down, that the world may be filled with the knowledge of the
Lord as the waters cover the Sea. O thou sower of discord, and Captain of
iniquity, how long will thou delight to murder, spoil and pursue the
distressed? Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the end? Command
the people to return every man from pursuing his brother: for lo, a Nation is
risen against you, a mighty Nation and terrible from the East, whose horses ace
fire and his Chariots flames of fire to devour: his men are as swift as the
Eagle, who will have no compassion on the fruit of the womb, nor shall their
eye pity: They shall encompasse ^hy Tents with an intent to lay all waste
before them, but nevertheless be con^ident and bold in the Lord of Hosts: for
fire shall come down from Heaven and return their wickedness upon their heads,
and their doings upon their own pates. O thou worship of Israel! how wonderful
art thou in thy doings toward the children of men^ Bringing light out of
darkness, strength out of weakness, and making Justice the mean to the
manifestation of thy goodness and glory! As for me, I will expect him who is
as well the King of Salem, Peace, as Melchised^ck, the King of Justice, all my
days: and will heartily pray for his coming, who shall bring every work into
judgment, and every thing to a legal trial, whether it be good or evil. He
is the Lamb upon the white Throne, before whose face Heaven and Earth shall fly
away, and the Sea be no more found: Death and Hell shall give up the dead that
are in them, and every Name that is not written in the Book of Life, shall be
cast into the Lake of fire. For which time all the Creation groaneth, crying
out to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, and restored to the
glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly,
that sin may be destroyed for ever, and righteousness eternally established in
stead thereof, Amen.

FINIS.
For^itan hunc aliquis verbosum dicere librum
Non dubitet: forsan multo praestantior alter
Pauca reperta pu^et, quum plura invenerit ipse:
Des^s and impatiens nimis haec obscura probabit:
Pro capt^^ Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli.
Sed me juditij non p^enitet: haec been vobis
Commis^, quibus est amor and sapientia juxta,
Et Labor in studijs ijsdem celebratus inhaeret:
Vos sequar: in vestro satis est examine cautum.

