AN INSTANCE OF THE REPENTANCE OF A LATE PASSIVE-OBEDIENCE-PARSON, Who was
lately a Justice of Peace in the County of Hereford.
I Hugh Pugh of Dorson in the County of Hereford, Clerk, being sensible of my
base and uncharitable Actings toward S -- L -- of Fanhope in the said County
of Hereford, Esquire one of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said
County; and being disturbed in my Soul for the Forgery I caused to be made of
High Treason against the said S -- L --; and likewise for those Actions of
Defamation I sent to the Lord Commissioner Keck, and other Nobles; that is to
say, unto the Duke of Ormond, and the Earl of Monmouth:

Do acknowledge, That I was guilty of, and advised and directed to the Earl of
Monmouth, in these words following, viz. These for the Right Honorable the
Earl of Monmouth, to be communicated to the King and Queens most Excellent
Majesty's, with all possible speed, for the Discovery of High Treason against
Them.

Hereford ff. ' John Scudamore of Ken-Church in the said County, Esquire one of
Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County, and Thomas Delahay
of Hayury in the said County, Esquire one of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace
for the said County, make Oath, That S -- L --, Esquire one of Their Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the said County, did on Monday last, being the
twenty-ninth day of this instant July, Annoque Dom. 1689. in the evening, in
their hearing, say, That he the said S -- L -- abhorred King William and Queen
Mary with a perfect hatred, and heartily wished their utter Destruction, and
that he might be so happy as to be instrumental therein; and that he had made a
very great preparation in order thereunto, and did not doubt of perfect success
in the same

And these Deponents further make Oath, That they really believe the Contents
hereof to be very true, and that they vehemently suspect the Murder of their
Persons, and Burning of their Houses, if they be known to detect the premised
Designs, before the said S -- L -- be Personally secured.

Jurat tricessimo die Julii Anno Regni Gulielmi and Mariae Regis and Reginae,
Angliae etc. primo Annoque Dom. 1689. Coram me, Ja. Woodhouse.
J. Scudamore, Tho. Delahay.


'All which was of my Malicious Contrivance, and that I caused to be forged the
Hands of John Scudamore, Esquire and Tho. Delahay, Esquire two of Their Majesty's
Justices for the said County; and likewise, the Hand of James Woodhouse, Esquire
before whom the said forged Affidavit is supposed to be taken. And I do
heartily repent me of the same, and humbly beg Pardon of Almighty God, and the
said S -- L --, for attempting to take away his Life, and good Fame, by such my
Villainous Forgery; and likewise, I humbly beg Pardon of the said John
Scudamore, Th. Delahay, and Ja. Woodhouse, for presuming to forge their Hands,
to Countenance such a dishonest Attempt. And I confess my self guilty of
Writing, Inditeing, and Sending that Letter to the Lord Commissioner Keck in
these Words, viz. To the Right Honorable my Lord Commissioner Keck, of the
High Court of Chancery, at his House in Chancery Lane, London. Honorable Sir,
Mr. S -- L --, a Justice of Peace for Herefordshire, is a great Countenancer of
Rogues, to busy insolent, and abusive to Persons of Quality, a great Scandal to
the Commission, and Dishonor to God, and Their Majesty's; much alienating the
Hearts of true Protestants and Loyal Subjects. And the Consequence may prove
dreadful, if he be not speedily Superceded; and that your Honor may so do, is
the humble Petition of your Honor's most humble Servant,

H. Pughe.

'All which said Offenses, I humbly beg Pardon for, and do Confess and
Acknowledge, that I had no Reason or Pretense so to do; but on the contrary, I
am very well assured, That the said S -- L -- never deserved any such Character
from me, or any other Person whatsoever; And that I had no Inducement, but the
Instigation of the Devil, to cause me to Defame the said S -- L --; and I
humbly make this Submission and Recantation, and do attest all the Contents
hereof to be unfeigned and true; and out of the Sense of my Errors humbly
entreat the said S -- L -- to accept hereof. In witness whereof, I put my hand
and Seal hereunto, the 21st of January, Annoque Dom. 1689/90.

Signed, Sealed, Confessed, and Subscribed in the presence of J. Scudamore,
Robert Minors, John Hereford, Tho. Morgan. H. Pughe.


I do attest this to be a true Copy of Mr. Pughe's Submission, and shall be
ready to prove the same when required.

Witness my Hand, this 13th day of February, 1689/90. S -- L --.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1690.


