AN INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY Of the Principal Kingdoms and States OF EUROPE.

By SAMUEL PUFFENDORF, Counselor of State to the present King of Sweden.

Made English from the Original.

LONDON, Printed for M. Gilliflower at the Spread-Eagle in Westminster Hall,
and T. Newborough at the Golden Ball in St. Paul' s Churchyard. MDCXCV.

To His EXCELLENCY, CHARLES Duke of Shrewsbury: His Majesty's Principal
Secretary of State; Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, etc. And one
of the Lords Justices of England.
SIR,
I Should scarce have had the boldness to prefix your great Name to this Book:
had I not been fully persuaded that the extraordinary worth of my Author would
strongly plead for me to your Excellencies Generosity. For, since my intention
was, that the Sieur Puffendorf's Introduction to the History of Europe should
appear in no less Luster in this Kingdom, than it has heretofore done in most
parts of Europe; I could not, without injuring a Person so famous for his
Learning, and the rank he bears in one of the Northern Kingdoms, submit his
Treatise to the Protection of any other Person, than your Excellency, whose
judging Power is so universally acknowledged: If it endures this Test, it must
pass current in this Nation. The high Station in which you are now placed by
the choice of the wisest and bravest of Kings, having put your Merits above the
Praises of a private Person; I shall rather admire than pretend to enumerate
them, wishing, that as your Actions have hitherto been most effectual in
preserving your Country's Liberty, so your Counsels may for the future prove as
fatal to the French, as the Swords of your glorious Ancestor's in former Ages.
Thus recommending my self to your Excellencies Protection, I beg leave to
subscribe my self,

Your Excellencies, Most devoted Servant, J. C. M. D.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THAT History is the most pleasant and useful Study for Persons of Quality,
and more particularly for those who design for Employments in the State, is
well known to all Men of Learning. It is therefore requisite, that young
Gentlemen should be exhorted early to apply themselves to this Study, not only
because their Memory is vigorous, and more capable to retain what they then
learn, but also because it may be concluded, that he who has no Relish for
History is very unlikely to make any Advantage of Learning or Books. It is a
common Custom as well in Public as Private Schools, to read to their Scholars
some ancient Historians; and there are a great many who employ several Years in
reading of Cornelius Nepos, Curtius, Justin and Livy, but never as much as take
into their Consideration the History of later Times. It Is true, and it cannot
be denied, but that we ought to begin with the ancient Historians, they being
equally useful and pleasant; but that the History of later Times is so much
neglected is a great Mistake and want of Understanding in those to whom the
Education of Youth is committed; for I lay down this as a Principle, That we
are to study those Things in our Youth, which may prove useful to us
hereafter, when we come to riper Years, and apply our selves to Business. Now I
cannot for my life apprehend, what great Benefit we can expect to receive from
Cornelius Nepos, Curtius, and the first Decad of Livy, as to our Modern
Affairs, though we had learned them by Heart, and had, besides this, made a
perfect Index of all the Phrases and Sentences that are to be found in them: Or
if we were so well versed in them, as to be able to give a most exact account,
how many Cows and Sheep the Romans led in Triumph when they had conquered the
Aequi, the Volsci, and the Hernici. But what a considerable Advantage it is to
understand the Modern History as well of our Native Country, as also its
neighboring Nations, is sufficiently known to such as are employed in States
Affairs. But it is not so easy a matter to acquire this Knowledge, partly
because those Histories are comprehended in large and various Volumes; partly
because they are generally published in the native Language of each Country; so
that he who intends to apply himself to this Study must be well versed in
Foreign Languages. To remove in some measure this Difficulty, I did some Years
ago, for the Benefit of some young Gentlemen in Swedeland, compile a
Compendium, in which was comprehended the History of such States as seemed to
have any Reference unto this Kingdom, with an Intention only to give them the
first taste of those Histories fitted chiefly for their Improvement. But after
this rough Draught had fallen into other Hands, I had some reason to fear, lest
some covetous Bookseller or another might publish it imperfect, as I have known
it has happened to others, whose Discourses scarc^ premeditated, have been
published against their Will and Knowledge. Wherefore I saw my self obliged,
notwithstanding I had but little Leisure, to revise the said Work* and after I
had rendered it somewhat more perfect, rather to publish it, such as it is,
than to suffer that another should rob me of it. I hope therefore, that the
Discreet Reader will look favorably upon this Work, not as a Piece designed
for Men of great Learning, but adapted to the Apprehensions and Capacities of
young Men, whom I was willing to show the Way, and, as it were, to give them a
taste, whereby they might be encouraged to make a further search into this
Study. I must here also advertise the Reader, That because I have taken the
History of each Kingdom from its own Historians, a great Difference is to be
found in those several Relations, which concern the Transactions of some
Nations that were at Enmity, it being a common Observation, That their
Historians have magnified those Factions which have proved Favorable to their
Native Country, as they have lessened those that proved Unfortunate. To
reconcile and decide these Differences was not my Business, but to give a
clearer insight into its History. I have added also such Observations as are
generally made concerning the good and bad Qualifications of each Nation,
nevertheless, without any Intention either to Flatter or Undervalue any; as
also what concerns the Nature, Strength and Weakness of each Country. and its
form of Government: All which I thought might be an Inducement to young
Gentlemen when they Travel or Converse with Men of greater Experience in the
Affairs of the World, to be more inquisitive into those Matters. What I have
related concerning the Interest of each State, is to be considered as relating
chiefly to that Time when I composed this Work And, though I must confess, that
this is a Matter more suitable to the Capacity of Men of Understanding than
young People, yet I could not pass it by in Silence, since this is to be
esteemed the Principle, from whence must be concluded, whether State Affairs
are either well or ill managed. I must also mention one thing more, which may
serve as an Instruction to young Men, Viz. That this Interest may be divided
into an Imaginary and Real Interest. By the first I understand, when a Prince
judges the Welfare of his State to consist in such things as cannot be
performed without disquieting and being injurious to a great many other States,
and which these are obliged to oppose with all their Power: As for Example, The
Monarchy of Europe, or the universal Monopoly, this being the Fuel with which
the whole World may be put into a Flame. Number si vos omnibus imperare vultis,
sequitur ut omnes servitutem accipiant? If you would be the only Masters of the
World, does it thence follow, that all others should lay their Necks under your
Yoke? The Real Interest may be subdivided into a Perpetual and Temporary. The
former depends chiefly on the Situation and Constitution of the Country, and
the natural Inclinations of the People; the latter, on the Condition, Strength
and Weakness of the neighboring Nations; for as those vary, the Interest must
also vary. Whence it often happens, that whereas we are, for our own Security,
sometimes obliged to assist a neighboring Nation, which is likely to be
oppressed by a more potent Enemy; we at another time are forced to oppose the
Designs of those we before assisted; when we find they have recovered
themselves to that degree, as that they may prove Formidable and Troublesome to
us. But seeing this Interest is so manifest to those who are versed in
State Affairs, that they cannot be ignorant of it; one might ask, How it often
times happens, that great Errors are committed in this kind against the
Interest of the State. To this may be answered, That those who have the Supreme
Administration of Affairs, are oftentimes not sufficiently instructed
concerning the Interest both of their own State, as also that of their
Neighbors; and yet being fond of their own Sentiments, will not follow the
Advice of understanding and faithful Ministers. Sometimes they are misguided
by their Passions, or by Time-serving Ministers and Favorites. But where the
Administration of the Government is committed to the Care of Ministers of
State, it may happen, that these are not capable of discerning it, or else are
led away by a private. Interest, which is opposite to that of the State; or
else, being divided into Factions, they are more concerned to ruin their
Rivals, than to follow the Dictates of Reason. Therefore some of the most
exquisite parts of Modern History consists in this, that one knows the Person
who is the Sovereign, or the Ministers, which rule a State, their Capacity,
Inclinations, Caprices, Private Interests, manner of proceeding, and the like:
Since unpon this depends, in a great measure, the good and ill management of a
State. For it frequently happens, That a State, which in it self considered, is
but weak, is made to become very considerable by the good Conduct and Valor of
its Governors; whereas a powerful State, by the i^l management of those that
sit at the Helm, oftentimes suffers considerably. But as the Knowledge of these
Matters appertains properly to those who are employed in the management of
Foreign Affairs, so it is mutable, considering how often the Scene is changed
at Court. Wherefore it is better learned from Experience and the Conversation
of Men well versed in these Matters, than from any Books whatsoever. And this
is what I thought my self obliged to touch upon in a few Words in this Preface.

THE TABLE.
A.
ANcient State of Mankind p. 1 The Assyrian Empire 3 Alexander the Great 9
America discovered 44 Peace made at Aix la Chapelle 244 An Association of the
Nobility in the Netherlands 259 The Duke de Alva is sent into the Netherlands
261 He causes the Earls of Egmont and Hoorn to be beheaded 261 Don John de
Austria made Governor of the Netherlands 264 The Duke of Alenson constituted
Sovereign over the Netherlands 266 Archduke Albert Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands 269 Avignon, why once the seat of the Popes 410 The House of
Austria most zealous for Popery 424 Albert Duke of Meclenburgh King of Sweden
475
B.
THE Duke of Braganza proclaimed King of Portugal under the Name of John IV.
65, 92 Brasil first discovered in America 90 (...) near Crecy betwixt the
English and French 191, 118 Battle near Poictiers betwixt the English and
French p. 192, 119 The Battle of St. Quintin betwixt the English and French 140
The Battle of Agincourt 198 Brittainy united with France 204 Battle of Pavia
betwixt Charles V. Emperor of Germany, and Francis I. King of France 212
Marshall de Biron's Conspiracy against Henry IV. King of France 233 Briel
taken by the banished Netherlanders 262 Battle near Nieuport betwixt the
Spaniards and Dutch 270 The Bohemian Tumults under the Emperor Ferdinand I.
301 The Crown of Bohemia offered to Frederic Elector Palatine 301 Boteslaus
Chrobry the first King of Poland 335 The Battle fought near Warsaw in Poland
351 Boris Goudenaw Czar of Muscovy 362 Of making Bishops 383 Battle fought near
Leipzick in Germany 520 Battle fought near Lutzen in Germany 524 Battle of
Norelingen in Germany 527 A second Battle fought near Leipzick 530 Battle
fought in the Island of Fuhnen 534
C.
CArthage 12 Constantinople the Imperial Seat of the Eastern Emperors 26
Castile made a Kingdom 33 Castile and Arragon united under Ferdinand and
Isabella 42 Charles V. 46 His Wars with France 47 Charles V. takes Rome 48
Charles V. wages Wars against the Protestants in Germany 52 Charles's
Abdication 53 His Death 53 Catalonia rebels against Spain 63 Charles II. King
of Spain 66 The Canary Islands 73 The Corfew Ball 106 Calais taken by Edward
III. King of England 119 Charles I. King of England 148 His Wars with France
149 His Wars with Spain 148 Commotions in England and the true Causes thereof
149 The Conduct of King Charles I. 151 He is made a Prisoner 158 He is
sentenced to death and executed 159 Charles II. Son of King Charles I. routed
near Worcester 160 Cromwell made Protector of England 161 Charles II.
Restoration to the Kingdom 162 His Wars with Holland 163 Charles surnamed the
Great, King of France 179 Is proclaimed Emperor of the Romans 179 The
Carlinian Family extinguished in France 182 Charles VI. King of France 195
Charles VII. King of France 199 Charles VIII. King of France 204 Conquers
Naples 205 Loses Naples 206 Charles IX. King of France 221 The first, second,
third, fourth and fifth Huguenot Wars under his Reign 221, 222, 223, 224
Charles the Great 282 Charles IV. Emperor of Germany causes the Golden Bull to
be compiled 295 Charles V. Emperor of Germany 297 He resigns the Empire 299
Christian I. the first King of Denmark out of the Owen burgh Family 322
Christian II. King of Denmark crowned King of Sweden 323 He is driven thence,
and afterward out of his own Kingdom 324 Christian IV. King of Denmark, his
defeat near Kings-Luttern 325 The Siege of Copenhagen 326 Christian V. the
present King of Denmark 327 He makes War upon Sweden p. 327 Makes a Peace with
Sweden 328 The Christian Religion is proper for all the World 370 Is not
contrary to civil Government 371 No other Religion or Philosophy comparable to
it 372 Concerning the outward Government of Religion 372 The consideration of
this Question according to the Nature of Religion in general, and of the
Christian Religion in particular 374, 375 First Propagation of the Christian
Religion, and by what methods it was established 376 Persecution of the first
Church, and the C^lumnies raised against the Primitive Christians 378 The first
Church Government 379 Constantine the first Christian Emperor 382 Could not
quite alter the former State of the Church 382 Of presiding in Councels 383
Abuses in Councels 384 Riches of the Church 394 Croisado's, by what Politics
carried on 395 How the Church was freed from all power over it 399 General
Councels to bridle the Popes power 409 Cardinal Cajetan and his ill Conduct 418
Calvin and Zwinglius 421 The Conclave 431 The College of Cardinals 433 Cardinal
Patroon 434 Celibacy of the Clergy 435 Their Number 436 Ceremonies 439 Half
Communion 440 Union made at Cilmar betwixt Sweden, Denmark and Norway 478
Christopher Duke of Bavaria made King of Sweden, Denmark and Norway 482 Church
Lands reduced in Sweden 494 Christina Queen of Sweden 525 Continues the War in
Germany 526 Makes an Alliance with France 528 Is engaged in a War with the
Elector of Saxony 527 And afterward with Denmark 530 Charles Gustave King of
Sweden 533 Siege of Copenhagen 534 Charles IX. the present King of Sweden 534
His Forces routed by the Elector of (...) 534
D.
THE Dutch sail to the East Indies 92 The Danes first come into England 102
Dauphine united with France 192 Denmark a very ancient Kingdom 316 The Genius
of the Danish Na^ion 328 Neigbours of Denmark 330 Disputes in England about the
investiture of Bishops 403
E.
THE first Sea Voyage into the East Indies under Emanuel King of Portugal 89
Ancient State of England 99 England conquered by the Romans 99 Edward the
Confessor King of England 103 Edward I. King of England 114 His Wars with
Scotland 115 His Wars with France 116 Edward II. King of England 116 Edward
III. King of England 117 His Pretensions to the French Crown 117 His expedition
into France 118 The English decline in France 201, 1^5 The English driven out
of France 202, 127 Edward IV. of the House of York King of England 128 Edward
V. King of England 130 Edward VI. King of England 139 Elizabeth Queen of
England 141 She assists the Huguenots 144 Refuses the Sovereignty over the
Netherlands twice offered to her 145 The Constitution of the English Nation 164
The English form of Government 169 The Power and Strength of England 171 The
East India Company in Holland 283, 270 England and France declare War against
the Dutch 279 Evangelical Union in Germany 301 Erick declared King of Sweden,
Denmark and Norway 477, 321 Of Episcopal Jurisdiction 384 Concerning
Excommunication 385 Increase of the Ecclesiastical Sovereignty 391 What
contributed to it 391 Disputes in England about the Investiture of Bishops 403
Erasmus favors Luther 416 Excommunication and Inquisition 445 Erick XIV. King
of Sweden introduces the Titles of Earls and Barons in that Kingdom 498
F.
FErdinand the Catholic and Isabella 42 France and its ancient State 174 The
Franks came out of Germany 175 France is divided 177 French Pretensions upon
the Kingdom of Naples 187 French Pretensions upon Milan 196 Francis I. King of
France 210 He aspires to the Empire 210 His Italian Wars 211, 212 His defeat at
the Battle of Paviae, where he is taken Prisoner, and set at liberty upon very
hard terms 212 Francis II. King of France 218 The Nature and Constitution of
the French 247 The Government of France 250 Strength of France in regard to
England and the other Neighboring Princes 251, 252 Frederick Henry I. Prince
of Orange 274 Frederick Elector Palatine's ill Success 302 Ferdinand I.
Emperor of Germany, his Proclamation concerning Church Lands 302 Frederick I.
King of Denmark 324 Frederick III. King of Denmark, his Wars with Sweden 326 Is
declared absolute and the Crown hereditary 327 Battle fought in the Island of
Fuhnen 534
G.
GReece p. 6 Gothic Empire and its downfall in Spain 29 Granada taken 43 Gaul
subdued by the Romans 174 by the Barbarian Nations 174 Germany divided from
France 180 The Gabel first introduced into France by Philip of Valois their
King 192 The Treaty of Ghent betwixt the Prince of Orange and the Netherlanders
264 Germany and its ancient condition 282 The Gvelfs and Gibellin Factions in
Italy 291 German Wars and their Origin under Matthias 300 Gustavus Adolphus
King of Sweden, his death 303 The Genius of the Germans 306 Form of Government
in Germany 307 Its Commodities 307 Its Strength and Weakness 308 Its Neighbors
312 Gregory Pope of Rome excommunicates the Emperor Henry IV. 402 Endeavor to
subject the Emperor 403 The German Princes dissatisfied with the Pope 417 The
Gothic Nation and its first Founders 461 The Goths and Swedes united in one
Kingdom 461 Gustavus I. King of Sweden 489 Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden 511
Makes Peace with the Muscovites 512 Carries on the War against the Poles in
Pon^ria 513 Engages in the German War 515 Lands his Forces in Germany and makes
an Alliance with France 517 Is killed 525
H.
HEnry III. King of England 113 The War with the Barons 114 Henry IV. of the
House of Lancaster invades England 121 After great difficulties surmounted
becomes King of England 122 Henry V. King of England 122 He invades France to
prosecute his claim to that Crown 123 The Battle betwixt him and the French
fought near Agincourt 123 Henry VI. King of England 124 Is proclaimed King of
France 125 Is crowned in Paris 125 Henry VII. Earl of Richmond invades England
131 Is made King and unites the White and Red Roses 132 Henry VIII. King of
England 133 His divorce with Queen Catharine 135 He abrogates the Popes
Supremacy 136 Marries Anna Bullen 136 Demolishes the Monasteries 137 Causes
Anna Bullen to be beheaded 138 His other Wives 138 Hugh Capel the Founder of
the present Royal Family in France 182 Henry II. King of France 215 His
Expedition into Germany 216 His Project to unite Scotland with France
miscarried 217 Huguenot Wars in France under Charles IX. the first, second,
third, fourth and fifth 221, 222, 223, 224 Henry III. King of France 224 The
Holy League under his Reign 225 Huguenot Wars in France the sixth, seventh and
eighth 225, 226, 227 Henry III. forced from Paris by the League 227 He makes
use of the Huguenots against the League 228 Henry IV. King of Navarre comes to
the Crown of France 228 His difficulties, an Account of his Religion 228 Is
excommunicated by the Pope 230 Changes his Religion 231 Is assaulted and
wounded by a Russian 231 Is assassinated by Ravillac 234 Henry IV. Emperor of
Germany 286 His troubles with the Pope 287 His Son rebels against him 288
Henry VII. Emperor of Germany poisoned by a Monk 294 Henry of Valois Duke of
Anjou made King of Poland 342 St. Hierom's Dream 387
I.
Jesuits sent first into the Indies under John III. King of Portugal 90
Ireland conquered by the English 111 John King of England 112 Loses Normandy
113 James I. King of England 146 The Independents become Masters in England 158
Ireland conquered by the Parliament, Forces of England 160 Constitution of the
Irish Nation 166 Jesuits banished out of France by King Henry IV. 231 The
Spanish Inquisition in the Netherlands 257 The long Inter-regnum in Germany 292
Insurrection of the Boors in Germany under Charles V. 299 John Casimir King of
Poland 349 John Pobeiski the present King of Poland 352 Constitution of the
Jewish Religion 369 Ignorance contributed to the Popes Authority 386 Causes of
this Ignorance 387 Ignorance of Luther's Adversaries 415 The Jesuits why they
have taken upon them the Education of the Youth 443 Inquisition and
Excommunication 445
L.
LEwis XI. King of France 202 His politic methods 203 Lewis XII. King of
France 206 Conquers Milan 206 Conquers Naples 207 Loses it again 207 Lewis
XIII. King of France 234 Takes Lorrain from that Duke 237 Lewis XIV. the
present King of France 238 Is forced to leave Paris 240 His differences with
the Pope 243 His Wars in Flanders 243, 244 Takes Mastricht 245 Leopold the
present Emperor of Germany 305 His Wars with the Turks 305 With France 305
Lithuania united to Poland 339 Luther gives a great blow to the Grandeur of the
Pope 412 Pope Leo his Virtues and Faults 413 Luther opposes Indulgencies, and
afterward the Popes power 414 Is favored by Erasmus 416 I Will conduct of Pope
Leo and Cardinal Cajetan 418 Why Luther's doctrine was not spread farther 419
Laity debarred from reading the Scriptures 437 The licensing of Books 444
Battle fought near Leipzick 520 Battle fought near Lutzen 524 A second Battle
fought near Leipzick 530
M.
MAcedonian Empire 8 Its fall 11 Massanello's Rebellion at Naples 65 The Maid
of Orleans 200, 125 Mary Queen of England 139 She restores Popery 139 Marries
Philip of Spain 140 Mary Queen of Scotland 142 She marries Bothwel who
murdered her husband 143 She is made a Prisoner in England 143 Is beheaded 144
The Merringim Family loses the Crown of France 178 Mazarine' s Ministry under
Lewis XIV. K. of France 238 Mazarine banished France 241 And recalled by the
Queen 241 Peace of Munster 275, 239 Mazarine's death 242 Archduke Matthew made
Governor by the Netherlanders 264 Maurice Son to William Prince of Orange made
Stadtholder of the united Provinces 267 Matthias Emperor of Germany 300
Muscovy and its ancient State 361 The Genius of the Muscovites 363 Their Form
of Government, Strength and Neighbors 365 What Commodities Muscovy affords 364
Concerning Marriages 385 Metropolitans 390 Mendicants order, and the Motives to
embrace this manner of Life 396 Is prejudicial to the regular Clergy 397 Merits
of good Works 439 Marriage made a Sacrament 440 Maydeburgh taken by the
Imperialists 519
N.
NAvarre conquered by Ferdinand the Catholic 46 Normandy annexed to the Crown
of England 108 The Norman Race extinct 109 Navarre taken and lost again in a
few days by Francis I. King of France 210 The Edict of Nants 232 Peace made at
Nimwegen 305, 246, 67 The ancient State of the Netherlands 254 Their condition
under the Emperor Charles V. 255 Causes of the Wars in the Netherlands under
Philip II. King of Spain 256 They were fomented by Elizabeth Queen of England
258 Constitution of the united Netherlands 280 Their Genius 281 Of their
Country, Shipping and Commerce 282, 283 Their Strength and Weakness 285 Their
Form of Government 286 Their Defects 288 The Genius of the Norwegians 328
Battle fought near Noringen in Germany 327
O.
THE Original of civil Societies 2 Origin of the Kingdom of Navarre and Arragon
3^ The Original of selling Offices in France 202 Si^ge of Ostend 271 Orders of
Friars and Nun^ in general 396
P.
THE Persian Empire 4 Philip King of Macedon 8 Peace made at Cambray betwixt
Charles V. and Francis I. 213, 49 Peace made at Crespy betwixt Charles V. and
Francis. I. 215, 52 Peace betwixt Spain and France 53 Treaty at Passaw 299, 52
Philip II. King of Spain 54 His Wars with England 55 Peace made at Vervin
betwixt France and Spain 232, 57 Portugal falls to Spain 91, 59 Philip III.
King of Spain 59 Philip IV. King of Spain 91 Portugal falls off from Spain 64,
92 Pyrenean Treaty 242, 65 Peace with Portugal 66 Peace made at Aix la Chapelle
66 Peace made at Nimwegen 246, 67 The Phillippine Islands 74 The Kingdom of
Portugal and its Origin 81 The first Project of sailing into the East Indies 88
The Portugueses banish the Moors and Jews 88 Peace betwixt Holland and Portugal
93 The Humor of the Portugueses 94 A Persecution raised on the Christians of
Japan 96 Strength of Portugal 97 Peter's Pence 101 Peace made betwixt the
English and French 119 Of no long continuance 120 Another Peace with France
under R. II. K. of Eng. 170 The Powder Plot under James I. King of England 147
Pharamond the first King of France 175 Pipin proclaimed King of France 178 The
Parisian Massacre 223 Pignerol bought from the Duke of Savoy by Lewis XIII.
King of France 236 Peace of Munster 275, 239 Peace made at Aixla Chapelle 244
The Duke of Parma Governor of the Netherlands 265 Protestants and the rise of
that Name 298 Protestant League at Smalkald 298 The differences betwixt the
Protestants in Germany 312 The Kingdom of Poland and its Origin 333 Twelve
Vaivodes or Governors in Poland 333 The Poles defeated in Moldavia 346 Poland
invaded by Gustavus Adolfus K. of Sweden 347 The Poles defeated by the Cosacks
349 Poland invaded by Gustavus Adolf. a second time 350 Poland invaded by
Ragezi Prince of Transylvania 351 The Genius of the Polish Nation 352 The
Kingdom of Poland, its Strength and Weakness, Form of Government, its
Commodities, Revenues, etc. 353, 354, 355. Of the Pope of Rome 368 The Popes
Authority and its Origin. 386 Pedantry introduced into the Schools 388 The
Greek and Roman Politicians prejudicial to Monarchy 388 Patriarchs 390 Of the
Popes Power 390 The Popes Confirmation of Bishops 391 How the Popes withdrew
themselves from their Subjection to the Emperors 399 The Pope seeks for
protection in France 400 The Pope establishes an ecclesiastical Sovereignty 402
The Pope pretends to a power over Princes, even to depose them 404 How this
power is colored over 405 The Papal Authority opposed and weakened by Schisms
407 Divisions among the Protestants, and the Licentiousness of some Protestants
420 The University of Paris 420 The Popish Sovereignty recovered 422 Popish
Clergy more regular and learned than before 422 How they make Converts 423 The
Popes temporal State, his Dominions, Forces, how he stands with relation to
Germany, Spain and France. 424, 425 Popish Monarchy as spiritual, its
particular Constitution 426 Why it was to be exercised in the Form of a
Monarchy 429 Why it must be elective 430 Why the Pope was to live in the State
of Celibacy 431 Popish Doctrine suited to the State 436 Penance 439 Purgatory
441 Prayers to Saints 441 The main Pillar of the Popish Monarchy 451 The Popes
Inclination toward the Protestants 452 No Peace to be expected betwixt the
Roman Catholics and Protestants 453 Strength of the Protestants and Papists
454 The Protestant Religion estabished in Sweden 495
R.
ROme a Warlike City 13 Its military Institutions 15 Religion of the Romans 17
Roman Kings expelled, and a new form of Government erected 19 Defects of the
Roman Commonwealth 21 In Rome were two distinct Bodies 23 The Romans Monarchy
could not be of long continuance 25 Rome taken by Charles V. 49 The Romans
conquer England 99 Richard I. King of England 111 His expedition into the Holy
Land 111 Richard II. King of England 120 Richard III. King of England 131
Rebellion begins in England under Charles I. 157 Richlieu made chief Minist. of
State under Lew. III. 235 Rochelle taken from the French Huguenots 235 Rudolf
Earl of Habsburgh the first Founder of the present House of Austria 292 The
Reformation in Germany 297 The Roman spiritual Monarchy 368 The Romans and
their politic Reason against the Primitive Christian Church 378 Rome, why it
was made the Place of Residence of the Ecclesiastical Monarchy 389 Relics 441
Reformation begun in Sweden 491
S.
SParta 7 Spain and its ancient State 28 Spain conquered by the West Goths 28
By the Saracens 30 Great Divisions in Spain 34 The Sicilian Vespers 188, 39
First Beginning of the Spanish Inquisition 43 Spanish Armado destroyed 145, 56
The Nature of the Spaniards 67 The Spanish West Indies 69 Its several sorts of
Inhabitants, and Its Riches 71, 72 Sardinia and Sicily 74 Spanish Netherlands
74 Strength and Weakness of Spain 75 Its condition in reference to its
Neighbors 77 The Saxons come into Britany 100 The Saxon Heptarchy 101 The
Scotch defeated by the English 119 The Scotch Covenant 154 The constitution of
the Scotch Nation 165 Spain enters into the Holy League in France 226 The
Slingers in France 239 The Switzers, and the first original of their
Commonweal* 273 Their first Union 274 Their Genius 279 Their Strength and
Weakness 279 League at Smalkald 298 Stephen Batori made King of Poland 342 He
puts the Cosacks in good Discipline 342 Sigismund III. King of Poland 343 His
Wars with the Muscovites 343 His oversight during the troubles in Muscovy 345
Si^^ Venial and Mortal 438 States that are tied by a particular Interest to the
Church of Rome 448, 449 Sweden the most ancient Kingdom in Europe 461 The
Christian Doctrine first taught in Sweden 464 Celibacy of Clergy introduced in
Sweden 468 The Kingdom of Sweden made hereditary and the Popish Religion
abolished 497 A new Swedish Liturgy introduced 504 Sigismund King of Poland and
Sweden 506 Is deposed 510 The Nature and Qualification of the Swedish Nation
535 Their Condition, Strength and Neighbors 536, 537
T
TRuce with Holland made by Philip III. K. of Spain 60 The Tripie Alliance 66
The Templers suppressed in France 189 Truce betwixt the Emperor Charles V. and
Henry II. King of France 216 The Tartars make the first inrode into Poland 338
Theodore Ivanowitz Czar of Muscovy 362 Traditions 438 First Translation of the
New Testament into Swedish 492
V.
THE Union of Utrecht, the Foundation of the Commonwealth of the seven United
Provinces 265 They enter into a Confederacy with the English 267 Uladislaus IV.
King of Poland obtains a signal Victory over the Muscovites 348 The causes of
the War with the Cosacks under his Reign 348 The Universities have promoted the
Popish Sovereignty 442
W.
WArs betwixt France and Spain and their first rise 44 Wars betwixt Charles V.
and France 47 Wars betwixt Holland and Portugal 93 William the Conqueror 104 He
conquers England 184, 105 Intestine Wars in France under King Francis II. 218
William Prince of Orange 256 Is murdered at Delft 267 William II. Prince of
Orange 275 He makes the two de Wits Prisoners 276 They are murdered 280
William III. Prince of Orange 277 Wars betwixt the English Parliament and the
Dutch 277 A second War betwixt the English and Dutch 278 Wars betwixt Charles
duke of Burgundy and the Switzers 276 Wars betwixt France and the Switzers 277
The Westphalian Treaty 304 Winifred the Monk 393 Wars betwixt the Muscovites
and Swedes 5^2 War betwixt the Swedes and Poles in Livonia 511 Zwinglius and
Calvin 421
An Introduction to the History of the Chief Kingdoms and States now in EUROPE.
CHAP. I.
Of the Ancient Monarchies, and more especially of the Roman, out of whose
Ruins arose several Kingdoms and States.
. 1. NO Man of Common Sense, imagines, that at the first Propagation of
Mankind, The most ancient State of Mankind.
there were such Governments as are among us at this time. But in those Times
each Father, without being Subject to any Superior Power, governed his Wife,
Children and Servants, as a Sovereign. Nay, it seems very probable to me, that
even to the time of the Deluge, there was no Magistracy, or any Civil
Constitution; but that the Government was lodged only in each Father of his
Family. For it is scarce to be imagined, that such abominable Disorders could
have been introduced, where the Power of Magistrates and Laws was exercised:
And it is observable, that after once the Rules of Government were Constituted,
we do not find that Mankind in general did run into the same Enormities, of
which God Almighty was obliged to purge the World by an Universal Punishment,
though the Root of the Evil was remaining as well after as before the Deluge.
It seems also, that for a considerable time after the Deluge this Paternal
Government continued in the World.

. 2. The Original of Civil Societies.
But the reason why the Fathers of Families left this Separate way of living,
and joined in a Mutual civil Society, seems to be, That among the Neighboring
Families, sometimes Quarrels used to arise, which being often decided by Force,
drew along with them very great Inconveniences, to prevent which, it was
thought necessary for the Preservation of Peace and Quietness among Neighbors,
to referr the Decision of such Matters to the Judgment of some of the wisest
and most Considerable among them. After the increase of Mankind, it was also
easily to be observed, how difficult it would prove for a Single Family to
defend it self against the Joint Conspiracy of a malicious Party, to Oppose
which, the Neighbors living so near, as to be able to assist one another in
case of Necessity, did enter into a Society Mutually to defend themselves
against their Common Enemies. That they might do this with the better Success,
the Administration of the whole Society was committed to him, who appeared most
Considerable for his Wisdom and Valor. It is also very Probable that such as
by Common Consent sought out new Habitations, chose a Leader, who both in their
Journey, and in the Country, which they possessed themselves of, had the chief
Direction of Affairs: And this office of a Judge, Head, or Leader by degrees
degenerated into that sort of Government, which Aristotle calls Heroical, which
is nothing else but a Democracy under the Authority of one of the Citizens, who
has a Power rather to Advise than to Command the rest. And this seems to be the
most ancient Form of Republics: for the Fathers and Rulers of their Families
could not so soon forget their Liberty, as not to Reserve to themselves a share
in the Government by which their Consent was required to be given unto all
Matters, which were to be decreed in the Name of the whole Society.

. 3. At what time the first States were constituted.
But at what time precisely these Societies were first Instituted, and which of
them is to be esteemed the most Ancient, is not easy to be determined; for
though commonly the Assyrian Empire is taken for the first Monarchy, yet it is
not from hence to be concluded, that the same was the first civil Society;
since it is evident that this Empire acquired its Greatness by swallowing up
Lesser States. And those Wars which the Assyrian Kings waged against other
States, do abundantly testify, that besides the Assyrian, there were also
other Civil Societies even at that time in the World. And here is to be
observed, that as all human Affairs do not come immediately to Perfection, so
were the first Institutions of Civil Society very simple and imperfect, The
first States were very small and imperfect.
till by degrees the Supreme Civil Power, together with such Laws and
Constitutions as were requisite for the maintaining of a Civil Society, were
instituted. The first Commonwealths also were very small, and their
Territories of a very little extent, so that it was easy for the Citizens to
assemble, either to Consult or to Defend themselves against a Foreign Power. It
is evident out of History, that the deeper you search into the most ancient
Times, the more Separate small Commonwealths you will meet withal, out of the
Union of which great Empires in Process of time did arise, some of those
Uniting themselves by common Consent, others being Subdued by the more
Powerful.

. 4. Among these great Empires, The Assyrian Empire.
the Assyrian is commonly reckoned the most Ancient, the reason of which may
probably be, That those Parts were Sooner, and More Inhabited than other
places, which being later possessed had Fewer Inhabitants. Wherefore the
Assyrians might without much difficulty overcome one small Commonwealth after
another, and by Subduing some, make way for an Entire Conquest over the rest,
that had not then learned the advantage of a joint Power and Confederacy. The
vast Armies with which Ninus and Semiramis (the first Founders of this
Monarchy) did overpower far distant Nations, make the common Chronologies very
doubtful: But to settle this is not to our present purpose. But by what means
the Kings of this vast Empire did bridle the Conquered Nations, ought to be
remembered, Two of them being most remarkable. By what means this Empire was
maintained.
The First was, That they intending to imprint an Extraordinary Character of
their Persons into the Minds of the People, they always kept themselves very
close in their Palaces, and being seldom to be seen by any but their nearest
Servants, they never gave Answer to their Subjects Petitions but by them.
Whereby they possessed the People that they were much above the Common Rank of
Mankind. The Second was, That every Year they used to draw a certain number of
Soldiers out of each Province, and these being Quartered in and about the
place of their Residence, and Commanded by such a one as was thought most
faithful, these Forces struck Terror both into the Subjects at Home and the
neighboring Nations Abroad. This Army was again Disbanded every year, and
another drawn out of the Provinces, that the General by the Authority he had
with the Soldiers, might not be in a condition to Invade the Empire. Its Fall.
The Ruin of this Empire under Sardanapalus, is not so much to be ascribed to
his Effeminacy, as to this, That the Kings allowed too much Power to the
Governors of Provinces of so vast an extent. These grew at last too Powerful
for the Kings themselves, who being lulled asleep by Voluptuousness (the
effects of Peace and Plenty) did not, as they used to do formerly, by great
Actions endeavor to maintain their Authority among the People. Out of the
Ruins of the Assyrian Empire two new Kingdoms were erected; Arbactes taking
upon himself the Sovereignty of Media, where he was Governor, as the Lord
Lieutenant of Babylon did the same in his Province, both which were afterward
reunited under the Persian Monarchy.

. 5. Cyrus the first Founder of the Persian Empire, The Persian Empire.
did, besides what formerly belonged to Media, and Babylon, also Conquer a
great part of the Lesser Asia. This Prince, besides other remarkable
Constitutions, did wisely institute this, as a most necessary one to preserve
the Peace of his Empire; By what means it was maintained.
That in all Provinces, where he sent his Lords Lieutenants, he Constituted
Governors of the Fortresses chosen out of the Commons, who being not under the
Jurisdiction of the Lords Lieutenants, had their dependence immediately on the
King. These therefore living in continual Jealousies, served as a Bridle to one
another. The Lords Lieutenants, without the Assistance of the Governors of the
Fortresses, were not in a Capacity to Mutiny against the King, who not only
Observed all their Actions, but also frequently Informed the King concerning
their Behavior. From the Governors of the Fortresses nothing was to be
feared, because, being of Mean Condition and a very Limited Power, they were
not capable of making any great Factions, or drawing any considerable Party
after them. Cambyses annexed Egypt to the Persian Empire. But whenever the
Kings of Persia did undertake to extend their Conquests further, it always
proved fruitless. Cambyses did in vain Attack the Aethiopians, as Darius
Hydaspes did the Scythians. And Xerxes was shamefully beaten by the Greeks: But
the following Kings, Artaxerxes Longimanus, Darius Nothus, and Artaxerxes
Mnemon, did Manage their Affairs with more Wisdom against the Greeks, whom they
did not Attack; but leaving them at rest, they quickly saw Intestine Wars
kindled amongst themselves; wherein they so well knew how to play their Game,
that by always affording Assistance to the weaker Side, they rather protracted
than finished these intestine Wars, till the Greeks, quite tired and exhausted,
were obliged to accept of such Conditions of Peace as were projected by the
Persians, whereby each City being declared free and independent of one another,
Greece was disabled hereafter to undertake any thing of Moment. Notwithstanding
Macedon, an obscure Nation of Greece, proved the Ruin of the Persian Monarchy,
through a defect of Policy in their Kings, in not early Opposing the Growing
Power of Philip, by raising Powerful Enemies in Greece, against him and his
Son Alexander, (which for great Sums of Money they might easily have done,)
and thus have cut out so much Work for these two Warlike Princes at Home, that
they could not have had leisure so much as to have entered on the thoughts of
Invading Persia: In the same manner, as formerly the Persians had obliged
Agesilaus quickly to return into Greece. But being over secure in their own
Strength, and despising Others, they drew upon themselves their own Destruction.

. 6. Greece.
Greece was in ancient times divided into a great many petty Commonwealths,
every one of these being governed by its own Laws. Among those in Process of
time, Athens grew most famous, whose Citizens for Ingenuity, Eloquence, and the
knowledge of Arts and Science, surpassed all the rest; their Glory increased
exceedingly after they had signalized themselves so bravely against the
Persians. After this, by adding of the Harbor of Pyreum to their City, they
made it very commodious for Shipping, and acquired such vast Riches, that by
their naval Strength they subdued the Isles of the Aegean Sea and the Coasts of
the Lesser Asia. But being puffed up with their good Success, they drew upon
themselves the hatred of their Allies: and after they once attempted to be sole
Masters of Greece, the Peloponnesians, headed by the Spartans (who especially
envied the Athenians) united together to chastise the insolence of Athens. Yet
the Athenians behaved themselves so bravely, that the War was carried on for a
considerable time with near equal Success, till at last being vanquished in a
Battle in Sicily, they also lost their whole Fleet on the Coast of Thrace; then
the Lacedaemonians becoming Masters of Athens constituted thirty Governors,
who tyrannized most cruelly over such of the Citizens of Athens as survived the
Storming of their City; yet Thrasibulus having expelled the same with the
assistance of some of the banished Athenians, restored the City to its former
Liberty. After this, though the Athenians did recover themselves a little, yet
were they never able to arrive at the former Grandeur of their Commonwealth,
and being afterward too forward in making head against Philip, they were
severely chastised by him. It was therefore the immoderate Ambition of the
Athenians, and their desire of conquering more than they were able to defend,
which occasioned their Ruin. For the number of the Citizens of Athens did not
exceed ten thousand, and they rarely receiving others as Citizens among them,
great Cities and Provinces, could not be kept in obedience by such a number,
and with one unfortunate Blow their whole power was struck down without
Recovery. And considering that such Cities are better fitted for their own
Defense, than making Conquests upon others, it is more advisable for them to
mind the advantage of their own Trade, than to inter-meddle too much in foreign
Affairs, and rather to keep safe their own Walls, than to invade their
Neighbors. Sparta.
Next to Athens, Lacedaemon was famous in Greece, whose Citizens by the
constitutions and rigorous Discipline introduced by Lycurgus, seemed to be most
fitly qualified for warlike Achievements. This City having not any powerful
Neighbor to contest withal, was strong enough to defend its Liberty against
the Neighboring Commonwealths. And the Spartans, as long as they, according to
their Laws and Institution, despised Riches, had no great occasion to invade
others: But as soon as they began to aim at higher matters, they found by
experience, that it was a quite different case to conquer Kingdoms, than to
defend their own City. For having had the good Fortune of subduing Athens, they
fell into the same folly which had been the Ruin of the Athenians, and were not
only for conquering the Asiatick Sea Coasts, but also under the Conduct of
Agesilaus they invaded Persia. But it was easy for the King of Persia to find
out means to chastise their Insolence, who caused a diversion to be made by the
Greeks, that envied the Success of the Spartans, so that they were quickly
obliged to recall Agesilaus to defend themselves at home. Not long after their
Fleet being beaten by Conon, Epaminondas defeated their Army by Land in the
Battle of Leuctra, whereby they were so weakened, that they were scarce able to
defend their own Walls. Next to these two Cities, Thebes was for a while
famous, through the Valor and Wisdom of Epaminondas, who so well knew how to
head his Countrymen, that they humbled the Spartans, and as long as he lived,
were the most flourishing State of Greece. But after his death, this City
returned to its former State, and making head against Philip, was severely
chastised by hir^, and quite destroyed by his Son Alexander.

. 7. Macedon.
Macedon was before the times of Philip an inconsiderable Kingdom, and so
exposed to the Incursions of its Neighbors, that it was scarce able to defend
it self, this Nation being then esteemed the most despicable of Greece. But by
the Military Virtue of two Kings, this Nation did show it self so considerable,
that it conquered a great part of the World. The circumstances wherein the
neighboring Nations of Macedon were at that time, The Politic Conduct and
great Actions of Philip.
and the good Conduct of Philip, whereby he so settled the Kingdom at home,
that it quickly became the chiefest in all Greece, gave the first opportunity
to lay the Foundation of this Monarchy. For on one side it had for its
Neighbors the Thracians, Triballians, and Illyrians, very barbarous Nations;
these were easily kept in awe by a neighboring, wise and brave King. On the
other side, was Greece and its Cities, which, though they were much fallen from
their ancient Glory, yet, were all together still too hard for the Macedonians.
Against those he made use of this Artifice, That by setting them together by
the Ears among themselves, he so weakened them with intestine Wars, that they
were afterward not able to hold out long against him. And because Philip used
only to attack one of those Cities at a time, and the rest were not forward
enough unanimously to hinder his growing Greatness, he was upon a sudden,
before they were aware of it grown too strong and potent for them all. Philip
seemed particularly endowed with great qualifications for this enterprise: For
besides the Vivacity of his Spirit, he was pushed on by an extraordinary
Ambition to make himself famous by great Actions. What real Virtues were
wanting in him, he endeavored to supply with pretending to the same; wherefore
though he did nothing without a fair Pretense, yet did he never stick at any
thing, provided he could obtain his ends, and was never sparing in Promises or
Oaths, if he thought he could thereby deceive such as he intended to overcome.
He was an absolute Master of his Passions, and knew how to keep his Counsels
secret, how to set Friends together by the Ears, and by pretending Friendships
to both Parties, to deceive them by vain hopes. He being also very Eloquent,
knew how to insinuate himself with every body; and as for Money, he made no
other use of it, than to advance his designs. He was a most experienced
Warrior, and had made the Macedonians so excellent Soldiers, that the
Macedonian Phalanx, first invented by him, was terrible, even to the Romans.
And, because he was always at the Head of his Armies, continually exercised his
Soldiers, and punctually paid them, there were no better Soldiers, in his
days, than the Macedonians. Being arrived to this Greatness, so that he was
chosen by the common consent of Greece their General against the Persians; and
being busy in making preparations for this expedition, he was barbarously
murdered, leaving his Son Alexander the glory of pursuing it.

. 8. Alexander the Great.
There is scarce in all History to be read of an Expedition more famous than
that of Alexander the Great, wherein he, with thirty odd thousand Men,
conquered so vast and potent Kingdoms, and by his victorious Arms extended his
Empire from the Hellespont to the Indies. If we enquire into the causes of so
uncommon and happy progresses; it is undeniable that, besides the Providence of
God Almighty, who has put bounds to all Kingdoms upon Earth, the incomparable
Valor of Alexander himself had a great share in the same; who having an Army
of chosen Men, fell upon his Enemy's Army with such swiftness and vigor, that
it was impossible for any new levied Forces, though never so numerous, to
resist him. Yet Darius committed a grand mistake, when he offered Battle to
Alexander; it being evident, that the Persians never were equal to the Greeks
in Pitched Battles. Besides this, the Persians having lived for a considerable
time in Peace, had few experienced Soldiers among them; so that the greater
the number was of such undisciplined Soldiers, the sooner were they brought
into disorder at the time of Battle. Darius was ignorant of that great Art of
protracting the War, and by posting himself advantageously, and cutting off the
Provisions from his Enemies, to take off the edge of fierce Alexander. And
because he had neglected to give him a diversion at home with the assistance of
the Greeks, who envied his Greatness, no other Event could reasonably be
expected, than what afterward followed.

. 9. He dies young.
But the untimely Death of Alexander robbed both him and his young Children of
the fruits of his Victories. For these, being young, lost not only their
Father's Kingdom, but also the fatal Wars carried on after his Death betwixt
his Generals, brought the conquered Nations under great Calamities, who else
would have been in hopes to have changed their Kings for a much better and
greater Prince. But that it seemed was next to an impossibility, that these so
suddenly conquered Countries should so soon be united in one Kingdom. Since a
firm Union betwixt so many Nations could not be established without a singular
Prudence of their supreme Head, and a considerable time. We find also that a
sudden Greatness is rarely lasting, there being no less ability required to
maintain, than to acquire a thing of this nature. The Conquests therefore of
Alexander being of so vast an extent, that the small number of his Macedonians
was by no means sufficient to keep them in awe; and to make those Provinces
dependent on the Macedonian Empire, there was no other way to maintain such
vast Conquests, than to treat the conquered Nations in the same manner with his
native Subjects, and not to oblige them to recede from their ancient Laws and
Customs, or to turn Macedonians, but rather for him to turn Persian, that the
conquered might not be sensible of any other change, but what they found in the
Person of their King. Alexander understood this very well; wherefore he not
only used himself to the Persian Customs and Habit, but also married the
deceased King's Daughter, and had a Persian Guard about him. Those Writers, who
reprehend Alexander's Conduct in this matter, only discover their own
indiscretion. But to settle a right understanding betwixt the Conquerours and
Conquered, did require a considerable time; to effect which, Alexander seemed
to be the fittest Man in the World, as being endowed with a more than ordinary
Valor, Magnanimity, Liberality and Authority. If he had left a Son behind him
not unworthy of so great a Father, the Persian Throne would questionless have
been entailed upon his Family.

. 10. Great Troubles after the Death of Alexander.
The Death of Alexander the Great was the occasion of long and bloody Wars; For
the Army, puffed up with the Glory of its great Actions, esteemed no body
worthy of the supreme Command; And the Generals refusing to obey one another,
were grown too potent to live as private persons. It Is time Arideus had the
name of King; but this poor Man wanted both Authority and Power to bridle the
Ambition of so many proud and great Men. Wherefore all spurred on by their
hopes, some of obtaining the whole Empire, some of getting a considerable
share, they waged a most bloody and long War among themselves, till their
number was reduced to a few, from a great many, who first pretended to the
Empire. Five of them took upon themselves the Title of Kings, and the Sovereign
Dominion of their Provinces, viz. Cassander, Lysimachus, Antigonus, Seleucus
and Ptolemy. But only the three last transmitted their Kingdoms to their
Families. There were then no more than three Kingdoms remaining in the power of
the Macedonians; viz. That of Syria, Egypt and Macedon; That part of the
Persian Empire which lay Easterly beyond the River Euphrates, being become a
vast new Kingdom under the name of the Parthian Empire. The abovementioned
three Kingdoms were afterward swallowed up by the Romans, The Fall of the
Macedonian Empire.
and the Kingdom of Macedon was the first, as lying nearest unto Italy. For the
Romans, after having subdued all Italy, began to extend their Conquests beyond
the Seas; and perceiving that Philip, an active King, bid fair for the Conquest
of all Greece; they did not think it advisable to let him grow more Powerful,
he being so near to them, that in time he might easily prove troublesome to
Italy. They entering therefore into a League with the same Cities of Greece,
which were Attacked by Philip, under that pretense made War upon Philip; and
having driven him back into Macedon, restored Liberty to all Greece. By which
means the Romans at the same time divided their Strength, and gained their
Affections; at length they Conquered Perseus, and with him the Kingdom of
Macedon: Then they turned their Arms against Syria, and took from Antiochus the
Great, all that part of Asia which extends as far as Mount Taurus. And though
this Kingdom did hold out for a while after, yet being miserably torn to pieces
by the Dissentions, which were risen in the Royal Family, it Surrendered it self
to Tigranes, King of Armenia. But he being Conquered by Pompey, the Whole was
made a Province of the Roman Empire. Egypt at last could not escape the Hands
of the Romans, after the Emperor Augustus had defeated Cleopatra and her
Galant Mark Antony.

11. Before we come to Rome, Carthage.
we must say something of Carthage. This City having long contested with Rome
for the Superiority, so that the Roman Government did not think it self well
secured, as long as this City was in Being. This City, though it was rather
fitted for Trade than War; yet having acquired vast Riches by its Traffic, and
being vastly increased in Power and Inhabitants, forced not only the next
adjacent Countries in Africa to pay them Tribute, but also sent vast Armies
into Sicily, Sardinia and Spain. This occasioned the Wars betwixt them and the
Romans; the two First they maintained with extraordinary Resolution and Valor,
but in the Third they were brought to utter Destruction. If they had avoided to
meddle with the Roman Affairs, they might in all probability have been able for
a great while to defend their Liberty. Ambition therefore was the chief Cause
of their Ruin, since the Constitution of their Government was such, as being
Adapted for Trade, did not require any great Possessions, except a few Lands
for the use of their Citizens, and some Seaports in Spain and Sicily, for
convenience of Commerce and Shipping. But the Conquests of large Countries were
more hurtful than profitable to them. For those Generals who Commanded their
Armies abroad, proved at last dangerous to them, thinking it below themselves
after so much Glory and vast Riches obtained, to be put in the same Rank with
their Fellow Citizens. The Inhabitants besides, of this City, were not so well
fitted for Land-service; so that they being obliged to fill up their Armies
with Mercenary Soldiers, collected out of several Nations, these were a vast
and certain Charge to them, the hopes of the Benefit remaining uncertain. And
besides this, their Faith was very inconstant, and the Conquered places could
scarce be trusted to those, whose Faith might easily be bought by Money. After
their first War with the Romans, they Experienced almost to their utter Ruin,
how dangerous it is to wage War altogether with Foreign and Mercenary
Soldiers. And therefore they could not possibly hold out against the Romans,
who fought with a much greater Constancy for their Native Country, than these
Foreign Mercenaries did for their Pay. 'Twas a Capital Error in the
Carthaginians, that they did not take care in time, so to Establish their Power
at Sea, that they needed not to have feared any thing from the Romans that way:
But after they had once let the Romans become Masters at Sea, they could not
but expect them one time or another at their City-gates. At the time when
Hannibal had such prodigious Success against the Romans, it proved also a fatal
Neglect in them, that they did not timely send fresh Supplies to Reinforce
him, so that he might have prosecuted the War to the Destruction of Rome. For
after they had once given leisure to the Romans, to recollect themselves, they,
conscious of their former danger, never rested till they had rased Carthage to
the ground.

. 12. Rome a Warlike City.
It is worth the while to trace the Commonwealth of Rome back to its Original,
because none ever yet Equaled it in Power and Greatness, and because young
Students are first Entered and best Read in the Roman History. This City was
perfectly made for War, from whence the first had her Rise, and afterward her
Fall. Its first Inhabitants were a sorry Rabble of Indigent People, the very
Dregs of Italy, being ignorant of what belonged to Commerce, and not expert in
any Handy-craft's Trade. For the carrying on of the first, Rome was not
Commodiously Situated; and the Latter was at that time unknown in Italy. That
small parcel of Ground which at first they had possessed themselves of, was not
sufficient to maintain a considerable Number of People; nor was there any
vacant Ground in the Neighborhood, which could be Tilled for their use. If
therefore they would not always remain Beggars, nothing was left them but their
Swords, wherewith to cut out their Fortune. And truly Rome was nothing else but
a Den of Wolves, and its Inhabitants, like Wolves, always thirsting after their
Neighbor's Goods and Blood, living by continual Robberies. It was then
necessary for a City, under these Circumstances, to keep up a constant Stock of
Valiant Citizens. To effect this the better, Bywhat means Rome became so
populous.
Romulus commanded, that no Child should be killed, except such as were very
Deformed; which barbarous Custom was also then very common among the Grecians.
Besides this, he ordered that all Slaves at Rome, together with their Liberty,
should have the Privilege of the City, from whom afterward descended great
Families, their Posterity being ambitious by great Deeds, to Efface the Memory
of their base Original. But above all, one thing did mightily contribute
toward the Increase of Rome, that Romulus did not suffer the Men to be put to
the Sword, in such places, as were taken by force by the Romans, nor would let
them be sold for Slaves; but receiving them into Rome, granted them the same
Privileges with the rest of the Citizens. The Roman Writers give this for one
reason, why Athens and Sparta could not so long maintain their Conquests, as
Rome did; since they seldom Naturalized Strangers; whereas Romulus frequently
used to receive the same as Citizens of Rome in the Evening, with whom he had
fought in the Morning. For War cannot be carried on without a good Stock of
Men; nor can Conquests be maintained without a considerable Number of Valiant
Soldiers, upon whose Faith the Government can rely in case of an Attack. But
that the Conquered places might not be left destitute of Inhabitants, and Rome
might not be filled up with too much Rabble, they used only to Transplant the
best and richest Men of the Conquered places to Rome, filling up their places
with the poorest of the Roman Citizens; who settling a continual good
Correspondence betwixt the Conquered and the Romans, served also for a Garrison
in these places. By these means the most Valiant and Richest Inhabitants of the
Neighboring Countries were drawn to Rome, and the poorest among the Romans
obtained thereby, in those places, large Possessions. But although Necessity
gave an Edge to the Roman Valor, 'twas not that alone that made them so
Warlike a People; for the Courage of their Kings, who instructed them in
Military Affairs, and hardened them to Dangers, had a great share in it; though,
the thing rightly considered, it is not always advisable, to lay the
Foundation of a State upon Military Constitutions; since the Changes of War are
uncertain, and then it is not for the Quiet of any State that Martial Tempers
should prevail too much in it. Wherefore Peaceable times did never agree with
the Romans; and as soon as they were freed from the Danger of Foreign Enemies,
they sheathed their Swords in each other's Bowels.

. 13. There were also other things worth our Observation, Several other
Military Institutions.
which did greatly advance the Military Affairs of Rome. One of the chiefest
was, That their King Servius Tullius had ordered, that only the most able and
wealthy Citizens should do Service as Soldiers, and Equip themselves either
with light Arms or complete Armor, according to their Ability: And, whereas
formerly every body, without distinction, was obliged to serve the Public in
the Wars at his own Charge; the poorer sort afterward were never made use of,
but upon Extraordinary Occasions. And though Riches do not make a Man the more
Valiant, yet was it but reasonable, since every body was obliged to serve
without Pay, that those, who were scarce able to maintain themselves, should be
spared as much as could be: But besides this, their Wealth was a Pledge of
their Fidelity. For he that has nothing to lose but his Life, carries all along
with him, and has no such strict Obligation to face Death; besides, that he may
easily be brought to desert his own Party, if he meets with a prospect of a
better fortune among the Enemies. On the contrary, a wealthy Man fights with
more Zeal for the Public Interest, because in defending That, he secures his
own, and is not likely to betray his Trust; For if he deserts, he leaves his
Possessions behind him, with uncertain hopes of a recompense of his Treachery
from the Enemy. And, though this Custom grew out of fashion under the
Emperors, yet, in lieu of that, they always kept part of their Arrears behind,
to assure themselves of their Fidelity; and these were never paid, till they
were dismissed. It is also remarkable, that, though the Romans have been often
Signally beaten in the Field, yet did they never despair or accept of any
disadvantageous Conditions of Peace, except what they did with Porsenae, and
the Gauls called the Terror; to the first they were fain to give Hostages,
upon condition, that they should not make any Iron-work, except what was
requisite for Tilling the Ground. Of which shameful Peace, the Roman
Historians have cautiously avoided to speak in their Writings. And the Gauls
were within an Inch of having put a period to the very Being of Rome, if they
had not been bought off with Money, to Raise the Siege of the Capitol, reduced
to the utmost extremity by Famine. For what is related, that Camillus coming up
just at the time of the weighing out of the Gold, and drove the Gauls from the
Capitol, some look upon as a fabulous Relation. Upon all other occasions they
have always born their public Misfortunes with an extraordinary Constancy.
For, notwithstanding that Hannibal in the second Punick War had reduced them to
the last Extremity, yet was not a word of Peace mentioned at Rome. And when
their Generals by Claudius and Numantia had agreed upon shameful Conditions
with the Enemies, they chose rather to deliver up the Generals to the Enemies,
than Ratify the Treaty. They used also commonly to have but a small regard,
and rarely to redeem such as were made Prisoners among them, to teach thereby
the Roman Soldiers, to expect no deliverance but from their own Swords. As
this Custom did oblige the Soldiers to fight till the last, so did their
Constancy stand them in great stead among other Nations. For he that shows
himself once fearful of his Enemy, must expect to be Attackt by him, as often
as opportunity presents it self.

. 14. Of the Religion of the Romans.
It is also worth the while to touch a little upon the Religion of the Ancient
Romans, which, though it was derived from the Greeks, yet the Romans knew much
better how to Accommodate it to the advantage of their State. It was therefore
from the very beginning a constant Rule at Rome, not to begin any public
Affairs of moment, without good Indications or Presages: Because that the Event
of things is commonly supposed to happen according to the Approbation of God.
And therefore such as think themselves assured of the good Will of God,
undertake and effect things with a greater Courage. These Indications were
commonly taken from Birds. Which being a very ancient Superstition, which took
its Rise from an Opinion of the Heathens, that the Gods having their place of
Residence immediately above the Region of the Air, did make use of the
Creatures of the next adjoining Element for their Interpreters. These
Indications also were thought particularly useful, because the same were at
hand at all times, and the Motions and Chirpings of the Birds might be
variously interpreted according to the Exigency of the Times, and the Affairs
of the State. The cunning Augrs or Soothsayers made use of these Predictions
from the flight of Birds, to inspire the ignorant Multitude either with Hopes
or Despair, Valor or Fear, according as it seemed most suitable and convenient
to the public Affairs. Wherefore Cato the Elder, who was an Augur himself, did
not stick to say; He did wonder, how one Augur, meeting another, could forbear
laughing, because their Science was built upon so slight a foundation. What the
Romans did call Religion, was chiefly instituted for the benefit of the State,
that thereby they might the better be able to Rule the Minds of the People,
according to the Conveniences and Exigencies of the State; quite in another
manner, than the Christian Religion does, which is instituted for the benefit
of the Soul, and the future Happiness of Mankind. Wherefore there were no
certain Heads or Articles of Religion among the Romans, whence the People might
be instructed concerning the Being and Will of God, or how they might regulate
their Passions and Actions so as to please God: But all was involved in outward
Ceremonies; viz. What sort of Sacrifices was to be made, what Holy Days and
Public Games were to be kept, etc. For the rest, the Priests were unconcerned,
as to what the People did believe or not believe of Divine Matters; or, whether
after this Life the Virtuous and Wicked were to expect Rewards according to
their several deserts; or, whether the Souls perished together with the Bodies.
For we see, that the Heathens have spoken very dubiously concerning these
Matters, and the wisest of them have taken these things for Inventions
wherewith to keep the People in awe. But in their Ceremonies they were most
exact, performing the same with great pomp and outward show, and rarely
admitting of the least alteration to be made in the same. All this was
instituted to please the humor of the Multitude, which is most moved with
those things, which dazzle the Eyes, and strike strongly on the Senses.
Wherefore their Temples and Sacrifices were not only extraordinary Magnificent,
but the Priests also were chosen out of the most Noble Families, which served
to increase the Reverence of the People, that commonly judges of the Value of
things, according to the quality of such as are employed about them. Yet
besides this, there was another Mystery in it. For, because they made use of
their Religion only as an Instrument of State, to make the People pliable to
the Intentions of their Rulers; it was by all means necessary, that such
Priests were made use of, as understood the Interest of the State, and did
themselves also sit at the Helm of the Commonwealth. On the contrary, if the
meaner sort had been employed as Priests, they might easily, out of Ambition,
have, with the assistance of the People, raised a Faction contrary to the
Governors, since the Multitude commonly depends on those of whose Sanctity
they have an Opinion; or else out of ignorance of the public Affairs and the
present Exigencies they might chance to influence the People in another manner,
than was consistent with the present state of Affairs. They prevented also by
this way, that the Priests could not form a particular Estate in the
Commonwealth, and thereby either cause a mischievous Division, or else strive
to get the Power into their own hands.

. 15. The Expulsion of their Kings, and the Erection of a new Form of
Government.
After Rome had been governed for Two hundred forty and two Years by Kings,
another Form of Government was introduced, Sextus Tarquin having at that time
ravished Lucretia. Whether Junius Brutus had sufficient reason, upon this
account, to expel the King, may very well admit of Dispute. For on one side
the Fact was most abominable, and of such a nature, that a brave Man would
rather venture at any thing, than bear such an affront. And there are a great
many Examples, that Princes, who, to satisfy their brutish Lusts, have
Violated the Chastity of their Subject's Wives and Daughters, and thereby lost
both their Lives and Crowns. But on the other hand, it is to be considered,
that a Fact, though never so Criminal, committed by a Son, without the
Knowledge and Consent of his Father, ought not to be prejudicial to the Father
and Family; much less could it be a pretense to depose a King from a Throne,
which he lawfully possessed; Especially, since to take Vengeance of Criminals
does belong only to the King, and not the Subjects. And Brutus and Collatinus
would have had reason to complain, after the King had denied them just
satisfaction for the Fact committed by his Son, or if he had in any ways
approved of the same. But it is commonly observed, that in Revolutions things
are seldom carried according to the New form of the Rules of Justice. And as
there is commonly some injustice committed at the first Settlement of a new
Form of Government; so Ambition and Envy, covered with Pretenses of the Faults
and Maladministration of the Prince, are the true Motives of Dethroning the
same. But not to insist further upon this, it is certain that Kingly Government
could not be durable at Rome; For such States as are comprehended in one great
City are more fit for an Aristocratical or Democratical Form of Government;
whereas a Monarchy is fittest to be erected in Kingdoms, where the Subjects are
dispersed in a considerable Tract and Extent of Land. The true Reason of this
is, That Mankind in general, politically considered, is like wild unruly
Creatures, ready upon all occasions to shake off the Bridle of Civil Obedience,
as often as Matters do not suit with its humors. Besides, this Man cannot be
kept in Obedience without the assistance of Men. From whence it may rationally
be concluded, why a King, who Commands only over one great populous City, is
immediately in danger of losing all, as soon as his Subjects are disgusted at
him, or another can insinuate himself into their favor, except he is fortified
with a strong Guard of Foreigners, and a considerable Fort; though these
Remedies are very odious, and oftentimes very uncertain. For when in such a
Government the Prince comes to be odious, the Hatred is quickly communicated to
all his Subjects, as living close together, and having consequently an
opportunity of uniting themselves easily against him. But where the Subjects of
a Prince live at a distance from one another, it is easy for him to keep so
many of them inclined to his side, as are sufficient to suppress the mutinous
Party. Wherefore also they are not so much to be feared, as being not able to
meet so soon, and to unite themselves in one Body. But it is more especially
very dangerous to Command over Subjects living in one place, of a fiery Temper,
and exercised in Arms. For Common sense tells us, that he who will control
another, ought to have more force than him. In the mean while, this is most
certain, that this Alteration of the Government mainly contributed toward the
Increase of Rome; it being not credible, that under the Monarchical Government
it could have arrived to that Greatness; partly, because the Kings would have
been obliged for their own security to suppress, in some measure, the Martial
Spirit of their Citizens; partly, because the Negligence or Unskilfulness of
some Kings must needs have proved disadvantageous to the Commonwealth.

. 16. Above all, Reasons of the fall of the Roman Greatness.
it is worth our Consideration, by what means the Roman Empire, which extended
it self over so considerable a part of the World, was destroyed, and became a
prey to the Northern Nations, after it had been broken by its own Intestine
Troubles. The Causes of which we will enquire into from their first beginning.
The People of Rome then being naturally of a fierce and martial Spirit, and
enclosed together within the Walls of one City, their Kings had no way left to
secure their Obedience, but by gaining their Affections with the gentleness and
moderation of their Government, since they had not sufficient Power to balance
the Forces of so vast a City. Wherefore the six first Kings kept the People in
Obedience, rather by their good Inclinations than Fear. But as soon as Tarquin
the Proud began to oppress the People with new Impositions, whereby he had so
alienated the Hearts of his Subjects from him; it was easy for Brutus, under
pretext of the Fact committed upon Lucretia, to stir up the discontented
People, and to shut the City-gates against the King. But as all sudden Changes
of Government, The Defects of the Roman Commonwealth.
that are carried on before things have been maturely considered, and all
Emergencies provided against, are commonly accompanied with great Defects: So
also was this at Rome, where some things were admitted, and others left undone;
not so much because they conduced to the advantage and safety of the State, but
because the present Juncture of Affairs would not suffer them to be otherwise.
There were also many Over-sights committed in the beginning, which left a Gap
open for future Evils and Troubles. It seems to be evident, that Brutus and his
Associates, after they had expelled Tarquin, did intend to introduce an
Aristocratical Form of Government: For it is scarce credible that they, being
Noblemen, with the peril of their Lives should have expelled Tarquin on
purpose to subject themselves to the Government of the Common people; but
because no Wise man is willing to exchange his present condition with another,
without hopes of amending the same: Therefore the chief Authors of this
Revolution were obliged, not only to render the Kingly Government odious to the
People, but also by Mildness and Concessions to make the People in love with
the New Government. For if the Common people had not been made sensible of the
benefit they received from the Government of the Nobility, they might easily
have opened the Gates again to Tarquin. Wherefore Valerius Papicola did strive
to please the People, especially in letting down the Rods or Fasces (the
Ensigns of Authority) before them, and allowing Appeals to the People, as a
tacit Confession that the Supreme Power of Rome did belong to them. It was by
all means requisite, if the Noblemen did intend to maintain the newly acquired
Authority, to have a particular care of these two things. First, To take heed
that they did not exasperate the Common people with their Pride; And, Secondly,
To find Means to maintain the poorer sort, that they might not be forced to
seek for Remedies against their Poverty and Debts by disturbing the Public.
But neither of them were sufficiently regarded by the Nobility. There being at
that time no written Laws at Rome, and the Nobility being in possession of all
public Offices, Justice was oftentimes administered according to Favor and
Affection, the poorer sort being often, though unjustly, oppressed by the more
Powerful. And because the Citizens were obliged to serve in the Wars at their
own Charge at that time, when little was to be got, they were thereby miserably
exhausted; so that they had no other remedy left them but to borrow Money from
the Richer sort. These used such as were not able to satisfy their Creditors
in so barbarous a manner, by Imprisoning, laying of them in Chains, and other
Cruelties, that the Commons, quite put into despair, unanimously retired out of
the City; neither could they be persuaded to return, before the Senate had
agreed to constitute Magistrates, called Tribunes of the People, who were to
protect the Commons against the Power of the Nobility.

. 17. Two distinct Bodies in Rome.
This was the Original and Cause of the Division of the Romans into two
Factions; viz. One of the Nobility, and the Other two Parties of the Common
people: The continual Jealousies of which did afterward minister perpetual
fuel for Civil Dissentions. It seemed at first sight but equitable and of no
great consequence, that the Commons might have for their Heads some, who could
upon all occasions protect them against the Nobility: But in this the Nobles
did commit a grand Error, that they allowed to the Common people, which made
the major part of the City, a protection independent of the Senate; making
thereby the Body of the Commonwealth as it were double-headed. Factious
Tribunes.
For the Tribunes, spurred on by Ambition, and the Hatred, which is common in
the Plebeians against the Nobility, were not satisfied with affording their
Protection to the People against the Nobility; but also were always
endeavoring to be equal in Power, nay even to surpass the Senate in Authority.
And first by their continual Contests they obtained a Privilege for the Commons
to intermarry with the Nobles; Afterward they forced also the Nobility to
consent that one of the Consuls should be chosen out of the Commonalty. They
took upon themselves the Power of a Negative Voice, so as that no Decree of the
Senate could pass into a Law without their consent, nay and even without the
consent of the Senate to make Laws, and to exercise the other Acts of Sovereign
Authority. The Senate, it is true, to divert and employ the People, continually
engaged them in one War or another, that they might not have leisure to
contrive any thing against the Government. This, though it did very well for a
while, and the Power and Territories of Rome were mightily thereby increased,
yet did arise from thence some other inconveniences, which did not a little
contribute toward the indisposition of the State. For whereas the conquered
Lands ought to have been given to the poorer sort of the people, whereby the
City would have been freed from a great many needy Citizens; the Nobles, under
pretense of Farming the same, took them into their own possession; and what
with these Revenues, and the great Booty which fell in the Wars almost all to
their share, as being Commanders in Chief, the Riches of the Nobles increased
prodigiously; whereas a great many of the Plebeians had scarce wherewithal to
maintain themselves. The Commonalty being for these Reasons extremely
dissatisfied with the Senate, there were not wanting some of the Nobility, and
others, of an ambitious Spirit, who having taken distaste at some Transactions
of the Senate, did, under pretense of maintaining the Liberties of the People,
make a considerable Party among them, though, in effect, their chief aim was,
with the assistance of the Plebeians, to carry on their ambitious designs.
Those being by force opposed by the Senate, it came quickly to a Civil War, and
they sheathed their Swords in each other's Bowels.

. 18. In the mean time, Citizens too powerful.
partly by the vast Increase of the Roman Empire, partly by Inadvertency of the
Senate, another Evil had taken root; viz. That vast and rich Provinces,
together with great Armies, were committed to the Government of some of the
Roman Citizens, and that for several years. From which, as it created in them
an aversion to a private life, so it gave an opportunity to have whole Armies
at their Devotion. It is not advisable for any State whatsoever to let any of
its Citizens mount to that degree of Power. For he that has a potent Army at
his Devotion, will scarce be able to resist the temptation, but will be apt to
attempt to make himself Sovereign. It is evident that the Ambition and great
Power of Marius, Sulla, Pompey and Caesar did spur them on, by Intestine Wars,
to suppress the Liberty of their native Country; and after Rome was quite
broken by them, to introduce an alteration in its Government. There was scarce
any remedy left against this Evil, after the Citizens had once laid aside the
respect due to the Senate, and the Soldiers had tasted the Sweets of the Booty
got by Civil Commotions. Wherefore this Commonwealth at the very time when it
was arrived to the pitch of its Greatness, it returned again to a Monarchy, but
not of the best kind, where the Army exercised Sovereign Authority. The
Constitution of the Roman Monarchy.
Augustus was the first Founder of this Monarchy, which he by his wife and long
Reign, seemed to have established pretty well: And truly this new introduced
form of Government, did for a while promise very fair, since Augustus assumed
only the Title of Prince, and maintaining the Senate and the rest of the great
Officers in their Stations, took upon himself no more than the administration
of Military Affairs. But in effect, this Monarchy was not founded so much upon
the consent of the Senate and People, as upon the Power of the Soldiery, by
whose assistance it was introduced and maintained. And because the ancient
Nobility could not brook to be commanded by one single person, and was always
for recovering its former Liberty, the Emperors left no Stone unturned either
to diminish, or quite to extinguish the Splendor of the ancient Nobility; so
that within the space of 200 Years, very few were left, in whose places new
Favorites of the Emperors were created, who were willing to submit themselves
to their Commands.

. 19. But this Monarchy being founded upon the Soldiery, The Roman Monarchy
could not be of a long continuance.
could not be of a long continuance; for as soon as the Soldiers had once
learned this Secret, that they being the Supporters of the Monarchy, could
dispose of the Empire at pleasure, and that the Senate and People were now
empty Names; the Emperors were not only obliged with double Pay and great
Presents to purchase their Favor; but they also began to kill such Emperors
as were not pleasing to them, and to fill up their room with such as could
obtain their Favor. And because one Army did claim the same Prerogative as
well as the other, not only the Pretorian Bands, but also other Armies, which
were on the Frontiers, undertook to do the same. Hence came nothing but Misery
and Confusion in the Roman Empire, the Life of each Emperor depending on the
Will of the covetous and unruly Soldiers, so that no Emperor was assured to
leave the Empire to his Posterity. Oftentimes the bravest Princes were
murdered, and in their room others set up of the meanest Rank and Capacity.
Oftentimes two or more were declared Emperors, who used to make horrid
slaughters among the Citizens in deciding their Titles to the Empire. And this
was the reason why not only very few of the ancient Emperors died a natural
death, but also the Power of this vast Empire, was diminished to that degree by
these intestine Wars, that it did appear no otherwise than a Body without its
Nerves. Constantine the Great did also hasten its fall, when he transferred the
Imperial Court from Rome to Constantinople, and sent away the Veterane Legions
which guarded the Frontiers of the Empire, along the Danube and the Rhine, to
the Easterly Parts, whereby the Western Provinces, destitute of their Guards,
became a prey to other Nations. Besides this, Theodosius divided the Empire
betwixt his two Sons, giving to Arcadius the Eastern, to Honorius the Western
parts; which division did not a little contribute toward the destruction of
the Empire. The Western Parts became a prey to the Germans and Goths, who about
that time came in prodigious numbers, to change their poor Habitations for the
pleasant and rich Provinces of the Romans. England the Romans left of their own
accord, as being not in a capacity to defend it against the Scots, and having
occasion for their Troops to defend France. Spain fell to the share of the
West-Goths. The Vandals settled themselves in Africa. The Goths, Burgundians
and Francks divided France betwixt them. Rhaetia and Noricum was conquered by
the Suevians and Bavarians. A great part of Pannonia and Illyricum was
possested by the Huns. The Goths settled a Kingdom in Italy* and did not think
Rome worthy to make it the place of Residence of the Gothic Kings.

. 20. Though the Western parts of the Roman Empire tell to the share of Foreign
Nations, yet the Eastern Provinces, (...)
who^e Capital City was Constanti^^le* remained for a great many hundred years
after* (...) ^his Eastern Empire was neither in Power nor Splendor to be
compared to the Ancient Roman Empire. And Agathias the Vth. says, That whereas
heretofore the Roman Forces consisted of 645000 Men, the same did amount in the
times of Justinian scarce to 150000. It Is true, under the Reign of this
Justinian, the Empire began to recover something of its former Power,
Belisarius having destroyed the Empire of the Vandals in Africa, as Narses did
that of the Goths in Italy, because these Nations were grown Effeminate, and
overcome with the deliciousness of a plentiful Country: Yet did it again
decrease by degrees, the neighboring Nations taking away one piece after
another, the Emperors were partly in fault themselves, some of them being sunk
in pleasures, and grown quite effeminate; others in continual Divisions,
destroying each other. One part was subdued by the Bulgarians. The Saracens
conquered Syria, Palestine, Egypt, Cilicia, and other neighboring Countries,
and ra^aging the rest, besieged Constantinople; which City was once taken by
Count Baldwin of Flanders, but his Forces were obliged to quit it not long
after. The City also of Trebisond, with the neighboring Countries withdrawing
from the Obedience of the rest of the Empire, set up an Emperor of their own
choosing. At last the Turks entirely subdued this Empire, who did not only
conquer the Saracens, but also afterward swallowed up the Remnants of the
Eastern Empire of Constantinople; Greece having before withdrawn it self from
the Obedience of the Emperors, was governed by its own petty Princes; making,
thereby, the Conquest of the Turks over them the easier; till, at last, the
City of Constantinople being taken by Storm by the Turks, Anno 1453.
was afterward made the place of Residence of the Ottoman Emperors.

CHAP. II.
Of the Kingdom of Spain.
SPain was in ancient Times divided into a great many States, The ancient State
of Spain.
independent of one another, which was at that time the condition of most other
Countries of Europe. But, by reason of this Division, this otherwise Warlike
Nation was very instrumental to its being conquered by foreign Enemies. To this
may be added, That the Spaniards did want good and understanding Generals,
under whose Conduct they might easily have resisted the Power of their Enemies.
For not to mention how the Celts passed out of Gaul into the next adjacent
parts of Spain, who being mixed with the Iberians* were from thenceforward
called Celtiberians; neither how the Rhodians built Roses, the Citizens of
Zante Saguntum, the Phoenicians Cadiz, Malaga and other Cities, the
Carthaginians, above the rest, immediately after the first Punick War with the
Romans, began to conquer a great part of Spain. Wherefore in the second Punick
War the Romans did at first send their Forces into Spain, where they fought so
long with the Carthaginians, till at last, Scipio, afterward sir-nam'd the
African, made a great part of it a Roman Province; the other parts were subdued
by degrees, till Augustus at last entirely subduing the Cantabrians, who live
next to the Pyrenean Mountains, joined all Spain to the Roman Empire, under
whose Protection it was peaceably governed for a considerable time, except that
the Spaniards now and then were drawn in to take a part in the Civil Wars among
the Romans.

. 2. West Goths conquer Spain.
But the Western parts of the Roman Empire declining, the Vandals, Suevians,
Alani and Silingi made an inrode into Spain, 410.
and after many bloody Battles fought, divided it betwixt them; which Conquests
nevertheless they did not enjoy long; for the Vandals passing over into Africa,
the Alani were quite routed by the Suevians, who having also subdued the
Silingi, were in a fair way of becoming Masters of all Spain, if they had not
been prevented by the West Goths; who, after they had under the Conduct of
their King Alarick, ransacked Italy and Rome it self, settled themselves upon
the Borders lying betwixt Spain and France, making Narbonne the Seat of their
Kings, who at first had under their Jurisdiction Catalonia and Languedock, but
soon after extended their Power over other Provinces of Spain. Among these was
particularly renowned their King Euric, who took from the Romans all what was
left them in Spain, except Gallicia, which remained under the Power of the
Suevians: He also conquered several Provinces in France. But Clodoveus, King of
the Francks, having defeated the Son of Euric, retook from the Goths, what they
had conquered before in France, under the Reign of Agila and Athanagildas; the
Romans, 554.
who had before rescued Africa from the hands of the Vandals, retook a part of
Spain, but were chased from thence, for the most part, under the Reign of
Levigildis, who also did quite root out the Suevians in Gallicia. Under the
Reign of his Son Recaredus, 572.
the Empire of the Goths was arrived to its highest pitch of greatness, 586.
as comprehending not only some neighboring Provinces of France, and a part of
Mauritania, but also all Spain, except a small part possessed as yet by the
Romans; from whence they were quite chased afterward by King Suinthila. King
Wamba subdued the Gothic Rebels in France with great success, 646.
and beat the Fleet of the Saracens, 677.
who much infested those Seas; but under Witiza the Gothic Empire begun to
decline from their ancient Valor, The Ruin of the Gothic Empire in Spain.
the Goths being much degenerated, till under the Reign of Roderic it was quite
extinguished. The King himself contributed greatly to its sudden downfall; for
having ravished a certain Court Lady called Cava, the Daughter of Count Julian,
Governor of that part of Mauritania which belonged to the Goths, as also over
that tract of Spain which lies near the Streights of Gibral^ar; he to revenge
himself for this affront, first stirred up a great many of the King's Subjects
against him, and afterward persuaded the Saracens to pass out of Africa over
into Spain. These to try their Fortune, first passed over with a small number,
but quickly increasing by continual Supplies of Men sent from home, they
vanquished such Forces as Roderic sent in have against them. After this Success
the treacherous Julian understanding that Roderic did intend to bring into the
Field the whole Forces of his Kingdom, 713.
which consisted of 100000 Men, brought more Saracens over into Spain, who
being joined with the rest, did in a most memorable Battle entirely rout this
Multitude of unexercised and ill armed Soldiers, who were surpised to see one
of their own party called Oppas, with the Troops under his Command, went over
to the Enemy, and fell into their Flanck, together with the Forces of Julian.
Thus all was given over for lost, and in this one Battle fell the whole Power
and Splendor of the Goths, which had been famous in Spain for three hundred
Years, Roderic himself being killed in the flight, 714.
so that the Goths being without a Head were quite dispersed, The Saracens
c^nquer Spain.
and all the great Cities, partly by force of Arms, partly upon Articles, fell
into the Hands of the Enemy within the space of three Years. Only Asturia,
Biscay, a part of Gallicia and some Countries next adjacent to the Pyrenean
Mountains remained under the Goths, rather, because the Enemies did not think
it worth their while to drive them from these Mountainous places, than that the
Goths trusted to their own Strength to defend themselves against them. Into
these parts also retired such Christians as had escaped the Sword of the
Enemies. But all the rest of Spain was inhabited by the Saracens and Jews.

. 3. Kings in Oviedo.
To free Spain from this Tyranny, was first undertaken by Pelagius, Pelagius.
who (as 'twas said) was descended from the Race of the Gothic Kings. This Man
being chosen King, 726.
did recollect the remaining Forces of this unfortunate Nation; and having
brought together an Army, obtained a signal Victory against the Moors; and in
the mean while that the Saracens were weakening their Strength in France, took
from them the City of Leon, and several others. His Son Favila, Favila.
who succeeded him, did nothing worth mentioning. But Alfonso the Catholic
re-took several Places from the Moors, Alfonso I.
and reigned till the Year 757. 737.
Whose Son Favila also Valiantly defended his Kingdom, Favila.
vanquishing the Moors in a great Battle. He was killed in the Year 768:
Aurelius.
But his Successor Aurelius made a shameful Peace with the Moors, by virtue of
which he was obliged to give them a yearly Tribute of a certain Number of
Virgins. He died in the Year 774. Silo.
His Successor Silo did also nothing worth mentioning, and died in the Year
783. After him reigned Alfonso, Alfonsus I*
the Son of Favila, against whom Mauregatus taking up Arms, forced him out of
the Kingdom; who, to settle himself the better in the Empire, craved assistance
from the Moors, promising them a yearly Tribute of 50 Noble Virgins, and as
many others. He died in the Year 788. His Successor Veremundus did nothing
Praiseworthy, Veremundus.
except that he recalled Alfonso, Sir-named the Chaste; who refusing to pay the
Tribute of the Virgins to the Moors, 791.
gave them several signal Defeats: But having no Children, he made an agreement
with Charles the Great, that he should assist him in driving the Moors out of
Spain; in recompense of which, he was to be his Heir in the Kingdom of Spain.
Charles therefore sent his Son Bernard with a Puissant Army into Spain, but the
Spaniards not liking the agreement, as being not willing to be under the
Command of the French, arose unanimously, and falling upon the French near
Ronceval; just as they were entering into Spain, entirely routed them; in which
Battle the famous Rowland was slain. Thus it is related by the Spanish
Historians, but the French do not agree with them in the relation. Alfonso died
in the Year 844, whose Successor Ramirus most gloriously ushered the Spanish
Liberty. Ramirus,
For the Moors demanding the Tribute according to the agreement made with
Mauregatus, he defeated them in a great Battle, but could not take from them
many of their strong Holds, being withheld partly by Intestine Commotions,
partly by an Inrode the Normans made upon him. He died in the Year 851. After
him succeeded his Son Ordonius, Ordonius I.
who reigned with great applause; he obtained a Victory over the Moors, and
took some of their strong Holds. He died in the Year 862, Alfonso III.
whose Son and Successor Alfonso, Surnamed the Great, fortunately overcame the
Rebels at home, and the Moors abroad. But by laying too heavy Impositions upon
the People, he drew the hatred of a great many upon himself, and was therefore
robbed of the Crown by his Son Garsias. Garsias.
This King Valiantly attackt the Moors, 910.
but died soon after. His Brother also was Victorious against the Moors* 913.
transferring the Seat of the Spanish Kings from Oviedo to Leon. The Origin of
the Kingdoms of Navarre and Arragon.
He died in the Year 923. But besides this Kingdom of Oviedo, there arose
several other Governments in Spain. For Garsias Semenus erected a new Kingdom
in Navarre; and Aznar, Son of Eudo, Duke of Aquitain, having taken several
Places from the Moors, took upon himself, with consent of the beforementioned
Garsias, the Title of Earl of Arragon. Lewis also, Son of Charles the Great,
taking Barcelona, constituted a Governor there, whose Name was Bernard, a
Frenchman, from whom descended the Earls of Barcelona. About the time also of
the abovementioned Kings there were several Earls or Governors of Old
Castile, who acknowledged the foresaid Kings for their Sovereigns. These Earls
being once suspected by King Ordonius, he called them together; who appearing,
were all killed by his Order. Wherefore the Old Castilians, under the Reign of
his Son Favila, Favila II.
a cruel Tyrant, withdrawing themselves from the Kingdom of Leon, chose two
Governors, under the Name of Judges, who were to administer all Civil and
Military Affairs. But this Form of Government did not last long among them.

. 4. Alfonso IV.
After Favila Alphonso the IVth. obtained the Kingdom, under whose Reign
Ferdinand Gonsalvo, Earl of Castile, performed great things both against the
Moors, and Sanctius Abareus, and his Son Garsias, Kings of Navarre, whom he
vanquished. But Alfonso himself being unfit to Govern the Kingdom, surrendered
it to his Brother Ramirus; Ramirus II.
who, with the assistance of the beforementioned Ferdinand, 931.
beat the Moors in several Places. He died in the Year 950, and was succeeded
by his Son Ordonius, Ordonius III
a Valiant Prince; but did not Reign long, leaving the Kingdom to his Brother
Sanctius Crassus. Sanctius.
He was Banished by Ordonius, Sir-named the Wicked; 955.
but soon restored by the help of the Moors. It is said that by certain
Articles made betwixt Sanctius and Ferdinand, Earl of Castile, 965.
it was agreed, that Castile after that time should not be obliged to
acknowledge any dependence on the Kings of Leon. Ramirus III.
He was succeeded by Ramirus, who, 967.
in his Minority, was under Women's tuition; and when grown up, proved very
useless to the Public. For, under his Reign, partly by civil Commotions,
partly by the In-roads made by the Moors, the Kingdom was considerably
weakened, and in great danger of losing more, several Places being taken from
the Christians. Veremund II.
Under Veremund II. also, the Moors did considerable mischief in those Parts,
982.
taking and plundering, besides a great many others, the City of Leon; to which
Misfortunes the civil Commotions did greatly contribute. But at last Veremund
entering into a Confederacy with the King of Navarre, and Garsias, Earl of
Castile, forced the Moors out of his Kingdom. Him succeeded his Son Alfonso V.
Alfonso V.
under whose Reign there were great Intestine Commotions in Castile, 999.
whereby the Moors were encouraged to attack it with such vigor, that they
over-threw Garsias, and took him Prisoner, whose Son Sanctius revenged himself
afterward upon the Moors. After this, great Dissentions being arisen among the
Moors, their Empire was divided into several Parts, each Governor of its
Province assuming the Name of King. Alfonso succeeded his Son Veremund III.
Veremund III
under whose Reign there happened a great Revolution in Spain. For Garsias,
Earl of Castile, 1025.
being upon the point of being married to the King's Sister at Leon, was there
barbarously murdered by some of his Vassals. Castile therefore falling to
Sanctius, King of Navarre, who had married the Sister of Garsias, he took upon
him the Title of King of Castile. This Sanctius, Sir-named Major, also waged
War against Veremund, Castile made a Kingdom.
who had no Children, taking from him, by force of Arms, a considerable part of
the Kingdom. Whereupon a Peace was concluded, whereby it was agreed, that
Sanctius should keep what he had taken before, but that his Son Ferdinand
should Marry Sanctia, the Sister of Veremund, she being Heiress to her Brother,
and to succeed him in the Kingdom of Leon. In this manner was Leon, Navarre and
Castile, Sanctius II.
United in one House: But in the mean while that Sanctius Major was in the
Field against the Moors, Major.
a great Misfortune happened at Home. He had particularly recommended to the
Care of his Queen a very fine Horse, which Garsias, her Eldest Son, had a mind
to have, and would have obtained it from the Mother, if the Master of the Horse
had not opposed it, telling them, that his Father would be greatly displeased
at it. This denial wrought so upon the Son, that he accused his Mother of
committing Adultery with the Master of the Horse. The Matter being examined,
the King's Natural Son, Ramirus, proffered to justify the Innocence of the
Queen in a Duel with Garsias, and the King being uncertain what to do, a Priest
did at last enforce the Confession of the Calumny cast upon the Queen from
Garsias; whereupon Garsias being declared incapable of succeeding his Father in
Castile, which did belong to him by his Mother's side, and Ramirus obtained the
Succession in the Kingdom of Arragon as a recompense of his Fidelity. This
Sanctius Major died in the Year 1035.

. 5. Thus all the Provinces of Spain, The pernici^us Division of Spain.
which were possessed by the Christians, being joined in one House, it seemed
an easy matter to root out the Moors, divided among themselves, and to restore
Spain to its former state, if the same had remained under one Head. But the
division made by Sanctius Major occasioned most bloody and pernicious Wars.
This beforementioned Sanctius had four Sons: To the Eldest Garsias, he left
Navarre and Biscay; to Ferdinand, Castile; to Gonsalvo, Suprarbe and Ripagorsa;
and to Ramirus his Natural Son, Arragon, giving to each of them the Title of
King. These being all ambitious to be equal in Power and Greatness to their
Father, and thinking their Bounds too narrow, fell quickly together by the
Ears. For whilst Garsias was gone in Pilgrimage to Rome, Ramirus endeavored
to make himself Master of Navarre; but the other returning home, ^hased him out
of Arragon. There arose also a War betwixt Ferdinand of Castile and his
Brother-in-law Veremund* King of Leon; wherein the latter being slain in
Battle, Ferdinand became Master of Leon, which did by Right of Succession
belong to him. 1038.
He also took from the Moors a great part of Portugal. After the Death of
Gonsalvo, the Third Son of Sanctius Major, Ramirus made himself Master of his
Territories, and endeavored also to recover, by force of Arms, Arragon from
the King of Navarre. 1045.
Not long after Ferdinand of Castile, and Garsias of Navarre, waged War
together about a certain Tract of Ground, 1053.
wherein Garsias was slain in a Battle. By his Death Ramirus got an opportunity
of recovering Arragon. Ferdinand, Sir-named the Great, died in the Year 1065,
dividing the Empire, to the great detriment of Spain, among his three Sons. The
Eldest Sanctius had Castile, Alfonso, Leon, Garsias Gallicia, and a part of
Portugal, with the Titles of Kings. Sanctius III.
Sanctius waged War with Ramirus of Arragon, 1067.
whom he slew in a Battle, but was beaten back again by Sanctius, Son of
Ramirus, and the King of Navarre. Afterward having driven Alfonso out of his
Territories, and taken Garsias Prisoner, he took possession of the Territories
belonging to his Brothers, but was slain in the Siege of Camora, which City he
endeavored to take from his Sister. Then Alfonso his Brother, Alfonso VI.
who had hitherto dwelt with the Moorish King of Toledo, made himself Master of
Castile and Leon. 1073.
And took from the Moors, besides some other Places, the City of Toledo, which
was in those days esteemed impregnable. 1085.
But the Moors in Spain having received fresh Re-inforcements out of Africa,
got new Courage, and falling upon the Christians, defeated them in two Battles,
till Alfonso got an entire Victory over them, obliging the Moorish King of
Corduba to pay him a yearly Tribute. Nevertheless he was afterward again
over-thrown in a Battle fought with the Moors, where he lost his only Son,
Sanctius, whose Death he revenged soon after upon them. He died in the Year
1109. Vrraca his Daughter was Heiress to the Kingdom, she being Married to
Alfonso King of Arragon; Alfonso VII.
Which Marriage, under pretense of too near a Consanguinity and Adultery
committed by the Queen, was afterward dissolved again. Alfonso VIII.
But, because Alfonso would nevertheless keep Castile as the Dowry of the
Queen, it caused great Intestine Wars and Divisions. For Alfonso VIII. Son of
Vrraca by Raymond of Burgundy, her first Husband, who was come out of France to
assist her Father in the Wars against the Moors, was proclaimed King of
Castile, in the mean while that Alfonso of Arragon was busied in taking,
besides some other Places, the City of Saragossa from the Moors. 1118.
At last a Peace was concluded betwixt Arragon and Castile. 1122.
Afterward Alfonso of Castile made War against the Moors with great Success,
taking from them diverse Places of Note. But Alfonso of Arragon being slain in a
Battle, 1134.
fought with the Moors, and leaving no Children behind him, those of Navarre
chose for their King Garsias, who was of the Race of their former Kings: But
the Arragonians conferred the Crown upon Ramirus, Brother to the deceased King,
who had been a Monk. Alfonso of Castile, in Opposition to both, pretending to
have a Right to these Kingdoms, conquered a great part of them, causing
himself, with consent of Pope Innocent II. who was supposed to do it in spite
to the German Emperors, to be proclaimed Emperor of Spain. But this
difference was also at last composed, it being agreed that Ramirus should give
his only Daughter, together with the Kingdom, to Raymond Earl of Barcelona, by
which means Catalonia and Arragon were United; 1137.
then Alfonso entering into a Confederacy with the Kings of Navarre and Arragon,
Attacked again the Moors, taking from them the City of Almeria, which in those
days was a great Seaport and Harbor for Privateers. Raymond took from the
Moors Tortosa, Lerida, and other strong Holds. Alfonso died in the Year 1157.

. 6. Sanctius IV.
The same Alfonso (though Spain had suffered sufficiently by its being divided
into so many Governments) left to his Son Sanctius, Castile; to Ferdinand, Leon
and Gallicia. Sanctius, who did nothing, that is remarkable, except that he
beat twice those of Navarre, died in the Year 1158, Alfonso IX.
leaving his Son Alfonso IX. a Child of four years of Age. During the time of
his Minority, there were great Disturbances in Castile, occasioned partly by
the Divisions among the Nobility, partly by the Wars with Ferdinando of Leon,
and Sanctius of Navarre, who took several Places from the Castilians. But
coming to his riper years, he did extricate himself, though not without great
difficulty, out of those Troubles. In the War against the Moors, who always
kept the Spanish Kings in Exercise, he suffered extremely, so that he was
obliged to make a Truce with them, because the Kings of Navarre and Leon at the
same time fell upon him. At last there was a Confederacy made betwixt these
Kings, with a certain agreement, how such Places should be disposed of as
should be taken from the Moors. In the Year 1210, a most Memorable Expedition
was undertaken against the Moors, where presented themselves a great many
Foreigners, who came to Signalize themselves; but a great many of them being
soon tired out, returned home. At that time was fought the famous Battle of
Lasa, where 200000 Moors being slain, they lost all their Strength. In this
Battle Sanctius King of Navarre, breaking first through a Chain which
surrounded the Moorish Army, he afterward bore a Chain with an Emerald in his
Shield. In this War was taken from the Moors, besides other Places, the City of
Calatrava. The King of Leon took Alcantara. Alfonso died in the Year 1214,
leaving behind him his Son Henry, Henry.
whose Minority occasioned great disturbances in the Kingdom; he died without
Issue in the Year 1217. He had two Sisters, the Eldest Blanch was Married to
Lewis VIII. Son of Philip Augustus, King of France: The second, Berengaria, was
Married to Alfonso, King of Leon. The Crown, by Right of Succession, did belong
to the Eldest, and her Heirs: But out of a hatred the States bore to Strangers,
they conferred the Kingdom upon Ferdinand, Ferdinandus Sanctus.
Sir-named the Holy, Son of Berengaria, who with all speed imaginable,
possessed himself of it, before he could be prevented by his Father,
surmounting all the difficulties which were raised against him, partly by his
Father, partly by some of the Nobility. It is related by some, That Blanch was
not the eldest Sister, but that some of the Castilian Noblemen did dispute the
right of Berengaria to the Crown, because the Pope had declared her marriage
with Alfonso void, and their Children illegitimate, as being too near in Blood.
1230.
By the death of Alfonso, Leon and Castile were reunited under Ferdinand, at
what time the Moors suffered extremely in their Affairs. 1230.
King James of Arragon took from them Majorca, in the Year 1232. Minorca in the
Year 1234. Yvica in the Year 1238. The City and Kingdom of Valencia. Ferdinand
took from them, besides other places, in the Year 1230, Merida and Badajoz. In
the Year 1236, 1240.
the City and Kingdom of Corduba: Murcia surrendered it self to the protection
of Castile. In the Year 1243, 1248.
Jaen, Sevile, and the greatest part of Andalusia. But whilst he was making
Preparations to carry the War into Africa, he died in the Year 1252.

. 7. Alfonso X.
The History of the next following Years is full of Troubles and Divisions.
Alfonso, it is true, was famous in foreign Countries for his Wisdom and great
skill in Astronomy, so that it is reported of him, that he used to say, That if
God would have advised with him at the time of the Creation of the World, the
World should have been made more uniform; yet he was unfortunate at home, and
hated by his Subjects. The first occasion of which was, that he being desirous
to fill his Treasury, which was exhausted, he caused the current Coin to be
diminished, which enhanc'd the price of every thing, and whilst to prevent
this, he set certain rates on all Commodities, 1256.
which occasioned a general scarcity of all things, the people not being
willing to sell at his rates. He was by some of the Electors chosen Roman
Emperor, but because his Children were then very young, and great Divisions
arose among his Nobles, he delayed for a great many Years to go thither, and to
receive the Imperial Crown, till in the Year 1275, a fancy took him all on a
sudden, to go and take possession of the Empire, though Rudolf of Habsburgh was
already got into the Imperial Throne. But his Journey was ended in Provence, he
returning from thence home by the persuasion of the Pope, who afterward
excommunicated him, and obliged him also to renounce the Title of Emperor.
After the death of Ferdinand, his eldest Son, Sanctius, the younger Brother,
did aim at the Succession, tho Ferdinand had left Children behind him. This
raised a Jealousy betwixt the Father and Son, who rose in open Rebellion
against his Father, being assisted by the major part of the States, which
Commotion however ceased with the death of Alfonso. 1284.
Under the Reign of this King many Battles were fought against the Moors with
various success. Sanctius V.
In the Year also 1282 happened the Sicilian Vespers, The Sicilian Vespers.
by which means Peter King of Arragon obtained the Kingdom of Sicily, he having
before a pretense to it, as having married Constantia the Daughter of Manfred.
Against this Sanctius the Son of Ferdinand, his elder Brother, raised several
disturbances, which he overcame all by his Wisdom: he dyed in the Year 1295.
During the time of the Minority of his Son Ferdinand IV. Ferdinand IV
the Kingdom of Castile was overwhelmed with trouble. After he came to Age, he
undertook an Expedition against the Moors, taking from them Gibraltar, and died
in the flower of his Age. 1312.
Under the Reign of this King James King of Arragon was presented with the
Kingdom of Sardinia, 1297.
by the Pope, who pretended to have a right of disposing of it; and those of
Pisa being then in possession of the same, were afterward beaten out by the
Arragonians. The Minority also of Alfonso XI. Alfonso XI.
was full of troubles. At that time the Moors had again received a great
Reinforcement out of Africa, 1324.
the Castilians nevertheless obtained a most signal Victory over them in the
Year 1340, in which Battle, it is said 200000 were slain on the side of the
Moors, and but only 25000 Spaniards. At that time Alzira was taken, and a Peace
concluded with the King of Granada, under condition that he should be tributary
to Castile. 1350.
This King died in the Siege of Gibraltar, which he had lost before. His Son
Pieter, surnamed The Cruel, Peter the Cruel.
reigned very tyrannically. He drew the hatred of most of his Subjects upon
himself by parting from his Queen Blanch, whom he afterward, tho Innocent, for
the sake of a Concubine, caused to be murdered. This occasioned a Plot against
him, which he suppressed with a great deal of Bloodshed. In the mean while a
War arose betwixt him and Pieter IV. King of Arragon, who assisted the Rebels
in Castile, who had set up for their King, Henry the King's Brother, begotten
on a Concubine called Eleonora Gusman: With him also joined a great many French
Volunteers; so that falling upon Pieter of Castile, 1366.
he forced him to flee into Aquitain. But he having raised there a considerable
Army, returned into Spain, defeated Henry, and obliged him to flee into France,
but did not desist from his Tyranny, whereby he quite lost the Affection of his
Subjects: And Henry having gathered another Army in France returned into
Castile; where being assisted by the Castilians he vanquished Pieter, and in
the flight killed him with his own Hands. 1369.


. 8. Henry II.
Out of the Race of this Henry II. sirnam'd The Bastard, sprang afterward
Princes who proved very mischievous to Spain. Henry himself did at first labor
under great difficulties, the neighboring Nations attacking him every where,
yet he surmounted them, and at last made Peace with them all. But the Favor of
his Nobles he bought with Money. He died in the year 1379. John II.
His Son John endeavored to obtain the Crown of Portugal, of Ferdinand its
King, whose Daughter he had married. But the Portugueses, out of a hatred
against the Castilians, set up for their King, John natural Son to Pieter King
of Portugal, who maintained himself against the Castilians, routing them near
to Aliunbaret; which Victory the Portugueses mightily boast of in their
Histories. Castile was at that time in great danger, the English siding with
the Portugueses, under the Duke of Lancaster, who having married Constantia,
the Daughter of Pieter surnamed The Cruel, pretended to the right of that
Crown, bearing also the Title and Arms: But the business was at last composed,
by marrying the Daughter of the English Duke to the Prince of Castile; after
which also a Peace was concluded with Portugal. 1390.
John died by a fall from his Horse. His Son Henry III. Henry III.
was a sickly Prince, under whose Minority great Divisions arose in the
Kingdom. During the time of his Reign he did nothing remarkable, except that he
restored the Revenues which the Nobles had alienated from the Crown. He died in
the Year 1407, John II.
leaving behind him John II. a Child of two Months old. The tuition of this
Prince was, besides his Mother, committed to Ferdinand his Uncle, to whom the
States did offer the Kingdom, which he generously refusing to accept of, he
obtained afterward the Crown of Arragon. This King being under the tuition of
his Mother grown very Effeminate, only addicted to Voluptuousness, having no
Genius nor inclination for public Business, committed the whole management to
his Favorite Alvarez de Luna, an ambitious Man, which occasioned great
Jealousies in his Nobles against him. This King taking his Favourite's part
against the Nobility, an open War ensued betwixt them, the Rebels being headed
by his own Son, and the City of Toledo declared against the King. At last the
King being tired with the many Inconveniences, cut this Favourite's Head off;
145^.
but died himself in the Year next following. Under the Reign of this King a
War broke out betwixt the Spaniards and those of Granada, wherein the first
signalized themselves to their advantage. In the Year 1420 King Alfonso of
Arragon was adopted by Joan Queen of Naples; but a difference arising betwixt
Joan and Alfonso, she declared the said Adoption void and null, receiving in
his stead Lewis Duke of Anjou; which afterward occasioned bloody Wars betwixt
France and Spain: Yet Alfonso at last kept the upper hand, making himself
Master of Naples, 1442.
and leaving the same to his natural Son Ferdinand. In the Kingdom of Castile
succeeded John his Son Henry IV. Henry IV.
the scandal to the Spanish Nation. He being incapable of begetting Children,
to take away this suspicion, hired one Bertrand Corva, who for this service was
made Earl of Ledesma, to lie with the Queen, who having brought forth a
Daughter called Joan, Henry caused her to be proclaimed Heiress to the Crown.
What confirmed this the more was, that the Queen afterward had another Bastard
begotten by another person. To remove this shame, and to exclude Joan from the
succession of the Crown, the Nobles of Spain entered into an Association; and
putting the Image of Henry upon a Scaffold, they there formally accused him,
and afterward, having taken off his Ornaments, threw it from the Scaffold, at
the same time proclaiming Alfonso, Brother of Henry, their King. From hence
arose most pernicious intestine Wars which ended in bloody Battles. During
these troubles Alfonso died: About the same time, 1468.
Ferdinand Son of John II. King of Arragon, whom his Father had declared King
of Sicily, props'd a Marriage with Isabella, Henry's Sister, to whom the
rebellious Castilians had offered the Crown, and forced Henry to confirm the
right of Isabella to the Crown; whereupon the Nuptials were celebrated, 1469.
but privately: Yet would Henry, by making this Concession void, have
afterward set up again the Title of Joan, whom he had promised in marriage to
Charles Duke of Aquitain, Brother to Lewis XI. King of France; but he dying
suddenly, Henry at last was reconciled to Ferdinand and Isabella, and died in
the Year 1472.

. 9. Ferdinand the Catholic and Isabella. The Kingdom of Castile and Arragon
united.
From this match of Ferdinand (whom the Castilians call The V. or The
Catholic) with Isabella, sprang the great Fortune and Power of Spain, it under
his Reign arriving to that pitch of Greatness, which ever since has made it
both the Terror and the Envy of Europe. This Ferdinand also met with some
obstacles at the beginning of his Reign, the States of Castile having limited
his Power within too narrow Bounds: And Joan, the late King Henry's supposed
Daughter, having contracted a match with Alfonso King of Portugal, who entering
Castile with a puissant Army, caused her to be proclaimed Queen; but the
Portugueses being soundly beaten, the whole design vanished, and Joan retiring
into a Monastery, the civil Commotions were totally suppressed. The next care
of Ferdinand was to regulate such Disorders as were crept into the Government
in the former Reigns; wherefore he caused that Law-book to be compiled, which
from the City of Toro, where it first was published, is called Leges Tauri. In
the Year also 1478, the famous Spanish Inquisition was first instituted by him
against the Moors and Jews, The first beginning of the Spanish Inquisition.
who having once professed themselves Christians, did afterward return to
their Idolatry and Superstitious Worship. This Court of Inquisition is esteemed
an inhuman and execrable Tribunal among other Nations, and carries the greatest
Injustice with it, in ordering the Children to bear the Guilt of their Parents,
nor permitting any body to know his Accusers to clear himself against them: But
the Spaniards ascribe to this Inquisition, the benefit which they enjoy of one
Religion, the variety of which has brought great Inconveniences upon other
States: It Is true, by those means you may make Hypocrites, not sincere
Christians. After he had ordered his Affairs at home, 1497.
and after the death of his Father, taken upon him the Government of Arragon,
he undertook an Expedition against the Moors of Granada, 1481.
which lasted ten Years, wherein the Spaniards were routed near Mallaga, 1483.
but quickly revenged themselves upon their Enemies, taking from them one place
after another, till they at last besieged the City of Granada with 50000 Foot
and 12000 Horse, Granada taken.
and having forced the King Boabdiles to a surrender, they put an end to the
Kingdom of the Moors in Spain, 1492.
after it had stood there for above 700 Years: And to prevent the possibility
of their ever increasing again in Spain, he banished 170000 Families of Jews
and Moors out of Spain, by which means, the Kingdom nevertheless was despoiled
of vast Riches, and of a great number of Inhabitants. After this he took from
them Mazalquivir, Oran, Pennon de Velez and Mellilla, situated upon the Coast
of Barbary. Ferdinand also made use of this opportunity to teach his Nobles,
who were grown overpowerfull, their due Respect and Obedience to the King, and
took upon himself the Sovereign Disposal of all the Spanish Orders of
Knighthood, which were grown to that excess of Riches and Power in Spain, that
they were formidable to its Kings. Much about the same time Christopher
Columbus, 1494.
a Genouese, discovered America, after his Offers had been refused by the Kings
of Portugal and England; America discovered.
and after he had been seven Years soliciting at the Court of Castile for a
supply to undertake the Voyage: At last 17000 Ducats were employed in equipping
three Vessels, out of which Stock such prodigious Conquests and Riches have
accru'd to Spain, that ever since it has aimed at the Universal Monarchy of
Europe. How easily the Spaniards did conquer these vast Countries, and with
what Barbarity they used the Inhabitants, is too long to be related here. Not
long after a War was kindled betwixt Spain and France, which has been the
occasion of inspeakable Miseries in Europe; after these two Warlike Nations
were freed from that Evil which had hitherto diverted them from meddling with
Foreign Affairs, the French having rid themselves from the English, and the
Spaniards from the Moors. For, when Charles VIII. The first rise of the War
betwixt France and Spain.
King of France, undertook an Expedition against the Kingdom of Naples,
Ferdinand did not judge it for his Interest, to let the French, by conquering
this Kingdom, to become Masters of Italy; especially, since by marrying his
Daughters he was in aliance with England, Portugal and the Netherlands, and
besides the then kings of Naples descended from the House of Arragon: And tho
France lately entered with him into a Confederacy, by virtue of which the
French gave up Roussilion to Spain, hoping thereby to bring over Ferdinand to
their Party; nevertheless, when he perceived, That by all his Intercessions he
could not dissuade him from undertaking of this Expedition, he entered into a
Confederacy with the Pope, Emperor, Venice and Milan against France. He also
sent to the assistance of the Neapolitans, Gonsalvus Ferdinand de C^rdua,
afterward sirnam'd The Grand Captain, under whose Conduct the French were
beaten out of the Neapolitan Territories, whilst he himself made an inrode into
Languedock. In the Year 1500 the Moors living in the Mountains near Granada
rebelled, and were not without great difficulty appeased. Afterward an
Agreement was made betwixt Ferdinand and Lewis XII. King of France, concerning
the Kingdom of Naples, under pretense, to make War from thence against the
Turks; which being soon conquered by their joint Power, they divided it
according to their Agreement. But because each of them would have had this
delicious Morsel for himself, they fell at variance concerning the Limits and
some other matters which intervened betwixt two Nations that had an animosity
against one another: Wherefore they came quickly to Blows, and Gonsalvus routed
the French near Ceriniola, took the City of Naples, beat them again near the
River Liris or Garigliano, and taking Cajeta, drove the French a second time
out of the Kingdom of Naples: But Gonsalvus was not rewarded by Ferdinand
according to his Deserts, for he not only lesien'd his Authority at Naples, but
also being suspicious, that he either intended to keep that Kingdom for Philip,
Son-in-law to Ferdinand, or else for himself, Ferdinand undertook a Journey in
Person to Naples, on purpose to bring Gonsalvus handsomely away from thence; and
taking him along with him into Spain, he treated him ill for his great deserts:
In the mean time died the Queen Isabella, 1504.
which occasioned some Differences betwixt Ferdinand and his Son-in-law Philip
the Netherlander, Philip.
Ferdinand pretending, according to the last Will of Isabella, to take upon him
the Administration of Castile. And to maintain his Claim the better, he entered
into a Confederacy with France, by marrying Germana de Foix, Sister to Lewis
XII. hoping thereby to obtain a powerful Assistance, in case Philip should
come to attack him: But Philip coming into Spain, and taking upon him the
Administration of the Government in the name of his Lady Joan, 1506.
Ferdinand retired into Arragon. But Philip died soon after, whose Queen Joan
being not in her right Wits, yet undertook the Administration of the
Government, not without the opposition of some of the chief of the Nobility;
wherefore, the Administration of the Government was by common consent committed
to Ferdinand after his return from Naples, notwithstanding the Emperor
Maximilian did pretend to it, in the right of his Grandson Charles. In the Year
1508 Ferdinand entered into a Confederacy against the Venetians, whereby he
regained the Cities of Calabria, Brindisi, Otranto, Trano, Mola and Polignano,
which the Venetians had formerly obtained for some Services done to the
Neapolitans. But as soon as Ferdinand perceived that the Venetians were like to
be swallowed up by the Emperor and France, the Pope and he left the
Confederacy, thinking it more convenient to preserve the State of Venice; since
by adding the Territories of Venice to those of Milan, which were then
possessed by the French, they would have grown too powerful in Italy. Hence
arose a War, in which John d' Albert, King of Navarre, taking part with the
French, was upon instigation of Ferdinand excommunicated by the Pope; under
which pretext Ferdinand took an opportunity to possess himself of that part of
the Kingdom, 1512.
which lies on the Spanish side of the Pyrenean Mountains; which since that
time the French have in vain endeavored to recover. Ferdinand conquered
Na^^arre.
In the Year 1510 the Spaniards took Bugia and Tripolis upon the Coast of
Barbary; but were routed in the Island of Gerbis. This wise King died in the
Year 1516.

. 10. Him succeeded his Grandson by his Daughter, Charles, Charles.
the fifth Emperor of that Name, who, with the assistance of the Cardinal
Ximenes, immediately took upon himself the Administration of the Government,
his Mother, to whom the same did belong, being incapable of Administering it.
This Prince, who, since Charles the Great, was the most Potent Prince that has
been in Europe, spent the greatest part of his Life in Travels and Wars. In the
very beginning of his Reign, there were some Commotions in Spain, which were
soon appeased. John D' Albert also made an Inrode into the Kingdom of Navarre,
in hopes to recover it, but was quickly repulsed. But with the French, during
his whole Life, he waged continual Wars. For, though in the Year 1516, he made
a League with King Francis I. whereby the Daughter of Francis was promised to
him in Marriage; yet was this Tie not strong enough to withhold the Animosity
of these two courageous Princes. Charles, who was flushed up with the great
Success of his House, had always in his Mind his Motto, Plus ultra. But
Francis, who was surrounded everywhere by so potent a Prince, did oppose his
Designs with all his Might, fearing, lest his Power should grow too strong both
for him and all the rest of Europe. Charles obtained a most particular
advantage. 1519.
When the Imperial Dignity was conferred upon him; to obtain which for himself,
or somebody else, Francis had labored with all his Might, Wars betwixt
Charles and France.
but in vain. Robert de Mare, Lord of Sedan, withdrawing himself from the
Emperor, and putting himself under the Protection of France, with whose
assistance he attacked the Lord of Emmerick, who was under the Emperor's
protection, administered new matter of jealsousie, which quickly broke out into
an open flame in the Netherlands. In which War the French lost Tournay and St.
Amant, but beat the Imperialists from before Meziores. Charles also did intend
to drive the French out of Milan upon instigation of Pope Leo X. Charles
pretending that Francis had neglected to receive this Duchy in fief of the
Empire, beat the French near Bicoque. Fonterabie also, which they had taken by
surprise, was re-taken by force from the French. It proved also very
disadvantageous to them, that the Constable Charles of Bourbon, sided with the
Emperor; and entering Provence, 1524.
besieged Marseilles; Which nevertheless he was forced to quit, as soon as
Francis marched with all his Forces that way into Italy to recover the
Milaneze. Where he took the City of Milan, but at the Siege of Pavia was
Attacked by the Imperial Generals, who totally routed his Army; and having
taken him Prisoner, 1525.
carried him into Spain. The King himself was in part the occasion of this
loss, he having sent a great part of his Army toward Naples and Savona; and
those that remained with him, were most Italians, Swiss and Grisons, who did
not perform their Duty in the Battle; and most of his Generals were of opinion,
to avoid the hazard of a Battle, by retiring under the City of Milan. The
French also succeeded ill in the Diversion, which they endeavored to give the
Emperor; for by the help of Charles Duke of Geldres, and the Friselanders, for
they were at that time worsted by Charles's Forces. There were some that
advised Charles, to set Francis at liberty without any Ransom, and by this Act
of Generosity to oblige him for ever: But he followed the Counsels of such as
did advise to make advantage of so great a Prisoner. He therefore imposed very
hard Conditions upon him, which Francis refusing to accept of, out of
discontent fell into a dangerous Sickness, so that Charles himself went to
visit and comfort him; Though he was advised to the contrary by his Chancellor
Gallinaca, who alleged that such a Visit, where he did not intend to promise
the Prisoner his liberty, would rather seem to proceed from Covetousness, and
fear of losing the advantage of his Ransom, than from any civility or good
inclination toward him. And this Sickness was the real cause, why at last the
Treaty, concerning his Liberty, which had been so long on foot, was finished,
the Emperor fearing that his Discontent might plunge him into another
Sickness, or Death it self. In the mean time, the prodigious Success which
attended the Emperor, did raise no small jealousy among other Princes; and by
instigation of Pope Clement VII. three Armies were raised to maintain the
Liberty of Italy. To prevent this Storm, and especially to withdraw the Pope
from the Confederacy, the Emperor's Generals marched directly against Rome,
which they took by Storm, (where Charles of Bourbon was slain,) and for several
days together plundered the City, and committed great Outrages. The Pope
himself was besieged in the Castle of St. Angelo; and Charles, at the same time
that the Pope was enclosed, his own Forces caused Prayers to be made for 40
days together, Rome taken by Charles V.
for his deliverance; at last, forced by Famine, he was forced to Surrender,
and to renounce the abovementioned League. 1527.
The Conditions, on which Francis had obtained his Liberty, were, That Francis
should surrender the Dukedom of Burgundy; to renounce the Sovereignty over
Flanders and Artois; quit all his pretenses upon Naples and Milan; to marry the
Emperor's Sister Eleonora, and to give his two Sons as Pledges for the
performance of these Articles. But as soon as he got into his own Kingdom he
protested against the Treaty, which was extorted from him during his
Imprisonment: And making a League with the Pope, England, Venice, the Suiss and
Florence, sent an Army into Italy under the Command of Odet de Foix, Lord of
Lautree. This occasioned not only that very gross words passed betwixt these
two Princes, but they also gave one another the lie, and a Challenge passed
betwixt them: But Lautree, who had at first great success, being destroyed with
his Army by Sickness in the Siege of Naples, A Peace mad^ at Cambray.
a Peace was at last concluded at Cambray, in the Year 1529, by virtue of which
Francis paid for his Sons 2550000 Rixdollars, renounced his Pretensions to
Flanders, Artois, Milan, and Nalpes, and married Eleonora, Sister to the
Emperor; out of which Marriage, if a Son should be born, he was to be put into
the possession of the Dukedom of Burgundy. In the Year 1530, Charles was
Crowned by Pope Clement VIII. at Bononia, whereby he obtained from the
Emperor, that the Commonwealth of Florence should be made a Principality, and
the said City was by force obliged to admit this Change. Alexander de Medicis
being constituted Duke, to whom the Emperor married his natural Daughter
Margaret. In the same Year the Bishop of Vtrecht resigned the Sovereignty of
that City, and the Province of Over-yssel, into the Hands of Charles, and the
Provinces of Geldren, Zutphen, Groningen; the Twente and Drente also fell into
his Hands. In the Year 1535, he went with a puissant Army into Africa, took
Tunis and Goletta, restoring the Kingdom of Tunis to Muleassa, who was banished
before by Haradin Barbarossa, but in Goletta he left a Garrison. In the Year
1537, another War broke out betwixt Charles and Francis: For the latter could
not digest the loss of Milan; and being advised by the Pope, that whenever he
intended to Attack Milan, he should first make himself Master of Savoy; and
Francis Sforzia dying at the same time, he fell upon Charles Duke of Savoy; and
under pretense, that he defrauded his Mother of her Dowry, drove him quite out
of Savoy, and conquered a great part of Piedmont. But the Emperor, who was
resolved to annex the Duchy of Milan to his Family, came to the assistance of
the Duke of Savoy, and at the Head of his Army, entering Provence, took Aix, and
some other Places; but his Army being much weakened with Sickness, for want of
Provisions, he was forced to retire again. In the Netherlands, the Imperialists
took St. Paul and Monstrevil, Killing great Numbers of the French. 1538.
Through Mediation of the Pope, Paul III. a Truce of 10 Years was concluded at
Nissa in Provence; after which these two Princes had a friendly Interview at
Aigues Mortes. And in the next following Year, the Emperor, against the advice
of his friends, ventured to take his way through the very heart of France,
being desirous with all possible speed to compose the Disorders, which were
arisen at Ghent. Yet had he before by the Connestable Anna Montmorancy,
cajolled Francis into a belief, that he would restore to him the Duchy of
Milan, which however he never intended to perform. In the Year 1541, he
undertook an Expedition against Algiers in Africa, at the latter end of the
Year, against the advice of the Pope and others of his friends, who persuaded
him to stay till next Spring. He there Landed his Army with good success; but a
few days after such prodigious Storms and Rains did fall, which dispersed his
Ships, and spoiled the Firelocks of the Soldiers, that the Emperor was
obliged, with the loss of one half of his Army, 1542.
to return into Spain. In the Year next following, Francis broke with him
again, under pretense that his Ambassadors Caesar Fregosus and Anthony Rinco,
which he had sent through the Milanese, by the way of Venice, to go to the
Ottoman Port, were upon the River Po Murdered by Orders of the Governor of
Milan. Wherefore William Duke of Cleves entering Brabant on one side, the Duke
of Orleans on the other side, took Luxemburgh and some other places. The
Dauphin besieged Perpignan, but was obliged to raise the Siege: The famous
Pirate Barbarossa, did by the instigation of Francis, great mischief on the
Seacoasts of Calabria, destroying Nissa in Provence by Fire. Charles seeing
himself at once attacked in so many places, setting aside the Differences which
were arisen about the Divorce betwixt Henry and his Aunt Catherine, made a
League with Henry King of England, wherein it was agreed, That the Emperor
should force his way through Champaigne, whilst Henry entered into Picardy,
that so they might, by joining their Forces, ruin the whole Power of France.
The Emperor therefore, with an Army of 50000 men, beat the Duke of Cleves in
the Netherlands, forcing him to surrender Guelderland; and after having
recovered the places in Luxemburgh, taken before by the French* entered into
Campaigne, taking by force Lygny and Disier: Francis kept with his Army on the
other side of the River Marne, and not daring to fight the Imperialists,
contented himself to ravage the Country which they were to march through, to
endeavor to cut off their Provisions: Nevertheless the Imperial Army found a
sufficient quantity at Espernay and Chasteau Thierry. This occasioned such a
Terror and Confusion in Paris, that the Citizens were for leaving the City, if
the King, by his Presence, had not encouraged them to stay. And if, on the
other side, King Henry had acted according to the Agreement, they might easily
have got the French Army betwixt them, and in all likelihood, would have put a
period to the French Greatness. But Henry being detained at the Sieges of
Bologne and Monstrevil, sent word to the Emperor, That he would not stir
further, till he had made himself Master of these two places. Charles then
began to suspect the King of England, whom he perceived merely to be for his
own Interest, and did not think fit to trust any longer; considering also with
himself what vast charges he was at in this War, and how thereby his Designs
were retarded which he had projected against the Protestants in Germany; as
also, that his Forces had received a considerable overthrow in Italy, near
Carizola, from the French, he made thereupon a Peace with Francis at Crespy in
the County of Valois. Peace made at Crespy.
Then Charles undertook to subdue the Protestants, 1544.
entering, for that purpose, into a League with Pope Paul III. Charles wages War
against the Protestants in Germany.
which War he carried on with such success, that without great trouble he
overthrew them, making their chief Heads, the Elector of Saxony and Landtgrave
of Hesse, 1547.
Prisoners: The Emperor made use of this Policy, in fomenting Divisions
betwixt Duke Maurice and his Cousin, the Elector of Saxony; and refusing to
fight with them at first, he thereby protracted the War, foreseeing, that a
Confederacy under so many Heads would not last long, and that the Cities, which
contributed the most toward it, would grow quickly weary of the Charges of the
War. Francis also, and Henry VIII. were both of them lately dead, who else,
questionless, with all their Power, would have opposed his designs of
oppressing the Protestants, thereby to make himself absolute Master in Germany.
The Heads also of the Protestant League did greatly contribute to their own
Misfortune, they having let slip several opportunities, especially, at first,
before the Emperor had rightly settled his Matters, when they might have done
him considerable mischief; nevertheless Charles was no great gainer by these
Victories, because he used the Conquered, whom he was not able to keep in
Obedience by force, with too much rigor, keeping the Captive Princes in too
close an Imprisonment. He also disobliged Maurice Elector of Saxony, after his
Father-in-law the Landtgrave of Hesse, had by his persuasions surrendered
himself to the Emperor. The Elector therefore being persuaded by the Prayers
of his Children and others, who objected to him, That by his Assistance their
Religion and Liberty were in danger of being lost, he fell unawares upon
Charles, whom, 1550.
under favor of the Night and a Fogg, he forced to retire from Inspruck. After
this exploit a Peace was concluded by the Mediation of King Ferdinand, where,
Treaty at Passaw.
in the Treaty at Passaw, the Protestant Religion was established. In the mean
while Henry II. King of France, coming to the assistance of the Protestants,
had taken Metz, Toul and Verdun, The Emperor attackt Metz again with great
fury, but having been fain to leave it after a considerable loss sustained, he
discharged his Fury upon Hesdin and Tervanne, which he levelled with the
Ground. In Italy the Imperialists took Siena, 1554.
which afterward Philip II. gave to Cosmus Duke of Tuscany, reserving to
himself the Sovereignty and some Seaports. At last, Charles tired with the
Toils of the Empire, and the Infirmities of his Body, resigned the Imperial
Crown to his Brother Ferdinand, who would not consent that the same should come
to his Son Philip. But to Philip he gave all his Kingdoms and Territories,
except those in Germany (which fell to Ferdinand's share) reserving to himself
only a yearly allowance of 100000 Ducats. Abdication of Charles.
He had made a little before, a Truce of five Years with France, which was soon
broke by the persuasions of the Pope, who endeavoring to drive the Family of
Colonna out of their Possessions; and they being upheld by the Spaniards, the
French sided with the Pope. But this War proved very unfortunate to the French,
they being routed at St. Quintins, lost that City, and the Marshall de Thermes
was also soundly beaten near Gravelin. Peace betwixt Spain and France, 1559.
At last a Peace was again concluded at Chateau en Chambrasis, by virtue of
which, the French were obliged to restore all what they had taken in Italy,
which had been the occasion of some Bloodshed by Francis and Henry. But
underhand it was agreed, That both the King of Spain and France should
endeavor to root out the Heretics (as they called them) which succeeded
afterward very ill both in Spain and France. In the Year before this, viz.
Charles dies.
1558, died Charles in the Convent of St. Justus in Spain, where he spent his
last days in quiet. His last Will and Testament (tho never so rational) was so
far from being pleasing to the Inquisition, that it wanted but little of having
been burnt as Heretical. But his Father Confessor and the rest of the Monks in
that Convent, who had been present, were forced to undergo the severe Judgment
of this Court.

. 11. Philip II.
Under the Reign of Philip II. the greatness of the Spanish Monarchy began to
be at a stand; neither had its Kings the same success, as formerly, to get vast
Kingdoms by Marriages. For from the match of Philip with Mary Queen of England,
came no Children. And truly, in my Opinion, the Spanish Greatness received the
first shock at that time, when Charles V. surrendered his Dominions in Germany
to his Brother Ferdinand, and afterward had him elected King of the Romans; by
which means the Power of this House was divided, and the Imperial Crown
separated from the Spanish Monarchy. Charles would fain have afterward
persuaded Ferdinand to transfer the Succession of the Imperial Crown upon
Philip; but he being persuaded by his Son Maximilian to keep what he had got,
would in no ways part with it. He was also much beloved by the Germans, whereas
they had an aversion against Philip; who being a mere Spaniard, did not as much
as understand the German Tongue: And Ferdinand and his Successors proved very
good Princes, who were not fond of the Spanish methods of Governing. But that
which gave the greatest shock to the Spanish Greatness, were the Troubles
arisen in the Netherlands. The reason why this Evil grew incurable, was,
because Philip being over fond of his ease, would rather sit still in Spain,
than by his Presence endeavor to stop the current before it ran too violent,
though his Father did not think it too much, to venture himself at the Discretion
of Francis his Rival, to appease the Tumults arisen only in the City of Ghent.
Another reason was, That he took the most violent course, by sending the Duke
of Alva, a cruel Man, among the Netherlunders, who being used to a mild sort of
Government, were thereby put into despair; especially when they were informed,
That the Inquisition had declared Criminal, not only those who were guilty of
the Rebellion, and pulling down the Images, but also all such Catholics as had
not made resistance against them. The Saying of Anthony Vargas, a Spanish
Minister, is a famous as ridiculous; Haeretici diruerunt templa, boni nihil
fecerunt contra, ergo omnes debent patibulari; i. e. The Heretics demolished
the Churches, the Catholics did not oppose them, wherefore they ought all to
be hanged. Besides this, the Spaniards were much hated by the Netherlanders,
not only because of the great differences there was betwixt the Manners of
these Nations, but also, because these latter had been in great esteem with
Charles V. who was very like them in all his Behavior: On the contrary, Philip
only encouraged the Spaniards, who having an extraordinary conceit of their own
Abilities, and taking the Netherlanders for Cowards, did not think they had
Courage enough to oppose their Designs. The Spaniards also were well pleased to
see the Netherlanders to begin first, hoping the King would thereby take an
opportunity to clip their Privileges, and by making them all alike obtain an
absolute Dominion over them: This done, they hoped to make these Countries
their Armory and Storehouse, from whence they might with more ease invade
France and England, and raise the Spanish Monarchy to the highest degree of
Greatness. But the Netherlanders, on the other side, were resolved not to part
with their Liberty, nor to be treated as a conquered Nation. And when Philip,
at his departure, would leave Spanish Garrisons in the Netherlands, and to
soften the matter, constituted the Prince of Orange and Earl of Egmont,
Generals over them, yet could they not be persuaded to accept of the same,
alleging, That the Netherlanders had got but very small Advantages by the
Peace with France, which they had procured by their own Valor, if they now
should be in danger of being subdued themselves by a foreign Power. The
neighboring Princes also, but especially Elizabeth, Queen of England, took an
opportunity by these troubles to empty the vast Treasures of Spain, and to
exhaust its Strength. The Protestant Princes also of Germany, who hated the
Spaniards, were glad of this opportunity, and assisted the Prince of Orange
upon all occasions. And the Emperors thought it more convenient to be at quiet
and to please the Germans, than to be too forward to assist their Cousins.
These Commotions in the Netherlands did also occasion the War betwixt Philip
and Elizabeth, War with England.
Queen of England, she not only affording assistance to the Netherlanders, but
also the English Privateers doing considerable mischief to the Spanish
West India Ships; and the famous Francis Drake plundered the very Southern
Coast of America. On the other side, Philip, by supporting the Rebels in
Ireland, proved very troublesome to Queen Elizabeth. At last Philip did resolve
with one stroke to put down the whole Strength of England; to which purpose he
was equipping a great Fleet for several Years together, which he called The
Invincible, the like never had been seen before those times. The Fleet
consisted of 150 Sail of Ships, which carried 1600 great pieces of Brass
Cannon, and 1050 of Iron; 8000 Seamen, 20000 Soldiers, besides Volunteers; the
Charge amounted daily to 30000 Ducats, but the whole Preparations to twelve
Milions of Ducats. The Pope Sixtus V. also excommunicated Queen Elizabeth,
assigning her Kingdom to Philip. But all these Preparations came to nothing,
the greatest part of this Fleet being destroyed, The Spanish Armado destroyed.
partly by the English and Dutch, partly by Tempests, few returned home, and
that in a most miserable condition, so that there was scarce a Noble Family in
Spain but went into Mourning for the loss of some Friend or another. But the
evenness of Temper is much to be admired in Philip, who received this bad news
without the least alteration, giving only this Answer, I did not send them out
to fight against the Winds and Seas. 1588.
Afterward the English and Dutch Fleets being joined, beat the Spanish Fleet
near Cadiz, taking from the Spaniards, not only a great many Ships richly
laden, but also the City of Cadiz it self; which nevertheless was again left by
the English General, 1596.
the Earl of Essex, after he had plundered it, to the great dishonor of the
English, who might from thence have done a great deal of mischief to the
Spaniards. Neither did Spain get any advantage by having entangled it self in
the Troubles, and (as it was called) the holy League, made in France. Philip,
it is true, proposed to himself to have met with a fair opportunity, by
excluding the Bourbon Family to annex the Crown of France to his House, or by
raising Divisions in this Kingdom to swallow up one piece or another, or to
assist one of his Creatures in obtaining that Crown; or, at least, by dividing
it into so many Factions, so to weaken its Strength, as that it should not be
able to recover it self for a considerable time. But by the Courage and good
Fortune of Henry IV. all these Measures were broke, and he declaring himself a
Catholic, took away the Foundation whereupon the League was built. Thus Philip
lost his vast Expenses; and besides this, suffered extremely in his Affairs;
for in the mean time that he sent the Duke of Parma, Governor of the
Netherlands, to the assistance of the League in France, the Confederate
Netherlanders had leisure given them to put themselves and their Affairs into a
good posture: Philip acted in this business according to the old proverb; That
he who hunts two Hares at once, commonly catches neither of them: Besides,
Henry IV. after he had restored his Affairs in France, 1594.
declared War against Philip; which was nevertheless carried on in the
Netherlands with various success, the Count de Fuentes taking Cambray in the
Year 1595, and in the Year next following, the Archduke Albert, Calais. On the
other side, Henry recovered Fere from the Spaniards. In the Year 1597, the
Spaniards took Amiens by surprise, which Henry recovered not without great
difficulty. At last, a Peace was concluded in the same Year betwixt France and
Spain at Vervin, Peace made at Vervin.
because Philip was unwilling to leave his Son, who was but young, entangl'd in
a War with so great a Captain as Henry was; and Henry was sensible, that the
Kingdom of France being enervated did greatly want a Peace. Philip also waged
several Wars against the Turks; for the Pyrate Dragutes had taken from the
Spaniards Tripoli, 1551.
after they had been in possession of it for forty Years. To retake this,
Philip sent a strong Army, 1560.
which took the Isle of Gerbis; but being afterward beaten by the Turkish
Fleet, he lost, together with the Island, 18000 Men and 42 Ships. In the Year
1564 Philip retook Pegnon de Velez. In the Year 1566 Maltha was besieged by the
Turks during the space of four Months, which was relieved by Philip, he forcing
the Turks to raise the Siege with great loss. In the Year 1571 the Confederate
Fleet of Spain, Venice, and other Italian States, under the Command of Don John
of Austria, did obtain a most signal Victory over the Turkish Fleet near
Lepanto, whereby the Turkish Naval Strength was weakened to that degree, that
they were never afterward so formidable in those Seas, as they were before:
But else the Spaniards had got no great Reputation in this War; for by their
delays that considerable Island of Rhodes was lost before. In the Year 1573 Don
John of Austria passed with an Army into Africa, to retake Tunis, which
succeeded so well, that he forced the City, and added a new Fortification to
it: But in the Year next following, the Turks sent a puissant Army thither, and
retook the City, its Fortifications being not quite perfected, as also Goletta,
which being not very well provided with all Necessaries, was lost by the
unskilfulness and Cowardice of the Governor; so that the whole Kingdom of
Tunis, to the great prejudice of the Christians, fell into the Hands of the
Turks. At home Philip had a War with the Marans of Granada, who rebelling
against him, were supported by the Algerines, and could not be subdued but with
great difficulty; and if the Turks had been quick enough in giving them timely
assistance, it might have proved very dangerous to Spain. This Rebellion did
not end till the Year 1570, after it had continued for three years. 1592.
There were also some Commotions among the Arragonians; who pretended to take
part with Anthony Perez, who standing upon his privilege against the Process
that was made him for having upon the King's Orders, murdered Escovedo, an
intimate Friend of Don John of Austria. Philip, by this intended to purge
himself of the Infamy of the fact, and at once to revenge himself upon Perez,
who had been unfaithful to him in some Love Intrigue, aiming at that himself
which he had undertaken to procure for the King. And tho this did not much
redound to the honor of Philip, yet by this he took an opportunity to retrench
the Privileges of the Arragonians. In the Year 1568, Philip caused his Son
Charles to be killed, under pretense that he had endeavored to kill his
Father; and not long after, the Queen Isabella also, Charles's Stepmother,
died, not without suspicion of having been poisoned. But a great many are of
opinion, that some Love Intrigues were the occasion of their death, which is
the more probable, because the said Isabella being intended for the Bride of
Charles, had been taken by the Father in spite of his Son. Portugal falls to
Spain.
Henry King of Portugal dying, there were several pretenders to that Crown,
among whom was Philip, 1579.
as being born of Isabella, Emanuel King of Portugal's Daughter, who maintained
his Right by the Sword; and under the Conduct of the Duke of Alva conquered the
Kingdom, forcing Anthony, the Bastard, who had caused himself to be proclaimed
King, to fly into England, and from thence into France, 1595.
where he died an Exile in Paris: Only the Island of Tercera held out for some
time longer, which the French intending to relieve, were totally routed by the
Spaniards. And thus Philip became Master, both of the East and West Indies, the
two greatest Mines of Riches in the World. Nevertheless, the French, English
and Hollanders had found out a way to ease him of these prodigious Revenues.
For Philip, just before his death, did confess, That the War with the
Netherlands only, had cost him 564 Millions of Ducats. And truly, it is very
probable, that trusting to his vast Riches he was thereby prompted to his
ambitious Designs, and to undertake more than proved beneficial to him. He died
in the Year 1598.

. 12. Philip III.
Philip the IIId's Father had left him the Kingdom in Peace with France, but
the Dutch War grew every day the heavier upon the Spaniards. The Spaniards did
hope, that after Philip II. in his latter days had married his Daughter Clara
Eugenia to Albert Archduke of Austria, giving her the Netherlands for a Dowry,
the Dutch would become more pliable, and reunite themselves with the rest of
the Provinces in the Netherlands, as having now a Prince of their own, and not
liable to the Spanish Government. But because the Hollanders did by no means
like this bait, and at the Siege of Ostend gave a taste to the Spaniards, both
of their Strength and firm Resolution, that they were resolved to stand it out
with them, the Spaniards resolved to make Peace with them; especially since the
Hollanders had found out the way to the East Indies, where they made great
progress; France also enjoying a peaceable Government under Henry IV. and
increasing in Power, it was feared, That if the French should fall upon Spain
with fresh Forces, which had been tired out by this tedious War, it might prove
fatal to Spain. They were also in hopes, that the fear of a foreign Enemy
ceasing, the Hollanders in time of Peace might fall into Divisions among
themselves; or at least, that Peace and Plenty might abate their Courage. The
Spaniards did sufficiently show their eagerness for a Peace with Holland, by
setting the Treaty on foot in the Hague, by sending Ambrosius Spinola himself,
among others, thither as Ambassador, and by granting and allowing them the
East India Trade. Whereas the Hollanders carried it very high, and would not
abate an ace of their Proposals. Truc^ with Holland.
At last, a Truce for twelve Years was concluded with Holland. In the Year next
following, 1609.
Philip banished 900000 Marans (the Offspring of the ancient Moors, who had
professed themselves Christians only for a show) out of Spain, because they
intended to raise a Rebellion, and had underhand craved Assistance from Henry
IV. In the same Year the Spaniards took the Fortress of Arache, situated on the
Coast of Africa; as they had likewise possessed themselves before of the
Harbor of Final, 1602.
near Genoua, in the Year 1619. Those of the Valtelins did withdraw themselves
from the Grisons. The Spaniards sided with the former, in hopes to unite them
with the Dukedom of Milan. But France taking part with the Grisons, the
business was protracted for a great many years, till at last matters were
restored to their former state. This difference did rouse up all Italy, and the
Pope himself took part with the Grisons, tho Protestants, assisting them in the
recovery of the Valtelins. The War being broken out in Germany, the Spaniards
sent Ambrose Spinola out of the Netherlands into the Palatinate, part of which
was subdued by them. Philip III. died in the Year 1621.

. 13. Philip IV.
His Son Philip IV. at the very beginning of his Reign made great alterations
in the Court, sending away the Creatures of the Duke de Lerma, the Favorite of
his Father: He himself foreseeing what was likely to befall him, did timely
obtain a Cardinal's Cap, fearing the King should aim at his Head. With the
beginning of the Reign of this King, the Truce with Holland being expired, the
War was rekindled, in which Spinola was forced to raise the Siege of Bergen op
Zoom, because Christian Duke of Brunswick, and General Mansfeld, 1622.
having before routed the Spaniards near Fleury, came to the assistance of the
Hollanders. Pieter Heyn surprised the Spanish Silver Fleet, with a Booty of 12
Millions of Gilders. 1628.
At the same time the Hollanders did settle themselves in Brasile, taking the
City of Olinda. In the Year 1629, the Spaniards being in hopes to make a
considerable Diversion, and to put the Dutch hard to it, made an Inrode into
the Velaw, and took Amersfort, whilst the Hollanders were busied in the Siege
of Hertogenbusk Bois le Duc, but the Hollanders taking Wesel by surprise, they
were obliged to retreat with all speed over the River Yssel, for fear, that
their retreat should be cut off by the Dutch. In the Year 1639, a great Fleet
was sent out of Spain into the Channel, under the Command of Don Oquendo, which
was destroyed by Martin Tromp, in the Downs, in the very sight of the English.
What the Intention was of sending so great a Fleet this way, was not generally
known at that time; but afterward it was divulged, that the same was intended
against Sweden, and that there were 20000 Men ready in Denmark, which, as soon
as this Fleet should have appeared before Gothenburg, were to have joined them
and entered Swedeland. Afterward the War was protracted, but most to the
disadvantage of the Spaniards, till the Year 1648, when the Spaniards concluded
a Peace with the Hollanders at Munster, declaring them a free People,
renouncing all their pretenses over them, and leaving to them all the places
which they had taken from them. And notwithstanding France did its utmost to
hinder the conclusion of this Peace, at least so long, till that Kingdom might
also make a Peace with Spain; but the Hollanders did not think it advisable to
stay their leisure, fearing, that if Spain was brought too low, the French
would thereby be enabled to swallow up the Netherlands, and become their
immediate Neighbors, which they foresaw would prove fatal to their State. It
was also alleged, and that with good reason, That it was time to put up the
Sword, when all those things might be obtained by fair means for which it was
drawn at first; and that the Province of Holland had contracted considerable
Debts. Spain also perceiving, that the Dutch were not to be overcome by force,
was willing to agree to those Conditions, being glad to be rid once of so
troublesome an Enemy, that they might have the more leisure to be even with
France and Portugal. It is reported, that this War cost the Spaniards above One
thousand five hundred Millions of Ducats. In the Year 1628, Vincent II. Duke of
Mantua, dying, the Emperor endeavored to exclude Charles Duke of Nevers, he
being a Frenchman born, from the succession of that Dukedom, under pretense of
having neglected some Matters appertaining to it, as being a Fief of the
Empire. The Savoyards also took this opportunity to renew their Pretensions
upon Montferrat, and the Spaniards, in hopes of getting something in the Fray,
besieged Casal. On the other side, the French took part with the Duke of
Nevers, raised the Siege of Casal, and put the Duke of Nevers into possession
of the Dukedom of Mantua, which did much weaken the Reputation of the Spaniards
in Italy. In the Year 1635, the French denounced War against Spain, under
pretense, that they had taken prisoner Philip Christopher Elector of Treves, he
being under the protection of the King of France, and that they had driven the
French Garrison out of Treves, and possessed themselves of that City; but the
true reason was, that it was thought high time to bridle the Ambition and Power
of the House of Austria, which after the Battle of Nordlingen, and the Peace
concluded at Prague, was grown very formidable, and France being well settled
at home, began to be in a very flourishing condition. The French therefore,
after they had beat the Prince Tomaso near Avennes, entered the Netherlands
with a great Army, but the Success did not answer Expectation; the Dutch
especially being unwilling, that France should make any considerable Conquests
on that side: Neither did the French gain any thing in Italy. In the Year next
following the Prince of Conde was forced to raise the Siege of Dole; and the
Spaniards entering Picardy filled Paris it self with Terror and Confusion.
Gallas also, the Imperial General, endeavored to enter Burgundy with his Army,
but did not advance much. In the Year 1637 the Spaniards lost Landresi. In the
next Year they were forced to retire from before Leucate with great loss; but
the Prince of Conde, on the other hand, 1639.
had the same ill fortune before Fonterabia; the Spaniards beat the French
soundly near Thionville, but lost Hesdin, Salses and Satins; and in the Year
following, the strong City of Arras, they being besides this, routed near
Casal: Nor could they with all their Strength force the Earl of Harcourt from
before Turin. Catalonia rebels.
In the same Year also the Catalonians did revolt, they being first
dissatisfied at the Pride of the Duke d'Olivarez, the King's Favorite, against
whom they had made great complaints, but were nevertheless sorely oppressed by
him. These discontents increased after the Catalonians, endeavoring the relief
of Salses, were beaten, they pretending that they were not duly assisted by
the Castilians, and therefore left the Army and marched home. Conte Duca taking
this opportunity, represented them very ill to the King, and caused their
Privileges to be considerably diminished, and their Country to be oppressed
with their quartering of Soldiers. This put them in open Rebellion, and
Barcellona beginning first, they drove the Spaniards out of Catalonia. Then
seeking Aid from France, they at last, after the Spaniards had cut off by their
Cruelty, all hopes of Mercy, put themselves under the Protection of that
Kingdom: And it was eleven Years before the Spaniards could quite recover
Catalonia, the intestine Commotions in France presenting them with a fair
opportunity; for Barcellona, being not timely relieved, was forced to surrender
to the Spaniards; 1651.
but the Portugueses withdrawing themselves from the Obedience of the
Spaniards, Portugal falls off from Spain.
gave a great shock to the Spaniards. Philip II. tho he had conquered this
Kingdom, 1640.
yet had always endeavored by mildness, and by preserving their Privileges, to
mitigate the hatred which the Portugueses bore to the Castilians, which were
grown to that height, that the Priests used to insert it in their Prayers, That
God would be pleased to deliver them from the Castilian Yoke: But after his
death the Spanish Ministers had not been so careful by maintaining their
Privileges, to keep the affection of the Portugueses, but rather had treated
them as a conquered Nation; which so exasperated the Portugueses, that as soon
as they saw Spain begin to decline, 1636.
immediately some places in Portugal did rebel, but were soon after reduced to
their former Obedience. The Spaniards therefore thought it advisable, that to
bridle this People, nothing could be more proper, than by employing the Nobles
as well as the Commoners in the Wars, to purge the superfluous ill Humors of
this Nation. In the mean while the Catalonians falling into Rebellion, the
Portuguese Nobles were ordered to go into the Field, which they did not relish
well; having besides this, some other reasons to be dissatisfied with the
Spaniards: And, because the Portugueses had a great affection for the Duke of
Braganza, the Spaniards tried all ways to entice him to come to Court, and
supposing that they had cajoll'd him sufficiently with fair promises, invited
him very courteously to go in person with the King into the Field; which
invitation, nevertheless he knew how to decline very dexterously. At last the
Portuguese Nobility being hard pressed to serve in the Expedition against the
Catalonians, The Portugueses.
which they would in no ways consent to, unanimously agreed to shake off the
Castilian Yoke, and secretly sounded the Inclinations of the Duke of Braganza.
As soon as he, upon the persuasions of his Lady, had re^olv'd to accept of the
Crown, they broke loose, and surprising the Garrison in the City, Palace and
Fort, seized the Ships, killed the Secretary of State Vasconcello, who had
carried himself very proudly among them, Duke of Braganza proclaimed King of
Portugal.
and proclaimed the Duke of Braganza King, under the Name of John IV. purging
the whole Kingdom within eight days of the Castilians, and that with the loss
only of two or three persons. Which may serve as a remarkable instance to
convince the World, how easily a Kingdom is lost, where the Peoples Inclination
is averse to the supreme Head. Thus the Spanish Monarchy received a great blow,
and its Power being distracted, it could not act effectually on all sides. 1642.
They also lost Perpignan; tho the French could not go further into Spain, for
the Prince of Conde besieged Lerida in vain. 1647.
In the Year 1641, the Prince Monaco driving the Spanish Garrisons out of his
Territories, put himself under the protection of France. Massan^llo' s
Rebellion at Naples, 1647.
There also happened a most dangerous Rebellion at Naples, the Head of which
was a poor Fisherman, whose Name was Massanello; who might have put the whole
Kingdom into a flame, if the French had been at hand to give him timely
assistance; but by the prudent management of the Governor, the Earl of Ognato,
the Tumult was appeased. Spain then being forced to quench the flames on all
sides, it could not be so mindful of Holland, as the most remote, having all
hands full, to resist the dangers threatening them nearer home. And the
Spaniards had the good fortune to reduce, as we said before, Catalonia, under
their Subjection, and to chase the French out of Piombino and Porto Longone;
1650.
but the English took from them the Island of Jamaica in the West Indies. At
last France being re-established in its former Tranquillity, the Spaniards
thought it most convenient to make Peace with that Crown: Which was concluded
betwixt the two great Ministers of State, the Cardinal Mazarini and Don Lewis
de Haro, The Pyrenean Treaty.
in the Pyrenean Mountains: By virtue of which France got Roussilion, and
several considerable places in the Netherlands. Spain having thus concluded a
Peace with all the rest of its Neighbors, it began in earnest to make War
against Portugal. The Spaniards therefore entered Portugal with a great Force,
taking from the Portugueses several places, but were also at several places
soundly beaten. The Battle near Entremos, 1662.
where Don Juan, and that near Villa Viciosa, where Caracena received a fatal
Defeat, 1665.
are most famous: The obtaining of which two Victories on the Portuguese side
is chiefly ascribed to the French General Schomberg. Philip IV. died in the
Year 1665.

. 14. Charles II.
He had for his Successor his Son Charles II. a Child of four years of age,
who under the Tuition of his Mother, negligently prosecuted the War against
Portugal, 1668.
and at last, by the Mediation of England, was forced to make Peace with that
Crown, Peace with Portugal.
renouncing his right to the same; because the French at that time made a
grievous havoc in the Netherlands. For though Mary Teresia, Daughter of Philip
IV. at the time when she was married to the King of France had renounced all
her right of Succession to her paternal Inheritance, yet the French taking the
opportunity of their flourishing condition, and the decayed state of Spain,
England also and Holland being engaged in a War with one another, who would
else not have left the Netherlands to be devoured by them; they entered
Flanders with a vast Army, using among other things, for a pretense, that which
in Brabant is called, Jus devolutionis, by which the real Estates of private
persons, fall to the Children born during the time of the first marriage, as
soon as the Father marries again. The French took in this War, without much
resistance, a great many considerable Cities and Forts, viz. Charleroy,
Tournay, Lisle, Douay, Oudenarde, and some others; they conquered also the
whole Franche Compte, which hastened the Peace betwixt England and Holland, The
Tripple Alliance.
and occasioned the Tripple Alliance, as it is called, made betwixt England,
Sweden and Holland, for the preservation of the Spanish Netherlands. In the
following Year France made a Peace with Spain at Aix la Chapelle, Peace made at
Aix la Chapelle.
restoring to Spain the Franche Compte, but keeping what places he had taken in
Flanders. 1668.
But when Holland, in the Year 1672, was attacked by the French, Spain sided
with the Dutch, knowing that the loss of the United Provinces must draw after
it that of the Spanish Netherlands: So it came again to an open War, wherein,
at first, Spain lost Burgundy. The rebellious Messineses threw themselves under
the protection of France, but were afterward deserted by them. France also got
Limburgh, Conde, Peace made as Nimmegen, 1679.
Valencienne, Cambray, Ypres, St. Omer, Aeth and Ghent: But a Peace was
concluded at Nimmegen, by virtue of which France kept the Franche Compte, and
most places taken in the Netherlands, restoring only to Spain, Limburgh, Ghent,
Cortryck, Oudenarde, Aeth and Charleroy.

. 15. The Nature of the Spaniards.
Having thus given a brief History of the Kingdom of Spain, we will also add
something concerning the Genius of the Spaniards, and the extent of their
Territories, as also of the Strength and Weakness of this Kingdom, and its
Condition in reference to its Neighbors: The Spanish Nation therefore is
commonly esteemed to be very wise, and to take remote prospects, thoroughly
weighing a thing before it undertakes it. Whereby, nevertheless the Spaniards,
being overcautious and exact in their Counsels, do often lose the opportunities
of action. Besides this, the Spaniards are very constant to their Resolutions;
and though they fail once in an Attempt, they will try their Fortune again,
endeavoring to overcome its frowns by their Constancy. They are very fit for
War, and not only brave at the first attack, but also will hold out till the
last; their sober way of living, and spare Bodies make them fit to bear Hunger
and Thirst, and to be very watchful: But this the Spaniards are extremely
blamed for, that they maintain their Gravity by high-flown Words and a proud
Behavior. Though those that converse with them, do declare, that this Gravity
which appears so odious, is not so much the effect of their Pride, as of a
melancholy Constitution and an ill Custom, they never being fond to converse
much with Foreign Nations. They are in general, very zealous for the Roman
Catholic Religion, and abominate all others. They are seldom fit for any Trade
or Business where any hard labor is required; such as Husbandry, or any
Handycraft Trades; wherefore these are chiefly managed among them by
Foreigners. It is credibly reported, That in Madrid alone, there are above
40000 Frenchmen, being for the most part, Merchants, Artists, Handycrafts-men
and Laborers, who go under the Name of Burgundians, thereby to avoid the
hatred, which the Spaniards naturally bear against the French. And such is the
Spanish pride, that though they think it below themselves to meddle with those
trifles, yet they do not think much to be a poor Sentinel in some Fort or
another all their life time, the honor of the Sword, and hopes of becoming in
time an Officer, making them amends for what hardship they endure. Their Pride,
Covetousness and rigorous proceedings make them hateful to all such as are
under their Command; which are very unfit Qualifications for the maintaining of
great Conquests. For no body is willing to be despised by Foreign Governors.
Spain being mightily exhausted of Men, and therefore incapable of raising great
Armies within it self, is very unfit to maintain vast Countries, for which
several reasons may be given. For the Women here are not so fruitful as in the
Northern parts, which is to be attributed to the heat of the Climate, and the
constitution of their spare Bodies. Those parts also which are remote from the
Seashore, are not well peopled, some of these Grounds being very barren, not
producing any thing for the subsistence of Mankind. Whoring also being
publicly allowed of here; a great many of them will rather make shift with a
Whore than to maintain a Wife and Children. These also, who have taken upon
them holy Orders, of whom there is a great number, are obliged not to marry.
The Wars which they have waged against so many Nations, but especially in Italy
and the Netherlands, have devoured a great many Spaniards. A vast number have
transplanted themselves into America, being glad to go to a place where they
may with a small beginning come to live very plentifully. Before the discovery
was made of America, Ferdinand the Catholic, had at once before the City of
Granada, an Army of 50000 Foot and 20000 Horse, though Arragon did not concern it
self in that War, and Portugal and Navarre were at that time not united with
Castile. At last this Country was mightily dispeopled, when Ferdinand, after
the taking of Granada, and Philip III. banished a great many thousands of Jews
and Marans, who could not be kept in obedience in Spain; these settling
themselves in Africa, retain to this day their hatred against the Christians,
robbing their Ships in those Seas. But this is evident enough, that the
Spaniards could never have made a Conquest of those vast Countries, by force of
Arms, if the greatest part of them had not fallen into their Hands by easier
ways.

. 16. The Constitution of the Spanish Countries.
Concerning those Countries which are under the Jurisdiction of this Nation;
Spain is large enough in extent for the number of its Inhabitants, but it is
not fertile alike in all places; for the most remote parts from the Seacoasts
are many of them barren, not producing any thing for the subsistence of Men or
Beasts: But for the most part, nearer to the Seaside, it is very fine and
fruitful. There is abundance of Sheep here. They have also very fine Horses,
but not in very great quantities, having scarce enough for their own use. This
Kingdom is very well situate for Trade, having on the one side the Ocean, and
on the other side, being almost surrounded by the Mediterranean, where they
have most excellent Harbors. The product of their Grounds and Commodities fit
for Exportation, are especially, Wool, Silk, Wine, Oil, Raisons, Almonds,
Figs, Citrons, Rice, Soap, Iron, Salt, and such like. In former times the
Spanish Gold-mines were most famous, but nowadays, neither Gold nor Silver,
as far as I know, is dug out in Spain: Some will allege for a reason, That
it is forbidden under severe penalties, to keep it as a reserve in case of a
great extremity. But I am rather apt to believe, That those Gold-mines have
been long a-goe quite exhausted by the Avarice of the Spaniards.

. 17. The Spanish West Indies.
The greatest Revenue of Spain comes from the East Indies, from whence Gold and
Silver, like Rivulets are conveyed into Spain, and from thence into the other
parts of Europe. At what time, and by whom this Country, which had been so long
unknown to the Europeans, was first discovered, we have already mentioned. Though
there are that pretend, That America was discovered in the Year 1190, by one
Madoe, Son to Owen Gesneth, a Prince in Wales, who they say, made two Voyages
thither; and having built a Fort in Florida or Virginia, or as some say, in
Mexico, died in America: And this is the reason why in the Mexican Tongue
abundance of British words are to be met withal; and that the Spaniards, at
their first coming into America did find the remnants of some Christian Customs
among the Inhabitants: From whence some infer, That if the first discovery of
a Country, gives a good Title of Propriety to the Discoverers, England would
have as good, if not a better Title to America than Spain; but this we will
leave to be decided by others. But it is not so evident, from whence Spain
could claim a right of subduing that Country by force of Arms. For, what is
alleged among other pretenses, concerning the Bull of Alexander VI. wherein he
did grant those Countries to Spain, this does not only seem ridiculous to us,
but also to those Barbarians themselves, who have ridiculed it, saying, The
Pope must be a strange sort of a Man, who pretended to give away that which was
none of his own: But let this be as it will, the Spaniards think it sufficient
that they are in possession of it; and if an exact scrutiny should be made into
other matters of this nature, it would appear, that the Titles to most
conquered Countries were none of the best. But some of the most conscientious
Spaniards do not justify what Cruelties, their Countrymen committed in the
beginning against those poor People, of whom they killed, without any
provocation given, a great many hundred thousands; or destroyed them by forcing
them to undergo intolerable hardships, and making the rest their Slaves: Though
afterward Charles V. being informed of their miserable condition, ordered all
the rest of the Americans to be set at liberty. But the Spaniards are not
Masters of all America, but only of the middle part of it, viz. The Kingdoms of
Peru and Mexico, and those vast Islands of Hispaniola, Cuba and Porto Ricco,
Jamaica having been taken from them by the English. These parts of America are
nowadays inhabited by five several sorts of People: Several sorts of
Inhabitants in the Spanish West Indies.
The first are the Spaniards, who come thither out of Europe; these are put in
all Offices. The second are called Crioliens, who are born in America of
Spanish Parents: These are never employed in any Office, as being ignorant of
the Spanish Affairs, and too much addicted to love their native Country of
America; wherefore the King is cautious in giving them any Command, fearing,
lest they should withdraw themselves from the Obedience of Spain, and set up a
Government of their own; especially, because these Crioliens bear a great
hatred against the European Spaniards. For this reason also the Governors are
changed every three Years, to take away the opportunity of strengthening their
Interest too much; who after their return into Spain are made Members of the
Council for the Indies, as being esteemed the most proper to advise concerning
the preservation of that Country. The third sort are called Metiffs, who are
born of a Spanish Father and an Indian Mother, are in no esteem among them.
Those who are brought forth of the marriage of a Spaniard with a Metiff, or of
a Metiff and a Spanish Woman, are called Quatralvos, as having three parts of a
Spaniard, and one of an Indian: But such as are born of a Metiff and an Indian
Woman, or of an Indian Man and a Metiffic are called Tresalvos, as having three
parts of an Indian and one of a Spaniard. The fourth sort are the remnants of
the ancient Inhabitants, of whom a great many are to be met with, especially in
the Kingdoms of Peru and Mexico, who are not so Barbarous as some may imagine,
there having been found among them such excellent Laws and Constitutions as
would make some Europeans blush. The fifth sort are the Moors, or, as the
Spaniards call them, Negroes, who being bought in Africa are sent thither to do
all sorts of drudgery. These are generally very handy, but very perfidious and
refractary, wherefore they must always be kept under a strict hand. Such as are
born of a Negro and an Indian Woman are called Mulats: Yet is that part of
America, considering its bigness, not very well stocked with People, since the
Spaniards did in a most cruel manner root out the most of its ancient
Inhabitants: And if I remember well, Hieronymus Benzonus says, That all the
Cities in America, which are inhabited by the Spaniards, joined together, were
scarce to be compared, for number of People, with the Suburbs of Milan: Yet
there are some who talk largely concerning Mexico, viz. That it has betwixt 30
and 40000 Spanish Citizens, who are most of them very wealthy, so that it is
reported, there are 18000 Coaches kept in that City. The Spaniards are not
easily to be beaten out of America; because most places which are in their
possession, are hard to come at, and it is very difficult to transport such a
number of Soldiers out of Europe, as can be sufficient to attack any of these
places: Besides this, the great difference of the Climate, and Diet could not
but occasion mortal sicknesses among them: But in Peru, especially, they are
very well settled, there being scarce any access by Land, and by Sea you are
obliged to go round the South and remotest parts of America, or else to come
from the East Indies; both which are such long Seavoyages, which an Army can
scarce undergo without running the hazard of being destroyed by Sickness.
Concerning the Riches of America, Riches of America.
it is true, the Spaniards at their first coming thither did find no coined Gold
or Silver, that being unknown in those days to the Inhabitants; but an
inconceivable quantity of uncoined Gold and Silver, and abundance of Gold and
Silver Vessels made without Iron Tools, all which the Spaniards carried into
Spain, except what the Seas swallowed up in their Voyages, which was very
considerable: But nowadays those Rivers which formerly used to carry a Golden
Sand, are most exhausted; and what is found there now is all dug up out of the
Mines; especially the Silver Mines of Porosi in Peru, do afford an incredible
quantity of Silver, which is yearly, together with some other Commodities,
transported in a Fleet into Spain: Nevertheless a great part of this Silver
belonging to Italian, French, English and Dutch Merchants, the least part of it
remains in Spain; so that the Spaniards keep the Cow, but others have the Milk:
Wherefore, when the French and Spanish Ambassadors at Rome quarreled about
Precedence, 1563.
and the latter, to represent his Master's Greatness, spoke very largely of the
vast Riches of America, the Frenchman answered, That all Europe, but especially
Spain, had been a considerable loser by them: The Spaniards having employed
themselves in searching after the Treasures of America, were thereby become
idle, and had dispeopled their own Country. The King of Spain trusting to his
great Riches, had begun unnecessary Wars. Spain being the fountain from whence
vast Riches were derived to other Nations, did receive the least benefit of all
by them, since those Countries that furnished Spain with Soldiers, and other
Commodities did draw those Riches to themselves. Formerly there were also
Emeraulds in America, and Pearls were found, but that Stock is long since, by
the Avarice of the Spaniards, quite exhausted. There is besides this, a great
quantity of Commodities in America, which are used in Physic and Dying
Colors. There is also great quantities of Sugars and Hides, as appears in that
in the Year 1587 the Spainsh Fleet transported 35444 Hides from St. Domingo,
and 64350 from New Spain: For the Oxen and Cows, which were first transported
from Spain into America, are grown so numerous, that they shoot them for their
Hides sake only, throwing away the Flesh, which is scarce eatable. And as
America is the best Appendix of the Spanish Kingdom, so the Spaniards take all
imaginable care to prevent its being separated from Spain. They make, among
other things, use of this Artifice, That they will not allow any Manufactory to
be set up in America, so that the Inhabitants cannot be without the European
Commodities, which they do not suffer to be transported thither in any other
Ships but their own.

. 18. Besides this, The Canary Islands.
the Canary Islands are in the possession of the Spaniards, from whence are
exported great quantities of Sugar and Wine, it is credibly reported, That
England alone transports above 13000 Pipes of Canary, at 20 l. per Pipe. The
Island of Sardinia also belongs to the Spaniards, Sardinia.
which Isle is pretty large, but not very rich, its Inhabitants being for the
most part Barbarians. Sicily.
The Isle of Sicily is of much greater value, from whence great quantities of
Corn and Silk are to be exported; but the Inhabitants are an ill sort of
People, who must be kept under, according to the old Proverb, Insulani quidem
mali, Siculi autom pessimi. Unto Sicily does belong the Isles of Maltha and
Goza, which was given in Fief from Charles V. to the Order of the Knights of
Rhodes. Spain also has a great part of Italy in its possession, Naples.
viz. The Kingdom of Naples, who is Capital City is scarce bridled by three
Castles. The Sovereignty of Siena, and a great many strong Seaports, and the
Seacoasts of Tuscany, viz. Orbitello, Porto Hercule, Telamone, Monte
Argentario, Porto Longone, and the Castle of Piombino; besides that noble
Dukedom of Milan, Milan.
which is the Paradise of Italy, as Italy is commonly called the Paradise of
Europe: They have also the Harbor of Final upon the Genouese Coast. In the
City of Milan, Trade and Manufactory flourishes extremely, and this Dukedom is
much valued by the Spaniards, because they have thereby a convenient
Correspondence with the House of Austria. As long as Burgundy and the
Netherlands were united, The Netherlands.
they might be compared to a Kingdom; but now Burgundy is lost, the seven
united Provinces have separated themselves from the rest of the Netherlands,
and France has conquered a great part of the remainder. And though in the Spanish
Netherlands there are very fair and strong Cities left, yet nevertheless it
seems, that the greatest benefit which Spain receives from them amounts to
this, That by them the French Arms are diverted from the other Spanish
Territories, that they commonly draw the Seat of War thither, and serve to take
off the edge of the French Fury. In the East Indies the Philippine Islands
belong to the Spaniards, The Philippine Islands.
whose Capital City being Manilla, was taken by them in the Year 1565: but
these Islands are so inconsiderable, that it has been often under debate,
whether it were not most convenient to abandon them: Yet some Indian
Commodities, which from several places, and especially from China are brought
to Manilla, are from thence transported to New-Spain and Mexico, whereby there
is kept a constant Communication betwixt the Spanish West and East Indies.

. 19. From what has been said it is evident, Strength and Weakness of Spain.
that Spain is a potent Kingdom, which has under its Jurisdiction, rich and
fair Countries, abounding with all Necessaries, not only sufficient for the use
of its Inhabitants, but also affording a great overplus for Exportation. The
Spaniards also do not want Wisdom in managing their State Affairs, nor Valor
to carry on a War: Nevertheless this vast Kingdom has its Infirmities, which
have brought it so low, that it is scarce able to stand upon its own Legs:
Among those is to be esteemed one, the want of Inhabitants in Spain, there
being not a sufficient number both to keep in obedience such great Provinces,
and at the same time to make Head against a potent Enemy; which want is not
easily to be repaired out of those Countries which are under their subjection,
since it is the Interest of Spain, rather to restrain the Courage of these
Inhabitants, for fear they should one time or another take Heart, and shake off
the Spanish Yoke. And whenever they raise some Soldier in these Provinces,
they cannot trust them with the defense of their Native Country, but are
obliged to disperse them, by sending them into other Parts, under the Command
only of Spaniards: Spain therefore is scarce able to raise within it self, a
sufficient number of Soldiers for the Guard and Defense of its frontier
places: Wherefore, whenever Spain happens to have War with other Nations, it is
obliged to make use of Foreign Soldiers, and to raise those, is not only very
chargeable but also the King is not so well assured of their Faith, as of that
of his own Subjects. The want of Inhabitants is also one reason, why Spain
cannot nowadays keep a considerable Fleet at Sea, which nevertheless is
extremely necessary to support the Monarchy of that Kingdom. Another weakness
is, That the Spanish Provinces are mightily dis-joined, they being divided by
vast Seas and Countries: These therefore cannot be maintained and governed
without great difficulty; for the Governors of the Provinces being remote from
the sight of the Prince, he cannot take so exact an account of their Actions;
and the oppressed Subjects want often opportunity to make their Complaints to
the King; besides that, Men and Money are with great charge and danger sent out
of Spain into these Provinces, without hopes of ever returning into the
Kingdom. Their Strength cannot be kept together, as being obliged to divide
their Forces. The more disjoined these Provinces are, the more frontier
Garrisons are to be maintained; all which may be saved in a Kingdom, whose
parts are not so much dis-joined. They are also liable to being attacked in a
great many places at once, one Province not being able to assist another:
Besides this, America being the Treasury of Spain, is parted from it by the
vast Ocean, whereby their Silver Fleets are subject to the hazard of the Seas
and Pirates. And if it happens that such a Fleet is lost, the whole Government
must needs suffer extremely by the want of it, the Inhabitants of Spain being
so exhausted, as not to be able to raise sufficient Sums to supply the Public
Necessities. The Spaniards are also mighty deficient in regulating their West
India Trade, which is so ill managed, that the greatest part of those Riches
are conveyed to other Nations, whereby they are empoured to chastise Spain with
its own Money. After the death of Philip II. it has also proved very
prejudicial to Spain, that by the carelessness of the succeeding Kings, and
during the long Minority of this present, the Nobles have so increased their
Power, that they are now very backward in duly assisting the King, and by
impoverishing the King and Commonalty have got all the Riches to themselves. It
is also a common Disease in all Governments, where the Popish Religion has got
the upper hand, That the Popish Clergy is very rich and potent, and yet
pretends, by a Divine Right, to be exempted from all public burdens, except
that some of them in the utmost extremity vouchsafe to contribute some small
portion for the defense of the whole, but that not without consent of the Pope:
Yet the King of Spain has that Prerogative, which he obtained from Pope Hadrian
IV. that he has the disposal of all the chief Church Benefices in his Kingdom;
and he is also Head and Master of all the Ecclesiastical Orders of Knighthood
in Spain. And because the Kings of Spain have hitherto pretended to be the most
zealous Protectours of the Papal Chair and Religion, they have thereby so
obliged the Zealots of the Roman Catholic Religion, and especially the
Jesuits, that these have always been endeavoring to promote the Interest of
Spain.

. 20. Lastly, In what condition Spain is in, in reference to its Neighbors,
and especially as to Barbary.
It is also worth our observation, how Spain does behave it self in relation to
its Neighbors, and what Good or Evil it may again expect from them. Spain
therefore is opposite to the Coast of Barbary, having also several Forts on
that side, viz. Pegnon de Velez, Oran, Arzilla, and would be better if they had
also Algiers and Tunis. From hence Spain need not fear any thing now, since it
has quite freed it self from the very Remnants of the Moors: But the Pyracies
committted by those Corsaires is not so hurtful to Spain, as to other Nations,
who traffic with Spain, Italy or Turkey; for the Spaniards seldom export their
own Commodities into the other parts of Europe, but these are exported by other
Nations. Turkey.
The Turks seem to be pretty near to the Islands of Sicily and Sardinia, and to
the Kingdom of Naples: Yet are they not much feared by the Spaniards; the Sea
which lies betwixt them being an obstacle against making a Descent with a
considerable Army in any of those Parts; and if an Army should be landed, its
Provisions, which must come by Sea, might easily be cut off: For in such a case
all the States of Italy would be obliged to side with the Spaniards to keep
this cruel Enemy from their Borders, and their Naval Strength joined together,
much surpasses the Turks in every respect. Italian States.
From the Italian States, the Spaniards have little to fear, it being a maxim
with them, to preserve the Peace of Italy, thereby to take away all opportunity
from France to get a footing in Italy, which is also a general maxim among all
the States of Italy: Nevertheless this is most certain, That if Spain should
endeavor to encroach upon the rest of the Italian States, they would
unanimously oppose it; and if they should find themselves too weak to oppose
their Designs, they might be easily wrought upon to call France to their aid.
The Pope.
The Pope, perhaps, might be willing enough to be Master of the Kingdom of
Naples, Spain holding the same in Fief of the Papal Chair, and thereby the
Popes might have a fresh opportunity to enrich their Kindred: But the Pope
wants Power to execute such a Design, and the rest of the States of Italy would
not be forward to see so considerable a Country added to the Ecclesiastical
State; and the Pope's Kindred are more for gathering of Riches out of the
present Ecclesiastical Revenues, than to bestow the same upon an uncertain War.
On the other side, Spain having found it very beneficial for its Interest, to
pretend to the chief Protectorship of the Roman Religion, and that the Pope's
good or bad Inclinations toward it, may either prove advantageous or
disadvantageous, Spain has always endeavored by all means to keep fair with
the Popes. France, on the contrary, having taken part with the Protestants,
whom Spain and the House of Austria have sought to oppress, has demonstrated
sufficiently to the Roman Court, that it is not so fond of that Religion, as to
neglect an opportunity to enrich himself with the Possessions of the
Protestants, and to make way for attaining to the so long projected Design of
the Universal Monarchy; which done, he might easily make the Pope his Chaplain:
Wherefore the chief aim of the wisest Popes has been, to keep the Power of
Spain and France in an equal Balance, this being the most proper method to keep
up the Authority and provide for the Security of the Popedom. It being the
principal maxim of the Venetians, Venice.
to reserve their Liberty and State, by maintaining the Peace of Italy, Spain
has no reason to be jealous of them as long as it undertakes nothing against
them. It is also the Interest, as well of them as of all the other Italian
States, that the Spaniards remain in possession of Milan, for fear, if France
should become Master of this Dukedom, it might thereby be put in a way to
conquer all the rest of Italy. On the other side, if Spain should show the
least Inclination to undertake any thing against the Liberty of Italy, it
cannot expect, but that the Venetians, if not by an open War, at least, by
their Counsels and Money would oppose it: For the rest, this State endeavors
to remain Neuter betwixt France and Spain, and to keep fair with both of them,
as long as they do not act against their Interest; Genoua is of great
consequence to the Spaniards, Genouae.
from which, depends in a great measure, the Security and Preservation of the
Milaneze: Wherefore, when Charles V. could not effect his Intention of building
a Castle (being opposed therein by Andreas Doria) whereby he intended to make
the Genoueses dance after his Pipe, the Spaniards found out another way to make
them dependent on their Interest, by borrowing vast Sums of Money from the
Genoueses upon the security of the King's Revenues in Spain. Besides this, they
are possessed of the Harbor of Final on the Coast of Genoua, whereby they have
taken away the power from them of cutting off the Correspondency betwixt Spain
and Milan. Spain has great reason to give in a good Correspondency with Savoy;
Savoy.
for if that Prince should side with France against it, the Milaneze would be
in eminent danger of being lost. But because it would be very pernicious for
Savoy, if the King of France should become Master of Milan, since Savoy would
be then surrounded on all sides by the French, it is easy for Spain to
maintain a good Correspondency with Savoy. Florence and the rest of the Italian
Princes have all the reason to be cautious how to offend Spain, yet, as much as
in them lies, they would scarce suffer Spain to encroach upon any of them. It
is also of consequence to the Spaniards to live in friendship with the Suiss,
The Suiss.
partly because they must make use of such Soldiers as are listed among them;
partly because they may be very serviceable in preserving the Milaneze; and
their Friendship is best preserved by Money. But, because the Suiss are of
several Religions, Spain is in greater Authority with the Roman Catholic
Cantons, but France with the Protestant Cantons, which being the most potent,
yet have, either cajolled by fair Words, or Money, or out of Fear, connived at
the Frenches becoming Masters of the County of Burgundy in the last War,
whereas formerly they used to take effectual care for its preservation. Holland.
The Hollanders were before the Peace of Munster the most pernicious Enemies to
Spain; but since the Conclusion of that Peace there is no cause that Spain
should fear any thing from them, since I do not see any reason, why these
should attack Spain, or endeavor to take any thing from them, having enough to
do to maintain what they have already got. And, if they should be tempted to
attempt any thing against the West Indies, they would not only meet with great
resistance from the Spaniards there, but also France and England would not
easily suffer, that both the East and West Indies, the two Fountains from
whence such vast Riches are derived, should be in possession of the Dutch: And
the Dutch, as for their own Interests, obliged to take care, that France, by
swallowing up the rest of the Netherlands, may not become their next Neighbor
on the Land, or that it should obtain any considerable advantage against Spain.
German^.
The Power of Germany Spain may consider as its own, as far as the same depends
on the House of Austria. And it is not long ago, since the States of Germany
were persuaded to take upon them afresh the Guaranty of the Circle of Burgundy;
whereby Spain hoped to have united its Interest with that of the German Empire
against France; since, whenever a War happens betwixt these two Crowns, it is
scarce possible, that this Circle should escape untouched, it being the most
convenient place where they may attack one another with vigor. England.
England is capable of doing most damage to the Spaniards at Sea, and
especially in the West Indies: But England, in all likelihood, would be no
great gainer by it, since the English have a vast Trade with the Spanish
Seaports, and their Trade in the Levant would suffer extremely from the
Spanish Privateers; but also Holland could not look with a good Eye upon these
Conquests of the English. Portugal.
Portugal, by it self, cannot much hurt Spain, but in conjunction with another
Enemy, it is capable of making a considerable Diversion at home. But the
Portugueses could not propose any considerable Advantages to themselves
thereby; and it might easily happen, that Holland siding with Spain might take
from hence an opportunity to drive the Portugueses quite out of the East
Indies. The King of France, France.
therefore, is the capital and most formidable Enemy to Spain, who wanting not
Power, not only longs to devour the rest of the Netherlands, but also aims at
the Conquest of other parts of Spain. But if the old Maxims of Policy are not
grown quite out of date, it is to be hoped, that all who have any Interest in
the preservation of Spain, will with all their power endeavor to prevent, that
the ruin of Spain, the Liberty and Possessions of all the States in Europe may
not depend on the Pleasure and Will of one single person. What may be the
consequence of the Extinction of the Royal Family.
But what Revolution may happen in Spain if the present Royal Family, which has
no Heirs yet, should fail, is beyond Human Understanding to determine or
foresee; because it is to be feared, that upon such an occasion, not only
France would do its utmost to obtain it, but also, because several States which
were annexed to Spain, by the Royal Family, might take an opportunity to
withdraw themselves from the same.

CHAP. III.
Of Portugal.
. 1. POrtugal, The Origin of the Kingdom of Portugal.
which comprehends the greatest part of that Province which the Romans called
Lusitania, fell, with the rest of Spain, under the last Gothic King Roderick,
into the Hands of the Moors, who were in possession of it for a long time; but
in the Year 1093, Alfonsus VI. King of Castile and Le^n, arming himself with
all his Power to attack the Moors; and craving also the Assistance of Foreign
Princes, among others; also, came one Henry, to signalize himself in this War,
whose Pedigree is variously related by the Historians. For some will have him
descended out of the House of Burgundy, and have made him a younger Son of
Robert Duke of Burgundy, whose Father was Robert King of France, Son of Hugh
Capet. Others derive his Pedigree from the House of Loraine, alleging, That
the reason of his being called a Burgundian was, because he was born at
Besanson. Henry Earl of Portugal.
To this Henry, King Alfonsus VI. gave in marriage his natural Daughter
Theresia, as a reward of his Valor, giving unto him for a Dowry, under the
Title of an Earldom, all that part of Portugal which was then in the possession
of the Christians; which comprehended that part of the Country, where are the
Cities of Braga, Coimbria, Visco, Lamego, and Porto, as also that tract of
Ground which is now called Tralos Montes, granting to him also a power to
conquer the rest of that Country, as far as to the River of Guadiana, and to
keep it under his Jurisdiction; yet with these conditions, That he should be a
Vassal of Spain, repair to the Dyets of that Kingdom, and in case of a War, be
obliged to serve with 300 Horse. Henry died in the Year 1112, Alfonsus I. King
of Portugal.
leaving a Son whose name was Alfonsus, being then very young: His Inheritance
was, during his Minority, usurped by Ferdinand Potz, Count of Trastamara, his
Father-in-law, he having married his Mother. But as soon as he was grown up, he
took up Arms against his Father-in-law, beat him out of Portugal, but his
Mother he put in Prison; who calling to her aid Alfonsus VII. he promised to
dis-inherit her Son, and to give him all Portugal. But Alfonsus of Portugal
defeated the Castilians in a Battle, by which Victory he pretended to have
freed himself from the Spanish Subjection. 1126.
This Alfonsus undertook an Expedition against King Ismar, 1139.
who had his Kingdom on the other side of the River Tajo, who being joined by
the Forces of four other petty Moorish Kings, drew out against him. Alfonsus
was then in his Camp near Cabebas des Reyes proclaimed King, thereby to animate
his Soldiers; and get a most signal Victory, The Origin of the five Shields in
the Arms of Portugal.
taking the five Standards of those Kings, whence he put five Shields in the
Arms of Portugal, and retained ever after the Title of King. He took afterward
a great many Cities from the Moors; and among the rest, with the assistance of
the Netherland Fleet the City of Lisbon in the Year 1147. 1179.
This Alfonsus was taken Prisoner near Badajoz, by Ferdinand King of Egypt, who
gave him his Freedom without any other Ransom, than that he was to restore to
him some Cities, which he had taken from him in Gallicia. After he had reigned
very gloriously, and greatly enlarged the Limits of his Kingdom, 1185.
he died in the 91st Year of his Age.

. 2. Him succeeded his Son Sanctius, Sanctius I.
who built a great many Cities, and filled them with Inhabitants. He took from
the Moors the City of Selva, being assisted in that Expedition, by a Fleet sent
out of the Netherlands to the Holy Land. He was, during his whole Reign, always
in action with the Moors, and died in the Year 1212. Alfonsus II.
After him reigned his Son Alfonsus surnamed Crassus, who did nothing worth
mentioning, but that, with the help of the Netherlanders, who went to the Holy
Land, he took from the Moors the City of Alcassar. He died in the Year 1223.
His Son Sanctius, Sanctius II.
surnamed Capellus, succeeded him; who being very careless, and ruled by his
Wife, was excluded from the Administration of the Government by the
Portugueses, who conferred it on Alfonsus his Brother. Sanctius died an Exile
in Toledo. The Portugueses have made this observation concerning him, 1246.
that he was the only Portuguese King who died without leaving either
Legitimate Children or Bastards behind him. Alfonsus III.
Alfonsus, the Brother of Sanctius, parted from his Lady Mathildis, Countess of
Boulogne, she being somewhat Ancient and Barren, and married Beatrice, Daughter
to Alfonsus X. King of Castile, with whom he had for a Dowry the County of
Algarbia; but the Pope being dissatisfied with this Divorce, excommunicated
both him and the whole Kingdom. He reigned very laudably, and united a great
many Cities to his Kingdom, and died in the Year 1279. The extraordinary
Virtues of his Son Dionysius, Dionysius.
especially, Justice, Liberality and Constancy, are highly extolled by the
Portugueses: He having also adorned the Kingdom with a great many public
Buildings, among which is the Academy of Conimbria, first founded by him. There
is an old Proverb concerning him, used among the Portugueses, El Rey D. Denis,
qui fiz quanto quin: King Dionysius, who did whatsoever he pleased. He died in
the Year 1325; his Son. Alfonsus IV. Alfonsus IV.
surnamed the Brave, was very glorious for his Achievements both in Peace and
War; but he banished his Bastard Brother, who was greatly beloved both by his
Father and the People; and caused D. Agnes de Castro, a very beautiful Lady,
who was without his consent married to his Son Pieter, barbarously to be
murdered; which so exasperated Pieter, that he taking up Arms against the
Father, did considerable mischief, till at last the business was composed.
Pieter.
He died in the Year 1357. His Son Pieter was commonly called the Cruel, though
some will have this rather to have been spoken to his praise, as having been an
exact observer of Justice, never sparing any Offender. He died in the Year
1368. His Son Ferdinand contended with Henry the Bastard, Ferdinand.
who had murdered his Brother Pieter, surnamed the Cruel, King of Castile,
about the Kingdom of Castile, because his Mother Beatrice had been Daughter of
Sanctius IV. King of Castile; and a great many of the Nobility and some Cities
of that Kingdom declaring for him, he waged War against the forementioned
Henry. But he being too strong for him, he could not maintain his Pretensions,
but was obliged to make Peace. 1373.
However the War broke out afresh again betwixt them, because Ferdinand had
protected some who were banished out of Castile for High Treason, neither
would, upon demand, surrender them. To revenge this, Henry made an inrode into
Portugal, and finding no resistance, overran the greatest part of the Country.
After the death of Henry, Ferdinand made a Peace with his Son John, but the
same was soon violated again by the Portugueses, who encouraged the Duke of
Lancaster, that married Constantia Daughter of Pieter King of Castile, to
pretend to the Crown of Castile: He came with a good Army into Portugal; but
the English being quickly grown weary of the War in Spain, and living very
disorderly in Portugal, a Peace was concluded on both sides. At last Ferdinand
married his Daughter Beatrice to John of Castile, under condition, that such
Children as were born of their Bodies, should succeed in the Kingdom of
Portugal; which was afterward the occasion of bloody Wars. This Ferdinand, who
by his frequent Wars had proved very pernicious to Portugal, died in the Year
1383, being the last of the true Race of the Kings of Portugal.

. 3. After the death of Ferdinand great Troubles arose in Portugal, Interregnum.
most of the Portugueses not being able to brook living under the Subjection of
the Castilians, whom they mortally hated. It was, it is true, agreed on in the
Articles of Marriage made betwixt the King of Castile and Beatrice Daughter of
Ferdinand, That her Mother Eleonora should have the Administration of the
Government in Portugal, till such Children as should be born of this Marriage
should be of age: But this Eleonora, leaving all to the management of the Count
of Ancira, her much suspected Favorite, she drew upon her self the hatred of
the Portugueses. John, therefore, natural Son of Pieter King of Portugal,
privately murdered him, whereby he got both the Favor of the People, and
increased the hatred against the Queen Dowager: But some of the Portugueses
being much dissatisfied at these proceedings, begged the King of Castile, Some
call in the King of Castile.
to take upon him the Crown of Portugal; which he might in all likelihood have
obtained, if he had been quick enough, either by fair means or by force, to
have put himself into full possession of the same: But he being uncertain in
his Resolutions, gave by his delays, time and opportunity to the adverse Party
to strengthen it self. Wherefore, he coming without an Army into Portugal, his
Mother-in-law resigned to him the Government, but he found but an indifferent
Reception among the Portugueses, they being very averse to him because he used
very rarely to speak or converse with them: Nevertheless a great many of the
Nobility and some Cities did side with him; but most out of a hatred to the
Castilians, chose for their Leader John the Bastard, a wise and brave Man, and
much beloved by the People. The Castilians thereupon besieged Lisbon, but their
Army being for the most part destroyed by the Plague, they were obliged to
leave it without having got any advantage. 1385.
In the Year next following, the Portugueses declared this John their King,
John the Bastard.
who very courageously attacked those places, which had declared for the
Castilians, and subdued the greatest part of them. The Castilians then entered
with an Army into Portugal, but were entirely routed by this new King near
Aliubarotta, which Victory is yearly celebrated to this day among the
Portugueses. After this Battle, all the rest of the Cities did without more
ado surrender themselves to the new King. The Portugueses also calling unto
their aid, the Duke of Lancaster, unto whom they had promised the Crown of
Castile, they entered into that Kingdom with an Army: But the English having
suffered extremely by Sickness, the Duke of Lancaster thought it most
convenient to conclude a Peace with the Castilians, whereupon it was agreed,
That the Son of the King of Castile should marry his only Daughter Catharine,
which he had by Constantia, Daughter to Pieter King of Castile. A Truce was
also made betwixt Portugal and Castile at that time; but the War soon breaking
out again, 1399.
at last, an everlasting Peace was concluded betwixt both Kingdoms; so that
John had the good fortune to maintain himself in the possession of the Crown of
Portugal, and reigned with great applause. After he was quietly settled in the
Throne, he undertook an Expedition into Africa, and took the City Ceuta; whose
Son also first found out the Isle of Madera. 1415.
This King died in the Year 1433, 1420.
and left a Memory that is to this day dear to the Portugueses.

. 4. Edward.
His Son Edward was a very Virtuous Prince, but did not reign long; for at that
time, Portugal being overrun with the Plague, he got the Infection by a
Letter, and died in the Year 1438. During his Reign, his Brothers undertook a
most unfortunate Expedition into Africa, where being themselves taken Prisoners
before Tangier, they promised to restore to the Moors Ceuta for a Ransom,
leaving Don Ferdinand as a Hostage behind them. But the States of Portugal
refusing to stand to the Contract, the Hostage was forced to end his days in
Prison. Alfonsus V.
Alfonsus, Son to this Edward, was but six years old when his Father died,
whose Tuition was committed, by his Father's last Will, to his Mother. But the
States, refusing to submit themselves to the Government of a Foreign Woman,
conferred the Administration of the Kingdom on Don Pedro Duke of Conimbria,
Brother to King Edward, but he received a very slender Recompense for his
Services; for being falsely accused before the new King, he was slain as he was
going with some Troops to the King to justify himself. Alfonsus V. was else a
very good Soldier and a brave Prince, under whose Reign the Portugueses took
several places on the Coast of Africa, viz. Tangier, Arcilla, Alcassar, and
some others. Good store of Gold was also transported out of Guinea into
Portugal, which he employed in coining of Cruisadoes. After this Alfonsus had
great contests with Ferdinand the Catholic and Isabella, there being a promise
of marriage made betwixt him and Johanna, the supposed Daughter of Henry IV.
King of Castile; but, as it was reported, begotten in Adultery; but the
Marriage was not consummated, she being Alfonsus's Sister's Daughter, though, at
last, the Pope gave his Dispensation, which he had refused at first. Alfonsus,
under this pretense, took upon himself the Title and Arms of Castile,
surprising several Cities, assisted by some of the Nobility of Castile, who
sided with him: Lewis XI. also, King of France, sent him some Auxiliaries, but
these were not sufficient to enable him to undertake any thing of moment:
Wherefore, Ferdinand retaking all the places from the Portugueses, routed them
also near Toro and near Albuhera; 1476.
so that Alfonsus despairing of obtaining his Ends, 1479.
concluded a Peace with Ferdinand, wherein he renounced both Castile and the
Bride Johanna, she being promised in marriage to John Son of Ferdinand, who was
then a Child: But she, perceiving that this was only done to elude her, 1479.
went into a Nunnery. Portugal sustained considerable losses in this War, and
Alfonsus died in the Year 1481, as it is supposed, out of Grief, because he had
lost the hopes of his Bride and the Crown of Castile. John II.
Him succeeded his Son John II. against whom a most horrid Conspiracy was
discovered, for which Ferdinand Duke of Braganza, and James Duke of Visco lost
their lives, the latter being killed by the King's own Hand. This King John was
the first, who found out the way to sail into the East Indies, A Project of
sailing to the East Indies.
having not only ordered an exact Survey to be made of the African Coast, as
far as to the Cape of good hope, but also sent some by Land into the East
Indies, to inform themselves concerning the Condition of those Countries. He
built also the Castle of Mina on the Coast of Guinea: But before this intended
Voyage to the East Indies could be begun, this King died in the Year 1495,
leaving no Heirs behind him.

. 5. Emanuel.
John II. was succeeded by his Cousin Emanuel, Son of Ferdinand Duke of Visco,
Grandchild of King Edward. With him contended for the Succession the Emperor
Maximilian, whose Mother Eleonora was a Daughter of King Edward: But the
Portugueses declared for Emanuel, who for his extraordinary Qualifications both
of Body and Mind, was extremely beloved by them. He, the better to establish
himself at home, married Isabella, eldest Daughter of Ferdinand the Catholic,
out of which marriage a young Prince was born, whose Name was Michael, who, if
he had lived, would have been Heir to all the Spanish Kingdoms, Moors and Jews
banished out of Portugal.
except that of Navarre. To please his Bride, he, by his Proclamation, banished
all the Jews and Moors out of Portugal by a prefixed time, under penalty, for
all such as should stay behind, to be made Slaves for ever. Whereupon the Moors
immediately retired into Africa; but from the Jews they took their Children
which were under the Age of fourteen, and baptized them against their Will: And
as for the old ones, they were so plagued and vexed every where, and stopped or
hindered in their Journeys, that most, to be rid of these Vexations, and to
avoid the danger of Slavery, were baptized, retaining, nevertheless, in their
Minds, their ancient Superstition: Under the Reign of this King, Portugal
arrived to the highest pitch of its Greatness, The first Seavoyage into the
East Indies.
the design of the East India Voyage round Africa, which was projected by the
former King, being now accomplished by Vascus de Gama, 1497.
who first arrived at Calicut. As soon as the Portugueses began to draw into
their Country the Trade of Spices, they were opposed, especially by the Sultan
of Egypt, because formerly these Commodities used to be conveyed through Egypt
to Venice, and from thence to other parts of Europe, from which both these
Countries drew vast Profit. Wherefore the Venetians stirred up the Sultan, The
reason why the Venetians opposed the Portugueses settling themselves there.
sending him great stores of Metal to make Cannons of, and Shipwrights to build
Ships; by which means they hoped to drive the Portugueses out of the Indies:
But the Portugueses, who did not much trust the Barbarian Kings of the Indies,
began to build Forts and strong Holds in the most convenient places; wherein
they met with little opposition, partly because the Indians were terrified by
the vastness of the Ships, and the thunder of the Cannons of the Europeans;
partly because they were not aware of what consequence they might prove one day
against them. The Progress of the Duke ^f Albuquerque in the East Indies.
The Duke of Albuquerque, especially, did mightily advance the Power of the
Portugueses in the Indies, who took the Cities of Ormuz, Malacca, Cochin and
Goa; the latter of which is the place of Residence of the Portuguese Governor
in the Indies. And thus the Portugueses engrossed to themselves the whole Trade
and Commerce of Africa and the remotest parts of Asia, having possessed
themselves of all the most commodious Ports and Places not only on the Western
side of Africa, in Mauritania, Guinea, Congo, Angola, in the Isle of St.
Thomas, and some others, but also on the East side, in Manzambique, Melinde,
Mombazo, Zafala, and from the mouth of the Red Sea, as far as Japan; from
whence incredible Riches were conveyed into Portugal. Besides all this did
Pieter Alvanus Capralis, or as some will have it Americus Vesputius discovered
the Country of Brasile in America, The discovery of Brasil in America.
whither the Portugueses sent 1500 several Colonies. And under the Reign of
this King Emanuel, who died in the Year 1521, Portugal increased to that
degree, that his Reign was called, The Golden Age. John III.
After him reigned his Son John III. under whose Reign Portugal continued in
the same flourishing condition. The Jesuits sent to the Indies.
This King sent Francis Xavier, and some other Jesuits into the East Indies,
who were to settle the Christian Religion among the Barbarians. The Jesuits
commonly boast of great numbers of Heathens converted by them, but whether they
deserve an entire credit in this, or whether, perhaps, a great many of these
have not rather taken upon them the Name, than the Faith of Christians, those
are best able to judge, who have been conversant in those places. He died in
the Year 1557.

. 6. Sebastian.
John III. had for his Successor his Grandson Sebastian, a Child of three
Years of age, whose Tuition was committed to the Cardinal Henry, his Uncle,
because his Grandmother was not willing to take upon her the burden of the
Government. Through the over-forwardness of this young Prince, Portugal
received such a blow, that it fell from the Pinnacle of its Greatness: For some
of his Court Favorites did put this magnanimous and ambitious Prince, upon
such Enterprises as were far surpassing both his Age and Power, and were in no
ways suitable to the present juncture of Affairs, so that his whole Mind was
bent upon Warlike Exploits, and how by Martial Exercises, to revive the ancient
Valor of his Subjects, which by Peace and Plenty, having been more addicted to
Commerce, was of late much decayed. He undertook, therefore, an Expedition into
the next adjacent parts of Africa, intending, by light Skirmishes to try his
Enemies. He proposed, afterward, a Voyage into the Indies, but his Council
opposing it, it was agreed upon, that he should undertake an Expedition into
Africa, an occasion presenting it self at that time; for that Muley Mahomet,
King of Morocco, being banished by his Uncle Muley Malucco, craved the
assistance of King Sebastian: Wherefore, notwithstanding the good Counsels of
Philip King of Spain, His fatal Expedition into Africa.
and others, who dissuaded him from it, he in person, with a great but
unexercised Army entered Africa, and advancing, against all Reason, too far
into the Country, was obliged, in a disadvantageous place, to fight against a
much more numerous Army; wherefore the success of the Battle was answerable to
the rash attempt; his Army, wherein was the flower of the Nobility of Portugal,
being miserably routed, and the Soldiers all either cut to pieces or made
Prisoners. This Battle is famous, because three Kings fell, viz. King
Sebastian, the banished Muley Mahomet, and Muley Malucco, King of Morocco, who
during the time of the Battle, died of a Fever. This happened in the Year 1578.
Henry.
Him succeeded his Uncle Henry the Cardinal, a very old Man, under whose Reign
there happened nothing worth mentioning, but that perpetual contests were set
on foot concerning the Succession. Wherefore, he dying in the Year 1580, Philip
II. King of Spain, thought it the most efficacious way, to dispute with the
Sword in hand; and perceiving that the Portugueses, out of that hatred which
they bare to the Castilians, were inclined to Anthony Son of Lewis de Beya,
natural Son to King John III. he sent the Duke d'Alba with a great Army into
Portugal, who quickly chased away Anthony, and in few days became Master of the
whole Kingdom, Portugal united to Spain.
all being forced soon to submit, except the Isle of Tercera, which was not
reduced till after the French, who came to its relief, were beaten. As the
Portugueses did not, without great reluctance, bear the Government of the
Castilians; so this Union with Castile proved very prejudicial to them
afterward. For Philip, who was for bringing the Netherlanders again under
Obedience, thought that nothing could do it more effectually, than to stop
their Trade and Commerce with Spain and Portugal: For hitherto they had traded
no further, being used to fetch away their Commodities from thence, and to
convey them into the more Northern parts of Europe. Wherefore Philip concluded,
that if this way of getting Money were once stopped, they would quickly grow
poor, and thereby be obliged to submit themselves. But this design had a quite
contrary effect; The Dutch sail to the East Indies.
for the Hollanders being themselves excluded from Trade with Spain and
Portugal, tried, about the end of the latter Age, to sail to the East Indies.
And as soon as, after a great many difficulties, they had once gotten footing
there, they greatly impaired the Portugueses Trade, who hitherto had only
managed the same, and afterward took from them one Fort after another. 1620.
And the English, with the assistance of Abbas King of Persia, forced from them
the famous City of Ormutz. 1630.
Nor was this all, for the Hollanders took from them a great part of Brasile,
and several places on the Coast of Africa; which the Hollanders, in all
probability, would have had no reason to undertake, if Portugal had remained a
Kingdom by it self, and had not been annexed to Spain.

. 7. But in the Year 1640, The Portuguese shake off the Yoke of Spain.
the Portugueses took an occasion to shake off the Spanish Yoke. For Philip IV.
then summoned the Portuguese Nobility to assist him in the War against the
Catalonians, who had rebelled against him. Being therefore armed, and finding
an opportunity to consult with one another, concerning those Troubles in which
Spain was involved at that time; they agreed to withdraw themselves from the
Subjection of Spain, The Duke of Braganz^ proclaimed King.
proclaiming for their King, John IV.
the Duke of Braganza, who styled himself John IV. whose Grandmother had stood
in competition with Philip II. for that Crown. The Spaniards committed a gross
mistake in this, that they did not in time secure the Duke, whom they knew to
have a fair pretense to that Crown; to be extremely beloved by that Nation, and
to be in possession of the fourth part of the Kingdom. The Spaniards being at
that time entangled in Wars against France, Holland and Catalonia; the
Portugueses had thereby good leisure given them, to settle their Affairs. They
made also a Peace with Holland, (...) League between Portugal and Holland.
by virtue of which, both Parties were to remain in possession of what they had
gotten. But this Peace did not last long; for, these places which were in the
possession of the Hollanders, in Brasile, revolted to the Portugueses, which
the Hollanders looking upon as done by contrivance of the Portugueses, A War
breaks cut betwixt them.
denounced War against them. And though they did not retake Brasile, yet did they
take a great many other places from them in the East Indies, viz. Malacca, the
places on the Coast of the Isle of Zeylon, on the Coast of Cormandel, and on
the Coast of Malabar, Cochin, Canaror, Cranganor, and some others; and if they
had not clapped up a Peace with them, A Peace in 1661.
they would in all likely hood have also driven them out of Goa it self. John
IV. died in the Year 1656, Alfonsus VI.
leaving the Kingdom to his Son Alfonsus, who was under Age, but the
Administration of the Government was in the mean time lodged with his Mother.
After the Pyrenean Treaty was concluded, out of which Portugal was excluded by
the Spaniards, it being besides this agreed with France, not to send any
Assistances to the Portugueses, the Spaniards fell upon the Portugueses in good
earnest: But these defended themselves bravely, and notwithstanding the
Articles of the Pyrenean Treaty, the French King did give leave to the Earl of
Schombergh, and a great many other Frenchmen to enter into the Service of the
Portugueses, who routed the Spaniards in several Encounters, but more
especially, near Extremos and Villa Vitiosa. 1668*
At last, the French entering with a great Army into the Netherlands, the
Spaniards were willing to conclude a Peace with the Portugueses, who were also
glad to be once disentangled out of so tedious a War. By virtue of this Peace
Spain did resign all its Pretensions upon Portugal. In the mean time Alfonsus
was grown up a wild and awkward sort of a Man, as Don Pedro's Friends have
represented him to the World; who, besides this, by a Distemper which he had in
his tender Age, was so disabled both in his Body and Mind, that he was neither
fit to rule nor marry: Yet he taking from his Mother the Administration of
Affairs upon himself (who quickly after died) married a Princess of Nemours,
1666.
descended from the House of Savoy; who having lived with him about sixteen
Months, retired into a Monastery, desiring to be divorced from him: She
alleged, That Alfonsus was not only incapable of Matrimony, but also that he
had endeavored, to have one of his Favorites get her with Child, thereby to
secure the Crown to his Family. There was, besides this, so strong a Jealousy
betwixt the King and his Brother Don Pedro, that the latter thought his Life to
be in danger, if he did not prevent the Designs of his Brother and his
Favorites: He therefore, bringing the Nobility and People over to his Party,
forced Alfonsus to surrender to him the Administ^^^^on of the Kingdom,
reserving for his Maintenance only the yearly Revenue of 270000 Livers, as also
the Palace of Braganza, with all its Appurtenances. Don Pedro.
Don Pedro would not take upon himself the Title of King, but chose rather to
be called Regent of Portugal, in the name of his Brother Alfonsus, he being
incapable of Administering the Government: He married also upon the desire of
the Portugueses, and with the Dispensation of the Pope, his Brother's Wife. And
because Alfonsus should not be in a capacity of raising any disturbances, he
was under a good Guard conducted into the Island of Ter^^ra. But Don Pedro has
hitherto administered the Government in peace, and to the general satisfaction
of the People.

. 8. The Humors of the Portugueses.
And to say something concerning the Genius of the Portugueses, and the
Strength and the Nature of the Country. The Portugueses are not inferior to
the Spaniards in Pride and Haughtiness; but are not esteemed so Prudent and
Cautious as these, but are over-secure in Prosperity, and in time of danger
rash and foolhardy. Where they get the upperhand they are very rigorous and
cruel. They are mightily addicted to be Covetous, and love Usury, and have
searched after Money in all corners of the World. Some also will have them to
be very Malicious, which they say is the remnant of the Jewish Blood, which is
intermingled with that of the Portuguese Nation. This Country, considering its
bigness, is very populous, as is evident by the number of Portugueses, which
have settled themselves in Brasile, on the Coast of Africa, and in the East
Indies: Yet are they not in a capacity to raise a numerous Land Army without
Foreign help, or to man out a mighty Fleet of Men of War; but they have enough
to do, to Garrison their frontier Places well, and to keep Convoys for their
Merchant Ships.

. 9. Fruitfulness of Portugal.
Concerning the Countries which belong nowa-days to Portugal. The Kingdom of
Portugal, by it self considered, is neither very large nor very fruitful, the
Inhabitants living most upon such Corn as is imported: Yet is the Country full
of Cities and Towns, and has a great many commodious Seaports. The Commodities
of the growth of Portugal, fit for Exportation, are Salt, of which a great
quantity is from Setubal or St. Hubes transported into the Northern Countries:
As also Oil, some Wine, and all sorts of Fruit. The other Commodities which are
brought from thence they first, have from those Provinces that belong to them.
The Silver Mine called Guacaldane, is said to be of the yearly value of 178
Quentoes of Silver (each Quent being reckoned to amount to 2673 Ducats, 8
Reals, and 26 Marvedoes.) Among those Countries that now belong to Portugal the
chiefest is Brasile, Brasile,
being a long tract of Land in America, extended all along the Sea side, but
very narrow, and famous for the wholsomness of the Air, and its Fertility. Here
abundance of Sugar is made, from whence arises the main Revenue of the Country,
the Portugueses making use of the same in preserving those excellent Fruits as
grow both in Portugal and Brasile. Brasile also affords Ginger, Cotton, Wool,
Indigo and Wood for the Dyers. But because the Natives of this Country are
naturally lazy, who cannot by any ways be forced to hard labor, the
Portugueses buy upon the Coast of Africa, and especially in Congo and Angola,
Negroes, whom they use for Slaves, buying and selling them in Brasile as we do
Oxen; they are employed in all sorts of hardships and drudgery. Africa.
The Trade of the Portugueses on the West side of Africa is not now of any
great consequence, since the Hollanders have interfered with them; and those
places which they are possessed of on the East side of Africa only serve to
enrich their Governors. What the Hollanders have left them in the East Indies
is of no small consequence to them; The East Indies.
for Goa is a very large City, where there is a great Trade among People of all
Nations: But the wiser fort do not approve of the Portuguese Government in the
East Indies; the Portugueses there are given to Voluptuousness, and neglecting
Military Affairs, are so presumptuous, as to imagine, that nevertheless with
their haughty Carriage they can out-brave others. Hence it was that the
Hollanders found it so easy to drive this Nation out of the greatest part of
the Indies, which was grown hateful to them all: Yet the Portugueses enjoy one
Privilege which the Dutch have not, that they are allowed a free Trade with
China, where they have the City of Macao in an Island not far distant from the
Continent; and they have understood so to mis-represent the Hollanders with the
Chinese, that they, hitherto, as far as I know, they have not been able to
obtain a free Commerce with China. A horrible Persecution raised on the
Christians of Japan* and the occasion of It.
Formerly the Portugueses had a great Interest in Japan, which was chiefly
procured by means of the Jesuits, who made it their business to convert the
Japoneses to the Christian Religion. It is related, that above 400000 of them
were baptized, not without hopes, that all the rest would at last have followed
their example. But about thirty years ago, the Dutch, by their Practices and
Artifices, rendered the Portugueses suspected to the Emperor of Japan, having
intercepted a Letter from the Jesuits to the Pope, wherein they promised to
bring, ere long, the whole Kingdom of Japan under the Obedience of the Roman
See. The Hollanders interpreted this Letter in such a sense, as if the Jesuits,
with the assistance of the new Converts, did intend to dethrone the Emperor;
telling him, That the Pope pretended to an Authority of disposing of Kingdoms
at his pleasure, and that the King of Spain who was then Master of Portugal,
was in great esteem with him. The jealous Japoneses were easily persuaded
hereof, when they considered with what Respect and Kindness the Jesuits were
treated by the new Christians; those being also very ready to accept of what
these good natured People offered them. And the Governors were sensible, and
complained, that their usual Presents from the Subjects decreased daily, since
the new Converts gave so much to their Priests. The Hollanders also showed the
Emperor of Japan in a Mapp, how the Conquests of the King of Spain did extend
on one side as far as Manilla, on the other side as far as Macao, so that by
subduing of Japan, he would have an opportunity of uniting his Conquests. This
occasioned a most horrible Persecution against the Christians, the Japoneses
endeavoring by incredible Torments to overcome the Constancy of a Nation,
which is naturally one of the most obstinate. Neither did they cease, till
there was not one Christian left in Japan, and the Portugueses, upon pain of
death, were for ever banished the Country. And the Hollanders, when afterward
they sent any Ships to Japan, used to forbid their Subjects, to show the least
appearance of Religious Christian Worship, but if they were asked, Whether they
were Christians, to answer, They were not, but they were Hollanders. Lastly, To
Portugal belong also the Isles called Azores, whereof Tercera, and the Isle
Madera, which are tolerably fruitful, are the principal.

. 10. From what has been said, it is apparent, The Strength of Portugal.
that the welfare of Portugal depends chiefly on their Commerce with the East
Indies, Brasile and Africa; whereby also it is evident enough, that the
Strength and Power of Portugal in comparison of the rest of the more potent
States of Europe is not to be esteemed such, as to be able to attack any of
them, or gain any thing upon them. It is therefore the Interest of this Crown
to take care how to preserve it self in the same condition as it is in now, and
to be very cautious of engaging it self in a War with any Nation that is potent
at Sea, which perhaps might undertake something against their Provinces abroad.
How it stands with regard to Spain.
But as for its Neighbors in particular; Portugal is for the most part nearest
unto Spain, so that it is easy for the Spaniards to enter Portugal, yet is the
Power of Spain not very dreadful to the Portugueses, partly, because the
Spaniards cannot conveniently keep an Army of above 25000 Men on foot on that
side, by reason of the scarcity of Provisions; the like number the Portugueses
also can bring into the Field; partly, because Spain cannot man out a
considerable Fleet of Men of War wherewith to attack the Portuguese Provinces:
Besides, Portugal in case of such an attack might certainly expect to be
assisted either by the French or English, who as much as in them lies, will not
suffer Spain to become again Master of Portugal. To France.
Neither does it appear for the Interest of Portugal, upon the Instigation of
France or some other Foreign Power, to engage it self without a pressing
necessity in a War with Spain, since it is not probable that it could gain any
thing considerable, but would only weaken it self without the hopes of any
advantage: Portugal has, in all probability, not much to fear from France, they
lying at a considerable distance from one another; besides this, the Naval
Strength of France is not come, as yet, to that height, as to be in a capacity
to be hurtful to a Nation that has settled it self very securely in the East
and West Indies; and more especially, since these two Nations have not any
pretensions on each other: And it rather concerns France that Portugal may
stand secure against Spain and Holland. To Holland.
The Hollanders have hitherto proved the most pernicious Enemies to Portugal,
they being in a capacity not only to disturb their Trade on the Coast of
Portugal, but also may prove very troublesome to them both in the East and West
Indies: And it seems, that it would be no difficult matter for the Hollanders,
by taking from the Portugueses the City of Macao, on the Coast of China, and
some other places on the Coast of Malabar, quite to destroy their Trade in the
East Indies. But it is probable, that, in case of a War betwixt the Portugueses
and Hollanders, England would assist the former against the latter, since it
has not been without great Displeasure to the English, to see what progresses
the Hollanders have made in the East Indies, whereby they have acquired such
vast Riches, that they have ^id defiance to England and all the rest of Europe.

CHAP. IV.
Of England.
. 1. IN Ancient Time, The ancient Sat of England.
Britainy, which was then esteemed the biggest Island of the World, was not
ruled by one Prince, but divided into a great many petty States, each of them
governed by its own King; but this multitude of petty Princes, as it caused
great Divisions among them, so it exposed them to the danger of being overcome
by their Foreign Enemies. This Island was scarce known to the Greeks and Romans
till Julius Caesar's time, who, after he had conquered the greatest part of
France, undertook an Expedition into this Island, hoping, as it is supposed, to
meet there with great Booty and Riches. But he entered not very far into the
Country, and after some Skirmishes with the Inhabitants, returned again without
leaving a Garrison, or exacting any Contributions. After this Britainy was not
attacked again by the Romans, till under the Reign of the Emperor Claudius,
who bent his Arms against it in good earnest, and the Inhabitants being divided
among themselves, and not joined in a mutual defense against the common Enemy,
The Romans conquer England.
he, without great difficulty, conquered part of it. At which time Britainy was
made a Roman Province, a constant Army being maintained here by the Romans, who
by degrees conquered one part after another, yet not without receiving some
Defeats. At last, under the Reign of Domitian, Julius Agricola marched with his
victorious Army through the whole Island, and giving a signal overthrow to the
Caledonians, who are now called the Scots, subdued them; though the Romans could
never entirely conquer the utmost parts of Britainy, being almost inaccessible.
Wherefore, afterward the Emperors Adrian and Severus, by building a Wall
cross the Island from Sea to Sea, divided them from the Roman Province, hoping
thereby to stop their Incursions. But the Romans never came into Ireland. After
the Britains had been above 400 Years under subjection to the Romans, the
Northern Nations at that time overrunning the Western parts of the Roman
Empire, the Romans left this Island voluntarily, being obliged to recall their
Legions, which were posted in Britainy, to oppose their Enemies.

. 2. Britainy being thus without an Army, The Saxons come into Britainy.
and besides, this, mightily exhausted in its Strength, for that the Romans had
made use of their young Men in their Wars, the Picts and Scots, from their
barren Country, made an Inrode into these plentiful Provinces, destroying all
before them. The English, to make the better Head against them, had chosen one
Vortigern for their King; but he perceiving himself to be no ways able to
resist their Power; and Assistance being denied him from the Romans, called in
the Angles, a Saxon Nation, living then in Holstein: One part of which retains
that Name to this day, though some will have them to have been Frieslanders,
others Goths; it being certain, that the mordern Language of the Frieslanders
has a great affinity with the ancient English Tongue. These Angles, under their
Leaders Hengist and Horsa, coming with some thousands of Men to the assistance
of the Britains, beat out the Scots. But they being mightily taken with the
Fruitfulness of the Country, ^450.
resolved to subdue it, and to lay the Yoke upon the Britains, who had called
them in to deliver them from it. As soon as the Britains perceived what their
Intention was, they endeavored to drive them out of the Island; but these
taking up Arms, and calling in a great many thousands of their Countrymen to
their assistance, first took from the Britains the Eastern parts of the Island.
And the Western parts, which were yet in the possession of the Britains, being
afterward extremely wasted by Plague and Famine, so that the British King
Cadwalladar retired into the lesser Britainy: The Saxons took hold of this
opportunity, conquering all the rest of Britainy, except the Province of Wales,
which being surrounded with Mountains, they were not able to subdue. This
abovementioned Cadwalladar was the last King of the ancient British Race, who,
perceiving that he was no ways able, any longer, to resist the Power of the
Saxons, 689.
retired to Rome, into a Convent. But Britainy received the Name of Anglia, or
England, from the Angles.

. 3. These Saxons erected seven Kingdoms, The Saxon Kings in England.
which however had not their beginning all at one time, but according as they
had taken one part after another from the Inhabitants: At last they fell
together by the ears among themselves, till one having swallowed up another,
all were united into one Kingdom; which, how it happened we will briefly
relate. The first Kingdom, The Saxon Heptarchy.
then, was that of Kent, which began in the Year 455, and during the Reigns of
seventeen Kings, lasted till the Year 827, when it was subdued by the West
Saxons. The second was the Kingdom of Sussex, which began in the Year 488, and,
under five Kings, lasted till the Year 601, when it was likewise made a
Province by the West Saxons. The third was that of the West Saxons, which began
in the Year 519, and lasted, under nineteen Kings, 561 Years. The Eleventh of
these Kings named Ino, Peter's (...)
did order, That each Subject that was worth ten Pence, should yearly give one
Penny to the Pope of Rome, which Tax was first called the King's Alms, and
afterward Peter's Pence. The fourth Kingdom was that of Essex, which began in
the Year 527, and lasted, under fourteen Kings, till the Year 808, when it was
also conquered by the West Saxons. The fifth was that of Northumberland, which
began in the Year 547, and lasted, under three and twenty Kings, till the Year
926, when it also was brought under subjection by the West Saxons. The sixth
Kingdom was that of the Mercians, which had its beginning in the Year 522, and
lasted, under twenty Kings, till the Year 724, when it also fell into the Hands
of the West Saxons. The seventh was that of the East Angles, which began in the
Year 575, and lasted, under fifteen Kings, till the Year 928, when under its
King Athelstan it was united with the rest. But after Egbert, King of the West
Saxons, had either subdued the rest, or forced their Kings to acknowledge him
for their Supreme Head, The Kingdom of England, 818,
he and his Successors were henceforward called no more Kings of the Saxons,
but of England. Under his Reign the Danes first entered England, Dancs first
come into England.
as they continued to do under the following Kings, though in the beginning they
were at several times bravely repulsed: Nevertheless they got footing, at last,
in the Northern parts of England, where they lived for a while pretty quietly
under the Protection of the Kings of England. But in the time of King Ethelred,
who began his Reign in the Year 979, the Danes made Inrodes into the Southern
parts of England, forced the English to pay them great Sums of Money, ravished
their Women, and committed such outrages, that they got the Name of Lord Danes.
And though the English conspired against the Danes, 1002.
and cut them all off, yet the Danish King returned the next Year, and made
prodigious havoc among the English, their great Preparations which were made
against the Danes, being by the Craft of the Traitor Edrick (notwithstanding
Ethelred had made him Duke of Mercia, giving him his Daughter for a Wife)
rendered ineflectual; so that Ethelred was obliged to leave his desolate
Kingdom, and to retire into Normandy. Sueno, while he was busy in plundering
the Nunnery of St. Edmund, having been killed by a Sword which no body knew
from whence it came, Ethelred returned out of Normandy into England, and forced
Canute, Sueno's Son, The Danes driven out, but return again.
to retire out of England into Denmark; but he returned quickly with a much
greater Force, and Ethelred making all imaginable Preparations against him,
died in the Year 1016, whose Son Edmund, surnamed Ironside, did defend himself
with great Bravery against the Danes, and might have obtained several Victories
over them, if he had not been therein prevented by that Traitor Edrick. At last
it was agreed, That both Kings should make an end of the War by a single
Combat, in which, though Edmund had the advantage of giving Canute a dangerous
stroke, yet was he persuaded to finish the Combat, by dividing the Kingdom with
the Danes; King, Edmund treacherously murdered.
and was afterward, as he retired privately to ease Nature, treacherously
murdered by Edrick.

. 4. Canute, the Dane, King of England.
After the death of Edmund, Canute called together the English Lords, and asked
them, Whether at the time, when the Kingdom was divided, there was any thing
mentioned concerning the right of Succession of the Brothers and Sons of
Edmund; and the English, out of fear, answering there was not, he received
Homage from them, and was crowned King of England. 1017.
After he had rid himself of all that were left of the Royal Race, he, to curry
favor with the People, married Emma, the Widow of King Ethelred, sent most of
his Danes home, and reigned with great applause. Some of his Parasites, who
pretended to attribute to him something above a Humane Power, he ridiculed, by
causing a Chair to be set near the Seaside, commanding the Seas not to wet his
Feet; but the Tide rolling on the Waves as usually, he told them, That from
thence they might judge of what extent was the Power of all worldly Kings. He
died in the Year 1035. Harald.
His Son Harald succeeded, by reason of his nimbleness surnamed Harefoot: He
did nothing worth mentioning, but that he caused his Stepmother Emma, and her
Sons, whom he had, with fair words, persuaded to come over out of Normandy, to
be miserably murdered. He died in the Year 1039, leaving no Children behind
him. After his death the great Men of the kingdom called out of Denmark,
Hardiknut.
Hardiknut his Brother, born of Emma and Canute, who was famous for nothing but
his greedy Appetite, he being used to keep Table four times a day. His Subjects
were so averse to him, that when he happened to die at a Feast, after he had
reigned but two Years, the English made public Rejoicings in the Streets,
which they called Hocks-tide; the Danes, after his death, growing so despicable
to the English, that the Danish Government in England expired, after they had
ravaged England for the space of 240, though they possessed the Throne but 26
Years. Edward the Consessor.
After the death of Hardiknut, Edward surnamed the Confessor, Son of King
Ethelred and Emma, Brother of Hardiknut on the Mother's-side, who had sought
Sanctuary in Normandy, was called in, to be king of England: He was crowned in
the Year 1042; and to gain the Affection of the People, he remitted a Tax
called Danegeld, which had been constantly paid for forty Years last past. He
reigned very peaceably, except, that he was now and then pestered with the
Irish and Danish Pirates, whom, nevertheless, he quickly overcame. He was the
first to whom was attributed that Virtue, which even to this day the Kings of
England are said to have, to heal by touching, that Disease which in England is
called the King's Evil. 1066.
He died without Children. He intended to have left the Kingdom to his Cousin
Edgar Atheling, Grandson of King Edmund Ironside; but he being very young,
Harald, Son of Goodwin Earl of Kent, who had the Tuition of Edgar, put the
Crown upon his own Head, but did not enjoy it above nine Months, being slain in
a Battle by William Duke of Normandy, whereby the Crown of England was
transferred to the Norman Family.

. 5. This William, W^lliam the Conqueror.
surnamed the Conqueror, was Son of Robert Duke of Normandy, who was descended
from Rollo, a Dane, who about the Year 900, with a great number of his
Countrymen and Norwegians, fell into France, and ravaging the Country without
resistance, Charles the Simple, the then King of France, thought it the best
way to set him at quiet, by putting him into possession of the Province of
Neustria, which afterward was called Normandy, and giving to him in Marriage
his Daughter Geisa, under condition that he should become a Christian. Rollo
had a Son whose Name was William, surnamed Long-sword; whose Son was Richard,
surnamed the Hardy; who was the Father of Richard II. surnamed the Good, who
was succeeded by his son Richard III. as he was by his Son Richard IV. But he
dying without Issue, after him Robert became Duke of Normandy. This Robert was
Father to William the Conqueror, whom he had by one Arlotte, a Furrier's
Daughter, with whom, it is said, he fell in love, seeing her dance among other
Maids in the Country, and afterward married her. And notwithstanding this
William was a Bastard, yet his Father made him his Successor, and got the
Nobility to acknowledge him as such when he was but nine Years of Age, and died
soon after. This William met with great Troubles and Dangers in his younger
Years, which he had the good fortune to overcome by his Valor, and acquired
thereby great Reputation. Willam conquers England.
After the death of Edward the Confessor, William understanding that Harald
had made himself King, resolved to demand the Crown of England, as belonging to
him by virtue of the last Will of King Edward, who, he pretended, had left the
same to him, as an acknowledgment for the great Favors he had received from
his Father Robert. There are others, who say, That Edward did only promise this
by word of mouth; and that Harald being then in Normandy, was forced to engage
by Oath, to help him in obtaining the Crown of England. It is possible, this
was only made use of as a pretense. But however it be, William landed without
resistance with a great Army, composed of Normans, French and Netherlanders,
whilst the Fleet of Harald was sailed to the Northern Coast of England, to
oppose his Brother and Harald Harfager King of Norway, who were entered England
on that side, and both vanquished by him; but thereby he left open the Door to
William to enter into the Kingdom, and brought his Soldiers back much weakened
and fatigued by their great Marches: Yet having reinforced his Army as well as
he could, he offered Battle to William near Hastings in Sussex; October 14,
which Battle was fought on both sides with great obstinacy; 1066.
till Harald being mortally wounded by an Arrow, the Victory and Crown of
England remained to William; England, without any further resistance,
acknowledging him for a King. The English were at first extremely well
satisfied with his Government, he leaving each in possession of what was his
own, and only giving the vacant Lands to his Normans; partly, also, because he
was related to the former Kings of England, partly, because he was greatly
recommended to them by the Pope. He was also very strenuous in securing
himself, commanding all the Arms to be taken from the People, and to prevent
Nocturnal Assemblies and Commotions, he ordered, The Corfew Bell.
That after the Bell had rung at eight in the Evening, no Fire nor Candle
should be seen in their Houses: Besides this, he built several Forts in the
most commodious places. Notwithstanding all this, Edgar Atheling makes an
attempt.
Edgar Atheling being with some of the Nobility retired into Scotland, and
being assisted by the Danish Pirates, continually ravaged the Northern Parts of
England, burning the City of York it self, wherein all the Normans were put to
the Sword; but he forced them afterward thence. There was also a dangerous
Conspiracy set on foot against him, which was happily suppressed by him, before
the Conspirators could join their Forces. His Son Robert Rebels.
His Son Robert also, endeavored to take from him Normandy, against whom his
Father led a great Army out of England, and the Father and Son encountering one
another in the Battle, the first was dismounted by the latter, but he
discovering him to be his Father by his voice, immediately dismounted, embraced
him, and begged his pardon, and was reconciled to his Father, who freely
pardoned all past Injuries. This King also forced Wales to pay him Tribute, and
King Malcolm of Scotland to swear Fealty to him. But perceiving that this
new-conquer'd People would not be governed altogether by Mildness, he began to
act more severely, He acts as a Conqueror.
taking away out of the Convents what Gold and Silver he could meet with, of
which there was great store conveyed thither, as into Sanctuaries. He also
imposed heavy Taxes, he appropriated to himself a great part of the Lands of
England, which he gave unto others, reserving to himself out of them a yearly
Revenue. He took upon him the Administration of the Goods and Possessions of
all Minors, till they came to the 21st Year of Age, allowing them only so much
as was requisite for their Maintenance: He revised all their Privileges,
introduced new Laws in the Norman Tongue; whereby a great many, that did not
understand that Language, fell under severe Penalties: He erected new Courts of
Judicature, and employed great tracts of Ground for the convenience of his
Hunting. This King introduced first the use of the long Bow in England, whereby
he had chiefly obtained the Victory against Harald, and whereby afterward the
English did great mischief to the French, and gained many Battles from them. At
last, Philip I. King of France, by stirring up his Son Robert against him,
Robert Rebels again.
endeavoring to raise Disturbances in Normandy, he went in person over into
Normandy, where the Son was quickly reconciled to the Father. But being obliged
to keep his Bed at Roan, by reason of an Indisposition in his Belly, which was
very gross, the King of France ridiculed him, asking, How long he intended to
lie in; to whom William sent this Answer, That as soon as he could go to Church
after his lying in, he had vowed to sacrifice a thousand Candles in France; and
he was as good as his word, for he was no sooner recovered, but he invaded
France, and burnt all wherever he came: But he having overheated himself he
fell ill and died, 1088.
leaving by his last Will, to his eldest Son Normandy, but to the second,
called William, the Crown of England.

. 6. William II. surnamed Rufus, met, William Rufus.
at first, with some Disturbances, occasioned by his Brother Robert, who
pretending to the Crown, was backed by a great many of the Nobility: but he
appeased him, by promising to pay him yearly, the Sum of 3000 Marks, and that
he should succeed him after his death. But the Nobles, who had dispersed
themselves up and down in the Country, he partly by fair means, partly by
force, reduced to Obedience. This Rebellion proved very beneficial to the
English, the Rebels being most of them Normans, wherefore the King afterward
relied more upon the English, as the most faithful. He waged War twice with
Malcolm King of Scotland, whom he forced in the first to swear him Fealty, but
in the last, he killed both him and his eldest Son. He also subdued the
Province of Wales. Among other Inventions to get Money one was remarkable; for
he summoned together 20000 Men, under pretense to go with them into Normandy,
but when they were just agoing to be shipped off, he caused Proclamation to be
made, that every one who was willing to pay ten Shillings, should have leave to
stay at home, unto which every one of them readily consented. He was killed by
a random shot in hunting. 1100.
Him succeeded his younger Brother Henry, Henry I.
who being present when the King died, seized upon his Treasures, whereby he
procured himself a great many Friends, so that he was preferred before Robert
his elder Brother, who at that time assisted in the taking of Jerusalem, which
proved no less than the loss of a Crown to him. For Henry, the better to
establish himself in the Throne, remitted not only several Taxes, which were
laid upon the People by the former Kings, but also secured unto his Interest
the King of Scotland, Edgar, his most dangerous Neighbor, by marrying his
Sister Maud. It Is reported, that this Maud had vowed Castity, and that when her
Brother forced her to marry, she wished, that such Children, as should be born
out of this Marriage, might never prove fortunate; which wish was afterward
sufficiently fulfilled in her Children, and a great many of their Posterity.
Robert makes a Lesient in England.
Notwithstanding this, Robert landed a great Army in England, but Henry and
Robert, by the mediation of some Friends, and a Promise of a yearly Pension to
be paid to Robert from Henry, were reconciled, which Pension also afterward
Robert remitted to Henry. But afterward repenting of what he had done, Henry
was so exasperated against him, that he made a Descent in Normandy with a great
Army, and vanquished him in a bloody Battle, wherein he took him Prisoner. He
kept him not only a Prisoner all his life time, Normandy annexed to the Crown
of England.
but also, at last, put his Eyes out, uniting Normandy to the Crown of England.
But King Lewis of France, surnamed Crassus, being very jealous of the Greatness
of Henry, undertook, with the assistance of Fulco Earl of Anjou, and Baldwin
Earl of Flanders, to restore unto William, Son of Robert, the Dukedom of
Normandy; whereupon a bloody War ensued, which was at last composed under this
condition, That William, Son of Henry, should swear Fealty to France, for this
Dukedom of Normandy. And it obtained afterward as a Custom, That the King's
eldest Son, was called Duke of Normandy, as long as this Province was united to
England. The new Duke of Normandy did also marry the Daughter of the Earl of
Anjou: And William, Son of Robert, being then made Earl of Flanders, and
endeavoring a second time to regain Normandy, was slain in that War. It is
related by some, though others contradict it, That this King was the first who
admitted the Commons unto the Grand Council of the Kingdom, unto which the
Nobility and Bishops only were admitted before it came to be divided into the
Higher and Lower House. His Son William, being by the carelessness of a drunken
Master of a Ship drowned at Sea, with a great many other persons of Quality of
both Sexes, as they were coming back from Normandy to England, he endeavored
to settle the Crown upon his Daughter Maud, and her Heirs, she being at first
married to the Emperor, Henry IV. by whom she had no Children, and afterward
to Geoffrey Plantagenet, Son to Fulk Earl of Anjou. Her Father made the States
of England take Oaths of Fealty to her in his life time. The Norman Race
extinct.
He died in the Year 1135, and with him ended the Male Race of the Norman Royal
Family in England.

. 7. Stephen.
After the death of Henry, Stephen Earl of Boulogne, Henry's Sister's Son, did
by great Promises obtain the Crown of England, notwithstanding that both he and
the States had taken the Oaths to acknowledge Maud for their Sovereign, which
they endeavored by a great many frivolous pretenses to prove to be of no
force. The better to establish himself in the Throne, he gained the Affection
of the States with Presents, and discharged the People of several Taxes, giving
Authority to the Nobility to build fortified Castles, which afterward proved
very mischievous to him. He also married his Son Eustace to Constantia, the
Daughter of Ludovicus Crassus, King of France. This King's Reign was
overwhelmed with continual Troubles. For the Scots, at first, and afterward a
great many of his Nobles, trusting in their strong Castles, raised great
Disturbances; yet he bridled the Insolence of the Scots, giving them a signal
overthrow. Maud makes War on him.
But his greatest Contest was with the Empress Maud; for she landing in England
was received by a great many, and King Stephen in a Battle fought near Chester,
was taken Prisoner. But she refusing to restore to the Londoners, King
Edward''s Laws, they sided with her Enemies, and besieged her very closely in
the City of Oxford, from whence she narrowly escaped; and King Stephen also got
an opportunity to get out of Prison. These Troubles continued till Henry, Son
of Maud, came to the nineteenth Year of his age, who, being Lord of four large
Dominions, as having inherited Anjou by his Father's, Normandy by his Mother's
side, Guienne and Poictou by his Wife Eleonora, Daughter and Heiress of
William, the last Duke of Guienne, he also endeavored to obtain the Crown of
England; for which purpose he landed with an Army in England. But he obtained
his End without any great opposition; for Eustace, King Stephen's Son dying
suddenly, an Agreement was made betwixt them, whereby Stephen adopted him, and
constituted him his Heir and Successor, and died not long after in the Year
1124. Henry II. Henty II.
therefore succeeded him, who, among other memorable Actions, demolished such
fortified Castles of the Nobility and Bishops, as were built with the consent
of King Stephen. After he had reigned near eighteen Years in Peace and
Quietness, he had a mind to have his Son Henry crowned, the better to secure
the Succession, he received him as his Copartner in the Government; but he
being married to Margaret, the Daughter of Lewis the younger King of France,
this proved the cause of great Disturbances afterward. For some persuaded
young Henry, That his Father having abdicated himself from the Government, had
committed thereby the same to his management. France envied that a King of
England should have such vast Possessions in France. The Scots wished for
nothing more, than to have an opportunity of committing Depredations in
England. Wherefore the French and Scots, H^s Son, with the French and Scots,
join in a War against him.
joining with young Henry, fell upon Henry II. all at one time, but were as
vigorously repulsed by him; the Scots, especially, suffered the most in this
War, and lost all Huntingtonshire. A Peace was also concluded with France;
Adela, Daughter of Lewis King of France, being promised in marriage to Richard,
second Son of Henry. But the old King, as it is reported, falling in love with
her, privately kept her company, and therefore opposed the consummation of the
marriage betwixt her and his Son Richard. This so exasperated Richard, who,
after the death of his eldest Brother Henry, was now the next Heir to the
Crown, that he made Head against his Father; and Philip Augustus, King of
France, taking hold of this opportunity, took the City of Muns. King Henry
seeing himself, besides this, deserted by his Friends, 1189.
Wife, and Children, died in few days of Grief. Ireland conquered.
This Henry also conquered Ireland, and united it to England, which he and his
Successors governed under the Title of Lords of Ireland, till the time of
Henry VIII. who, after he had withdrawn himself from the Obedience of the Pope,
to nettle him the more, assumed the Title of King of Ireland; because the Pope
pretends to the sole right to bestow the Title of King in Christendom, and that
none ought to take it upon him without his consent; wherefore the Pope,
afterward, to make his Pretense the more plausible, freely gave the same Title
to Mary Queen of England. Henry also had some differences with Thomas Backet,
Archbishop of Canterbury, who pretended it was derogatory to the Glory of God,
that the Priests, according to the King's Commands, should be subject to the
Civil Judicatures. There is a fabulous Relation concerning this Archbishop
Thomas, That he riding a Horseback, one time, through a Village, the Country
Fellows cut off the Tail of his Horse, and that their Children, afterward,
were born with such Tails.

. 8. Richard I.
Richard I. who succeeded his Father Henry in the Kingdom, did, out of a
preposterous Zeal, undertake an Expedition into the Holy Land, He makes an
Expedition into the Holy Land.
with 35000 Men, being accompained by Philip Augustus, King of France. In this
War he took the Island of Cyprus, which he gave to Guido Lusignanus, who in
consideration thereof resigned his Right to Jerusalem; and in the Year 1192, he
was present at the taking of Ptolemais, where the Standard of Duke Leopold of
Austria being set up first, he pulled it down again, putting his own in the
place. But when they were in great hopes of gaining Jerusalem, Philip returned
home engaging himself by a solemn Oath, that he would not injure Richard in any
of his Dominions. Hugo, Duke of Burgundy, afterward followed his example,
which greatly encouraged Saladin: And Richard understanding that the French
were fallen into Normandy, he also made a Peace with Saladin; and taking his
way by Land incognito, In his return ^e is taken Prisoner.
was discovered in his Journey through Austria, where Duke Leopold, remembering
the affront done to him near Ptolemais, took him Prisoner, and delivered him to
the Emperor, who after fifteen Months Imprisonment, made him pay 100000 Pounds
for his Ransom. After his return home, he found every thing in confusion, the
French having not only ravaged Normandy, and other Provinces belonging to him,
but also his Brother had made a Pretension to the Crown; but he obliged the
latter to implore his Pardon, and beat the French back into their own Country.
1199.
He died not long after, of a wound which he received in a Siege of some
inconsiderable place in France. John.
After his death his Brother John took upon him the Crown of England, His
Nephew Arthur opposes him.
who was opposed by Arthur Earl of the lesser Britainy, his elder Brother's
Son; who finding himself alone not strong enough, sought for Aid of the King of
France, who was ready upon all occasions to create Troubles in England. He took
a great many Cities in Normandy and Anjou. Wherefore King John was obliged to
make a dishonorable Peace with him, giving in marriage, to Lewis, King
Philip's Son, Blanch Daughter of Alfonsus, King of Castile, and of his Sister
Eleonora, to whom he gave as a Dowry, all the Cities which Philip had taken
from him, except Angiers. Then he married Isabella, Daughter and Heiress of the
Earl of Angoulesme, who was promised before to Hugh Earl of March. He, to
revenge this affront, joined his Forces with the King of France and Prince
Arthur of Britainy, and fell into Touraine and Anjou. But King John falling
upon them unawares, routed the Enemy, and took Prince Arthur Prisoner, who died
not long after a Prisoner in Roan. But Constantia, the Mother of Arthur, made
her Complaints to Philip King of France, whose Vassal King John was, on the
score of such Provinces as he was possessed of in France, and the King of
France summoned King John to appear before him, and to answer for the death of
Arthur. But he not appearing, The King of France dispossesses him of Normandy.
it was declared, that King John had forfeited what Fiefs he was possessed of
in France, and King Philip took from him Normandy 316 Years after Rollo the
Norman had conquered the same. But the French afterward attacked also Angiers,
where they were repulsed with great loss by King John, whereupon a Truce was
concluded betwixt them for two Years: During which time he routed the Scots,
and suppressed the Rebels in Ireland and Wales. The Truce being expired, the
War began afresh with France, and King John's Army being routed, he made
another Truce with France. But this ill success had much diminished his
Authority among his Nobles, who also hated him, because he had imposed heavy
Taxes upon them; wherefore they, with joint consent, demanded from him the
restitution of their ancient Privileges; but perceiving that he only intended
to give them fair Words for Deeds, The Dauphin invited by the Barons, invades
England.
they called to their aid, Lewis, Son of Philip King of France, who landing
with a great Army in England, was received with a general applause, and whilst
King John endeavored to make Head against him, 1216.
he died overwhelmed with Troubles.

. 9. Henry III.
Him succeeded his Son Henry III. whose tender Age wrought Compassion on most,
and extinguished the Hatred which had been conceived against his Father. And
the Earl of Pembroke, to whose Tuition he was committed, having totally routed
the French near Lincoln, and destroyed the French Forces at Sea, The Dauphin is
forced ^ome again.
that were sent to their assistance, Lewis did renounce all his Pretensions
upon the Crown of England, and retired into France. This King's Reign was very
long, but also very troublesome, occasioned chiefly by the great concourse of
Foreigners into England; who crept into all places of profit: For the Pope sent
at one time 300 Italians, who being admitted into Church Benefices, did so lay
about them, that their yearly Rents amounted to 60000 Marks of Silver, which
was a greater Revenue than the Crown had at that time. And by reason of the
Prodigality of the King, though constantly burthening the People with Taxes, he
was always in great want of Money. He married, besides this, the Daughter of
the Earl of Provence, who having abundance of poor Kindred, they enriched
themselves out of the Treasury of the King. This caused, at last, A War with
the Barons.
an open War betwixt the King and the principal Men of the Kingdom, in which
Henry resigned to the King of France, He quits his Pretensions on Normandy for
a Sum of Money.
all his Pretensions upon Normandy, Anjou, Poictou, Touraine and Man's, in
consideration of the Sum of 300000 pounds paid him by the French King, and he
was himself taken Prisoner in the first Battle: But his Son, Prince Edward,
gathered another Army, and killed the General of the Rebels, Simon of Monfort
Earl of Leicester; delivering thereby his Father, and suppressing the whole
Rebellion. He did nothing worth mentioning abroad, except that he undertook two
Expeditions into France, both which proved fruitless. He died in the Year 1272.
Him succeed his Son Edward, Edward I.
who was at that time in the Holy Land; and though he did not come into England
till a Year after his Father's death, yet took quiet possession of the Crown.
This King entirely united the Principality of Wales to the Crown of England,
the last Prince, Lyonel, being slain in a Battle. Under his Reign also began a
bloody War, and an implacable hatred was raised betwixt the English and Scotch
Nations, which for 300 Years after caused abundance of bloodshed betwixt both
Nations. The occasion was thus: The causes of the Differences betwixt the
English and Scots.
After the death of Alexander III. King of Scotland, who died without Heirs,
there were several that pretended to the Crown of Scotland, wherefore King
Edward took upon him the Arbitration of this matter, that Crown having depended
on his Predecessors, and the Scots being still obliged to do Homage to the
King of England. The matter being examined, it so proved, that John Baliol Earl
of Galloway, and Robert Bruce, were found to have the best Title to that Crown.
But these two having contested for the same during the space of six whole
Years, Edward sent under hand to Bruce, telling him, That he would decide the
difference concerning the Crown of Scotland in favor of him, if he would swear
Fealty to England, which Bruce refused, answering, That he was not so fond of
the Crown, as to purchase the same with the prejudice of the Liberty of his
Native Country. But John Baliol receiving the same offer, was made King of
Scotland. There was about that time a capital Quarrel in Scotland, betwixt the
Earl of Fife and the Family of Alberneth, who had killed the Earl's Brother,
and the King of Scotland had by his Sentence absolved the latter. The Earl,
therefore, appealed to the English Court, whither King Baliol was called to
appear, and to sit with the King in Parliament: But as soon as this matter came
under debate, he was admonished to rise from his Seat, and to give an account
concerning his Sentence. He pretended to answer by his Advocate, which being
denied him, he was obliged to answer in person from the same place, where
others used to plead their Causes: Which both he and the Scots resented as so
signal an affront, that, no sooner was he returned home, but he renounced his
Oath to King Edward, pretending the same to have been unjust, and that it was
not in his power to make such a promise; and renewing the ancient Aliance with
France, he denounced War against England. A War with Scotland.
King Edward, therefore entered Scotland with an Army, took the best strong
Holds, and forced the Scots and their King to swear fealty to him; their King
he sent a Prisoner into England, leaving considerable Forces in Scotland, which
were, nevertheless, soon after beaten out of Scotland by the Scots, under the
Conduct of a Gentleman of a mean Fortune, whose name was William Wallis. But
King Edward soon returned, killed 40000 Scots in a Battle near Torkirke, and
forced them to swear Fealty to him a third time. Notwithstanding all these
Oaths, Robert Bruce, who had been John Baliol's Competitour, took upon him the
Crown, who was several times worsted, but also beat the English at other times,
particularly when King Edward going with an Army against Robert, in person,
fell sick and died. 1307.
This King Edward had also had some Differences before with France. For some of
his Subjects in Aquitain, having done considerable mischief by Privateering on
the Coast of Normandy, King Philip sirnam'd the Handsome summoned Edward to
appear at his Court as his Vassal, and to answer the same, which Edward
refusing to do, he declared all his Possessions which he held from the Crown of
France to be forfeited; taking from him by force of Arms Bourdeaux and some
other places; With France.
against whom Edward entered into a Confederacy with the Earl of Flanders and
the Emperor Adolphus. But coming into Flanders with an Army, and finding every
thing in confusion and disorder, he made a Truce with King Philip, promising,
That his Son Edward should marry Isabella, Philip's Daughter. 1297.
This King caused, likewise, all the Jews to be banished out of England, He
banishes the Jews.
not allowing them to carry away any thing more than what they could carry
themselves.

. 10. Edward II.
Him succeeded his Son Edward II. who at the very beginning of his Reign,
married Isabella, Daughter of Philip surnamed the Handsome, with whom he had for
a Dowry Guienne, and the County of Ponthieu, the greatest part whereof had been
taken from his Father by the French. Vnsuccessfull (...) his War with Scotland.
This King was very unfortunate in his Wars against the Scots, who in the
Battle fought near Bannoksborough, with an Army of 30000 Men defeated 100000
English, which struck such a terror among them, that 100 English durst scarce
face three Scotchmen: And the English were continually beaten by the Scots
(except in Ireland, where they beat the Scots out, who had entered that
Kingdom) so that Edward was at last obliged to make a Truce with them. (...)
He met also with great Disturbances at home, the great Men of the Kingdom
pressing him without intermission, to leave to their Mercy, his Favorites
Gaveston, and after him the Spencers, which he refusing to consent to, they
fell into open Rebellion, in which they proving unsuccessfull, several of the
Nobility paid with their lives for it. But the Queen, pretending that the
Spencers had diverted the King's Love from her, retired first into France, and
from thence into Hainault, and returning with an Army, took the King Prisoner,
and caused the Spencers to be executed. The King was carried from place to
place, and greatly abused during his Imprisonment, having been forced before by
the Parliament, to resign the Kingdom to his Son Edward. At last, about six
Months after his Deposition, 1327.
he was miserably murdered.

. 11. Edward III.
Edward III. was very young when the Crown was conferred upon him, wherefore
the Administration of the Government was, during his Minority committed to his
Mother, and managed under her chiefly by her Favorite Roger Mortimer. She
immediately, at the beginning, made a dishonorable Peace with Scotland,
whereby Edward renounced the Sovereignty and all other Pretensions upon that
Kingdom; and the Scots renounced their Title to Cumberland and Northumberland.
This and some other matters laid to their charge, was the reason why, some
Years after, the Queen was condemned to a perpetual Imprisonment, and Mortimer
was hanged. Afterward a most cruel War broke out betwixt England and France;
for Lewis, Philip and Charles, all three Sons of Philip surnamed the Handsome,
dying without Issue, His Pretensions to the French Crown.
Edward did pretend a right to the French Crown, as being the late King's
Sister's Son; alleging, That if his Mother, as being a Woman, might be thought
incapable of governing the Realm, the same ought not to be prejudicial to him,
as being a Man. But Philip de Valois, notwithstanding he was a degree farther
of, as being the late King's Father's Brother's Son, yet prevailed with the
States, who under pretense of the Salick Law, and the hatred they bore to a
Foreign Sovereign; being, besides this, encouraged thereunto by the Earl of
Artois, set him upon the Throne. Edward being afterward summoned by Philip, to
come in person, and to do Homage for the Dukedom of Aquitain, went thither in
person, he being then but young, and England full of intestine Commotions,
notwithstanding this seemed to be very prejudicial to his Pretensions: And King
Edward appearing in the Church at Amiens with the Crown upon his Head, his
Sword and Spurs on, was ordered to lay them aside, and to take the Oath upon
his Knees; which so exasperated Edward, that France afterward felt the effects
of it. Not long after, Edward Baliol, Son of John Baliol, made pretensions to
the Crown of Scotland against the young King, being assisted by King Edward,
notwithstanding King David of Scotland had married his Sister. During which
Commotions the English recovered Barwick upon Tweed, He is successful against
Scotland.
and in one Battle killed 30000 Scots, whereupon Edward Baliol did do Homage to
the King of England for the Crown of Scotland. By this time King Edward being
come to his riper years, His Expedition into France.
upon the instigation of Robert Earl of Artois, undertook an Expedition into
France, and taking upon him the Title and Arms of France, renewed his
Pretensions to that Crown. In this Expedition he entirely routed the French
Fleet near Sluys, which was sent to hinder his landing, 1340.
and defeated 30000 Men. and after he had besieged Tournay he made a Truce with
them for twelve Months. In the mean while the English were engaged in a War
with the Scots, who, under the Conduct of their former King David, had driven
out Edward Baliol. The time of the Truce being expired, the War began afresh in
France, where, among other places, the English took Angoulesme. King Edward
himself came with a great Army into Normandy, and took, both there and in
Picardy, a great many places from the French: At last a bloody Battle was
fought betwixt them near Crecy in Picardy, The Battle near Crecy.
wherein the English, though but 30000 strong, fought against 60000 French,
killing 30000 upon the spot, among whom were 1500 persons of Quality. The next
day after 7000 French were cut to pieces by the English, who, not knowing what
had happened the day before, were upon their march to the French Camp. 1346.
In this Battle no Quarter was given on either side. Much about the same time
King David of Scotland entered England with an Army of 60000 Men, to make a
Diversion in behalf of France; The Scotch defeated.
but he was defeated in a great Battle, and himself taken Prisoner. The English
had no less success the same Year in Britainy and Guienne. In the Year next
following King Edward took the City of Calais, He takes Calais.
which he filled with English Inhabitants. Prince Edward, Son to Edward III.
1356.
whom his Father had sent with an Army into Guienne, behaved himself very
valiantly, making great havoc wherever he came. John King of France drew out
an Army against him of 60000 Men, though the Prince was not above 8000 strong;
upon this the King, thinking he had caught the Bird in the Net, would not
accept of any Conditions, though never so advantageous. But Prince Edward having
posted his Men betwixt the Bushes and Vineyards, from thence so galled the
French Horse with his long Bows, that they being repulsed, put all the rest in
confusion; King John himself was taken Prisoner, as also his youngest Son, and
above 1700 persons of Quality were slain. The Battle near Poictiers.
This Battle was fought about two Leagues from Poictiers. At last, after King
Edward had with three Armies overrun the greatest part of France, a Peace was
concluded by the Mediation of the Pope, at Bretaigny, A dishonorable Peace to
France.
not far from Chartres: The Conditions of this Peace were, That England,
besides what it had before in France, should be put in possession of Poictou,
Zaintogne, Rochelle, Pais d' Aulnis, Angoumois, Perigord, Limoisin, Quercy,
Agenois, and Bigorre, with an absolute Sovereignty over the same; besides this,
the City of Calais, the Counties of Oye, Guisnes, and Ponthieu, and three
Millions of Crowns were to be given as a Ransom for the King; and that King
John should give his three younger Sons, his Brother, and thirty other persons
of Quality as Hostages for the payment of the said Sums. But that on the other
side, the English should restore all the other places which they had taken from
the French, and renounce their Right and Title to the Crown of France. The
Peace being thus concluded, Prince Edward, to whom his Father had given the
Dukedom of Aquitain, restored Peter King of Castile to his Kingdom. But in his
Journey, the Soldiers being very mutinous for want of Pay, he levied an
extraordinary Tax upon his Subjects, which they complaining of to the King of
France, he summoned the Prince to appear before him, who answered, He would
suddenly appear with an Army of 60000 Men; therefore Charles V. King of France,
Another War with France.
denounced War against the English, pretending, that the promised Sovereignty,
at the last Peace, was void, because the Prince had not fulfilled the Articles
of the same, and had committed Hostilities against France. But whilst Prince
Edward was busy in making great Preparations against France, he died suddenly,
and with him, the English good Fortune; for the French took from them all the
Dukedom of Aquitain, except Bourdeaux and Bayonne. The King was so troubled at
the loss both of so brave a Son and his Conquests in France, that he died
within ten Months after his Son. 1377.


. 12. Richard II.
Him succeeded Richard II. Son of that brave Prince Edward, who being but
eleven Years of Age when he came to the Crown, was despised by the French, who
burnt several places on the English Coast. The Scots also made an Inrode on the
other side of England, and the War being carried on with various Fortune, A
Peace with France.
after several Truces expired, a Peace was at last concluded. There were also
great commotions in the Kingdom under this King's Reign: Troubles at home.
For in Kent, and other neighboring Counties, there was an Insurrection of the
Rabble, occasioned by the Insolence of one of the Receivers of the Poll Tax:
This Rabbles Intention was to have murdered both the Nobility and Clergy,
except the Mendicant Friars; but were soon restrained by the King's Valor. But
there were continual Discontents betwixt the King and the Lords, the King being
resolved to rule according to his Pleasure, and to maintain his Favorites
against the Lords, who were for removing his Favorites, and bringing his Royal
Power into a more narrow compass by the Authority of the Parliament. But it was
the King's custom, as soon as the Parliament was dissolved, to reverse all that
was concluded upon before; yet once the Parliament got him at an advantage,
when it forced him to permit most of his Favorites to be either killed or
banished; and obliged him by an Oath to promise, That he would administer the
Government according to the Advice of his Lords. Not long after, a Conspiracy
among the Lords was discovered against him, a great many of them paid for it
with their Heads, the King seemed at last to have mastered his Enemies; but he
was, nevertheless, ruined at last, which was occasioned thus: The occasion of
his Ruin.
Henry Duke of Lancaster accused the Duke of Norfolk, as if he had spoken ill
of the King; and the latter giving the lie to the former, they challenged one
another, but the Duel was prevented by the King's Authority, who banished them
both out of the Kingdom. Henry of Lancaster retired into France, raising there
a Faction against the King, by inviting all dissatisfied persons to him, who
promised to set him on the Throne of England. Henry Duke of Lancaster invades
England.
He landed but with a few in England, but at a time, as King Richard's ill
Fortune would have it, when he was in Ireland; and the Wind proving contrary,
he could not have notice of his Enemies arrival in England till six Weeks
after, which gave them opportunity and leisure to strengthen their Party. The
King also committed a great error, for that he afterward, against his
Promise, tarried so long in Ireland, which was the cause, that such Forces as
were brought together by his Friends, whom he had sent before, were again
dispersed before his arrival in England. Coming afterward in person into
England, and being informed how powerful his Enemies were, he despaired of his
Affairs, and having dismissed his Forces, that were ready to fight for him till
the last gasp, he was made a Prisoner. Henry of Lancaster calling, immediately
hereupon, a Parliament, a great many things were objected to Richard, and he
was declared to have forfeited the Crown. But before this Resolution was
published, he resigned himself, and was not long after miserably murdered in
Prison. 1399.


. 14. Thus Henry IV. of the House of Lancaster, Henry IV. of the House of
Lancaster.
came to the Crown, he being after the Deposition of King Richard declared King
by the Parliament, though, if the Pretensions of Henry, together with the Power
of the Parliament, be duly examined, the Title of Henry IV. to the Crown of
England, will be found to have a very ill Foundation. For what some pretend,
that Edmund, from whom the House of Lancaster descended, was the eldest Son of
Henry III. and that he being very deformed, was obliged to give way to his
Brother Edward I. is rejected as a frivolous Fable by the English Historians.
This King did labor under great difficulties at the beginning of his Reign, He
had great Difficulties which he surmounted.
all which he at last overcame: For the Design of the French to restore Richard
ended with his death. And a Conspiracy of some Lords against him was
discovered, even before Richard died. The Scots, who made War on him, got
nothing but blows. The Welshmen also, in hopes of having met with an
opportunity to shake off the English Yoke, joined with a discontented Party out
of England, and rebelled against him; but before they could join all their
Forces, the King came suddenly upon them, and overthrew them in a great Battle,
wherein, it is said, the King killed six and thirty with his own Hands. Yet the
discontented Party did not rest, but entered into a third Conspiracy against
him, which was soon discovered. A great many of them retired afterward into
Scotland, where they stirred up the Scots against England (for these never used
to miss an opportunity of being troublesome to England) but they got nothing
but blows again for their pains. This King died in the Year 1413.

. 15. Henry V.
After him reigned his Son Henry V. who in his younger Years did not promise
much, but after he came to the Crown, showed himself one of the most valiant
Kings the English ever had. And as he was very Aspiring and Ambitious, so he
thought he could not meet with a better opportunity of gaining Glory, than by
entering into a War with France, and renewing the ancient Pretensions upon that
Crown. He sent, therefore, his Ambassadors to Charles VI. to lay claim to that
Crown, and to make this Proposition to him, That if he would resign to him the
Crown of France, he would marry his Daughter Catharine. But it being not usual
that Princes are persuaded to part with a Crown thus, the next way was to try
their Fortune by Arms. He invades France to prosecute his claim of the Crown.
The Battle uear Aguicourt.
Henry therefore entered France with an Army, took Harfleur, and obtained
afterward a most signal Victory near Agincourt in Picardy against the French,
who (according to the English Historians) were six times stronger than the
English. Ten thousand of the French were killed upon the spot, and as many
taken Prisoners, not above some Hundreds being slain of the English: Yet at
that time Henry did not pursue his Victory. But not long after, the French
Fleet having first been beaten by the English near Harfleur, Henry made a
second Descent upon France, taking one place after another in Normandy, and at
last the City of Roan it self: He met with very little opposition in France at
that time, 1419.
because all was in confusion at the French Court, the King, Charles VI. being
not in his right Wits, and the Queen being fallen out with her Son, the
Dauphin, who had taken from her all her Jewels and Money, alleging, That they
might be better employed upon the Soldiery: Which was the reason that the
Queen siding with John Duke of Burgundy, did promote him to the place of chief
Minister of France; who was more intent to maintain his private Interest and
Greatness, against the Dauphin, than to make Head against the English. A
Congress was proposed to be held betwixt the two Kings, but this Design was
frustrated by the cunning of the Dauphin, who gave the Duke hopes of an entire
Reconciliation to be made betwixt them both. And Monterau being named for the
place where they should meet, the Duke of Burgundy was there, (questionless, by
instigation of the Dauphin) miserably murdered. For this reason his Son, Duke
Philip, being resolved to revenge his Father's death, declared openly for the
English, and by his Mediation obtained, That King Henry should marry the
Princess Catharine, and during the life of his Wife's Father, administer the
Government in his name, but after his death, should succeed him in the Throne.
The Nuptials were afterward celebrated at Troyes in Champaigne. 1420.
After the Treaty had been confirmed by solemn Oaths on both sides, The
Administration of France to be in Henry during Charles's life, and after his
death the Crown to descend to him.
which was also ratified by the three Estates assembled in Paris, where the
Dauphin was summoned to appear, to answer concerning the death of the Duke of
Burgundy: But he not appearing, Sentence was given against him, That he should
for ever be banished out of France. There were also some who designed to make
him away, and he was forced to go from place to place, but his common place of
Residence was Bourges, wherefore they used to call him, by way of ridiculing,
The King of Bourges. In the mean time the English took one place after another
from him. At last, King Henry being upon his March to raise the Siege of the
City of Cosne on the Loire, which was besieged by the Dauphin, he fell sick in
his Journey thither, and being carried to Bois de Vicennes, there died in the
flower of his Age and Felicity, 1422.
leaving the Administration of France to his Brother, the Duke of Bedford, and
the Administration of England to his second Brother, the Duke of Gloucester.

. 15. Henry VI.
Him succeeded his Son Henry VI. a Child of eight Months old; who, after he was
grown up, degenerated from his Father's Martial Valor, and by his ill
management, lost what his Father had got, eclipsing thereby the English Glory.
He was, after the death of Charles VI. who died not long after Henry V.
Proclaimed King of France.
proclaimed King of France in Paris. In opposition to him, the Dauphin, Charles
VII. also declared himself King of France, with whom sided the Bravest among
the French, and a great many Scots were sent to his assistance. But Philip Duke
of Burgundy, and John Duke of Britainy, held to the Confederacy with the
English, which was renewed at that time. And then they began to fall upon one
another with great fury: For the French received a great Defeat near Crevant in
Burgundy, 1423.
and were soundly beaten near Verneuil. 1424.
In the Year 1425 the French had besieged St. Jaques de Beuveron with Forty
thousand Men, the Garrison being reduced to great extremity, prayed with a loud
voice to St. George of Salisbury: The Besiegers hearing the name of Salisbury
very frequently among the Besieged, supposed that the Earl of Salisbury was
coming to raise the Siege; whereat the French were so terrified that they run
away for fear of his Name. This is certain, that the English, for a while, were
Masters wherever they came, but before Orleans the carreer of their Fortune
was first stopped. For, tho, during that Siege, they beat the French, who came to
cut off their Provisions (which Battle is commonly called the Battle of the
Flemmings) and the City would have surrendered it self to the Duke of Burgundy,
which the English would not accept of; yet did they not only lose in that Siege
the brave Earl of Salisbury, but also the French, The Maid (...) Orleans.
being encouraged by a Maid called Joan, that was born in Lorraine, beat the
English from before Orleans. This Maid did several great exploits against the
English, and led, her self in person, King Charles to his Coronation in Rheims.
At last she was taken Prisoner by the English in an Encounter, who carried her
to Roan, where they burnt her for a Witch. But because the English perceived,
that after the Coronation of Charles, a great many Cities sided with him, they
also called over their King Henry out of England, and crowned him King of
France in Paris. He was crowned in Paris.
About the same time, a Truce was concluded by Mediation of the Pope, 1432.
for six Years; but it lasted not long, for the French, during the time of the
Truce, possessed themselves of several places, which they had brought over to
their side by cunning Insinuations, pretending, That any thing gained without
open violence did not violate the Truce. And King Charles's Maxim was, Not to
fight with the English, The English decline in France.
but to strive to get Advantages over them rather by Policy than open force.
But that which gave a great blow to the English, was, That the Duke of Burgundy
having taken a distaste at the English upon some slight occasion, was
reconciled to King Charles. There were some small Differences arisen betwixt
the Duke of Bedford and the Duke of Burgundy; to compose which, a meeting was
appointed at St. Omer: But the time being near at hand, a Dispute arose, which
of them should appear there first; it being supposed, that he who should come
first, did thereby yield the Precedence to the other; wherefore the Duke of
Bedford refused to come first, alleging, That he being Regent of France, ought
not in that Quality to give preference to a Vassal of France. But the Duke of
Burgundy stood upon his right of being Sovereign of the place where they were
to meet; 1435.
so that the meeting being set aside, the Duke of Burgundy broke quite off with
the English, The Duke of Burgundy leaves the English and is reconciled to
Charles.
and afterward assisted King Charles against them. The death of the Duke of
Bedford, proved another Misfortune to the English. For the Duke of Somerset and
the Duke of York both pretended to his place; and though the latter did obtain
it, yet did the first always oppose his Designs, so that, before the new Regent
arrived, Paris, which had been seventeen Years in the possession of the
English, and a great many other Cities, did surrender themselves to King
Charles. 1436.
Yet did the Duke of Gloucester beat the Duke of Burgundy before Calais, making
great havoc in Flanders, Artois and Hainault; and the brave Talbot did
considerable mischief to the French. The occasion of the Troubles in England.
But when afterward, by a Truce made with France, the fury of the War ceased
for a little time, there was a Foundation laid in England for intestine
Commotions. The King had promised marriage to the Daughter of the Earl of
Armagnac, to prevent which, the French King had made both the Earl and his
Daughter Prisoners. The Earl of Suffolk, who was then Ambassador in France,
did propose thereupon, without having received any Instructions to that purpose
from the King, a Match betwixt the King and Margaret Daughter of Rene, Duke of
Anjou and King of Naples and Sicily, and afterward persuaded the King to
ratify the same. This Match was mightily opposed by the Duke of Gloucester,
the King's Uncle, who alleged, That her Father had only the bare Titles of
King and Duke; and that besides this, great Injury was done thereby to the
first Bride, viz. to the Daughter of the Count of Armagnac. Notwithstanding
this, the Match went forward, and to obtain the Bride of the French, Anjou and
Maine were given them as a Recompense. The King being thus led away by the
Queen and his Favorites, her first design was to revenge her self upon the
Duke of Gloucester, whom she accused of Male Administration, and after she had
got him committed to Prison, caused him privately to be murdered. The death of
so innocent a Man did afterward fall heavy upon the King: For the French, 1449.
not long after, took from them all Normandy, The English driven out of France.
the English, by reason of a Rebellion in Ireland, not being in a capacity to
send thither speedy and sufficient Relief. They were also beaten out of
Aquitain, so that they had nothing left them in France, but Calais, and some
neighboring places; neither could they, afterward, ever get footing again in
France. The occasion of this sudden loss.
This sudden loss was occasioned by the carelessness of the English Garrisons,
that were not provided with able Governors, as also by the Pride of the
English, whereby they were become hateful to the French Subjects: But the
chief cause was, Richard Duke of York, who had underhand raised intestine
Commotions in England: For he being sensible of the King's Weakness, and how
ill satisfied the People were with the Queen's management of Affairs, hoped, by
fomenting and raising Troubles in the Kingdom, to make way for himself to
obtain the Crown; and this he did, principally, because he pretended to have
the best right to the Crown, being descended, by his Mother's side, from Lionel
Duke of Clarence, third Son of King Edward III. whereas Henry was descended
from John of Gaunt, fourth Son of the said Edward III. but publicly he
professed, That his Intention was only to remove from the King's Person his
pernicious Favorites, and especially the Duke of Somerset. Having therefore
got an Army on foot, he fought with the King's Forces, in which Battle the Duke
of Somerset was slain, and the Duke of York thereupon declared Protector of the
King's Person and the Kingdom. But this Agreement did not last long, and things
came quickly again to an open War, wherein the Duke of York being worsted, was
forced to fly into Ireland. But not long after the Earl of Warwick did beat the
King's Army, and taking him Prisoner, the Duke of York was again declared
Protector of the King and Kingdom, and lawful Heir of the Crown; under
condition that Henry should retain the Title of King during his life. But
Matters did not remain long in this condition, for the Queen, who was fled into
Scotland, marched with a great Army against the Duke of York, who was killed in
the Battle, and all the Prisoners were executed. But his Son, in conjunction
with the Earl of Warwick, raised another Army, and marching up to London, the
young Duke of York was there proclaimed King by the Name of Edward IV. 1460.


. 16. Edward IV. of the House of York.
Thus Edward IV. came to the Crown, but could not maintain it without great
difficulty: For Henry had got together a very powerful Army in the North,
against whom Edward fought the most bloody Battle that was ever fought in
England, A bloody Battle betwixt Edward and Henry.
there being 36796 Men killed upon the spot, because Edward knowing his Enemies
to be superior in number, had ordered, not to give Quarter to any of them:
After which Battle Henry retired into Scotland, from whence he returned with
another Army, and being again defeated, with much ado got safely into
Scotland. But returning again incognito into England, he was taken Prisoner and
committed to the Tower. This Prince, would have made a better Priest than a
King of such a Nation, that was distracted by the Animosities of several
Factions. But the Tragedy did not end here: The King had sent the Earl of
Warwick into France, to conclude a Match betwixt him and Bona the Daughter of
Lewis Duke of Savoy. But the King having in the mean time suddenly married
Elizabeth, the Widow of John Gray, the Earl was so dissatisfied at it, that he
declared for King Henry; and having brought over to his Party the Duke of
Clarence, the Brother of King Edward, he fell upon a sudden upon Edward, and
took him Prisoner; but by the carelessness of his Keepers he escaped not long
after. And though an Agreement was then made betwixt them, yet was it of no long
continuance, for the Earl of Warwick's Forces were routed, and he forced to fly
into France. As soon as he had recovered himself a little, he returned into
England, where he was so well received, that he forced King Edward to fly into
the Netherlands to Charles Duke of Burgundy: And King Henry, Henry taken out of
Prison and set on the Throne.
after he had been nine Years a Prisoner in the Tower, was again set upon the
Throne. But Edward having received some Assistance from the Duke of Burgundy,
Edward returns into England.
returned again into England; but perceiving that but few came in to him, he
made an Agreement with King Henry, which he confirmed with a solemn Oath, That
he would not undertake any thing against him, but be contented with his own
Estate: Yet notwithstanding his Oath, he underhand gathered what Forces he
could. The Earl of Warwick therefore marched toward him, when the Duke of
Clarence, being reconciled to his Brother King Edward, went over with all his
Forces to him. This gave a signal blow to the Earl of Warwick, who being now
not strong enough to oppose him, was forced to let him march up to London,
where he was joyfully received by the Londoners, to whom, as it is said, he owed
much Money, and was very acceptable to their Wives; Henry a second time
Prisoner 147^, and murdered by the Duke of Gloucester.
but King Henry was committed again to the Tower. Then King Edward attacked the
Earl of Warwick, where a bloody Battle was fought, the Victory seeming, at
first, to incline on the Earl's side: But some of his Troops, by reason of a
thick Fogg, charged one upon another, which lost him the Battle, he remaining,
with a great many other persons of Quality, slain in the Field. There happened
also this misfortune, That King Henry's Lady and his Son Edward having got
together very considerable Forces in France, could not come time enough to his
assistance, having been detained by contrary Winds; and coming afterward into
England, she was taken Prisoner, and her Son killed; and King Henry, also, was
murdered by the Hand of the bloody Duke of Gloucester. England being thus
restored to its Tranquillity at home, Charles, Duke of Burgundy, who was in
hopes of getting an advantage by a War betwixt England and France, stirred up
King Edward against Lewis XI. King of France. But King Lewis, who was not
ignorant how mischievous the Confederacy of England and Burgundy might prove to
him, did endeavor to detain the English King with fair words, and to render
the Duke of Burgundy suspected to him; which had the designed effect with
Edward, who considered with himself, That Charles Duke of Burgundy having
besieged Nuys, did not send him the promised Succors; so that the Peace was
easily concluded, the French having been very liberal to the English. To
confirm this Peace, King Lewis proposed a Congress to be held betwixt him and
Edward at a certain place, where he, without making any further difficulty,
appeared first in person, and bestowed a good quantity of Wine upon the English
Soldiers, who soon after returned with their King, who had got but little
Honor in this Expedition into England. But he behaved himself better against
the Scots, to whom he did considerable mischief. In the mean time the Duke of
Gloucester had rid himself of his elder Brother, the Duke of Clarence, thereby
to advance himself one step nearer to the Crown. At last King Edward being now
resolved to enter again into a War with France (since King Lewis made a very
slight account of what he had promised in the last Peace, after he was once rid
of his Enemy) he fell sick, and died in the Year 1483.

. 17. Edward V.
After the death of Edward IV. his Son Edward V. a Child of eleven Years of Age
was proclaimed King, but scarce enjoyed this Title ten Weeks. For his Uncle
Richard, Duke of Gloucester, the most bloody and wicked Man that ever the World
beheld, immediately made it his business to set the Crown upon his own Head.
Wherefore he first of all secured to himself the Tuition of the King's and his
Brother's Persons, by making away their most trusty Friends. Afterward, by the
help of some Impudent Priests, he got it spread abroad, That Edward IV. was
born in Adultery, and that consequently the Crown did of right belong to
himself, as being the most like his Father. At last, the Duke of Buckingham did
insinuate into the Lord Mayor of London, That the Crown ought to be offered to
Richard; and his Proposal being approved by the Acclamations of a few Villains
set on for that purpose, it was divulged, That the People had conferred the
Crown upon Richard. Richard III.
Having by these Intrigues obtained the Crown, Richard III. got himself
proclaimed King; 1483.
and having been crowned, he caused the innocent King Edward V. Murders his
Nephews.
and his Brother, miserably to be murdered. But soon after his Coronation a
difference arose betwixt him and the Duke of Buckingham, who had been chiefly
instrumental in helping him to the Crown. He therefore leaving the Court, began
to make a Party against the King, with an intention, to set the Crown upon the
Head of Henry Earl of Richmond, who was then an Exile in Britainy. And though the
Duke of Buckingham's Plot was discovered, and he beheaded, yet was not the
Design stopped. For the Earl of Richmond set fail with a great Fleet out of
Britainy, but being driven by contrary Winds on the Coast of Normandy, he
sought Aid of Charles VIII. King of France, which he readily granted him. A
great many English, also, went over to him, who swore Allegiance to him, he
promising them upon Oath, That he would marry the Princess Elizabeth, Daughter
of Edward IV. But Henry was within an ace of having been delivered up to
Richard by the Treachery of one Pieter Landois, Treasurer of the Duke of
Britainy, who had received a great Sum of Money from Richard for undertaking
it, for which reason he was afterward hanged by his Master's order. Richard
also had an Intention of marrying the Princess Elizabeth, and therefore had
privately made away his former Lady, He murther's his Wife.
but was obliged to delay the consummation of the Match, by reason of the
approaching danger from Henry: Henry Earl of Richmond invades England.
Who to prevent this intended Match, did in all haste sail out of France, and
landing in Wales, was kindly received by most. Not long after he gave Battle to
Richard, where William Stanley, with some thousands of Men, went over to Henry;
and besides this, a great many of Richard's Soldiers refusing to fight,
Richard himself was slain in the Field, and the Crown being immediately there
put upon Henry's Head, he was proclaimed King. 1485.


. 18. Henry VII.
Hitherto England had been miserably torn to pieces by the bloody Wars betwixt
the Houses of York and Lancaster, the first whereof bore a White, the latter a
Red Rose in their Shields. For Henry IV. of the House of Lancaster, had driven
Richard II. from the Throne; Edward IV. of the House of York, dethroned again
his Grandson Henry VI. And Henry VII. of the House of Lancaster, took from
Edward the IV th's Brother, Richard III. both his Crown and Life. He united the
White and Red Roses.
This King Henry marrying the Daughter of Edward IV. united the Red and White
Roses, and by his singular Wisdom, did again settle the State of the Kingdom.
Yet was he not altogether free from Disturbances at home. Lambert Symnel.
For first of all, one Lambert Symnel, Son to a Baker, taking upon him the Name
and Person of Edward Earl of Warwick, caused himself to be proclaimed King in
Ireland. This Comedy was first invented by a Priest, and encouraged by
Margaret, the Widow of Charles Duke of Burgundy, Sister to Edward IV. who, to
spite Henry, gave them all the Assistance she could. This Symnel transported an
Army out of Ireland into England, but was routed by Henry; and being taken
Prisoner, was made a Turnspit in the King's Kitchen. In the Year 1491 Henry
undertook an Expedition against France, He makes an Expedition in^^ France,
and besieged Bologne. But the Emperor Maximilian failing in his promises of
giving him Assistance, he in consideration of a good Sum of Money made a Peace
with France. In the mean time, Margaret Duchess Dowager of Burgundy, had set
up another Impostor, whose Name was Perkin Warbeck. Perkin Warbeck.
He pretended to be Richard, a younger Son of King Edward IV. and knew so well
how to act his part, that he got a considerable Party in Ireland. From thence
he went to Paris, where he was very well received, France being then engaged in
a War with England: But a Peace being concluded betwixt them, he retired to the
Duchess Margaret's Court. From thence he returned into Ireland, and afterward
came into Scotland, where being splendidly received by that King, he was
married to one of his Kinswomen, and entered England with a confiderable Army.
This business might have proved very dangerous to England, since there were, at
the same time, great Tumults in England, arisen about some new Taxes. But the
Rebels were beaten, and the Scots obliged to retire with great loss into
Scotland. The Scots made thereupon a Peace with England, promising, among other
things, not to uphold, by any ways, the Impostor Perkin, who fled from thence
into Ireland, and so came into Cornwall, where he caused himself to be
proclaimed King: But perceiving that few came over to his side, and the King's
Forces coming upon him, he took sanctuary in a Church, and surrendered himself
to the King, who committed him a Prisoner to the Tower; but he having twice
made an attempt to escape, was at last hanged according to his demerits. In the
Year 1501, a Marriage was concluded betwixt James IV. He marries his Daughter
Margaret to the King of Scotland.
King of Scotland, and Margaret the Daughter of Henry, which afterward united
England and Scotland under one King. Arthur, also, eldest Son of Henry, married
Catharine Daughter of Ferdinand the Catholic. But the Prince dying a few Weeks
after the Wedding, in the sixteenth Year of his Age, and Henry being unwilling
to give back the Dowry, and desirous to maintain the new Alliance with
Ferdinand, married the said Catharine to his second Son Henry, who was then but
twelve Years of Age, having obtained a Dispensation from Pope Julius II. under
pretense that there had been no carnal knowledge betwixt them; which afterward
proved the cause of great Alterations. This King is reckoned among the wisest
of his Age, and the only thing which is reprehended in him, is, That he had a
way, by false Accusations against the rich, to squeeze out of them great Sums
of Money from them. He died in the Year 1509.

. 19. Henry VIII.
Henry VIII. immediately upon his first accession to the Throne, celebrated the
Nuptials with his Brother's Widow, more to fulfill his Father's Will than out
of his own Inclination; yet as long as he lived with her in Wedlock he governed
the Realm very laudably, and in the Court nothing was seen but Plays and
Diversions. As to his Transactions abroad, upon the persuasions of Pope Julius
II. He enters into League with Ferdinand and the Pope,
and Ferdinand the Catholic, he entered into a Consederacy with them against
France, which Confederacy was pretended to be made for the defense of the Holy
See. 1512.
Ferdinand also put him in hopes of recovering Guienne; wherefore Henry sent an
Army into Biscay, His Expedition against France.
to fall in conjunction with the Spaniards into Guienne. But Ferdinand having
rather his Eye upon Navarre, and being negligent in sending timely Succors to
the English, they returned home without doing any thing. A second.
In the Year 1513 Henry entered France with a great Army, where he lost his
time in the taking of Terovane and Tournay, which was wholly destroyed in
spite of all the Attempts of the French to relieve it, though Tournay was
redeemed by Francis I. with a good Sum of Money. But at that time Henry did
not pursue his Advantage, partly out of carelessness, incident to young Men,
partly, because he had carried on this War, not so much for his own Interest,
as in favor of the Pope, and so returned into England. During the absence of
Henry, An Invasion of the Scots.
James IV. King of Scotland, upon instigation of the French invaded England,
but received a great overthrow, himself being killed in the Battle. In the Year
next following, Henry perceiving that his Father-in-law Ferdinand did only
impose upon him, concluded a Peace with France, giving his Sister Mary in
marriage to King Lewis XII. In the Year 1522 Henry again denounced War against
Francis I. He makes a second War against France.
and sent considerable Forces into France, which, nevertheless, both in the
same and next following Year did nothing of moment; and the Scots, on the other
side, obtained not any advantages against the English. But after Francis was
taken Prisoner near Pavia, it seemed that Henry had met with a fair opportunity
to give a great blow to France, more especially, since he had before prepared a
Fleet, which lay ready to make a Descent in Normandy, yet he left Charles and
made Peace with France. And Charles, after he thought he had obtained his aim,
did not make any great account of England, leaving the Princess Mary, Daughter
of Henry, to whom he had promised Marriage, for the Princess of Portugal, whom
he married. And whereas he used formerly to write to the King with his own
Hand, and subscribe himself, Your Son and trusty Friend; he now caused his
Letters to be writ by his Secretary, subscribing only his Name, Charles. And
truly it seemed very necessary for Henry to keep a little the Balance. Though a
great many are of opinion, That Cardinal Woolsey had a great hand in this
business, who was no great Friend of Charles V. because he had not promoted him
to the Papal Dignity, and had denied him the Archbishopric of Toledo, of which
he had put him in hopes at first; neither did he subscribe himself any more
Your Son and Cousin, as he used to do. But however it be, Henry at that time
saved France from an imminent danger. The Divorce of Henry VIII.
After he had lived very peaceably and well with his Queen for the space of
twenty Years, he began to have a scruple of Conscience, Whether he could
lawfully live in Wedlock with his Brother's Widow; which scruple he pretended
was raised in him first by the President of Paris, who was sent to treat
concerning a Marriage betwixt Mary Daughter of Henry, and the second Son of
Francis. Some say, that he being weary of her, was fallen in love with Anna
Bullen, and found out this way to be rid of her. Yet this seems not so probable
to some, since he did not marry the said Anna Bullen till three Years after he
pretended to the scruple of Conscience; whereas the heat of Love does not
usually admit of such delays. Some will have it, that Cardinal Woolsey raised
this scruple first in him, on purpose to nettle Charles V. and to please
Francis I. in hopes, after this Divorce, to make up a Match betwixt Henry and
the Duchess of Alenson, Sister of Francis. But however it be, the business was
brought before the Pope, who gave a Commission to the Cardinal Campegius, to
enquire, in conjunction with Woolsey, into the matter: It Is said, That the Pope
was willing to gratify Henry, and for that purpose had sent a Bull to
Campegius, yet with this caution, to keep it by him till further order. But
when he afterward saw Charles V. to prove so successful, he durst not venture
to do any thing that might displease him, wherefore he ordered Campegius to
burn the Bull, and to delay the business to the utmost. The Queen also refused
to answer to their Commission, but appealed to the Pope in person; besides,
Charles V. and his Brother Ferdinand had protested against this Commission.
Woolsey did also perceive, that the King was fallen in love with Anna Bullen,
which being likely to prove prejudicial to his Authority, he persuaded the Pope
underhand, not to give his consent unto this Divorce. The fall^ of Woolsey.
Henry being informed what Intrigues the Cardinal was carrying on against him,
humbled the greatness of this haughty Prelate, who died in the Year next
following in great misery. And Henry being made sensible, that the Pope
regarded more his own Interest than the merits of the Cause, he forbid, that
any body should hence forward appeal to Rome, or send thither any Money for
Church Benefices. He therefore sent to several Universities in France and Italy
to desire their Opinions in this matter, who all unanimously agreed in this,
That such a Marriage was against the Laws of God; and having once more, by his
Ambassadors, solicited the Pope, but in vain, to decide the matter, the King
had the same adjudged in Parliament, and divorced himself from her, 1532.
yet conversed with her in a very friendly manner ever after till her death,
except, that he did not bed with her since the time when this scruple first
arose. He marries Anna Bullen.
Some Months after he was married to Anna Bullen, by whom he had Elizabeth, who
was afterward Queen. He abrogates the Pope's Supremacy.
Anno 1535 the King caused himself to be declared Supreme Head of the Church of
England, abrogating thereby all the Pope's Authority in that kingdom, and John
Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Thomas Moor the Lord Chancellor, refusing to
acknowledge him as such, it cost them their Heads. Yet would Henry never
receive the Doctrine of Luther or Zwinglius, but continued in the Roman
Communion, because he was mightily exasperated against Luther. For Henry had
formerly got a Book to be published under his Name against Luther in favor of
the Pope, for which he acquired the Title of Defender of the Faith, which Title
the Kings of England retain to this day. But Luther setting aside all the
Respect due to a King, writ an Answer to the same, full of Heat and bitter
Reflections. Yet because he esteemed the Monks as a sort of people that were
not only useless, Monasteries demolished.
but also such as depending on the Pope, might prove very pernicious to him at
home, he gave free leave to all Monks and Nuns to go out of the Convents and
Nunneries; and by degrees converted unto his own use the Revenues of all
Nunneries and Convents, Colleges and Chapels, as also those of the Order of
the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem; nevertheless he employed some part of
them in erecting six new Episcopal Sees, and Cathedral Churches, and to the
advancing of Learning in the Universities. A great part also he gave away or
sold for a little Money to great Families, intending thereby to oblige them for
the future to maintain the alterations he had made. It is reported, that these
Church Revenues which were so reduced, did amount yearly to 186512 l. or as
some others will have it, to 500752 l. He also abolished the superstitious
worship of Images, and made some other alterations in Religious Worship, so
that, in effect, he laid the Foundation of the Reformation. Nevertheless.
England was at that time in a miserable condition; Protestants and Papists
executed.
for a great many Roman Catholics, that would not acknowledge the King for the
Supreme Head of the English Church were executed: And a great many more
Protestants received the same punishment, because they would not own the
Corporal presence of the Body of Christ in the Sacrament; though this effusion of
blood was not so much caused by the King as by the Bishops, who had first
brought in use such rigorous Laws, and now executed them with as much severity.
War with Scotland.
In the Year 1543, another War happened with the Scots, who making an Inrode
into England were beaten by a few English; which did grieve King James V. to
that degree, that he died for trouble, leaving behind him one only Daughter
Mary, whom Henry would have engaged to his Son Edward, thereby by to unite
these two Kingdoms; and the business was like to have succeeded very well, if
the Archbishop of St. Andrews had not opposed it. Henry also entered into a
League with the Emperor against France, He enters into a League with the
Emperor against France.
wherein it was agreed, to join their Armies of 80000 Foot and 22000 Horse near
Paris, to plunder that City, and to ravage the whole Country as far as the
Loire. But neither of them acted according to the Agreement, for Henry wasted
his time in the Siege and taking of Boulogne, which he afterward, by the Peace
concluded in the Year 1546, promised to restore to France within the space of
eight Years, in consideration of the Sum of 800000 Crowns to be paid him for
the same; which was performed accordingly under Edward VI. 1550.
Neither do I believe that Henry was in good earnest by ruining the French to
give such great advantages to Charles V. After his Divorce with Catharine of
Arragon, he was very unfortunate in his Marriages; Anna Bullen beheaded.
for Anna Bullen was beheaded for Adultery and Incest, though some are of
opinion, that it was more the Protestant Religion than the Crime which proved
fatal to her. It is certain, that the Protestant Princes of Germany did so
resent this matter, that whereas they intended to have made Henry the Head of
their League, they afterward would hold no correspondency with him. His other
Wives.
After Anna Bullen he married Jane Seymour, Mother to Edward VI. who died in
Childbed. Then he married Anna of Cleves, whom he also pretending I know not
what bodily infirmity in her, quickly dismissed. The fifth was Catharine
Howard, who was beheaded for Adultery. The sixth Catharine Parre, Widow of the
Lord Latimer, who outlived him. Henry died in the Year 1547.

. 20. Edward VI.
Edward VI. was nine Years of age when he came to the Crown, during whose
Minority his Uncle, the Duke of Somerset had the Administration of Affairs. His
first design was to force the Scots to agree to a Match betwixt Edward and
their young Queen Mary, wherefore he fell into Scotland, and overthrew them
near Muskelborough in a great Battle. Nevertheless he missed his aim, for the
Scots sent their Queen into France, who was there married to the Dauphin,
afterward King of France by the Name of Francis II. Under this King Edward the
Reformed Religion was publicly established in England, and the Mass quite
abolished; which occasioned great disturbances in the Kingdom, which were
nevertheless happily suppressed. In the Year 1550 there was a Peace concluded
betwixt England, France and Scotland, when also Boulogne was restored to the
French. But King Edward falling sick, the Duke of Northumberland, who had
before destroyed the Duke of Somerset, persuaded King Edward, under pretense of
settling the Protestant Religion, to exclude by his last Will and Testament his
two Sisters, Mary and Elizabeth (for of the Queen of the Scots they made but
little account at that time) from the Succession of the Crown, and to settle it
upon Jane Gray, Daughter of the Duke of Suffolk, whom he had by Mary Daughter
of Henry VII. which afterward proved fatal both to Jane and the Author. For
after the death of Edward, the Duke of Northumberland caused Jane to be
proclaimed Queen in the City of London; 155^.
but Mary eldest Sister of Edward did immediately lay claim to the Crown in her
Letters to the Privy Council: Lady Jane Gray proclaimed Queen.
And Letters proving ineffectual, they began to come to blows; but most of the
Nobility, unto whom Mary promised not to make any alteration in Religion, did
side with her; and a part of the Army and Fleet, most of the Privy Counselors,
and the City of London, taking her part proclaimed her Queen. Northumberland
himself being now willing to go with the tide, did proclaim Mary Queen in
Cambridge, notwithstanding which he afterward lost his Head.

. 21. Mary.
Queen Mary caused the Roman Catholic Religion and Mass, which were abolished
in her Brother's time, Restores Popery.
as also the Pope's Authority to be restored in England, she used the
Protestants very hardly, of whom a great many were punished with death, Yet was
she not able to restore the Church Revenues, for fear of exasperating the
greatest Families, who had them in their possession. The Pope did also send
Cardinal Poole, to reunite the Kingdom to the holy See of Rome. This Queen
Mary was married to Philip Son of Charles V. Marries Philip of Spain.
who was afterward King of Spain, yet under these Conditions, That she should
have the sole disposal of all Offices and Revenues of the Kingdom, and if a Son
was born, he should, besides the Crown of England, inherit Burgundy and the
Netherlands: Don Carlos, who was born of a former Wife, should be Heir of Spain
and all the Italian Provinces, and in case he died without Issue, this should
also inherit his part. But no Children came of this marriage, Mary being pretty
well in Years, for she was thirty Years before proposed in Marriage. And there
were some, who being dissatisfied at this Match, raised Tumults; among whom was
the Duke of Suffolk, Father of Jane, Lady Jane, etc. beheaded.
who had hitherto been a Prisoner in the Tower, but she and her Husband
Guilford, and her Father, paid with their Heads for it. It was within an ace
but that Elizabeth, who was afterward Queen, had also undergone the same fate,
if Philip and the Spaniards had not interceded for her, not out of any
affection to her person, The reason why Philip interceded for the Lady
Elizabeth.
but because they knew, that after her, the next Heir to the Crown of England
was Mary Queen of Scotland, who being married to the Dauphin of France, they
feared, lest by this means England and Scotland might be united with France.
Among other Articles in the Marriage Contract of Queen Mary, it was agreed,
That she should not be obliged to engage her self in the Wars which her
Husband, Philip, should carry on against France: Notwithstanding which, when
Philip afterward was engaged in a War with France, she sent to his assistance
some of her best Forces, who by their Bravery chiefly obtained the Victory near
St. Quintin; The Battle of St. Quintin.
for which reason Philip gave the City to be plundered by the English. Henry
II. King of France, taking hold of this opportunity, Calais lost.
assaulted the City of Calais, under the Command of the Duke de Guise, which
being not well Garrisoned he took in a few days, and obliged all the
Inhabitants to quit the City, and to leave behind them all their Gold, Silver
and Jewels. He also took afterward the two Castles of Guisnes and Hammes, and
thereby drove the English quite out of France. Not long after this loss Queen
Mary died. 1558.


. 22. Elizabeth.
Elizabeth, who after the death of her Sister, was unanimously proclaimed
Queen, maintained her Authority, and governed with great Prudence and Glory in
the midst of a great many threatening dangers to the very end. In the beginning
Philip endeavored by all means to keep England on his side, for which reason
he proposed a Marriage betwixt Elizabeth and himself, Philip desires her in
marriage.
promising to obtain a Dispensation from the Pope, which was nevertheless
opposed by the French in the Court of Rome. Elizabeth was very unwilling to
disoblige so great a Prince, who had well deserved of her; yet on the other
side, the same scruple which had caused her Father to be divorced from
Catharine of Arragon, by a parity of reason, did remain with her; she
considered, especially, that the said Divorce must needs be esteemed unjust, if
the Pope's Dispensation was allowed of; since it had been alleged as a
fundamental reason of the said Divorce, that the Pope had no power to dispense
in any cases which were contrary to God's Law: She resolved therefore not to
have any further concerns with the Pope, and to give a friendly refusal to
Philip. Then she, by an Act of Parliament, constituted the Protestant
Episcopacy, yet not at once, but by degrees, taking away from the Papists the
free exercise of their Religion, and under several Penalties and Fines obliged
every one to frequent the Protestant Churches on Sunday. Every body also was
obliged by a solemn Oath to acknowledge her the Supreme Governor in England,
even in Spiritual Matters; which Oath was among 9400, who were possessed of
Church Benefices, taken by all, except 189 who refused the same, among whom
were fourteen Bishops. She kept steadfast to the established Episcopal Church
Government, though she met with great opposition from two sorts of people, viz.
Papists and Paritaus.
the Papists and Puritans. These having conceived a great hatred against
Episcopacy, and all other Ceremonies which had the least resemblance of Popery,
were for having every thing regulated according to the way of Geneva. Though
their number increased daily, yet the Queen kept them pretty well under. But
the Papists made several attempts against her Life and Crown; for her envious
Enemies did erect several Seminaries or Schools for the English Nation in
foreign Countries; Poreign Seminaries.
viz. at Douay, at Rheims, at Rome and Valedolid; all which were erected for
the Instructing of the English Youth in these Principles, viz. That the Pope
had the Supreme Power over Kings, and as soon as a King was declared a Heretic
by him, the Subjects were thereby absolved from their Allegiance due to him,
and that it was meritorious work to murder such a King. Out of these Schools
Emissaries and Priests were sent into England, whose business was there to
propagate the Roman Catholic Religion; but more especially, to instruct the
People in the abovementioned Doctrines. To these associated themselves some
Desperado's, who, after Pope Pius V. had excommunicated the Queen, were
frequently conspiring against her Life. But most of them got no other advantage
by it, than to make work for the Hangman, and occasioned that the Papists were
stricter kept than before. Mary Queen of Scotland.
Mary also, Queen of Scotland, raised abundance of troubles against Queen
Elizabeth; she being the next Heiress to the Crown of England, did, with the
assistance of the Duke of Guise, endeavor to have Queen Elizabeth declared by
the Pope Illegitimate (which the Spaniards underhand opposed) and both she and
the Dauphin assumed the Arms of England, which undertaking proved afterward
fatal to Queen Mary. For Elizabeth sided with the Earl of Murray, natural
Brother of Queen Mary, whose main endeavor was to chase the French out of
Scotland, and to establish there the Protestant Religion, both which he
effected with the assistance of Queen Elizabeth. This Queen Mary being after
the death of Francis II. returned into Scotland, was married to her Kinsman
Henry Darley, one of the handsomest Men in England, by whom she had James VI.
But her Love to him grew quickly cold; for a certain Italian Musician, whose
name was David Ritz was so much in favor with the Queen, that a great many
persuaded Henry, that she kept unlawful company with him. He being thus
animated, with the assistance of some Gentlemen, pulled David Ritz out of the
Room where he was then waiting upon the Queen at Table, and killed him
immediately. From whence King James, with whom Queen Mary was then big with
Child, had this natural infirmity, That he could not see a naked Sword, his
Mother having at that time been frighted with naked Swords. This so exasperated
the Queen against her Husband, that he soon after, The Queen of Scots married
Bothwell, who murdered her Husband.
as was supposed, was in the Night time murdered by George Bothwell, who was
afterward married to the Queen. The Earl of Murray, with some others, did
publish, That this Murder was committed by the instigation of the Queen, and
George Buchanan, a Creature of the Earl's, does boldly affirm the same in his
Writings. Yet there are some, who say, That the Calumnies as well concerning
David Ritz, as also concerning the death of Henry Darley, were raised against
the Queen by the Artifices of the Earl of Murray, thereby to defame and
dethrone her. But however it be, there was an Insurrection made against the
Queen, and Bothwell, whom she had married, was forced to fly the Land (who died
in Denmark some Years after in a miserable condition) and she being made a
Prisoner, made her escape in the Year 1568. But the Forces which she had
gathered being routed, She was made a Prisoner in England.
she retired into England, where she also was made a Prisoner. There she
entered into a Conspiracy against the Queen Elizabeth, with the Duke of
Norfolk, whom she promised to marry, hoping thereby to obtain the Crown of
England. But the Plot being discovered, the Duke was made a Prisoner, but was
afterward released. And being again discovered to have afresh pursued his
former design, 1572.
paid for it with his Head. Queen Mary was confined to a more close
Imprisonment. Several Treaties were set on foot to procure her Liberty, but no
sufficient security could be given to Queen Elizabeth. Wherefore Queen Mary
growing at last impatient, and being overcome by ill Counselors, entered into
a Conspiracy with Spain, the Pope, and the Duke of Guise against Elizabeth:
Which Plot having been long carried on privately, did break out at last, 1586.
and some Letters of her own hand writing having been produced among other
matters, a Commission was granted to try the Queen; by virtue of which she
received Sentence of Death; which being confirmed by the Parliament, great
application was made to the Queen for Execution, which Queen Elizabeth would
not grant for a great while, especially, because her Son James and France did
make great intercessions in her behalf. At last the French Ambassador d'
Aubespine, having suborned a Ru^^ian to murder Queen Elizabeth, her Friends
urged vehemently to hasten the Execution, which she granted, and signed the
Warrant, commanding, nevertheless, Secretary Davidson to keep it by him till
farther order: But he advising thereupon with the Privy Council, it was
ordered, that Execution should be done upon her immediately. Beheaded,
Queen Elizabeth seemed much concerned there-at, 1587.
and removed Davidson from his place. King James also was grievously
exasperated, and some of his Friends advised him to join with Spain and to
revenge his Mother's death. But Queen Elizabeth found a way to appease his
Anger, and there was ever after a very good understanding betwixt them to the
very last. The Duke of Guise and his party were great Enemies to Queen
Elizabeth in France, Queen Elizabeth assists the Huguenots.
and she, on the other hand, assisted the Huguenots with Men and Money, who
surrendered into her Hands as a pledge, 1562.
Havre de Grace, but her Forces were obliged to quit the same in the Year next
following. Neither could she ever get Calais restored to her, 1559.
though in the Peace concluded at Chasteau en Cambresis, the same was promised to
her. With Henry the IVth. she lived in a good understanding, sending frequently
to his assistance both Men and Money. But with Spain she was at variance about
the Rebellious Netherlanders, to whom she not only granted a safe retreat in
her Country and Harbors, but also assisted them, first underhand, and
afterward openly, both with Men and Money, they having surrendered unto her as
a pledge, Flushing, Brill and Rammeken: But she would never accept of the
Sovereignty of the Netherlands, The Sovereignty of the Netherlands twice
offered her.
which being twice offered her, she refused as often, out of weighty and wise
Considerations. She sent, however, the Earl of Leicester, her Favorite,
thither as Governor, who did not acquire much Reputation; but having put
things rather in confusion, he was recalled in the second Year. She did also
great damage to the Spaniards on their Coasts, and in the West Indies, by Sir
Francis Drake and others, 1595.
and the Earl of Essex took from them Cadiz; but quitted it immediately after.
On the other side, Spain was continually busy in raising Commotions and
Conspiracies against her. And because the Spaniards were of Opinion, That
England might be sooner conquered than the Netherlands, and that the latter
could not be subdued without the other, they equipped a Fleet which they called
the Invincible Armado, wherewith they intended to invade England. The Armado
defeated.
Which Fleet, to the Immortal Glory of the English Nation being partly
destroyed by them, and many miserably torn to pieces by Tempests, did return
home in a very miserable condition. Spain also supported constantly the Rebels
in Ireland, who were very troublesome to Queen Elizabeth, though they were
generally beaten by her Forces, except in the Year 1596, when they soundly beat
the English. Wherefore the Queen sent thither the Earl of Essex, who did
nothing worth mentioning. And after his return, the Queen giving him a severe
Reprimand, and ordering him to be kept a Prisoner, he was so exasperated at it,
that though he was reconciled to the Queen, he endeavored to raise an
Insurrection in London, Essex heheaded.
which cost him his Head. Though the Spaniards were twice repulsed and chased out
of Ireland with considerable loss, yet the Rebellion lasted till the very end
of her life. Neither could a Peace be concluded betwixt her and the Spaniards
as long as she lived: For though a Treaty was appointed to be held at Boulogne,
1600*
by the Mediation of Henry IV. yet the same was immediately broke off, because
the English did dispute Precedence with the Spaniards. This Queen could never
be brought to take a Resolution to marry, though her Subjects did greatly desire
it, and she had great Offers made her; amongst whom were, besides Philip,
Charles Archduke of Austria, Eric King of Sweden, the Duke de Anjou, and his
Brother the Duke de Alenson, the Earl of Leicester, etc. It was her custom not
to give a flat denial to such as sued for her in Marriage, but she used to
amuse them with hopes, whereby she made them her Friends: For she treated with
Charles Archduke of Austria for seven Years together, and with the Duke of
Alenson she was gone so far, as that the Marriage Contract was made, yet was it
so drawn as that a way was found to annul the same afterward. Under her Reign
the English Trade was first established in Turkey and the East Indies, the
finest Coin, as also the Manufactury of Serges and Bays was settled in England
about the same time. This Queen also brought first into Reputation the English
Naval Strength, She was jealous of her Power at Sea.
which she was so jealous of, that, though she supported the Netherlanders
against the Spaniards, yet would she never consent, that the Netherlanders
should so augment their Sea Forces, as that thereby they might be able to
contest with England at Sea. This Maxim, which seemed so necessary for England,
was not regarded by King James, he being a lover of Peace: And King Charles I.
having always his Hands full with his Rebellious Subjects, was not in a
capacity to observe it; wherefore the Dutch Power at Sea, could neither by
Cromwell, nor by Charles II. be brought down again. This most glorious, and by
her Subjects, extremely beloved Queen died in the Year 1602, having before
appointed James VI. King of Scotland, for her Successor.

. 23. James I.
After the death of Elizabeth, James VI. King of Scotland, was with an
unanimous applause proclaimed King of England. His Title to this Crown was
derived from Margaret Daughter of Henry VII. who was married to James IV. King
of Scotland; whose Son James V. left one only Daughter, who was Mother of James
VI. He at first showed himself pretty favorable to the Papists, fearing, lest
they might in the beginning of his Reign raise some Commotions against him.
Cobham's Conspiracy.
Notwithstanding which, immediately after his Coronation the Lord Cobham, Gray,
and others, entered into a Conspiracy against him: Their main design was to
root out the Line of James, 1603.
and to put in his place the Marchioness d' Arbelle, she being also descended
from the abovesaid Margaret Daughter of Henry VII. This Lady was after the
death of her Father married to Archibald Douglass, by whom she had Margaret,
who was married to Ma^thias Earl of Lenox; and this Arbella being the Daughter
of Charles Lenox, the third Son of this Earl, was, by the intercession of
Spain, to have been married to the Duke of Savoy, and by this means the Popish
Religion was again to be introduced into England: But the whole Plot being
discovered, the Ringleaders were punished, yet not with that Severity as the
hainousness of their Crime did deserve; though in the Year next following, all
the Jesuits and Popish Priests were, by a severe Proclamation, The Powder Plot.
banished out of England. In the Year 1605, some Popish Villains had hired a
Vault under the Parliament House, which being filled up with a great many
Barrels of Gunpowder, they intended to have blown the King, the Prince, and the
whole Parliament into the Air. But this devilish Design was discovered, for one
of the Accomplices, by a Letter that was obscurely written, and delivered by an
unknown person to a Footman of the Lord Mounteagle, did entreat him not to come
the next day into the Parliament House: Which causing a suspicion in the King,
all the Vaults were searched, and the Powder found. Hereupon the Parliament
made an Act, That all Subjects, by a solemn Oath, should acknowledge James for
their lawful Sovereign; neither, that the Pope had any Authority to Dethrone
Sovereigns, or to absolve Subjects from their Allegiance. He concluded a Peace
with Spain, 1604.
and was afterward one of the Mediators of the Truce made betwixt Spain and
Holland. His Son-in-law, the Elector Palatine being banished out of his
Territories, he assisted only with sending of Ambassadors and proposing of an
Agreement, all which the Spaniards rendered ineffectual. 1626.
His Son Prince Charles was sent into Spain to marry the Infanta, where the
Marriage Contract was concluded and confirmed by Oath, but the Nuptials were
deferred till the next year, the Spaniards being willing to gain time, and to
see how things would be carried on in Germany for the House of Austria. But
when, after the Prince's return into England, the English would needs have the
Restitution of the Elector Palatine inserted in the Articles, the Match was
broke off, and, though the Parliament voted a Subsidy to be employed toward the
restoring of the Elector Palatine, yet the Design came to nothing. Under this
King there was a period put to the Differences and Wars betwixt England and
Scotland, which hitherto had created abundance of Troubles to this Island. And
that nothing of jealousy might remain betwixt these two Nations about
Preference in the Royal Title, he introduced the Name of Great Britain, which
comprehends both the Kingdoms. There was also set on foot a Treaty to unite
both Kingdoms into one Body, but it did not succeed, because the Scots would
not be Inferior to the English. Under this King's Reign Colonies were
established in Virginia, Foreign Plantations.
Bermudos and Ireland; by which means the English have extended their
Dominions, but there are some, who believe that this has weakened the English
at home, and that in all probability, it would have been more profitable for
England to have employed those people in Manufactury and Fishing of Herrings,
which produce such vast Riches to the Dutch in the very sight of the English.
Yet some are also of Opinion, That it is good for the public repose, that the
unruly Multitude do not grow too numerous in England. The East India Trade was
also greatly promoted at that time, but the English could not come there in
competition with the Dutch, these having been before hand with them. This King
died in the Year 1625.

. 24. His Son Charles I. succeeded him, Charles I.
who, after the Spanish Match was broke off, married Henrietta Daughter of
Henry IV. 1626.
He equipped out a great Fleet against the Spaniards, War with Spain.
the English landed near Cadiz, but being repulsed with loss, returned without
doing any thing, and all Commerce was prohibited betwixt Spain and England. War
with France.
He also broke with France, and because the French Merchants had been ill
treated by the English, all Commerce was also prohibited betwixt these two
Nations. The English thereupon endeavored to send Aid unto the City of
Rochelle, and landing in the Isle of Rhee, besieged the Fort of St. Martin,
which being valiantly defended by one Toyras, the English were repulsed with
great loss. In the Year next following, they undertook to relieve Rochelle, but
in vain. A Peace concluded with both.
Whereupon Charles concluded a Peace with France in the Year 1629, and in the
Year next following with Spain, having by this War, waged against these two
Nations, which were not so easy to be attacked by one at the same time, gained
no Reputation to the dissatisfied Subjects, and vast Debts. Under this King
arose very violent Divisions betwixt him and the Parliament, which produced a
most strange Revolution in that Kingdom. It will be very well worth our while,
Causes of the intestine Commotions in England.
to enquire a little more narrowly into the true causes thereof. That wife
Queen, Elizabeth, held it for a constant maxim, to oppose the growing power of
Spain with all her might, whereby she weakened Spain, and not only enriched her
Subjects, but also exercised them in Sea Affairs, wherein consists the chief
Strength and Security of this Kingdom: Wherefore she always kept a good
Correspondency with all such as were Enemies of the House of Austria; she
assisted France against the Designs of the Spaniards, favored the Protestant
Princes in Germany, upheld the Dutch against the Spaniards, thereby the better
to weaken so formidable a Neighbor, looking upon the Netherlands as the
Out-work of her Kingdom. Besides this, she finding continual employment for her
Subjects abroad, did not a little contribute toward the preserving the Health
of the State; for by this means a great deal of corrupt and inflamed Blood
being taken away, The different Conduct of Queen Elizabeth and King James as to
the State.
it prevented intestine Diseases in the State. But King James took quite
another course, and perceiving that the United Provinces were grown strongh
enough, not only to support themselves against Spain, but also to dispute the
Dominion of the Narrow Seas with England, he left them to themselves, and
concluding a Peace with Spain, established a lasting Tranquillity at home, for
his Inclinations were more for Books than Arms. And because Subjects in general
are apt to follow the Inclinations of their Sovereigns, the People laid aside
all Warlike Exercises, and fell into such Weaknesses and Vices, as are commonly
the product of Plenty and Peace: And the King hoped, when these Nations applied
themselves only to Trade and Commerce, they would be diverted from having any
thoughts of opposing his Authority. He made it also his main endeavor to unite
the Minds of the Scots and English, by Naturalizing the English in Scotland,
and the Scots in England, and by joining the great Families by Marriages: But
he was more especially careful of establishing one Form of Religious Worship
in both Kingdoms. The Occasions that were taken from Religion.
For though there was no great difference in the Articles of Faith, yet the
Ceremonies and Church Government were very different. For Queen Elizabeth, when
she established the Protestant Religion retained many Ceremonies, which were
anciently used in the Primitive Church, as also used by the Papists afterward;
she maintained also the Authority of the Bishops, yet under the Royal Power;
supposing that this Constitution was most suitable to a Monarchy, considering
that the Bishops had some dependence on the King, and had their Votes in
Parliament. And it used to be the saying of King James, No Bishop, no King. But
this Constitution did not agree with those of the Reformed Religion in Holland,
Switzerland and France, partly because these Nations were used to a
Democratical Liberty, and therefore loved an Equality in the Church Government
as well as the State; partly because they had suffered from some Kings and
Bishops, and therefore both were equally hated by them. These would not allow
of any Superiority among the Clergy, but constituted the outward
Church Government by Presbyteries, Classes and Synods; neither would they admit
any Ceremonies, believing, that the perfection of the Reformed Religion did
consist in not having so much as anything, tho'never so indifferent, common
with the Papists. And according to this Form the Church of Scotland being
established, the number of such as were of the same Opinion increased daily in
England, who were commonly called Presbyterians or Puritans. And the
Capriciousness of those who were of several Sentiments proved the more
dangerous, because these Nations being of a melancholy temper used to adhere
steadfastly to their Opinions, not to be removed from them. King James being
besides a great Enemy of the Puritans, thought to have found out a way to
suppress them in Scotland, by inserting it among the Royal Prerogatives, which
was to be confirmed by the Parliament of Scotland, That he had the Supreme
Power both in Spiritual and Temporal Affairs in the same manner in Scotland as
in England. By this means he hoped to model, without any great difficulty, the
Church of Scotland according to that of England. And though this Proposition was
opposed by a great many in the Parliament of Scotland, yet the King's party
prevailed, and a new Form of Church Government was established in Scotland. But
the King had no sooner turned his back and was returned into England, but the
common people made an Insurrection against the Bishops in Scotland, who began
to introduce there the Ceremonies of the Church of England.

. 25. The Conduct of Charles I.
Though King Charles I. was of a more warlike temper than his Father, yet was he
obliged, though against his Will, according to the Maxims of his Father, to
preserve Peace abroad, to avoid the danger of being obliged to depend on the
Capricious Humors of his Subjects. And because he, as well as his Father, had
a great dislike of the Power of the common people, and of the Temper and
Principles of the Puritans, all his Thoughts were bent to find out ways how to
secure himself from the danger of both: And because the King could not impose
any extraordinary Taxes without the consent of the Parliament, Charles chose
rather to control his own Inclinations, which were bent for War, than to fawn
upon the Parliament; in hopes that its Heats, which was for limiting the King's
Power, would by degrees diminish, if it was not called together for a
considerable time. It is supposed, that the Lord Treasurer Weston did confirm
him in this Opinion, who did expect to be called to an account by the
Parliament. The Parliament used anciently to provide a certain yearly Revenue
for the King, toward maintaining his Court and Fleet, to secure the Commerce
of the Kingdom, which Revenue was not hereditary to the next Successor. The
first Parliament which was called by Charles I. had settled the Customs, as
part of his Revenue, but when he afterward, having dissolved the same against
the Opinion of the Male Contents, his Revenues also began to be called in
question, it being their Opinion, that nothing could so soon oblige the King to
call a new Parliament, as if what was necessary for his and the Courts
Subsistence, were withheld from him. But the King, however, did not only
receive the same Customs as his Predecessors had done, but also augmented them
with new Impositions to the yearly value of 800000 l. by which means the King,
who was firm in his Opinion, was thought to have a Design to alter the ancient
Constitution of the Government, and to maintain himself without a Parliament;
which however was looked upon as an impossibility by the generality of them:
For King James had left above 1200000 l. Debts, which were since increased by
Charles 400000 l. more, which Money was expended in the Wars against France and
Spain; it was therefore not visible, how he could extricate himself out of
these Debts without the assistance of a Parliament, since according to the
fundamental Constitutions of the Realm he could not levy any Taxes upon the
Subjects, and to force them to pay any, was beyond his Power, having no Forces
on foot, but the Militia of the Kingdom. And it was impossible to bring in such
a Foreign Force, as could be supposed to be able to make Head against the
dissatisfied people. Notwithstanding all which the King pursued his Resolution,
and having asked the Opinion of Men skilled in the Law, who told him, That it
was allowable, for the public benefit, to levy Money by his own Authority; he
imposed several new Taxes, whereby he augmented his yearly Revenue from 500000
l. to 800000 l. Besides this, he laid a Tax for maintaining of a Fleet, which
amounted to 200000 l. All which caused great dissatisfaction among the Subjects
against the King: Besides, the King was thought by the Puritans, to deal hardly
with them and too mildly with the Papists (by the Counsel of Archbishop Laud, a
Man of great Resolution, who at that time apprehended, that Faction very
dangerous both to Church and State which was by the Puritans interpreted, as if
the King was resolved, by suppressing of them, to introduce Popery; to
insinuate this into the Multitude, abundance of Libels and scurrilous Papers
were scattered abroad against the King and the Bishops, and Commissioners being
appointed to inquire into them, they were rather exasperated than appeased by
its Severity.

. 26. Both Nations being therefore full of Discontents, Troubles in Scotland
and England.
the Flame first broke out in Scotland: For the King endeavoring to root out
Puritanism there, to establish the Authority of the Bishops, and an Uniformity
in Religion, he ordered a Church Liturgy to be composed, abrogating all
Presbyteries, Classes and Provincial Synods, and enjoining every one under
severe penalties, to conform to the same; there was a general Insurrection
raised by that party in Scotland. There was also another reason; 1637.
for, at the time of the first Reformation the Revenues of a great many Church
Benefices were appropriated to the use of the Crown, but without any remarkable
advantage; for they were let out, for the most part, to younger Brothers of
Noble Families. These having found the benefit of them, had, by getting from
time to time the Survivorship, continued the same in their Families, and kept
them as their own Propriety. Nay, they did more than this, for during the
Minority of King James VI. 1567.
they had obtained the Titles of Lordships for some of the most considerable of
these, or some lesser Benefices joined together. King James afterward
perceiving, 1617.
that thereby they had bound him up from rewarding such with these Benefices as
deserved well of him, would have recalled the beforesaid Grants, but met with
such opposition in the Nobility, that he desisted from it. 1633.
But the King undertook the business effectually, employing the said Revenues
toward the augmenting of the Salaries of the Clergy. These therefore who had
been losers by this Revocation joined with such Ministers as were mortal
Enemies of the Liturgy, did, with all their might, help to stir up the
Rebellion. Alexander Lesley, also, who had been a Commander in the German Wars,
and having refused to serve under John Banniers there, was returned into his
native Country, in hopes to make his advantage of these Troubles. He put
himself at the Head of the Rebellious Party, and by persuading the Nobility,
that the King intended to take away their ancient Privileges, stirred up a
great many against the King. And to make a fair show to the common people, they
made use of the Religious Cloak of Conscience, The Scotch Covenant.
ordering a Directory to be composed by the Ministers quite opposite to the
former Liturgy. They thereupon entered into an Association* confirmed by solemn
Oaths, That they would maintain the same against all, even the King himself:
This Association was called the Covenant, which being subscribed by the
greatest part of the Nobility and Clergy, a Council was constituted, unto whom
was committed the supreme direction of their Affairs. To suppress these
Commotions, the King sent the Marquess of Hamilton into Scotland, who dealing
mildly with them, only encouraged the adverse party: For the King calling a
Parliament in hopes to remedy these Disorders, the Covenant was by its
Authority confirmed, the Episcopal Authority quite abolished, and Puritanism
established in defiance of the Royal Authority. There being then no other way
left to reduce the Rebellious Party to Obedience but force, and the King being
in want both of Money and a sufficient number of faithful Subjects, he was
forced to make some use of the Papists to obtain both, wherefore he did not
only raise an Army, wherein were some Papists, but also was assisted by them
with some Sums of Money, all which, however, was in no ways sufficient to
supply the want of the King; and a Supply being demanded from the Subjects,
very few, except the King's Servants and Officers were for contributing any
thing. And it being divulged, that a great many thousand of Irish Papists and
Germans were ready for the King's Service, to try, whether by this way the
Subjects could be frightened out of some Money, it served only to exasperate
the Minds of the people. Yet the King's Forces might in all probability have
been successful against the Scots, if they had fallen upon them immediately.
But because they had leisure given them, they did not only settle a
Correspondency with France and Holland, from whence they were supplied with
Money and Ammunition; but also sent their Deputies into England, who so well
knew there to represent the state of their Affairs, that the King being
persuaded by the English, made a dishonorable Agreement with them: Which
nevertheless did not last long, the Court being ashamed of the Agreement, and
the Scots not trusting the King, A Letter intercepted, wherein the Scots desire
Succor from France.
the King had in the mean while intercepted a Letter, wherein the Scots had
solicited for some Officers and Money to be sent them from France; this he
hoped might prove an inducement to the English to oppose the Treachery of the
Scots, and to furnish him with some Supplies, of which he stood in great need
at that time. He calling therefore a Parliament, The Parliament is sactious,
and favors the Scots.
the Letter was read, but to no great purpose, the Members of the House of
Commons being most of them Puritans, who were great friends of the Scots, so
that the Parliament was a little while after dissolved by the King's Authority.
The King had caused to be made Prisoner in London the Scotch Commissioner, who
had subscribed the abovementioned Letter, whereupon the Scots took up Arms, and
took the Castle of Edinburgh. The King having with great difficulty, for want
of Money, got together an Army, went in person against the Scots, but as a
party of his Army endeavoring to force their passage was beaten back with
loss, which augmented the Discontents of his Subjects, the Soldiers for want
of Pay, being to be maintained by those Counties where they were quartered.
Besides this, ten thousand Men, which were raised by the Parliament in Ireland
for the King's service, were forced to be disbanded for want to Pay. There was
then no other remedy left but to make a Truce with the Scots, and to call a new
Parliament in England, which began to sit in November in the Year 1640.

. 27. But in the Session of this Parliament, The Parliament of England directly
oppose the King.
the Ulcer which had been long gathering in the Minds of the people broke out:
For the Parliament, in lieu of assisting the King against the Scots, entered
into a Confederacy with them, promising a monthly Subsidy toward the
maintaining of the Scottish Army, which was to be ready at the English
Parliament's command. Then they began to reform the States, to clip the King's
Authority, to punish his Ministers and Servants, and to take away the Bishops,
Liturgy, and fall upon Papists. The better to obtain their aim, they forced the
King to consent, that he would not dissolve the Parliament, till all such as
were criminal were punished, and the State were entirely reformed: In a word,
that they should have the liberty to sit as long as they pleased. Which in
effect put an end to the Royal Authority. To try the King's Patience, and their
own Strength, they brought, the Earl of Strafford, Lord Deputy of Ireland, to
his Trial, who, notwithstanding he made a good Defense, and the King did his
utmost to preserve his beloved and faithful Minister, yet the Rabble of
London, then encouraged by the House of Commons, making an Insurrection, he
received Sentence of Death in the House of Lords. And the King refusing to sign
the Warrant for his Execution, was obliged thereunto, partly by the importunity
of the Parliament, partly by the Insurrection of the Rabble of the City of
London, and partly by a Letter from the Earl, desiring him to do it. Then the
rest of the King's Ministers went to rack, some of them saving themselves by
flight, some being imprisoned. The Bishops were excluded from the House of
Lords. The Star Chamber, the Authority of the Privy Council, and the High
Commission were suppressed: the Customs and power over the Fleet were taken
away from the King. Some of these and some other things, which proved very
prejudicial to him, the King was forced to grant them, in hopes thereby to heal
the ulcerated Minds of the people. He went also in person into Scotland, where
he granted them all what they could desire. About the same time a horrid
Conspiracy broke out among the Irish Papists, who pretended to maintain the
Popish Religion, and to redress some Grievances by force of Arms, which
occasioned afterward a most cruel slaughter. At last it came to an open
Rebellion: 1642.
For the Parliament not ceasing to encroach daily more and more upon the Royal
Authority, The Rebellion begins.
the King resolved to assert his Authority; wherefore he summoned five Members
of Parliament, whom he accused as Traitors, and authors of all the Differences:
And the House of Commons taking their part, the King went into the House
accompanied with some Officers, and spoke to them with a due resentment of
their Behavior, Their Behaviors
which however they made but little account of, being not ignorant of his want
of Power, of which he seemed to betray himself, when he immediately afterward
condescended and came nearer their Expectations. The House of Commons thereupon
stirred up the neighboring Counties, and especially the London Apprentices,
who made such an Insurrection, that the King, not thinking himself safe in
London, retired into the Country. And the Parliament ordered all the Governors
of the Seaports, not to obey the King's Commands. It was certainly a great
error in the King, that in such troublesome times, he had not taken care to
secure to himself the Seaports, by which means he might have hoped for some
assistance from abroad: For, when the King intended to possess himself of the
Fort and Harbor of Hull, he was not admitted; so that there was nothing left,
but that the Parliament had not as yet taken from the King the disposal of
Offices. But for the rest it was evident, that their Intention was, to abolish
totally the Royal Power, and to introduce a Democracy. And after the King had
once given his Assent to the exclusion of the Bishops from the House of Lords,
where they had six and twenty votes, and the rest of the King's Friends had
once absented themselves from both Houses, it was easy for the remainder quite
to abolish the Authority of the House of Lords. Thus, after there had been long
contests by Words and Writings betwixt both parties, the King now as well as
the Parliament began to Arm themselves: And the King having at several times,
at first, beat the Parliament Forces, the Parliament stirred up the Scots,
entering with them into a Confederacy. Whereupon the Scots came with a
considerable Force to the assistance of the Parliament, which turned the Scale,
the King's Forces being routed near York, and he obliged, for want of Men and
Money, to give himself up to the protection of the Scots, The King made a
Prisoner.
who nevertheless did surrender him to the English for the Sum of 400000 l.
under condition that he should not be abused by them. The King was afterward
carried a Prisoner from place to place for a considerable time.

. 28. By these means the Puritans or Presbyterians, The Independents become
Masters.
had, under the pretext of Religion, overthrown the Royal Power: But that they
could not long enjoy their usurped power, was occasioned by a certain Sect that
called themselves Independent, because they would not depend on any certain
from of Faith, or Spiritual, or Temporal Constitutions, nor acknowledge any of
the same, whereby they opened a door for all sorts of Fanatics, to come under
their Protection. These, under pretense of a particular holy Zeal, had not only
got a great sway in the Parliament, and had been against any peaceable
accommodation, proposed by others; but also by their cunning insinuating way
crept into the chief Civil and Military Employments: For in the place of the
Earl of Essex, Thomas Fairfax was made General, and Oliver Cromwell Lieutenant
General over the Army, the last of which was the Head of the Independents, a
sly and cunning Fox. And out of this party all vacant places were supplied in
Parliament. The Presbyterians therefore perceiving that the Independents began
to be very strong in the House, and that most Military Employments were in
their Hands, proposed in the House, That one part of the Army should be sent
into Ireland, that some Forces only should be kept in England, and the rest be
disbanded. Cromwell made use of this to stir up the Soldiers, telling them,
that they were likely to be disbanded without pay, or else to be starved in
Ireland. Thereupon the Soldiers entered into an Association among themselves,
taking upon them not only the Military, but also all the Civil Power, they took
the King from the Parliament into their own custody, pretending they would give
him his liberty, but made themselves Masters of the City of London, and acted
in every thing at discretion. For they quickly after broke off the Treaty with
the King, and a great many of the Subjects, who were not able to bear their
Tyranny, taking up Arms were dispersed by Cromwell, who also beat the Scots
that were come into England to the assistance of the King, making their General
Hamilton a Prisoner. But during the absence of Cromwell, the Parliament had
reassumed the Treaty with the King, and the business was carried on so far,
that there was no small hopes of an Accommodation, when the Soldiers, headed
by Ireton, Son-in-law to Cromwell, broke off the Treaty, taking Prisoners such
Members of the House as did oppose them: So that there were not above forty
Members left in the Parliament, and those were either Officers, or at least,
favorers of the Army. These decreed, That no Treaty should be set on foot for
the future with the King; That the Supreme Power was to be lodged in the
People, which was represented by the House of Commons; But the Regal Power, and
the Authority of the House of Lords should be quite abolished. Then they
ordered a Court of 250 persons to be erected, The King is sentenced to death
and executed.
by whose Authority the King was to be summoned, sentenced and punished,
notwithstanding that the generality of the people looked upon this Court as an
abominable thing, some Presbyterian Ministers cried out aloud against it in the
Pulpits; the Scots protested against it, and the Dutch Ambassadors, and other
Princes did their utmost to oppose it. Before this Court, where sat among the
rest, a great many of very mean Extraction, the King was accused of High
Treason, Tyranny, and of all the Murders and Robberies committed since the
beginning of these Troubles. And the King, as in justice he ought to do,
refusing to acknowledge its Authority, was sentenced to be beheaded, though there
were but 67 of these pretended Judges present, the rest abominating the fact,
had absented themselves, among whom was Fairfax. But the King, having been
miserably abused by the Soldiers, was beheaded with an Ax upon a Scaffold
erected for that purpose before Whitehall. 1648.


. 29. Ireland conq^er'd.
After the death of the King the outward show of the Supreme Power was in the
Parliament, but in effect it was lodged in the Generals of the Armies. Their
first design was to banish the King's Son and the whole Royal Family, and to
suppress all such as adhered to him. Cromwell was sent into Ireland, where the
Royal Party was as yet pretty strong, which Island was reduced in the space of
one year by Cromwell's good Fortune and Valor. In the mean while the Scots had
proclaimed Charles II. though under very hard Conditions, their King, who also
arriving there safely out of France, whither he was gone for Shelter, was
crowned King of Scotland. The Parliament thereupon recalled Cromwell out of
Ireland, and having made him General (for they had deposed Fairfax whom they
mistrusted) sent him into Scotland, where he beat the Scots several times, but
especially gave them an entire defeat near Leith, taking, among other places,
the Castle of Edinborough, which was hitherto esteemed impregnable. The King,
in the mean while, having gathered a flying Army entered England, in hopes that
a great many English would join with him: But he was deceived in his hopes,
very few coming to him, and Cromwell overtaking him with his Army near
Worcester, Charles II. r^^ted.
his Forces were routed and dispersed; so that he was forced to change his
Clothes in his flight, and after a great many dangers was miraculously saved,
and escaped, by the help of a Merchant-ship, into France. The King being thus
driven out of the Island, the Scots were entirely subdued under the Conduct of
General Monk, who was sent thither by Cromwell, who having imposed upon them
very hard Conditions, The Scots c^nquered.
according to their deserts, entirely subjected them to the English. This done,
the Parliament began to take into consideration, how to disband part of the
Army, and to quarter the rest in the several Counties. But Cromwell sent away
that Parliament, which had been the cause of so much troubles, and constituted
a new Parliament, consisting of 144 Members, most of them being Fanatics and
Enthusiasts; among whom Cromwell had put a few cunning Fellows, who being
entirely devoted to his Service, did make the rest dance after his pipe. These
having first let these silly wretches go on in their own way, till by their
fantastical Behavior they had made themselves ridiculous and hated by every
body, then offered the Supreme Administration of Affairs to Cromwell; Cromwell
made Protector.
who having accepted of the same under the Title of a Protector, selected a
Privy Council, wherein were received the Heads of the several Sects. Thus they
who had shown so much aversion to the Royal Power, and hatched out a Monarch of
their own, who, without control, ruled the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland
and Ireland at pleasure. Cromwell, to have a fair pretense to keep on foot his
Sea and Land Forces, which were the Foundation of his Power, 1652.
began a War with the Dutch, who seemed to despise this new Monarch: But
Fortune was so favorable to Cromwell in this War, that he took above 1700
Merchant men from the Dutch, and beat them in five Sea Engagements, in the last
of which the Dutch lost Martin Tromp, and twenty seven Men of War. The
Hollanders then were obliged to beg for Peace, and to accept of such Conditions
as were proposed to them; among which, one was, That the Province of Holland
should exclude the Prince of Orange for ever, from succeeding in his Father's
place. Another was, That they should not receive the banished King Charles II.
into their Territories. Which some allege as a reason, that he was always
ready afterward to revenge himself upon them, 1660.
though at his return into the Kingdom, they endeavored with abundance of
flattery to make amends for the former affront. It is very likely also, that
the King was suspicious, that the Dutch had fomented the Differences betwixt
his Father and the Parliament. Cromwell acquired so much Glory by this War,
that most Princes sent their Ambassadors to him as if he had been a lawful
Sovereign, and desired his Friendship. He was no less fortunate in discovering
several Plots which were made against him: For which purpose he entertained his
Spies every where, even near the King's person; having besides this, a cunning
way to draw the people over to his party, and to suppress such as envied his
Fortune He sent also a Fleet into the Mediterranea^, wherewith he curbed the
Pirates on the Coast of Barbary. Another was sent into the West Indies, where
his Designs against St. Domingo and Hispaniola miscarried, but Jamaica he took
from the Spaniards, notwithstanding that a great many of his Men were taken off
by Sickness; and he did considerable mischief to the Spaniards by ruining their
Silver Fleet. He sent some Auxiliary Troops to the French in Flanders, who, in
recompense, surrendered to him Dunkirk. He died in the Year 1658, having been
as great and formidable as ever any King of England. He was a great Master in
the Art of Dissimulation, knowing how to make his advantage of Religious
Pretenses; wherefore he gave liberty of Conscience to all Sectaries, whereby he
not only got their Favors, but also by dividing the people into several
Opinions, he prevented their easily joining against him.

. 30. King Charles II's Restoration.
After the death of Cromwell this unlawful and violent form of Government
could not be of a long continuance: For though his Son Richard succeeded him in
the Protectorship (this was the Title used by Cromwell, having refused the Name
of King) yet was he in no ways capable to bear such a weight. Wherefore he was
soon deposed by the Parliament, which being divided within it self, Monk, who
was then Governor of Scotland, took this opportunity, and marching with an
Army out of Scotland into England, possessed himself of the City of London,
dissolved the Military Parliament, and recalled King Charles II. into his
Kingdom. 1660.
This King did restore the ancient Form of Government in the Kingdom both in
Spiritual and Temporal Matters, for his Subjects were ready to gratify him in
most respects, as having been taught by Experience, That the Frogs who despised
to have a Block for their King, got afterward a Stork for their Master. This
King, who judged, that the Greatness of England did chiefly depend on the
Dominion of the Seas and Commerce, which was disputed by no body but the Dutch,
did, in all probability, bend all his Thoughts that way, viz. How to make these
proud Merchants more pliable, his hopes being grounded upon what he had seen
Cromwell do against them. Wherefore he began a War with Holland, War with
Holland, 1665.
which was carried on at first with equal losses on both sides: But the English
at last taking a Resolution to tire out the Dutch without coming to an
Engagement, they ventured at a bold stroke, and to the great dishonor of the
English, entered the River of Thames, firing some Ships at Chattam. This
obliged the King to make a Peace with them by the Mediation of Swedeland, though
the great success of the French Arms in Flanders may probably have contributed
a great deal toward it. Yet it seems as if ever since he had kept up a
Resolution of Revenging himself upon them, he being also again exasperated by
the Rabble in Holland, who affronted him afterward. He therefore in the Year
1672 attacked the Dutch at Sea, whilst the King of France made War against them
by Land. But this War did not succeed according to his expectation; for the
Dutch did not only take from the English a great number of Merchant-ships, but
also the English could not master the Dutch in any of these Sea fights, partly,
because the French would not fall on in good earnest, partly, because the Dutch
acted very circumspectly, not giving any opportunity to the English to make a
Descent either on Holland or Zealand. It is possible that the King's Intentions
may perhaps have been frustrated by some Intrigues at home. And because the
English Nation began to grow very jealous of the great Successes of France, the
King was obliged to make a separate Peace with Holland, 1674.
and afterward was received as a Mediator betwixt the Parties then engaged in
War against one another.

. 31. Constitution of the English Nation.
The English Nation is very populous and fruitful: There are some who have
reckoned, that in England are 9913 Parishes, in each Parish 80 Families, which
make 778183 Families, and seven persons reckoned to each Family amounts to
6470800 Souls, among which number it may be supposed to be above a Million of
Men capable of bearing of Arms. This Nation is also very fit to settle Colonies
in Foreign Countries, because the English, as soon as they are in the least
settled in a place, they quickly marry, and remain there for their life time.
Whereas other Nations, if they go into far distant Countries, go only with an
intent to get a little Money, which they afterward love to spend in their
Native Country. The English are also Courageous, Brave, not fearing Death. For
in former times their Land forces were much superior to the French, and ever
since the times of Queen Elizabeth, when they first began to apply themselves
in earnest to the Sea, they have not been inferior in Skill and Courage to any
Nation in the World, except that the Dutch may be compared with them in Sea
Affairs. But this is to be observed of the English Valor, that they commonly
are very Furious and Brave at the beginning, yet great Hardship, Famine, and
other Inconveniences they are not so well able to endure with Patience, as
being used to live in great Ease and Plenty in their own Country. Wherefore
Maurice Prince of Orange used to put the English, that were sent to his
assistance, upon desperate Enterprises, before (as he used to say) they had
digested the English Beef. They are also very dexterous in Woollen and Silk
Manufacturies, and are generally great Improvers of other Arts and Mysteries:
Yet they are also somewhat Highminded, inclining themselves to Diversion, which
is the reason that they do not so much Work as otherwise they might; and yet
they expect to be paid for their idle Hours as well as the rest, which is the
reason why they sell their Wares at a higher rate than others, and that they
envy such French Handycrafts-men, who live among them, and are seldom diverted
from their daily Labor by any Pleasures. They being generally of a melancholy
temper, makes them very Ingenious, and when they apply* themselevs to any
Science, they make great progress in the same, if they hit the right way. But
by the same rule, because there happens often to be an ill mixture of this
melancholy temper, abundance of Fanatics and Enthusiasts are to be found among
them, who having formed to themselves Opinions out of ill-grounded Principles,
adhere so steadfast to them, that they are not by any ways to be removed from
them. Wherefore there is not any Nation under the Sun, where more different and
more absurd Opinions are to be met withal in Religion than in England. The
loose sort of people are addicted to Thieving and Robbing upon the Highway,
wherefore the Hangmen are always busy in England. This Nation also loves to
eat and drink extremely well; though there are some who will have it, that the
English have got their way of drinking so plentifully from the Netherlanders in
the Wars of the Low Countries, and from thence have brought that ill Custom
over into England, which before, they say, was not in use there. Their own
Histories are sufficient evidences, that they have been always inclined to
Rebellion and intestine Commotions. Wherefore their Kings can never be secure,
except they keep a watchful Eye over the restless Spirit of the People.

. 32. Constitution of the Scotch Nation.
The Scots are reported to have a share of Pride and Envy in them. They are
very apt to propose to themselves great Matters, and to delight in their own
Inventions. They are good Land-Souldiers, and can endure more hardship than the
English, neither are they so much addicted to their Belly, both which they have
from the barrenness of their Native Country. They are very Revengefull, and
intestine Broils among the Noble Families were formerly very common among them:
For it was a custom, that each Family used to select one for the Head of the
Family, unto whom they almost paid more respect than to the King himself, and
if any one of the Family had received an Injury, he made complaint thereof to
the Head of his Family: And if the Head of the same Family did resolve to
revenge the Injury, the whole Family, under the Conduct of their Head, fell
upon the Family of the Aggressour with Fire and Sword. Which abominable Custom
King James VI. did endeavor to abolish. Besides this, they are easily stirred
up to Rebellion, very obstinate in defending their Opinions to the utmost.
Their fruitfulness in Children makes them seek other Countries, since their
Country can scarce maintain them all at home. There is another reason also to
be given for this, which is the right of the Firstborn, whereby the eldest Son
is Heir of all the real Estate of his Father, the rest of the Brothers being
obliged to be satisfied with their share in the Personal Estate. These then
being obliged to advance themselves as well as they can, apply themselves
either to the Wars or Study: Wherefore most Ministers in Scotland are said to
be younger Brothers of good Families. But in England it is no shame for the
younger Brothers of such Families to be Merchants. In former times, before
Scotland and England were united under one King, the Scottish Soldiers were in
great esteem, because the French made constantly use of them in their Wars, and
at home they were always picquering with the English: But afterward they grew
careless of Warlike Exercises, and especially when Cromwell subdued them, their
ancient Glory was quite obscured. The Scots are also often very Ingenious, and
well versed in the Latin Tongue. And at that time, when all Liberal Sciences
were suppressed in Europe by a long Barbarism, the same were kept up in
Scotland, which did furnish several other Nations with Learned Men, who
instructed them in these Sciences. But as the Scots, which live in the low
Countries, on the South Side, are well civilized, so those who inhabit the
Mountains, who are called Highlanders, as also the Inhabitants of the Orkney
and Western Islands, are very raw and unciviliz'd.

. 33. Of the Irish.
The Irish are commonly esteemed to be a foolhardy and ill sort of people;
very lazy, yet pretty hard in undergoing the Fatigues of War. They are very
obstinate, and never to be bent from their Opinion. After Ireland was conquered
by King Henry II. abundance of English settled themselves in that Kingdom,
whose numbers increased from time to time to that degree, that scarce the
fourth part of the Island remain in the possession of the ancient Inhabitants.
And because most of the Irish adhere to the Popish Religion, they did not only
rebel under Queen Elizabeth, but also under the Reign of King Charles I.
entered into a most horrid Conspiracy against the English living among them, of
whom, it is said, they murdered 200000 within the space of six Months: But when
the English had recollected themselves, they again killed about 100000 of them.
Cromwell had once a mind to have rooted out the whole Nation, as being quite
incorrigible and past hopes of any amendment. Wherefore he sent some thousands
to the King of Spain, under condition, that none of them should return into the
English Dominions. He used also to plague them every way, so that they are
become a miserable Nation.

. 34. The Condition of Great Brittainy.
Concerning those Countries which belong to the King of England, the Kingdom of
England is a Rich and Fertile Country, abounding in every thing, either for the
Necessity or Pleasures of Mankind, except Oil and Wine, and such other
Commodities as do not grow in the other parts of Europe, are of the growth of
that Country. But else they have great numbers of very fine Horses, and good
Cattle, especially the best Sheep of all Europe, which make the best part of
the native Riches of England, bearing so good a sort of Wool, that an
incredible quantity of the best Cloth is made in England, and from thence
every Year transported into Foreign Parts. These Sheep feed in great Flocks in
the Country without as much as a Shepherd, there being no Wolves to be met
withal in England; the reason of which, as it is reported, is, that King Edgar,
about the Year 940, did order a certain number of Wolves to be paid by the
Prince of Wales to him as a yearly Tribute, by which means the Wolves were
quite destroyed in England: Though it is also very probable, that the great
English Mastiffs have been very instrumental in this point, it being certain,
that for Fierceness and Strength they surpass all the rest in the World. A
great quantity also of Lead, but especially of the finest Tin is to be found in
England, which surpasses in goodness all others in that kind. The Sea also is
very profitable to the English, since it produces a great quantity of Fish,
which are daily caught by the Inhabitants. Though by the Negligence and Laziness
of the ancient English, who did not apply themselves industriously to Fishing,
they have lost a great part of that advantage: But the Netherlanders, from
ancient times, have made use of this advantage, and got vast Riches by the
Fishery of Herrings and Cods, giving only a small Gratuity to the English, in
case they have occasion to dry their Nets on their Shores; though oftentimes the
English, envying the Netherlanders, will force them to pay more than ordinary,
which has several times served as a pretext for a War betwixt both Nations.
Besides this, the Sea is extremely advantageous to England, for thereby the
English being separated from their Neighboring Nations, cannot easily be
attacked; whereas they may easily invade others: And because this Island is
situated almost in the very middle of Europe, in a narrow Sea, where all Ships
which either go East or Westward must pass by; and having, besides this, a very
deep Coast and commodious Harbor, it lies most convenient for Commerce and
Trade, which the English carry on in most parts of the World, and the Dutch
hitherto have been the only obstacle that they are not become Masters of the
whole Trade of the World. For it proves very disadvantageous to the English,
that they love to eat and drink well, and that in great quantity, and by reason
of their love of Ease, they are ^ain to employ double the number of Seamen in
their Ships, of what the Dutch do; and besides this, they will not be contented
with a small gain: Whereas the Dutch live very sparingly, do not refuse the
Penny, and therefore are easier to be dealt withal than the English. They
import a great deal of raw Silk into England, which being wrought in the
Country, mightily increases their Riches. In the same manner they do with their
Woollen Manufactury now, whereas before the times of Henry VIII. they used to
transport most of their Wool into the Netherlands, where it was wrought, and
turned to the great advantage of those Cities. But this King perceiving that
his own Subjects might as well make the same benefit of it, he set up the
Woollen Manufactury in his Kingdom, which increased prodigiously, afterward,
when at the time of the Troubles in the Netherlands, a great many of these
Weavers did settle themselves in England. The Riches of England also are, as it
seems, not a little increased, because it is not permitted there to any Body to
carry any Gold or Silver of their own Coin out of the Land, except it be
perhaps to the value of ten pound Sterling for a Traveller. But Scotland does
not come near England, neither in Fertility nor Riches, having not any
Commodities fit for Exportation, except Salt-fish, Salt, Lead and Coals. The
Western and Orkney Islands also produce nothing but Fish. Ireland abounds in
Cattle, and especially in Sheep, though the Irish Wool is not so fine as the
English, but for the rest it is a fertile and plentiful Country. In America
belong to the English Crown, the Islands of Bermudos, Virginia and New England,
and some of the Caribby Islands, whither the English have sent their Colonies,
and have also begun to settle themselves on the Continent of Guiana. The
Product of these Countries is chiefly Tobacco, Sugar, Ginger, Indigo and
Cotton. They have also a Colony in the Island of Jamaica, from whence the
English Buckaneers and Privateers do great mischief to the Spanish West Indies.
For it is a custom with the English, That though they are at Peace with the
Spaniards in Europe, they do them, nevertheless, all the Mischief they can in
the West Indies. Tangier King Charles II. got as a Dowry with the Infanta of
Portugal. Lastly, The English also are possessed of some places in the Banda
Islands, and thereabouts in the East Indies, which are of no small consequence
to them.

. 35. The Form of the Government in England.
The Constitution of the Government in England is chiefly remarkable for this,
that the King cannot act at pleasure, but in some Matters is to take the Advice
of the Parliament. By this Name is to be understood the Assembly of the Estates
of England, which is divided into the Higher and the Lower House. In the first
sit the Bishops and the Lords, in the latter the Deputies of the Cities, and of
the 52 Counties or Shires, into which the whole Kingdom of England is divided.
The first origin of the Parliament, as it is related, was this, That the former
Kings of England did grant great Privileges to the Lords, by whose assistance
they had conquered the Country, and kept the common people in obedience. But
these in conjunction with the Bishops growing too headstrong, proved very
troublesome, especially to King John and Henry III. wherefore, to suppress
their Insolence, Edward I. took part with the Commons. And whereas formerly,
out of each County or Shire two Knights and two Citizens only were called, to
represent their Grievances, which having been debated by the King and the House
of Lords, they used to receive an answer and to be sent home again: This King
Edward called together the Commons, and consulted with them concerning the
public Affairs; though there are some who will have their origin to be much more
ancient. This House, after it was once established, did extremely weaken the
Authority of the Lords, and in process of time did not a little diminish the
Regal Power; for ever since that time the Rights of the People were maintained
with a high hand, the House of Commons imagining, that the Sovereignty was
lodged among them, and if the Kings refused to gratify them in their Requests,
they used to grumble at their proceedings. And because the Power of the
Parliament is not so much established by any ancient Laws as Precedents and
Customs, this is the reason why it is always very jealous of its Privileges,
and always ready to make out of one single Precedent a right belonging to it
ever after. This Parliament the King is obliged to call together as often as
any extraordinary Taxes are to be levied (for the Parliament did assign this
King, at first, for his ordinary Revenue, 1200000 l. per annum, which has been
considerably augmented since) or any old Laws are to be abrogated, or new ones
to be made, or any alteration to be made in Religion. For concerning these
matters the King cannot decree any thing without consent of the Parliament. The
Parliament also used to take into consideration the state of the Kingdom, and
to present their Opinion to the King, yet is the same of no force till approved
of by the King. It often also calls into question the Ministers of State,
concerning the Administration of public Affairs, and inflicts Punishment upon
them, with the King's approbation. And it is a common rule in England, that
whatever is committed against the Constitutions of the Realm, is done by the
Ministers and Officers; for the King, they say, does never amiss, but his ill
Counselors, which is not altogether contrary to Truth. But if the Parliament
should pretend to transgress its bounds, the King has power to dissolve it; yet
ought the King also to be cautious in this, lest he should by an unseasonable
Dissolution of the Parliament exasperate the People.

. 36. The Power and Strength of England.
If we duly consider the Condition and Power of England, we shall find it to
be a powerful and considerable Kingdom, which is able to keep up the Balance
betwixt the Christian Princes in Europe; and which depending on its own
Strength, is powerful enough to defend it self. For, because it is surrounded
every where by the Sea, none can make any attempt upon it, unless he be so
powerful at Sea, as to be able entirely to ruin the Naval Forces of England.
And if it should happen, that the English Fleet were quite defeated, yet would
it prove a very hard task, to transport thither such an Army, as could be
supposed to be superior to so powerful a Force as the English Nation is able
to raise at home. But England ought to take especial care, that it fall not
into civil Dissentions, since it has often felt the effects of the same, and
the Seeds of them are remaining yet in that Nation; which chiefly arises from
the difference in Religion, and the fierce Inclinations of this Nation, which
makes it very fond of Alterations. Nevertheless a Wise and Courageous King may
easily prevent this evil, if he does not act against the general Inclination of
the People, maintains a good Correspondency with the Parliament; and for the
rest is very watchful, and as soon as any Commotions happen, takes off
immediately the Ringleaders. Lastly, With relation to other States.
England and Scotland being comprehended in one Island, whose chiefest Strength
lies in a good Fleet, it is evident, that this King need not make any great
account of such States as either are remote from the Sea, or else are not very
powerful in Shipping. Wherefore, as the King of England takes no great notice
of Germany (except as far as it relates to France or Spain) of Poland and other
such like States; so it is easy for him to curb the Pirates on the Barbary
Coast: Which Nests of Pirates might have been easily destroyed long ago, if
they had not been let alone on purpose to render the Trade in the Mediterranean
difficult to the Hamburgers, and some others. England has nothing to fear from
Portugal; and this must rather hope for assistance from England and Holland
against Spain. The Naval Strength of the Northern Crowns, To the Northern
Crowns.
England need not be jealous of, as long as the same is divided. Yet it cannot
be for the Interest of England, if one of those Kings should become absolute
Master of the East Sea, or that they should be fain to depend on the Discretion
of the Dutch. To Spain.
Since the Naval Strength of Spain is mightily decayed England need not fear
any thing from thence: Yet does it not seem to be the Interest of England to
fall out with that Kingdom, considering what a vast Trade the English have into
Spain; for Spain does either consume the English Commodities at home, or else
exchanges them for Silver, by sending of them into America. There are some who
have computed, that in case of a War with Spain, the English would lose in
effects above thirty Millions; and besides this, their Trade into the Levant
and other places, would be greatly endangered by the Privateers of Ostend,
Biscay, Majorca and Minorca, who at the time of the Wars under Cromwell took
1500 Merchant-ships from the English. To France.
Though the Land Forces of France are now-adays much superior to the English,
this Island both for its bigness and strength making up not above a third part
of France; yet the Naval Strength of France has hitherto not been able to come
in competition with the English. It is the chiefest Interest of England, to
keep up the Balance betwixt France and Spain, and to take a special care that
the King of France do not become Master of all the Netherlands; for it is
visible, that thereby his Power at Sea would be increased to that degree, that
he might enter on a Design of being even with England, for what they have
formerly done to France. Holland seems to be the only obstacle that the English
cannot be sole Masters of the Sea and Trade, To Holland.
though for the rest they have no reason to fear the Dutch by Land, but only at
Sea, because the Dutch Land Forces are not so considerable, as to be able to
undertake any thing of great moment. Nevertheless, how desirous soever the
English are to be sole Masters at Sea, yet does it not seem to be the Interest
of England, frequently to engage it self in Wars with Holland, it having been
observed, that the Dutch, since the Wars with England are rather increased in
Valor, Experience, and Power at Sea. And because other Nations are not likely
to suffer that Holland should be swallowed up by the English, or that one
Nation should have the Monopoly of Europe; it seems therefore the best method
for the English, to let the Dutch trade as well as themselves, and to set some
others upon their Backs, which may give them so much work as thereby to give a
check to their growing Greatness, and in the mean while, take care to establish
their own Power at Sea, and Commerce abroad* But least of all it would be for
the Interest of England, if Holland should be brought under the Yoke of the
French King, who, without question, by the additional Sea Forces of Holland,
and the advantage of the East India Trade, would be superior in Power to any
in Europe.

CHAP. V.
Of FRANCE.
. 1. The most ancient Stare of France.
AS far as we can search into the most ancient Histories, it is evident from
th^nce, That Gaul, now called France, has been a very powerful and populous
Country. For the Gauls in ancient times had conquered a great part of Italy,
where they settled themselves; who also, when they had overrun Greece and some
other neighboring Countries, inhabited a part of the Lesser Asia, which was
called from them Galatia or Gallo-gracia: Yet formerly this so powerful
Country did never either rightly understand or exert its own Strength against
other Nations, because it was not then under the Government of one Prince, but
divided into a great many p^^^y States, which were always at variance with one
another. This much facilitated the Conquest of the Romans over them, who else
stood not in fear of any Nation so much as the Gauls. Gaul subdued by the
Romans.
And though the incomparable Valor of Julius Caesar was chiefly instrumental in
subduing this Nation, yet with t^n Legions he had work enough to effect it in
ten Years time. But as soon as the Romans had brought this fair Country under
their Subjection* they employed all means to suppress the Martial Spirit of
this Nation, in which they succeeded as well in this as in other Nations, it
being their Custom to civilize and refine the Manners of these Nations, thereby
to render them soft and e^^eminate. After France had been near 500 Years under
the Dom^nion of the Romans, it fell, under the Reign of the Emperor Honorius,
into the Hands of the Barbarous Nations. By the Barbarous Nations.
For the Goths, after they had overrun Italy, settled themselves in Gallia
Narbonensis, and the Burgundians, conquered a considerable part of the rest.
But the Franks entering this Kingdom, settled and maintained themselves in it,
giving it the Name of France, after their own Name. These Franks, were for
certain, Germans, though some of our Modern French Writers pretend to
demonstrate, That this Nation was a Colony of the ancient Gauls, who being
overstock'd with People at home, passed over the Rhine, and having settled a
Colony in Germany, after several hundred Years, returned into their Native
Country. That the Franks came out of Germany.
But it is more probable, That the Franks are the same Nations which were
formerly encompassed by the Rivers of the Mayn, the Rhine, the We^er, and the
Sea; and which in Tacitus's time were called Salii, Bructeri, Trisii,
Angrivani, Chamari, Sigambri and Chatti, and who having entered into a mutual
Confederacy against the Romans, called themselves, in spite of their Power,
Franks, or a free People, as not doubting but to be able to defend their
Liberty against them. The origin of the French Language.
And it is certain, that they did transplant the German Tongue into France,
which was for a great while after in fashion among persons of the best Quality,
till at last they used themselves, by degrees, to the Latin Tongue, formerly
introduced by the Romans, which being corrupted by the German Tongue produced
the modern French Language. It is also evident, that the Race of the ancient
Gauls was not quite extinguished, but that both Nations were by degrees united
in one, yet with this difference, that the Frankish Families made up the Body
of the Nation.

. 2. But howsoever this be, Pharamond the first King.
all Historians agree in this, That the Franks did choose for their King, about
the Year 424, Pharamond, who established among them wholesome Laws and
Constitutions; yet most are of Opinion that not this Pharamond, but his Son
Clodion, Clodion.
surnamed Long-hair, invaded Gaul; who, after he had been several times
repulsed by Aetius the Roman General, at last took Artois, Cambray, Tournay,
and some other places as far as the River Sum, making Amiens his place of
Residence. He died in the Year 447; Merovaeus.
but his Successor and Kinsman Merovaeus, in conjunction with the Roman
General Aetius and Theodorick the King of the West Goths having beaten Attila,
the King of the Hans out of France, extended his Dominions as far as Mentz on
one side, and on the other side conquered Picardy, Normandy, and the greatest
part of the Isle of France. The Romans themselves contributed to this loss, for
that not only in the Battle fought against Attila, they had lost a great many
of their best Forces, but Aetius also being fallen into disgrace with the
Emperor Valentinian, was by him murdered; which Aetius may be justly said to
have been the last great Captain the Romans had; there being after his death no
body left who could resist Merovaeus. From this King sprang the first Race of
the French Kings, which is called the Merovigian Family. He died in the Year
458. Childerick.
His Son Childerick, for his Lasciviousness, was banished; in whose stead one
Aegidius of the ancient Race of the Gauls was set up for King. But Childerick,
through the faithfulness of his Friend Guyeman, was after an Exile of eight
Years, recalled out of Thuringia, whither he fled, and restored to his Throne;
who drove back the Britains and Saxons, that made at that time great havoc in
France. He also conquered that part which is now called Lorrain, and took
Beauvais, Paris, and some other places near the Rivers of the Oise and the
Seyne. He died in the Year 481. Clouis I.
His Son Clouis or Lewis, having killed Syagrius, the Son of Aegidius,
established the French Monarchy, and added great Territories to the Kingdom.
This King fell in love with Clotildis, of the Royal Race of Burgundy, who
promised to marry him* if he would turn Christian. Which, however, he
afterward delayed to perform, till the Alemans, who would have got a footing
in France, entered that Kingdom, whom he meeting with his Army near Zulick, a
bloody Battle was fought, where, when he saw the French began to fall in
disorder, he vowed, That if he obtained the Victory, he would be baptized;
which Vow, 496.
after the Victory he performed, being baptized at Reims by St. Reim, whose
example the whole Nation of the French followed. This King also overturned the
Kingdom of the Goths, which they had established in Languedock; uniting that
Country with his Kingdom: He also conquered several petty Principalities, and a
part of the Higher Germany. He died in the Year 511.

. 3. France is divided.
After the death of Clouis, France received a signal blow, the Kingdom being
divided among his four Sons; who, though they annexed the Kingdom of Burgundy to
it, yet this division weakened this Kingdom, and administered Fuel to the
following intestine Dissentions. Nay, this impolitick dividing the Kingdom went
further still; for they subdivided the Kingdom again among their Sons, which
occasioned most horrible civil Commotions in France, these Kings endeavoring,
as it were, to outdo one another in Iniquity: And among the rest, the two
Queens Brunechildis and Fredegundis are infamous for their monstrous Crimes. At
last, after a great many intestine Divisions. Clotarius II,
Clotarius II. re-uniting the divided Kingdom, did somewhat restore its ancient
State. 614.
He died in the Year 628. Dagobert.
But his Son Dagobert fell into the same Madness; for he not only gave part of
the Kingdom to his Brother Albert, but also divided his own share among his two
Sons; neither did he do any thing for the Benefit of the Public during his
Reign. From this time the French Kings quite degenerated from their ancient
Valor, giving themselves over to Laziness and Debauchery. Wherefore the Grand
Mareschals of the Kingdom did by degrees assume the Power and Administratinon
of Public Affairs. Among these Pipin was famous, descended of a Noble Family
in Austrasia, who had the Administration of Affairs during the space of twenty
eight Years, under several Kings. Char^es Martell. 714.
His Son Charles Martell succeeded his Father in his Power and Office, which he
rather augmented, after he was grown famous by his Martial Exploits, having
chased away the Saracens, who about that time, conquering Spain, fell also into
France, of whom he killed a vast number. 732.
This Man took upon himself the Title of a Prince and Duke of France, so that
nothing remained with the Kings but the bare Title and an empty Name, they
being kept in the Country, and once a Year carried for a Show through the City,
to expose them to the view of the People like strange Creatures. At last, Pipin
the Younger, Son of this Charles Martell (who died in the Year 741) having
brought the great Men of the Kingdom over to his Party, deposed King Childerick
II. and having sent him into a Convent, Pipin proclaimed King.
got himself proclaimed King of France. This was approved easily enough by Pope
Zachary, because he being in fear of the growing Power of the Longobards in
Italy, The Merovingian Family loses the Crown.
did endeavor by all means to oblige the King of France to come to his
Assistance. And thus the Merovignian Family loses the Crown of France. 751.


. 4. Pipin, Pipin's Expeditions.
to convince the World that he was not unworthy of the Crown, or else to
furnish the People with other Matters than to talk of the deposing of
Childerick, undertook an Expedition against the Saxons, whom he vanquished in a
great Battle. And he had likewise, under the Reign of the former Kings,
undertaken several Expeditions into Germany with great Success, and subdued
some of the Nations bordering upon the Rhine. Not long after an Opportunity
presented it self to make himself famous in Italy, For Aistulphus, the King of
the Lombards, had proposed to himself the Conquest of all Italy; after he had
chased the Governors of the Grecian Emperors, which were then called
Exarches, out of Ravenna, and all other places which were under their
Jurisdiction, and was ready to march directly against Rome: The Pope Stephen
III. being in great fear of this Enemy, and not knowing where to find
Assistance, craved Aid of Pipin, He assists the Pope against the Lombards.
whom he at last persuaded to take his part against Aistulphus. In this War
Pipin recovered from Aistulphus all what he had before taken from the Grecian
Emperors in Italy, the Revenue of which, he, as it is pretended, gave to the
Roman See, reserving to himself, as it is very probable, the Sovereignty over
these places. He gained, by this Action, the Reputation of being very Zealous;
and by bestowing these Revenues upon the Holy Chair, got a firm footing in
Italy, and the advantage of swaying Matters there according to his Pleasure. He
made also Tassilo, Duke of Ba^aria, his Vassal, and beat the Duke of Aquitain.
This Pipin died in the Year 768, leaving behind him two Sons, Charles and
Carolomannus, who divided the Kingdom betwixt them. But Carolomannus dying
quickly after, the whole Kingdom fell to Charles. Charles the Great.
This Charles was justly sirnam'd the Great, he having carried the French
Monarchy to the highest pitch of its Greatness, none of his Successors having
been able to attain to the like, though some of 'em have aimed at it. For having
routed Desiderius, the last King of the Lombards, who endeavored to recover
what was formerly taken from Aistulphus, he conquered the Kingdom, and brought
it under his Subjection. 774.
He also subdued Germany, having routed Tassilo, who had taken upon him the
Title of King of Bavaria. He also waged War against the Saxons, for the space
of 32 Years, whom he at last brought under his Obedience* obliging them to
embrace the Christian Faith. For which purpose he erected several Episcopal
Sees and Monasteries, by the help of the Priests, to reform the ba^barous
Manners of this Savage People. He also beat the Sclavonians, Danes and Huns,
and took from the Saracens a part of Spain, as far as to the River Iberus; though
his Forces, in their return home, were overthrown near Ronceval, where was also
slain the famous Rowland. This Charles was in the Year 800, He is proclaimed
Emperor of the Romans.
at Christmas, being then at Rome, proclaimed Emperor by the People, by the
Instigation of the Pope, in St. Peter's Church. Though he gained nothing by this
Title, except it was the Sovereignty or Protection of the Roman Church, and the
Patrimony of St. Peter, if both did not belong to him before, for all the rest
he enjoyed before under other Titles. He died in the Year 814.

. 5. After the death of Charles the Great, the French Monarchy began to decline
again, because his Son Lewis surnamed the Pious, Lewis the Pious.
was more fit to be a Priest, than a Soldier: And it is certain, that so vast
a Kingdom, where the new Conquests were not yet well settled, did require a
Prince of a Military Spirit. And notwithstanding he had the good Fortune to
force some of the Rebellious Nations to return to their Duty, yet he committed,
afterward, two fatal Oversights, when in his life time he gave to his Sons the
Titles of Kings, He divides his Kingdom.
and divided the Kingdom betwixt them. The first of which proved pernicious to
himself, the second to the Monarchy. For these impious and ungrateful Sons
were not for staying for their Father's Death, His Sons Rebel.
but Rebelling against him, and made him, after he was deserted by every body,
their Prisoner. The Bishops, who were by him kept under strict Discipline,
after they had condemned him, forced him to resign the Government. 833.
But the great Men of the Kingdom quickly repenting, restored him to his
Throne, and he also pardoned his Sons. He died in the Year 840, having before
his Death made a new Division of the Kingdom betwixt his Sons; the Effects of
which appeared soon after to the World, when Lotharius, the elder Brother, who
also had the Title of Emperor, undertook to take from his Brothers their
Portion; against whom, the two other Brothers, Lewis and Charles entering into a
Confederacy, forced him to divide the Monarchy with them, having first obtained
a bloody Victory near Fountenay unfar Auxerre, in which Battle were slain above
100000 Men, and among them the Flower of the French Nation. Germany divided
from France.
In this Division Germany fell to Lewis's share, which ever since has continued
separate from France, and has made a distinct Empire. But the younger Brother,
Charles the Bald.
Charles surnamed the Bald, got for his Portion the greatest part of France,
viz. all that part which lies betwixt the Western Ocean and the Meuse; but the
eldest Brother obtained Italy, Provence, and all those Counties which are
situated betwixt the Meuse, Rhine, and the Some. Under the Reign of this
Charles the Bald, The Normans make an Irruption into France,
the Normans (so they called the Danes and Norwegians) fell, with a
considerable Force, into France, making great Havoc wherever they came: And
the Kingdom was weakened to that degree, by the last bloody Battle, and its
being divided into so many Principalities (for the Sons of Lotharius had also
shared their Father's Provinces among themselves) that it was not strong enough
to chase out of its Dominions these Robbers, but was obliged, 912.
under Charles surnamed the Simple, to give into their possession the Province
of Neustria, which they called after their Name, Normandy. The Sons of
Lotharius dying without Issue, Charles the Bald and the Sons of Lewis shared
their Part betwixt them, out of which Charles got Provence. At last Charles
obtained the Title of Emperor, and died in the Year 877. His Son Lewis
surnamed Balbus, Ludovicus Balbus.
succeeded him, who dying soon after, left the Kingdom to his two Sons, who
were very young, Ludov. III. and Carolomannus.
viz. to Lewis III. and Carolomannus; from whom Lewis King of Germany took
Lorrain. Lewis dying in the Year 882, as did Carolomannus in the Year 884, none
was left but a Brother of theirs by the Father's side, viz. the Son of Lewis
surnamed Balbus, who being then a Child of five Years of Age, Charles the
Simple.
was afterward called Charles the Simple. For at that time the Authority of
the Kings of France was decayed to that degree, that it was a common custom to
give them Sirnames according to the several defects of Body or Mind, as were
obvious in them. He was, during his Minority, committed to the Tuition of his
Cousin Carolus Crassus, who also had the Title of Emperors, who not long
after, because he was very infirm both in Body and Mind, was deposed, and died
in the Year 888. The decay of the Royal Authority.
The Royal Authority being thus decayed, and nothing but Divisions found in the
Kingdom, The Excessive Power of the Nobles.
the great Men of the Kingdom mightily increased their own Power, so that,
whereas they used formerly to be Governors of their Provinces under the King's
Command, they now began to claim them as a Propriety belonging to themselves,
independent of the King. It is related by some, That the Kings at that time had
nothing left but Rheims and Laon which they could really call their own; which
Evil could not be totally suppressed by the following Kings, till several
hundred Years after. After the Death of Carolus Crassus, Eudo Count of Paris
crowned King of France, 923.
Eudo Count of Paris got himself to be crowned King, and waged War with Charles
the Simple, but died in the Year 898: Rudolf of Burgundy crowned King*
Yet Charles the Simple, quickly found another Rival for the Crown. For Rudolf
King of Burgundy, got himself to be crowned King of France, making Charles the
Simple his Prisoner, who died during his Imprisonment. 929.
After the Death of Rudolf (which happened in the Year 936) reigned Lewis IV.
Lewis Outremer.
sirnam'd Outremer, because he had, during the Imprisonment of his Father,
sheltered himself in England. This King's Reign was full of intestine
Commotions; he died in the Year 954, leaving for his Successor his Son
Lotharius, Lotharius.
who likewise reigned in continual troubles till the Year 985, Lewis the
Fainthearted.
leaving behind him his Son Lewis surnamed the Faint-hearted, of whom the
French Historians only say this, that he did nothing. He had for his Tutor and
Administrator of the Kingdom, Hugh Capet Earl of Paris. 987.
After this King's Death, his Uncle, viz. Lewis surnamed Outremer's Son, laid
claim to the Crown, but was disappointed in his Pretensions by the great Power
of Hugh Capet. He afterward endeavored to maintain his Right by force of
Arms, but was made a Prisoner, and dying in Prison, put an end to the
Carolinian Race, The Carolinian Family extinguished.
or at least, to its Inheritance of the Crown of France, which had been in its
possession for at least 236 Years. It is very remarkable, that this Family lost
the Kingdom through the same Error which the former lost it. For though this
Family, by prodigious Conquests, had raised the Power of France, yet were the
Conquests soon after, by the Divisions made of the Kingdom again dis-united,
and even a considerable part quite separated from that Kingdom, and annexed to
the German Empire* Besides this, by the Negligence of these Kings, and the
excessive Power of the great Men in the Kingdom, France was reduced to a very
low Condition.

. 6. As Hugh Capet, Hugh Capet, the first of the present Race.
the first Founder of the present Royal Family, obtained the Crown, not so much
by right of Succession as by the assistance of the chief Men of the Kingdom,
who excluded the right Heir; so (as it is very probable) he was obliged to
remit a great many of the ancient Royal Prerogatives, and to confirm to the
great Men of the Kingdom the Power of governing their Provinces, with the
Titles of Dukes and Earls, under condition that they should acknowledge
themselves Vassals of the Kingdom, yet not be obliged to depend absolutely on
the King's Commands; so that France at that time was like a misshapen and weak
Body. Hugh, in the mean time, reunited to the Crown (which at that time had
scarce any thing left which could be called her own) the County of Paris, the
Duchy of France, wherein was comprehended all that lies betwixt the Rivers of
Seine and the Loire, and the County of Orleans. Among the great Men of the
Kingdom, the chief were the Dukes of Normandy (on whom also depended Britainy)
of Burgundy, Aquitain and Gascoigne; the Earls of Flanders, Champaign and
Tolouse, the latter of which was also Duke of Languedock: But the Counties of
Vienne, Provence, Savoy and Dauphine belonged to the Kingdom of Arelat, which
was a part of the German Empire. Yet these Kings had at last the good Fortune
to see all these Demi-Sovereign Princes extinguished, and their Countries
reunited to the Crown of France. Hugh died in the Year 996, whose Son Robert,
Robert.
a good natured Prince, reigned very peaceably, he having reduced the Dukedom
of Burgundy, to which, he, after the Death of his Uncle, was the next Heir,
under the entire Jurisdiction of the Crown. The Tyranny exercised by the Pope
against this King ought to be mentioned here. For, the King having an Intention
of marrying Bertha, of the House of Burgundy, which Match was esteemed very
beneficial to his State, and the said Bertha standing with him in the fourth
degree of Consanguinity; besides that, he had been Godfather to a Child of hers
in her former Husband's time: He desired and obtained the Consent of his
Bishops, the said Marriage being otherwise against the Canon Law. The Pope
excommunicates him and his Kingdom.
But the Pope took hence an occasion to Excommunicate the King and the whole
Kingdom, which proved so mischievous, that the King was deserted by all his
Servants, except three or four, and no Body would touch the Victuals that came
from his Table, which was therefore thrown to the Dogs. He died in the Year
1033. The Reign of his Son Henry was also not very famous, Henry I.
except that he waged some inconsiderable Wars against his Vassals. He
presented his Brother Robert with the Dukedom of Burgundy, from whence comes
the Race of the Dukes of Burgundy descended from the Royal Blood. He died in
the Year 1060. Philip I.
His Son Philip did nothing memorable; he was also for his Marriage
excommunicated by the Pope, but at last obtained a Dispensation. Under the
Reign of this King Philip, William Duke of Normandy conquered England, Will.
Duke of Normandy conquers England.
which proved to be the occasion of unspeakable Miseries to France; for these
two Kingdoms were ever after in continual Wars, till the English were driven
out of France. About the same time the first Expedition was undertaken into the
Holy Land, Expedition into the Holy Land.
which Extravagancy continued for near 200 Years after. The Popes drew the most
Benefit from these Expeditions, assuming to themselves, an Authority, not only
to command, but also to protect all such as had listed themselves under the
Cross. Under this pretext also frequent Indulgences were sent abroad into the
World, and what was given toward the use of this War, was collected and
distributed by their Legates. The King of France, and other Kings, received
thereby this Benefit, That these Wars carried off a great many turbulent
Spirits: And a great many of the Nobility used either to sell or else to
mortgage their Estates; and if any of them happened to die in the Expedition,
leaving no Heirs behind them, their Estates fell to the King. By this means
also, that prodigious number of People, wherewith France was overstock'd at
that time, was much diminished, whereby the Kings got an Opportunity to deal
more easily with the rest. Nevertheless, when afterward the Kings, either by
Instigation of the Popes, or out of their own Inclinations, undertook these
Expeditions in their own Persons, they found the dismal effects of it. For, by
so doing, the best of their Subjects were led to the Slaughter; and yet it was
impossible to maintain these Conquests as long as they were not Masters of
Egypt: Whereas, if this Kingdom had been made the Seat of the intended Empire,
and the Storehouse of the War, a Kingdom might have been established, which
would have been able to support it self by its own Strength. This King died in
the Year 1108. Lewis the Fat*
His Son Lewis surnamed the Fat was always at variance with Henry I. King of
England, and in continual Troubles with the petty Lords in France, who did
considerable Mischiefs from their strong Castles; yet he was too hard for them
at last, Lewis VII.
and died in the Year 1137. His Son Lewis VII. surnamed the Younger, His
unfortunate Expedition to the Holy Land.
undertook, upon the Persuasion of St. Bernhard, an Expedition into the Holy
Land, but this proved a fatal Expedition, for by the Defeat which he received
at Pamphylia, and the Siege of Damascus, which he was forced to quit, and the
Fatigues of so great a Journey, as well as the perfidiousness of some of the
Commanders, after he had ruined a great Army, he returned with the miserable
Remainders into France, without having done any thing answerable to such an
Undertaking: But he committed the greatest Error, when he divorced himself from
his Lady Eleonora, whether out of Jealousy or tenderness of Conscience is
uncertain, she being his Cousin in the third or fourth degree. This Eleonora
being also the only Heiress of Aquitain and Poictou, was immediately after
married to Henry Duke of Normandy, afterward King of England, the second of
that Name, who, by this Match annexed these fair Countries to the Crown of
England. In fine, having been kept in a continual alarm by his petty Vassals,
but especially by Henry II. King of England. He died in the Year 1180.

. 7. His Son Philip II. surnamed Augustus, Philip II. the Conqueror.
or the Conqueror, was at first engaged in a War against Henry II. King of
England, from whom he took several considerable places; which, however he
restored afterward to his Son Richard, with whom he entered into a League to
retake Jerusalem from the Saracens, pursuant to which, Another Expedition to
the Holy Land.
both the Kings went thither in Person with a considerable Force. But a
Jealousy arising betwixt these two Kings, nothing was done worth mentioning;
for Richard accused Philip, that he had an ill design against him in Sicily, in
their Voyage; besides that, he had refused to consummate the before intended
Match betwixt his Sister and Richard: Wherefore, as soon as Ptolemais had been
taken by their joint Forces, Philip, under pretense of Sickness returned into
France, leaving only with Richard, Hugh III. Duke of Burgundy, with some
Troops; who envying Richard, hindered the taking of the City of Jerusalem.
After his return from that unfortunate Expedition to the Holy Land, he
undertook a War against Richard, War betwixt France and England.
which he also carried on against his Brother John, wherein Philip had much the
better of the English, for he took from them Normandy, the Counties of Anjou,
Maine, Touraine, Berry and Poictou. He was very instrumental in deposing the
Earl of Toulouse, who, because he had taken into his Protection the Albigenses,
was excommunicated by the Pope. Philip also obtained a great Victory near
Bouvines, betwixt Lisle and Tournay, against the Emperor Otho IV. who being
joined with the Earl of Flanders, attacked him with an Army of 150000 Men,
whilst the King of England was to fall into France on the side of Aquitain.
This King was so successful in his Wars against England, that his Son Lewis
was very near obtaining the Crown of England. And though he was chased again out
of England, yet did he, after his Father's Death, 1223.
pursue his Victories against the English in France, taking from them, among
others, the City of Rochelle. Lewis VIII.
But this Lewis VIII. did not reign long, for he died in the Year 1226, leaving
for Successor his Son Lewis IX. Lewis IX.
surnamed the Holy, during whose Minority, his Mother Blanch of Castile had the
Supreme Administration of Affairs; and though some of the Nobility raised great
Troubles against her, she subdued them all by her singular Prudence. In the
Year 1244, the City of Jerusalem was ransacked by some Persians, who called
themselves Chorasmii, Lewis being about the same time dangerously ill, made a
Vow, That if he recovered he would undertake an Expedition against those
Infidels; which he afterward performed. A third Expedition to the Holy Land
without Success.
But before his departure he issued out his Proclamation throughout the
Kingdom, intimating, that whoever had received any damage by his Soldiers,
should have Restitution made him, which was performed accordingly. In this
Expedition he took the strong City of Damiata; but the overflowing of the River
Nile, hindered him from taking Grand Cairo. After the River was returned to its
usual Bounds, he vanquished the Enemy in two Battles; but they having received
new Reinforcements, cut off the Provisions from the French, who were also
extremely pestered with the Scurvy. The King then resolved to retreat toward
Damiata, but in his March thither they attacked him, gave him a terrible
overthrow, and took him Prisoner, yet released him again for a Ransom of 400000
Livres, he being obliged to restore also to them the City of Damiata. Thus he
marched with the Remainders of his Army, which from 30000 Men was moulder'd
away to 6000, to Ptolemais, where, after he had given what Assistance he could
to the Christians, 1254.
he at last returned home. Under the Reign of this King, The first Pretensions
of the French upon the Kingdom of Naples.
France got first an Opportunity to intermeddle in the Affairs of Italy, from
whence, yet this Kingdom never reapt any great Benefit. Manfred, natural Son of
the Emperor Frederick II. having first killed King Conrad his Brother, made
himself King of Naples and Sicily. But the Pope, on whom this Kingdom depended
as a Fief, being dissatisfied with Manfred, offered the same to Charles Earl of
Anjou, Brother of Lewis IV. King of France, which he having accepted of, was
crowned at Rome, 1261.
with Conditon, that he should pay to the Pope 8000 Ounces of Gold, make a
yearly Present of a White Horse, as an acknowledgment; and if he was chosen
Emperor, that he should not unite that Kingdom with the Empire; the Pope being
unwilling to have any one more powerful than himself in Italy. Charles
thereupon vanquished Manfred, and having murdered him and his Children, took
possession of the Kingdom. The young Conradin, Duke of Swabia, came with an
Army to recover the Kingdom, which was his Inheritance, from his Grandfather,
but having been overthrown in a Battle near the Lake of Celano, 1268.
was made a Prisoner, and in the Year next following, had his Head cut off at
Naples, upon the Instigation of the Pope, who being asked by Charles, What he
had best to do with his Prisoner? answered, Vita Conradini, mors Caroli; Mors
Conradini, vita Caroli; i. e. The Life of Conradin is the Death of Charles; The
Death of Conradin the Life of Charles. And as by the Death of this young Prince
was extinguished the Noble Race of the Dukes of Swabia, so this Charles laid
the first Pretensions of France to the Kingdom of Naples. In the mean while,
King Lewis being not satisfied with his former unfortunate Expedition against
the Infidels, An unfortunate Expedition of S. Lewis.
resolved to try again his Fortune against Tunis, either because he found, that
this place lay very convenient for his Brother's Kingdom of Sicily, or because
he hoped thereby to open a way for the Conquest of Egypt, without which, all
the Expeditions into the Holy Land, were likely to prove ineffectual. But in
this Siege he lost a great part of his Army by Sickness, and he died himself
there in the Year 1270. From a younger Son of this Lewis IV. viz. from Robert
Earl of Clairmont, sprang the Bourbon Family, which now sways the Scepter of
France.

. 8. Philip the Hardy.
His Son Philip surnamed the Hardy succeeded him, under whose Reign that
considerable Earldom of Toulouse was united to the Crown of France. Alfonsus
Son of Lewis IX. who had married the only Heiress of this Country, happening to
die without Issue, in an Expedition into Africa. Under the Reign also of this
King fell out the so much celebrated Sicilian Vespers, The Sicilian Vespers.
whereby all the French were at one blow extirpated out of Sicily. The Business
was thus; Some Frenchmen had ravished the Wife of John of Porchyta, born at
Salerno, who, enflamed with Revenge, did seek for Aid of Pieter King of
Arragon, hoping, by his Assistance, to drive Charles out of Sicily; the
Sicilians also being very averse to the French, who had committed great
Outrages in that Kingdom. Pope Nicholus V. lent a helping hand, who stood in
fear of the Power of Charles; as did also Michael Paleologus the
Constantinopolitan Emperor, because Charles had made some Pretensions to that
Empire. John therefore, disguised in a Monks Habit, traveled about from place
to place, till he had brought his Design to Perfection. It was next to a
Miracle that the Design was not betrayed in three years time, it having been so
long a forming in several places* 1282.
At last it was put in Execution, it being agreed upon, that in the second
Holyday in Easter, at that very time when the Bells rung in to the Vespers, all
the French throughout the whole Kingdom of Sicily should be massacred at once,
which was done accordingly, within two Hours time with great Barbarity, no
person having been spared in the Massacre. Which being done, Pieter King of
Arragon possessed himself of the Kingdom of Sicily. And, though the Pope ordered
the Croisade to be preached up against Pieter, and declared Charles, the second
Son of Philip King of Arragon, and this Philip marched with a great Army to put
his Son into possession, yet it did prove labor in vain, and Philip died in
the Year 1285. Philip the Handsome*
His Son and Successor Philip surnamed the Handsome, upon some frivolous
Pretenses, 1292.
began a War with the English, taking from of them the City of Bourdeaux, and
the greatest part of Aquitain, which however they soon after recovered by
virtue of a Peace concluded betwixt them. Not long after he attacked the Earl
of Flanders, He has ill Success in Flanders.
who, by the Instigation of the English had entered into a Consederacy with a
great many neighboring Lords against him, from whom he took most of his strong
Holds. But the Flemings, being soon tired with the Insolences committed by the
French, cut in pieces the French Garrisons; whereupon the King sent an Army
under the Command of Robert Earl of Artois, to reduce them to Obedience; 1302.
but he was defeated near Courtray, there being 20000 French slain upon the
Spot, which happened chiefly by a Misfortune, that the Cavalry was misled into
a moorish Ground. It is related, that the Flemings got above 8000 gilt Spurs as
a Booty from the French. 1304.
And though afterward there were 25000 killed of the Flemings, yet they quickly
recollecting themselves, raised another Army of 60000 Men, and obliged the
King, by a Peace made betwixt them, to restore them to their ancient State.
This King Philip also, with consent of the Pope, suppressed the rich Order of
the Knights Templers, and died in the Year 1314. He suppressed the Templers.
Whom succeeded his three Sons, each in his turn, who all died without Issue,
and without doing any thing of moment. Lewis X.
The eldest, Lewis X. surnamed Hutin, died in the Year 1316; whose Brother
Philip surnamed the Tall, Philip the Tall.
had a Contest for the Crown with his deceased Brother's Daughter Joan, she
being supported by her Mother's Brother, the Duke of Burgundy, but it was
determined in favor of Philip by virtue of the Salick Law. Under this King the
Jews were banished out of France, they having been accused of poisoning the
Fountains. He died in the Year 1322. Him succeeded the third Brother Charles
IV. Charles IV.
surnamed the Handsome, under whose Reign all the Italians and Lombards, who
being Usurers, did exact upon the People, were banished the Kingdom. A War also
was begun in Aquitain against the English, but these Differences were quickly
composed by the Intercession of Queen Isabella, Sister of Charles. He died in
the Year 1328.

. 9. After the Death of this King; Philip of Valois.
France was for a great many years together torn in pieces by very unfortunate
and bloody Wars, which had almost proved fatal to this Kingdom: His Title
contented by Edward III. of England, and in what ground.
For a Contest arose about the Succession, betwixt Philip of Valois, Philip the
Handsom's Brother's Son, and Edward III. King of England, the abovementioned
Philip the Handsom's Daughter's Son. The former pretended a right by virtue of
the Salick Law, which excludes the Females from the Succession: But the latter,
though he did not deny the Salick Law, yet did he allege, That this Law did not
bar from the Succession the Sons born of the King's Daughters. And it was
certain, that he was nearer a kin to the deceased King than Philip, neither
could any Precedent be brought where a Son of the King's Daughter had been
excluded from the Succession to admit his Brother's Son: Yet the Estates of
France declared for Philip, partly upon the persuasion of Robert Earl of
Artois, partly because they were unwilling to depend on England. And though King
Edward did dissemble at first, this Affront, and came in person to do homage to
Philip for his Provinces which he was possessed of in France; yet not long
after he began to show his Resentment, the French having obliged him at the
time when he performed the Ceremony of Homage, to lay aside his Crown, Scepter
and Spurs. Besides, the States of England did persuade him not so easily to let
fall his Pretensions, and Robert Earl of Artois, being fallen out with Philip
about some Pretensions concerning the County of Artois, did stir up King Edward
to undertake a War against France. In the mean time while Philip had defeated
the Flemings, who were risen in Rebellion against that Earl, to that degree,
that of 16000 Men not one escaped the Sword. War with England.
In the Year 1336 the English began to make War against France, which was
carried on for some Years with equal Advantage on both sides, and was
interrupted by several Truces; till at last Edward landed with an Army in
Normandy, and outbraving the French, approached to the very Gates of Paris. But
Edward making soon after his Retreat through Picardy toward Flanders, was
overtaken by Philip near Albeville, Battle near Crecy.
where a bloody Battle was fought betwixt them. The French Forces being
extremely tired by a long March gave the English an easier Victory. Besides
this, some Genoese Foot retreated immediately, their Bows having been rendered
useless by the rainy Weather; which the Duke d' Alenzon perceiving, and
thinking it to have been done by Treachery, fell with a Body of Horse in among
them, which caused the first Confusion. The English also made use of four or
five pieces of great Cannon against the French, which being never seen before
in France, caused a great terror in the French Army. Several French Lords also
being not well satisfied with the King, were glad to see him defeated. This
Victory is the more remarkable, because (according to the French Historians)
the English were not above 24000 strong, whereas the French were above 100000.
Out of which number 30000 Foot Soldiers were slain, and 1200 Horsemen, among
whom was the King of Bohemia. This King, though he was blind, yet charged the
Enemy on Horseback betwixt two of his Friends, who had tied his Horse to
theirs, and they were all three found dead together. The next day there was a
great slaughter made among some French Troops, who not knowing what had passed
the day before, were on their March to join the French Camp. After this Battle
the English took Calais, The English take Cal^is.
Philip having in vain attempted its relief with 15000 Men. This unfortunate
King, 1347.
however, received this one Comfort, That the Dukedom of Dauphine was annexed
to the Crown of France by a Gift of Hubert the last Duke, Dauphine annexed to
France.
with Condition, that the eldest Son of the Kings of France should bear the
Title of Dauphin. This Hubert having conceived a mortal hatred against the then
Earl of Savoy had before put himself under the Protection of France; but when
afterward by an unfortunate Accident he killed his only Son, he retired into a
Monastery, giving to the King of France the Possession of his Country. 1349.
This King Philip also bought Roussilion and Montpelier, and was the first who
imposed that so much abominated Tax in France upon Salt, Philip introduced the
Gabell.
called the Gabell, whereby the Subjects are obliged to pay for the Sun and Sea
Water at so dear a rate. Wherefore King Edward used to call him in jest, The
Author of the Salick Law. He died in the Year 1356.

. 10. John.
His Son and Successor John was more unfortunate in his Wars against the
English than his Father. Unfortunate in his Wars against the English.
For the Truce being expired, the War began afresh, wherein Prince Edward made
an Inrode with 12000 Men out of Aquitain, destroying all roundabout him; King
John intending to cut off his Retreat, overtook him with all his Forces near
Maupertuis, two Leagues from Poictiers. Battle near Poictiers.
The Prince offered the King Satisfaction for the Damage sustained, which he
refusing to accept of, attacked Prince Edward in his advantageous Post, he
being surrounded with Hedges and Vineyards; but the English, by the help of
their Bows, soon broke through his Vanguard, and afterward the whole Army,
which consisted of 50000 Men, put them in Disorder, killing upon the Spot (as
it is related by the French Historians) 6000 French, among whom were 1200
Gentlemen, the King and his youngest Son were both made Prisoners: The three
eldest had the good Fortune to escape. 1356.
During the Father's Imprisonment Charles the Dauphin took upon him the
Administration of Affairs, but the People which had been sorely oppressed
hitherto, being unwilling to obey it, caused great Disorders in the Kingdom.
The Peasants rise up against the Nobility, and the Citizens of Paris made heavy
Complaints. The Soldiers for want of Pay lived at Discretion, and made a
miserable havoc in the Country; Charles of Navarre added Fuel to the Fire, in
hopes to make his own Advantage by these Troublesome times, and did not stick
to make Pretensions to the Crown; yet Matters were composed with him at last.
And the Estates of France refusing to accept of such Conditions as were
proposed by the English, the King of England entered France with a great Army,
and overrun the greatest part of it, yet could not make himself Master of any
fortified place. Then a Peace was concluded at Bretigny, a League from
Chartres; by virtue of which the French were to surrender to the English,
besides what they were possessed of before, Poictou, Xaintonge, Rochelle, Pais
d'Aulnis, Angoumois, Perigord, Limosin, Quercy, Agenois, and Bigorre, with the
Sovereignty over them; besides this, Calais, and the Counties d'Oye, Guisnes
and Ponthieu, and three Millions of Livers, as a Ransom for the King's person.
This Peace was very hard for France, A dishonorable Peace to France.
and continued not long. King John, forced by Necessity, was obliged to do
another thing little becoming his Grandeur, for he sold his Daughter to Galeas
Viscount of Milan, 1360.
for 600000 Crowns, giving her in Marriage to the said Viscount. This King
presented his youngest Son Philip surnamed the Hardy, with the Dukedom of
Burgundy, it being vacant by the Death of the last Duke. From this Philip
descended the famous Dukes of Burgundy, whose Territories, at last, devolved to
the House of Austria. This King died in England, whither he was gone to make
satisfaction for his Son, who being a Hostage there had made his escape. Some
say, that he went to see a Lady there, with whom he was much in love. 1364.


. 11. Charles the Wise,
King John was succeeded by his Son Charles V. surnamed the Wise, who prudently
made amends for the Rashness of his Grandfather and Father, never engaging
himself in Battles with the English, but by protracting the War and secret
Intrigues, endeavored to tire out their Courage. The disbanded Soldiers had
mutineer'd, and were become so Insolent, that no body durst oppose them. These
he sent into Spain, where Pieter surnamed the Cruel and Henry I. fought for the
Crown of Castile. These Forces had put the Pope in such a fear, that in their
March he presented them with 200000 Livers and a good store of Indulgences, to
divert them thereby form taking their way near Avignon. Prince Edward also
engaged himself in this War, but got nothing by it but a sickly Body and great
want of Money. Wherefore he pretend^ng to lay a Tax upon his Subjects in
Guienne, to pay off his Soldiers, they complained thereof to the King of
France; who having well prepared himself, and being informed that the Prince
languished under a mortal Disease, summoned him to appear in Paris, pretending,
that the Peace made at Bretigny was of no force, since the English had not
performed the Conditions, and had since that time committed Hostilities,
wherefore he insisted upon his former right of Sovereignty over Aquitain. And
Prince Edward having sent him a disdainful Answer, King Charles denounced War
against the English, He declares War against the English.
A great many Fast-days and Processions were kept by the King's Order in
France; and the Priests made it their business to represent the Justice of the
King's Cause, and the Injustice of the English to the People. By this way he
insinuated himself into the Favor of the French that lived under the English
Jurisdiction, and persuaded his own Subjects to be more free in paying their
Taxes. The Archbishop of Toulouse alone, did, by his cunning Persuasions, bring
over to his Party above fifty Cities and strong Castles. The Constable Bertrand
du Guesolin did also great mischief to the English with small Parties, and
worsted them not only in several Rencounters, but also beat them out of
Perigord and Limosin: But in Guienne, especially, the English Affairs were in a
bad condition, after the Spanish Fleet, which was sent to the Assistance of the
French by Henry King of Castile, had ruined the English near Rochelle. After
which exploit Poictiers was taken from them, and Rochelle upon very
advantageous Conditions, surrendered it self to the King of France. And King
Edward being detained by contrary Winds, not being able to bring over timely
Relief, Xaintonge, Angoumois, and some other places, followed the Example of
the former, The English, not long after, with an Army of 30000 Men, marched
from Calais cross the Country as far as Guienne, ravaging and plundering by the
way wherever they came, yet would Charles never hazard a Battle with them,
but contented himself to annoy them with Skirmishes, whereby he did them
considerable Mischief. The Pope, in the mean while, labored hard to make Peace
betwixt these two Crowns, but King Edward happening to die about that time,
After the Death of Edward, Charles attacks the English with Advantag^.
King Charles took hold of this Opportunity, and attacking the English with
five several Armies at one time, took all from them but Calais, Bourdeaux and
Bayonne in Guienne, and Cherbury in Normandy. The English, during the Minority
of their King, being also pestered with the Plague and the War with the Scots,
were not in a Capacity to send sufficient Relief: Yet this King miscarried in
his Enterprise against Britainy. In the Year 1379, the Emperor Charles IV.
came to visit him in Paris, where he constituted the Dauphin a perpetual Vicar
of the Empire in Dauphine: And ever since, say the French, the German Emperors
never did pretend to any thing in Dauphine, and in the Kingdom of A^elat. He
died in the Year 1380.

. 12. Charles VI.
Now we are come to that most unfortunate Reign of Charles VI. at the very
beginning of which, one of the main occasions of Mischief to France was, That
Joan Queen of Naples standing in fear of Charles de Duraz, did adopt Lewis Duke
of Anjou, declaring him Heir of that Kingdom. The Duke willingly accepting of
her Offer, raised, in her behalf, an Army of 30000 Horse, having employed
thereunto the Treasure left by Charles V. which he had got clandestinely into
his possession. With this Army be made himself Master of Provence, which then
belonged to Joan. And though in the mean time Charles de Duraz having killed
Joan, had made himself Master of the Kingdom, the Duke of Anjou, nevertheless,
pursued his intended Expedition; but was, by continual Marches, and the Cunning
of Charles, led about and tired to that degree, that he died in great Misery,
very few of so great an Army having had the good fortune to return into France.
1384.
The People also were generally much dissatisfied at the beginning, because
those who had the Tuition of the King, to curry-favour with the People, had
promised an abatement of the heavy Taxes. But the same being not long after
again introduced, augmented and devoured by the Courtiers, great Troubles and
Insurrections arose both in Paris and other places. In the mean while the
Flemings had carried themselves insolently toward their Lord, who calling to
his Assistance, the French, they killed 40000 Flemings, together with their
General Arteville. The general Dissatisfaction of the People was much increased
afterward, 1382.
when a great Sum of Money was employed upon an Expedition against England,
which proving fruitless, both the Money and Men were lost. The first rise of
the French Pretensions upon Milan^
Lewis Duke of Orleans, Brother of this King Charles, married Valentina the
Daughter of John Ga^^acius Viscount of Milan, with this Condition, That he
should receive immediately, as a Dowry, not only a great Treasure of Money and
Jewels, but also the County of Ast; and in case her Father should die without
Issue, the whole Country should be devolved on Valentina and her Children.
Which Contract has not only furnished France with a Pretension to Milan, but
also has been the occasion of great Calamities. After this another Misfortune
happened to France, for the King, whose Brains were mightily weakened by
Debaucheries in his younger Years, (...).
as he was traveling in Britainy, fell upon a sudden Distraction, caused,
partly by the great Heat, which was then in the Month of August; partly,
because, as it is reported, a tall black Man appeared to him, who, stopping his
Horse by the Bridle, said, Stop King, whither will you go? you are betrayed,
Soon after a Page being fallen asleep, let the point of his Lance drop upon the
Headpiece of him who rid just before the King, which the King being extremely
surpised at, interpreted it as directed against him. And though this Madness did
cease afterward, yet was his Understanding much impaired, and the Fits would
return by intervals. This unhappy Accident was the occasion of that fatal
Contest concerning the Administration of the Kingdom (which the King was
incapable of) betwixt Lewis Duke of Orleans, the King's Brother, and Philip
Duke of Burgundy, his Uncle. The first claimed it on the account of proximity
of Blood, the latter on account of his Age and Experience. The latter was most
approved of by the Estates, who declared him Regent; yet the Duke of Orleans,
by making new Intrigues, still endeavored to make himself the Head of the
Kingdam, which caused pernicious Factions in the Court. And though the Duke of
Burgundy died, 1404.
his Son John pursuing his Father's Pretensions, the Hatred so increased
betwixt both Parties, that notwithstanding the Reconciliation made betwixt
them, The Duke of Orleans assassinated by the Duke of Eurgundy, 1407.
the Duke of Burgundy caused the Duke of Orleans to be murdered by some
Ruffians, at Night, in the Streets of Paris. And though the Duke of Burgundy,
after having made away his Rival, and forced a Pardon from the King, was now
the only Man in the Court, yet were the Animosities betwixt the Duke of
Burgundy, and the Sons of the murdered Duke of Orleans, not extinguished
thereby, which divided the whole Kingdom into two Factions, one siding with the
Burgundian, the other with the Family of Orleans, and occasioned barbarous
Murders, Devastations, and such other Calamities, which are the common
products of Civil Commotions. At last the Burgundian Faction was brought very
low by the King and his Party. The English take advantage of these Troubles.
But the English having observed the intestine Divisions in France, landed in
Normandy with a great Army, and took Harfleur: But being extremely weakened
both in the Siege and by Sickness, 1415.
they resolved to retreat toward Calais. In the mean while the French had got
together an Army which was four times stronger than the English, which met them
near Agincourt, a Village in the County of St. Poll, where a Battle being
fought betwixt them, Battle of Agincourt.
6000 French were killed upon the Spot, and a great number taken Prisoners,
among whom were a great many persons of Quality. (The English Historians make
this Defeat much greater, it being rarely to be observed, that the Historians
of two Nations, who are at Enmity, agree in their Relations.) Yet the English
being extremely tired, could not pursue the Victory. In the mean time the
Invasion made by a Foreign Enemy did in no ways diminish the intestine
Divisions, but rather augmented them: For the Duke of Burgundy perceiving his
Party in France to decline, began to favor the English, who, in the Year next
following, landed again in Normandy, and had great Success. At last the Queen,
who had hitherto had a share in the Government, added Fuel to the Fire: For the
Constable d' Armagnac having now the sole Administration of Affairs, and being
only balanced by the Authority of the Queen, took an opportunity, by the free
Conversation of the Queen, to put such a Jealousy in the King's Head, that
with the Consent of Charles the Dauphin she was banished the Court. Which so
incensed the Queen, that she having conceived an implacable Hatred against her
Son, sided with the Duke of Burgundy, whose Party was thereby greatly
strengthened. Thus commenced the intestine Wars, wherein both Parties were so
exasperated against one another, that they had little regard to the great
Success of the English, who, in the mean time conquered all Normandy and Roan
it self. 1419.
The Dauphin intending at one blow to root out the Evil of these intestine
Commotions, cunningly invited the Duke of Burgundy to come to an Agreement with
him, The Duke of Burgundy assassinated.
when at their second meeting at Monterau, he caused him to be killed. But this
stroke had a quite contrary effect: For the generality of the Nation abominated
the fact, and the Queen took from hence an Opportunity totally to ruin her Son,
and to exclude him from the Succession. Wherefore, entering into a League with
the murdered Duke's Son Philip, a Peace was concluded with Henry V. King of
England, by virtue of which he was to marry Catharine, the Daughter of Charles
VI. and during his Life to be Regent of France, and after his Death to be put
into the full possession of the Crown of France; That both the Crowns of France
and England should be united, yet that each Kingdom should be ruled according
to its own Laws. Besides this, a Sentence was pronounced against the Dauphin in
Paris, That by reason of the Murder committed by him upon the Duke of
Bargundy, he was declared incapable of the Crown, and that he for ever should
be banished the Kingdom. He appealed from this Sentence to God and his Sword,
and set his Court up at Poictiers, so that at that time there was in France two
Governments and two Courts. But the Affairs of the Dauphin were in a very ill
condition, very few of the Provinces siding with him; those that did, were
Anjou, Poictou, Tours, Auvergne, Berry and Languedock, but all of them mightily
exhausted of Money. But it was happy for him, that the brave King Henry V. died
in the very Flower of his Age and good Fortune, as likewise did, not long
after, 1422.
Charles VI. whose Life (by the Infirmities of his Mind, being incapable of
governing the Kingdom) had greatly obstructed the Welfare of the Kingdom.

. 13. Charles VII.
Charles VII. whom we hitherto have called the Dauphin, caused himself,
immediately after his Father's Death, to be proclaimed King, with the
Assistance of the Bravest among the French, nevertheless his Affairs at the
beginning were under very ill Circumstances: For the Duke of Bedford, who was
constituted Regent in France, having caused young Henry VI. of England to be
proclaimed King of France in Paris, Henry VI. of England proclaimed King of
France.
in conjunction with the Dukes of Burgundy and Britainy, tried all ways to
expel him quite out of France. His Forces were several times miserably beaten
by the English, the greatest part of the Cities abandoned him, so that the
English used to call him, in derision, the King of Bourges, because he used
commonly to reside there. He was at last become so poor that he rarely could
dine in Public, and it was observed, that one time he had nothing for his
Dinner but a piece of roasted Mutton and a couple of Fowls. Besides this, most
of the great Men about him being dissatisfied with the ambitious Proceedings of
the Constable Richmond, had left the Court, and were driving on their own
Intrigues. Misunderstandings betwixt the English and the Duke of Burgundy the
only Advantage Charles had left.
The only Comfort left to Charles was, that there was a misunderstanding
betwixt the English and the Duke of Burgundy; else, if they had with their
joint Forces vigorously attacked Charles, he, in all probability could not have
held out long against them. The occasion happened thus; Jaqueline Countess of
Hennegau, Holland, Zealand and Friesland, being divorced from her Husband, John
Duke of Brabant, a Cousin of the Duke of Burgundy, was married again to the
Duke of Gloucester, Brother of Henry V. The Duke of Burgundy taking his
Cousin's part, it caused great Heart-burning betwixt him and the Duke of
Gloucester. The Duke of Bedford endeavored to appease them, yet did the Duke
of Burgundy from that time entertain a Grudge against the English; which
increased afterward, when the English refused to put the City of Orleans into
the Hands of the Duke of Burgundy. This City being besieged by the English was
reduced to the utmost Extremity; the French, which attacked a Convoy which was
going to the English Camp, having been entirely beaten: Which Engagement is
called la journee des Haranes, or, the Battle of the Herrings. Charles's
Affairs were then become so desperate that he had resolved to retire into
Dauphine, when upon a sudden an unlooked for help was sent him: For a Country
Maid born in Lorraine, The Maid of Orleans.
whose Name was Joan, did pretend that she was sent from God to relieve
Orleans, and to see the King crowned at Rheims. Both which she effected,
striking thereby great terror into the English; whereas, on the other side,
the French being greatly encouraged by this Success, saw their Affairs from
henceforward mend every day. But this poor Wench following the Wars longer, as
it seems, than she had in Commission, was taken Prisoner making a Sally out of
Compeigne, and being delivered to the English, 1431.
was with great dishonor burnt as a Witch at Roan. The English Power declines
in France.
The English, perceiving their Affairs not to go so forward as formerly,
resolved to give them new Life and Vigor, by bringing over the young King
Henry, and having him crowned in Paris: And to keep fair with the Duke of
Burgundy they gave him the Counties of Brie and Champaigne; yet all this proved
insufficient. The War therefore having been thus carried on for several Years
only with light Skirmishes, both Parties being tired out, a Treaty was at last
proposed by Mediation of the Pope at Arras; but the English rigorously
insisting upon their Pretensions, which were very hard, they were deserted by
the Duke of Burgundy, who made a separate Peace with Charles upon very
advantageous Conditions. There befell also the English another Misfortune by
the Death of the Duke of Bedford, 1435.
who hitherto had administered the Affairs in France with great Prudence. After
this the Cities of France surrendered themselves one after another to Charles;
among which was Paris, which submitted it self to its natural Lord. 1436.
But because the English had made miserable havoc throughout France, and the
French Soldiers themselves being ill paid, had committed great Depredations,
without any Order or Discipline, a great Famine ensued, and afterward a great
Plague. It is related that the Wolves did snatch the Children out of the
Streets of the Suburbs of St. Anthony in Paris. The War having been thus
protracted for a considerable time, a Truce was concluded for some Years. The
King, to be rid of the Soldiers, sent them into Alsace, under pretense to
disturb the Council at Basil. They killed at once 4000 Swiss, but having lost
double the number soon after, returned home again. In the mean time the English
were degenerated from their former Valor, their Forces were extremely
diminished in France, and the Soldiers for want of Pay had given themselves
over to Plunder. They wanted good Officers, their Places were not well
provided, and their Subjects weary of the Government. England, at home, was
divided within it self, and the English weakened by two Overthrows, which they
had received from the Scots. Charles therefore having met with this
Opportunity, resolved to beat the English at once out of France. He took, for a
Pretense of the War, that they had broken the Truce in Britainy and with the
Scots; and attacking them with great Vigor in several places at once, He
drives the English out of France, 1449.
he drove them, within the space of thirteen Months, out of Normandy. The next
Year after he took from them Aquitain, Bayonne being the last which surrendered
it self; 1451.
so that the English had nothing left on the Continent of France but Calais and
the County of Guines: Bourdeaux soon after revolted from the French, and sought
for Aid of the English, but the brave Talbot having been killed in an
Engagement, it was retaken and reunited to the French Crown, 1453.
after it had been 300 Years in the possession of the English. Thus did this
King reunite the mangled Kingdom, having expelled the English out of its
Bowels. Nevertheless he did not entirely enjoy the Fruits of his good Fortune,
living at variance with his Son, who for the space of thirteen Years came not
to Court. And being at last persuaded, that a Design was formed against his
Life, it so disturbed him, 1461.
that for fear of being poisoned, he starved himself.

. 14. Him succeeded his Son Lewis XI. a cunning, Lewis XI.
resolute and malicious Prince, who laid the first Foundation of the absolute
Power since exercised by the Kings of France, whereas formerly the Royal Power
was kept under by the Authority of the great Men of the Kingdom. He reduces the
excessive power of the Nobility.
He began with reforming his Court and Ministers according to his Pleasure: Of
which the great Men of the kingdom foreseeing the Consequence, they entered
into a League, A League against him.
which they called, La Ligue du bien public, the League for the public good;
wherewith they pretended to defend the Public against the King's arbitrary
Proceedings. Among these were the Dukes of Burgundy and Britainy, who were
willing to keep the King within bounds. In the Year 1465, Charles, the young
Duke of Burgundy, entered France with an Army, and fought a Battle with the
King near Montlehery, wherein the Advantage was near equal; but, because the
King retreated a little backwards the Night following, the Duke of Burgundy
pretended to have gained the Victory, which put him upon those Enterprises
which afterward cost him his Life. The King's (...) ^^thods.
The King extricated himself with a great deal of Cunning out of this danger,
for he released the Taxes, and with great Promises and fine Words appeased the
People, all which, as soon as the danger was passed, he revoked at pleasure. To
dissolve the knot of this Faction, he made Divisions betwixt the most
powerful, the bravest he brought over to his side by giving them particular
Advantages, the rest he ruined by his Policy, especially by bribing their
Friends and Servants. And being in great want of Money, he borrowed great Sums
of his Servants, and such as refused to lend, were put out of their
Employments: Which, The Original of selling the Offices of France.
it is said, gave the first occasion, that the Offices were afterward sold in
France. But the Duke of Burgundy persisted in his Opposition, who had in the
Year 1468 hemmed him in at Peronne, which danger he however escaped. Duke of
Burgundy slain.
At last Lewis was rid of this his troublesome Enemy, who had laid so many
Designs against him, 1477.
he being killed by the Swiss near Nancy. Lewis taking advantage of the great
Confusion, which was occasioned by the Death of the Duke in that Country, took
possession of the Dukedom of Burgundy, under pretext that the same was an
Appanage, and brought over to his side the Cities situated on the River Some,
which had been under the Jurisdiction of Charles. It was generally believed,
That Lewis, by way of Marriage, might easily have annexed the whole Inheritance
of this Duke unto France, if he had not conceived such an implacable hatred
against this House, that he was resolved to ruin it. Two Years before the Death
of the Duke of Burgundy King Edward IV. landed with a great Army in France,
whom Lewis with Presents and fair Promises persuaded to return home again. He
united to the Crown Provence, Anjou and Muns, having obtained the same by the
last Will and Testament of Charles d' Anjou, Count de Maine, who was the last
Male Heir of the House of Anjou; notwithstanding that Rene Duke of Lorraine,
Son of Ygland d' Anjou pretended a Right to the same by his Mother's side. In
his latter days he lived miserably, and grew ridiculous, being in continual
fear of death. He died in the Year 1483.

. 15. Charles VIII.
His Son Charles VIII. had at the beginning of his Reign his Hands full with
the Duke of Britainy, and was marching with an Army to unite that Province by
main force to the Crown. But understanding that Maximilian of Austria had
concluded a Match betwixt Anna, the only Heiress of this Dukedom and himself,
the French King did think it no ways advisable to let such a delicious Morsel
fall to the share of the House of Austria, but obliged the Bride, partly by
force, partly by fair words, to renounce Maximilian, and to be married to
himself, whereby this Country was united to France. And though Henry VII.
Britainy united to France,
King of England, did not look with a good Eye upon the growing Power of
France, 1491.
and therefore with a great Army besieged Boulogne, yet in consideration of a
good Sum of Money he was prevailed upon to return home again; especially,
since Maximilian (who had received a double affront from Charles, who had not
only taken his Bride from him, but also had sent back his Daughter Margaret,
which was promised to him in Marriage) did not join his Forces with him
according to Agreement. Maximilian took Arras and St. Omer, but being not able
to go further he consented, that his Son Philip, Lord of the Netherlands, might
make a Truce with Charles. On the other side, Charles gave to Ferdinand the
Catholic, the Counties of Russilion and Cerdagne, some say, to engage him
thereby not to oppose his intended Expedition against Naples. Others say, that
Ferdinand corrupted Charles's Confessor, to persuade him, that he should
restore that Country to its lawful Sovereign. France being thus by the Union
with Britainy become an entire Kingdom, it began to contrive how to obtain the
Sovereignty over Italy. Charles had a Pretension, An Expedition to Naples, end
the Pre^^^sions of it.
because the Right and Title of the Family of Anjo and Naples was by the Death
of the last Duke of Anjou and Earl of Provence devolved to Lewis XI. and
consequently to himself. But this young King received the greatest
Encouragement from Lewis surnamed Morus, or the Black, Duke of Milan, who,
having Tuition of his Nephew John Galeas, the true Heir of this Dukedom, but a
weak Prince, had under that Pretense made himself Master of the same. This Duke
fearing that he might be put out of possession by Ferdinand King of Naples,
whose Son Alfonsus's Daughter Isabella was married to John Galeas, endeavored
to give Ferdinand his Hands full of Work, that he might not be at leisure to
think of him; knowing also, that Ferdinand and his Son Alfonsus were much hated
by their Subjects for their Tyranny and Impiety. An Expedition was therefore
undertaken against Naples, 1494.
which proved the occasion of continual Miseries to Italy for the space of
forty Years; for so long it was the Cockpit for the French, Germans and
Spaniards, and at last lost a great part of its ancient Liberty. Charles
conquered Naples.
It seemed to be fatal to Italy, that the wise Italians either could or would
not prevent this Expedition, which was designed two Years before. Charles had
at the beginning all the Success imaginable, for the Italian Troops were in a
very ill condition, and there being no body who durst oppose him, Florence and
the Pope sided with him, the latter declaring Charles King of Naples. King
Alfonsus stirred up by his own Conscience, abdicated himself, transferring all
his Right and Title upon his Son Ferdinand: But his Forces being soon beaten
and dispersed, Charles made his solemn Entry into Naples with loud
Acclamations. 1495.
Immediately the whole Kingdom submitted to him, except the Isle of Iseria, and
the Cities of Brundisi and Gallipoli. The Conquest of so fair a Kingdom, and
that within five Months time, struck a Terror into the Turkish Emperor
himself, being in fear at constantinople, and Greece being ready to rebel as
soon as the French should land on that side. But the Face of Affairs was
quickly changed; for the French, by their ill behavior quickly lost the Favor
of the Neapolitans; the King minded nothing but Gaming, and the rest following
his Example, were careless in maintaining their Conquest. Besides this, it was
looked upon as a thing of such Consequence by the rest of the Princes of
Europe, The League of Italy against the French.
that the Emperor, the Pope, King Ferdinand of Arragon, Venice and Milan
entered into a Confederacy, to drive the French out of Italy; Charles therefore
fearing lest his Retreat might be cut off, took his Way by Land into France,
having left things but in an indifferent state of Defense in Naples. In his
March he was met by the Confederate Army near the River of Taro, where a Battle
was fought, in which, though there were more killed on the Confederate side than
of the French, He los^th Naples.
yet he marched forward with such Precipitation, as if he had lost the Battle.
Charles was no sooner returned into France, but Ferdinand soon retook, without
great trouble, the Kingdom of Naples, to the great Dishonor of the French, who
were not able to maintain themselves there a whole Year, of whom very few
returned alive into France. Not long after Charles died without Issue. 1498.


. 16. Lewis XII.
Him succeeded Lewis XII. formerly Duke of Orleans, who, not to lose Britainy,
married Anna Widow of the late King. He made War soon after on Milan,
pretending a Right to that Dukedom by his Grandmother's side, and having
conquered the same within 21 days. 1499.
Lewis the Black was forced to fly with his Children and all his Treasure into
Germany. He conq^ers Milan.
But the Inhabitants of Milan grew quickly weary of the French, their free
Conversation with the Women being especially intolerable to them, and therefore
recalled their Duke, who having got together an Army of Swiss was joyfully
received, and regained the whole Country, except the Castle of Milan and the
City of Novara. But Lewis sending timely Relief, the Duke' s Swiss Soldiers
refused to fight against the French, so that the Duke endeavoring to save
himself by flight in a common Soldiers Habit, was taken Prisoner, and kept ten
Years in Prison at Loches, where he died. Thus the French got Milan and the
City of Genoua again. After so great Success Lewis began to think of the
Kingdom of Naples: To obtain which, he made a League with Ferdinand the
Catholic, He conquers Naples.
wherein it was agreed, that they should divide the Kingdom betwixt them, so
that the French should have for their share Naples, Terre de Labor and
Abruzze; and the Spaniards, Poville and Calabria. Each of them got his share
without any great trouble, Frederick King of Naples surrendering himself to King
Lewis, 1501.
who allowed him a yearly Pension of 30000 Crowns. But soon after new
Differences arose betwixt these two haughty Nations, concerning the Limits; for
the French pretended that the Country of Capitanate (which is very considerable
for its Taxes paid for Sheep, which are there in great numbers) did belong to
Abruzze, whereas the Spaniards would have it belong to Poville; and from Words
they came to Blows. The French, at first, had somewhat the better; but as soon
as Gonsalvus de Cordoua, that cunning Spaniard had broke their first Fury, and
Lewis did not send sufficient Relief, Loses it again.
they were as shamefully beaten again out of the Kingdom, as they had been
before. Lewis endeavored to revenge himself upon the Spaniards in the Year
next following, 1503.
but though he attacked them with four several Armies, yet could he not gain any
thing upon them: Wherefore he made a Peace with Ferdinand, and entered into an
Alliance with him against Philip Son-in-law to Ferdinand, who having, after the
death of Isabella, taken from him the Kingdom of Castile, was upheld by his
Father Maximilian, and backed by Henry King of England, whose Son had married
his Wife's Sister. In the Year 1507, the City of Genoua rebelled against Lewis,
but was soon reduced to her former Obedience. Then the War began afresh in
Italy, The Venetian War.
with the Venetians, who being too much addicted to self-interest, had drawn
upon themselves the hatred of all their Neighbors, having encroached upon
every one of them; and Lewis especially attributed to them his loss of the
Kingdom of Naples. To humble this proud State a League was concluded at
Cambray, Lewis joins in the League against th^^.
betwixt the Emperor, the Pope, the Kings of France and Spain. 1508.
Lewis, by entering into a Confederacy with his mortal Enemies, had more regard
to his Passion than his Interest, it being certain that he might upon all
occasions have trusted to the Friendship of the Venetians. But now he was the
first that fell upon them, 1509.
and defeated them in a great Battle near Giera d' Addua, which caused such a
Terror among them, that they left all what they had on the Continent, within
twenty days, and if Lewis had pursued his Victory whilst they were under this
first Consternation, he might doubtless have put a period to their Greatness.
But in the mean time that he marched back toward Milan, not making the best of
his Victory, they got leisure to recover themselves; especially since the
Emperor Maximilian was not in earnest against them, and Pope Julius II. was
reconciled to them. A League against Lewis.
Nay, in the Year 1510, the Pope, Ferdinand, Henry VIII. and the Swiss Cantons,
denounced War against Lewis. For the Pope could not look with a good Eye upon
the growing Power of France in Italy, Ferdinand feared lest Lewis might attack
Naples, and Henry being come lately to the Crown, was for making himself famous
by so great an Undertaking; the Swiss were set against France, because Lewis
had not paid them their old Arrears, and had refused to increase their Pension,
not because their Demands were extravagant, but because he would not be
out-brav'd by them. In this War the French General Gasto de Foix behaved
himself very gallantly; for he relieved Bononia, beat the Venetian Army, killed
8000 of them in Brescia, and obtained a glorious Victory against the
Confederate Army near Ravenna; 1512.
in which Battle, nevertheless, this brave General, being too hot in pursuing
the Enemy, was slain. With his death the French Affairs began to decline, and
they were again forced to leave Italy. Maximilian, Son of Lewis the Black was
restored to his Duchy of Milan by the help of the Swiss: The Genoucse
revolted, and made sanus Fregosus their Duke. Ferdinand the Catholic took from
King John the Kingdom of Navarre, which the French in vain endeavored to
regain from the Spaniards. But Lewis being extremely desirous to regain Milan
entered into a League with Venice, He conquers Milan agai^n.
and retook most places of that Dukedom and the City of Genoua. He besieged
Duke Maximilian in the Castle of Novara, but the Swiss coming to the Assistance
of the Duke, attacked the French with incredible Fury in their Camp, and drove
them quite out of the whole Dukedom, which was twice taken in one Month. He is
attacked by several Princes at once.
Then Lewis was at one time attacked by the Emperor, England, and the Swiss;
and if the English and the Swiss had joined, France would have run a great
Risque: But King Henry, in lieu of entering into the Heart of France, lost his
Time at the Siege of Terou^ne, where he defeated the French, that were come to
its Relief, near Guinegast; this Battle was called La journee des esperons, or
The Battle of the Spurs, because the French made better use of their Spurs than
their Swords; and after he had taken Tournay, he returned into England. The
Swiss, who kept the Duke of Tremoville besieged, were bought off with 600000
Crowns, which were promised to them by the Duke without the King's Order, as
likewise, that he should renounce the Council of Pisa and his Pretensions to
the Dukedom of Milan. Which shameful Agreement the King refused to ratify; and
if the Swiss had not been more fond of the Ransom offered for the Hostages than
their Blood, they had paid with their Lives for it. In the Year next following
Lewis made a Peace with the King of England, who gave him his Sister Mary in
Marriage; which young Lady, it is thought, did hasten the Death of the old King,
which ensued in the beginning of the Year 1515. This King was so well beloved
by his People, that he was generally called, Le Pere du Peuple, or The Father
of the People.

. 17. His Nephew Francis I. succeeded him, Francis 1.
who having made a League with England, the Archduke Charles and Venice,
entered upon a sudden into Italy, and took Genoua and some other Places without
great Opposition; but being encamped near Marignano, within a League of Milan,
the Swiss unexpectedly fell upon him, where a bloody Fight ensued. The Swiss
were at last repulsed, and found that they could be beaten, having lost above
10000; but the French also left 4000 of their best Men upon the Spot. After
this Maximilian surrendered himself and the whole Country to the King, on the
Condition of an annual Pension of 30000 Ducats to be paid him. Soon after the
King agreed with the Swiss, whom in Consideration of a good Sum, he brought
again into an Alliance with France. He made also an Agreement with Pope Leo X.
by virtue of which the King was to have the Right of naming Bishops and Abbots,
but the Pope to keep certain Benefits out of the chiefest Church Benefices. In
the Year 1518, he redeemed Tournay form the English for a good Sum of Money.
He aspires to the Empire.
In the Year next following, after the Death of the Emperor Maximilian, Francis
employed all his Engines to be exalted to the Imperial Dignity; but the German
Princes fearing lest the French should endeavor to humble them, and for some
other Considerations, preferred before him Charles V. This proved the
Occasision of great Jealousies betwixt these two Princes; for Francis being
very sensible what great Advantages he had gained by the Imperial Dignity, put
himself into a good posture, to prevent his becoming Master of him and all the
rest of the Princes in Europe. This Jealousy broke at last out into an open
War, In a few Days he takes and loses the Kingdom of Navarre.
Francis endeavoring to re-take Navarre from the Spaniards, as thinking to
have met with a fair Opportunity, whilst the Divisions in Spain were on Foot.
The French conquered that Kingdom in a few days time, but being not careful
enough to preserve it, as easily lost it again. Soon after the War was kindled
in the Netherlands, 1521.
occasioned by Robert Van de Marck, Lord of Sedan, whom Francis took into his
Protection. This Robert was so puffed up with the French Protection, that he writ
a Letter of Defiance to the Emperor, and fell into the Country of Luxemburgh.
But Charles quickly chastis'd this petty Enemy; and being persuaded that
Francis had encouraged him thereunto, he took from him St. Amand and Tournay,
The Business nevertheless might have been composed at the beginning, if the
French had not insisted upon keeping Fonterabia, which in the mean time had
been surprised by them. A War (...) in Italy.
But the hardest task was in Italy, both the Emperor and Pope being willing to
drive Francis out of Milan, and to restore Francis Sforza. They effected both
with good Success, for the French Army was not timely supplied with Money, and
being, besides this, beaten near Bicoque, the French were again driven out of
Milan and Genoua. The French driven out of Milan, 1521.
And on the other side they also lost Fonterabia. But what happened very ill to
Francis, was, That the Constable Charles of Bourbon went over to the Emperor;
The Duke of Bourbon revolts to the Emperor.
the Reason of which was, That he had been for a while mightily kept under by
the Queen Mother, the Chancellor Duprat, and Admiral Bonnivet. The first had
commenced a Suit at Law against him about the Dukedom of Bourbon, which he
despaired to be able to maintain against so strong a Party, as believing that
the King was underhand concerned in the Matter. It Is said, that the first Cause
of this Difference was, because the Duke of Bourbon had refused to marry her.
The Duke of Bourbon therefore had agreed with the Emperor and the King of
England, That they should divide the Kingdom of France betwixt them; the
Kingdom of Arelat and the Emperor's Sister having been promised to the Duke of
Bourbon. But the Design being discovered the Duke of Bourbon was forced to fly
into Italy. 1524.
Notwithstanding the English had made an Inrode into Picardy, Francis sent
again an Army into the Milaneze, under the Command of the Admiral Bonnivet,
which was beaten back with considerable loss by the Duke of Bourbon. This
Bonnivet persuaded the King to go in Person into Italy, with this prospect,
that if Things succeeded well, he should have the Glory of having been the
Adviser, but if they succeeded ill, the Misfortune would be covered by the
King's Person. Francis therefore went with a good Resolution into Italy,
because he saw the Duke of Bourbon, who in the mean time having entered
Provence, had besieged Marseilles, did retreat before him, and having laid
Siege to Pavia, he for two Months together harrass'd his Army in that Siege. In
the mean while the Imperialists drew their Forces together, and marched against
him (who was encamped in the Parks) with an Intention either to sight him,
Franc's desired at the Battle of Pavia, and taken Prisoner,
or to relieve Pavia. Francis engaged with them in a Battle, but was defeated
and taken Prisoner. And thus the French were again driven out of Italy. Francis
was carried into Spain, and kept very hardly, 1525.
so that he fell sick for Grief; which hastened his Liberty, it being feared
that he might die through Vexation. Besides that, England and the Italian
Princes entered into a Confederacy to hinder the growing Power of Charles. The
Conditions upon which he obtained his Liberty we have touched upon in another
place; but besides this, Francis gave his Parole of Honor, if the said
Conditions were not fulfilled, That he would return a Prisoner. He is set at
Liberty on hard Conditions, which he did not perform.
But the wiser Sort did sufficiently foresee, that Francis would not perform
the Agreement, wherefore Gattinata the Chancellor refused to sign the Treaty,
alleging, That Charles could get nothing else by this Treaty but the
implacable Hatred of the French, and to be ridiculed by every Body; that he had
been bubbl'd and disappointed in his covetous Designs. And Francis having
obtained his Liberty after thirteen Months Imprisonment, pretended, That what
had been done was done in Prison, and contrary to his Coronation Oath which he
had taken at Rheims; That the Kingdom was not in his disposal, he having only
the use of the same for Life. The same was alleged by the Estates, and
especially, by the Burgundians, who would in no ways consent to be separated
from the Crown of France. If Charles was so much for having Burgundy, he ought
to have taken care to have been put into possession of the same, before he set
Francis at liberty. As soon as Francis had got his Liberty, he made it his
first Business to renew the League with England and the Italian States. He with
the King of England declare War against the Emperor.
And the new Treaty having proved fruitless which was set on foot with the
Emperor, both Kings denounced War against him. Charles afterward accusing
Francis of not having kept his Parole, the latter gave the first the Lie,
sending him also a Challenge, which Matters were looked upon by the World as
very unbecomming the Grandeur of such Princes. He sends an (...) my into Italy.
Francis sent, after this, an Army into Italy under the Command of Odet de Foix
Lautree, which having made considerable progresses in the Milaneze, entered the
Kingdom of Naples, and having taken a great many places there, laid Siege
before the Capital City it self. But the French Affairs received the first
Shock there, when Andrew Doria, the Admiral, leaving the French side, went over
to the Emperor, he being dissatisfied that the King had refused to conferr
upon him the Government of his Native City Genoua, and to restore to the
Genouese, Savona. This Doria is deservedly praised, for that, when he might
have been Lord of his Native Country, he chose rather to procure its Liberty,
which it enjoys to this Day. But Doria leaving the French side, was the
occasion that the City of Naples could not be cut off of their Communication by
Sea. And the Plague began to reign in the Army during this long Siege, which
devoured the greatest part of it, and the General himself. The Remnants of the
Army were miserably treated, the Officers being made Prisoners, and the common
Soldiers disarmed; the French were also obliged to quit Milan and Genoua. At
last, the Emperor having obtained his Aim, and Francis being very desirous to
see his Children at Liberty again, Peace made at Cambray.
a Peace was concluded betwixt them at Cambray, by virtue of which, 1529.
Francis paid two Millions of Ducats as a Ransom for his Sons, and renounced
the Sovereignty over Flanders, Artois, Milan and Naples. And this was all the
Benefit which this King and his Predecessors had reapt from the Italian Wars.
1535.
Nevertheless, some Years after, The War breaks out afresh.
the War began afresh, at which time Francis found a new way to make himself
Master of the Milaneze, by first securing to himself the Dukedom of Savoy.
Wherefore he made Pretensions upon Charles Duke of Savoy concerning the
Inheritance of his Mother, descended out of the House of Savoy, and for some
other Reasons he fell upon him, and took most of his strong Holds. In the mean
time died Francis Sforza Duke of Milan, wherefore the Emperor was resolved to
annex this Country to his House, but Francis could by no means digest the loss
of it. Charles therefore entered Provence in person with an Army of 40000 Foot
and 16000 Horse, ransacked Aix and besieged Marseilles, which however he could
not take, his Army being in a Month's time greatly diminished by Sickness. An
Army of 30000 Men also entered Picardy from the Netherlands, which took Guise,
but was beaten from before Peronne; yet afterward took St. Pol and Monstrevil.
Francis summoned the Emperor before him as his Vassal concerning Flanders and
Artois, alleging, that the Sovereignty of these Provinces was inseparable from
the Crown, and made an Alliance with the Turks. The first seemed to be very
ridiculous to most People, the last very unbecoming a Christian Prince. The
French however reply, That this Alliance was eagerly sought for by the Emperor
himself. At last, by the Mediation of the Pope, The Truce prolonged for nine
Years.
the Truce which was the Year before made at Nissa in Provence was prolonged
for nine Years, and these two great Rivals gave afterward one another a Visit
at Aigues Mortes. And when in the Year next following the City of Ghent
rebelled, Charles had such a Confidence in Francis, that he took his Journey
through France, though Charles in the mean while had cunningly given Francis some
Hopes of the Recovery of Milan; which however afterward he would not
acknowledge, because upon the Persuasions of the Constable Montmorency, the
King had not taken from him any Security under his Hand during his stay in
Paris; which some allege to be one reason why Montmorency afterward fell into
Disgrace. But the Truce was broke again, Francis breaks the Truce,
under pretense, That the Governor of Milan had caused to be killed Caesar
Fregosus and Anthony Rinco the Ambassadors of Francis, 1542.
as they were going along the River Po in their Way to Venice, the first of
whom was to have gone from thence to Constantinople, Francis thought to have
met now with a fair Opportunity, because Charles had suffered a considerable
loss before Algier. He therefore attacked the Emperor with five several Armies
at once. But the strongest of all, which lay before Perpignan did nothing, the
Second took some Places in the Country of Luxemburgh. The Emperor Solomon also
made a great Diversion in Hungary, taking Gran and some other Places. The great
Pyrate Barbarossa arrived in Prevence with his Fleet, but did more mischief
than good to France, But Charles, on the other hand, made an Alliance with
Henry VIII. who was dissatisfied with Francis, because he had taken part with
the Scots, and would not renounce his Obedience to the Pope. He, after he had
beat the Duke of Cleves, who depended on the French, besieged Landrecy with a
great Army, but to no purpose. In the mean time the French had obtained a most
signal Victory over the Imperial Forces near Cerisolles in Piedmont. But the
King could not prosecute his Victory, being obliged to recall his Troops,
because the Emperor and Henry King of England had made an Agreement with an
Army of 80000 Foot and 22000 Horse, to fall into France; the first by the Way
of Champagne, the second by the Way of Picardy, to join their Forces near
Paris, to ransack the City and all the adjacent Countries as far as to the
River Loire. The Emperor took by the Way Luxemburgh, lay six Weeks before
Disier, got abundance of Provision in Espernay and Chasteau Thierry, which put
the whole City of Paris into a great Consternation; and no small Danger seemed
to threaten that City, if King Henry had joined his Forces in time, according
to his Promise: But he losing his Time in the Sieges of Boulogne and
Monstrevil, A Peace concluded at Crespy, 1544.
Charles hearkened to a Peace, which was concluded at Crespy. By virtue of this
Peace all the Places were restored, and the Emperor promised to the Duke of
Orleans, the second Son of the King, either his or his Brother's Daughter in
Marriage, and to give for her Dowry either Milan or the Netherlands; which was
not performed, because the said Duke died in the Year next following. 1546.
Francis also made a Peace with England, under Condition that he should have
liberty to redeem Boulogne for a certain Sum of Money. He died in the Year
1547.

. 18. Henry II.
Him succeeded his Son Henry II. to whom fell the Marquisate of Saluzze, 1548.
as a Fief of Dauphine, the last Marquess Gabriel dying without Issue. 1549.
He severely chastised the City of Bourdeaux, which had rebelled against him.
1550.
In the Year next following he redeemed Boulogne for a certain Sum of Money
from the English. In the Year 1551, the Emperor being engaged in a War against
the Turks, and the German Princes being very jealous of his Greatness, Henry
thought to have met with a fit Opportunity to break with him. He began
therefore in the Netherlands and Piedmont; and having made an Alliance with
Maurice Elector of Saxony, His Expedition into Germany, 1552.
he marched with his Army toward the Rhine, and surpised by the Way the
Cities of Metz, Toul and Verdun, and would have done the same with Strasbourgh,
if they had not been upon their Guard there. But the Elector of Saxony having
made a Peace with the Emperor without including the King, and some Princes
entreating him not to advance farther into the Empire he marched back into the
Country of Luxembourgh, where he took some Places. The Emperor then besieged
Metz with an Army of 100000 Men, but the Duke of Guise defended himself so
bravely, that the Emperor was obliged to raise the Siege with great loss. To
revenge this Affront, he attacked Terouene in Artois with great Fury, and rased
to the Ground this Fortress, which had proved hitherto so troublesome to the
Netherlands. The same he did to Hesdin, both the Garrisons being put to the
Sword. On the other side the French took Siena in Italy, and several Places in
the Island of Corsica, 1555.
but were again beaten out of Siena, after they had been mauled near Marciano.
A Truce between Charles V. and Henry II.
In the Year 1556, a Truce was concluded at Vaucelles near Cambray, the
Emperor being desirous to leave the Kingdom to his Son (to whom he had
surrendered the same) in Peace. But the Truce was scarce confirmed by Oath,
when the French, upon the Instigation of Pope Paul IV. broke the same again,
who having some Differences with Spain persuaded Henry to take his part. The
Duke of Guise was therefore sent into Italy with an Army, but did nothing worth
mentioning. In the mean time King Philip had gathered an Army of 50000 Men,
hoping thereby to establish his Reputation in the beginning of his Reign, and
having also drawn England into the War, he besieged St. Quintin, into which
place the Admiral Gaspar Coligny had thrown himself. The Constable Montmorency
advanced with an Army to the Relief of the Place, but retreating again in sight
of the Enemies, they fell upon him, and gave him a terrible Defeat. 1557.
France had been then in the utmost danger, if this Victorious Army had marched
directly toward Paris, and if the Enemies Design upon Lions had not
miscarried. But King Philip feared least the Duke of Savoy, who commanded his
Army, might take this Opportunity to reconcile himself to France upon some
advantageous Conditions; wherefore he would not let him march on far into the
Country, but took St. Quintin by Storm, and lost his Time in the taking of Han,
Chastelet and Noyon. This gave leisure to the French to recollect themselves,
and having recalled the Duke of Guise out of Italy, they retook Calais, and
those few other places which remained under the English thereabouts, as
likewise Thionville in the Year 1559. A Project to unite Scotland with France
misscarried.
In the same Year a Project was set on foot, to unite the Kingdom of Scotland
with France, by a Marriage betwixt Queen Mary and the Dauphine Francis; but the
same miscarried, no Children being born of them. The Marshall de Fermes, who
made an Inrode into Flanders was soundly beaten near Gravelingen. At last a
Peace was concluded at Chasteau en Cambresis, which proved very pernicious for
France; because, for the Castle of Cambray, the Cities of Han, Chastelet and
St. Quintin, there were not only 198 Places redeliver'd to Spain, and the Duke
of Savoy restored, but also this Peace was partly the Occasion of those
intestine Wars, which afterward miserably tore in pieces the Kingdom of
France. It was also resolved in France not to intermeddle any more in the
Italian Affairs, and to dissolve the Alliance with the Turks. After this Peace
was concluded Henry was killed in a Turnament, a Splinter of a broken Lance
having got into his Eye; for the King had challenged the Earl of Montgomery to
run against him with an open Vizier, and as soon as he was wounded he lost both
his Senses and Speech, and died within eleven days. By this Accident, the
Wedding which he celebrated for his Sister Margaret, which was married to
Chilibert Emanuel Duke of Savoy, was very mournfully consummated.

. 19. Francis II.
Him succeeded his Son Francis II. under whose Reign the French Divisions began
to break out with Fury in their own Bowels, which continued near 40 Years,
whereas formerly the violent Heat of this Nation had been quelled, partly by
the Wars with the English, partly by the several Expeditions undertaken against
Italy. The Causes of the intestine Wars of France.
Concerning the Causes of these Intestine Wars, it is to be observed, That
after the House of Valois came to the Crown, the next in Blood were those of
the House of Bourbon, which House was grown so Potent, by its Riches, Power and
Authority of a great many brave Persons, which descended from it, that the
preceding Kings were grown extremely jealous of it. And, though Francis I. at the
beginning of his Reign did constitute the Duke of Bourbon Constable; yet being
soon convinced afterward, of the Reasons which had induced his Ancestors to
keep under this House, he used all his Endeavors to humble the said Charles of
Bourbon. For this Reason he entered into a Conspiracy against Francis, which
having been discovered, he went over to Charles V. and commanded as General in
the Battle near Pavia, where Francis was taken Prisoner, and was slain in the
storming of Rome. 1527.
By his Death the House of Bourbon received a great blow, those who were left
being looked upon with a very ill Eye, though they kept themselves very quiet to
extinguish the Suspicion and Hatred conceived against them. The House of
Bourbon being thus brought very low, the two Houses of Montmorency and Guise
held up their Heads under the Reign of Francis I. The first was one of the most
ancient in France; the latter was a Branch of the House of Lorrain. The Head of
the first was Annas Montmorency, Constable of France; of the latter Claude Duke
of Guise. Both of them were in great Favor and Authority with Francis I. but
both fell into Disgrace at the latter end of his Reign, being banished the
Court. It is related of Francis I. that just before his Death he advised his
Son Henry to consult with neither of them in his Affairs, since too great and
too able Ministers proved often dangerous. Yet notwithstanding this, Henry II.
did receive both Annas Montmorency and Francis de Guise, the Son of Claude,
into his particular Favor; who quickly grew jealous of one another, the first
taking much upon him because of his Experience in State Affairs, and Gravity,
the latter being puffed up with the Glory of Martial Exploits, The House of
Guise rises, and that of Bourbon declines.
and the Applause of the People; the Authority of the Duke of Guise was greatly
increased after he had repulsed Charles V. from before Metz, and taken Calais;
whereas the unfortunate Battle fought near St. Quintin, and the ensuing
dishonorable Peace were very prejudicial to Montmorency, But the House of
Guise got the greatest Advantage, after Francis II. had married Mary Queen of
Scotland, whose Mother was Sister to the Duke of Guise: So that during the
Reign of Francis II. the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal his Brother, were the
Men that bore the greatest Sway in the Kingdom; which extremely exasperated
Montmorency and the two Brothers of Bourbon, Anthony King of Navarre, and the
Prince of Conde, seeing themselves thus neglected. And though Anthony was of a
very modest Behavior, watching only an Opportunity to regain his Kingdom of
Navarre from the Spaniards, and having a sufficient Revenue out of his Country
of Bearn, wherewithal to maintain himself; yet the Prince of Conde was
Ambitious, Poor, and of a turbulent Spirit, who was not able to maintain his
Grandeur without some considerable Employment. Besides this, he was continually
stirred up by the Admiral Gaspar Coligny, an ambitious, cunning and fly Man;
who, as his Enemies will have it, was very forward to fish in troubled Waters;
his Brother d' Andelot also being of a very wild and turbulent Spirit. These
three only watched an Opportunity to raise Commotions in the Kingdom. Thus the
great Men of the Kingdom were divided into these several Factions, at the Time
when Francis II. began his Reign, a Prince scarce sixteen Years old, weak both
in Body and Mind, and therefore incapable to rule the Kingdom by himself.
Several therefore pretended to have a right to the Administration of the
Government, Divisions about the Administration of the Government.
these of Bourbon, as being the next Princes of the Blood; the House of Guise,
as being nearly related to the Queen, and the Queen Mother Catharine de
Medicis, the very pattern of an aspiring and cunning Woman, hoped, That whilst
the Princes were in contest about the Administration of the Government, it
would fall to her share, wherefore she always fomented the Divisions, by
keeping up the Balance betwixt them. This Catharine first sided with the House
of Guise, dividing the Administration of Affairs with them, so that she was to
have the Supreme Administration, the Duke of Guise was to manage the Military
Affairs, and his Brother the Cardinal the Finances. This Agreement being made
betwixt them, the Constable, under pretense of his old Age was dismissed from
Court, and the Prince of Conde sent as Ambassador into Spain. These, who were
thus excluded, had a meeting, to consider which way they might free themselves
from these Oppressions, where it was resolved that the King of Navarre should
intercede for them at Court; who being put off with fair words and empty
Promiess, set himself at rest. Conde was resolved to try his Fortune by force;
but having not a sufficient Interest, Coligny advised him, he should side with
the Huguenots (for so they called in France those who professed the Protestant
Religion) who labored then under a severe Persecution and wanted a Head, under
whose Conduct they might obtain the free Exercise of their Religion: Besides
that, they mortally hated those of Guise, whom they supposed to be the Authors
of their Persecution. The Business was thus concerted; That the Huguenots
should assemble in private, and some of them by a humble Petition to request
the free Exercise of their Religion at Court; which, if it should be refused,
the rest should be at hand, to kill those of Guise, and to force the King to
receive, the Prince of Conde for his chief Minister of State. The Execution of
this Design was undertaken by a certain Gentleman called Renaudie; but the
Enterprise being deferred for some time, because the Court went from Blois to
Amboise, it was discovered, and thereby rendered inpracticable, above twelve
hundred that were taken paying with their Lives for it; Conde was also sent to
Prison, and was just upon the point of receiving Sentence of Death, when
Francis II. after a very short Reign, died suddenly of an Ulcer in the Head,
1560.
which caused great Alterations in the Affairs of the Kigdom.

. 20. Charles IX.
Him succeeded his Brother Charles IX. then scarce eleven Years old, whose
Tuition his Mother Catharine took immediately upon her self, hoping to enjoy it
quietly, whilst the Houses of Bourbon and Guise were engaged in mutual
Quarrels; wherefore she was very careful to uphold these Jealousies betwixt
them. To find an Opportunity to set up the Prince of Conde and his Party,
thereby to balance those of Guise, she pretended to be no Enemy to the
Protestant Religion, under which Pretense the same was much in request at
Court. To suppress the reformed Religion, Montmorency, the House of Guise, and
the Mareschaal of St. Andrew, joined in a Confederacy, who calling themselves
the Triumvirate, drew also the King of Navarre in to their Party. The
Conferenec of Poissy.
After this a Conference and Disputation was held betwixt some Divines of both
Religions at Poissy, after which, the Royal Protection was by a public Edict,
promised to the Protestant Religion; 1562.
which from the Month is called the Edict of January. This extremely
exasperated the Triumvirate, so that in the very same Year the War commenced.
The first Huguenot war.
The first occasion of it was given by some belonging to those of Guise, who in
a small Town called Vassy, disturbed the Protestants in the Exercise of their
Religion; and a Quarrel arising thereupon, killed near threescore of them:
Which was the first Blood shed in this Civil War; and from this time Things
went very strangely in France. It is not our purpose to enumerate all the
Cities that were taken, neither to speak of all the small Skirmishes which are
innumerable, nor the Cruelties committed on both sides, and the Barbarities of
the Rabble; it will be sufficient for us to touch upon some of the main points.
In this first War the King of Navarre died of a Wound, which he received in the
Siege of Roan, Near Dreux a bloody Battle was fought, where Conde at first had
the Advantage, but his Soldiers falling to plundring, he was beat back again,
he himself being made a Prisoner, and the Marshall St. Andrew being killed by
a Shot, 8000 Men were slain upon the Spot, and the Loss near equal on both
sides; the Duke of Guise kept the Field, but was afterward, at the Siege of
Orleans, treacherously murdered by one Poltrot, with a Pistol-shot, who was
supposed to have committed the Fact by instigation of Coligny. Soon after a
Peace was made. It is related, 1563.
that above 50000 Huguenots were slain in this War; on the other side, they
took the Churchplate and Ornaments, which they having turned into Money, Silver
was after this War more current in France than before. But Catharine had
persuaded her self, that both Parties were reduced to that Condition, that she
could now handle them at pleasure. After the Peace was concluded the English
were again beaten out of Havre de Grace, which the Huguenots had given them as
an Acknowledgment for their Assistance. This Peace lasted no longer than till
the Year 1576, when the Huguenots were persuaded, that at the interview betwixt
Catharine and the Duke of Alba at Bayonne, a League was set on foot for rooting
out the Heretics: And in effect, they were immediately after more severely
dealt with, and, as it was reported, the Prince of Conde and Coligny were to be
secured. The Second War.
The Huguenots therefore began the Second War, during which, the Constable
Annas Montmorency being mortally wounded in an Engagement, he told a Monk, who
at his last Hour was very troublesome to him; He should let him be at quiet,
since during the Time of 80 Years that he had lived, he had learned how to
employ one quarter of an Hour in dying. The Huguenots got great Reputation for
Valor in this Engagement, they being much Inferior to the other in Number.
About the same time the City of Rochelle declared for the Huguenots, which
afterward for 60 Years together served them for a secure Retreat. 1568.
Then a second Peace was concluded, not with an Intention to keep it, but that
each Party might find a better Opportunity to take Advantage of one another;
nor were the Conditions ever fulfilled. The War therefore was renewed in the
same Year, The Third War
during which the Prince of Conde was killed by a Shot, 1569.
in a Battle near Jarnack. The Prince of Conde being slain, the King of Navarre
is declared Head of the Huguenots.
After his Death the Huguenots declared Henry King of Navarre, the Son of
Anthony, who afterward was King of France, their Head, tho in effect Coligny
had the chief management of Affairs. He in vain besieged Poictiers, in the
Defense of which Place the young Duke of Guise gave the first proofs of his
Valor; he was also soundly beaten near Moncontour, where he lost 9000 Foot. He
lost nevertheless nothing of his former Reputation, for he quickly recollected
his broken Troops, and got together a great Army, being assisted by Queen
Elizabeth with Money, and by the Paltzgrave with Soldiers. 1570.
He directed his March toward Paris, whereupon a Peace was concluded to the
great Advantage of the Huguenots, the four strong Cities of Rochelle,
Montauban, Cagnac and Charity being given them for their Security: But the main
design of this Peace was, that the King perceiving, that the Huguenots could
not be suppressed by Force, hoped he might win them by Policy, therefore
endeavored by fair Words and great Promises to make them secure. The Admiral
was caressed at Court, he being consulted withal concerning an Expedition to
be undertaken against the Spaniards in the Netherlands. A Marriage also was
concluded betwixt Henry King of Navarre and Margaret the King's Sister, to
which Wedding they invited the chief of the Huguenots, The Parisian Massacre,
with a Design to cut their Throats in Paris. And first of all the Admiral
Coligny, as he was going home from Court, was by sorne Villains, who were
suborned by the Duke of Guise, shot with two Bullets through the Arm. Then it
was agreed, That in the Year 1571, on the 24th Day of August, early in the
Morning, when the Bells were ringing to Prayers, all the Huguenots should be
massacred, except the King of Navarre and the young Prince of Conde: The
Execution of this Enterprise the Duke of Guise had taken upon himself. The
beginning of whose Massacre was made with Coligny, who was ill of his Wounds;
then it fell promiscuously upon the rest, the Fury of the Mob not ceasing till
after seven Days slaughter. A great many other Cities of France followed the
Example of Paris, so that within few Days near 30000 were miserably massacred.
The King of Navarre and Prince of Conde were forced to abjure the Reformed
Religion. This was the so much celebrated Parisian Wedding, which Gabriel Naude
would fain represent us a State's Trick, but this is, in my Opinion, The Fourth
War.
a very gross way of arguing. Nevertheless the Huguenots did quickly recollect
themselves, after the first Consternation was over, renewing the War with great
Animosity and Revenge. During this War the King's Army besieged Rochelle near
eight Months together, and having lost 12000 Men before it, News was brought,
That the Duke d' Anjou was elected King of Poland. Hence an Opportunity was
taken to raise the Siege with some Reputation, and to make a Peace the fourth
time with the Huguenots; by virtue of which, 1573.
the Cities of Rochelle, Montauban and Nismes were given them for their
Security. But immediately, The Fifth War.
in the Year next following, the fifth War commenced; at which time also a
third Faction arose in France, which was called, that of the Politicians; they
pretended, without having any regard to the Religious Differences, to seek the
public Welfare, to have the Queen removed from the Administration of the
Government, and the Italians and those of Guise to be banished the Kingdom of
France. The Heads of this Faction were those of the House of Montmorency, who
intended, during these Troubles, to play their own Game. These were afterward
very instrumental in helping Henry IV. to the Crown. During these Troubles
Charles IX. died, leaving no legitimate Issue behind him.

. 21. Henry III.
After the Death of Charles IX. the Crown fell to Henry III. who was at that
time in Poland, during whose absence his Mother Catharine governed the Kingdom,
which was in a very confused Estate. He left Poland privately, and taking his
Way by Vienna and Venice, arrived safely in France. But after he had taken upon
him the Administration of Affairs, he deceived every body in those Hopes which
were conceived of him before. For he being addicted only to his Pleasures and
Idleness, was led away by his Favorites, leaving the chief Administration of
the Kingdom to his Mother. The Huguenots Power increased remarkably after the
Duke of Alenson, the Kings Brother, sided with them, and Conde and the
Paltzgrave, John Casimir, led an Army out of Germany into France; besides that,
the King of Navarre found means to make his escape out of Prison. The fifth
Peace was therefore concluded with the Huguenots, whereby they obtained very
advantageous Conditions. About the same time a new Faction was set up, The Holy
League.
which was composed of a great many small ones, this was called The holy Union,
or League, which reduced France to the most miserable Condition that could be.
The chief promoter of it was Henry Duke of Guise, who, perceiving, that the
great Authority which he had among the People, made him to be hated by the
King, endeavored to make a Party of his own. He made use especially of the
Priests and common People of Paris; among whom the Name of the Guises was in
great Veneration. He was encouraged to undertake this Design, because the King
was despised by all, and the Women by their Intrigues, ruled at Court. Besides
this, he pretended to be descended from the Race of Charles the Great, which
was excluded unjustly from the Crown by Hugh Capet. The Pretense of this League
was the Catholic Religion; and there was a Draught made of this League, which
contained chiefly three things, viz. The Defense of the Catholic Religion; the
Establishment of Henry III. in the Throne, and the maintaining the Liberty of
the Kingdom, and the Assembly of the States. Those who entered into this League
promised to be obedient to such Head or General as should be chosen for the
Defense of this League, all which was confirmed by Oath. At the first setting
up of this League the King connived at it, hoping thereby the sooner to subdue
the Huguenots; nay, he himself subscribed the same at the Diet at Blois, 1577.
declaring himself the Head of this League. The Sixth War.
Then the sixth War was begun against the Huguenots, but the King made Peace
with them the same Year, notwithstanding that they were in a very ill
Condition, neither was any thing done worth mentioning in this War. The War
being ended, the King returning to his Pleasures, confounded great Sums of
Money, and therefore laid new and heavy Impositions upon the People, and his
Favorites grew very Insolent; which increased the Hatred against him, and at
the same time the Respect and Love of the People to those of Guise. Besides
this, the Duke of Alenson, the King's Brother, declaring himself Lord of the
Netherlands, Spain enters the League.
Philip King of Spain was provoked to revenge himself of the French, and upheld
the League. The Seventh War.
In the Year 1579 the Seventh War was begun against the Huguenots, wherein also
they succeeded very ill. Notwithstanding this the King made a Peace with them
in the Year next following he being unwilling that they should be quite rooted
out, for fear that the League might prove too strong for himself. The German
Horse were also much feared, and the Duke of Alenson was very forward to have
the Peace concluded, that he might be at leisure to employ his Forces in the
Netherlands. This Peace lasted five Years, during which time the Hatred against
the King increased daily, because of the heavy Taxes which were devoured by his
Favorites. He made himself also the more despised by playing too much the
Hypocrite, and by transforming himself almost into a Monk. The French Glory was
also much eclipsed, when the Duke of Alenson behaved himself so ill in the
Netherlands, and the French Fleet which was sent to the Assistance of Anthony
the Bastard, was totally ruined near Tercera. But the League grew very strong
after the Death of the Duke of Alenson, the King's younger Brother, the King
having no hopes of any Issue of his Body: Then it was that the Duke of Guise
proposed to himself no less than the Crown, though he for a color set up the
Cardinal of Bourbon, thereby to exclude the King of Navarre. And because it was
suspected that the King favored the King of Navarre, the Priests began to
thunder in the Pulpits, and to make horrid Exclamations, that the Catholic
Religion was lost; the Duke of Guise entered into a Confederacy with Philip,
who was to furnish great Sums of Money under pretext of maintaining the
Catholic Religion, and to assist the Cardinal of Bourbon in obtaining the
Crown; but in effect, this Intention was to uphold the Divisions in France,
1585.
thereby to disenable it to take part with the Netherlands. Then the Leaguers
began to break out into an open War; and having taken a great many Towns,
obliged the King, according to their Demands, to forbid the Exercise of the
Protestant Religion in France. The Eighth War.
And so began the Eighth War against the Huguenots, and if the King had been in
earnest to ruin them, they would have been in a very ill Condition: For though
the King of Navarre beat the Duke de Joyeuse near Coutras, 1587.
yet did he not prosecute his Victory. And about the same time the Duke of
Guise dispersed the German and Swiss Forces, which under the Command of Fabian
de Dona were marching to the Assistance of the Huguenots. This Army, being
destitute of a good Commander was miserably mauled, and the rest sent home in a
very shameful Condition. This Victory acquired the Duke of Guise great
Applause and Favor among the People, and still lessened the Value of the
King's Person; so that the Priests now did not stick to exclaim against the
King in their Sermons, calling him a Tyrant. The King therefore having resolved
with himself to punish the Heads of the League in Paris, The League force the
King from Paris.
they broke out into open Rebellion, and having sent for the Duke of Guise as
their Protector, the King was obliged to leave Paris by Night: But the King
perceiving that more Cities sided daily with the League, 1588.
and despairing to overcome them by Force, took another Course to obtain his
Ends, and made an Agreement with the Duke of Guise, with great Advantages on
his and the Leaguers side: He pretended also to have forgotten all past
Injuries, on purpose to inveigle the Duke of Guise. And under these specious
pretenses he got him to appear at the Assembly of the Estates at Blois. In the
mean time the Duke of Savoy had taken from the French the Marquisate of
Saluzze, the only Province left them in Italy: But the Estates, who were most
of them Creatures of the Duke of Guise, being very urgent in their Demands, to
have the King of Navarre declared incapable of the Crown, and the Duke of Guise
to be made Constable, The Duke and Cardina of Guise assassinated by the King's
Order at Blois.
the King caused the Duke of Guise and his Brother the Cardinal to be
murdered. This put those of the League into a Rage, and with the Assistance of
the Priests, the King was in Paris publicly declared to have forfeited the
Crown. Most of the great Cities of France being stirred up by the Example of
the Parisians did the same, declaring the Duke de Maine, Brother to the Duke of
Guise, Lieutenant General of the State and Crown of France, and Supreme Head of
the League; who endeavored, but in vain, The King makes use of the Huguenots
against the League.
to surprise the King in Tours. The King then being overpowered by the League,
and besides this, excommunicated by the Pope, was obliged to make an Agreement
with the King of Navarre and to make use of the Huguenots. And having got
together a great Army, he marched toward Paris, with a Resolution to reduce
that City to Obedience by Force of Arms: But the day before the general Attack
was to be made, one James Clement, a Jacobin Monk, brought a Letter out of the
City directed to the King, which whilst he delivered, pretending to whisper the
King, thrust a Knife into his Bowels, of which Wound he died the day following:
Aug. 2. 1589.
The last of the House of Valois.

. 22. Henry IV.
Henry IV. whom we hitherto have called the King of Navarre, and, who was the
first of the House of Bourbon, did at the beginning of his Reign, meet with no
less Difficulties than he had met with before. For though he was lawful Heir to
the Crown, yet the Protestant Religion, which he professed, was no small
obstacle, for as long as he was addicted to that, the League, the Pope, and
Spain, would questionless oppose him with all their might: But if he changed
his Religion he was in danger of losing the Assistance of the Huguenots which
had been steady to him, and so set himself betwixt two Stools. His Difficulties
on the account of his Religion.
And it would have been very unbecoming, to have so publicly accommodated his
Religion to his Interest. Notwithstanding this, immediately after the Death of
Henry III. all the great Men of the Army assembled together, promised him
Obedience after several Contests, under Condition, that within six Months he
would suffer himself to be instructed in the Catholic Religion. But because
Henry would not be bound to any certain time, but only gave them some Hopes in
general terms, it was agreed, That the Huguenots should enjoy the free Exercise
of their Religion, yet that the Catholic Religion should be reestablished in
all Cities, and the Revenues restored to the Clergy. But, those of the League,
because the Duke of Maine at that time durst not take upon him the Title of
King, proclaimed the Cardinal of Bourbon, an ancient decrepid Man, Uncle to
King Henry, and who was then in Custody, their King, declaring the Duke de
Maine Lieutenant General of the Crown. The Leaguers made the strongest Party,
having on their side the Common People, most of the great Cities, all the
Parliaments except that of Rennes and Bourdeaux, almost all the Clergy, Spain,
the Pope, and the rest of the Catholic Princes, except Venice and Florence.
But the Heads were not very unanimous, and the Duke de Maine had not Authority
enough to keep them in Unity. But on the King's side were almost all the
Nobility, the whole Court of the deceased King, all the Protestant Princes and
States, the old Huguenot Troops, who had done great Service to Henry, and would
still have done more, if they had not mistrusted him, that he would change his
Religion. Each Party watched an Opportunity of surprising one another. The Duke
of Maine endeavoring to surprise the King near Diep, was bravely repulsed,
which seemed to be ominous to the League. On the other Hand, the King could not
get Paris though he had taken the Suburbs. But Henry was not only pestered by the
League, but also for want of Money, was obliged to keep up his Party with fair
Words and Promises. The Spaniards also began to intermeddle publicly in the
Affairs of France, in hopes in this Juncture either to conquer the Kingdom, or
to divide it, or at least to weaken it. But the Duke de Maine did underhand
oppose these Designs, being unwilling, that in case he could not be King
himself, France should fall under the Subjection of Spain. In the Year 1590,
Henry obtained a glorious Victory over the Duke de Maine, who had double the
Number, near Ivry. Then he blocked up Paris, which was reduced to the greatest
Extremity by Famine, but relieved by the Duke of Parma Governor of the
Netherlands. In the Year 1591, there arose a third Faction, the young Cardinal
of Bourbon making Pretensions to the Crown, but was very fortunately
disappointed in his Aim by the King. The Pope Excommunicates Henry.
Then Pope Gregory XIV. excommunicated Henry, exhorting all his Subjects to
withdraw themselves from their Obedience, which Difficulty Henry did not
surmount without great troubles. The Spaniards also declared themselves more
freely, Philip offering his Daughter Isabella Clara Eugenia to be made Queen of
France; which Proposal was mightily encouraged by the young Duke of Guise, he
being then just escaped out of his Custody, as it is supposed, by connivance of
the King, who supposed, that thereby that Party might be divided, since he
would certainly endeavor to oppose the Designs of the Duke de Maine his Uncle.
Proposals about setting up another King.
After the Duke of Parma had raised the Siege of Roan, the Spaniards urged more
and more, that the French would take a Resolution concerning the setting up of
another King. And in the Assembling of the Estates in Paris, which was held for
that purpose, 1593.
it was proposed, That Isabella the Daughter of Philip, being born of a French
Mother, should be declared Queen of France, and that she should have for her
Husband Ernest Archduke of Austria. But the French refusing to accept of a
Foreigner for their King, Charles Duke of Guise was proposed as a Husband to
Isabella. This Proposition relished very ill with the Duke of Maine, who
thought himself so well deserving, that no body ought to be preferred before
him; wherefore, if he could not have the Crown, he was resolved no body else
should have it, and so employed all his Cunning, that there was nothing
determined in the Assembly concerning this Proposition; the King, however,
plainly perceived, That if he did not change his Religion, his Affairs must
needs grow worse, especially, since these Catholics, who hitherto had been of
his Party did threaten to leave him, if he did not perform his Promise. He
called therefore the Bishops together, The King changes his Religion.
who instructed him in the Catholic Faith, and having received Absolution, he
went, 1593.
to St. Denys's Chapel to Mass. And that the People might taste the sweetness of
Peace, and desire it, he made a Truce of three Months, which proved very
successful, especially, since the fundamental Pretense, namely, Henry's being
a Heretic, was now removed. Vitry and the City of Meaux were the first that
surrendered themselves to the King in the same Year, Several Cities surrender
to him.
upon very advantageous Conditions; Aix, Lions, Orleans, Bourges and other
Cities soon followed their Example. And to encourage the rest to do the same,
the King caused himself to be Crowned and Anointed in Chartres, Rheims being as
yet in the hands of the League. Not long after Paris was also Surrendered by the
Governor Brissac; and here the King was received with such joyful
Acclamations of the People, as if they had never been his Enemies, the Spanish
Garrison being turned out with Ignominy, and the hissing of the Common people.
Then all the rest of the Cities and Governors surrendered themselves to the
King on very advantageous Conditions, which the King was willing to grant them,
that he might once be put in quiet possession of the Crown, and drive the
Spaniards out of France. The young Duke of Guise submitted himself, being made
Governor of Provence. Then Henry denounced War against Spain, not only to
revenge himself for what Troubles they had created to him before, but also to
please the Huguenots, and to root out of the People their affection for the
Spaniards. These were the Fruits Philip reapt for so many Millions, which he
had bestowed in supporting the League. In the beginning of the same Year, 1594.
a Knife was by a certain desperate Ruffian, The King assaulted and wounded by
a Ruffian.
called John Castle, thrust into the King's Mouth, whereby he lost one of his
Teeth. It was the King's good fortune that he just bowed himself, this
Villain's aim having been at his Throat: The Jesuits banished,
And because it was found out, that the Jesuits had been tampering with him,
whose Principles also were thought very dangerous, they were banished out of
France, but some years after restored again. Afterward the Duke of Nevers
being sent to Rome to obtain Absolution for King Henry, the same was granted by
the Pope, who had been very averse hitherto to Henry; but perceiving that he
would maintain his Crown in spite of him, was now for ingratiating himself with
the King. Then the Dukes of Maine, and Espernon, and Marseilles were received
again into the King's favor. But the War against Spain did not succeed
according to wish. For though the King had got some advantages over them in the
Franche Comte, and had beat the Spaniards out of Han in Picardy; yet on the
other side, these took Dourlans and Cambray, the latter of which had been
hitherto in the Possession of Balagny under French protection; and in the Year
1596, next following, they took Calais and Ardres. And though the King took from
the Spaniards Fere, yet was that a very slender compensation of his Losses. But
there happened another great Misfortune; For the Spaniards in the Year next
following took the City of Amiens by surprise, which was not re-taken without
great pains. In the Year 1598, the Duke of Mercoeur, who hitherto had stood out
resolutely in Bretany, did at last submit himself, hoping thereby to obtain the
said Dukedom. And to set the Huguenots at rest, he published for their security
that famous Edict of Nants, The Edict at Nants.
as it is called, by virtue of which they have hitherto enjoyed the free
Exercise of Religion. At last a Peace was concluded betwixt Henry and the
Spaniards at Vervins, The Peace of Vervins.
with Conditions, that such Places as were taken since the Year 1559, should be
restored on both sides. A Peace being thus concluded, and Henry resolved to be
even with the Duke of Savoy, who under his Predecessour's Reign had taken
Saluzze, and during the intestine Wars had raised great Troubles in Dauphine
and Provence, in hopes to snatch away a piece of the dismembered Kingdom; and
though the Duke came in Person into France, and promised to the King to give him
some other Places in exchange of the former; yet was he not in earnest, in
hopes to be upheld by Spain, or that the Marshal de Biron, with whom he kept
private Intelligence, should renew the civil Commotions. But the King fell upon
him, He takes from the Duke of Savoy, all that he possessed on this side the
Alps.
and took from the Duke all what he was possessed of on this side of the Alps.
At last, by Mediation of the Pope, an agreement was made, that the Duke should
give to France, in exchange for Saluzze, La Bresse, Bugey, Valromay en Gex. The
Italian Princes were very ill satisfied with this Peace, 1600.
since there being no door left for France to enter Italy, Italy was left to
the discretion of the Spaniard. But Henry being tired with so long and tedious
War, was resolved at last to enjoy the sweet Fruits of Peace after so many
years Troubles. But soon after a dangerous Conspiracy was discovered, The
Conspiracy of the Marshal de Biron.
contrived by the Marshall de Biron, who intended with the Assistance of the
Spaniards to depose the King, and to dismember the Kingdom, by setting up a
great many petty Principalities; having agreed with the rest, to have for his
share the Dukedom of Burgundy. And he refusing to accept of the King's Mercy,
which he was willing to grant him in consideration of his great Deserts, was
condemned, 1602.
and his Head cut off. The King being now at Peace, did employ all his
Thoughts, how France might recover it self after such tedious Wars, and that
good Ordinances might be established, but especially that his Revenues might be
increased. He established for this purpose all sorts of Manufactories, He
introduces Manufacturies.
and especially that of Silk, (which afterward drew great Riches into that
Kingdom.) But even in the midst of Peace he was continually troubled with his
Queen, who was jealous about his Mistrisses; and the Spaniards were always
plotting both against his Person and Crown. On the other hand, Henry had a
design to oppose the growing Power of the House of Austria, His Design to put a
stop to the growth of the House of Austria.
by keeping it within the Bounds of Spain, and the Hereditary Countries in
Germany. And it is said, that for that purpose he concerted Measures with the
Northern Crown, with Holland, with the Protestant Princes of Germany, with the
Elector of Bavaria, the Duke of Savoy, the Swiss, and even the Pope himself. To
put this design in execution, he took the opportunity of those Differences
which were then on foot concerning the Succession in the Country of Juliers,
which, that it might not be devoured by the House of Austria, he was resolved
to prevent with all his Might. This is certain, that his Preparations were
greater, than seemed to be requisite only for the business of Juliers; for he
and his Allies had got 120000 Men together, and prodigious Sums of Money. The
House of Austria on the other hand did not make the least Preparations, just as
if it had fore-known the fatal Blow, which happened soon after: The Army was
marching toward the Netherlands, and the King ready to follow in a few days,
having caused the Queen to be Crowned, and constituted her Regent during his
absence; When the King going along the Street in Paris in his Coach, which was
fain to stop by reason of the great Crowd of the People, He is Assassinated by
Ravillac.
was by a desperate Ruffian, whose Name was Francis Ravillac, stabbed with a
Knife in his Belly, so that he without uttering one word died immediately. May
14. 1610.
There are some, who make no-question of it, but that this Villain was set on
to commit this fact, and that it was not done without the knowledge of the
Spaniards and the Queen her self. And so fell this great Hero by the hands of a
profligate Wretch, after he had surmounted great Difficulties in ascending the
Throne, and had avoided above fifty several Conspiracies; which being most
contrived by the Priests against his Life, were all timely discovered. His
Death proved very pernicious to the Kingdom, because, during the Minority of
his Son, the Power of the Great Men, and also of the Huguenots, did extremely
increase.

. 23. His Son Lewis XIII. succeeded him, Lewis XIII.
being scarce nine Years of Age, and under the Tuition of his Mother Mary de
Medicis, she endeavored to preserve Peace abroad by Alliance, and at home by
Clemency and Liberality toward the great Men of the Kingdom, who nevertheless
several times raised Disturbances, whereby they made their own advantage, the
Queen-Regent being not Powerful enough to keep them in Obedience by force. As
soon as the King had taken upon himself the Management of Affairs, 1617.
he caused Concini, Marshal d' Ancre, who was born a Florentine, to be killed,
he having been in great Power during the Queen's Regency, and by his Pride,
Riches and Power, drawn upon himself the Hatred of the Subjects; by his Death
he hoped to appease the dissatisfied Multitude. The Queen Mother was sent away
from Court to Blois, from whence she was carried away by the Duke d' Espernon.
And these Commotions were at last appeased by bestowing liberal Presents among
the Great Men. 1619.
About the same time Richlieu, Richlieu comes in play.
afterward made a Cardinal, began to be in great Esteem in Court, who advised
the King to establish his Authority, and to take up by the Roots the intestine
Evils of France. He laid this down as a fundamental Principle, That he should
take from the Huguenots the power of doing him any mischief, considering that
such as were dissatisfied at any time, or that were of a turbulent Spirit, took
always refuge, and were assisted by them. The first beginning was made in the
King's Patrimonial Province of Bearn, where he caused the Catholic Religion to
be reestablished. The Huguenots being greatly dissatisfied thereat, began to
break out into Violence, whence the King took an opportunity to recover several
Places from them, but sustained a considerable Loss in the Siege of Montauban,
till at last Peace was made with the Huguenots, under condition that they
should demolish all their new Fortifications, except those of Montauban and
Rochelle. In the Year 1625, Cardinal Richlieu was made Chief Minister of
France, Made chief Minister of State.
about which time also the second War with the Huguenots was ended. But this
Peace did not last long, because those of Rochelle would not bear, that the
Fortress called Fort-Lewis, should be built just under their Noses. Richlieu
therefore having taken a resolution at once to put an end to this War by the
taking of Rochell, besieged it so close both by Sea and Land, that the English,
who had had very ill Success in the Isle of Rhee, where they Landed, could
bring no Succors into the place. Rochelle taken.
Their Obstinacy was at last overcome by Famine, of 18000 Citizens, there
having been not above 5000 left, for they had lived without Bread for thirteen
Weeks. With this stroke the Strength of the Huguenots was broken, Montauban
upon the persuasion of the Cardinal having demolished its Works. The cunning
Duke of Roan also at last made his peace, after he had been sufficiently
troublesome to the King in Languedoc, under condition, that the Cities of
Nismes and Montpelier should demolish their Fortifications; but for the rest,
enjoy the free Exercise of their Religion. And thus the Ulcer, which had
settled it self in the very Entrails of France, was happily healed up. The
Effects of the Civil Wars.
It is related by some, that these Civil Wars have devoured above a Million of
People; that 150 Millions were employed in paying of the Soldiers; that nine
Cities, 400 Villages, 20000 Churches, 2000 Monasteries, A War in Italy.
and 100000 Houses were burnt or laid level with the ground. Then France
applied all their care toward Foreign Affairs. 1628.
The King assisted the Duke of Nevers, in obtaining the Dukedom of Mantua,
which belonged to him by Right of Succession, but whom the Spaniards
endeavored to exclude from the same, as being a Frenchman. In this War the
Siege of Casal is most famous, in the defense of which place, the French gave
incredible proofs of their Bravery. At last the business was, The first
Occasion of Mazarini's Greatness.
through the wise Management of the Popish Nuncio Mazarini (who then laid the
first Foundation of his future Greatness in France) composed, and the Duke of
Nevers afterward by the Treaty made at Chierasco, established in the Dukedoms
of Mantua and Montferrat. The King also bought Pignerol of the Duke of Savoy,
How Pignerol came into the hands of the French.
that so the French might not want a door into Italy. France had also before
taken part with the Grisons against the Inhabitants of the Valteline, who had
revolted being assisted by the Spaniards, whereby he prevented this Country
from falling into the Hands of the Spaniards, and so Matters were restored to
their former State. In the Year 1631, France made an Alliance with Sweden,
allowing to that King a yearly Pension, to assist him in opposing the Greatness
of the House of Austria. But when King Gustavus Adolphus began to be formidable
on the Rhine, he took the Elector of Treves into his protection, putting a
Garrison into Hermanstein, (which nevertheless in the Year 1636, The Queen
Mother raises Troubles.
was forced to a Surrender by Famine.) In the mean time the Queen Mother and
the Kings Brother the Duke of Orleans envying the Greatness of Richelieu had
raised some tumults. With them also sided Montmorency, who paid for it with his
Head, and put an inglorious end to his noble Family, which boasted to have been
the first noble Family that embraced the Christian Religion in France. And though
this business was afterward Composed, the Queen Mother being received into
Favor again, yet was she so dissatisfied, because she could not Act according
to her own Will; that she retired into Flanders, and from thence into England,
where she made some stay, 1642.
and at last died in a very low Condition in Cologne. The King takes Lorrain
from that Duke.
In the Year 1633. the King took from the Duke of Lorrain his Country, because
he had declared himself for the Emperor. And when afterward, 1634.
viz. after the Battle fought near Nordlingen the Swedish Affairs were in a
very low Condition, and the House of Austria began to hold up its Head again,
France broke out into open War with Spain, to balance the growing Power of the
House of Austria. He took for a pretense that the Spaniards had surprised the
City of Treves, and taken the Elector of Treves Prisoner, who was under French
protection. And then the War began in Italy, Germany, the Netherlands and
Roussilion, which was carried on with various Fortune; yet so, that the French
got the better of it at last. To touch upon some of the most remarkable
Actions: The first Attack which the French made in the Netherlands did not
succeed very well, they having been forced to raise the Siege of Lovain with
great Loss. 1636.
In the Year 1636, Piccolomini marched into Picardy, and Galias into Burgundy,
but did nothing of moment. On the other hand the French beat up the Siege of
Leucate in Roussilion, 1638.
and the brave Duke Barnhard of Saxen-Weimar took the Fortress of Brisac, he
carrying on the War with French Money. And after the Death of this Duke, which
happened not long after, the King of France brought both that Fortress and his
Army over to its side with Money. Yet the French miscarried in the same Year
before St. Omer and Fontarabia, before the last of which Places the Prince of
Conde sustained a considerable Loss. In the same Year, viz. on the 5th. of
September, Lewis XIV. was, almost by a Miracle, born of a Marriage, which had
proved unfruitful for twenty Years before. In the Year 1639, the French were
beaten before Thionville. In the Year 1640, they took Arras, and in the same
Year Catalonia, revolting from Spain, threw it self under the French
Protection. In the Year 1641, a great Misfortune hung over Richlieu's Head, the
Count the Soissons having raised a dangerous Rebellion; but, he being killed in
an Engagement, wherein otherwise his Party had the better, established, by his
Death, the Cardinal's Authority, and the Quiet of France. In the Year 1642,
Perpignan was taken, at which Siege the King and Richlieu were both present.
Monsieur Cinqmats did about that time first insinuate himself into the King's
favor, hoping thereby to undermine Richlieu. And the better to balance the
Cardinal, he had made some underhand Intrigues with Spain. But the Cardinal
having discovered the business, caused his Head to be cut off; as also de Thou
the younger's, because he had been privy to the business; though he had advised
against it, yet had he not discovered it. From the Duke of Bouillon, who had
been also of the Cabal, he took for a Punishment his strong Hold, Sedan. In the
same Year Richlieu died, to his great good fortune, the King being grown quite
weary of him, notwithstanding he had laid the first Foundation of the Greatness
of France, May 14. 1643.
which is now so formidable to Europe. The King also died not long after.

. 24. Lewis XIV. Lewis XIV.
was but Five years of Age when he came to the Crown, his Mother it is true bore
the name of Regent of France, but in effect the Cardinal Julius Mazarini had
the chief Management of the Kingdom; Mazarini' s Ministry.
which was then in a very flourishing Condition; but every Body was for
enriching himself out of the Kings Purse during his Minority; and Mazarini was
very liberal, thereby endeavoring to make them in love with his Government.
But the Treasury being become empty, new Taxes were of necessity to be imposed
upon the People which caused a great dissatisfaction against the Government.
Nevertheless for the first Five years every thing was pretty quiet at home, and
War carried on abroad. At the very first beginning of this new Government the
Duke d' Austria obtained a signal Victory against the Spaniards near Rocroy;
after which he took Thionville, and Gaston the Kings Uncle Graveling; 1644.
Anguin revenged the loss which the French had sustainded the Year before near
Dutlingen, and, having first beaten the Bavarian Forces near Friburg in
Brisgaw, he took Philipsburg; in the Year 1646. he beat the Bavarian Troops
near Norlingen, and afterward took Dunkirk. But in the Year next following he
in vain besieged the City of Lorida. Peace of Munster.
In the Year 1648. a Peace was concluded at Munster in Westphalia, betwixt the
Emperor and France, by Virtue of which the latter got the two Fortresses of
Brisac and Philipsburg, the Country of Puntgau, and part of the upper Alsatia.
But as France by this Peace was freed from one Enemy, The intestine Commotions.
so on the other hand the intestine Commotions put a stop to its great
Progresses. The chief reason of these Troubles was, that some envying Mazarini,
as being a Foreigner, they would by all means have him removed from the Helm,
and this they sought with the greater Importunity, because they were not in awe
of the King, who was but a Child, neither of his Mother, she being an
outlandish Woman. Some of the great Men also were for fishing in troubled
Waters: But above all the rest, the Prince of Conde would fain have been
Master, and have made the Cardinal dance after his Pipe. The Cardinal was for
bringing of him over to his Party by a Marriage proposed to him; but the Prince
of Conde perceiving that the Cardinal was for maintaining his old Post, nor
would depend on him, rejected the Offer as unbecoming the Grandeur of his
House. There were also some Women of a restless Spirit concerned in these
Intrigues, among whom was Mad. de Longueville, Sister of the Prince of Conde,
Mad. Chevreuse, Mombazon, and others. The first beginning was by slanderous
Papers and Libels which were daily dispersed in Paris. 1648.
There was also a certain Faction set up, The Slingers.
who called themselves the Slingers, because they openly undertook to knock
down the Cardinal, as David struck down the Giant Goliath by the help of his
Sling. The Heads of this Faction were the Duke of Beaufort, and Guadi the
Archbishop of Paris, afterward called the Cardinal de Rez. With this Party
also sided the Parliament of Paris, which did pretend to have a great Authority
against the Government at that time. The first Insurrection was made in Paris,
occasioned by the taking into Custody of one Braussel a Member of the
Parliament, whereupon the King left the City. Yet the Business was composed for
that time, some things having been granted to the mutinous Party. But the
Faction of the Slingers renewing their former Disturbances, The King forced to
leave Paris, 1649.
the King left the City a second time. The Parliament having then publicly
condemned the Cardinal, grew every day stronger, Turenne, who then commanded
the French Army in Germany, having declared for that side; but he was fain to
leave the Army, which was kept in Duty by the help of a good Sum of Money. And
though Matters were afterward reconciled a second time at St. Germains, yet the
Design against Mazarin was not laid aside; the Prince of Conde, who had brought
over the Slingers to his Party, not ceasing to stir them up against him. But
because they had a different Aim, for the Slingers were for totally pulling
down of the Cardinal, but the Prince of Conde would only have humbled him, the
Cardinal cunningly raised a misunderstanding betwixt them, by setting the
Prince of Conde against the Slingers. Whereupon the Slingers were reconciled
with the Cardinal. The Cardinal taking hold of this Opportunity, caused the
Prince of Conde and his Brother the Prince of Conti, and their Brother-in-law
the Duke of Longueville to be taken into Custody. The Imprisonment of the
Princes.
This was putting Fuel into the Fire, every body being dissatisfied at the
Imprisonment of the Princes. The City of Bourdeaux openly rebelled. The
Spaniards upon this Occasion took from the French, Piombino and Porto Longone
in Italy. The Archduke Leopold struck Terror into the City of Paris it self,
on the side of the Netherlands. And though the Cardinal beat Turenne near Rethel,
he being gone over to the Spaniards, yet the Hatred against him increased
daily, and the Faction of the Slingers, the Parliament, and the Duke of Orleans
were absolutely for having the Princes set at Liberty. The Cardinal therefore
perceiving that nothing was to be done by open Violence, resolved to avoid the
Storm, by setting the Princes at Liberty: And he himself retired to Bruel, the
Court of the then Elector of Collen. 1651.
Then he was by a Decree of the Parliament for ever banished the Kingdom of
France. The Cardinal banished France.
Mazarini being thus removed, the Prince of Conde began to disturb the public
Quiet with more freedom, having engaged himself with the Spaniards, and being
gone to Bourdeaux, he began to make open War against the Government. And the
Spaniards taking hold of this Opportunity, recovered Barcellona, and with it
all Catalonia. The Queen recalls him.
Then the Queen recalled the Cardinal, who having strengthened the King's Army
by such Troops as he had got together, fought several times very briskly with
the Prince of Conde. But seeing that the Hatred which the Faction of the
Slingers and the Parliament had conceived against him, did not diminish, he
took this Course, that he publicly declared, he was willing to leave the
Kingdom, to re-establish the public Quiet. He hoped by so doing, to lay the
Blame of the Intestine Divisions upon the Prince of Conde alone; which Design
proved successful; for thereby the Eyes of the People were opened, who now
plainly perceived, that the Cardinal sought the Good of the King and Kingdom,
but the Prince of Conde his own Interest, Dunkirk and Graveling being lost in
the Fray. The Prince of Conde therefore perceiving that he had lost the Favor
of the People, retired with his Troops into the Spanish Netherlands. Then the
Cardinal returned to Court, and ever after had the Administration of the
chiefest Affairs of the Kingdom till his Death, without any further Opposition.
The City of Paris returned to its due Obedience, the Faction of the Slingers
was dissolved, the Duke of Orleans left the Court; Rez was taken into Custody,
and Bourdeaux forced to submit. In the Year next following the French began
again to make War on the Spaniards; 1653.
they took Mommedy with great difficulty, and fortunately relieved Arras: But
they were beaten from before Valenciennes and Cambray. France having just made
an Alliance with Cromwell, 1658.
the joint Forces of France and England besieged Dunkirk under the Command of
Turenne: And the Duke John d' Austria and Prince de Conde, who came with an
Army to relieve it, being repulsed with great loss, the City was taken and
delivered to the English, from whom the King afterward redeemed it for four
Millions. 1662.
About the same time Graveling was also retaken. The Pyrenaean Peace, 1659.
At last a Peace was concluded between France and Spain near the Pyrenaean
Mountains by the two chief Ministers of State, on both sides, viz. by Mazarini
and Don Lewis de Haro, by virtue of which, France was to keep Roussilion and
the greatest part of the places which were taken in the Netherlands; Mary
Theresa, the Daughter of Philip IV. was to be married to the King, and the
Prince of Conde to be received into Favor again. This last point met with
great Opposition for a considerable time. The Death of Mazarini.
In the Year next following died Mazarini, who, as it is said, left the King
among others, this Lesson, That he should govern himself, and not trust
entirely to any Favorite. The first thing of moment, which the King undertook,
was, to settle his Revenues in a good order. 1661.
He began with the Lord High Treasurer Fouquet, whom he took into Custody, and
made a strict Inquisition against all such as having had hitherto the
management of his Revenues, had enriched themselves therewith: The Sponges
which were swelled up with Riches, being soundly squeezed out, brought an
incredible Treasure into the King's Coffers. A Dispute about Precedence between
the French and Spanish Ambassadors.
In the Year 1661 a Difference arose betwixt the French and Spanish
Ambassadors in London, about the Precedence at the solemn Entry made by Count
Nile Brake the Swedish Ambassador, where the French Embassadour's Coach was
put back by Violence. This might easily have proved the Occasion of a War, if
the Spaniards had not given Satisfaction to the French, and agreed, That
wherever there were any French Ambassadors resident, the Spanish should not
appear upon any public Occasions: Which the French do interpret, as if Spain
had thereby declared, That the Spanish Ministers were always to give place to
the French of the same Character. In the Year 1662, A Treaty with the Duke of
Lorrain.
the King made an Agreement with the Duke of Lorrain, according to which, he
was to exchange his Dukedom for an Equivalent in France, and his Family to be
the next in right of Succession, if the Family of Bourbon should happen to
fail: Which Agreement the Duke would fain have annulled afterward, but the
King, who did not understand jesting in such a point, forced him to surrender
to him Marsal. A Differance with the Pope.
In the same Year the Duke de Crequi the French Ambassador at Rome, was
grossly affronted there by the Corsi Guards, which the King resented so ill,
that he took from the Pope the City of Avignon: But the Difference was composed
by the Mediation of the Grand Duke of Tuscany at Pisa, and the Pope was fain to
send a splendid Embassy to give Satisfaction to the King. About the same time
the French would have got footing at Gigeri on the Coast of Barbary, but were
repulsed with considerable loss by the Moors. 1664.
The King also sent some Troops to the Assistance of the Emperor against the
Turks, who behaved themselves bravely in the Battle fought near St. Gothard,
and contributed much to the Victory. Notwithstanding which the Emperor clapped
up a Peace with the Turks, fearing lest the King of France might make use of
this Opportunity to fall into the Netherlands. Yet those Forces, which were
sent to the Assistance of the Venetians into Candie, did not acquire so much
Glory, they being too forward and hot in the first Onset, where they lost the
Duke of Beaufort. In the Year 1665, the King of France kindled a War betwixt
the English and Dutch, thereby to weaken their Naval Force, which was so
formidable to him, and in the mean while to get leisure to conquer the
Netherlands. He attacks Flanders.
In the Year 1667, he entered the Netherlands in person, and took Charleroy,
Lisle, Tournay, Doway, Courtray, Oudenarde, and some other places, pretending,
that the Netherlands did belong to him in right of his Queen, by virtue of the
jus devolutionis or right of devolution, in Brabant, notwithstanding that in
the Marriage Contract she had renounced all her Title to it. He also conquered
the County of Burgundy, but after having demolished the Fortifications he
restored it again, but kept those places which he had taken in the Netherlands,
by virtue of the Peace concluded at Aix la Chapelle. The tripple Alliance,
Peace made at Aix la Chapelle, 1668.
as it is called, made betwixt Sweden, England and Holland, which was intended
for the Preservation of the Netherlands, did greatly hasten this Peace; though
France afterward found out a way to draw the English Court from this Alliance,
and to join with him in humbling the Hollanders, who he said were too proud.
For though France all along had been in the Interest of Holland, yet the King
took it very ill, that the Dutch had made a Peace at Munster without including
France, and that they had been so bold as to undertake the Preservation of the
Netherlands; 1667.
and when afterward the King put strong Garrisons into the conquered places,
they sent a Fleet on these Coasts, as it were to brave him. The tripple
Alliance also was displeasing to him, and some are of Opinion, that the King of
England, who had not forgot the Business at Chatam, and that the Peace
concluded at Breda was not according to his wish, had engaged himself in this
Alliance, only to draw in the Dutch thereby, and so to exasperate the King of
France against them. He invades Flanders, 1672.
At last, France in conjunction with England, made War on Holland, with
prodigious Success at first; for he took three Provinces, viz. Gueldres,
Over-yssel and Vtrecht; besides that he had already possessed himself of some
Passes leading into Holland: But his Confederate the Bishop of Munster had not
the same Success in the Siege of Groningen, and afterward lost Coeverden
again. And the Dutch had better Success at Sea, where they behaved themselves
bravely in four several Engagements, whereas the French Fleet, as the English
say, did not engage heartily: Besides, England grew Jealous of the great
Success of the French, which was one reason, why the Parliament did in a manner
oblige the King, to make a separate Peace with Holland, fearing, that France,
after England and Holland had destroyed one another at Sea, might also, at
last, fall upon them. The Emperor and Elector of Brandenburgh endeavored,
immediately at the beginning of the War, to give a Diversion to France but to
no great purpose, since they did nothing but ruin several Provinces in Germany,
and drew Turenne with his Army thither, who ravaged the Country, but especially
Westphalia. The Elector of Brandenburgh made a Peace with France at Vossem,
1673.
whereby he got the Restitution of his strong Holds in the Duchy of Cleves,
but as soon as he got them into his possession, Mastricht taken by the French.
he made no great account of the Peace. In the Year next following, France took
the strong City of Mastricht, where the French both showed their Bravery and
Dexterity in attacking of places. On the other hand, the Imperialists had good
Success against Turenne, who pretended to oppose their March; for they tricked
him, and having marched to the lower Rhine, in conjunction with the Spaniard
and Prince of Orange, took Bon: This, and the loss of Narden, which the Dutch
took, caused the French to leave Vtrecht and all the other places in the United
Provinces, except Grave and Mastricht: For it seemed very difficult to maintain
so many Garrisons, and at the same time to have a sufficient Army in the Field
to oppose the Enemy; since it might easily have happened, that all
Correspondency with these places in the United Provinces might have been cut
off by the Enemy. Afterward Spain and the whole German Empire declared against
France, and a great many were of Opinion, That the joint Power of Spain,
Holland and Germany, would be sufficient to curb the French, and to carry the
Seat of the War into France it self; but this could not be effected. It Is true,
the Germans did take from the French, Philipsburgh, and beat them out of
Treves, where Marshall de Crequi received a Defeat. But on the other hand, the
Germans were several times also, especially near Sintsheim and in Alsace,
worsted by the French, and obliged to repass the Rhine. And in the Year 1675,
there was a great probability that it would not have gone very well with them
on this side of the Rhine, The Death of Turenne.
if the brave Turenne had not been killed by an accidental Shot, which obliged
the French, who were ignorant of his Design, after a sharp Engagement, to
retire on the other side of the Rhine. For the rest, Spain lost most by this
War: for the Franche Compte was taken from them, The Losses of the Spaniards in
this War.
Messina received voluntarily a French Garrison, and the Dutch Fleet which was
sent to the Assistance of the Spaniards into Sicily, got nothing but Blows, the
brave Admiral de Ruyter being there slain; though afterward the French quitted
Messina on their own accord. Besides this the French took from them these
strong holds; Limburgh, Conde, Valenciennes, Cambray, Yper, St. Omer, Air and
several others. The Prince of Orange retook Graves, but in the Battle of
Seneffe and St. Omer, he was worsted, and sustained a considerable loss before
Mastricht, At last France ended this War very gloriously for it self, Peace at
Nimmegen.
restoring to Holland what it had taken from those Provinces, but kept Burgundy
and a great many strong places in the Spanish Netherlands. In Germany in lieu
of Philipsburgh it got Friburgh, and for the rest the Westphalian and
Copenhagen Treaties were renewed, by Virtue of which Sweden was restored to its
own again.

. 25. To consider the French Nation, The French Nation.
whose History we have briefly related, it must be observed, That it is
swarming (if I may so speak) with People, and sowed thick with Cities and
Towns. Under the Reign of Charles IX. it is related, That above twenty Millions
of People paid the Poll Tax. Some say, That Richlieu affirmed, that by
Computation, France could bring into the Field 600000 Foot, and 150000 Horse,
provided every Man that was able to bear Arms, did go into the Field. This
Nation also has been always warlike: nevertheless in former times, it has been
objected to them, That they were very brave at the first Onset, but after their
first Fury was a little cooled, their Courage used to slacken, if they met with
a stout and brave Resistance: wherefore they used to make great Conquests, but
seldom kept them very long. And after they had good Success, they used to grow
careless, insult over the conquered, and put them to great Hardships under
their Government. But in our last Wars they have shown sufficiently, that they
as little want Constancy at last, as Heat and Fury at first. There is a great
number of Nobles in France, Full of Nobility.
who make Profession of the Sword, and make no difficulty to expose themselves
to any Hazards to gain Glory. In former times, the French Infantry was good for
nothing, wherefore they always used to employ Swiss and Scotch: but now adays,
their Foot are very good, and in attacking of a place, they are to be preferred
before all other Nations. This Nation always has a great Veneration and Love
for their King; and as long as he is able to maintain his Authority, is ready
to sacrifice Life and Estate for his Glory. The French are also brisk, forward,
and of a merry Constitution: as to their outward appearance in their Apparel
and Behavior, they are generally very comely; Their Natural Qualities.
and some other Nations, whose temper is more inclined to gravity, and do
attempt to imitate them, appear often very ridiculous, there being a vast
difference in these matters, betwixt what is natural and what is affected. They
are of a Genius fit to undertake any thing, whether it be in Learning, Trade,
or Manufactures; especially in those things which depend more on ingenuity and
dexterity than hard labor. On the other side, the levity and inconstancy of
the French is generally blamed, which is easily to be perceived by such of them
as are raw and unpolished; and a great many of them glory in amorous Intrigues,
oftentimes more than is true; and under Pretense of Freedom, they commit great
Debaucheries.

. 26. The Country which is possessed by this potent Nation, The Nature of the
Country.
is very conveniently situated, almost in the very midst of the Christian
World; wherefore this King may conveniently keep Correspondence with them all,
and prevent Europe from falling into the hands of any one Prince. On the one
side, it has the Mediterranean, on the other the Ocean, and on both sides a
great many pretty good Harbors; and is well watered with Rivers; besides that
great Channel with twelve Sluices, by which the present King has joined the
Rivers of Garonne and the Aude, and consequently the Mediterranean with the
Ocean; which proves very beneficial for Trade. It is also very near of a
circular Figure, and well compacted, so that one Province may easily assist
another. Its Situation.
On the side of Spain, the Pyrenaean Mountains; and on the Italian side, the
Alps are like a Bullwark to the Kingdom: but on the side toward Germany and
the Netherlands, it lies somewhat open: For out of the Netherlands, Paris it
self has often been hard put to it. And this is the reason why the French have
been so eager in getting a good part of these into their Possession, in which
they have been successful in the last War, and thereby have mightily
strengthened their Frontiers: and for the same reason, they have made
themselves Masters of Lorrain, to fortify themselves on the side of Germany;
and by degrees to become Masters of the Rhine, the ancient boundary of Gaul,
which seems the only thing wanting to the Perfection of France. Next to this,
France may be one of the most happy and most fruitful Countries, Its Fertility.
not only for the equal Temperature of its Climate betwixt an immoderate Heat
and an excessive Cold; but also, because it produces every thing, which seems
to be requisite for the Sustenance and Convenience of Mankind; so that scarce a
spot of Ground is to be found in France, but what produces something or other
for the benefit of Man. And its Product is not only sufficient for its
Inhabitants, but also plentiful enough to be exported into foreign parts. The
Commodities exported out of France, are chiefly; Wine, Brandy, Vinegar, Salt,
innumerable sorts of Silk, and Woollen Stuffs, and Manufactures, Hemp, Canvas,
Linen, Paper, Glass, Saffran, Almonds, Olives, Capers, Prunello's, Chestnuts,
Soap, and the like. Yet in Normandy and Picardy, grow no Vines, but the common
people drink Cider. Scarce any Metals are to be found in France, and not Gold
or Silver Mines. But this want is supplied by the ingenuity of the French, and
the folly of Foreigners. For the French Commodities have drawn Fleets of their
Money into France, especially since Henry IV. set up the Silk Manufactury
there. There are some who have computed that France sells Stuffs A-la-mode
yearly to Foreigners only, to the value of 40 millions of Livres, Wine 15
millions, Brandy 5 millions, Salt 10, and so proportionably of other
Commodities. Mr. Forcy an Englishman, says, that about the year 1669, the
Commodities which were brought from France into England exceeded what were
carried from England to France, in value 1600000 lib. Sterling. And it is
notorious that by help of such Commodities as they send into Spain, they get a
great part of their West India Plate-Fleet. Yet Navigation does not flourish so
much in France as it might. The reason seems to be, that the French Nation is
not so much addicted to the Sea, and that other Nations have been beforehand
with them in the East and West Indies. Which is the reason, that the King, though
he has above 100 Capital Ships, yet cannot set out so great a Fleet hitherto,
as the English and Dutch, as some think, wanting able Seamen. For it is not
sufficient to Man out a Fleet once, but in time of War, Recruits must also be
had. Nevertheless it may be this King will first settle his Maritime Affairs,
and afterward take his opportunity to surprise his Neighbors. Its Plantations.
France has very few Plantations abroad, except what is in the Caribby Islands,
the Isles called Tartuges, and on the North-side of Hispaniola. They apply
themselves also to fishing upon the great Sand Bank before Newfoundland, and
catch in Canada and New France good store of Bevers. They have set several
Projects on foot for the East India Trade, but without any great success
hitherto, the Dutch, who are so powerful there, opposing them with all their
might. Lastly the great strength of France may be judged of by this, that the
Revenue of the Clergy, which is possessed of two fifth parts, as it is said, of
the Kingdom, amounts to 104 millions and 500000 Crowns yearly. The King's
Revenues are computed to amount now to 150 millions of Livres, whereas in the
last Age it did not amount to above 9 or 10 millions. At the time of Henry IV.
to 16 millions, and in the year 1639 to 77 millions; which vast difference is
in part to be ascribed to the different value of Money since those times, and
the great Taxes which are imposed upon the Subjects: but without question the
chief reason is, that France since that time has found out new ways to draw
Money out of other Countries.

. 27. As to the Form of Government of France, The Government of France.
it is to be observed, That anciently there were very potent Dukes, Earls and
Lords in France, who, though they were Vassals of the King, yet they used to pay
no further Obedience to him, than was consistent with their own Interest,
except the Kings were in a Condition to oblige them to it: But all these in
process of Time were extinguished, and their Countries united to the Crown.
Nowadays the Dukes and Earls in France are nothing else but bare Titles
annexed to some considerable Estate without any Sovereignty or Jurisdiction.
And whereas formerly certain Countries used to be assigned to the King's Sons,
whereof they bore the Title, nowadays only a certain yearly Revenue is
allotted them, with the Title of a certain Dukedom or County, wherein perhaps
they have not a Foot of Ground. And after the ancient Sovereign Dukedoms and
Earldoms were abolished, some of the great Men of the Kingdom had taken upon
themselves great Authority in the Kingdom, but by the Policy of Richlieu and
Mararini they were reduced to such a Condition, that they dare not utter a Word
against the King. The Assembly of the Estates (there being three of them, viz.
The Clergy, Nobility, and the Citizens, they making up the third Estate) were
also formerly in great Veneration, whereby the King's Power was much limited.
But they having not been convened since the Year 1614, their Authority is quite
suppressed. Those of the Reformed Religion did prove also very troublesome to
the Kings of France as long as they were in a Condition to take up Arms, but
with the loss of Rochelle they lost the Power of giving their Kings any
Disturbance for the future. And though the King hitherto does not force their
Consciences, yet he draws off a great many from that Party, by hopes of his
Royal Favor and Preferments. Heretofore the Parliament of Paris used to oppose
the King's Designs, under pretense, that it had a right, that the King could
not do any thing of great moment without its consent; but this King has taught
it only to intermeddle with Judicial Business, and some other Concerns, which
the King now and then is pleased to leave to its Decision. The Gallick Church
also boasts of a particular Prerogative in regard of the Court of Rome, she
always having disputed with the Pope some part of his Authority over her; and
the King has the Nomination of the Bishops and Abbots, all which contributes
much to the Strength and Increase of this Kingdom, if a wise and good King sits
upon the Throne.

. 28. The Strength of France with reguard to England.
When we duly weigh the Power of France in comparison with its Neighbors, it
is easily perceived, that there is not any State in Christendom which France
does not equal if not exceed in Power: It Is true, in former Ages the English
reduced the French, but at that time they were possessed of a great part of it
themselves; there were then several Demi-Sovereign Princes; the French Infantry
was then inconsiderable, and the English Bows were terrible to them: All which
is quite otherwise now, and the English Landforces are now not to be compared
with the French neither in Number nor Goodness, since the English are
unexercis'd, and their Civil Wars have rather been carried on by Armies raised
on a sudden, than well disciplined Troops, and these Wars have not a little
weakened this Nation. On the other hand, the English have chiefly applied
themselves to Sea Affairs, and in this the French cannot hitherto be compared
with the English; yet England can scarce reap any great Advantages from France
at Sea. For, suppose they should beat the French Fleet, yet they would scarce
venture to make a Descent upon France, as having not any footing there; and the
French Privateers would certainly do great mischief to them. But if the English
should once miscarry at Sea, an that the French should once get footing in
England, it might perhaps prove fatal to that Kingdom, since the fate of the
War must be then decided by the Issue of one Battle, England having no Inland
strong Holds. In the last Age Spain proved very troublesome to France, To Spain.
the French scarce being able to defend themselves against it, and having
several times been obliged to make Peace upon disadvantageous Conditions: But
besides, that at that time the French Infantry was good for little, and the
Spanish Nation was then at its height, whereas now the Spanish Nobility is
more for Debauchery, Gaming, and such like Intrigues, than for acquiring Glory
in War; they were then in full possession of all the Netherlands, and Charles
V. had a great Advantage by being Emperor. But nowadays the Netherlands are
miserably torn to pieces, they being scarce able to Garrison the places that
remain. Naples and Milan are almost in the same condition; and France may
easily secure the Coast of Provence against the Spaniards, who may be well
satisfied if the French don't by the way of Roussilion, Navarre, or Bayonne
enter Spain. To Italy.
Italy is neither willing nor powerful enough to hurt France, but these
Princes are well satisfied if France does not pass the Alps and disturb their
Repose. To Holland.
The French are not powerful enough for the Dutch at Sea, if they have an
Opportunity to make use of all their Naval Strength, yet the French Privateers
may do them considerable Mischief, wherefore I cannot see what benefit Holland
can reap from a War with France without an absolute necessity: For the Dutch
Landforces gathered out of all Nations, are not likely to do any great Feats
against it. The Swiss also neither can nor will hurt France, To the Swiss.
they being well satisfied if they can get Money: Wherefore the French need not
fear any thing from them, except they should make them desperate, when in
Confederacy with others they might prove very troublesome. Germany seems to be
the only Country, To Germany.
which alone might be able to balance France; for, if these Princes were well
united, they are able to bring more numerous Armies into the Field, and that in
no ways inferior in Goodness to the French; and perhaps they might be able to
hold it out with France. But considering the present State of Germany, it seems
next to an impossibility, that all the Members of the Empire should unanimously
and resolutely engage themselves in a long War, and prosecute the same with
Vigor: For it is not to be imagined, that all of them should have an equal
Interest in the War, and some of them must expect to be ruined, though the War in
the main should prove successful; but if it should succeed otherwise, they
must be great losers by it without reprieve.

. 29. But if it should be supposed, The Strength of France in regard of a
Confederacy.
that France may be attacked by a great many at once; it is to be considered,
that it is absolutely against the Interest of some States, to join themselves
against France. For, as Affairs now stand, Portugal is not likely to join with
Spain, Sweden with Denmark, Poland with the House of Austria, against France.
Neither is it probable that the Italian Princes will be desirous to assist the
Emperor and Spain in subduing of France, except we must suppose them to be
willing to promote their own Ruin. Neither is it likely that England and
Holland will agree in a War against France, for whilst one of them is engaged
in a War against France, it seems to be the Interest of the other to stand
Neuter, and to promote its own Trade and Navigation. It is also not very
probable, that the Princes of Germany, especially those of the Protestant
Religion, should be willing to see France fall before the House of Austria;
since both their Power and Religion would stand upon slippery Ground, if not
supported by a Foreign Power. Wherefore it seems to be no difficult task to
persuade some of the Protestant Princes, at least, to sit still. The Swiss also
are not likely to cooperate with Spain and the House of Austria in the
Conquest of France, and therefore it would not be so difficult for France to
defend it self against the House of Austria and all its Confederates. Not to
mention here, that in such a case, Sweden and Poland would not leave France, if
they were in a Condition to assist it. But it is not probable, that France
should make any account upon an Alliance with the Turks, except in the greatest
Extremity; for the Mohammedan Princes have learned by Experience, that
wherever they have intermedled with the Christians in their Wars, these
commonly have clapped up a Peace, without including them, or having any regard to
their Interest. On the other hand, France seems not to be strong enough to
overturn all the States of Europe by his Conquests: For France may be the most
potent Kingdom in Christendom, but not the only one; and by extending its
Conquests too far it would be weakened within: In the mean time, those lesser
States bordering upon France are in great danger to be devoured by so
flourishing a Kingdom.

CHAP VI.
Of the United Provinces.
. 1. The ancient State of the United Provinces.
THat Country which is commonly called the Netherlands or the Lower Germany,
was anciently comprehended, partly under Gaul, partly under Germany, according
as they were situated either on this or the other side of the Rhine, which was
the ancient Boundary of these two vast Countries. That part which was situated
on this side of the Rhine, was by Julius Caesar, together with the rest of
Gaul, reduced under the Obedience of the Roman Empire. Afterward the Batavi
and the Zealanders did also submit to the Romans, yet so, that they were rather
esteemed Allies than Subjects. And when in the Fifth Century, after the Birth
of Christ, the Francks established a new Kingdom in France, these Provinces
were also at first united to it: But at the same time when Germany was
separated from France, most of them fell to Germany, few remaining with France.
The Governors of these Provinces did, in process of time, under the Names of
Dukes and Earls, make themselves Demi-Sovereigns, as did also other Princes of
Germany and France; yet so, that it was a general Maxim among them, To rule the
People with Mildness. And for the Security of their Liberty, they used to grant
them great Privileges, in the maintaining of which this Nation was always very
forward. The Estates also, which consisted of the Clergy, Nobility, and Cities,
were always in great Authority, and would not easily suffer that any new
Impositions should be laid upon the People without their consent. The Division
of the 17 Provinces.
These Provinces, according to the common computation, are Seventeen in number:
viz. Four Dukedoms of Brabant, Limburgh, Luxemburgh, and Gueldres: Seven
Earldoms of Flanders, Artois, Hainault, Holland, Zealand, Namur and Zutphen:
Five Lordships of Friesland, Malines, Vtrecht, Over-yssel and Groningen.
Antwerp has the title of a Marquisate of the Roman Empire. These Provinces were
anciently ruled each by its Prince or Lord; but afterward several of them were
either by Inheritance, Marriages, or Contracts united together, till most of
them fell to the share of the House of Burgundy, from whence they came to the
House of Austria by the Marriage of Maximilian I. who had married Mary the only
Daughter of Charles surnamed The Hardy. The Union of the 17 Provinces.
And were afterward all united under Charles V. who governed them in Peace and
Prosperity. It Is related, that he had once taken a Resolution to make them one
Kingdom, which however he could not effect, their Laws and Privileges being so
different, and they so jealous of one another, that none of them would remit
any thing of their Pretenses in favor of the rest. But the Reign of Charles V.
over the Netherlands, proved so very fortunate, because he bore an
extraordinary Affection to them, and they to him: T^eir Co^diti^n than under
Charles V.
For Charles was born in Ghent, educated amongst them, and lived a considerable
time there. His Humor suited very well with theirs, he conversed with them in
a friendly manner without haughtiness, employing the Netherlanders frequently
in his Affairs, whereby this Nation was in great esteem at his Court. But under
the Reign of his Son Philip II. these Provinces were torn to Pieces by
intestine Commotions and civil Wars, which occasioned the Rise of a potent
Commonwealth in Europe. This Government having proved the occasion of great
Alterations, it is worth our while to search both into the cause of these
Commotions and the Origin of this new Government.

. 2. The cause of the Wars in the Netherlands under Philip II.
Philip II. therefore was not a little to be blamed, as being partly himself
the cause of these civil Troubles; for he being born in Spain, and educated
after the Spanish Fashion, did favor only the Spainards, representing in all
his Behavior a perfect haughty Spaniard; which did mightily alienate the Minds
of the Netherlanders, especially after he resided altogether in Spain, and did
not so much as honor the Netherlands with his Presence; thinking it perhaps
below his Grandeur, that he who was Master of so great a Kingdom, and had such
great Projects in his Head, should trouble himself much about the Affairs of
the Netherlanders. Though in all Probability these might have been kept in
Obedience by his Presence; for his Father, the sooner to appease a Tumult which
was only risen in the City of Ghent, did venture to take his journey through
France, and the Territories of Francis, William Prince of Orange.
who was but lately reconciled to him. Moreover, William, Prince of Orange, a
crafty, thoroughpac'd, and ambitious Man, did not a little foment these
Divisions. For when Philip had taken a Resolution to go into Spain, and to
commit the Administration of the Netherlands to a Governor, this Prince was
contriving how Christina, Duchess of Lorrain, might be constituted Regent of
the Netherlands, and how he, by marrying her Daughter, might bear the greatest
sway in the Government: But he miscarrying in both, because Philip constituted
Margaret of Parma, natural Daughter of Charles V. Regent of the Netherlands,
and refused to give his consent to the Match, was so dissatisfied thereat, that
by doing of Mischief, he resolved to show his own Strength. Discontents of the
Nobility and Clergy.
The Earls of Egmont and Hoorn were also very much dissatisfied, as also a
great many others, who being in great esteem with the People, were all very
jealous of the Spaniards. A great many also of the Nobility were for a Change,
partly out of a hatred to the Spaniards, partly because they were naturally of
a turbulent Spirit, and were become poor and over Head and Ears in Debt, as
having endeavored to outvie the Spaniards in Splendor at Court, and thereby
spent more than their Incomes would allow of. The Clergy besides this, was
somewhat discontented, because Philip, having created several new Episcopal
Sees, would have employed the Revenues of several Abbeys for the Maintenance of
them, which did not only dissatisfie such as were in present Possession of
these Abbeys, but others also, who were in hopes of them for the future: for
the Abbots were chosen by a free Election of the Monks in each Monastery, but
the Bishops were nominated by the King. Change of Religion.
But all this could not have furnished sufficient Fuel for so great a Flame, if
Religion had not been joined to them, which proves most efficacious in
disturbing the Minds of the Common People, and always serves for a specious
Pretense to such as are for alterations in a State. There were great numbers in
the Netherlands, who had relinquished the Roman Catholic Religion, some of
them professing the Augsburgh Confession, some the Doctrine of the Huguenots,
others fell into the Errors of the Anabaptists. Charles V. had by severe
Proclamations and Punishments been very hard upon them, which had served for
nothing else than to exasperate the Minds of the People, and to promote the new
Religion. Wherefore it was the Opinion of Mary Queen of Hungary, the Sister of
Charles V. and then Regent of the Netherlands, That they ought rather to be
treated more mildly: But Philip had taken a Resolution to root out by force
this Heresy, either out of a Zeal for the Roman Catholic Religion, or because
he hoped thereby to oblige the Pope, whose Favor he stood in need of at that
time. He renewed therefore his Father's Proclamation, and that with more
Severity against these Heretics; and to put them in Execution, he was for
setting up a Court of Judicature, Spanish Inquisition.
according to the Model of the Spanish Inquisition; the very Name of which was
terrible to every body: And in effect, this Inquisition is a very cruel
Constitution, whereby the Life, Estate, and good Name of every Subject is put
into the Hands of unmercifull Priests, whose chief Glory is to be Inhuman and
Rigorous in their proceedings; and who have a power to take up and punish any
person upon Suspicion only; and though a Man is wrongfully accused, he is not to
know either his Accuser or Crime, and though he makes his Innocence appear, yet
he seldom escapes without some punishment. The Netherlanders were the more
frightened, not only because in this Court, no Privileges, no Favor of the
King, nor Intercessions, did avail; but also, because they knew the
Netherlanders to be free in their Speech, carrying, as it were, their Hearts
upon their Tongues, and that by way of Trade they were obliged to be conversant
with those of other Religions. Whereas on the other hand, it was natural and
easy for an Italian or Spaniard to keep his Thoughts within himself. Some are
of Opinion, That the Spaniards were glad to see that the Netherlanders did
begin the Fray, hoping thereby to get an Opportunity to force them to
Obedience, and by suppressing their Liberty and Privileges to rule over them at
pleasure. They hoped that this Country might serve them one day for a Magazine,
from whence they might conveniently attack France, England, and the Northern
Kingdoms. Yet it is also most certain, that some foreign Princes did administer
Fuel to nourish and augment the Flame; especially Elizabeth Queen of England,
whose Intention was, Queen Flizabeth ^^mented their Revolt.
by this means to cut out so much Work for the Spaniard, that he might not be
at leisure to think of Conquering others, his great Power being at that time
become terrible to all Europe.

. 3. Thus the Seeds of Civil Commotions were sown in the Minds of the
Netherlanders, about which time Philip II. 1559.
went into Spain; having so constituted the Government, that the supreme
Administration of Affairs should be in the Hands of the Regent and the Council
of State, of which Council, besides the Prince of Orange, were the Earl of
Egmont and others, The Cardinal Granville.
the Cardinal Granville, a Burgundian, a wise Man, and much relied on by the
King, who had given secret Instructions to the Regent to rule according to his
Advice: But the Netherlandish Lords quickly perceiving, that the whole
Government was managed according to the Counsels of the Cardinal, did
sufficiently show their Discontent in opposing themselves against it;
especially when the Cardinal pressed hard to execute the King's Commands
concerning the Establishment of the Bishops, and rooting out of the new
Religion; the Netherlandish Lords advised a Toleration of the same, and to deal
more gently with the People. This raised a general Hatred against the Cardinal,
whereupon the Prince of Orange, and the Earls of Egmont and Hoorn writ to the
King, That if he was not removed, it would be impossible to preserve the Peace
of the Netherlands; neither did they rest stisfy'd till Philip did consent to
their Demands: But because the Regent was, 1564.
after the removal of the Cardinal, swayed by the President Vigilius and the
Earl of Barlemont, who in every respect followed the footsteps of the Cardinal,
this Joy did not last long, but the old Discontents being renewed, it was said,
That the Body of the Cardinal was removed from the Council, but his Spirit
remained in it. Thus the Divisions continued in the Council of State, nor could
the Proclamations against the new Religion be put in Execution, because the
People began more and more to oppose them. Count Egmont sent into Spain.
It was therefore with consent of the Regent and Senate agreed upon, to send
the Earl of Egmont into Spain, who was to give an account to the King, of the
whole state of Affairs, and to see whether the King could find out another
Remedy. The King received him very courteously as to his person, but would not
remit any thing from his Severity as to Religion. And imagining that the cause
why this Evil had taken so deep root, was the Mildness of the Regent, he caused
his Proclamation to be renewed, commanding withal, That the Counsel of Trent
should be introduced in the Netherlands. Besides these Severities a Rumor was
spread abroad, That Philip had agreed with Charles IX. at Bayonne, by all Means
and Ways to root out the Heretics, which was the cause why it was resolved to
oppose the King's Intentions. Some of the Nobility made the first beginning, An
Association of the Nobility.
who entered into an Association (which they called the Compromise) whereby
they engaged themselves, to oppose the Inquisition, and to stand by one
another, if any one should be molested for his Religion; but solemnly
protested, That they had no other Aim by so doing, but the Glory of God, the
Grandeur of the King, and the Peace of their native Country. This Association
was drawn up by Philip Marnix Lord of Aldegonde, and subscribed by 400 Persons
of Quality, among whom the chiefest were Henry of Brederode, Lewis Earl of
Nassau, Brother of the Prince of Orange, the Earls of Culenburgh and Bergh.
These met at Brussels, 1566.
and delivered a Petition to the Regent, wherein they desired, That the
Proclamations issued forth touching Religion might be annulled. The Regent
answered them in courteous but general terms, telling them, That she would know
the King's Pleasure in the Matter. It Is said, That the Earl of Barlemont, who
stood then near the Regent, did tell her, That they were no ways to be feared,
because they were only Geusen or Beggars; which has rendered the Name of the
Geusen very famous afterward, they having had a Beggars Pouch the Coat of Arms
of that Confederacy. In the mean while abundance of Pamphlets were spread
abroad, which did more and more exasperate the People. And because Philip had
given but a very indifferent Reception to those Deputies, which were sent into
Spain, to pray for a Mitigation of these Proclamations, and had refused to
comply in the least with the Sentiments of the People, it came to an open
Insurrection. So that the new Religion was not only publicly professed and
taught in a great concourse of People, but the Rabble also fell to plundering
of Churches and pulling down of Images. Breaking of Im^ges.
And though the Prince of Orange and the Earl of Egmont, did what they could to
appease this Tumult, yet had the King conceived a shrewd Suspicion as if they
had been in the bottom of it; wherefore they were consulting their own safety,
but could, as yet, not come to any Resolution. In the mean time, the Regent
having raised some Troops, and endeavored either by Fear or fair Words, or any
other ways to reduce the dissatisfied Party to Obedience, some of whom did by
Submission and other Services endeavor to be reconciled to the King. And this
Design succeeded so well, that without any great trouble and the punishment of
a very few, the Country was restored to its Tranquillity: Nevertheless, because
it was rumored abroad, that a great Army was marching out of Spain against
them, a great many of the Inhabitants, and especially of the Handycrafts Trade,
did retire into the neighboring Countries. The Prince of Orange himself
disliking this calm retired into Germany.

. 4. It was then the Advice of the Regent, that the King should come in person,
without any great Force, into the Netherlands, and by his Presence and Clemency
endeavor entirely to heal the ulcerated Minds of the People. But he followed
the Advice of the Duke of Alva, The Duke of Alva.
who advised to make use of this Opportunity to bring the Netherlands under the
Yoke, and to strike Terror into the rest. he marched with a brave Army through
Savoy and Burgundy into the Netherlands, 1568.
and having immediately taken into Custody the Earls of Egmont and Hoorn, whom
he pretended to have been underhand the Authors of these Troubles, declared all
those guilty of High Treason that had had any hand in the Association, the
Petition, and pulling down of the Images. And a Court was erected of twelve
Judges, from which no Appeal was to be allowed, where Judgment was to be given
concerning these Matters, this Court was commonly called The bloody Council.
Before this Court, the Prince of Orange and some other Lords, who were fled,
were summoned to appear, and upon nonappearance they were declared guilty of
High Treason, and their Estates Confiscated. The same Severity was used against
others of less note. This caused such a Terror among the Inhabitants, that they
left their Habitations in Troops. He caused also Citadels to be built in
several great Cities, among which one of the chiefest was that of Antwerp. In
the mean time the Prince of Orange had brought together considerable Forces in
Germany, some of which, under the Command of Lewis his Brother, falling into
Friesland, beat the Count of Arembergh, the Governor of that Province. The
Earls of Egmont and Hoorn beheaded.
But soon after the Duke of Alva, having first caused the Earls of Egmont and
Hoorn to be beheaded, marched against him in person. Not long after the Prince
of Orange fell with a great Army into Brabant, but was beaten back by the Duke
of Alva, and his Forces dispersed. The Duke of Alva, puffed up with this great
Success, did not only cause a most magnificent Statue to be erected at Antw^rp;
but having also formed a Design to conquer the Netherlands with their own
Money, he imposed a Tax upon them, of the hundredth Penny, to be paid of the
whole value of all Estates; and besides this, the twentieth Penny to be paid of
all Movables, but the tenth of all Immoveables, as often as they were sold.
This did exasperate the Netherlanders to the utmost degree. And whilst the Duke
of Alva, being in great want of Money, was busy in squeezing out these Taxes,
and was upon the point of forcing the Inhabitants of Brussels, who refused to
pay it, News was brought, That the banished Netherlanders, who were turned
Privateers, and had about 24 Ships of indifferent Strength, had under the
Conduct of the Earl of March taken the City of Briel in Holland. Briel taken,
April 1. 1571.
Then most Cities of Holland, out of a Hatred to the Spaniards, and the tenth
Penny, revolted from the Spaniards, except Amsterdam and Schonhoven, which
remained for some time under the Obedience of Spain. It was a grand mistake in
the Duke of Alva, that during his Regency of four Years, he had not secured the
Sea Coasts. The revolted Places chose for their Governor the Prince of Orange,
swearing to him Allegiance as the King's Stadtholder, as if they had only
revolted from the Duke of Alva and not the King. A great many Privateers then
joined from France and England, who within the space of four Months made up a
Fleet of 150 Ships, who had their Rendezvous at Flushing, and afterward did
great Mischiefs to the Spaniards. The Duke of Alva was not in a condition to
resist this Storm, because the Earl of Bergh had not only at the same time
taken a great many places in Gueldres, Friesland and Over-yssel, but also Lewis
Earl of Nassaw, had with the Assistance of the French, surprised Mons: Which
City the Duke of Alva endeavored to recover by force of Arms, and the Prince
of Orange, who with an Army newly raised in Germany, had made prodigious havoc
in Brabant, had in vain endeavored to relieve it, was retired into Holland.
Wherefore this City was surrendered upon Articles to the Duke of Alva. He then
tried all ways to reduce the revolted places to Obedience by force, having
among others, pillaged Malines and Zutphen, quite destroyed Naerden, and taken
Haerlem after a tedious Siege, the Inhabitants of which City were most
barbarously treated.

. 5. The Affairs of the Spaniards in the Netherlands being by the rigorous
proceedings of the Duke of Alva (who used to bragg, that during his Regency of
six Years he had caused 18000 to be executed by the Hangman) put into
Confusion, Duke of Alva recalled.
he was recalled in the Year 1573. Lewis Requesenes succeeded him, a Man of
somewhat a milder Temper, Lewis Requesenes Governor.
but who had a very ill beginning of his Regency, the Fleet which he had sent
out to relieve Middleburgh being destroyed before his Eyes, and the City
surrendered to the Prince of Orange: Yet the Prince also received a great Blow;
for his Brother Lewis, who led an Army to his Assistance out of Germany, was
routed near Grave upon the Mockerhyde, where he and his Brother Henry were
slain in the Field. After this Victory the Spanish Soldiers mutiny'd for want
of Pay, and lived upon free Quarters in Antwerp till all was paid. Then the
Siege of Leyden was undertaken, which was reduced to the utmost extremity by
Famine, till a Dyke of the Maese was cut through, by which means, and the help
of a North West Wind at Spring tide, the Country round about being put under
Water, the Spaniards, after a great loss sustained, were forced to leave it. In
the Year next following the Emperor endeavored by his Mediation to compose
these Troubles, 1574.
and a Meeting was held for that purpose betwixt the Deputies of both Parties
at Breda, which proved fruitless. Then the Spaniards took Ziricuzea after a
Siege of nine Months; but before the place was taken Lewis Requesenes died.
1576.
After his Death the Council of State took the Administration of the Government
into their Hands, which was approved by the King.

. 6. In the mean time the Hatred of the Netherlanders against the Spaniards was
more and more increased, especially after the Soldiers, who were grown
mutinous for want of Pay, and had committed great Outrages, that the Council of
State had declared them Enemies, giving leave to the Inhabitants to take up
Arms against them. During which Disturbances Maestricht and Antwerp were
plundered: Which disposed the rest, The Treaty of Ghent.
to enter upon a Treaty with the Prince of Orange at Ghent, which contained,
That the Provinces had made a Peace betwixt themselves, That the Proclamations
issued forth during the Regency of the Duke of Alva should be annulled, and the
Spaniards sent out of the Country: Which Contract, though it was ratified by the
King, yet he had taken a Resolution quickly to disunite them again. For this
purpose he constituted Don John d' Austria, Don John d' Austria made Governor,
his natural Brother, Governor of the Netherlands, The Prince of Orange
forewarned the Netherlanders, That he ought not to be trusted; notwithstanding
this, he was received by plurality of Voices, they having obliged him to
subscribe the Contract made at Ghent, and to send away the Spanish Soldiers.
But the Prince of Orange and the Provinces of Holland and Zealand were not well
satisfied with this Agreement, and the rest also quickly began to mistrust him.
He gave them sufficient occasion to believe that their Jealousy was not ill
grounded, when he by Surprise made himself Master of the Castle of Namur, under
pretense to secure his person against any Attempts, which so disturbed the
Netherlanders, that they took up Arms to drive him out of Namur, They also took
all the strong Holds, where any German Garrison was left, and demolished the
Castles. And sending for the Prince of Orange to come to Brussels, they
constituted him Grand Bailiff of Brabant. This increase of the House of Orange
made some great Men envious, who made a Party to balance it; among whom, one of
the chiefest was the Duke of Arshot. Archduke Matthew.
These called in Matthew, Archduke of Austria, whom they made Governor of the
Netherlands, who coming with all speed was also received by the Party of the
Prince of Orange, under condition that the Prince should be his Lieutenant, and
he not do any thing without the consent of the Estates. 1577.
On the other hand, Alexander Duke of Parma.
Alexander Duke of Parma came with an Army out of Italy to the Assistance of
Don John d' Austria, who bringing with him a good number of old Spanish Troops,
beat the Army of the Estates near Gemblours, and took Louvain, Philipville,
Limbourgh, and several other places. The Estates then finding themselves alone
not strong enough, offered to put themselves under the Protection of Henry III.
King of France, and he having refused to accept it, the same offer was made to
the Duke of Alenson his Brother, who having accepted of it, came into the
Netherlands: But could do nothing of moment, the Provinces and great Men being
so divided among themselves, that no body knew who was Master. There arose also
a new Division among the Estates, when upon Request of those of the Reformed
Religion, Liberty of Conscience was allowed in the Netherlands; which was
willingly consented to by those of Ghent and others; but Artois, Haynault, and
some other Wallooon Cities, that were very zealous for the Catholic Religion,
did oppose it with great violence; and having by degrees separated themselves
from the rest, set up a new Faction, who were called the Malcontents. During
these Troubles Don John d' Austria died, Malcontents
leaving the Government to the Duke of Parma, who was confirmed in his place by
Philip. The Duke of Parma.
He began his Regency with the taking of Maestricht, and bringing over the
Wallon Provinces, viz. Artois, Haynault, and the Walloon Flanders, to the
King's Party by accord.

. 7. The Prince of Orange therefore perceiving that the Contract of Ghent was
quite broke, The Union of Utrecht the Foundation of the Commonwealth.
and that the Great Men who envied one another, and the several Provinces, that
were of a different Religion, were scarce ever to be United: And yet being
desirous to secure himself, and to establish the Protestant Religion, he got
the Estates of the Provinces of Gueldres, 1579.
Holland, Zealand, Friesland and Vtrecht, to meet. Here it was agreed, that
they would defend one another as one Body; that they would consult concerning
Peace and War, Taxes, and the like, with common Consent; and that they would
maintain Liberty of Conscience. This Union, made at Vtrecht, (wherein also
afterward Over-Yssel and Groningen were included) is the Foundation of the
Commonwealth of the United Netherlands. At that time their Affairs were in so
low a Condition, that they coined a Medal, wherein their State was represented
by a Ship without Sails, or Rudder, left to the Mercy of the Waves, with this
Inscription, Incertum quo fata ferant. The Fortune of the Prince of Orange
absolutely depending now on this Union, he made it his business to hinder the
Conclusion of the Treaty of a general Peace, which by the Mediation of the
Emperor was set on foot at Collen, because a general Peace might easily have
dissolved this Union. And, because the Affairs of the Netherlands grew worse
and worse every day, the Spaniards having taken one after another, the Cities
of Bois le Duc, Breda, Tournay, Valenciennes, Malines, and Others, and a great
many of the Great Men being gone over to the Spanish Party: The Prince of
Orange on the other hand being well assured, that the Spaniards one time or
another would revenge themselves upon him and his friends; and finding himself
not in a capacity to maintain the Cause against them, he persuaded the Estates
of the Netherlands that they should renounce all Obedience to Philip, who had
violated their Privileges confirmed to them by Oath, and make the Duke of
Alenson their Sovereign, with whom he had underhand made an agreement, That the
United Provinces should fall to his share. And the Estates of Holland, Zealand
and Vtrecht, were then for making him their Sovereign, except the Cities of
Amsterdam and Gouda; and questionless it would have been done afterward, if
his unexspected Death had not prevented it.

. 8. The Duke of Alenson.
The Duke of Alenson having obtained the Sovereignty, raised the Siege of
Cambray, which was besieged by the Spaniards, and in the year next following
was at Antwerp proclaimed Duke of Brabant, and at Ghent Earl of Flanders. But
his Power being confined within very narrow Bounds by the Estates, he, by the
advice of his Friends, resolved to make himself Absolute. He proposed to the
Estates, That if he should die without Issue, these Countries might be United
with the Crown of France; which being denied him, he took a strange Resolution;
viz. By surprise to make himself absolute Master of Antwerp, and some other
Cities. For this purpose several Thousands of French were already got privately
into Antwerp, which were beaten out by the Citizens with considerable Loss.
They made the like Attempts upon several other Places on the same day, which
everywhere miscarried, except at Dendermond, Dunkirk, and Dixmuide. And thus
the French having lost at once all their credit, and the affection of the
Netherlanders, the Duke of Alenson, full of shame and confusion, returned into
France, where he died soon after. The French intermedling with the Affairs of
the Netherlands, had drawn with it another Evil; which was, That Foreign
Soldiers were again brought into the Netherlands, which was against the
Agreement made with the Walloons, Then the Duke of Parma re-took Dunkirk, 1583.
Newport, Winoxbergen, Menin, Alost, and some other Places in Flanders. 1584.
Ypres and Bruges did also submit. And in the same Year the Affairs of the
Estates received a great Blow by the Death of William Prince of Orange, who was
stabbed in his Palace at Delft by a Burgundian, whose Name was Balthazar
Gerhard. Prince of Orange murdered.
By whose Death the Netherlands being without a Head, were left in great
confusion.

. 9. After the Death of Prince William, the Estates did make Maurice, His Son
Prince Maurice made Stadtholider.
Son of the deceased, Stadtholder of Holland, Zealand, and Vtrecht; and he
being but eighteen Years of Age, they constituted the Earl of Hohenloe his
Lieutenant. But the Sovereignty they proffered to the King of France, who being
at that time distracted with intestine Wars, was not at leisure to accept of
it. The Duke of Parma in the mean while taking advantage of this juncture of
Affairs, reduced Antwerp by Famine within a Twelve month's time; as also
Dendermond, Ghent, Brussels, Malines and Nimeguen by Force. After the Loss of
Antwerp, the Estates, who were for submitting Themselves to any body but the
Spaniards, The English Confederacy.
offered the Sovereignty over them to Queen Elizabeth, which she refused to
accept of: Yet she entered with them into a more strict Alliance, by virtue of
which she obliged her self to maintain a certain number of Soldiers at her own
Charge in the Netherlands, which, with all the other Forces of the Estates,
were to be Commanded by an English General. And the Estates did Surrender to
the Queen, as a Security for the Charges she was to be at, the Cities of
Flushing, Briel and Rammakens, or Sceburgh upon Walchorn, which were afterward
restored to the Estates for the Sum of One Million of Crowns. 1616.
The Queen sent Robert Dudley, 1586.
Earl of Leicester, as General into Holland; The Regency of the Earl of
Leicester.
who being arrived there, was made by the Estates their Governour-General, and
that with a greater Power then was acceptable to the Queen; but he did no great
Feats. For the Duke of Parma not only took Grave and Venlo, and forced him from
before Zutphen; but he also administered the public Affairs at a strange rate,
to the great dissatisfaction of the Estates, to whom he had rendered himself
suspected. Their Discontents were much augmented, after William Stanley, who
was by the Earl of Leicester made Commander in Chief in Deventer, had betrayed
that City to the Spaniards. The Year next following, the Earl of Leicester
attempted the Relief of Sluice in Flanders, but to no purpose; and being
returned into Holland, where he by several suspicious Undertakings augmented
the Differences betwixt him and the Estates, he returned very ill satisfied
into England; where, by Command of the Queen, he resigned his Office of
Governor.

. 10. The State of Affairs in Holland legias to mend.
Hitherto the Affairs of the United Netherlands (whom henceforward we will call
Hollanders) had been in a very ill Condition; but from this time forwards they
began to mend a-pace, and became more settled. This was partly occasioned by
the Ruin of the two Provinces of Brabant and Flanders, which were reconciled to
the King, upon condition, That such as would not profess themselves Roman
Catholics, should leave the Country within a prefixed time: A great many of
these flocking into Holland, made its Cities very populous. Especially all the
Traffic of Antwerp was transplanted to Amsterdam, which rendered that City very
Rich and Potent at Sea. Besides this Philip, like those, who will hunt two
Hares with one Dog, 1588.
did not only attempt to Invade England with a great Fleet, but also sent in
the Year next following the Duke of Parma with an Army to the Assistance of the
League in France; both which proving fruitless, the Hollanders had in the mean
while leisure given them, to put themselves into a good posture. Whereas the
Duke of Parma had wisely advised the King, that he should with all his Power
first subdue the Hollanders, before he engaged in another War. For Maurice,
whom they had, after the Departure of the Earl of Leicester, made their
Generalissimo both by Sea and Land, had restored their lost Reputation. His
first Attempt was upon Breda, 1590.
which he took by a Stratagem. In the Year next following he took Zutphen,
Deventer, Hulst and Nimeguen. And in the Year 1592, Steenwyck and Coeverden. In
the same Year the Death of the brave Duke of Parma proved a great Loss to the
Spaniards. For the Spanish Soldiers growing Mutinous everywhere, did not a
little advance the Progresses of the Hollanders. 1592.
Gertrudenbergh was taken in the sight of the Spanish Army, In the Year next
following Groningen was reduced, whereby the United Provinces were made entire,
and secured on this side of the Rhine. In the Year 1596, Albert, Archduke of
Austria, Archduke Albert, Governor of the Spanish Netherlands.
arrived as Governor of the Netherlands, who began his Regency with the Taking
of Hulst. And, because Philip, being oppressed with Debts, was fain to shut up
his Exchequer. Albert, for want of Money, was not in a capacity to undertake
any thing of moment in the Year next following, but was soundly beaten near
Tougenhout. And after the Trade of the Hollanders with Spain and Portugal,
whither they used to send their Ships under Foreign Flags, had been quite cut
off; whereby the Spaniards hoped the sooner to reduce them to Obedience,
Necessity, and the desire of Lucre, taught them another way to obtain vast
Riches. For by this means the Hollanders were forced to try whether they could
Sail themselves into the East Indies, and to attempt to find out a nearer Way
thither round about the North. But this Design not succeding, they took the
common Course about Africa; and having with incredible Pains, in spite of all
the Resistance made by the Portuguese, settled a Trade there, a great many
Merchants and others, who knew no better way to employ their Readymoney,
erected several Societies to Trade into the East Indies: 1602.
All which were by virtue of a Patent granted by the Estates, The East India
Company.
formed into one Company, which did afterward prodigiously increase its Power
in the EastIndies, and has conveyed unconceivable Riches into Holland. In the
Year 1597, Maurice took Rhinebergh, Meurs, and all the rest of those Places of
Over-Yssel, which were as yet in the possession of Spain.

. 11. In the Year 1598, they found out another Decoy for the Hollanders. For
because it was generally pretended, that they would not live under Spanish
subjection, Philip found out this artifice: He Married his daughter Isabella
Clara Eugenia to Albert, Isabella Clara Eugenia.
Archduke of Austria, giving unto her as a Dowry Burgundy and the Netherlands;
yet, with this Condition, That the same should return to Spain, if no Heirs
proceeded from this Match, which the Spaniards were very well assured of, the
Princess being pretty well in Age; and besides this, having been spoiled before
by means of some Medicaments administered to her to prevent Conception. The
Netherlands being then by this means, according to outward appearances freed
from a Foreign Subjection, as having got their own Prince, it was hoped the
Hollanders would the easier reunite themselves with the other Provinces;
because a Peace being lately concluded betwixt France and Spain at Nervin, the
Hollanders had thereby lost their chief Confederate. But the Hollanders
remained steadfast in their former Resolution, rejecting all Propositions of
Peace made by the Emperor and the Arch Duke Albert. In the Year 1600, Battle
near Newport.
Maurice fell into Flanders, with an intention to besiege Newport, but was met
by Albert, where a bloody Battle ensued, and Maurice obtained a most glorious
Victory, who was otherways always averse to Field-fights, and would never have
resolved at that time to have ventured the whole Fortune of Holland upon the
Issue of a Battle, if he had not been forced to it; wherefore, without
attempting any thing farther, he returned into Holland. Siege of Ostend, 1601.
Albert then undertook the Siege of Ostend, during which both sides did their
utmost, till Ambrose Spinola forced the place, the besieged having no more room
left to make any Retrenchments. It Is said, The Conquests on both sides.
that the Hollanders lost within the Town above 70000 Men, and the Spaniards
without a great many more. But in the mean time the Spanish Fleet under the
Command of Frederick Spinola was destroyed, and Rhinebergh, Grave and Sluice
taken by Maurice. In the Year 1605, Spinola retook from the Hollanders, Lingen,
Groll and Rhinebergh, and Maurice sustained some loss before Antwerp. The last
glorious Action in this War was, that of James Heemskirke, who burned the
Spanish Fleet in the Harbor of Gibraltar, where he himself was killed. The
Spaniards therefore finding it impossible to reduce Holland by force, which
they found increased in Strength by the War; and being besides this, jealous of
Henry IV. and quite out of breath by this tedious War, they resolved to make an
end of it at any rate. How desirous the Spaniards were of the Peace may easily
be conjectured from hence, That Albert himself proposed the Treaty to be at the
Hague, and first sent Spinola himself thither as Ambassador, whereas the
Hollanders carried it very high, and were very resolute. The Business met with
great difficulty, before it could be brought to the conclusion of a Truce of
twelve Years: The greatest obstacle was, that the Hollanders urged it closely,
That Spain without any Exception should declare them a free People, which the
Spanish Ambassadors refusing to do, at last this Medium was found out; That
Spain and the Archduke Albert did declare, they would treat with the
Netherlanders, As a free Nation. And they being not satisfied also with this,
the President Janin, who was sent thither in behalf of France, answered, That
the word As could not add much to the Strength of Spain, nor diminish theirs;
and that it was their Business to secure themselves and their State by Arms and
not by Words. A Truce of 12 Years,
Both Parties kept what they were possessed of, and the Hollanders maintained
their Navigation into the East Indies, which the Spaniards would fain have got
from them; but the chief cause, why the Hollanders at that time when their
Affairs were in so good a Condition, consented to a Truce, seems to be, that
they began to be jealous of France, for fear, lest that King should snatch
Flanders away upon a sudden, which must needs have proved their Ruin. Besides
this, Maurice being grown very Powerful during this War, was likely to be
troublesome to their Liberty. And this was the first step which Holland made
toward the Establishment of a free Commonwealth. 1609.


. 12. Soon after the Truce was concluded, the Hollanders were engaged in the
Business concerning the Succession of the Country of Juliers; A Quarrel about
the Duchy of Juliers.
for the Emperor, after the death of the last Duke, being very desirous to
annex these Countries unto his House, had sent the Archduke Leopold, to make a
Sequestration, who took the strong City of Juliers, but was beaten out again by
the Hollanders, with the Assistance of the French. But a difference arising
afterward betwixt the Elector of Brandenburgh and the Duke of Newburgh, who
had at first made an Agreement betwixt themselves; and the Duke of Newburgh
having called to his Assistance Spinola, who took the City of Wesel: The
Hollanders on the other hand sided with the Elector of Brandenburgh, and put
Garrisons into Rees and Emeric, whereby the Country of Cleves was involved in
the War of the Netherlands.

. The Differences between the Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants
13. But there arose a more dangerous intestine Division in Holland betwixt the
Arminians or Remonstrants (as they are termed) and others; which Division was
partly occasioned by a State-jealousie, partly by Disputes among the Divines.
We have said before, that Prince William did endeavor underhand to be
Sovereign over the United Provinces, which was prevented only by a very few
Voices. Then after his Death his Son Maurice pursued the same Design, but was
opposed by the chief Men among them; who alleged, That their Labor was very
ill bestowed, if in place of a great One, they should be brought under
subjection to a little Prince. Among these, one of the chiefest was John of
Olden Barneveldt, Pensionary of Holland, who had been always for upholding the
public Liberty. But because the Authority of the Captain General was more
conspicuous during the War, Afterward managed by State Policy.
Maurice endeavored to set aside the Treaty with Spain; but Barnevelt did, as
much as he could, promote the Truce with Spain, knowing that in time of Peace,
the Authority of the Captain General would be diminished, which Maurice kept in
good remembrance. In the mean time Arminius, a professor of Divinity in the
University of Leyden, had defended several Propositions concerning
Predestination, and some other Articles relating to the same, with less rigor
than the rest of the Reformed Churchs had hitherto generally taught. His
Opinion was after his death opposed by one Francis Gomarus. This Dissension
being spread abroad, most of the Clergy sided with Gomarus, but the chief
Statesmen with Arminius. But because the generality of the People followed the
footsteps of the Clergy, Maurice, who after the Death of his elder Brother, was
become Prince of Orange, declared himself for the Gomarists. And there
happening great Tumults in several places; viz. at Alckmaer, Leyden and
Vtrecht, the Prince took this opportunity to displace up and down such
Magistrates as adhered to the Arminians. Barnevelt, Hugo Grotius, and some
others, where, under the same pretext, taken into Custody; the first by a
Sentence of the States General lost his Head in the 72d. Year of his Age;
Grotius was condemned to a perpetual Imprisonment; out of which he afterward
made his escape by means of his Wife, who had enclosed him in a Chest. And though
at the Synod of Dort the Doctrine of Arminius was condemned as erroneous, 1629.
yet this Violence of the Prince against a Man, who had deserved so well, was
very ill resented by a great many: And these two Factions have ever since taken
so firm root there, that it is not improbable, but at last they may occasion
the ruin or change of the State.

. The Spanish War renewed, 1621,
14. But Dangers from abr^ad did afterward appease these inward Dissensions.
For the time of the Truce being expired, the War began a-fresh with Spain. In
the Year 1622, Spinola took Juliers, but was obliged to raise the Siege from
before Bergen op Zoom; because the Count of Mansfeld and Christian Duke of
Brunswick, having defeated the Spanish Army near Fleury, marched to the
Assistance of the Hollanders. To revenge this Affront, Spinola besieged Breda;
and Prince Maurice having in vain endeavored to raise the Siege; and besides
this, his Attempt upon the Castle of Antwerp having proved unsuccessfull,
Prince Maurice dies, 1625.
he fell into a deep Melancholy, and died, Breda being not long after forced by
Famine to surrender it self. Prince Frederick Henry I.
To Prince Maurice, succeeded in the Stadtholdership and all other Offices,
which had been in his possession, his Brother Frederick Henry, 1627.
who took Groll. In the Year 1628, Pieter Heyn took the Spanish Silver-fleet;
and in the Year next following the Prince took Bois le Duc. During this Siege,
the Spaniards made an Inrode into the Velaw, hoping thereby to give the
Hollanders a diversion, who were put into a great Consternation. But the
Hollanders on that very day surprised the City of Wesel, which obliged the
Spaniards to repass the River Yssel as fast as they could: And from that time
forwards the Spaniards despaired of ever reducing Holland under their
Obedience. In the Year 1630, the Hollanders got first footing in Brasile. In
the Year 1631, they surprised some Thousands of Spaniards near Bergen op Zoom,
who were gone out in Shallops upon some secret Enterprise. In the Year next
following the Prince took Venlo, Ruremond, Limburgh and Macstricht, and
Pappenheim endeavoring to relieve the last, was soundly beaten. In the Year
1638 the Prince took Rhinebergh, but in the Year next following the Spaniards,
A League Offensive between France and Holland, 1635.
Limburgh. An Offensive Alliance was made betwixt France and Holland, wherein
they had shared the Netherlands betwixt them: But this Alliance proved
fruitless, the Hollanders being very well satisfied, that this Design did not
succeed, being glad not to have the French for their Neighbors on the
Land-side: But the Spaniards surpised Shenkenshantz, 1636.
which the Hollanders retook not without great trouble. In the Year 1637 the
Prince retook Breda, but the Spaniards, Venlo and Ruremond. In the Year 1638,
the Hollanders were bravely beaten near Callo; but in the Year 1639, Martin
Tromp entirely destroyed the Spanish Fleet, which lay in the Downs, and was
intended to attack Sweden, in conjunction with the Danes. Prince William II.
In the Year 1644, Ghent, and in the Year next following Hulst was taken by
William II. Peace concluded at Munster, 1648.
who had succeeded his Father: It is thought, that he might also have taken
Antwerp, if the Province of Zealand and Amsterdam had not opposed it, they
being grown powerful out of its Ruins. At last, a Peace was concluded at
Munster, betwixt Spain and Holland, wherein it was declared a free
Commonwealth, to which Spain should for the future make no Pretensions
whatsoever. And though France and the Prince did oppose this Peace with their
utmost Endeavors, yet the Hollanders did consider, that the Spaniards having
granted all that they could desire, the Cause of the War ceased: They feared,
besides this, that Spain might be brought too low, and France grow too
powerful; and the Province of Holland was considerably indebted. Thus Holland
ended this tedious War with great Reputation, but the Spaniards with great
Dishonor, having besides this, quite enervated themselves. Though this is
observable, that as long as the Hollanders were engaged in the War against
Spain, they were favored by every body except the Spanish Party; but
immediately after the Peace was concluded, both France and England, by whom
they had been hitherto uph^ld, gave manifest proofs of their Jealousy of them.

. War with Portugal.
15. But the Hollanders could not enjoy Peace very long; for soon after Brasile
rebelled against them, submitting it self to the Portuguese, which proved very
disadvantageous for the West India Company; but the East India Company drew
great Advantage from it; for this having occasioned a War with Portugal, which
lasted till the Year 1661, the Hollanders took from the Portuguese almost all
the places, which they were possessed of in the East Indies. Divisions in
Holland.
In the Year 1650, a remarkable Dissension arose in Holland, which might have
proved the cause of great Calamities. For the War with Spain being now at an
end, some of the States, and especially the Province of Holland, were of
Opinion, That to ease the Public, their Forces should be diminished; which the
Prince opposed, under pretense, that it would not be advisable to be without
an Army, as long as France and Spain were engaged in a War. And the Opinion
being divided concerning this Business, it was agreed upon by the Majority of
the States General, who were great Friends of the Prince, that the Prince
should visit in person these Cities, to try, whether he could convince the
Magistrates in this point: Against this petitioned some of the Cities in
Holland, and especially Amsterdam, fearing, that if the Prince should come in
person to them, he might, by changing the Magistrates and other Alterations, do
something which might prove prejudicial to their Liberty. The Prince being
dissatisfied at these proceedings, replied, That this was done to affront him
and his Office, and therefore desired, that Reparation should be made him; but
the Cities insisted upon their former Resolution, alleging, that it was
according to their Privileges. Da Wit and others made Prisoners by the Prince.
Then the Prince took into Custody six of the States of Holland, whom he
supposed to be chiefly against him, among whom the chiefest were the Sieur the
Wit, Burghermaster of Dort, whom he sent all together Prisoners to the Castle
of Louvesteyn. He also privately ordered some Troops to march toward
Amsterdam, to surprise that City; but some of these Troops having lost their
way in the Nightime, the Design was discovered by the Hamburgher Post-boy:
And the Amsterdamers perceiving that the Prince intended to force them to a
Compliance, opened their Sluices, and put the Country round about it under
Water: At last the Business was agreed, and the Prince had this Satisfaction
given him, that the Sieur Bicker Burghermaster of Amsterdam was deposed, and
the Prisoners in the Castle of Louvestein were set at liberty, under condition
that they should be discharged from their places. But this Business was likely
to have been the occasion of more troubles, if the Prince had not died soon
after. The Birth of Prince William III.
Soon after his death, viz. in the Year 1650, on the 13th day of November, his
Princess was brought to Bed of William III. the present Prince of Orange. In
the Year 1651, the United Provinces held a grand Assembly, where they renewed
the Union, being now destitute of a Governor.

. War with the English Parliament.
16. Not long after the Hollanders were engaged in a heavy War with the English
Parliament, which at the beginning being very ambitious of their Friendship,
sent one Dorislaw to the Hague, who before he had his public Audience, was
murdered by some Scots who were all masked. And the Parliament having received
no Satisfaction upon this account, began to look with an ill Eye upon them,
which they little regarded, till Cromwell had reduced the Scots. And, though the
Parliament sent other Ambassadors to the Hague, yet the Dutch were not very
forward, but were for protracting the Treaty, till the Ambassadors having been
affronted by the Rabble, departed dissatisfied: Whereupon the Parliament gave
out Reprisals against them, declaring withal, That no Merchandises should be
transported into England, except in English Bottoms, and the English Privateers
began to fall every where upon the Dutch Merchant-ships. The Hollanders, who
were not very unanimous among themselves, did resolve at last, to try first
whether the Business might be compounded by fair means, and if that did not
succeed, to begin the War in good earnest, and for this purpose Ambassadors
were sent into England. Tromp in the mean while was sent out with a Fleet, to
secure their Commerce, and meeting with the English Admiral Blake, and refusing
to strike, a bloody Engagement ensued, which ended with equal loss on both
sides. The Hollanders pretended, that this had happened by accident; both
Parties however made great Preparations for War, and fought twice, the
Advantage remaining on the English side, notwithstanding they were beaten near
L^ghorn. But in the last Engagement the Hollanders having lost their Admiral
Tromp, and seven and twenty Men of War, they were obliged to conclude a Peace
with Cromwell, A Peace* 1654.
which was very advantageous and glorious on his side, they being among other
Articles obliged, for the future, never to make any one of the House of Orange
their Stadtholder. It was observed, that the Dutch Ships were not large enough,
which Error the Hollanders corrected afterward. Differences with Swedeland.
In the Year next following the Hollanders were grown jealous of the great
Success of the Swedes against Poland, and being desirous to prevent the Swedes
from becoming Masters of Prussia, they stirred up the King of Denmark against
them. But the Danes having been worsted in this War, the Hollanders sent a
Fleet to relieve Copenhagen, which was besieged by the Swedes: A bloody Battle
was fought in the Oresound, betwixt the Swedish and Dutch Fleets, wherein the
Hollanders lost two Admirals, but nevertheless gained their point in relieving
of Copenhagen. And in the Year next following they also bore their share in the
Battle of Funen, 1660.
till at last a Peace was concluded before Copenhagen, to the small
Satisfaction of the Danes, who accused the Hollanders, that they had not been
zealous enough in their Assistance against the Swedes; but the Hollanders were
afraid, that England and France might declare for Sweden, and under that
pretense fall upon them; besides that, they thought it their Interest, not to
let Denmark grow too powerful.

. The Second War with England, 16^5.
17. Holland was then for a few Years at Peace, till a bloody War broke out
betwixt them and the English, who could not but think the flourishing Trade and
great Power of the Hollanders at Sea, to be very prejudicial to them. France
blew up the Coals, being desirous to see these two mighty States weaken one
another's Power. In this War the English had the Advantage in the first and
third Engagements, but the Hollanders in the second: But the English, at last,
being willing to save Charges, did resolve only to infest the Hollanders by
their Privateers, and not to equipp a Fleet, which the Hollanders taking an
advantage of, ventured to enter the River of Thames; and having landed near
Chattam, they burned several Ships in the Harbor. This obliged England to make
a Peace with them, which was by mediation of the Crown of Sweden concluded at
Breda. In this War Holland recovered its Reputation, which it had lost in
Cromwell's time, and showed it self not to be inferior in Strength at Sea to
England; but they discovered their Weakness on Land, the Bishop of Munster
having been very troublesome to them.

. England and France declare War with Holland.
18. At last, in the Year 1672, a prodigious Storm fell upon Holland, which at
first threatened its ruin; France attacking it by Land, and England by Sea. It
was surprising to see how the French in a few days time took the Provinces of
Gueldres, Over-yssel and Vtrecht, which occasioned so general a Consternation,
that some are of Opinion, they might have taken Amsterdam it self, if they had
immediately gone toward it, whilst the first Consternation lasted. Some lay
the fault upon Rochford, who having received Orders to make an attempt upon
that City, tarried two days at Vtrecht, which he bestowed in receiving of
Complements, the Amsterdamers getting thereby time to take a Resolution for
their Defense. It served also for a great Encouragement to the Hollanders, that
the Bishop of Munster was forced to go away from before Groningen, he having,
together with the Elector of Collen, taken the French side. In the Year next
following the French took Maestricht from the Hollanders. But the Hollanders
having behaved themselves bravely in four Sea Engagements, and the Parliament
of England being become very jealous of France, a separate Peace, was by the
Mediation of Spain, concluded betwixt Holland and England. The Emperor and
Spain having then declared for Holland, the French King took his Garrisons out
of all the conquered Places, having first exacted from them great
Contributions, except Naerden and Grave, which were retaken by force. Thus the
Hollanders got all their places again except Maestricht; Rhinebergh which
belonged to the Elector of Collen being restored to him, and the Country of
Cleves to the Elector of Brandenburgh. This War also restored the Prince of
Orange to the same Dignity, and that under better Conditions than they had been
in the possession of his Ancestors. For the Common People, which already
favored the House of Orange, being put quite into a Consternation by the
prodigious Success of the French, and being persuaded, that this Misfortune was
occasioned by the Treachery of some who sat at the Helm, and that no body but
the Prince could restore the decayed State, did raise Tumults in most Cities,
which the Prince was forced to appease, by deposing the former Magistrates, and
putting in their room such as he knew were favorers of himself. In one of
these Tumults Cornelius and John du Wit, The Du Wits murdered.
two Brothers, were miserably murdered by the Rabble in the Hague; though a
great many are of Opinion, That especially the last of these, who had so long
sat at the Helm, had better deserved of his native Country. Tho the Prince had
been not a little instrumental in appeasing the Commotions, whereby Holland was
put in a condition to recover it self, yet he was not so successful in his War
against France: For he received a considerable loss near Seneffe, 1674.
he was repulsed before Maestricht, and endeavoring to relieve St. 1676.
Omer, he was defeated by the French; 1677.
and the Dutch Fleet which was sent to the Relief of Sicily had no great
Success. At last their Fear, that through long War their Liberty might be
endangered by the Prince, influenced them to make a separate Peace with France,
by virtue of which Maestricht was restored to the Hollanders.

. The Constitution.
19. The Seven Provinces of the United Netherlands are filled with a prodigious
number of People, there being some, who have computed, that in the Province of
Holland, the Number amounts to two millions and 500000. And unto this vast
Number of People is to be attributed their Industry, increase of Trade and
great Riches; for in a Country which is not the most fruitful, and where every
thing is very dear, they must else of necessity perish by Famine: But most of
the Inhabitants were transplanted thither out of other Countries; out of France
during the times of the Civil Commotions; out of England under the Reign of
Queen Mary; out of Germany during those long Wars there; but chiefly, out of
the other Provinces of the Netherlands, at the time of their revolting from
Spain. These Strangers were invited into this Country by its convenient
Situation, the Liberty of Religion and the Government; by its extraordinary
Constitutions and Conveniences for Trade and Correspondency in all Parts; and
at last, by the great Reputation which the States have gained abroad, by their
wise Management at home, and Success of their Arms abroad. And because every
body, who either brings some Means along with him, or has learned something to
maintain himself withal, finds a good Reception in Holland; even those who are
prosecuted in other places find a certain Refuge in this Country. Their Genius.
The Netherlanders are commonly very open-hearted, downright and honest, very
free in Words and Conversation, not easily to be moved or stirred up; but if
once made soundly angry, not easily to be appeased. If you Converse with them
without Haughtiness and with Discretion, so as to accommodate your self a
little to their Inclinations, you may do with them what you please. Charles V.
used to say of them, That there was not a Nation under the Sun, that did detest
more the Name of Slavery, and yet if you did manage them Mildly and with
Discretion, did bear it more patiently. But the Rabble here is very bad, it
being a common Custom to speak ill and despicably of their Magistrates, as
often as things do not answer Expectation. The Hollanders are very unfit for
Land-service, and the Dutch Horsemen are strange Creatures, yet those who live
in Gueldres, and upon the Borders of Westphalia, are tolerably good. But at Sea
they have done such Exploits that they may be compared with any Nation in the
World. And the Zealanders are esteemed more Hardy and Venturous than the
Hollanders. They are also generally very parsimonious, not much addicted to the
Belly, it being not the Custom here to spend their yearly Income, but to save
every Year an overplus. This saving way of living upholds their Credit, and
enables them to bear such heavy Taxes without being ruined by them. They are
very fit for all sorts of Manufactury, and very much addicted to Commerce, not
refusing to undergo any Labor or Danger, where something is to be got, and
those that understand Trade deal very easily with them. They are very punctual
in every respect, pondering and ordering a thing very well before they begin
it. And there is scarce any Nation in the World so fit for Trade as the Dutch,
this being very praiseworthy in them, that they always choose rather to get
somewhat by their own Industry, than by Violence or Fraud. But especially, the
greatest Liberty which they enjoy, is a great Encouragement for Trade. The
chiefest Vice among them is Covetousness, which however is not so pernicious
among them, because it produces in them Industry and good Husbandry. There is a
great many who have been amazed at the great Conduct which has appeared in the
management of their Affairs, notwithstanding that the Hollanders in general are
rarely of extraordinary Wit or Merits: Some allege this for a Reason, That a
cold Temper and Moderation of Passions are the fundamental Qualifications of
such as intend to manage State Affairs.

. The Nature of (...) Country.
20. The Seven United Provinces are not very large in Extent, they being to be
reckoned but for one Corner of Germany; but they are filled up with so
considerable a Number of beautiful, large and populous Cities, that no other
place of the same bigness is to be compared to it. Besides the Seven Provinces,
they are possessed of some Cities in Flanders and Brabant, viz. Hulst, Sluice,
Ardenburgh, Bois le Duc, Maestricht, Breda, Bergen op Zoom, Grave, and some
others. They also keep a Garrison in Embden, thereby to secure the River of
Embs. The Country in general is more fit for Pasture than Tilling, it producing
scarce so much Corn as is sufficient for the fifth part of its Inhabitants. But
this want is made up by the Industry of the Inhabitants, and the great
convenience of so many Rivers and the Seas, fit for Fishing and Navigation. The
Herring Fishery and that of Codds brings in vast Riches to them; and some
English have computed, That the Hollanders sell every Year 79200 Lasts (which
makes 138400 Tuns) of Herrings, which amount to the value of 1372000 l. not
including what is transported into Spain, Italy and France, and what is
consumed at home. Of their Shipping and Commerce.
But their Shipping and Commerce is of much greater Advantage to them, which
does flourish there to that degree, that some are of Opinion, That in Holland
are more Ships than in all other parts of Europe. Besides, Holland's Situation
in the midst of Europe makes it very fit for Trade, so that it sends its Ships
with great Convenience into the East and Western Seas; and though the
Commodiousness of those vast Rivers of the Rhine, Meuse, Elbe, Weser, and Embs,
draw the Commodities out of Germany, and in exchange for these vends its
Manufacturies there: For Holland has in regard, especially of the Rhine and the
Meuse, a great Advantage in its Trade before England, though this on the other
hand, has better Harbors and a deeper Coast: And because Holland is at the
latter end of the Year commonly overflown with Waters, which makes the Air very
thick and foggy, Nature has been kind to this Country, in that about that time
the Wind blows much Easterly, which disperses the Vapors, refreshes the Air,
and renders it wholesome; but from hence it is that their Harbors are often
shut up with Ice for three Months together, whereas they are always open in
England. The Hollanders trade almost into every Corner of the World, they
having been very careful to erect Fortresses and Colonies in far distant
Countries. But the East India Company, East India Company.
especially, has vastly increased her Trade and Riches; for this Company has
extended her Trade from Basora, which is situated near the great Bay of Persia,
at the very Mouth of the River Tigris, all along a prodigious Tract of rich
Ground near the Sea side as far as to the utmost parts of Japan; she stands
there in Confederacy with many Kings, and with many of them has made Treaties
of Monopolies, and is possessed of a great many strong Holds in those parts.
The Capital City there is Batavia, in Java Major, where the Governor General
keeps a Court like a King, under whose Jurisdiction are the other places. The
Company is Sovereign Mistress over all these Countries, the chiefest of which
are the Isles of Molucca and Banda, Amboina, Malacca, the Coast of the Island
of Zeilon, Patiacatta, Musulapatan, Negapatan upon the Coast of Cormandel,
Cochin, Cananor and Cranganor upon the Coast of Malabar, and several more;
whether they have a free Trade in the East Indies with China, I cannot affirm,
though it is certain that the Chinese drive a great Trade with them in Batavia;
but in Japan they have the whole Trade alone, no Portuguese being permitted to
come there. This Company is able to set out a Fleet of betwixt 40 and 50
Capital Ships, and to raise an Army of 30000 Men. The first Funds of this
Company did amount to sixty Tuns of Gold, which in the space of six Years,
deducting all the Charges and Dividends made to the Owners, was increased to
three hundred Tuns of Gold. The Funds of the West-Indi^ Company was of
fourscore Tuns of Gold, The West India Company.
and flour^sh'd extremely at the beginning, but ruined it self by making too
great Dividends, and not keeping a Fund sufficient for the carrying on of the
War against Spain. Besides, those concerned in this Company were more eager
after Conquests than Trade, and when Brasile revolted they received a capital
blow: Yet they are possessed in Gumea, of the Castle de Mina; and if I am not
mistaken of Loanda in Angola, and some other places, as also some of the
Caribby Islands, and of New Holland, in the Northern parts of America. They
have also lately begun to erect some Colonies in Guiana, and on the great River
of Orenoque. Some of the most curious have observed, that a great many things
concur in Holland for the promoting of Trade, which are not to be met withal
all at once in any other Country: As for example, the great quantity of People,
the Convenience and Security of the Country, the small Interest which is paid
for Money, which shows the great Superfluity of ready Money; the Severity used
against Thieves, Cheats, and Banquerooteers; the Bank of Amsterdam, great
number of Convoys, and moderate Customs, that they are so exact and regular in
their way of Trading, that the Magistrates are generally Merchants, or at
least, such as have an Interest in Commerce; That they are Masters in the
East Indies, and that by reason of the Frugality and Industry of the
Inhabitants, far more Commodities are exported than imported. And it is
observable, that though the Hollanders are Masters of the Spice in the Indies,
yet they use them least of all themselves. They have also the greatest share in
the Silktrade in Persia, and yet they cloth themselves in Woollen Cloth,
generally speaking. Nay, they sell their fine Clothes abroad, and send for
courser out of England for their own use. They sell their delicious Butter, and
send for other out of the North of England and Ireland for their use. French
Wines and Brandies are the chiefest Commodities which are consumed here, yet
even when they make a Debauch, they are not overlavishing.

. Strength and Weakness of this Commonwealth.
21. From what has been said, it is manifest that the Strength of this
Commonwealth is founded upon Trade and its Naval Force, which is absolutely
necessary to maintain the former; nor is there any Country so stocked with good
Seamen, for the setting out of a great Fleet. But on the Land-side, where the
Country cannot be under Water, it is not near so strong. For though they do not
want Money to raise an Army of Foreigners, yet is it not always advisable, for
a Commonwealth to rely only upon such as have no other tie but their Pay,
since they may easily prove unfaithful, or else, misled by the General,
assist him in over-turning the Liberty of the State. And it has been in regard
of this that some have advised, that the Provinces of Holland and Zealand
should separate themselves from the rest, and only endeavor to strengthen
themselves betwixt the Meuse, the Rhine, and South Sea; and in case of
Necessity, by opening of their Sluices, put the Country under-water; but for the
rest, only endeavor to strengthen themselves at Sea: But to examine this
Proposition, is not now my business. There are several Inconveniences that
proceed from the very Form of the Government of this State. For, to speak
properly, these seven Provinces do not make up one entire Commonwealth, but
there are seven Common wealths, Form of Government.
which by the Union at Vtrecht are joined into one Confederacy; they have their
Deputies constantly residing at the Hague, whose business it is to take care of
such Affairs as concern the whole Union; and if any thing of moment is to be
decreed, they send to the several Provinces, and according to the Approbation
of these they make their Decrees: these Deputies are called the States General.
Nay, it seems that each Province is rather a Confederacy, than one City or
Commonwealth, because the several Members of each Province do treat with one
another like Confederates, and not like one Body, where one is superior to the
other, or the majority of Votes determines a business. For even in the
Provincial Assemblies a great many things cannot be determined by the Plurality
of Votes, but every Member's consent is required. Which shows, that these
Provinces and Cities not united by so strong a Tie, as those who are governed
by one Sovereign, except as far as Necessity obliges them to keep together. And
the great Cities are filled with Rabble; which if once put in motion, uses to
make strange work among them. It is therefore the great Care of the
Magistrates, that they are kept in constant Employment to get Bread, for Famine
would quickly be the occasion of great Tumults here. There is also a Jealousy
betwixt Holland and the other Provinces; the latter pretending to some
Prerogative, as being the most Powerful, and contributing most to the Public;
whereas the others are for maintaining their Liberty and Equality. All the rest
of the Cities are especially jealous of Amsterdam, because this City draws
abundance of Trade from the rest, and puts them in apprehension, as if She were
ambitious to domineer over them. But the greatest Irregularity happens in their
Constitution, by means of the Prince of Orange, Prince of Orange.
who having the Favor of the Common people, of the Land-Souldiers and the
Clergy (for the Clergy hate the Arminians, who being of the Barnefelt Faction,
are Enemies of the Prince) seems to endanger their Liberty. Wherefore the chief
Men in the Cities, to whom belongs the Magistracy there, possess their places
in continual fear, except they will be pliable to the Prince of Orange; Whose
interest is also inconsistent with that of the State, because no Land way can
be advantageous for Holland; whereas in time of War, his Authority is much
greater than otherwise. And therefore according to this Form of the Government,
scarce a firm Peace can be established at home. It may easily happen that the
Prince may aspire to be their Sovereign. 1675.
And when the Province of Gueldres did offer to him the Sovereignty, he did
give them to understand, That if all the rest were of the same Opinion, they
should have no occasion to look for him behind the Wine-pipes, as the Jews did
for Saul; yet the wiser sort are of opinion, that he would reap no great
benefit from this Sovereignty, since it would be scarce possible to keep so
many great Cities in Obedience against their Will. For Cittadels and Garrisons
would prove the Ruin of Trade, which never flourishes where absolute Power
controuls the Subject. Wherefore it seems more advisable for the Prince to be
satisfied with what Power he has, it being certain, that if he knows how to
manage the Humor of the People, he is almost able to do what he pleases.
Whether it is their advantage to have a Sovereignty.
It has been a great Dispute, whether it be for the advantage of these
Netherlands, to have a Governor General. Those who are for the Affirmative,
allege, That this Country having been from ancient Time under the Jurisdiction
of a limited Sovereignty, has been used to that Form of Government; That it
conduces to the outward Splendor of the Commonwealth, and to uphold the
Authority of the Magistrates in the Cities; That thereby Factions and Tumults
are kept under and suppressed. That thereby are prevented a great many
Inconveniences in executing any designs of moment, which were incident to an
Aristocratical and Democratical State; viz. Slow and divided Counsels in
Consultations, delays in Executions, and the divulging of secret Designs; all
which we will leave undetermined here. This is also to be esteemed one of the
Weaknesses of this Commonwealth, that so great a number of Inhabitants cannot
be maintained by the Product of the Land, but must get their Bread from abroad,
and by the help of Foreigners. Wherefore the certain Ruin of this Commonwealth
is at hand, Other Defects of this Commonwealth.
whenever its Trade and Navigation should be stopped; which however is not
altogether impossible to happen. The difference of Religion is commonly
reckoned among the weaknesses of a State. But some make this one of the main
Pillars of the flourishing Condition of Holland, because it contributes greatly
to the Strength and Increase of this State. The Reformed Religion is here the
Established Religion, all the rest being only tolerated: The Papists are
connived at, but also they keep over them a strict Eye, for fear the Priests,
who all depend on the Pope, should enter into a Correspondency with Spain. Yet
it is rarely seen in Holland, that one Subject hates the other, or prosecutes
him upon the Score of Religion. It has been the Saying of some, that in other
Countries Religion does more good, but in Holland less harm. It is also very
inconvenient for the Inhabitants, that all sorts of Victuals are sold at so
excessive a Rate: The reason of which is, That the greatest Revenues of
Holland, are raised by way of Excise upon these Commodities; and it is a common
Saying, That before you can get a Dish of Fish ready dressed upon your Table at
Amsterdam, you have paid above Thirty several Taxes for it. And notwithstanding
all these heavy Impositions, the State is much in debt. There are some also who
pretend, that the Traffic of the Dutch does grow less and less; for which they
allege several Reasons; viz. That since the Peace concluded at Munster, other
Nations have also applied themselves to Trade. That the Price of the East India
Commodities does fall every Year, and yet the Charges of the Company increases
daily. For whereas formerly five or six East India Ships coming home yearly,
were reckoned very considerable, now eighteen or twenty do return; which so
over-stocks them with these Commodities, that they are obliged to lay them up
in their Warehouses for a considerable time, before they can vent them without
Loss. They allege also, that Corn has been of late years so abundant in
France, Spain, Italy and England, that the Hollanders have not sent much of it
into these Parts, it being their custom to fetch Corn from off the East-Sea,
where they vent, in exchange of it, most or their Spices: That the great
Addition of Fortifications and sumptuous Buildings to the City of Amsterdam,
have taken up a great quantity of Ready-money, which might have been better
employed in way of Trade; and that Luxury and Debauchery does increase daily in
that City. But the Reason why the Hollanders had such ill Success at the
beginning of this War, seems to be, that by the great Eagerness of Gain and
Trade, their Martial Heat was almost extinguished; and that after the Peace
concluded at Munster, they being not apprehensive of any Invasion by Land, they
only applied themselves to strengthen their Power at Sea; and having dismissed
their best Officers, they had supplied their place with their own Relations;
whose Motto was, 1665.
Peace and a good Government. For at the time of the War with England they had
dismissed the Old English Bands; and in the Year 1668, the French Troops, both
which were the flower of their Armies, which of necessity must have been
reduced into a very ill condition, since the Prince of Orange had no more
concern with them. Besides this, they thought themselves very secure, not
imagining that France would either dare, or be able to attempt a Conquest over
them, as long as they were sure, that the Emperor and Spain would side with
them; neither did they imagine that the English would join with the French
against them. And at last they hoped, they would beat the English out of the
Sea, before France should be able to take three or four Places. They relied
upon the old Way of making of War, when a whole Company was taken up with the
Taking of one Place, and when whole Books were composed of the Taking of Groll,
or the Sar of Ghent. It is also believed, that some of the Hollanders were not
sorry, that they had no great Success by Land, hoping thereby to bring into
discredit the Conduct, and to diminish the Authority of the Prince, whom they
had been obliged to make their Captain General against their Will.

. The Neighbors of Holland.
22. As for the Neighbors of Holland, and what it has to fear or to hope from
them; it seems that the English are the most dangerous Neighbors to the
Hollanders, they being the only Nation that have been formidable to them
hitherto, against their Pretensions to the Dominion of the Seas and Trade; who
are extremely dissatisfied, that this new Commonwealth, which, when it was in
a very tottering condition, was strongly upheld by them, has now been
beforehand with them in the East Indies, and daily spoil their Markets almost
everywhere. For, because an Englishman is naturally proud, England.
and loves to live well; whereas a Hollander minds nothing so much as his Gain,
being satisfied with an indifferent share, nor spends any thing idly; a
Hollander can sell cheaper than an Englishman, and Strangers will always
rather deal with the first than the last. It is therefore in all probability
the chief Interest of Holland, not to irritate England, and rather to allow
them some Ceremonial Prerogatives at Sea, such as striking, and the like; but
withal to strengthen their Power at Sea, that, in case England should really
contest with them for the Trade and Fishing, it may be able to make head
against them. The Hollanders must also, as much as is possible, endeavor to
encourage the same sort of Manufacture, as is in England, and either to make
these Commodities better, or at least to sell them cheaper, thereby to get the
advantage from them. The Hollanders ought to stand in great fear of France on
the Land-side, France.
especially since that King is their great Enemy, having opposed for a
considerable time all their Designs. It is therefore very necessary to be in a
good posture on the Land-side, and to keep fair with the Princes of Germany,
who else would permit the French to march through their Territories, or else
perhaps join with him. They must endeavor the Preservation of the Spanish
Netherlands, which they ought to consider as their Frontiers, and whereby Spain
is obliged always to Side with Holland against France. They must take care to
be provided with good Officers, and to put the Province of Holland into a
better Posture of Defense on the side of Gueldres. It is not easy to be
supposed, that England and France will join again against Holland, which may be
prevented by the Hollanders. It is also the Interest of Holland to take care,
that the Naval Strength of France do not increase too much, and to prevent, as
much as in them lies, that they do not settle a Trade in the East Indies. And
because France draws the Riches of all Europe to it self by its Manufacturies,
the Hollanders must try to imitate them, and furnish other Nations with the
like. Spain.
From Spain, Holland need fear nothing either by Sea or Land, since that time,
that this Kingdom has lost all its labor against them. Nay, it is their Common
Interest now that they cultivate a mutual good Understanding, to stop the
Progresses of the French in the Netherlands: And the Spaniards have scarce any
thing left them, from which the Dutch could have any prospect of Benefit, they
being not in a Capacity to conquer or to maintain the West Indies. And though
the Hollanders may be very troublesome to the Spanish Silver Fleets, yet the
Spanish Privateers may also do them considerable mischief. Portugal has no
Pretensions against Holland, Portugal.
and it ought most to stand in fear of the Hollanders, because these would be
glad of an opportunity to take from the Portuguese Brosile, and what they have
left in the East Indies, which however they would not so easily be able to
execute; because the Hollanders are obliged to fetch their Bread out of the
East-Sea; they have always taken care that neither of the Northern Kings should
be Master alone of the EastSea; The Northern Crowns.
which Balance is the easier kept now, since the Sound is divided betwixt
Sweden and Denmark. And it is notorious enough what Game they have played with
these two Kings. For the rest, it is the general Interest of Holland, to keep
fair with all other Princes, thereby to maintain a free Commerce everywhere.
And in these Places where they cannot Trade alone, it is the Interest of the
Hollanders either by goodness or cheapness of their Commodities, and an easy
Deportment to endeavor to draw the chief Benefit of Trade to themselves. For
this is the easier and less odious Way to heap up Riches, than if they should
attempt publicly to mix the Foreign Trade of all other Nations; since it would
prove impossible for them alone to maintain a general Monopoly.

CHAP. VII.
Of the SWITZERS.
. 1. First Original of this Common^ealt^.
THese Countries which are possessed now by the Switzers belonged formerly to
the German Empire; but that they were united in one Commonwealth was occasioned
thus; the three small Counties of Vry, Switz, and Vnder-Walden, which commonly
are called the three Forest Towns, enjoyed very ancient Privileges, which they
pretended to have been granted them by the Emperor Lewis, Surnamed the Pious,
yet so, that the Emperor used to send thither an Imperial Judge or Vicar, who
had the supreme Jurisdiction in criminal Affairs. There were also some
Monasteries in those Countries which, tho they enjoyed particular Privileges,
yet did they not interfere with their Liberty of the People. But there lived a
great many Noblemen among them also, who by degrees getting the ascendant over
the Common People, did oppress their Liberty, especially during the diffe^ences
which were betwixt the Emperors and the Popes, when the Nobility used to side
with the Popes, but the Commonalty with the Emperor. These divisions betwixt
the Nobility and the People grew very high at the time of the great
Interregnum, which happened after the death of the Emperor Frederick the
Second, which breaking out into an open War, the whole Nobility was driven out
of the Counrry; but by the Emperor Rodolfus's Authority, a reconciliation
having been made betwixt them, the Nobles were restored to their Estates. Thus
these Countries did enjoy their former Liberty, till the Reign of Albert I. who
having conceived a hatred against them, because they had sided with his Rival
Adolph of Nassaw, was very desirous to annex them to his Hereditary Countries;
the Monasteries therefore, and a great many of the Nobility, having, upon his
desire, submitted themselves to the Jurisdiction of the House of Austria: The
same was also proposed to the three abovementioned places, who refusing his
proposition, he set over them Imperial Judges or Vicars, who, contrary to the
ancient Custom, began to reside in strong Castles, and having first tried by
persuasions to bring them over to the House of Austria, afterward, when they
found their labor lost that way, grew very burthensom to the People by their
oppressions; neither were the Petitions made against them by the Commonalty in
any ways regarded by the Emperor; nay the Judge of Vnder-Walden, who is name was
Geisler, was become so extravagant, that he set his Hat upon a Pole in the
Marketplace of Altorf, commanding that every body should pay the same respect
to his Hat as to himself; thereby to make a trial of their Obedience. And among
others one William Tell having often passed by without paying his Respect, he
forced him to shoot with an Arrow through an Apple, which was pla^ed upon his
own Sons Head; but this man whilst he was carrying to prison, making his
escape, stirred up the hatred of the People against the Judges.

2. The first Vn^on of he Switz
There were at that time three Men of great Authority among them, viz. Werner
Stouffacher, born in Switz, Walter Furst born in Vry, and Arnold of Melchtale
born in Vnder-Walden: These entered into an Association, whereby it was agreed
among them, to rid themselves of this Tyranny, and to restore their ancient
Liberty. A great many more having entered afterward into this Association an
agreement was made betwixt them; that in the year 1308. on the first day of
January, they would surprise these Judges in their strong Castles, and drive
them out of the Country. This Confederacy was made in the year 1307. on the 17.
of October; and having afterward been put in execution in the abovementioned
year, on the first day of January, these three places entered into a Confederacy
for ten years for the mutual Defense of their ancient Liberties. In the year
1315. Leopald Archduke of Austria, Son of Albert I. marched with an Army of
20000 Men to force them to Obedience; against whom they marched out with 1300
men, and whilst the Austrian Forces were marching betwixt the Lane and
inaccessible mountains, some of the Switzers by rolling down upon them, and
throwing great heaps of stones among them, put the Enemy in confusion, whilst
the rest fell upon them and entirely defeated them near Morgarten. Then these
three places renewed their Confederacy, The B^^^el near Morgarten.
and having confirmed it by solemn Oaths, they agreed it should continue for
ever. This was done at Brun, in the year 1320. on the 7 th. of December. And
this is the first beginning of that Commonwealth, whose Confederates used to
call themselves Edytsgenossen (which signifies Allied by Oath) but strangers
call them in general Switzers, from that one place called Switz.

3. To first design of this Confederacy.
Nevertheless the first intention of this Confederacy was not to separate
themselves from the German Empire, but only to maintain their ancient
Privileges; tho by degrees they began to Administer their own Affairs at home
without sending their Deputies to the Dyets of the Empire: and the Switzers
were not till in the year 1648. viz in the Westphalian Peace declared quite
Independent from the Roman Empire; for the Emperor Lewis IV. had confirmed the
former Confederacy, and in 1320. had sent them a new Imperial Vicar or Judge,
unto whom, after having received new assurances to be maintained in their
Privileges, they did Homage, in the name of the Emperor. But the following
Emperors gave them full power to choose Judges among themselves, granting them
the supreme Jurisdiction both in Civil and Criminal Affairs. In the year 1332.
Lucern, and in the year 1351. Zurick entered into this Confederacy. Lucern was
formerly under the Jurisdiction of the House of Austria. Zurick, which is the
chiefest of the Confederacy, was formerly a free Imperial City. Immediately
after Glaris, and in the year 1352. Zug and Bern were United with the former.
The Switzers after this time had great Wars with the House of Austria, and in
1386 slew Leopold Archduke of Austria, Battle near Sempach*
with a great many* Nobles, in the battle near Sempach. In the year 1444. the
Switzers did give another proof of their Valor; for the Dauphin of France,
afterward, called Lewis XI. marching with a great Army to disturb the Council
then held at Basil, was attacked by 1900 Switzers with such fury, that tho they
all fell in the enterprise, yet did they strike such a terror into the French,
that they quickly retreated homewards.

4. Wars wi^h Charles Duk^ of Burgundy.
In the year 1476 the Switzers were engaged in a war against Charles Duke of
Burgundy, who was stirred up by Lewis XI. who was for setting the Duke at work.
Against him Rene Duke of Lorain, and the Bishops of Strasburgh, and Basil, made
an Alliance with the Switzers: The Emperor Frederick III. also being desirous
to revenge the quarrel of his House, commanded them to fall upon the Duke of
Burgundy, who then was an Enemy of the Empire. And having afterward made a
Peace with the Duke without including the Switzers, he hoped they would be
severely chastized by this brave Prince; but things happened quite contrary to
his expectation; for the Switzers defeated the Duke in three great Battles; the
first near Granson, afterward near Murten, where the Duke had an Army of one
hundred thousand Men, and at last near Nancy in Lorain, where the Duke himself
was killed. By these Victories the Switzers gained great Reputation. In the
year 1481. Fribourgh and Solothurn; in the year 1501. Basil and Shafshausen,
and last of all Appen-Zell were united with this Confederacy. The whole body
then of the Swisse Confederacy is composed of 13 Commonwealths, which they call
Places; but the Italians and French call them Cantons; Their All^es
among these Zuric, Bern, Lucern, Zug, Basil, Fribourgh, Selothum, and
Shafshausen, are Cities; Vry, Switz, Vnderwalden, Glariss and Appen-Zell, are
Countries, where are a good number of Towns and Villages to be met withal. The
Switzers have also some other Confederates, viz. the Abbey and City of S. Gall,
the Grisons, the Vallesins, the Cities of Rotweil, Munthusen, Bienne, the Biel,
Geneva, and Newburgh on the Lake: There are also among them several Cities and
some Counties, which are either subject to the whole Confederacy or to some
particular Commonwealths.

5. Some other Wars of the Switzers
The Switzers were also obliged to fight against the Emperor Maximilian I. for
their Liberty; he having stirred up the Swabian League against them, 1499.
hoping by this way to chastise them. But the Switzers for the most part got
the better of their Enemies, till through the mediation of Lewis Duke of Milan
a peace was made betwixt them. Not to relate here some intestine Commotions
among them, scarce worth mentioning, they have done great Actions abroad, under
the Conduct of other Nations, and more especially under the French: For Lewis
XI. having, whilst he was Dauphin, sufficiently tried their Valor in the
engagement near Basil, sought by all ways after he was King, to make use of the
Switz in his Wars; wherefore he allowed them a certain yearly Pension: And his
Son Charles VIII. made use of the Switzers with good success in his Expedition
against Naples; for the Italians, when they saw the Switzers make such a
prodigious havoc among them by the help of their BattelAxes and large
Back-Swords; they were so surprised at it, that they counted the former Wars
but like Childrens play in comparison of this, and looked upon the Switzers
more like some Monsters than Soldiers. Lewis XII. also employed the Switzers in
his Service in his Italian Wars, tho they lost great part of their Reputation
there. For these Switzers which were listed in the Service of Lewis Menis Duke
of Milan, refusing to fight against their Countrymen that were in the French
Army, thereby betrayed this Prince into the hands of the French.

6. But in the year 1510. Their Wars with France
the Switzers left the French Service; for the time of agreement with France
being expired, they demanded a larger Pension, and which Lewis XII. refused to
pay them, thinking it unbecoming the grandeur of a King to be imposed upon by
these Highland Peasants (as he used to call them) he having therefore dismissed
them, took into his Service some of the Grisons and Germans in their stead. But
this proved very disadvantageous to France; for they listed themselves under
Pope Julius II. and did great Service against France. They attacked the French
who were much more numerous, 1513.
with such fury, near Novara, that after a bloody Fight they not only routed
them, but also quite beat them out of Italy. Afterward they fell into Burgundy
and besieged the City of Dijon, where the Duke of Tremoville was obliged to
make a very dishonorable agreement with them, and was glad to send them home
with fair promises of great sums of Money; and if he had not stopped their
progress they would certainly have put France into the utmost danger, the King
of England being at the same time fallen into France on the other side. The
Switzers attacked Francis I. 1515
in his Camp near Marignano; the fight lasted two days, and after a great deal
of bloodshed on both sides the Switzers retired in good order. Wherefore
Francis I. in the year next following gained their Friendship by a great sum of
Money, whose example the succeeding Kings have followed ever since. Their
ancient Reputation is much diminished of late years, partly because they are
not altogether so furious now, partly because other Nations have found out a
way to bring their Infantry into a better condition. And besides this, those
great Back-Swords which the Switz used to handle with so much dexterity by the
extraordinary strength of their Arms, are quite out of use in Europe.

7. As to the qualifications of these Countries, The (...) of the Soil.
which are Inhabited by the Switzers, they are very different; for in the
mountainous parts scarce any thing else but Pasture Grounds are to be met
withal; but tho the Valley and flat Country produce Corn and Wine in
considerable quantities, yet among so vast a number of Inhabitants there
appears no great plenty here, since Foreign Commodities cannot be imported
without great difficulty, and what is deficient in the native Soil, is not
repaired by Traffic and Manufactories. It Is therefore accounted a common
calamity among the Switzers if once in some years the Plague does not come
among them, to rid them of so many superfluous Mouths. Yet they enjoy this
benefit by the situation of their Country, that, by reason of the high
Mountains and narrow Passages, it is almost inaccessible, especially on the
Italian side, and in the midst of the Country; for some of the outward parts
are of a very easy aocess.

8. The Gen^ns of this N^tion.
The Switzers pretend to be downright honest and true to their word; and
indeed, they are generally Simple and Plain-Dealing, without any great Cunning
or By-Designs; but they are courageous and soon provoked to wrath. They are
steadfast in their Resolutions, from whence they don't easily recede; their
valor, constancy, talness and strength of Body, has so recommended them to a
great many Princes, that they choose their Guards among them; and the King of
France maintains a considerable number of Switz Foot Soldiers. They are very
forward to fight, but not to undergo any other hardship or labor; they expect
to have duly their pay, if that fail, they return home as fast as they can;
from whence comes the Proverb, No Money no Swisse. They do not love to bear
hunger or hardship in other Countries, because they have enough of that at
home. It is one of the Articles of Agreement made with France, that that Crown
shall never have less than 6000 at a time in pay, and that these are not to be
separated: That in case these Articles should not be performed, they may be in
capacity to assist one another: They also never will be employed in any Sea
service.

9. Their strength and weakness
The main strength of this Confederate Commonwealth consists in the number of
its Inhabitants: For in the City of Bern, which has the greatest Territories,
pretends alone to be able to send into the Field 100000 fighting Men. And it is
not to be questioned, but that, if they had been ambitious of making Conquests,
at that time when their Glory was at the highest pitch, or had not wanted
Conduct, they might easily have brought under their Subjection the Franche
Comte, and a great part of Lombardy; but the reason why they did not aim at
Conquests was partly their Inclination, which did not prompt them to encroach
upon their Neighbou^s; partly the constitution of their Government, which seems
to be unfit for great and sudden Enterprises: For each Canton by itself
considered is a Democracy, the highest Power being lodged in the Guildes; and
it is certain, that such as are of little Understanding and Experience, are
always very positive in their opinions, and suspicious of all mankind. And the
whole Confederacy is altogether adapted for their common Defense, and for the
maintaining of a firm Union betwixt themselves. The difference of Religion is
also a main obstacle among them, some of them being Roman Catholics, but most
Protestants, and both Parties great Zealots in their Religion: Wherefore it
seems a hard task to make them all truly unanimous, except forced by the
necessity of a common Danger. And in this Democratical Government it is not to
be supposed, that one man can have sufficient Authority to sway the rest, and
to stir them up to any great and sudden Enterprise. And this slowness of their
public Counsels is such a check upon their natural Valor at home, that they
can employ it no better than to sell it for a little money to other Nations.

10. Their neighbors.
This is the very reason why the Switzers are the best Neighbors in the World;
as being never to be feared, and always ready to assist you in case of
necessity, if you pay them for it. On the other hand, they need not stand in
great fear of their Neighbors. The States of Italy are not in a capacity to do
them any harm, and Germany is not willing to hurt them. If the House of Austria
should attack them, they are able to defend themselves, and besides this, they
may in such a case be sure to be backed by France. France alone seems to be
their most dangerous Neighbor; and it has been the wonder of many, why the
Switzers rely altogether upon the French Alliance and Promises, and do not in
the least endeavor to secure their Country against the growing Power of
France; and that in the last war they left the Franche Comte to the mercy of
the French, which opens the Passage into their Country, and enables the French
to levy Soldiers on their Frontiers at pleasure. It seems therefore to be the
present Interest of Switzerland, not to imitate the French, and nevertheless to
take care, that they do not make themselves Masters of their Frontier Places,
viz. of Geneva, Newburgh on the Lake, the Four Forest Towns, and Constance.
That they do not send too great a number of their Men into the French Service,
whereby they may exhaust their own Stock of Soldiers; and that such as are
sent into the French Service, may be engaged not to be forgetful of their Duty
to their native Country, so as to be ready to return home in case of necessity.
On the other hand, France seems to have no great reason to attack the Switzers,
as long as they are quiet and do not pretend to oppose the French Designs; it
being evident, that if France had once obtained its aim, the Switzers would be
obliged to submit themselves. And it seems at this time more Advantageous for
the French to make use of the Switzers as their Allies, than by conquering
them, to make them refractory Subjects, who, by reason of their natural
stubborness, must be bridled by strong Garrisons, which would scarce be
maintained out of the Revenues of so poor a Country.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the GERMAN Empire.
1. Te ancient condition of Germany.
GErmany was not anciently one Commonwealth, but divided into a great many
States, and independent of each other, most of them being Democracies: And tho
some of them had their Kings, yet these had more Authority to Advise than to
Command. These several States were at last united under the Government of the
Francks: The Kings of the Merovingean Family having undertaken several
Expeditions into Germany, did reduce several of these States under their
Subjection: And Charles the Great reduced all Germany under his Jurisdiction,
Charles the Great.
he being at the same time Master of France, Italy, Rome, and a part of Spain;
all which Provinces he committed to the care of certain Governors, who were
called Graves or Marc-Graves. The Saxons retained more of their ancient Liberty
than the rest; wherefore the better to keep this, then barbarous Nation in
obedience, he erected several Episcopal Sees in Saxony, hoping, by the
influence of the Christian Doctrine, to civilize this barbarous People. Lewis
the Pious.
Lewis, Surnamed the Pious, Son of Charles the Great, had three Sons, viz.
Lotharius, Lewis, and Charles, who divided the Empire of the Francks among
them. In this Division Lewis got for his share all Germany, as far as it
extends on this side of the Rhine, and also some Countries on the other side of
that River, by reason of the Vineyards, as it is said, which are on both sides.
Lewis K. of German^.
All which he was possessed of as Sovereign, without being in any ways
dependent on his elder Brother, much less the younger, who had France for his
share: And at that time Germany was first made a Kingdom independent of any
other.

2. Carolomannus, the Son of this Lewis, did, after the death of Charles the
Bald, who was King of France, and had born the Title of Roman Emperor, Conquer
Italy, and took upon him the Imperial Dignity, notwithstanding that Lewis, Son
of Charles the Bald and King of France, had, upon instigation of the Pope,
assumed the same Title. After him succeeded his younger Brother Carolus
Crassus, C. Crassus.
who maintained both the Kingdom of Italy and the Imperial Title. 8^7.
But the great Men in Germany having deposed the said Charles, they made
Arnolph, the Son of the abovementioned Carolomannus, King of Germany, 894.
who went into Italy and took upon him the Title of Roman Emperor, for which
had contended for a good while Berengarius Duke of Trioul, 899.
and Guido Duke of Spoleto. But after the death of Arnulph, Lewis the Child.
his Son Lewis, Surnamed the Child, obtained the Crown of Germany, under whose
Reign the Affairs of Germany were in so ill a condition, that he had no leisure
to look into those of Italy: For Arnulph had called to his assistance the
Hungarians against Zwentepold, King of Bohemia and Moravia, who had Rebelled
against him, with whose assistance he reduced Zwentepold to obedience; but the
Hungarians, who were at that time a most barbarous Nation, having got a taste of
Germany, made an inroad into that Country, ravaging every where with an inhuman
Cruelty. They also defeated Lewis near Augsburgh, 9^5.
obliging him to pay them a yearly Tribute; notwithstanding which, they ravaged
and plundered wherever they came. This overthrow was chiefly occasioned by the
Kings tender Age, and the Divisions of the great Men among themselves, who
aimed at nothing more than to establish their own Authority. 9^1.
After the death of Lewis, Cunrad.
Cunrad, Duke of Franconia, was elected King Germany, under whose Reign the
Potent Dukes of Lorain, Swabia, Bavaria, and Saxony, did pretend to maintain
the Sovereignty over their own Countries, and a Hereditary Possession; which
Cunrad was not able to prevent; and because Henry Duke of Saxony was the most
Potent, and Cunrad feared, that at last he might quite withdraw himself from
the German Empire, he upon his Deathbed advised the rest of the Princes of
Germany to make him their King, which was done accordingly. And thus the Empire
was transferred from the Carolingian Family to the Saxons.

3. Henry the Faulconer.
Henry Surnamed the Birdcatcher, did bridle the Fury of the Hungarians: For
they having made a great inroad into Germany, and demanded the Yearly Tribute
from him, he sent them a Mungeril-Dog, and afterward Defeated them in a bloody
Battle near Merseburgh, where he slew 80000 of them. Under the Reign of this
King, the greatest part of the Cities which are situated on the sides of the
Rhine. were either Built, or else Fortified with Walls. This Henry, also did
Conquer the Serbes and Wendes, a Sarmatick or Sclavonian Nation, who being
possessed of a large Tract of Land in Germany, on the River Elbe, he drove out
of Misnia, Lusatia and the Marquisate of Brandenburgh. After he had
re-established the Affairs of Germany, he died in the Year 936. Otto the Great.
After him succeeded his Son Otto, Surnamed the Great, who at first was engaged
in heavy Civil Wars against several Princes, but especially against those who
pretended to be of the Race of Charles the Great, and were extremely
dissatisfied that the Royal Dignity was transferred to the Saxons. He was also
very Fortunate in his Wars against the Danes. To the Hungarians, who ventured
to make another Incursion into Germany, he gave a capital overthrow near
Augsburgh, since which time, they never have dared to show themselves in
Germany. In Italy there had been great Confusions for a long time, the
Sovereignty having been usurped sometimes by one, sometimes by another, till at
last* Otto being called thither, possessed himself both of the Kingdom of Italy
and the Imperial Dignity, it having been then agreed, that both the Imperial
and Royal Dignity of Italy, should be inseparably annexed, without any further
Election, to the Royal Dignity of Germany, and that no Pope should be chosen
without the Approbation of the King of the Germans, ^62.
and Otto was Crowned at Rome: though this Conquest has proved not very
beneficial to Germany, the succeeding Popes having made it their Business to
raise continual Disturbances, which was not easy to be prevented, because these
Places were not kept in awe by strong Castles or Garrisons. Wherefore as often
as the Popes were pleased to raise new Commotions, the Germans were obliged to
send great Armies thither, which continual Alarms consumed great quantities of
Men and Money: In lieu of which, their Kings had scarce any Revenues out of
Italy, except that they had Free Quarters and Entertainment given them during
their stay there. This Otto died in the Year 974 leaving for his Successor his
Son Otto II. Otto II.
who also at first met with great Disturbances from some of the Princes of
Germany. Afterward Lotharius King of France would have made himself Master of
Loraine, and had very near surprised the Emperor at Aix la Chapelle: But Otto
marched with an Army through Champaigne to the very Gates of Paris; but in his
return home received a considerable Loss. At last a Peace was concluded at
Rheims, by Virtue of which, Loraine was left to the Emperor. He then undertook
an Expedition into Italy against the Greeks, who had made themselves Masters of
that Country; these he overthrew at first, but received afterward a grand
Defeat, because the Romans and those of Benevento immediately turned their
Backs; he himself fell into the Hands of the Enemy, but found means to make his
Escape from them, and revenged himself against the former for their Infidelity.
He died not long after of Vexation. His Son Otto III. Otto I*
did employ a great part of his Reign in appeasing these Tumults, which were
raised in Rome by the Consul Crescentius, who aiming at the Sovereignty, was
hanged for his pains by Order of Otto, who was afterward poisoned by the
Widow of the said Crescentius with a pair of Gloves made up with a certain
sort of Poison. 1001.
Otto having left no Children behind him, the Crown was conferred upon Henry
II. Surnamed the Lame, Duke of Bavaria, who sprang from the Saxon Race; with
whom Ecbart Landgrave of Hesse, did contend for the Crown, but lost his Life in
the Quarrel. This Emperor was entangled in continual Troubles in Italy, and
chastised Boleslaus King of Poland, Because he was a great Benefactor to the
Clergy, he was made a Saint after his Death.

4. 1024.
Henry II. having left no Children behind him, Conrad II.
the Princes elected Conrad Sali Duke of Franconia, Emperor in his room, which
occasioned great Jealousy in the Saxons, and great Wars in Germany. This
Emperor met with great Disturbances both in Germany and Italy, which were at
last all composed. Radolf the last King of Burgundy and Arus dying without
Issue, left him that Kingdom by his last Will, which he took Possession of and
united the same with Germany, having forced Eudo the Earl of Champaigne who
made a pretension upon it, 1034.
to resign his Title. He was also very Fortunate in his Wars against the Pole^
and Sclavonians, and died in the Year 1035. Him succeeded his Son Henry, Henry
III:
Surnamed the Black, who was continually alarmed by the Hungarians and the
Popes Intrigues, against whom he maintained the Imperial Dignity with great
bravery. He died in the Year 1056. His Son Henry IV. Henry IV.
his Reign was very long, but also very Troublesome and Unfortunate. Among
other Reasons, this may be counted one of the Chiefest, that he being but Six
Years of Age when his Father died, was left to the Tuition of such as had no
true Care of his Education; and besides this, by selling the Church Benefices
without having any Regard to Deserts, had done considerable Mischief to the
Empire. Wherefore Henry coming to his riper Years, and perceiving how the
Ecclesiastics had got all the best Possessions of the Empire into their Hands,
he resolved to dispossess them again, whereby he drew upon himself the hatred
of the Clergy. The Saxons were also his great Enemies, because he had by
Building up of some Fortresses endeavored to restrain their Insolences; and
though he often kept his Court in Saxony, yet he seldom preferred the Saxons to
any Offices. Most of the Princes were also dissatisfied with him, because he
rarely advised with them concerning the public State of Affairs, but either
followed the Advice of his Counselors, who were most of them Men of mean
Birth, or else his own Head. These and some other Reasons, set the Saxons
against him in an open Rebellion, with whom he waged long and bloody Wars, The
Pope gives him great trouble
till he vanquished them at last. But Pope Hildebrand or Gregory VII. and his
Successors, did raise a more dreadful Storm against him; for the Popes having
long since been vexed to the Heart, that they and the rest of the Clergy should
be subject to the Emperor, Hildebrand thought to have now met with a fair
Opportunity to set the Clergy at Liberty, at a time when the Emperor was
entangled in a War with the Saxons, and hated by most Princes of the Empire.
The Emperor had lived somewhat too Free in his younger Years, and the Church
Benefices having been rather bestowed upon Favorites or such as paid well for
them, than such as deserved them, furnished the Pope with a specious Pretense
to make a Decree, that it was not the Emperor's right to bestow Bishoprics or
other Church Benefices upon any Body, but that it did belong to the Pope. The
Emperor was also summoned to appear at Rome, and to give an Account concerning
his Mis-behaviour, and in case of failure, he was threatened with an
Excommunication. On the other Hand, the Emperor having declared the Pope
unworthy of his Office, would have deposed him. So the Pope excommunicated the
Emperor, discharging all his Subjects from their Allegiance due to him, which
proved of such Consequence in those Times, that all his Authority fell to the
Ground at once among most of his Subjects, whereby he was reduced to the
greatest Extremity. For most Princes assembled at Trebes, where they deposed
Henry: which Sentence, however, was so far mitigated afterward, that the same
should be left to the Pope's decision. Henry therefore accompanied by a few,
was obliged to undertake a Journey in the midst of the Winter into Italy, and
being arrived at Canu^io, was fain to stay three Days barefooted in a coarse
Woollen Habit in the outward Court, and in an humble posture, to beg the Pope's
Absolution, which he at last granted him.

But the Emperor received no great Advantage by it, for the Italians were
quite disgusted at this Demeanor of his, which obliged the Emperor to make
use of his former Authority to reduce them to Obedience. In the mean while the
Princes of Germany by instigation of the Pope, did elect Radolph Duke of Swabia
their King; but the Bavarians, Franconians, and the Countries next adjacent to
the Rhine did remain in obedience of the Emperor Henry. Thus a bloody War
ensued, wherein Radolph, and the Saxons were vanquished in two battles, and in
the third he lost his right hand and life. 1084.
Then Henry called together an Assembly of the Bishops, and having deposed
Hildebrand, he caused another to be chosen in his room: He also returned home
himself, and banished Hildebrand. But the Saxons persisted in their Rebellion
against the Emperor, who was again Excommunicated by the Pope, and having
first set up Herman Duke of Luxenburgh, and after his death, Ecbert Marquess of
Saxony for their Kings, H^^ S^n R^^els.
but to no purpose; they at last stirred up the Emperors Son against the
Father. Against him the Emperor raised a great Army, whom the Son met, and in
a deceitful manner begged his pardon: Upon his persuasions the Father having
abandoned his Forces, and being upon his Journey to the Diet at Mayence,
accompanied by a few, this ancient Prince was made a Prisoner and Deposed. 1106.
He died soon after in great misery, who, in sixty two battles which he had
fought in his life time, generally obtained the Victory.

5. Henry V.
As soon as Henry V. was made Emperor he followed his Fathers example in
maintaining the Imperial Dignity: For as soon as he had settled the Affairs of
Germany, he marched with an Army toward Rome, to renew the ancient Right of
the Emperors in nominating of Bishops, and to be Crowned there. The Pope,
Paschal II. having got notice of the Emperors design, raised a great Tumult at
Rome, where the Emperor was so close beset, that he was fain to fight in
Person for his safety: But the Emperor having got the upper hand, made the
Pope a Prisoner, and forced him to give his consent to his demands. And this
their Agreement was confirmed by solemn Oaths and Execrations; yet no sooner
had the Emperor turned his back, but the Pope having declared the Agreement
void, stirred up the Saxons and the Bishops in Germany against the Emperor.
With these Henry was engaged in a very tedious War; and perceiving at last,
that there was no other way left to compose these differences, he granted the
Popes demands, by renouncing his Right to nominate Bishops, 1122.
at the Diet held at Worms: which resignation, as it greatly diminished the
Emperor's Authority, so on the other hand, it strengthened the power of the
Pope. 1125.
This Emperor died without Issue. Him succeeded Lotharius Duke of Saxony,
Lothar^us the Sax^n.
who had for a Rival in the Empire Cunrad Duke of Franconia, whom he quickly
obliged to beg fair Quarters. This Emperor having twice undertaken an
Expedition into Italy, did with great Glory restore Tranquillity to that
Country; and, because he used to flatter the Pope, he was in great esteem among
the Clergy. He died in the year 1138. After his death Cunrad III. obtained the
Imperial Dignity, who was opposed by Henry Duke of Saxony and Bavaria, and his
Brother Wulff, which occasioned bloody Wars against him. But peace being
restored among them, he undertook an Expedition into the Holy Land, where he
underwent great Calamities; for, tho he fought his way through the Saracens,
and arrived safely at Jerusalem, yet after he had lost the greatest part of his
Army, without doing any thing of moment, he was fain to return home. But whilst
he was busy in making preparations for another Expedition into Italy he died,
in the year 1252.

6. Frederick I. Fredrick I.
succeeded him, who by the Italians was Surnamed Barbarossa, Duke of Swabia,
who immediately at the beginning of his Reign, having settled the affairs of
Germany, did afterward reduce Italy under his obedience; which however was not
of long continuance; for the Milaneses quickly Rebelled, but were severely
chastis'd, their City having been laid level with the ground. He was also in
continual broils with the Pope, against whom, and his Associates, he obtained
several Victories; yet being at last tired out with so many wars, he made peace
with him, especially since his Son Otto had been taken Prisoner by the
Venetians. At the concluding of this Peace, it is said, that Pope Alexander III.
did set his foot upon the Emperors neck, which by a great many is taken for a
fable. This Emperor was the last who maintained the Authority of the German
Emperors in Italy. Last of all he undertook an Expedition into the Holy Land
against Saladin the Sultan of Egypt, who had taken the City of Jerusalem: He
beat the Saracens several times, but endeavoring to pass over a River in
Cilicia on Horseback, or as some will have it, intending to wash himself in the
River, he was drowned. 1189.
And tho his Son Frederic, after his Fathers death, did take a great many
Cities in Syria, yet the whole Expedition had a very bad end, the greatest part
of the Army, together with the Duke Frederick having been consumed by the
Plague, Henry VI.
or Famine. Frederick was succeeded by his Son Henry VI. in the Empire, who,
with his Lady Constantia, got the Kingdoms of Sicily, Calabria and Apuiia. This
Emperor went to Rome to receive the Crown from Pope Celestin, when the Pope
sitting in his Chair, and the Emperor on his knees, put first the Crown upon
his head, but immediately struck the same off again with his foot, intimating
thereby, as if it was in the power of the Popes to give and to take away the
Imperial Crown. He died in the year 1198. having just then made great
preparations for an Expedition into the Holy Land, and sent his Army before, he
being ready to follow.

7. Philip
After the death of Henry VI. the Germans were miserably divided among
themselves; for Frederick II. his Son, being then but five years old, his Uncle
Philip pretended to have the Tuition of his Nephew, and the Administration of
the Empire, according to the last Will of the deceased Emperor; but this being
opposed by the Pope, he persuaded some of the Princes to elect Otto Duke of
Saxony. Germany was thus miserably torn in pieces, most siding with Philip, the
rest with Otto. After a long war an agreement was made betwixt them, that Otto
should Marry the Daughter of Philip, but lay down the Royal Title, till the
death of Philip, when the same was to be restored to him. Not long after Philip
was murdered at Bamberg by Otto the Palatin of Wittelbach. After his death
Otto obtained the Imperial Dignity, 1208.
and having been Crowned at Rome, Otto VI.
he resolved to reunite such places as were unjustly possessed by the Popes to
the Empire, which so exasperated the Pope, that he Excommunicated him,
exhorting the Princes to elect another Emperor. Most of them were for
Frederick II. Frederick II.
Son of Henry VI. which made Otto to hasten into Germany; but having in vain
endeavored to maintain himself in the Empire, he was forced to surrender the
Imperial Crown to Frederick the Second, King of Sicily and Naples, and Duke of
Suabia; who, after he had bestowed* a considerable time in settling the Affairs
of Germany, went into Italy, where he was Crowned by the Pope. In the year
1228. he undertook an Expedition into the Holy Land, and retook Jerusalem from
the Saracens. He was continually alla^m'd by the intrigues of the Popes, who
were for playing the Masters in Italy; against whom he bravely maintained his
Right. This occasioned several Excommunications to be thundered out against him
by the Popes, who raised great disturbances. From hence had their rise the two
famous Factions in Italy, whereof those who sided with the Pope, called
themselves Guelfs, The ^ue^fs and G^b^^lins.
but these who were for the Emperor, Gibellins; which two Factions, for a
considerable time after, occasioned great Commotions in Italy: And tho
Frederick behaved himself bravely against the Pope and his Associates, yet the
Popes Excommunication, had such powerful Influence in that Superstitious Age,
that, after the Pope had solemnly deposed him in the Council held at Lions,
some Princes of Germany did choose Henry, 1245.
Landgrave of Thuringia their King, who was commonly called the King of the
Priests; but he dying in the year next following, some Princes declared William
Earl of Holland their King; who was not able to Establish himself, being
opposed by Cunrad, Son of Frederick II. who was appointed to succeed his Father
in the Empire. In the mean time his Father had been very unsuccessful in Italy,
who at last died in the year 1250. Cunrad having left Germany, retired into his
Hereditary Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, where he died. 1254.
William Earl of Holland was slain in a battle against the Frizelanders, in the
year 1256.

8. A long inte^regnum.
With the death of Frederick II. the Authority of the German Emperors in Italy
was quite extinguished: And that it might not be revived again, the Pope gave
the Kingdom of Naples to Charles Duke of Anjou, who, by the Instigation of the
Pope, caused the young Cunradin (who being the Son of Cunrad, was come to
recover his Herediatary Kingdom, and taken Prisoner in a battle fought betwixt
them) to be executed by the hands of the Hangman; with whom was extinguished
the Race of the Dukes of Swabia. In the mean time there were great divisions
among the German Princes, concerning the election of a new Emperor; some of
them had chosen Richard Duke of Cornwall, Son of John King of England, and the
rest were for Alfonsus X. King of Castile; both were elected in the year 1257.
Richard came on his Journey as far as the Rhine, to take possession of the
Empire, but, for want of Money, was forced to return home again: And Alfonsus
came not within the sight of Germany. Then there was a complete and long
vacancy of the Throne in Germany; during which time there was nothing to be
seen but confusion, every body pretending to be Master. These Civil Disorders
were of the worse consequence, because that about the same time the three great
Families of the Dukes of Swabia, the Marquesses of Austria, and Landgraves of
Thuringia being extinct, a great many aspired to possess themselves of these
Countries. To be short, the longest Sword was then the best Title, and he that
could master another kept him under subjection; and robbing and plundering was
an allowed exercise at that time. Against these outrageous Proceedings several
of the Cities upon the Rhine entered into a Confederacy, with whom a great many
other Princes afterward joining their Forces, they demolished the strong Holds
of these Robbers, 1255.
and cleared the Highways.

9. R^d^lph ^arl of Habsbu^^h
At last Rodolph Earl of Habsburgh and Landgrave of Alsace (from whom are
descended the present Archdukes of Austria) was unanimously chosen Emperor;
who, 1273.
the better to establish himself in the Throne, Married his three Daughters to
three of the great Princes of Germany, viz. to Lewis Palatin of the Rhine, to
Albert Duke of Saxony, and to Otto Marquess of Brandenburgh. After the death of
Frederick Marquess of Austria, who had his Head cut off at Naples, together
with Cunradin, Ottocar the King of Bohemia had possessed himself of Austria,
Stiria, Crain, the Windishmarck and Portenau. But Rodolph, who thought that his
Family had more Right to it having ^etaken these Countries, from Ottocar, gave
them in Fief to his Son Albert; and to the second, whose name was Rodolph, the
Dukedom of Swabia: Besides this, the Grandson of Albert got Crain and Tyrol.
Thus Rodolph did by obtaining the Imperial Dignity, raise his House from a
moderate State to great Power and vast Riches. But tho he was often invited to
come into Italy, yet he could never be persuaded to it, alleging that old and
notorious saying of the Fox, Quia me vestigia terreat; because the footsteps
deter me. Nay he declared a great many Cities there Free, for Sums of money; by
which the Kingdom of Italy, being first torn into a great many pieces, was
quite lost: But Germany he took into his particular Care, and destroyed a great
many Castles there which served for a retreat for Robbers. He was the first
that introduced the use of the German Tongue in all Public Courts and Private
Transactions, whereas formerly the Latin Tongue had been made use of in the
like cases. He dyed in the year 1291.

His Son Albert did lay claim to the Empire, but by the Interest of the
Archbishop of Mayence, Adolph
Adolph Earl of Nassau, who was his kinsman, was chosen Emperor; the
Archbishop being in hopes to have, under him, the supreme Management of the
Affairs; but Adolph not being willing to depend on the Archbishop, he conceived
a hatred against him. Some did think it unbecoming the grandeur of the
Emperor, that he engaged in a League with England against France for a Sum of
Money paid to him by the English; but this might admit of a very good excuse,
since besides this, the English had promiss'd the Emperor to assist him in the
recovery of the Kingdom of Arclat, a great part of which France had, during the
Troubles in Germany, taken into its possession. On the other hand France sided
with Albert, who being advanced near the Rhine, the Archbishop of Mayence did
assemble some of the Electors, who being dissatisfied with Adolph, deposed him,
and chose Albert Emperor in his stead. A bloody Battle was fought betwixt
these two near Spires, wherein Adolph being slain, Albert I.
being slain, the Imperial Crown remained to Albert: But because he aimed at
nothing more than to enrich himself, his Reign was both very unglorious and
unfortunate. His Covetousness was at last the occasion of his death; for his
Nephew John Duke of Swabia, whom he had dispossessed of his Country, murdered
him near Rhinefeld. 1308.


10. After his death, Philip King of France endeavored to obtain the Imperial
Crown, but was prevented by the Electors, (...) VII.
who, upon the persuasion of the Pope, chose Henry VII. Earl of Luxemburgh.
This Emperor, after he had settled Germany, undertook a Journey into Italy,
with a resolution to suppress the Civil Commotions there, and to reestablish
the Imperial Authority. The beginning of this undertaking proved so prosperous,
that every body hoped for great success from it: (...) by ^ Monk.
But in the midst of this prosperity he was murdered by a Monk, who had given
him a poisoned Host, he having been hired by the Florentines, the Emperors
Enemies, to commit this fact.

In the year 1313. the Electors were again divided in the Election of a new
Emperor, some having given their Votes for Lewis Duke of Bavaria, (...).
the rest for Frederick Duke of Austria. The first was Crowned at Aix la
Chapelle, the latter at B^nn. These two carried on a War against each other for
the Imperial Crown during the space of nine years, to the great detriment of
the whole Empire: At last Frederick being made a Prisoner in a battle fought in
the year 1323. Lewis became sole Master of the Empire, and restored its
Tranquillity. But he afterward went into Italy, to back the Gibellines, who
were of his side, and tho at first he was very prosperous, yet could he not
settle his Affairs to any purpose, Exc^mmunic^ted b^^^^e Pope.
because the Pope had Excommunicated him. Wherefore also the Popes Associates
in Germany, maugre all his resistance, were always too hard for him; and at
last, by the persuasions of the Pope, stirred up the Electors against him, who
chose Charles IV. Marquess of Moravia, Son of John King of Bohemia, Emperor in
his stead; who nevertheless, as long as Lewis lived, was not much taken notice
of. He died in the year 1347. It is to be observed, that the preceding
Emperors used generally to make their Progress through the Empire, and to
maintain their Court out of the Revenues belonging to the Empire: But this
Lewis IV. was the first who kept his constant Court in his Hereditary Country,
and maintained it out of his own Revenue; whose example the succeeding
Emperors followed, the Revenues belonging to the Empire having been by degrees
extremely diminished.

11. After the death of Lewis, Charles IV.
there were some who would have made void the former Election of Charles, and
had chosen in his stead Edward King of England, who did not think fit to accept
of the Imperial Dignity: The same was also refused by Frederick Marquess of
Misnia: At last Gunther Earl of Swartzburgh was elected; whom Charles caused to
be poisoned, and by his Liberality established himself in the Empire. During
his Reign he gave away a considerable part of the Dependencies of the Empire,
and among the rest, he granted to France the perpetual Vicarship of the Kingdom
of Arclat; and in Italy he sold what he could to the fairest bidder: But he was
not so careless of his Kingdom of Bohemia, unto which he annexed, among other
Countries, that of Silesia. He was a great favourer of the Cities which he
dignified with such Privileges, that they might the better be able to maintain
themselves against the Power of the Princes: The best thing that ever he did,
was, that he caused first to be compiled the Golden Bull, The Golden Bull.
wherein were set down the Rules to be observed in the elections of the ensuing
Emperors, and Divisions among the Electors, prevented for the future. He died
in the year 1378. having not long before by great Presents made to the
Electors, prevailed with them, to chose his Son Wenceslaus King of the Romans:
Wenceslaus. 1400.

But he being very brutish and careless of the Affairs of the Empire, was
deposed by the Electors, which he little regarded, but retired into his
Hereditary Kingdom of Bohemia, where he lived for a considerable time. After
Wenceslaus was deposed, Jodocus Marquess of Moravia was chosen Emperor, but he
happening to die within a few months after, before he could take possession of
the Empire, Fred^rick o^ Bru^s^ick.
Frederick Duke of Brunswick was elected in his stead, who, in his Journey to
Francfort was, by instigation of the Archbishop of Mayence, Rupert.
murdered by the Earl of Waldeck. At last Rupert, Palatin of the Rhine was
chosen Emperor; who Reigned with great applause in Germany; but his Expedition
into Italy proved fruitless. He died in the year 1410.

12. Sigismund.
After the death of Rupert, Sigismund King of Hungary, Brother to Wenceslaus,
was made Emperor; a Prince endowed with great Qualities, but very unfortunate
in his wars, having, before he obtained the Imperial Crown, received a great
defeat from the Turks near Cogrelis; which was occasioned by the too much heat
and forwardness of the French Auxiliaries. He caused John Huss, 1393.
notwithstanding the safe Conduct granted him, to be burnt at the Council of
Constance; whose death his adherents, who called themselves Hussites, did
revenge with great fury upon Bohemia and Germany; this War having taken up the
greatest part of his Reign. He died in the year 1437.

After him succeeded his Son-in-Law Albert II. Albert II.
Duke of Austria, and King of Hungary and Bohemia, who did not Reign a whole
year. He died in the year 1439. whilst he was very busy in making preparations
against the Turks. Fredrick III
Him succeeded his kinsman Frederick III. Duke of Austria; since which time all
the succeeding Emperors have been of this House. During his Reign several
disturbances were raised in Germany, which were neglected by the Emperor. He
also had some differences with Ladislaus, Son of Albert II. concerning Austria,
and was attacked by Matthias Hunniades King of Hungary; which war he prosecuted
with more patience than vigor. He died in the year 1493. Him succeeded his Son
Maximilian I. Maximilian I.
who had the good fortune by his Marriage with Mary the Daughter of Charles the
Hardy Duke of Burgundy, to annex the Netherlands to the House of Austria. As he
was very fickle in his undertakings, so the success was generally answerable to
it and various; and his Wars with the Switzers, and those in Italy against the
Venetians had but a very indifferent end: The chiefest thing of moment done by
him, is, that whereas formerly all differences in Germany were decided by the
Sword, he reestablished the Peace of the Empire. He died in the year 1519.

13. Charles V.
Him succeeded his Grandson Charles V. King of Spain and Sovereign of the
Netherlands; under whose Reign the face of Affairs in Germany was remarkably
changed; which was occasioned by the Religious Differences set on foot about
that time: For the Pope had caused Indulgences to be sold here in so scandalous
a manner, that the wiser sort began to be ashamed of it. 1517.
Wherefore Martin Luther Doctor of Divinity and Professor in the University of
Wittenbergh, held a public Disputation against it; The Reformation.
wh^ being opposed by others, all the neighboring Countries were alarmed at
it. Luther at first did submit himself to the decision of the Pope, but finding
that he favored the Indulgence Merchants, and that he was condemned by him, he
appealed to a free General Council, and then began to go farther, to examine
the Popes Authority; and having laid open some Errors and Abuses which were
crept in among them, his Doctrine was so approved of by some of the Princes and
free Imperial Cities, that they began to banish the Priests and Monks out of
several places, and to reduce their Revenues. And tho the Emperor did declare
Luther, 1521.
at the Diet of Worms, an Outlaw, and endeavored by several Proclamations to
put a stop to these Proceedings and Innovations; nevertheless, the Emperor
being then engaged in a war with France, and therefore not in a capacity to
apply himself in good earnest to the suppressing of this Division* Luthers
Party grew daily stronger.

Perhaps he was afterward not very sorry, to see the wound increase, that he
might make the better benefit of the Cure; there having been a Proclamation
published at the Diet of Spiers, 1529.
which was in no ways agreeable to the Lutheran Princes, they protested against
the same, The Rise of the Name of Protestants.
from whence they are called Protestants. In the year next following they
delivered a Confession of their Faith to the Emperor at Augsburgh, and entered
into a Defensive Alliance at Smalkald; 1530.
which League was renewed in the year 1535. The League at Smalkald
when a great many Princes and Free Imperial Cities were received into it. This
League made at Smalkald was a great eyesore to the Emperor, who used all
means to dissolve the same: But the Protestants, who now began to trust to
their own strength, standing by one another, the Hostilities began on both
sides, and the Protestants did bring into the Field an Army of 100000 Men, 1546.
under the Conduct of John Frederick Elector of Saxony, and Philip Landgrave of
Hesse. If they had fallen immediately upon the Emperor, whose Forces were then
not joined, they might in all probability have worsted him; but having lost the
first opportunity, the Emperor strengthened himself, that he forced the
Protestants to quit the Field and to disband their Forces. He also caused a
diversion to be given the Elector at home by his Kinsman Maurice, which had
such influence upon the Free Imperial Cities, that they were obliged to submit
themselves and to pay considerable Fines. In the year next following the
Emperor fell into Saxony, and having defeated the Elector near Michlbergh,
took him prisoner; against whom he pronounced sentence of Death, which however
he changed into an Imprisonment. Philip Landgrave of Hesse having also
submitted himself, was, contrary to agreement, made a Prisoner; whereby the
Protestant Religion in Germany was reduced to great extremity. The Electorat of
Saxony was given to Maurice Duke of Saxony, who at last being resolved not to
permit any longer that both the Religion and Liberty should be quite destroyed,
neither that his Wifes Father the Landgrave of Hesse, who upon his Parole had
surrendered himself to the Emperor, should be detained a Prisoner, fell so
suddenly with his Forces upon the Emperor, that he was very near having
surprised his Person at Inspruck. 1552.
Henry II. King of France having also made an Inroad on the other side of
Germany, surprised Metz, Tullie, and Verdun. King Ferdinand therefore the
Emperors Brother interposing his Authority, A Peace concluded.
a Peace was concluded at Passau; where their Religion was secured to the
Protestants, till matters could be better settled at the next ensuing Diet. 1552.
The Landgrave was released; as likewise John Frederick the Elector, who was
dismissed out of prison a little before by the Emperor. 1555.
At last the Religious Peace in Germany was established, at the Diet at
Augsburgh, where it was provided, that neither Party should annoy one another
under the pretext of Religion, and that such of the Church Lands and Revenues,
as the Protestants had been possessed of before the Peace concluded at Passau,
should remain in their possession. An Insurrection of the Boors.
The Boors also in Germany raised a most dangerous Rebellion under the Reign of
Charles V: of whom there were killed above 100000. 1525.
In the year 1529. the City of Vienna was besieged by Solomon the Turkish
Emperor, but to no purpose, he being obliged to raise the Siege, 1532.
not without considerable loss: And afterward the Turks who were marching with
a great Army into Austria, were beaten back again. In the year 1534. the
Anabaptists were for erecting a new Kingdom in Munster in Westphalia, under the
Conduct of John, a Tailor of Leiden, and one Knipperdolling; who received the
dire Reward of their madness. He Resign.
At last this great Prince Charles V. surrendered the Imperial Dignity to his
Brother Ferdinand I. Ferdinand I.
King of Hungary and Bohemia, who united these two Kingdoms to the House of
Austria, he having Married Anna Sister of Lewis King of Hungary and Bohemia,
who was slain in the battle fought against the Turks near Mohatz. He Reigned
very peaceably in Germany, and died in the year 1564. Maximilian II.
Him succeeded his Son Maximilian II. who also Reigned in peace, except that a
Tumult happened at that time in Germany, raised by one William Grumpach and his
Associates, who having first murdered Melchior Zobel the Archbishop of
Wartzburgh, had plundered that City; they also endeavored to stir up the
Nobility and to raise disturbances in other places. 1567.
This man having been declared an Outlaw, was protected by John Frederick Duke
of Saxony, who paid dearly for it, Gotha, one of his best strong Holds having
been demolished, and he himself taken Prisoner* Maximilian died in the year
1576. R^dolph II.
Him succeeded his Son Rudolph II. who Reigned also very peaceably in Germany,
except that the Hungarian Wars did now and then keep the Germans a little in
exercise; and that in the year 1609. the right of Succession in the Country of
Juliers was brought in question. At last his Brother Mathias, Archduke of
Austria grew impatient to possess his Brothers Inheritance before his death,
1612.
to him Rudolphus surrendered Hungary and Bohemia, and at his death he left him
his other Countries and the Imperial Crown.

14. Under the Reign of Matthias, Matthias.
the ill Humors did so increase by degrees in Germany, that toward his latter
days they caused violent Convulsions. The origin of this war, which lasted
thirty years, was this: In the Religious Peace formerly concluded at Passau,
two Parties were only included, viz. the Roman Catholics, and those who
adhered to the Augsburgh Confession, Origin of the German Wars.
the free exercise of Religion being forbidden to all others. But some of the
States of the Empire, among whom the chiefest were the Elector Palatin and the
Landgrave of Hesse Cassel, having since that time received the Reformed
Religion, commonly called the Calvinian, the Roman Catholics were against
their enjoying the benefit of the Religious Peace. These on the other hand
alleged, that they did belong, as well as the rest, to the Augsburgh
Confession, and that the whole difference did only consist in some few
passages: But the rest of the Protestants who strictly adhered to the Words of
the Augsburgh Confession, were not for receiving them into the same Communion,
yet it was their opinion, that they ought not to be prosecuted for the
differences that were betwixt them. But afterward these controverted Articles
were by the heat of the Priests explained in so different a manner, that the
name of a Calvinist became as odious to some Protestants, as that of a Roman
Catholic. The Roman Catholics taking hold of this opportunity, caressed the
old Protestants, especially those in the Electorate of Saxony, unto whom they
represented the Calvinists as a Generation equally destructive to both Parties;
whereby they hoped to disjoyn them from the rest, and after they had destroyed
them, to make the easier work with the rest of the Protestants. These therefore
of the Reformed Religion, entered into a Confederacy for their common security;
into which there having been received a great many other Protestant Princes, it
was called the Evangelical Union. The Evangelical Union.
In opposition to this Confederacy, the Roman Catholics made an Alliance among
themselves, which they called the Catholic League, whose Head was the Duke of
Bavaria, a constant Rival of the Elector Palatin. There happened also some
other matters which had exasperated both Parties, viz. that the Protestants had
reduced a great many Church Revenues, after the Peace at Passau; that the
Cities of Aix la Chapelle, and Donawerth, had been very hardly dealt withal,
and some other matters, which were manifest proofs of the Animosities of both
Parties against one another.

15. The Bohemian Tumults.
Both Parties being thus exasperated and prepared for War, did administer fuel
to that flame which quickly after broke out in the Kingdom of Bohemia. The
Bohemians pretended, that the Emperor Matthias had taken from them their
Privileges, and having raised a Tumult, did throw three Persons of Quality, who
spoke in the Emperors behalf, out of the Castle Windows; 1618.
and immediately after entered with an Army into Austria: In the mean while
Matthias died, Fer^inand I
whose Nephew Ferdinand (who also succeeded him in the Empire) the Bohemians
had before his death received for their King; but now, under pretense that he
had broken the Contract made betwixt him and the Estates, The Crown of Bohemia
offered to the Electo^ Palatin.
had renounced Ferdinand, and offered the Crown to Frederick Elector Palatin.
This young Prince was persuaded by some of his Friends, who were of an
unsettled Spirit, and not diving deep enough into a business of such
Consequence, to accept of this offer, before he had laid a foundation for such
an undertaking: For the Bohemians themselves were fickle and unfaithful,
Bethlem Gabor Inconstant. England was not for meddling in the matter; Holland
was very backward in giving assistance. The Union which they chiefly relied
upon, was a Body with a great many Heads, without vigor, or any constant
Resolution. Besides this, France did endeavor to dissolve this League, as
being not willing that the Elector Palatin and the rest of the Reformed
Religion, should grow too potent; for fear, that in time they might afford
their assistance to the Hugonots, whose destruction was then in agitation at
the French Court. In the beginning of this War the Affairs of Ferdinand looked
with an ill Aspect; because Bethlem Gabor, Duke of Transylvania, fell into
Hungary, in hopes to become Master of that Kingdom; and there were also great
discontents among his Subjects in Austria: but he having recovered himself by
the Alliance made with the Duke of Bavaria, The ill succes^ of the Elector
Palatin.
the Elector Palatin lost, with that unfortunate Battle fought on the white
Hill near Prague, at once all his former advantages: For Ferdinand soon after
reduced Bohemia, 1620.
Moravia, and Silesia to obedience. Spinola made an inroad into the Lower
Palatinat, which was deserted by the Forces of the League. The Duke of Bavaria
got the Upper Palatinat and the Electoral Dignity. The Elector of Saxony, who
had been very instrumental in reducing of Silesia, had for his reward Lusatia,
in Fief of the Kingdom of Bohemia.

In the mean time the Marquess of Durlach, The War spread in Ge^ma^y.
Christian Duke of Brunswick, the Earl of Mansfield, and some others who were
of the Elector Palatins Party, marched with their Armies up and down the
Country, and the Emperor, under pretense of pursuing them, sent his Forces
into all parts of the Empire. Against these the Circle of the Lower Saxony
armed itself, having made Christian IV. King of Denmark, General of that
Circle: But he having received a great overthrow near Kings Lutter, 1626.
from Tilly the Imperial General, the Emperor overrun all the Lower Saxony;
and having obliged King Christian to make Peace with him at Lubeck* 1629.
he began to get footing near the Coast of the Baltic. The Procl^mation
concerning Church Lan^s.


16. The Emperor by this success being arrived to such a pitch of Greatness,
that he did not question but for the future to be absolute in Germany; 1629.
did publish a Proclamation, enjoining the Protestants to restore to the
Catholics all such Church Lands or Revenues, as were taken from them since the
Peace made at Passau. Under this pretense he hoped quickly to subdue the rest
of the Protestant Princes, not questoning but that the Catholic Estates would
easily be forced to submit themselves to his pleasure.

The Protestants, it is true, entered into a Defensive Alliance at Leipsick, but
without any great prospect of success, Gustavus A^olphus.
if Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweedland had not come to their assistance. This
King was induced to enter Germany, partly because the preservation of his own
State seemed to depend on the Emperors not getting firm footing on the
Baltic, partly because several of the German Princes had craved his
assistance, partly also because the Emperor had assisted the Poles against him
in Prussia, and he stood in a good corespondency with France and Holland, who
were very jealous at the Greatness of the House of Austria. 1630.
This King came with an Army into Germany, and drove the Imperial Forces out of
Pomerania and the neighboring Countries. In the mean time the Imperial General
Tilly had quite destroyed the City of Magdeburgh, and was upon his march
against the Elector of Saxony, whom he did not question but to rout quickly:
But King Gustavus having joined his Forces with those of the Elector of Saxony,
defeated Tilly, in that eminent Battle near Leipsick; where the Emperor at one
stroke lost all his hopes which he had conceived from the happy success of his
Arms during the space of twelve years before. From thence he marched on to the
Rhine, where he made almost miraculous progresses; but because the Elector of
Saxony had not so vigorously attacked the Hereditary Countries of the Emperor,
he had thereby leisure given him to raise another Army, 1632.
under the Conduct of Wallenstein; against whom the King lay encamped for a
considerable time near Nurenbergh; and afterward in the battle of Lutzen,
Gustavus'^ D^^th.
tho his side gained the Victory, he lost his life.

After his death his Generals and Confederates carried on the war, The Wa^
continue^.
under the Conduct of Axel Oxenstem, Chancellor of Sweden, with indifferent
good success; but having received an entire defeat in the battle near Noringen,
which they fought without necessity, they lost all their Conquests. The Elector
of Saxony having also concluded a peace with the Emperor at Prague, 1634.
which was extremely disliked by the Protestant Party; 1635.
the Emperor was now again in hopes to drive the Swedes by force out of
Germany: But by the valor and conduct of their Generals the Swedish Affairs
began to look with a better face, who carried the War again into the very
Hereditary Countries of the Emperor. At last all parties began to incline to a
peace; for the Emperor and the Princes of Germany were tired out with the war;
France began to be divided at home by Commotions; Holland had made a separate
peace with Spain; and the Swedes feared that the Germans, of whom was composed
the greatest part of their Army, might at last grow weary of being instrumental
in the Ruin of their native Country, or that one unfortunate blow might chance
to rob them of the Fruits of their former Victories; a Peace was therefore
concluded at Osnabrugge with Sweden, and at Munster with France; Peace of
Osn^^rugge and France.
by virtue of which the Swedes got a part of Pomerania, Bremen, and Wismas, and
five Millions of Crowns for the payment of their Forces. 1648.
France kept Brisac, Suntgaw, a part of Alsace and Philipsbourg. By this Peace
the Authority of the States of Germany and the Protestant Religion were
Established at once; and the Emperors Power confined within such Bounds, that
he could not easily hereafter attempt any thing against either of them;
especially since both Sweden and France had a free passage left them, from
whence they might easily oppose him, 1637.
if he designed to transgress these Limits. During this war died Ferdinand II.
Ferdinand the Third.
whom succeeded his Son Ferdinand III. who died in the year 1657. In whose
stead was, in the year next following, elected Emperor his Son Leopold.

19. Leopold.
After the Westphalian Peace Germany remained in peace for a considerable time,
except that the Emperor and Elector of Brandenburgh (at which time the Swedes
were engaged in a War with Denmark) fell into Pomerania; 1659.
but these differences were composed by the peace made at Oliva. In the year
1663. a war began with the Turks; War with the Turk
when the Turks took New^eusel; but were also, especially near St. Godhart;
soundly beaten. Some are of opinion, that if the Emperor had at that time
vigorously purs^ed his Victory, he might have beaten them out of Hungary; since
the Turks were put into a great consternation by the Persians, and some
Rebellious Bassa's, and the Venetians did so vigorously push on the Siege of
Canea: But the Emperor was so forward in making peace with them, because, as
it is supposed, he was jealous of France. And in the year 1672. Germany was
again entangled in a war with France; War with France.
which was occasioned by the great progresses of the French against the
Hollanders, who were relieved by the Emperor and the Elector of Brandenburgh:
For tho in the year before the Emperor had made an Alliance with France,
whereby he had promised, not to meddle in the War if France should attack one
of the Triple Alliance; nevertheless he sent his Forces toward the Rhine,
under pretense that it belonged to him as being Emperor, to take effectual
care, that the flame which was burning in the neighboring Countries, might not
prove destructive to Germany: And the Elector of Brandenburgh made heavy
complaints, that the French had made great havoc in his Territories of Cleves.
The French on the other side sent an Army toward Germany, in hopes to oblige
the Emperor not to concern himself in this War; but the French having not only
committed great outrages in the Empire, but also taken into possession the City
of Treves, and made great havoc in the Palatinat, the Emperor persuaded the
States of the Empire to declare war against France. Sweden was also afterward
engaged in the same war; Peace of Nim^e^^n*
which was ended by the peace made at Nimwegen; 1679.
whereby France got Friburgh in Bris^an, in lieu of Philipsburgh; and Sweden
was restored to those Provinces which it had lost during the war.

18. The Genius o^ this Nation.
If we duly consider the Genius of this Nation, which inhabits this great
Empire, it is most evident, that this Nation ever since the memory of Men has
been very brave, and addicted to War; and that Germany has been an
inexhaustible Source of Soldiers, since there is scarce ever any want of Men,
who are ready to serve for Money: and if they are once well Disciplined, they
are not only good at the first onset, but are very fit to endure the hardships
and inconveniences of a long war. There are not in any other Nation so many to
be met withal, that are ready to list themselves in Foreign Service for Money;
neither ^is there any Country in Christendom where greater Forces both of Horse
and Foot may be raised, than in Germany But besides this, the Germans are much
addicted and very fit for Commerce, and all sorts of Handycrafts Trade; and not
only the Inhabitants of the Cities do apply themselves with great industry to
the same; but also if a Countryman gets a little beforehand in the World, he
puts his Son to some Handycraft's Trade or another, tho a great many of them
afterward run into the Wars. They are generally very free and honest, very
ambitious to maintain the so much praised Fidelity of the ancient Germans; they
are not easily stirred up to raise Tumults, but commonly are willing to remain
under the same Government where they are Educated.

19. Tho the German Empire has no Possessions abroad, Nature of (...) Soil.
except you would account Hungary to be such; which is under subjection to the
House of Austria; nevertheless it is a Country of a vast extent by it self,
which is full of great and small Cities, Towns and Villages: The Ground is very
Fertile in general, there being very few spots to be met withal of any large
extent, which do not produce something or another for the sustenance of
Mankind; so that there is every where great plenty of all sorts of Provisions.
Germany also abounds in all sorts of Minerals, especially in Mines of Silver,
Its Commodities.
Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron, Mercury, and other sorts. It has abundance of Springs
that furnish waters for the boiling of Salt: and those several great Navigable
Rivers wherewith it is adorned, make it very commodious to transport its
Commodities from one place to another. The Commodities of Germany are these;
v^z. Iron, and all sorts of Instruments made of it, Lead, Mercury, Wine, Corn,
Beer, Wool, course Cloth, all sorts of Linen and Woollen Manufactories,
Horses, Sheep, etc. If therefore the Germans would apply themselves to imitate
these Manufactories at home, which are now Imported by Foreigners, or else
would be contented with their own, and not make use of Foreign Manufactories,
those Commodities which are Exported out of Germany, would much surpass these
which are Imported; and therefore it would of necessity grow very Rich,
especially since a considerable quantity of Silver is dug out of the Mines
there.

20. Form of Government
As for the Form of Government in Germany, it is to be considered, that it is
not like some Kingdoms, where the Kings have the whole Power in their hands,
and according to whose commands the Subjects are obliged to comport themselves;
neither is the Sovereign Power here circumscribed within certain bounds, as it
is in some Kingdoms of Europe, where the Kings cannot exercise an absolute
Sovereignty without the consent of the Estates: But Germany has its particular
Form of Government, the like is not to be met withal in any Kingdom of Europe,
except that the ancient Form of Government in France came pretty near it.
Germany acknowledges but one Supreme Head, under the Title of the Roman
Emperor; which Title did at first imply no more than the Sovereignty over the
City of Rome, and the Protection of the Church of Rome and her Patrimony. This
Dignity was first annexed to the German Empire by Otto I. but it is long ago
since the Popes have robbed the Kings of Germany of this Power, and only have
left them the bare Name. But besides this, the Estates of Germany, some of
which have great and potent Countries in their possession, have a considerable
share of the Sovereignty over their Subjects; and tho they are Vassals of the
Emperor and Empire, nevertheless they ought not to be considered as Subjects,
or only as potent or rich Citizens in a Government; for they are actually
possessed of the supreme Jurisdiction in Criminal Affairs; they have power to
make Laws and to regulate Church Affairs, (which however is only to be
understood of the Protestants) to dispose of the Revenues arising out of their
own Territories; to make Alliances, as well among themselves as with Foreign
States, provided the same are not intended against the Emperor and Empire;
they may build and maintain Fortresses and Armies of their own, Coin Money, and
the like. This grandeur of the Estates, it is true, is a main obstacle that the
Emperor cannot make himself absolute in the Empire, except it be in his
Hereditary Countries; yet this has been always observed, the more potent the
Emperor is, the more he has exercised his Authority, and the Estates have been
forced to comply with his commands: and it is certain, that the grandeur of the
Estates, except what is contained in the Golden Bull concerning the Electoral
Dignity, was more founded upon ancient Customs and Precedents, than any real
Constitutions; till in the Westphalian Peace their Rights and Authority have
been expressly and particularly confirmed and established.

21. Stren^th and weakn^ss of this Empire.
Tho it is certain that Germany within itself is so Potent, that it might be
formidable to all its Neighbors, if its strength was well united an rightly
employed; nevertheless this strong Body has also its infirmities, which weaken
its strength, and slacken its vigor: its irregular Constitution of Government
is one of the chief causes of its Distemper; it being neither one entire
Kingdom, neither properly a Confederacy, but participating of both kinds: For
the Emperor has not the entire Sovereignty over the whole Empire, nor each
Estate in particular over his Territories; and the former is more than a bare
Administrator, yet the latter have a greater share in the Sovereignty than can
be attributed to any Subjects or Citizens whatever, tho never so great. And
this seems to be the reason why at last the Emperors did quit their
pretensions upon Italy, and the Kingdom of Arclat; because these potent Princes
of Germany, Wh^ the Emperor quitted the Kingdom of Arclat.
and the turbulent Bishops, who were continually stirred up by the Popes, used
to give them so much work, that they had enough to do to take care of Germany
as the main Stake, without being able to concern themselves much about other
parts. Yet do I not find any instances in History, that any of the ancient
Emperors did endeavor to subdue the Princes, and to make himself absolute
Master of Germany. But this ambitious Design Charles V. as it seems, was first
put upon by the Spaniards, or, as some will have it, by Nicolas Pereno^
Granvel. And truly the Electors had the same reasons not to have admitted him
to the Imperial Dignity, as they had not to admit Francis I. King of France:
And common Reason tells us, What is the Interest of the Electors.
that no Nation that has the Power of Electing a Prince, ought to choose such a
one as if possessed before of a considerable Hereditary Estate, that he may
think it his Interest to take more care of that than the Elective Kingdom: For
he either will certainly be very ca^^less of the Interest of the Elective
Kingdom, or else he will make the Interest of the Elective Kingdom subservient
to that of his Hereditary Countries, and make use of the Strength of the first
to maintain the latter, and render it more Powerful; or else he will endeavor,
by making himself Sovereign over the Elective Kingdom, to make it dependent on
his Hereditary Estate. Germany found all these three inconveniences by
experience, under the Reign of this Emperor; The Conduct of Charles.
for he came very seldom into Germany, and that only en passant: He never made
the true Interest of Germany the Rule of his Designs, but all was carried on
for the grandeur and increase of his House; and at last, under pretense of
Religion, he attempted to suppress entirely the ancient Liberty of the Estates.
On the contrary, if Germany had an Emperor at that time who had not been
possessed of any Countries, or at least an inconsiderable part without the
Empire, the true Interest of the Empire would have been his Rule; and it would
have been his business not to side with either of these two Potent and
courageous Nations of the French and Spaniards, but to have looked upon them
like an Arbitrator, and whilst they had been fighting together to have,
according to the circumstances of Affairs, sometimes balanced one, sometimes
another, so that one might not become Master of the other; and thereby gain
such advantages, as might prove prejudicial to Germany: For it is a far
different case, whether I come in betwixt two Parties as a Mediator, or whether
I am engaged to one certain Party: For in the first Case, I can engage my self
as deep as I think fit, and at least take care to come off harmless; but in the
latter case I must needs be a loser, let things go how they will, and at last
another shall reap the Fruits of my Labor.

And to give a specious Color to these Consequences, Of the Ga^ranties of the
Circle of Bur^undy.
so perjudicial to Germany, Charles V. did gain this Point, at the Diet of
Augsburgh, upon the Estates, at that time, 1548.
when having brought the Protestants very low, no body durst oppose it, that
they should take upon them the Guarantie of the Circle of Burgundy; whereby
Germany was obliged to be always engaged in the Wars betwixt Spain and France,
and with its Treasure and Men to assist the Spaniards in the defense of the
Netherlands. I must confess, that it is not the Interest of Germany, to see
these Countries fall altogether into the hands of France; nevertheless it is
not absolutely necessary that the Estates in Germany should Ruin themselves for
their sake; since there are others also, who are better able, and have the same
Interest that Germany has, to preserve these Provinces. The attempt which
Charles V. made against the Protestant Religion in Germany, was a true Spanish
Design: For not to mention here the notorious Falsities in the Roman Catholic
Religion, I cannot for my life see, what could move the Emperor, if his aim
had been for the sole Interest of the Empire, to act contrary to the general
Inclination of the Nation, and not rather to take hold of this so favorable
opportunity, to free himself from the Tyranny of the Popes, who for several
Ages together had trampled upon the German Empire; and with the superfluous
Church Lands, to increase his own, and the Revenues of the Empire, or at least
to give liberty to the Bishops to Marry without quitting their Church
Benefices. If the Emperor would have given a helping hand, the Reformation
would have been as easily settled in Germany, as it was in Sweden, England and
Denmark

After these Spanish States Maxims had lain a while dormant, Ferdinand pursu^s
the Spanish M^xims.
they were at last revived, and that with more vigor, under the Reign of
Ferdinand II. besides a great deal of misery which did from thence accrue to
Germany: this was the cause that the Estates of Germany, to preserve their
Liberty, were obliged to seek for Foreign Aid, by which means they maintained
their Liberty; but it had been questionless more advantageous to Germany, not
to have wanted the assistance of Foreigners, who were not forgetful to make
their own advantage by it. Now if it may be supposed, that there are some
remnants of the Spanish Leaven, it may easily be conjectured, what jealousy
and distrusts must be betwixt the Members of the Empire, and how contrary and
different their Counsels and Actions must needs be: and tho perhaps by settling
a good understanding betwixt the Supreme Head and Estates, a medium might be
found out to obviate this and some other inconveniences, yet the^e reign
various and great Distempers amongst the Estates themselves, which seem to
render the best Remedies and Counsels either ineffectual, or at least very
difficult: Among these must be counted the Religious Differences betwixt the
Catholics and the Protestants in general; which Differences do not only depend
on the several Opinions in Matters of Faith, but also on a Worldly Interest;
the Catholics endeavoring upon all occasions to recover such Possessions as
were taken from them since the Reformation; and the Protestants being resolved
to maintain themselves in the Possession of them. Wherefore it has been
observed, that sometimes the Roman Catholics have been more guided by their
particular Interest, and by their Clergy, than by that of the Public. Nay, it
is to be feared, that if Germany should be vigorously attacked by a potent
Foreign Enemy, that some of the Popish Bigots would not be so backward in
submitting themselves under the yoke, and be willing to lose one Eye, provided
the Protestants might lose both.

Beside, the Protestants are again sub-divided into two Parties; T^^ difference
betw^xt h^ Protestants.
there being among them some differences concerning several Articles of Faith;
which, by the heat of the Clergy, were widen'd to that degree, that both
Parties were brought to the very brink of Ruin. The great number of Estates
augments the Distemper, it being next to an impossibility, that among so many,
there should not be some, who either prompted by their passions, obstinacy, or
for want of Understanding, may not deviate from the true Interest, or be misled
by ill Counselors to act against the same; so that it would be a miracle to
see so many Heads not well united. The Estates are also very unequal in Power;
from whence it often happens, that some of the most Potent are for being like
Sovereigns, and therefore being inclined rather to act according to their
particular Interest and Grandeur than for the Public, they make little account
how they Ruin the less powerful. These therefore, when they see that the Laws
cannot protect them, are at last obliged to take more care of their own
preservation, than of the Public Liberty, as thinking it indifferent by whom
they are oppressed. Not to mention here, the jealousies which is betwixt the
three Colleges of the Empire, and the several pretensions and differences which
are among some of the Estates: I could wish that I could find out as easy a
remedy against these and some other the like Diseases, as I have enumerated
them, and demonstrated their pernicious Consequences.

22 As to the Neighbors of Germany, (...)
the Turks border upon Stiria, Croatia, and Hungary: The two last do not
properly belong to Germany, but yet belong to the House of Austria, and are
like a Bulwork to it; so that Germany is much concerned in the preservation of
them. The Turkish Emperor has greater Revenues out of his vast Territories,
and perhaps is able to raise a greater number of Men than the Germans can do;
nevertheless he is not so formidable to them: for the Hungarian Wars are very
troublesome to the Turks; The Turks.
because the Asiatick Forces, and other supplies of Provision and Ammunition,
are not without great difficulty carried so far; neither can these Forces be
put into Winter Quarters there, as being not used to so cold a Climate, the
neighboring depopulated Provinces being also not able to maintain them. The
Turks also are in continual fear, that, as soon as they have bent their whole
Force against Hungary, the Persians may fall upon them on the other side, or
some of the Bassa's toward the East Revolt from them. And a well Disciplined
Army of Germans, will scarce shrink before all the Turkish Forces; and when
Germany is resolved to stand the brunt, the Turks will, I believe, qu^ckly be
weary of attacking it. Italy.
Italy is in no ways to be compared with Germany either for its strength or
number of Men, besides that it is divided into several States, by which it is
disabled to attack any Foreign State, much less so Potent an Empire, which
being possessed of some Passes leading into Italy, might in time take an
opportunity to renew its pretensions upon that Country.

The Switzers are very good Neighbors to Germany, ^h^ Swisse.
as having neither will nor power to attack it, especially since they are
destitute of good Horsemen: Neither can Poland compare its strength with
Germany; Poland.
for tho the Poles can bring a great number of Horse into the Field, yet they
are not to be compared with the German Horse, much less their Foot, to the
German Infantry: wherefore the Poles cannot undertake any considerable and if
the Poles should enter into an Alliance with another Prince, and make a
diversion to the Germans, by falling upon the back of them, it would not be
difficult for the Germans to be even with them; since they are not well
provided with Frontier Places, or any strong Holds within the Country which are
able to withstand an Enemy; whereas in Germany they would meet with Places
which would give them sufficient work: And in such a case perhaps the
Muscovites might easily be prevailed withal to fall upon the back of them: but
it is not to be supposed, that such a Commonwealth as this will easily attempt
an offensive War against its Neighbors; yet it is of great consequence to
Germany, that Poland may not be brought under subjection to the Turks, or any
other Power. And these two Nations are able to do one another considerable
Services, if they would with their Joint-Forces attack the Turks.

Denmark has no pretensions upon Germany, Denmark.
and the best Landforces of the Danes being Listed in Germany, their Army may
be Ruined, only by the Emperors recalling the Germans out of that Service, if
they should attempt any thing against the Empire. Neither do I believe that
Germany, but especially the Circles of the Higher and Lower Saxony, will be so
careless of their own Interest, as to let Denmark become master of Hamborough
and Lubeck.

England cannot do any harm to Germany, Englan^.
except by disturbing the Trade of Hamburgh; tho it seems to be the Interest of
the English, rather to enjoy the benefit of their Free Trade there. On the
other hand, the Germans may do a service to the English against the Hollanders,
by Land, whilst these are engaged with them in a War at Sea.

Holland has neither power nor inclination to attack Germany: Holla^d.
For if the Germans should be recalled out of the Service of the Dutch, their
Landforces would make but a very indifferent show: Neither can they reap any
benefit by making new Conquests; but it seems rather to be for their purpose to
keep fair with the Germans, that in case of a War with their Neighbors, they
may make use of their assistance.

Spain cannot pretend to do any considerable mischief to Germany, Sp^i^.
if the Head and Members are well united; but if it should join with the Head
against the Members it may prove mischievous, especially by the assistance of
their Money: but in such a case there would questionless not be wanting some
that would oppose its designs.

Swedeland alone is not so powerful as to be in any ways formidable to Germany;
Sweden.
neither is this Kingdom for making any more Conquests on that side, since
thereby it would lose more of its own strength, than it can gain by them: but
on the other hand, it is of great Consequence to Sweden, that the state of
Religion and of the Government, remain in the same condition as it was settled
in the Westphalian Peace; neithat Germany be subjected or ruled by any absolute
Power.

France has of late made itself so Powerful, France.
that this Kingdom alone may do more mischief to the Germans, than any of the
rest of their Neighbors. France, in consideration of its Form of Government,
has a considerable advantage over Germany; for the King there has all the best
Men, and the Purses of his Subjects at command, and employs them as he thinks
fit: But however such is the strength of Germany, that if well united, it need
not much dread France; for Germany is capable of raising as numerous, if not
more numerous Armies, than France, and may as easily recruit them: Besides
this, the German Soldiers (every thing duly considered) will scarce turn their
backs to the French. There might also be a way found out, for Germany to keep
always a sufficient Army on foot against France; at least it is not easily to
be supposed, that if France should attack Germany in good earnest, all the rest
of Europe would be lookers on: but if Germany be divided within it self, so
that either one Party should join with France, whilst some others stand
Neuters, till France has devoured some of the Neighboring States, then nothing
but fatal Consequences can attend it.

CHAP. IX.
Of DENMARK.
1. (...) Kingdom.
DENMARK is one of the most ancient Kingdoms in Europe, which was Established a
great many years before the Birth of our Savior, but for want of good
Histories it cannot be precisely determined at what time it had its beginning,
nor how long each of its ancient Kings Reigned, or what were there great Deeds.
We will not therefore detain the Reader by inserting here there bare Names, but
only to touch upon such matters as are with some certainty transmitted to
Posterity. Among the most ancient Kings, (...) III.
Frotho III. is most famous, who, it is said, did Reign just before the Birth of
Christ, and was a most Potent Monarch, who Ruled over Denmark, Sweden, Norway,
England, Ireland, and other Neighboring States. The Borders of his Territories
were on the East Side Russia, and on the West Side the Rhine. It Is also
related, that he Conquered the Vandals, which lived then in these Countries
that now are called Pomerania and Mecklenburgh, and that he was the first King
that styled himself King of the Vandals. Gotrick it is said, did assist
Wittekind, the King of the Saxons, against Charles the Great.

Erick is commonly reckoned to have been the first Christian King of Denmark
(tho some pretend, Eric^ I.
that his Brother Herald, 846.
who Reigned before him, was the first.) Under this Kings Reign the Christian
Religion was propagated in Denmark by the help of Ansgarius, then Bishop of
Bremen; which afterward King Gormo II. endeavoring to root out again, was
forced by the Emperor Henry, sumamed the Bird Ketcher, to grant the free
Exercise of the Christian Religion throughout his Kingdom. His Son Harald was
attacked by the Emperor Otto I. from whom the Sea betwixt Jutland and Holland
has got the Name of Otten Sound; because the Emperor there threw in his Lance
to mark the utmost Limits of his Expedition. Suen O^tt^.
His Son Suen Otto came to the Crown in the year 980. who being taken Prisoner
by the Jutins, was redeemed by the Women, who gave their Gold and Silver
Ornaments for his Ransom: In recompense of which he granted them this
Privilege, that whereas they used only to have a small Portion in Money out of
their Fathers Inheritance, they for the future should have an equal share with
the Males* He also Conquered a part of England, and died in the year 1012.

His Son Canut, Canut II.
or Cnut II. surnamed the Great, was King of Denma^k, Norway and England,
having Conquered the latter of these three by force of Arms, tho England did
not remain long under the subjection of the Danes; for after his death, Harald
and only Hardiknut Reigned in England; after whose death the Danes were again
chased out of England. Besides this, Magnus, Son of S. Olaus King of Norway,
made himself Master of Denmark; which Kingdom however, after his death, Sueno
II. obtained, but he was forced to fight for it against Harald Hardrode, then
King of Norway. He died in the year 1074. Him succeeded his Sons Harald VII.
(who Reigned but two years) and Canute IV. This King did give great Power to
the Bishops in Denmark* and granted the Tenths of all the Revenues of the
Country to the Clergy. At which the Jutes being exasperated, 1087.
slew him at Oden Sea; but the Clergy as an acknowledgement of his Favors
bestowed upon them, placed him in the number of Saints, and his memory was
afterward celebrated with full Cups at their Feasts, by those who called
themselves the Knutgylden, from him. His Brother Olaus IV. succeeded him, who
died in the year 1095. and after him Reigned his Brother Erick II. who took
Jutin, at that time a great City in Pomerania. He died in the Ille of Cyprus in
his Pilgrimage to Jerusalem.

. 2. After his death the whole Kingdom was in great Confusion, especially when
three at once fought for the Crown, viz. Sueno III, Canute VI, and Waldemar I.
These, after they had waged wars together for many years, did at last agree to
divide the Kingdom into three parts: but Canute having been assassinated by
Sueno, and Sueno* again having been slain in a Battle against Wald^mar,
Waldemar I.
he got the whole Kingdom into his possession He subdued the Rugians and
Vandals* 1157.
who had hitherto proved very mischievous to Denmark; he also destroyed the
City of Julin. 1164.
It Is related that he laid the first Foundation of the City of Dantzwick: and
under the Reign of this King, Absalom Bishop of Roshild first began to build
the City of Copenhagen. Waldemar died in the year 1182. Canute VI.
Him succeeded his Son Canute VI. who waged great Wars against the Vandals, and
at last forced their Princes to be his Vassals; taking upon himself the Title
of King of the Vandals or Slaves. He took from Adolf Earl of Holstein, among
other places, the City of Hamburgh, which however twenty seven years after did
shake off the Danish Yoke. He having also conquered Esthonia and Livonia, the
Christian Faith was established in these Countries by his means. He died in the
Year 1202.

After him reigned his Brother Waldemar II. who at the beginning was a very
fortunate and potent Prince, and had under his Subjection, besides Denmark, the
Countries of Esthonia, Livonia, Curland, Prussia, Pomerania, Rugen,
Meck^enburgh, Holstein, Stormar, Ditmarsen and Wagern, as also the Cities of
Lubeck and Lauenburgh. But he lost a great part of them again by the following
occasion: Henry Earl of Swerin having undertaken a journey to the Holy Land,
had committed, during his absence, his Lady and Country to the care of
Waldemar: but having been informed, after his return, that the King had lived
in Adultery with his Lady; he, to revenge this Affront, took him Prisoner by
stratagem, and after he had kept him three years in prison dismissed him, making
him pay for his ransom the sum of 45000 marks of fine Silver. The Countries of
Mecklenburgh and Pomerania, and the Cities of Lubeck and Duntzwick taking hold
of this opportunity, revolted from Waldemar; Adolf Earl of Shauenburgh took
from him Holstein and Stormar; the Knights of the Cross took Esthonia and
Livonia. And endeavoring to recover these Countries, he was vanquished in a
Battle fought near Bornhove, 1227.
by the Earl of Shauenburgh. Yet he recovered Reval and Esthonia; and died in
the year 1241.

. Erick V.
13. His Son Erick V. succeeded him in the Kingdom, tho he had also given some
parts of it to his other Sons; viz. to Abel, Sleswick; to Canute, Blecking^n;
and to Christopher, Laland and Falster. These were each of them for being
Sovereigns in these Countries; but Erick pretending that they ought to be his
Vassals, there were great Commotions in Denmark, till Erick was miserably
murdered by his Brother Abel; Ab^l.
and Abel after he had reigned two years was slain by the Friselanders and
Ditmarsians. 1250.
Whom succeeded his Brother Christopher I. Aganist this King the Archbishop of
Lunden raised abundance of Troubles, 1252.
and the King having imprisoned him, Christ^ph. I.
he was by the rest of the Bishops and Clergy excommunicated, and with him the
whole Kingdom. And at last the King was by them poisoned, 1259.
as it is thought, with the Host.

After him reigned his Son Erick VI. Erick VI.
who was at Variance with the Bishops, and engaged in Wars against Sweden and
Norway; at last he was taken Prisoner in a Battle by Erick Duke of Holstein,
1286.
and was barbarously murdered by some of the great Men of the Kingdom. Erick
VII.
He left the Crown to his Son Erick VII, who immediately, in the first year of
his Reign, had great contests with the King of Norway, who had given protection
to to the Murderers of his Father. He also had some other Differences with
some of the neighboring States, and died in the year 1319. Him succeeded his
Brother Christopher II, Christoph. II
who got his Son crowned in his Life time. This King was banished the Kingdom
by his Subjects, who, under pretense of being oppressed with Taxes, elected in
his stead Waldemar Duke of Sleswick their King. But they grew also quickly
weary of him, and recalled Christopher, who afterward in a battle fought
against this Waldemar lost his Son Erick Under 1332.
the Reign of this King, Schonen being sorely oppressed by the Holsteiners, who
were in Possession of it, surrendered itself to Magnus King of Sweden: And John
Duke of Holstein, perceiving that he could not maintain it by force, sold all
his Right and Title to it, for 70000 Marks* fine silver. Under the Reign of
this King, Denmark was torn into so many pieces, that very few places were left
to the King. He died in the year 1333. After his death there was an Interregnum
in Denmark during the space of seven years: In the mean time the Holsteiners
had brought the greatest part of Denmark under their Subjection; till the Danes
making an Insurrection against them, endeavored to chase them out of Denmark
and for this purpose called Waldemar the Son of Christopher II. (who had been
Educated at the Court of the Emperor Lewis the Bavarian) into the Kingdom.

4. Wald. III.
Waldemar III. did somewhat restore the decayed State of the Kingdom, having
partly forced and partly bought the Holsteiners out of Denmark: He sold
Hisponia and Reval, to the Knights of the Cross, for 28000 Marks, fine silver;
which sum he bestowed most upon a Journey which he undertook into the Holy
Land. But he got Schonen again from Magnus Sameck the then King of Sweden, by
fair promises; and by an agreement made betwixt him and Albert, King of
Swedeland, Gotland was also surrendered to him, and some other places belonging
at that time to Sweden. He was frequently at Wars with the Hanse Towns, and
died in the year 1375.

After him Reigned his Grandson Olaus VI. Olaus VI.
born of his Daughter Margaret and Hacquin, King of Norway. During his Minority
the Mother had the supreme Administration of Affairs. Having after his Fathers
death obtained the Crown of Norway, he laid also claim to the Kingdom of
Sweden, because his Father was Son of Magnus Sameck, King of Sweden; but he
died young.

In his stead the Danes and Norwegians received for their Queen Margaret, his
Mother; and she having declared Erick Pomeran, her Sisters Daughters Son, her
Associate in the Government, entered into a War against Albert King of Sweden.
But the Swedes being in general dissatisfied with their King, deserted him,
acknowledging Margaret for their Queen. Albert fought a Battle against
Margaret, but was defeated and taken Prisoner with his Son; whom Margaret did
not release till after seven years Imprisonment, under condition that he should
either pay 60000 Marks, fine silver, for his Ransom, or else resign his
Pretensions to the Kingdom of Sweden; and he having performed the last,
Margaret caused Eric Pomeran to be Crowned King of Sweden. In the year next
following the Estates of all the three Northern Kingdoms assembled at Calmar,
1396.
where Erick having been declared their King, an agreement was made among them,
that these three Kingdoms for the future should be Ruled by one King. Margaret,
who had been an extraordinary good Queen to Denmark, died in the year 1412.
After whose death Erick was sole King over these three Kingdoms; but he was in
continual broils with the Holsteiners (who were assisted by the Hanse Towns)
concerning the Duchy of Sleswick; which differences were at last composed. He
surrendered to his Cousins, Eric Pomerar.
the Dukes of Pomerania, the Island of Rugen, which had been a considerable
time under Danish Subjection. 1438.
In the mean time the Swedes were grown very discontented, because Erick did
not Govern them according to his Coronation Oath, and oppressed them by his
Foreign Officers; which obliged them to stand up for the Defense of their
Liberty. The Danes also, seeing that he was very careless of the Affairs of the
Kingdom, and did always live in Gotland, did withdraw themselves from his
Obedience, alleging, among other matters, that because he had been
endeavoring to Establish his Cousin Bogislaus Duke of Pomerania in his Throne,
in his life time, he had thereby violated their Right of a Free Election:
Christopher.
And having chosen in his stead Christopher Duke of Bavaria, 1439.
Erick's Sisters Son, he was Deposed, and retired into Pomerania, where he
ended his life. Christopher Reigned till the year 1448. with whose Reign the
Danes were very well satisfied.

. Chris^ian I.
5. After his Death the Danes made an offer of that Crown to Adolf Duke of
Sleswick and Earl of Holstein; But he being very ancient and infirm refused to
accept of it, and recommended to them Christian Earl of Oldenburgh, his Sisters
Son, whom both the Danes and Norwegians declared their King; and in this Family
these two Crowns have remained ever since, by a continual succession. This
King, soon after, began a War with the Swedes (who had made one Charles Cnutson
their King) because they would have driven the deposed King Erick out of
Gotland; but King Christian, coming to his assistance, made himself Master of
that Island. Besides this, some of the Swedish Nobility, who were dissatisfied
with Charles Cnutson, having sided with Christian, the War began to be carried
on very vigorously betwixt these two Nations. In this War the Archbishop of
Vpsal did attack Charles with such Success, that he obliged him to retire into
Prussia, and Christian was crowned King of Sweden. 1458.
But the Swedes being again dissatisfied with Christian, recalled Charles
Cnutson when the War began afresh: and notwithstanding Charles Cnutson died in
the year 1470, 1463.
and Christian came with a great Army into Swedeland, yet could he not maintain
himself in the Throne, his Forces having been defeated near Stockholm. In the
year 1471 the Emperor Frederick III. gave to him in Fief, Ditmarsen, as also to
the Country of Holstein the Title of a Dukedom. He married his Daughter
Margaret to James III. King of Scotland, giving her for a Dowry the Orkney
Islands and Hetland, which had hitherto been dependent on the Kingdom of
Norway. He died in the year 1481. In whose stead the Danes and Norwegians chose
his Son John their King, who divided the Dukedom of Holstein with his Brother
Frederick. This King John after he had reigned in peace for a con^iderable
time, John.
did at last enter into a War against Sweden, and having defeated the
Dalekarls, forced Steenure the Governor to surrender himself and the City of
Stockholm, and was crowned King of Sweden. 1497.
But in the year 1501, he was miserably and shamefully beaten by the
Ditmarsians, whom he would have brought under his Subjection, and afterward
Steen Sture also drove him out of Sweden. He was in continual broils with him
and his Successor Suant Sture, who were assisted by the Lubeckers, till these
Differences were at last composed; soon after which he died.

. 1513.
6. Him succeeded his Son Christian II, who drew upon him the Hatred of the
Danes, Christian II.
partly because he entertained a Woman of mean birth in the Netherlands, whose
name was Duivecke, to be his Mistress, and was strangely led by the Nose by her
Mother Sigibirta, a crafty old Woman; partly because he had caused Torber Ox,
the Governor of the Castle of Copenhagen, to be, as it is thought, unjustly
executed. In the mean time great Differences were arisen in Sweden betwixt
Steen Sture the younger and Gustave Trolle the Archbishop of Vpsal, the first
having destroyed the Castle of Steka, which belonged to the latter. King
Christian coming to the Assistance of the Archbishop took him along with him
into Denmark, where they laid the Design against Swedeland. A Decree therefore
was obtained from the Pope, wherein he having condemned the Swedes to undergo
great Penalties for the violence offered to Gustave Trolle. King Christian, to
put this Decree in execution, sent his Forces into Sweden, where Steen Sture
being slain in an Engagement, the whole Kingdom was put into Confusion by his
Death: And King Christian, coming at last in person, forced Christina, the
Widow of Steen Sture, to surrender the City of Stockholm. At last a general
Amnesty having been published first, Crowned K. of Swede^.
he was crowned King of Sweden. 1520.
But when the Swedes thought themselves most secure, he caused some of the
chief Men, under pretense of the former Violences committed upon Gustavus
Trolle, to be executed by the Hangman, and committed besides great Cruelties.
In the mean time, Gustavus Erickson, who had been a Prisoner in Denmark, having
made his Escape arrived in Sweden; and with the assistance of the Dalekarls,
whom he had stirred up, entirely drove the Danes out of Sweden, which ever
since has maintained its Liberty against the Danes. By this time the Hatred of
the Danes against Christian was mightily increased; and the Jutes having first
of all withdrawn themselves from their Obedience to him, (...) of his own Kingd
it put him into such a Consternation, that he retreated with his Wife and
Children into the Netherlands. The Danes chose in his stead his Uncle Frederick
Duke of Holstein for their King. Christian, having raised some Landforces, did
endeavor to regain the Throne, but they were dispersed again. Charles V. also,
his Brother in law, was so entangled in the War with France, that he could not
send him sufficient Succors. At last he came with a Fleet into Norway, where
he surrendered himself to Dnut Gyldenstern, who promised him security. But King
Frederick, alleging that he was not obliged to keep that promise, made him a
Prisoner, and sent him to the Castle of Sunderburgh. But having resigned his
Title to the Kingdom, 1532.
he was removed to the Castle of Callenburgh, 1546.
where he died. 1559.


7. Frederick I.
Frederick I. entered into an Alliance with Gustavus King of Sweden, and the
Hanse Towns, against the deposed King Christian; and forced the Cities of
Copenhagen and Malmoe, which adhered to Christian, to surrender themselves to
him. He also granted great Privileges to the Nobility, and died in the year
1533, the year after he had made Christian II. his Prisoner. Him succeeded his
Son Christian III. Christian III
who met with great Opposition at first from Christopher Earl of Oldenburgh and
the Lubeckers, who pretended to restore the imprisoned Christian to the Throne,
and had brought several Provinces over to their side; but he at last surmounted
these Difficulties, with the Assistance of Gustavus King of Sweden, and made
himself Master of Copenhagen. And because the Bishops had been all along
against him, 1556.
they were excluded from the general Agreement; and having been deposed in the
same year, the Protestant Religion was at the same time established in Denmark
and Norway. He reigned very peaceably after that time, and died in the year
1558.

8. Fred^rick II
His Son and Successor Frederick II. subdued the Ditmarsians: then he entered
into a War against Erick King of Sweden, 1560.
which was carried on with great losses on both sides for the space of nine
years: at last a Peace was concluded at Stetin, by the mediation of the
Emperor, 1570.
and the Kings of France and Poland. He Reigned afterward very peaceably in
Denmark, till the year 1588. when he died.

Under the Reign also of his Son Christian IV. Christian IV.
the Kingdom was in great Tranquillity, till the year 1611. when he attacked the
Swedish King Charles IX. and took from him Calmar and Elfsburgh. 1613.
But he made Peace with Gustavus Adolph, the Son of Charles; by virtue of which
he restored these places unto him, in consideration of a good Sum of Money.
1625.
He was entangled in the Civil Wars of Germany; for he having been made General
of the Circle of the Lower Saxony, he thereby came to be engaged in a War
against the Emperor: But this War proved very disadvantageous to him, he
having received a great overthrow near King Luttern, and being obliged not only
to quit Germany, but the Imperialists also entered Holstein and Jutland itself:
Yet he recovered all again by virtue of a Peace made at Lubeck, 1629.
except that he lost the advantage of some Ecclesiastical Possessions in
Germany, which he intended for his Sons. When Swedeland was afterward engaged
in the German Wars, he offered his mediation betwixt them and the Emperor, in
hopes thereby to recover his losses of the Ecclesiastical Possessions, and to
prevent that the Swedes might not get a firm footing in Germany. In the mean
while he was very vexatious to the Swedes, endeavoring by all ways and means
to stop the career of their Victories in Germany, and to spoil their Trade at
home; till at last the Swedes being sorely vexed that their Ships were
continually detained and confiscated in the Sound, did resolve to put an end to
these inconveniences; and after they had let the Danes know, that they would
no longer suffer these Injuries, fell with an Army into Holstein and Jutland,
and at last also into Schonen. 1643.
In this War the Danes were great losers both by Sea and Land, but by the
extraordinary Valor of their King they maintained themselves, 1645.
till by the mediation of France, a Peace was concluded at Bromsebroo; by
virtue of which the Swedes got Gothland, Osel, and Jemperland, and Holland was
given them as a Pledge for the space of thirty years. The Hollanders also
taking hold of this opportunity, did regulate the Toll of the Sound, which
hitherto having been raised at pleasure, had been very troublesome to them. He
died in the year 1648.

9. Fr^^erick III
Him succeeded his Son Frederick III. who upon the persuasions of the
Hollanders, 1657.
attacked the Swedes, promising himself great success against them, War with
Sweden.
at that time when he supposed that their King Charles Gustavus had quite
weakened his strength against the Poles; but the Swedish King came upon a
sudden with an Army into Holstein and Jutland, and among others, took the
Fortress of Fredericksudde by storm; and there happening an extraordinary hard
Frost at the beginning of the year 1658. he marched over the Ice, first into
Funen, where he surprised the Danish Troops; from thence taking his way over
Largeland, Laland and Falster, into Zealand. This prodigious success obliged
King Frederick to conclude a Peace with him at Roshild, by virtue of which,
besides some other advantages, he surrendered to the Swedes, Holland,
Bleckingen, Schonen, Bornholm, Bahus, and Drontheim in Norway.

But King Charles Gustavus being informed, that by the persuasions of the
Emperor, the Elector of Brandenburgh, and the Hollanders, the Danes had
resolved to renew the War, as soon as the Swedes had left the Country, or
should be again engaged in a War with Germany or Poland, he resolved to be
beforehand with them, and returning into the Isle of Zealand, took Cronenburgh,
(...) C^penhagen.
and Besieged Copenhagen by Sea and Land. In the mean while the Dutch sent a
Fleet to Relieve Copenhagen, against whom the Swedes fought with great bravery:
But in the year next following, the Swedes did in vain storm Copenhagen, 1659.
and besides this, lost the Battle in Funen* Bornholm revolted, and Druntheim
was retaken. And tho the Danes endeavored to carry on the War against the
Swedes, hoping to have now after the death of their King Charles Gustavus, met
with an opportunity to revenge themselves for their former losses; yet
acccording to a Project concluded upon by France, England and Holland, A Peace
conclu^ed.
a Peace was made near Copenhagen, almost upon the same Conditions with that
concluded formerly at Roshild, except that Bornholm and Druntheim remained in
the possession of the Danes; in lieu of which some Lands were assigned to the
Swedes in Schonen.

A Peace being thus concluded, The King ^eclared absolute an the Crown
heredi^ar^.
the King, at the Diet held at Copenhagen, was declared an absolute Sovereign,
and the Crown Hereditary; whereby the great Privileges of the Nobility were
abolished, and a new Form of Government introduced, where the whole Management
of Affairs depends absolutely on the King's pleasure.

This King died in the year 1670. Christian. V.
Him succeeded his Son Christian V. who after he had put his Affairs into a
good Posture, entered into an Alliance with the Emperor, Holland and their
Confederates. And seeing that the Swedes had been worsted in the Country of
Brandenburgh, he hoped to have met with a good opportunity to break with
Sweden. 1675.
He began therefore with the Duke of Holstein; who, not foreseeing the Design,
came to him at Rensburgh, whom he forced to quit all his Advatanges which he
had obtained by the Peace of Roshild, and to surrender into his hands the
Fortress of Tonningen, which he caused to be demolished, and afterward took
Wismar from the Swedes.

In the year next following he entered Schonen, where he took Helsingburgh, H^
mak^th War upon Swed^n.
Landscrone and Christianstad, as also the Isle of Gotland, with little
Resistance. But he having detached some Troops to invest Halmstad, they were
surprised by the King of Sweden, who routed them, and such as were not slain
were all made Prisoners. Not long after, the whole Danish Army was beaten out
of the field in a bloody Battle fought near Lunden. In the year 1677. King
Christian besieged Malmoe, but having miscarried in a Storm which he made upon
the place, he was forced to raise the Siege; and soon after received another
Overthrow in a Battle fought near Landscrone betwixt him and Charles King of
Sweden. In the Year next following the Danes were obliged to raise the Siege of
Bahus, and to surrender Christianstadt, which reduced to Extremity by Famine:
but at Sea they had better Success; A Peace.
yet, by virtue of a Peace made betwixt them, they restored all such places as
they had taken from the Swedes.

10. The G^nius o^t is N^tion.
It is evident, out of ancient History, That this Nation has been formerly very
warlike: but in our age the Danes have lost much of their ancient Glory,
because the Nobility have been rather for enjoying their Revenues in Plenty and
Quietness, than for undergoing the fatigues of War, and the Commonalty have
followed their Example. This may also perhaps be alleged for a reason, that
they having seldom been engaged in any Wars, but with Sweden, (except that
Christian IV. made war in Germany, which however was carried on chiefly by
German Soldiers) which could not be of any long Continuance, the Danes often
wanted opportunity to keep themselves in exercise; especially since they had
the convenience of making use of the Germans, whom they listed for money: and
the number of Inhabitants seemed to be but proportionable to the Country, which
is of no great extent. Since the King has been declared Sovereign, all means
have been employed to improve the Military force of the Nation; but it seems
that the National Forces, without the help of the Germans, will not be of any
great Consequence, as to Land-service. Neither is it the King's interest to put
his Nobility upon Martial Exploits, or that they should grow famous in War, for
fear they should make an Effort to recover their former Privileges.

The Norwegians undergo all sorts of hardship with more Courage and Vigor, The
Norwegians.
whereunto they are inured by their Climate and Air. But the Danes, since they
have been Masters of Norway, have always endeavored to keep under this Nation,
by taking from them all opportunities of exerting their vigor, and there are
very few left of the ancient Nobility in Norway. Yet the Norwegians are now
adays very good Seamen, and the Dutch make good use of them in Sea-service: and
a great many of the Inhabitants of North-holland, where they are addicted to
Fishing, were originally of Norway.

11. Nature of the Soil.
The country of Denmark is of no great extent, yet it is generally very
Fertile, and fit both for Tillage and Pasturage; for a great number of Oxen and
Horses are yearly Transported out of Denmark to other places. And a
considerable quantity of Corn is sent out of Denmark into Norway and Island.
The Seas near Denmark are pretty well stocked with Fish, which however are
rather for the benefit of the Inhabitants, than for exportation. There are
little or no Manufactories there, the Inhabitants being not fitted for such
works; neither is there any Commodities fit for Exportation in great
quantities. On the other hand, the Danes are obliged to Import Wine, Salt, good
Beer, and Woollen Manufactury for Clothes. They have begun to bring Spices
themselves out of the East Indies, where they have a small Fort upon the Coast
of Cormandel. The Toll, which is paid by Foreigners in the Sound in ready
money, is a very good Revenue in Denmark. Which is the reason why the Danes can
scarce forgive the Swedes, that they do not pay this Tributary Toll to Denmark*
Norway is for the most part a very raw Country, yet it produces several
Commodities fit for exportation, viz. dried and salted Fish in great quantity,
Timber, Board, Masts, Tar, Pitch, and the like. There are also in Norway,
Silver, Copper, and Iron Mines. But it produces not Corn sufficient in quantity
for the maintenance of its Inhabitants, nor to brew Beer; besides it wants also
the same Commodities which are wanting in Denmark. As for its situation its
very commodious, to Export and Import Merchandises to and from other Seacoasts
in Europe. Island is stocked with Fish, some salted Flesh, and very good Down
Feathers, which the Inhabitants are fain to exchange for such Commodities as
are, besides Fish and Flesh, requisite for the sustenence and convenience of
Life. The Fenock Islands do for the most part live on their Sheep and Fish.
Besides that, Denmark cannot raise a considerable Army of its Natives, I^s
defects.
this is also a great weakness to this Kingdom, that not only Norway and
Denmark are separated by the Sea, and cannot keep correspondency together but
by that way; but also that this Kingdom is divided into so many Islands; so
that if an Enemy once becomes Master at Sea, he must needs prove very
troublesome to Denmark.

12. N^ighbours of Denmark.
As to the Neighbors of Denmark, it Borders on one side upon Germany; for
Holstein, which belongs to the present Royal Ramily, is a Fief of the Empire.
And tho the Land Forces of Denmark do not come to any comparison with those of
Germany, Germany.
and Jutland lies quite open on that side; yet the Islands are very secure from
the Germans, who are not provided with Shipping, except it should happen that
the great and lesser Belt should both be frozen, which happens very rarely.
Neither is there any great probability that these two States should differ,
except the pretensions upon Hamborough, which the King of Denmark will not
easily let fall, should furnish an occasion for War. And to speak truly, it is
so delicious a morsel, that it may easily provoke an Appetite. But it will be a
very difficult task for the King of Denmark to attain his aim by open force,
except there should happen a very strange juncture of Affairs, or that the
inward Divisions, or else by treachery, this City should give an occasion for
its Ruin. In the mean while it is not easily to be supposed, that the
Neighboring German Princes should suffer that a City of so great Consequence
should fall into the hands of a Foreign Prince. In fine, it is of vast
Consequence to Denmark, to hold a good understanding with Germany, since from
thence it must draw the greatest part of its Landforces, wherewith to defend
itself against Swedeland.

With the Swedes Denmark had been in continual Broils for a considerable time;
Sw^^en.
and it seems that there is an old grudge and animosity betwixt these two
Nations, arising chiefly hence, that the Danes have formerly always endeavored
to make themselves Masters of Sweden, and to reduce this Kingdom into the same
condition as they had done Norway. Besides, that afterward they have made it
their business, by ruining their Shipping and Trade, to prevent the growing
Greatness of Sweden: But Sweden has always vigorously defended itself, and in
latter times has gained great advantages upon Denmark; for the Swedes have not
only recovered Schonen, and secured West Gothland, by the Fortress of Bahus;
but they have also a way open into Jutland, out of their Provinces in Germany.
On the other hand, the Danes have made it their business hitherto, by making
Alliances with the Enemies of Sweden, to get from them these Advantages. But if
we consider, that these two Kingdoms are now divided by their natural Bounds to
preserve which, France, England and Holland seem to be mutually concerned; and
that as in human probability Denmark cannot conquer or maintain itself in
Swedeland; so the other States of Europe, are not likely to suffer, that Sweden
should become Master of Denmark: It seems therefore most convenient, that these
two Kingdoms should maintain a good understanding, and be a mutual security to
one another against their Enemies.

From Holland Denmark may expect real assistance, Holland.
in case it should be in danger of being Conquered; since the prosperity of
Holland depends partly on the free Trade of the Baltic; and if one should
become Master both of Sweden and Denmark, he would questionless keep these
Passages closer than they are now. But the Danes also are sensible enough, that
the Hollanders will not engage themselves any further in their behalf, than to
keep the balance even, for fear they should with an increase of Power, attempt
hereafter, to raise the Toll in the Sound at pleasure. But as long as Holland
sides with Denmark, England.
England will not be fond of the Danish Party, but rather declare for the other
side; for the preservation of Denmark, and the Trade in the Baltic, is not of
so great consequence to England, as it is to Holland.

The Muscovites may prove very serviceable to Denmark against Sweden: The
Muscovites.
yet cannot the Danes make any great account upon an Alliance with them;
because it is very difficult to maintain a Correspondency with them, especially
if the Poles should declare for Sweden: Besides that, the Muscovites, as soon
as they have obtained their aim, commonly have but little regard to Alliances,
or the Interest of their Allies. Denmark can have no great reliance upon
Poland, Poland.
except that Crown should be engaged in a War against Sweden. France.
France has hitherto shown no great concern for Denmark, because it has always
been in Alliance with its Enemies; yet France would not willingly see it
ruined, because no State of Europe would desire the two Northern Kingdoms
should be under the Subjection of one Prince: But I cannot see any reason, why
an offensive Alliance with Denmark, should be profitable to France. Spain is
more likely to wish well to Denmark, than to assist it, except it should
happen, that Swedeland was engaged in a War against the House of Austria, or
any other Allie of Spain.

CHAP. X.
Of POLAND.
1. THE POLES, Origin of the Kingd. of Poland.
who anciently were called Samartians, and afterward Slavonians, derived their
Name from the Nature of the Country which they possess; which lies most upon a
Plain, for Pole signifies in their language a Plain; tho some are of opinion
that the Word Polacki, is as much as to say, the Posterity of Lechus. This
Nation formerly did inhabit nearer to the Country of the Tartars; but after
vast Numbers out of Germany entered the Roman Provinces, their places were
supplied by the nations living behind them. And it seems that Poland being in
the same manner left by its Inhabitants, which were then Venedi or Wends, they
made room for the next that took their Place. These then, as it is said, having
taken possession of this Country about the year 550, did, Lechus.
under the Conduct of Lechus, lay there the Foundation of a new State. Lechus
resided at Gnicsen, being encouraged thereunto by an Eagles Nest which he found
there, and taking it as a good Omen, put an Eagle into the Arms of the new
Commonwealth, giving to that City the name of Gnicsen, which in the Polish
Language signifies a Nest. This Nation first settled it self in that part of the
Country, which now goes by the name of the great and lesser Poland; neither did
their Limits extend any further, tho since that time they are mightily
increased.

2. Twelve Vayvods or Governors.
The first Governors of this Nation did not assume to themselves the Title of
Kings, but only that of Dukes; and the first form of Government was very
inconstant: for after the Race of Lechus was extinguished (tho it is uncertain
how many of them, and for how long a time they Ruled, or what were their
Atchievments) twelve Governors, which in their Language are called Vayvods,
did administer the Government, who having at first regulated and refined this
barbarous People by good Laws and Constitutions, at last were divided among
themselves. 700.
Wherefore the Poles elected for their Prince one Cracus, Cracus.
who having restored the Commonwealth to its former State, built the City of
Cracovia, so called after his own Name, which he made his place of residence.
Lechus II.
Whose youngest Son Lechus II. to obtain the Principality, murdered his elder
Brother; but as soon as the Fact was discovered, he was banished the Country.
After him ruled a Virgin, whose Name was Venda, Venda.
the only Daughter left of the Children of Cracus, 750.
who having vanquished one Ritiger a German Prince that pretended Marriage to
her out of a blind Superstition, drowned herself in the River of Weixel. After
her death the administration of the Government returned again to the Governors
or Vayvods, which continued for some time, till the Poles elected again for
their Prince a Goldsmith called Premislus, who is also called Lescus I. Lescus
I.
because he had by a Stratagem defeated the Moravians, who had made an
Irruption into Poland. But he leaving no Issue behind him a Horse Race was
instituted, with condition that the Victor should succeed in the Government.
One of the Competitours had laid Iron Hooks in the Ground, by which means the
others Horses having been ^amed he was the first that came to the Goal, but the
Fraud being discovered he was killed upon the spot. In the mean while a certain
poor Fellow on foot had run the Race and was the next to the Impostor, whom the
Poles declared their Prince. 776.
His name was Lescus II. and as some say, was slain in the Wars against Charles
the Great. Lescus II.
Him succeeded his Son Lescus III. 804.
who having appeased Charles the Great, Lescus III.
with Presents, made Peace with him, either as an unequal Allie, or else by
acknowledging himself his Vassal. Popiel I.
He left Poland to his Son Popiel, whom he had begot in Wedlock; but to his
natural Sons he gave the neighboring Countries of Pomerania, Mack, Ca^^ubia,
with some others. Popiel II.
Him succeeded his Son Popiel II. an ill man, who upon the persuasion of his
Lady murdered his Father's Brothers, it is reported that out of their dead
Bodies came forth Mice, which devoured Popiel with his Wife and Children.

3. 820.
After his Death there was an Interregnum full of troubles, till the Poles
declared Piastus, Piastus.
a Countryfellow born at Crusswitz, their Prince, from whom ever since such of
the Natives as obtained the Royal Dignity, were called Piasti. His Posterity
has reigned for a long time in Poland, from whom also descended the race of the
Dukes of Lignitz and Brieg in Silesia, which is but lately extinguished. It Is
said that he was 120 Years old before he died. Zicmovitus.
His Son Zicmovitus began his Reign in the Year 895. a Warlike and brave
Prince; whom succeeded his Son Lescus IV. Lescus IV.
a good and peaceable Prince. Much of the same temper was his Son Zicmovistus,
902.
who began to Reign in the Year 921. Zicmovistus.
This Prince had but one Son, who being blind was in the seventh Year of his
Age (in which Year, according to the Custom of those times, his Head was to be
shaved, and he to receive his Name) restored to his Sight, which was then taken
for an Omen, that he should be enlightened with the Christian Faith. Micislaus
(...)
His Name was Micislaus I. and began his Reign in the Year 962. He having a
great many Wives and no Children, occasioned in him a desire to turn Christian,
for some Germans representing to him, that if he left the Heathenish
Superstitions he would certainly beget Children; he was persuaded by them to
remove his Heathenish Wives, which he did, and married Dambrateca, the Daughter
of Bogislaus Duke of Bohemia. Before he married her, he was baptized himself,
and first introduced the Christian Religion into Poland, 965.
as also that custom which has obtained since there, that at the time when the
Gospel is read in the Mass, the Men half draw their Cymetars to signify that
they were ready to fight for the Christian Faith.

4. 999.
Him succeeded his Son Boleslaus Chrobry, who was by the Emperor Otto III.
Boleslaus Chrobry, the first King of Poland.
dignified with the Title of King, who also remitted unto him all the
Pretensions which the former Emperors had upon Poland; and this in
consideration for the kind entertainment which he had received from Boleslaus
in his Pilgrimage to the Grave of Albart Bishop of Gnicsen, which being then
very famous for some Miracles, was visited by the Emperor to fulfill his Vow
which he had made during a precedent Sickness. This first King of Poland
behaved himself very bravely in his Wars against the Red Russians, the
Bohemians, Saxons and Prussians. He also instituted twelve Senators as his
Assistants in the administration of the Government. Miccislaus II.
But his Son Miccislaus lost for the most part his Father's Conquests, Moravia
having among the rest been taken from him by the Bohemians. He began his Reign
in the Year 1025. and died in the Year 1034. leaving but one Son behind him,
whose Name was Casimir, Casimir I.
who being an Infant, his Mother Rixa administered the Government for a while.
But the Poles being dissatisfied with her, she fled with her Son into Germany,
who in his Journey in France, assumed the Order and Habit of a Monk. During his
absence, there were great Disturbances in Poland, Maslaus having about that
time made himself Master of Masuria, which for a long time after, remained
independent of the Kingdom of Poland. At last the Poles prevailed upon Casimir,
to leave his Monastery and accept the Crown. And to persuade the Pope to
absolve him from his Vow, they promised, that for each Head, except those of
the Nobility and Clergy, they would contribute yearly a Farthing toward the
maintaining of a perpetual burning Lamp in the Church of St. Peter in Rome, and
cause their Heads to be shaved above their Ears like Monks. After he came to
the Crown he beat Maslaus and the Prussians, and restored the Kingdom to its
former tranquillity.

His Son Boleslaus Surnamed the Hardy, Boleslaus the Hardy.
did at first wage War against his Neighbors the Prussians, Bohemians and
Russians with great Success; 1058.
but afterward giving himself over to all manner of Debauchery, and having
been checked for that reason by Stanislaus the Bishop of Cracau, who also at
last excommunicated him, he cut him to pieces before the Altar. Then he was
excommunicated by the Pope, and perceiving himself to be hated by every body,
left the Kingdom, and at last murdered himself.

5. Vladislaus 1082.
Him succeeded his Brother Vladislaus, who standing in fear of the Pope, would
not at first take upon him the Title of King. He met with great Troubles both
at home and abroad, which however he overcame at last. Boleslaus III.
Him succeeded his Son Boleslaus III. a brave Soldier, 1103.
who obtained a signal Victory over the Emperor Henry V. in a Battle fought in
the Dogsfield near Breslau. There was never a Prince in Poland more Famous for
Military Achievements than himself; it being related of him, that he fought
forty five Battles all with good Success, except the last of all, fought
against the Red Russians, which was lost by the Cowardice of the Vayvod of
Cracovia, unto whom the King for a recompense sent a Hare-skin and
Spinning-Wheel, which so troubled him, that he hanged himself: But the King
also was so troubled at this Defeat, that he died of grief, 1139.
leaving four Sons behind him. Vladislaus II.
Among whom Vladislaus II. obtained a great part of the Kingdom with the Name
of a Prince, yet the other Brothers also shared several great Provinces among
themselves, according to their Father's last Will. This occasioned great
Divisions and Civil Wars betwixt these Brothers; and Vladislaus, who pretended
to dispossess the rest, was himself obliged to quit the Country. Boleslaus IV.
After him Boleslaus Crispus his Brother was made Prince of Poland, 1146.
who was forced to wage War against the Emperor Conrade III. and Frederick I.
who would have restored Vladislaus. At last a Peace was concluded betwixt them,
by Virtue of which, Poland remained to Boleslaus, but he was obliged to
surrender Silesia, which was then dependent on Poland, to Vladislaus, which
being afterward divided into a great many Dukedoms, at last fell to the Crown
of Bohemia. This Boleslaus also received a great overthrow from the Prussians,
his Army having by the treachery of a Guide been mis^ed into the Moors and
Boggs. Him succeeded his Brother Miccislaus Senior, Miccislaus III.
but he was deposed for Maladministration. 1174.
Him succeeded his Brother Casimir, Casimir. 11780.
who is only famous for that he chastised the Prussiant. He died in the year
1194. Lescus V.
His Son Lescus Surnamed the White, was fain to contend with the banished
Miccislaus for the Kingdom with various Success, till Miccislaus died. 1213.
Whose Son Vladislaus also raised some Disturbances against him for a while,
till at last he was forced to leave him in the quiet possession of Poland. The
first Inroads o^ the Tartars.
Under the Reign of this Lescus the Tartars made the first In-road into Russia,
and have ever since proved very troublesome and mischievous to Poland. This
Lescus was forced to wage War with Sventopolek, whom he had constituted
Governor of Pomerania. He having made himself Duke of Pomerania did dismember
it from the Kingdom of Poland. Conrade, also the Brother of Lescus had got the
possession of Masovia and Cusavia, who being not strong enough to defend
himself against the Prussians, who were fallen into his Country, he called in
the Knights of the Cross, who were then by the Saracens driven out of Syria.
Unto these he surrendered the Country of Culm, under condition, that such places
as by their help should be conquered in Prussia, should be divided betwixt
them; which afterward proved to be the occasion of great Wars betwixt them and
Poland.

To Lescus succeeded his Son Boleslaus, B^lesiaus V.
Surnamed the Chaste, 1226.
under whose Reign the Tartars committed prodigious Barbarities in Poland, and
from thence made an In-road into Silesia, where in a Battle fought near
Lignitz, they slew so many of the Inhabitants, that they filled nine great
Sacks with the Ears which they had cut off. His Reign was besides this full of
intestine Troubles. Him succeeded his Cousin Lescus, L^scus VI. 1279.
Surnamed the Black, who was very Fortunate in his Wars with the Russians and
Lithuanians: he also quite rooted out the Jazygians, which then inhabited
Podolia, but the Civil Commotions and frequent Incursions of the Tartars,
occasioned great Disturbances in the Kingdom. He died in the year 1289.

6. After the Death of Lescus, there were great Contests in Poland concerning
the Regency; Premislus
till at last Premissus, Lord of Great Poland got the upper hand; 1291.
who also reassumed the Title of King, which the Regents of Poland had not used
during the space of 200 years; ever since that the Pope, after the banishment
of Boleslaus the Hardy, had forbid them to choose a King of Poland. And the
succeeding Princes were not very ambitious of that Title, because the Country
was divided among several Persons. But Premislus did think himself powerful
enough to make use of it. He was murdered by some Brandenburgh Emissaries,
after he had reigned but seven Months. Vladisl. III.
After him was elected Vladislaus Locticus, or Cubitalis, who did not style
himself King, but only Heir of Poland. But he having been deposed for
Maleadministration, Wenceslaus King of Bohemia was elected in his stead. 1300.
But after his Death, which happened in the Year 1309. Locticus was restored,
who waged great Wars against the Knights of the Cross, whom he at last
vanquished in a great Battle. Under his Reign the Dukes of Silesia who were
Vassals of Poland, submitted themselves to the Crown of Bohemia. He died in the
Year 1333. Casimir III.
Him succeeded his Son Casimir the Great, who having subdued all Russia, united
it to the Kingdom of Poland, so that it should enjoy the same Laws and
Liberties. He also first introduced the Magdeburgh Laws and Constitutions into
Poland, and the Duke of Masuria did then first submit himself as a Vassal to
the Crown of Poland. He died in the Year 1370. leaving no Issue behind him; and
by his Death the Male-Race of Piastus lost the Crown of Poland.

7. After Casimir the Crown of Poland was devolved to Lewis King of Hungary,
Lewis.
the Sister's Son of Casimir: The Poles were not well satisfied with him,
because he favored the Hungarians too much. He died in the Year 1382.
Sigismund King of Hungary would fain have succeed him in Poland, but the Poles
refused him. Some proposed Zicmovitus the Duke of Masuria, but Hedwig the
Daughter of King Lewis, for whom the Poles would by all means reserve the Crown
of Poland, would not accept of him for her Husband. At last the Poles Crowned
the abovementioned Hedwig, and married her to Jagello Duke of Lithuania,
Jagello, or Vla^isl. IV.
under Condition that he and his Subjects should turn Christians, and Lithuania
should be united to Poland in one body. How Lithuania was united o Poland.
The first Condition was performed immediately, for he was baptized, and called
Vladislaus IV. But the performance of the second Article was delayed by the
Kings of Poland for a considerable time after, under pretense that the
Lithunians were not well satisfied in this Point, but in effect, because they
were unwilling to surrender their right of Succession to the Dukedom of
Lithuania; till at last this Union was perfected under the Reign of King
Sigismundus Augustus. This Jagello defeated the Knights of the Cross in a
memorable Battle, where 50000 Men having been slain, he took from them a great
many Cities in Prussia, but they afterward recovered themselves. He died in
the Year 1434. Vladisl. V.
Him succeeded his Son Vladislaus V. who also afterward was made King of
Hungary, where he was engaged in a War against the Turks. In this War John
Humades first defeated the Turks near the River Morava, and Vladislaus so beat
them upon the Frontiers of Macedonia, that they were forced to make a Truce for
Ten Years. But upon the persuasions of the Pope, who sent the Cardinal Julian,
to absolve the King from his Oath, this Truce was broken; and not long after
that memorable Battle was fought near Varna, where the King himself was killed.
1445.
This Defeat was very shameful and prejudicial to the Christians.

8. Casimir IV.
In his stead Casimir was made King of Poland: A great part of Prussia, which
was weary of the Government of the Knights of the Cross, did surrender it self
under his Protection: This occasioned a heavy War betwixt them and the Poles,
which having been carried on a great while with dubious Success, a Peace was at
last concluded by the mediation of the Pope; by Virtue of which, the Poles got
Pomerellia, Culm, Marienburgh, Stum and Elbing, the rest remaining under the
jurisdiction of the Knights of the Cross, under Condition, that the Master of
that Order should be a Vassal of Poland, and a Duke and Senator of that
Kingdom. Much about the same time, the Duke of Vallachia, did submit himself as
a Vassal to the Crown of Poland. Under the Reign of this King, the Deputies of
the Provinces first appeared at the Dyets of the Kingdom. Vladislaus the Son of
this Casimir was made King of Bohemia, and afterward also of Hungary, though his
own Brother John Albert did contend with him for the latter, but being soundly
beaten, was obliged to desist from his Pretensions. Casimir died in the Year
1492. Him succeeded his Son John Albert, John Albert.
who received a signal overthrow in Vallachia from the Turks and rebellious
Vallachians. The Turks also fell into Poland, but by a sudden great Frost a
great many Thousands of them were starved to Death. Under the Reign of this
King, the Dukedom of Plotzk^ in the Country of Masovia was united to Poland. He
died in the Year 1501. Whom succeeded his Brother Alexander, Alexander.
Sigismund.
but he did not Reign longer than till the Year 1506. Whom succeeded Sigismund
one of the most Famous Princes of his time. This King was engaged in three
several Wars against the Muscovites, wherein the Poles always were Victorious
in the Field, but the Muscovites who had got Smolensko by Treachery, kept the
possession of that place. The War which he waged with the Knights of the Cross
in Prussia, at last composed under these Conditions; that Albert Marquess of
Brandenburgh, who was then Master of that Order, should receive the Eastern
parts of Prussia as a hereditary Fief from the King, and should acknowledge
himself hereafter a Vassal of the Crown of Poland. Under his Reign also the
whole Country of Masovia was reunited to the Crown of Poland. He also fought
very successfully against the Vallachians, and died in the Year 1548. Sigismund
is Augustus.
leaving for his Successor his Son Sigismundus Augustus. Under his Reign
Livonia submitted it self to Poland, as being not able to defend it self
against the Muscovites, who already had taken Dorpt, Felin, and several other
places. In this public Consternation Estlad and Reval did surrender themselves
to Erick King of Swedeland* But the Archbishop of Riga, and the Master of the
Teutonick Order, did seek for Protection of the King of Poland, which he would
not grant them upon any other terms, than that they should submit themselves to
the Crown of Poland. Whereupon the Master of the Order having abdicated
himself, surrendered the Castle of Riga and some other places to the Poles. And
he in recompense of his Loss was made Duke of Curland and Semigall. This
occasioned a War betwixt the Poles and Muscovites, wherein these took from the
former Plotzk^. This King died without Children, 1552.
and by his Death the Male Race of the Jagellonick Family was quite
extinguished.

9. After his Death there were great Contentions in Poland concerning the
Election of a new King, and at last by the majority of Votes, Henry of Val^^s
Duke of Anjou. 1574.
Henry Duke of Anjou, Brother of Charles IX. King of France, was declared King
of Poland, who arriving there was crowned in the same Year. But he had scarce
been four Monthsin Poland, when having Notice that his Brother the King of
France was dead, he in the Night time, and in a thick Fog, for fear the Poles
should detain him, relinquished Poland, and taking his way through Austria and
Italy into France, took Possession of that Kingdom. The Poles being extremely
vexed at this Affront, were for electing a new King. A great many were for
Maximilian of Austria, Steph. Batori.
but Stephen Batori Prince of Transylvania having been declared King by the
plurality of Votes, quickly came into Poland, and excluded Maximilian by
marrying Anna the Sister of Sigismundus Augustus. This King reduced the City of
Dantzick, which had sided with Maximilian to obedience. Afterward he fell upon
the Muscovites, taking from them Plotzko and the neighboring Countries. At
last he made Peace with the Muscovites, under this Condition, that they should
resign to him the whole Country of Livonia, in lieu of which he would restore
to them such places as, he had taken from them in Muscovy. This King adorned
the Kingdom with wholesome Constitutions, and established the Militia of Horse,
which Soldiers being paid out of the fourth part of the Royal Revenues, are
commonly called the Quartians; these he disposed upon the Frontiers to defend
the same against the Incursions of the Tartars. By this means that Tract of
Land which from Bar, Bracklavia and Kiovia, extends it self betwixt the two
Rivers of the Dniester and the Borysthenes, as far as to the Black Sea, was
filled with populous Cities and Towns, which is now called the Vkraine, it
having been formerly a desolate Country. He also put into a good Order and
Discipline the Cosacks, The Cosacks.
who served for Foot Soldiers, giving to them Techtimorovia, situated on the
River Borysthenes, which they made afterward their Magazine, and the place of
Residence of their Governors. Before this time the Cosacks were only a wild
and barbarous sort of Rabble, who were gathered out of the Polish Russia, and
having settled themselves in the Island of the River Borysthenes beneath
Kiovia, lived upon Robbing and Plunder. These Cosacks, after they were brought
into good Discipline by this King Stephen, have been for a considerable time
serviceable to the Crown of Poland, not only against the Incursions of the
Tartars, but also by their cruising into the Black Sea, have done great
Mischief to the Turks. For they have had Courage enough to ransack the Cities
of Trebisond and Sinope, nay, even the Suburbs of Constantinople with other
places. This brave King, whilst he was making Preparations against the Turks,
died in the Year 1586.

10. Sigism. III.
After his Death, Sigismund Son to John King of Swedeland was made King of
Poland, who had this Advantage, that his Mother Catherine had been Sister of
Sigismundus Augustus, and so consequently was descended from the Jagellonick
Race. Some of the Poles proclaimed Maximilian their King, but he coming with
some Forces to take Possession of the Kingdom, was beaten and taken Prisoner,
and before he obtained his Liberty, was obliged to renounce his Title to that
Crown. After the Death of John King of Sweden, 1592.
Sigismund went in the Year next following into Swedeland, where he was Crowned
King of Sweden. But having afterward lost that Crown, it occasioned a War
betwixt Poland and Sweden. In the beginning of this War, Charles IX. King of
Sweden took a great many places from the Poles in Livonia, which were however
most of them afterward retaken by the Polish General and Chancellor Zamoiski:
Besides this, 1605.
the King of Sweden was vanquished in a great Battle fought near Kirckholm and
Riga, where he narrowly escaped himself. But some intestine Divisions being
arisen betwixt the King and the Nobility of Poland, King Charles got an
opportunity to recover himself.

In the mean time there was a War kindled betwixt the Muscovites and Poles by
the following occasion: The occasion of he War between Poland and M^sc^vy.
There was a certain Person in Poland who pretended that he was Demetrius the
Son of John Basilowitz, Grand Duke of Muscovy, and that he was to have been
murdered by the Order of Boris Gudenow, who hoped thereby to obtain the
Succession in the Empire after the Death of Theodore the eldest Son of the said
John Basilowitz, but that another had been killed in his stead. This Man having
found great Encouragement from George Mniszeck the Vayvod of Sendemir, promised
to marry his Daughter. Wherefore this Vayvod with the Assistance of some other
Polish Lords having gathered an Army that marched with Demetrius into Muscovy:
And the Grand Duke Boris Gudenow happening to die suddenly soon after, 1605.
Demetrius was well received by the Russians; and having vanquished such as
pretended to oppose him, he came up to the City of Muscovy, where he was
proclaimed Grand Duke: But he quickly made himself odious to the Muscovites,
they suspecting him to be an Impostor, but did however hide their resentments
till the arrival of the Polish Bride. In the mean while the Muscovites (under
the Conduct of those of Suski, who were by their Mother's side descended from
the Family of the Grand Dukes) had underhand got together about 20000 Men.
1606.
These at the time when the Nuptials were celebrating with great Pomp, raised a
Tumult, attacked the Castle, and cut to pieces Demetrius and a great many Poles
who were come along with the Bride, though some of the chiefest defended
themselves bravely and escaped their Fury.

Then Basilius Suski was proclaimed Great Duke in the public Market place,
Basil. great Duke of Muscovy.
who caused there the Body of Demetrius to be exposed to public view, but he
being extremely defaced by his Wounds, his Face could not be discerned by the
multitude. Immediately after, a rumor was spread abroad, that Demetrius was
escaped, and another appeared soon after, who pretended to be the same
Demetrius. Whether it was the same or not, is not yet determined; this is
certain that the Poles did acknowledge him as such, they being very desirous to
revenge the former Affront and the Death of their Friends. This Old or New
Demetrius did march with a great Army composed of Poles and Cosacks into
Muscovy, 1086.
where he several times beat Suski, whom he obliged to set at Liberty the
captive Bride, and to beg the King of Poland to recall his Subjects. But the
Bride having acknowledged this Demetrius for her Husband, he got a great part
both in Muscovy and Poland that sided with him, and would quickly have ruined
Suski, if he had not been succored by the King of Sweden who sent Pontus de la
Gardie with some Forces to his Assistance.

Sigismund also took hold of this Opportunity, Sigismund makes his a (...) of
these Troubles in Muscovy. 1609.
to try whether he could at least recover Smolensko and Severia from the
Muscovites. Wherefore he besieged Smolensko in the Year 1609. which however he
could not make himself Master of till the Year 1611. when he took it by Storm.
In the mean time, the Poles which had hitherto sided with Demetrius, were
recalled by Sigismund, who did think it not convenient that so considerable a
part of his Forces should be under the Command of another. By the removal of
these Forces, Suski had leisure given him to recollect himself, and with the
Auxilaries sent him out of Swedeland, he marched against the Poles who had
besieged Smolensko, 1610.
but was defeated by the Poles near Clusin. By this overthrow the Affairs of
the Muscovites were again put into a very dangerous Condition. Wherefore they
took this Resolution to avoid the Danger which threatened them from the Polish
side. They deposed Suski, who by his Misfortunes was become odious to them, and
offered the Crown of Muscovy to Vladislaus the Prince of Poland. The Policy o^
the Musc^vites.
By this means they hoped at one stroke to ruin Demetrius, and to be reconciled
to the Poles, in hopes, that they might easily meet with an Opportunity
hereafter, when they had once rid themselves of the present Danger, to rid
themselves also of the Prince of Poland. And this Project succeeed very well,
for the Polish Troops immediately left the Party of Demetrius; Suski was
surrendered to the Poles, who promised to the Muscovites, what had sworn before
Allegiance to Vladislaus, that he should appear in Person in Muscovy in the
Year 1610. But King Sigismund by the persuasions of some of his Friends refused
this offer, thinking it more for his purpose to Conquer Muscovy by Force of
Arms; which Opportunity, however, he missed of, since he did not immediately
march toward the City of Muscovy, The Oversight of Sigismund.
which he might have taken at the first Assault. But the Muscovites having
discovered the Design of the Poles, did unanimously revolt from Vladislaus,
especially since they had in the mean while been rid of Demetrius, who had been
murdered by the Tartars that were his Gaurds. They therefore attacked the
Polish Garrison in the City of Muscovy, which consisted of Seven Thousand Men,
but these defended themselves bravely; and besides this, set Fire to the whole
City, which before had 180000 Houses, where abundance of People were burned.
Nevertheless the Muscovites recovered themselves and besieged the Polish
Garrison in the Castle of Muscovy. If King Sigismund immediately after the
taking of Smolensko, had sent them Relief, as he easily might have done, he
questionless might have established his Affairs in Muscovy. But he marching
back with his Army into Poland, and sending to their Relief neither Men nor
Money, the Garrison who had before plundered the Treasury of the Great Duke, to
the number of 7000. leaving some to Guard the Castle, fought their way through
the Muscovites, and came to King Sigismund to demand their Pay. And though
Sigismund began to apply himself in good earnest to re-establish his Affairs in
Muscovy, yet all his Designs were by the jealousy which reigned betwixt the
Generals so long delayed, till the Poles who had the Gaurd of the Castle of the
City of Muscovy, were forced by Famine to surrender it. Thus all was lost in
Muscovy; for Sigismund, who was the more troubled at it, because he had made an
account by the Conquest of Muscovy, to open his way into Swedeland.

Besides this, The Poles defeated in Moldavia.
the Poles sustained in the same Year a considerable Loss in Moldavia. Prince
Vladislaus did undertake an Expedition into Muscovy, but to no great purpose,
wherefore he made a Truce with them for fourteen Years, 1617.
wherein it was agreed, that the Poles in the mean time should keep in their
Possession the Dukedom of Severia, Zernigo and Novogrod, which they had taken
during these Troubles in Muscovy. In the mean time George Farenbach did
surrender several places in Livonia to the King of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus,
but it was suspected that he intended to betray the King; for soon after, the
same Farenbach was reconciled to King Sigismund, unto whom he restored all the
places, except Pernau.

In the Year 1620. A War betwixt the Poles and Turks.
the Poles were engaged in a War against the Turks, that were as it is supposed,
stirred up by Betlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania; for Sigismund having
assisted the Emperor against him, Betlem Gabor was for making them a Diversion
by the help of the Turks. The Turks therefore entered Moldavia with an Intention
to banish that Duke, who sided with the Poles. the Polish General Zolkieuski
coming to the Assistance of the Duke of Moldavia advanced too far into the
Country, and as he was marching back, was totally routed and himself slain upon
the Place. In the Year next following the Turks marched with their whole Froces
against Poland, who were met by the Poles near Chocim under the Command of
Prince Vladislaus. The Polish Army was about 65000 strong, but the Turks 392000
Men, commanded by the Turkish Emperor Osman in Person. The Turks did attempt
three times to take the Polish Camp by Storm, but were as often repulsed with
great Loss. But the Poles in the mean while suffered extremely for want of
Ammunition and Provisions, and were mightily weakened by Sicknesses and the
Mortahty among their Horses. Nevertheless the Turkish Emperor made a very
honorable Peace with them, after he had lost 60000 Men, in these several
Storms made upon their Camp, and a greater Number in his march back to
Constantinople.

In the mean time King Gustavus Adolphus falling into Livonia, 1621.
took the City of Riga without any great Resistance. The Invasiof Gustavus
Adolp^ us.
And the rest of Livonia, except Dunneburgh was Conquered by the Swedes in the
Year 1625. 1625.
King Gustavous entered Prussia with an Army in the Year 1626. where he took the
Cities of Marienburgh and Elbing, besides some other Places. This War was thus
carried on without any General Engagement till the Year 1629. when Hans Wrangel
the Swedish General defeated the Poles near Gorzno. Then the Emperor sent some
Forces to the Assistance of the Poles, who in a Battle fought near Stum, were
very near having made King Gustavus their Prisoner. But the Polish Affairs
being after this Battle fallen into great Confusion, a Truce was concluded by
the mediation of France and England till the Year 1634. the Swedes being in the
mean while to keep in their Possession Elbing, Memel, Braunsberg, Pill^u, and
what else they had taken in Livonia. Sigismund died in the Year 1632.

11. Vladis. IV.
After his Death his Son Vladislaus IV. was declared King, who in the Year next
following, obtained a signal Victory over the Muscovites that had besieged
Smolensko; for he not only forced them to raise the Siege, but also brought the
Muscovite Army into such streights, that they were forced to surrender
themselves. And the Turks who would have made a Diversion to him, 1634.
were also bravely repulsed. At last Vladislaus made a very advantageous Peace
on his side with the Muscovites, by virtue of which these renounced all their
Pretensions upon the two large Dukedoms of Smolensko and Ozernichow. This begot
such a Terror among the Turks, that they freely made him Restitution for the
Damages sustained in their last In-road, having also caused the Bashaw who
commanded these Forces, 1635.
to be strangled. The Truce with Sweden was prolonged at Stumdorf in Prussia,
for 26 Years, where the places possessed before by the Swedes in Prussia were
restored to the Poles, because the Swedish Affairs in Germany were then after
the Battle of Norlingen in a very ill Condition, and besides this, the English
and Dutch were extremely dissatisfied with the Tolls that were paid in Prussia.

In the Year 1637. The Cause of the War with the Cosacks.
the Foundation was laid of the War with the Cosacks, which has brought
unspeakable Mischiefs upon the Poles. The business happened thus: As the number
of the Cosacks was greatly increased by the great number of Boors, which
frequently ran into them, so the great Men in Poland had purchased great
Estates in the Vkraine, who were of Opinion, that their Revenues would be
considerably increased, if the Liberty of the Cosacks were reduced into more
narrow bounds. Wherefore they having advised the King, that they ought to be
more restrained for the future; the Polish General Konicepoliski, did cause the
Fortress of Hudack to be built, just at a point where the River of Zwamer falls
into the Dnieper or Borysthenes. The Cosacks endeavored to prevent the
perfecting of this Work by force, but being routed by the Poles, were obliged
to surrender their General Pauluck and some of their Chief Men among them, who
were all, notwithstanding a Pardon was promised them before hand, beheaded.
Besides this, it was decreed in the Diet, that all their former Privileges and
the Fortress of Techtimorovia should be taken from them, and that in their
stead, a new body of Militia should be settled there. To put this Decree in
execution, the Polish Army marched into the Vkraine, against which, the Cosacks
fought with great bravery, promising nevertheless, that they would be faithful
to the Crown of Polana, if their ancient Privileges were confirmed to them,
which the Poles did promise them, bur did not perform; nay, did even treat some
of them very ill. For among other oppressive Methods, they took also from them
some of their Greek Churches. Their General Chmielinski was also grossly
Affronted, for which he could obtain no Satisfaction. For the King having
granted him a Privilege to build some Mills, a certain Gentleman whose Name
was Jarinski, burnt the same, having also ravished his Wife, and afterward
killed both her and her Son.

12. John Casimir.
In the mean time Vladislaus died, whom succeeded his Brother John Casimir.
1647.
Then Chmielinski to revenge himself, stirred up the Cosacks against the Poles,
who with Burning, Plundering and Ravishing, did what Mischief they could to the
Polish Nobility. And the Senators having desired the King to march out into the
Field against them, they were answered by him, That they ought not to have
burnt down their Mills. Whereat the Poles being extremely dissatisfied brought
together an Army of 50000 Men, which being defeated by the Cosacks, The Poles
defeated by ^he Cos^^^s.
there were killed 10000 upon the Spot, and besides this, they took the City of
Kiovia. To revenge this Affront, the Poles summoned the seventh Man throughout
the whole Kingdom, and marched against the Cosacks without the Consent of the
King, but were again miserably beaten by them. But Chmielinski celebrating the
Nuptials of his Son with the Daughter of the Prince of Vallachia, the Poles
surprised the Cosacks thereabouts, plundered the City, and took the Grecian
Patriarch prisoner. The Cosacks then sent to the King to know whether this had
been done by his Authority; and the King having answered* No, but that it had
been done by the Nobility to take revenge of the Cosacks; these joined with the
Tartars and fell into Poland; against these the King went in Person into the
Field at the Head of the Nobility, and defeated them in a Battle* but the King
having afterward made an Agreement with them, the Nobility was greatly
discontented with the King's proceedings, alleging, that the King had granted
too much to the Cosacks.

Whilst the Jealousies reigned in Poland, The Muscovites join with the C^sacks.
the Muscovites fell into Poland, and having brought the Cosacks over to their
Party, besieged Smolensko, which they took in the Year next following; and
having ravaged every where in Lithuania, 1653.
they took Wilea and some other Cities, where they committed great Barbarities.

In the Year 1655. The King of Sweden invades Poland.
another Storm threatened the Poles. For Charles Gustavus King of Swedeland
having with an Army of chosen Men entered that Kingdom, first Conquered great
Poland and Masovia, and afterward the lesser Poland, with the capital City
Cracovia, from whence he marched into Prussia, where almost all the Cities
surrendered themselves, except Dantzick, where were at first a great many
Citizens that favored the Swedes, but by the persuasions of some Ministers,
were kept in Obedience to Poland. The Resistance which was made by this one
City, was the main Reason why all the Advantages got by the Swedes proved
fruitless at last, and that they could not maintain themselves in Prussia,
notwithstanding that not only the whole Militia of Poland, and that part of
Lithuania which was not under the subjection of the Muscovites, had submitted
themselves to the Swedish Protection, but also, that King John Casimir himself
fled into Silesia. For the Poles having recollected themselves after the first
Constemation was over, and being joined by the Tartars, fell upon such of the
Swedish Forces as were dispersed up and down the Country. The Lithuanians also
revolted, and killed all the Swedes that were in Winter Quarters with them.
King Charles Gustavus also had greatly weakened his Army, not only by the great
March toward Jeroslavia, but also Czarneski, the Polish General did often with
his Light Horse fall upon on the Rear of the Army, and did considerable
Mischief. In the mean while the Poles also had retaken Warsovia, where they had
made the Swedish Governor Wittenbergh and some other great Officers Prisoners,
contrary to the Articles made at the surrendry of the Place. And though King
Charles Gustavus having been joined before by the Elector of Brandenburgh's
Forces did vanquish the Poles and Tartars in a memorable Battle which lasted
three Days, and was fought near Warsovia, The Battle of Warsaw.
yet all the Princes of Europe began to look about them, and to consult about a
Diversion to be made Sweden. The Muscovites fell into Livonia, where they
besieged Riga, but to no purpose. The Hollanders did give plainly to
understand, that they were not willing that Prussia should come under the
subjection of Swedeland. And the Danes also began to be in motion. On the other
hand, Ragozi Prince of Transylvania invades Poland.
Ragozi Prince of Transylvania entered Poland with an Army, to try whether
perhaps he could obtain that Crown for himself. But the King of Sweden being
obliged to march out of Poland against the Danes, Ragozi made a bad Market of
it; for before he could reach his own Country, he was totally routed, and
oliged to make a shameful accord with the Poles. Which misfortune however he
might have avoided, if he, according to the advice of the King of Sweden, who
promised to keep the Poles so long in play, till he was out of danger, would
have taken his march directly over Brescie, Pinsk, and so further toward his
own Frontiers. But Ragozi would by all means take his way near Cracaw. Then the
Poles retook Cracaw and Thorn, and chased the Swedes out of Curland, who had
before taken the Duke of that name Prisoner. The Poles also besieged Riga, but
were beaten from thence by the Swedish General Helmfeld. 1606.
And tho the Poles by the Peace made at Oliva recovered all Prussia again, yet
were they obliged to renounce all their pretensions upon Livonia, and to leave
the Muscovites in the possession of Smolensko, Severia and Kiovia. Neither
could they appease the Cosacks, some of them having put themselves under the
protection of the Muscovites, some under the Turks, whereby they showed the way
to the Turks into Poland. Neither could the King put an end to the intestine
divisions and jealousies, wherefore at last tired with these troubles John
Casimir resigned the Crown, and living a retired life in France in the Abbey of
St. Germain, he there dyed a few years after.

. 13. There being now left none of the Royal Family in Poland, several
Foreigners pretended to the Crown. But at last a Piastus, whose name was
Michael Witsnowizki, Michael Witsnowizki
was declared King, chiefly by the Votes of the lesser Nobility. His short
Reign was full of intestine commotions, 1670.
and the Turks in the mean while did not cease to do considerable mischief in
Poland; having in the year 1672. taken Caminieck in Podolia, which Fortress
having been formerly thought impregnable, serves them now for a door, through
which they may enter Poland at pleasure. A Peace was then concluded with the
Turks, by virtue of which the said Fortress remained in the possession of the
Turks, the Poles also having promised to pay to the Turks a yearly Tribute.
This King dyed in the year 1673. In whose stead in the year next following the
Polish General John Sobieski was made King of Poland, John Sobieski.
he having in the year before attacked the Turks in their Camp with such
success, that of 32000 Men scarce 1500 escaped alive. He renewed the War with
the Turks, but concluded a Peace with them in the year 1676. by virtue of which
the Turks kept the Fortress of Caminieck, but remitted the yearly Tribute to
the Poles. He being a Man of great capacity, it is hoped that he may prove a
good King of Poland.

. 14. It is to be considered concerning the Polish Nation, The Genius of this
Nation.
that whosoever is not a Nobleman in Poland, is esteemed a Boor. For the
Inhabitants of the Cities are very little regarded, and the Tradesmen are most
Foreigners. But the Boors are esteemed nor used no better than Slaves, being
also very raw and barbarous, both in their Life and Conversation, wherefore
when we talk of the Poles, thereby ought only to be understood the Nobility.
They are therefore commonly downright and honest, very seldom given to the art
of dissembling; they are of a very generous spirit, and expect a great deal of
respect. And if you give them as much respect as they pretend to, they are no
less courteous, and will willingly pay a respect again to you; and their words
and behavior are full of Pomp and Ceremony. They are very liberal, or rather
profuse; and not given to be parsimonious, tho they should want the next day.
This Nation also is very fierce and extravagant, much inclined to an
uncountroled liberty, or rather licentiousness and petulancy. Wherefore Plots
and Conspiracies against their Kings are frequent among them, whose Actions
they canvase with a great deal of freedom, being always jealous of the least
point of their Liberty. They do not want courage, but they are more fit to act
with a sudden heat, than to endure long the fatigues of War. And because the
Nobles only apply themselves to the War, who never serve but on Horseback, and
the rest of the Inhabitants are of no great spirit, their infantry gathered out
of the Natives is not worth much, wherefore they are obliged in their stead to
make use of Foreigners listed into their Service, or of the Cosacks, who are
courageous and active.

. 15. This Country is of a vast extent, The Nature of the Soil, etc. Its
Commodities.
and very Fertile in general, fit both for Tillage and Pasture, or breeding of
Cattle. For Holland draws most of its Corn out of Poland, and the Polish Oxen
are sent in great numbers into Germany. The Polish Wool also is in good esteem
abroad. Poland abounds with good Horses. Lituania produces abundance of Honey,
which is most consumed by the Inhabitants, who make Mead of it; the rest is
exported, as likewise abundance of Wax, Hemp, Flax, Leather, Pot-aslies, Salt,
Wood, and the like. But on the contrary the Commodities which are imported here
are Silk, woollen Stuffs and Clothes, Tapestries, Sables, Hungarian and Spanish
Wines, abundance of Spice, which they use in great quantity in their Diet. If
the Poles were addicted in the least to good Husbandry, and would apply
themselves a little to Manufactures, the Commodities fit for exportation here,
would much surpass those which need be imported.

Poland is very populous and full of Towns and Villages. Some have computed
that the King and the Nobility have in their possession 90000 Cities and
Villages, the Bishops and Canons 100550, the rest of the Clergy, Monks and
Nuns, 60950. Which in all amounts to the number of 250950 Towns and Villages.
Yet I will not be answerable for this account.

. 16. The strength of the Kingdom.
The chief strength of this Kingdom consists in the Nobility. The Poles have
formerly given out that they could raise 250000 Horse, some say 200000, out of
the Nobility. Which seems to be a little largely spoken, except you would
reckon among them their Servants. This is certain that in no Kingdom of Europe
there is so great a number of Nobles. They also may find a way to raise a
proportionable Infantry out of the Cosacks. And if they will stretch a little
their Purses, they are able enough to raise sufficient for the maintaining of a
great Army. Their weakness.
But here is the mischief, that the King cannot levy any extraordinary Taxes,
without the consent of the Nobility, and both the Clergy and the Nobility are
very backward in paying of any Taxes, or at least grow quickly aweary of them,
except it be in case of the highest necessity. And this is the reason why the
King of Poland cannot carry on a War long with vigor. Besides this when the
Nobles are s^^moned to appear in Arms, they come slowly into the ^ield, and are
not easily kept under Discipline. The Polish Armies have also this
inconveniency in them, that where 10000 fighting Men are, at least five times
the number of Servants and idle Fellows follow the Camp, which proves a
destruction to their own Country, and occasions scarcity of Provisions both for
Men and Horse.

. 17. Concerning their Form of Government; Their form of Government.
it is to be observed that the Poles live under one Head, who bears the Title,
and lives in the Splendor becoming a King; but if you consider his Power,
which is circumscribed within very narrow bounds, he is in effect no more than
the Prime or Chief Regent in a Free Commonwealth. This King is always chosen by
a free Election, where every Noble Man there present has his Vote; and tho the
Poles have been always inclined to keep to the Royal Race, yet have they never
been for declaring a Successor during the life of the present King, but have
always expected the vacancy of the Throne, as being of opinion, that this time
is the most proper to abolish such Abuses as perhaps are crept in under the
former Reign, and to prevent all means which may prove prejudicial afterward
to their Liberties. But, that, during this Vacancy, all disorders may be
prevented, Justice is then exercised with more severity than at other times:
the Archbishop of Guiesen, who is the Primate of Poland, being in the mean
while the Regent, or as it were Interrex of the Kingdom. The Poles have had for
a considerable time this Maxim, that they would rather choose a King out of a
Foreign Princely Family, than out of their own Nobility; as being of Opinion
that thereby the equality among the Nobility may be better preserved; for a
Foreigner is no more engaged to one than to another; whereas a Native always
prefers his Kindred and Relations before the rest: and this Rule they have
observed ever since the time of Jagello, who being a Lituanian, united Lituania
with Poland. But they had not the same good fortune with Sigismund King of
Sweden, partly because the situation of these two Kingdoms is such: that both
cannot well be governed by one King; partly because they were thereby engaged
in a heavy War against Swedeland, which else might easily have been avoided;
but they have been always very careful not to take their Kings out of the House
of Austria, fearing lest they should be treated like the Hungarians and
Bohemians. In the two last Elections they have chosen two Kings out of their
own Nobility, and whether thereby these Factions which have hitherto been
predominant in that Kingdom, can be suppressed, time will show. This Elective
King has a great Revenue out of the Lands belonging to the Crown, The Revenues
of the King.
and has the sole power to dispose of all vacant Offices, Dignities and
Benefices; but he cannot make new Laws, begin a War* impose new Taxes, or
undertake any other Matters of great moment, without the consent of the
Estates. The Estates in Poland are composed of the Bishops and some Abbots, The
Estates of the Kingdom.
of the Palatins or Vaywods, which are Governors of the Provinces, of the
Castellans or Governors of Castles, and of the chief Officers of the Kingdom;
these compose the Senate, which consisted formerly of 150 Persons; besides
these there are the Deputies of the Nobility out of each District, who have
almost the same power which the Tribunes of the People had at Rome; since one
single person among them by entering his Protest may annul a Decree at the Diet;
and these Deputies use their Tongues very freely at the Diet, both against the
King and his Ministers; from whence it often happens that Matters are debated
here with great confusion, since by the capricious humor of one Deputy the
benefit of the whole Diet is lost at once; especially since a certain time of
six weeks is prefixed by the Laws for the holding of the Diet, which they
rarely suffer to be Prorogued, and that not but for a very few days; but they
call this right of contradicting, the Soul of the Polish Liberty. The King is
also obliged to bestow all the vacant Benefices upon the Nobility, and cannot
reserve any for his own use, or bestow them upon his Children without consent
of the Estates, Of the Administration of Justice.
neither can he buy or take possession of any Noblemens Lands. The King also is
not Master of the Judicial Courts; but there is a certain High Court of
Justice, the Judges whereof are Nobles: first Instituted by King Stephen
Batori. These Judges are changed every twelve months, and keep their Session
six months in the year at Petricovia, and six months again at Lublin, and from
these no Appeal lies to the King; except that some Cases of the greatest
Consequence are determined at the Diet; but Cases belonging to the King's
Exchequer, or to his Revenues, are determined by the King. The Poles are
extremely fond of this form of Government, as being very suitable to their
natural fierce inclinations; yet the same is very improper for any sudden and
great undertaking; and contributes not a little to the weakness of this vast
Kingdom, especially when the Nobility is refractory, and jealous of the King.

. 18. Neighbors of Poland.
The Neighbors of Poland are on one side the Germans, where there is an open
Country upon the Frontiers; and particularly Poland borders upon Silesia, and
in one corner upon Hungary. It Is true that the German Empire is much superior
in strenth to Poland, Germany.
but the interest of both these Kingdoms is such, as not to have any great
occasion to differ with one another, except Poland should perhaps join with
such Estates in Germany as would upon an occasion oppose the setting up of an
Absolute Sovereignty in the Empire; and in such a case the Poles would not want
assistance either from the German, The House of Austria in particular.
or foreign Princes, that must concur in the same Interest. The House of
Austria alone is not powerful enough to conquer Poland, or to maintain a
Country which is of so vast an extent and very populous, and lying all upon a
level is not secured by any fortified places. If no body else should side with
Poland, the Turks themselves would not easily suffer that the House of Austria
should acquire such an advantage, and the Turks are the fittest instruments to
prevent it. But the House of Austria has often endeavored, tho the wisest
among the Poles have always opposed it, to unite the Kingdom of Poland to their
Family by an Election; but the Poles are conscious of the danger which might
accrue from this Union to their Liberty; and besides this they are no great
admirers of the Germans, whose modesty and good Husbandry they commonly
despise. The Interest of Poland and Germany, with reference to the Turk.
But it is of great consequence to Poland, that the Turks may not become quite
Masters of the Upper Hungary, and much more that they do not get footing in
Moravia; since thereby they would open their way into the very Heart of Poland.
And on the other hand it is the common Interest both of the House Austria, and
of all Germany, that the Turks may not become Masters of Poland, since thereby
they would open their way into Germany. For the old saying of Philip
Melanchton, Si Turca in Germaniam veniet, veniet per Poloniam, if the Turks
come into Germany* they will certainly come by the way of Poland, did not arise
from a Prophetic Spirit, but has its good Reason in Geography. And it seems to
be the common Interest of Poland, and the House of Austria, to keep up a mutual
good understanding, since they both cover one another Frontiers, and Poland
draws a great advantage from its Oxen and Salt which are sent into Germany. And
if Poland should engage it self in good earnest against the House of Austria,
it ought to be jealous of the Moscovites, who may attack it behind, except
Moscovy were otherwise employed before. Poland also may be troublesome to the
House of Austria, when that House is engaged in Wars against France, Sweden, or
the Turks. Wherefore for a considerable time the House of Austria has
endeavored by Marriages to Allie Poland with their Family, and to gain a
considerable party in the Senate. And France has followed the same methods to
draw Poland from the Interest of the House of Austria; and the Poles having
been caressed by both parties have got no small advantage by this Rivalship.
Brandenburgh.
Brandenburgh also borders on one side upon Poland, and tho he alone cannot
hurt it much, yet experience has taught us that in conjunction with others he
has been able to create great troubles to the Poles. Tho on the other hand it
is to be feared, that perhaps upon a good occasion offered to the Poles they
may attempt to unite all Prussia to their Kingdom, as the Elector of
Brandenburgh knew how to time it, when he obtained the Sovereignty over it. As
long as the differences betwixt Poland and Sweden were on foot, Denmark and
Sweden.
Denmark by making a diversion could be very serviceable to Poland; but since
the causes of these differences are taken away, Poland need not make any
particular reflection upon Denmark Swedeland and Poland have all the reason in
the world to cultivate a mutual good understanding, since they may be very
serviceable to one another against the Moscovites. Poland borders upon Moscovy
by a great tract of Land, Moscovy.
where the Frontiers are common to both: These two Kingdoms seem to be very
near equal in strength* and tho the Poles are better Soldiers than the
Moscovites, yet has the Great Duke of Moscovy this advantage over them, that he
is absolute in his Dominions. And it is of great consequence to either of them,
which of these two is in the possession of Smolensko, to recover^ which the
Poles ought to employ all their strength. For the rest, these two States being
both obliged to have a watchful Eye over the Turks, can assist one another
against them in case of necessity.

The Tartars are the most pernicious Neighbors of Poland, The Tartars*
for they are a Nation living by depredations, who surprise their Neighbors,
and when they have loaded themselves with Spoils return Home again, where you
cannot be revenged of them, they being so nimble, and having nothing worth
taking from them. Wherefore what ever mischief they do must be taken as if you
were bit by a Dog, except you can catch them in the fact, and make them pay for
it with their Heads. Against these the Country of Moldavia used to be a Bulwark
to Poland. Moldavia.
For through that Country the Tartars have a direct passage into the Provinces
of Poland, which may be shut up against them by the help of that Prince.
Wherefore the Poles do much lament the loss of this Dukedom, which having been
formerly a Fief of that Crown, tho that Duke pays also some Tribute to the
Turks, was brought in the year 1612. entirely under the Turkish subjection. The
Cosack^.
The Cosacks also used to be very serviceable against the Tartars, as living
near the Isthmus of the Taurick Chersonese, and therefore were conveniently
situated to cut of their retreat in their return Home. But the Poles by their
ill entertainment have so exasperated the Cosacks, that since they have done as
much mischief to them, as formerly they used to do good. And if the Poles
should not be able by fair means to bring over the Cosacks again to their side,
and these should either submit themselves to the Moscovites or the Turks, or
that these should quite root them out, then Poland has got an incurable Ulcer
on that side, which may prove fatal to all the Neighboring Provinces of the
Vkrain.

Lastly, the Turk is a dangerous Neighbor to Poland, whose strength is much
superior to that of Poland, especially if the Poles are not assisted by the
Cosacks, or by some Foreign State. For, tho the Polish Cavalry may not be
inferior to the Turks, yet cannot I see which way they can bring into the
Field such Forces as may be equal to the Janisaries. Tho the negligence and
domestic divisions of the Poles have lately been the chief inducements, which
have drawn the Turks so deep into Poland. There is not any thing which would
more conveniently secure the Poles against the Turks, than if the Princes of
Moldavia, Wallachia and Transylvania, did belong to Poland, they being able to
hinder the passage of the Turks into Poland. But, because the Poles have long
ago lost this advantage, or rather neglected it, it is their business now, to
take care that the Turks do not advance deeper into the Country. And to take
away all pretensions of a War from the Turks, it seems very necessary that the
Poles, as much as in them lies, do take care that the Cosacks do not in time of
Peace commit depredations upon the Turkish Subjects. For else the Turks are not
to be blamed, if endeavoring to root out these rapacious Birds they destroy
their Nest, and make the Vkrain a vast Wilderness. When Poland is engaged in a
War with the Turks, it may expect some Subsides from the Pope. The House of
Austria, is able, by making a diversion to the Turks, to give relief to Poland;
but this House hitherto has not been forward to attack the Turks, if these have
not been the first aggressors. The Moscovites also might contribute something
this way, if there were any hopes of a true understanding betwixt these two
Nations; but as the case now stands, the Poles must chiefly rely upon their own
strength, and by the circumstances of their own affairs be able to judge how far
they ought to engage themselves against the Turk.

CHAP. XI.
Of MOSCOVT.
. 1. THE first origin of this Empire, The ancient State of Russia.
and the achievements of their ancient Princes are very uncertain and obscure,
since what is to be found of this nature among an ignorant people, is all very
confused: So much is certain, that this great Empire was formerly divided into
a great many petty Lordships, which afterward were united in one body. We will
only relate in a few words, that the Russians in the year 989. first embraced
the Christian Religion, at which time their Prince, Wolodomir married Anne, the
Sister of the Grecian Emperor Basilius Porphyrogenitus. In the year 1237.
their Prince George, was slain by Battus the King of the Tartars; whereby the
Russians being brought under the subjection of the Tartars, their Princes were
dependent on them. After a long time they at last freed themselves from this
slavery under their Prince John, John.
Son of Basilius the Blind, who began his Reign in the year 1450. Under his
Reign Russia was first united into one considerable Body, he having subdued
most of these petty Princes, which had divided Russia among them, especially
the Dukes of Tiver and of Great Novogrod, in which City it is said he got a
booty of three hundred Cart loads of Gold and Silver. This Prince built
Juanogrod, a Castle near Narva.

. 2. Basilius.
Him succeeded his Son Basilius who took Pleskeu, which was formerly a free
City. From the Poles he also took Smolensko, but was soundly beaten by the
Astracan Tartars, who at the same time ransacked the City of Moscovy. John
Basilewitz.
Him succeeded his Son John Basilowitz, a cruel Tyrant, 1533.
who conquered the two Kingdoms of the Tartars of Casan and Astracan, and
united them to Muscovy. He used the Livonians very ^atharously, having killed
one Furstenbergh the Master of the Order of Knighthood there, which was the
occasion that the City of Reval and whole Tethland surrendered themselves to
Swedeland, and all the rest of Livonia to Poland. He was at first victorious
against the Poles, but afterward Stephen Batori took from him Plotzko and
several other places. He died in the Year 1584. and unto him succeeded his Son
Theodore Iuanowitz* Theodore Iuanowitz.
a very simple Prince, against whom the Swedes waged War about Ingermanland.

3. This Theodore dying without Issue, his Brother in Law Boris Guidenow did by
his Intrigues obtain the Empire, Boris Guidenow.
but with very indifferent Success, especially after the supposed Demetrius
began to contend with him for it; 1605.
during which Troubles he died. His Son Theodore Borissowitz was proclaimed
Great Duke of Muscovy, but the Muscovites having afterward for the most part
sided with the supposed Demetrius, he was taken Prisoner and murdered, after
he had but Six Months enjoyed the Title of Grand Duke. What became of the
supposed Demetrius, 1606.
and how Basilius Zuski took upon him the Imperial Dignity, we have related
before. To this Zuski, Charles IX. King of Swedeland offered his Assistance
against the second supposed Demetrius, which he at first refused to accept of.
But afterward, when the other began to be too strong for him, he earnestly
desired the same, promising to surrender to Charles as an acknowledgement,
Kekholm. The King sent to his Assistance Pontus de la Gardie with some Thousand
Men, who were very serviceable to the Muscovites; nevertheless they made a
great many Evasions, refusing to deliver up these places which they had
promised before; wherefore the Swedes took them by Force, and thereby united
Carelia and the rest of Ingermanland with the Kingdom of Sweden. How this
Basilius Zuski was delivered up to the Poles, how the supposed Demetrius was
slain, and Vladislaus Prince of Poland made Duke of Muscovy, had been related
before.

4. Michael Fadorowitz.
At last Michael Fadorowitz Son of the Patriarch Theodore Mikitowitz, born of
the Daughter of John Basilowitz maintained himself in the Empire, 1613.
who having concluded a Peace with Sweden and Poland* restored tranquillity to
the Muscovites. 1645.
Him succeeded his Son Alexius Michaelowitz, Alexius Michaelowitz.
who in the Year 1653. falling upon the Poles, took from them Smolensko and
Kiovia, and committed great depredations in Lithuania. 1656.
And having entered Livonia took Dorpt, Koenhusen and several other places of
less Note, but was obliged to raise the Siege of Riga with great Loss. And by
virtue of a Peace made with Swedeland, was obliged to relinquish them all
again. In the Year 1669. one Stephen Ratzin raised a Rebellion against him, and
having brought under him Casan and Astracan, committed great depredations all
over the Country, but being taken Prisoner, received his due reward, and the
rest were reduced to their former obedience. And because some of the Cosacks
had submitted themselves to his Protection, he was thereby engaged in a War
with the Turks, wherein he got but little Advantage. He died in the 1675. Him
succeeded his Son Theodore Alexowitz a young and sickly Prince, Theodore
Alexowitz.
of whom we can say nothing as yet.

5. The Genius of this Nation.
Of the Qualifications of the Muscovites, nothing very praiseworthy can be
said. For among them there is no such Education as among most other European
Nations, Reading and Writing being the highest Degree of Learning among them,
and the Learning of their Priests themselves does not go further than to be
able to read a Chapter out of the Bible, or to read a piece of a Sermon. They
are also jealous, cruel and bloody-minded; insupportably proud in prosperity,
and dejected and cowardly in adversity. Nevertheless they have such an Opinion
of their own Abilities and Merits, that you can scarce ever pay them sufficient
Respect. They are very fit for and cunning in the Trade of Usury, but are of a
servile Temper, and must be kept under by severity. At all sorts of Games and
Sports their end is with blows and fighting; so Sticks and Whips are the usual
Instruments among them. They are of a strong Constitution, able to undergo all
sorts of Fatigues, even Famine and Thirst. In Field-Fights and Sieges they are
worth nothing, because they are soon brought into Confusion, and are themselves
of Opinion, that other Nations are their Masters in this Point. But they defend
a Fortress to the utmost, not only because they are very fit to undergo
hardships and all sorts of misery, but also because they know it is present
death to them if they return home after they have surrendered a Fortress by
accord. Nevertheless, they do endeavor to bring their Soldiers under better
Discipline, for which purpose, they make use of a great many Scotch and German
Officers, who are to instruct them in all manner of Exercises as practiced
among other European Nations. But they do not allow that the Muscovites should
serve abroad and learn themselves the perfection of Military Arts and
Exercises, because the Grand Duke stands in fear, that if they should grow too
knowing, they might be for making Innovations at home.

6. The Nature of the Country and Commodities.
The Territories of the present Grand Duke of Muscovy are of a very large
extent, yet so* that a great many parts are mere Wildernesses scarce inhabited
at all. The Muscovites have at home great plenty of Corn, Cattle, all sorts of
Game, Fish, Salt, Furrs and all other Necessaries. They have a great many
Commodities fit for exportation, especially, Furrs and their precious Sables,
which are esteemed at a high Rate among their Neighbors, Salt-Fish, Casiarr,
Hides, Tallow, Wax, Honey, Potashes, Soap, Hemp, and the like. But the
Commodities which are imported to them are Silk, Stuffs, Gold, Silver and
Woollen Cloths, Tapestry, Pearls and Precious Stones, Spices and Wines, but the
latter not in any great Quantities; Tobaco is now a prohibited Commodity there.
They keep it for a constant Custom in their way of Trade, not to buy with ready
Money, but to exchange Commodities for Commodities, and it is against the
Constitutions of Muscovy, to export any Coin. Their greatest Trade is at
Archangel, which way the English first found out in the Year 1553. But since
that time the Hollanders and Hamburgers have followed their Example. Before
that time, this Trade was carried on by the way of Narva and Reval, but though
this was the shorter way, yet did the foreign Merchants not care to be so much
in subjection to the Swedes and Danes. There is also a considerable Trade
carried on with the Persians upon the River of Wolga by the way of Astracan.

7. Form of Government.
The Form of Government here is an absolute Monarchy; the Grand Duke, whom they
call in their Native Language Ozar, being not tied up to any Laws or Rules,
unto whom his Subjects are obliged to pay Obedience without reserve, so that
they are no more than Slaves, which also suits best with their natural
Constitution. And therefore this absolute Power of the Prince is a great
addition to his Strength, Strength of the Country.
since he cannot only raise some Hundred Thousands of Men at the first Command,
but also has vast Riches and prodigious Revenues. These do accrue to him, not
only out of the Taxes and income of so vast a Country, but also because the
Grand Duke himself has the monopoly of Sables, and if I am not much mistaken,
also Farms out all public Inns, Taverns and Alehouses himself, which amounts
to a prodigious Revenue in a Country where the Nation is much addicted to
drinking. He makes also his Presents to Foreign Princes and Ambassadors in
Sables, but receives in lieu of them Gold and Silver. Besides this, it is a
common Custom with him, to set a new Stamp upon Crown Pieces, and to oblige his
Subjects to take them for double the value: From whence it cannot be supposed
but that this Prince must lay up vast Treasures. Muscovy also enjoys this
Advantage before other States, that it is not to be attacked on the backside,
because its Territories are on the North-East side surrounded by a vast
unnavigable Sea, and vast Wildernesses.

8. Neighbors of Muscovy. The Persiant.
The Neighbors of Muscovy are on the Eastside, the Persians. These two States
cannot hurt one another much, the Caspian Sea, unaccessible Countries and vast
Wildernesses being their common Borders; wherefore it is not worth their while
to extend their Conquests upon one another. But they may be serviceable to one
another by making a Diversion to the Turks. Tartars.
The Tartars are woublesome Neighbors to the Muscovites, who make no account
of Faith or Alliances, but make a Trade of Robbing and Plundering, against whom
there is no Remedy, but to kill them as fast as one can; and this is not so
easily to be done, because they are very nimble. The Crim-Tartars are the most
mischievous to Poland, to hinder their Incursions, the Muscovites are obliged
to keep a considerable number of Horse upon the Frontiers, and they give them
sometimes a Diversion, with the help of the Donisque Cosacks, and the Nagage
and Calmuck-Tartars. If the Muscovites could maintain themselves in Kiovia, and
a part of the Vkraine, it would serve them at once to bridle these Robbers, and
for a Bulwark against the Turks. For the Turks do not immediately border upon
Muscovy, but by the Country of the Crim-Tartars, who being Vassals of the
Turks, they make use of them like their hunting Dogs. Wherefore it is of great
consequence to Muscovy, that the Turks do not become Masters of the whole
Vkraine, since thereby they would be enabled with the help of the Cosacks and
Tartars to do great mischief to Muscovy.

The Muscovites ought to have a watchful Eye over the Poles, Poland.
they being so situated, that they may do the greatest mischief to Muscovy,
especially since the Poles are much better Soldiers than the Muscovites in the
Field. But the Muscovites have at present a great Advantage against Poland,
since they are possessed of Smolensko, Severia and Kiovia, which cover their
Frontiers on that side. Muscovy need not fear any thing much from that side
where it borders on Sweden, Sweden.
not only because it is able enough to defend it self there, if every thing is
quiet at home, but also because the Swedes are not ambitious to make any more
Conquests on that side, since to maintain such large and far distant Countries,
would be more hurtful than profitable to their State. And the Kings of Sweden
have of late showed no great inclination to fight with the Muscovites. But if
the Swedes in conjunction with the Poles should attack the Muscovites, they
would put them very hard to it; whereas also the Muscovites may prove very
troublesome to Swedeland if they should join in conjunction with the Enemies of
Swedeland. Nevertheless, the Muscovites ought not to make any great account
upon an Alliance with Denmark, because they are far distant from one another,
and therefore cannot revenge themselves upon one another; if one of them should
put a Trick upon the other, and as soon as he has obtained his aim, leave the
other in the lurch: Neither have the Muscovites hitherto appeared at any
general Treaties.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Spiritual Monarchy of Rome: or, of the Pope.
1. Politic Reflections upon Popedom.
THE Pope may be considered two different ways: First, As far as the Articles
which are taught by him and differ from other Christians, are agreeable or
disagreeable with the Holy Scriptures, and consequently useful or prejudicial
to Salvation, which Consideration we leave to Divines. Secondly, As far as the
Pope is not only possessed of a considerable Principality in Italy, but also
pretends to be the Sovereign and Supreme Head of Christendom, at least in
Spiritual Matters, and in effect, exercises the said Power in those States of
Europe which profess themselves of the same Communion with him.

This second Consideration belongs to the Politicians, for this spiritual
Sovereignty does introduce great alterations* and interferes with the Supreme
Civil Power; nay, circumscribes and maims it. Wherefore since Religion has been
so interwoven with the Civil Interest, it belongs to the perfection of an
understanding Politician, to be well instructed whence this Spiritual Monarchy
had its Original, and by what means it has so mightily increased and is
preserved. From whence also will appear, of what nature are the chiefest
Controversies now in vogue among Christians in the Western Parts of the World,
how far they are owing either to the various Interpretations of the Holy
Scripture, or to worldly Interest; so that from thence a Wise Man may easily
judge, whether at any time these Controversies are likely to be composed or not.

2. Now to look back to the first beginning of things, we find, that before the
Nativity of our Savior the Inhabitants of the whole Universe, except the Jews,
lived in gross Ignorance as to Spiritual Affairs. For what was commonly taught
concerning the Gods, was for the most part involved in Fables and most
extravagant absurdities It Is true, The Blindness of Heathens in Matters of
Religion.
some of the learned among them, have pretended to give some rational Account
concerning the Nature of the Gods and the State of the Soul; but all this in so
imperfect and dubious a manner, that they themselves remained very uncertain in
the whole matter. They agreed almost all of them in this Point, that mankind
ought to apply it self to the practice of Virtue, but they did not propose any
other Fruits, but the Honor and Benefit which from thence did accrue to Civil
Society. For what the Poets did give out concerning the rewards of Virtue and
punishments of Vice after Death, was by these who pretended to be the wisest
among them, looked upon as Fables, invented to terrify and keep in awe the
common People. The rest of the People lived at random, and what the Heathens
called Religion, did not contain any Doctrine or certain Articles concerning
the knowledge of Divine Matters. But the greatest part of their Religious
Worship consisted in Sacrifices and Ceremonies, which tended more to Sports and
Voluptuousness, than to the Contemplation of Divine Things. Wherefore the
Heathen Religion did neither Edify in this Life, nor afford any Hopes or
Comfort at the time of Death.

3. The Constitution of the Jewish Religion.
At that time the Jews were the only Nation unto whom God had revealed the true
Religion, which could lead Mankind in the way of Salvation. Nevertheless, there
was a vast difference betwixt that and the Christian Religion, not only because
the Jewish Religion represented the Savior of the World and the Fountain of
Salvation in Types and Promises; whereas the Christian Religion comprehends the
reality and accomplishment of the same; but also because the Jewish Religion
was clothed with a great many and those very burdensome Ceremonies: And some
of them being accommodated to the natural inclination of that Nation, they
proved an obstacle to the general reception of that Religion by all Nations:
This ceremonial part being like a Wall, whereby the Jews were separated from
other Nations. It Is true, all other Nations were not excluded from receiving
Salvation through the Belief in the Savior of the World who was to come. There
were also some among the Jews, who were very careful, and applied themselves to
the conversion of such as they kept Correspondence withal. But it was not
decreed by God Almighty to send all over the Earth at that time his Delegates
or Apostles, instructed with peculiar Gifts to call all Nations to unite
themselves with the Jewish Church: And what was done by some private Persons in
converting of Infidels, was of no great consequence in comparison of the whole
World. Besides this, the Jewish Nation being at that time the selected People
of God, adorned with great Prerogatives, and having the possession of the only
Temple of God, was grown so proud, that the Jews despised all other Nations
besides themselves. They being also obliged by the Institution of their
Ceremonies, not to converse too familiarly upon several accounts with other
Nations; this occasioned a mutual hatred betwixt the Jews and them, which was a
main obstacle to the propogation of the Jewish Religion. Neither could other
Nations easily digest this, that as often as they were to attend the solemn and
public divine Service, they were first to travel to Jerusalem, as if it were
not in their power to build a Temple equal to the other near home. Besides
this, such as received the Jewish Religion, were esteemed among them one degree
below the Natives, which was the reason why very few could resolve for the
Jewish Religion's sake, to be despised among them as Foreigners.

4. The Christian Religion is proper for all the world.
But the Christian Religion is not only much clearer, and also has other great
Prerogatives above the Jewish, which Consideration we will leave to the
Divines: But it is also freed from those Circumstances which were particular to
the Jewish Religion, and endowed with all Qualifications requisite for an
universal Religion; wherefore every one is obliged to receive and embrace it,
which deserves particularly to be remarked, that hereby we may investigate and
penetrate to the very bottom, the propriety and genius of the Christian
Religion. For here is no particular place appointed by God Almighty for
performing in public the Divine Service, nor can any place claim a Prerogative
before another, so that no Nation henceforward has any occasion to make
exception about the remoteness of the Temple; but in all places you may lift up
holy Hands unto him, no Temple in the World having any particular promise
appertaining to it that God will sooner hear your Prayers in that than in
another. No Nation has according to the Christian Religion, a precedence before
another, whereby one may claim a Prerogative above the other. Here is no Jew,
no Greek, no Bond nor Freeman, but they are all one in Jesus Christ. Here is no
particular Family or Tribe appointed by God for the public administration of
Divine Service as it was among the Jews; but none is excluded here, provided he
be endowed with the necessary Qualifications. There is no Article in the
Christian Religion, which forbids us to cultivate with others either
familiarity, or to render to one another the Duties required from us by the Law
of Nature.

It is purely and by it self considered, Not contrary to Civil Government.
quite separated from all worldly Ends and Interests; yet is her Doctrine not
in the least repugnant to, or alters Civil Society or Laws, as far as they are
consonant to the Law of Nature, but it rather (though that is not her main
intention) confirms the same. There is nothing to be found in the Christian
Religion, which is destructive to the Ends of Civil Society, or which hinders
us from living honestly, quietly and securely under the protection of Civil
Magistrates, or from executing in every respect the highest Civil Power
according to the Law of Nature, true Reason and the Necessities of the State,
or from administering all Offices and performing such Duties without offending
against the Rules of Christianity, as are requisite for the maintaining a State
established according to the Law of Nature. The Christian Religion rather
promotes all these things, expressly commanding us strictly to observe every
Commandment of the Law of Nature, and especially those where no temporal
punishment could be conveniently inflicted by the Civil Constitutions, and to
perform our Duty with all Faithfulness and Zeal, as far as the same is
consonant with Honesty and the Law of Nature. No other Religion or Philosophy
comparable to it.


Wherefore not any Philosophy or Religion whatsoever is in this point to be
compared with the Christian Religion, which may be evident enough to all who
will make a true comparison betwixt this and all the rest. And every body is
therefore obliged as he hopes to answer for his Soul before God, not only to
receive the Christian Religion, but also all Sovereigns and Magistrates ought
for the abovementioned reasons, and out of a Duty belonging to their Office,
to introduce and maintain it. It is objected, that the Effects of the Christian
Religion are not so visible, nor that the Life and Conversation of a great many
Christians is not different from that of the Heathens and Turks; it is to be
observed, that this Fault is not to be imputed to the Christian Doctrine, but
to the Inclinations of such as profess the name of Christians, but will not in
earnest apply themselves to alter their evil Inclinations, and to live
according to the wholesome Precepts of this Religion.

5. Concerning the outward Government of Religion.
As what we have hitherto said, can scarce be denied by the more understanding
sort, so there arises now a Question, viz. Whether, according to the Doctrine
of the Christian Religion it is absolutely requisite, that the outward
Direction or Government of the same be committed to another, besides him who
has the supreme Civil Power in a State? or, which is much the same, Whether
according to the Christian Doctrine, it be necessary that the outward
Government of it be lodged with the whole Body, or one of the Clergy in
particular independent of the Supreme Magistrate? Or, whether there ought to be
but one Sovereign Administrator of the Christian Religion, on whom all other
Christian States ought to depend in this Point? Or, which some take for the
same thing, whether every State ought to be governed according to its own
Constitutions and Interest? Or whether all other States are obliged to be
Slaves to one, and to promote the Interest of that one, with the Detriment and
Ruin of their own. What is meant by the external Government of Religion.


By the outward Direction or Government of the Christian Religion, we
understand the Power of constituting certain Persons for the exercising of the
public Divine Service, and the supreme Jurisdiction over their Persons; the
supreme Administration and Direction of such Possessions as are dedicated to
Religious Services. The Power of making Laws for the outward maintenance of
Religion, and the determining of such Differences as may arise among the Clergy
under what pretext soever it may be, and such like. We make a great difference
betwixt the outward Direction of Religious Affairs and betwixt the Ministry of
the Church, which consists in teaching, preaching and administering of the
Sacraments, all which, doubtless belong only unto the Clergy. This Question
also is to be understood of a Church already planted and established, not of a
Church that is to be planted and established. For since the Christian Religion
owed its Original to Divine Revelation, no humane Power could pretend to have
any Direction in the same, before this Doctrine was thoroughly proposed and
taught by such as had an immediate Authority for so doing from God Almighty.
For when our Savior after his Resurrection did send his Disciples as Delegates
and Apostles throughout the whole World, to publish and introduce the Christian
Religion, they received their Commission for Preaching every where not from the
supreme Civil Magistrates, but from God himself: wherefore Kings as well as the
common People were obliged to acknowledge them as immediate Messengers of God,
and obediently to submit themselves to their Doctrine; and it would be next to
an absurdity if any one should pretend to a Direction in such Matters, as he
was not instructed in before. From whence arises this Consequence, that what
has been said is to be understood of such Sovereigns or supreme Magistrates as
themselves profess the true Christian Religion, but not of those who are
Infidels or erroneous in the chief Articles of the Christian Faith. For to
commit the Direction of Religion to the latter, would be to make the Wolf a
Shepherd.

6. The Consideration of this Question according to the nature of Religion in
general.
This Question may be considered in three-several ways: First, Whether this
Necessity arises from the Nature of each Religion in general? Or, Secondly,
Whether it arises from the Genius of the Christian Religion in particular? Or,
Thirdly, Whether the same is imposed upon us by Divine Institution or the
particular Command of God? That it should proceed from the natural Constitution
of Religion in general, I am in no ways able to find out. For Reason does not
tell me, that if I intend to serve God, I must of necessity make a division in
the State, and thereby introduce two different Powers independent of one
another. The dismembring of the supreme Power, or such a doubleheaded
Sovereignty in a State, administers continual Fuel, which at last breaks out
into Jealousies, Divisions, and intestine Commotions. On the other hand, it is
in no ways contrary to Reason to serve God, and at the same time leave the
supreme Direction of the outward Matters belonging to Divine Service, to such
as have the supreme Power in the State; if we suppose that those who have the
supreme Power in their Hands, will not impose any thing upon their Subjects
which is false or erroneous. It cannot be denied, that as every one is bound by
the Law of Nature to serve God; also is it at the same time in his Power to
perform the outward Ceremonies in such a manner as he believes they are most
pleasing to God. But after Civil Societies were instituted, that same Power is
thereby devolved to those who have the supreme Administration of Affairs in a
Civil Society. And the most ancient Fathers who did not live under any
regulated Government, exercised this Power in their Families, which used to be
transferred to the Eldest Son, as haereditas eximia (or a hereditary
Prerogative) if the Brothers, after the Father's death, did resolve to live
together in one Community. But when afterward Civil Societies were instituted,
the same Power was transferred to the Heads of these Societies, and that out of
a weighty Consideration: For if every one had been left to his free Choice in
this Point, the various and different Ceremonies in the Divine Service must
needs have introduced Confusions, Divisions and intestine Commotions. And though
by the Jews the public Ministry was hereditary to one particular Family, yet
the inspection and supreme Direction was among them reserved to those who had
the supreme Civil Power in their Hands, as the same is practiced among most
other Nations.

7. According to the Nature of the Christian Religion in particular.
Neither can any Reason be given why the Christian Religion is particularly so
qualified, as to imply a necessity, that the abovementioned Direction should be
committed to any other than the supreme Magistrates, though it contains something
more than is taught us by the Light of Nature; since we suppose that by virtue
of this directive Power, they ought not to impose any thing upon us contrary to
the Word of God, nor be a hinderance to the Priests in performing the Ministry
according to the Ordinances of God in the Holy Scriptures. Neither can I find
out any Reason, why the supreme Magistrates should want means duly to qualify
themselves for this Administration or Direction. At least, they may let this
Direction be exercised under their Authority by such as have acquired
sufficient abilities for the same: In like manner as Sovereigns exercise their
Power by others in Civil Affairs, so the Power of making Laws was never denied
to appertain to Sovereigns, though it is certain that a Doctor or Professor of
the Law, ought to be better instructed in them than is required from a King.
For both in these and other Matters, Sovereigns ought to act with the Advice of
such as have applied themselves thoroughly to such Affairs. And as it is against
the Interest of a Good and Wise King, if this Power be not well exercised, so
it is both his Duty and Interest to see the administration of Religious Matters
well performed. For the more zealous and earnest he is in maintaining the
Christian Religion, the more obedient and better qualified his Subjects are
likely to be, and he may the better hope for the Blessing of God Almighty.
Neither can any thing be alleged why God Almighty should not as well afford
his Assistance to a Christian and Orthodox Sovereign as to any other, to
perform this Government praise-worthily. Lastly, because the Christian Religion
does not in any other way derogate from Civil Ordinances and Laws, or from the
Power of Civil Magistrates as far as they are founded upon the Law of Nature;
so it is not to be supposed that it disagrees from this in this one Point,
except a positive Command of God can be alleged for the proof of this
Assertion. Whether there be such a Command in the Holy Scriptures, which
expressly forbids Sovereigns to intermeddle with this Direction, and allows the
same to others in the highest degree of Sovereignty without any dependency at
all, those are obliged to prove, who endeavor to maintain this Assertion. In
the mean while we will inquire into the first Occasion, and by what degrees
this Ecclesiastical Monarchy was established in the Western Churches.

8. First propagation of the Christian Religion.
The Apostles therefore having after the Ascension of our Savior, according to
the Instructions received from his own Mouth, begun to spread the Doctrine of
the Christian Religion in far distant Countries, met with great approbation in
a short time, both among the Jews and other Nations; but more especially among
the Common People, which having hitherto lived in gross Ignorance and in a
miserable Estate, very joyfully received this Doctrine, which enlightened and
comforted them in the miseries of this Life. The Apostles also themselves, who
were of mean Extraction and of no great Authority, used to converse most among
this sort of People, as having the most easy access to them as their equals.
But Men of Quality and Learning did scare at first think it worth their while
to apply themselves diligently to search into the bottom of this Religion, and
very few of them would profess it. The Methods of God in Establishing the
Christian Religion.


If we may inquire into the Reasons why it was the pleasure of the Wise God to
choose this way of planting the Christian Religion, it seems very probable,
that God was not pleased to introduce the Christian Religion by the Power and
Authority of Civil Magistrates, nor by the Assistance of Learned Men, because
it might not be deemed hereafter a State Trick, or a Philosophical Speculation;
but that whenever a due comparison might be made betwixt the slender beginnings
and prodigious increase of this Religion, the World might from thence conclude,
that the whole was something above humane Power. And because the Learned had
proved unsuccessful with all their subtilties in their Discoveries concerning
Divine Matters; and that Socrates and some others who were sensible of the
vanity of the commonly received Superstitions, and had condemned them as such,
had not been able to abolish those, and in lieu thereof, to introduce a better
Religion; God Almighty was willing to convince the World of the Vanity of
worldly Wisdom, and to show, how easy it was for him to effect this great Work
by the means, even of poor Fishermen. Besides this, the Doctrine of the
Apostles seemed to be full of absurdity to the Philosophers and Politicians,
the same being founded upon, and begun with Jesus who was crucified. For it
appeared very strange to them that the Apostles should acknowledge him for the
Son of God and their Savior, who was of a hated and despised Nation, who
having lived without any great Splendor, or performed any great Heroic
Actions; had besides this, not made himself Famous throughout the World by long
Study or Preaching, but had in his younger years suffered a most infamous
Death. And this is the reason why the Jesuits, when they teach the Christian
Religion among the refined Chinese, do not begin with the Doctrine of the
Passion of Christ; but argue first with them out of the Principles of natural
Religion, and so at last come about to this Article of the Christian Faith. But
whether these Fathers by this method are likely to be more successful than the
Apostles I will not determine here. Way the meanest first converted.
It may also be alleged, that God was pleased to deliver the common People
among the Heathens, before great Men, out of their misery and darkness; because
the first were seduced by the latter, and upheld in their Superstition; for
these, though they were sensible of the Vanity of the Pagan Religion, yet did not
do their utmost endeavors to search after a better. Wherefore God Almighty by
first drawing away the common People from Paganism, did undermine the whole
Structure, which was forced to fall of it self. Since the simplicity and
credulity of the common People were the Foundation Stones of the Pagan Religion.

9. Persecution of the first Church.
The Christian Doctrine therefore having been most of all, at first, spread
abroad among the common People, as I have said before, it was grievously
oppressed and persecuted afterward by the Roman Emperors; for in the
Territories of the Roman Empire it had its first beginning and chief increase.
One of the main occasions of these Persecutions was their Ignorance of the true
nature of this new Religion, or what was the main end of it; since they saw the
number of the Christians daily increase, who all despised the Pagan Religion.
The Emperors thought it below their high Station to make a due enquiry into
the Foundation of this Doctrine, and there were very few among the first
Christians that were fitly qualified to represent their Doctrine in due form to
People of Quality. The Calumnies against the Primitive Christians.
These therefore used to be led away by the false suggestions of the Enemies of
the Christians, who insinuated to them, that the Christians in their nocturnal
Assemblies, did practice all sorts of Debaucheries much after the manner as
formerly used to be practiced at the Festivals of Bacchus, or else that they
were then Plotting against the State.

There were also not a few among the Romans, The Politic Reasons of the Romans
against it.
who being averse to any Innovation whatsoever, were of Opinion, that since the
Roman Empire had stood in a flourishing Condition several Ages past under the
ancient Religion, the same ought not to be abrogated; especially, they did
think it in no ways becoming the common People to pretend to an Innovation and
to more Wisdom than their Sovereigns. The Christians also having among
themselves a certain Form of Ecclesiastical Government, this rendered them
suspected to the Romans, who looked upon them as such that were for setting up
a Faction against the State, and erecting a new Society in it, and so to divide
the Empire, and at last make themselves Masters of it: Some also there were,
who perceiving, that the more the numbers of the Christians increased, the less
frequented were the Temples of the Heathens, and that the Roman Empire began to
decline and received great shocks; they persuaded themselves that these
Misfortunes befell them, because those Gods through whose Assistance the Roman
Empire arrived to the Pinnacle of its Grandeur, were now despised among them,
and therefore looked upon the Christians as an Atheistical Generation,
endeavoring to over-turn the very Foundations of Religion. And because the
Christians refused to adore the Idols, notwithstanding the Emperors Commands,
and suffered the most prodigious Tortures and Death with constancy and even
Joy; they were treated like a perverse and obstinate sort of People by the
Romans, who increased their Cruelties to maintain their Authority against them.
But no sufficient Reasons can be alleged for the justification of these
Persecutions against the Christians, which ought to be considered no otherwise
than unlawful Tyrannies, and pernicious Abuses of the supreme Civil Power. For
their Subjects had received this Religion according to the express Command of
God, which could nor ought not to be opposed by the Civil Power; the
Magistrates as well as the Subjects being obliged to receive it, except they
would grossly sin against God Almighty. Neither could their Ignorance serve them
for an excuse, since this being a new Doctrine, it was their Duty to take due
information concerning the same, before they had sent the Innocent Christians
to Execution, only, because they refu^ed to obey the Commands of their
Sovereigns, which ought not to oblige them to Obedience in this Point. For no
body ought to give Sentence of Death against any one before he is duly informed
concerning the nature of the Crime, he is accused of.

. The first Church Government.
10. And because the Sovereigns did at first not concern themselves for the
welfare of the Christian Religion, the Christians therefore did without their
assistance constitute a Ministry and the outward Church Government among
themselves, which was maintained among them as well as it could. For this is
common to all Societies which are instituted without the consent of the Supreme
Magistrate, that the Members thereof are forced to agree among themselves,
which way to order their Affairs best, and to Constitute certain Rules, and
Governors for the management of the Societies: Else, according to the Rules of
Policy, founded upon the Law of Nature, the outward Government of Religion
belongs to the Sovereigns. But because the Magistrates would not perform their
duty at that time, the Christians were obliged to Constitute Ministers of their
own accord, who received their maintenance from the Charity of good
Christians. And if any Errors did arise, or other matters happened of such
consequence, that the same could not be decided by one assembly, several of
these Assemblies used to consult among themselves concerning the matter in
question, or leave the determination to an Assembly of such Mininisters as were
next at hand. Tho it is certainly else not to be allowed in a State, that
private persons should Constitute a Society among themselves, consisting
especially of a considerable number; yet the Assemblies and Synods of the
ancient Christians are not therefore to be deemed unlawful Meetings; since
their only aim was the exercise of their Religion, which being commanded them
by God, ought not to have been opposed by any human Power. Neither is it
reasonable, that because the Magistrates were careless both of their Duty and
their own Salvation, the rest also who had knowledge of the true Religion,
should lose the benefit of their Salvation; against which no Civil Power ought
to extend its Jurisdiction. And, as it is allowable for every body to defend
himself with his own Strength and Weapons, if Magistrates either can or will
not protect him; so, if a Sovereign will not do his Office as to the
preservation of my Soul, I have as much more right to take care of it without
him, as the Soul is dearer to me than the Body; and as by the exercise of the
True Religion my Fellow Subjects are less endangered, than by a violent defense
of my own person; for no body by becoming a Subject in a Civil Society, does
thereby renounce the privilege of taking care for his Soul and Body. Otherwise
no doubt is to be made, that if it had been the Will of God to introduce the
Christian Religion by the Conversion of the Emperors and Kings, these would
with their Commands have assisted the Apostles in their Office, thrown down the
Temples of the Idols, abolished the Pagan Idolatry, and would according to the
instruction of the Apostles, have Constituted the outward Church Government,
and maintained it afterward. For it is evident enough, that this has been the
manner of proceeding, as to this point in other Countries, where the Christian
Religion has been first introduced into the State, by the authority of their
Sovereigns.

. What persuasions arise thence.
11. Nevertheless because the first Christians were obliged, when the
Magistrates failed in their Duty, to regulate and Constitute a Church
Government among themselves, this has occasioned the rise of several Errors,
which are of no small consequence. For, some have from thence, endeavored to
make this inference, that the people, as they stand in opposition to
Sovereignty, has an original and inherent Right to Elect Church Ministers. It Is
true a Minister ought not to be obtruded upon an Assembly against their will,
especially if they have a lawful exception against him; because he would edify
but little in his Station; nevertheless, it is not from hence to be concluded,
that, because some Assemblies have been obliged to provide themselves with
Ministers when the Magistrates did neglect their Duty, therefore the same Right
is ever since Originally in the People. For without this supposition an
Assembly has as little right to call and Constitute a Church Minister, as to
dispose of Public Offices and Employments in the State. And if in some places
the Common People or some others have such a Right, it is enjoyed either by
connivance, or a concession from the Supreme Magistrate, whom we suppose to be
a Christian and Orthodox. Some also have been endeavoring to draw from thence
this Conclusion, viz. That the outward Church Government is separate and
distinct from the Supreme Civil Power, and that it ought to be administered
either by the whole Clergy, or else to depend absolutely on one single person
of the Clergy; so that, according to this supposition, there must be in each
Christian State two distinct Bodies independent of one another, one of which
must be called the Ecclesiastic (Ecclesia) the other the Politic State,
(Civitas) and each of them to be Sovereign in its Government. But, tho this has
been made use of sometimes, when Magistrates were quite negligent of their
Duty, this ought not to be drawn into Consequence, when Magistrates are ready,
duly to execute their Office. Neither does it follow, that the same power
which belonged to the Apostles at that time when the Church was first to be
Established, is now devolved to such Church Ministers as have not an immediate
Vocation from God in the Established Church. For the Office of the Apostles was
particular, and very different from the Church Ministry, as it is exercised now
adays; in like manner as the outward Church Government is very different from
the Ministry. And as every lawful Church Minister is therefore not immediately
an Apostle, so the King is therefore not immediately a Priest. And tho the
Christian Religion ows its Original to God, and is above human reason;
nevertheless the Supreme Magistrate may be capable of having the outward
direction over it, with the assistance of such persons as are best versed in
such Affairs. And, from what has been said, this Conclusion may be made: viz.
That the practice of the Primitive Church as to this Point of the outward
Church Government, is not to be made a perpetual and universal Rule of the
Church Government in a State, which is under the Jurisdiction of a Christian
and Orthodox Magistrate. For that practice was accommodated to the
Circumstances of their Affairs then: But, where both the whole People and the
Sovereign have received the Christian Religion, the case is quite different,
and implies not any necessity that the State should thereby become a Body with
two Heads.

12. Constantine could not quite alter the former State of the Church.
After Constantine the Great had embraced the Christian Faith, the Church began
to get another Face, the Sovereign being then fitly qualified to take upon him
the outward Church Government. Nevertheless the said outward Church Government
could not be so immediately and regularly ordered, as if from the first
beginning the Sovereigns had received the Christian Religion; For, there were a
great many remnants left of the former provisional Church Government, which
afterward occasioned great abuses in the Western or Latin Church. For, it was
scarce possible for these Emperors, who passed then but for Novices in the
Christian Religion, to make use at first of their Power in Ecclesiastical
Matters, and to bridle the Authority of the Bishops and Clergy, that were very
backward to part with it. They were rather obliged to keep fair with them, and
to make use of their assistance to Establish themselves in the Throne, since
most of their Subjects being then become Christians paid a profound Veneration
to their Priests. The first Christian Emperors also made use of several
Ministers and Officers in their Courts, who were as yet Pagans; wherefore it
seemed not just, that Matters concerning the outward Church Government, should
be determined by a Council, whereof some Members were Heathens.

This was the reason why the Vocation of Bishops and other Ecclesiastics was
performed for the most part according to the Customs introduced before. Of
making Bishops.
And not only such Controversies as arose concerning certain Articles of Faith,
but also of such as had a relation to the outward Order and Government of the
Church, and all other differences of moment among the Clergy of the higher Rank
were brought before the Councils, or the Assemblies of the Clergy where these
did pretend alone to have the right to Preside and to give their Votes; Tho it
is certain that not only the right of calling them together belongs to the
Sovereigns, who also for a considerable time have exercised that power; but
also the direction and Presidentship of such Assemblies: Of Presiding in
Councils.
whatever matter is to be debated there, does at least belong to the Prince, if
their Decrees shall pass afterward for, and have the power of a Law or a
definitive Sentence in the State. Indeed the Supreme Magistrates, no more than
the Clergy can pretend to a right of introducing new Articles of Faith, or of
explaining the Scripture according to their own pleasure: Nevertheless, the
whole Duty of a Christian being contained in the whole Scriptures, which God
has commanded to be published for the benefit of Mankind, and not to be
committed, like Sibylline Oracles, to the custody of certain Priests; and since
others as well as the Clergy have the opportunity to comprehend the Sense of
the Holy Scripture, it seems not at all contrary to reason, that the Civil
Magistrates should have at least the Supreme direction of these Assemblies,
where matters concerning the different interpretations of the Scripture are to
be debated. From hence also this benefit will accrue to the Public, that
thereby the extravagant Heats and immoderate Passions, which are commonly
obvious in these Disputes, may be moderated, matters may be debated with
prudence, and not stretched too high out of a fondness of contradicting, nor
that any one by malicious interpretation of his Words and Opinion may fall
under Slanders and Censures, or the Excommunication be thundered out without
necessity against the innocent. And because the first Christian Emperors did
either neglect this their Right, or had no opportunity of exercising it, this
occasioned great confusion in some Councils: Abuses in the Council^.
From hence also the Pope took an opportunity, after he had set himself above
the Western Bishops and Councils themselves, to take upon him an Authority to
decide Controversies even concerning Articles of Faith, to introduce such
Canons or Ecclesiastical Laws in the Church, as he thought most proper for his
Interest and State, and by pretending to the highest Jurisdiction to exempt the
Church from the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrates: For when once this
Opinion was established, that all these Matters did belong of right to the
Clergy only, without having any respect to the Civil Power, the Pope did
pretend to the same by the same Right, by which he had set himself above the
Clergy and the whole Church.

. Of the Episcopal Jurisdiction.
12. Besides this it was the Custom among the Ancient Christians, that they
very seldom pleaded their Causes, according to the admonition of S. Paul,
before the Pagan Judges: But, in case of differences among themselves, they
used to refer the same to the decision of a Bishop, that by their Contests they
might not give any occasion of Scandal to the Heathens, since it might seem
unbecoming, that those who made profession of despising worldly Riches, should
quarrel among themselves about the same. This Custom as it was very useful and
praiseworthy at that time; so because it was not Abrogated, but rather
confirmed afterward by the Christian Emperors, tho the Courts of Justice were
then Governed by Christian Judges, the Bishops afterward pretended to a formal
Jurisdiction, which did not only derogate from the Authority of Temporal
Judges, but also the Bishops were thereby diverted from performing such Duties
as properly belonged to their Office. There was also another Custom among the
first Christians, that if a scruple arose concerning nearness of Blood in
Marriages, Concerning Marriages.
they used to take the Opinion of the Priests in this Case, and if any
differences did arise betwixt married People, it used to be referred to the
Arbitration of the Priests; who at the time also when the Nuptials were
Celebrated, used to give them their Benediction and Pray with them. This, if in
itself considered, very good beginning, furnished an occasion of great Abuses
afterward, the Pope having from hence taken a pretext to subject all
Matrimonial Affairs, concerning Divorces, Nullities of Marriages, Successions,
Inheritances, and the like, of the greatest Consequence, under his
Jurisdiction, who, to render his pretensions the more plausible, did make
Marriage a Sacrament.

Besides this, Concerning Excommunication.
the first Christians were very desirous to recommend their Religion to the
Heathens by a Holy and Innocent Life, especially since some sort of Vices were
not punishable according to the Pagan Laws. Wherefore in the Primitive Church,
if any one had given a Public Scandal by his vicious Life, a certain Church
Penance was laid upon him, which at the utmost did amount to this, that he was
excluded from the Communion of the Christians. Which Custom as it is not
unreasonable, so it may be of good use in a Christian State, provided the Civil
Magistrate have the Supreme direction, and take care that such a Censure be not
abused out of obstinacy or private ends and passion. Especially since these
Censures have had such an influence upon Civil Societies, that in the Eighth
Age no body would Converse with any one that was Excommunicated. And this Power
ought not to be given to the absolute disposal of any one, except to the
Sovereign, if you will not divide the Sovereignty. But in what manner the Popes
have afterward abused this Censure, and extended it even to the
Excommunication of Emperors, Kings, and whole Commonwealths, and by forbidding
the Public Exercise of Divine Service, Absolving the Subjects from their
Allegiance, and bestowing their Kingdoms upon others, have forced them to a
compliance against their own Interest, is sufficiently known out of History.
Yet in the Eastern Empire these Abuses did not grow up to the same height, for
the Emperors at Constantinople did at least so far maintain their Authority
against the Clergy, that they durst not pretend to dominere over them. Besides
that the Eastern Bishop wanted an opportunity to set themselves one above the
other, because the Bishops at Constantinople had no other Prerogative allowed
him, but Precedence of Rank above the others without his Diocese, but not any
Jurisdiction.

. The Origin of the Authority of the Popes.
14. But in the Western parts the Church afterward took quite another Face,
since the Bishop of Rome had projected a peculiar sort of a Monarchy, which by
degrees he brought to perfection, and has not had its parallel ever since the
memory of mankind, it being founded upon quite other Principles, and upheld by
very different means from other States. The more influence this Monarchy has
had for several hundred years together upon the States and Affairs of Europe,
and has been maintained with great Zeal by one, and opposed by the other party,
the more it will be worth our while, to dive into the first Origin and
Constitution of it, and to allege some reason, why in the last Age this
Monarchy was reduced to a tottering condition, but has recollected its vigor
in ours. From whence a wise Man also may be able to judge what success may be
hoped for from the Projects of those, who are for reconciling the differences
betwixt the Protestants and Papists. Wherefore, it may be said, that toward
the increase of this Monarchy, so pernicious to the Supreme Civil Power, has
not a little contributed, tho afar off, the Barbarity and ignorance, Barbarity
and Ignorance contributed to it.
which, after the decay of the Roman Empire, did spread itself over the Western
parts. For bad Wares are best vented in the dark, or at least by a dim light:
And an ignorant person is sooner prevailed upon to believe ridiculous Stories
than a wise Man versed in all sorts of Sciences.

There were several causes, The Causes of this ignorance.
which promoted this barbarity, which did degenerate afterward into the worst
sort of pedantry, (whereas the former Age had been sufficiently instructed with
learned Men.) One of the principal ones was the Invasion made upon the Western
Provinces of the Roman Empire by those Nations, who tho sufficiently Brave,
were ignorant of Learning; which occasioned for one or two Ages after great
Changes in the Government, bloody Wars, horrible disorders, and all sorts of
miseries in the Empire. And Learning being the product of Peace and Prosperity,
it is little regarded in times of War, or during the Distractions of a State;
since then there is but little leisure time given for the use of Books. The
Schools are commonly destroyed, and the Teachers obliged to make shift, where
best they can, a Musket being at such times of more use than a School Satchel.
The Schoolmasters especially are forced to shut up Shop at such times, if the
victorious Enemy is ignorant of Learning, and makes no account of Books. There
are also some who affirm that the Clergy was accessory to this barbarism. For,
because the Philosophers had under the Reigns of the Pagan Emperors proved
very mischievous to them, and afterward under the Christian Emperors continued
to oppose themselves against the Clergymen especially, these had conceived such
a hatred against Philosophy, and against all such as professed it, that they
not only infused the same into their Auditors, but also removed out of the
Schools and took from the young Students, who were committed to their care, the
Pagan Authors, under pretense that they might otherwise be again infected with
the erroneous Principles of the Pagans, and that it could not but be sinful for
Christians to read such Books as were filled every where with the names of the
Pagan-Idols, which they would not have as much as named by Christians. They
related a Story concerning S. Hierom how that he was whipped in a Vision with
Rods, S. Hierom's Dream.
because he used frequently to Read the Works of Cicero; and about the year
400. after the Birth of our Savior; the Council of Carthage forbid the Bishops
the reading of Pagan Authors. And Learning being in those miserable times
become almost useless except to those who intended to profess Divinity, and the
remnants of Learning being lodged therefore among the Clergy, the main
Institution in the Schools was only directed for that Purpose, and the rest of
the young Disciples were not very forward to dive much into the secrets of
Ancient Learning. And that Ignorance and Barbarism have greatly promoted the
establishment of Popery is evident enough to those, who will consider that in a
learned Age those Decretals which are ascribed to the first Popes, could never
have passed Muster; which nevertheless have been made use of to persuade the
People that the Bishops of Rome have exercised an Authority from the very
beginning of Christianity, to prescribe Laws ot the Christian World.

But when afterward the times proved more favorable in Europe, The Pedantry
introduced into the Schools.
and the Popes perceived that some among the most considerable Nations of
Europe could not be longer kept in a gross Ignorance, they introduced into the
Schools, over which they had assumed the Supreme Direction, the most miserable
sort of Pedantry, which is also maintained by their Creatures with great
earnestness in their Schools to this very day. But above all the rest, it seems
that the ignorance of the true Principles of Policy, has had a main stroke in
laying the Foundation of Popery, for want of which they were not then duly
instructed concerning the Foundation, Nature, and Perfection of the Supreme
Civil Power, and that no State could be esteemed well Established, where the
Supreme Civil Power was either divided or diminished. The Greek and Roman
Politicians prejudicial to Monarchy.
And the Grecian and Roman Politicians themselves had divulged most pernicious
Doctrines concerning the division and mixture of the Supreme Power, whereby
they had enamoured the People with an Aristocratical or Democratical sort of
Government, but infused into them such a hatred against Monarchy, that it was a
common Maxim among them, that the more they could incr^^ch upon the Authority
of the Prince, the more it must turn to the advantage of the State. In this
pernicious Opinion a great many were confirmed by the Tyrannical proceedings of
the Emperors, who were mortally hated by most of their Subjects. It was
therefore no great wonder, that at the time of this general Ignorance the
knowledge of true Policy was not taught among the Christian Clergy, since it
seemed to them to be repugnant to their Profession. From hence it was, that,
when by degrees the Foundation of the Ecclesiastical Sovereignty was laid, few
did thoroughly understand of what Consequence this undertaking was, and how
prejudicial it would prove to the Supreme Civil Power, when ever it could be
brought to perfection. And we see even to this day, that in those Schools,
which are under the care of the Popish Clergy, the Principles of true Policy
are either neglected, or at least so disfigured that they may not be hurtful to
the Authority of the Popes, but rather serve to support it.

. Why Rome was made the place of Residence of the Ecclesiastical Monarchy.
15. But the chief reason, why Rome was chosen for the place of Residence of
the Ecclesiastical Monarchy, seems to be, that this City had a particular
Prerogative of being the Capital City of the Roman Empire, where the Christian
Religion at first had its r^se and increase. For what is related concerning S.
Peter's Chair is nothing but a vain pretense, which may be easily seen from
thence, that afterward the Bishop of Constantinople had the next place
assigned him after the Bishop of Rome, only because that City was then the
place of Residence of the Emperor, and new Rome. And when afterward the
Western Roman Empire was come to decay, and the City of Rome had lost its
former luster, the Bishop of Constantinople disputed the precedence with the
Roman Bishop. After the Persecutions, which the Christians had endured under
the Pagan Emperors, were ceased, and they afterward enjoyed their full
Liberty, the Clergy began, under pretense of introducing a wholesome Order in
the Church to Establish a particular sort of Government or Hierarchy, the
Bishops having then begun to claim a great Prerogative above the Priests. The
Bishops also were made subordinate to one another, so that commonly the
inspection over the Bishops in a certain Province was committed to the Bishop
of the Capital City of the same Province, Metropolitans.
who being then called Metropolitans, did afterward, viz. about the Eighth
Century most of them assume the name of Archbishops. Four of them were most
eminent above all the rest, viz. The Archbishops of Rome, Patriarchs.
Constantinople, Antioch and Alexandria, these being then the four principal
Cities of the Roman Empire; and the Archbishop of Jerusalem was added to their
number, because of the Ancient Holiness of that City. And tho the Emperor
Phocas, out of a spite against the Patriarch of Constantinople, who who would
not approve of the Murder committed upon Mauritius, did grant the precedence
to Boniface III. the then Bishop of Rome, who did thereupon take upon him the
Title of Ecumenical Bishop; yet this Prerogative did not extend any further
than to bare Precedence, nor did imply any Power or Jurisdiction over the rest,
which the other Patriarchs never acknowledged. And a considerable time before,
when the Bishop of Rome pretended to put his Commands upon the Bishops of
Africa, and for that purpose alleged a Canon of the Council of Oliva, which
was falsified, they sent him back a very smart Answer.

And in the whole business there is no footsteps of a Divine Institution to be
met withal, Of the Popes Power.
the same being purely Human, nor can any reason be alleged, why the Bishop of
Rome possesses the first Rank, other than why he of Antioch has the third among
them. And because one State cannot prescribe Laws to another, therefore if any
Prerogatives have been granted to the Bishop of Rome by the Roman Emperors, or
the Ancient Councils, (which were nothing formerly but an Assembly of the
Clergy of the Roman Empire,) the same do not oblige any other State, nor can
they extend beyond the Bounds and Jurisdiction of the ancient Roman Empire. But
if we put the Case that some Christian Princes or States have afterward
allowed to the Pope a certain power over the Church in their Dominions, this
was either done because they either understood not the true nature of this
Power, or because they were deceived by the Popes. In the first Case the same
is to be deemed nothing else but a Treaty or Alliance with the Pope, the better
to Administer the Church Affairs with the Pope's Direction. Such a Treaty or
Alliance as it Originally proceeds from the Consent of that State; so the same
may be Annulled again, in the same manner as other Alliances are, whenever it
proves prejudicial to the State, or the Pope begins to abuse the Authority
granted him by the State. But if the Pope has either by Fraud or Imposition
obtained his Power over other States, these so misguided and thus surprised
States, have a right, as soon as they have discovered the Fraud, and are
convinced of their Error, to shake off such an unjust Usurpation, and besides
may demand satisfaction for the damages sustained by these impostures.

. Further Increase of the Ecclesiastical Sovereignty.
16. Neither could the Bishops of Rome extend their Power over the Western
parts all at once, but it was introduced from time to time, by degrees and by
various Artifices, and under several pretenses. For, when they had once
fastened their Paws, they did not retreat till they had obtained their
pretensions, tho they were several times denied admittance. They did very
wisely take hold of that opportunity which presented itself, and was the
chiefest of all in my jugdment, when the Emperors began to choose other places
of Residence besides Rome, What contributed to it.
since by their constant presence there they might easily have kept under the
ambitious designs of the Bishops. For the Bishops of Constantinople, who
questionless were no less proud and ambitious than those of Rome, could never
gain this Point. The next thing which mainly contributed to this Power, was,
that afterward the Western Empire was divided into several new Kingdoms,
erected by barbarous and Pagan Nations; and these having been converted to the
Christian Faith with the assistance of the Romish Church, thought themselves
obliged to pay to her a profound respect, and to honor her as the most ancient
and the principal of the Western parts.

To recite all the particulars here is not for our purpose, The Popes
Confirmation of Bishops.
it will be sufficient to touch upon some of the main Points: it is therefore
to be remarked, that since the Fifth Century the Bishops which lived on this
side of the Alps used to go to Rome to visit the Sepulchers of S. Peter and S.
Paul out of a Superstition or a Devotion very common in those days, or because
they thereby intended to testify their firm adherency to the Christian Faith.
This voluntary Devotion was afterward by degrees changed into a necessity, and
such as neglected it, used to receive severe rebukes. From hence it was easy
for the Popes afterward to pretend that the Bishops ought to receive their
Confirmation from Rome. Some other Bishops and Churches also, that were Novices
in comparison of the ancient Roman Church used to refer themselves to, and ask
the advice of the Church of Rome concerning some Matters of great Consequence,
and the true use and interpretation of the Canons. And when they once perceived
at Rome that their answers were taken as decisions, they began to send their
Decrees before they were demanded, under pretense that Rome being the first
Seat of the Christian Bishops it ought to take effectual care that the Canons
and Ecclesiastical Laws were duly put in Execution. Under the same pretense
they made themselves immediate Judges over the Differences arisen betwixt the
Bishops, and incroaching upon the Right and Jurisdiction of the Metropolitans,
used to depose such Bishops, as according to their Opinion had not a right
Ordination; or such as were accused of some enormous Crimes, they obliged to
appear before them at Rome to defend their Cause. And if there were some that
pretended to a Prerogative, or to obtain an Exemption from the Canons, they did
Travel to Rome, where they were kindly received and encouraged in their
demands, whereby the Staple of Dispensations and Favors to be granted, was
established at Rome: And if any one had lost his Cause before the ordinary
Judge, he used to Appeal to Rome, where he was kindly received and encouraged.
The French Historians relate, that, because the Emperor Henry had made the City
of Arles the Capital City over seven Provinces, the Pope Constituted the
Archbishop of the said City his Vicar in France, for fear lest the said
Archbishop might by degrees attempt to make himself Patriarch of France. And
this Archbishop chose rather to have the inspection, tho precariously, over
seventeen Provinces, into which France was divided at that time, than to be the
Head only of seven in his own right. This Man to add the more Authority to his
Commision, did as much as in him was, endeavor to Establish the Popes
Authority there.

Afterward in the Eighth Century, when great Disorders and Debaucheries were
become frequent among the Monks and Clergy, Of the Monk Winifred.
an English Friar, whose name was Winifred, and who afterward called himself
Boniface, did out of a particular Zeal take upon himself the Reformation of the
Manners and Lives of the Clergy; and did endeavor to Establish the Christian
Religion in several parts of Germany, but especially in Thuringia and
Friezland. This Man, to acquire the greater Authority to himself, had entirely
Devoted himself to the Interest of the Roman Chair, from whence he received the
Episcopal Pall, and the Title of Archbishop of Mayence, having also been
Constituted by Pope Gregory III. his Vicar, with full Power to call Councils,
and to Constitute Bishops in those places which were by his assistance
Converted to the Christian Faith, and with ample recommendations to those
Nations, and to Charles Martel, the then Grand Master of France, that he should
take him into his protection, which he very willingly did. And when afterward
his Son Carlomannus showed a great forwardness to have the Church Discipline
regulated, Boniface was very willing to take upon him this Office to the great
advantage of the Roman Chair. He also at the request of Carlomannus called a
Council in Germany, and at the request of Pepin several Synods in France, where
Boniface always was President in the quality of Legate of the Roman Chair. In
the first Council the Clergy signed a certain Confession of Faith, whereby they
obliged themselves, not only to maintain the Catholic Faith, but also to
remain in constant Union with the Roman Church, and to be obedient to the
Successors of S. Peter. This Boniface also was the first, who put it upon the
Bishops of Germany to receive the Episcopal Pall from the Pope, who sent it to
the Bishops of France without their request, thereby to unite them with the
Roman Chair. And when once these Ornaments were become customary amongst them,
they were put upon them afterward as of absolute Necessity, and the Episcopal
Function was forbidden to be exercised by them before they had received these
Ornaments.

Besides this, Annals.
the Popes assumed to themselves an Authority of giving leave to the Bishops to
remove from one Episcopal See to another, and obliged all the Western Bishops
to receive their Confirmation from Rome, for which they were obliged to pay a
certain Sum of Money as an acknowledgement, which was since converted to
Annals. The Popes also by making void the Decisions of the provincial Synods or
Assemblies, overthrew their Authority; wherefore when every body plainly
perceived that the Decrees of these Assemblies could produce no other Effects
but to be continually annulled by the Popes, without as much as hearkening to
any Reasons, they were by degrees quite abolished. Pope Gregory VII. also
forced the Bishops to swear an Oath of Fealty to the Pope, and by a Decree
forbid that none should dare to condemn any one that had appealed to the Pope.
They were also not forgetful in sending Legates or Nuncios to all places, whose
business was, to exercise in the name of the Pope the same Authority which had
formerly belonged to the Bishops, Metropolitans and Provincial Assemblies.

17. Riches of the Church.
This growing Ecclesiastical Sovereignty was the more prejudicial to the
supreme Civil Power, the more the Church daily increased both in Numbers and
Riches. The first Foundation of the Wealth of the Church was laid by the
Liberality and Charity of Princes and other great Men, who were of Opinion,
that they did a very agreeable Service to God Almighty if they were liberal and
bounteous toward his Church and the Clergy. And after they had once persuaded
the People, that by doing good Works, among which the Gifts and Donations for
Pious uses had the first place they could and must deserve Heaven from God
Almighty; this Liberality was increased to a high degree. Yet the voluntary
Contributions of the People not being able to satisfy the avarice of the
Clergy, which increased together with their Riches, other ways and artifices
were found out to empty the Peoples Purses, and a great many unnecessary
Institutions introduced which were to be purchased for Money. Then it was that
the saying of Masses for the living and the dead, Purgatory, Indulgences,
Dispensations, Pilgrimages, Jubilees, and the like, were introduced without
measure. They had besides this, always a watchful Eye over such as were at the
point of death, since they knew that Men were commonly not so addicted at that
time to their worldly Riches, which they were else to leave to their Heirs who
often rejoiced at their Death: Nay, they were not ashamed to make a profession
of begging.

Among other Tricks, The Policies of the Popes in the Croisade.
the Popes did in the Eleventh and the following Century turn the Croisadoes to
their great Advantage. For in these expeditions after the People had once
received the Sign of the Cross to assist in the recovery of the Holy Land, the
Popes pretended to the supreme Command and Direction; they took the Persons and
Estates of such as had received the Cross under their particular Protection,
exempting them thereby from the Civil Jurisdiction both in Civil and criminal
Causes, and rendering their Dispensations and Indulgences more frequent and
flourishing than before; the Pope's Legates did dispose of such Alms,
Collections and Legacies as were given for that purpose, and under the same
pretext received the Tenths from the Clergy; nay, even pretended to put their
Commands upon Princes to receive the Cross themselves. These they employed
afterward against such as were declared by them Scismaticks or Heretics,
whose possessions they used to confiscate and bestow upon those who had proved
serviceable to them, without asking the Advice of the Sovereign, who durst not
but invest these with those Countries that were presented to them by so high a
Hand.

18. Multitude of Ecclesiastics
No less did the number of Ecclesiastics increase proportionably to the
increase of the Riches of the Church, because there were not wanting such as
were willing to have a share of them without taking much pains. For it was not
thought sufficient to have an ordinary Minister, Chaplain and others necessary
for the exercising of Divine Service belonging to each Church, but also each
Cathedral had a Chapter of Canons, and there were great numbers of Persons of
high and low Quality that were forward in taking upon them these profitable and
in no ways but then some Functions, because the inconveniency of Celibacy which
the Pope in the Eleventh and the following Century forced upon the
Ecclesiastics not without great trouble and reluctance was sufficiently
recompensed by the Honors and Revenues which they enjoyed quietly in their
several Stations.

Besides, Friars and Nu^^.
an innumerable multitude of Friars and Nuns settled themselves all over
Christendom. This sort of People began first to appear in the World at the time
of the great Persecutions, but in the Fourth and following Centuries did
multiply their numbers to a prodigious degree. In the beginning they lived upon
what they could get by their Handiwork; a great many used to give their Goods
to the Poor, though voluntarily, and lived under the Direction of the Bishops,
according to a Discipline prescribed in the Canons. In the Seventh Century
especially, Friars and Nuns were much in vogue in those Western Parts, which
were every where filled up with Monasteries and Nunneries built by the
encouragement of Princes and other great Men that endowed them with great
Revenues. But when the Charity and Liberality of the People seemed almost to be
exhausted by the great Charges bestowed upon so many rich Monasteries, and yet
there were not enough to contain all such as were desirous to enter into this
sort of Life; at last in the Thirteenth Century the Order of the
Mendicant-Fryars was erected: Mendicants.
These made a great show of Holiness, because they would not be taken for such
as were forward to choose a Monastic Life to live in plenty, but for such as
had taken a resolution to bid farewell to all the Pleasures of this World, and
at the best, The Motives to embrace this manner of Life.
maintain themselves by Alms. A great many have embraced this severe Order, out
of an Opinion of a particular Holiness and Merit, which they believed did
belong to this Order, or rather an Ecclesiastic Ambition; the Pride of Mankind
being so great and natural to some, that they did not think the Commands of God
sufficient, but rather would receive Heaven from God Almighty as a desert than
as a gift, and were ambitious of having a preference before others, even in the
other Life. Some there are who embrace a Monastic Life out of desperation,
some out of laziness. A great many are by their Parents and Relations sent into
a Monastery out of Superstition or Poverty, and to prevent the ruin of a Family
by the division of the Estate among a great many Children. And out of these
Friars the Pope has chosen his Regiment of Guards, which he lays in Garrison
not only to plague the Laiety, but also to curb the Bishops and the rest of the
Clergy. It was for this reason that the Pope did uphold the Friars with so much
zeal against the Bishops, in the Tenth Century, especially, when they
withdrawing themselves from the Jurisdictions of the Bishops, did submit
themselves to the immediate Authority of the Pope. And the Popes know so well
how to handle them, that though there are great Jealousies on foot betwixt their
several Orders, as for example, betwixt the Franciscans and Dominicans, they
nevertheless keep so even a balance betwixt them, and so equally dispose of
their Favors toward them, that one Order may not oppress another, or that any
of them may have any reason to complain of the Pope's partiality.

These Friars also used to interfere often with the regular Clergy, Prejudicial
to the regular Clergy.
as pretending to a great share in the Legacies and Burials of the richer sort,
to the direction of Consciences and the administration of the Sacraments. From
hence did arise a continual envy and hatred from the Bishops and regular Clergy
against these Friars, who being upheld by the Pope's Favor, were not concerned
at their anger. And therefore whenever any Bishop attempted any thing against
the Pope's Authority, these Friars with their clamor and noise pursued him
every where like so many Hounds, and rendered him odious to the common People,
amongst whom they were in great veneration, through their outward appearance of
Holiness; and from thence it came to pass, that the Bishops who opposed the
Pope's Authority never could make a great Party among the common People.
Besides this, the Friars always kept a watchful Eye over the actions of the
Bishops, giving continual advices concerning them to their Generals residing at
Rom^, whereby by the Popes were enabled to oppose timely any design intended
against their Authority. And these Friars proved the main obstacle, why the
Bishops could not so effectually oppose the Pope's Authority which he assumed
over them, so that being destitute of means to help themselves, they were
forced to follow the current. Though it is also certain, that some of them were
very well satisfied with it, as believing that they did participate of the
Grandeur of their supreme Head, and that thereby they should be exempted from
the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrates, which was more dreadful to them than
a foreign Jurisdiction exercised by those of their own Order, from whom they
had all the reason to expect more Favor. Nevertheless it is also undeniable,
that a great many Bishops, especially among those on this side the Alps bear a
grudge to the Pope's Authority to this very day, which evidently appeared at
the Council of Trent, where the French and Spanish Bishops did insist very
closely upon this Point, that it might be decided, whether Bishops are not
obliged to Residence by the Law of God, which is also the Opinion of the
Jansenists (as they are called) in France and the Netherlands. The more refined
sort did easily perceive what their Intention was by making this Proposition.
For if God had commanded them this, it must also be a consequence that he had
given them means and instructed them with sufficient Power (qui dat jus ad
finem, dat jus ad media) and that therefore they were not obliged to go to Rome
first, and to purchase an Authority to exercise their Function. The Pope met
with great Difficulties before he could surmount this obstacle at the Council
of Trent, wherefore it is very likely that this will be the last Council, since
the Pope will scarce hereafter put his Grandeur to the hazard and the decision
of such an Assembly; which also seems now to be of no further use, since the
Jesuits and some others have taught that the Pope is infallible and above
Councils, from whom they ought to receive a confirmation, and a binding or
obliging Power. But let it be as it will, the Bishops are for their own sakes
obliged not to withdraw themselves from the Popes subjection, since thereby
they would fall under the Jurisdiction of the Civil Power, and would be obliged
to seek for Protection from their Sovereigns, who must be Potent Princes, if
they should protect them against the Pope; wherefore they are now forced to
choose the least of two Evils.

19. How the Church was freed from all Power over it.
Though the Church was never so abounding in Riches and in great numbers of
Ecclesiastics, yet was it absolutely necessary, that the Pope if the intended
to establish an Ecclesiastical Monarchy, should not be in any ways dependent on
any Temporal Prince; and that he should reside in a place which was free from
all subjection to any Civil Power but himself; that he also should be possessed
of such an Estate, as might be sufficient to maintain his Grandeur, and not to
be liable to be taken away from him upon any pretense whatsoever; where also
his adherents might find a safe retreat whenever they should be pursued by the
Civil Power. To establish this was a business of a considerable time and
labor, neither could it be effected without great opposition, and that by a
great many Artifices and knavish Tricks. And it is certain that as long as
there was an Emperor in the Western Empire, and as long as the Empire of the
Goths lasted in Italy, the Bishops of Rome could not so much as think of this
Greatness. How the Popes withdrew themselves from their subjction to the
Emperors.
But this having been destroyed under the Emperor Justinian, and Rome and
Italy made a Province of the Grecian Empire, then it was that the Popes took
their opportunity to exempt themselves from the Jurisdiction of these
Emperors, whose Authority was mightily decayed in Italy, partly by the ill
management of their Governors at Ravenna, partly by their own weakness and
want of Strength; for the Lombards were Masters in Italy, and in the times of
Justinian II. one Emperor was for ruining the other. Besides this, some of
these Emperors were against the adoring of Images, and Leo Isaurus quite
ejected them out of the Churches, because this adoration was wholly degenerated
into Idolatry, and as to the outward appearance, the Saints were more regarded
than God himself. This undertaking was very vehemently opposed by Pope Gregory
II. who stood up for the Images, partly because the Roman Chair found this
Superstition very advantageous; partly because the Pope took it very ill that
the Emperor should undertake a Reformation in Matters of Religion without his
Knowledge and Consent, and that at that time when he was busy to introduce the
Ecclesiastical Monarchy in the Western parts; partly also, because he thought
to have met with an opportunity to withdraw himself from the Jurisdiction of
the Grecian Emperors. The better to obtain his Aim, he stirred up the Romans
and Italians, who hitherto had been under the Obedience of the Emperors, to
refuse to pay them Tribute; and the Governor residing at Ravenna, endeavoring
to maintain the Emperor's Right, was slain in a Tumult. Whereby the
Jurisdiction and Power of the Grecian Emperors was abolished in those parts of
Italy, and these Countries began to be free and independent on any Foreign
Jurisdiction.

20. The Pope seeks for Protection in France.
By these means the Pope had freed himself from the Jurisdiction of the
Emperors of Constantinople, but not long after he was threatened by another
Enemy, who being nearer at hand, was likely to prove more troublesome to him
than formerly the Emperors who lived at so considerable a distance. For the
Kings of the Longobards endeavored first to make themselves Masters of those
parts which were fallen off from the Emperor, and afterward of all Italy.
They had already taken Ra^enna, and there was none left in Italy who was able
to stop their Victories. The Popes were then hard put to it, and knew not where
to seek for Protection except of the Kings of France, who at first endeavored
to finish these Differences by an amicable Composition, but the Longobards not
being willing to rest satisfied therewith, they resolved by force of Arms to
maintain the Italian Affairs. They were easily prevailed upon to undertake this
Business, not only because Pope Zachary had approved of the Proceedings of
Pepin, who having abdicated the lawful King, was from a Grand-Marshal become
King of France; but also they had thereby an opportunity offered them to make
Conquests in Italy, whereof the French Nation has been always very ambitious.
Pepin and afterward Charles the Great, having been so Fortunate in their Wars
against the Longobards, as to Conquer their whole Kingdom; they gave to the
Papal Chair all that Tract of Land which had been formerly under the
Jurisdiction of the Grecian Governors. There are some who are of Opinion, that
to obtain this Gift, the Pope made use of the fictitious Donation of
Constantine the Great, which in those barbarous times was easily imposed upon
the ignorant World. Besides this, the French Kings had great Obligations to the
Pope for the abovementioned reason, and were also fond of acquiring the name
of pious Princes, by bestowing liberal Presents out of other Men's Possessions.
For it was in those Days a common Custom, that Men of all degrees made it their
Business to outdo one another in Liberality toward the Clergy. Nay, the
Princes used to grant them these Possessions without any encumbrances, that
thereby the Ecclesiastics might be sure to enjoy free possession of what they
had bestowed upon them. These extravagant Donations were none of the least
Causes why the Clergy afterward did labor with so much vehemence to withdraw
themselves from the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrates, as fearing that
these extravagant Donations and Grants might be recalled and declared void by
their Successors. Wherefore it has been always a Maxim of Wise Men. that
Princes by granting extravagant Privileges and Gifts, made their Subjects
rather Jealous than Friends; since those who have obtained them, living always
in fear that the same either in part or wholly, may be taken away again, employ
all means so to establish themselves as to be in a capacity to maintain
themselves therein in spite of the Prince. Those Learned Men who are of an
impartial Judgment, take it for granted, that the Pope did pretend to exercise
a Sovereign Power over these Countries granted to him by the French Kings, but
that the People refused the same, as being for maintaining their Liberty; and
thinking it very odd, that the Pope who was an Ecclesiastical Person, should
pretend to be also a Worldly Prince. When therefore the Romans mutinied against
Pope Leo III. he was forced to seek for Assistance from Charles the Great, who
restored the Pope. But on the other hand, the Pope and People of Rome
proclaimed Charles Emperor, whereby he was put into possession of the
Sovereignty over that part of Italy, which formerly belonged to the
Jurisdiction of the Governors at Ravenna, and the other remnants of the
Western Empire; so that the Pope afterward enjoyed these Countries under the
Sovereign Jurisdiction of the Emperor, who therefore used to be called the
Patron and Defender of the Church, till the Reign of the Emperor Henry IV.

21. The Pope withdraws himself from the Obedience of the Emperors, and
establishes an Ecclesiastical Sovereignty.
But the Popes began at length to grow weary of the Imperial Protection,
because the Emperor's Consent was required in the Election of a Pope, and if
they were mutinous, the Emperors used to check them, and sometimes turn them
out of the Chair. To exempt themselves from this Power of the Emperors over
them, the Popes have for a long time together employed all their Cunning and
Labor before they could obtain their Aim. They used to make it their constant
Business to raise intestine Commotions against the Emperors, sometimes in
Germany, sometimes in Italy, thereby to diminish their Power and Authority. The
Bishops, especially in Germany, were always very busy, as being dissatisfied
that they were dependent on the Emperors, who nominated the Bishops, and
therefore joined with the Pope to assist him in setting up the Ecclesiastical
Sovereignty. The Reign of the Emperor Henry IV. furnished them with an
opportunity to put in execution their Design, this Emperor by his Debaucheries
and ill management of Affairs, living in discontents and continual broils with
the Estates of Germany; and as soon as Gregory VII. who was before called
Hildebrand, a proud, resolute and obstinate Man got into the Chair, he began to
exclaim against the Emperor, that the granting of Church-Benefices did not
belong to him, since he made a Traffic with them, and sold them to all sorts
of People whom he installed before they had taken Holy Orders. Pope Gregory
excommunicates Hen IV.
And when the Emperor resolved to maintain his ancient Right and Title, he
excommunicated him, and stirred up the Bishops and the Estates of Germany
against him, who made him so much work, that he was obliged to resign his Right
of Constituting of Bishops. The Pope under this pretext, did not only intend to
exempt the Bishops from the Emperor's Jurisdiction, but the main point was to
make himself Sovereign over Italy, and to make all the other Princes submit to
the Pope's Authority. And some are of Opinion, that this Design might have been
put in execution, considering that Europe was at that time divided into so many
Principalities, and most of these Princes being not very Potent, might either
out of a Devotion, or to avoid falling under the Jurisdiction of more Potent
Princes, submit themselves under the Pope's protection and pay him Tribute. It
is therefore not improbable, that if three or four Popes had succeeded one
another, instructed with sufficient Capacity to cover their Design with the
Cloak of Holiness, and in the mean while to uphold the Interest of the People
against the Oppressions of their Princes, the Popes might have made themselves
absolute Sovereigns both in Temporal and Spiritual Affairs.

Neither did the Pope only pretend to free himself from the Emperor's
Jurisdiction over him, The Pope endeavors to subject the Emperor.
but also endeavored to make him his Subject; for he pretended to be his
Judge, he summoned him before him to make answer to the Complaints of his
Subjects, excommunicated him, and declared him to have forfeited his Right and
Title to the Empire. And though his Son, the Emperor Henry V. did endeavor to
recover what was forcibly taken away from his Father, and made Pope Paschal a
Prisoner, whom he forced to restore to him the right of Constituting of
Bishops, yet were the whole Clergy in Europe so dissatisfied hereat, and raised
such Commotions, 1122.
that at last he was obliged to resign the same again into the Pope's hands.

Much about the same time there were great Disputes concerning this Point in
England, Disputes in England about the investiture of Bishops.
which were composed in such a manner, that the King should not pretend to the
Power of investing of Bishops, but that these should do Homage to him. 1107.
The last of which the Pope was very unwilling to grant, who would fain have
had the Bishops to be quite independent of the King, which was the reason why
he expressly forbid the Bishops in France to follow this Example; but King Lewis
VI. and his Successors did maintain their Right with so high a Hand, that the
Popes were never able to establish their pretended Right in France. Neither did
the Popes think it advisable to fall out at once with the Emperor and France,
but that it would be more secure to have one at hand to uphold them against the
other; especially, the Popes were not so much for weakening of France, because
they were not so nearly concerned with that Kingdom, as for humbling the
Emperors that were Potent in Italy, and pretended to the Sovereignty over the
City of Rome. Neither was Germany so entirely united as France, and most
Princes of Europe being then very jealous of the Grandeur of the Empire, were
very willing to join with the Pope against the Emperors, under pretense of
upholding the Authority of the Holy Church and Papal Chair. It Is true, the two
Emperors Frederick I. and II. did afterward endeavor to restore the ancient
Imperial Right, but were not able to attain their aim, especially since Italy
was divided into the two Factions of the Guelfs and Gibellines, the first
whereof were for the Pope, the latter for the Emperor, which caused such a
Confusion in Italy, that the Emperors could never afterward reduce Italy to
an entire Obedience. And because after the death of the Emperor Frederick II.
the whole Empire was during that long vacancy of the Throne, put into great
Confusion and Disorders, the succeeding Emperors found so much work in
Germany, that they were not in a Condition to look after Italy, whereby the
Pope had sufficient leisure given him to make himself Sovereign both as to his
own Person, and over the Possessions belonging to the Church of Rome.

22. The Pope pr^tends to a Power over Princes even to depose them.
But the Pope not being contended to have attained this degree of Grandeur,
quickly set on foot another Doctrine, which was of far greater consequence,
viz. That the Pope had an indirect Power over Princes, that it belonged to him
in his own Right to take Care how they governed and managed their Affairs. For
though they did not expressly pretend in gross terms that Princes did depend on
them in Civil Affairs, yet they believed that the supreme Ecclesiastical Power
did entitle them to an Authority to judge concerning the Actions of Princes,
whether the same were good or bad, to admonish them, to correct them, and to
command what was fitting, and to forbid what was unfitting to be done. If
therefore Princes waged War against one another, the Pope pretended to have an
Authority to command a Truce to be made betwixt them, to bring their
Differences before him, and refer them to his Decision, not without threatenings
that he would not only excommunicate them in their Persons, but also forbid the
exercise of Divine Service and administration of the Sacraments throughout
their whole Kingdom. They also did believe it belonged to their Office to
obviate all public Scandals, to defend such as were oppressed, and to see
Justice done to all the World. It was from this pretension, that they received
the Complaints of all such as pretended to be oppressed; nay, they went
further, for they sometimes took information concerning the Injuries done by
Princes to their Subjects, and concerning some Impositions laid upon the
People, whereby the People thought themselves aggrieved, which they forbid to
be levied upon them under the penalty of Excommunication. Sometimes they used
to declare the Possessions of such as were excommunicated, forfeited, exposing
their Persons to danger, and releasing the Subjects from their Oaths of
Allegiance, under pretense that the Government of a Christian People ought not
to be trusted to the management of such as had rebelled against the Church.
This has been attempted against a great many Crowned Heads, and put in
execution against some of them.

This abominable pretension (as they persuade the ignorant) was founded upon
their fictitious Decretals upon which they have built their Canon Law, How they
color over this Power.
which grants to the Pope an unlimited Power over Christians, by virtue of
which, he may as the Common Father, send out his Commands to all Believers, and
admonish them concerning all such Matters as belong to Religion and their
Salvation, and in case of Disobedience, lay punishments upon them. For that the
Predecessors of Gregory VII. did not make use of this Power (they say) was
because the preceding Emperors, either kept themselves within their bounds,
or else the Popes lived an ungodly Life. To give specious colors to these
pretensions, they made use of the Examples of Ambrose and Theodosius; they used
to relate how the Spanish Bishops had obliged King Wamba by way of penance to
lay down the Crown: As also, how the Bishops of France had deposed Lewis
Surnamed the Pious, who afterward could not recover his Crown without the
Consent and Authority of another Assembly of Bishops. They alleged for another
Example, how Fulco then Archbishop of Rheims had threatened Charles Surnamed
the Simple, to absolve his Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, if he made
an Alliance with the Normans, who were then Pagans. They supposed that it was
without question, that the Pope's Power did extend it self beyond that of all
other Bishops, since it was not limited by any thing, except by the express
Canons of Councils and Decrees of the Popes, wherein nothing was contained
against this Power of deposing of Kings; and (they say) it was not to be
supposed that they could have been forgetful of this point. And because they
had assumed a Power to give the Name and Title of a King to some who either
prompted by their Ambition or Superstition had begged the same from them, they
supposed that by the same Right, they might take away the Crown from such as
they esteemed unworthy of wearing it.

They also had forbid to marry within the seventh degree of Consanguinity, and
the fourth of Affinity, whereby they often met with an opportunity to be
troublesome to Princes: For because it seldom happened among those of so high a
Rank, but that one side or other was within one of these degrees, they stood in
continual fear lest the Pope should disturb their Negotiations, except they
humbly begged for a Dispensation; and in both cases the Popes knew how to make
their advantage of them. Lastly, the Popes having abundance of Business to
dispatch, did thereby draw the best and most refined Wits to their Courts, who
used to go thither to look for Employment, and to perfect themselves in the
great School of Europe. These were always for promoting the Pope's Interest and
Designs, from whom they expected their promotion; besides that, the whole
Clergy did adhere to him as to their supreme Head. Pope Boniface VIII. did
clearly give us to understand his meaning at the Jubilee kept in the year 1300.
when he appeared sometimes in the Habit of an Emperor, sometimes in that of a
Pope, and caused two Swords to be carried before him as the Ensigns of the
Ecclesiastical and Civil Power.

23. The Papal Authority opposed.
But the Popes could not long enjoy this unsufferable Usurpation in quiet, for
it was so often called in question, till they were obliged to draw in their
horns, and to make their pretensions a little more plausible. It Is true, in the
Business with the Emperors, the Henrys and the Fredericks, they got the upper
hand; nevertheless, they met betwixt while often times with very indifferent
entertainment, and such things were sometimes published against them as were
little to their Honor, and from whence it might easily be judged by those that
were impartial, that not the Glory of God, but their own Grandeur was the chief
aim of their undertaking. But when Boniface III. pretended to play the same
Game with Philip Surnamed the Handsome, King of France, he watched his
opportunity so well, and gave him such a blow, that the Pope felt the smart of
it. And to avoid the Scandal which the common People might take at these so
severe proceedings against the Pope, use was made of this pretext, that what
was done against his Person, was not intended against the Vicar of Jesus
Christ, but against a pernicious Person, who by unlawful means was got into the
Chair, and that a general Council ought to be called to free the Church from
his Oppressions.

But the ensuing Schisms have proved the most pernicious to the Popes
Authority, The Schisms much weakened their Power.
as also the double Elections which have been made at several times, when the
Cardinals being divided, set up two Popes at once, who used by turns to
excommunicate and revile one another, and to maintain themselves in the Chair,
were fain to flatter the Kings, and acknowledge that they were beholding to
them. This Division was an evident sign, that the Elections of these Popes had
not been guided by the Holy Spirit, but been influenced by some ill Designs and
Intrigues. Wherefore it was also the Opinion of the Wiser sort, that in such a
case, neither of them ought to be acknowledged as Pope, but that a new one
ought to be chosen, which was also put in execution at the Council of
Constance. The first Schism arose, according to my Opinion in the year 1134. or
as some will have it 1130. when after the death of Honorius II. Innocent II.
and Anacletus were both chosen Popes. And though the first had the greater party
on his side, yet did the King of Sicily and Duke of Aquitam, vigorously uphold
the latter; and his adherents did after his death choose another in his stead,
who called himself Victor, with whom Innocent made an agreement, so that he
voluntarily relinquished his pretension, and acknowledged him his Superior.
But after the death of Adrian IV. two Popes were again elected at one time,
viz. Alexander III. and Victor IV. To the first adhered France, England, and
Sicily; to the latter, the Emperor Frederick I. all Germany and the Clergy of
Rome And after his death, those of his party chosen three successive Popes, all
whom Alexander outlived. These used to make a common Trade to excommunicate
and revile one another, and each of them were fain to behave themselves toward
their Protectours, more like a Client than a Master. But much greater was the
Schism after the death of Gregory IX. when again two Popes were elected at
once, whereof one resided at Rome, the other at Avignon. This Schism lasted
through several successions, near the space of Forty Years; during which time,
both parties excommunicated one another very frequently, and committed great
Cruelties. France, Scotland, Castile, Savoy and Naples, were of the side of the
Pope that resided at Avignon, but all the rest of Christendom declared for the
other at Rome. Both parties took great pains to set out the great numbers of
Saints that were of their party, and what Miracles and Revelations were made
concerning their approbation. And both sides knew how to produce such Reasons,
that at last, there was no other remedy left them but to force both the
Anti-Popes to abdicate themselves at the Council of Constance, and to choose a
new one in their stead. The last Schism of all arose when the Council of Basil
having deposed Eugenius IV. 1433.
did in his stead elect Felix V. Pope, unto whom the former would not submit.
And these Dissentions were continued till after the death of Eugenius, when
Nicholas V. was chosen in his stead, unto whom Felix for quiet sake, did resign
the Chair upon very advantageous terms in the year 1488.

It is very easily to be imagined how these Divisions did expose to public
view the Secrets of these Fathers. Hence an occasion taken to bridle the Popes
Power by general Councils.
Since from hence an opportunity was taken to make use of the Assistance of the
Councils to bridle the Popes, and from the Popes to appeal to these which were
now made use of to terrify the Popes withal, whenever they pretended to
transgress their bounds. The Popes could the less refuse to acknowledge the
Power of the Councils at that time, because Gregory VII. himself after the
quarrel betwixt him and the Emperor was renewed, had proposed to call a
Council to be held in a place of Security, where both Friends and Foes, both
the Clergy and Laiety might meet, to judge whether he or the Emperor had broke
the Peace, and to concert Measures how to re-establish the same. Gelasius II.
who had Differences with Henry V. made the same Declaration, adding withal,
that he would rest satisfied with what Judgment his Brothers the Bishops should
give who were constituted Judges in the Church by God Almighty, and without
whom, he could not decide a Business of this nature. So Innocent III. had writ,
that he would not undertake to decide the Marriage Controversy betwixt Philip
Augustus and Engebourgh of Denmark without consulting a general Council; for if
he should attempt any such thing, he might thereby forfeit his Office and
Dignity. Which words seemed intimate, that a Pope for mismanagement might be
deposed. And when afterward these and the like words were made use of against
the Popes, it was then too late to endeavor to make them pass for Compliments;
since it proves often dangerous to be too modest in matters of such
consequence. Wherefore the Council of Pisa in the year 1409. did depose the two
Anti-Popes, Benedict XII and Gregory XII. in whose stead they chose another,
viz. Alexander V. In the same manner the Council of Constance did not only
confirm the deposition of these two Popes, but also turned out John XXIV. who
was made Pope after the death of Alexander V. In the same manner the Council of
Basil did with Eugenius IV. and besides this made a Decree that neither at the
Court of Rome, neither in other places any money should be taken for the
dispatches of Ecclesiastical Affairs. All which as it shook the very Foundation
of the Papal Chair, so it was not to be admired that the Popes were very averse
afterward to call the Council of Trent, and were forced to make use of all
their cunning, that nothing might pass there to the prejudice of their
Grandeur, and that since that time they have bid farewell to Councils for ever.

. Concerning the Seat of the Popes being transferred to Avignon.
24. Among other divisions, this has proved very prejudicial (as it seems) to
the Authority of the Popes, that Clement V. did transfer the Papal Chair from
Rome to Avignon, as I suppose, upon instigation of Philip Surnamed the Handsome,
King of France, who having had great differences with Boniface VIII. was
Excommunicated by him. To render this ineffectual, he thought it the most
proper way if the Pope resided in France, and that thereby the like would be
prevented for the future; since it was very probable that the greatest part of
the Cardinals hereafter would be taken out of the French Nation. The Popes made
this City their constant place of Residence for seventy years together, not to
mention that some of the Anti-Popes also did Reside there. This changing of the
Seat carried along with it several inconveniences, which proved very
prejudicial to the Ecclesiastical Monarchy. For the Pope's Authority was among
other things also founded upon this belief, that S. Peter had been at Rome, and
by his presence had Communicated a particular Prerogative and Holiness to that
Chair, and whether the same could be transferred to Avignon seemed somewhat
doubtful to a great many; besides this, the Pope was then for the most part
obliged to comply with France, and to live as it were at the Discretion of the
French Kings. Tho also the French, who then thought they had a great Catch,
have since complained, that they got little else by the presence of the Roman
Court than Simony, and another abominable Vice not fit to be named. Besides
this the Court of Rome being then kept among Strangers, as it were, out of its
Natural Element its Faults were the sooner discovered, and the whole the more
despised. This removal also of the Court of Rome proved very prejudicial to the
Revenue of the Church in Italy. For after the Authority of the Emperors in
Italy came to decay, each State was for living free, and being Sovereign
itself, and the Factions of the Guelfs and Gibellines caused most horrid
distractions. And the Authority of the Pope being vanished by his absence, they
made bold with the Church Possessions. Most Cities of the Ecclesiastical State
upon the persuasions of the Florentines had sent away the Popes Legates, and
acknowledged no Sovereign. The Emperor Lewis, Surnamed the Bavarian, who was at
Enmity with the Pope, but in great esteem among the Inhabitants of the
Ecclesiastical State, did pretend to the Sovereignty over the same, as being a
Fief of the Empire, which he granted to such as upheld his Party against the
Pope. The Patrimony of the Church was then but very slender, and tho the Popes
recovered part of it afterward, they were obliged to leave most in Possession
of what they had got. But the City of Rome was nevertheless at last forced to
submit to the Popes power, which it had resisted so long, when Boniface IX. in
the year 1393. put on the Bridle, by building the Castle of S. Angelo. And
Alexander VI. was the chief cause that the Ecclesiastical State was reduced
under the Obedience of the Popes. This Pope had a Natural Son, whose name was
Caesar Borgia, but who commonly is called Duke of Valence, from the Dukedom of
Valence, which he got with his Lady Charlotte d' Albret. The Pope being very
ambitious to make this his Son a great Prince in Italy, proposed this expedient
to him, that he must drive out these petty Lords, which were then in Possession
of the Ecclesiastical State, and when he had made himself Master of these
places, he would confirm him in the Possession of them for ever. He succeeded
very well in this Enterprise, having made away with most of these petty Lords,
some by Force, some by Treachery; for he used to stick at nothing, alleging,
that whatever he did could not be done amiss, since he had received his
Commission from his Father, who was endowed with the Holy Ghost. And being
reduced to the utmost want of money, wherewith to pay his Soldiers, he and his
Father agreed to Poison the richest Cardinals at a Feast intended for that
purpose; some of whom they also knew to be averse to their Designs. But the
Servant who had the management of the business having out of carelessness filled
the Pope and his Son a Cup out of the Poisoned Flasks, the Father died
immediately, the Son narrowly escaping by the help of some Sudorificks. And not
being able so to influence the next Election, as to get one chosen fit for his
purpose, the whole design of Caesar Borgia came to nothing. Tho after the death
of Pius III. who Sat but a few Weeks in the Papal Chair, Julius III. a most
mortal Enemy of Borgia was chosen in his stead, who having taken into his
Possession all what he had got before, banished him out of the Country. Neither
did this Pope rest satisfied, till he had recovered all what formerly belonged
to the Church, (except Ferrara which was not reunited with the Papal Chair,
till about the latter end of the last Age, when the Legitimate Race of the
Dukes of Este was extinct. This Pope also prevented the French from becoming
Masters of Italy.

. Luther gives a great blow to the Grandeur of the Pope.
25. But when the Ecclesiastical Monarchy seemed to be come to the very Pinnacle
of its Grandeur, when all the Western parts were either in Communion with, or
in Obedience to the Church of Rome, except some few Remnants of the Waldenses
in France, and of the Hussites in Bohemia, and when just the differences arisen
betwixt Pope Julius II. and Lewis XII. which easily might have occasioned
another Schism, were after the death of the first happily Composed by Leo X.
and all the complaints against the Ambition of the Court of Rome were almost
extinguished, there was such a Revolt made from the Chair of Rome, first raised
upon a very indifferent occasion, that a great part of Europe withdrew itself
from the Obedience of the Pope, who was thereby put in danger of losing all. We
will in this, as we have done in all other matters, only relate how far human
Counsels and helps were concerned therein. For the hidden Counsels and Works of
God Almighty, ought in our judgment rather to be received with admiration and a
submission, than to be dived into with presumption. And what Tacitus says, in a
certain place, may conveniently be applied here: Abdi^'s numinis sensus
exquirere illicitum, anceps, nec ideo assequare, i. e. To search into the
hidden designs of God is unlawful, uncertain, nor are they to be penetrated by
us.

Pope Leo of the House of de Medicis was an affable, The Virtues and Faults of
Leo.
and magnificent Man, very liberal toward all honest and learned Men, who
might have made a very good Pope, if he had but had an indifferent knowledge of
Religion, and an inclination to Piety, whereas he was very careless of both. He
having lived very splendidly, and by his Liberality and Magnificence exhausted
the Apostolical Chamber, and not being acquainted with the Arts of acquiring
Riches, made use of the Cardinal Laurence Puccius, who at last, when all the
other Gold Mines were emptied, proposed the way of raising money by Indulgences.
These Indulgences were therefore sent abroad all over Christendom, both for the
dead and the living, Eggs, Milk, and the like were allowed to be eaten on fast
days. The several sums of money thereby to be raised, were beforehand assigned
to certain uses; All what was to be Collected in Saxony and thereabout, as far
as to the Sea side, having been granted to Magdalen the Pope's Sister; She to
make the best of the Pope's Grant, had committed the whole management of her
share to one Arcimbold a Bishop by his Title and Coat; but who was most
experienced in all the Genoese Tricks of Merchandising. He again employed such
as did proffer the most, and had no other prospect than the getting of money. It
had been formerly a Custom in Saxony that the Hermits of the Order of S. Austin
used to proclaim the Indulgences. But Arcimbold's Commissioners, did not think
fit to trust them at this time, as knowing them to be expert in that Trade, and
fearing that they might not deal fairly with them, or at least that they might
not bring in more money than used to be gathered at other times. They chose
therefore the Dominicans to Preach up the Indulgences, which the Austin Friars
took very ill, as being thereby defrauded of their Authority, Right and Profit.
The Dominicans in the mean while, to show themselves well qualified for this
new Employment, did magnify their Ware to that extravagant degree, that their
Auditors were extremely scandalized at it; especially since the Commissioners
lived in continual debaucheries, and spent with great infamy, what the poor
Country Fellows spared out of their Bellies, to redeem their sins. This obliged
Luther, Luther opposes Indulgences.
a Friar of the Hermits Order of S. Austin, to oppose these impudent Merchants
of Indulgences; and having duly weighed the matter with himself, he in the
year 1517. did affix 95. Theses concerning this Point at Wittenbergh, and John
Tezel, a Dominican Friar, published some other Theses in opposition to those,
at Franckfort. Thus the Dispute having been set on foot, each of them began to
enlarge himself upon the abovementioned Theses. But Luther having upon his side
both Reason and Scripture, his Adversary had nothing to allege for himself,
but the Authority of the Pope and the Church. Wherefore Luther was obliged to
make an enquiry, Afterward the Popes Power.
upon what Foundation the Authority of the Pope was built, and in what
condition the Church was at that time; which led him by degrees unto the
discovery of the Errors and Abuses, which were crept into the Church, and to an
invective against the Impostures, and scandalous lives of the Monks and
Priests, and that it was a duty incumbent upon the Magistrates to abolish these
Abuses. And to this purpose, as also to oblige the Magistrates to uphold his
Doctrine, he spoke very magnificently concerning the Nature and Grandeur of the
Civil Power, which the Priests hitherto had represented as despicable. By which
means he at first got a great Party, and his Doctrine was spread abroad every
where.

. The Circumstances of these times.
26. But that we may the better understand the Reason, why a Poor Friar was
able to give such a blow to the Chair of Rome, we must, next to the Supreme
Direction of God Almighty, consider the circumstances of these times, and what
disposition there was at that juncture of time in the minds of the People in
General. First then, Luther's Propositions concerning the Indulgences were very
good and reasonable, and a great many Divines, which afterward opposed his
Doctrine, were at first of his side, as were also some Cardinals, and George
Duke of Saxony himself. His Adversaries were so perverse, that every body
lamented their folly and perverseness. Neither was it at first in the least
suspected, that things would go so far as they did. Luther himself had at first
not the least thoughts of falling off from the Pope. The Emperor Maximilian had
no aversion to the Doctrine of Luther, and it is credibly related, that, when
he first heard of him, he did say; that this Friar ought to be kept safe, since
good use might be made of him. Some Monks only, and these Commissioners, who
were likely to be the losers by it, did make such a clamor, and raised such
tumults by blowing up the Coals, that this small Spark broke out into a great
Flame. Whole Christendom was also in a miserable condition, it being quite
overwhelmed with Ceremonies; the perverse Monks, did what they pleased, and had
entangled tender Consciences in their Snares. All Divinity was turned into
Sophistry New Doctrines and Propositions were broached, without any regard, how
they ought to be proved and maintained. And the whole Clergy of all degrees had
rendered their Lives and Conversations odious and despised to the World. The
late Popes Alexander VI. and Julius II. had been infamous for their Pride,
Treachery, turbulent Spirit, and other such like Vices, as were very ill
becoming Ecclesiastical persons. Such Bishops as were fit for something had
quite entangled themselves in worldly business; a great many of them led a most
scandalous Life, and were more expert in Hunting, than skilled in the Bible.
The Priests and Monks were over Head and Ears in Ignorance, and scandalized the
Common People by their Debaucheries, and their Avarice was grown unsupportable
to every body.

Besides all this, The Ignorance of Luther's Adversaries.
those who first pretended to oppose Luther, were a sort of simple, miserable,
and some of them debauched wretches; these, when they saw Luther maintain his
Arguments in a manner which was not common at that time, were soon confounded
and put to a nonplus, not knowing where to begin or to end. It Is true, in
former Ages also the Clergy had not been free from Vices, but the Ignorance of
those barbarous times had served them for a Cloak. But after Europe began to be
restored to its flourishing condition, and all sorts of Learning began to
dispel the former darkness, it was then that these abominable Spots became more
conspicuous to the Eyes of the World. As the ignorant Priests and Monks, who
could not bear the glance of this bright shining Light, were stark mad at those
who had restored Learning to Europe, and did them all the mischief they could,
and when they found themselves worsted by them, used to make a Point of
Religion of their different Disputes, and to accuse those of Heresy that were
more Learned than themselves: so these used to expose their folly, and as much
as in them lay to discover their Ignorance to the World. 'Twas upon this
account, the impudent Monks picked a quarrel with John Reuchlin, whom they fain
would have made a Heretic; from whence that learned Gentleman Vlrick van
Hutten (if I remember right) took an opportunity to expose them most miserably
in Epistolis obscurorum virorum. Whilst the War betwixt the Lovers and the
Persecutors of Learning was carried on with great heat on both sides, Luther's
Doctrine appeared in the World. And because the Monks made it their business to
bring the most learned Men into the same Quarrel which they had against Luther,
in hopes to strike them both down at one blow, this proved the occasion that
most of the learned Men in Germany did actually side with Luther. Erasmus
favored Luther.


It is also undeniable that Erasmus of Rotterdam had a considerable share in
the Reformation, for he had before already discovered, and reprehended a great
many Abuses and Errors, he had rejected the School Divinity, and recommended
the reading of the Bible and Fathers: he had ridiculed the Barbarity and
Ignorance, which was upheld by the Monks, and approved at first Luther's Cause,
tho he always excepted against his violent and biting way of writing. His
silence alone proved very mischievous to Luther's Adversaries. For Erasmus
being then esteemed the most learned Divine of his Age, every body took his
silence for a kind of an approbation of Luther's Cause. And when he afterward
published his Treatise de libero Arbitrio, it made no great impression upon the
minds of the People, since it sufficiently appeared, that it was rather writ to
please others, than of his own inclination. Besides that this was not the main
Point in dispute, and Luther did refute sufficiently his Propositions.

The Princes and Estates of Germany also having been sufficiently convinced,
The Princes of Germany dissatisfied with the Pope.
that heavy Impositions had been laid upon them of late under several pretenses
by the Court of Rome, for no other purpose but to maintain the Grandeur of the
Ecclesiastics at Rome, were extremely dissatisfied with the Pope. The general
fear which was then in Germany of an Invasion by the Turks, and the differences
arisen betwixt Charles V. Francis I. and Henry VIII. did greatly promote the
Reformation, since there was but little time for to think much of these
Disputes. Some are of Opinion, that Charles V. did connive at the spreading of
the Doctrine of Luther throughout Germany, hoping by these Divisions to get an
opportunity to suppress the ancient Liberty of the Estates, and to make himself
Sovereign over Germany. For else (they say) he might easily have quensh'd the
Fire at first, viz. in the year 1521. when he had Luther in his power at
Worms, where he might have secured him, which would have passed well enough
for a State Trick. But it is not so evident, whether, tho Luther had been
murdered against the Public Faith granted him, thereby his Doctrine would
have been rooted out; it is more probable that the Emperor, being then but
young, did not at that time foresee of what Consequence this business might
prove afterward; and that he did not think it advisable at that juncture of
time to break with the Elector of Saxony, who was then in great Authority.
Neither could he pretend at the same time, when he was engaged in a War against
France and the Turks, to attack the Princes of Germany that were then courted
by Francis, and who began to make Alliances with them. Yet it is certain that
under the pretense of Religion he afterward made War upon the Protestant
Estates of Germany, and intended by their ruin to open himself the way to the
Absolute Monarchy over Germany. And tho he was very succesful in the War
against the League made at Smalkald, nevertheless he could not accomplish his
projected design, because he stood in need of the assistance of the German
Princes against France, and the Turks, and to obtain the Imperial Crown for his
Son Philip. Nay Paul III. himself dreaded the growing greatness of the Emperor,
to that degree that he stirred up the French to oppose his prevailing Power,
and to prevent the entire ruin of the Protestants, allowed them to make use of
the Alliance with the Turks against the Emperor, who he feared intended a
thorough Reformation of the Court of Rome.

And besides all this the ill Conduct of the Pope did great mischief to the
Roman Catholic Party. The ill Conduct of Leo and Cardinal Cajetan.
For it was a grand mistake in Leo X. that he with so much violence declared
himself for these Merchants of Indulgences, and by his Bull of the 9. of
November in the year 1518. decided the Points in Controversy betwixt them,
whereby he cut of all hopes and means for an Accommodation. It would
questionless have been better for him to have stood Neuter, and to have imposed
silence upon both Parties, and in the mean while to have found out an expedient
to appease Luther. And Cardinal Cajetan did in the year 1519. act a very
imprudent Part at Augsburgh, when he dealt so very rudely with Luther, and
refused to accept of his Proposal, viz. that he would be silent, provided his
Adversaries would do the same. For by this refusal made to so resolute a Man,
whom he would have obliged to make a Recantation, he forced him to do his
utmost, and to fall directly upon the Pope himself. It would have been no
difficult matter to have granted him, that some corrupted Manners were crept
into the Church, to keep him from meddling with the Reformation of the
Doctrines. But on the contrary, the Pope making continual instances at the
Elector of Saxony's Court, to have Luther delivered up to him, Luther was
thereby obliged, to show the unreasonableness of the Pope, and to demonstrate
that his own Doctrine was built upon a very solid and good Foundation. And the
Pope rendered his Cause very suspicious, that he, when Luther appealed to a
Council, did by making a great many evasions protract to call one: From hence
it was evident that he did not trust much to the goodness of his Cause, if it
were to be debated before impartial Judges. It was also an unlucky hit for the
Pope, when he fell out with Henry VIII. who to spite the Pope, did open the
Door for the Protestant Religion to be settled in England. Likewise did those
of the House of Navarre propagate and protect the Protestant Religion in
France, out of a hatred, as some say, against the Pope, who had shown the way
to Ferdinand the Catholic into that Kingdom. Besides this there were abundance
of good Men of the Roman Catholic Religion, who were glad to see that Luther
did wash the scabby Heads of the Monks with so strong a Lie, as he did. So that
every thing seemed to concur to promote the Decree of God Almighty.

. Why the Doctrine of Luther was not spread farther.
27. But, why the Doctrine of Luther was not spread farther, and the
Ecclesiastical Monarchy was not quite overturned, several Reasons may be
alleged. First it is to be considered, that, in those States, where Luther's
Doctrine was received, the Supreme Direction in Ecclesiastical Affairs became
necessarily to be devolved on the Civil Magistrates. For if any one of these
States would have pretended to this Direction over the others of the same
Communion, these, who would have thought themselves no less capable, would
never have acknowledged the same. Which did not a little weaken their Union and
Strength, and was the main occasion, that they could not act so unanimously and
vigorously against the Pope, as he against them. It is also to be considered,
that this Reformation was not undertaken after mature deliberation, and as it
were on purpose to form or set up a new State; but this great Revolution
happened upon a sudden and unexpectedly, so that the whole Work was carried on
as occasion offered and by degrees. And tho Luther was the first, that gave the
Alarm, yet the rest did not think themselves obliged to follow precisely his
Opinion, but were also ambitious of having contributed something toward the
Reformation. This occasioned Disputes among themselves, Divisions among the
Protestants.
and because no body had an Authority among them, to decide these
Controversies, each Party persisted obstinately in their Opinion; from whence
arose such a Schism, that they became neglectful of the Common Enemy, and fell
upon one another. This furnished the Popish Party with a very probable
Argument, who cried out aloud the Heretics were fallen into Confusion among
themselves, as not knowing what to believe; and since they had left the Church
of Rome, they were brought into an endless Labyrinth. There were also a great
many of the Protestants, who under pretext of the Gospel did lead an impious
and scandalous life, The Licenciousness of some Protestants.
as if by the Liberty of the Gospel they had obtained a License to abandon
themselves to all sorts of Vices. This gave also occasion to the Papists to
defame the Doctrine of Luther; especially since he had with great severity
reproved the licenciousness of the Clergy, and had been generally applauded for
it. It also proved very mischievous to Luther's Doctrine, that immediately
after whole swarms of Fanatics, Anabaptists and the like appeared in the
World, and that the Boors in Germany run as it were mad, and made a most
dangerous Insurrection. When some Princes took this Point into Consideration,
the Doctrine of Luther began to become suspicious to them, as if thereby the
licenciousness of the Common People was Taught and Authorized; which they
looking upon as a greater Evil, than what oppression they were likely to suffer
from the Clergy, did with all their Power oppose the Doctrine of Luther.

There are some who will have it, The University of Paris.
that the University of Paris also had a share in this. For Luther having
persuaded himself, that this University was dissatisfied at Leo X. because he
had abolished the Pragmatick Sanction, concerning the Elections of Bishops; and
that therefore the Members thereof would be glad of an opportunity to revenge
themselves, he submitted his Disputation with Eckius to their Judgment; but
these gave their Judgment against him, and that in very hard words. The Kings
of Spain also did afterward consider that it was for their purpose to take
upon them the protection of the Roman Chair; wherefore they opposed the
Protestant Doctrine with all their might, and so powerfully assisted the League
in France, that Henry IV. if he would maintain his Crown, was obliged to leave
the Protestant Religion.

Some also have observed; Zwinglius and Calvin.
that when Zwinglius, and afterward Calvin, began all upon a sudden to
introduce too great a Reformation, not only as to the inferior but also the
Essential parts of the Church, and thereby fell from one extreme to another:
this proved a main obstacle to the increase of the Protestant Religion. For
Luther had hitherto made very little alteration in outward Matters. He had left
in the Churches the Ornaments, Clocks, Organs, Candles, and such like, he had
retained the greatest part of the Mass, but had added some Prayers in the
Native Tongue so that he was looked upon by most as a Reformer of the Abuses
only. But when it seemed that this Revolution was likely to become Universal,
Zwinglius appeared in Switzerland, as did Calvin afterward in France; these,
instead of following the footsteps of Luther, began to Preach against the
Presence of the Body of Christ in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, abolished
all sorts of Ceremonies and Ornaments, destroyed all Relics, broke the Altars
and Images, abolished all order of the Hierarchy, and despoiled Religion of all
such things as did most affect the Eyes and exterior Senses of the People.
This caused an aversion and animosity in the Common People against them, and
increased its Zeal for that Religion, which it had received from its Ancestors.
The Riches of the Church did partly promote Luther's Doctrine, a great many
having thereby taken an opportunity to possess themselves of of these ample
Revenues; nevertheless the same kept a great many Prelates under the obedience
of the Roman Chair, who, if they had not been afraid of losing their Rich
Benefices, would not have been so backward to side with Luther's Party. This
was manifestly to be seen in France, where both the Prelates and Common People
had made no great account of the Popes Authority before the Reformation, but
when they saw that those of the Reformed Religion were for breaking into their
Quarters, they agreed better afterward with the Court of Rome, and the
Commonalty was very Zealous against the Reformed Religion.

. The Popish Sovereignty recovered.
28. But besides this the Pope, as soon as his adherents had recovered
themselves from their first consternation, and his Enemies were fallen out among
themselves, has since settled his Affairs in such a manner, that the
Protestants in all likelihood will not only not be able to hurt him for the
future, but he also by degrees gets ground of them. For those things wherewith
Luther did upbraid them, and did the most mischief to them, they have either
quite abolished, or at least they are transacted in a more decent manner; Si
non cast, tamen caute: They have also made use of the same Weapons, wherewith
Luther did attack them. For the Popes now a days do not insult with so much
haughtiness over Princes, but treat them with more Civility and Lenity. It is
true, in the last Age Paul IV. behaved himself very impudently toward Spain,
and in our Age Paul V. did the same with Venice. But by the mediation of wiser
Heads, these Differences were Composed, before they could draw after them any
further ill Consequences; and the Popes ever since have been sufficiently
convinced, that these hotheaded proceedings are in no ways suitable to their
present condition. For Paul V. did quickly give fair words, when the French
Ambassador made him believe, that the Venetians had sent for some Ministers
from Geneva, to be instructed in the Principles of the Reformed Religion.
Neither have of late years sat such Debauchees in the Papal Chair as Alexander
VI. or such Martial Popes as Julius II. was, but of late they have endeavored
to carry on their Intreagues under hand, whilst they in outward appearance
pretend to be the Promoters and Mediators of Peace. That most scandalous Trade
of Indulgences, and that gross sort of Simony they have set aside, whilst they
make it their business to cajole the People out of their money, in a more
handsome manner.

The Bishops are now of another Stamp, The Bishops, Priests, and Monks, more
Regular and Learned than heretofore.
and carry it on with much more gravity than before the times of Luther, nay,
there are now among the Prelates eccellent and well qualified Men. The Ordinary
Priests and Monks also have been much Reformed in their Manners, and been
obliged to lay aside their former brutish Ignorance. Luther And his adherents
did at first gain mightily upon the People by their most excellent and learned
Sermons, and by their Books which they published thereby to excite the People
to Piety, Prayers, godly Meditations and Exercises. Both which the Papists have
imitated since, for among them now adays are to be found most excellent
Preachers, and very good Prayer-Books; so that the Protestant Clergy has now
not much to object against them, as to their ability or outward behavior. They
have also got a very good insight into all the Controverted Points, and have a
dosen or more Distinctions at hand against any Objection. For example: whereas
nothing seems more ridiculous, than that the Pope should grant his Indulgences
for twenty or thirty thousands years to come, they know how to give this a fine
color by these Distinctions of Intensive and Extensive, Potentialiter and
Actualiter, which relish strangely with young Students, and the ignorant
suppose them to be terms full of Mysteries. And because the Ignorance of the
Clergy, and the hatred conceived against Learning and learned Men, had proved
very prejudicial to the Popish Monarchy, the Popish Clergy, and especially the
Jesuits, have since altered their Course, and having taken upon them the
Education of Youth, have pretended to the Monopoly of Learning among the Roman
Catholics; so that since that time Learning has not only not been prejudicial
but very profitable to them.

Lastly, How they make Converts.
they now adays do not make use of Fire and Sword to propagate the Roman
Catholic Religion, but the chief Men among the Protestants are enticed to come
over to their Party with fair Words, great Promises, and actual Recompenses. If
any one who is well qualified will go over to their Party he may be sure to
make his Fortune, since the Wealth of their Church furnishes them with
sufficient Means to maintain such a Person, tho his Merits were not
extraordinary. Whereas on the contrary, if any one goes over from them to the
Protestants Religion, and either has not wherewithal to live, or else is
endowed with extraordinary qualifications, he must expect nothing but want. The
House of Austria most Zealous for Popery.
Last of all, those of the House of Austria have greatly promoted the Popish
Interest, when they drove the Protestants out of the Hereditary Countries in
Germany, out of the Kingdom of Bohemia and the Countries belonging thereunto,
and lately have done the same to the Protestants in Hungary, except to a very
few; or else have forced them to profess themselves Roman Catholics.

. The Temporal State of the Pope.
29. From what has been said it may easily be understood, in what manner this
Ecclesiastical Sovereignty has extended her Power over the Western parts of
Christendom. But thoroughly to understand the whole Structure, and Composure of
this Engine, and by what means it is sustained, it will not be improper to
consider the Pope in two different ways; first as a Prince in Italy, and
secondly as the spiritual Monarch over the Western Church. As to the first it
is to be observed, that the Pope may be reckoned a Potent Prince in Italy, but
is in no ways to be Compared with the other Princes in Europe. His Dominions.
The Countries under his Jurisdiction are the City of Rome, with her
Territories situated on both sides of the River Tyber; the Dukedom of Benevento
in the Kingdom of Naples, the Dukedoms of Spoleto, Vrbino and Ferrara, the
Marquisate of Ancona, several places in Tuscany, Romaniola or Flaminia, where
are situated Bologna and Ravenna. In France the Country of Avignon belongs to
him. Parma is a Fief of the Church, which Paul III. granted to his Son Lewis
Farnese. But since that time a Constitution has been made, that it shall not be
in the power of any Pope to Alienate any Fief, or to grant any of the Countries
belonging to the Church in Fief to any person whatsoever, to prevent the ruin
of the Ecclesiastic State, and, that, in case the Revenues from abroad should
fail, the Pope nevertheless might not want means to maintain himself and his
Court. The Kingdom of Naples is also a Fief of the Church, in acknowledgment of
which the King of Spain every year presents the Pope with a white Horse, and
some thousands of Ducats. What other Pretensions the Court of Rome makes are
out of date. For the rest, these Countries are indifferently Populous and
Fertile, having several Cities of Note, out of which the Pope receives a
Revenue of two Millions per annum. And the Popes Ministers take effectual care,
that their Subjects may not be overgrown in riches.

Perhaps there might be a considerable number of good Soldiers maintained out
of the Ecclesiastic Estate, His Forces.
but his Military strength is scarce worth taking notice of, since he makes use
of quite other means to preserve his State than other Princes do. He maintains
about twenty Galleys, which have their Station at Civita Vecchia. The chief
State maxim of the Pope, as a Temporal Prince is, that Peace may be preserved
in Italy, and that Italy may remain in the same State, as it is now, and
especially, that there may not be introduced any other Sovereign Power, which
might prove so formidable as to domineer over the rest. He must take great care
that the Turks may not get footing in Italy, and in case of an Invasion from
the Turks, not only Italy would be obliged to join against them, but also whole
Christendom must be called in to help to chase out these Barbarians, since no
Christian Prince would be contented that this delicious Country should fall
into their hands.

The Pope has nothing to fear more from the German Empire, How he stands with
relation to Germany, Spain and France.
as long as it remains upon the same Foundation. But if it should fall under
the Government of an Absolute Monarch, it is likely he might attempt to renew
the Ancient Pretensions. Spain and France are the two Kingdoms, which are most
formidable to the Pope. Against them the Pope makes use of this Maxim, that he
either sets them together by the Ears, or at least keeps up the Balance
betwixt them, that one may not become quite Master of the other. I am apt to
believe that the Pope would be glad with all his heart, that the Spaniards were
driven out of Italy, especially out of the Kingdom of Naples. But it is scarce
to be supposed, that he should be able to do it by his own strength, and to
make use of the French in this case, would be to fall out of the Drying Pan
into the Fire. Therefore all what the Pope can do, is, to take care, that Spain
may not encroach upon others in Italy; and there is no question but if the
Spaniards should attempt any such thing, France and all the other Italian
States would be ready to oppose their design. Neither can it be pleasing to the
Pope, if the King of France should get so much footing in Italy, as to be able
to sway Matters there according to his pleasure, which the Pope ought to
prevent with all his might. The Pope need not fear much from the other States
of Italy. For though some of them are under hand his Enemies, and dread his
Spiritual Power, some of them also have been chastised by the Court of Rome,
nevertheless, they must at least in outward appearance pay to the Pope a due
Veneration, neither dare they as much as devise to make any Conquests upon the
Pope. Notwithstanding this, they would not look with a good Eye upon the Pope,
if he should pretend to make any Conquests upon his Neighbors and enlarge his
Dominions; this refined Nation being extremely jealous, and desirous to keep up
the balance betwixt the States of Italy.

30. Particular Constitution of the Popish Monarchy as Spiritual.
But if we consider the Pope, secondly, as the Spiritual Monarch of Christendom
and the Vicar of Jesus Christ upon Earth, we meet in this Spiritual State with
such surprising and subtle pieces, that it must be confessed, that since the
beginning of the World, there has not been set up a more artificial Fabric
than the Popish Monarchy. It has required the more sagacity to erect and
sustain this Structure, the more the ends of this Sovereignty are quite
different from the ends of all other States in the World, and the more feeble
the Title appears upon which it is founded. For it is the main end of other
Commonwealths, to live in Security and Peace; for the maintaining of which, the
Subjects contribute a share out of their Goods and Possessions; nay, venture
their lives that they may sufficiently provide against the attempts of
malicious People, and live in security and without danger from their Enemies.
And besides this, it is the Duty of every Subject to take care that he may be
able to maintain himself out of his own Revenues, or by his Labor and
Industry. But the Popish Monarch's chief design is, that the Popes and the
Clergy may live in Plenty and Splendor in this World, all which is to be
maintained at the Cost and Charge of other People, who must be persuaded to
part with their Money by several shining Arguments and artificial Persuasions.
And whereas other States are fain to maintain their Forces and Garrisons with
great Expenses, the Pope on the contrary entertains his Militia without any
Charge, but rather with Profit to himself. And whereas it is also a State Maxim
among the wiser Princes, not to extend their Conquests too far, the Pope has no
occasion to imitate them in this point, since it is neither dangerous nor
troublesome to him, though he extends his Jurisdiction over the East and West
Indies. The Rights of Sovereignty are founded upon evident and undeniable
Principles and divine Institution, since without it, it is impossible that
mankind should live honestly, securely, commodiously and decently. But to find
out the same necessity and foundation of the Pope's Sovereign Authority, and to
demonstrate that as the Peace and Welfare of Mankind, cannot subsist without a
supreme Civil Power; so the Christian World cannot be without a supreme
Ecclesiastical Power, is in my mind impossible to be done. He that is unwilling
to believe this, let him find out a demonstrative proof and he will be the
miracle of the World. But if the Pope's Champions pretend to a positive Command
from God Almighty, they are obliged to prove by clear and evident proofs, and
that in all its clauses and determinations out of the Holy Scripture; that our
Savior when he sent his Disciples all over the World to preach the Christian
Faith, did give them full Power, not only to propagate the Christian Doctrine
among all Nations, and not to be dependent on any humane Power in their Office,
so as thereby to be hindered from preaching or forced to add or retrench any
thing from their Doctrine (which Power is unquestionable:) But also that they
had a Power granted them, to put into the Ministry of the Gospel, and that
without the Consent of the Magistrates (though the same professed the true
Christian Religion) as many and whom they pleased; that they also might grant
to these again full Power to increase their Order to such a number as they
should think fit themselves, without having any regard to the Civil Power or
Magistrates, whose Right and Title is thereby empaired. And because they cannot
live upon the Air, they must also have a Power granted them to seek out all
ways and means not only for their subsistence, but also for carrying on their
pride and extravagancies. They must also have a prerogative granted them of
being exempted from the Civil Jurisdiction both in their persons and such
possessions as they have acquired to themselves, though the same appertain to the
Revenues of the Commonwealth, are situated in the Territories, and enjoy the
protection of the Sovereign, who is to have no power to lay Taxes upon them, to
prescribe them limits or employ them to any other uses. They must also prove
that the supreme Direction over this Order as well concerning their Office as
their Possessions does belong to one of the same Order on whom the rest depend
as their Sovereign, and that the Civil Magistrates cannot pretend to any
superior Jurisdiction over them, though the Ecclesiastical Order either by its
number or misbehaviour should prove pernicious to the State, and though the State
could not be maintained without the Revenues of the Ecclesiastics, which must
not be employed for the benefit of the public without the Consent of him who
has the supreme Direction over this Order. Besides this, they are obliged also
to prove some other Hypotheses of theirs, which are Matter of Fact. As for
example, that our Savior Christ did grant the Spiritual Sovereignty over the
Church to St. Peter only, without allowing the least share to the rest of the
Apostles. That he did grant this Prerogative, not only to St. Peter for his own
person, but also that the same should be a perpetual Inheritance to such as
should succeed him in that place where he resided as Bishop. Besides this, they
must prove that St. Peter was actually Bishop of Rome, that he exercised the
same Power there, and granted the said Prerogative to no other place where he
used to preach besides Rome. And because these Points are so very hard to be
proved, the Popish Doctors are obliged to be very cautious in proposing these
Questions distinctly to the World, but rather treat of the same confusedly and
superficialy. It is rather their business to fill the Peoples Heads with
far-fetched Arguments which do not so nearly touch the point, viz. concerning
the great Promises, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the
Church, concerning the great Authority and Prosperity of the Church, her
Antiquity, the Succession of the Popes, the Holy Fathers and Councils, the
Authority of so many Ages and Nations, Miracles and such like stuff, fit for a
Declamation. They also make use of another expedient, viz. that if any one
dares to contradict these things, he is immediately without hearing his
reasons, branded with the Name of a Heretic, and esteemed as one that being a
novice and ignorant in his Trade, ought not to be so bold as to contradict his
Master, but deserves to be burnt.

31. Why the Popish Sovereignty was to be exercised in the Form of a Monarchy.
It is easily to be imagined, that this spiritual Sovereignty was of necessity
to be established in the form of a Monarchy, since it was in no ways suitable
to a Democratical or Aristocratical Government, not only by reason of several
inconveniences which would have attended it, but more especially, because that
so many different Heads as sway a Democratical and Aristocratical Government,
would even by the most severe Laws never have been kept in such a Union, but
that by raising of Factions and Dissensions they would have easily overturned a
Work which was built upon so slight a Foundation. But among the several sorts
of Monarchical Governments, they have chosen such a one as that by all the Art
of Men, there could not have been invented one more suitable to their purpose;
it being most certain that all the speculative Inventions of the most refined
Politicians, are not in the least to be compared to what may be met wital in
this Popish Monarchy. It Is true, some Princes have gained to themselves and
their Government a great Authority, by pretending to be the Offspring of the
Gods, and that they had laid the Foundation of their Government by the express
Command of the Gods and by their peculiar Approbation; wherefore they used to
be after their death placed in the number of the Gods, and were adored as such.
But the Pope has gone farther, and persuaded the People that he is the
Lieutenant of Jesus Christ, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth, and his
Vicar in the World, and that in a more exalted Sense than it is spoken of the
Magistrates, that they are Ministers of God's Justice upon Earth. For he
pretends that he has the Power of dispensing the Merits of Jesus Christ, and
that such as refuse to acknowledge this Prerogative, are not capable of
obtaining Salvation. And since there is nothing more powerful in this World to
induce People to a profound Veneration than the Divine Majesty, and no motive
more strong to enforce from them an obedience and an entire submission to all
sorts of hardship than the fear of God's wrath and eternal damnation; it is
evident that if this Point is once gained and the People thoroughly persuaded,
there needs no further proof of the rest of their Articles of Faith, than that
(...), the Pope has determined it so.

Besides this, Way it must be an elective Monarchy.
most Nations having esteemed an hereditary Government the most convenient and
least dangerous, have introduced that form into their States; but this form of
Government could not suite with the intention of this Spiritual Monarchy. For
in these States where the Crown is hereditary, it must of necessity sometimes
happen, that the same is devolved to Princes who are Minors; and it would be an
odd sight, that a Child that rides the Hobbyhorse, should be taken for the
Vicar of Christ, and that the Protector of Christendom shoul want a Tutor.
Neither is it to be supposed that young Princes could behave themselves so
gravely and wisely, as seems to be requisite for a Person of his station;
neither can it as much as be hoped, that a whole succession of Princes should
be inclinable to such a Function. In a word, an hereditary succession would
have made it the same with a temporal State, which could never have been
maintained long upon so awkward and slight a Foundation. For the great
Ministers themselves would have been for putting by the Pope, that they might
succeed in his stead; whereas these seeing they cannot possess themselves of
the Papacy by open force are now very obedient, in hopes that either they
themselves or at least their Friends may one time or another attain to this
Dignity by Election. Besides this, it might easily have happened, that in case
the Royal Family should have been extinguished, such Dissensions might have
arisen concerning the Succession, that the whole Frame of the State would
thereby have been disjointed.

It was also thought convenient this spiritual Sovereign should be obliged
never to marry, Why the Pope was to live in a State of Celibacy.
which seemed most suitable to the gravity of this Court, since a great train
of Ladies living in great splendor and plenty would have made such a figure,
as must needs appear but little suitable to excite others to a Holy Life and
Devotion. Wherefore it was the main design, by a fained hypocrisy to impose a
belief upon the People, as if the Court of Rome was so wholly taken up with
spiritual Affairs, that there was no room left for worldly Pleasures. It was
also reasonably supposed, that a Prince who had Wife and Children might
sometimes be led away to take more to heart the private Interest of his Family
than the public Good of the State, since there can scarce be any thing more
prevailing upon a Man, than the consideration of the welfare, and preservation
of Wife and Children. And what Alexander VI. and Paul III. did with their
Bastards, have been convincing Instances of this position to the Court of Rome.
It is possible that they also rook this into consideration, that if a Temporal
foreign Prince should obtain this Dignity, he would entail it upon his House,
which inconveniences are now avoided by the Obligation which is laid upon the
Pope never to marry.

The Conclave is also a most admirable Invention to bridle the immoderate
Ambition, The Conclave.
and prevent those Schisms, which used formerly miserably to afflict the Sea
and weaken the Authority of the Popes; besides that, thereby a long Vacancy of
the Chair is prevented, and by means of this Election, it is much easier to
pick out one that is fitly qualified to represent the great and artificial
Hypocrite, and afterward to make the People believe, that are ignorant of the
Intrigues of the Conclave, that it was by the particular providence of God
Almighty, that such a Person was chosen as was the most worthy to be God's
Vicar upon Earth. Thus much at least may be obtained by an Election, that such
a Person is chosen as is well versed in the Arts of Policy and their ambitious
Designs, and whose Age being above the folly and extravagancies of young Men,
may by his years and long experience appear more venerable in his Function.
What Qualifications are necessary for one that is to be chosen Pope.
It is also a very wise Ordinance concerning the Election of a Pope, that he is
to have two third parts of the Votes in the Conclave, which seems to have been
introduced, that the new Pope might not be displeasing to a great number of
Cardinals. Now a days it is a general maxim in the choice of a Pope, to elect
an Italian, which is not only done because they rather will bestow this Dignity
and Advantage upon a Native of Italy than upon a Foreigner, but also because
the security and preservation of the Papal Chair depends in a great measure on
the balance which is to be kept betwixt France and Spain, which is not to be
expected from a French of Spanish Pope, who would quickly turn the Scale, and
by granting too great Prerogatives to his Countrymen, endeavor to exclude
others from the Papal Chair. They also choose commonly a Pope who is pretty
well in years, but very seldom a young one, that also others may be in hopes of
attaining the same Dignity, and that a young Pope during a long Regency may not
undertake to alter their Customs and Maxims, or to make his Family so Rich and
Potent and set up so many Creatures of his own, as thereby to entail the Papal
Chair upon his House. Besides that, in this station where the Pope need not to
go into the Field, there is more occasion for a grave ancient Man than a
vigorous young Person. It is also another Maxim among them, to take care that
he may not be too near a Kin to the deceased Pope, that the vacant
Church-Benefices may not fall into the Hands of one Family, and the new Pope
may be the sooner prevailed upon to amend the Faults of his Predecessor.
Lastly, They are commonly for choosing such a one as is neither too much
addicted to the Spanish nor the French Interest, yet that he be not hated by
either of these two parties. Wherefore it is a Custom among them, that both
these Crowns give in a List of such Cardinals as they would have excluded from
being elected Pope. Notwithstanding all this it often so happens, that one is
chosen Pope of whom no body thought before, when the Cardinals are tired out by
so many Intrigues, and are glad to get out of the Conclave. It is also often
observed, that a Pope proves quite another Man after he is come to sit in the
Chair than he was before, when yet a Cardinal. The Pope at his entering upon the
Government, is not tied to any certain Rules or Capitulations, since it would
seem very unbecoming to control by humane Laws and Contracts the Power of him
who is pretended to be endowed with the Holy Ghost.

But the College of the Cardinals is as it were the standing Council of the
Ecclesiastical State, College of the Cardinals.
in like manner as the Chapters of the Cathedrals are to the Bishops in
Germany. With those the Pope advises concerning Matters of the greatest moment;
nevertheless it often happens that the Popes and their Nephews make but little
account of their Advice, but act as they please. The chief Prerogative of the
Cardinals consists chiefly in that they have the Power of choosing a Pope, and
that out of their own Body, they being supposed to be the next to him, and best
acquainted with the Affairs of the Court of Rome, which is one necessary
qualification of a Pope. Their ordinary number is Threescore and Ten, which is
seldom complete. They now adays are treated by the Title of your Eminency,
according to a Decree of Pope Urban VIII. whereas they were formerly called
Most Illustrious (Illustrissimi) which Title was grown very common in Italy.
And because the Cardinals had got a new Title, the Princes of Italy pretended
also to be treated by the Title of your Highness (Altazza) whereas formerly
they were very well satisfied with the Title of your Excellency (Excellenza.)
The Election of the Cardinals depends absolutely on the Pope's pleasure, who
nevertheless, constantly takes notice of such as are recommended to that
Dignity by France, Spain and other Princes. The Parasites of the Court of Rome,
are not ashamed to maintain, that the Cardinal's Cap is equal in Dignity to a
Crowned Head, and to this day they pretend to have the precedence before the
Electors of the Empire.

Ever since the time of Pope Sixtus IV. The Popes enrich their Kindred.
viz. since the Year 1471. the Popes have made it their Business to enrich
their Families out of the Church Revenues, of which there are very remarkable
Instances. For it is related that Sixtus V. during his Regency of five Years,
did bestow upon his Family above three Millions of Ducats; and Gregory XV. had
in two Years and three Months, got together the value of three Millions in
Lands, without reckoning what he left in ready Money. It is reported of the
House of the Barbarini's, that at the death of Urban VIII. they were possessed
of 227 Offices and Church-Benefices, most of them reckoned at three, five,
eight and ten Thousand Seudi a piece, whereby it is said, they got together a
Treasure of 30 Millions of Scudi. This has been represented as a very
scandalous thing by some, but if duly considered, it is a great folly to
suppose, that since the main intention of the Popish Sovereignty is to enrich
the Clergy, the Popes should stifle their natural inclination toward their
Kindred, and not make Hay whilst the Sun shines. This is rather to be looked
upon as a common Infirmity, that Favorites and others whilst they are
Fortunate are envied by others, who are vexed because Fortune is not so
favorable to them. Besides that, the Revenues of the Church are so great, that
the Popes since they need not entertain any considerable Army, scarce know how
to employ them better.

Since the time of Pope Urban VIII. a Custom has been introduced, to make one
of the Pope's Nephews Chief Minister of the Ecclesiastical State, whom they
call Cardinal Patroon (Cardinal Patrono.) Among other Reasons, Cardinal Patroon.
why the Pope commits the management of Affairs to one of his Nephews, this is
alleged for one; that by reason of the nearness of Blood, he ought to be
preferred before others, and that by so doing, the Pope's Person is better
secured against any attempts which are sooner made upon his Life than of other
hereditary Princes, whose death their Successors are able to revenge. How
fearful the Popes are of Poison, may be judged from thence, that as often as
the Pope receives the Sacrament, his Chaplain who is to administer the Bread
and Wine, is obliged to taste of both before the the Pope. It is also
pretended, that by the Ministry of the Nephews, this Advantage is obtained,
that the other Ministers and Governors have not so much opportunity to enrich
themselves, and to put one another out of place, which is the common Custom in
Elective States. For their Nephews are few in number, and therefore sooner to
be satisfied; neither will they easily suffer that others should enrich
themselves, since they are sensible that all the hatred falls upon themselves.
They are also very serviceable to the Pope, in that they more freely can
disclose the Interests of the several Princes to him, than other Ministers who
are not so nearly allied to him, and that they are fain to be more circumspect
in their management of Affairs, for fear, left they may one time or another be
called to an account; for which reason it is their Business, so to oblige one
Prince or another, that they may upon all occasions be sure of his Protection.
Besides, that by their Assistance, Affairs may be carried on with much more
secrecy than otherwise. And if the Pope were destitute of their Counsel, he
would be obliged to have recourse to the Cardinals, who most commonly are very
partial, being most of them engaged to foreign Princes either by Pensions or
Benefices.

32. Concerning the Celibacy of the Popish Clergy.
The Subjects of this Ecclesiastical Monarchy may commodiously be divided into
two several sorts; the first comprehends the whole Clergy, the second all the
rest of Christendom, as far as the same professes the Roman Catholic Religion,
which is commonly called the Laiety. The first may be compared to the standing
Army of a Prince, who thereby manitains his Conquests; the rest are to be
deemed as Subjects that are Tributaries to the Prince, and are obliged to
maintain those standing Forces at their Charge. The first have this particular
Obligation upon them, that they must abstain from Marriage. This is done under
pretense of a special Holiness, and that thereby they may be the more fit to
perform their Duty without any hinderance; but the true reason is, that they
should not prefer the Interest and Welfare of their Wife and Children, before
that of the Church, and in consideration thereof, not side with those Princes
under whose Jurisdiction they live, or that they should not enrich their
Children with the Revenues of the Church, but be the more ready upon all
occasions to execu^e the Pope's Will, especially against such Princes, under
whose Protection they live. For since Wife and Children are esteemed the
dearest Pledges, not to be left to the discretion of an enraged Enemy, they
could the easier despise the anger of their Princes, if they had no other Care
to take but for themselves, a single Man not needing to fear a livelihood in
any place whatever. And it has been the main endeavors of the Popes to exempt
the Clergy by all means from the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrates, and to
make them only dependent on himself. Besides this, the avaricious Clergy would
not have made so good a Harvest if it had been taken for granted among the
People, that the same was collected for their Wife and Children, whereas now it
is pretended, that they receive not for themselves, but for the maintenance of
the Church. But those who have been so busy to force Celibacy upon the Clergy,
were forgetful in not prescribing them at the same time a Recipe against
Incontinency, and which they seem to stand in great need of. How vast a number
there is of this sort of People, Their Number.
may be best judged out of what is related of Pope Paul IV. who used to brag,
that he had 228000 Parishes, and 44000 Monasteries under his Jurisdiction, if
he did not mistake in his account, especially as to the Monasteries, The Clergy
may again be subdivided into two sorts, viz. those who are bare Priests and
Ecclesiastics, and those who have engaged themselves by a particular Vow, viz.
the Monks and Jesuits who are to be esteemed the Pope's pretorian Bands. They
receive for their pay Honors and Dignities, great Revenues, a quiet Life,
without any great Labor, and live always near a good Kitchen; but those who
have addicted themselves to a more strict Order, are fed with the vain belief
of Holiness, great Merits and particular Prerogatives above others.

33. The Popish Doctrine suited to the S^^e.
The Pope makes use of this Artifice to keep the Laiety in Obedience, that he
persuades them to receive and consider his Ecclesiastical Troops, as the Chief
Promoters of their Salvation, and Masters over their Consciences; which serves
like a Bridle to lead and turn them about according to the Will of the Clergy.
And that every thing may be accommodated to the Interest of this Spiritual
Monarchy, several Articles of the Christian Religion have been by degrees
stretched or patched up with new Additions; and any one that will duly weigh
these Matters wherein they differ with their Adversaries, will soon find that
in those points there is generally a mixture of Interest as to the Authority,
Power and Revenues of the Clergy. Among those in the first place is to be
reckoned the Doctrine concerning the Authority and Power of the Pope, whereby
they pretend to set him above Councils, and make him Infallible; which point is
stretched to the utmost by the Jesuits, because, if that stands fast, all the
rest is soon proved. As that of the Pop^^s Power.
Wherefore, what has been taught formerly, and if I am not mistaken, is taught
even to this Day, by the Doctors of the Sorbon, viz. that the Councils are
equal to, or rather above the Pope, is destructive to the very fundamental
Constitution of the Popish Monarchy, since this Doctrine smells strongly of a
Democracy, which is directly contrary to a Monarchy. And it is not easily to be
reconciled how the Pope who pretends to have such great Prerogatives above all
others, should be subject to the Censure of his Cretures and Vassals. For as
they will have it, whatsoever either the Holy Scripture, or the ancient Fathers
have attributed to the Church, ought altogether to be applied to the Pope, in
like manner, as what is spoken of a whole Kingdom, is commonly to be understood
of the King.

The Laiety has been debarred from reading the Holy Scripture, The prohibition
of the Laietya reading the Scripturea.
by which means not only the Authority of the Clergy is maintained among the
People, as if the Priests were the only Men that have a privilege to approach
to the Divine Oracles; but also the Laiety is thereby prevented from finding
out those points in the Scripture which are repugnant to the Interest of the
Clergy: For if the People should once get a true Understanding of the
Scripture, they would not be so forward to follow so blindly the Instructions
of the Priests. They also by this means prevent the Laiety from diving too
deeply into Divinity, which they pretend belongs only to the Clergy; and for
this reason it is that they attribute the Power of explaining the Scripture to
the Pope only, that nothing may be brought to light, which may in any ways be
prejudicial to the spiritual Monarchy. For the same reason the Pope pretends to
have the sole Authority of deciding all Controversies whatsoever.

It is also given out among the People, Traditions.
that the Holy Scripture is imperfect, which must be explained by ancient
Traditions; whereby they gain this point* that if they invent any Doctrine for
the Interest of the spiritual State, whereof there is not the least footsteps
to be found in the Holy Scripture, they without any other proof, may only have
recourse to the ancient Traditions.

The distinction betwixt Venial and Mortal Sins, Venial and Mortal Sins.
as also what is alleged de casibus reservatis, is barely invented for the
benefit of the Clergy. That infinite number of Books of Confession, enough to
freight whole Fleets withal, is not published with an intention to correct
Vices, but that by laying a Tax upon the same, the Clergy may the better be
able to maintain their Grandeur, and satisfy their Avarice. The most
comfortable Doctrine of remission of Sins, has wholly been accommodated to the
Interest of the Clergy. Penance*
For, because it would not have turned to the profit of the Clergy, if every
one who truly repented should obtain remission of his Sins, only by Faith in
the Merits of Christ; it has been the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that it
was an essential piece of penitence, and the means to obtain forgiveness of
Sins, if a most exact and precise account of every individual Sin committed was
given to the Priest. By which means, they not only keep the People under their
Devotion, and make such impressions upon them as are fitting for their purpose;
but they also come thereby to the knowledge of all Secrets, Counsels, Designs
and Inclinations of the People, which they make good use of for their benefit;
notwithstanding, that they are under an obligation not to reveal any thing that
is told them by way of Confession; for, else it would be impossible for them to
persuade the People to act against the natural Inclination of all Mankind. The
Priest has also a Power to command works of satisfaction to be done, whereby he
commonly has his good share. For though certain Prayers, Pilgrimages, Fasts,
Flagellations and the like, are often imposed upon them for Penances, yet they
also very often condemn some, and especially the richer sort in a good sum of
Money, to be given instead of a Penance to a certain Monastery, Church or the
Poor, among whom are the Mendicant-Fryars. These honest Fellows call themselves
minimos fratrum, according to the 25. Chap. of St. Matthew, that they may have
a fair shining pretense to fill their Purses. For by this Interpretation, the
Christains have got this benefit, that they are obliged to feed and maintain
100000 lazy, idle Fellows. Besides this, the first sort of Penance may be
redeemed with Money, if you think it too hard to be performed. And who that is
wealthy, would not be civil and liberal toward his Father-Confessour, to
oblige him to a mitigation of the Penance or because he has already showed
himself favorable before?

Why good Works have been made meritorious and the means of obtaining Salvation
from God Almighty, Merit of good Works.
is easily to be guessed. For when they were to give a definition of good
Works, they were sure to put in the first place, that the Pople ought to be
liberal toward the Clergy, Churches and Monasteries, and to perform every
thing which is commanded them by the Pope and his adherents, though never so full
of Superstition and Hypocrisy. Neither must this be forgot, that they also have
taught, that the Monks are not only able to perform good Works sufficient for
themselves, but that also they have an overplus of Merits which they can fell
to the Laiety. And out of this overplus, they have laid up an inexhaustible
store very profitable to the Clergy, which costs them nothing, which does not
grow musty nor ever decays, and which cannot be returned upon their hands, when
the Buyer finds out the Cheat.

Their Religious Exercises are so full of Ceremonies, Ceremonies,
so many superfluous Feasts and Processions are instituted so many Chapels are
Altars erected only to employ so great a number of Clergymen, who else would
appear like so many idle Fellows, whereas now it turns all to their profit;
which is also the reason why they have increased the number of Sacraments of
seven, since they know that none of them can be administered, but the Priest
gets by it. The Mass without Communicants has been introduced and proclaimed a
Sacrifice both for the dead and the living, that they might have an opportunity
to put both the dead and the living under Contribution. For no body undertakes
any thing of moment, but he has a Mass sung first, for the good success of the
thing in hand. No body of wealth dies, but he orders a good store of Masses to
be sung for his Soul, all which brings grist to the Priest's Mill.

On the other hand, Half Communion.
after it once was become an abuse, that the Laiety did receive the Sacrament
without partaking of the Cup, it was made into a Law. And though the contrary was
very evident both by the Institution of Christ, and the practice of the Church
for a great many Centuries, yet did they persist with great obstinacy, because
it should not seem that the Clergy had committed an Error; and also that they
might have a Prerogative before the Laiety in this Sacrament. And to ridicule
the more impudently both God and Men, they give to the Laiety a Chalice which
is not consecrated, which in very despicable Terms they call the rinsing
Chalices, as People when they have eaten any uncleanly thing, use to rinse
their Mouths.

Marriage also was to be made a Sacrament, Marriage made a Sacrament.
though nothing is more absurd, that the Clergy might have an opportunity to draw
all matrimonial Causes under their Jurisdiction, which are often very
profitable, very various and of the greatest Consequence, since the welfare,
inheritance and succession of most People, nay, even of whole Kingdoms depend
thereon. This obliged Mary Queen of England to endeavor the re-establishment
of Popery in that Kingdom; for without the Pope's Authority, she must have
passed for a Bastard. And Philip III. King of Spain was among other reasons
obliged to the Pope, because he had given Dispensation to his Father to marry
his own Sister's Daughter, of whom Philip was born, which Marriage would not
easily have been approved by other Christians. There were also so many
prohibited degrees introduced on purpose that the Clergy might have frequent
opportunities to give Dispensations, whereby they know how to feather their
Nest. Extreme Unction.
By the Extreme Ointment the Priest takes an occasion to exhort the dying
people to leave Legacies for pious uses, which they commonly know how to apply
to the advantage of their own Order. Purgatory.
Purgatory was invented for no other purpose, but that the dying Man, who at
that time is not so greedy of worldly Goods, which he is to leave to others,
might be liberal toward the Clergymen, in hopes, by their intercession and a
good number of Masses to get the sooner out of this hot place. The Veneration
paid to the Relics, Relics* Prayers to Saints.
has also been very beneficial to the Clergy; these are employed, besides other
uses, to reward people of Quality, that have done great services to the Pope,
with a piece of an old Bone in lieu of a better present. The Adoration of the
Saints serves for a pretext to build the more Churches, institute more Feasts
and employ and feed a greater number of Priests. The power, which the Pope has
assumed of Canonization, gives him a considerable authority among the People,
as if it were his prerogative to bestow Dignities and Offices upon whom he
thinks fit, even in Heaven, and that God Almighty cannot but accept of such
Referendaries, as the Pope is pleased to represent to him. By this means he
makes himself Master of the Inclinations of the People though living in far
distant places, unto whom he proposes this as a Recompense of their Credulity
and Ambition, if they stick at nothing to promote his Interest. And ever since
this Superstition has taken root in Christendom, those who have been Canonized
have for the most part been Clergymen, who either by a new invented Hypocrisy,
or outward appearance of Holiness had made themselves famous in the World. Or
if by chance one Layman or another has attained to this Dignity, either he
himself, or at least those that interceeded for him, have been fain to deserve
very well of the Papal Chair. Not to mention here, in what manner they by
fictitious Miracles, several sorts of Images, Apparitions, Exorcisms,
Indulgences, Jubilees, prohibition of diverse sorts of Victuals, and such like
tricks used to fool the People out of their money.

. The Universities have promoted the Popish Sovereignty.
34. Next to what has been said, the Universities, which have partly been
Instituted by the Popes Authority, partly by other States, yet so that most of
them have been Confirmed by the Popes, who also have claimed the Supreme
Direction over the some, have been mainly instrumental in maintaining the
Popish Sovereignty. It is evident enough of what Consequence this Direction
must needs be to the Pope. For, since in the Universities Men are first imbued
with such Opinions, as they afterward are to make use of during their whole
Life, and instill them into others, the Universities, and Sciences there to be
taught were to be sure to be accommodated to the Popes Interest. Neither were
the Professors of Divinity here, who claimed the Precedence before all others,
the only Creatures of the Pope, but also the Professors of the Canon Law, who
were as busy as any to put his Decrees upon the World, and to maintain his
Authority. For the World may thank the Canon Law for the first Introduction of
those long Law Suits, which the Clergy pretended to belong to their
Jurisdiction, that by receiving of Bribes they might the sooner satisfy their
Avarice. The greatest-part of the Philosophers were also the Popes Slaves, and
if one or another attempted to investigate the true causes of Things, he was
sure to be kept under by all the rest. The Divinity and Philosophy which was
professed in these Universities were not taught with an intention to make the
young Students more learned and understanding, but that the ingenious by these
confused and idle terms might be diverted from thoroughly investigating those
matters which would have led them to the whole discovery of the Popish
Intreagues. For their Scholastic Divinity is not employed in searching and
explaining the Holy Scripture, but for the most part entangled in useless
questions, invented chiefly by Peter Lombard, Thomas Aquinas, Scotus, and the
other Patriarchs of Pedantry. And what they call Philosophy is nothing else but
a Collection of foolish Chimer's, empty Terms, and very bad Latin, the
knowledge of which is rather hurtful than profitable, if you have not been
better Instructed otherwise. So that all what they pretended to, was to take
care that the Sciences might not be fundamentally taught to the Students. With
these Trumperies the Universities were not only overrun during the former
barbarous times, but even continue to this very day; and tho most Sciences are
so much improved, the old Leaven is with great Industry preserved and
propagated: on the contrary all the solid Science, especially such, as are
Instrumental in discovering the Vulgar Errors of the World are suppressed.
Above all the rest, the most useful of all, Doctrine of Morality is much
misinterpreted and entangled in an endless Labyrinth, that the Fathers
Confessors may not want means to domineer over the Laymens Consciences, and to
entangle them with so many dubious and double meaning insinuations, that they
are thereby rendered incapable to examine and rule their Actions, according to
solid Principles, but are obliged to be guided blindfold according to the
pleasure of their Fathers Confessors.

. Why the Jesuits have taken upon them the Education of the Youth.
35. But, because Learning had given the main blow to the Pope, at the time of
Luther's Reformation, the Jesuits, who may well be called the Popes Guard du
Corpse, have afterward taken upon them the management of the Youth; for they
not only teach publicly in the Universities, but they have also engrossed to
themselves the Instruction of the Youth in the Schools, that they might have
all the opportunity so to guide and direct them in their Studies, that they
might not only not prove prejudicial, but rather advantageous to the Kingdom of
Darkness. For by this way of managing the Youth they have not only acquired
vast Riches and Authority to their Order, but also have been very instrumental
in maintaing the Popish Monarchy, which they are bound to do by a particlar Vow
above all the other Monks. They make it their business to imprint into the
tender minds of the Youth a Veneration for the Pope, and so to guide their
inclinations as they think it most profitable to the State of the Church. They
use the young people from their infancy to persist obstinately in their
conceived Opinions, and that no Reasons ought to prevail against them, whereby
they render them incapable of ever attaining the knowledge of Truth. They have
also an opportunity thoroughly to investigate and discover the Capacities and
Inclinations of their Disciples, which they make good use of to their
advantage, whenever these are employed in State Affairs. But such as they find
of an extraordinary Capacity or abounding in Wealth, they endeavor by all
means to draw into their Order. So that the main intention of their School
Discipline which is so famous throughout the World, is, to uphold the Pope's
Sovereignty. They boast of extraordinary methods to teach the Latin Tongue to
young people, but they take a particular care, that they do not let their
Disciples grow too wise, except such as are to be received into their Order.
And, because, they have by this management of the Youths brought a great many
able Men over to their Order, and are besides this very gentile and civil in
their Conversation (in which point they are far above all the other Monks, who
are most of them full of Incivility and Pedantry) they have found means, under
pretense of being Confessors, to creep into most Courts, and to insinuate
themselves into the very Secrets of the State; so that in a great many Courts
they have the greatest sway in the Councils; And there you may be sure they
will never be forgetful of the Popes and their own Interest. Nevertheless by
their insatiable Avarice, and forwardness of meddling in all Affairs they have
made themselves odious in some places; And because the Jesuits have trespassed
upon the Authority and advantages of the other Monks, who are of more ancient
Orders, these are grown jealous of them to the highest degree.

Neither ought it to be passed by in silence, Licensing of Books.
that the Pope and his adherents pretend to have a right of Censuring and
Licensing all Books whatsoever, whereby they may easily prevent that nothing
may come to light, which might prove prejudicial to them. And in Censuring of
Books they are so impudent as not only to strike out of the ancient Authors,
when the same are to be reprinted, at pleasure, such passages as they dislike,
but also they do not stick to insert such new passages as are suitable to their
intentions. If any Book is to be published in their Territories first the same
is exactly revised and corrected. And if it should happen by chance, that
something should be overseen in the first Edition which does not suit with
their Interest, it is marked in an Index made for that purpose, that it may be
omitted in the next Edition. But the Books of their Adversaries are prohibited,
nay the reading of them is not allowed, but to some particular persons, and
that not without special leave, and these are such as they know to be
thorough-paced and entirely devoted to their Interest. By so doing they may lay
to their Adversaries charge what they please, since their Subjects never get
sight of the others Refutation. It has been a general observation, that since
the scandalous life of the Monks had not only been very prejudicial to the
Popish Monarchy, but also that the Protestants had set out their Vices in their
natural colors; The Papists have bespattered the Protestant Ministers with the
same Vices as they were charged withal, and have not only representedthe
infirmities of some particular persons to the World, but also have laid to
their charge the most heinous crimes they could invent; and afterward have
challenged their Adversaries to prove the contrary; which Calumnies have such
influence, at least upon the simple and common sort of People, that it gives
them a great aversion to the Protestants. They also do not want impudence to
set out at a high rate their Miracles, Martyrdoms and other great Feats, which
generally are transacted in far distant Countries; by which means they gain a
great Credit at least by the inconsiderate multitude. Among others Edwin Sandys
an English Knight has discovered abundance of these tricks in his Treatise
concerning the State of Religion.

36. Excommunication and Inquisition.
The Pope also makes use of more violent means to maintain his Authority; In
former Ages his Excommunication was a most terrible thing; when whole Countries
were forbidden the exercise of Religious Worship; by which means the Popes have
often obliged Emperors and Kings to come and creep to the Cross. But now adays
this Weapon is not frightful to any body except to some petty States in Italy.
Nevertheless in Spain and Italy they have set up a certain Court, which is
called the Office of the Holy Inquisition, where Information is taken and all
such proceeded against as have in any ways tendered themselves suspected of
Heresy: And it is counted the worst sort of Heresy, if any one attempts any
thing against the Popish Law and Doctrine, or against the Pope's Authority.
This serves for a Bridle to curb the People withal, and to the Inhabitants of
those Countries is as terrible as the Plague, since matters are transacted with
so much severity in this Court, that scarce any body, that falls under the
Inquisition, escapes their hands without considerable loss.

37. Some Reasons why the People remain in the Communion of the Church of Rome.
Though the Supreme Direction and Administration of the Romish Religion,
together with their other rules, which serve to uphold it, and have been
alleged by us here, are a sufficient awe upon the People; And besides this,
the Popish Clergy know how to manage their Affairs with that dexterity as to
give some satisfaction to every one; so that I am apt to believe, that a great
many, who live under the Popish subjection, are verily persuaded, to believe,
what the Priests tell them, to be real, since they want means and opportunity
of being better instructed; Nevertheless it is very probable that a great many
of the more learned and wises sort are sufficiently convinced, in what manner
things are carried on among them, and that therefore it is in respect of same
particular considerations, that they do not free themselves from this Yoke. I
am apt to believe, that most are kept back, because they do not see how to
remedy this Evil; And yet they are unwilling to ruin their Fortunes by going
over to the Protestant side, where they are not likely to meet with so
plentiful a share. These Temptations are not easily to be resisted, wherefore
they think it sufficient for the obtaining of Salvation if they believe in
Jesus Christ and trust upon his Merits, but for the rest think it of no great
consequence if in some matters, which are the inventions of Priests, they by
conforming themselves play the Hypocrite, and believe as much concerning them
as is suitable with their Opinions. They suppose it to be of no great
consequence, that perhaps the Female Sex and the vulgar sort of People that are
always fond of extravagancies, do believe these things in good earnest. There
are also, questionless, not a few, who not having sufficient Capacity to
distinguish betwixt such Points in Religion, as are commanded by God, and
betwixt such as are invented by the Clergy for private Ends, and perhaps coming
afterward to the knowledge of some of these deceits, they take all the rest
for fabulous Inventions, only covering their Atheistical Principles with an
outward decent behavior to save themselves the trouble of being questioned and
disturbed. Every Man of Sense may without difficulty imagine how easily a
sensible Italian or Spaniard, that never has read the Bible or any other
Protestant Book may fall into this Error, if he once has had an opportunity to
take notice of the Intrigues of the Clergy; though it is certain, that since the
Reformation of Luther, the Church of Rome has changed her Habit, and her
Garment appears far more decent than before. But besides this, there are a
great many Persons of Quality as well as of a meaner Condition, who make their
advantage of the Romish Religion, where they have an opportunity to provide for
their Friends, by putting them either into some Order or other of Knighthood,
or into that of Monks, or other Ecclesiastics, by which means a great many
Families are eased of a great Charge, and sometimes are raised by it. At least
the superstitious Parents are well satisfied when they see their Children are
become such Saints: And those that cannot make their Fortunes otherwise, run
into a Monastery, where they are sure to be provided for. All these
conveniences would be taken away if the Popish Monarchy should fall, and the
Church Revenues were applied to the use of the State. The Popish Doctrine also
has got so firm footing in those Countries where it now rides triumphant, that
if any of their Princes should endeavor to root it out, he would find it a
very difficult Task, since the Priests would be for raising Heaven and Earth
against him, and not stick to find out another James Clement or Ravilliac for
their purpose. Besides this, most of those Princes are tied by a Political
Interest to the Church of Rome, and by introducing a Reformation cannot propose
any advantage to themselves, but rather cannot but fear very dangerous
Divisions and Innovations.

38. What States are tied by a particular Interest to the Church of Rome.
Italy by its particular Interest is obliged to support the Popish Monarchy, it
being much to the advantage of this Country, that the Pope resides among them,
especially since now adays no other but Italians do attain to this Dignity;
Italy.
so that there is scarce a great Family in Italy, but some of their Friends
have some dependence on the Roman Chair. Poland.
Because the Bishops and Prebendaries in Poland are always chosen out of the
Nobility; the Noblemen who have the chief sway of Affairs in that Kingdom are
tied to the Popish Interest, and the Bishops who are there also Senators of the
Kingdom, have a great influence in all the Transactions of any moment. Portugal.
The Clergy is very Potent in Portugal, and in case of any Innovation, would be
assisted by the Spaniards; this was the reason why the Portugueses of late
years have been fain to comply with the Pope, notwithstanding that the Pope to
curry favor with Spain, did not many years ago treat them so ill in the matter
of Collation of Bishoprics, which else might have served them for a fair
Pretense, to withdraw themselves from the Obedience of the Roman Chair.

Some of the Estates of Germany are to this day adhering to the Popish
Interest; Germany.
among the Imperial Cities that of Cullen is the Chiefest, which City is
overrun with Ecclesiastics. Besides this, there are abundance of Counts and
others of the Nobility, that hitherto have not thought fit by turning
Protestants, to exclude themselves from Ecclesiastical Dignities and Benefices.
Among the Temporal Princes, the Elector of Bavaria has stuck close to the
Romish Religion, because the House of Bavaria has always had a great Appetite
to the Imperial Crown, which hope it must lay aside, if it should leave the
Popish Religion. What has induced some Protestant Princes to return to the
Romish Communion, is sufficiently known. Neither is it much to be admired at,
that the present Bishops and Prelates stand firm to the Popish Interest in
Germany, since they find it more advantageous to be great Princes than poor
Preachers. Besides this, they have been deterred from undertaking any
Reformation by the Example of two Electors of Collen, which they in the last
Age did begin with a very unfortunate Success in their Dominions. After Charles
V. (being influenced by the Spanish Counsels) did let slip the Opportunity of
settling the Protestant Religion throughout the Empire; the Emperors have ever
since that time, for reasons of State, not been able to disentangle themselves
from the Popish Sovereignty if they had been never so willing. For as the case
now stands, the Ecclesiastical Princes of the Empire are tied to the Emperor's
Interest, from whom they hope for Assistance against the Secular Princes in
case of necessity. But if the Emperor should abandon the Church of Rome, the
whole Clergy would be against him; and he could not promise himself any certain
Assistance from the Secular Princes, especially since some of the most ancient
Houses of those Princes, that now have laid aside the hope of attaining the
Imperial Crown, by reason of difference in Religion, would then pretend to have
the same right to that Dignity with the House of Austria. The Pope also upon
such an occasion would not cease to stir up Heaven and Earth against him, and
the King of France would not let slip this Opportunity, but would with all his
might endeavor to obtain the Imperial Dignity, in which design he perhap^ might
meet with encouragement from the Clergy.

The Spaniards pretend to be the greatest zealots of the Romish Religion, Spain.
because they stand in need of the Pope's Favor to assist them in the
preservation of the Kingdom of Naples and the State of Milan; and they commonly
use to lay their Designs under the cover of preserving and maintaining the
Roman Catholic Religion, wherein, however they have for the most part
miscarried, not to mention here that the Clergy is very Potent in Spain, and
that the common People through the false persuasions of the Priests, have got a
great aversion against the Protestants.

France does outwardly show it self not so fond of the Popish Interest, France.
nor has the Gallick Church ever acknowledged the Pope's absolute Power over
her. And whenever the Pope pretends to encroach upon the Liberty of the French
Church, the Parliament of Paris is ready to take notice of it. The Doctors also
of the Sorbon have rejected several Propositions, which were maintained by the
Pope's Parasites. They also keep so watchful an Eye over the Pope's Nuncio
there, that it is not easy for him to transgress his Bounds. The Nuncio's, when
they go out of Rome. carry the Cross upright, but as soon as they enter the
Territories of France, they let it down till such time as they have obtained
leave from the King to exercise their Function, when they are fain to oblige
themselves by their own Handwriting, that they will not act otherwise in this
Station, and no longer than it pleases the King. They also must make use of a
French Secretary, and at their departure, leave behind them a Register
concerning their Negotiation, and also are tired to several other Formalities,
without which, all their Negotiations are accounted void and of no force.
Formalities observed by the Nuncio' s in France.
From hence it is that the French say, that the Pope's Nuncio there, has his
Commission both from their King and the Pope, and that it is precarious, and
may be recalled by the King at pleasure. And it is to be observed that the
Pope's Nuncio pu^s by his Cross in any place where the King is present, thereby
it is intimated that his Commission ceases when the King is present. Nay, it is
credibly related, that under the Ministry of Cardinal Richlieu it was debated
in France, whether they should not constitute a Patriarch of their own in that
Kingdom* though as far as I can see, this design would not have proved so very
advantageous to France. For the Clergy, must needs have become very jealous of
the King's Power, for fear he might take this Opportunity to retrench their
ample Revenues. And if the King of France has not laid aside his thoughts and
pretenses upon the Imperial Crown, he can never suppose to obtain his aim, if
he should withdraw himself from the Roman Chair. For if so Potent a Prince as
the King of France is, should once obtain the Imperial Dignity, it is very
likely he would not only revive the ancient Pretensions of the Emperors upon
Rome, which have for a long while been lying dormant; but he would also under
the specious pretense of protecting the Roman Chair, endeavor to recover such
Possessions as had been ^equestred from the Church of Rome. On the other hand,
the Pope is heartily afraid of a French Monarchy, being well convinced that it
would endeavor a thorough Reformation of the Court of Rome, and that his Wings
would be clipped to that degree, that in effect he would be no more than a
Patriarch. Neither ought he to exspect any better treatment if the Spanish
Monarchy had been brought to perfection; as either of them must needs have been
destructive to the Protestant Religion.

It may therefore be taken for granted that one of the main Pillars of the
Popish Monarchy is the jealousy and balance, The main Pillar of the Popish
Monarchy.
which is to be kept up betwixt these two Crowns; and that it is the Pope's
Interest, as much as in him lies, to take care that one of these Crowns do not
ruin the other, and set up for an universal Monarchy. If we look into the
transactions of former times, we shall find that the Popes have long since
observed this Maxim. It Is true, after the death of King Henry II. when France
was extremely weakened, the Popes were forced to be good Spanish whether they
would or no, the Spaniards having then found out the way to oblige them to it
by fair or foul means. They knew how to influence the Popes by their Nephews,
who were for settling and enriching their Families, whilst their Kinsmen were
alive. Those they brought over to their party by granting to them Pensions,
Church-Benefices, large Possessions, great Offices and advantageous Marches;
who in acknowledgement of the same used often to make the Pope good Spanish,
even against his inclination; but if they resisted these temprations, they used
to prosecute these Nephews with a vengeance, after the Pope's decease. And it
was their constant practice in those days, to exclude such from the Papal
Chair, as they thought were bent against their Interest. But as soon as France
began to recover its Strength, the Popes managed themselves with more
indifferency, and showed no more favor to either side, than they thought was
suiting with their present Circumstances. It is remarkable that the Jesuit
Guicardus in a Sermon preached in Paris in the 1637. in the Month of July, did
say, that the War which the then King of France waged against the Spaniards,
was to be deemed a Holy War, carried on for the preservation of the Holy
Religion. For if the King of France had not taken up Arms, the Spaniards
designs were so laid, as to make the Pope an Almoner to the King of Spain.

39. The Pope's In^lination toward the Protestants.
But as to those who have withdrawn themselves from the Pope's Obedience, it is
certain the Pope would be glad, if they could be reduced to his Obedience,
provided it might be done by such means, that thereby one party were not so
much strengthened as to become terrible to all Europe. For it is better to let
my Enemy live, than to kill me and my Enemy at one stroke. It was for this
reason, that we read that Pope Paul III. was vexed to the heart at the
stupendous Success of the Emperor Charles V. against the Protestants, which
made him recall his Troops that were sent to his Assistance. And if Philip II.
had been successful in his expedition against England, Sixtus V. would
questionless have acknowledged his Error of assisting him in this Enterprise.
So Gregory XV. during the Differences betwixt those of the Valtelins and the
Grisons sided with the last, the Protestants against Spain. Neither was Urban
VIII. dissatisfied at the Success of Gustavus Adolphus against the House of
Austria, especially since the latter had given much about the same time an
evident instance to the World, as to the business of Mantua, that they used to
give no better treatment to Roman Catholics than Protestants. Some have
remarked, that when Ferdinand II. did desire some Subsidies from the Popes,
which he had promised before, the Pope sent him plenary Indulgences for him and
his whole Army at the point of death, that they might be prepared to dye with
the more Courage. And some Years ago, the Court of Rome was no less concerned
at the then prodigious Success of France in Holland, when this State seemed to
be reduced to the utmost extremity. But the chief aim of the Pope is, to reduce
by all manner of Artifices the Protestants to his Obedience. To obtain this
end, he sets the Protestants together by the Ears, flattereth the Protestant
Princes, and takes care that many of them may marry Roman Catholic Ladies; the
younger Brothers out of the greatest Families he obliges to come over to his
Party, by bestowing upon them great Dignities and Church-Benefices, all that
will come over to his side are kindly received and very well used, neither do
they write so much against the Protestant Divines, but rather endeavor to set
up and maintain Controversies among them. By these Artifices the Popish Clergy
had got very visible advantages in this Age over the Protestants, and are
likely to get more every day, since they see with the greatest satisfaction
that their Adversaries do weaken themselves by their intestine Quarrels and
Divisions.

40. From what has been said it is easily to be judged, No Peace is to be
exspected betwixt the Roman Catholics and Protestants.
whether those Differences which are on foot betwixt the Roman Catholics and
the Protestants may be amicably composed, either so that both Parties should
remit something of their pretensions, and agree to one and the same Confession
of Faith, leaving some by-Questions to be ventilated in the Universities; or so
that both Parties may retain their Opinions, and yet, notwithstanding this
Difference, might treat one another like Brethren in Christ and Members of the
same Church. Now if we duly weigh the Circumstances of the matter, and the
Popish Principles, such a Peace is to be esteemed absolutely impossible; since
the Difference does not only consist in the Doctrine, but both Interests are
absolutely contrary to one another. For first the Pope is for having the
Church-Possessions restored; but the Protestant are resolved to keep them in
their possession. The Pope pretends to be the supreme Head of Christendom, but
the Protestants States will not part with their Prerogative of having their
Direction circa Sacra, which they look upon as a precious Jewel belonging to
their Sovereignty. And to pretend to live in Communion and Amity with the Pope,
and not to acknowledge his Sovereignty in Ecclesiastical Affairs, is an
absolute contradiction. In the same manner, as if I would be called a Subject
in a Kingdom, and yet refuse to acknowledge the King's Authority. Besides this,
the infallibility of the Pope is the Foundation Stone of the Popish
Sovereignty, and if that is once removed, the whole Structure must needs fall,
wherefore it is impossible for the Pope, and that for reasons of State, to
abate any thing from his (...) wherein he differs from the Protestants. For if
it should ^e once granted that the Pope had hitherto maintained but one single
erroneous point, his infallibility would them fall to the ground; since, if he
has erred in one point, he may be erroneous in others also. But if the
Protestants should allow the Pope's infallibility, they a^ the same time must
deny their whole Doctrine. And it seems not probable that the Protestants can
ever be brought to contradict and at once to recall their Doctrine concerning
the vanity of the Popish Tenets. Nay, if it might be supposed that the Laiety
should do it, what must become of the Clergy? Where will they bestow their
Wives and Children? Wherefore, how good soever the intention may have been of
those that have proposed a way of accommodation betwixt the Papists and
Protestants, which is commonly called Syncretism, they are certainly nothing
else but very simple and chime^ical Inventions, which are ridiculed by the
Papists; who in the mean while are well satisfied to see that the Protestant
Divines bestow their labor in vain as to this point, since they (the Papists)
are no loosers, but rather the gainers by it. For this Syncretism does not only
raise great Animosities among the Protestants, but also does not a little
weaken their Zeal against the Popish Religion: It is easy to be imagined, that
some, who do not thoroughly understand the Differences, and hear the Divines
talk of an accommodation betwixt both Religions, are apt to persuade
themselves, that the Difference does not lie in the fundamental points; and if
in the mean while they meet with an advantageous proffer from the Roman
Catholics, are sometimes without great difficulty prevailed upon to bid
farewell to the Protestant Religion. It is taken for a general Rule, that a
Fortress and a Maidenhead are in great danger, when once they begin to parley.

41. But if the Question were put, Strength of the Protestants and Papists.
whether the Pope with all his adherents be strong enough to reduce the
Protestants under his Obedience by force; it is evident enough that the joint
power of the Papists is much superior to the strength of the Protestants. For
Italy, all Spain and Portugal, the greatest part of France and Poland, adhere
to the Pope, as also the weakest part of the Swiss Can^ons. In Germany those
hereditary Countries which belong to the House of Austria, the Kingdom of
Bohemia, and the greatest part of Hungary, all the Bishops and Prelates, the
House of Bavaria, the Dukes of Neuburgh, and Marquisses of Baden, besides some
other Princes of less note; some Coun^s, Lords and others of the Nobility and
some Imperial Cities, besides others of the Roman Catholic Communion that live
under the Jurisdiction of the Protestant States; all which according to my
computation make up two thirds of Germany. There are also a great many Papists
in Holland, neither is England quite free of them. But of the Protestant side
are England, Sweden, Denmark, Holland, most of the Secular Electors and
Princes, and the Imperial Cities in Germany. The Hugonots in France are without
strength, and the Protestants in Poland being dispersed throughout the Kingdom
are not to be feared. Curland and the Cities of Prussia may rest satisfied, if
they are able to maintain the free exercise of their Religion; neither is
Transylvania powerful enough to give any considerable Assistance to the
Protestant Party. The Papists also have this Advantage above the Protestants,
that they all acknowledge the Pope for the supreme Head of their Church, and at
least to outward appearance, are unanimous in their Faith; whereas on the
contrary, the Protestants are not joined under one visible spiritual Head, but
are miserably divided among themselves. Divisions of the Protestants.
For not to mention here those Sects of lesser note, viz. the Arminians,
Socinians, Anabaptists and such like, their main Bod is divided into two
Parties, of very near equal Strength, viz. into the Lutherans and those of the
Reformed Religion, a great many of which are so exasperated against one
another, that they could not be more against the Papists themselves.

Neither are the Protestants united under one Church Government or Liturgy,
Other Inconveniences.
but each of these States regulate the same according as they think sit.
Neither can it be denied, but that the Roman Catholic Clergy in general is
more zealous and industrious in propagating their Religion than the
Protestants; a great many of these making no other use the Church-Benefices,
than to maintain themselves out of them, just as if it were a mere Trade; and
the propagating of the Christian Faith, is the least of their Care, or at least
only their by-work. Whereas the Monks and Jesuits gain great applause by their
Missions in the East and West Indies; and tho perhaps they brag more than is
true of their great Success there, yet is this Institution in the main very
praiseworthy. Besides this, there is such an implacable jealousy betwixt some
of the Protestant States, that it is not probable that they will be one and all
against the Papists: not to mention others here, such a jealousy is betwixt
Sweden and Denmark. as likewise betwixt England and Holland. Though on the other
hand, there is as great a jealousy betwixt France and Spain, which will always
be an obstacle to any union betwixt these two Crowns against the Protestants.
So that notwithstanding the unequality betwixt the Papists and Protestants,
these need not fear the Pope's Power.

Nevertheless, there is a great difference to be made as to those Protestants,
The Hugono^s of France
that live in a Protestant State, independent on any other, and those who live
under the jurisdiction of a Roman Catholic Prince, the latter of which are not
so very well assured of the free enjoyment of their Religion. For the Hugonoes
in France have no other Security but the King's bare Word, and the Edict of
Nantes, which would stand them but in little stead, if the King of France
should be overcome with a Zeal like to that of the Spaniards, or the House of
Austria. Yet does it not seem probable to me, that the King of France should
easily pretend to force them to another Religion, as long as they are quiet;
since he ought to consider what great Services the Hugonots have done to Henry
IV. without whose Assistance he would in all likelihood not have been able to
obtain the Crown. to Protestants of Poland.
It is not easily to be supposed, that the Poles should raise a persecution
against the Protestants in Curland and Prussia, especially as long as the City
of Dantzick maintains her Liberty.

The Protestants in Germany are so considerable, Of Germany.
that they may be esteemed equal in strength to a Kingdom. But their being
divided under several Heads, and that of a different Interest, much abates
their strength. And the Emperors within the space of a hundred Years, have
twice reduced them to that extremity, that both their Religion and Liberty
(which are so linked together, that one cannot be lost without the other)
seemed to be near gone, if France and Sweden had not prevented it. It Is true,
there has of late Years a new Maxim been set up, viz that the Protestants of
Germany are now in a capacity to maintain themselves without the assistance of
the two abovementioned Crowns, and that the Elector of Brandenburgh is the
most fitly qualified to be their Head, and to have the Direction among them:
And as it is the Interest of the House of Austria to uphold them in this
belief, so Brandenburgh and Luneburgh make use of this supposition to cover
their designs of getting into their possession those Provinces, that were given
to Sweden as a recompense for having been so instrumental in preserving the
Religion and Liberty of the Protestants of Germany. But suppose they should
compass their Design, it is most certain that those two Houses by the addition
of those Countries, would be much less formidable to the Emperor, than they
were at that time when they were upheld by Sweden. And it is a great mistake if
they persuade themselves that what assistance they may exspect from Denmark and
Holland, can countervail what they had from France and Sweden. If the Emperor
should obtain his Ends and drive those two Nations out of Germany, and restore
the Spanish Interest, and then tire out the Estates by sending great Armies
against them, it would be a question who would be able to oblige the Emperor
in such a case to disband his victorious Forces? Or whether the Emperors might
not under some pretense or another keep his Army on foot, and oblige the States
to provide for them in their Territories? Whether Brandenburgh and Lunenbuhgh
would be able alone to oppose the Emperor's design? But if the Protestant
Estates should find themselves not strong enough to resist his Power, it would
be the Question whether these Crowns would be immediately ready at their
demands, or whether the circumstances of their Affairs would be such, as to be
able to undertake such a task? Or whether at the time of imminent danger such a
one as Gustaous Adolfus, would be sent down from Heaven, who could act with the
same Fortune and Success. For he that believes, that the Religion is
sufficiently secured by Seals and Deeds, or that the Emperors have laid aside
all thoughts of making themselves Sovereigns of Germany, if an occasion should
present it self, especially since Religion, and the recovery of the Church
possessions furnishes them with so specious a pretense, must needs have lost
the memory of all past transactions. But the last Peace made at Nimmeguen has
sufficiently convinced the World, that these designs could not be put in
execution. Those Protestant States therefore that are Independent on other
Princes need not fear the power of the Roman Catholics. For, as two States
that are of the same Religion, nevertheless differ in State Interests, and are
jealous of one another, which is plainly to be seen betwixt France and Spain,
and betwixt England and Holland; so, though States are of a different Religion,
it is not from hence to be concluded, that if a Potent Prince of the Roman
Catholic Persuasion should attempt to ruin a Protestant State, the other Roman
Catholic States would not prevent it, if it was for their Interest to see that
Protestant State preserved.

The best way then to preserve the Protestant Religion is, The best way to
preserve the Reformed Religion.
that each of these States take effectual care, how the same may be well
preserved in their several States. And this may be done without any crafty
inventions, as the Roman Catholics are obliged to make use of, but only by
plain and simple means. One of the main Points is, that both the Churches and
Schools may be provided with persons fitly qualified for that purpose; That the
Clergy by their wholesome Doctrine and a good Life, may show the way to the
rest. That the people in general, but more especially such as in all likelihood
one time or another may have a great sway in the State, be well instructed in
the true and Fundamental Principles of the Protestant Religion, that thereby
they may be proof against the Temptations of the Court of Rome, especially when
they are to Travel in Popish Countries. That the Clergy may be so qualified as
to be able to oppose the devises and designs of their E^^^ies, who every day
busy themselves in finding out new Projects against them.

Some are of Opinion, that the Protestant Party would be mightily strengthened,
if the two Chief Factions among the Protestants, Whether the Lutherans and
those of the Reformed Religion are likely to agree.
that besides the difference in their Doctrine, are also of a different
Interest, which seems to flo^^ from their various Opinions, could be reconciled
to one another; and they believe this not impracticable, if the old hatred,
animosities, pride, and selfconceited Opinions could be laid aside. But if we
duly take into consideration the general inclinations of mankind, this seems to
be a hard supposition. For those who peruse the Writings of both Parties
without partiality cannot but admire, how their Authors are often obliged to
rack themselves, that they may maintain their Opinions whether they be
consonant to the Scriptures or not: As likewise how they bring to light again
the old Arguments, which have been refuced a thousand times before. Neither
will this do the business, if one Opinion should be supposed as good as the
other; since such an indifferency would be a shrewd sign, that the whole must
needs be very indifferent to us. Neither can we without danger declare some
Points, in which we differ, problematical, since I do not see how we can
pretend to have a power to declare a certain Article either necessary or
Fundamental, or problematical. Some therefore have thought upon this expedient,
to make a trial, whether out of the Articles, wherein both Parties agree could
be Composed a perfect Systeme of Divinity, which might be linked together like
one Chain, according to Art. If this could be effected, though some different
Opinions remained, as long as this Chain was kept entire, we might be assured
that we did not differ in the Fundamental Points necessary to the obtaining of
Salvation; and what remained undecided would not be of such Consequence as to
hinder us from being united into one Body or Church. But before a true Judgment
can be given of this Proposition, it would be requisite that such a Systeme
composed according to Art, were proposed to the World. For my part I know no
better advice, than to leave it to the direction of God Almighty, who perhaps
one time or another will put us in the way of finding out a good Expedient. For
untimely remedies may prove the occasion of new Divisions. In the mean while it
behooves both Parties notwithstanding these differences to be mindful of their
joint Interest against their Common Enemy, since they may verily believe that
the Pope has no more kindness for the Lutherans, than for those of the Reformed
Religion.

But as for the other Sects of less note, Socinians and Anabaptists.
viz. The Socinians, Anabaptists, and such like, it is evident that their
Principles cannot possibly be reconciled with our Religion; For those who
adhere to the first, do not consider the Christain Doctrine otherwise than a
Moral Philosophy, and the latter scarce know what to believe themselves.
Besides this, the Anabaptists have hatched out I know not what rules of Policy,
which, if not suppressed in time, must prove destructive to the State. But
whether the Socinians also have any such projects in their Heads, I am not able
to determine, since hitherto they have not been powerful enough to raise any
disturbances in the State.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Kingdom of Sweden.
1. THE Swedish Historians have out of their ancient Monuments shown the World,
Sweden the most ancient Kingdom in Europe.
that the Kingdom of Sweden is the most ancient Kingdom in Europe, and that
this Country, was, after the Deluge, sooner stored with Inhabitants than the
other parts of Europe. Nevertheless it is very uncertain who were the first
Inhabitants, and at what time they first settled there, as likewise whether
they were immediately governed by Kings, or whether the Fathers of Families,
had the chief sway among them, till the Regal was grafted on the Paternal
Power. The names and deeds of their Kings, and the time of their Reigns are
also not easy to be determined, for the List which has been published of these
Kings, is not so Authentic, but that it may be called in question; And, as to
the transactions of those times, they are most of them taken out of ancient
Songs and Fabulous Legends, and some of them out of the allegorical Traditions
of their ancient Poets or Scalders, which have perhaps been wrongly interpreted
by some Authors. And Johannes Messenius in his Scandinavia Illustrata, does not
stick to say, that the old Swedish Historiographer Johannes Magnus did strive
to outdo in his bragging History, the Danish Historian Sanno Grammaticus. First
Founders of the Gothic Nation.
Johannes Magnus Makes Magog, the Son of Japhet Grandson of Noah, the first
Founder of the Schytick and Gothic Nations, and says that from his two Sons
Sweno, and Gether and Geg, the Swedish and Gothish Nations had their names. He
relates, that after this Family was extinguished, Sweden was during the space
of four hundred years under the Government of certain Judges, and that about
eight hundred years after the Deluge, both the Kingdoms of the Swedes and
Goths were united under Bericus, who in person planted a Colony of the Goths
beyond the Seas, after having Conquered the Vlmirugii, who then inhabited
Prussia, from whence he extended his Conquests over the Vandals. A considerable
time after, these Nations did settle themselves not far from the Mouth of the
River Danube near the Black Sea, from whence having under taken several
Expeditions both into Asia and Europe, at last in the third and fourth
Centuries after the Birth of Christ, did enter the Roman Provinces on this side
of the Danube, and carried their Conquering Arms into Italy and Spain, where
they erected two Kingdoms. But the greatest part of this Relation is
contradicted by Messenius, who also rejects the List which Johannes Maginis h^^
given us, of the Kings before our Soviour's Birth, alleging that the times
before Christ's Nativity, are all involved in fabulous Narrations, as to those
Northern parts, and that most of these Kings lived after the Birth of our
S^viour. But, since even the Chronology of the first (...) after Christ's
Nativity, and the Genealogy of those Kings it somewhat uncertain in these
Contries, it will suff^ce to mention here some few of the most famous among
them, till the latter times furnish us with an opportunity to relate things
with more certainty.

2. Sixty years before the Birth of Christ, the famous Othin or Woden, Othin or
Woden.
having been driven by Pomp^y out of Asia with a great number of people, first
Conquered Bussas, afterward the Saxons and Danes, and last of all Norway and
Sweden, about twenty four years before Christ's Birth. Othin kept for himself
Sweden only, yet so, that all the other Scandinavian Princes should own him a^
their Supreme Lord, from whence came that Custom which was used for several
hundred years after, viz. That at the great and general meetings of these
Nations, the King of Denmark used to hold the Bridle of the King of Sweden's
Horse, whilst he mounted it, and the King of Norway the Stirrup. He was
succeeded by Frotho surnamed. Frotho.
Jorgo, who covered the Temple at Vpsal with Gold, and surrounded its Pinnacle
with a golden Chain. After him were these following Kings Niord, Sigtrug,
Asmund, Vffo, Hynding, Regner, Halvard, Helgo, Attilus, Hother, Roderick
surnamed Singabond, Hogmor, and Hogrin, Erick, Haldan, Sivand, Erick, Haldan,
Vngrin, Regnald. About the year 588. Rodolf was King of the Goths, but being
vanquished by the English, whom he left in the possession of that Kingdom, he
himself fled into Italy, where he sought Sanctuary of Dicterick the King of the
Goths. In the mean while Frotho, either the Son, or else a Kinsman of Regnald,
was King of Sweden, whom succeeded these following Kings Fiolmus, Swercher,
Valander, Vislur, who was burnt by his own Sons. Damalder, who was Sacrificed
by his own Subjects to their Idol at Vpsal. Domar, Digner, Dager, Agnius, who
was hanged by his own Wife. Alrick and Erick, who flew one another in a single
Combat, Ingo, Hugler, Haco, Jerundar, Hacquin surnamed Ring, under whose Reign
that most memorable Battle at Brovalla was fought, Battle fought near Brovalla.
betwixt the Swedes and Danes, where thirty thousand Men were killed on the
Danish, and twelve thousand on the Swedish side. This King Sacrificed nine of
his Sons to the Idol at Vpsal, and would have done the same with the tenth, who
was the only Heir left to the Kingdom, if he had not been prevented by the
Swedes. Him succeeded his Son Egillus, whom followed in the Kingdom of Sweden,
Othar, Adel, Ostan, Ingvard, Amund, Sivard, Hirot or Herolt, who married his
Daughter Thera to Regnerthethen King of Denmark. Ingellus.
Ingellus the Son of Amund, succeeded Hirot in the Kingdom of Sweden; who, the
night after his Coronation caused seven of those petty Princes, that were
Vassals of the Crown of Sweden to be burnt in their Lodgings; and afterward
exercised the same Cruelty against five more of the same Rank. His Daughter
Asa, that was married to Gudrot a Prince of Schonen, exceeded her Father in
Cruelty, for having murdered her Husband and his Brother, she betrayed the
Country to the Enemies; which so exasperated Ivan, the Son of Regner, King of
Denmark, that he fell with great fury upon Ingellus, who had taken his Daughter
into his Protection, destroying all with Fire and Sword. Ingellus being reduced
to the utmost extremity, by the advice of his Daughter burnt himself, his
Daughter, and the whole Family, in his own Palace, except his Son Olaus, who
sheltered himself in Wermeland. After the death of Ingellus, a certain
Nobleman, of an ancient Family in Sweden, whose name was Charles, assumed the
Royal Title and Power, but Regner King of Denmark, who pretended that it
belonged to his Son, did send a challenge to the said Charles, and having
killed him in the Combat, transferred the Kingdom of Sweden to his Son Bero or
Biorn, who was Hirots Daughters Son.

3. Bero.
Under the Reign of this Bero or Biorn, Ansgarius, a Monk of Corvey, A. C. 829.
and afterward Bishop of Bremen, was sent into Sweden, The Christian Doctrine
first taught in Sweden.
by the Emperor Lewis the Pious, to Preach the Gospel in that Kingdom. But the
King refusing to hearken to his Doctrine, was by the Swedes banished the
Kingdom, together with his Father Regner. Amund.
His Successor Amund did also Rule but a very few years, and having raised a
most horrible Persecution against the Christians, was also banished the
Kingdom. The Swedes being quite tired out with Amund's tyrannical Government,
Olaus.
did call in Olaus, out of Wermeland to be their King, who to establish himself
in the Throne, married the Daughter of Regner to his Son Ingo, and thereby
obtained the quiet possession of the two Kingdoms of the Swedes and Goths. A.
C. 853.
Not many years after Ansgarius rerurned into Sweden, and Converted Olaus, (who
then resided at Birca a most populous City) to the Christian Faith. Olaus then
marched with a Potent Army into Denmark, and having committed the
Administration of that Kingdom to his Son Ennigruus, returned into Sweden;
where he was by his Heathen Subjects Sacrificed to their Idol at Vpsal. His Son
Ingo, Ingo.
the better to Establish himself in the Throne, married the King of Denmark's
Daughter, A. C. 890.
and afterward was killed in the War against the Russians. Him Succeeded his
Son Erick surnamed Weatherhat, Erick.
famous for his skill in Witchcraft, who was succeeded by his Son Erick
surnamed Seghersell, Erick Seghersell.
who Conquered Finland, Curland, Livonia, and Ehestland From Denmark he retook
Halland and Schonen, and at last drove the Danish King Swen out of Denmark, who
could not recover his Kingdom till after his death. Stenchill the Mild.
His Son Stenchill, surnamed the Mild, was Baptized at Sigtuna (a great City at
that time) and having destroyed the Idol at Vpsal, and forbid his Subjects upon
pain of death to Sacrifice to the Idols, the Pagans were so enraged thereat,
that they slew and burnt him near Vpsal, and with him the two Christian Priests
that were sent to him by the Bishop of Hamburgh. Olaus.
His Brother Olaus nevertheless obtained from King Etheldred of England several
Christain Priests, who not only preached the Gospel in Sweden, but also the
King, and a great number of People were Baptized by one of these called
Sigfried in a Fountain called Husbye, which is called St. Sigfrieds Kalla Well
to this day. This Olaus was surnamed Skotkonung, because upon the persuasion of
the English Priests he granted to the Pope a yearly Tax against the Saracens,
which was called Romskot. This Olaus took from Oluf Tryggeso the Kingdom of
Norway, which he however recovered afterward. This Olaus Skotkonung was also
the first who made a perfect union betwixt the two Kingdoms of the Swedes and
Goths, The Swedes and Goths united in one Kingdom.
who had hitherto been often at great enmity with one another.

To Olaus succeeded his Son Amund, under whose Reign the Christian Religion
increased very succesfully in Sweden; Amund.
after whom Reigned his Brother Amund, surnamed Slemme, Amund Slemme.
a Man very negligent both in maintaining Religion and Justice. He was slain
with the greatest part of his Army by Cnut King of Denmark, near a Bridge
called Strangepelle. After his death the Goths and Swedes disagreed about the
Election of a new King, Haquin the Red.
the first choosing Haquin surnamed the Red. the latter Stenchill the younger.
At last it was agreed betwixt them, that Haquin being pretty well in years
should remain King during his life, and should be succeeded by Stenchill. After
the death of Haquin, who Reigned thirteen years, Stenchill.
Stenchill the younger, Olaus Skotkonung's Sisters Son, began his Reign, who
vanquished the Danes in three great Battles. Him succeeded Ingo surnamed the
Pious. Ingo the Pious.
This King utterly destroyed the Idol at Vpsal, which so enraged his Pagan
Subjects, that they Banished him the Kingdom, and afterward murdered him in
Schonen, he was buried in a Convent called Wa^hei^^ in West-Gothland. After him
reigned with great applause his Brother Halstan, Halstan.
whom succeeded his Son Philip A. C.
Ingo, Philip's Son, and his Queen Ragoild, 1086.
were also very famous for their Piety and other Virtues: Philip. Ingo.
she was after her death honored as a Saint, A. C.
and her Tomb frequently visited at Talge. 1138.
This King left no Sons, but two Daughters, Christina and Margret, the first
was married to St. Erick, the second to Magntis King of Norway. He was poisoned
by the East Goths, who were grown weary of the Swedish Government. Under the
Reign of these five last Kings there were golden times in Sweden, the Christian
Faith was then Established and the Subjects lived in Peace and Plenty.

4. After the death of Inge, the East Goths, without the consent of the other
Provinces, made one Ragwald Knaphofde, Ragwold Knaphofde.
a Man of great bodily Strength, but of no great Wisdom, their King, who was
slain by the West Goths. In his stead the East Goths chose Swercher II.
Swercher II.
a very good King, who nevertheless was murdered by one of his Servants. After
the death of Swercher, the East Goths chose his Son Charles for their King,
but the Sw^des at their General Assembly at Vpsal Elected Erick the Son
Josward, Erick the Holy.
he having married Christina the Daughter of Ingo surnamed the Pious. But both
the Swedes and Goths considering afterward, how necessary it was to keep up
the Union betwixt these two Kingdoms, made an agreement that Erick should
remain King over both Kingdoms, but that Charles should succeed him, and that
afterward their Heirs should Rule the Kingdom in the same manner in their
several turns. This Erick having reduced the Finns to their former Obedience,
obliged them to receive the Christian Doctrine. A. C.
He also ordered the ancient Constitutions of the Kingdom to be Collected into
one Book, 1154.
which was called after his name St. Erick's Law. He was slain in the Meadows
near Vpsal by Magnus the King of Denmark's Son, who having first defeated his
Army, was proclaimed King. 1160.
But the Swedes and Goths under the Conduct of Charles the Son of Swercher,
fell again with such fury upon the Danes, that they killed all the Danes with
their King and his Son upon the spot, and out of the spoil built a Church near
Vpsal which they called Denmark, Charles the Son of Swercher.
Charles therefore, the Son of Swercher became King of Denmark, who Reigned
with a general applause; 1168.
till Cnut the Son of Erick returned out of Norway, Cnut Erickson.
and under pretense that he had abetted his Father's death, surprised and
killed him. His Lady and Children fled into Denmark, where having got some
assistance they joined with the Goths under the Conduct of Kell, the Brother
of Charles, to recover the Kingdom, but their General was killed upon the spot,
and their Forces dispersed by Cnus Erickson. After which he Reigned very
peaceably for the space of twenty three years. After the death of Cnut,
Swercher III.
Swercher the Son of Charles was made King of Swedeland, but had for his Rival
Erick, the Son of the last deceased King. At last the difference was thus
Composed, that Swercher should remain King during his life, but should be
succeeded by Erick. But Swercher, who notwithstanding this agreement was for
settling the Crown upon his Family, did barbarously murder all the Sons of
Cnut, except Erick, 1207.
who escaped into Norway; from whence he returned with some Forces, and being
assisted by the Swedes vanquished Swercher, who fled into West Gothland. Having
obtained Succors of sixteen thousand Men, from Weldemar, the King of Denmark,
he attempted to recover his Kingdom, but was miserably beaten by Erick's Army,
he himself narrowly escaping into Denmark; 1208.
from whence he not long after again fell into West Gothland, 1210.
but was again defeated and slain in the Battle, Erick Cnutson.
Leaving Erick Cnutson in the quiet possession of the Throne, who renewed the
former agreement made betwixt those two Families, and Constituted John the Son
of Swercher his Successor in the Kingdom. He married Ricnet the Sister of
Waldemar King of Denmark, 1219.
and dyed in Wisingsoe. Him succeeded according to agreement, John the Son of
Swercher, who Reigned but three years and dyed also in the Isle of Wisingsoe,
which was the general place of residence of the Swedish Kings in those days.

5. Erick Lespe.
After the death of John, Erick, the Son of the former King Erick, became King
of Sweden, who being lame, and besides this lisping, was surnamed the Lisper.
There was about that time a very Potent Family in Sweden called the
Tolekungers, who aimed at the Crown. To bring these over to his Party the King
had married three of his Sisters to three of the Chiefest among them, he
himself having married Catharine the Daughter of Sweno Tolekunger. But these
being grown more Potent by this Alliance; Cnut Tolekunger rebelled against the
King, and having worsted him, obliged him to fly into Denmark; from whence he
soon returned with a strong Army and vanquished Tolekunger, and having caused
him and Halingar his Son to be slain, restored the Peace of the Kingdom. Under
the Reign of this King it was that Gulielmus Sabinensis the Pope's Legate did
first forbid the Priests in Sweden to Marry, whereas before that time it had
been a common Custom among the Priests there to Marry, Celibacy of Clergy
introduced in Sweden.
as well as Laymen. This Erick under the Conduct of his Brother in Law Birger
Yerl forced the Finnes to return to Obedience, and to receive the Christian
Faith, and built several Fortresses upon their Frontiers. 1250.
He dyed without Issue in Wisingsoe. Whilst Birger Yerl was absent in Finland,
Waldemar.
the States made Waldemar the eldest Son of Birger Yerl their King, as being
the deceased King's Sisters Son: 1251.
Who being Crowned in the year next following, the Administration of the
Kingdom was committed during his minority to his Father Birger, who augmented
the ancient Law Book, and deserved so well of the Public, that upon the
request of the Estates he was created a Duke, whereas before he had been only
an Earl, or as it is in their ancient Language Yerl. He met with great
opposition from the Tolekungers, who had not quite laid aside their pretensions
to the Crown, so that their jealousy at last broke out into open War. But the
Duke, under pretense of making an agreement with them, after having granted
them a safe Conduct persuaded them to give him a meeting, where having made
them all Prisoners caused them to be Executed, except Charles Tolekunger who
fled into Prussia, and remained there all his life time. Things being thus
settled, he gave to his Son, in Marriage, Sophia the Daughter of Erick King of
Denmark, 1263.
and laid the first foundation of the Castle and City of Stockholm; and tho his
Son was become of Age, yet did he never surrender the Government to him as long
as he lived. 1266.
He died after he had been Regent fifteen years, leaving four Sons, Waldemar
King of Sweden, Magnus Duke of Sudermanland, Erick of Smaland, and Benedict of
Finland, who afterward raised great Disturbances: for Waldemar having, during
his Pilgrimage to Rome and Jerusalem, left the Administration of the Kingdom to
his Brother Magnus, at his return accused him of having aimed at the Crown. The
States of Sweden held an Assembly at Strengness to compose these differences if
possible; 1275.
but met with so much difficulty that it was impossible to be effected.
Wherefore Magnus and Erick being retired into Denmark, soon returned from
thence with a considerable Force; and having routed the Vanguard of King
Waldemar, made him their Prisoner. Whereupon Magnus called together the Estates
of the Kingdom; who being most of them of his Party, did assign the whole
Kingdom to Duke Magnus, except only East and West Gothland, Smaland and Daht,
which the King was to have for his share. But this Agreement lasted not long;
for the Danes, who had not received their Subsidies promised by Magnus, siding
with Waldemar, the War was renewed, which was carried on with various Success;
till at last the Danes, having received satisfaction for the Money due to them,
left Waldemar in the lurch, who, in the presence of the Estates, resigned the
Kingdom to Magnus.

6. Magnus.
Waldemar having resigned the Kingdom, Magnus was crowned at Vpsal: 1279.
who resumed the Title of King of the Swedes and Goths, which had not been used
by his Predecessors ever since the time of Olaus Skotkanung, but is since
retained by the Kings of Sweden to this day. Under this King's reign the Family
of the Tolekungers began to raise new Commotions, and being assisted by some of
the Nobilty, murdered Ingemar Danschkep the King's Favorite, and took Gerhard
the E. of Holstein and Father-in-law to the K. Prisoner, laying also close
Siege to the Castle of Joncoring; which obliged the K. to appea^e them for that
time by fair Promises: but not long after the E. was released, the K. accused
them before the Assembly of the Nobility of High Treason, and caused them all
to be executed at Stockholm, except Philip of Runby, who was fain to redeem his
Life at a very dear Rate. And with this Stroke the Greatness of the Family of
the Tolekungers was quite laid in the dust. Having thus settled his Affairs, he
got his Lady Hederig crowned at Suderasping; and, with the advice of the
Senators, made King Waldemar a Prisoner in the Castle of Nicoping, 1288.
where he died four years after. Magnus died in Wisignioc, 1290.
but was buried at Stockholm in the Church of the Gray Friars, having left the
Tuition of his Son Birger, who was but eleven years of age, and the Care of the
Kingdom to Torckell C^utson the RixMarshal. Torckell Cnutson was Regent for the
space of thirteen years, Birger II.
during which time he also imprisoned King Waldemar's Son; but after their
decease he sent an Army into Car^lia, and having subdued this Nation, and
induced them to receive the Christian Faith, he built on their Frontiers the
Fortress of Wibourg, and took from the Russians Kekhelm. 1292.
King Birger being by this time come to his riper Years, married Mereta the
Daughter of Erick King of Denmark; and having sent new forces into Carelia and
Ingermania, 1298.
built the Fortress of Norburgh on the Frontiers of Russia, which however a few
years after was retaken and demolished by the Russians. Soon after he declared
his Son Magnus, who was but three years old his Successor in the Kingdom, 1303.
which was confirmed by the chief Men of the Kingdom, and especially by his
Brothers. But this solemn Transaction was of no long continuance, for the
Brothers quickly fell into divisions among themselves, and the two younger
growing mistrustful of the King, the Marshal retired first into Denmark, and
from thence into Norway, to make use of that King's Intercession to recover
their Inheritance, which King Birger had seized upon; but all this proving
ineffectual, they made several Inroads into West-Gothland, and killed and
dispersed the Swedish Troops that were sent to oppose them. The King went at
last in person with an Army, and was met by his Brothers with some Forces,
which they had obtained of the King of Norway; when by the Intercession of some
Senators, the Differences betwixt the Brothers were composed, and the two
younger restored to their Estates in Sweden. This Agreement cost the old
Torcell his Head, 1305.
who, under pretense of having upheld the Ammosities betwixt the Brothers, and
some other matters laid to his charge, was beheaded at Stockhelm. But no sooner
was this Wise Man dead, but the two younger Brothers began to aim again at the
Crown, and having surprised the K. and Q. at their Country Seat called Hatuna
forced him to resign the Kingdom, and to surrender the Crown and City of
Stockholm to his Brother Erick, who made the King a Prisoner in the Castle of
Nicoping; but his Son Magnus was, during this Tumult, carried into Denmark. The
King of Denmark undertook 3 several Expeditions to relieve his Brother-in-law
and Sister, but to no great purpose, only that at last it was agreed, that the
King, Queen and their Children should be set at liberty, and the matter decided
in the Assembly of the Senate of the Kingdom. The Senate therefore having been
called together at Ar^oga, it was there concluded, That in case King Birger
would pardon all past Injuries, and be contented with what part of the Kingdom
should be assigned to him, he should be set at liberty: which was performed
accordingly, the Senate and his Brothers having again sworn fealty to him. Thus
matters seemed to be composed for the present, when not long after a greater
Storm broke out. 1308.
Erick the King of Denmark, having made an Alliance with Haquin King of Norway,
came with an Army of 60000 Men into Sweden, to assist King Birger in bringing
his Brothers under his Subjection: their first Success was answerable to their
great Preparations, having taken Joncoping, and forced the Duke's Forces to fly
before them; but the Danes, who began to be in want of Provision, being most of
them gone home, there was a Meeting appointed betwixt the Brothers to be held
at Helsinburgh, where the former Agreement made at A^bega was renewed; by
virtue of which Duke Erick, was to have West Gothland, Daht, Halland,
Wermeland, and Smal^nd; Duke Waldemar was to have for his share Vpland, Oeland
and part of Finland; the rest was to remain under the King, and the Dukes to
hold their Possessions in Fief from him. Thus all Animosities seemed to be laid
aside, and the three Brothers lived in great splendour, striving to outdo one
another in Magnificence; which occasioning some new Taxes, proved also the
occasion of some Insurrections in the Kingdom, which were nevertheless happily
appeased, and Peace restored to the whole Kingdom.

In the mean while Duke Waldemar in his journey from Calmar to Stockholm, gave
a visit to the King at Nycoping, who not only treated him with extraordinary
Civility, but also desired him to return and bring his Brother along with him,
by which means he hoped that the very seeds of their former Animosities betwixt
them might be rooted out. 1317.
Waldemar, being overcome by these fair Promises, over-persuaded his Brother
Erick, who was very averse to it at first, but at last consented. Being arrived
in the Castle where the King was, they were kindly received and splendidly
entertained at Supper; but they had not been long in bed, and most of their
Servants dispersed into several Quarters of the Town, till they were made
Prisoners, beaten, abused, and half naked, laden with Irons, thrown into a
strong Tower, their Servants having been all either killed or taken Prisoners.
The King marched directly for Stockholm, in hopes to surprise the City; but the
News of this barbarous act having been already carried to Stockholm, they not
only repulsed him, but also pursued him to Nycoping. The King perceiving that
they intended to besiege Nycoping, retired to Stockeburgh; but before his
departure, having caused the Doors of the Prison to be barricado'd up, he threw
the Keys into the River, and commanded upon pain of death, not to open the
Doors till his return. Soon after Nycoping was besieged, but before it could be
forced both the Brothers died by Famine. King Birger having by this Treacherous
fact animated the whole Kingdom against him, sought for Aid in Denmark; and
having obtained some Forces, shifted with them from place to place, till some
of them were suprized at Sudercoping, and the Danish Horse having also left
Nycoping, the King, destitute of all, retired with the Queen into Gethland,
leaving his Son Magnus in the Castle of Stegeburgh. The Swedes having
immediately after invested the Place, forced it to surrender by Famine, and
sent Magnus a Prisoner to Stockholm. The Senate of the Kingdom made there
Matthew (...) Regent of Sweden, 1319.
who vigorously prosecuted the Remnants of the King's Party, which obliged King
Birger to seek for shelter to Christopher King of Denmark.

7. Magnus Smocck.
After K. Birger had left Gothland, the Estates assembled at Vpsal, chose for
their King Magnus the Son of D. Erick being then but 3 years old. The Year next
following Magnus the Son of K. Birger, notwithstanding that the Senate and
Estates of the Kingdom had sworn Fealty to him as to their future King, was
villainously sentenced to death and beheaded accordingly, and King Birger and
his Queen died soon after for Grief. But the Swedes, who had conceived great
hopes of their new King, found themselves extremely deceived in their
Expectation after the death of of Ketelmundson, who at first managed affairs
with great Prudence. For the King being now of age married Blanch the Daughter
of an Earl of Namur, and laying aside the old Counselors made use of the
Advice of his young Favorites, among whom one Benedict born in West-Gothland
had the chief place. The Inhabitants of Schonen being sorely oppressed by the
Holsteiners, put themselves under his protection, which was afterward
confirmed by Waldemar King of Denmark, and the Sound, by common consent, made
the common Borders of these two Kingdoms on that side. After he had ruled
twelve years in peace, he undertook an Expedition against the Russians, which
succeeded very ill, being obliged to redeem the peace by the surrender of a
part of Carelia. His Treasury having by this War been mightily exhausted, he
not only imposed new and heavy Taxes upon the people, but also pawned a great
many of the Crown Lands. Pope Clement VI. also had excommunicated him because
he had applied the Revenues of S. Peter, given to the Roman Chair by Olaus
Skotkonung, to the use of the Russian War. The People being extremely
discontented at these Proceedings, the Sena^e persuaded the King that he should
cause his two Sons to be declared Kings, viz. Brick of Sweden, and Haquin of
Norway, which was done accordingly. The Nobility being now headed by a new
King* began to withdraw from their obedience to the old King, and killed his
Favorite Benedict. The King who now began to see his Errors, sought for Aid
from the King of Denmark, which so exasperated the Nobility, that they obliged
the young King to take up Arms against his Father, which occasioned a bloody
War, till at last the Kingdom was divided betwixt them, the Father having got
Vpland, Gothland, Wermeland, Dabt, North-Halland, 1357.
West-Gothland and Ocland. But Sh^^^n, Bleckingen, South-Halland,
East-Gothland, Smaland and Finland fell to the Son's share.

But notwithstanding this agreement, the jealousy continued betwixt the Father
and Son, and not long after the Father having sent for his Son under pretense
of some Business of great moment, he was there poisoned by his Mother. By his
death King Magnus being put again into the possession of the whole Kingdom,
studied nothing but revenge against the Nobility. The better to encompass his
design, he made an underhand Alliance with the King of Denmark unto whom he
surrendered Shonen again; who not only took possession of it, but also by
connivance of King Magnus fell into Gothland and Oeland, 1361.
where he killed a great many Boors, plundered the whole Country, and
demolished Borgholm. The Swedes being thus put to a nonplus submit themselves
to the protection of Haquin King of Denmark, who made his Father Magnus a
Prisoner in the Castle of Calmar. The Senate of the Kingdom then persuaded King
Haquin to marry the Daughter of Henry Earl of Holstein, which he seemingly
consented to at that time. But the Bride in her Voyage into Sweden, having been
driven on the Coast of Denmark, was detained by Waldemar King of Denamark, who
intended to marry his Daughter to King Haquin. Albert Duke of Me^klenburgh and
the Earls of Holstein did denounce War against the King of Denmark if he did
not release the Bride, but King Waldemar had in the mean while so well managed
the Affairs with Haquin, that he resolved to marry Margaret his Daughter. The
Bride was then set at Liberty, but being arrived in Sweden was so slightly
received by King Magnus, who in the mean time had obtained his Liberty, that
she retired into a Nunnery; and those Senators who urged the King to perform
his Marriage Contract, were by Magnus banished the Kingdom, 1363.
who soon after married his Son to Margaret, that was then but eleven years
old. At this Wedding which was held at Copenhagen, Waldemar caused the Parents
of Haquin to be poisoned, which worked so violently upon Blenha, that she died
immediately, but King Magnus was preserved by the skill of his Physicians.

8. Albert Duke of Mecklenburgh.
Those Swedish Lords that were banished by King Magnus, having for some time
lived in Gothland did at last agree among themselves to elect Henry Earl of
Holstein, King of Sweden. But he being a Man in years, and not willing to
entangle himself in those troublesome Affairs, recommended to them Albert Duke
of Mecklenburgh, King Magnus's Sisters Son. The banished Lords therefore having
chosen his second Son, whose name also was Albert their King, carried him into
Gothland, and from thence to Stockholm, which they easily took, being assisted
by a strong party within the City. Having then called together such of the
Nobility as they knew to be Enemies to King Magnus, they proclaimed Albert King
in the City of Stockholm. 1364.
Magnus and his Son having thereupon got together considerable Forces both in
Sweden and Denmark, marched against King Albert into Vpland, and were met him
near by Encoping, where a bloody Battle ensued, the Victory inclined to
Albert's side, King Magnus was taken Prisoner, Haquin wounded but escaped the
Hands of his Enemies. During the imprisonment of King Magus, 1365.
Sweden was reduced to a most miserable estate, by the Wars that were carried
on betwixt King Albert and Haquin and Waldemar, the two last sending continual
Supplies into Sweden to uphold their Party, and Haquin was grown so strong,
that he defeated King Albert in a Battle and besieged Stockholm. At last it was
agreed that King Magnus should have his Liberty, 1371.
paying a Ransom of 12000 Marks of sine Silver, and resign the Crown of Sweden
and Shonen to King Albert, which was performed accordingly, King Magnus
retiring into Norway, where he was drowned by accident. King Haquin did not
long survive his Father, and his Son Olaus dying very young, Queen Margaret
after his decease was sole Queen of Norway. By the Death of this Olaus, the
ancient Race of the Swedish Kings was extinguished, which ever since the time
of St. Erick viz. for the space of 220 Years had ruled in Sweden. 1376.
Not long after, Waldemar King of Denmark died without leaving any Male Heirs
behind him. In whose stead the Danes to unite Norway with Denmark, declared his
Daughter Margaret their Queen. King Albert by the Death of his Enemies being
now established in the Throne of Sweden began to slight the Swedish Nobility,
and to employ the Germans in his Service, who grew very Rich and Potent; and
his Treasury being exhausted by the war which was carried on against Denmark he
demanded from the States that part of the Revenues of the Clergy, and some of
the Lands which belonged to the Nobility should be incorporated with the Crown,
which they refusing to consent to, he nevertheless pursued his Intentions by
open Violence. Whilst therefore some that were no loosers by it and hoped to
partake of the Booty, sided with the King, the rest were consulting how to
deliver themselves from these oppressions, and having renounced their obedience
to King Albert, Margaret.
sought for Protection by Margaret Queen of Denmark, which she granted them,
upon condition that if she should deliver them from King Albert, she was to be
Queen of Sweden. Which the Swedes being forced to accept of, she was proclaimed
Queen of Sweden. This proved the occasion of unspeakable miseries, both Parties
committing great Outrages in the Country, which was quite exhausted before, by
King Albert who also at last was forced to pawn the Isle of Gothland for 20000
Nobles to the Prussian Knights of the Cross; 12. Sept.
notwithstanding which being not able to defray at length the Charges of the
War, 1388.
he challenged Queen Margaret to a Battle to be fought in the Plains of
Talkoping in West-Gothland. The Battle of Tal^oping.
The appointed day being come, a bloody Battle was fought in the
beforementioned Plain, where the Queen's Forces at last obtained the Victory,
King Albert and his Son being taken Prisoners. But this Victory rather
increased than diminished the miseries under which the Kingdom had groaned
before, because the Dukes of Mocklenburgh; Earls of Holstein and the Hanse
Towns sided with King Albert's Party, who sent constant Supplies from Rostock
and Wismar by Sea to Stockholm, Calmar and other strongholds in their
possession, from whence the German Garrisons made miserable havoc all round
the Country, and the Sea Coasts were extremely infested by Privateers, which
had quite ruined the Trade of the Kingdom. This pernicious War having thus
lasted seven Years, a Treaty of Peace was set on foot at Helsingburgh, which
proving fruitless, 1394.
another meeting was appointed at Aleholm, 1395.
where it was agreed that the King, his Son, and the rest of the Prisoners of
note should be set at Liberty, under condition that he within the space of
three Years, resign all his pretensions to the Kingdom unto Queen Margaret, or
else return to Prison; and that in case of failure, the Cities of Lubeck,
Hamburgh, Dantzick, Thorn, Elbingen, Saralsund, Stetin and Campen should oblige
themselves to pay 60000 Marks of fine Silver to the Queen. Thus King Albert
returned into Mecklenburgh, after he had reigned 23 Years in Sweden. He had
notwithstanding this agreement not laid aside his hope of recovering his
Kingdom, for which he had made great preparations, if his Son had not died, two
Years after, when he at the appointed time resigned his pretensions, and the
places as yet in his possession to the Queen, and at last ended his days in his
native Country of Mecklenburgh. Thus Margaret became Queen over all the three
Northern Kingdoms, which she governed with extraordinary Wisdom, yet so that
the Danes were much better satisfied with her Government than the Swedes.

9. Erick Duke of Pomerania.
Queen Margaret having restored Peace to the Northren Kingdoms, her next care
was to unite these three Crowns for ever on one Head. For which purpose she had
sent for Henry a young Duke of Pomerania, her Sister's Son, whose name to
please the Swedes, she changed into that of Erick. Union made at Calmar betwixt
Sweden, Denmark and Norway.
This Prince, though very young, was in the second Year after the releasing of
King Albert, proclaimed King. In the Year next following, the Senators and
Nobility of all the three Kingdoms being assembled at Calmar, 1396.
where also the young Erick was crowned, the Union of the three Kingdoms was
proposed, which at last was perfected and confirmed by Oath and by the Hands
and Seals of the States of the three Kingdoms; which might have tended to the
great Advantage of these three Nations, if the Danes had not afterward broke
this Union, and endeavored to make themselves Masters of Sweden, which proved
the occasion of bloody Wars betwixt these two Kingdoms. But because King Erick
was but very young Queen Margaret had the administration of Affairs during his
Minority, when the Swedes and Norwegians soon perceived that the Articles of
this Union were likely to be but ill observed, since the Queen preferred the
Da^es and other Strangers much before them, and what Taxes she levied in
Sweedland, were for the most part spent in Denmark, where she generally
resided. In the eighth Year after King Erick was crowned, Queen Margates
attempted to re-gain the Isle of Gothland from the Prussian Knights, without
paying the Ransom; but having not succeeded in her Enterpise, she redeemed it
for 10000 Nobles. 1410.
King Erick being by this time come to his riper Years, 1412.
married Philippa the Daughter of Henry IV. King of England, and having after
his Aunt's Death, which happened not long after, taken upon him the sole
management of Affairs, he was entangled in a tedious War with Henry Earl of
Holstein, the Hanse Towns, and the Dukes of Mecklenburgh and Saxony, about the
Duchy of Sleswick, which at last cost him his three Kingdoms. For his Subjects
being over charged with Taxes, which were employed toward the War, that could
at the best only prove beneficial to Denmark, and their Commerce being
interrupted with the Hanse Towns, it occasioned great discontents among them;
besides this, the King's Officers had used the Swedes very tyrannically, and
the King had upon several occasions receded from the Articles of Union made at
Calmar, especially when he sent the most ancient Swedish Records into Denmark,
which at last obliged the Swedes to take desperate Counsels. The first
Insurrection was made by the Dalekarls, who being headed by a certain ancient
Nobleman in those parts called Engelbrecht Engelbrechtson, besieged one of the
King's Officers called Josse Erichson, who had exercised great Tyranny over
them, in his Castle, neither could they be appealed till he was deposed from
his Office, and another put in his place. But this Calm did not last long, for
the Boors being again stirred up by Engelbrecht overrun all the neighboring
Country, destroying with Fire and Sword, all such as would not side with them;
and being joined by one Erick Pue^^, who headed the Northlanders, they took a
great many strongholds, killing all the Foreigners they met withal, whose seats
they destroyed, and at last forced the Senate of the Kingdom assembled at
Wadstena, to renounce their Allegiance to the King. These intestine Commotions
obliged King Erick to make Peace with the Holst^i^^rs and the Hanse Towns, and
to turn all his Forces against the Swedes. But his Fleet being for a great part
destroyed by Storms, he arrived with the rest at Stockholm, but not being able
to cope with so great a multitude, as Engelbrocht had raised against him; he
was fain to make a truce with them for twelve Months. In the mean while he
retired into Denmark. leaving only a Garrison of 600 Men in the Castle of
Stockholm. After his departure Engelbrocht was declared Generalissi^^ over all
the Forces of the Kingdom, who, at last upon the persuasion of the Archbishop
Cluf, agreed to a Treaty to be set on foot betwixt the King and his Subjects,
where it was agreed that the Swedes should again acknowledge him for their
King, provided he would stand to the Union, which the King at that time
consented to, reserving only to his free disposal the three Castles of
Stockholm, Calmar and Nycoping, all the rest being to be committed to the
Government of the Natives of Sweedland. Thus things seemed to be restored to
the ancient State, but no sooner had the King got the aforesaid Castles into
his possession, but he began to recede, and having left a Garrison of 500 Men
in the Castle of Stockholm, retired upon a sudden into Denmark. King Erick
having thus left the Kingdom a second time, the Swedish Senators, who feared
that he might soon return with a greater Force, being assembled at Arboka,
called together the whole Nobility, and a Burger-Master out of each City, to
consult about the present exigency of Affairs; but before they could come to
any steady resolution, Engelbrecht by the assistance of some of the Citizens of
Stockholm, had made himself Master of that City, and besieged the King's
Lieutenant in the Castle. The Treaty being thus broke of, and the flame of
Rebellion rekindled, Charles Cnutson.
the Marshal Charles Cnutson was declared Governor and General of the Kingdom:
This was like to have occasioned great Disturbances, if Engelbrecht, who
pretended to be injured by this Choice, had not been first appeased with great
Promises, and afterward murdered by one Benedict Suenson, with whom he had an
old quarrel. 1436.
But Erick Pu^ke the chief Companion of Engelbrecht taking up his Friend's
Quarrel against his Murderers that were protected by Charles Cnutson, it
occasioned great Jealousies betwixt them. The Castles of Stockholm and Calmar
being also in the King's possession, and some of the Chiefest of the Kingdom
grown very jealous of the greatness of the Marshal, the Treaty was renewed with
the King at Calmar, who came thither in Person, and promised to put into all
Offices and Places of Trust, Natives of Sweden, and having made Benedict
Suenson Governor of the Castle of Calmar, appointed an Assembly of the Senate
and Nobility to be held in September following when he would be ready to
surrender all the Strongholds into the hands of the Native Subjects of Sweden,
But in the mean time the King in his Voyage from Gothland to Suderkoping, was
overtaken by a violent Tempest, wherein most of his Ships having been lost, he
narrowly escaped drowing. As soon as the Swedes got notice of this Misfortune,
not knowing whether the King was alive or dead, it was resolved that the last
Treaty made at Calmar should remain in Force. Pursuant to this Decree, the
Marshal having partly by great Promises, partly by Threats, got into the
possession of all the Castles of the Kingdom, seemed to want nothing to
accomplish his Designs, but the Title of a King, where^t Erick Pueke being
vexed to the Soul, raised a great number of Boors against him, who having
defeated the Marshal and his Forces, would quickly have put an end to his
Greatness, if he under pretense of reconciliation had not invited Erick Pueke
to an interview, and notwithstanding his Faith given, sent him to Stockholm,
where he was beheaded. In the mean while, the Senators of the Kingdom having
got notice that the King was alive, 1437.
appointed an Assembly to be held at Calmar, where the King was to fulfill the
former Treaty; but the King not coming at the appointed time, Commissioners
were sent into Denmark to treat with him about the performance of the Agreement
made at Calmar, which he refusing to do, they made an underhand League with
some of the great Men in Denmark against King Erick. the effects of which he
felt soon after. Whilst these things were transacting in Denmark, the Marshal
had by his cunning got the whole Power of the Kingdom into his hands, and
obtained from the Senate in Sweden, to appoint a certain day for the King to
appear in Sweden, and put an end to those Differences that were then betwixt
him and the Estates, and in case of a refusal, they renounced their Allegiance
to him. But the Archbishop Oluf, and some of the Chief Men of the Kingdom, that
were dissatisfied at the Marshal's proceedings did so far prevail by their
Authority, that a General Assembly of all the Senators of the three Northern
Kingdoms should be held at Calmar, which in all likelihood might have had
better Success than before, if the Archbishop had not been poisoned in his
Journey thither by the Marshal. Notwithstanding this, the rest of the Senators
appeared at Calmar, but the King's Commissioners refusing to acknowledge and to
confirm the Treaty made at Calmar, which the Swedes insisted upon, the whole
meeting proved fruitless. In the mean time King Erick was retired with all his
Treasure out of Denmark into Gothland, and the Danish Senators who as well as
the Swedes had been dissatisfied with the King for a considerable time before,
agreed with the Swedes to renounce their Allegiance to him, and to choose one
in his stead, that would maintain the Union betwixt these Kingdoms. The Danes
therefore sent to Christopher Duke of Bavaria, Christopher Duke of Bavaria.
who being King Erick's Sister's Son, had for some time lived in Denmark,
desiring him to accept of that Crown. 1439.
As soon as he arrived in Denmark, Ambassadors were sent to the Marshal and the
other Senators of Sweden, that were then at Calmar, to notify the arrival of
the Duke of Bavaria, and to treat with them to receive him also for their King,
as the only means to maintain the Union and Peace betwixt those Kingdoms. The
Marshal and his Party were not a little surprised at this Proposition; but
perceiving that, at the Diet held at Arboga, most of the Estates were inclined
to maintain the Union, and receive Christopher for their King, they also agreed
with the rest of the Estates, and Christopher was received by the Marshal and
the Senators with great Pomp at Calmar, from whence being conducted to
Stockholm, and from thence to Vpsal, he was there crowned King of Sweden, and
soon after returned into Denmark. After he had reigned four years, he married
Dorothee the Daughter of John Marquis of Brandenburgh; and King Erick, who was
yet in the possession of Gothland, doing considerable damage to the Swedish
Ships, he was prevailed upon by the Senate to undertake an Expedition into
Gothland. Whilst every body was in great expectation about the success of this
Enterprise, he upon the sudden clapped up a Peace with King Erick, leaving him in
the quiet possession of Gothland. 1448.
He died at Helsinburgh, in his Journey to Joncoping, whither he had called
together the Senate and Nobility of Sweden, having left great Legacies to
several Churches in Sweden; but the Danes, who had all his Ships, Ammunition,
rich Furniture and ready Money in their hands, would not pay one groat of it.

After the death of K. Christopher, Charles Cnutson.
the Estates of Sweden that were assembled at Stockholm were divided into two
parties, some of them being for deferring the Election of a new King, till such
time as the Senators of the 3 kingdoms could, at a general Assembly choose a
King, according to the Union agreed upon betwixt them; but the Marshal and his
Party, which was the strongest, were, without having any respect to the Union,
for choosing immediately a King of their own: this Contest lasted for several
days, and that with such heats that they were ready to come to blows, till at
last the Marshal Charles Cnutson's Party prevailed, who was chosen King of
Sweden. But the Danes offered the Crown of Denmark to Adolf Duke of Holstein,
and he by reason of his old Age, having refused to accept of it, they made
Christian Earl of Oldenburg, the Duke's Sister's Son, their King. Charles, at
the very beginning of his Reign, besieged King Erick in the Castle of Wisby,
who having deluded the Swedish Generals with a Truce, did, in the mean while
provide himself with all Necessaries, and was at last relieved by Christian
King of Denmark; who sent him into Pomerania, where, in the City of Rugen, he
ended his days, without making any further pretension to the Crown.

In the mean while the Norwegians, except some of the Nobility, had made
Charles also their King, which occasioned almost a continual War betwixt him
and Christian king of Denmark, in which King Charles was pretty successful at
first; but after the death of the brave Thord Bond, his General, who was
barbarously murdered; King Christian, with the Assistance of the Archbishop of
Sweden and several others of the Swedish Nobility, who were Enemies to King
Charles, proved too hard for him: for the Archbishop having surprised the
King's Forces at Strengness, besieged him in the City of Stockholm; so that
King Charles finding himself reduced to the utmost Extremity, resolved to
embarque with all his Treasure for Dantzick, where he arrived safely, after a
Voyage of three days, in the tenth year of his Reign. Christian I.
No sooner had King Charles left the Kingdom, 1458.
but the Archbishop, having got all the Stronholds of the Kingdom into his
hands, sent to Christian King of Denmark, to invite him into Sweden, who being
arrived with a considerable Fleet at Stockholm, was, by the Senate and Nobility
declared King of Sweden, and crowned at Vpsal. He reigned at first with a
general satisfaction of the Swedes; but some years after, by his Cruelty and
heavy Impositions laid upon the People, became odious to them: for he not only
caused some of the Great men, that were falsely accused of holding a
Correspondency with King Charles, to be tortured to death, but also exercised
great Cruelty against a great number of Boors, that were risen in Arms against
him; and having conceived a jealousy of the Archbishop, he caused him to be
carried Prisoner to Copenhagen. This so exasperated Katil the Bishop of
Lyncoping that he raised an Insurrection against the King, and forced him to
retire into Denmark: and tho the King returned the year next following with a
considerable Army, yet being defeated by the Bishop's Forces, he was forced to
leave the Kingdom a second time; 1464.
and the Bishop having laid siege to the City and Castle of Stockholm, where
King Christian had left a Garrison, sent for assistance to King Charles, who
being glad of this Opportunity, came with some Forces (which he had gathered in
Poland and Prussia) into Sweden, where he was no sooner arrived, but the City
of Stockholm was surrendered to him, and he again received as King of Sweden.
But this Joy was of no long continuance; for a difference being arisen betwixt
him and Bishop Katil, about the exchanging the Archbishop that was Prisoner at
Copenhagen, the said Bishop did underhand agree with King Christian to restore
him to the Kingdom of Sweden, under condition that he should set the Archbishop
at liberty. According to this agreement, a Reconciliation being made betwixt K
Christian and the Archbishop; the latter was received very splendidly by the
Bishop, and was no sooner arrived in Sweden, but having raised some Forces
against King Charles, defeated him in a bloody Battle fought upon the Ice near
Stockholm, and forced him to abjure his Right and Pretension to the Kingdom.
After the King's Resignation, the Archbishop made himself Master of all the
Strongholds of the Kingdom, without any opposition, except that one Nils
Sture, a particular Friend of K. Charles's, traversed sometimes his Designs.
This Nils Sture and one Erick Axelson, Governor of Wibourg in Finland, having
at last made a party against him, played their Game so well that Erick Axelson,
Erick Axelson,
who had married King Charles's Daughter was declared Regent of the Kingdom.
1466.
But the A. Bish. was obliged to surrender Stockholm and some other Strong
holds into the Regent's hands. Nevertheless the hatred betwixt the two
exasperated Factions, headed by Nils Sture and Erick Nilson (of which party was
also the Archbishop) continued with great animosity. Erick Nilson and his
Party, under pretense of protecting the Archbishop against the Power of King
Charles and his adherents, endeavored the Restoration of King Christian, but
Nils Sture and his Party openly declared, that they would either have King
Charles restored, or at least maintain the Regent in his Station. These two
Parties did not only commit great Insolences and Murders, making great havoc
all over the Country, but at last also came to an open War, wherein the
Archbishop's Party being worsted, he died for grief; and the Common People in
hopes to put an end to the miseries of the Kingdom once more restored Charles
to the Crown.

But Erick Nilson, Erick Carlson, T^olle and some others having again raised
some Forces against him, 1468.
and surprised his Army during the time of the Truce, again forced him to seek
for shelter in the Dalers, whither being pursued by Erick Carlson, he with an
unequal number gave him a signal overthrow, forcing him to retire into Denmark
King Charles being soon after returned to Stockholm, (which City and the whole
Kingdom he recommended before his death to Steen Scure his Sister's Son) he
there died in the same year, leaving the Kingdom in such a confusion, 1470.
that for a twelve month after, there was a mere Anarchy in Sweden, some having
declared for King Christian, some for Steen Sture to be made Regent of the
Kingdom. At last the Government was committed to Steen Sture, who having
vanquished King Christian in a memorable Battle fought near Stockholm, 1471.
and forced him to retire with his broken Forces by Sea into Denmark* got into
the possession of the whole Kingdom of Sweden. And though King Christian kept the
Regent of Sweden in a continual alarm as long as he lived, and several meetings
were held concerning his Restoration, yet there was no open War betwixt the
two Kingdoms, and Steen Sture reigned for a considerable time with a general
applause; so that King Christian during his Regency, never durst return into
Sweden, but died in Denmark in the year 1481.

After the Death of King Christian, 1481.
the Danes and Norwegians having made John the Son of Christian their King, the
Swedes also agreed with King John upon certain Articles, which the King having
confirmed to them under his Seal, he was declared King of Sweden. But the
Regent Steen Sture, notwithstanding this solemn Transaction remained in the
possession of the Kingdom for fourteen Years after, under pretense that the
Danes had not fulfilled their Promise according to the Articles of the Treaty,
during which time the Kingdom was miserably afflicted by intestine Divisions,
and the Wars which were carried on against Denmark and Russia. The Senators
therefore of Sweden having in vain endeavored to persuade Steen Sture to lay
down his Office, at last deposed him from the Regency, and craved Assistance
from King John, John II.
who having defeated Steen Sture and his Party near Stockholm, was by the
Senate and the Regent himself received as King of Sweden and his Son Christian
declared his Successor after his death in that Kingdom. 1497.
This King reigned very peaceably for a while, but after some Years by the
persuasions of some Courtiers, fell into the same Error which had been the
undoing of his Predecessors: For under pretense that the Revenues of the Crown
were extremely diminished, he obliged Steen Sture and several others to
surrender the Fiefs belonging to the Crown, which they were in possession of,
some of which he bestowed upon the Danes and Germans. Besides this, his
Governors had committed great Insolences in their Provinces, which so
exasperated the People, that as soon as the News of his defeat in Ditmarsen was
spread over Sweden, the Swedes being headed by Steen Sture, assembled at
Wadstana, where having renounced their Allegiance, they bid open defiance to
him, alleging that he, had not fulfilled the Articles of the Treaty made at
Calmar.

The King being surprised at this unexspected News sailed forthwith for
Denmark, leaving the Queen with a good Carrison at Stockholm, which City was
thereupon besieged by Sture; who being soon after again constituted Regent of
the Kingdom, forced the Castle of Stockholm to a surrender, and got almost all
the rest of the Strongholds in Sweden into his possession; notwithstanding
which, the Danes burnt Elfsburgh and Oresteen, and committed great Cruelties in
West-Gothland, under the Conduct of Christian King John's Son, who had done the
like not long before in Norway, where he had rooted out almost all the Noble
Families. Yet because the Queen was as yet in Sweden, the fury of the Danes was
for a while appeased by the intercession of the Lubeckers and the Cardinal
Raimow, who having procured Liberty for her to return into Denmark, she was
conducted by the Regent to the Frontiers of Swaland. But in his return to
Ioncoping, he died suddenly, and his death having been kept secret for a while,
there was a strong suspicion that he had been poisoned by Mereta the Widow of
Cnut Alfson, thereby to open the way to her Bridegroom Suante Sture, to the
Regency of the Kingdom. As soon as the news of the Regent's death was spread
all over the Kingdom, 1503.
the Estates convened at Stockholm, where it was disputed for some time,
whether King John should be recalled, or Suante Nilson Sture should be made
Regent, till the latter having prevailed, the said Sture was made Regent of the
Kingdom. 1504.
Then the War was renewed with King John, which was carried on with various
Success, both Parties committing great devastations, without any other
remarkable advantage. The Danes having at first stirred up the Emperor, the
Pope and the Russians against the Swedes, did considerable mischief, but the
Regent having made a Peace with the Russians, and set the Lubeckers against
Denmark* retook Calmar and Bornholm, and would in all likelihood have made
greater Progresses, if he had not soon after died at Westekaos, in the eighth
year of his Regency. After the death of this Regent, there were again great
Divisions in the Senate about the Election of a new Regent; 1511.
the younger sort were for choosing Steen Sture the deceased Regent's Son:
Steen Sture the younger.
But the Archbishop and Bishops, and the rest of the ancient Senators, would
have elected Gustavus Trolle an ancient Wise and experienced Man. After several
prorogations and very hot debates, 1512.
at last Steen Sture, who was favored by the common People, and had most of
the Strongholds of the Kingdom in his hands, was declared Regent, and King John
died in the year next following at Ablburgh in Jutland. 1513.
After his death, the Danes and Norwegians had declared Christian his Son their
King but the Swedes who had not forgot his cruelties formerly committed in
West-Gothland desired time to consider of a thing of such importance. King
Christian finding himself after four years tergiversation deceived in his
hopes, and that the Regent would not part with his Power by fair means, did not
only stir the Pope Leo X. up against him, but also brought Gustavus Trolle the
new Arbhbishop by great Presents over to his side, and persuaded the Russians
to make an in-road into Finland. Steen Sture being soon convinced of the
Archbishop's sinister Intentions, had tendered the Oath to him, which he
refusing to take, was besreged by the Regent in his Castle of Stecka. Then it
was that the Archbishop called King Christian to his Assistance, who having
taken some Ships laden with Ammunition belonging to the Regent, and in vain
endeavored to relieve the besieged Castle, the War was begun on both sides.
For the Archbishop having been forced to surrender the Castle and his Office,
Pope Leo thereupon excommunicated the Regent, laying a Fine of 100000 Ducats
upon the Swedes, and enjoining the execution thereof to King Christian.
Pursuant to this Decree, the King of Denmark fell with a great Army into
Sweden, and was met by the Regent and his Forces in West-Gothland, but the
Regent having received a Wound there, of which he died soon after at
Strengness, his Army first retreated, and being deprived of a Leader,
afterward dispersed. King Christian then having divided his Army, sent one
part into West and East-Gothland, which were soon subdued, and marched with the
rest to Strengness. 1520.


The Archbishop taking hold of this opportunity, reassumed his Archi-Episcopal
Dignity, and being assisted by two other Bishops and seven of the Senators of
the Kingdom did declare Christian King of Sweden in the name of the Estates at
Vpsal. The King having been Crowned by the Archbishop Trolle, and received the
City of Stockh^lm by surrender into his hands, treated the Swedes at (...) with
abundance of humanity, but soon after, found out a Weapon wherewith to destroy
his Adversaries, and this was the business concerning the degradation of the
Archbishop and the ruining of his Castle of Stecka. For though the King by an
Amnestie had pardoned all past Offenses, yet no satisfaction having been given
to the Pope, the Archbishop in his Name, demanded a million pounds of Silver in
reparation of the damages done to the Church at Vpsal, and his Castle of
Stecka. And to make up the matter, it was pretended that Gunpowder had been
conveyed into the King's Palace to blow him up. Steen Sture's Widow, his Mother
in Law, fifteen others besides the Senare and Commonalty of Stockholm, were
accused as Actors and Abettors, who were all condemned as Heretics, ninety
four of them, all People of Note, being beheaded at Stockholm and their
Servants hanged up with Boots and Spurs. The deceased Regent's body having been
dug up, was exposed among the rest of the executed Persons, and the Quarters
set up and down the Country. His Widow and Mother in Law were forced to
purchase their Lives with the loss of their whole Estate, and were nevertheless
with a great many other Women of Quality committed to Prison. In Finland,
Hemoning Gudde, notwithstanding his former Services done to him, was with ten
more executed by the King's Command, the Abbot of the Convent at Nydala was
with eleven Monks drowned by his Orders, and two Gentlemen's Sons, one of nine,
the other of seven years, beheaded at Joncoping, and after he had in this
manner murdered 600 of his Swedish Subjects he returned into Denmark

9. But in the mean while that King Christian was busied in bringing the Swedes
under the Danish yoke, by all manner of inhumane Barbarities, Gustavus I.
Gustavus Erichson (whose Father had been beheaded by the Tyrant, and his
Mother thrown in Prison) had sheltered himself among the Dalek^rls, who being
made sensible of the danger which threatened them and the whole Kingdom, had
made Gustave their Head, whose example being followed by the Estates of Sweden,
they soon after declared him Regent of that Kingdom, except the Archbishop and
his Party, that remained firm to the Danish Interest. King Christian being
violently exasperated at Gustave, revenged himself upon his Mother and two
Sisters, whom he sent from Stokholm to Copenhagen, where they perished in
Prison; he issued also out an Order, that no quarter should be given to any
Swedish Nobleman, and committed great Barbarities wherever he came. The Swedes
on the other hand, under the Conduct of their Regent Gustave, repaid the Danes
with the same Coin wherever they met them, and with the Assistance of the
Lubeckers besieged Stockholm, which was as yet in King Christian's Possession,
when they received the joyful news out of Denmark, that the Jutlanders had
renounced their Allegiance to King Christian. 1523.
This so encouraged Gustave and his Party, that they did not only drive King
Christian's Forces out of most Provinces of the Kingdom, retook Ocland and
Borkholm, but also recovered the Castle and City of Calmar, and made Gustave
King of Sweden, who thereupon immediately summoned Stockholm to a surrender,
and the Garrison being without hopes of relief, surrendered the City and Castle
to the Lubeckers, who restored the same to King Gustave. In the mean while King
Christian was retired with his Queen into the Netherlands, and the Jutlanders
having made Frederick I. King Christian's Uncle, their King, would fain have
persuaded the Swedes to follow their example, but these being not ambitious of
continuing the Union with Denmark, had refused their proffer, and chosen
Gustave their King. But King Gustave finding the Treasury mightily exhausted by
these long intestine Wars, he not only taxed the Clergy to pay considerable
Sums toward the payment of his Soldiers, but also made bold with the
superfluous Ornaments of the Churches, against which, Brask the Bishop of
Lincoping having protested and made complaint thereof to Johannes Magnus the
Pope's Legate, Peter Bishop of Westeraas endeavored to raise an Insurrection
among the Dalekerls.

But whilst these Bishops were employed in maintaining their Privileges, the
Protestant Religion had begun to spread all over the Kingdom. The same was by
some Merchants and German Soldiers first introduced into Sweden, and some
Swedish Students, that had studied at Wittenbergh, had brought along with them
into their Native Country, both the Doctrine and Writings of Luther. Among
these one Olaus Petri was the chiefest, who having been an Auditor of Luther,
at his return into Sweden was made a Canon and Protonotary to the Bishops of
Strenguess: this Man after the death of the Bishop, having brought Lars
Anderson the Archdeacon over to his Opinion, began not only to defend Luther's
Doctrine publicly in the Schools, but also to publish the same from the
Pulpit. The Bishop being absent, Dr. Nils Dean of that Chapter, with all his
might opposed this new Doctrine, which being come to the King's Ears, he
advised with Lars Anderson, who having instructed him in the chief Points of
it, Reformation begun in Sweden.
and in what manner a great many German Princes had taken away the superfluous
riches of the Clergy, began to hearken to his Opinion, resolving nevertheless
to go on cautiously in this business, and to see how some Princes in Germany
should proceed in this Affair, as also how the Bishops in Sweden would relish
this Doctrine. In the mean while Pope Hadrian IV. had sent his Legate into
Sweden to endeavor the extirpation of this Heresy, and the Clergy of Sweden
grew every day more refractory, refusing to pay the Taxes imposed upon them, as
being contrary to their Privileges. On the other hand, Olaus Petri being
encouraged by the King, was not silent, but defended his Cause both by Dispute
and Writing, with such Success, that the King not only constituted him Minister
in the great Church of Stockholm, and put into other vacant Church-Benefices,
such Ministers as had studied at Wittenbergh, but also constituted over the
Dominicans and Black Friars, such Priors as he knew to be faithful to him, and
such of them as were Foreigners he banished the Kingdom, and told unfeignedly
to Bishop Brask* that he could not deny Protection to the Lutherans, as long as
they were not convinced of any Crime or Error.

But all this while one Soren Norby, who still adhered to King Christian, had
Gothland in his Possession, and did considerable damage to the Swedes in their
Trade; against him King Gustavus having sent Bernhard van Melan with some
Forces to reduce the said Island, and Norby finding himself too weak put
himself and the Island under the Protection of Denmark, which occasiaoned some
differences between these two Northern Kings* who had been very good Friends
ever before. About this time Olaus Petri was publicly married in the great
Church at Stockholm, and the King had not only demanded the Tenths of the
Clergy toward the maintenance of his Forces, but also Quartered some of his
Horse in the Monasteries, which so incensed Bishop Brask, that he forbid in his
whole Diocese so much as to name the Doctrine of Luther. But the King having
understood that Olaus Petri was busy in Translating the New Testament into the
Swedish Tongue, First Translation of the New Testament into Swedish.
commanded the Archbishop, to take care that the Roman Catholics also should
make a Translation, which though it ^elished very ill with the Bishops, yet
were they fain to comply with the King's command, who, to mortify them the
more, also ordered a Disputation to be held at Vpsal betwixt Dr. Pieter Galle
and Olaus Petri, concerning the chiefest Points in question betwixt the Roman
Catholics and Lutherans, where Olaus Petri had much the better, and his
Translation was approved of before the others, which had been patched up by so
many Translators. In the mean time the Danish Clergy had given a considerable
Subsidy to their King to be employed against King Christian, wherefore King
Gustave, taking hold of this opportunity, demanded a considerable supply from
the Swedish Clergy, but these objecting that it was against their Privileges
and Rights, the King ordered the same to be examined in another Dispute betwixt
Olaus Petri, and Dr. Pieter Galle, and because they were not able to prove
their Title out of the Holy Scripture, the King concluded them to be dependent
on his pleasure, and at the Diet held at Westeraos not only demanded a supply
from the Clergy, but also proposed that the superfluous Bells should be taken
out of the Churches, and be employed toward the payment of the Debt due to the
Lubeckers. And because the Archbishop grew more troublesome every day, the King
first took him into Custody, and afterward sent him Ambassador into Poland,
from whence he never returned into Sweden. He also commanded another
Disputation to be held concerning the chief Points in question betwixt the
Lutherans and Roman Catholics, which however met with great opposition from
Bishop Brask, and the rest of the Roman Catholic Clergy, who set up a Country
Fellow, against Gustave. This Fellow pretended to be the Son of Steen Sture
(notwithstanding he was dead a twelve month before) and having got a party
among the Dalekerls, and being upheld by Bishop Brask and the Bishop of
Druntheim in Norway, 1527.
and encouraged in his undertaking by King Frederick of Denmark, laid open
claim to the Crown, threatening all the Lutherans and especially the City of
Stockholm with Fire and Sword, which was the most forward in settling the
Protestant Religion.

About the same time the Emperor had besieged Pope Clement VII. in the Castle
of St. Angelo, wherefore King Gustave taking hold of this Juncture, appointed a
Diet to be held at Westeraos, where in his Declaration he professed; that the
Roman Catholic Clergy had made it their business to charge him with making
Innovation in Religion for no other reason, but that he would not let them
domineer over the Laymen, and had forced them to submit to the Civil Power, and
to give part of their superfluous Riches, some of which they had got by fraud,
toward easing the Common People of those burdensome Taxes (which he hitherto
had been forced to impose upon them.) And that for the same Reason the Emperor
himself had been forced lately to teach the Pope his duty. The same thing was
proposed by the King to the whole Diet, where he told them; that the
superfluous Revenues of the Clergy ought to be annexed to the Crown, and
especially such Lands as since the year 1454 had been given to the Clergy,
should be restored to the right Heirs, promising withal that the Common People
should be for the future eased of their Taxes; in case they would give their
consent to the reduction of the Revenues of the Clergy. And the better to get
the consent of the Temporal Lords and Senators he made a great Banquet, where
he gave the next place to himself to these Senators, whereas the same had
belonged formerly to the Bishops, who now were forced to be contented with the
next place after them, the third place was given to the rest of the Nobility,
the fourth to the inferior Clergy, the fifth to the Citizens, the sixth to the
Boors; which so exasperated the Clergy that they assembled in the Church of St.
Egidius, and secretly took a resolution among themselves not to obey the King
in this Point, not to surrender any of their Revenues, or to recede from their
ancient Religion. And Bishop Brask freely told the King, that the Clergy of the
Kingdom had such a strict dependency on the Pope, that without his consent they
could not do any thing whatsoever. Which as it met with great approbation from
all the rest of the Clergy, and from some of the Temporal Estates, so the King
was so incensed thereat, that he immediately rose from his Seat, and told the
Estates that he was ready to Abdicate the Kingdom, if they would repay him his
Charges and Moneys which he had laid out for that use, and to show them that he
was in earnest, retired for several days with some of his chief Officers into
the Castle. The Estates being much surprised at the King's resolution,
especially when they saw the Citizens of Stockholm to be steadfast to the King,
and that Dr. Peter Galle was worsted by Olaus Petri in a late Disputation,
thought it their best way to beg the King's pardon and to entreat him not to
resign the Crown. Upon their reiterated request the King having been at last
prevailed upon to come out of the Castle, demanded from several Bishops to
surrender into his hands their Castles, and to subscribe a Decree made at this
Diet, concerning the regulating of the Clergy, which they were fain to comply
withal. As soon as the Diet was ended he took not only from the Monasteries
such Lands as had been given to them since the year 1454. Church Lands reduced
in Sweden.
but also several other Church Lands and precious movables, all which he
annexed to the Crown. In the mean while the Bishops and their party were not
idle, but were contriving all manner of mischief against the King, though with
small success. For the Dalekerls, who had made an Insurrection, were frightened
by the King to comply with his commands, and to send away their Leader, the
supposititious S^ure; and Sigismund King of Poland, unto whom the dissatisfied
party had proffered the Crown, did not think fit to accept of it; so that
Bishop Brask, despairing at last of the Roman Catholic Cause, under pretense
of a Journey retired to Dantzick.

The King having surmounted all these difficulties, thought convenient not to
defer any longer his Coronation, 1528.
which having been solemnized at Vpsal with the usual Solemnity: he summoned
the Rebellious Dalekerls to appear before him at Thuana, threatening them with
Fire and Sword if they did not appear at the appointed time; The Rebels being
thoroughly frightened by the King's severity appeared without Arms at the
appointed place, where he caused several of the Ringleaders to be Executed, and
dismissed the rest, after having promised to be obedient for the future. In
Helsingland he appeased the tumultuous multitude with threats, and fined their
Leaders, and having called together a Synod of the Clergy at Orebro, where the
King's Chancellor was President, the chiefest Points of the Popish Doctrine
were there abolished, and in their stead the Protestant Religion introduced,
where it was also ordered, that a Protestant Professor of Divinity should be
Constituted in each Cathedral. This wrought in a manner Miracles among the
Inferior Clergy and Monks, The Protestant Religion Established in Sweden.
who left their Monasteries, were married, and became Ministers in the
Protestant Churches. But the Bishops and their party entered into an Association
with some of the dissatisfied Lords in West Gothland, who accused the King of
Heresy and other Crimes, renouncing their Allegiance to him. These were Headed
by Thuro Johanson the Rix Marshal, who raised an Insurrection among the
Dalekerls, and endeavored also to stir up the West and East Goths, whom he
persuaded to make Magnus Brynteson, a Man in great Authority among them, their
King. But the King having again appeased this tumult by granting his Pardon to
them, Magnus the Bishop of Skara and Thuro Johnson fled into Denmark, but
Magnus Bayteson, Nils Olofson and Thuro Erickson having been Convicted of High
Treason at the Diet held at Str^ngness, the two first were Executed, and the
third paid a considerable Fine. The King then, to settle the minds of his
Subjects having renewed his Pardon, caused the superfluous Bells to be taken
out of the Steeples, the same being granted to him by the Estates toward the
payment of a Debt due to the Lubeckers. Which proved a new Subject for an
Insurrection; for the Dalekerls not only seized upon some of these Bells, but
also pretended to hold an Assembly at Arboga, to consult about the Deposing of
King Gustave, which obliged the King to call together the Estates at Vpsal,
whither he came in person with a good Army, and meeting with great opposition
from the mutinous People, ordered his Soldiers to fire among them, which so
terrified them that upon their Knees they begged his Pardon, promising to be
more Obedient for the future. Things being thus pretty well settled the King
married Catharine the Daughter of Magnus Duke of Saxen Lauenburgh, and having
received intelligence that King Christian was landed in Norway with a
considerable Force, he sent some Troops under the Command of Lars Sigeson the
Rix Marshal to the Frontiers of Norway, who having been joined by some Danes,
forced King Christian to raise the Siege of Banus, 1533.
who at last surrendering himself to the Danes, was by Frederick King of
Denmark, committed to Prison, where he died after twenty seven years
imprisonment. But no sooner was this storm over, but the Lubeckers raised
another against Sweden. For, they having demanded from the King, to grant them
the whole Trade on his Northern Sea Coasts, which he refused to consent to,
peremptorily demanded their Debt, and having joined with a great many Refugies
of King Christian's party, and made John Earl of Hoya, who had married King
Gustave's Sister, their Head, did propose to themselves no less than the
Conquest of the Northern Kingdoms, having enticed some Citizens of Stockholm
under pretext of making that City a free Hanse Town, to lay violent hands on
the King: And after the death of Frederick King of Denmark, when that Kingdom
was divided into several Factions persuaded the Senate of Copenhagen and Malmoe
to enter into the Confederacy of the Hanse Towns. Being thus strengthened by a
considerable party within that Kingdom they had great success against the
Danes, till these having declared Christian III. their King, and being assisted
with Money, Ships, and Forces by King Gustave beat the Lubeckers near
He^sinburgh, and afterward in a Sea Fight defeated their whole Fleet, and
carried a great many of their Ships into Denmark, Soon after King Gustave to
strengthen himself the better at Home, married Margaret the Daughter of Abraham
Erickson, Governor of West Gothland, which Alliance stood afterward his Son
Duke John in great stead against King Erick. King Gustave having also conceived
a jealousy against the Emperor Charles V. whom he suspected to be for making
Palls Grave Frederick, Son in Law of the imprisoned King Christian, King over
the Northern Kingdoms, took a resolution to strengthen himself with the
Alliance of France. To put this design in execution he sent his Secretary into
France, who having first made a Treaty of Commerce betwixt these two Crowns,
did also afterward conclude a defensive Alliance betwixt them.

Gustave having thus settled his Affairs called a Diet to be held at Westeraas,
1542.
where the Estates of the Kingdom declared the Succession Hereditary for the
future, 1544.
Constituting Erick Gustaveson, The Kingdom of Sweden made Hereditary, and the
Popish Religion abolished.
who was then but eleven years old, his Father's Successor. At the same Diet
the Popish Religion was quite abolished, and the Lutheran Religion Established
in Sweden, the King and the Estates having obliged themselves by a Solemn Oath
to maintain the same with all their power. In the year 1551. King Gustave,
after the death of his Queen Margaret, married Catharine the Daughter of
Gustave Olufson, and ruled the Kingdom of Sweden with great Tranquillity, except
that the Russians had fallen into Livonia and Finland, with whom having made a
Peace, and being now grown very old he by his Testament gave to John his second
Son the Dukedom of Finland, to the third Son Magnus the Dukedom of East
Gothland, and to Charles, 1556.
the youngest of all, the Dukedom of Sudermanland, Nericke and Wermeland, which
Countries they were to hold in Fief from the Crown. But his eldest Son Erick,
who was ^o succeed him in the Kingdom, having been persuaded by his Tutor,
Dionysius Burraeus a Frenchman to make his Addresses to Elizabeth Queen of
England, thereby to strengthen his Interest against his Brothers, sent the said
Dionysius into England, who having writ to his Master that nothing was wanting
to make up the Match but his presence, the Prince would have gone forthwith
into England, if his Father had not opposed it, who sent in his stead his
second Son John, and Steen Sture. These being very civilly entertained by Queen
Elizabeth, at their return Home told the Prince that they believed nothing to
be wanting to complete the Marriage but his presence, which was very joyfully
received by the Prince. But the old and wise King, who soon perceived, that
they had mistaken Complements for Realities, thought it advisable to
Communicate the business with the Estates Assembled at Stockholm, who after
having confirmed the former Hereditary Union and the King's Testament, at last
gave their consent to this Marriage, granting a considerable Supply toward the
defraying of the charges of this Marriage. But whilst the Prince was preparing
for his Voyage, part of his Baggage having been sent before, he being near
ready to follow in person, King Gustave dyed at Stockholm, 1559.
and King Erick, not thinking it advisable to trust his Brother with the
Kingdom, was forced to put by his Journey into England.

10. Eri^k XIV.
King Erick was twenty seven years of age when he succeeded his Father in the
Kingdom. His first business was to prescribe certain new Articles to his
Brothers, thereby to maintain the Royal Authority against them, which though
sorely against their will, they were forced to subscribe at the Diet held at
Arboga. 1561.
At his Coronation he first introduced the Titles of Earls and Barons into
Sweden, The Titles of Earls and Barons introduced.
alleging that in an Hereditary Kingdom there ought to be also Hereditary
Dignities among the Nobility. At his very first Accession to the Crown he was
engaged in the Troubles, which then sorely afflicted the Li^landers. For some
of them having put themselves under the Protection of Denmark, some under the
Crown of Poland, those of Reval and the Nobility of Esthenland, that were
nearest to Sweden, sought for Protection to King Erick Whereupon the King
having sent an Army under the Command of Claes Horn (who was joyfully received
at Reval) took them into his Protection, and confirmed to the City and Nobility
their former Privileges. As soon as the Poles heard of the arrival of the
Swedish Army at Reval, they sent an Ambassador to demand Reval from the
Swedes, who having received no other answer, but that the Swedes had at least
as good a Title to Reval, as the Poles, returned Home again, and the Swedish
Garrison that was besieged by the ^olish Forces in Reval, forced them to quit
that Enterprise. Soon after, the King being fully resolved to pursue his
intentions concerning the Marriage with Queen Elizabeth of England, Embarked at
Elshorgth to go thither in person, but was by a violent Tempest forced to
return. As he was very inconstant in his Temper, and very Superstitious, being
much addicted to Astrology, so after this misfortune he laid aside the thoughts
of this Marriage for a while, making his Addresses by his Ambassadors, and
with great Presents, to Mary Queen Scotland, and the Princess of Lorain both at
one time, and not long after to Katharine the Daughter of the Landgrave of
Hessen, but succeeded in neither. In the mean while his Borther John had
married Katharine Daughter of Sigismund King of Poland, which having been done
without Ring Erick's good liking, who was both mistrustful of the Poles and his
Brother, put him into such a rage, that he besieged his Brother in the Castle
of Aboa, which having been taken by Strategem, he caused him to be sentenced to
death, which Sentence he however changed into a perpetual Imprisonment for that
time, but seemed to repent of it afterward, when the Russians demanded the
said Katharine, his Brother's Wife* in Marriage for their Great Duke. The Poles
to revenge this Affront, stirred up the Danes and Lubeckers against the Swedes,
and the Danes having affronted the Swedish Ambassadors at Copenhagen,
preparations were made on all sides, which soon broke out into a War, wherein
the Swedes routed the Danes and Lubeckers in several Sea Engagements, but also
lost their Admiral (which Ship carried two hundred Brass Guns) and by Land
there was great havoc made on both sides, with almost equal Fortune, except
that the Swedes had pretty good success in Livonia. But whilst King Erick was
engaged in War with all his Neighbors round about him, the inward discontents
began to increase more and more among his Subjects by the ill management which
he had shown both in his Affairs and Amors, being surrounded with a Seraglio
of Mistrisses, (among whom one Katharine, an ordinary Country Wench had the
greatest sway over him, whom he also married afterward, whereby he lost his
Authority among the Nobility.) Besides this, he was guided in most concerns of
moment by one Joran ^erson his Favorite, and his former Tutor Dionysius
Beuraeus, who fomented a continual jealousy betwixt him and the Family of the
Stures, which at last broke out into a fatal revenge. For there having been
Witnesses suborned against Suarte Sture and his Son Erick, they were with
several others of that Family not only committed to Prison, and miserably
murdered there by the King's command, but he also with his own hands stabbed
Nils Sture, and repenting soon after of so barbarous a Fact caused his former
Tutor Dionysius, who advised it, to be slain by his Guards.

A great part of the Kingdom, having been put into confusion by these enormous
cruelties, of which the King feared the consequences, he thought it his best
way, to prevent further inconveniences, to set his Brother John at Liberty
under certain conditions, and to lay the blame of these barbarities upon Joran
Peerson his Favorite, who having been committed to Prison the Intestine
Commotions seemed to be appeased for the present. But the King having not long
after been very succesful in several Engagements against the Danes, whom he
beat quite out of Denmark he soon after released his Favorite, and not only
declared him free from any imputation, but also justified the death of those
Lords formerly murdered at Vpsal. By his advise also he would have taken from
his Brothers those Provinces which were allotted them by their Father's
Testament, in exchange of which he proffered them some Possessions in Livonia.
But the Brothers having refused this proffer, he again resolved to make away
his Brother John at the Nuptials which were to be celebrated at Stockholm
betwixt his Mistress Catharine and himself, and to give his Widow in Marriage
to the Grand Duke of Russia. But the Brothers having been advertised of the
King's sinister intentions, did not appear at the Wedding, and having made an
Association with several of the Nobility, that were Kindred of the Lords
murdered at Vpsal, they resolved to dethrone King Erick. The better to execute
their intentions, they had by the intercession of the King of Poland procured a
Truce with Denmark, and having gathered what Forces and Money they could among
^^eir Friends, and brought over some German Forces, that were in King Erick's
service to their side, as also engaged Charles, King Erick's Brother, to join
in the Confederacy, they seized upon the Castles of Stockeburgh, Lackoe and
Wadstena, in the last of which they found a great Treasure. Then they published
their Reasons for taking up Arms against the King and his evil Counselors,
and marched directly with their Forces toward Stockholm, near which place
having fixed their Tents, they attacked the City on the side of the
Brunckehill; King Erick on the other side defended himself valiantly for a
while, and by frequent Sallies did great mischief, and being mistrustful of the
Citizens of Stockholm, he sent a Messenger into Denmark, to crave assistance
from King Frederick; but this Messenger having been taken and killed by the way
the Senate of that City, who despaired to hold out much longer against the
Dukes Forces, and also were favorers of their party, would have persuaded the
King to a surrendry; which proposition having been rejected by the King, they
whilst the King was at Church opened the Gates to his Enemies, so that he
narrowly escaped into the Castle. The Dukes Forces laid then close Siege to the
Castle, so that King Erick, having first received Hostages, was forced to come
out, and after having resigned the Crown to surrender himself a Prisoner to his
Brother Duke Charles. The Estates then assembled at Stockholm having also
jointly renounced their Obedience to him, he was made a close Prisoner, and
committed to the care of some of the Friends of the murdered Lords, who used
him most barbarously.

11. John III.
After the Deposition of King Erick, John, was by the Estates then assembled at
Stockholm proclaimed King of Sweden, 1568.
who having caused some of those that had been instrumental in the Murder of
the Lords at Vpsal, to be Executed, sent his Ambassador to Roeshild to treat
with the King of Denmark either concerning a Peace or at least the prolongation
of the Truce; But these Ambassadors having exceeded their Commission, and
agreed to such articles as were very prejudicial to Sweden the whole
Transaction was declared void at the next Dyer, and King John sent other
Ambassadors to desire more moderate propositions of Peace from the King of
Denmark. And to give some sort of satisfaction to his Brother Charles, unto
whom he had formerly promised a share in the Government, he put him in the
Possession of Sudermannia, Nericke and Wermeland, which Provinces were granted
him before pursuant to his Father's Testament. Then he was Crowned at Vpsal,
and having sent back the Russian Ambassadors, he sent also some of his own
into Moscovy to prolong the Truce betwixt them, but no sooner were they arrived
there, but the Moscovites took them into custody, and perceiving that the
Liflanders would in no ways submit themselves under their Yoke, they found out
this expedient to put Magnus Duke of Holstein into the Possession of that
Country, with the Title of an Hereditary King, paying only some small
acknowlegement to the Grand Duke of Moscovy. This Proposition having been
approved of by the King of Denmark Duke of Holstein, and all the Liflanders in
general who were very willing to live under the jurisdiction of a German
Prince. The Moscovites to put their design in execution advanced with a great
Army, which obliged King John to make Peace with the Danes, at Stetin, upon
very disadvantageous terms. But whilst the Moscovites had employed all their
Forces in Livonia and Finland, the Tartars being set on by the Poles, fell into
Moscovy, and having taken and burnt the City of Moscovy, cut above thirty
thousand of the Inhabitants to pieces. This misfortune proved a main obstacle
to their design upon Livonia, 1571.
yet having made a Truce with the Tartars and Poles for some years they again
entered Livonia with 80000 Men, and committed most inhuman barbarities, which
the Swedes, who were much inferior in number, could not prevent at that time.
But a Swedish party of 600 Horse and 100 Foot, War with the Moscovites.
that were fallen in with the Moscovites, having routed 16000 Moscovites, killing
7000 of them upon the spot, the Czar of Moscovy was so dismayed that he of his
own accord offered a Treaty of Peace to be set on Foot at Newgarten, which
place being disliked by King John, the War began a fresh, which was carried on
but with very indifferent success on the Swedish side, they having been
repulsed before Wefenbergh and Telsburgh. There happened also another
misfortune in the Swedish Camp, which proved not a little prejudicial to their
Affairs; for the German Horse and Scottish Foot that were in their Service came
to handy blows, upon some distaste taken against one another, wherein 1500
Scottish Foot were all cut to pieces by the Germans, except 80 that escaped
their fury, and the Russians not long after surprised the Swedes and Germans,
that were drunk in their Camp (and killed a great many of them upon the spot;
and because the Swedes were also not idle on their side, but made frequent
inrodes into the Russian Territories, a Truce was concluded betwixt them for
two years. Most of the Swedes are of opinion that King John might have
prosecuted this War, with more vigor if he had not been more intent upon a
Religious design, than upon warlike preparations.

The business proceeded thus: King John, though he was Educated a Protestant,
yet having been very conversant with a great many learned Roman Catholics, and
influenced by his Queen, had resolved to restore by degrees the Roman Catholic
Religion, under pretense of making a Reformation in the lately introduced
Protestant Religion. To effect this, he intended to follow the footsteps of
Georgius Cassander, that was employed by the Emperors Ferdinand I. and
Maximilian II. to unite and compose the Religious differences in Germany, and
having called in some Jesuits disguised in Laymens Habits to be assisting to
his Secretary Mr. Pieter Fretenius, who was to be the chief manager of the
business, he at the Convocation of some of the Bishops and Clergy at Stockholm
proposed to them a new form of a Liturgy, wherein a great many of the Popish
Ceremonies were to be used in the Administration of the Sacraments, and
Consecration of Bishops and Priests, as also the Mass was again introduced;
which new Liturgy he got subscribed by the new Consecrated Bishops and some of
the inferior Clergy, and was called the Liturgy of the Swedish Church, conform
to the Catholic and Orthodox Church. This Liturgy having been published under
the new Archbishop's name in the Swedish and Latin Tongues, the Mass and other
Roman Catholic Hymns were again sung in the Swedish Churches (except in the
Territories belonging to Duke Charles the King's Brother) and the Celibacy of
Priests and other Popish Doctrines mightily extolled in the Pulpits by these
disguised Roman Catholics. The next thing to be done was to try whether he
could bring over his Brother Charles to his party whom he solicited by his
Delegates to introduce the Liturgy into his Territories, who having made answer
that it was, (according to their Father's Testament) neither in his, nor in the
King's power to make any Innovation in Religion, this proved the subject of a
great misunderstanding betwixt them. Next the King had his recourse to the
Pope, who also having disapproved his undertaking, he demanded from the Clergy
at Stockholm to give their approbation of the said Liturgy, but these answered
that thereby a door was opened for the Roman Catholic Religion to be
re-established in Sweden, and having made their Appeal to a General Synod of
that Clergy in the Kingdom, a Convocation of the Clergy of the Kingdom (except
those in the Duke's Territories) was held by the King's Authority, 1577.
where the King's party prevailed, New Liturgy introduced.
so, that the Liturgy was confirmed not only by the said Clergy, but also by
the Temporal Estates, who declared all such Traitors as should for the future
oppose the same. The King having gained this point banished and imprisoned some
of those, that would not conform to the said Liturgy, notwithstanding which a
great many of the Clergy that were professed Enemies of the said Liturgy, and
upheld by Duke Charles did not only boldly discover the deceitful snares of the
adverse party, but also sent to the German Universities of Wittembergh,
Leipzick, Helmstad, Francfut and others, where their Zeal for the Augsburg
Confession was approved, and the said Liturgy condemned as dangerous to the
Protestant Religion. Hitherto King Erick had suffered a very hard imprisonment
during the space of nine years, but he having in the mean while by several ways
endeavored his delivery, and King John now fearing, that perhaps these
Intestine Divisions might furnish him with an opportunity to make his escape,
he sent his Secretary to give him his last Dose, which he did accordingly,
having poisoned him in a Pease Soop. The King being rid of this danger began
now to act more barefaced than before; for now the Invocation of Saints was
publicly taught in the Pulpits, those that contradicted it were imprisoned, a
new University of Papists was to be erected at Stockholm, he sent his
Ambassador to reside at Rome, and the Pope had his Nuncio at Stockholm, and to
complete the matter, a great many young Scholars were sent to the Jesuits
abroad, to be duly instructed in their Principles. In the mean while the War
betwixt the Swedes and Moscovites was carried on without any remarkable
advantage on either side, till it was agreed betwixt the two Kings of Poland
and Sweden, that each of them should act separately against the Moscovites, and
what either of them could gain by his Sword, should remain in his possession.
Then it was that Stephen King of Poland having attacked the Moscovites
vigorously on his side, the Swedes also under the Command of Pontus de la
Gordie took from the Moscovites the strong Forthress of Kekholm, the Castle of
Padis, Wesenburgh, Telsburgh, Narva, (where 7000 Moscovites were killed)
Jawmagrod and other places of note, which raised such a jealousy in the Poles
that they not only made a separate Peach with the Moscovites, 1582.
but also demanded several of those places, taken from the Moscovites by the
Swedes, for their share, which put a great stop to the Swedish progresses, and
occasioned a Truce of two years (which was afterward prolonged for four years
longer) betwixt them and the Moscovites. Whilst these things were transacting
the misunderstanding betwixt the King and his Brother Charles could not be
removed, notwithstanding that the Duke had shown his inclination of having
these Differences composed, but the King having called together a Diet at
Wadstena, sent a summons to the Duke to appear there in person. The Duke on the
other hand, who did not altogether trust the King, having assembled some Forces
in his Territories, did not appear at the said Diet, but lodged himself in some
of the adjacent Villages, were at last by the mediation of some of the
Senators, the Brothers were reconciled, the Duke having begged the King's
pardon, 1587.
and referred the Differences concerning the Liturgy to the decision of his
Clergy, who at an Assembly held at Strengness rejected the aforesaid Liturgy.
In the mean while died Stephen King of Poland, and his Widow Ar^^a being Aunt
of Prince Sigismund the Son of King John, she prevailed with some of the great
Men in Poland to make him their King, which was done accordingly, though not
without great difficulty on the Swedish side, who could not for a great while
agree to the several Propositions made to them by the Poles, and King Sigismund
himself seemed soon after to repent of it. As soon as Sigismund had left
Sweden, his Father King John began to renew his Care for establishing the new
Liturgy in the Duke's Territories; but the Clergy there trusting upon the
Duke's Authority and Protection, remaining steadfast in their Opinion; the King
at last being tired out by their constancy, sent for his Brother Charles to
Stockholm, where a hearty reconciliation being made betwixt them, Charles was
so dear to him ever after, that he did nothing without his Advice or Consent,
which Friendship continued betwixt the two Brothers till a little before the
King's death, when Charles having married Cloristina the Daughter of Adolph
Duke of Holstein, the former jealousy was renewed in some measure in the King,
which soon ceased by his death, 1592.
which happened a few Months after at Stockholm.

12. After King John's death had been kept secret for two days, the same having
been notified to Duke Charles, he forthwith came to Stockholm, and having sent
a Messenger to King Sigismund in Poland, Sigismund.
he in the mean while took upon him the Administration of the Government with
the Consent of the Senate, which was confirmed to him by King Sigismund for
that time. Soon after, he called together the Swedish and Gothic Clergy at
Vpsat (the Finns refusing to appear) where the Augsburgh Confession was
confirmed, and the Liturgy, as also Popish Ceremonies newly introduced quite
abolished. This Decree having been approved of by the rest of the Estates, they
also made another, wherein was declared, That no body should appeal out of
Sweden to the King in Poland, and that the King should subscribe these Decrees
before his Coronation. This proved the subject of great broils afterward, for
the King having understood what had passed at Vpsal, he declared, that he being
a hereditary Prince in Sweden, would not oblige himself to any thing before his
Coronation, and as to the Decrees made at Vpsal, he declared them void, which
the Estates looked upon as an ill Omen for the Protestant Religion in Sweden.
Their jealousy was also not a little augmented when they saw King Sigismund
come into Sweden accompanied by the Pope's Nuncio, by whose advice the King
demanded a Church for the Roman Catholics in each City, that the new
Archbishop should be deposed, and that he would be Crowned by the Pope's Nuncio
which obliged the Estates to send their Deputies to Duke Charles, to desire him
to interpose his Authority with the King. Charles therefore having in
conjunction with the Estates, in vain endeavored to persuade the King to a
compliance with the Estates, entered into an Association with them for the
defense of the Protestant Religion, and mustered his Troops near Vpsal. The
King perceiving them to be in earnest, thought it his best way not to let
things run to extremity, but having consented to most of their Propositions,
which he surrendered to them the same morning when he was to be crowned, the
Coronation was performed by the Bishop of Strengness. But no sooner was he
returned to Stockholm, 1594.
but he took a resolution quite contrary to his Promise, with an intention to
obtain by force what he could not get by fair means. Wherefore having sent for
some Forces out of Poland, he hoped to terrify the Estates into a compliance
at the next Diet, but these being backed by Duke Charles, and having raised the
Delekerls, remained steadfast in their Resolution. The King seeing himself
disappointed again in his Design, resolved upon the advice of the Poles, to
leave the Kingdom and the Government in an unsettled Condition, hoping thereby
to oblige them to be more pliable for the future. But as soon as the Senators
understood that he was sailed toward Dantzick, they in conjunction with Duke
Charles, took upon themselves the administration of the Government, deposed the
King's Governor of Stockholm (he being a Papi^t) and forbid the exercise of
the Romish Religion. And soon after, a Peace having been concluded with the
Muscovites, a Diet was held at Sudercoping, where after the Estates had
justified their proceeding in a Letter to the King, the Augsburgh Confession
was again confirmed, the Popish Religion abolished, and all Swedes that adhered
to the same, declared incapable of any Employments in the Kingdom, and several
other Decrees were made against the Papists, and for the maintaining of the
Privileges of the Subjects. Then they constituted Duke Charles Regent of the
Kingdom to govern the same with Advice of the Senate, and the whole Transaction
was published in the Latin, Swedish and German Tongues. This having occasioned
a general flight among the Roman Catholics out of Sweden; King Sigismund was
so dissatisfied thereat, that he quickly sent some Commissioners out of Poland
to dissuade the Duke from these proceedings, but also when this proved
ineffectual by his Letter to the Estates he committed the whole management of
Affairs to the Senate, excluding the Duke from the Regency. In the mean while
some Senators either to curry favor with the King, or upon some distaste taken
against Duke Charles, had shown themselves great Favorers of the King, and
declined to appear at the Diet, which was appointed to be held under the Duke's
Authority at Arboga. Notwithstanding which, the few Senators and the Estates
there present did again confirm the Decrees lately made at Vpsal and
Sudercoping, declaring Duke Carles sole Regent of Sweden. But Niclaco Flemming
the King's General, being in Arms, and having lately killed a great number of
the Boors, the Duke also thought it not fit to fit still, but having gathered
what Troops he could, possessed himself first of Gothland, and not long after
of the whole Kingdom of Sweden, the King's Governors and those of the
Senators, that had not appeared at the last Diet held at Arboga, flying in
great numbers to the King in Poland. King Sigismund then perceiving that his
presence was absolutely necessary in Sweden, resolved to go thither in Person
with 6000 Men, which the Duke having been advertised of, 1598.
called together the Estates of the Gothic Kingdom at Wadstena, and having
made known to them the King's intention, it was unanimously resolved to meet
the King with an Army near Calmar. But the West-Goths and Smalanders having
taken up Arms for the King, and the Finns equipped some Ships for this Service,
the former were beat back by the Boors, headed by two Professors of Vpsal, and
whilst Duke Charles was sailed with his. Fleet to reduce the latter, which he
did with good Success, the King without any opposition arrived at Calmar.
Several Treaties were then set on foot to endeavor the settlement of the
Kingdom, and to reconcile Matters betwixt the King and Duke, which proving
ineffectual, both Parties had recourse to Arms. The first encounter happened
near Stegeburgh, where the Duke's Forces being surrounded, were quickly put to
the rout, but laying down their Arms, obtained Pardon from the King; but the
Duke soon made amends for this Misfortune, at Stangbroo, where having surprised
part of the King's Army, he killed 2000 of them upon the spot, with the loss of
40 Men on his side. This Defeat occasioned an agreement betwixt the King and
Duke upon certain Articles, of which the Estates were to be Guarrantees, and
the King promised to come forthwith to Stockholm to settle the Affairs of the
Kingdom, whither he would needs go by Sea, though it was in October, but in lieu
of sailing to Stockholm, directed his Course from Calmar (where he was droven
in by contrary Winds) to Dan^zick. The Duke being surprised at this unexpected
departure, called together the Estates of the Kingdom, who having once more
constituted him Regent of Sweden at their second meeting at Stockholm, 1599.
renounced their Obedience to King Sigismund, offering at the same time the
Crown to his Son Vladislaus, in case he would come within a twelve Months time
into Sweden, and be educated in the Lutheran Religion, but in case of failure
he and his heirs to be excluded from the Crown. Duke Charles thereupon marched
against the Finns, whom he quickly forced to Obedience, and having made an
Alliance with the Russians, 1600.
convened the Estates of the Kingdom in the next following year at Sincoping,
where some of the Lords that were here, having before fled into Poland,
Sigismund deposed.
were condemned of High Treason and executed accordingly, and not only King
Sigismund declared incapable of the Crown, but also his Son Vladislaus (because
he had not appeared within the limited time) excluded from the Succession.
About the same time the Duke being certified that the Eastlanders. and
especially those of Reval were inclined to his side, he marched thither with a
great Army, and being received very joyfully by the Inhabitants of Reval, the
Polish Governors left the rest of the places of Esthland voluntarily to the
disposition of Charles. The same fortune artended him at first in Livonia,
where he took several places of note without much opposition, but was forced to
raise the Siege of Riga upon the approach of the Poles, who retook Kakenhausen
and some other places thereabouts. Charles having in the mean time got notice
how the Poles had set up the false Demetrius, and assisted him against the
Muscovites, under pretense of being afraid of the designs of the Poles against
Sweden, desired to resign. But these having first offered the Crown to John
King Sigismund's half Brother, who refused to accept of the same, they bestowed
it upon Charles, who being the only Son left of King Gustave, and by his Valor
and Prudence having deserved so well of the Kingdom, the Crown was confirmed to
his Heirs even to the Females. 1604.
No sooner was Charles declared King, Charles IX.
but he undertook an Expedition into Livonia, where he received a signal
overthrow from the Poles, which might have proved of very ill consequence to
Sweden, if King Sigismund had not been prevented by the intestine Commotions of
the Poles to pursue his Victory. The Russians also had slain the false
Demetrius, and having made one Suski their Grand Duke, craved Assistance from
King Charles, who sent some Thousand Auxilaries under the Command of James de
la Gardie, with whose Assistance they were very successful against the Poles.
But in Lifland the Poles got the better of the Swedes in several encounters,
and the Danes seeing the Swedes engaged on all sides, Warbetwixt the Swedes and
Poles in Livonia.
began to make great preparations against them. The Muscovites also had
delivered their Grand Duke Suski up to the Poles, and offered that Crown to
Vladislaus the Son of Sigismund, so that the Swedish Affairs looked with an ill
face at that time, if Prince Gustave Adolph, King Charles's Son by his
extraordinary Valor had not upheld their drooping Courage. For whilst the
Danes we busy about Calmar, he with 1500 Horse, not only surprised their chief
Magazin in Blekinyen, which is now called Christianstad, but also took from
them the Isle of Oeland and the Castle of Borkholm; and whilst he was busy in
putting his Forces into Winter Quarters his Father King Charles died at
Nycoping in the 61 year of his age. 1611.


13. Gustavus Adolphus.
Gustavus Adolphus being at the time of his Father's Death, yet under age, was
under the Tuition of his Mother Christina, Duke John and some of the Swedish
Senators. But the Swedes being at that time embroiled in the Polish and Russian
Affairs, and the Danes pressing hard upon them, it was concluded at the Diet at
Nycoping, that King Gustave Adolph, notwithstanding he was not 18 years of age,
should take upon himself the administration of Affairs. The King immediately
applied all his Care to the Danish War, which was carried on but with
indifferent Success on the Swedish side especially by Sea, where the Danes
played the Masters, the Swedish Fleet being but in a very ill condition; and
the Danes having taken besides Calmar, also Risbyfort and Elffesburgh, two
considerable places in Sweden. King Gustave finding this War very grievous to
the Kingdom, and the Muscovites having about the same time declared themselves
very favorably in behalf of his Brother Charles Philip, (unto whom they
offered that Crown) a Peace was concluded with the Danes, the Swedes being
obliged to pay them a Million of Crowns for these three places abovementioned.
In the mean while James de la Gardie had so well managed his Affairs in
Muscovy, 1613.
that the Chiefest among them desired King Gustave Adolph, and his Brother
Charles Philip to come into Muscovy, but King Gustave Adolph who had more mind
to unite that Crown with Sweden than to leave it to his Brother, was not only
very slow in his Resolution, but also at last in his Answer to the Muscovites
only spoke of his own coming thither, without mentioning his Brother, which
having been interpreted by the Muscovites as if he intended to make their
Country a Province of Sweden, they made one Michael Foedorowitz Romano their
Grand Duke, and when Prince Charles Philip afterward came into Muscovy, some
of them for a while adhered to him, but the new Grand Duke having the stronger
Party, the rest also at last left the Swedish side, who vigorously attacked and
beat the Muscovites in several Engagements, and took from them some of their
Frontier places, Peace with the Muscovites.
till at last a Peace was concluded betwixt both Partys at Stolbova, by the
mediation of the English, by virtue of which, 1617.
the Swedes got Kerholm and Ingermanland.

In the mean while a Truce had been concluded with Poland for two years, but
the same being near exspiring, King Gustave Adolph resolved to pursue the War
against the Poles with more vigor than before. The better to put this Design
in execution, he after his Coronation had been performed at Vpsal with an
universal Joy of the People, 1617.
paid to Christian King of Denmark the residue of the sum due to him by virtue
of the last Treaty of Peace; and having married Mary Eleonora the Daughter of
John Sigismund Elector of Brandenburgh, 1620.
he attacked the City of Riga, which defended it self for six weeks bravely,
but being reduced to the last extremity, surrendered it self upon very
honorable Terms. From hence he sailed toward Dantzick, to carry the War into
Prussia, but King Sigismund being then at Dantzick, the Truce was renewed for
two years longer. During the time of the Truce a Peace was proposed betwixt
these two Crowns, which the Polish Estates were very desirous of,
notwithstanding which, King Sigismund persisted in his former Resolution of
pursuing the War. King Gustave therefore again entered Livonia with a good Army,
where having defeated 3000 Lithuanians, who under the Command of Stanislaus
Sariecha would have disputed his Passage, Kakenhausen, Dorpt, and other places
of less note, surrendered themselves to the King. From hence he advanced into
Lithuania, and took Birsew, and though the Poles had nothing left in Livonia, but
only Duneburgh, and the Lithuanians were again defeated by the Swedes near
Walsow in Sem-Gallia; King Sigismund persisted in his Resolution of carrying on
the War, being encouraged by the Emperor, who then was very successful in
Germany. King Gustave then resolving to give the Poles a home-stroke, 1626.
sailed with a Fleet of 80 Ships and 26000 Landmen toward the Pillaw, where by
Order of the Elector of Brandenburgh, having been received without opposition,
he landed his Men, and without any resistance took Brandenburgh and
Frauenburgh. The next was Elbingen, where the Citizens having made some show of
resistance, the Senate surrendered the City without making as much as a
Capitulation. The same good Fortune attended him before Marienburgh, The War
carried on against the Poles in Prussia.
Meve, Dirshaw, Stum, Christburgh and other places in Prussia, which all fell
into his hands, before the Poles had notice of his arrival. Soon after the
Poles sent 8000 Horse and 3000 Foot into Prussia, who had formed a design to
surprise Marienburgh, but were repulsed with the loss of 4000 Men, and were
also forced to raise the Siege of Meve. And Stanislaus Konierpol ki with his
Podolians also besieged Dirshaw in vam, but retook Pautske from the Swedes, and
dispersed some Germen Troops that were listed in Germany for the Service of
King Gustave. In the next Spring the Swedish King having received new Supplies
out of Sweden, 1627.
intended to attack Dantzick, but having received a shot in the Belly before
one of their outworks, he desisted for that time, but soon after made himself
Master of the said Fort, having first beaten the Poles that came to its relief,
who nevertheless, in the mean while had forced Meve to a surrendry. Soon after,
both Armies encamped near Dirshaw, where King Gustave having drawn out his
Forces in Battle array, the Poles did the like, having a boggy Ground before
them, which the King did not think fit to pass with his Army; but when the
Poles began to draw off again into their Camp, the King falling into the Rear,
killed them a great number of Men. But some days after, attacking them in their
Camp, he received a shot in his left Shoulder with a Musket Bullet, which his
Forces being dismayed at, they returned without any further Action into their
Camp. Toward the latter end of the year, a new Treaty having been set on foot
betwixt the two Kings, the Treaty was so far advanced, that King Sigismund had
resolved to sign it the next day, if the Austrians (who did promise to send 24
Men of War and 12000 Men to his assistance) had not prevented it. After the
Treaty was broke off, King Gustave, before his Army went into Winter Quarters,
took several places from the Poles, and at the beginning of the year next
following, attacked a Fort near Dantzick, but was repulsed with loss. Soon
after he had a smart Engagement with the Poles, wherein 3000 of them were
killed upon the spot, the Swedes having taken four pieces of Cannon, and
fourteen Standards, though not without great bloodshed on their side. Then the
King advanced nearer unto Dantzick, having sent eight Men of War to block up
that Harbor, but the Dantzickers with ten Men of War having attacked the
Swedish Squadron, they killed the Swedish Admiral Nils Sternshield, took his
Ship, forced their Vice Admiral to blow up his own Ship, and put the rest to
flight, though the Dantzickers also lost their Admiral and 400 Men in this
Engagement. King Gustave then having detached 1000 foot Soldiers, who passed
the Veixel in Boats, they surprised Niewburgh, which being a Magazin of the
Poles, they took most of their Baggage and 600000 Crowns in Money. 1629.
But in the year next following, he gave them more work; for Herman Wrangel
raised the Blockade of Brodnitz where 3000 Poles were killed, 1000 taken
Prisoners, with five Pieces of Cannon and 2000 Wagons with Provision. The
Poles being frightened at this Defeat, were very desirous then to receive the
Imperial Forces which were sent to their Assistance under the command of
Arnheim, who with 5000 Foot and 2000 Horse, joined Koniccpoliski, the Polish
General near Graudentz. King Gustave on the other hand encamped with an Army of
5000 Horse and 8000 Foot near Quidzin; and though the Swedes were much inferior
in number, yet did they not refuse the Combat; and both Armies soon after
having met near Stum, there happened a brisk Engagement betwixt them, wherein
the Swed^sh Horse were first repulsed, with the loss of five Standards, but the
King coming up in Person with more Forces, soon forced the Poles to retreat,
who would have passed over a Bridge which they were laying over the River of
Nogat. But King Gustave endavouring to cut off their retreat that way, the
Fight was renewed on both sides with great fury, so that the King venturing
himself too far, was taken hold of by his Shoulder-belt, which he slipping over
his head, got free of them, leaving his Hat and Belt behind him. But
immediately after, another catching hold of his Arm. would have carried him
off, if one Erick Soop had not shot the Polander, and delivered the King. In
this Action the Swedes got seventeen Colors and five Standards, the Imperial
Forces having received the greatest damage. Not long after, there happened
another Engagement about the same Bridge, where the Poles were again repulsed,
and in the attack of Stum, they lost 4000 Men of their best Forces. The Poles
having imputed these Losses chiefly to Arnheim the Imperial General (who being
a Vassal of the Elector of Brandenburgh, was suspected by them to hold a
correspondence with the said Prince) and being grown quite weary of the
Imperial Forces, being also pestered with Famine and the Plague, by the
mediation of France, England, Brandenburgh and Holland, a Truce was concluded
for six years, by virtue of which, King Gustave was to restore to Poland,
Brodnitz Wormdit, Melsack, Stum and Dirshaw, Marienburgh was committed to the
custudy of the Elector of Brandenburgh, King Gustave kept the Castle and
Harbor of Pillaw and Mem^l, Truce with Poland.
as also Elbingen and Braunsbergh, besides all what he was possessed of in
Livonia, so that King Gustave Adolph had ended both the Russian and Polish War
to his eternal Honor and the great Advantage of his Kingdom.

14. German War.
But he was not long at rest before Germany was the Scene where he acquired
everlasting Glory to his Nation, and performed some of the greatest Actions
that were ever seen in Europe. As soon as the Protestants in Germany began to
be jealous of the Roman Catholics sinister Intentions against them, they were
then for bringing King Gustave over to their Alliance; but he being at that
time entangled in the Polish Affairs, was not at leisure to engage himself with
them. 1626.
But Christian IV. King of Denmark who was ambitious of that Honor, having in
the mean while received a great Defeat from the Imperialists, who since that
had made themselves Masters of the Lower Saxony, and got footing on the
Baltic, King Gustave fearing the consequence of it, pressed the harder upon
the Poles to oblige them to a Peace or Truce; 1623.
and having called together the Estates of Sweden, he represented to them the
danger which threatened Sweden from the Imperialists, who had not only got
footing on the Baltic, but also made themselves Masters of a part of Denmark;
whereupon it having been resolved by the Estates, that it was not advisable to
stay till the Enemy should attack them at home, but to meet him abroad and to
keep him from getting footing on the Borders of the Baltic, the King only
waited an opportunity to put this Design in execution, which presented it self
in the same year. For Albert Wallenstein, Duke of Friedland, the Imperial
General, having laid a Design against the City of Strahlsund, the King who was
then in Prussia, offered his Assistance to that City, and having sent them
voluntarily some Ammunition, and exhorted them to a vigorous Defense; the
Citizens accepted of the King's offer, making an Alliance with him for the
Defense of their City and Harbor, and to maintain their Commerce in the
Baltic. Pursuant to this Treaty, the King sent some of his Forces to their
assistance, who were very instrumental in defending that City against the
Imperialists, but he did not think fit to attempt any thing further at that
time, because Wallenstein and Tilly were with two considerable Armies not far
off. But as soon as the ^ol^sh War was ended, he resolved not to make any
further delay. Having therefore in vain proffered his mediation for the
procuring of a Peace in Germany, and represented again to the Estates of Sweden
the necessity of meeting the Imperialists with an Army abroad, he with all
expedition prepared himself for the next Campaign, 1630.
and having sent Alexander Lesley with some Troops before, to drive the
Imperialists out of the Isle of Rugen (which he effected) and settled his
Affairs at home, he embarked with 92 Companies of Foot, and 16 of Horse (which
were however considerably augmented afterward by some Regiments raised in
Prussia) and landed the 24 of June at Vsedom. Charles Gustave lands with his
Forces in Germany.
Upon his arrival the Imperialists having left their Forts thereabouts and at
Wollin, he re-embarked his Soldiers with a Train of Artillery in some small
Vessels and directly took his course toward Stetin, and having obliged the
Duke of Pomerania to receive him and his Forces into that City, he made a
defensive Alliance with him. From hence he marched to Stargard, Anclam,
Vckermund and Wolgast, all which places he took without much opposition. And
whilst King Gustave acted with such Success against the Imperialists in
Pomerania, Christian Withelm administrator of Magdeburgh (who had been deposed
by the Emperor) had got into the possession again of the City and Territories
of Magdeburgh, whither King Gustave sent D^cterick of Falekenbergh to be
assisting to the said Administrator in settling his Affairs that were then in
great confusion. In the mean while several Regiments of Liflanders and
Finlanders were arrived under the Command of Gustave Horn, these having been
joined by such Troops as were lately come out of Prussia, the King left his
Camp near Stetin, he himself marching with his Army into Mecklenburgh. In his
absence the Imperialists had endeavored to force the Swedish Camp near Stetin,
but were vigorously repulsed, and at his return he also beat them out of
Greiffenhagen and Gartz, nay, even out of the furthermost parts of Pomerania,
and the New Marck. The Archbishop of Bremen, Duke George of Lunenburgh, and
William Landgrave of Hesse, then entered into an Alliance with the King, and the
Protestant party in general being encouraged at the Success, began to consider
of ways and means to rid themselves of the Roman Catholic yoke.

At the beginning of the next ensuing year, 1631.
King Gustave at last concluded the so long projected Alliance with France,
Alliance made with France.
by virtue of which he was to receive a yearly Subsidy of 400000 Crowns from
the French King. Having thus strengthened himself, he notwithstanding the Winter
Season, took Lokenitz, Prentzlow, New Br^ndenburgh, Clempenow, Craptow and
Leitz, without much opposition. Demmin also, where the Duke of Lavelli was in
Garrison with two Regiments, was surrendered after a Siege of three Days, and
Colberg surrendered after a Blockade of five Months. The Emperor in the mean
while perceiving that his Generals were not able to cope with King Gustave
Adolph, had given to Tilly the Bavarian General the supreme Command over his
Forces, who being an ancient experienced and renowned Captain marched directly
to the relief of Demmin, but having received intelligence that the place was
surrendered before, he fell with great fury upon Kniphausen who lay with two
Regiments of Swedes at New Brandenburgh, which being a place of no defense, he
forced after a brave resistance, killing most of the Common Soldiers. But
perceiving that King Gustave being strongly entrenched, was not to be forced in
his Camp, he directed his march upwards to Magdeburgh, in hopes to draw the
King out of his advantageous Post. But King Gustave marched directly toward
Franckfort upon the Oder, where the Earl of Shaumburgh lay with a small Army,
notwithstanding which, he took the place by Storm after a Siege of three Days,
slew 700 of the Enemies and took 800, among whom were a great many Officers of
note: From hence he sent a Detachment to Landsbergh, to endeavor to drive also
the Imperialists from thence. About the same time a general meeting of the
Protestant German Princes was held at Leipzick* where a League was proposed to
be made in opposition to the demanded res^itution of the Church Lands. Thither
King Gustave sent some of his Ministers to exhort them to a mutual Union
against the Emperor, and to demand some assistance from them of Men and Money.
But the Elector of Saxony was very backward in declaring himself positively,
pretending several reasons, but in effect intended to make himself head of the
Protestant League, and in the mean while to take this opportunity of putting
the Protestants in a good posture, and to keep the balance betwixt the
Emperor and the Swedes. King Gustave therefore perceiving that the Protestants
in Germany were so very cunning and overcautious, thought it his best not to
venture his Army at the discretion of others, wherefore though he was very
willing to have relieved the City of Magdeburgh, which was reduced to
extremity, yet did he not think it advisable to march thither before he had
secured his retreat. To render therefore his design effectual, he marched with
his Army strait to Berlin, and having obliged the Elector of Brandenburgh,
partly by fair words, partly by threats, to put into his hands the Forts of
Spandau and Custrin for the security of a retreat over the two Rivers of the
Havel and Oder, he would have straitways marched to the relief of the City of
Magdeburgh, if the Elector of Saxony would have joined him, but whilst the
said Electors made a great many tergiversations, the said City was taken by
Storm by General Tilly, The City of Magdeburgh taken by the Imperialists, 10
May.
who miserably burnt the City, and killed most of the Inhabitants, there having
been but 400 left of a great many thousands. After this Disaster, King Gustave
having published his Reasons, why he could not timely enough relieve that City,
and having cleared the whole Pomerania of the Imperialists, he divided his
Army, and having sent part of his Forces to the assistance the Dukes of
Mecklenburgh, he marched with the rest into Marck and encamped at Werben near
the River Elbe, to observe Tilly, who having received Intelligence of the
King's arrival near that River, was obliged to alter his march (which he
intended to have directed toward Saxony) in hopes to force the King to a
Battle. But the King surprised his Avaint-Guard near Wolmerstadt, where he
totally ruined three Regiments of Horse. Notwithstanding which, Tilly
approached near the King's Camp at Werben, but the King refusing of fight, and
he not daring to attack him in his Camp, he was for want of Forage, obliged to
march back to his former Camp at Wolmerstadt. In the mean while the Dukes of
Mecklenburgh had with the assistance of the Swedish Auxiliaries driven the
Imperialists out of their Territories, except Domitz, Wismar and Rostock, which
places they also kept blocked up. And about the same time James Marquis of
Hamilton came with 6000 English and Scots into Pomerania, but stood the King in
no great stead, most of them dying in the same year by several Diseases. But
Tilly seeing that he could not attack the King near Werben, decamped from
Wolmerstadt and marched to Eisleben, and from thence to Halli, from whence he
marched with 40000 Men to Leipsick, which he took soon after. The Elector of
Saxony being thus put to a nonplus, was then forced to send to King Gustave,
and to desire him to join his Army which lay encamped near Torgawi, the King
who had foreseen what would befall him, being already advanced near New
Brandenburgh; and though the King was very glad of this opportunity, yet because
the Elector being now put to a nonplus, now desired what he had resused before,
he proposed to him certain Conditions, which the Elector having readily
granted, he passed the River Elbe near Wittenbergh with 13000 Foot and 9000
Horse, and joined the Elector near Dieben. Then a Council of War having been
called (where the Elector of Brandenburgh also was present) the King, who did
not exspect that the old cunning General would give them any opportunity to
fight, was for acting very cautiously; but the Elector of Saxony was not for
protracting the War, telling them that if the rest refused he would fight
alone: This opinion at last prevailed, the King then thought it most convenient
to attack him immediately before he could be joined by the Generals Altringer
and Tieffenbach, the first of which was already arrived near Erffurt, the
second being on his march out of Silesia. Thereupon the command of the right
Wing being left to the King, that of the left to the Electors, they marched
toward the Enemy. Tilly had no sooner been informed of their approach, but he
began to fortify himself in his Camp near Leipzick. Battle near Leipzick. 7.
Sept.
But Papenheim and the rest of the Imperial Generals trusting too much upon the
bravery of their Veteran Bands, and despising the new Levies of the Saxons and
the Swedes that were tired out by long march would by all means fight the Enemy
in the Plains near Braitenfeld, where Tilly lost the fruits of his former
Victories. He had possessed himself of all the rising Grounds where he had
planted his Cannon, and had also the advantage of the Wind; but King Gustave
who had put some Battalions of Foot among the Squadrons of Horse, by wheeling
about, got the advantage of the Wind from him, and having obliged the
Imperialists to open their left Wing, John Banner fell in among them and
brought them into confusion. But the greatest force of the Imperialists fell
upon the Saxons, whose Infantry and some of the Militia Horse were put to
flight, which obliged the King to fall with his Wing upon the Enemy's Horse
that were in pursuit of the Saxons, whom he quickly also forced to fly. But the
Imperial Infantry still held out, till Gustave's Horse with some Squadrons of
the right Wing fell into their Flank; and the King about the same time having
taken all the Enemy's Artillery, they were put to an entire rout on all sides,
leaving 7600 Men dead upon the spot, besides what was killed in the pursuit,
5000 Prisoners took Service under the King. Tilly himself who refused Quarter,
was likely to have been killed by a Captain of Horse, if Rodulf Maximiliun Duke
of Saxon-Lauenburgh had not delivered him by shooting the Captain through the
head. The Swedes took above 100 Standards and Colors, but lost 2000 Men most
of them Horse; the Saxons lost 3000, who quickly retook Leipzick, whilst the
King marched toward Merseburgh, where he out to pieces 1000 of the Enemies,
and took 500 Prisoners. Then it was resolved at a Council of War held at Halle,
not to follow Tilly, who was retired toward the River of Weser, but to carry
their victorious Arms into the Emperor's hereditary, and other Roman Catholic
Countries thereabouts. After some dispute it was agreed that the King should
march toward Franconia, whilst the Elector of Saxony entered the hereditary
Countries of the Emperor. Pursuant to this agreement, the King marched toward
Erffurt, (where William Duke of Weimar was received without opposition) and
from thence into Franconia, where he took Koningshofen and Sweinfurt without
any opposition, and the Castle of Wurtzburgh after some resistance. In the mean
while Tilly the Imperial General having been reinforced by several Troops that
were before dispersed in Germany, was come to the relief of Wurtzburgh, but
coming too late, marched toward the River of the Tauber to cover the Bavarian
and the Emperor's hereditary Countries on that side, but in his march the
Swedes falling into his Rear, cut off four entire Regiments. The King having
then made an Alliance with the Marquis of Anspach marched toward the Rhine,
surprised Hanaw, but Franckfort on the River of Mayn surrendered voluntarily,
and having possessed himself of the whole Country of Ringau, directed his march
into the Palatinate, which was then in the possession of the Spaniards. Soon
after entering the Berghstrate he took Gersheim, and passed the Rhine near
Stockstadt, having defeated the Spaniards that would have disputed his Passage,
and at Oppenheim he cut 500 Spaniards in pieces, but the Garrison of Mayence
surrendered upon Articles, and Landaw, Spiers, Weissenburgh and Mainheim, fell
soon after into the King's hands. Rostock also and Wismar having in the mean
while been surredred, the Baltic Seacoast was cleared from the Imperialists.
And the Members of the Circle of the Lower Saxony at an Assembly held at
Hamburgh, had resolved to levy 6000 Foot and 500 Horse for the defense of that
Circle. The Elector of Saxony in the mean while having refused the offers made
to him by the Spanish Ambassador, had sent his Army under the command of
Lieutenant General Arnheim into Bohemia, where among other places they had
taken the City of Prague; but having conceived a jealousy against the King
(whom he suspected to aim at the Imperial Crown) he could not be prevailed upon
to march further into Moravia and Austria. And the Imperial Court seeing that
Tilly was no more able to cope with the King, resolved to give the supreme
Command of the Imperial Forces to Wallenstein, who being an old experienced
Soldier, and in great Authority among the Soldiers, had besides this gathered
such riches that he was able to raise an Army at his own charge. He having been
at last prevailed upon to take upon him the supreme Command, raised an Army of
40000 Men against the next Spring. 1637.
But whilst these Preparations were making at Vienna, the King's Forces,
notwithstanding the Winter Season, having beaten the Spaniards upon the
Moselle, had taken Creutznach, Braunfels Kobenhausen and Kirchbergh, and the
King having left the supreme direction of Affairs on the Rhine to Axel
Oxenstirn, he himself toward the Spring marched into Franconia. But Tilly at
his approach, retired on the other side the Danube, the King possessed himself
of all the places along that River as far as Vlm, from whence he marched
toward the River of Lech, where Tilly had entrenched himself in a Forest on
the other side of that River. Here it was that General Tilly was wounded by a
Canon Bullet, of which he died in a few days after at Ingolstadt. His Army
being dismayed at the loss of their General left their advantageous Post, and
the Swedes having cut 1000 of them in pieces in their retreat marched
straightways into the Country of Bavaria, where they took possession of Raio,
and Niewburgh upon the Danube. Augsburgh surrendered without much resistance.
But their design upon Ingolstadt and Ratisbonne miscarried, being repulsed at
the first, where the King's Horse was shot under him, and Christopher the
Marquis of Baden killed by his side, but the latter the Elector of Bavaria had
secured by throwing some of his Forces into the place. The King therefore
returning into Bavaria set that Country under Contribution, and the City of
Municken opened its Gates to the King. In the mean while General Wallenstein,
having left the Elector of Bavaria a while to shift for himself, had driven the
Saxons out of Bohemia, by the treachery of their General Arnheim, who was an
utter Enemy of King Gustave, and the Imperialists under Lieutenant General
Pappenheim had made considerable progresses in the Circle of the Lower Saxony,
Wallenstein also had taken a resolution to fall with all his Forces upon the
King in the Country of Bavaria. Pursuant to this resolution, the Elector of
Bavaria having left a sufficient Garrison at Ingolstadt and Ratisbonne, marched
toward Egen to join Wallenstein, whom the King pursued in hopes to hinder
their conjunction, but coming too late, he encamped near Numbergh, till he
could be joined by his Forces that were dispersed in several parts of Germany.
Wallenstein then made a show as if he would turn his Arms against the Elector
of Saxony, thereby to draw the King out of his advantageous Post near that
City; but the King remaining in his Post he marched toward him, spreading his
Cavalry all round about, which occasioned a great scarcity of Forage in the
King's Camp, but as for Provisions he was sufficiently supplied withal from
Numbergh. Whilst the King was reduced to these Straits he received a
reinforcement of 15000 Foot, and 10000 Horse from several places, so that being
now superior in number he attacked Wallenstein in his Camp, who being strongly
Entrenched repalsed the Swedes with the loss of 2000 Men. In the mean time the
Imperial General Pappenheim had beat the Hessians near Volckmarsen, had forced
the Duke of Lunenburgh to raise the Siege of Callenbergh, had beat General
Baudist from before Paterborn and Hoxter, had relieved Wolffenbuttel, and taken
Hildesheim, from whence he was marched into Thuringia, to join Wallenstein. On
the other hand the Saxons were entered Silesia with an Army of 16000 Men, where
meeting with no opposition, they might have carried all before them, if their
General Arnheim had not been treacherous to King Gustave, whom he hated, and
was for working a reconciliation betwixt the Emperor and the Elector of
Saxony. The King therefore, not to lose any more time, having put a good
Garrison into Numbergh, resolved to send part of his Army into Franconia, and
with the main Body to return toward the Danube into Bavaria, where he had
taken several places on the River of Lech. But whilst he was carrying on his
victorious Arms among the Roman Catholics, frequent Messengers were sent to
him by the Elector of Saxony craving his assistance against Wallenstein, who
was with all his Forces entered into Misnia. The King though he had great reason
to be dissatisfied with the Elector, yet fearing he might be forced to make a
separate Peace with the Emperor, if he did not come to his assistance; he
having left some Forces in Bavaria and Suabia, under the Command of Paltsgrave
Christian of Berckenfeld, and commanded Gustave Horn to remain in Alsatia,
where he forced Benfelden to surrender, (as Franckenthal was about the same
time forced to surrender by Famine) himself marched with the Army toward
Misnia. Being arrived at Nauenbu^gh he received information that the Enemies
had raised the Siege of Werssenfels, and that they had detached Pappenheim with
some Forces upon another design. Having therefore resolved not to stay for the
Duke of Lunenburgh, who being already arrived at Wittenbergh, was to have
joined him, but to fight the Enemy before he could be rejoined by Pappenheim.
Pursuant to this resolution he marched to the great Plains near Lutzen, Battle
near Lutzen. Nov. 6.
where a most bloody Battle was fought betwixt them, in which the Swedish
Infantry fell with such fury upon the Imperial Foot that they routed them, and
made themselves Masters of their Cannon. But the Swedish Horse being stopped by a
broad Ditch, (that was cut cross the Plains for the convenience of floating of
Wood) the King put himself at the Head of the Smaland Regiment of Horse,
encouraging the rest by his example to follow him. Thus furiously advancing
before the rest, and being only accompanied by Francis Albucret Duke of Saxen
Launenburgh, and two Grooms, he there lost his life. Concerning his death there
are different opinions, but the most probable is, that he was shot by the said
Duke of Lauenburgh, who was set on by the Imperialists that had their only
hopes in the King's death. The Swedes were so far from being dismayed at the
King's death, King Gustave Adolfe killed.
that they fell with great fury again upon the Enemy, whom they routed on all
sides. The Imperialists having been rejoined by Pappenheim would have rallied
again, but Pappenheim having also been killed, they were routed a second time,
leaving an entire Victory to the Swedes, which was nevertheless dearly
purchased by the death of so great a King.

15. Christina.
The death of this great King caused great alterations in Europe, for, though
the Imperialists had lost the Battle and a great many brave Officers, 1633.
yet were they in no small hopes that the Swedish Affairs would now sink under
their own weight, and therefore made great preparations against them the next
Campaign. The Protestants in Germany were by his death divided into several
Factions, not knowing whom they should choose for their Head, and the Swedes
overwhelmed with troubles, his Daughter Christina being then but six years of
Age. Nevertheless, having settled their Affairs at Home, and committed the
Administration of the Kingdom to the five chief Officers of the State, the
chief management of the Affairs in Germany was committed to the care of the
Lord Chancellor Oxenstirn, who having been sent by the King's order into the
higher Germany, received this sad News at Hanau. The Chancellor did not so
much fear the Power of his Enemies as their constancy and unanimous Resolution,
whereas the Protestants were divided in their Counsels and Opinions, and were
not likely to follow his directions after the King's death, it being not
probable that the Electors and Princes of the Empire would be commanded by a
Foreign Nobleman; nevertheless he thought it not advisable, by leaving their
Conquests, to ruin at once the Protestant Cause and the Interest of Sweden, but
rather to endeavor by a brave resistance to obtain an honorable Peace. Having
therefore sent some Regiments back into Sweden, he divided his Army, and having
sent 14000 Men under the Command of George Duke of Lunenburgh into the Lower
Saxony and Westphalia, the last were ordered into Franconia, and some Forces
were also detached toward Silesia. These Forces acted with good success against
the Imperialists, especially in Westphalia, where the Duke of Lunenburgh took
several places, defeated the Earl of Mansfeld near Rinteln and besieged the
City of Hamelen. But in Silesia the Common Cause was not carried on with the
same forwardness, by reason of the misunderstanding betwixt the Swedish and
Saxon Generals, the latter of which keeping a secret Correspondency with
Wallenstein, left the Swedes in the Lurch, who were at last miserably beaten by
the said Wallenstein. But in all other places they had better success, where
their Generals took several places of note, and the Duke of Lunenburgh had also
retaken the strong City of Hamelen by accord, after having defeated 15000
Imperialists that were coming to its relief, whereof 2000 were killed upon the
spot, and as many taken Prisoners. Thus the Swedish Army were every where
flourishing but in Silesia, nevertheless the burden of the War grew heavier
upon them every day, most of their Confederates being grown weary of the War,
and willing to be rid of the Swedes. Whilst they labored under these
difficulties, Wallenstein being fallen in disgrace and killed by the Emperor's
order, they hoped to reap some advantage by this Change, but the Emperor
having made the King of Hungary (his Son) General of his Army, who having taken
Ratisbonne, and being joined by the Spanish Forces that were marching toward
the Netherlands besieged Nordlingen, where the Swedish Avantguard intending to
possess themselves of a Hill near that City, were engaged with the
Imperialists, 1634.
which occasioned a Battle betwixt the two Armies, Aug. 27.
and the Swedish Left Wing having been brought into disorder by the Polish,
Battle of Nordlingen.
Hungarian and Croatian Horse, was forced back upon their own Infantry, which
also were brought iuto Confusion and totally routed, 6000 having been slain
upon the spot, a great number taken Prisoners, among whom was Gustave Horn, and
130 Colors were lost, besides the whole Artillery and Baggage. After this
Battle the whole Upper Germany being overrun by the Imperialists, and the
Elector of Saxony having made a separate Peace with the Emperor, the Swedish
Affairs seemed to be reduced to a very ill condition, especially since the
Elector of Brandenburgh also had sided with the Saxons, and the Truce with the
Poles was near expired about the same time, which made the Swedes very desious
of a Peace; but the same not being to be obtained in Germany they were fain to
prolong the Truce with the Poles for twenty six years, Truce prolonged with the
Poles.
and to restore to them their so dearly beloved Prussia, and to draw France
into Germany to their assistance, to put them in the Possession of
Philipsburgh. Thus having in a manner settled their Affairs, the War broke out
betwixt them and the Elector of Saxony, who offered them a recompense of money
for the Archbishopric of Magdeburgh, which the Swedes refusing to accept of,
there happened a sharp Engagement betwixt them near Allenburgh upon the Elbe,
where of 7000 Saxons, War betwixt the Swedes and Elector of Saxony.
one half were killed, and the rest taken Prisoners. Notwithstanding this
advantage the Swedes had no small obstacles to surmount, since the Emperor was
in Possession of the whole Upper Germany, and had besides this set the Elector
of Saxony upon their Back, which obliged the Swedes to take new Measures, and
being now left by all their Confederates, they were at liberty at least to act
more unanimously, though perhaps with less force, the effects of which appeared
soon after; for though the Elector of Saxony had the good fortune to retake
Magdeburgh from the Swedes, yet they soon after revenged this loss near
Perlebergh where they attacked the said Elector with a less number in his
fortified Camp, and having routed his Army killed 5000 upon the spot, besides
what were killed in the pursuit, 1100 being killed on the Swedish side, and
3000 wounded, and having soon after droven the Imperialists out of Hessia into
Westphalia, and regained Erffurt, they were again in a fair way to get footing
in High Germany. They had also in the next ensuing year several Encounters with
the Imperialists and Saxons, 1637.
which proved most to their advantage, Banner having defeated eight Saxon
Regiments near Edlenburgh, and soon after 2000 more near Pegau, and when the
Imperialists thought to have got him with his whole Army into their Clutches
near Custrin, he got off with great dexterity, but could not prevent, but that
the Imperialists took several places in Pomerania, as also near the Rivers of
Havel and Elbe; George Duke of Lunenburgh having also declared against the
Swedes, who also began to be extremely jealous of Brandenburgh by reason of his
pretension upon Pomerania, after the death of Bagislaus XIV. the last Duke of
Pomerania, (who dyed this year) an Alliance was concluded betwixt them and
France for three years.

The Swedes having been brought the year before somewhat in the straits, 1638.
they now, Alliance with France.
after having received fresh Recruits began to recover what they had lost the
year before, Banner having driven Gallas the Imperial General back even into
the Hereditary Countries of the Emperor. And Bernhard Duke of Weimar had the
same success on the Rhine, where having besieged Rhinefelden, he fought twice
with the Imperialists, that came to its relief, and having routed them in the
second Engagement took Rhinefelden, Kuteln and Fryburgh in Brisgau. After this
exploit having blocked up Brisack so closely that it was reduced to the utmost
by Famine, the Imperialists endeavored to relieve it with 12000 Men, which
were so received by the said Duke that scarce 2500 escaped. And not long after
the Duke of Loraine having attempted its relief with 3500 Men, the same were
also cut in pieces, and the place surrendered to the Duke. The Imperialists
having been thus routed both near the Rhine and in the Lower Saxony, the Duke
and John Banner had both taken a resolution to carry the War into the
Emperor's Hereditary Countries, and Banner marched straitways (after several
Defeats given to the Imperialists and Saxons) into Bohemia, where he in all
likelihood might have had great success if the untimely death of Duke Bernhard
(who was to join him) had not broke his Measures. This Duke being solicited by
the French to surrender Brisack into their Hands, (which he refused) was
Poisoned by them, and his Army with great promises and money debauched to submit
under the French Command. The Imperialists then growing too strong for Banner
alone in Bohemia, he marched back into Misnia and Thuringia, and having been
joined by the Duke of Longueville, who Commanded the Army of the lately
deceased Duke of Weimar and by some Hessians and Lunenburghers near Erffurt
(which made up an Army of 21 Brigades and 2000 Horse) he would fain have Fought
the Imperialists, but these avoiding to come to a Battle the Campaign was most
spent in marching up and down the Country. But at the beginning of the next
ensuing year Banner had very near surprised the City of Ratisbonne, 1641.
where the Emperor and the Estates of the Empire were then assembled, if the
Ice which was by which was by a sudden Thaw loosned in the River, had not
hindered them from laying a Bridge of Boats, which design having miscarried,
Banner resolved to carry the War again into Moravia, Silesia, and Bohemia. But
the Weimarian Forces under the Command of the French General having left him
thereabouts, the Imperialists had so closely beset him, that there was no way
left to retreat but through the Forest of Bohemia, which was done with all
expedition, having left Colonel Slange, with three Regiments of Horse behind,
who after a brave resistance were all made Prisoners of War, but saved the
Swedish Army, which would else have been in great danger if they had not
detained the Imperialists, the Swedish Army being arrived but half an hour
before them at the Pass of Presswitz, where they stopped the Enemies march. Not
long after dyed the famous Swedish General John Banner, May 10.
whose death caused some dissatisfaction in the Army, notwithstanding which
they beat the Imperialists near Wolffenbuttel at two several times, and
Torstenson, (who was made General) being arrived in the Camp, directed his
march into Silesia, where he toook Great Glogau with Sword in Hand, 1642.
and a great many other places, the chiefest of which was Sweinitz, where he
defeated the Imperialists, that came to its relief, under the Command of
Francis Albert Duke of Saxon Lauenburgh, who was killed himself and 3000 Horse.
Afterward he besieged Brieg, but was forced to raise that Siege, the
Imperialists being superior in number, who also prevented him from marching
into Bohemia. Wherefore having directed his March toward the Elbe, and passed
that River at Torgaw, he straightways went to besiege the City of Leipzick. But
the Imperialists under the Command of the Arch Duke, Battle fought near
Leipzick.
and General Piccolomini coming to its relief, a bloody Battle was fought in
the same Plains near Breitenfeld, where King Gustave Adolf before had obtained
a signal Victory against the Imperialists. In this Battle the Left Wing of the
Imperialists having been brought into confusion, Oct. 23.
the Left Wing of the Swedes underwent the same fate, but the Swedes Left Wing
rallying again and falling in the Flank of the Imperialists Right Wing, they
put them to the rout, 5000 being killed upon the spot, and 4500 taken
Prisoners. The Swedes lost 2000 Men, and had a great many wounded. After the
loss of this Battle Leipzick was soon forced to surrender, but Freybergh (which
was soon after besieged by Torstenson) defended it self so well, that the
Swedes, upon the approach of the Imperial General Piccolomini, were forced to
raise the Siege with the loss of 1500 Men. And the Weirmarian Army under the
Command of the French General Gebrian was for the most part ruined by the
Bavarians.

In the mean while Torstenson had received Orders to March with his Army into
Holstein, War with Denmark.
the Swedes provoked by a great many injuries, 1644.
having resolved to turn their Arms against Denmark; which was executed with
great secrecy, so that the Swedes coming unexpectedly upon the Danes took the
greatest part of Holstein, beat their Troops in Jutland and Shonen, and ruined
their Fleet; made themselves Masters of the whole Bishopric of Bremen, and the
Isle of Bernholm, which obliged the Danes to make a disadvantageous Peace with
them at Bromsebtoo given to the Swedes Jempteland and Herndalen, Gothland and
Oesel, besides other advantages. 1645.
Torstenson having then made a Truce with the Elector of Saxony marched again
into Bohemia, Peace with Denmark.
where another Battle was fought near Janowitz betwixt the Imperialists and
Swedes, wherein the first were routed with the loss of 8000 Men, one half of
whom were killed the rest taken Prisoners. The Swedes had 2000 Men killed. The
Swedes then marched through Bohemia into Moravia, and from thence into Austria,
where having been joined by Ragozi they were in a fair way of making greater
progresses, if Ragoz, who had received satisfaction from the Emperor, had not
left the Swedish Army, and marched Home with his Forces. The French also under
the Command of Turenne having been again routed by the Bavarians, Torstenson
marched back into Bohemia, who having put his Forces into Winter Quarters near
the River of Eger, and growing very crazy left the Supreme Command of the Army
to Wrangel, who finding the Enemy too strong for him thereabouts, marched
further back into Misnia, and from thence toward the Weser. But having not
long after been joined by Turenne near Gieslen they attacked Augsburgh which
being reinforced with 500 Men, they were forced to quit the Siege upon the
approach of the Imperialists, who also retook several places in the Hereditary
Countries of the Emperor. Not long after Wrangel also made a Truce with the
Elector of Bavaria, which however lasted not long, the said Elector having upon
the persuasion of the Emperor broke the same a few months after, and joined
his Forces with the Imperialists. But Wrangel marching early out of his Winter
Quarters, in conjunction with Turenne, 1643.
pressed so hard upon the Bavarians that they were forced to retire to
Saltzburgh, leaving a great part of the Country to the discretion of the
Allies, where these burnt a great many Houses, because the Inhabitants refused
to pay Contribution. About the same time Koningsmark had surprised the Suburbs
of Prague, July 16.
where he had got a prodigious Booty in the Imperial Palace, and other
Noble-Mens Houses which are all built on that side of the River, but could not
take the City, which was defended by 12000 Citizens, so that having sent his
Forces into their Winter Quarters thereabouts, whilst Wrangel was marching into
the Upper Palatinate they received the News of a Peace being concluded at
Munster.

This Peace had been long in agitation before it was brought to perfection,
Peace made at Munster and Osnabrug.
the Imperialists having endeavored, after they saw the Swedes recover
themselves so bravely after the Battle of Nomingen to persuade them to a
separate Peace without including the Protestant Estates in Germany. But the
Swedes having refused these offers as being neither honorable nor secure,
seven years were spent in the Preliminaries, and these having been adjusted the
Treaty it self was begun at Osnabrug and Munster, where the Emperors, Spanish,
and Dutch Ambassadors, as also those of the most Roman Catholic Estates, and
the Popes Nuncio were Resident, but in the first the Imperial Ambassadors
also, and those of most of the Protestant Estates were assembled, where at last
a Peace was concluded, by virtue of which Sweden got the Dukedoms of Bremen and
Veerden, the greatest part of Pomerania, the Isle of Rugen, and the City of
Wismar, to hold these Countries in Fief of the Empire, with all the Privileges
thereunto belonging, and five Millions of Crowns toward the payment of their
Armies. Besides this they had the Honor of having been instrumental in
re-establishing several German Princes in their Territories, and settling both
the Quiet and Protestant Religion in Germany. The War being thus ended to the
great Honor of the Swedes, the Queen, who had already then taken a resolution
of surrendering the Crown to her Nephew Charles Gustave, would willingly have
put an end to the Differences betwixt Sweden and Poland, which were likely to
revive again after the Truce expired, but the Poles were so haughty in their
Behavior, and refractory in their Transactions that no Peace could be
concluded at that time. Having therefore settled her Affairs and reserved a
certain yearly allowance for her self during her life, she surrendered the Crown
to the said Charles Gustave her Nephew at the Diet at Vpsal, 1654.
where he was Crowned the same day when she resigned the Government. Jun. 6.


16. Charles Gustave.
Charles Gustave, finding the Treasury exhausted, obtained at the first Diet
from the Estates that the fourth part of such Crown Lands as had been granted
away since the Reign of Gustave Adolfe, should be reunited with the Crown, and
having again settled the Military Affairs, which were somewhat decayed since
the last Peace, resolved to force the Poles to an honorable Peace. The War
with Poland renewed.
The better to execute his design, he marched in Person into Poland, where he
met with such success, that after having defeated some that would have opposed
his passage, not only the Polanders, but also the Lithuanians submitted
voluntarily, swearing Allegiance to him, and John Casimir, their King, was
forced to fly into Silesia. But whilst the King of Sweden was marched into
Prussia, the Poles, with the assistance of the House of Austria, having with
the same readiness again forsaken his Interest, were fallen upon the Swedes in
their Quarters, of whom they killed a great many, especially in Lithuania,
forcing the rest to seek for shelter in some strong Holds which were in their
possession. The King having put an end to the differences betwixt him and the
Elector of Brandenburgh concerning Prussia, in conjunction with the said
Elector, marched back toward Warsaw, where he obtained a signal Victory over
the Poles and Tartars; and being in the beginning of the next year joined by
Bogislaw Radzivil, 1656.
Prince of Transylvania, would in all likelihood have humbled the haughty
Poles, if the Danes had not threatened a dangerous diversion near Home, and
actually denounced War to Sweden.

This obliged the King to draw his main Army that way, War with Denmark.
where he not only made great progresses both in Holstein and Bremen; but also
by a prodigy scarce to be believed by Posterity marched over the Ice into the
Island of Tuhnen, 1658.
and from thence to other Islands, and at last into Sealand, where he carried
all before him, which brought the King of Denmark to such a distress, that he
was forced to clap up a sudden Peace at Rocshild, giving to the Swedes Schonen,
Halland and Bleckingen, the Isle of Bernholm, besides several other Possessions
in Norway. But this Peace was of no long continuance, for the King having again
conceived a jealousy at the Danes, Embarked his Forces in Holstein, and under
pretense of going toward Datzick landed in Sealand, and besieged Copenhagen,
Siege of Copenhagen.
whilst Wrangel reduced the strong Fortress of Cronenburgh. But the Danes being
chiefly encouraged by their King's presence defended themselves bravely, till
the Dutch Fleet gave them relief, which obliged the King after having
attempted, but in vain, to take it by Storm, to raise the Siege. But the
greatest misfortune befell the Swedes in the Island of Tuhnen, Battle in Tuhnen.
where being over numbered by the joint Forces of the Imperialists, Poles,
Brandenburghers and Danes, they were totally routed near Nyborgh, 1666.
their Infantry being most cut to pieces, and the rest made Prisoners. The King
being busy in repairing this loss, was seized with an Epidemical Fever, of
which he dyed on the 23. of February.

17. Charles IX.
Charles being but five years old when his Father dyed, the Swedes applied all
their care to obtain an honorable Peace, Peace made with the Poles, May 3.
which was concluded with the Poles in the Monastery called Oliva, near
Dantzick, wherein were also included the Emperor and Elector of Brandenburgh,
and King John Casimir resigned his pretension to the Crown of Sweden, and the
Poles to Livonia. In the same month a Peace was concluded with Denmark, May 23.
Peace made with Denmark.
much upon the same conditions, which were agreed on formerly at Rocshild,
except that the Danes kept the Isle of Bornholm, and Druntheim in Norway. For
the rest, the Swedes were for preserving Peace with their Neighbors during the
minority of the King, till having broke off the Triple Alliance made betwixt
them, and the English and Dutch they sided with France against the Elector of
Brandenburgh, 1674.
whom they pretended, by sending an Army into his Territories, to draw from the
Interest of the Empire. But this occasioned a heavy War to the King, at the
very beginning of his Reign, The Swedes routed by the Elector of Brandenburgh.
wherein the Elector having routed the Swedish Army, took all what the Swedes
were possessed of in Pomerania, as the Lunenburghers got into their possession
the Dukedoms of Bremen and Veerden, and the King of Denmark the City of Wismar,
and several considerable places in Shonen, but the Danes having at last been
routed at two Battles in Shonen, the King after the Treaty of Nimeguen, by a
particular Peace was put again into the possession of his Countries in Germany,
very few excepted, and Denmark was forced also to restore the places taken from
the Swedes in Shonen. This Peace having been again settled in Sweden, the King
married Vlrica Eleanora the present King of Denmark's Sister, since which time
the King has chiefly applied himself to settle his Military Affairs and
Revenues, and to maintain the Peace with his Neighbors. 1678.


18. The nature and qualification of the Swedish Nation.
The Swedish and Gothic Nation has anciently been famous for Warlike
Archievements, and is very fit to endure the Fatigues of War; yet were their
Military Affairs in former times but very indifferently ordered, their chiefest
Force consisting in the Boors, till Gustave and his Successors with the
assistance of some Scotch and German Officers and Soldiers have introduced
such a Discipline as that now they do not stand in so much need of foreign
Soldiers, except it be to make up the number of Men, wherewith they are not
overstock'd, especially since the late great Wars. As in most other Kingdoms of
Europe, by reason of the multitude of their populous Cities, the Estate of the
Citizens is the fundamental part of the State, so is in Sweden that of the
Boors, who enjoy more liberty in Sweden than in other Kingdoms, and also send
their Deputies to the Diet, where their consent is requisite to any new Taxes
to be levied upon the Subjects.

This Nation loves to show a great deal of gravity and reservedness, which if
not qualified by conversation with other Nations, often degenerates into
mistrustfulness. They generally are apt to think very well of themselves, and
to despise others. They have sufficient Capacity to attain to the first
Principles of any Art or Science, but commonly want Patience to attain to the
perfection of them. Their inclination is not much to Trade or Handiwork, and
therefore Manufacturies are but little encouraged among them.

19. Condition of the Country and its Strength.
The Kingdom of Sweden is of a great extent, but full of great Forests and
innumerable Lakes, and the Seacoast surrounded with many Rocks. But deeper
into the Country, there are a great many fertile tracts of Ground, the Forests
furnish them with Fuel, and the Lakes with great store of good Fish, which also
contribute much to the easy transportation of the Native Commodities from one
place to another. The Country produces Corn sufficient for its Inhabitants,
neither is there any want of Cattle or Horses. Sweden produces more Copper and
Iron than any other Kingdom in the World, and their Mines are fitted by nature
for that purpose, being surrounded with Woods and Rivulets. There is a Silver
Mine in Westmanland. Finland brings forth Pitch, and Tar, and Deal; and
Wermeland good store of Masts. The Native Commodities of Sweden are Copper,
Iron, Tar, Pitch, Masts, Boards etc. In lieu of which, Sweden receives from
abroad Wine, Brandy, Salt, Spices, Clothes, Silk and Woollen Stuffs, fine
Linen Cloth, French Manufactories of all sorts, Furs, Paper and such like,
all which in some years surpasses in value the Commodities fit for exportation
here. To recompense this, Navigation and Commerce has been encouraged of late
years among the Natives, and several sorts of Manufactories, whereof those made
of Copper, Iron and Brass would questionless turn to the best account, if these
Artists were duly encouraged to settle themselves in this Kingdom, Copper and
Iron being the foundation of the Swedish Commerce abroad. This present King has
put their Forces both Horse and Foot in a better Condition than ever they were
before, which are maintained in Sweden, with a small charge to the Crown, the
Foot being maintained by the Boors, but the Horsemen have for the most part
some Farms in their possession belonging to the Crown, the Revenues of which
are their pay. But the King's Guards are paid out of his Treasury. Formerly the
station of the Royal Navy was at Stockholm, but since a new Harbor has been
made in Bleckingen, where the Ships may be put to Sea sooner, and with more
convenience. Besides this, Sweden has this advantage, that it is covered on the
side of Norway with inaccessible Rocks, besides the three strong Fortresses of
Bahus, Marstrand and Gothenburgh, and the Swedish and Finland Coasts are so
well guarded by innumerable Islands, that it is very difficult to approach the
shore.

20. Neighbors of Sweden.
As to the Neighbors of Sweden, it borders on the East side upon Muscovy, with
whom the Swedes in former times were often at War, Muscovites.
but since Finland is now well covered against them by the Fortresses of Narva,
Kexholm and Noteburgh, and they have learned by experience that the Swedes are
better Soldiers than they, there is nothing to be feared from thence. And
since the Swedes have no great reason to covet any further Conquests on that
side, they may be taken now for good Neighbors. Poles.
With the Poles the Swedes used formerly to have no difference at all, except
when in outrage that Nation espoused the quarrel of their King concerning his
Title to Sweden. But since Charles Gustave a little humbled their pretensions
upon Livonia, as the Swedes have done upon Prussia, the Poles for the future
may in all likelihood prove good Neighbors to Sweden. Germany.
The Swedes have had anciently a great Communication with the Germans, by
reason of their Commerce with the Hanse Towns. But since the Swedes have by the
Westphalia Treaty been put into possession of two Provinces in Germany, they
enjoy the same right with the rest of the Estates, and the King of Sweden is
now to be considered as a Member, and not as a Neighbor of the Empire, whose
Interest therefore is to see, that the Westphalia Treaty be kept in vigor.
There is some jealousy betwixt the Swedes and the Elector of Brandenburgh,
about some part of Pomerania, which would else have fallen to that Elector's
share, and besides this, he is obliged to keep up a constant standing Army
against so considerable a Neighbor, but since Sweden has preserved
Brandenburgh and the rest of the Protestant Estates, and the said Elector has
received a triple equivalent for this loss, it is but reasonable that something
of allowance should be given as to this point especially, since it is not for
the Interest of Sweden to make any further Conquests in Germany. But betwixt
the Swedes and the House of Lunenburgh, there ought to be a good understanding,
since they are able to do one another great Service against Denmark
Brandenburgh and the Westphalian Bishops. Since Sweden by making the Sea the
borders betwixt them and Denmark, Denmark.
has put a stop to these troubles which formerly used to proceed from the too
near neighborhood of the Danes, and secured their Trade, it ought not to make
any attempt of further Conquests in Denmark, it being the Interest of most
Estates of Europe, to take care that neither of the two Northern Kings become
sole Master of the Sound. Wherefore Sweden ought to endeavor to keep the
present limits betwixt them and Denmark, and to live in amity with those
Estates in Germany, who are jealous of the Neighborhood of Denmark. The
foundation of the good Correspondency, France.
betwixt France and Sweden was built upon the common agreement of keeping under
the overgrown Greatness of the House of Austria, but since the case is now
altened, the King of France now pretends to play the Master over Princes.
Sweden ought not to assist France in those Designs which overturn the
Westphalian. Treaty, or are intended against the Protestants in Germany and
Holland. The good understanding betwixt Sweden and Holland is chiefly founded
upon this bottom, Holland.
that as Sweden cannot be glad to see Holland ruined, so the Hollanders are
obliged to prevent the King of Denmark from making himself sole Master of the
passage of the Sound or the Baltic. England.
England has hitherto had so little concern with those Northern parts, that
their greatest Correspondency has been transacted by way of contemplating with
very little Reality. Spain and Portugal.
Spain is considered by the Swedes as a part of the House of Austria, though the
Swedes have so far a concern in the Spanish Netherlands, as from their
preservation depends the welfare of Holland. But the good understanding betwixt
Sweden and Portugal depends only from the mutual Commerce of these two Nation,
who else by reason of this great distance can scarce be serviceable to one
another.

FINIS.
BOOKS printed for Matthew. Gillyflower at the Spread-Eagle in Westminster Hall.
Complete Gardener; or, Directions for Cultivating and right Ordering of
Fruit-Gardens and Kitchen-Gardens; with diver Reflections on several parts of
Husbandry, in six Books. By the Famous Monsieur de la Quintinye* Chief Director
of all the Gardens of the French King. To which is added his Treatise of Orange
Trees, with the raising of Melons, omitted in the French Editions. Made English
by J. Evelyn Esquire illustrated with Copper Plates.

The Commentaries of Julius Caesar of his Wars in Gallia, and the Civil Wars
betwixt him and Pompey, with many Excellent and Judicious Observations
thereupon. By Clement Edmonds Esquire.

To this Edition is now added at the end of every Book those Excellent Remarks
of the Duke of Rohan; also the Commentaries of the Alexandrian and African
Wars. Written by Aulus Hirtius Pansa, now first made English, with a
Geographical Nomenclature of the Ancient and Modern Names of Towns, together
with the Life of Caesar, and an account of his Medals.

The Roman History from the building of the City to the settlement of the
Empire by Augustus Caesar, being 727 years, for the better understanding of the
Roman Authors and Roman Affairs. By Lawrence Etchard A. M.

The Life of the Famous Cardinal Duke de Richlieu, Principal Secretary of State
to Lewis XIII.

A new Voyage to Italy, with a Description of the Chief Towns, Churches, Tombs,
Libraries, Palaces, Statues and Antiquities of that Country, with useful
Instructions for those who shall travel thither. By Maximilian Misson, Gent.
Adorned with Figures.

BOOKS printed for Tho. Newborough at the Golden Ball in St. Paul's Churchyard.
THE Great Historical, Geographical and Poetical Dictionary; being a Curious
Miscellany of Sacred and Profane History, containing the Lives of the
Patriarchs, Judges and Kings of the Jews; of the Fathers of the Church; of the
Popes, etc. of Heresiarchs: with an Account of their principle Doctrines; of
Emperors, Kings and Illustrious Princes, etc. of Philosophers, Inventors of
Arts, and those that have recommended themselves to the World. The Genealogy of
several Illustrious Families in Europe, the Fabulous History of the Heathen
Gods, etc. the Description of Empires, Kingdoms, Commonwealths, Islands,
Mountains and Rivers, and other considerable Places of Geography, etc.
Collected from the best Historians, Chronologers and Lexicographers, by Lewis
Morery, D. D. The Sixth Edition, Corrected and Enlarged, by Monsieur l' Clarke.
To which are added the Lives and most Remarkable Actions of the English, Scotch
and Irish Nobility, Gentry, Clergy and Artificers, etc. by several Learned Men;
with the five Years Historical and Geographical Collections of Edmund Bohun
Esqiure, never yet published.

Geographia Universalis: The Present State of the whole World. Giving an
Account of the several Religions, Customs and Riches of each People: The
Strength and Government of each Polity and State: The Curious and most
Remarkable Things in every Region; with other Particulars necessary to the
understanding History and the Interest of Princes. Written Originally at the
Command of the French King, for the use of the Dauphin, by the Sieur Duval,
Geographer in Ordinary to his Majesty. The Third Edition, Corrected and
Enlarged, by R. Midgley. M. D.


