A Short DEMURRER To the JEWS Long discontinued barred Remitter into ENGLAND.
Comprising, An exact Chronological Relation of their first Admission into,
their ill Deportment, Misdemeanors, Condition, Sufferings, Oppressions,
Slaughters, Plunders, by popular Insurrections, and regal Exactions in; and
their total, final Banishment by Judgment and Edict of Parliament, out of
England, never to return again: collected out of the best Historians and
Records.

With a Brief Collection of such English Laws, Scriptures, Reasons, as seem
strongly to plead, and conclude against their Readmission into England,
especially at this season, and against the General calling of the Jewish
Nation. With an Answer to the chief Allegations for their Introduction.

The second Edition, enlarged.

By William Prynne Esquire a Bencher of Lincolnes-Inne.

2 Chronicles. 19.2. Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the
Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord.

Prove. 6.27. Can a man take coals in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt?

Council. Toleta. 4. cap. 57. Surius Council. Tom. 2. p 734. Tanta est quorundam
^is^u^^. a^ ut quidam eam appetentes etiam a fide erraverint: multi quippe
hucusque ex Sacerdotibus atque Laicis accipientes a Judaeis munera, perfidiam
eo^um suo patrocinio fovent, qui non immerito ex corpore Antichristi esse
noscuntur, quia contra Christum faciunt. Quicunque ergo deinceps Episcopus,
sive clericus, sive Secularis, illis contra fidem Christianam suffragium vel
munere, vel favore praestiterit, vere (ut prophanus and Sacrilegus) anathema
effectus, ab Ecclesia Catholica, and Regno Dei habeatur extraneus: quia dignus
est ut a corpore Christi separetur, qui inimicis Christi PATRONUS efficitur.

Printed at London, for EDWARD THOMAS dwelling in Green Arbor, 1656.

To the Christian Reader.
THat I may not justly 1 Pet. 4.15.
suffer (so much as in thy Thought) as a busy body in other men's matters, for
publishing my Opinion in a public Case; wherein I conceive my self some ways
interessed, both as a Christian and English Freeman: I shall inform thee of
the true original cause of this my sudden unpremeditated undertaking.

Being much affected with God's late admirable Providence, in causing the Sea
the Declaration of 21 Nov. 1655.
sixth day of this instant December to be set apart for a Day of Solemn Fasting
and Humiliation, for the late Rebukes we have received, the Tares of Division
that have been sown by the envious one, and the growth they have had through
his subtilty; the abominable Blasphemies, Apostacies, and abuse of Liberty by
many professing Religion, and the continual Series of Difficulties we have been
exercised under: and, inviting all the People of God in these three Nations on
that day, to join in solemn and earnest Supplications to the Throne of Grace,
That the Lord will be pleased truly to humble our present Governors, and the
Nation, under his Righteous Hand, that we may be every one searching out the
Plague of his own Heart, and turn unfeignedly from the evil of our ways. This
being the very day of the Month, whereon this time seven years, ( December 6.
1648.) Colonel Pride with other Officers of the ARMY, besetting the
Parliament House with their armed Forces A Collection of Ordinances ^. 5^9, 623.
raised to Defend its PRIVILEGES and MEMBERS) against their Trusts, Duties,
forcibly seized, secured my self, with above forty Parliament-Members more, as
we were going into the Commons-House to discharge our duties; translating us
that day from the Queens Court (where they first impresoned us) to Hell in
Westminster, and there lodging us upon the bare boards without Beds, all that
miserable Cold Night, like so many Turkish Gally-slaves, rather than
Parliament-Members: seconded with other succeeding Restraints, and high
unparalled Violations both of our Parliamentary Privileges, and Hereditary
Laws and Liberties. Which transcendent Exorbitancies, as we may justly fear,
are the Plague of the Heart, and Evil of their Ways, who were the chief
Contrivers or Actors of them; if not the greatest Rebukes the English
Parliament or Nation ever received; the most dangerous Tares of Division that
have ever been sown by the envious one in our Realm, which have since
extraordinarily grown and spread amongst us through his subtilty; the saddest
Apostasy, and abuse of Liberty by men professing Religion ever heard of amongst
Christians; and the very Fountain of all that continued series of difficulties
we have since been exercised under. For which the principal Architects,
Executioners, and whole English Nation had never publicly been humbled, nor
seriously lamented, repented them in seven whole years space; It pleased God by
his overruling Providence, beyond the Intentions or Thoughts of Men, so at
last to bring it about, that this very forgotten sad day, whereon this was
publicly acted, should be now by a printed Declaration, specially devoted for
A Day of solemn Fasting and Humiliation, throughout this Commonwealth, to
lament and bewail these former enormous Actions on it, as well as other Crimes.
Having informed diverse thereof, both before and on this Fast Day, who were much
taken with it; On the seventh of December, (the day after the Fast, on which the
secured Members that time seven years were carried from Hell to White Hall, and
there kept fasting till past seven a clock at night to attend the
Army Officers, who pretended a desired conference with them; and at last,
without vouchsafing to see them, sent them PRISONERS through the dirt with
Musketeers at each of their backs, and other Guards of Horse by their sides,
to the King's Head and Swan, where they long remained:) I walked down to
Westminster, to visit some of my then Fellow Prisoners and Members, to acquaint
them with this memorable Providence; in my passage thither in Martin's-Lane, I
unexpectedly met with Sir John Clotworthy (who was one of them) leading his
Lady on foot toward Wallingford-house, the place whither the Officers promised
to carry, and there to confer with us, when they thrust us into Hell; who
taking notice of, and saluting me, I informed him of the foresaid adorable
Providence, in appointing the former days Fast on that day seven years whereon
we were seized: who professing he had forgotten it, and that it came not within
his thoughts; but in truth it was very miraculous, and worthy special
observation. We thereupon walked on, discoursing of it till we came to
Wallingford-house-gate, where Colonel Pride, who then seized, met us full but;
and I not perfect^y knowing him, Sir John told me, here is Colonel Pride, and
then gave him this seasonable Memento; Fellow Pride, Remember this Time seven
years. So we parting company, I went and visited some others of my then Fellow
Prisoners in Westminster; discoursing with them of these Providence,
(wherewith they were much affected, as having not observed them before) and of
our Fast at White Hall this day seven years. In my return homewards that day by
the Garden-wall at White Hall, Mr. Nigh the Minister, going very fast, there
overtook, and saluting me by name, presently demanded this unexpected Question
of me; Whether there were any Law of England against bringing in the Jews
amongst us? for the Lawyers had newly delivered their Opinions, there was no
Law against it. To which I answered, That the Jews were in the year 1290. all
banished out of England, by Judgment and Edict of the King and Parliament, as
a great Grievance, never to return again: for which the Commons gave the King
the fifteenth part of their Movables: and therefore being thus banished by
Parliament, they could not by the Laws of England, be brought in again, without
a special Act of Parliament, which I would make good for Law. He replied, I
wish it might not be done otherwise; and, that this business had been formerly
moved in the Bishops time, rather than now. To which I subjoyned; That it was
now a very ill time to bring in the Jews, when the people were so dangerously
and generally bent to Apostasy, and all sorts of Novelties and Errors in
Religion; and would sooner turn Jews, than the Jews Christians. He answered, He
thought it was true, and was sorry he could not discourse longer with me, the
Committee about the Jews being sat, and staying for him as he feared.
Whereupon, as he was turning in toward White-Hall-Gate, I told him, The Jews
had been formerly great Clippers and Forgers of Money, and had crucified three
or four Children in England at least, which were principal causes of their
banishment. To which he replied, That the crucifying of Children was not fully
charged on them by our Historians, and would easily be wiped off. Whereto I
answered, He was much mistaken: and so we parted. As I kept on my way, in
Lincolnes-Inne. Fields, passing by seven or eight maimed Soldiers on Stilts,
who begged of me; I heard them say aloud one to another, We must now all turn
Jews, and there will be nothing left for the poor. And not far from them
another company of poor people, just at Lincolnes-Inne back Gate, cried aloud
to each other: They are all turned Devils already, and now we must all turn
Jews. Which unexpected concurrent Providence and Speeches, made such an
impression on my Spirit, that before I could take my rest that night, I perused
most of the passages in our English Histories concerning the Jews carriage in
England, with some of their misdemeanors in other parts, to refresh my memory,
and satisfy my judgment; making some Collections out of them, which after I
enlarged and digested into this ensuing Demurrer, with as much speed as the
sharpness of the season would permit; and was induced to publish it (knowing no
particular discourse of this Subject extant) for the general information,
satisfaction of others, and honor of my blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
the righteous, whom the Jews with malicious hearts, and wicked hands Acts 2.23,
36. c. 3.14, 15. 1 Thessalonians. 2.14, 15, 16. Mat. 26. and 27.
crucified in person heretofore, and their posterity by their blasphemies,
despiteful actions against Christ, his Kingdom, Offices, Gospel Heb. 6.6. 1
Job. 4.3.
crucify afresh every day, trampling under foot the Son of God, putting him to
open shame, offering despite to the Spirit of Grace, and counting the blood of
the Covenant an unholy thing. And in all their public and private Devotions,
praying constantly for the sudden, universal, total, final subversion,
extirpation, perishing of Christ's Kingdom, Gospel, and all his Christian
Members, which they plot, and continually expect, such is their implacable
transcendent malice. I have deduced their introduction into England, only from
William surnamed the Conqueror, because I find not the least mention of them
in any of our British, or Saxon Histories, Councils, Synods, Canons, which
doubtless would have mentioned them, and made some strict Laws or Canons,
against their Jewish as well as against Pagan Superstitions, had they exercised
(...) ^ere, as they would have done as well as in Spain, and other places, had
they resided here. That any of them were here in the time of our famous Emperor
Constantine, is but a dream of such, who because they find an Epistle of
Constantines in the Council of Nice, to all the Churches of Christ, in
Spelmanni Council. p. 43, 44.
Sir Hen. Spelmans Collections of the Decrees, Canons, and Constitutions of the
British World* wherein is mention made of the Churches of Britain, in that age,
as well as in Rome, France and other parts, keeping the Passover in a
different manner from the wicked blinded Jews, would thence infer, there were
then Jews resident in Britain; of which there is not one syllable in that
Epistle, nor in any Classick Author Foreign or Domestic, I yet ever saw or
heard of.

That they were settled in our Island in the Saxons time, is collected, only
from that Law inserted by Annal. pars poterio^, p 604.
Hoveden, and Spelmanni Council. p. 623.
Spelman amongst Edward the Confessors, here cited, p. 3. But there being no
mention of the Jews in any of our Saxon Kings Raigns, Councils, Decrees, Laws,
before the Confessor, out of which all his Laws were Malmesbury a^g^st^s Regum
Angl. l. 2. c. 3. p. 75. Chronicon Johannis Brom. col. 956, 957. Spelmanni
council. p 625.
wholly extracted, and this Law of the Jews being not to be found in the true
Original Copy of the Confessors and Conquerors Laws of Abbot Ingulphi Hist. p.
914.
Ingulphus, who flourished in that age, was present at their confirmation, and
then brought them to Croyland Abbey, published by Mr. Ad Eadmerum Notae, p. 172
to 195.
John Seldom, nor yet in Bromton, I cannot but reject it as counterfeit, and
esteem it rather, a Declaration of the Jews Condition in England in Hovedens
time (inserted by him, as well as some other things of punier date, amongst
these Laws) rather than any Law of, or in the Confessors days, wherein I can
find no evidence of any Jews residence here, but only this interpolation and
forged Law, which Mr. Seldom wholly omits in his Collection of his Laws. The
History of King William Rufus, his compelling the Jews of Rhoan that were
turned Christians, to renounce their Christianity and turn Jews again, ACCEPTO
PRETIO APOSTASLE, upon the complaint and money given him by the Infidel Jews
there, with the Dialogue between Him and Stephen the Jew, cited out of
Holinshed, here p. 5, 6. I find originally recorded of him by Histo^iae
noverum, l. 2. p. 46, 47.
Eadmerus, living in his reign: who though very bitter and injurious to him, by
reason of the great Contests between him and Anselme (whose Favorite, Follower
and Companion in adversity Eadmerus was) yet he relates it not as a certain
Truth, but as a Report of others of that Country, who had another Opinion of
Rufus, Quam de Christianis Christianos Lex Christiana docet habere: quae tamen
sicut illa accepimus simpliciter ponam, non astruens vera an secus extiterint,
an non. Only he adds this passage to the story of Stephen, which Holinshed
omits: That St. Stephen appearing to him as he was traveling on the way, he
demanding of him who he was? Answered, That he was long since of a Jew made a
Christian, and was Stephen the first Martyr; but for this cause, I have now
come down from Heaven to Earth, that thou casting away thy Jewish Superstition,
might be made a Christian; and being baptized in Christ, might be called
by my name. Whereupon he became a Christian, and was baptized. That immediately
after the conference between the King and Stephen, (which agrees with that in
Holinshed) he being thrust out, and meeting his Father standing before the
door, expecting the event, being animated against him, said; O Son of death,
and fuel of eternal perdition, is not thine own damnation sufficient for thee,
unless thou also cast me headlong into it together with thee? But God forbid,
that I to whom Christ is now revealed, should ever acknowledge thee henceforth
for a Father, because the devil is thy father.

I have omitted in this second enlarged Edition of my Demurrer, no passage to
my knowledge, in any of our Historians, relating to our former English Jews,
reciting them all in a Chronological Order in the Historians own words, quoted
in the Margin: only I find sundry Records concerning them, which I shall
supply by a subsequent Appendix by themselves, to gratify those who bought the
first Edition, whom their insertion into this might have injured.

Herein P. 64, 65, 89, 60.
I have only briefly touched, not handled, the great Question, of the general
calling and conversion of the Jewish Nation to the Faith of Christ, toward the
end of the world; for which I cannot find any satisfactory grounds in
Scripture. That Text of Levit. 26.41, to 46. on which some build their general
call, having these two clauses in it, that seem strongly to oppose, or make it
very dubious, v. 41. IF THEN their uncircumcised heart be humbled, and that
they accept of the punishment of their iniquity, etc. and v. 46. I will not
cast them away, neither will I abhor them to DESTROY THEM UTTERLY. And that
other Text of Romans 11. whereon others most rely, having this conditional
passage and express clauses against it, v. 23. And they also, IF they abide not
still in unbelief, shall be grafted in, for God is able (he says not resolved)
to graffe them in again. And v. 3, to 8. I have reserved to my self 7000 men,
etc. Even so then at this present time there is a Remnant according to the
election of grace, etc. But the Election has obtained it, and the rest were
hardened, or blinded. Which compared with Romans 9.27, 29. ( Isa. 10.20, 22, 23.
Isaiah also says concerning Israel, Though the number of the children of
Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet a REMNANT of them (only) shall be saved.
Isa. 1.9. See c. 11.11, 16. Joel 2.32.
Except the Lord of Hosts had left unto us A SEED, A VERY SMALL REMNANT (so
Isaiah calls it) we had been as Sodom, etc.) will necessarily evince, that Romans
11.26. And so all Israel shall be saved, etc. (on which they ground this
general call) must be intended only of all this small elect remnant of the
Israel of God, and seed of Abraham according to the faith, not flesh, Romans 4
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Gal. 3.7, 8, 9, 14, 16. Ga. 6.16. of all such who are
Jews inwardly, and have the Circumcision of the heart, Rom: 2.28, 29. not of
the whole Jewish Nation, (whose servants I fear we^e as few under the Gospel,
as the Gentiles, Converts, and Proselytes under the Law.) And those who will
strain that Text further, must necessarily aver, not only an Universal Calling,
but likewise Salvation and taking away the ungodliness and sins of the whole
Nation then by Christ, (of which that Text only speaks) not only contrary to
these forecited Scriptures, and Gods dealing with all other Rev. 3.4.
Churches, Nations; but to Jer. 3.14. I will take you, one of a City, and two
of a Tribe, and I will bring you to Sion. Mat. 21.16. Many are called, but few
chosen: and few saved, Mat. 7.14. Luke 13.23. Therefore for any to call in the
Jews among us upon this surmise of their general approaching Conversion, is a
strange Solecism, both in State Policy and Christianity, especially in this
age, wherein that Speech of De unitate Ecclesiae Francofurti. 1600. p. 180,
191, 216. See Jacobus Ussertus, De Ecclesiarum Christian. Successione and
Statu, c. 5. p. 108, 109, 119.
Waltramus Bishop of Naumburge, is most truly verified, Diabolus videns Idola
derelicta, and per nimium credentium populum seeds suas ac templa deserta,
excog^itavit novam fraudem, ut sub ipso Christiani nominis titulo fallat
incautos; haeresesque invenit and schismata, quibus subverteret fidem,
corrumperet veritatem. Exinde divisa est Ecclesia, and divisa sunt Ecclesiae
Sacerdotia, atque omnia scandalorum orta sunt genera. Exinde crevit grave and
diuturrum bellum, and non solum civil bellum, sed and plusquam civil bellum,
and factae sunt absque divino pariter and humano respectu vastationes
Ecclesiarum, and caedes hominum: Exinde etiam corruptae sunt divinae pariter
and humanae leges, sine quibus non subsistit vel Dei Ecclesia, vel Imperii
Respublica: and ex inde violata est fides and publica, and Catholica: exinde
etiam illa crevit injustitia, ut pro veritate falsa testimonia, and pro fide
Catholica, abundent perjuria: ut post quam Leges bello silvere coactae,
impleaturiam ista Domini sententia per Osee Prophetam: Non est veritas, and non
est misericordia, and non scientia Dei in terra: maledictum, and mendacium, and
homicidium, and furtum, and adulterium inundaverunt, and sanguis sanguinem
tetigit. Ipse Diabolus videtur nunc de carcere suo solutus esse. Hinc publicae
civium contra Cives congressiones, aliis pro pastoribus legitimis, aliis vero
contra pastores dimicantes: as he and De Investigatione Antichristi Syntagma,
p. 41.
Gerhobus Richerspergensis writ of Pope Hildebrands days.

If any man chance to censure me, as overharsh or earnest in my expressions
against the Jews; I hope that speech of their royal Prophet, (a man after Gods
own heart) Ps. 139.20, 21, 22. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and
am I not grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with a
perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies: for they speak against thee
wickedly; depart from me therefore ye bloody men: will apologize for me;
especially seeing their See the humble Addresses of Manasseh Ben Israel in
behalf of the Jewish Nation, and their printed Proposals.
Proposals are, Not only to be admitted and received into our Commonwealth
under the protection and safeguard of our Governors, AS THE NATIVES
THEMSELVES: and that all the Heads and Generals of Arms may take an Oath to
defend them upon all occasions, that they may be permitted to traffic freely
in all sorts of Merchandise as others; but to be judged by their Judges in
differences between themselves, according to the Mosaic Law: And to be allowed
PUBLIC SYNAGOGUES, not only in ENGLAND, but also IN ALL OTHER PLACES under
our power; and TO OBSERVE IN ALL THINGS THEIR RELIGION AS THEY OUGHT: That in
case there have been any Laws against their Jewish Nation, they may IN THE
FIRST PLACE, and BEFORE ALL THINGS BE REVOKED. A clear evidence of an intended
design in them, only to set up their Rev. 2.9. c. 5.9.
Synagogues of Satan, Judaism, and Jewish Ceremonies in the highest degree,
amongst us, as lawful, in direct opposition and subversion of our only Lord,
Savior, Redeemer, Mediator, Jesus Christ his Person, Offices, Kingdom, Gospel
and Christianity it self, without any thoughts of turning Christians
themselves. As Manasseh Ben Israel his printed Addresses most fully discovers.
In which case not to be passionately zealous, not to Numb. 25.15. Gal. 4.18.
Jude 3.4.
contend earnestly for the Faith against these ungodly men, turning the Grace
of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord
Jesus Christ; is in a great measure to deny and betray them, together with our
Church, and Nation at once, unto these their inveterate enemies. For whose
Conversion, (not National, but of the Isa. 1.9. Romans 9.27.
very small elect Remnant of them) as I shall pray, so I cannot but pray and
write against their Readmission amongst us on these, or any other terms, for
the Reasons here humbly presented to thy view, and Christian Consideration, by

Thy Christian Brother, and Companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdom and
Patience of Jesus Christ, William Prynne.
Lincolnes-Inne, 14 December, 1655.
A Short Demurrer to the Jews long discontinued Remitter into ENGLAND.
HOw the Nation of the Jews ( once Deuteronomy. 7.6. c. 14. etc. 26.19.
Gods own beloved, special, chosen People) after their Acts 2.22. 1 Thessalonians.
2.15, 16.
malicious crucifying of our Savior Jesus Christ, and imprecation, That Mat.
27.25.
his Blood might be on them and their children, were for this 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16.
their crying sin especially, made the saddest spectacles of divine Justice,
and humane Misery of all other Nations in the World, being quite extirpated out
of their own Land, almost totally deleted by the sword, pestilence, famine;
carried away Captives, and dispersed like so many Vagabonds over the face of
the whole Earth, as the very off-scowring of the World, and execration,
derision of all other people, having no place, City, form of Government, or
Republike of their own, in any corner of the Universe; (according to Gods
Comminations against them, Levit. 26.14. to 46. Deuteronomy. 28.15. to 68. Jer. 9.10.
c. 13.24. Ezech. 5.2. to the end. c. 12.15. c. 22.15. Mich. 1.21. Mat. 24.) Or
what banishments, punishments, oppositions, restraints by penal Laws,
suppressions of their Synagogues, Ceremonies, they have received in all ages
from Christian Kings, Princes, Republikes in Foreign parts, for their implacable
malice, blasphemy against our Savior Jesus Christ, Christians, Christian
Religion, and other Crimes and Misdemeanors to which they are most addicted, is
not the subject of my intended Brief Discourse, and so fully related by
Josephus, Egesippus, Eusebius, Nicephorus, Zonaras, Paulus Diaconus, Paul Eber,
the Magdeburgian Centuriators, out of them and other Historians, in their 2. to
their 13 Centuries, chap. 14, and 15. in Baronius his Annals, and Heylins
Microcosm, p. 568, 569, 570. where all may peruse them, that I shall not spend
time to recite them, but wholly confine my self to, a Brief Relation of their
first admission into, their ill deportment, misdemeanors, sufferings, popular
insurrections against them in, and their final banishment by Judgment and
Edict of Parliament out of England, never to return again, collected out of the
best Historians: to which I shall subjoyn, a taste only of such Laws,
Scriptures, and Reasons, as seem strongly to plead against their readmission
into our Island, especially at this season.

When the Jews came first into England, appears not certainly by any
Historians, there being no mention of their being here in any of our British or
Saxon Kings reigns, to my remembrance. Antoninus in his Chronicles, Tit. 16. c.
5. records, That William the Conqueror King of England, translated the Jews
from Rhoan to London; and the Magdeburg Centuries out of him, Cent. 11. cap.
14. col. 686. add thereto, that it was OB NUMERATUM PRECIUM, for a sum of
money given to him by them, (which I find not in Antoninus.) Both these Authors
intimate, That this was their first arival in England, yet in what year of this
King, they are silent. With them concurs Raphael Holinshed, Vol. 3. p. 15.
where thus he writes, Among other grievances, which the English sustained by
the hard dealings of the Conqueror, this is to be remembered, That he brought
Jews into the Land from Rouen, and appointed them a place to inhabit and
occupy: (reputing their very first introduction a Grievance to the English, and
hard dealing.) Which John Stow in his Annals of England, p. 103. and Survey of
London, printed 1633. p. 288. thus seconds, King William FIRST brought the Jews
from Rhoan here to inhabit in England; and Sir Richard Baker in his Chronicle
of the Kings of England, London, 1653. p. 39. This King was the FIRST that
brought the Jews to inhabit here in England. But this Law concerning the Jews
inserted amongst the Laws in the Confessors time, seems to prove their arival
and settlement in England, to be before this Normans reign; unless mis-placed
in point of time amongst his Laws by Hoveden: being rather in my opinion, a
Declaration of the Jews servile condition under King William, and Richard the
first, when Hoveden writ, then any Law in King Edwards reign, or before,
(amongst whose Laws or the Conquerors it is not to be found in Abbot Ingulphus
his Original copy, published by Mr. Seldom in his Notae and Spicilegium ad
Eadmerum, p. 172, etc.) as the words themselves import.

Rog. Hove. Annal. pars posterior p. 604 Spelmanni Council. p. 623. Lambard.
Archaion.
De Judaeis in Regno consticutis. SCiendum est quoque, quod omnes Judaei,
ubicunque in Regno sunt, sub tutela and defensione Domini Regis sunt; nec
quilibet eorum alicui diviti se potest subdere, sine Regis licentia. Judaei,
and omnia sua Regis sunt. Quod si quispiam detinuerit eis pecuniam suam,
perquirat Rex tanquam suum proprium: (or detinuerit eos, vel pecuniam eorum,
perquirat Rex, si vult, tanquam suum proprium, as Sir Henry Spelman renders it.)

This Law or Declaration (being the first record making mention of their being,
and condition in England:) proves, That as all the Jews when they came first
into England, were under the Kings protection and patronage where ever they
resided: so they were all under him only as his mere Vassals, their persons and
goods being his alone; and that they could dispose of neither of them without
his license: Into which slavish condition they doubtless then put themselves,
(being banished out of other Nations for their villainies) only to avoid the
fury of the common people, to whom they were most detestable, who else would
have quickly murdered, or stoned them to death, and stripped them of all their
wealth; as the sequel will declare.

The next Passage in Historians concerning the Jews being and condition in
England, is that of De Gestic Regum, l. 4. p. 123.
William of Malmsbury, in William Rufus his reign. The Jews (writes he) in his
time gave a testimony of their insolency: Once at Rhoan, endeavoring by gifts
to persuade and revoke certain men to Judaism, who had deserted their error:
Another time at London, being animated to enter into a combat (or dispute)
against our Bishops, because the King (in merriment, as I believe) had said,
That if they should overcome the Christians, and confute them by open
arguments, he would then revolt to them, and become one of their Sect;
Whereupon it was managed with great fear of the Bishops and Clergy, and with
pious solicitude of such who were afraid of the Christian Faiths miscarriage.
And from this combat the Jews only brought away nothing besides confusion;
although they would many times boast, that they were overcome not by argument
or reason, but by a faction. Chronica pars 2. Tit. 16. c. 5. f. 167.
Antoninus relating the story in the same words, adds only this, That the
Jews coming to this King on a certain Solemnity, and offering him gifts;
(after their removal from Rhoan to London) he thereupon animated them to a
conflict against the Christians, swearing by St. Lukes face, that if they
overcame them, he would revolt to their Sect: (as if he spoke it in good
earnest) with whom the Centur. xi. ^. 14. col. 667.
Magdeburg Centuries, John Stow in his Survey of London, p. 288. and Sir
Richard Baker in his Chronicle, p. 51. accord.

By which we may observe, That the Jews were no sooner transported and settled
in Rhoan and London, but they presently began to grow very insolent against the
Christians, 1. Endeavoring to pervert some of them by moneys to Judaism. 2ly,
Attempting to corrupt the King himself, by gifts, to side with them against the
Bishops and Clergy, and to become one of their Sect. 3ly, By entering into open
Disputations with the Bishops and Clergy against the Christian Faith, to the
great fear of the Professors, and hazard of the Christian Religion. 4ly, By
boasting frequently when they were overcome, That it was only by power and
faction, not truth or disputation. And will not this be their very practice
now, if readmitted, to the hazard of our Christian Religion, and seduction of
many simple, unstable souls, in this unsettled, apostatizing age? when not only
the ignorant people, but many great Professors, turn Atheists, Heretics,
Seekers, Apostates, Blasphemers, Ranters, Quakers, Antiscripturists, and what
not, but real, upright, just, and mortified self-denying Christians?

This History of William Rufus, causing a disputation between the Christians
and the Jews, is related by Raphael Holinshed in his Chronicle; Vol. 3. p. 27.
who likewise records of him See Eadmeri Hist. Novorum l. 2. p. 46, 47. Where
this History is first recorded upon the reports of there is and Sir Richard Baker
his Chronicle p. 51.
That he being at Rhoan on a time, there came to him diverse Jews, who inhabited
that City, complaining to him, that diverse of that Nation had renounced their
Jewish Religion, and were become Christians; wherefore they besought him, that
for a certain sum of money which they offered to give, it might please him to
constrain them to abjure Christianity, and turn to the Jewish Law again. He was
content to satisfy their desires, and so receiving the money, called them
before him; and what with threats, and putting them otherwise in fear, he
compelled diverse of them to forsake Christ, and to turn to their old errors.
Hereupon, the Father of one Stephen a Jew, converted to the Christian Faith,
being sore troubled for that his Son was turned a Christian, and hearing what
the King had done in such like matters, presented to him 60 Marks of Silver,
conditionally, That he should enforce his Son to return to his Jewish Religion;
whereupon the young man was brought before the King, unto whom he said: Sir,
thy Father here complains, that without his license thou art become a
Christian: If this be true, I command thee to return again to the Religion of
thy Nation, without any more ado. To whom the Young man answered, Your Grace
(as I guess) does but ^est. Wherewith the King being moved, said, What? thou
dunghill knave, should I jest with thee; Get thee hence quickly, and fulfill my
commandment, or by St. Lukes face, I shall cause thine eyes to be plucked out
of thine head. The young man nothing abashed thereat, with a constant voice
answered Truly I will not do it; but know for certain, that if you were a good
Christian, you would never have uttered any such words; for it is the part of a
Christian, to reduce them again to Christ, which are departed from him, and not
to separate them from him, which are joined to him by Faith. The King herewith
confounded, commanded the Jew to avaunt and get him out of his sight; But his
Father perceiving that the King could not persuade his Son to forsake the
Christian Faith, required to have his money again, To whom the King said, he
had done so much as he promised to do; that was, to persuade him so far as he
might. At length, when he would have had the King to have dealt further in the
matter; the King (to stop his mouth) tendered back to him the one half of his
money, and retained the other to himself. All which increased the suspicion men
had of his infidelity.

By this History we may perceive what a prevailing Engine the Jews money is,
both to serve them into Christian Kingdoms, though the most bitter, inveterate,
professed Enemies of Christ himself, Christians, and Christianity, and how
their money can induce even Christian Princes to perpetrate most unchristian,
and antichristian actions; and enforce by threats and violence, even converted
Christian Jews to renounce their Christianity, and apostatise to their former
Jewish Errors which they had quite renounced. And do not they still work even
by the self-same Money Engine? preferred by too many Christians, before Christ
himself and Christianity.

In the year of our Lord, 1145. during the reign of King Stephen, the Jews grew
so presumptuous in England, that they crucified a child called William, in the
city of Norwich, in derision of Christian Religion, as Matthew Westminster,
Flores Historiarum, Ann. 1145. p. 36. Chronicon Johannis Bromton. Col. 1048.
Hygden in his Polychronicon; Antoninus: Centuriae Magdeburgenses: Centuriae 12.
c. 14. Mr. John Fox in his Acts and Monuments, 1640. Vol. 1. p. 302. Richard
Grafton in his Chronicle, p. 46. Raphael Holinshed in his Chronicle, Vol. 3. p.
56. Stowes Survey of London, p. 288.
and others jointly attest. Not long after this, Anno, 1160. (the 6 year of
Henry the II.) they crucified another child at Gloucester, (in contempt of
Christ and his Passion) as John Bromtons Chronicon col. 1050. and Henry de
Knyghton de Event. Angl. l. 2. col. 2394. Polychronicon: Fox Acts and
Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 302. Grafton in his Chronicle, p. 46.
others record. And in the same Kings reign, Anno 1181. upon the same account,
the Jews on the Feast of Easter martyred and crucified another child at St.
Edmonds-bury, called Robert; who was honorably interred soon after in the
Church of St. Edmunds, and grew famous by miracles there wrought; as Gervasius
Dorobernensis, in his Chronica, col. 1458. relates.

What punishments were then inflicted on them for these Murders and
Insolences, I find not recorded; perchance they purchased their peace with
moneys: Yet I Gervasius Dorobern. Chro. col. 1403.
read, That in the year 1168. King Henry the 2. wanting moneys, banished the
wealthiest of the Jews out of England, and fined the rest of them in 5000
Marks; most likely for these their Misdemeanors. John Stow in his Survey of
London, p. 288. writes, That King Henry the 2. grievously punished the Jews for
corrupting his coin; which no other Historian mentions.

The Chronicon Johann. Bromton, col. 1129. Polydor Virgil, l. 13. Holinsheds
Chronicle Vol. 3. p. 101. Graftons Chro. p. 79. Cent. Magdeburg. 12 c. 15. col.
1759. John Stow his Survey of London, p. 318. Sir Richard Bakers Chronicle, p.
81.
Jews, though there were a great multitude of them in England, in every quarter
of the Realm, had only one Churchyard allotted them, and that at London, (near
Red-cross-street) in which they were enforced to bury all their dead corpse,
wheresoever they died; which being a great trouble and annoyance to them:
thereupon in the year 1178. they petitioned King Henry the 2. (being at
Stanstede) for a License to have churchyards without the Cities wherein they
inhabited, in convenient places where they could purchase them, wherein to bury
their dead; which he then granted to them.

It seems the Jews were then so odious to the whole Nation, that they would not
permit them to bury their very dead corpse in any English soil, for fear of
polluting it, nor near any Christians bodies, without the Kings special
License. Neither did they desire to be interred near, or amongst any Christians
corpse, out of detestation to them, as if one earth, could no more contain them,
than one Heaven, which the Jews would engross to themselves alone.

Guliel. Nubrigens. Hist. l. 4. c. 1.7, 8. etc. Matthew west. Mat. Paris, Rog.
Hoveden, Hygden, Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton, Stow, Speed, Fox, Daniel, in the
life of Rich. 1. Chronicon Johannis Bromton, col. 1152.1160.1171. Radulphus de
Diceto Ymagines historiarum, col. 647.651. Henricus de Knyghton, de Eventibus
Angliae, l. 2. c. 13. col. 2401. John Stow his Survey of London, p. 288. Sir
Richard Bakers Chronicle, p. 89, 94, 95. Cent. Magd. 12. c. 14.
King Richard the first being to be crowned King at London, in the year of our
Lord, 1189. the chiefest of the Jews flocked together from all parts to his
Coronation, resolving to purchase the favor of the New King with most ample
gifts, and to get their former privileges confirmed, which they feared they
should lose. But they being suspected of Sorcery and Magic, the King by a
public Proclamation prohibited all Jews from entering the Church whiles he was
crowning, or his Palace whiles he was therein feasting. Notwithstanding some of
the principal Jews secretly got into the Church and Palace; who being
discovered one after another, were well beaten, and thrust out of the Church
and Court by the Kings Officers and Christians. Upon which the common people
then flocking in great multitudes to the Kings coronation, fell upon the Jews
standing in great multitudes at the Palace gate, first beating them with their
fists, and then taking up clubs and stones slew some of them, and left the
others half dead: whereupon one of them called Benedict of York, being so
beaten and wounded, that he despaired of life, and extraordinarily terrified
with the fear of death, received Baptism from William, Prior of St. Mary's of
York, and thereby escaped the peril of death, and hands of the persecutors. In
the mean while there was a great rumor spread throughout the city of London upon
this occasion, That the King desired, and had commanded, that all the Jews
should be banished and destroyed; Whereupon an infinite number of people, as
well out of the City as most counties of England then coming to the coronation,
inflamed with the desire of booty, betaking themselves to their arms, fell
pell-mell upon the Jews, and slew and pillaged them both in the streets, and in
their houses; and those who defended themselves for a time in such strong
houses which they could not enter, were there soon after burnt and consumed,
together with their houses by the furious multitude, who put fire to their
houses, and burnt down most of them, Synagogae datae dedecori, and likewise
defaced their Synagogues, as Radulphus de Diceto records. The King being
informed hereof whiles he was feasting with his Nobles, thereupon sent
Ranulphus de Glanvil, then chief Justice of the Realm, a potent and prudent
man, together with other great Noblemen to persuade and restrain these bold
people. But all in vain, for in so great a multitude, none would hear their
voices, nor reverence their persons; but rather murmuring against them,
exhorted them speedily to return: whereupon they advisedly declining their
unbridled rage, the fury of these plunderers ceased not til the next day. Ac
licet immensitas tantae rab^ei si dissimulata and multa transiret, primordia
regiae majestatis denigraret plurimum, propter reorum tamen infinitam
multitudinem dissimulari oportuit quod vindicari non potuit; writes Henry de
Knyghton. Yet the very next day the King sending his Officers throughout the
City, commanded some of the said malefactors to be apprehended, and brought
before him, of which three were hanged by the judgment of his Court: one,
because he had stolen the goods of a certain Christian, and two because they
had made a fire in the City, whereby the houses of Christians were burned.
After which the King sent for the man, who of a Jew was made a Christian, and
demanded of him, in the presence of those who had seen him baptized, Whether he
were made a Christian? Who answered, That he was not, but that he permited the
Christians to do to him what they would, that he might escape death. Then the
King demanded of the Archbishop of Canterbury, in the presence of many
Archbishops and Bishops, What was to be done concerning him? who answering very
indiscreetly, said: If he will not be a man (or servant) of God, let him be a
man, (or servant) of the Devil; And so he returned to the Judaical Law and
pravity, like a dog to his vomit Roger de Hoveden, pars post^^ior. p. 657.
and soon after died at Northampton, and was deprived of the common burial of
the Jews, because he had been made a Christian in this manner, and likewise of
common burial with the Christians, because he apostatized to the Jewish
wickedness, for which some would have had him proceeded against as an
Apostate. In the mean time the King sent his Writs throughout all the Counties
of England, prohibiting, That none should do any harm to the Jews, but that
they should enjoy his peace. But before that Edict was published, the Jews
which were in the Town of Dunstaple (to preserve their lives from the peoples
fury) being converted to the Christian Faith, were baptized, betroathing their
wives after the manner of Christians; which was likewise done through many
Cities of England. And although the King by his Proclamation, had decreed peace
to the Jews, yet notwithstanding the fury against the Jews kindled at London,
not verily out of a zeal of Faith, but of Gain, vehemently raged in other
places of the Land. For a certain Jew at Lynne happening to be made a
Christian; thereupon the Jews persecuting him, as a prevaricator of their Law,
taking an opportunity, assaulted him with arms as he passed through the city,
whereupon he took sanctuary in the Church; yet notwithstanding the raging Jews
would not rest quiet for this, but with a continued fury presently began to
assault the Church with great violence: presently hereupon there arose a great
clamor, and the Christians assistance was defired with loud outcries. This
clamor and fame incensed the Christian people, and young men which were
strangers, of which a great number at that time resorted thither, by reason of
traffic; who running to the Church armed, valiantly assaulted the proud Jews,
who being unable to resist the assault of the Christians, presently betook
themselves to flight. After which, the Christians assaulting and taking their
houses, spoiled and then burnt them with fire. Hereupon the young men who were
strangers, laden with prey, departed with it speedily to their ships and failed
thence, lest they should be questioned, and perchance enforced to restore their
booty by the Kings officers. But the Inhabitants of the place, when they were
questioned for this by the Kings Officers, translated this fact to the
strangers, who were then departed from thence; although themselves were not
altogether innocent, taking up arms against the Jews upon the outcry; but yet
doing nothing against the Jews for fear of the Kings displeasure.

Not long after, in Lent there arose a new storm against the Jews at Stanford;
for there being solemn Fairs there held in Lent, the young men and Soldiers
who had taken upon them the sign of the Cross, and were then ready to go to
Jerusalem with the King, assembling together there out of diverse counties,
disdaining that the Jews, being the enemies of the cross of Christ, possessed
such great store of goods and wealth, when as they had not sufficient to defray
the necessary expenses of so great a journey; and imagining that they should do
God good service, if they assaulted these his enemies; boldly rushed upon them,
no man opposing himself against so great attempts: whereupon diverse of the Jews
were slain, and the rest being received into the castle, hardly escaped with
their lives, their goods being all plundered, and the plunderers departing
freely away with their booty, none of them being so much as questioned, or
punished by the Kings discipline. The citizens of Lincoln hearing what was done
to the Jews of Stanford, taking occasion, and being animated by the examples of
others, were willing to do something against them: and being assembled together
against the Jews inhabiting together with them, became enraged against them.
But these Jews being made more wary by the slaughters and damages of others,
some few of them suffering harm and damages, the rest fled timely with their
moneys into the Royal Fort, and there secured themselves. In all other places
wheresoever the Jews were found, they were pillaged and slain by the hands of
the Pilgrims, who hastening through England toward Jerusalem, decreed to rise
up first against the Jews; before they invaded the Saracens. Hereupon all the
Jews who were found in their own houses at Norwich were slain on the 8 of
February, some few of them only escaping to the Castle. At the same time, the
Nobles and Gentry of Yorkshire, nothing fearing the Kings Proclamation, the
wicked Jews having by Usury reduced them to extreme poverty, joining with them
some holy foldiers,, brake up the Houses of the chief Jews, equal to the Kings
Palace, slew their families, spoild their Goods, and burnt their houses in the
night, and then retired themselves to their homes in the dark. After which, the
promiscuous multitude making an assault upon the Jews, slew them without
distinction of sex or age, except some few who would give up their names to
Christ in baptism to save their lives. On the 18 day of April, being
Palm Sunday, the rest of the Jews in the City of York, (being 500 men and
women, besides their children) fearing the violence of the Christians, shut up
themselves within the castle of York by the will and consent of the Guardian
thereof, and of the Sheriff; who being thus received into the castle for their
defense by the Guardian and Sheriff, would not afterward deliver it up unto
them again. Whereupon the Sheriff and keeper of the castle being much offended
with them, assembled the soldiers of the county, and men of the city, that
they might free the castle from those Jews, exhorting them to do their utmost
endeavors to effect it: who when they had assaulted the castle day and night,
the Jews offered a great sum of money to save their lives; but all in vain,
the people being so incensed against them that they would not accept it:
whereupon a certain Jew skillfull in their Law, stood up, and said. Men of
Israel hearken to my counsel; It is better for us to die for our Law, then to
fall into the hands of the enemies of our Law; and our very Law commands the
same thing. Upon which all the Jews, as well women as men, consented to his
counsel, and every Father of a family going with a sharp razor, first of all
cut the throats of his own wife and children, and then of his family, casting
the dead corpse of those whom they had thus sacrificed to Devils, over the
castle walls, upon the Christian people. After which, burning their rich
clothes, and casting their golden Vessels and Jewels into Privies, that the
Christians might not be enriched by them, these murderers shutting up
themselves and the rest they had killed in the Kings house, set it on fire, and
so burnt both themselves and it. After which the Citizens of York and the
soldiers of the county burning all the Jews houses together, spoiled their
goods, seized their possessions to themselves, and burned all the charters of
their debts. The King being informed hereof, and much incensed, both for the
contempt of his Royal proclamation and Authority, and damage to his Exchequer,
to which all the Goods and Debts of the Jews, being Usurers belonged, commanded
his Chancellor to inflict due punishment upon the authors of this Sedition.
Whereupon, after Easter, the Bishop of Ely the Kings Chancellor gathering a
great Army together, came to York, to apprehend those as malefactors who had
destroyed the Jews of the city: And understanding that this was done by the
command of the Sheriff and Governor of the castle, he put them both from their
Offices, and took sureties from the Citizens of the City, for to keep the Peace
of the King and kingdom, and to stand to the Law in the Kings court concerning
the death of the Jews: and commanded the Soldiers of the County who were at
the destruction of the Jews, to be apprehended; but the chief of them flying
into Scotland, escaped, not one of them all being put to death for this great
Massacre and Riot.

Henry de Knyghton, De Eventibus Angliae, l. 2. c. 13. gives this censure of
these slaughters and popular tumults against the Jews. The Zeal of the
Christians conspired against the Jews in England, but in truth not sincerely,
that is, for the cause of faith; but either out of emulation and envy, because
of their felicity, or out of gaping after their goods: The Justice truly of God
not at all approving such things, but decently ordering them, that by this
means he might punish the insolency of a perfidious Nation. He likewise adds;
that one John, a most bold Christian, flying from Stanford with many spoils of
the Jews to Northampton, was there secretly slain by his Host, to get his
money, and thrown without the city in the night, the murderer flying thereupon.
After which, through the dreams of old women, and fallacious signs, the simple
people attributing to him the merits of a martyr, honored his Sepulcher with
solemn vigils, and gifts. This was derided by wise men, yet it was acceptable
to the Clerks there living, by reason of the gains. Which the Bishop hearing
of, presently unsaincted him, and profaned the Monuments of this false martyr,
continued by the study of simple and covetous persons. I wish no such
plunderers as this, might be saincted and adored in our age, as too many of
them are, even before their deaths, who will be un-saincted after them, as well
as this bold plunderer of the Jews.

Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 305. relating the story of the
massacres of the Jews this year out of the Chronicle of Westminster, says:
That there were no less than a thousand five hundred of the Jews destroyed at
that time in York alone, (beside those slaughtered in other places) so that
this year, which the Jews took to be their Iubile, was to them a year of
confusion. Neither was this plague of theirs undeserved, Nota.
for every year commonly their custom was, to get some Christian man's child
from the Parents, and on Good Friday to crucify him, in despite of our
Religion.

King Richard the first, after his return out of the Holy Land in the year
1194. Rog. de Hoveden Annal. pars posterior, p. 743 744.
appointed Justices Itinerant through all the Counties of England, who amongst
other Articles, were to enquire; Concerning the slayers of the Jews: who they
were that slew them? and concerning the pawns and chattels, and lands and
debts, and charters of the Jews that were slain? and who had them? and how much
any one owed to them? and what morgages they had, and who held them? and how
much they were worth? and who took the issues of them? and what they were? and
that all the Morgages and Debts of the Jews who were slain should be taken into
the Kings hands, and that those who were present at the slaying of the Jews,
and had not made a fine (or end) with our Lord the King or his Justices, should
be apprehended, and not delivered, unless it were by the King our Lord or his
Justices. The self-same year King Richard appointed Justices, Laws, and Orders,
for preventing the frauds, and regulating the contracts of the Jews, both
between themselves, and between Christians and them, thus recorded at large by
Annalium pars posterior, p. 745. Chron. Johan. Bromton, col. 1258. Holinshed,
Vol. 3. p. 155.
Roger de Hoveden, and briefly touched only by some others.

All the Debts, Pawns, Morgages, Lands, Houses, Rents, and Possessions of the
Jews shall be registered. The Jew who shall conceal any of these, shall forfeit
to the King his body, and the concealment, and likewise all his possessions and
chattels; neither shall it be lawful to the Jew ever to recover the
concealment. Likewise 6 or 7 places shall be provided, in which they shall make
all their contracts, and there shall be appointed two Lawyers that are
Christians, and two Lawyers who are Jews, and two Legal Registers; and before
them, and the Clerks of William of the Church of St. Mary's, and William of
Chimilli, shall their contracts be made: and Charters shall be made of their
contracts by way of Indenture. And one part of the Indenture shall remain with
the Jew, sealed with his seal to whom the money is lent; and the other part
shall remain in the common chest; wherein there shall be 3 locks and keys,
whereof the 2 Christians shall keep one key, and the 2 Jews another, and the
Clerks of William of St. Mary's Church, and William of Chimilli, shall keep the
third. And moreover, there shall be three seals to it; and those who keep the
seals, shall put the seals thereto. Moreover, the Clerks of the said William
and William shall keep a roll of the transcripts of all the Charters; and as
the Charters shall be altered, so let the roll be likewise: For every Charter
there shall be 3 pence paid, one moity thereof by the Jew, and the other moity
by him to whom the money is lent; whereof the 2 writers shall have 2 pence, and
the keeper of the roll the third. And from henceforth, no contract shall be
made with, nor payment made to the Jews, nor any alteration made of the
Charters, but before the said persons, or the greater part of them, if all of
them cannot be present. And the aforesaid 2 Christians shall have one roll of
the Debts or receipts of the payments which from henceforth are to be made to
the Jews, and the 2 Jews one, and the keeper of the roll one. Moreover, every
Jew shall swear upon his Roll that all his debts and pawns, and rents, and all
his goods and possessions he shall cause to be enrolled, and that he shall
conceal nothing, as is aforesaid: And if he shall know that any one shall
conceal any thing, he shall secretly reveal it to the Justices sent unto them;
and that they shall detect and show unto them, all falsifiers or forgers of
Charters, and clippers of moneys, where or when they shall know them, and
likewise all false charters.

By these strict politic Laws, the King and his Officers knew the particular
wealth, moneys, goods, debts, and real and personal estates of every Jew, and
in whose hands they were, and so could seize and command them at their
pleasure, upon any real or pretended misdemeanors, or complaints against them.

King John, (who in the ^ooks 2 Instit. p. 507, 508.
1 and 2 years of his reign, granted them large liberties, and an high Priest
for moneys) in the year of our Lord Mat. West. An. 1210. Mat. Paris, Hist.
Angliae. Londini 1640. p. 229. Holinshed Vol. 3. p. 174. John Stow, p. 1.68.
and his Survey of London, p. 288. Daniel p. 115. Polyd. Virgil Hist. Angl. l.
15. Cent. Magd. 13. c. 15.
1210. commanded all the Jews of both sexes throughout Engl^nd to be
apprehended and imprisoned, and to be afflicted with most grievous torments,
that so they might satisfy the Kings pleasure with their money. Some of them
being grievously tortured, gave all things which they had, and promised more,
that they might by this means escape so many kinds of torments. Amongst whom
one Jew at Bristol, punished with various torments, when as he would neither
redeem himself, nor submit to any fine: the King commanded his tormentors, that
they should every day pull out one of his grinding teeth, until he should pay
to the King ten thousand marks of silver. And when at last for 7 days space
they had pulled out 7 of his teeth, with intolerable torment, and now on the 8
day the tormentors had begun the like work again; this Jew, an overflow
provider for his profit, gave him the aforesaid money, that he might save the 8
tooth to himself, the other 7 being pulled out: who with much more wisdom, and
less pain, might have done so before, and have saved his 7 teeth, having but 8
in all.

In the 17 year John Stowes Chron. p. 172. Survey of London. p. 288.
of King John, the 17 day of May, the Barons coming to London, brake into the
houses of the Jews, and searched their Coffers to stuff their own purses, that
had been long empty: After which they applied all diligence to repair the Gates
and Walls of the City with the stones of the Jews broken houses.

Mat. Paris Hist. Ang. p. 314.315. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 151. Bracton, l. 3.
c. 9.
In the year 1222. 7 H. 3. in a Council at Canterbury under Archbishop Stephen,
a certain Apostate Jew, made of a Christian a Deacon, and afterward
apostatizing, was there judicially punished, whom Falco presently apprehending,
caused to be hanged, as Matthew Paris writes; but Bracton and others record,
that he was burned to ashes.

John Stow his Survey of London p. 288.289.
King Henry the 3. in the 11 year of his reign, Anno Dom. 1226. granted the
lands and houses of Benomye Matton, a Jew in London, escheated to him by a
murder committed by this Jew, to Semain and others, as appears by his Chatter
of that year.

Mat. Paris hist. Ang. p. 365. Mat. West. p. 128. Holinshed. p. 22^.
King Henry the 3. Anno. 1230. wanting moneys, constrained the Jews whether they
would or would not, to give him the third part of all their moveable goods, and
that with all expedition.

Jo. Stows Chronicle. p. 121.
The Jews in the year of our Lord 1231. builded a Synagogue very curiously, but
the Christians obtained of the King, that it should be dedicated to our blessed
Lady, and was since by the same King Henry granted to the Brethren of St.
Anthony of Vienna, and called St. Anthonies Hospital.

Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 393. Stow. p. 183. Speed. p. 516.

See John Stow his Survey of London, p. 289.455.


In the year of our Lord 1233. King Henry the 3. at his proper costs built in
London, not far from the old Temple, a decent house and Church, sufficient for
a Covent, with other convenient edifices thereto belonging, called The house of
the Converts. (now the Rolls) To which house the converted Jews flying, leaving
the blindness of Judaism, under a certain honest rule of living, might have a
certain habitation, a safe refuge, and a sufficient livelihood during their
whole lives, without servile labor, and the gain of Usury. Whereupon it came
to pass, that in a short time there was gathered together in that place, a
great number of Converts, who were there baptized and instructed in the
Christian Faith, and lived laudab^y, being governed by a skillful Rector,
specially appointed for that purpose.

John Stowes Survey of London. 1633. p. 435.
This House of the converted Jews was founded by King Henry the 3. in the place
of a Jews house to him forfeited in the year 1233. and the 17 of his reign, who
builded there for them a fair Church, now used and called the Chapel for the
custody of Rolls and Records of Chancery; It stands not far from the old
Temple and the new, in the which house all such Jews and Infidels as were
converted to the Christian Faith, were ordained and appointed, under an honest
rule of life, sufficient maintenance: Whereby it came to pass, that in short
time there were gathered a great number of converts, who were baptized,
instructed in the Doctrine of Christ, and there lived under a learned
Christian, appointed to govern them. Since the which time, to wit, in the year
1290. All the Jews in England were banished out of the Realm, whereby the
number of converts in this place was decayed, and therefore in the year 1377.
this House was annexed by Patent to William Berestal Clerk, Custos Rotulorum,
or Keeper of the Rolls of the Chancery, by Edward the 3. in the 51 year of his
reign, and the first Master of the Rolls, who was sworn in Westminst. Hall, at
the Table of Marble: since which time that house has been commonly called, the
Rolls in Chancery lane. Notwithstanding such of the Jews or other Infidels as
have in the Realm been converted to Christianity and baptized, have been
received there; for I find in record, that one William Peirs a Jew that became
a Christian, was baptized in the 5 of Richard the 2. and had 2 d. the day
allowed him, during his life, by the said King (out of the Rolls.)

Mat. Paris, Hist. Angl. 409. Mat. Westminster. p. 136. Holinshed, Vol. 3. p. 2.19.
Stow p. 183. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 423. Speed p. 521. Polychronicon, l.
7. c. 35. Fa^ian part 7. p. 46. Grafton p. 122. Mat. Park. Antiq. Eccl. Bri. p.
178. Rot Claus ^8 H. 3. m, 2.3.
King Henry in the year 1235. keeping his Court and the Nativity at Westminster,
with many of his Bishops and Nobles, there were brought before him; upon the
complaint of John Toly, 7 Jews, who had circumcised a certain child in Norwich,
whom they had stolen away from his Parents, and kept for a years space from
the fight of Christians; intending to crucify him on the Feast of Easter. But
being convicted for this fact, they confessed the truth of the thing in the
Kings presence: and so being at the Kings pleasure, both for their life and
members, were dete^^ed in prison for this fact, and some of them drawn and
hanged.

Mat. Paris p. 532. John Stow his Survey ^f London. p. 289.
In the year of our Lord 1240. the Jews circumcised a Christian child at
Norwich, and being circumcised, they called him Jurninus, but reserved him to
be crucified in contumely of Jesus Christ crucified. But the Father of the
child, from whom the Jews had stolen him, diligently seeking after his Son, at
the last found him shut up in the custody of the Jews; and with loud clamours
declared, that his Son, whom he thought to have been lost, was wickedly kept up
in the Chamber of a certain Jew. Which great premeditated wickedness coming to
the knowledge of the Bishop William Rele, a prudent and circumspect man, and of
other great men, lest through the slothfulness of the Christians so great an
injury of Christ should be passed by unpunished, all the Jews of the City were
apprehended, and when as they would have defended themselves by Regal
authority; the Bishop said, These things belong to the Church, and are not to
be determined in the Kings Court, seeing the Question to be discussed is
concerning circumcision, and the breach of faith. Whereupon 4 of the Jews being
convicted of the aforesaid wickedness, were first dragged at the tails of
Horses, and at last hanged on the Gallows, lamentably breathing forth the
relics of life.

The Proceedings in this New case I find thus recorded in the Placita of 18 H.
3. rot. 21. thus endorsed, Placitum loquelae de Iudaeis Norwich, qui sunt in
Prisona apud London. Benedictus physicus appellat Jacobum de Norwich Judaeum,
quod cum Odardus, filius suus puer aetatis 5 annorum ivit ludendo in via Villae
Norwich vigilia Sancti Egidii 4 annis elapsis, venit idem Jacobus Judaeus and
coepit eundem Odardum and eum portavit usque ad domum suam and circumcidit eum
in membro suo, and voluit ipsum facere Judaeum, and eum retinuit per unam diem
and unam noctem in domo sua, quousque per clamorem vicinorum venit ad quandam
domum; and illum invenit in manibus ipsius Jacobi, and sic ^psum puerum
circumcisum monstravit Officiali Archidiaconi and Coronatoribus ipso die, qui
praesentes simul and hoc idem testantur; Qui dicunt, quod viderunt praedictum
puerum circumcisum, and qui habuit membrum suum grossum and valde inflatum, and
ita aturnatum sicut praedictum est. Et quod hoc nequiter fecit and in felonia,
and in dispectu Crucifixi and Christianitatis, and in pace Domini Regis, et
quod ipse non potuit habere in perfortiam Christianorum, offert disrationare
eum sicut Curia considerabit. Et postquam circumciderat eum vocavit eum
Jurnipin, and puer visus coram Justiciariis, and liquidum est quod circumcisus
erat.

Idem appellat de forcia and consilio Leonem filium Margerie senior, and filium
Josce Bodon. and plures alios Judaeos, qui omnes venerunt praeter Dedone Joppe,
Benedictum Moses and Isaac, and hi totum defendunt sicut Judaei versus
Christianum.

Postea praedictus puer, qui tunc fuit aetatis 5 annorum, and nunc est aetatis
9 annorum, requisitus quomodo circumsciderunt eum? dicit, quod ceperunt eum, et
adduxerunt eum usque ad domum ipsius Jacobi; and unus illorum tenuit eum and
cooporuit oculos suos, and quidam alius circumcidit eum quodam cultello, and
postea capiunt peciam illam quam scinderant de membro suo, and posuerunt in
quodam vacyno cum sabelons, and que suenint peciam illam cum parvis sufflatis
quousque quidam Judaeus qui vocabatur Jurnepin invenit eum primo, (tunc)
vocaverunt eum Jurnepin.

Et Officialis Archidiaconi venit coram Justiciariis cum magna secta
Sacerdotum, qui omnes dixerunt in verbo Dei, quod praedictus puer ita
circumcisus fuit sicut praedictum est, et per praedictos Judaeos, and quod
viderunt praedictum puerum recenter circumcisum, habentem membrum suum grossum
and valde inflatum et sanguinolentum.

Et Coronatores de Comitatu, et Coronatores de Civitate Norwici, and 36 homines
de villata de Norwic. Jurati venerunt, and troue (inveniunt) ut fuit
circumcisus, etc. Et quod juxta ripam Norwic. il fuittroue (fuit inventus)
ululans and plorans per unum Maude de Berneham, and sa file, and que i luy
emesiont a lovr meason; ton esteaut les Jews veigne and dioit, que il fuit
Judaeum suum; and vocaverunt eum Jurnepin, etc. Et quando Judaei non potuerunt
eum habere propter Christianos, prohibuerunt eidem Matildae, Ne daret ei carnem
porcinam ad manducandum: quia dixerunt, ipsum esse Judaeum. Ita quod per vim
venerant Christiani and abstulerunt puerum praedictum a manibus Iudaeorum.

Et Maude examyne confess ceo tout, etc. Et omnes Iudaei sunt in prisona apud
Norwich, praeter illos qui fuerunt apud London, quando haec Inquisitio facta
fuit. Et omnes Iuratores requisiti, Qui interfuerunt ad Circumcisionem illam?
d^cunt. Quod omnes praedicti Judaei fuerunt consentientes facto illo, praeter
Massi filius Saloni. Haec autem omnia facta fuerunt in Curia Domini Regis apud
Norwic, and Fratribus Praedicatoribus, and Fratribus Minoribus, and pluribus
aliis tam Clericis, quam Laicis praesentibus. Et tout ceo fuit testify, per
Ric, de Tresingfield Constable de Norwich, and auters.

Posteacoram Assembled in Parliament, where all New and doubtful Cases were to
be decided.
Domino Rege, and Domino Cantuar. and Majori part Episcoporum and Baronium
Angliae, quia casus iste nunquam prius accidit in Curia Domini Reg^s, and
praeterea quia factum illud primo tangit Deum, and sanctam Ecclesiam, eo quod
Circumcisio and Baptismus sunt pertinentia ad fidem; et praeterea non est ibi
talis felonia, nec amissio membri, nec Mahemium, nec plaga mortalis, vel alia
felonia Laica quae possit hominem damnare, sine Mandato Sanctae Ecclesiae:
Consideratum est, quod istud in primo tractetur in sancta Ecclesia, et per
Ordinarium loci inquiratur rei veritas: Et mandetur Domino Regi unum Marcum
auri persic, quod puer videatur coram Iusticiariis, si circumcisus fuit, vel
non; and recipitur. Et visus est puer, et membrum ejus visum est, pelle
coopertum ante in Capite: Et in tali statu liberatur patri suo, ut eum habeat
coram Iudicibus Ecclesiasticis, and ipsi Iudaei remaneant in Prisona. So far
this Record relates the proceedings in the Kings Court, and Matthew Paris
informs us what they afterward did in the Bishops.

It seems the Citizens of Norwich upon this occasion fired the Jews Houses in
the City: for in Placita 18 H. 3. rot. 27. in Dorso, I find a complaint of the
Citizens of Norwich against the Sheriff of Norfolk, for certain injuries done
unto them, in entering their Liberties, beating their Servants, and ayding the
Jews; who justified that what he did, was because the Citizens had fired the
Jews houses; Which business was debated before the King at Bromholne. And
because the Bailiffs of the Town made no Inquisition concerning these burnings,
and beatings of their Servants, as belonged to their Office, nor made any
emendation thereof, neither would the Commonalty of the City it self, in
defense of their Liberties, permit the Sheriff of Norfolk to reform it, it was
adjudged, that they should be in the Kings mercy, as well for their Liberties
as for the other things, and after paid a fine of fifty marks.

The very next year the Jews in Foreign parts, especially in Germany,
believing, that the Tartars were of their own Nation, entered into a secret
League with them, to destroy the Christians, and subdue the whole world to
themselves; to which end they provided many Hogsheads filled with arms to be
transported to the Tartars; pretending to the Christian Princes, that they were
Vessels filled only with poisoned Wines, wherewith they intended to poison and
destroy the Tartars, who would drink no wines but such as were made by the
Jews. But this their treachery being detected by the Customers in Germany, who
found these pretended Vessels of wine, to be fraught with arms for the Tartars
wherewith to destroy the Christians; thereupon the Jews were delivered to
Tormentors, to be perpetually imprisoned, or slain with their own swords, as
Matthew Paris more at large relates. Anno 1241. p. 564.

Mat. Paris, p. 605.
King Henry, Anno 1243. exacted a great ransom from the most miserable Jews,
both in gold and silver: so that, besides what he exacted from others, he
extorted from one Jew, Aaron of York, 4 marks of gold, and 4000 marks of
silver: the King himself receiving the gold with his own hand from every Jew,
man or woman, being made of a King, a new receiver of Custom; but the silver
was received by others for the King.

Mat. Paris p. 644.
Anno 1244. in August, the corpse of a little male child was found buried in the
City of London, in whose thighs and arms, and under whose paps, there was a
regular inscription in Hebrew Letters. To which spectacle when as many
resorted, admiring at it, and not knowing how to read the letters, knowing that
the letters were Hebrew, they called thither converted Jews, who inhabited the
House which the King had founded in London, that they as they loved their life
or members, for the honor, love, and fear of their Lord the King, without
figment of falsehood, might declare that writing. For the Kings Bailiffs and
Conservators of the Peace were present. They likewise believed, neither without
cause, that the Jews had either crucified that little child in obloquy and
contumely of Christ (which was related frequently to have happened) or had
afflicted him with sundry torments to crucify him, and when he had given up the
ghost, they had now cast him there, as unworthy the Cross. Moreover, there
appeared in his body blew marks, and rents of rodds, and manifest signs and
footsteps of some other torment. And when as those Converts were brought to
read those things that were inscribed, and studied that they might perfectly
read them, they found the Letters deformed, and now not legible, being many
ways disordered, and tossed up and down, by reason of the extension and
contraction of the skin and flesh. But they found the name of the Father and
Mother of the little child, suppressing their surnames, and that the child was
sold to the Jews; but to whom, or to what end, they could not find. In the mean
time, certain of the London Jews took a secret and sudden flight, never to
return again, who by this very thing rendered themselves suspected. And some
affirmed, that the Lord had wrought miracles for the child. And because it was
found, that the Jews at other times had perpetrated such wickedness, and the
holy bodies crucified had been solemnly received in the Church, and likewise to
have shined brightly with miracles, although the prints of the 5 wounds
appeared not in the hands and feet and side of the said corpse, yet the Canons
of St. Paul took it violently away, and solemnly buried it in their Church, not
far from the great Altar.

Mat. Paris p. 641.
The same year (1241.) The Barons in Parliament ordered, That there should be
one Justice at the least appointed for the Jews, by the nomination of the
Parliament.

Mat. Paris, p. 778, 779, 785. Speed. p. 529. John Stow his Survey of London,
p. 289. Sir Richard Bakers Chron. p. 120: See Rot. Pat. 33. H. 3. in 4. Rot.
Finium. 33 H. 3. m. 6. Rot. Fin. 34 H. 3. m. 1.2.
In the year of our Lord 1250. King Henry the 3d. burning with a covetous
desire, commanded money to be extorted from the Jews without all mercy, so as
they might seem to be altogether and irrecoverably impoverished; exacting what
moneys soever they had in their chests. Notwithstanding, although they were
miserable, yet they were pitied by none, because they were often proved and
convicted to have been counterfeiters as well of moneys as of seals. And to
pass by the moneys of others, we shall only mention one, that their malice may
the more appear to them. There was a certain rich Jew, having his abode and
house at Berkamstede, and Wallingford; Abraham in name, not in faith: who was
very dear to Earl Richard, who had a very beautiful wife, and faithful to him,
named Flora. This Jew that he might accumulate more disgrace to Christ, caused
the Image of the Virgin Mary, decently carved and painted, as the manner is,
holding her Son in her bosom. This Image the Jew placed in his house of
Office, and which is a great shame and ignomy to express, blaspheming the
Image it self, as if it had been the very Virgin her self, threw his most
filthy and not to be named excrements upon her, days any nights, and commanded
his wife to do the like. Which when his wife saw, after some days she grieved
at it, by reason of the Sex, and passing by secretly, wiped off the filth from
the face of the Image most filthily defiled. Which when the Jew here, husband
had fully found out, he therefore privily and impiously strangled the woman her
self, though his wife. But when these wicked deeds were discovered, and made
apparent, and proved by his conviction, although other causes of death were not
wanting, he was thrust into the most loathsome Castle of the Tower of London.
Whence to get his freedom, he most certainly promised, That he would prove all
the Jews of England, to have been most wicked Traitors. And when as he was
greatly accused almost by all the Jews of England, and they endeavored to put
him to death, Earl Richard interceded for him. Whereupon the Jews grievously
accusing him both of the clipping of money, and other wickednesses, offered
Earl Richard a thousand marks, if he would no^ protect him; which
notwithstanding the Earl refused, because he was called his Jew. This Jew
Abraham therefore gave the King 700 marks, that he might be freed from
perpetual imprisonment, to which he was adjudged, the Earl assisting him
therein. The King thereupon at the same time sent the Justices of the Jews
throughout all England, to search out all their money both in Debts and
Possessions, and with them a certain most wicked and merciless Jew, that he
might wickedly and falsely accuse all the rest against the truth; who verily
reprehended the Christians, pitying and weeping over the affliction of the
Jews, and called the Kings Bailiffs, lukewarm and effeminate; and gnashing with
his teeth over every Jew, affirmed with many great Oaths, that they could give
twice as much more to the King, then what they had given, although he most
wickedly lied against his own head. This Jew, that he might more effectually
hurt the rest, revealed all their secrets daily to the Kings Christian
Exactors. In the mean time the King ceased not to scrape money together from
all hands, but principally from the Jews; so tha^ from one Jew alone; born and
living in York, called Aaron, (because he was convicted of falsifying a
Charter, as was reported) he extorted 14000 marks, and 10000 marks of gold for
the Queens use, for a little times respite* that he might not languish in
prison. All which sums being paid, it was found that this Aaron had paid to the
King since hi^ return from foreign parts, 30000 marks of silver, and two
hundred marks of gold to the Queen, as the said Aaron upon the attestation of
his honor and faith averred to Matthew Paris, who records it, Yet
notwithstanding although the Jews might be pitied, yet were they pitied by no
man; seeing they were corrupters and counterfeiters of the Kings money and of
charters, and manifestly and frequently proved, condemned, and reprobated as
such.

King Balaeus Cent. 4. Scrip. Brit. c. 14. in Apendice, Cent. Magd, 13 c. 15.
col. 1285.
Henry, Anno 1251. Decreed to destroy all the Jews in his Kingdom, but some of
his Counselors dissuaded him from it, and that they should rather be left as
Vagabonds, like Cain, that their misery by this means might be set before the
eyes of men in all ages. Whereupon the Kings mind was mitigated, and his Decree
abolished. Notwithstanding he seriously prohibited them the eating of flesh in
Lent, and on Fridays.

Mat. Paris, p. 827.
Ph^lip Luuel, Clerk, called to the service of the King, and deputed to the
custody of the Jews, Anno 1251. was grievously accused before the King, his
adversaries affirming, that when he and Nicholas of St. Albans Clerk, were sent
toward the Northern parts to tax and squeeze the Jews, he privily received
most precious Vessels from a certain Jew, that he might spare him in his
Tallage to the King; and that he likewise took secret gifts from others, that
he might spare them; and that he oppressed these Jews notwithstanding, to the
damage of the King, and the violation of his Faith. Whereupon the King being
very angry, commanded Philip himself to be unworthily handled, until he should
satisfy him for this great transgression. Philip hereupon, a crafty and
circumspect man, humbly craved advice and assistance from the Lord John Mansel,
the Kings Prime Counselor, concerning his great tribulation, because he had
promoted him to the Kings service, who effectually procured that he recovered
the kings favor, giving him a great sum of money for it, a thousand marks as
was reported, Yet notwithstanding he was removed from his Office, and not a
little disgraced.

It seems the kings Officers could fleece the Jews in that age, by secret
Bribes and Gifts, as well as himself, by intolerable Exactions.

Mat. Paris, p. 831.856.
King Henry the III. to satisfy the Popes desire in taking a Voyage to the Holy
Land, Anno 1252. extorted from the Jews whatsoever those miserable wretches
might seem to have, not only by scraping or excoriating, but even by
unbowelling them. Being also an Hydropical thirster after gold, he so greedily
sucked talents, or Bullion, or Jewels, as well from Christians as Jews, that a
new Crassus might seem to be raised from the dead. And this very year Robert de
la Ho, to whom the king had committed the custody of the Jews, and of the Seal
which belonged to their Exchequer, was grievously accused before the king,
being charged with this crime, That he had oppressed the innocent Son of a
certain knight, by a certain false Charter, confirmed with the Seal, of which
the said Robert, Justice of the Jews, was the bearer and keeper. Whereupon he
was basely apprehended, and committed to a close Prison; and defamed with the
like scandal wherewith Philip Luuel but the year just before had been entangled
in the snares of the perfidious Jews, who was then their Justice. At last, by
the great labor of his friends, the malice of the Jews is detected, but the
innocence of the said Robert then set free, scarce declared. Whereupon being
put from his Offices, he openly paid 4 marks of gold at least for his fine.

Mat, Paris Hist. Angl. p. 861, 862. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 413.
This very year (1252.) there came out of the holy Land a Mandate from the king
of France, that all the Jews should be expelled out of the Realm of France, and
condemned to perpetual exile, with this clause of moderation added thereto: But
he who desires to remain, let him be an artificer or handicrafts-man, and apply
himself to mechanical artifices. For it was scornfully objected to the said
King by the Saraccus; That we did little love or reverence our Lord Jesus
Christ, who tolerated the murderers of him to live among us.

Mat. Paris, p. 873, 874
In the year of Christ, 1253. November 10. the Obligatory Chatter wherewith the
Abbot and Covent of St. Alban were held bound for the debt of Richard de Oxaie
knight, was taken out of the hand of Elias the London Jew, and freed out of the
chest; and it was proclaimed in the School of the Jews at London (where it
seems they had then a School) that the foresaid Abbot and Covent should be quit
from all this debt against them from the beginning of the world till then, as
the Statute obtained by them protests.

Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 423 ex Eulogio.
The Jews in Northampton about the year of our Lord, 1253. had among themselves
prepared wildfire, to burn the City of London, for the which diverse of them
were taken and burned in the time of Lent in the City of Northampton.

Mat. Paris, p. 187. See John Stows Survey of London. p. 289. Polydor. Virgil
Hist. Angl. l. 16. Cent. Magd. 13. c. 15. col. 1286. Bakers Chronicle p. 1^2,
Ann 1254. King Henry after Easter so cruelly raged against the most miserable
people of the Jews, that they loathed even to live. And when they were called
together, Earl Richard exacted of them for the use of the King, who was then in
great want, no small sum of money, under pain of a most loathsome prison, and a
most ignominious death. Elias therefore of London, High Priest of the Jews,
taking counsel with his Companions, answered for them all, who had frequently
paid very great sums of money, whether they would or would not. O noble Lords,
we see undoubtedly that our Lord the King purposes to destroy us from under
heaven. We entreat, for Gods sak^* that he would give us license and safe
conduct of departing out of his Kingdom, that we may seek and find a mansion in
some other place, under some Prince who bears some bowels of mercy, and some
stability of truth and faithfulness, And we will depart; never to return
again, leaving here our houshouldstuff, and houses behind us. How can he love
or spare us, Nota.
miserable Jews, who destroys his own natural English? He has people, yea his
own Merchants, I say not Usurers, who by usurious contracts, heap up infinite
heaps of money. Let the King rely upon them, and gape after their emoluments.
Verily they have supplanted and impoverisht us. Which the K. howsoever
dissembles to know, exacting from us those things we cannot give him, although
he would pull out our eyes, or out our throats when he had first pulled off our
skins. And speaking this with sighs and tears hindering his speech, he held his
peace, falling almost into an ecstasy ready to die. Which when it came to the
knowledge of the Magistrates, they permitted them not to depart out of the
Realm; saying. Whether will ye flee, O wretches! Behold the King of France
hates and persecuteth you, and has condemned you to perpetual exile, shunning
Charibdis, you desire to be drowned in Scylla. And so the small little
substance, which was left to them for their mean sustentation, was violently
extorted from them.

Mat. Paris p. 902. Mat. West. p. 270. Holinshed, Vol. 3. p. 252. John Stows
Survey of London, p. 289. See Pat. 39. H. 3. m. 4. dors. and 2. and 46. H. 3.
m. 11.
King Henry the 3d. An. 1255. exacted with great earnestness from the Jews,
although very frequently impoverished, 8000 marks, to be speedily paid unto him
under pain of hanging. But they seeing nothing else hanging over them, but
destruction with confusion, answered all unanimously. Sir King, we see that
thou sparest neither Christians, nor Jews, but studiest with crafty fetches to
impoverish all men: we have no hope of respiration left us: the Usurers of the
Pope have supplanted us; permit us to depart out of thy kingdom with safe
conduct; and we will seek for our selves such a mansion as we can, be it what
it will. Which when the King had heard, he cried out with a querulous voice,
saying: It is no marvel if I covet money, it is an horrible thing to imagine the
debts wherein I am held bound, By the head of God, they amount to the sum of
two hundred thousand marks, and if I should say of three, I should not exceed
the bounds of truth. I am deceived on every side. I am a ma^med and abridged
King, yea, now but an halfed King. For having made a certain estimate of the
expenses of my rents, the sum of the annual rent of Edward my Son amounts to
above 15000 marks. There is therefore a necessity for me to live of the money
gotten from what place soever, from whomsoever, and by what means soever.
Therefore being made another Titus, or Vespasian, he sold the Jews for some
years to Earl Richard his brother, that those whom the King had excoriated, he
might eviscerate. Yet the Earl spared them, considering their abbreviated
power, and ignominious poverty.

Mat. Paris p. 912. Fabian part. 7. p. 58. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 423.
Jo. Stow Chronicle. p. 190. Survey of London, p. 289. Grafton, p. 127.
Holinshed, p. 253. Balaeus Cent. 4. c. 22. Johan. Major l. 4. c. 12. Cent.
Magd. 13. c. 14. col. 1282.
The same year, about the Feast of Peter and Paul, the Jews of Lincoln stole a
child called Hugo, being 8 years old, and when as they had nourished him in a
certain most secret chamber, with milk and other childish aliments, they sent
almost to all the Cities of England wherein the Jews lived, that in contempt
and reproach of Jesus Christ, they should be present at their sacrifice at
Lincoln: for they had, as they said, a certain child hid to be crucified.
Whereupon many assembled at Lincoln. And coming together, they appointed one
Lincoln Jew for the Judge, as it were for Pilate. By whose judgment, by the
consent of all, the child is afflicted with sundry torments. He is whipped even
unto blood and lividness, crowned with thorns, wearied with spittings and
shriekings: and moreover he is pricked by them all with ponyards, made to drink
gall, d^rided with reproaches and blasphemies, and frequently called by them
with grinding teeth, Nota.
Jesus the false Prophet. And after they had derided him in diverse manners,
they crucified him, and pierced him with a spear to the heart. And when the
child had given up the ghost, they took down his body from the cross, and took
the bowels out of his corpse, for what end is unknown; but it was said it was to
exercise Magical arts. The mother of the child diligently sought for her absent
son for some days, and it was told her by neighbors, that the last time they
saw her child whom she sought, he was playing with the children of the Jews of
his age, and entered into the house of a certain Jew. Whereupon the woman
suddenly entered that house, and saw the body of the child cast into a certain
pit. And having warily called the Bailiffs of the City together; the body was
found and drawn forth; and there was made a wonderful spectacle among the
people. But the woman, mother of the child, complaining and crying out,
provoked all the Citizens there assembled together, to tears and sighs. There
was then present at the place John de Lexinton, a circumspect and discreet man,
and moreover elegantly learned, who said. We have sometime heard, that the Jews
have not feared to attempt such things in reproach of Jesus Christ, our
crucified Lord. And one Jew being apprehended, to wit, he into whose house the
child entered playing, and therefore more suspected than the rest; he says unto
him. O wretch! know thou not that speedy destruction abides thee? All the
gold of England will not suffice for thy deliverance or red^mption.
Notwithstanding I will tell thee, although unworthy, by what means thou may
preserve thy life and members, that thou may not be dismembered. I will save
both to thee, if thou do not fear to discover to me whatsoever things are
done in this case without falsehood. Whereupon this Jew, whose name was Copin,
believing he had thus found out a way of escape, answered, saying, Sir John, if
thou make thy words good by thy deeds, I will reveal wonderful things to
thee, and the industry of Sir John animating and exciting him thereto, the Jew
said. Those things are true which the Christians say. The Jews almost every
year crucify one child, Nota.
to the injury and contumely of Jesus; but it is not found out every year: for
they do this secretly, and in hidden and most secret places; But this child
whom they call Hugo, our Jews have most unmercifully crucified, and when he was
dead, and they desired to hide him being dead, he could not be buried in the
earth; nor hid. For the corpse of the innocent was reputed unprofitable for
Divination, for he was unbowelled for that end. And when in the morning it was
thought to be buried, the earth brought it forth, and vomited it out, and the
body sometimes appeared inhuman, whereupon the Jews abhorred it. At last it was
cast headlong into a deep pit, neither as yet could it be kept secret. For the
importunate mother diligently searching all things, at last showed to the
Bailiffs the body she had found. But Sir John notwithstanding this, kept the
Jew bound in chains. When these things were known to the Canons of the Church
of Lincoln, they requested the body to be given to them, which was granted. And
when it had been sufficently viewed by an infinite company of people, it was
honorably buried in the Church of Lincoln, as the corpse of a most precious
martyr. The Jews kept the child alive for 10 days, that being fed for so many
days with milk, he might living suffer many sorts of torments. When the K.
returned from the Northern parts of England, and was certified of the premises,
he reprehended Sir John, that he had promised life and members to so flagitious
a person, which he could not give; for that blasphemer and homicide was worthy
the punishment of many sorts of death. And when as unavoydable judgment was
ready to be executed upon this Offender, he said. My death is now approaching,
neither can my Lord John preserve me, who am ready to perish. I now relate the
truth to you all. Almost all the Jews of England consented to the death of this
child, Nota.
whereof the Jews are accused: and almost out of every City in England wherein
the Jews inhabit, certain chosen persons were called together to the immolation
of that child, as to a Paschal Sacrifice. And when as he had spoken these
things, together with other dotages, being tied to an horses tail, and drawn to
the Gallows, he was presented to the aereal Cacodaemons in body and soul; and
91 other Jews, partakers of this wickedness, being carried in carts to London,
were there committed to prison. Who if so be they were casually bewailed by any
Christians, yet they were deplored by the Caursini (the Popes Italian Usurers)
their corrivals with dry eyes. Afterward by the Inquisition of the Kings
Justices, it was discovered and found; That the Jews of England by Common
counsel had slain the innocent child, punished for many days and crucified. But
after this the Mother of the said child constantly prosecuting her appeal
before the King against them for that iniquity and such a death; God the Lord
of Revenges, rendered them a condign retribution, according to their merits;
for on St. Clements day, 88. of the richest and greatest Jews of the City of
London, were drawn and hanged up in the air upon new Gibbers especially
prepared for that purpose, and more than 23 others were reserved in the Tower
of London to the like judgment.

I have transcribed this History at large out of Matthew Paris, who flourished
at that time, because our other Historians do but briefly touch it, and
because it undeniably manifests the transcendent impiety, blasphemy, malice,
persecution, and obloquy of the Jews against our Savior Jesus Christ, and
Christians, and their constant, usual practice of crucifying children almost
every year, in contempt and reproach of our crucified Savior, by common
consent; which Mr. Nigh conceived might be easily wiped off, as false, and not
fully proved or charged on them by our Historians, which this ensuing passage
concerning these Jews will further ratify.

Mat. Paris p. 622.
Certain infamous Jews being 71 in number, adjudged to death by the Oath of 25
Knights, for the miserable death of the child crucified at L^ncoln, being
reserved in the Prisons of London to be hanged Anno 1256 (the year after their
condemnation) sent secret Messengers to the Friars Minors, (as their enemies
affirm) that they might intercede for them, that they might be delivered from
death and prison, being notwithstanding worthy of the most shameful death.
Whereupon they (as the world reports, if the world in such a case be to be
credited) by the mediation of money, freed them by their prayers and
intercession, both from the prison and from the death which they had deserved;
led thereto with a spirit of piety, as I think is piously to be believed:
Because so long as any man is in life, and in this world, he has free will,
may be saved, and there is hope of him. But yet for the Devil, or the
manifestly damned, we are not to hope nor pray, because there is no hope of
them, for death and a definitive sentence, at once irrevocably entangle them.
Neither could this answer excuse the Minors, for although they were not guilty,
yet the scandal did defame them. The common people now has withdrawn their
hands, that they do not benefit them with their alms, as heretofore, and the
Londoners devotion is grown cold toward the Minorites. For procuring these
condemned Jews life and liberty, whose money (it seems) could even corrupt
these very self-denying Popish Saints, who had renounced the world in habit,
but not in heart.

Mat. Paris, Additamenta, p. 202.207.
All the Prelates of England in the year 1257. drew up certain Articles in
writing concerning their liberties, which they intended to present to the King,
and Nobles, to be ratified by them in Parliament in due season; wherein they
complain, Artic. 32, 33. That when as the Jews are convicted before the
Ecclesiastical Judges for delinquency against an Ecclesiastical person, or for
Ecclesiastical things, or for sacrilege, or for laying violent hands upon a
Clerk, or for adultery with a Christian woman; the conusans of the cause is
hindered by the Kings prohibition: because it alleges, that they have their
proper Judge, the Sheriff of the place, and their proper delegated Judges, who
may and ought to have conusance of these things. And yet if they be convented
by a Clergyman or Layman before them for such things, upon the denial thereof
by the person alone, by the simple assertion of another Jew, and of one
Christian, without the administering of an Oath; they purge themselves, the
proof of the prosecutor being utterly rejected.

Item, If Communion be denied to them by the Church because they bear not their
Table or sign, or because they retain Christian Nurses against the Precepts of
the Church, or if they be excommunicated for some other excesses; the Bailiffs
(or Officers) of the King communicating with them, command on the behalf of our
Lord the King himself, that they be not avoided by any, and cause them to be
admitted and received to Communion.

Against which grievances in derogation of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, the
Bishops then thus provided. And because in like manner the Office of the
Prelates is hindered when as it happens a Jew offending against Ecclesiastical
things and persons shall be convented for these things before them, and for
other things which appertain to their Ecclesiastical Court of mere right; We
provide, that the Jew notwithstanding shall be compelled to aswer in these
cases by the interdict of commerce, contracts and Communion of the faithful:
likewise the inhibiters, hinderers and distrainers shall incur the
punishments of interdiction and excommunication.

Mat. Paris: Hist. Angl. p. ^82.
In the year of Christ 1259. On the Feast of Christ's Nativity, a certain
creature, Elias a Jew of London, whose Surname was Bishop, fearing danger and
manifest damnation to himself, fled to the laver of defense and salvation, and
was newborn in the Spirit; for, being cleansed with wholesome Baptism, two
others also accompanying him, he was del^vered out of the lot of the Devil, and
saved from the revenge of the most wicked crime heretofore committed by him.
For it was said, that in his house that poisonous drink was made, which had
proved mortal and perilous to many Nobles of England, (poisoned therewith by
the Jews) which even he himself, as was reported, well confessed. But then he
was a Devil, but now thoroughly changed, and a Christian, and as the condition,
so the operation is changed. As Matthew Paris Ironically writes of them.

Mat. Paris H^st ^ngl. p. 990. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 423. John Stows
Chronicle p. ^1. Survey of London p. 289. Polychronic. l. 7, c. 37. Cent. Magd.
13. c. 15 col. 1287. Volat. Geogr. l. 3. Bakers Chron. p. 130.
A certain Jew in the year 1260. fell into a Privy at Teuxsbury, but because it
was then the Sabbath, he would not suffer himself to be pulled out, except on
the following Lords day, for the reverence of his Sabbath; Wherefore Richard de
Clare Earl of Gloucester, commanded him (in reverence of the Lords Day) to be
kept there till Monday, at which time he was found dead of the stink; or hunger.

John Stows Chron. p. 210. Survey of London, p. 289. Holinshed, Vol 3. p. 263.
The Barons of England, Anno 1262. robbed and slew the Jews in all places. There
were slain of them in London to the number of 700. the rest were spoiled, and
their Synagogues defaced. The original occasion of which massacre was, because
one Jew had wounded a Christian man in London in Cole-church, and would have
enforced him to have paid more then two pence for the Usury of 20 s. for one
week.

Mat. west. 1264. pars 2. p. 323. Raphael Hol. Vol. 3. p. 27^
In the year 1264 in the Passion week, the Jews that inhabited the City of
London, being detected of treason, which they devised against the Barons and
Citizens, were slain almost all the whole number of them, and great riches
found in their houses, which were taken and carried away by those that
ransacked the same houses.

Hol. Vol. 3. p 272. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol 1 p 438.
The dis-inherited Barons and Gentlemen in the Isle of Oxholm, in the year 1266.
took and sacked the City of Lincoln, spoiled the Jews, and slew many of them,
entered into their Synagogue, and burnt the book of their Law, with all their
Charters and Obligations.

Anno 1275. the 3. of King Edward the 1. his reign, the Statute De Iudaismo was
made, not in the 18 E. 1. as 2 Instit. p. 506, 507.
Sir Edward Cook most grossly and confidently mistakes, in his commentary
thereon. To clear which, I desire the Reader to take notice, that this Statute
is not now extant on record, all the Parliamentary Rolls before 5 E. 2. (the
first extant) with sundry others since that time, being utterly lost, through
the iniquity, injury, or carelessness of the times, and some Pleas only in the
Parliaments of King Edward the 1. extant in a Parchment Book in the Tower, but
no Acts nor Rolls of Parliament during his reign, except such as are elsewhere
extant on the backs of some clause Rolls or Patents, or in the Red Book of the
Exchequer (as some few of them only are) or in our Manuscript or printed
Statutes. This Statute de Iudaismo, was first printed in French, by Richard
Totel in his Magna Charta, Anno 1556. part. 2. f, 58, 59. with this Title,
Statuta Ed. primi, de Iudaismo, with out mention of any year of his reign
wherein it was made, not extant in the Manuscript copies out of which he
printed them: and the first Statute of them is also printed in Justice Rastall
his Abridgement and Collection of Statutes, Title Usury, sect. 2. without any
date; for which he renders this reason in his Elenchus Parliamentorum, at the
end of his Abridgement. Tempus Ed. 1. Ceux Statutes auxi come semble fueront
faits in temps E. 1. mais, LA CERTAINTY DES ANS JEO NE TROVE UNCORE, (for lack
of skill in our Histories, which too many Lawyers want.) He mentions 5.
Statutes in his reign of this Nature, whereof DE JUDAISMO; De terris and
tenementis non amortisandis, (made in 3 E. 1. as Walsingham, Hist. Angl. p. 5.
Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 68. Holinshed, Speed, and others affirm, and Henricus de
Knyghton, de Eventib. Angliae, l. 3. c. 1. col. 2462.) and De Tallagio non
concedendo; are three: the last whereof was certainly made in 25. E. 1. (not 34
E. 1. as 2 Instit. p: 332.
Sir Edw. Cook and most Collectors of our Statutes and Lawyers mistake) as is
clear by Thomas Walsingham, Hist. Angl. Ann. 1298. p. 37, 38, 40. and Ypodigma
Neust. p. 84, 85. The first De Iudaismo was made, in 3 Ed. 1. as these
subsequent Historians evidence, who are the best and only witnesses in this
case, the Parliament Rolls being not extant to resolve us. Flores Historum,
pars 2. Londini 1570. p: 363.
Matthew Westminst. who lived and writ his History in or near that time, is
most clear herein. Anno gratiae 1275. Rex ad Parliamentu^ Westminster. omnes Nobiles
regni sui jusserat congregari. In quo statuta multa ad utilitatem regni fuerunt
publ^cata. INTER QUAE JUDAEIS FUIT INTERDICTA EFFRAENATA LICENTIA USURANDI: and
ut possint, a Christianis discerni, praecepit Rex, quod ad instar Tabularum, ad
vnius palmae longitudinem, signa fierent in exterioribus indumentis. Who is
thus seconded, if not translated by In his Chronicle, printed 1569. p: 163, 164.
Rich: Grafton, Ann. 1273. Soon after he (King Edward 1.) ordained certain new
Laws for the wealth of the Realm, which are too large here to rehearse. He made
a Law also THE SAME TIME AGAINST THE EXCESSIVE TAKING OF USURY BY THE JEWS: and
that they should wear a certain Cognisaunce upon their uppermost garment,
whereby they should be known from Christians. Both which are expressly provided
for in these Statutes, de Iudaismo. The same is attested by John Rouse, and by
John Stow out of him, in his Chronicle, p. 200. in these words. In the 3. year
of King Edward the 1. in a Parliament at Westminster, USURY WAS FORBIDDEN TO
THE JEWS, and that they might be known, the King commanded them to wear a
Tablet, the breadth of a palm upon their outmost garments. Which in his Survey
of London, 1633. p. 289. he thus expresses, The 3. of Edward the 1. in a
Parliament at London, USURY WAS FORBIDDEN TO THE JEWS, And that all (Jewish)
Usurers might be known, the King commanded that every Usurer should wear a
Tablet on his breast, the breadth of a paveline, or else to avoid the Realm. With
whom Sir Rich: Baker in his Chronicle of the Kings of England, Edit. 2. London,
1653. p. 147. concurrs. So that without all question the Statutes De Iudaismo,
were made in the Parliament of 3. not of 18 E. 1. as the Statutes themselves
will sufficiently evidence (which had all been nugatory, ridiculous, useless,
if made in the Parliament of 18 E. 1. as Sir Edward Cook affirms, wherein they
were hence exiled. In Rastal usury 2. and Cooks ^ Instit. p. 89.
) These Statutes I shall here translate out of French, and insert, being not
extant in our Statutes at large, nor never yet all printed in the English
tongue that I can find, but only Totles Mag. Charta 1556. part. 2 f. 58, 59.
some clauses of the first of them.

1. Forasmuch as the King has seen, that many mischiefs and disherisons of
honest men of this land have happened by the usuries which the Jews have made
therein in times past, and that many sins have therein risen from thence:
Albeit he and his Ancestors have had great profit from the Jews both now and in
times past: Notwithstanding this, for the honor of God, and for the common
benefit of the People, the King does ordain and establish; that no Jew
hereafter shall take ought for usury upon lands, rents, nor upon other things:
and that no Usury, shall run from the Fea^t of St. Edward last past, and
before, but that the covenants before made shall be held, save only that the
Usuries themselves shall cease. Provided that all those who are indebted to
Jews upon pawns moveable, shall discharge them between this and Easter at
furthest, and if not, let them be forfeited: And if any Jew shall take usury
against this establishment, The King neither by himself, nor any of his
Officers, will not intermeddle to cause him to recover his debt (or use) but
will punish him at his pleasure for the Trespass, and shall do right to the
Christian to recover his gage.

2. And it is provided that the distresses for the debt of Jews, shall not
hereafter be so grievous, that the moity of Lands and Chattels to the
Christians shall not remain for their sustenance. And that no distress shall
be made for the debt of a Jew, upon the heir to the Debtor named in the Charter
of the Jew, not upon other which holds the Land which was the Debtors, before
the debt shall be dereigned and acknowledged in Court. And if the Sheriff or
other Bailiffs by commandment of the King ought to make seisin to a Jew, to one
or more, for their debt, of chattels, or of lands, to the value of the debt,
the chattels shall be praised by the Oath of honest men; and the Chattels
shall be delivered to the Jew or Jewesse, or to their Arturney, to the value of
the debt; And if the chattels be not sufficient, the lands shall be extended by
the same Oath, before that the seisin shall be delivered to the Jew or Jewesse,
every one according to the value, and so that they may after know certainly the
Debt is discharged, that the Christian afterward may then have his lands:
saving to the Christian for ever the moity of his lands, and of his chattels
for his sustenance, as before is said, and the chief house.

3. And if any thing stolen at this hour shall be found in the possession of a
Jew, and any will sue, let the Jew have his summons, if he may have it, and if
not, he shall answer so, that he shall never be privileged for it otherwise
than a Christian.

4 And that all the Jews shall be residents in the Cities and in the Buroughs
which are the Kings own, where the Sea here p. 15 and Rot. Claus. 1 E. 1. m.
Chest for the Jews Indenture is wont to be. And that every Jew after he is
past 7 years of age, shall carry a sign (or See Council. Lat. sub Innocent. 3.
c. 68. Surius Council. Tom. 3. col. 754. extra de Judaeis and Saracenis c. 13.
badge) in his chief garment; that is to say in form of two Talles of So the
Fren^ but it should (...) white.
yellow taffety, of the length of six fingers and breadth of 3 fingers (or an
handful.) And that every one after he is past 12 years shall pay 3 d. the poll
every year to the King, which shall be paid at Easter; and this shall be
intended as well of women as of men.

5. And that no Jew shall have power to infeoffe another Jew nor Christian of
their houses, rents or tenements which they have now purchased, nor to alien
them in any manner, nor to make an acquittance to any Christian of his debt,
without the special license of the King, until the King has otherwise
ordained.

6. And because holy Church wills and suffers, that they should live and be
protected, the King takes them into his Protection, and gives them his peace,
and wills that they shall live, and shall be guarded and defended by his
Sheriffs, and his other Bailiffs, and by his Leiges; and commands that none
shall do them harm, injury, nor force in their bodies, nor in their goods,
movables or immoveables. And that they shall not be impleaded, sued nor
challenged in any Court, but in the Sea Rot. claus 3 Ed. 1 memb. 17.
Kings Court, wheresoever they are.

7. And that none of them shall be obedient, respondent, nor render rent, but
to the King and his Bailiffs in his name, if it be not of their houses which
they now hold rendering rent; saving the right of holy Church.

8. And the King grants them, that they shall live of their lawful
merchandises, and by their labor, and that they shall converse with the
Christians for lawful merchandising in selling and in buying. But yet, that by
this privilege, nor any other, they shall not be levant (rising) or couchant
(lying down) amongst them. And the King will not, that by reason of their
merchandise, that they should be in lots nor scots, nor Tallage with those of
the Cities or Buroughs where they remain, seeing they are tailable to the
King, as his own Vassals, and to none other.

9. Moreover the King grants them, that they may buy houses and curtelages in
the Cities or Buroughs where they reside, so as they hold them in chief of the
King: saving to the Lords the Services due and accustomed.

10. And that they may take Lands to farm for term of ten years, or under,
without taking homages or fealties, or such manner of service of a Christian,
and without having advowson of holy Church, for to support their life in the
world, if they know not how to merchandise, Nota.
or be unable to labor. And this power for to take Lands to farm, shall not
endure to them but 15 years from this time forth to come.

By these Laws this politic King to please his English Christian Subjects,
abridged many of the Jews former privileges, and put many new restraints upon
them. And yet on the other hand, to gratify the Jews, (who gave him more
moneys than the English) he takes them all into his special protection,
prohibits all violence to their persons or estates, and grants them some petty
privileges for the present, which seemed to content them, and made for his
own advantage, more than theirs.

Rot. Clause^ E. 1. in the Tower, rot. 8. I find, that one who was bound to
Gamilel^ a Jew, and had lands, afterward acknowledged himself a Villain;
whereupon a writ then issued to inquire, what lands he had at the time of the
making of the bonds, and to extend them JUXTA STATUTA JUDAISMI. And claus. 4 E.
1. rot. 11. there is this recital made of this very Statute of Judaism: Cum
secundum Assisam ET STATUTUM JUDAISMI NOSTRI, Judaei nostri in part^ ne habere
DEBEANT a Christianis creditoribus MEDIETATEM terrarum reddituum et Catallorum
ipsorum, quousque debita sua perciperent, etc. and execution awarded in the
case of a Jew, according to the 2 clause of this Statute. Therefore it is most
certain, it was not made in 18 E. 1. which was 14 years after these two
records, reciting it both by name and words, but in 3 E. 1. the very next year
before these records, the end for which I here insert them.

Mat. West. An. 1278. p. 367. Hygden, Polychronicon, l. 7. c. 38. Henry de
Knyghton de Eventibus Angliae. l. 3. c. 1. col. 2462. Walsingh. hist. Ang. Ann.
1279. p. 18. Ypodigm. Neustriae, p. 69. Fabian part. 7. p. 124. Grafton, p.
164. Stows Chronicle. p. 200. Survey of London, p. 289. Holinshed, p. 279.
Balaeus Cent. 4. Script. Brit. c. 61. in Appendice Cent. Magd. 13. c. 15. col.
1286. Bakers Chron. p. 145. Rot. Clause 7. E. 1. m. 6, 7.
In the 7th year of King Edward the 1. Anno Dom. 1278. as some, or 1279. as
others compute it, the King held a Parliament at London, which was chiefly
called for the reformation of his coin, which was then sore clipped, by reason
whereof it was much diminished and impaired. In the time of this Parliament in
the month of November all the Jews throughout England, (as Matthew
Westminster) or many of the Jews in London, and other parts of the Realm, were
apprehended in one day, and imprisoned in London for clipping of money: and in
December following, diverse Enquests were charged in London, to enquire of the
said Jews, and all others who had so blemished and clipped the Kings coin; By
which Enquests the Jews of the City, with the Goldsmiths that kept exchanges
of silver, were indicted. And shortly after Candelmas, the Mayor and Justices
of the Land sat at London, where before them was cast 297 persons for clipping;
of the which 3 only were Englishmen, and all the other were Jews, born either
within this Realm, or elsewhere, but most of them English Jews; who were all of
them at sundry places and times put to execution in London; who impeached the
chief men of London, and very many Christians, who consented to their
wickednesses. After which a very great multitude of Jews were hanged in other
Cities of England for the same offense. Hereupon in the Patent Rolls of 7, 8,
and 9 Edw. 1. in the Tower, I find sundry grants of the Jews Houses and Lands
in London, York, and Northampton, made by the King, to several persons, as
escheated to him by those executed Jewish offenders.

John Stow his Chron. p. 20. Survey of London p. 289.
Anno 1279. The Jews of Northampton crucified a Christian boy, but did not
thoroughly kill him, upon Good Friday; for the which fact many of the Jews at
London, after Easter, were drawn at Horses tails, and hanged.

John Stow his Chronicle, p. 202. Survey of London, p. 289.
In the year of our Lord 1282. John Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury, sent an
express precept and command to the Bishop of London, to suppress and destroy
all the Synagogues of the Jews within his Diocese.

Stow his Chronicle, p. 203, 204. Su^vey of London, p. 289.
On May 2. Anno 1287. All the Jews of England were apprehended by the Kings
precept, for what cause was not known; who ransomed themselves for 12000l. of
silver; They had then a Synagogue at Canterbury. Fabian writes, that the Jews
of England were sessed at great sums of money (perchance the cause of their
seizure) which they paid unto the King; But of Fabian part: 7 p. 131. Grafton
p. 168. Holinshed vol: 3. p. 283.
other Authors it is said, That the Commons of England then granted to the King
the fifth part of their movables, for to have the Jews banished out of the
Land. For which cause the said Jews, for to put the Commons from their
purposes, gave of their free wills great sums of money to the King, which
saying appears to be true, for that the said Jews were exiled within few
years after: with whom Grafton and Holinshed accord. A strong evidence of the
potency of Jewish money, over-powring the whole Commons of England in
Parliament, and this their Liberal subsidy for their banishment at that season.

Thomas Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 14.
K. Edward the 1. the next year (1288.) being in Gascoigne, a certain English
Knight decreed to convent a Jew, for the undue detention of a certain Manor
morgaged to him, before the Judges: but the crafty Jew refused to answer,
pretending a Charter of King Henry heretofore, which was granted to him, that
he should not be drawn into judgment before any Judge, except only before the
person of the King. The Knight being troubled at this, went into Gascoigne,
that he might obtain some remedy hereupon from the King. Whom when the King had
heard, he answered: It is not seemly for children to make void the deeds of
their parents, to whom by Gods Law they are commanded to give reverence:
wherefore I have decreed, not to make void the deed of my Father; but I grant
to thee, and to the rest of my Realm by the like Law (lest a Jew might seem
better than a Christian) that for any injury whatsoever done to the Jew, so
long as he shall enjoy his Charter, you shall not be convented before any
Judge, except my self. The Knight returning with this privilege, the Jew
considering that danger and peril hung over his head, voluntarily renounced his
Charter, evacuating the condition of his privilege, and wishing that both
parties might be subject to the Common Law.

Th. Walsingham, Hist. Angl. p. 15.
The year following, Anno 1289. King Edwa^d taking upon him the character of the
Cross at Blankeford in Gascoigne, presently banished all the Jews out of
Gascoigne, and all other his Lands, which he possessed in the Realm of France,
AS ENEMIES OF THE CROSS. From whence returning into England, Anno 1290. he was
joyfully received at London, both by the Clergy and all the people; and the
same year exiling the Jews likewise out of England, giving them expenses into
France, he confiscated all the rest of their goods; together with their Lands
and Houses, and in 19 and 20 E. 1. he made several Gifts of the Jews Houses and
Lands to others: as appears by the Patent Rolls in the Tower of London.

Upon what grounds, by what Authority, for what time, in what manner, with what
desire of, and content to all the whole Commons and Realm of England, the Jews
were then banished thence, these ensuing Historians will at large relate, in
their own words, which I shall transcribe for the better information and
satisfaction of all sorts of men, whether Christians or Jews.

Flores Hist. par. 2. ann. 1290. p. 381.
Matthew Westminster (flourishing at that time) gives this relation of it.
About these days, namely the 31 of August, the exasperating multitude of Jews,
which dwelt confidently in times past through diverse Cities and strong Forts,
JUSSA EST, was commanded with their wives and children, together with their
moveable goods, to depart out of England, about the Feast of All Saints, which
was assigned to them for the term, WHICH THEY DARED NOT TO TRANSGRESS UNDER
PAIN OF HANGING, whose number was supposed to be 16511. Such A DECREE had
issued out before from the laudable King of England in the parts of Aquitain,
from whence all the Jews were likewise banished.

Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 62.
Thomas Walsingham, living near that age, thus records it. The King returning
out of Gascoigne to London, was solemnly received by the Clergy and all the
people: who the same year banishing all the Jews out of England giving them
their expenses into France, confiscated the rest of their goods. This year the
King held A Parliament, in which were made the Statutes called Westminster the
3d. In quo etiam Parliamento pro expulsione Iudaeotum. concessa sunt Regi a
Populo, quinta decima pars honorum. In which Parliament likewise for the
banishment of the Jews, there was granted to the King by the People, a
fifteenth part of their goods.

De Eventibus Angliae, l. 3. c. 1. col. 2462 2466.
Henry de Knyghton a Canon of Leicester, a most diligent Antiquary flourishing
in Richard the 2ds. reign, renders it in these terms: King Edward grievously
punished the Jews and their consorts for clipping of money, and corrupt
exchanges, whereupon in one day he caused all the Jews to be apprehended: some
he hanged, the rest he banished. When he had done his will upon his corrupt
Judges (fined, deposed, and some of them banished in the same Parliament that
the Jews were exiled) presently another cause moved him concerning his money,
which he found to be basely clipped and corrupted, to the prejudice of the
Crown, and the great damage of the people, By the Infidelity and Malice of the
Jews as it was inquired and found or found upon inq^iry) et fecit stabilire
unum Parliamentum, in quo convicti sunt Iudaei de ea falsitate: Et statuit,
quod omnes Iudaeis exirent de Terra Angliae, deinceps non redituri, propter
eorum incredulitatem principaliter, et propter falsitatem quam eis dure
imposuerat: et pro hac causa cum festinatione facienda, et sine dilatione
explenda, communes regni dederunt Regi quintum denarium de omnibus bonis suis
mobilibus. And he caused a Parliment to be summoned, wherein the Jews are
convicted of that falsehood; And he ordained that all the Jews should depart out
of the Realm of England, not to return again afterward, for their incredulity
principally, and for their falsenesse, which he had hardly pressed upon them.
And for this (their banishment) speedily to be made and executed, without
delay, the Commons of the Realm gave to the King the fifth part of all their
moveable goods.

Histor. Majoris Brit. l. 4. c. 9.
John Major, and the Cent: Mag: 13. c. 15. col. 1286.
Centuriators of Magdeburgh, out of him, thus register it to posterity. In the
year 1290. Iudaei Anglia pulsi sunt, the Jews were banished out of England, for
the Englishmen had made a great complaint to Edward the 1. that by their
usuries and frauds most men of the inferior sort were reduced to nothing: which
thing was gainful to the King, for every of the Commoners gave the King the
fifteenth penny, ut Iudaeos ejiceret, that he might banish the Jews.

Our learned Centur. 4 Scrip. Brit. c. 60. in Appendice.
John Bale Lib. 17. Ed. 1.
Polydor Virgil, and the Cent. Mag. 13 c. 9. col. 967. c. 13. col. 1284.
Century Writers out of him thus express it. Anno Dom. 1291 (it should be
1290) In the Parliament at London, the^e was a debate ^n the first place de
Iudaeorum ejectione, Concerning the banishing of the Jews; whereof there was a
gr^^t m^ltitude throughout England, Sed Edicto publico Concilii Londinensis
(writes one) Publico igitur Decreto jussi sunt alio commigrare, ut infra paucos
dies omnes exirent; (says another) But by the public Edict of the Parli^me^t
assembled in London, and by a public decree, They were all commanded to
depart the Realm with their goods within a few days, which they, Concilii
jussis obedientes obeying the commands of the Parliament, speedily did.

Thomas Stubs his Acta Fontificum Eboracensium c. 1728 thus relates the
universal banishment of them out of all England in one day, Anno Dom. 1290. In
c^rastino animarum Exulati fuerunt Iudaei a Regno Angliae, et hoc eodem die per
totam Angliam. Raphael Volaterianus, Geograph. lib. 3. f. 25. thus expresses
it: Iudaei omnes expulsi^^ Annals Dominicanorum Colmarionsium, thus relate it;
Anno 1291. Rex Angliae omnes Iudaeos Regno expulit. Gilbertus Genebrardus,
Chronogr. l. 4. p. 659. thus records it, Anno 1291. Concilium Londinense ad
Westmonasterium jussu Edwardi Regis: Eo in Concilio Publico Edicto jussi sunt
Iudaei de Anglia in perpetuum exire, words most express. Abraham Bzouius thus:
Anna: Ecclesiasticorum, Tom. 13. Anno 1291. n. 1. col. 966. Ex Polydoro l. 19.
and Man: Vaticano 1526 de Rebus Angliae.
Londini ad Westmonasterium celebratum est Concilium. In hoc imprimis agitatum
est De ejectione Iudaeorum, quorum erat per omnem Angliam ingens multitudo: quo
sic oves ab hoedis segregarentur. Itaque Publico jussum est Edicto ut intra
paucos dies omnes abierint cum bonis. illi jussis Concilii parents, alii alio
discesserunt. Ita profuga Gens de Anglia, in perpetuum exivit: misera semper
alicubi terrarum peti^ura, usque eo dum denique deleatur. But I shall pass from
Latin to our more common English Historians.

Fabian, in his Chronicle, part 7. p. 133. Mr. John Fox in his Acts and
Monuments, Land. 1640. Vol. 1. p. 443. and Richard Grafton in his Chronicle, p.
169. thus report it, in the same words almost. This year also 1290. all the
Jews were utterly banished the Realm of England, for the which the Commons gave
he King a fifteenth.

N^cholas Trivet, Polychronicon, l. 7. c. 38. and William Caxton, in his
Chronicles, printed 1502. in the life of K. Edward the 1. thus stories the Jews
banishment, out of Hygden and Trevisa, in their words; Anon after the King had
done his will of the Justices, tho let he inquere and espy how the Jews
dysceyved and beguyled his people, thorough the sin of falseness, and of
usury. And let Ordain a Prevy Parliament among his Lords: So they ordainned
among them, That all Jews should void out of England for their Mysbyleve,
and also for their false usury that they did unto Christian Men. And for to speed
and make an end of this thing. All the Comynalte of England gave unto the King
the XV. Penny of all their Goods mevable: and so were the Jews driven out of
England. And tho went the Jews into France, and there they dwelled, through
leve of King Phylip that tho was King of France. Raphael Holinshed in his
Chronicles out of them, Vol. 3. p. 285. thus publishes it. In the same year
was a Parliament holden at Westminster, wherein the Statutes of Westminster the
3 d. were ordained. It was also DECREED, That all the Jews should avoid out of
the Land; in consideration whereof, a fifteenth was granted to the King: and so
hereupon were the Jews banished out of all the Kings Dominions: and Never since
could they obtain any privilege to return hither again. All their goods not
moveable were confiscated, with their tailles and obligations; but all their
goods that were moveable, together with their coin of gold and silver, the King
licensed them to have and convey with them. See Cooks 2. Instit. p. 508.
A sort of the richest of them being shipped with their Treasure in a mighty
tall ship, which they had hired, when the same was under sail, and got down the
Thames toward the mourh of the River beyond Quinborow. The Master Mariner
bethought him of a wile: and caused his men to cast anchor, and so rode at the
same till the ship by ebbing of the stream remained on the dry sands. The
Master herewith enticed the Jews to walk out with him on land for recreation:
and at length, when he understood the tide to be coming in, he got him back to
the ship, whither he was drawn by a cord. The Jews made not so much have as he
did, because they were not ware of the danger. But when they perceived how the
matter stood, they cried to him for help, Howbeit he told them, that they ought
to cry rather unto Moses, by whose conduct their Fathers passed through the red
Sea, and therefore if they would call to him for help, he was able enough to
help them out of these raging floods, which now came in upon them: They cried
indeed, but no succor appeared, and so they were swallowed up in the water.
The Master returned with the ship, and told the King how he had used the
matter, and had both thanks and reward, as some have written. But Chron.
Dunstap: Cooks 2. Instit: p. 508.
others affirm, (and more truly as should seem) that diverse of those Mariners
which dealt so wickedly against the Jews, were hanged for their wicked
practice, and so received a just reward of their fraudulent and mischievous
dealing. In Capitula Itineris, in Totles Magna Charta, f. 151. made in Edward
the first his reign. There is one chapter of Inquiry: De catallis Judaeorum
occisorum, et eorum chartis and vadiis, and qui ea habeant, (taken out of the
Air of Rich. the 1. forecited) which relates to these Jews thus drowned and
slain, as I conceive, since I read of no other massacre of them, near that time.

John Stow in his Annals, p. 204. and Survey of London, p. 289. writes thus of
it; King Edward banished all the Jews out of England, g^ving them to bear their
ena^rges till they were out of the Realm. The number of the Jews then expelled,
was fifteen thousand and sixty persons, whose hous^s being sold, the King
received an infinite mass of money.

John Speed in his History of Great Britain, p. 545 thus varieth the expression
of it. King Edward Anno 1290. to purge England from such corruptions and
oppressions as under which it groaned, not neglecting therein his particular
ga^n, banished the Jews out of the Realm, confiscating all their goods, leaving
them nothing but money to bear their charges, they by their cruel Usuries
having eaten his People to the bones.

To pass by Heylins Microcosm, p. 570. Henry Isaacsons Chronology, Anno 1290.
Sir Rich. Baker his Chronicle of the Kings of England, p. 146, 147. with See
Purchase Pilgrimage. l. 2. c. 10. Sect. 7. p. 171.
others, who mention this their final banishment out of England, I shall
conclude with the words of Samuel Daniel his History, p. 160. Of no less
grievance (than corrupt Judges, then fined, displaced, banished) this King
eased his people, by the banishment of the Jews, for which the kingdom
willingly granted him a fifteenth. having before in Anno Regis 9. offered a
fifth part of their goods to have them expelled. But then the Jews gave more,
and so stayed till this time; which brought him a great benefit by confiscation
of their immoveables, with their Tallies, and Obligations, which amounted to an
infinite value. But now has he made his last commodity of this miserable
people, which having never been under other cover, but the will of the Prince,
had continually served the turn in all the necessary occasions of his
Predecessors, but especially of his Father and himself.

Sir Edward Cook in his 2 Institutes, p. 506, 507, 508. in his Commentary upon
Statutum de Judaismo forecited, seems to contradict these forecited Historians
touching their banishment, whose words I shall at large rehearse, and refute
too in this particular. This Statute was made [writes he] in the Parliament of
18 Ed. 1. That the m^schiefs before this Statute, against Jewish Usury, were
these. 1. The evils and disherisons of the good men of the land. 2. That many
of the sins and offenses of the Realm, had risen, and been committed by reason
thereof, to the great dishonor of Almighty God. (And are no^ the^e two
sufficient grounds to keep them out now, as well as to restrain and banish them
then?) The difficulty (adds he) was how to apply a remedy, considering what
great yearly revenue the King had by the Usury of the Jews, and how necessary
it was, that the King should be supplied with Treasure. What See Cooks 2.
Instit. p. 89.
benefit the Crown had, before the making of this Act, appears by former
records, as take Rot. Pat. Anno 3 E. 1. m. 14.17.20. William Middleton reddit
compot.
one for many. From the 17 of December in the 50 year of H. 3. until the
Tuesday in Shroveride, the 2 year of Edward the first, which was about 7 years,
the Crown had four hundred and twenty thousand pounds, fifteen shillings and
four pence De exitibus judai^mi: at which time, the ounce of silver was 20 d.
and now it is more than treble so much. So as the recital of the Preamble is
true, That he and his Ancestors had received great profit from Judaism. Temp.
R. Job. To. Char. 2. Jo. n. 49.53.18. H. 3. Dors. Claus. m. 37. Dors. Pat. 55.
H. 3. m. 20.
Many provisions were made both by this King and others: Some time they were
banished, but their cruel usury continued, and soon after they returned; and
for respect of lucre and gain, King John in the second year of his reign,
granted unto them la^ge Privileges, whereby the mischiefs rehearsed in this Act
multiplied. But the lucre and gain which King John had, and expected of the
Infidel Jews, made him impie judaisare for to the end they should exercise the
Laws of their Sacrifices (which they could not do without a Priesthood) the
King by his Charter granted them to have one, etc. Which for the great rarity
thereof, and for that we find it not either in our Books or Histories, I will
rehearse In haec verba.

Rot. Char. ^ Regis Johan. part. 1 m. 28. Char. 171.
Rex omnibus fidelibus suis, and omnibus and Judaeis and Anglis, salutem.
Sciatis nos concessisse, Jacobo Judaeo de Londoniis Presbytero, Judaeorum
Presbyteratum omnium Judaeorum totius Angliae. Habendum and tenendum quamdin
vixerit, libere and quiet and honorifice and integre it a quod nemo ei super
hoc molestiam aliquam, aut gravamen infer presumat. Quare volumus and
firmiter praecipimus, quod eidem Jacobo quoad vixerit, Presbyteratum Judaeorum
per totam Angliam, garantetis, manu-teneatis, and pacifice defendatis. Et si
quis et super eo forisfacere praesumpserit, id ei sine dilatione (salva nobis
emenda nostra) de forisfactura nostra emendare faciatis, tanquam Dominico
Judaeo nostro, quem specialiter in servicio nostro retinuimus. Prohibemus etiam
ne de aliquo ad se pertin^nte ponatur in placitum, nisi coram nobis, aut coram
capi^ali Justiciario nostro, sicut Charta Regis Richardi sratris nostri
testatur. Test S. Bathonien. Episcopo, etc. Dat. per manus Huberti
Cantuarientis Archiepiscopi Cancellarii nostri apud Rothomagum 12 die Julii,
Anno Regni nostri primo.

To which Charter Sir Edward Cook annexeth this marginal Note, Th^s King had a
most troublesome and dishonorable reign, God raising against him, for his just
punishment, two potent Enemies, Pope Innocent the 3. and Philip King of France,
And besides, which was the worst, he lost the heart and love of his Baronage
and Subjects, and at the last had a fea^full end.

He adds Rot. 2. E. 1. m. 1.3.5. Rot. Claus. 3. E. 1. m. 8.10 13.16.23. Rot.
Pat. 3. E. 1. m. 36. and 17. Dors. Claus. 7. E. 1. m. 6.
Our Noble King Edward 1. and his Father H. 3. before, sought by d^vers Acts
and Ordinances, to use some means and moderation herein, but in the end it was
found, That there was no mean in m^schief, and as Seneca, says, Res profecto
Stulta est nequitiae modus (And will it not be so now in their new limited
readmission, if consented too?) And therefore King Ed. 1. as this Act says,
for the honor of God, and for the common profit of his people, without all
respect (in respect of these) of the filling of his own Coffers, did ordain,
That no Jew from thenceforth should make any bargain or contract for usury, nor
upon any former contract should take any usury, from the Feast of St. Edward
then last past. So in effect all Jewish Usury was forbidden: This Law struck at
the root of this pestilential weed, for hereby usury it self was forbidden, and
thereupon the cruel Jews thirsting after rich gain, to the number of 15060
departed out of this Realm into foreign parts, where they might use their
Jewish trade of usury, and from that time that Nation never returned again into
this Realm. Holinshed, p. 385. Walsing. Ypodig. 72. Florileg. Chron, Dunstab.
Some are of opinion, (and so it is said in some of our Histor^es) That it was
enacted by authority of Parliament, that the usurious Jews should be banished
out of the Realm: ^^t the truth is, that their usury was banished by t^^s Act
of Pa^liament, and that was the cause, that they banished themselves i^to other
Countries, where they might l^ve by their usury: So that by his opinion, they
were not then banished by the King or Parliament, but only voluntarily banished
themselves upon the making of this Statute against their Usury.

But under the favor of this deceased reverend Judge, whose memory and
judgment in Law I generally reverence, this opinion of his is a mere mistake.
For 1. This Statute de Iudaismo was not made in the Parliament of 18 E. 1. as
he confidently affirms, without any ground or Authority at all, but in the 3d
year of his reign, as I have Here p. 37. to 42.
formerly proved; being full 15 years before the Jews banishment out of
England: the term the Statute de Iuda^smo allowed them to take Lands and Houses
to farm, but no longer. If then they resided here full 15. years after the
banishment of their Usury by this Statute, it is most certain, it was not the
ground of all their voluntary banishments in 18 E. 1. as he strangely fancieth,
but some particular Act for their general expulsion then made upon the Commons
importunity: else they would have voluntarily exiled themselves 15 years
before, upon the first publication of this Statute against their Usury, in all
probability, rather than so long after its banishment of it in 3: 2. This Stat.
has not one syllable of their banishment in it, but expressly authorizeth them,
to take houses and lands to farm and continue here 15 years space, but no
longer. Now, had it been made in 18 E. 1. as Sir Edw. Cook affirms, the King
and Parliament had been so far from banishing them that year, (as the premised
Histories and Records he cites do jointly attest they did) that they had
thereby authorized them to continue here 15 years longer, even till 33 E. 1.
Yea the Commons had been much overseen to give the King a fifteen in the
Parliament of 18 E. 1. for the present banishment of all the Jews out of
England, had they passed the Statute de Iudaismo at that very time, which
allows them 15 years space longer to take Houses and Lands to farm; to extend
the mo^ty of the Lands and Goods of their Creditors; to be resident in the
Kings Cities and Buroughs, where their chests for Indentures were: to grant
them the Kings Peace and Protection, both for their persons and estates, and
exempt them from suits in all Courts but the Kings, and from all Taxes, with
other Subjects. And that clause of this Statute prescribing them to wear a
badge on their uttermost Garments, after they were 7. years of age; and to pay
3 d. the poll yearly to the King after they were 12 years old: had been merely
ridiculous, if made but in 18 E. 1. when they were forthwith banished, and not
in 3. before their exile, as our Historians affirm; who are only to be credited
in this case, because all the Parliament Rolls of this Kings reign, and before
are utterly lost, and this very Statute de Iuda^smo, not extant on Record in
the Tower, or elsewhere; nor any other Statutes made in his or his Ancestors
reigns all lost, as well as that of 18 Edw. the 1. for the Jews Banishment; as
the Clerks and Keepers of the Records informed me, upon my searches after them.
3ly. No Record nor Historian mentions, that the Jews voluntarily banished
themselves upon the making of this Law: and their voluntary departure hence
upon the publication of it, could not be styled a Banishment, since Annalium l.
3.
Cornelius Tacitus, resolves; Exilium non est, ubi quis abit non Senatus
consulto, non Lege pulsus. This their banishment therefore must necessarily be
by an express Law or Decree of Parliament. 4ly, The forecited Historians
record, that the Jews but a few years before gave King Edw. the 1. a vast sum
of money (full 12 years after this Statute De Judaismo made in the 3. of his
reign) to prevent their banishment hence, urged by the Commons in Parliament in
the 15 year of his reign, with the profer of the 5 th part of their goods to
the King for their banishment. Therefore it is very improbable they would in 18
E. 1. (full 15 years after this Statute) voluntarily banish themselves only
because their Usury was so long before exiled by it. 5. All the forecited
Historians of those and of later times (who are more to be credited then Sir
Edward Cooks singular, groundless opinion) unanimously record, that the Jews
were all judicially, really expelled and banished the Realm in 18 E. 1. both by
the King and Parliament, and that principally for their infidelity not Usury,
and other fore-alleged reasons; and commanded under pain of hanging by a
special Decree and Edict to depart hence by a prefixed day: for the effecting
and hastening whereof, the Commons gave the King a fifteenth. Therefore they
were all precisely banished by the King and Parliament, not by themselves
alone. 6. The King then banished them out of England upon the same grounds, and
in the self-same manner, as he had newly banished them the year before out of
Gascoigne, and all his Dominions in France, as Matthew Westminster, Walsingham,
and others record. But then and there he banished their persons by an express
Decree, not only for their Usury, but chiefly for their Infidelity and Enmity
to Christ's Cross. Therefore he did the like in England. 7ly, All Usury in all
persons whatsoever, was strictly prohibited, and quite banished out of England,
long before this Statute De Judaismo, which was but a mere confirmation of
former Laws with particular relation to the Jews: not an introduction of any
new Law: The clearing whereof (nor impertinent to my Theme against Jewish
Usurers) will most fully discover Sir Edward Cooks mistake to the very meanest
capacity. The famous Spelmanni Council. p. 299.
Council of Calchuth, Anno Dom. 787. under King Alfwood, and King Offa,
condemned all usury in these terms, c. 17. Vsuras quoque prohibemus, dicente
Domino ad David, dignum fore habitatorem Tabernaculi sui qui pecuniam suam non
dederit ad Vsuram, etc. After which King Edward the Confessor enacted this Law
against Usury about the Year, 1050. ratified by William the Conqueror in the
fourth year of his reign. Hoveden Annalium pars posterior p. 6^0 Lambardi
Archaion. Spelmani Council. p. 623.
Usurarios quoque defendit rex Edwardus, Ne remaneret aliquis in toto regno,
etc. and si qu^s inde conv^ctus esset, qu^d f^r^ns ex^ger^^, omni substantia
propria careret and pro Exlege haberetur. Hoc autem asserebat ille Rex se
audisse in Curta Regis Francorum dum ibidem moraretur, quod Usura summa radix
est omnium v^tiorum. This Law precisely banished all Usurers, with their Usury
out of England, and confiscateth all their goods to the King as Outlaws upon
conviction. If therefore there had been any Jewish Usurers in England in St.
Edwards reign (as the spurious Law just before it in Spelman and Hoveden Here
p. 3.
forecited pretends) they had all been expressly banished the land by this Law,
and never permitted to reside therein, above 270 years before the Stat. de
Judaismo was enacted. In Simeon Dunelmensis Hist. de gestis Regum Angl. col.
254. and Richardus Prior Hagastaldensis de gestis Regis Stephani col. 327.
the Council of London Anno 1128. 25 H. 1 and in the Council of Westminster
Anno 1138. the 3 of King Stephens reign; All usury was prohibited under pain of
deprivation both from Office and Benefice in Clergy men. By virtue of which
laws and Canons all the goods of Usurers became forfeited to our Kings after
their deaths and they exco^munic^ted persons. This is evident by the words of
Ranulp. de Glanvil, a famous Lawyer under King Henry the 2. De legibus and
consuetudinibus Regni Angliae lib. 7. c. 16. where thus he writes. Usurarit
vero omnes res, sive testatus, sive intestatus decesserit, DOMINI REGIS SUNT.
Vivus autem non solet aliquis de crimine usurae appellari nec convinci. Sed
inter caeteras Regias Inquisitiones solet inquiri and probari, aliquem in tali
crimine decessisse, per duo decim legales homines de vic^neto, and per eorum
Sacramentum. Quo probato in Curia, omnes res mobiles, and omnia catalla quae
fuerunt ipsius usurarii mortui, Ad usus domini Regis capientur penes Quemcunque
inveniantur res illae: Haeres quoque ipsius hac eadem de causa exhaeredatur,
secundum jus regni, and ad Deminu^ vel Dominos revertetur haereditas. Sciendum
tamen, quod si quis aliquo tempore Usurarius fuerit in vita sua, and super hoc
in patria public defamatus, si tamen a delicto ipso ante mortem suam
destituit, and poenitentiam egerit, post mortem ipsius, ille vel res ejus lege
Usurarii minime censebuntur; Oportet ergo constare, quod usurarius decesserit
aliquis ad hoc, ut de eo tanquam de usurario, post mortem ipsuis judicetur, and
de rebus ipsius tanquam de rebus usurarii disponatur; which he likewise affirms
for Law in that age, lib. 10. c. 3.8. Therefore usury in that and former ages,
was equally prohibited to all, as well See here p. 13.
Jews as English, under pain of forfeiture of all their real and personal
estates to the King, and their inheritances to the Lords, in case they died
usurers. And if the Jews had not been within the compass of these Laws, but
might have freely exercised usury when the English could not, they had been in
this respect in far better condition than the native English; when as the
forecited law concerning them resolves us, Hoven Annal. Pars Posterior p. 604.
Spelmani Council. p. 623. here p. 3.13.
Iudaei and omnia sua Regis sunt, both in this Kings reign and before upon this
account amongst others, because they were known Usurers. This Law continued
still the same in succeeding ages, as is most apparent by Roger de Hoveden
Annal, pars posterior p. 744.
Cap^tula placitorum Curiae Regis made, and to be inquired of by the Justices
itinerant, in the 6 year of King Richard the 1. Anno 1194. wherein I find this
Article. Item de Faeneratoribus, and eorum catallis qui mortui sunt: which is
general, extending equally to all Usurers, whether English or Jews, Christians
or Infidels. But in the Hoveden p. 783..
Capitula Placitorum Coronae Regis in the 10 year of this King Richard, Anno
1198, it was thus varied, and confined only to Christian Usurers; Inquirendum
est (by the Justices itinerant, then appointed in each County) etiam de usuris
Christianorum, and eorum Catallis qui mortui sunt. Perchance to put a
difference between the Jews, whose goods the King claimed as his own whiles
living, and the English Usurers who forfeited not their estates for usury, till
after their deaths and not unless they died usurers without public repentance
thereof before their death. Tottles Mag. Chart. l. 151.
This form of Inquisition continued both before and after the Statute de
Judaismo, as is evident by Capitula itineris, used in the reigns of Henry the
3. and Ed. 1. De Christianis usurariis, qui fuerunt, and quae catalla habent,
and qui catalla illa habuerant? De catallis Judaeorum occisorum, and eorum
chartis and vadiis, and qui ea habeant. King Henry the 3 rot. finium 29. H. 3.
m. 8. De catallis quae fuerunt cujusdam foeneratoirs: seized the Charters of a
certain Usurer, as confiscated by Law unto him; the Statute of Merton c. 5. in
the 20 year of his reign, provided and granted; That usuries should not run
against any, being within age, from the time of the death of his Ancestors,
whose heir he is unto his lawful age, etc. So nevertheless that the payment
of the principle debt, with the payment of the usury, that was before the death
of the Ancestor, whose heir he is, shall not remain. On which Statute St.
Edward Cook himself thus Coments. This Statute has been diversely expounded
(some expounding it only of Nomine poenaes and doubling the rent upon Leases,
Bonds and Recognizances, others literally) That the Statute extended to the
usurious Jews that then were in England, for at that time, and Inter leges
sancti Edw. Lamb. Si quis de usura convictus Glanv. l. 7. c. 16. Ockham
qualiter non absolvitur Cap. Itineris de Christianis usurariis.
before the Conquest also, it was not lawful for Christians (he might have
added, nor yet for Jews) to take any usury, as it appears by the Laws of St.
Edward, etc. and Glanvil, and other ancient Authors and Records: And by this
Act it was manifest, that the usury intended by the Statute was not unlawful,
for the usury before the death of the Ancestor is enacted to be paid, and after
the full age of the heir also. And no usury was permitted but by the Jews only.
But King Edw. the 1. (That mirror of Princes) By aeuthority of Parliament made
this Law, which is worthy to be written in letters of gold. Forasmuch, etc.
That no Jew should take any usury, etc. As if usury (in his opinion) had been
lawful for Jews, before the Statute de Judaismo, when it was equally
prohibited to Jews and Christians, though not to make to contractor usury
merely void, except only against Infants during their minority, yet to make
both their chatels goods and estates liable to confiscation to the King after
their deaths, or before, as the premises undeniably evidence. So that the
Statute de Judaismo prohibiting usury to the Jews, was no introduction of any
new Law, as to the unlawfullnesse and penalty of usury it self in the Jews, no
more than in Christians, (to whom Rastal equally extends it. Usury 2.) but only
in respect of the legal means for recovevering the use upon usurious contracts,
See Claudius Salmasius, De usuris.
Usury it self being even reputed absolutely unlawful by Gods Laws and ours.

Hence I find Rot. claus. 36 H. 3. m 21. A Prohibition by writ to all forain
Merchants within the Realm, Quod nil capiant ad Vsuram: and if they do, Omnia
mobilia and immobilia eorum cedant ad usum Regis, all their goods movable and
immovable, shall be confiscated to the Kings use: Rot. claus. 2. E 1. m. 1. De
Mercatoribus Usurariis, commands all Merchants that were Usurers to depart the
Realm, the year before the Stat. de Iudaismo made. And in the Patent Roll of 5
E 1. Dors. 26. There is an Inquisition De Usurariis seu Christianis
Judaizantibus, ut de eis fiat justitia secundum legem terrae: which punished
them by sines and loss of Goods in the Temporal Courts, and by Ecclesiastical
censures in the Spiritual Courts, as is clear by Placita. 18 H. 3. rot. 36. and
all Canonists in their Titles De Usura; which is further evident by these
Records and Statutes made since the Statute De Iudaismo, by 15 E. 3. rot. Parl.
n. 24.32.21. E. 3. rot. Parl. n, 49.50. E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 47. 6 R. 2. rot.
Parl. n. 57. 14 R. 2. rot Parl. n. 23. 5 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 68.15. E. 3. c. 5.
3 H. 7. c. 5, 6. 11 H. 7. c. 8. 37 H. 8. c. 9.5 and E. 6. c. 20. 23 Eliz. c. 8.
39 Eliz. c. 18.21. Iac. c. 17. Therefore the banishing of Usury by this Law,
thus condemned, prohibited in all former ages, could no ways move the Jews
voluntarily to banish themselves hence, no more than all other English and
Italian Usurers, but some new special Act for their final expulsion. 8ly, It
cannot be proved, or imagined, that all the Jews then in England were Usurers,
though the most and wealthiest of them were such. And it is very improbable
that all the Jews throughout England with one consent should agree to banish
themselves voluntarily out of England, where they were born and lived so long,
and that on the same day, because the Usury of some of them was there
prohibited, without any Law for their banishment. 9ly, The Council. Later. sub
Innocentio 3. Surius, Tom. 3. p. 753. Extrav. de Usuris. c. 18. Volaterranus,
lib. 2. Geog^. Cent. Magd. 13. c. 15.1285. Munsteri Cosm. l. 4. c. 12.22.23 f.
1061, 1062. Jacobus de Graffiis Decis. Aur. Tom. 2. l. 2. c. 23. sect. 39. etc.
c. 34.
Jews by several Laws, Canons were expressly prohibited Usury elsewhere in that
age, which they are totally forbidden to use of late years, and now in
Lithuania, Russia, Poland, and some other places where they reside, living only
by See Purchase Pilgrims. l. 9. c. 5.
Merchandise, Husbandry, and Manufactures. Yea Menasseh Ben-Israel himself in
his Humble Addresses newly printed, p. 22.23. writes thus: As for Usury, such
dealing is not the essential property of the Jews, for though in Germany there
be some indeed that practice it, yet the most part of them that live in Turkey,
Italy, Holland, and Hamburgh, being come out of Spaigne, they hold it See Mr.
Seldom, De Jure Not. and Gentiu^ juxta Discipl. Ebraeorum, l. 6. c. 9, 20. p.
723.
infamous to use it. Therefore the bare suppression of their Usury in England by
this Statute would no more induce them to banish themselves voluntarily out of
England, and leave all their houses, morgages, housholdstuff, amounting to a
vast sum, to the King, than out of other Countries where their usury was
restrained, then and since, seeing they might live as well without Usury in
England, by their Merchandises, Husbandry, and Manufactures, as in any other
Climate. 10ly, Sir Edward Cook himself contradicts himself herein, not only in
his 4th Institutes, p. 254. where writing of The Court of the Justices assigned
for the Government of the Jews; he says, But when the Jews were utterly
banished (as has been said) this Court ceased with them, in 18 E. 1. Anno Dom,
1290. (misprinted 1293.) but likewise in this very Chapter, his own subseqvent
words and Records in direct terms contradicting this opinion of his no less
than 5 times, which I wonder he observed not; I shall recite them at large to
undeceive his over-credulous Readers of the long Robe, who take his words and
works for Oracles (though in many things very full of gross mistakes
contradicted by his own Records, he cites, specially in his Chapter of See my
Levellers levelled and Plea for the Lords.
Parliament and Admiralty.)

2 Instit. p. 507.
And for that [writes he] they were odious both to God and Men, that they might
pass out of the Realm in safety, they made Petition to the King, that a certain
day might be prefixed to them to depart the Realm [it was prefixed by the King
and Parliament against their wills] to the end that they might have the Kings
writ to his Sheriffs for their safe conduct, and that no injury, molestation,
damage or greivance be offered to them in the mean time, (for which perchance
they did petition, though not for their departure hence.) One of which Writs we
will transcribe.

Rot. claus. 18 E. 1. m. 6. 11 Julii. The like writs, to other Counties, and
entitled, De Judaeis Regno Angliae exeuntibus.
Rex, Vic: G. Cum Judaeis Regni nostri universis Certum tempus praefixerimus a
regno illo transfretandi: ( therefore prefixed by the King h^mself, without
their Petition, and that for the banishment of them all out of the Realm.)
Nolentes quod ipsi per ministros nostros, aut alios quoscunque, aliter quam
fieri consuevit, indebite pertrectentur: Tibi praecipimus, quod per totam
Ballivam tuam, public proclamati, and firmiter inhiberi facias, ne quis eis
intra terminum praedictum, injuriam, molestiam, damnum inferat, seu gravamen.
Et cum contingat ipsos cum catallis suis, quae eis concessimus, versus parts
London, causa transfretationis suae, dirigere gressus suos, salvum and securum
conductum eis habere facias sumptibus eorum. Proviso, quod Judaei praedicti,
ante recessum suum, Vadia Christianorum quae penes se habent, illis quorum
fuerint, si ea acquietare voluerint, restituant, ut tenentur: Test Rege apud
Westmin. 18. die Julii, Anno 18 E. 1.

This Statute De Judaismo, was made at the Parl. 1.3. E. 1.
Parl. post festum Hilarii, Anno 18 E. 1. (a See p. 33. to ^1.
gross mistake.) At which Parliament the King had a 15 granted to him, pro
expulsione Iudaeorum [Therefore by his own confession they were expelled,
banished by the King and Parliament against their wills, and a fifteenth given
for it, as the former Historians note] And this writ was granted in July
following [in pursuit therefore of their Judgment of banishment, not upon
their petition] the King beginning his reign November. 16. For the Parliament
knew [a strange conceit of a Judge, for how could they certainly know it?] that
by banishing of Usury [though they banished it only, not the Jews:] the Jews
would not remain. And thus this Noble King by this means banished for ever
these infidel usurious Jews [Ergo, their persons, not their Usury only] the
number of which Jews, thus banished, was fifteen thousand and threescore.

Plac. Parl. post Pascha apud London, 21 E. 1. rot. 4.
We will here add a (Parliament) Record de Priore de Bridlington; thus.

Et quod praedictus Prior cognoscit, quod praedicta peonnia praed. Judaeo
debebatur, viz. 3 col. nec ei solvebatur Ante exilium Iudaeorum ( therefore by
this Parliamentary record but 3 years after, they were judicially banished by
Parliament, not voluntarily of themselves, no banishment in Law.) Et quicquid
remansit eorum, debitis aut catallis in regno post eorum Exilium ( again
repeated, as most certain) Domino regis suit. Confideratum est, quod Dom. Rex
recuperet pecuniam praedictam: and dictum est eidem Priori, quod non exeat
Villa antequam Domino Regi de praedicta pecunia satisfaciat: Et respondeat
Johannes Archiepiscopus Eborum, quia praecepit dicto Priori solvere Valetto suo
praedictam pecuniam in deceptionem Regis, contra Sacramentum and fidelitatem
suam Domino Regi datam. Idem in alio Rot. Ann. 27. E. 1. rot. 5.

Therefore by these 3 records resolutions cited by himself, the Jews were all
banished by sentence of Parliament, in such sort as our Historians record, and
not in his New sense alone, amounting but to a voluntary Recess. And to put
this beyond all future doubt or controversy, though the particular Act and
Parliament Roll for their Banishment be utterly lost, for ought I can find upon
diligent search and inquiry after it as are all other Parliament Rolls during
this Kings reign; yet there is a particular Roll still extant in the Tower, of
the particular sales of all the Jews Houses and Lands in London, York,
Canterbury, Northampton, and all other places of England where they resided,
made by King Edward the 1. in the 19 and 20 years of his reign, (the next years
after their exile) reciting, they were all escheated into the Kings hands By
the Jews banishment out of England, which Roll was thus indorsed in that age:
Charta de Judaismo, Patentes de domibus Iudaeorum concessis post eorum exilium
de Anglia, Annis 19, and 20. E. 1. The fifth Charter mentioned in the Roll of
19 E. 1. conteins this Kings Grant of the House of one Leo a Jew, in St.
Martins Parish in London. Domus Leonis, filu Cusae, filii Eliae Judaei, de
Parochia Sancti Martini, etc. per Exilium ejusdem Iudaei e Regno nostro tanquam
escheata in manu nostra existentis. After which follow near one hundred other
several charters of other particular Jews houses to particular Englishmen the
same year, in the self-same Roll, as escheated to the King, per Exilium ejusdem
Iudaei. After these, in the same Roll, follow several other Patents of this
King of the Jews houses, made in the 20 year of his reign, the first whereof is
this Kings grant, Domus Benedicti Iudaei, per Exilium ejusdem Iudaei ex Regno
nostro, tanquam escheata nostra, in manu nostra existentis. After which follow
several other Charters of other Jews Houses in the self same form. So that by
the testimony of all these Charters and Records, and likewise of the Patent
Roll of 19 E. 1. granting all the profits of the Jews houses Twice repeated:
See the 2 part of the Demurrer.
a tempore Exilii eorundem, to charitable uses (the two very next years after
their exile) the Jews were all immediately and legally banished out of England
against their wills, and all their houses there upon escheated into the Kings
hands, who upon this Title, made sales of them to Englishmen, recited in all
their Charters, the Rolls whereof I have lately perused in the Tower, where all
who please may examine them for their satisfaction herein.

By all these concurrent irrefragable Records and Testimonies it is apparent
[against Sir Edward Cooks grounlesse conceit.]

1. That all the Jews were then banished out of England, never to return again,
at the special instance and request of the Commons in two several Parliaments,
as an intolerable grievance and oppression under which they then groaned.

2. That the principle grounds of this their perpetual banishment were, their
Infidelity, Usury, Forgeries of Charters, clipping and falsifying of moneys, by
which they prejudiced the King and Kingdom, and much oppressed and impoverished
the people.

3. That this their banishment was so acceptable to all the people, who
oft-times pressed it in Parliament, that they gave the King a Fifth and
Fifteenth part of their movables, to speed and execute it.

4. That this their banishment was by the unanimous desire, judgment, edict
and decree both of the King and his Parliament, and not by the King alone: and
this Banishment, total of them all, and likewise final, Never to return into
England. Which Edict and Decree, though not now extant in our Parliament Rolls
(many of which are utterly lost) nor in our printed Statutes, yet it is
mentioned by all these Authorities and Records.

From whence I shall infer and conclude: That as by the fundamental Laws of
England: No Freeman and Natives of England can be justly banished or exiled out
of it, but by special judgment of Parliament, or by act of Parliament, (as
well as by the ancient Romans, Athenians, and Syracusians Laws, Lege Duodec^m
Tabularum hoc sancitum fuerat, ut de capite Civis Romani, NISI CENTURIATIS
COMITIIS, nihil decerni possit, sed nec tolli de Civitate, vel a solio Patrio
relegari, aut in exilium agi, nisi dicta causa and CENTURIATIS COMITIIS POSSET.
Atheniexsibus Clisthenes exilii legem tulit primus, qui haud multo post sua
lege damnatus paenas primus tulit. Ostracismon dixerunt, ab ostraco per quam
suffragia ferebant: qui mos talis erat, ut in testulis nomen civis, cujus
potentiam formidabant, Comitiis inscriberent; and cujus plures erant testae in
urnam conjectae, is DE CONCILII SENTENTIA, ab aris focisque projectus, ut a
Civium arceretur aspectu, 15 aut 10 Annorum, exilio solum vertebat: Quae
Comitia NISI SUPRA SEX MILLIA CIVIUM CONCILIO AD JUDICII DIEM CONVENIRENT,
nulla atque irrita erant. Alexander ab Alexandro, Genesis Dierum l. 3. c. 20. T.
Livii Hist. l. 26. c. 9. C. Taciti Ann. 13 and 4. Xenophon de Atheniensium
Republica Plutarchi Aristides, Nicias. Diodorus Siculus. Bibl. Hist. p. 308,
404. Arist. Polit. l. 3. c. 8, 9. Dr. Case Sphaera Civitate l. 3. c. 9. Aelian
variae, Hist. l. 13. c. 24.
no Citizen of Rome, Athens, Syracuse could be banished his City or Country,
but by the lawful judgment of the Senate and People in their Parliamentary
Assemblies and Senates, which were very numerous,) as is evident by Magna
Charta c. 29. The banishment of Sir Thomas Wayband Chief Justice of the Common?
Pleas, 19 E. 1. Rot. Pat. rot. 12. and these Jews then banished. Walsingham^,
Ypodig. Neustriae Hist. Ang. p. 52 75 95.
Exilium Hugonis le Dispenser patris and filii. Tottles Magna Charta, f. 50.51.
The double banishment of Peter de Gaverston out of England, Assensu communi
Procerum and Magnatum, and of the King in Parliament. Walsingham Hist. Angliae,
p. 71, 72. The Statute of 1. Edward the 3. c. 2. 11 Richard the 2. c. 2, 3, 4.
for the banishment of Belknap and other Judges into Ireland, 21 R. 2. Rot.
Parl. n. 16, 17. For the banishment of Thomas Arundel Archbishop of
Canterbury. The Statute of 35 El^z. c. 1. of and 39. Eliz. c. 4. For banishing
dangerous Sectaries, Rogues, out of the Realm, after conviction upon Indictment
only, not before (which could not be done by Law, before these Acts) Cooks 2
Institutes, f. 47. Mr. St. John's Speech against the Shipmoney Judges. p. 22. My
New Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny, p. 166, 167, 168. Walsingham H^st.
Angl^ae, p, 394. and other Testimonies: as also by 1 E. 3. c. 54. H. 4. c. 13.
The Statute for the pressing of Soldiers for Ireland. 17 Caroli Exact.
Collect. p. 435. The Mat. Paris 1256.1258. p. 872.934.55 Daniel p. 172.175.
Barons opposition and refusal to assist King Henry the 3 in their persons or
purses in his foraign wars in Apulia and elsewhere, as no way obliged
thereunto. The Petition and Protestation of the Lords and Commons in See my
Sovereign power of Parl. 6, 7, 8, etc.
Parliament against serving the King in person, or contribution to his wars in
Flanders, and other foraign parts. 25 E. 1. Walsingham Hist. p. 35, 37, 38.
Henry de Knyghton de Event. Angl, l. 3. c. 11.14 or in Gascoign, France,
Normandy, Scotland, or Ireland, Cook 2 Instit. p. 528. 4 H. 4. n. 48. 1 H. 5.
n. 17. 7 H. 5. n. 9.18. R. 2. n. 6. So none once banished the Realm by
Judgment or Act of Parliament, can, may or ought, by the fundamental and known
common Laws of England, to be restored and recalled again, but only by a like
judgment Act and Restitution in full Parliament, as is adjudged, declared,
resolved by the cases and Petitions of the two Spencers, and Pierce Gaveston,
Walsingh. Ypodig. Neust. p. 104, 101 152. Hist. Angl. p. 68.71, 72. Holinshed
p. 328. Speeds Hist. p. 674. The Printed Statute of 20 R. 2. c. 6. for the
restitution of Belknap, and the other exiled Judges, 28 E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 8.
to 14 and 29 E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 29. touching the repeal of the Judgment in
Parliament against Roger Mortimer Earl of March, 17 R. 2. Rot. Parl. n. 18. for
the pardon and restitution of the Justices banished into Ireland 21. R. 2. n.
55. to 71. for confirmation of the repeal of the exile of Hugh de la Spencer,
Father and Son, An. 15 E. 2. and the revocation of the repeal thereof in 1 E.
3. [A notable full record in point.] The Osbernus and. Mat. Parker in his life
Antonini Chron. Tit. 16. c. 6. f 163. Spelman. Council. p. 439.
revocation of Abbot Dunston his sentence of banishment by King Edgar and his
great Council held at Brentford. Anno Dom. 959. 3 H. 7.10. 4 H. 7.10. 1 H. 7,
4. 10 H. 7.22. b. 15 E. 3. Fitz. Petit. 2. 9 E. 2.23.24. 9 E. 4.1. b. with
sundry other Records for the repeals of Judgments and Acts of former
Parliaments, by the subsequent Judgments and Acts of other Parliaments, in
Cooks 4 Institutes, c. 1. and Ashes Tables. Parliament. 16. and Statutes 68.
Therefore the Jews being so long since by Judgment, Edict and Decree both of
the King and Parliament for ever banished out of England (never since repealed
or reversed) neither may, nor can by Law be readmitted, reduced into England
again, but by common consent and Act of Parliament, which I conceive they will
never be able to obtain.

I have now presented you with a true Historical and exact Chronological
Relation of the Jews first admission into England; (not in the time of the
Emperor Constantine the great) as some groundlesly would collect, from his
Socrates Scholast. l. 1. c. 9. Theod. l. 4. c. 10. Niceph. Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c.
25. Cent. Mag. 4. c. 3. col. 650, 651. Spelman. Council. p. 43.44
General Epistle to all Churches, touching the Decrees of the Council of Nice,
and the unanimous observation of the Feast of Easter, not after the Jewish
computation; wherein there is mention of the Churches in Britain, (as well as
in Rome, Africa, Spain, France, and other places) conc^^^ing with other
Churches herein; but not one syllable of any Jews therein, or in Britain then;
nor in any other particular places, but only these general passages against
Christians complying with them in their Paschal observation. Ac primum quidem
indigna res funt sanctissimum eum diem imitatione, atque consuetudine Iudaeorum
c^lebrare, qui manibus suis nefario flagitio contaminatis, non injuria quoque
animis sunt excaecati, homines scelerati. Quidni enim l^ceat, gente ea rejecta,
rectiore, verioreque ordine, quem a primo passionis di^ hucusque servavimus, ad
futura quoque saecula observationis hujus ritum transmittere? Item nihil nob^s
commune sit cum infestissma Judaeorum turba, etc. Quin and strict or ipsa atque
exactior ratio flagitare v^detur, NEQUA NOBIS CUM IUDAEORUM PERIURIO COMMUNIO.
From whence, as all may jui^ly resolve, that the blinded wicked Jews ought not
to be introduced amongst, nor to have communion with us, nor we with them: so
no rational man can thence infer, that there were any Jews at that time
observing their Jewish passover in Britain, of which I can find no syllable in
any Domestic or foreign Historians or Writers whatsoever; nor yet that they
inhabited here, or were here in the Briton, Saxon, or Danish Kings Reigns;
which if they had, some of our Historians, Synods, Decrees, and Laws in those
ages would have mentioned it, (as well as the Sea Leges Wisigothorum, l. 12.
Tit. 2.3. Surius Council. Tom. 2.3. Hispaniae Illustratae, Tom. 5.
Gothish, Spanish Histories, Laws, Councils and Constitutions, where they
resided) in which there is not one syllable of them, but only in the forecited
Law foisted in amongst the Confessors, to which doubtless it was puny:) but in
William the Conquerours reign: Together with, their ill deportments,
misdemeanors, sufferings, massacres, servile condition, and manifold popular
tumults against them, during all the time of their residence in England, and
final banishment out of it, never to my knowledge, collected Only I find John
Stow in his Survey of London, p. 288.289. has collected some of them very
imperfectly.

And Purchase in his Pilgrimage, l. 2. c. 10. Sect. 7.


into one entire History before. The serious consideration whereof, will, in my
weak judgment, sufficiently satisfy, convince the whole English Nation, that
they have just grounds and reasons, in point of piety, of policy, never to
re-admit them more into our Island; and likewise resolve the very Jews
themselves, that they have little cause or reason at all to desire to re-plant
themselves in England, where their ancestors in times past, sustained so many
miseries, massacres affronts, oppressions, fleecings upon all occasions, and
themselves can expect little better usage for the future. To this principal
part of my undertaking, for fuller satisfaction, I shall hereunto subjoyn a
Taste of such Laws, Scriptures, Reasons, as seem strongly to plead, yea conclude
against their readmission into England, at least in that latitude and freedom
as formerly they there enjoyed, and now See Menasseth Ben-Israel his Humble
Addresses.
petition for.

As 1. To erect new Synagogues, Temples amongst us, or turn any of our
Churches, Chapels into Synagogues, for the free public exercise of their
Judaism, Jewish Worship, Customs, Religion, See Cent. Magd. 2. to 13. c. 15. in
each: Antonini Chro. pars 2. Tit. 16. c. 1.
diametrically contrary to the Gospel, Person, Kingdom, Priesthood, Offices,
Mediation, Redemption of our Lord Jesus Christ, which they thereby professedly
deny, renounce, as false and fabulous.

2ly. To set up a Jewish Corporation or Fraternity amongst us in our Cities and
Corporations, distinct and separate from the English, subject to their own
immediate peculiar Officers and Judges, as heretofore.

3ly. To purchase Houses, Habitations, Rents, Lands exercise Merchandises and
all sorts of Trades, and Manufactures amongst us, as free Denizens or
Merchants, upon such terms and qualifications as shall be indulged to them.

1. For our Laws and Statutes, these following, make directly or obliquely, by
way of necessary consequence, against their readmission.

1. For their Jewish Synagogues, Worship, Sacraments, Religion; these ancient,
pious Laws of our Saxon and Danish Kings (made in their great Parliaments and
Councils before the Jews first coming into England) strongly oppose their
admission now.

As namely the Chron. Johannis Bromton col. 829.901.908. Lambardi Archaion, and
Spelman. Council. p. 376.513.515, 521, 522, 549, 550, 599. Mr. Jo. Seldom ad
Eadmerum Notae, p. 189. makes this one of the Conq. Laws too. Statuimus
imprimis super omnia, Unum Deum per totu^ Regnum nostru^, venerari; unam fidem
Christi semper inviolatam custodiri etc. Taken out of these Kings Laws.
Laws of King Alfred and Guthern, Lex 1.2. of King Ethelred in the Council of
Aenham, c. 1.3.27, 29, 30. of Habam, c. 1. with the Laws of King Knute the
Dane, Lex 1.27, 28. All which enact, That the only true God and our Lord be
loved, worshipped in all ages by all the people, with all their might: the one
Christian, holy Catholic faith, orthodoxly kept, and the Churches of God to be
diligently frequented throughout the Realm. That all Paganism and false
Religions be renounced both in words and deeds; That who ever wickedly
resists the Laws of Christ, shall be grievously fined and put to death: and,
that all men should diligently seek out by all means; Ut recta Christi rel^gio
maxim provehatur; That the right religion of Christ might be most of all
advanced: obtesting all Ecclesiastical and secular persons again and again;
most earnestly to keep the sincere faith unanimously in the true God, and the
right Christian faith in a right manner; diligently to hear the Teachers of
Gods word; studiously to follow their Doctrine and Precepts; to maintain peace
and tranquillity in the Church of God, and there diligently to pour forth their
prayers. All which particulars exclude all Jewish Synagogues, and Judaisme, and
are of perpetual force, being grounded on the very Law of God.

Moreover King Spelman. Council. p. 553.566.
Cnute his Ecclesiastical Laws [made by the advice of his wise men, to be
observed throughout all England] prohibited, That no Christian should be sold
or sent out of the Realm, or banished amongst those who had not as yet embraced
the faith in Christ, lest per adventure those Souls should perish at any time,
which our Lord Jesus Christ had redeemed with his own blood and life. If
Christians for this cause ought not to be sent, sold or banished amongst Jews
and Infidels, much more then ought not Infidel Jews, with their Jewish
Synagogues, Religion, Ceremonies, to be now introduced amongst us Christians,
to the hazard of many Christian Souls redeemed by Christ's blood.

2. All the Statutes concerning Uniformity of Common Se^vice, and
administration of the Sacraments, as 1 Ed. 6. c. 1, 2. 2 Ed. 6. c. 1. 6 Ed. 6.
c. 1.1 Eliz. c. 2.23 Eliz. c. 1.35 Eliz. c. 1.2. [most of them still in force,
being never legally repealed] do fully and directly oppugn the introduction of
any J^wish Synagogues, Service, Sacraments, Worship, Ceremonies, with the use
of them in any place within our Realm.

3. The Statutes of 3. E. 6. c. 10.13 Eliz. c. 2.23 Eliz. c. 1.28 Eliz. c. 2.6,
35 Eliz. c. 1.3. Jac. c. ^. against Popish Recusants, Seminary Priests,
Jesuits, Friars, Masse-Books, Agnus Dei's, Popish Books, Superstitions: for
eventing the withdrawing of the Subjects of this Realm, from the public
Ordinances, Sacraments and Religion here established; and for speedy banishing
all Seminary Priests and Jesuits, and keeping them perpetually out of the
Realm (upon this account, amongst others) though professing Christ, Christian
Religion, and agreeing with us in all Articles of the Creed, and most
fundamental points of Christianity: Must in Substance, Law, Reason, (in this
regard) much more perpetually exclude, abolish all Jews, Jewish Priests;
Rabbis, Synagogues, worship, Ceremonies, Superstitions, out of our Dominions,
being far more dishonorable to Christ, opposite to our Christian Religion, and
destructive to the peoples souls, if once admitted, then any Jesuits, Seminary
Priests, Friars, Popish Recusants, or any Romish Masses; Superstitions
whatsoever. And if the Jewish Priests, Judaism, and Jewish Ceremonies, may be
now set up and practiced publicly amongst us, notwithstanding all these
Statutes, then much more Mass Priests, Masses, Popery, and Prelacy, by the
self-fame reason, justice, equity.

To these I might annex all the late Ordinances for the Directory, The solemn
League and Covenant, and for Suppressing, punishing of Heresy and Blasphemy:
therefore of Judaism, which is both Heresy and Blasphemy, and Jewish
assemblies, the very Synagogues of S^tan; and Jews great blaspemers, by Christ's
own resolution, Rev. 2.9. c. 3.9. Acts 18.6. Romans 2.21. With the late printed
Article 37.
Instrument of Government, which although it allows not only toleration, but
protection to all Sects and Religions, professing faith in God through Jesus
Christ, (though differing from the Doctrine and Discipline publicly held forth
in the Nation) except only to Popery and Prelacy: yet certainly it can no ways
extend to the toleration or protection of Jews, and their John 4.3 2 John 7.
Antichristian blasphemies against Christ himself, and the Gosple; seeing they
are so far from professing faith in Jesus Christ, that See Petrus Alphonsus
adversus Judaeos, Antonini Chro. pars 2. Tit. 16. c. 12. Agobardus de
Insolentia Judaeorum, and Judaicis superstitionibus, and Cent. Magdeburg. 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. c. 14, 15. where this is largely proved, and
Judaisme refuted.
they utterly renounce, and professedly decry him to be the true Savior and
Messiah of the world, rejecting the whole New Testament and Doctrine of the
Gospel: and so by consequence, are necessarily secluded by this Instrument, and
Oath for its observation, from practicing their Jewish worship, Ceremomies, or
erecting any Synagogues in our Nation for that purpose.

2ly. Though the Sea Brook and Ash. Corporation and Prerogative.
Kings of England by the Law and their Prerogative, may in sundry cases erect
New Corporations of their Subjects by their Charters only: yet notwithstanding,
no Corporation or Fraternity of Jews, being mere Aliens, may, can, or ought to
be erected in England, by the Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of the Realm,
but only by full consent of the Nation in Parliament, by special Acts of
Parliamennt; it being one of the greatest Intrenchments that can be upon the
English Nations Rights, Liberties, Customs, privileges, profit, and a
violation of all the former Charters, Previledges, Rights, Franchises,
confirmed to them by the great Charter of England, (forty times since ratified
by new Acts of Parliament.) This is evident by the Statutes of Magna Charta, c.
9.37. 34 E. 1. c. 4. 1 E. 3. c. 9. 14 E. 3. c. 1. 1. H. 4. c. 1. 2. H. 4. c. 1.
7. H. 4. c. 1. 9. H. 4. c. 1. 13. H. 4. c. 1. 3. H. 5. c. 1. 2. H. 6. c. 1.
compared with 2 E. 3. c. 9. 27. E. 3. c. 1. to 29. 28 E. 3.13.15, 39. E. 3. c.
7, 19 H. 7. c. 12, and all other Acts for the Sea Rastal Staple.
Staple and Styliard: and with 3. E. 4. c. 6. 1. R. 3. c. 9. 14 H. 8. c. 2. 21
H. 8. c. 16. 22 H. 8. c. 8. 32 H. 8. c. 16. touching Artificers, M^rchants and
Aliens.

3ly. The Sea my Sovereign power of Parliaments part 2. p. 76, 77, 78.
preambles of the Statute of Merton, 20 H. 3. 3 E. 1. with c. 17.48. 6 E. 1. of
Quo Warranto, and of Gloucester, 13 E. 1. 12 E. 2. of York, 9, 10, 14, 15, 25,
28, 36, 37. E. 3.1.3, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 21. R. 2.1, 2, 4, 6. H. 4.1,
8, 10, 12. 36. H. 6. 18 E. 3. c. 1, 2, 3. R. 2. Rot. Parl. n. 36, 40. 6 H. 6.
c. 5. and other Acts, declare and resolve. That the Kings of England by their
Oath and Duty, and the Lords and Commons in Parliament, are all obliged by
their trusts and our Laws, to advance, uphold, maintain and defend the welfare,
wealth, safety of the Church, Realm, Subjects, People of England, and to
prevent, redress, suppress, remove by wholesome Laws and Ordinances, all
Grievances, Mischiefs, Damages, Inconveniences, Disinherisons contrary
thereunto; it being a fundamental Maxim both in our Laws and Law Books, SALUS
POPULI SUPREMA LEX: which the Army Officers in their Declaration of 16 November.
1648. and Mr. John Pym, in his Speech against Strafford, 12 April 1641. p. 3.
etc. printed by the Commons special Order, much insist on. Moreover, it is
another Maxim in our Law, Cooks Reports l. 10. f. 55.
Summa ratio est, quae pro religione faecit. Now the admission of the Jews into
England, as appears by the Statute de Judaismo, and premised Histories, is no
way consistent with the welfare, profit, wealth, safety of the Church, Realm,
Subjects, People, or Religion of England, and will be an extraordinary damage,
mischief, grievance, inconvenience, and disinherison to them all. Therefore
prohibited, enacted against by the general scope of all these Laws and Maxims,
and no ways to be admitted.

4ly. The Jews heretofore in England, and still in all See Cent. Mag. 3. to 13.
c. 14. Alberti Argentinensis Chron. and de Gest^s Bertoldi, p. 148.149.178.
other parts, being most grievous Clippers, coyners, forgers of money, Usurers,
Extortioners, and the greatest cheators, cozeners, Impostors in the world, in
all their Merchandises and Manufactures whatsoever: upon this account they are
and ought to be still excluded, and never readmitted amongst us, by the
provisions of See Rastals Abridgement title, Artificers, Aliens, Money,
Treason, Drapery, etc.
all our Laws, yet in force, prohibiting clipp^ng, coining, usury, extortion,
frauds, deceipts, in any Merchandises or Manufactures whatsoever; unless we
intend to have them now more practiced by them and others among us, than ever
heretofore. The rather, because they were never admitted free Trading and
Habitation in England by See Rastals Abridgment, Tit. Merchant^ and Merchandise.
any of our Laws touching Alien Merchants, and Artificers free Traffic amongst
us, from the time of their forementioned banishment, till this present, under
the Name and Notion of Jews, Foraign Merchants, or Artificers. And therefore not
to be adm^tted to those new desired privileges, from which all these forecited
Laws (in my weak Judgment) with the former old Parliamentary Judgment, and
Edict, for their perpetual banishment, in Law, Justice, Conscience, still
debar them re-admittance, til repealed; and they (if ever readmitted against
all these Acts and Statutes) must be introduced, re-setled by special Acts of
Parliament, which no English Parliament (in probability) will ever indulge unto
them, as the peoples general present declamations in all places, against their
endeavored introduction, prognostic. And thus much I thought meet to inform
the Nation, touching those Laws and Statutes which in my poor opinion)
directly, or by consequence oppose their readmission, and refute those Lawyers
misinformation, who confidently averred, there is no Law of England at all
against it, if Mr. Nigh did truly inform me.

2. For Scriptures, these Texts may resolutely engage us against their
readmission,

1. Matthew. 5.13. Luke 14.34, 35. Salt is good: but if the salt have lost its
savor, w^erewith shall it be seasoned? It is neither fit for the land, nor yet
for the dunghill, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men. This
is the condition of the Jews, who have lo^t both their Savior and their favor
too. Therefore not fit for our land, nor yet for our dunghils; but to be kept
and cast out from amongst us, and trodden under foot of all true Christian men,
whiles unbeliever s.

2. 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema Maranatha. That is, separated and cast out from all Christian society
and communion until the day of Judgment; the highest kind of Jewish
Excommunication. Now the Jews are such, who do not only not love, See. Cent.
Magd. 3. to 13. c. 14, 15.
but deny, defy, and hate our Lord Jesus Christ in the highest degree.
Therefore to be excommunicated and secluded from our Christian communion and
cohabitation amongst us, to which they can pretend no right.

3. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, etc. Be ye not unequally yoaked together with unbelievers;
for, what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what
communion has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial?
and what part has he that believes with an Infidel? and what agreement has
the Temple of God with Idols? etc. Wherefore come out from among them, and be
ye separate says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you.
The unconverted Jews, are both Unbelievers, Infidels, Darkness, Belialists, and
the very Synagogue of Satan, as the Scripture resolves them, Acts 14.1. Mar.
6.6. Romans 11.20.23.32. Heb. 4.6.11. John 1.5. Mat. 8.12. Rev. 2.9. 1 Thessalonians.
2.14, 15, 16. Therefore we Christians ought not to be unequally yoaked, or to
have any fellowship, communion, agreement, part or mixture with them; much less
to receive them into our land and bosoms, from whence they were formerly spued
out, but to keep our selves separated from amongst them, lest God reject us, as
he has done them.

4. 2 John 6.7. This is the commandment that ye have heard from the beginning,
that ye should walk in it: For many deceivers are entered into the world, Who
confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh: This is a Deceiver and an
Antichrist. and v. 10, 11. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the
doctrine of Christ, has not God: he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he
has both the Father and the Son. If there come any unto you, and bring not
this Doctrine receive him not into your house, neither bid him, God speed: for
he that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. The Jews are
these Deceivers and Antichrists, who confess not, but absolutely deny, that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh and they abide not in the Doctrine of Christ;
and if they come unto us, they will not bring this Doctrine to us, but the
quite contrary. Therefore we ought not to receive them into our Dominions or
Houses, nor bid or wish them Godspeed, in returning to dwell amongst us. And if
any do the contrary, they are and shall be partakers of their evil deeds.

5. Tit. 1.10, 11, 13, 14. For there are many unruly and vain talkers and
deceivers, Especially they of the Circumcision; whose mouths must be stopped,
who subvert whole houses reaching things which they ought not, for filthy
lu^res sake. Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the
faith: Not giving heed to Jewish Fables, and commandments of Men that turn
from the Truth. I^ the circumcised Jews were such unruly Decei^ers, ^educers,
and subverters of whole hou^es, even in the Apostles own days, and their
Jewish fables then did turn so many from the truth, to prevent which, their
mouths were then to be stopped, With what color of Christianity, piety,
conscience, can we call them in amongst us now, in these times of fearful, and
almost universal Apostasy from the truth, and give them leave to set up their
Synagogues, and open their blasphemous mouths here in England, even when many
orthodox Ministers mouths are quite stopped up in public and private, without
hearing, to the great Joy both of Jesuits and Jews, (even whiles their
readmission amongst us is in agitation) when less dangerous seducers are
freely permitted to ramble abroad in all places, and have subverted whole
houses, parishes, and almost Cities and Counties too, to Gods dishonor, and
the danger of the peoples souls.

6. 1 Thessalonians. 2.14, 15, 16. For ye also have suffered l^ke things of your
Countrymen, even as they have of the Jews: who both killed the Lord Jesus, and
their own Prophets, and have persecuted (or chased out) us, and they please not
God, and are contrary to all men: Acts 4.17, 18, c. 5.28, 29.40. c. 13.45. Let
those who now imi^a^e them, in ejecting and silencing Ministers from preaching,
consider and repent of this Jewish crime.
Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up
their sins always: For the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. This Gospel
character of the Jews, expressing their transcendent malice to the Lord Jesus,
their own Prophets, the very Apostles themselves, the Gentiles, with their
contrariety to God, and all other men, and Gods wrath upon them for it to the
uttermost: administer plenty of invincible arguments, against our receiving
them in again amongst us, lest they bring along with them the extremity of Gods
wrath upon the whole English Nation, who have enough thereof already, and are
likely to feel more of it, if they really imitate or play the Jews, and
silence, cast out their own Prophets, Ministers, Countrymen in these and other
particulars.

7. Acts 18.5, 6, 7. Paul was pressed in Spirit, and testified to the Jews that
Jesus was the Christ. And when they opposed themselves and blasphemed, he
shook his raiment, and said unto them, your blood be upon your own heads: I am
clean, from henceforth, I will go unto the Gentiles. And he departed thence
and entered into a certain man's house named Justus, who worshipped God. etc.
compared with Acts 13.44. to 52. The next Sabbath Day came almost the whole
City together to hear the word of God: but when the Jews saw the multitude,
they were filled with envy, and spoke against those things that were spoken by
Paul, contradicting and blaspheming: Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and
said, it was necessary the word of God should first have been spoken unto you;
but because ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life; Lo we turn to the Gentiles; For so has the Lord commanded us, etc. And
the word of the Lord was published throughout all the Region. But the Jews
stirred up the devout and honorable women, and the chief men of the City, and
raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their
coasts, but they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came unto
Iconium: See the like, Acts 17.5. to 16. c. 19.8, 9, 10. c. 28.25. to 31. This
malicious carriage and persecution of the Jews, even against the Apostles
themselves, their Doctrine, and the Gentiles salvation, and casting them
maliciously out of their coasts; with their Separation from them, and turning
themselves wholly to the Gentiles upon this account, by Gods own command;
demonstrates, what all Gods faithful Ministers, and we Christian Gentiles must
expect from them now: and that being formerly cast out of our Coasts by our
Ancestors for their infidelity, crucifying of Christ in his Members, and such
like misdemeanors, and so being totally separated in cohabitation and communion
from us, we neither may nor ought now to resume them into our Land, Bosoms or
Communion again, upon any pretenses whatsoever. The rather for that Martin
Luther on Mich. 4.1.2. and Mr. Samuel Purchase in his l. 2. c. 21. p. ^13.
Pilgrimage inform us, That sooner than the Jews would endure that the
Gentiles, whom in their daily prayers they curse and revile, should have any
part with them in their Messiah, and be accounted coheirs thereof, they would
cruc^fy ten Messiahs, yea if it were ^ossible would do to death God himself,
with all the Angels and creatures else, although they should therefore undergo
a thousand Hells.

8. When God was bringing the Jews into the promised Land which he gave them to
inherit, he gave them these special commands. Thou shall driv^ the Inhabitants
of the land out before thee Exodus 23.31, 32, 33. c. 34.1. to 17. Deuteronomy. 7.2. to
9. Jos. 23.3. to 15. Judge. 2, 3, 4.
Thou shall make no Covenant with them* nor with their Gods they shall not
dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me, and it be a snare in the
midst of thee. Thou shall make no Covenant with them, nor show mercy to them,
Neither shall thou make marriages with them. Thy Daughter thou shall not give
unto his Son, nor his Daughter shall thou take unto thy Son, for they will turn
away thy Sons from following me, that they may serve other Gods, so will the
anger of the Lord be kindled against thee, and destroy thee suddenly; If ye do
in any wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant of these Nations, and go in
unto them, and they to you, know for a certain, that the Lord will no more
drive out any of these Nations before you; but they shall be snares and traps
unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until you perish
from the good Land which the Lord your God gives you: But thus ye shall deal
with them, ye shall destroy their Altars, and break down their Images, and cut
down their groves, etc. for thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God. Now,
the not driving out of these Nations by the Israelites from amongst them,
according to the^e command, o^ God, is charged (...) special sin upon them by
God, ent^ce^ them to Idolatry, and brought his severe wrath upon them, ^udges
1.27. to 36. c. 2.2, 3, 12, 13, 19, 20* 21, 22, 2^. and is thus expressed by
the Psalmist Psalm. 106.14. to 43. They did not destroy the N^tions concern^ng
^^^m t^^ L^^d commanded them but were mingled amongst the heathen, and learned
their works, and they served their ^^ol^, which were a snare unto them, yea
they sacrificed their Sons and Daughters unto Devils, and shed innocent blood,
even the blood of their Sons and Daughters, whom they sacr^ficed unto the Idols
of Canaan, and their Land was defiled with b^ood. Therefore was the wrath of
the Lord kindled against his people, insomuch that he abhorred his own
inheritance, and he gave them into the hands of the Heathen, and they that
hated them were Lords over them; their enemies also oppressed them, they were
brought unto subjection under their hands. The morality, ground and equity of
which precepts, as they justify our Ancestors expulsion of the Jews out of
England, with their adulterous worship, Ceremonies and Synagogues heretofore.
So I conceive they strongly oblige all English Christians (especially after our
late solemn League and Covenant) to seclude and keep them out from re-entring,
coming in, mingling, and dwelling among us now, for fear they draw the
self-same sad effects, and bring down the same, or like heavy judgments of God
upon us, as these Scriptures threatened, and God himself inflicted on the
Israelites for transgressing them.

In brief, the Parables of the Vineyard and Husbandmen, the King going into
foraign parts, and Marriage-Supper, Mat. 21.33. to 46. c. 22.2. to 11. c.
23.21. to the end. Mar. 12.1. etc. Luke 19.12. to 28. c. 20.9. etc.
particularly applied to the Jews, and notably setting out their desperate
malice against our Saviors person, Kingdom, Government, Ordinances, Ministers,
Gospel, and his rejection of them for it. Together with Romans 16, 17, 18.31.32.
1 Cor. 5.4. etc. Phil. 3.2.3. Mat. 7. 15. c. 16.7.11.12.17 Col. 2.8. 2 Pet.
3.17. c. 2.1 etc. 7, 8.20, 21, 22. 2 Timothy 3.1. to 10. c. 2.16, 17 Titus
3.10.11. Rev. 2.9.14. Heb. 6.4. to 9. c. 16.26. to 32. Ph. 4.2, 3. Gal.
4.29.30. will all furnish us with sundry arguments against their readmission
amongst us, as likewise Prove. 9.27.28. Amos 3.3. Psalm. 101.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Psalm. 119.104. Psalm. 139.21, 22. Numb. 8.13. Numb. 16.26, 27. Psalm. 6.8. Psalm.
119.115. Psalm. 139.16. which every good Christian may peruse at leisure, and
apply as he sees cause.

3. For Reasons against their readmission into England, they are diverse,
Theological, Political, and mixed of both.

1. God himself by his Prophets, Son, Apostles, before their rejection, while
they were his special, peculiar chosen people, treasure, above all other
Nations of the world, most frequently complains of them, and the generality of
the Nation Deuteronomy. 9.6, 7, 13. c. 31.17. Exodus 32.9. c. 33.3.5. Psalm. 78.8, 9.
Jer. 3.6. to 22. c. 5.23. c. 8.5. c. 2.11. c. 23.14 Isay 3.9. c. 24.5. Ezech.
2.3. to 9. c. 3.26, 27. c. 12.2. to 26. c. 17.12. c. 16, 46, 56, 57 c. 24.3. c.
44.4. Hos. 4.16. c. 5.2. c. 6, 7. c. 11.7. Mat. 3.7. c. 11.23, 24. c. 23.33.
Acts 7.51, 52. and other texts. Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. Isay. c. 1. and 9. and 14.
and 29. and 32. Jer. c. 1. to 30. Lam. c. 1. to 5. Ezech. c. 2. to 25. Hos. c.
1. to 11. Joel, c. 1. and 2. Amos, c. 2. to 5. Mal. c. 1. and 2. Zeph. 1. Zach.
11.2. Kings 17.2. Chron. 36. Mat. 24. Lev. 22. Egesippus, Eusebius, and others.
That they were a most rebellious, disobedient, gainsaying, stiff-necked,
impenitent, incorrigible, adulterous, whorish, impudent, froward, shameless,
perverse, treacherous, revolting, backsliding, idolatrous, wicked, sinfall,
stubborn, untoward, hardhearted, hypocritical, foolish, sottish, brutish,
stupid, ungrateful, Covenant breaking Nation, House, People; a seed of evil
doers, a generation of Vipers, doing evil greedily with both hands, according
to all the Nations that were round about them; as bad, nay worse than Sodom or
Gomorrha, casting all Gods Laws, Ordinances, behind their backs, trampling ^em
under their feet, rejecting, forsaking, despising God himself, provoking him
continually to his face, grieving him to the heart, forgetting him days without
number, always erring in their hearts, and disobeying his voice, and the like:
And dare, can we then harbor such a Nation as this, and bring them in amongst
us now they are worse in all these resects than ever?

2. God himself has denounced against, and inflicted upon the Jews, greater,
severer Woes, Judgments, Calamities Dispersions, Devastations, Captivities,
Desolations, Curses, Plagues of all kinds, for their sins, rebellions,
impenitencies, and to on, their Nation, Kingdom, Country, Cities, than to or
on any other Nations, Kingdoms, People, and that more frequently than against
any other: Swearing against them in his wrath, that they should never enter
into his rest, Psalm. 95.11. Hebr. 3.10, 11, 18. stiling them, the generation of
his wrath; Jer. 7.29. and averting of them, that wrath is come upon them to the
utermost, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15.16. And can or shall we then receive such a Nation as
this into our bosoms now, without entertaining, and pulling upon us, that wrath
and these curses of God which are denounced against, and do now pursue and
accompany them in all places?

3. The Jews were always heretofore a very murmuring, mutinous, discontented,
rebellious, seditious people for the most part, not only against God, but their
Exodus 15.24. c. 16.2. etc. Number. c. 14. c: 16. c. 20. c. 21. 2 Samuel 1.15 to 21.
2 Kings c. 12, c. 15. c. 16. 2 Kings c. 9. c. 10. c. 12.20. c. 14.17. c.
17.21.23. c. 23. c. 20. c. 27. 2. Chron. c. 23. c. 36. Ezech. 17.13. to 24.
lawful Governors, Kings, Priests, Prophets, often tumul^uously rebelling
against, disobeying, revolting from, deposing, murdering their Kings, and
Sovera^gns, and contemning, disobeying, slaying, killing, stoning the Prophets,
Messengers whom God sent unto them. Whence God himself gives us this black
Character of them, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. And the Lord God of their Fathers sent
unto them by his Messengers, rising up betimes, and sending, etc. But they
mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets,
until the wrath of the Lord rose against his people, till there was no remidy,
etc. And our Savior Christ a worse: Lu. 13.33, 34. It is impossible (or cannot
be) that a Prophet perish out of Jerusalem: Mat. 23.27. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
thou that killest the prophets, and stonest those that are sent unto thee!
Which St. Stephen thus seconds, Acts 7.51.52. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised
in heart and ears; ye do always resist the holy, Ghost as your fathers did, so
do ye? W^^ch of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted; and they have
slain them which have showed them before of the coming of the Just One, of whom
ye have been now the betrayers and murderers. Which St. Paul also confirms in
the forecited observable Text of the 1 Thessalonians. 2.14, 15, 16. And can we then in
point of piety or policy, even in these distracted, rebellious, mutinous times,
entertain, or bring in such a Nation, People as this amongst us? Or can our
despised Ministry in this age, when they can hardly convert, keep any of their
own English from seduction, have any hopes of reclaiming or converting such a
mutinous, ever rebellious, stiff-necked people, who have thus abused, murdered,
stoned their own Prophets in former times, though immediately sent unto them by
God himself? and will quickly teach the English to do the like, who already
imitate them in too many places.

4. Mat. 21.33. to 36. c. 26. and 27. and 28. Mar. 14 and 15. Lu. 22. and 23.
John 5.16.18. c. 7.1. c. 9.22. c. 10.31, etc. c. 11.8.55. c. 18 and 19. c.
20.19 Act. 2.23.36. c. 3.13, 14, 15.
They were the greatest haters, revilers, persecuters, blasphemers, betrayers,
and the only murderers, crucifiers of our 1 These. 2.14, 15.
Lord Jesus Christ himself, and his Act. 4.1. to 23. c. 5, 5.17. to 42. c. 6.9.
to 15. c. 7. c. 8. v. 9. c. 12.3. c. 13.42. to the end. c. 14.2.4, 5.19. c.
17.6. to 17. c. 18.12, etc. c. 21. to c. 27. c. 28.17, 18, 19. 2 Cor. 11.24. 1 Thessalonians. 2.14, 15, 16.
Apostles whiles on earth, as the Evangelists, Acts, and other Scriptures
testify. And although Christ and his Apostles miraculously converted some
thousands of them by their preaching and miracles, to the faith of Christ,
Acts, 2.41. c. 21.20. Yet the generality and body of the Nation continued still
blind, obstinate, under the very most powerful Ministry of the Prophets,
Apostles and Christ himself, being then and ever since that time, judicially
and penally given up to a blind, obdurate, obstinate, impenitent, stupid heart
and spirit, a reprobate sense, a cauterized conscience, and divorced, rejected,
reprobated, broken off, cast off by God himself, proclaiming them to be no more
his people, to be reprobate silver, because he has rejected them; to make way
for the calling, conversion, salvation of the Gentiles, whom he has ingrafted,
called, and taken into special Covenant in their stead, as is evident by Acts
13.45, 46, 47. c. 19.9. c. 28.25, 26, 27, 28. Isa. 8.14. to 17. c. 10.22, 23.
c. 29.8. to 15. c. 65.2, 3, 9. c. 53. 1. Jer. 6.10. c. 7.29. c. 14. 19 Lam.
5.22. Hos. 1.9.10. c. 4.6. Mat. 13.13, 14, 15. c. 21.24. to 46. c. 22.2. to 11.
Mar. 4.12. Luke 2.34. c. 8.10, etc. John 9.39.41. c. 12.37. to 44. Romans 9.24.
to 33. c. 10.16.19.20, 21. c. 11.5.7. etc. 1 Thessalonians. 2.14, 15, 16. Heb. 10.26.
to 31. compared together. Which Texts conjoined with Lu. 18.8. Mat. 24.9. to
15. Joh. 1.11. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 1.3. to 10. c. 4.3, 4. 2 Pet. 2.1.2.
etc. c. 3.3.1. John 2.18. Jude 18. in my judgment unanswerably refute, that
commonly received opinion, of the calling and conversion of the whole Nation
and Body of the Jews in these latter days to the faith of Christ, and such
glorious Gospel times in the last age of the world, which some have
over-confidently asserted, and now insist on, as the chiefest argument for
calling in the Jews amongst us at this season, as if they were able more
effectually to persuade, convert them, then either their own Prophets, or
Christ himself and his Apostles, and remove that veil of obstinate blindness,
and obduration, which God has laid upon their hearts and eyes, to this very
end, that they might neither see, hear, nor understand, nor be converted, that
he might heal them. Acts 28.25, 26, 27, 28.

5. God himself, (especially for their rejection of Jesus Christ, and refusing
him to be their King to rule and reign over them) has utterly extirpated and
ejected the Jews out of their own promised land, which himself bestowed on them
for their peculiar Genesis 15.7.8. c. 26.5. Nu. 26.54.55. c. 27 7.8. c. 32.18.19.
c. 33.55. Josh. c. 14. to 20. Ps. 78.55. Ps. 105.11.1 Kings 8.36. Ezech. 48.29.
inheritance, and habitation, and settled them in actual possession thereof by
an outstretched hand, and power: yea, scattered, dispersed them into other
Nations, like chaff before the wind, without any fixed habitation, according to
the ancient comminations and curses long since denounced against, and now fully
executed upon them. Deuteronomy. 28.63, 64, 65. etc. Levit. 26.33.36, 37, 38, 39.
Deuteronomy. 4.27. c. 32, 26. 1 Kings 14, 15. Neh. 1.8. Psalm. 106.27. Jer. 9.16. and
17.24. c. 18.17. c. 49.32.36. Ezech. 5.2. to 13. c. 12.14, 15. c. 20.23. c.
22.15. Daniel 12.7. Zach. 1.21. Ezech. 11.16, 17. c. 6.8.17.21. which
scattering, is principally intended only amongst Heathen Nations, where they
should be totally deprived of all Gods Ordinances, and means of salvation, and
where they shall serve other Gods, which neither they nor their Fathers have
known, even wood and stone; as these texts expressly resolve and import.
Therefore, to receive them into, and settle them in our Christian Kingdom and
Island, whereunto they have no title, nor color of inheritance, which God has
See Acts 17.28. Exodus 36 43. Number. 20 14. to 22. c. 21.21, 22, 23. Deuteronomy 2.26. to
32. Judge. 11.12. to 29. Deuteronomy 2.9 2 Chronicles. 20.10. Genesis 34.20. Number. 26.54. Deuteronomy.
26.9. Ezech. 36.5. Exodus 20.17. Gal. 4.30.31.
appointed to the English alone for their portion, (and therefore these Aliens
may not invade or intrude themselves into it, without the whole Nations general
consent) is in some sense to cross these sacred Texts, and neither convenient
for us to grant, nor for them to request, being already over-stored with Native
Englishmen.

6. Since the Jews crucifixion of our Savior Jesus Christ himself, and their
extirpation and dissipation for it, they have often times in sundry places, ages,
in high contempt and despite of his person, and passion, maliciously acted it
over and over again in representation, not only, by Athanasius de passione
Imaginis Christi: Cent Magd. 4. c. 13. col. 1445. Cent. 6. col. 825. Cent 8.
col. 122. Cent. 10. col 633. cent. 11. c. 657. Fasciculus Temporum. f. 56.
Sigeberti Chro. Hermannus Sched^l. Chron. f. 168. Nauclerus. ^^l. 1. Gener. 50.
C^anzius Vandalia l. 4. Abraham Ezouius. Annal. Eccles. An. 1291. n. 16. Anno
1298. n. 1. An. 1299. n. 22. An. 1399. n. 13. An. 1406. n. 20. An. 1407. n. 20.
An. 1491. n. 7. An. 1505. n. 4. Naucl. vol. 1. Chronogr. gener. 44. Cent. Magd,
13. c. 15. col. 1287.1288.
piercing his Images with swords and spears, and by Chron. Magn. Germaniae, An.
1036. p. 268, 269. Hermanus Sched^l. C^^^n. f. 278, 289. Genebr. chronogr. p,
824, 825. Jansenius, l. 4. Mer. Gallobelgici.
stabbing, piercing, boiling, burning, braying in a mortar, and otherwise
despighting the consecrated Sacramental bread, representing his crucified bod^,
as the Historians in the Margin at large relate; and likewise by crucifying a
Ram at Easter, as they did at Johannis Bromton chron. col. 1025,
Syracusa, in the year, 1113: but likewise by crucifying sundry Christian
children on Good Friday, or near Easter, on a Cro^se, in a most barbarous
manner, in derision of our Saviors death and passion. To pretermit those 7. or
8. forecited instances in England alone, I shall instance in some foreign ones
recorded by Historians. About the year of our Lord, 430. the Jews in their
^^b^ick Socrates Scholast. l. 7. c. 16. Cent Magd. 5. c. 14.
Enterludes and Dances, held on their Sabbath, openly crucified a Christian
child in contempt and derision of Christ's death and passion, at Inmestar in
Syria; first nailing him to a tree, and lifting him up on high; then deriding
and laughing at him; after that like mad men, scourging him as long as any
breath remained in his body: whereupon there arose great contention between
them and the Christians; and by the Emperors command, the Jews who had done
this in jest, were punished in earnest, Anno 1172. Sigeberti continuator. Cent.
Magd. 12. c. 14. Cent. 13. c. 14.
they crucified in like manner another Christian child at Bloys in France, and
near the same time, the Jews at Antonini Chron. pars 2. Tit. 17. sect. 26.
Vincentius Spec. Hist. l. 29. c. 25. Gaguinus l. 6. de Francis, Cent. Magd. 12.
c. 14. col. 170.
Bray in France, crowned a Christian man (whom they accused for a Malefactor)
with thorns, then led him publicly about the Town, scourged him with many
stripes, and at last crucified him in contempt of Christ. Not long after the
Vincentius Spec. Hist. l. 29. c. 25. cent. Magd. 13. c. 14. Munsters Cosm. l.
2. p. 170.
Jews at Paris in France, in like manner impiously crucified a Christian child
called Richard, and sundry others yearly. Anno 1236. Fragmentum Historicum
Chronicon. Hirsaug. Muntzerus. Centur. Magd. 13. c. 14. Bzouius An. 1296. n. 16.
the Jews at the Monastery of Fulda, killed many Christian children in a Mill,
piercing them with ponyards, and squesing out their blood, to mix and knead it
with their unleavened bread in their Passover, as was generally reported,
which being discovered, many of them were burnt to death for it, and the rest
grievously punished. Anno 1252. they massacred and crucified a Christian Child
Bzouius Ecl. Annal. Anno 1252. n. 16.
at Wissinburgh. At Cranzius. l. 7. c. 14. in Vandalia. Cent. Magdeb, 13. c. 14.
Prague in Bohemia, the Jews on Good Friday in the year 1283. shutting their
gates, crucified a Christian man, having first of all done unto him in
contempt, what ever they had learned was done to Christ by their Ancestors:
which when the people had discovered, running to their arms, they raged cruelly
against, and slew many of these impious Murderers.

The Jews Chron. Hirsaug. Cent. Magd. 13, c. 14. Fasciculus Temporum, Aventinus
Analium Boiorum l. 7. p. 576.
Anno 1286. stole away, cruelly tormented, pricked with ponyards, drew the
blood, and impiously crucified a Christian Child called Wernerus, not far from
the Rhene in Germany, barbarously murdering him after sundry torments. Sebast.
Munsteri Cosm l. 3. p. 482.
Anno 1287. they tormented and crucified another Christian Child at Bern called
Rodolphus, for which they were massacred and cruelly handled by the furious
vulgar. The Jews at Hermannus Schedel. Chron. f. 285.286. Ant. Coccius
Sabellicus Enead. 10. l. 6. p. 742. Bzouius Au. 1479, n. 13. Munster. Cosm. l.
2. c. 71. p. 300,
Trent on Good Friday, in the year 1475. tortured, whipped, pierced and
crucified to death a Christian child, about 13 years old, called Simeon, in
contempt of Christ's passion and Christians, kneeding their Paschal unleavened
bread with his blood, which History is as large related by the Marginal
Historians; for which many of them were tortured, burnt slain, put to death,
and others banished the City: yet 6 years after Chron. Hermanni Sched. f. 286.
Aetas 6.
An. 1480. they again perpetrated the like wickedness in crucifying and
torturing a child at a Town called Motta near Friuli, Chron. Herm. Sched. sexta
Aetas f. 186. Sebast Munster Cosmogr. l. 2. c. 57. p. 171.
for which 3 of them were carried prisoners to Venice, and there tortured and
burnt to ashes. And to instance in no more particulars. Vincentius Beluacensis
Speculum Hist. l. 29. c. 25. Gaguinus l. 6. de Francis. Centur. Magd. 12 and 13
c. 14. Antonini Chron. p. 2, 3. f, 17. sect. 8. Mat. Par. Mr. Fox, and Purchase
Pilgrimage, l. 2. c. 10. Sect. 7.
others record, That the Jews in Paris and elsewhere, did every year steal some
Christian child or other brought up in the Kings Court, and carrying him to a
secret house or vault, did on Good Friday, or Easter Day, in contempt and
derision of Christ and Christian Religion, crucify him on a Cross (as Christ
was crucified) and that they had been frequently apprehended persevering in
this wickedness; for which, upon Detection, they were usually murdered,
stoned, burned, destroyed, hanged by the furious multitudes violence, or
executed, imprisoned, banished by Christian Kings and Magistrates; yet such was
their malice to Christ, that they would still persevere therein, and act it
over again upon every opportunity: Which being so fully justified by these many
particular presidents, proofs, authorities, in several ages, places,
sufficiently refutes Humble Addresses p. 24, 25.
Menasseh Ben Israel his bare-denial, and poor shifts to evade it, as false and
scandalous. How can or dare we then receive into our Christian Island, such
barbarous, bloody obstinate murderers, and inveterate, incorrigible, malicious
enemies to, and deriders, despisers of our blessed Saviors death and passion,
formerly cast out by our Ancestors (amongst other things) for their bloody
impieties and unchristian blasphemies of this nature, unless we first renounce
both our Christianity and Humanity at once, and become as bad as the very worst
of Jews?

7. The Jews ever since their dispersions, in all ages, places to their power,
have been more bitter enemies to the Christians than the worst of Pagans,
bending all their studies, forces, wits, endeavors to hinder, oppugn,
blaspheme, extirpate the Christian Religion, and all professors of it out of
the world; stirred up many bloody persecutions against them, upon all
advantages, confederating both with Julian the Apostate, the Pagan Persians,
the Tartars, Sarazens, Turks, to murder and delete them, having a great hand in
raising the 4th. persecution, and murdering, Justiniani Codicis lib. 1. Tit.
12. Lex 2. Cent. Mag. 4. c. 15. col. 1471. Vincentius Beluacensis Speculum
Hist, l. 21. c. 78.
stoning to death, burning, destroying even those of their own Nation, yea
poisoning their own Wives, Children, for embracing Christianity. Moreover they
have raised up many seditions, rebellions against Christian Princes, poisoned,
destroyed some of them and their Nobles, yea, raised, occasioned many great
popular Tumults, Commotions, Seditions against them in all ages, places, as
well as formerly here in England, As you may read at large in Socrates
Scholasticus, Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 13. Zonaras, Tom. 3. Paulus Diaconus, l. 16,
17, 18. Nicephorus Eccles. Hist. l. 14. c. 14. l. 17. c. 6. Ambrose Epist. l.
5. Epist, 29. Jerome. in cap. 4. ad Galatas, and in Abdiam. Sozomen, Hist. l. 1.
c. 8. Mat. Paris Historia Angl. p. 564. Aventinus Annal. Boyorum, l. 5. and 7.
Abbas Uspergensis Paraleip. p. 346. Cent. Magd. 4. c. 14, 15. and c. 3. ^ol.
85, 86. Cent. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13. c. 3.14.15. Mr. Fox Acts and
Monuments, vol. 1. p. 56. Munsteri Cosmogr. l. 3. c. 71. p. 482. l. 2. c. 71.
p. 310. l. 3. c. 55. p. 583.707. with sundry others. Upon this ground, certain
Christians on the contrary, out of an over-furious zeal, have endeavored to
extirpate them all from under Heaven, unless they would turn Christians. Anno.
1101. Aventinus Annal. Boyorum. l. 5. p. 468. Hedio in Chron. Annot. Cent.
Magd. 11. c. 15. co^, 68^,
Emicho a German Earl, and the Inhabitants near the Rhine, pillaged, plundered,
banished, slew and destroyed all the Jews in those parts, w^o refused to turn
Christians, slaying no less than twelve thousand of them, many of the Jews
killing each other with their own hands, to avoid their fury, but the rest
receiving baptism, and turning Christians only to save their lives, relapsed
to their Judaisme again when the storm was over. In the year 1146. one Otto de
Gestis Fred. 1. Imp. l. 1. c. 37.38. p. 428. Cent. Magd. 12. c. 14. Genebrardi
Chronogr. l. 4. p. 618.
Rudolphus a Monk, out of a misguided bloody zeal, stirred up many thousands of
people in France and Germany, near the Rhine, to take up the Cross for the
holy wars; exhorting them in his preaching, that they should in the first place
kill and destroy all the Jews, remaining every where in the Cities and Towns,
as being the greatest enemies of Christ. The seeds of which doctrine took such
deep root in many Cities of France and Germany, that in a tumultuous sedition
and uproar, they slew most of the Jews in those parts, but such who fled into
fenced Cities and Castles, under the protection of the Emperor Fred. the 1:
which bloody doctrine and proceeding was reprehended by St. Bernards Letters to
these people, informing them, That the Jews for their excessive wickednesses
were not to be slaughtered, but dispersed. In the year of Christ 1298.
Aventinus Annal. Boiorum. l. 7. p. 589. See Munsteri Cosmogr. l. 3. p. 547,
707. Cent. Magd. 13. c. 15. c. 1287.
one Rindflaisch an Husbandman in Germany, openly preached to the people; That
he was sent from heaven, and specially chosen by God to root out the Jews in
all places: And proclaimed, who ever will have the Christian Commonwealth to be
safe, let him follow me; Whereupon the people flocking to him in great
multitudes, and choosing him for their Captain, sought out the Jews in
Wirtzburge, Nurinburgh, Rotenburgh, Bambergh, O^enberge, and all other Towns
and Villages in Franconia and Bavaria, and slew many of them, the greatest part
of them in these places, both men and women obstinately setting their own
houses on fire, and burning both themselves, wives, children, with their
houses, housholdstu^f and goods together, that they might not fall into the
Christians hands. In the year M. Alberti Argentini Chro. and de rebus gestis
Bertoldi, p. 147, 148.149.177, 178. He^manus Schedel. Aetas 6. f. 258. See
Abbas Ufpergensis Paraleip. p. 346. Seb. Munsteri Cosmogr. l. 3. c. 139. p.
563.707. Fasciculus Temporum.
1349. There being a great plague and mortality in Germany, the Jews were
generally accused for the chief Authors or increasers thereof, by poisoning all
the Wells and Fountains, to destroy all the Christians, and corrupting likewise
some baptized Jews, and other Christians with money and charms so far, that
they could willingly have destroyed and slain all their fellow Christians,
which some of them confessed upon their examinations. Hereupon the Common
people in great rage and fury (against their Magistrates and Bishops wills and
commands, who neither could nor durst withstand their violence) fell upon all
the Jews in Bern, Friburgh, A^gentine, Worms, Oppenheim, Francfort, Mentz,
Spires, and other places, slew, and brained many of them, burned other of them,
hanged up many others upon Gibbets, pillaging, burning, breaking and pulling
down their Houses, the Jews themselves in many of these places burning both
themselves, wives, children, goods, to avoid the enraged peoples fury; very few
of them escaping, who were baptized to preserve their lives: The Inhabitants of
Spire, fearing the air would be infected with the stink of the slaughtered Jews
dead corpse lying in the streets, although most of them were burnt, put them
into empty Caskes, and threw them into the Rhine. All such who protected any of
the Jews for money (as some did) were so murmured against, and hated by the
people, that they were in great danger of their lives, which some of them lost,
as Albertus Argentinensis records at large: Which sad calamity came upon them
by Gods just judgment, many of them being found guilty of all sorts of
wickednesses, poysonings, the murder of many Children, forging of Letters,
counterfeiting and corrupting of moneys, thefts, deceipts, and other villainies,
whereby they offended the Divine Majesty. To these I might add many other such
tumults, uproars, occasioned by, and massacres, burnings and destructions of
them for their villainies in France, Spain, Germany, and other parts, recorded
in Hermannus Schedel. Chron. f. 243, 248, 258, 271, 272. and Genebrardi
Chronog. p. 461, 627, 660, 618, 688, 824, 830. Abraham Bzou^us, Annal. Eccl.
Tom. 15. Anno 1239. n. 9. Anno 1391. n. 8. Anno 1464. n. 44. An. 1491 n. 6.7.
Cromerus de Rebus Polonor. l. 25. with those forementonioned in England, and
that of Munsteri (...) Cosm. l. 3. c. 306 p. 707.
Norlingen An. 1290. where many of them were slain by the Citizens, whom they
had undone and ruined. And can we then in point of Christian piety or prudence
now bring in such a generation of men as these amongst us, especially in these
unsettled, unquiet, discontented times, to kindle new flames of discontent, and
tumults amongst the people?

8. The Surius Council. Tom. 2. p. 735. Gratian. Did. 28. qu. 5. and 29. qu. 8.
conversation of the Jews is so dangerous to Christians; that the 4 Council of
Toledo: can. 59.61, 62, made this Decree, The Conversations and Companies of
evil men do oftentimes corrupt even the good, how much more then those who are
prone to vices. Let therefore the Jews who are converted to the Christian
faith, have no further Communion henceforth with those, who still continue in
their old Jewish rites, lest peradventure they should be perverted by their
Society: Therefore we decree, that the Sons and Daughters of those Jews, which
are baptized, that they be not again involved in the errors of their Parents,
shall be separated from their company, and placed with Christian men and women
fearing God, where they may be well instructed, and grow in faith and Christian
manners, and that the Jews believing Wives, shall be divorced and separated
from their Husbands, unless upon admonition they turn Christians. The ^^^e was
decreed by the Surius Council Tom. 4. p. 58.57.
Council of Basil Sess. 20. and Fredericus Lindebrogus Codex Legum, Antiq.
^nacted by the Wisogothes Laws; lib. 12. Tit. 2.3. Yea Centur. Magdeb. 12. c.
7. col. 1079.
Pope Alex. the 3. Decretal. l. 6. c. 7. prohibited all Christians, under pain
of Excommunication to cohabit with the Jews, or keep company with them, because
their manners and Christians accord in nothing, and they by reason of the^r
continual conversation, and daily familiarity, might easily incline the minds
of simple people to their superstition and infide^ity. And should not those
men, who pretend themselves far greater Zealots than the Goths, Spaniards, or
Pope, and the Popish Canonists (who decree the like upon the some reason) upon
these very grounds much more oppose, prohibi^e their readmission into England,
in this giddy Apostatizing age, lest their Company and Society should easily
seduce the unstable people to their Judaism and Infidelity, to Christ's
dishono^r, their own damnation, and the infamy of our Church and Government?
The rather, because if extraordinary care be not taken herein, under pretext of
Jews, we shall have many hundreds of Je^uites, (who derive both their Name and
pedigree from the Jews even from Iesui and his family of the Jesuits Number.
16.44., as some of them affirm in prin^, Hospiniani Historia Jesuitica, l. 1.
c. 2.
though others from other grounds.) of Popish Priests and Friars come over
freely into England from Portugal, Spain, Rome, Italy, Poland, and other
places, under the title, habit, and disguise of Jews, of purpose to undermine
our Religion, Church and State, and sow the seeds of Heresy, Blasphemy,
Popery, Super^tition, Schisms, and Divisions amongst us, they having formerly
sent over some of late years amongst us, under the notion and vizard of
converted Jews, as Ramsey the Scot, and Eleazer, and Joseph Ben-Isaiah, all
Jesuitical, wicked, cheating Impostors: the two last whereof, have cheated the
honest people of the Nation of many thousand pounds being notorious Villains,
one of them formerly a Trooper and Plunderer in Prince Ruperts army, as he
confessed to his Hostess at Dursly in Glocestersh^re in his ^rink, where he
would have ravished the Maidservant of the house, locking the door upon her,
whi^es she was warming his bed in the night, and upon her crying out for help,
fled away presently in the night, to avoid apprehension; And yet wanders about
cheating the people in other places, instead of being brought to Tybu^ne for
his Villainies. And if they abuse and cheat us thus already, much more will they
do it upon, and after the Jews admission.

9. To pretermit their banishment out of Rome by the Emperor Claudius, recorded
Acts 18.2. and that as Orosius l. 2. c. 6. Cent. Magd. 2 col. 26 Eusebius. l. 2.
c. 8. Opmeri Chron. p. 185. Metamerus de Academiis Hisp.
Ecclesiastical Historians report, for their cheating, and tumults there
raised. I shall only in brief relate, how they have from time to time been
banished, expelled many Christians Citi^s, Countries, Kingdoms, and their
Synagogues burnt and destroyed, especially for their Infidelity, and other
forementioned Mildemeanors, Crimes, Vi^lanies. Soc^ates Schol. Eccl. Hist. l.
7. c. 13. Agobardus de Judaicis superstit. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 9 pars 1. p. 564.
Cent. Magd. 4. col. 1081.1490
About the year of Christ 430. at the instigation of St. Cy^il Bishop of
Alexandria, and the Christians there, they were expelled and banished that
famous City, where they had long inhabited for their insolenc^es, and seditious
conspiracies against the Christians. The Paulus Diaconus, l. 17. Zonaras Tom.
3. Cent. Magd. 7. c. 15. col. 588.
Emperor Phocas, about the year 605. banished them out of the City of Antioch,
for the tumults they had there raised against the Christians and Government.
The Surius council. Tom. 2. p. 742.
6 Council of Toledo Anno 686. c. 3. informs us, That King Chinrilla by the
inspiration of the most high God, inflamed with the ardor of Faith, utterly
extirpated the Infidelity, prevarications and superstitions of the Jews,
neither would he permit any one of them to live in his Realm, who would not
become a Christian: For which this Council highly commended him, rendered
special thanks to God for it, and withal enacted by the con^ent of the Nobles,
that every King of Spain in future times, before he should be installed and
crowned King, should take an Oath, That he would not suffer the Jews to violate
the Christian Faith, and that he would in no wise favor their infidelity,
through any kind of negligene or covetousnes, nor give entranc to any thing
tending to the precipices of infidelity and prevarication, etc. About the year
of Christ, 615. they were banished out of Jerusalem it self, by Heraclius the
Emperor, as Zonaras, Tom. 3. in his life: Paulus Diaconus, rerum Romans l. 18.
and Cent. Mag. 7. c. 4. story, and near that age, out of Arverna Bibl: Patr.
Tom. 6. part. 2. p. 243. Venantii Fortun. l. 5. c. 5. About Anno 616. Rodericus
Toletanus de Rebus Hisp. l. 2. c. 17. Vasaeus Chron. Hisp. p 685. Jo Mariana de
Reb^s Hisp. l. 6. c. 3. Sigeberti chro. Ado Viennensis. Opmeo^^s Orbis
unive^si. Chronogr. p. 355 Cent. Magd. 7. c. 14. Genebrar. Chronogr.
King Sisebutus banished them all out of Spain, unless they would turn
Christians, which the most of them refusing to do, departed thereupon into
France, as the marginal Authors unanimously attest. About the year 618. they
were all banished out of France by King Dagobert, unless they would renounce
their Judaism, and turn Christians, upon the command and instigation of
Heraclius the Emperor; as Reg^no, Chron. l. 1. and Cert. Magdeb. 7. c. 14.
relate. King Wamba about the year 710. banished them out of the Province of
Narbon; as Rodericus Toletanus de Rebus Hisp. l. 3. c. 11. informs us. About
the year 1196. they Cent. Mag. xi. c. 14. etc. 15. col. 689.
were banished out of the City of Mentz, and near the same time out of the City
of Triers, and the Bishopric thereof, by Bishop Everhard. Vincentius Belu.
Spe. Hist. l. 29. c. 25. Antonini Chron. pars 2. Tit. 17. c. 9. Mat. Paris
Hist. Angl. p. 861. Abbas Usperg. Paral. p. 346. Herman. Schedel. Chro. f. 231.
Cent. Mag. 12. c. 15. col. 1781. Genebrardi chron. l. 4. p. 638. Fox. ^cts and
Mon. Vol. 1. p. 423, Cook^ 2 Inst. p. 507. Seb. Mun. Cos. l. 2 c. 57. f. 117.
Bzovius Annal Eccl. An. 1198. n. 3.
Philip Augustus King of France banished them all out of France by several
Edicts, Anno 1152. 1162. and 1182. for the^e reasons: Because they had diverse
times crucified children of Christians in Paris, and elsewhere, in contempt of
Christ and his passion; entertained Christian men servants and maid servants in
their houses, who did likewise play the Jews with them, contrary to the Decrees
of God and the Church; above measure oppressed, impoverished by their Usuries,
the Citizens, Knights, Gentry, and Country people both in the Cities, Suburbs
and Villages of France, and detained some of them prisoners in their houses,
like captives, binding them by an oath, not to depart out of them; most vilely
profaned the sacred Vessels pawned to them by Churchmen in cases of necessity,
causing their little children ordinarily to drink wine and eat sops out of
them, yea to lay their excrements in them (as lib. 5. Epist. 33. Cent. Mag. 12.
c. 14.
Petrus Cluniancensis records, in contempt of the Sacrament) and casting the
silver Vessels, Crosses, and gilded Books of the Gospel pawned to them, into a
Jakes in a sack, that the Christians might not find them, and because the
Saracens upbraided the Christians for entertaining them amongst them, being the
professed Enemies of Christ: Upon these grounds, as also because their wealth
and number were so increased, that they had almost gotten half the city of
Paris into their hands, King Philip caused them to be all apprehended through
France in one day, as they were in their Synagogues, then To which the Epistle
of Petrus Cluniacensis to him lib. 5. Epist. 33. encouragd him, wherein he
proves it lawful.
spoiled them of all their rich gold and silver garments, confiscated all their
Lands, Houses, possessions, and banished them the Realm, notwithstanding the
intercessions of many Bishops and Nobles (bribed with their gold and gifts) in
their behalf, and the proffers of great sums of money to him by the Jews,
wherewith he would not be mollified. After which, he caused their Synagogues to
be profaned, and then consecrated and converted to churches, that so where
Christ was first blasphemed after the manner of the Jews, he might in the same
places be praised both by the Clergy and people, as Vincentius records at
large. After this, creeping into that Realm again by money and bribes, they
were Aemilius l. 8. Gaguinus, l. 7. Genebrardi chronogr. l. 4. p. 634.660, 667.
Heylins M^crocosme, p. 576.
again bannished out of France, and their goods confiscated by King Philip the
Fair, in the year 1293. as some, or 1307. as others compute it, and driven into
Germany. In the year 1349. at the earnest importunity of the people they were
all banished out of Alberti Argentinensis chron. p. 147, 148. De Rebus Gestis
Bertoldi p. 177, 178.
Alsatia, and the Impe^ial Cities, by the agreement of the Bishops and Nobles,
and most of them burnt and destroyed, as they had been formerly in those parts
by Earl Aventinus Annal. Boior. l. 5. p. 468.
Emicho, An. 1102. who then banished them thence. Ludov^cus Duke of Bavaria,
about the year 1425. banished all the Jews out of his Territories, as Aeneas
Picolomineus in his Europae status sub Frederico, l. 3. c. 32. p. 79. assures
us: and that for conspiring against the Christians, etc. Procul ejicienda Gens
mpia finibus, quae in contumeliam Christi and in subversionem vergit
Christianorum: as Munsteri Cosmogr. l 2. c. 20. p. 78.
Abraham Bzovius writes. The Jews were banished out of the Anno 1425. n. 15.
Kingdom of Cast^le by K. John the 2. about the year 1430. See Munsteri
Cosmog. l. 2. p. 72, 73.171. Bzovius Annal. An. 1424. n. 2.44. An. 1497. n. 16.
Hieron. Connestaggius de Portugal, and Cast, conjunct. p. 1064, 1065. Vasaeus
Chron. Hisp. Johan. Mariana de Rebus Hisp. l. 26. c. 1.3. The general History
of Spain in their Lives. Genebrardi chronog. p. 380, 634, 660, 667, 703,
705.708. Heylins Microcosme, p. 507. Opmeri Chronogr. p. 429.
In the years, 1474, 1482. and 1492. they were all banished out of Spain by
King Ferdinand, surnamed the Catholic, from whence they were transported and
received into Portugal, they paying to King John the 2.8. Ducats for every
poll of them at first, for their admission; which much augmented his Exchequer,
though it diminished his piety and honor. Not long after, Anno 1497. they were
driven and banished out of Portugal by King Emanuel: And in the year 1539. they
were banished out of Naples and Sicily by Charles the 5th. To which I might
add the destruction, burning and utter extirpation of the Jews by the
Rubeaque^ses, Anno 1309. and 1338. Munst. Cosm. l. 3. p. 547. Bzovius Annal
Eccl. Tom. 15. An. 1385. n. 22. and An. 1410. n. 35. An. 1475. n. 13.
Their banishment out of Germany, Anno 1385. out of Misnia and Thuringia Anno
1410. out of Worms and Spires, Anno 1092. Munsteri Cosm. l. 3. p. 582. Out of
Prague, by Wratislans for hating and slaying the christians, Geor. Bartholdus
Pontanus Bohemiae Piae. l. 2. p. 20. Out of Berne, Anno 1287. Munsteri Cosm. l.
3. p. 582. Chron. Herman. Schedel f. 275, 276. Munster. Cosm. l. 2, c. 71.
Sabellicus Aenead l. 10. p. 472.
Out of Trent, Anno 1475. for crucifying a child: And out of Hiero Rubeus Hist.
Raven. l. 11.
Rome it self, Anno 1508. by Pope Pius quintus, for their horrid extravagant
usuries, oppressions, combining with Thieves and Robbers, Forgeries, and
ungodly charms in wooing of women to their lusts. Having therefore been thus
frequently banished by Christian Kings, Princes, from time to time, at the
earnest solicitation of their godly christian Ministers, Bishops, people; and
by our King and Parliament too out of Annals Domin, Colmariensium, p. 25.
England, so long since, never to return again, what shadow, color of piety,
policy, prudence, justice, law, reason, there can be for any person or persons
whatsoever to re-admit them (except the argument of dishonest, private, filthy
underhand Bribes or Lucre, by which they usually scrue themselves into those
places, whence they have been exiled) transcends my shallow capacity to
comprehend, especially at this season, when we are so over-stored with English,
that some think of sending and planting Colonies in another world, whithet
these Gold-thirsty Jews may do well to transplant themselves, if they be weary
of their former habitation.

10. The forecited Christian Authors, Historians, old and new, much applaud and
magnify those Christian Emperors, Kings, Magistrates, States, who have most
opposed, restrained, suppressed by See Justiniani Codicis. l. 1. Tit. 10, 12,
13. Council. Meldense c. 73. Surius council. Tom. 3. c. 465, 466. Leges Wistgoth.
l. 12. Tit. 2, 3. Surius council. ^. Tom. 2.277, 608, 640, 679, 696, 674, 680,
734, 735, 1092 Tom. 3. p. 552.622, 670, 726.754. Cent. Mag. 4. col. 541.1461.
cent. 6. col. 324. cent. 7. col. 588.
severest Laws, Edicts, the Jewish Synagogues, Ceremonies, Superstitions,
Rites, Abuses: and banished these Antichristian Blasphemers and Enemies of
Christ Jesus out of their Kingdoms and Territories, especially for their
Infidelity, and censured those who favored them. And Matheus Flacius
Illericus, Johannis Wigandus, Andreas Corvinus, Thomas Holthuter, 4 famous
learned Protestant Historians and Divines, in their laborious, learned
Ecclesiastical centuries, as they every where do the like: So in their 12 Cent.
cap. 7. col. 1078, 1079. they pass this sharp censure against the Decrees of
Surius council. Tom. 3. p. 726.
Pope Alexander the 3. and Clement the 3. (prohibiting the Jews to build any
new Synagogues where were none before, yet tollerating them only to repair old
ones where they were fallen down and defaced, to use their rites in; But
withal forbidding all christians under pain of Excommunication, any communion
with them, for fear of being se^uc^d to their Superstitions, and^.) Denique ut
extremam ^^omanorum Paparum impadentiam et stupendam impletatem videas, non
pige ^i^ ^orum Decreta, pro blasphema in deum gente Iudaeorum lata, adscribere;
(^^ough some Popish Schoolmen, as Alexander Alensis, Summa Theologiae pars 2.
qu. 61 Aquinas. 2.2. quest. 10. Art. 9, 10, 11, 12. Scotus in l. 4. Sent. did.
4. qu. 9. are not ashamed to justify, Quod ne deterius quid contingat, and
aliquo modo bonum eliceatur, tollerandi sunt Judaei ritus suos servare, to
gra^^fie their Popes herein, which they likewise affirm of the i^olatrous
Gentiles rites and worship, as well as of the Jews.) And Peter Heylin in his
Microcosme, p. 569, 570. writing, That the Jews having been put to diverse fines
and ransoms, they are at last even thrust quite out of Europe also. They were
banished out of England by Edward the 1. Anno 1290. Out of France, Spain,
Portugal, Naples, and Sicil (by the Kings forecited) subjoyns by way of
censure: Yet are they found in great numbers in the Romish part o^ Germany and
Poland, in most Cities of Italy, especially Rome, where there are no less than
15000 or 20000 of them, and also in the Popes country of Avignion. The reason
why they are permitted to live thus under our holy ^athers Nose, is forsooth,
an expectation of their conversion, which is a mere pretense, the reason being
indeed the benefit hence arising to his Holiness coffers, Nota.
but the hopes of their conver^ion is small, and the means less, etc. And
therefore we cannot now re-admit them into England upon the self-same pretense,
and ground of gain; without incurring the like censures from Protestants and
Papists too; and bringing intolerable Scandal, Dishonor, Reproach, both on
our Nation and Religion, in these times of pretended highest Reformation; they
being the professed Enemies of our Lord Jesus Christ, who will not have him to
rule over them, Luke 19.27. and so odious to the Heylins Microcosm, p. 570.
very Turks themselves for crucifying Christ, that they often use to say in
detestation of a thing, I would I might die a Jew. Neither will they permit a
Jew to turn Turk, unless he be first baptized.

11. Many of the wisest Heathen Lawgivers, Politicians, States, have specially
prohibited the introduction and habitation of foraigners amongst them. Hence
^lexander ab Al^x^^dro, l. 4. p. ^03. Plutarch's Laconica institut. Xenoph^n de
Lacaedem. Republica, Thucidides, Coelius Rhodigi^us antiquar. lect. l. 18. c.
5. Boemus de moribus Gent. p. 199,
Lycurgus the famous Legislator, and the Spartans by his Law and advice,
expelled all foraigners out of their city and country, lest by insinuating
themselves amongst them, they should teach their Citizens some ill, introduce
foraign manners, and an ill disordered kind of life; upon which ground they
also prohibited their Citizens to travel into foraign countries. Upon these
grounds the Thebans and Apoloniatae (in imitation of the Spartans) banished all
foraigners out of their City, as Aelian Var. Hist. l. 13. c, 16. Alexander ab
Alex. l. 4. c. 10 record. Plato the Philosopher Dialogo 12. de Legumlatione,
though he permits foraigners by way of study, trade, travel, and embassy to
come into his city and Republike under certain Laws, and Rules, yet he totally
secludes them from inhabiting therein, or to trade, without strict Laws to
prevent their danger, upon this ground; Solet enim civitatum in commerciis
permixtio, varios mores civitatibus ammiscere, dum externi externis vicissim
novationes inducunt; quae res civitatibus, per rectas leges been institutis
maximum deirimentum affert. De Repub. l. 5. c. 2.
Aristotle observes, That the bringing in of foraigners is the principal cause
of seditions, tumults,, Qui inquilinas aut advenas recipient in civitatem, Hi
fere omnes aut certe plurimi seditionibus conflictantur. Sphaera civitatis l.
5. c. 3. p. 435.437, 438.
Dr. Jo. Case gives the reason of it. Nam ut nihil citius corpus humanum
inficit, quam pestilentium vaporum malis humoribus copulatio; ita nihil
velocius corrumpit Civitatem, quam peregrinorum admissio, in qua contagio and
venenum latet. And hereupon he raises this question from Aristotle's Text;
Utrum periculosa sit in Rempublicam peregrinorum admissio? And thus resolves
it. It is perilous to take Snakes into the bosom, and Foraigners into the
Commonweal; for as they being refreshed with heat do bite and sting: So these
being enfranchised destroy the Republike. To prove this by arguments, we may
consider, that every Nation has its proper ceremonies which they bring along
with them, and do not change with the climat when they come into another
Country; Wherefore there is great danger, lest by receiving strangers the
ancient manners and Laws should be changed into new and foraign. Now what
sooner begets sedition than alteration of Laws and Customs? (as we may see
even in sundry Scripture examples, which he remembers not, and of the Jews
especially Acts 14.2. to 7.16. c. 16.19. to 25. c. 18.5, 6, 7.17, 18, 19. c.
17.12. to 18. c. 19.24. to 41. c. 21.27 to 40. c. 22.22. etc. c. 23, and 24,
and 25.) What therefore is more perilous than the admission of Foraigners into
our Commonwealth? Moreover wherefore has Nature instructed like to associate
together with like, if it should draw men of strange and different manners into
a Republike? Nature will not that sheep should be associ^ted with wolves,
neither wills Prudence that Natives should be coupled with Foraigners; For
Philosophy persuades this, that contraries cannot dwell in the same place, but
strang^rs for the most part are Enemies to the Citizens with whom they
converse. Add to this, that as Locusis are to the Corn, so are Foraigners to
the Republike, for as they do wast and consume the grain of Corn, so these
devour the fruit of the Commonwealth; for although they are branches of the
same plant, yet they suck not wholesome juice, but poison from the root,
wherewith at length the who^e plant being infected, perishes. This he proves
by several examples out of De Republ. l. 5. c. 2.3. See Thucidides Hist. l. 6.
p. 506.
Aristotle himself, by the Trezenii, Zanclei, Sybarites, Bysantii, Antissiaei,
Apoloniatae, Chii, Syracusani, Amphipolitae, who by receiving strangers into
their cities and countries were all much infested, some of them quite
supplanted and ejected by them, the rest enforced to expel them by force of
arms. Then he subjoyneth, That the strangers admitted among Gods own people,
proved briars and thorns unto them; and Solomon himself by many strange women
fell into Idolatry; concluding thus, The Spaniards in my opinion did not
unjustly banish the seditious Jews out of their Coasts: propius non accedo, ^ed
Christum oro, ne peregrinorum turba immanis turbo in civitate fiat. As these
Grecians in ancient times prohibited the introduction of strangers amongst
them, for the forementioned reasons, so likewise did some of the wisest Romans:
Pennus in ancient times, and Papius after him (as Cicero de Officiis l. 3.
Cicero relates) Peregrinos Vrbibus prohibent, eosque exterminant; which
although he thus censures as an inhumanity, suvero urbis prohibere peregrinos,
sane inhumanum est; Yet he intends it only of excluding strangers from all
trading and commerce, not from cohabitation, as Denizens, from which he holds
it just to debar them, there being a special Law then in force for that
purpose, which he thus expresses: Nam esse pro cive qui civis non sit, RECTUM
EST NON LICERE: QUAM LEGEM TULERUNT SAPIENTISSIMI CONSULES, Crassus and
Scaevola. Hence Claudius the Emperor banished the Jews out of Rome, Acts 18.2
and Suetonius in his life. And the mischief of admitting forraigners is largely
argued in Page 218, 219, 220.
Cornelius Tacitus, who were after his time banished out of Rome, as Antiqu.
Lection, l. 18. c. 5.
Coelius Rhodigmus relates out of Ammianus Marcelinus; So the Alexander ab
Alexan. Genesis Dier. l. 4. c. 10.
Carthaginians, Solthians, Scythotauri, Gamphasantes, Seres, Indians,
Egyptians in some places; the Epidauri, and Athenians also excluded foraigners
their country, company and conversation; Ne cives longo usu dissimiles mores
imbuerent, and in alienas leges ritusque transirent, as Alex. ab Alexandro,
Genesis Dierum l. 4. c. 10. and Boemus de Mor. Gentium record. Yea we read of the
Purchase pilgrimage, l. 4. c. 13.19. p. 537, 538.
Tartars and most politic Inhabitants of China, at this day, that they will
admit no strangers into their Countries, so much as to travel or traffic for
fear of discerning their secrets, and corrupting their manners, and those few
they admit by special license to enter into their Country, they will by no
means suffer to return thence, nor permit Merchants and Mariners there trading
to walk abroad publicly in their Cities and Countries, nor to lodge on land,
but only in their ships. And to come nearer home, our Kings heretofore upon the
grievous complaint of the Nobility, Gentry, People, have frequently banished
all strangers out of England, as the greatest pests, inconveniences and
grievances to the Natives. Thus in the reign (of Will. Malmesb. de Gestis Regum
l. 2. c. 13. Mat. West. Fl. Florentius Wigorniensis Huntindon, Hoveden,
Polychron. Brompton, Speed, and others.
) King Edward the Confessor, Anno 1052, All the Normans, except two or three
were banished our of England for giving ill counsel to the King, and incensing
him against the English, by agreement both of the King and Parliament. So King
Nub^^^ersis, Trivet. P^lydor Virgil. in H. 2. Holinsh. p. 65. Grafton chron. p.
50. and others;
Henry the 2. in the 1 year of his reign, Anno Dom. 1154. or in the second year
of his reign as others write, commanded all strangers to avoid out of the
Realm, by Proclamation, by a certain day under great penalty, especially the
Flemings and Soldiers, who committed all kinds of mischief, under pretense of
a liberty permitted to Soldiers by the Law of arms in time of war. In the year
1220. ^o^inshed p. 202. Grafton p. 119. Speed, p. 513. Matthew. Paris, Hygden,
and others.
King Hen. the 3. by his Proclamation commanded all strangers, to avoid the
land by Michaelmas next following, except such as came with Merchandise to make
sale of their wares under the Kings safe conduct: After which the Mat. Part.
Hist. Angl. p. 973, 976, 983, 989, 990. Mat. West. An. 1258.1269. See Daniel,
Holinshed, Speed, Baker, and others.
Po^ctouvines coming into England in great number, obtaining great offices
about the King, miscounselling, seducing and encensing him against the English
Nobility, and engrossing the wealth of the Kingdom into their hands, were
assaulted, plundered, and many of them enforced to retire out of England by the
Barons in the year 1258. And the next year after they were all banished out of
England by Edict of Parliament. After which they returning, and oppressing the
Realm, were again expulsed and exiled by the Barons Anno 1260. So in the
Walsingham Hist. Ang. p. 71. Ypodigm. Neustriae, p. 99. See Holinshed, Speed,
and others.
Parliament of 4 Ed. 2. Anno 1311. It was ordained by the Archbishops, Bishops,
Earls, and all the Commons in Parliament, amongst other things, That the King
should banish all Foraigners out of his Court and Kingdom, as his Father had
commanded him; which the King obliged himself by Oath to perform: And
thereupon banished his own Minion Pierce Gaveston into Ireland. Which practices
and proceeding of all these recited Nations and our Ancestors, being if not
grounded on, yet at least warranted by Gods own forcited Precepts to the
Israelites, and being warranted by the Jews own practice, who had no dealings
with the Samaritans, John 4.9. and the Samaritans reciprocal carriage toward
the Jews, whom they would neither lodge nor entertain, Lu. 9.51, 52, 53. Why we
should not upon this account seclude those alien Jews, so different from us
both in manners, customs, Laws, Religion, and obeying not the Laws of our
Savior Christ Jesus, it being not for the Kings or the Kingdoms profit to
suffer them, (as Haman, Esther 3.8. once said of them in another case) I
refer it to all wise Statesmen to resolve, since it may be truly said of such
unwelcom guests.

Turpius ejicitur quam non admittitur hospes. Neither will this contradict that
Gospel precept, Heb. 13.2. Be not forgetful to entertain strangers: or Deutr.
10.18.19. c. 23.7 Mat. 25.35, 43. which extend only to Christian hospitality,
liberality, and pity toward private distressed exiles, travelers, and other
strangers, coming to lodge or sojourn with us for a short season into our
houses or country, upon extraordinary or just occasions especially such who
stand in need of our releif,, and are of the Household of Faith, as is clear by
the Texts themselves, compared with Romans 12.13. 1 Pet. 4.9.3. John 5. Gal.
6.10. not to Infidels Jews, Pagans, or who are in no such absolute necessity
nor stand in need of our charity or reception, nor yet to the reception of any
foreign Nation or Colony into our Island, Here p. 6.
to cohabit perpetually with us (the only point in question) which the
Scripture no where commands nor intends, but disallows in the aforecited Texts,
and Neh. 9.2. c. 13.30. And these Scripture expressions, Prove. 5.10. Lest
strangers be filled with thy wealth. Isay 1, 7. your lands strangers devour in
your presence, and it is desolate as overthrown by strangers. Lam. 5.2. Our
inheritance is turned unto strangers, our Houses to aliens. Hosea 7.9.
Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows it not; sufficiently
manifest both the illegallity, folly and sad consequences of our receiving Jews
and other strangers in such a nature, of which our Ancestors had sufficient
experience in the Jews themselves, enforcing them for ever to exile them hence:
who have places enough in many other parts of the world where they now inhabit
in peace and plenty, and enjoy their Merchandises and other franchi^es,
together with their Schools and Synagogues, as Benjamin the Son of Jonas a
Jew records at large in his Peregrination: together with Mr. Samuel Purchase in
his Pilgrims, l. 9. c. 5. And Menasseh Ben-Israel him self confesses in his
Epistle Dedicatory and Addresses, where thus he writes; Our Nation at the
present is spread all about, and has its seat and dwelling in the most
flourishing parts of all the Kingdoms and Countries of the world, as well in
America, as in the other three parts, (which he prosecutes more at large, p. 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. boasting of their extraordinary wealth, Offices, Power and
Privileges in other places.) And therefore this only remains in my judgment,
Before the Messia come and Restore our Nation that first we must have our seat
here ^^kewise: therefore having so much Elbow-room already throughout the
world, their reception here will be no act of piety or charity in us, neither
do they press it as such; but an act of the highest impiety, they now
insisting on it as a necessary preparative to the coming of their long expected
false Messia, to restore them to their temporal Kingdom again, and Fathers
inheritance, as he expressly writes.

These general Reasons against the Jews readmission premised, which I hope will
satisfy most men, I shall conclude with some particular Reasons drawn from
late published Declarations, of our Grandees, which I conceive will best
satisfy them of any other: and for this end, (I hope without any just offense,
or Scandalum magnatum) I shall crave leave to press them home in this common
cause, for the defense of the Glory, Honor, Scepter, Gospel, Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the only 1 Timothy 6.15. Col. 2.10. and 16. R^v. 1.5. c. 17.14.
c. 19.16. tom. 9.4
Potentate, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, the head of all principality and power, and God over all blessed for
ever, before whose feet all other subordinate Kings and Potentates whatsoever
ought to Rev. 4.9.10.11, c. 19.4. Romans 11.36.
prostrate, not only their persons, but Crowns, and most peremptory Royal
Wills and Edicts too; for whose pleasure, honor and glory alone, all things and
powers likewise both are and were created: in whose cause we must be most
Ez^c^. 2.3. to 9. Acts 4.19.20 c. 5.20, 30, etc.
bold and zealous, not fearing the faces of any Mortals.

My 1. Reason shall be drawn from the very words of the Declaration of 21.
November. 1655. inviting the people of this commonwealth to a day of solemn
Fasting and Hum^liation, on the 6. of December last ( a 2 Kings 19.3.
day of trouble and of rebuke, of blasphemy, and provocation, in respect of the
violence acted on it that time seven years, when the children were come to the
birth, and there was no strength to bring forth, but only to obstruct and pull
out the Members, to prevent out peace and settlement.) The principal cause
whereof they Declare to be; The abominable Blasphemies vented and spreading of
late, through the Apostasy of, and the abuse of Liberty by many professing
Religion. And to join with them in solemn and earnest supplications to the
throne of Grace; That the Lord will disappoint the designs of those, that
labor to lift themselves up against the interest of Christ and his people:
That he will rebuke the foresaid Evils, and give his people to know the things
that belong to their Peace, that so we may with one heart and shoulder serve
the Lord, both theirs and ours. The Jews of all other Nations in the world, are
the greatest venters, spreaders of abominable Acts 13.45. Rev. 2.19.
Blasphemies against our Savior and the Gospel; the greatest Apostates from
God and abusers of Liberty of any professing Religion; The greatest designers,
plotters and lifters up of themselves against the interest of Christ and his
people; as the Premises undeniably evidence: And their introduction amongst us
at this season, when the generality of the people, and professors of Religion
likewise are so bent to Apostasy, and all kind of Errors, of Novelties in
Religion, will no ways allay, but most certainly increase the venting and
spreading of abominable Blasphemies amongst us, multiply the Apostacies of, and
abuse of liberty by the professors of Religion, and make thousands in
probability turn Apostate Jews, instead of converting any of the Jews to
Christianity. It will not disappoint, but most of all advance the designs of
those that labor to lift up themselves against the interest of Jesus Christ
and his people; this being (as some justly fear) the Jews very end and plot in
pressing now to be received amongst us, to seduce us unto Judaism, to which
many are now inclined; and to deny our Savior Christ in words, as too many
have Tit. 1.16. 2. Tim. 3.5. 2. Pet. 2.1, Jud. 14.1 Joh. 4 3.
denied him in their works, and some in their opinions of late years. It will
not rebuke, but foment the foresaid Evils; obstruct Gods people both from
knowing and pursuing the things that concern their peace; and instead of
enabling them with one heart and shoulder to serve the Lord, divide them into
more Sects and Schisms, than formerly, and set up Judaism to affront
Christianity with open face, as 2 Pet. 2.1. Jude 3.4. etc. Tit. 1.10.11. 1 John
4.3. 2 John 7 resol^^ and so multiply the late Rebukes and Judgments of God
upon the Nation. Therefore their readmission into England after such a Sol^mn
Declaration, and Day of Humiliation as this (and some others formerly
prescribed, observed through the Nation, for the late monstrous growth and
spreading of Errors and Blasphemies amongst us,) if resolved and effected, will
be reputed by God and Men, A most palpable violation, yea contradiction of this
Declaration and Humilation; a most hypocritical, Atheistical mocking of God
himself to his face; a most profane abuse, and per^ersion of this Solemn Fast
and Humiliation; a frustration of all the prayers, hopes of most religious
people thereon, who observed it for far other prescribed ends, and an high
Provocation of Gods severest wrath against the perverters of it, to this very
end, to introduce the long-since banished Jews, the debate whereof was proposed
immediately before, and began the very next day after it.

My 2. Reason shall be deduced from the Declaration of the 24 November. 1655. in
order to the securing of the peace of the Commonwealth; Declaring it necessary
to use all good means to secure the Peace of the Nation, and prevent future
troubles within the same. The bringing in of the Jews at this season, when the
people are ^o generally divided, discontented, and declare (for ought I can
learn) their highest, unanimous dislike, and detestation of it, is the most
probable means to disturb the peace of the Nation, and to engender future new
troubles, Tumults within it; the generality of the people in England, and in
other Countries, having in former See here p. 8. to 15 8.27.32, 35.79. to 88 89
^0. etc.
ages frequently ri^en up in arms against them, massacred, burnt and de^^royed
them, notwithstanding their Kings and Magi^^r^te Proclamations and Edicts to
the contrary. And the Sea Socrates Schol ast. l. 7. c. 13. Sozomen, l. 4. c. 7.
Cent. Magd. 4, 5.7.12, 13, c. 14.
Jews themselves in all ages having been principle firebrands of sedition both
in their own Land, and all places where they have been d^spersed, as the Texts
and Authors in the 3. and 7. premised reasons, with the foregoing Relations out
of our English Historians attest. Therefore their readmission into England,
(especially in this unquiet season) must needs be diametrically contrary to the
scope of this Declaration; and neither in policy nor prudence to be resolved
on, but utterly rejected.

My 3d. reason shall be grounded on this clause of that Declaration: That no
person who has or shall be sequestered, or e^ected for Delinquency, or being in
actual arms for the late King against the th^n Parliament, or for Charis Stuart
his Son, etc. out of any Benefice, School, or College, shall from and after
the 1. day of December, be kept as a Chaplain or Schoolmaster in any
s^questred persons house; Nor after the 1. day of January, keep any School
public or private; Nor preach in any public place, or private meet^ng of any
other persons than those of his own family; No^ shall adm^nister Baptism, or
the Lords Supper, or Marry, etc. upon pain that every person so offending in
any of the premises sh^l be proceeded against, as by Orders (therein mentioned)
is provided: prescribing 3 months imprisonment for the 1.6 months for the 2 d,
and banishm^nt for the 3 d Offense, as I am inform^d. If native freeborn
Eng^ishmen formerly ejected out of any Benefice, College or School, only for
their old delinquency in adhering to the l^te King and Prince (though according
to their Oaths, duties and dictate of their consciences) after some years
public liberty to preach, Articles of Agreement confirmed by the Army and both
Houses, and that which some call, An Act of Oblivion, and future indemnity,
though orthodox in Doctrine, unblamable in con^ersation, and eminent in
learning, without any particular impeachment, hearing, conviction of any new
Delinquency or mi^demeanors whatsoever, must not have so much liberty as to
keep any School, or preach Gods Word in public or private, or to be
entertained in formerly sequestered Englishmens h^uses, under the foresaid
penalties at this season, only in Order to the Nations peace: Then much less
ought J^ws, mere aliens, who always have been, and still are ^^ofessed Enemies
in arms against the Person, Kingdom, Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ (which the
late Parliamen^ by their solemn Protestation, Vow and Covenant, eng^ged by all
good means to d^fend and advance) to be ent^rtained by any Engli^h Christians
or publicly or priva^ely to teach, preach, spread, propagate their Jewish
Doctrines, Errors and abo^ished Ceremonies in our Island, but to be banished
for ever from amongst us, if any o^ them should pub^ikely or privately attempt
to creep in amongst us; Else not on^y all sequestered Delinquents, but the whole
Eng^ish Nation and world too, will cry out and say, imo qui Regi parucrit pro
excommunicato habeatur: qui contra regem fecerit, a n^ a injustitiae, and
periurii absolvatur, as Sigebertus Gemblacensis. Chron. An. 1088. Writes of
Pope Hildebrand, and his Abetto^^.
the faithful loyal Chaplains, S^rvants, followers, Friends of the late K. and
Pr. though English Nativs, Freemen, ye our fellow brethren Members in Christ are
more execrable to, more injuriously, unchristianly, uncharitably dealt with by
their Fellow English Christians in present power, only for their loyalty and
conscientious adhering to their late temporal King and Prince, than the very
alien Jews, who both denied, rejected, crucified the Lord Jesus Christ, their
own tem^oral Sovereign, who M^^. 2.2. c. 27, 37. Lu. 1.32.33. Rev. 15.9.^3.
was born King of the Jews, and had this very title inscribed on his Cross;
and their and our only spiritual King and Savior, whose Honor, Power,
Kingdom, Gospel, we avowedly profess to ad^ance; and that they enjoy less
Christian or civil liberty for themselves, their wives and families necessary
subsistence, (for whom they 1. Tim. 5.8.
must provide, unless worse than Infidels) now in their Native country then the
Jews, where they must neith^r teach nor preach Christ Jesus to any in public
or private, though Gods word and their function, condition, en^oyn, 1 Cor.
9.16. 2. Tim. 4.1.2. Acts 4.19.30.
necessitate them to do both, when as these admitted Jews may (and all other
kind of Sectaries do) both teach and preach against him too in public and
private. Which restraints on these English Royalists on the one hand, and
indulged liberty to the alien Jew 1 John 4.3. 2 John 7.
Antichr^sts on the other, if now put in execution, I humbly ref^rre it to the
saddest confiderations and conscientious meditations of all in power to resolve
themselves, how scanda^ous and odious it will prove both to God and all good
men: how much it will resemble the proceedings, not only of the malicious Jews
themselves against the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, recorded, Acts 4.1. to
24. c. 5.24. to 32.1 These. 2.14, 15, 16. and of beheaded Canteries Doom, p.
107.138, 491, 199.
Canterbury, against Mr. Workman of Gloucester, whom he first prohibited from
preaching, then from teaching School and practicing Physic, to su^port himself
and his family, whereby he was reduced to great extremity; But likewise of that
detestable Apostat Emperor Ambros. Epist. l. 5. Ep. 29. Cent. Magd. 4. cap. 3.
col. 114. to 120. c. 14. col. 1438.1459. Nazianzen Oration 2. in Julianum
Socrates Schol. l. 3. c. 22. Rusfinus, l. 1. e. 28. Theodoret, l. 3. c. 20.
Nicephorus l. 10. c. 3.4.5.24, 25, 32, 33. Sozomen. l. 5. c. 22.
Julian, who out of his desperate malice to Christ, to undermine and exti^pate
Christian Relig^on without shedding the blood of Christians, first showed
himself a most zealous Christian professor, reducing the O^thodox Bishops,
Ministers, christians, whom the persecuting Arian Emperor Constantius had
exiled, and restoring them to their confiscated Bishoprics, to ingratiate
himself with the people; but not long after turning Apostat, he took away all
the privileges, honors, revenues of the Clergy, settled on them by
Constantine, with the Laws for their establishment, shut up the Churches and
Schools of the Christians, prohibiting them to preach or teach in public or
private, or to set their Children to School, unless they would renounce their
former Religion, and turn Pagans; impoverished, oppressed the Christians with
extraordinary doubled Taxes, from which the Pagans were exempted, and cast many
of them into prison. But on the contrary at the same time, he showed
extraordinary favor and affection toward the Jews, sent for the chiefest of
them to his Court, where he dicoursed with them, writing a special Letter to
them, wherein the desired their prayers for him; granted them free exercise of
their Jewish ceremonies, and sacrifices long discontinu^d, encouraged and
assisted them with moneys out of his public Treasury to re-edifie the Temple
at Jerusalem, to revive and set up all their Jewish Sacrifices and customs
there formerly used, whereupon they began to build it, till miraculously
interrupted therein; and all to vex and undermine the Christians. By which
indulged Liberty, the Jews then grew so insolent against the Christians that
they greivously persecuted diverse of them, destroyed and burn down some of
their Churches, and threatened to persecute them worse than the Pagan Romans had
done; as the Marginall Historians record more at large. The imitation of whose
proceedings now in any degree in these particulars, what harsh cons^ructions
and sad events they may produce, I refer to all wise Christian Statesmen
seriously to ponder, for their own and our Religions honor and Security.

My 4. argument is this, The Orders for securing the peace of the Nation, which
the Declaration relates to; See here, p. 63, 64, 65. 1 H 4. rot Parl. n. 44,
47, 50. Memineritis. nihil posse judicio fieri contrarium magisquam sine
judicio proscribere aliquem Non sinit Lex decretum lege plus valere: iste cum
tot sunt leges, decretum ratum facit, leges tollit: Demosthenes, Oration contra
Timocratem, p. 200.
contrary to all the Statutes, Acts, Resolutions of our Parliaments and
Law Books forecited, upon another occasion) authorize the Major Generals and
Commissioners named in them. To banish and send into Foraign parts and
Plantations, all persons of the royal party formerly in arms, of no estate, and
living loosly, and all persons whatsoever that shall appear by their words or
actions to adhere to the party of the late King or his Son, and to be dangerous
Enemies to the peace of the Commonwealth; even without and before any Legal
indictment, trial, conviction of any particular crime, for which a Sentence of
Banishment is prescribed by our Laws: or any Judgment or Act of Parliament
inflicting this heavy Punishment upon them, far worse to many than death it
self. Now I shall earnestly entreat in the name and fear of God, all those whom
it most concerns, to consider and determine in their own retired thoughts, how
unjust, un-righteous, unreasonable, unchristian and more then Parcit cognatis
macults similis sera, etc. Juvenal.
brutish, it will seem to all Freeborn English men, and conscientious
christians, both at home and abroad, and what great scandals it may bring, both
upon our Nation, Government, and Religion it self, in this manner, (and on this
old account alone) to banish these christian English Freemen out of their
Native country, both from their Wives, children, Kindred, and Gods own public
Ordinances; and at the self-same time to call in foraign Infidel Jews,
(greatest Enemies to Christ himself and Christians, and in that respect more
dangerous to the peace and welfare of the Nation than those thus to be
banished) to supply their places, even against an express old Judgment, and
Edict of the whole Kingdom in Parliament, for their perpetual exile. What a sad
pernicious Mat. 7.2. Luke 6.37.38. and Rev. 13.10. Obad. 15. and Joel 3.6, 7, 8.
president it may prove in future ages, (especially to the Authors of it and
their posterities by divine retalliation, as the Ae^ian Variae Hist. l. 13. c.
24. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 3. c. 24. Caelius Rhodiginus Antique Lect. l. 5. c. 44.
Athenian Ostracisme did to Clisthenes who invented it and was the first exiled
by it.) upon every new revolution to banish all English freemen of a contrary,
party, and call in Forraigners in their rooms: Whether it will not revive that
ancient complaint of Lib. 5. Epist. 33. and Cent. Mag. 12. ca. 14.
Petrus Cluntacensis. Lex nam vetusta sed vere diabol^ca ab ipsis Christianis
Principibus processit, etc. Manet inultum scelus detestabile in Judaeo, quod
exilio vel horrenda morte suspendit punitur in Christiano. Pinguescit inde and
deliciis afflu^t Iudaeus, unde laqueo suspend^tur Christianus? And whether upon
consideration of this and the precedent reasons deduced from these
Declarations, and all the premises, they ought not peremptorily to conclude
against the Jews present and future readmission into England?

I shall close up all with an Answer to the two principal Allegations for their
reception into our Realm.

1. The main and on^y conscientious Argument for their introduction, is this;
That it may be a very probable hopeful means of the general calling and
conversion of the Jewish Nation to the Christ an Faith, which has been so long
prayed for and expected by Christians, and seems now approaching; which their
seclusion from us may much obstruct.

Not to enter into any large debate of this conversion of the Jews, wherein
learned See Oecotampadius Hyperius, Osiand. Peter Martyr, Bucer, Melan^thon,
Calvin, Selneccerus, Marlorat, Pareus, Willet, Wilson, and others on Romans 11.
Dr. Prideaux, Orat. 6. de Vocatione Judaeorum. Dr. Willet, de Generali and
novissima Judaeorum conversione. Purchase Pilgrim. l. 2. c. 21.
Orthodox Divines and Writers, are much divided. I say, 1. That I could never
yet be satisfied, that there shall be such a general call and conversion of the
whole or major part of the Nation of the Jews, as some expect, but only of
every small electremnant of them, The He^e p. 63, 64, 65, 66.
forecited Texts, with Is. 30.8, 9, 10, 11. Now go write it before them in a
Table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come FOR EVER and
EVER, That this is a rebellious people, children that will not hear the Law of
the Lord, which say to the Seers see not, and to the Prophets, prophecy not
unto us right things, etc. cause the holy one of Israel to depart from before
us. Luke 20.16, 17, 18. Mat. 21.41, 42, 43, 44, 45, John 1.11.12. Romans
9.27.26.33. c. 11.2, 5, 7, 8. contradicting such a general conversion of them,
and that of Romans 11.26.27, 28. And so all Israel shall be saved: being meant
only of the Elect, and true Israel of God, both Jews and Gentiles, as many
judicious Expositors, and Romans 2, 26, 27, 28, 29. c. 9.6, 7, 8. c. 11.1. to 8.
Gal. 3.7, 9, 14, 16, 22, 28, 29 c 6.16. seem to expound it, not of the whole
Jewish Nations calling and salvation at the last. 2ly. It is agreed by most who
expect such a general calling and conversion of the Jews Paraeus Wil^^t, Peter
Ma^tyr. Wilson on the place, and Dr. Prideaux, Oral. 6.
That it shall not be till the fulness of the Gentiles become in, as Rom, 11,
24, 25. resolves, And whether this fulness be yet come in, there being so
many Gentile Nations yet See Purchase Pilgrimage, and Pilgr^m. Edwa^d B^^rewood
his Inqui^y touching the diversity of Religions through the chief par^s of the
wo^^d.
unconverted, especially in Asia, Africa, and America, and those infinitely
exceeding the Gentiles yet converted to the Gospel, let those consider who now
expect the Jews conversion. 3ly. If this fulness of the Gentiles conversion
to Christ, must preceed the general calling of the Jews, as a necessary
preparative and introduction thereunto, then we ought by this allegation in the
first place to call the Turks, Tartars, Persians, Chinoys, Indians, and all
other unconverted Gentile Nations with their Religions into England, and first
convert them to the Christian faith, before we bring in the Jews, whose
conversion is to succeed theirs, and the Gentiles fullness: And then we shall
have Religions enough in England to please all Novellists, and a thousand
aliens to each English Native. 4ly, There are far more express, direct
promises, texts, grounds, both in the Ps. 2.8. Ps. 22.27. Ps. 65.2, Ps. 72.1 to
18. Ps. 67.3.4.6.7 Ps. 86.9, 10. Ps. 100.1, 2, 3, 4. Ps. 148, 11, 12. 1. Kin.
8.43 Isay 2.1, 2.3, 4. c. 9.2.7. c. 11, 10. c. 18.7. c. 35.1, 2, etc. c. 40.4,
5. c. 41.2. c. 42.1, 6, 7, 10 11, 12, 16. c. c. 49.6, 7, etc. 20, 21, 22, 23,
24 c. 54.1, 2, 3, 4 c. 55.4, 6.1. ^. 56 5, 7, 8. c. 60. throughout, c. 61.5, 6,
9. c. 62.2. c. 65.1 c. 66.19. to 24. Jer. 16.19. Dan. 7.14, Hag. 2 7. Mic. 4.1.
to 8. Mal. 1.10. Hos. 1.10. c. 2.23. Genesis 49.10.
Old and Mat. 12.21. c. 28.19, 20 Mar. 16.15. Luke 2.32. Job. 7.25. Act^ 9.25.
c. 10.1. etc 44.65. c. 11.1.18. c. 13.42. to 49. c. 14.27. c. 15.3. to 24. c.
16.4. to 13. c. 17.12 c. 18.8.10. etc. c. 19.10. c. 21.25. c. 22.21. c, 26.20,
21, 22, 23. c. 28.28. Romans 1.13. c. 9.24.30 c. 10, 12, 13, 18, 19, 20. c.
11.11, 12, etc. 25.30. c. 15.8. to 30. c. 16.4.26. 1 Cor. 12.2. to 24. Gal.
2.2.16. c. 3.14. Ephesians. 2.1.11. to 22. c. 3.6. to 12. Col. 1.6.23, 26, 27. 1
T^^: 2.1. to 9. c. 3.16. 2 Timothy 1.11. c: 4.17. Rev. 5.10. c. 6.9, 10. c. 11.15.
c. 14.1.3.6.7.
New Testament, for the calling, conversion of all Gentiles, and yet
unconverted Heathen Nations to the faith of Christ, then of the Jewish Nation:
not one Nation of them (for ought we read) being so far rejected, broken off,
and given up to an obduration of heart, and blindness of mind, by Gods
judicial decree, as we read the Jews to be; Isa. 6.9, 10, 11, c. 8 14.15, 16.
c. 29.9, 10, 11, 12. Mat. 13.14, 15. Mar. 4.11, 12. Lu* 8.10. John 12.37, 38,
39, 40. Act 28.25, 26, 27, 28. Romans 11.7, 8, 9, 10. Therefore our prayers and
endeavors ought first to be for the conversion of all Gentiles yet unconverted
to the faith, being more hopeful, more successful in all probability, than
our prayers, endeavors for the Jews conversion, at least till the Gentiles
fulness be come in. 5ly, Admit either a general or special calling and
conversion of the Jews in the latter end of the world; yet the calling of them
into England to cohabit with us in such a manner as they now desire, is no ways
necessary for that end. For 1. it is no where declared in Gods word, that they
must be called in England, or by English men. 2ly. If they were principally to
be converted by English Divines or Laics, we may with more ease, less danger
and prejudice to our Nation and Religion, send English Divines and Laics into
other foreign parts where they now reside, to instruct, teach, convert them to
the faith, than call them into England to convert them now, in this giddy,
unsettled, apostatizing age, wherein they are likelier to gain a thousand
English Proselytes to their Judaisme, than we one Jewish convert to
Christianity, if introduced with their Synagogues and Jewish ceremonies;
perhaps their hopes of such a harvest here, is the principal motive that they
are so pressing to be now admitted again into our English climate, without
delay. 3ly. If we admit them with all their Jewish worship, Synagogues,
Ceremonies, as they now propose, it will be rather a means to harden, then
convert them; a 1 Timothy 2.3 10. Romans 3 8.
doing of evil that good may come of it: a swallowing down of a certain deadly
poison, in hope to correct it with a subsequent antidote; and to set up a
present Rev. 2.9. c. 3.9.
Synagogue of Satan, upon hopes hereafter to convert it into a Church of
Christ. 4ly. God can convert them in any other Countries, as well as in
England, and by any other Christian Nations, as well as English, as he has
done See Cent. Mag 4.10 13. c. 14. Pa^^ns Com. in To. 13. p. 1101. Here p. 17.
Antonini Chron. pars 2. Tit. 16.1.2. and Tit. 17.
some few of them in all ages as Hieron: a fide, and Petrus Alphonsus, Lyra,
Tremel. three eminent Divines and Writers, amongst others: And there being as
learned able Protestant Divines in Holland, Germany, France, Denmark, as any
in England, if they cannot convert them, what hopes have we to do it? 5ly.
Conversion of their hearts to the truth of the Gospel, and saving Grace, is Je^
31 18. Eph^ 2 1. etc. John 3 8. c 12.40. (...). 2 13.
only the work of God, not men, who can work it when, where, and by whom he
pleases, and is not tied either to place or persons, much less to our English
climate to effect it. And, it is Gods and Christ's usual prescribed way of
converting Nations, People, to send Apostles, Ministers to preach the Gospel
to, and convert them, in the Countries, places where they dwell; not to call
them into another Foreign Land where the Gospel first shined, or where it is
entertained: as he sent his Apostles from Jerusalem into all the world, to
convert the Gentiles, not called them all to Jerusalem or Palestine, to be
there instructed and converted, Mat. 9.38. c. 10.5.6. c. 28.19, 20. Mar. 16.15.
Isay 2, 3, 4. Acts 9.15. c. 10.20. c. 22.12. Ephesians. 3.8. 2 Timothy 4.17.3. John 7.
Why then we should take this newfound contrary way, of calling the Jews in to
us to convert them, and not rather send out Ministers to them, I cannot
discern; The rather, because the Surius Council. Tom. 4.57. Fox Acts and p. ^
M^n. (...) 1. (...) 13 un. (...) ella and An^^^^ca, Tit. (...)
Council of Basil, An. 143 1. Sessio 19. prescribes this course both for the
converting of the unbelieving Jews and Gentiles to the Orthodox Faith; That all
Diocesans should yearly, at appointed times, provide certain men well learned
in holy Scriptures, and in the Tongues, to preach and explain the truth of the
Catholic Faith, IN SVCH PLACES WHERE THE JEWS AND OTHER INFIDELS DID DWELL,
in such sort, that they acknowledging their error, might forsake the same. To
which preaching they should compel all of both Sexes that were at years of
discretion to resort, by interdicting them commerce with Christians, and other
fitting penalties. Provided, the Diocesans and Preachers should behave
themselves toward them mercifully, and with all charity, whereby they might
win them to Christ, not only by declaring of the truth, but also by other
Offices of humanity. 6. If the observation of learned Comment. on Romans 11. p.
1101, 1102. See Sir Edw. Sands his Relation of the State of Religion. etc.
Paraeus be true, that the over flowing of all sorts of wickednesses, crimes,
murders, wars, oppressions, rapines, injustice, tyranny, cruelty, extortions,
usuries, the infinite multiplicity, contrariety of Sects, Schisms, Religions,
and unchristian, heathenish, atheistical practices of one Christian toward
another, be principal obstacles to hinder the Jews conversion, especially
amongst Protestants (as these, with idolatrous worship of Images, Saints, and
the Hestia amongst Papists) than the calling of them now into England, where
See my Q^a^ers U^mas^ed: and New Discovery of Free State Tyran^^.
all these abound more than ever heretofore, and more than in other Nations,
will be a means more to harden them, and hinder their conversion, then any
furtherance thereunto: the rather, because the desperate Apostasy, and
atheistical actions of sundry late eminent Professors, have caused many English
Christians to turn Antiscripturists, Seekers, Atheists, and like the Jews, to
repute Christ and Christianity mere Fables. 7ly. Most of the Jews, who since
their dispersion have been baptized, and turned Christians in any age or place,
have done it either out of fear, to save their lives, or estates, when
endangered by po^ular tumults, or judgments of death denounced against them for
their Crimes; or for fear of banishment, or by coercion of penal Laws, not
cordially and sincerely, they still playing the Jews in private upon every
occasion, and renouncing their baptism and christianity at last, either before
or at their deaths, as our own (...) P. 9, 10, 12.^^.
forecited Historians; Synodus Nicaena 2 Can 8. Surius council. Tom, 3. p. 193.
the 4th Council of Toledo, cap. 58, 59, 62.63. Iustiniani Codicis l. 1. Tit.
10. de Ap^states I^o^, Gregorius Teronersis, lib. 6. Bibl. Patrum. ^^m. 6. pars
2. p. 467. Leges Wisigethorum, lib. 12. Tit. 23 Vincersius Beluacensis Spec.
Hist. l. 29. c. 25. Roderi^us Tel^tanus, de rebus Hisp. l. 2. c. 17. Avertin^s,
Annal. Boiorum l. 5. p. 468: Abbas Uspergensis Chron. p. 227.228. and (...) 147
(...). 3 (...). l. 19. ^. 481, 482. (...). l. 1. ^. 19. ^. 72.73. S^m. Reselia.
Tit. Judaeus
other authors attest. Of which we have this late memorable History recorded by
Munster in his Cosmography, l. 2. c. 19. f. 72, 73. There being no less than
one h^ndred twenty four thousand Jews banished out of Spain, Anno 1492. leaving
all their gold, jewels, houses behind them, and paying two ducats a poll to
the King for their transportation into Portugal; some of them there seemingly
turned Christians, and were baptized, but yet secretly practiced their Judaical
rites, being Christians only in show, but not in heart, observing the
Passover, and eating flesh with the Jews: Upon the discovery hereof, there
arose a great tumult of the people against them in Lisbon, the people
complaining thereof to the King, Anno 1506. Whereupon the King commanded 16 of
them to be imprisoned, and at last dismissed them without other punishment.
Upon this the Citizens conspiring against the King and Governor, raised a
comm^tion against these Jews and false Christians, slaying all those false
converted new Jews they could find throughout the City, to the number of six
hundred, whom they likewise burnt; which example spreading into the Country,
there were slain in the City and Country of these false Jewish, converts, to
the number of 1630: which the King hearing of, being then absent, he was so
incersed against the Jews, that he imprisoned very many of them, whereof some
were burned, others beheaded, others hanged on Gibbets, and all the rest
spoiled of their goods, then expelled and banished the Kingdom, A sad judgment
on them for their Hypocritical conversion; and such converts mostly we are like
to find them, and none other. Whereupon the 2 Council of Nice, Canon. 3.
decreed, That no Jews should be admitted suddenly into the Christian Church,
nor baptized, unless they publicly certified, that they were converted, out
of a pure sincere faith, with all their heart, and utterly renounced their
judaical rites. And the Council of ^gatha Can. 34. decreed, That the Jews who
desired to turn Christians should remain for 8 months space amongst the
Catechimeni, for trial of the sincerity of their conversion before they were
baptized, upon this ground, because they frequently returned to their
infidelity and vomit again Judaei qui eorum perfidia FREQUENTER ad vomitum
reddit. Which Alexander Alensis summa Theolog. pars 2. qu. 161. approves. 7ly.
If any private Jews out of mere conscience or sincere desires of being
converted to the Christian faith, shall upon that account alone desire
admission into England, to be instructed by our English Divines, I suppose no
English Christians will oppose, but further their desires herein, and
contribute both their prayers and best endeavors for their conversion, and if
there be cause, admit them also into our Churches Communion upon real
testimonies of the truth of conversion in, and work of grace upon them; which
is as much as they can desire at our hands; But to admit whole multitudes and
Colonies of infidel Jews at once into our Nation, who neither desire nor
pretend conversion to Christianity, (but the quite contrary) together with the
free use of their Jewish Synagogues, Rites, Ceremonies, (which they strongly
insist upon) to establish their Judaism, make way for their long expected
Messia his coming, increase their wealth and traffic, and enable them to
recover their ancient Country and Kingdom again, the only things they now aim
at as Menasseh Ben Isreal's printed addresses proclaims to all the World, is
such an Impious, Unchristian, Antichristian dangerous president (glossed over
only with a possibility of their future conversion) as no sincere English
Christians can approve of, nor the Jews themselves desire: For as the Jews by
Deuteronomy. 7.5. Exodus 23.35. c. 34.13, 14.2. Chron. 30.14. c. 31.1 c. 34.3. to 9.33
Levit. 17.12. c. 24.16.22. Nunn. l. 5.16.30, 31. Deuteronomy. 31.12. See Mr. Seldom.
de Jure naturali and Gentium, juxta Disciplinam Eorum. l. 2 and 3. Judaei non
permiserunt Gentiles secummanere qui Gentilitiis ritibus semerebant, at eos
permiserunt qui uberum Deum colebant. Thomas Waldenses Doctrinales Fidei. l. 3.
c. 5. Sect. 1. p. 4.18.
Gods own Laws, and their own Jewish Rabbis precepts, neither might, nor yet
would permit any Heathen Gentiles heretofore to dwell among them, nor to set up
any Altars, Images, Idols, Groves, or exercise any Idolatrous worship amongst
them, or to blaspheme, reproach their God or Religion, under pain of death, if
they transgressed therein; There being the self same Law of God in these things
both to Gentiles, and Jews: And like as they afterward would not permit the
Apostles and Christians in Jerusalem, or any other Cities, for to preach the
Gospel, and exercise the Christian Religion freely, but raised up present
tumults against and persecuted and cast them out thence, as 1 These. 2.14, 15,
17. the whole History of the Acts, and premises abundantly testify: So by the
very self same justice and equity, they can neither now demand nor expect that
we, or any Christian Realm or State should tolerate or connive at, much less
openly countenance and protect them in the public or private exercise of their
Iudaisme, or Jewish Rites, and Blaspemies against our crucified Savior, and
his Gospel: All then that English Christians can do for them, is to Romans 10.1.
1. Tim. 1.1. p. 3.
desire, and pray for the conversion of all Gods elect amongst them in his due
time, by such means as he shall think meetest, and to instruct them in the
faith, by learned Ministers sent to them, if they desire it; but not to admit
them (and perchance many disguised Jesuits, Papists and Friars with them)
promiscuously into our Nation; to undermine our Church and Religion, and undo
many thousand Souls, it being our duty, 1 Cor. 10.32.
as to give no just offense to the Jew, so neither to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God, whom their admission amongst us, especially upon Manasseth
Ben-Israels motives and addresses, (tending nothing at all to Piety or their
converversion,) but worldly gains and obstinate perseverance in their Jewish
Antichristian Rites and Superstitions will most justly offend. Lastly those
Popes and Popish Princes, who have hertofore admitted any Jews to cohabit
amongst them have done it under these several cautions and limitations
prescribed to them by their Ju^tiaiani Codicis l, l. 1. Tit. 12. de J^daeis
Frede^icus Lindebrog^s Codex l^gum Antiq^. leges Wisegothorum. l. 12. Tit. 2,
3. Lau^. Su^ius, Council. Tom. 2. p. 277.322, 366, 608.646, 634, 674, 679, 698,
735, 1042. Tom. 3. p. 2.6.7.466, 467.552, 670.726, 754, 632, 753, 495, C^ncil
Basilens. Self. 19. Surius Tom. 4. p. 57, 56. A^^xander, 3 De^^et. l. 5. Tit.
6. c. 4, 5, 7, 8. Innocentii, ^. Opera. T^m. 1. p. 488. Tom. ^. p. 798 805. G^^
Greg. Ep. 7. Ep. 15.113.10. tiau Cause. 28. qu. 1. Pa^o^^^i^an, (...) ^^n^i
Co^s^i^, Rep^r^or^^^m in (...). Tit. Judaeus Cardinalis Hostinensis Summa cum
additionibus, Nicholai Superami^, l. 5. ^it. 11. de Judaeis and Saracenis and
eorum servis Baptista Trovomala Summa Rosella Tit. Judae^s Angelus de Clavasio
Summa Angelica. Tit. Iudaeus, The Zeru^ a Praxis Escopalis pars, 1 Tit.
Judaeus, Centur. Magd. 12 c. 7. Iac. de Graff^is Decipi. Au earum pars, 2. lib.
2. cap. 23. de Judaeis and Saracenis Calderni^s ac Judas Cons^l. Claus. 37. H.
3. m. 18. Clause 7. E. 1. m. 6. dors.
Laws, Councils, Canons, Decrees, Divines and Canonists. 1. That they should
build no new Synagogues, nor repair any old o^es qu^te demolished. 2. That
where there were old Synagogues formerly used by them standing; they should
only repair, but not enlarge or build them higher than before, nor
extraordinarily adorn them. 3. That they should not stir out of their doors on
good Friday, nor open their doors, windows, shops, or do any servile work on
the Lords days or other solemn Christian Festivals. 4. That they shall utter no
blasphemous words, speeches against God, Christ, Christians, or Christian
Religion, nor manifest their open contempt of them by gestures or actions,
under pain of pecuniary, corporal, and capital punishments, according to the
quality of the offense. Yea King Eringius Leges Wisigothorum, l. 2. Tit. 3. c.
3.4.7. and 12. Council of Toledo c. 9. prohibited the Jews the use of
circumcision, the observation of their Jewish Passeovers, Sabbaths, differences
of meats, and other Jewish Rites under pain of whipping, confiscation of goods,
loss of Noses, Genitals, Banishment, 5. That they shall be admitted to no
degress of learning, honor, dignity, office or preferment whatsoever in state
or Church, because it is most absurd and unjust, that any blasphemer of Christ,
should exercise any power or authority over Christians in any Christian State.
6. That * they should neither eat nor drink, nor have any daily familiarity or
communion with Christians, nor entertain any Christian man or woman in or out
of their houses, either as a Servant, or Nurse to their Children, or otherwise,
nor yet administer physic to any Christian in his sickness, lest any simple
Christians should be seduced by them to Judaisme by these means. 7. That all
Jews both males and females should always wear a specicial Claus. 2 H. 3. m. 10
D^rs. Claus. 37. H. 3. m. 18.

See here, p. 35. Munsteri Cos^e. l. 4. c. 44. p. 1^8. Council La^eranums^^.
Innocent. 3. c. 65. ^urius Tom. 3. ^. 753.


badge or sign in all places upon their outward Garments or heads, whereby they
might be distinguished from C^ristians, and known by all men to be Jews, to
avoid commixtion and communion between them and Christians which otherwise
would happen. 8. That they should be disabled to bear witness, or give in any
legal testimony against Christians, or to purchase any advowson or
Ecclesiastical preferment, or to bequeath any legacy to the Nation or
Corporation of the Jews, or to exercise usury amongst them. 9. That they should
be subject both to the Ecclesiastical and Temporal Courts and Judges for all
offenses properly punishable by them which they should commit. 10. That they
should pay all predial and personal Tithes to the Christian Ministers where
they lived. 11. That though they should not be compelled to be baptized or turn
Christians against their will, yet they should at certain times S^^ Pat. 8.
(...) m. 37.
be all constrained to come to the Sermons of such Christian Priests and
Ministers as were appointed to instruct them in the Christian faith, and to
preach unto them to convert them. 12. That their Servants and Children being
Jews; when once baptized and turned Christians, should no more cohabit with,
nor be under their power. 13. That upon their conversion to Christianity, all
their goods and money gotten by usury and cheating should be distributed to
pious uses, and the rest only retained for their proper use and livelihood. 14
That if any of them after their baptism apostatized and turned Jews again, or
fell into Heresy, they should be proceeded against and burned, executed as
Apostates, and Heretics. 15. That no Christians should communicate with them
in any kind, except in buying and selling, nor cohabit with, serve them as a
Nurse or Servant, under pain of excommunication, Yet notwithstanding all these
restrictions and cautions, we read of few Jews really converted by them, and
that the Jews have Zon^^as Tom. 3. Centur. M^^^l. 9. c. 14. col. 614. Ma^ianus
S^^us, General Hist. of Spanish. 775 958. Bzovius Annal. Eccl. p. An. 1259, n.
3.
perverted and seduced sundry Christians to Iudaisme, and made them professed
Jews; persuaded other Christians to observe Mosaical ceremonies, besides
Baptism, whereby they made a confused Chaos of Religion; yea they corrupted
Michael Balbus the Emperor so far, that he commanded Christians to fast on
their Sabbath, and made him as it were a sink of Sects, as Zonaras and others
record; And Frederic. and Isabella banished them out of Spain upon this ground,
that they induced many of the Nobles in Andaluzia to become Jews, as Manasseh
Ben-Israel himself acknowledged, p. 15.25. Yea, Sedechias the Jewish Physician
Martini Poloni supputationes. Anno 876. Sigeberti chron. Grimston and others in
his life.
poisoned the Emperor Charles the Bald his body, as well as others in that age
and after poisoned other Christians souls. What mischiefs then they may do to
men's bodies in England, by poisoning of them, (as they did the Sea here, p.
35.78.
English Barons heretofore, and Dr. Lopez a Jew, bribed by the Spaniard would
have poisoned Cambden, Speed, and others in her life.
Queen Elizabeth of late whom he professed, he loved as well as he did Jesus
Christ himself) and what desperate venom they may infuse into their souls by
their Jewish Doctrines, Synagogues, and Antichristian Ceremonies, if admitted
without, such or upon these restrictions, or any other, let all prudent
Christians resolve: Since Constitut. l. 2. Constit. 22. Oper. Tom. 2. p. 798.
Pope Innocent the 3. himself, and Summa li. 5. tit. 11. De Judaeis, etc.
Cardinal Hostiensis, with other Popish Canonists, who have tolerated them,
give us this account of their requital for it, in positive terms. Iudaei
ingrati, pro gratia reddunt contumeliam, pro familiaritate contemptum,
impendentes nobis illam retributionem, quam juxta vulgar proverbium, MVS IN
PERA, SERPENS IN GREMIO, IGNIS IN SINV, suis consueverunt Hospitibus exhihere,
Nam sunt quidam (quod nefandum est dicere) Nutrices Christianas habentes, non
permittunt lactare filios cum corpus Christi sumpserunt, nisi prius per triduum
lac effuderint in latrinam, (quasi intelligunt, quod corpus Christi
incorporetur, and ad secessum descendat.) and alia inaudita committunt, and
detest^bilia, quae a fidelibus sunt minime toleranda, ne si haec n^gligunt quae
inducunt confusionem fidei INDIGNATIONEM DIVINAM INCVRRANT. As therefore
Consil. 87. and 264.
Oldradus de Ponte; Abbbot Panormitan, Repertorium in Ab. Panormitan. Tit.
Judaeus Jac. de Graff. Decis. Aur. Tom. 2. l. 2. c. 23 Sect. 60.
Antonius Corsetus, and other Popish Canonists conclude positively. That
Christians and Christian Kings may lawfully expel and banish all Jews and
Infidels out of their Realms, though peaceable, for their Infidelity, and other
just causes: So may all English Protestants likewise upon the premised reasons
conclude: we may as justly, as lawfully now keep them from re-entring into
England, notwithstanding the pretense of their conversion to the Faith, which I
hope I have satisfactorily answered.

The 2. Allegat. 2
Allegation for bringing in the Jews is merely politic, That it will bring in
much present and future gain and money to the State, and advance trading. This
is the Argument Menassah Ben-Israel most insists on, p. 1. to 11.3. How
profitable the Jews are, adding, That profit is a most powerful motive, and
which all the world prefers before all other things. And therefore (writes he)
we shall handle that point first. Though he handles it so, that every eye may
see he aims more at his own Nations profit, benefit, advance, than ours.

I answer, Answer.
1. That if this argument overpoysed not the scales, that of conscience, (the
hopes of their conversion) would be lighter than the dust of the balance and
stick with no man, their money being the only engine, which has opened the gate
and passage for them into any Christian Kingdoms at first, and made new
entrance for them when they have been expelled, as (...) council. Tom. 3. p. 534.
Concilium Toletanum, 4. c. 57. and others inform us. This opened their first
passage into See ^ere, p. 2.6.
England, Hi^ r^mus Con^^^. ^gius de Po^^^gal et Castil. unione. p. 1054, 1065.
Opu^^^^s Chronog. p. 429
Spain, Portugal: and Philip Augustus who banished them out of France, An.
1182. Postea vero quum propter bella inopia laboraret pecuniae, accepta grandi
a Iudaeis pecunia redditum eis concessit and domicilium Parisiis, as Cosmogr.
l. 2. p. 171. Vincentius, l. 29. c. 25, Gaguinus and others.
Munster and others inform us. And this kept them so long in England
heretofore, till their very banishment; A sign we love their money better than
their souls or our own. 2ly, This argument, for their readmission, is but
wordly, carnal, sensual: the very same with that of Hamer to the Shechemites,
when he would persuade them to be circumcised, and turn Jews, Genesis 23.25. shall
not their cattle and their substance, and every beast of theirs be ours? only
let us consent unto them, and they will dwell with us. An argument only fit for
such whom the Apostle characterizeth, Phil. 3.18, 19. For many walk of whom I
have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the
Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose
glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things; Or for such Princes or
Governors as God of old complained thus of Ezech. ^2.27.
Her Princes in the midst thereof are like Wolves ravening the prey, and to
shed blood, and TO DESTROY SOULS TO GET DISHONEST GAIN. It proceeds from such
Ier. 22.17.
whose eyes and hearts are not but for their Covetousnes Phil. 2.20, 21.
who all seek their own, not the things that are Jesus Christ's. And if the root
of it be covetousness Ephesians. 5.3. Col. 3.5.
which is Idolatry, which Christ commands all Lu. 12.15.
to take heed and beware of, and Ephesians. 5, 3.
is not so much as to be named (much less practiced) amongst Christians, whose
Heb. 13.5.
conversation ought to be without covetousness, and they to rest contented
with those things they have; Because 1 Timothy 6. ^2.80.
They that will be rich fall into temptations, and a snare, and into many
foolish and noysom lusts which drown men in perdition and destruction; For the
Love of money is the root of all evil, which whiles some coveted after, they
have been sedu^ed (or erred) from the faith, (as thousands of late years have
been) and pierced themselves through with many sorrows, Therefore it is not so
much as once to be named or insisted on amongst us, unless we will renounce
our Christianity, make great gain our only godliness, instead of making 1 Timothy
^ c. 6.
Godliness with contentment our great gain; Mat. 26, 15, 16. c. 27.3, 4.
betray and sell our Savior Christ again to the Jews, like Judas, for thirty
pieces of silver, without repenting and making restitution of it to the Jews,
as he did; and most blasphemously transfer our very Saviors most blessed
Deity, and stamp his most sweet and highest Title Mat. 1, 23.
GOD WITH US, upon a contemptible piece of white and yellow shining clay, as
some have lately done on all our New State coin (as if it were the only God
with them and us) how christian-like, let themselves determine. 3ly. God
himself who says Ezech. 22 12, 13.
Behold I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain, which thou have
greedily gained of thy neighbor by oppression, and other unlawful means; will
certainly smite his hand at this gain by the Jews readmission. And therefore
let us give that resolute answer to the Jewish Agents, if they proffer to
purchase an indenization amongst us by their gold, as Acts 8.18, 19 20.
St. Peter once did to Simon Magus in another case: Thy money perish with thee;
Thou have neither part nor lot in this business, for thy heart is not upright
with God. 4ly. None ever gained by the Jews introduction or continuance in any
Christian State, but the King and some of his bribed Officers, and that by
oppressing, squeezing, fleecing, taxing: excoriating, eviscerating, crucifying,
pillaging, plundering the poor Jews in such an unchristian, inhuman, illegal,
unrighteous manner, against Exodus 22.21. c. 23. Mic. 2.1, 2. c. 3.2.3, 4, 9.
Zeph. 3.3. Ezech. 22.27.28. Jer. 22.17. Mal. 37. Levi^. 13.34. Baptista
^rou^mola, Sum Roselia Iudaeus. 2. Angelus de Clavasio, Sum Angelica Iudaeus,
sect. 30 Oldradus Consil. 83.264. Iacobus de Graffiis Decis. Au^ea^um. Tom. 2.
l. 2. c, 23. Sect. 60. Gratian. Cause. 23 qu. 7.
the express commands of God, as made both Christians and Christianity most
detestable to them, brought a secret curse of God upon all those unrighteous
gains as also upon their very persons and Government, (witness See Mat.
^a^is, and others in their lives.
King John, and Henry the 3d.) and encouraged them to oppress, fleece and
pillage their Native Subjects, by illegal Taxes and Projects, and to use them
rather like Jews than Christians, enforcing them thereby to take up arms
against them for their Laws, Liberties and Properties just defense, as those
Kings reigns, and others sufficiently evidence. 5ly, The introduction of the
Jews into England and other Nations, never advanced the public wealth of the
Natives and Republike, Here p. 33.34.38. to 46.74.75, John S^owes Survey n^
London 1633. p. 288, 289.
but much impaired it by their Vsuries and Deceits, clipping and falsifying
moneys, engrossing all sorts of commodities into their hands, usurping the
Natives trades, and becoming such intolerrable grievances to them, that they
were never quiet till they were banished, as their greatest Annoyance, and
purchased their Exiles even with public Subsidies granted to their Kings to be
quit of them; as the Here p. 43. to 63.
premises abundantly evidence. 6ly. The Trade of this Nation flourished more
after their banishment hence, then ever it did before; and their introduction
now, will but supplant, undo our English Merchants and other Natives, to
enrich them, and some few other Grandees, who shall share with them in their
spoils and unrighteous gains: as they utterly supplanted, impoverished, ruined
the City of Norlingen in Germany where they intruded themselves in great
numbers by the Emperors privileges; whereupon the Citizens Anno Dom. 1290.
being reduced to extreem poverty by them, rose up in arms and slew a geeat
number of them, without destinction of age or sex; for with the Citizens were
put to so great fines by the Emperor Rodolfus and so oppressed by the Nobility
and others obliged to the Jews by morgages and moneys lent them, though the
Jews instigation, that the natives were enforced to leave both their Studies,
Trades, aend the City it self, reduced thereby to extreem penury for above 59
years space; as Cosmr. l. 3. c. 306. p. 707.
Sebastian Mu^ster. at large records. Which together with the premises,
sufficiently disproves Humble addresses p. 1 to 11.
Meuasseth Ben Isreal's Suggestion of the profit the Natives of England may
receive by their readmission. 7ly, The taking off all long continued,
uncessant, new, illegal Taxes, Excises, Imposts See my Legal and Historical
Vindication, of the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, part. 1. p. 13.
to 20.60 to 104, etc. part 2. p. 65. to 80. Si quis Mercatores novis
Thelontorum, and Pedagiorum exactionibus molestare tentaverit Christiana
communione careat, donec satisfecerit, Gratian Cause. 24. q. 3. Vincentii Spec.
Doctrine. 1, 10, c. 163.
imposed without common consent in Parliament on the Nation, engrossing,
anticipating most of the current Moneys of the Land, which are the nerves and
wheels of Trade, eating up all the Merchants, Peoples gains and labors, and
overclogging all or most Commodities imported or exported. The disbanding of
all unnecessary mercenary Forces and Garri^ons, who have devoured most of the
public and private wealth of our three Kingdoms, and extraordinarily
impoverished them, only to enrich and advance themselves; and setting up the
old unmercinary Trained Bands and Legal Militia of the Realm in their steads:
The encouraging of Merchants to bring in gold and silver Bullion, to set the
Mint on work, which has lain for the most part idle near 15 years: the
suppressing of the superfluous making, wearing, use of gold and silver lace,
wyre, gilding, which consume many thousand pounds of current coin every year:
The inhibiting of the excessive use of that late intoxicating smoke of Tobacco,
causing such a prodigal expense of money, time, and hindering more necessary,
useful, staple merchandises and plantations. The regulating of the gross
abuses of Letters of Mart, now little better than commissioned open pyracies,
occasioning the ruin of Trade and Merchandise by way of Reprisal: The ordering
according to Law, Justice, Conscience, that all prizes taken from any foraign
Enemy, or other who pillage or damage the English, by the States Ships, and men
of War, set out by the Merchants Customs, Tonnage, Poundage, Imposts, and
therewith maintained for their defense, Qui s^n^^^ (...), s^^^ere d^b^t and
commodum; is, and o^g^r to be (...) in th^s c^se.
shall be equally distributed to our English Merchants that are damnified, or
undone by them, toward the reparation of their losses, who maintain them, to
enable and encourage them in their trading (especially when much impoverished
or undone by their losses) and not at all converted or rather perverted to the
use of that some style, the Admiralty and State, or Mariners who take them; (at
whose cost they are not maintained:) The binding of all Captains of all States
men of war, See 5. E. 2. Stat. 2. Chapter 3.
to make good all the English Merchants, and their Allies losses, sustained by
their default or negligence: The Sea Mr H^^^orical V^nd^^^t^on, part 1. p.
64.103.104.
resuming of all the late alienated ancient Lands, rents, revenues of the
Crown, got into private hands, which ought to defray the constant expense of
the Government, now extorted for the most part by arbitrary new devices, out of
the exhausted peoples purses, The speedy preventing of the late unparalleld
wastes in all places of English Timber, fit for shipping, of which there is like
to be such scarcity ere long, as will both destroy our Navy, shipping Trade.
All these and every of them will far more advance the Trade and Traffic of
the Nation, and the public wealth, and give all the people far better content
and satisfaction ten thousand fold, then this New distastefull pernicious
project of bringing in the Jews: against which I shall only discharge this
ancient Surius Council. Tom. 2 p. 734, 735.
Canon of the 4th Council of Toledo in Spain, under their most religious King
Sysenandus in the year of our Lord 681. which thus batters all ecclesiastical
and temporal promoters of this allegation for filthy Lucres sake, with this
direful thunderbolt; recited and confirmed in consil. Meldenses c. 58. Surius
Tom. 3. p. 465. So great is certain men's lucre of money, that some coveting
after it, according to the Apostles saying, have erred from the faith. For many
hitherto of the Priests and Laity receiving gifts from the Jews, foster their
perfidiousnesse (or infidelity) by their patronage; who not undeservedly are
known to be of the body of Antichrist, because they act against Christ:
Therefore whatsoever Bishop or Clergy man, or secular person shall from
henceforth give his suffrage to them against the Christian faith. Either For
reward or favor,, being ( as profane and sacrilegious) really made accursed
let him be reputed, excommunicated from the Catholic Church and Kingdom of
God; because he is worthy to be separated from the Body of Christ, who is made
a Patron or Protector to the enemies of Christ.

I shall close up all with the memorable apposite History and words, of that
famous ancient Bishop of Millain St. Ambrose Amb^osii E^^st, l. 5. Epi^t. 29.
^g^bardus de Judaicis s^pe. (...). Bibl. Pa^^^^ Tom. 9. p. 516. T^ipa^t^. Hist.
l. 3. c. 1. l. 9. c. 1. Zena^es Tom. 3. cent. Ma^^. 4. col 1165.1166
The Eastern Christians, out of Christian zeal, burnt down a Synagogue of the
Jews in the Castle of Callin^co, by their Bishops instigation and command, for
which the Emperor Theodosius being much incensed against them by the Jews and
their Instruments, commanded his Lieutenant of the East to punish the people,
and the Bishop to re-edify the Synagogue for the Jews at his own costs: Of
which St. Ambrose being informed; and unable to go to the Emperor, writ an
Epistle to him, wherein he most boldly pleads the cause both of the Bishop and
people, proving by evident arguments; The burning of this Synagogue of impiety
to be just, and that the Emperor should sin both against his own and his
Kingdoms safety if he should do any thing severely against the Bishop or people
for it; Adding, that he himself was prepared rather to suffer death in this
cause, than that he should by his dissimulation make the Emperor a
Prevaricator, who had commanded such an unjust thing against the Church. After
which the Emperor coming to Millain, and St. Amb. hearing that the Jews had
built a Synagogue in the Market at Constantinople: he publicly preached
against it, and justified the peoples burning of the other Synagogue in his
Sermon before the Emperor and people: wherein amongst other passages, he used
this Speech to the Emperor himself in the person of Christ. O Theodosius! I
have made thee of an obscure private person, an Emperor, committing my flock
unto thee: I have adorned thy formerly squalid head with a Crown: I have
delivered the forces of thine Enemy unto thee, I have reduced thine Enemy
under thy power, I have made thee triumph without labor; and do thou make
mine Enemies to triumph over me? and offer contumely unto me, by preferring
those whom I have rejected, before those by whom I am worshipped? by offering
violence unto them, and suffering a Synagogue to be built in the midst of that
City, wherein I am worshipped, and my Cross adored, by those who have been my
Murderers? When St. Ambrose came forth of the Pulpit, the Emperor saying to
him: O Bishop, you have this day preached against us. He thereunto replied; He
had not spoken against him, but for him. To which the Emperor subjoyning, O
Bishop, will you have the people in a well governed Commonwealth, to have
license rashly and impudently to do what they please? St. Ambrose thereto
rejoyned: Neither is this verily to be granted, That the Jews should have
Synagogues in the midst of a Christian City, and offend the ears of the Godly
with blasphemous Prayers: Nor ought thou to Decree this, most holy Emperor;
Whereupon the Emperor being quite silenced and convinced of his error,
forthwith gave his faith and promise to St. Ambrose, to reverse his former
decree for re-building the Jews Synagogue, before he went to the Altar to
receive the Sacrament at his hands. I wish this my Demurrer may produce the
like effects, and prove a perpetual bar to the present and future read
mission of them and their Synogogues into England.

Gal. 5.2, 3, 4. Behold I Paul say unto you, that if As every Jew^is.
ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing; For I testify again to
every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole Law: Christ
is become of no effect unto you; whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye
are fallen from Grace.

1 John 4.3. Every Spirit that The case of every Jewish Spirit.
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, and THIS
IS THE SPIRIT OF ANTICHRIST, whereof ye have heard that it should come, and even
now already is in the world.

Alexandri ab Alexandro Iuris periti Neapolitani, Genialium dierum lib. VI.
cap. VII. Querebat aliquando exme, dum Comae agerem, Raphael Volaterranus, vlr
insignis doctrinae and virtutis, cui ad mores emend atissimos gravitas libero
homine digna, non modicam accessionem faciebat, quid causae foret, quod cum
causarum patrociniis and foro usque a pueritia essem addictus, illis
posthabitis, and quasi forensibu negotiis praetermissiis, in his studiis
mitioribus ita me oblectatem, ut causarum patrociniis bellum indixisse viderer?
cui hoc causae referebam, quod leges, quae ad communem utilitatem editae,
studio and labor maximo quaesitae and meditatae nobis forent, neque ab his qui
jura darent, coli, neque perinde ut oporteret, praecipi viderem, doleremque
juri dicundo illos plerunque peaesidere, qui eas vel turpiter ignorarent, vel
per gratiam and sordes facile corrumpi sinerent: and quibus servandarum legum
praecipua imminet cura, hi maxim legum scita contemnerent: quibus rebus
effici, ut tot scita and decreta veterum monumentis nobis tradita, maximisque
ingeniis elaborata, and tam pensiculate expensa, unus homunculus nequissimus
audacissimusque, ignarus legum, judiciorum and fori, qui magistratui prae
esset, non salubri temperamento, nec disceptatione ac judicio, sed ausu
temerario, and omni jure neglecto, ad suam libidinem per scelus and nequitiam
everteret. Horum non minima exempla dicebam fore ea, quae dudum experti
vidimus. Nuper cum Romae custodias cognoscerem, operae precium fuit videre,
quae rerum miracula monstris and portentis similia, ac dictu fastidienda,
quaeve turpitudines ad aliquorum libidinem admitterentur contra jus fasque:
siquidem sacerdotem quempiam in his nacti sumus, gravem and sanctum virum, vita
and moribus ornatissimu^, hominem profecto honestae and magnae laudis, diu
tenebris and carcere maceratum, indignissimam fortunam subire coactum, pro eo
quod pecuniam sibi traditam ab eo qui illam furto subtraxerat, ut vero domino
restitueretur, illius jussu mandatoque restituerat suppresso autore, ipsumque
quaestionibus subdi vidimus and tormentis vexari, ut illum qui conscientia
culpae, and spe veniae adductus, abstulisse confessus fuerat, palamfaceret
delinquentisque delicta, quae ille poenitens culpae dixerat, enunciaret: quo
discrimine adactus pauper senior, confitentis peccatum and delinquentem
enunciare coactus fuit: quod quidem Scripto jure vetitum, sanctionibusque and
decretis interdictum esse constat. Rursus alium immani scelere coopertum
hominem impurissimum turpissimumque, qui maximorum criminum reus testibus,
tabulis, testimoniis, and certissimis documentis convictus fuerat, quae nec
ipse gloriabundus diffitebatur, quique legum, judiciorumque poenis saeviss^me
coercendus erat, ab eisdem ergastulis, sola praesidentis temeritate, nullo
negotio dimitti and liberari, aliasque audacias and turpitudines, ne dicam
scelera indigna audiru profatuque, quae vix credenti non modo enunciata, sed
visa and comperta fuere. Jason Matassalanus and Ludovicus Matha, quum
sacerdotalibus quibus fungebantur muneribus cedere nollent, quaesitis
occasionibus ad inimicorum libidinem, tetro carcere usque eo tenti fuere, donec
illorum arbitrio singulis ornamentis, fama, and fortunis omnibus exturbati,
quoad illis liberet, excruciati sunt, non vero judicio, sed praesidentis sola
temeritate and libidine: ne prosequar viros vitae inculpassimae, summa
integritate and fide, falsis criminibus circunuentos ab impotentibus inimicis,
miseros and laborentes, in quos graviter crudeliterque consultum vidimus, vel
ut afflictas fortunas invaderent, ipsosque de possessione and antiquissimis
sedibus deturbarent, vel ut invidorum libidini obtemperarent: aliaque in
miseros edita exempla, nulla pietate in supplices and calamitosos, eosque
innoxios turpibus judiciis conflictari, and usque premi ab his, qui gratia and
opibus plus possunt, pollentque, alios vero autores manifesti facinoris, ne
appellari quidem. Quae cum viderem, patronisque contra vim potentiorum aut
gratiam nihil praesidii esse, nihil opus frustra nos in legum controversiis,
and ediscendis tot casuum var^etatibus ^am pensiculate editis, tantum laboris
and vigiliarum suscipere, tantoque nos studio fatigari dicebam, quum ad
ignavissimi impurissimique cujusque temeritatem, qui jure dicundo praesideret,
quem leges virum bonum esse volunt, non aequo jure, sed ad gratiam and
libidinem judicia ferri, decretaque legum tanto consilio edita convelli and
labefactari viderem.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
EPistle p. 8. l. 17. servants were, r. Converts will be, l. 33. excogitavit.
p. 10. l. 10. discover. Book, p. 9. l. 8. r. multa. p. 20. l. 21. r. quesuerunt
sufflatis. p. 35. l. 10. thence from. p. 41. l. 11. r. Claus. 4. E. 1. l. 12.
r. Gamalict. l. 19. part ne. r. Regno nostro, p. 45. l. 20. Judaei. p. 62. l.
4. fifth, r. first. p. 105: l. 11. Ceremonies, l. 35. these, p. 109. l: 32:
others, r: their.

Margin: p. 35. l. 13. Geogr. p. ^9. l. ^ c: 10. p: 105. l. 1. Imo: ^.23. 1
Ti^: 5.8. p. 115. l 17. (...) l. 22. servirebant. p. 116. l. 42. Episcopalis.
l. 42. Cal^ern^nus.

The Second Part of a Short DEMVRRER TO THE JEWS Long discontinued REMITTER
into ENGLAND. Containing a Brief Chronological Collection of the most material
RECORDS in the reigns of King John, Henry 3. and Edward 1. relating the
History, Affairs, State, Condition, Privileges, Obligations, Debts, Legal
Proceedings, Justices, Taxes, Misdemeanors, Forfeitures, Restraints,
Transactions, of the Jews in, and final Banishment out of England, never
formerly published in Print: with some short useful Observations upon them.

Worthy the knowledge of all Lawyers, Scholars, Statists, and of such Jews who
desire Readmission into England.

By William Prynne Esquire, a Bencher of Linco^ns-^nne.

Amos 3.3. Can two walk together, unless they be agreed?

Gregorius lib. 7. Registri Epist. 226. Surius Tom. 2. Council. p. 698. Cum
Excellentia vestra (Reccaredus Rex Gothorum and Suevorum) Constitutionem
quandam contra Judaeorum perfidiam dedi^^et, ^i de quibus pr^^^^ fuerat,
rectuudinem vestrae mentis inflectere pecuniarum summam offe^^^ (...) sunt;
quam Excellentia vestra contempsit, and omnipotent^s Dei placere jud^^^^r
qui^^n^, auro innocentiam praetulit. Si igitur ab armato Reg^ in Sac^ificiu^
D^^ v^^sa c^^ aqua contempta, pensemus quale sacrificium omnipotenti D^o R^x
^^^u^it, qui pro amore illius non aquam, SED AURUM ACCIPERE CONTEMPSIT. Itaque
fili Excellentissime fident^^ dicam, quia liba^i^ AURUM D^mino, quod contra cum
habere noluisti.

LONDON Printed, and sold by Edward Thomas in Green Arbor, 1^56.

To the Ingenuous Reader.
THe Extraordinary Coldness and Shortness of the Time I had, to compile,
transcribe, publish my Short Demurrer to the Jews long discontinued Remitter
into England, that it might come into the world in due season, before any final
Resolves upon the late Whitehall Debates, and Consults concerning it;
necessitated me not only to omit three or four less pertinent Passages in some
of our Historians concerning the English Jews, (with some few others relating
to their misdemeanors in foraign parts) which I have since supplied; and to be
more sparing in refuting reverend Sir Edward Cooks mistakes, touching the time
of the making of the Statute de Judaismo, and the Jews voluntary banishing of
themselves thereupon, without any particular Act or Edict of the King and
Parliament for their universal Exile and Expulsion hence; (which I have more
fully refuted in the Page 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 41.
second enlarged Edition thereof, beyond all contradiction) But likewise to
leave out most of the unprinted Records in the reigns of King John, Henry the
3. and Edward the 1. relating to the History, State, Affairs of the Jews in
England under them, and to their final Banishment thence; which Records,
because I could not conveniently insert into the Second Impression, for fear of
incr^asing it into an over-large bulk, and of over prejudicing those who had
bought the first Edition; I have therefore digested into a Chronological
method, according to their series of time, and published apart by themselves in
this Second Part; that so such who have bought the first Impression, may annex
them thereunto; and those who shall buy the second, may bind them up with it,
if they see cause; into which Page 19, 20, 21, 22, 41.
Impression I have ins^rted only such new Records, (not extant in the first) as
were necessary to clear some passages in our Histories, and to refute our
learned Sir Edw^rd Cooks mistakes, whose venerable Authority has misguided
many, especially of the long robe, in point of the Jews expulsion, and date of
the Statute de Iudaismo.

What new light, information, or satisfaction this Additional Publication may
yield to the judicious Readers, consis^ing of unprinted, and for the most part
unknown Records, never formerly published, I cannot di^ine: yet the great
satisfaction my former Demurrer has given to, and kind acceptance it has
found with most godly and judicious persons throughout the Nation, give me some
good assurance, that this Appendix to back and illustrate it, will not be
unwelcom, but delightful to them, especially to those of my own Profession,
for whose information I principally intended it. I hope both of them united,
will through Gods blessing prove, a perpetual Bar to the Antichristian Jews
readmission into England, both in this newfangled age, and all future
Generations; maugre all printed pleas, and Endeavors for their present
Introduction, the sole end of their publication by

The unfeigned weak Endeavor to Promote his Saviors Honor, Religions Safety,
with his Native Countries weal and Prosperity by this Undertaking, WILLIAM
PRYNNE.
Lincolnes Inn, Feb. 1. 1655. 6.
The Second Part of a short Demurrer to the Jews long discontinued barred
Remitter into ENGLAND.
HAving in my late Short Demurrer to the Jews long discontinued barred Remitter
into England, presented the world with an Exact Chronological History of the
English Jews and their affairs, from their very first arival in England under
King William the Conqueror, till their universal final Banishment and Expulsion
thence, in the 18 year of King Edward the first, after about 260 years
continuance in our Island, collected out of the best printed Historians,
Law Books, and some few Records; I conceived it not only expedient, but
necessary to second, amplify and illustrate it, with this new Chronological
Collection of such unprinted, and generally unknown Records (remaining in the
Tower of London, and Exchequer) during the respective reigns of King John, King
Henry the 3. and Edward the 1. as properly relare to the History, State,
affairs, Legal transactions, Proceedings, Contracts, Government of the Jews in
England under these three Kings, and to their final Banishment hence, which for
want of time and other causes I could not conveniently insert into my first
Demurrer.

The Reasons inducing me hereunto are, 1. The Rarity and Novelty of these
Records never formerly published in print. I have been informed by persons of
Credit, that our great learned late deceased Antiquary Mr. John Seldom, many
years since made a particular collection of the Records concerning the English
Jews, and gave them to Mr. Samuel Purchase to insert into his Pilgrimage, who in
his 3. Edit. thereof, Land. 1617. B. 2. chapter 10. Sect. 17. p. 171. published a
Section with this Title to it. Of the Jews sometimes living in England,
collected out of ancient Records, by Mr. JOHN SELDOM of the Inner Temple:
wherein there is such a poor maimed account given of them, out of Records or
Histories, and so different from that delivered him; that upon the publication
thereof Mr. Seldom was very much offended with Mr. Purchase for abusing him in
such a manner, and his Readers likewise; there being not above 3 Records, and
those maimedly cited in that whole Section; which defect I thought meet here to
supply. 2ly, The rectifying and refuting of some Mistakes in Sir Edward Cook
his 2 Institutes, concerning the Statute de Iudaismo, and the Jews Banishment
out of England, which I have more fully refelled in my second Edition, and
shall here further clear by several Records,. 3ly, The illustration and
ratification of some Passages in our Historians, touching the slavish condition
and frequent Taxes imposed on the Jews by our Kings. 4ly, The fuller discovery
of the manner of their Contracts, Stars, Legal Proceedings, Judicatories,
transactions and Government whilst in England, wherein our Histories and
Lawbooks are very defective. 5ly, The manifestation of the Machiavillian Policy
of King John, and Henry the 3d, to draw the Jews from foreign parts into
England, by granting them ample Liberties and Protection, on purpose afterward
to ensnare, oppress, vex, squeeze and prey upon them and their estates, with
far greater greediness and advantage. 6ly, To publish to the world the
zealous, pious care of our Ancestors, even in grossest times of Popery, to
prevent all communion of Christians with, and seduction by the Jews, to
suppress their blasphemy, and convert them, by compelling them to resort to the
Friars Sermons for their edification and providing for their converts, by
sundry Ordinances not mentioned in any printed English Historians, but only in
the Records here published. 7ly, To add a further Bar to their Readmission
into England; they having been invited hither (if Menasseh Ben-Israel may be
credited) by diverse EMINENT PERSONS excelling both in Piety and Learning, as
well as power: who from the beginning of their Government of this Commonwealth
have professed much respect and favor toward them, and made known unto them
some years since, that wished for liberty that they now are about to grant
them; as he in his late Humble Addresses, and Declaration to the Commonwealth
of England has published to the world in print; being now inquiring after a
convenient Summer House, intending to settle himself at least, if not his
exiled Nation, here among us; whereas Pars 2. Pat. 1. E. 2. n: 10 Walsingh.
Hist. Ang. p. 68. to 76.97. to 108. Ypodigm. Neustriae, p. 100, 104, 105.108.
etc. Grafton, Fabian, Speed, Holinshed, Stow, Daniel, Baker, in Ed. 2. Claus.
5. E. 2. m. 15. et D ^.7. ^l^us. 15 E 2. m. 2^. and 14. Sched. and Do^s 32.
Pierce Gaveston, a Forraigner, and the two Spencers, great Potent Englishmen,
have heretofore lost their lives and heads for returning into England, without
the Parliaments and Nobles license, though by the Kings own invitation, and
license, when banished thence by Parliament; which this Jewish Rabbi, and his
banished Countrymen may do well advisely to consider, for fear of afterclaps.

The first Records of our former Kings now extant (except some few Charters,
and Exemplifications of them in Leiger-books, Records, and Histories) are those
o^ King John preserved in the Tower of London, and Exchequer. Amongst the
Charter Rot. Chart. part. 1. R. Johan. n. 28. Chart. 171.
Rolls of this King John I find a special Charter of his in favor of the Jews,
made in the first year of his reign, dated at Rhoan, July 31. (Anno Dom. 1199.)
whereby he grants to James of London, a Jewish Priest, the Priesthood of all
the Jews throughout England, to have and hold it during his life freely,
quietly, honorably, and entirely, without mo^^s^ation trouble or disturbance by
any Jew or English (...) in the exer^^se thereof, etc. (Such a Cha^te^ as
M^^^sseh B^n-Isr^el now aspires after for himself, as his Addresses inti^^^^^
which because I find printed by In his Pilgrimage, Edit. 3.1617, l. 2. c. 10.
sect. 7. p. 172. In his Pilgrims, l. 9. c. 5. sect. 1. p. 1441. in the Margin.
Mr. Samuel Purchase, and 2 Instit. p. 508.
Sir Edward Cook, and I have already published it verbatim in my Short
Demurrer, Edit. 1. p. 44. and Edit. 2. p. 50.51.) I shall here pretermit, with
this ob^ervation; that in the close thereof there is mention made of a Charter
of King Richard, granted to this Jew, That he should not be impleaded for any
thing appertaining to him, but only before the King himself or his chief
Justice. This is the very first Charter extant on record conning the English
Jews. What is recorded of them in our Histories before this rhyme, I have A
short Demurrer, p. 1. to 16.
elsewhere published at large.

I find another Charter of Safe Conduct, granted by K. John to this Jewish
Priest the self-same day and year as the former, for his safe and free passage,
and of all things appertaining to him, in all places, both on this side and
beyond the Sea, without any injury, molestation, impediment, or grievance to be
done unto him, more then to the King himself: which being never yet printed, I
have here transcribed out of the Record it self.

Chart. 1 Johannis, pars ^. n. 50, rot. 2^.
Johannis Dei gratia, etc. Omnibus fidelibus suis, ad quos Literae praesentes
pervenerint, tam ultra mare, quam citra. Mandans vobis and praecipiens,
Quatenus per quascunque Villas and loca Jacobus Presbyter Judaeorum, dilectus
and familiaris Noster; transierit, ipsum salvo and libere cum omnibus ad ipsum
pertinentibus transire, and conduci faciatis; nec ipsi aliquod imped^mentum,
molestiam aut gravamen fieri sustineatis, plus quam Nobis ipsis. Et si quis ei
in aliquo forisfacere praesumpserit, id ei sine dilatione emendadari faciatis.
Test VVillielmo Marisco etc. Dat. per manum Hu. Cantuar. Archiepiscopi,
Cancellarii nostri apud Rothomagum, 31. die Julii, Anno Regni nostri primo.

It is observable, that both these Charters were made not in England, but at
Rhoan in Normandy, whence King William A short Demurrer, p. ^5^ ^.
the Conqueror first transplanted the Jews into England: And that both the
Charters to this Hig^ Priest of the Jews, were granted by the hand of Hubert,
Archbishop of Canterbury, then Chancellor, Prima^e, Metropoli^an and High
Priest of the English Na^i^n, who^e Successors have justified the Divinity and
Lawfulness, of their Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction from the Jewish High Priests
Office, and Pagan Archst^^ius. Sic mu^^^ mulum scalpit. Dignum Patello
operculum.

King John having granted such Privileges and Protection to this Jewish High
Priest and Bishop in the first year of his reign, proceeded (by his and their
moneys most powerful mediation) to confirm and grant m^^y ample Privileges
and Immunities to all the English and Norman Jews in his 2 year, by these two
ensuing Char^ers, not formerly printed, which I shall here transcribe verbatim
as I find them on Record. The first r^ns thus.

Cart. 2. Johannis, number. 49, Carta Judaeorum Angliae.
Johannes Dei gratia, etc. Sciatis Nos concessisse Omnibus Judaeis Angliae and
Normanniae, libere et ho^o ifice habere residentiam in terra nostra, and omnia
illa de Nobis tenenda quae tennerunt de Rege Henrico Avo Patris nostri; et
omnia illa quae modo rationabiliter tenent in terris et feodis, and vadiis and
akatis suis: and quod habeaxt omnes libertates and consuetudines suas sicut eas
habuerunt tempore praedicti Regis H. Avi pat^is nostri, melius and quiecius and
honorabilius. Et si querela orta fuerit inter Christianum et Judaeum, ille qui
alium appellaverit ad querelam suam dirationandam habeat T^stes, scilicet
legutimum Christianum and Iudaeum. Et si Iudaeus de querela sua Breve habuerit,
Breve suum erit ei testis. Et si Christianus habuerit querelam adversus Iudaeum
sit judicata per Pares Judaei. Et cum Iudaeus obierit, non detineatur corpus
suum super terram, sed habeant homines sui pecuniam suam and debita sua, it a
quod mihi non disturbetur, si habaerit haeredem qui pro ipso ^espondeat and
rectum faciat de debitis suis and de forisfacto suo: Et liceat Judaeis omnia
quae eis apportata fuerint sine occasion accipere and emere, exceptis illis
quae de Ecclesia sunt, and panno sanguine lento. Et si Judaeus ab aliquo
appellatus fuerit sine test, de illo appellatu erit quietus solo Sacramento
suo super librum suum, et de appellatu illarum rerum quae ad Coronam nostram
pertinent, similiter quietus erit solo Sacramento suo super Rotulum suum. Et si
inter Christianum and Iudaeum fuerit dissentio de accommodatione alicujus
pecuniae, Judaeus probabit Catallum suum, and Christianus lucrum. Et liceat
Judaeo quiet vendere vadium, postquam certum erit, eum illud unum annum and
unum diem tenuisse. Et Judaei non i^trabant in placitum, nisi coram Nobis, aut
coram illis qui Turres nostras custodierint, in quorum Ballivis Iudaei
manserint. Et ubicunque Iudaei fuerint, liceat eis ire ubicunque voluerint, cum
omnibus catallis eorum sicut res nostrae propriae, and nulli liceat eos
retinere, neque hoc eis prohibere. Et praecipimus quod ipsi quieti sint per
totam Angliam and Normanniam de omnibus Consuetudinibus and Theoliniis and
modiatione vini sicut nostrum proprium catallum. Et mandamus vobis and
praecipimus quod eos custodiatis, and defendatis, and manu-teneatis; et
prohibemus ne quis contra Cartam istam de hiis supradictis eos in placitum
ponat super forisfacturam nostram; Sicut Carta Regis H. patris nostri
rationabiliter testatur. T. Humf. filio Petri Com. Essex, Willielmo de
Marescal: Com. de Pembr. Henr. de Bohun Com de Hereford, Robert de Turnham,
Willielmo Brywer, etc. Dat. per manum S. Well. Archidiac. apud Merleberg,
Decimo die Aprilis, Anno regni nostri secundo.

The second Patent runs in these words.

Cart. 2. Johannis. n. 53. Confirmatio Judaeorum de Libertatibus suis.
Johannes Dei gratia, etc. Sciatis Nos concessisse, and praesenti Carta nostra
confirmasse Judaeis nostris in Anglia, ut excessus qui inter eos emerserint,
exceptis hiis qui ad Coronam and Justitiam nostram pertinent, and de morte
hominis and mahemio, and de assaltu praemeditato, and de fractura domus, et de
Raptu, et de Latrocino, and de Combustione, and de Thesauris, inter eos
deducantur secundum Legem suam, et emendentur, and Justitiam suam inter se
ipsos faciant. Concedimus etiam eis, quod si quis eorum alium appellaverit de
querela quae ad eos pertineat, Nos neminem compellemus ad testimonium cuiquam
eorum contra alium exhibendum, sed si Appellator rationabilem and idoneum
testem habere poterit, eum secum adducat. Siquod vero opus sceleratum and
apertum inter eos emerserit quod ad Coronam nostram vel ad Justitiam pertineat,
sicut de praedictis Placitis Coronae, licet nullus eorum noster appellator
suerit, Nos ipsam que^elam faciemus per Legales Judaeos nostros Angliae
inquiti^ sicut Carta Regis H. patris nostri rationabiliter testatur. Test G.
filio Petri Com. Essex, Willielmo Mareschallo Com. de Pembr. Hen: de Bohun Com.
de Hereford, Petro de Pratell. Roberto de Turnham. Willielmo de Waren, Hugo: de
Nevil, Roberto de veteri Ponte. Dat. per manum S. Well. Archidiac. apud
Merleberg. X. die Aprilis, Anno Regni nostri secundo.

Both these Charters were dated at the same place, on the self-same day, by the
self-same hand, and subscribed by the same Witnesses for the most part. The
first of them extends to all the Jews both in England and Normandy, the latter
to the Jews in England alone: The persons subscribing them as witnesses, were
eminent both for honor and power: and it appears by the recitals in the
Charters, that the Liberties granted and confirmed by them to these Jews, were
wholly, or for the most part such as King Henry the first, Grandfather, and K.
Henry the 2. Father to King John had formerly granted and confirmed to them by
their respective Charters, And if you compare that Law inserted by Annal pars
Post. p. 604. See the first part of A Short Demurrer, p. 3.
Hoveden and others amongst the Confessors and Conque^ors Laws. De Judaeis in
Anglia constitutis. You will find it taken almost verbatim out of these Kings
Charters, in whose times Hoveden writ his Annals, and puny to the Confessors
and Conquerors Laws, in the true Original copyes whereof it is not to be found.

We need not much wonder that King John did grant such large Lib^rties and
Charters as these recited to the Jewish High Priests and Jews throughout his
Dominions, since some few years after (as Hist. A^^glia, Anno ^213. p. 243.
Matthew Paris writes) he sent special Ambassadors to Admirallus the Great
Mohammedan King of Africa, Fesse and Spain, pr^fe^i^g to surrend^r up his Crown
and Kingdom to him, and hold them under him as his Vassal; and likewise To
renounce the Christian Religion, as vain, and faithfully to Adhere to the
Mohammedan Religion. For which he was much scorned and derided by this Mohammedan
Prince, as the Dregs both of Kings and Men^: He will soon turn a com^leat Turk,
who is become half a Jew.

These Liberties thus ratified by King John, drew many J^ws into England out of
foreign parts with their w^a^th and treasure, according to the old Proverb,
Histula dulec canit volueres dum decipit auceps. but when these Decoyes had
drawn them and their wea^th into the Net, you may read how he plucked off
their feathers and tormented their bodies to gain their moneys in our
Historians, and my Page 16.
first Demurrer.

Amongst the Records in the Treasury of the Receiver of the Exchequer in the
4th year of King John, I find one ^^n^fand a Jew indicted at B^dford for
gelding and cutt^^^ o^f the yard of one Richard, whereof upon his trial ^e was
acqited: as the Record it self will more fully (...) in its own dialect.

(...) capta apud Bedeford a die Sacti Michaelis in (...): cor^m Simon de
Pateshall, and Rich de Fau^^nb^ig* and Sociis suis, Anno Regni Regis Johannis 4
to. (...). 5. ^n dorse.

V^^^dr. de C^ipton.

^ob^rtus de Sutton appellat Bonefand Judaeum de Bede^o^^, quod i^se in pat^r
Domini Regis, and nequiter fecit ementulare Ricardum nepotem suum unde ipse
obiit: Ita quo^ ipse fecit portare eum usque in terram suam de Hacton; quam
ipse habet in vadio, and ibi obiit: et hoc offert probare. Et tunc Bonefand
venit, et defendit totum, and offert Domino Regi 1 marc. pro habenda
Inquisitione, utrum sit inde culpabilis vel non: Et Iuratores inquisiti dicunt,
quod non est culpabilis inde: et ideo Bonefand st quietus, and Robertus in
misericordia pro falso appill^. And in the Margin of the Roll cast diatur is
written. This is the first Indictment I find upon record against a Jew.

Not long after King John's Charters confirmed, the Jews self to their usual
trade of clipping and washing the current coin of the Kingdom, as is evident by
this New Ordinance against this abuse, and touching the Assise of moneys, in
the 6 year of King John.

Pat. 6. Johan. number 7. dorso.
Assisum est de Moneta, quod vetus moneta currat unde quelibet libra sit lacta
ii. s. vi. d. ad plus, and libra quae plus lactaverit, and denarii qui plus
lactaverint perforentur and reddantur sicut alias provisum fuit. Iudaei vero
aurifabri, and mercatores forinici emant moneta ista victum et vestitum suum
tantum, sed non debent prestitum vel Merchandizas facere, nisi de grossa et
forti moneta quae sit de lege and pondere denatiorum sterlingorum. Et ad
cognoscendum denar: de praedicto lacco, exeat a monetaria nostra I. Pempeis,
and liberetur cui voluerit habere habendam usque ad Pentecosten Anno regni
nostri 7. de lacco octavae partis denarii. Item denarius qui de caetero fuerit,
scilicet post Natale. Anno Regni nostri 6. inventus intonsus in alicujus manu
perstietur, et ille cujus manu captus fuerit, capiatur ut lat. Item prohibitum
est, quod nullus vetus de^arius reblangietur, et qui eum reblangia^erit, sit in
misericordia nostra de toto catallo suo, et ami^tat quod reblangiavit. Item
denarius debet omnis fabricari, ita quod s^t de equa lege and pondere, habens
circulum exteriorem, et quo^ nil sit extra illum circulum, and ubi aliter
inventus fuerit, fabricator et custos ejus sint in misericordia nostra de toto
catallo suo. Item si quis cambiaverit Denar. vel argentum alibi quam ad Cambium
nostrum (salvo Cambio Domini Cantuariensis Archi Episcopi apud Cant.) tam
cambiens quam recipiens, cum eo quod cambiaverint, capiantur. Et assisum est,
quod nullus capiat ad Cambium pro libra de sine et argento plus vel minus quam
Denar. de lege; et quod nullus denarius exeat de Cambio nostro, vel Dom
Cantuar. nisi sit legalis de Victualorum. Ite^ inquiratur per liberos et
legales homines in Civitatibus, Burgis and Villis, quis Christianus vel Judaeus
denar. retondit, et qui inventus fuerit retonsor Christianus vel Judaeus,
capiantur omnia catalla sua, et corpus suum mittatur in prisonam nostram, et
sit in potestate nostra de Justitia facienda. Item si denarii qui non sint
rationabiles de lege and pondere inventi fuerint in manu Judaei aurifabri, vel
Mercatoris forinseci vel servientium eorum, pro merchandisa, vel prestito
faciendo, assisum est, quod illi in quorum manu fuerint inventi, (nisi tantum
ad victum and vestitum suum emendo, ut praedictum est) capiantur. T. me-ipso
apud Winton, 26 die Jan.

The same year King John granted this ensuing safe conduct to one Hamechun a
Jew, to come and reside in England like other Jews.

Pat. 6 Johan. m. 7. intus.
Rex, etc. Iusticiariis, etc. Sciatis quod dedimus Hamichuno Judaeo nostro
firmam pacem nostram, ita quod concessit salvo venire et ibi stare, sicut alii
Iudaei nostri in terram nostram, pro bono servicio suo quod nobis fecit in
Castro Audel. cum dilecto and fideli nostro R. Constab. Cestriae. Et ideo vobis
mandamus et firmiter praecipimus, quod firmam pacem nostram sicut praedictum
est, habeat. Test me-ipso apud Westminster. 2 die Novembr.

The Jews by Hoveden, Annal. pars posterior, p. 745.
Capitula de Iudaeis, enacted and published by Rich. the 1 recited at large in
my former Demurrer, were obliged to register all their Contracts, Morgages,
Obligations, Debts, and to put them into a common Chest with 3 Locks and Keys,
kept by certain Christians and Jews specially designed for that purpose, as
you may there read at last. This Chest was called See Purchase Pilgrimage l. 2.
c. 10. sect. 7.
Arca Cyrographica, or Cyrographorum Iudaeorum: and the Notaries or Registers
of them styled, Cyrographi Christiani et Iudaei Arcae Cyrographicae London,
Oxon, or other such City where such Chests were kept. All their Deeds,
Obligations, and Releases were usually called Stars, and Starra, Starrum,
Starr: in our Latin Records. from the Hebrew word SHETAR (contracted by the
omission of he) which signifies a Deed or Contract. These Stars were written
for the most part in Hebrew alone, or else in Hebrew on the one side or top of
the parchment, and in Latin on the other side, or bottom of the Deed after the
Hebrew. Some of these Stars were lately extant amongst the evidences and
writings belonging to the Dean and Chapter of Westminster, writ in very fair
Hebrew Characters; and one of them I have lately seen in the Treasury of the
Exchequer, written in Hebrew without pricks, In King John's Reign, at the Top;
the substance whereof is thus expressed in Latin just under it, lik an English
Condition under a Latin Obligation.

I stud Star fecit Hagius filius Magri de London, Domino A de de Strattona, de
acquietantia de Stann. re de omnibus debitis in quibus Dominus S, de Cheyndut
ei tenebatur: Ita quod idem Iudaeus nec haeredes sui, nihil exigere possunt de
praedicto A de, nec de haeredibus suis ratione terrae de Stanmore de praedictis
debitis. If any Christian indebted and obliged to any Jew by any Star or
writing put up and reserved in this Chest paid not the same at the day
appointed, to there with all the interest where any interest was reserved; then
he sued forth Letters by way of Process against him, both for the Debt and
interest under the Notaries or Registers hand, to appear before the Justices
specially appointed for the government and custody of the Jews, to recover the
same, paying to the King for a fine for such Letters and License to sue, unum
basantum, or besantum (as it is variously written) for every pound of money he
sued for, as appears by sundry instances in the fine Rolls both of King John,
Henry the 3. and Edward the 1. of which we have these 3 instances together in
the fines of the 6 year of King John's reign.

Fines 6 Ioh. m. 17.
I^aac filius Joie habet literas super Martinum Martel de xxv marcis, cum lucro,
per Cirograsum.

Elias de Burgi Judaeus habet literas super eundem Martinum Martel de xx
libris, cum lucro, per Cirografum.

Manasserus Grassus habet literas super eundem Martinum Martell de xxiiii
marcis, cum lucro, per Cirografum; Dominus Rex DEBET HABERE DE QUALIBET LIBRA.
UNUM BASANTUM.

Fines 6. Joh. m. 6.
And in the same Roll of this year there is one more such president,

Moss Judaeus fill. Leonis habet literas super VValterum fill. Radi de
Huncetanosiot de xlviii marc. cum lucro per Cirografum, Capiatur de qualib.
libra 1 Besantum ad opus Domini Regis.

In the Treasury of Receipts in the Exchequer in the xth. year of King John,
there is this Record touching the manner of proving the validity of the Jews
Charters, it denied, or a^^^eged to be counterfeit, by the testimony of two
Christians and two Jews, etc. according to the forementioned Charter of King
John.

Inter Placita apud Westminster. Anno x Regis Johannis Termino Hilarii in Octabis
Sancti Hilarii Rotulo 9 in dorso. Suthantes ss.


Samuel Mucun and Muriel Judaea petunt versus Herebertum filium Heb. CCCCl. de
Catallis de debito Israel, per quandam Cartam; et producunt duos Christianos
and duos Judaeos paratos ad hoc probandum prout Curia consideraverit.
Herebertus dicit, quod Carta illa falsa est, and ideo falsa, quia Sigilium
illud nunquam suum suit, nec Cartam illam fecit, nec pecuniam illam mutuo
recepit: and producit Sigillum suum Eburneum and plurimas Cartas, Sigillo illo
Sigillatas, tam de Abaciis, quam de confirmatione terrarum. And hereupon I find
no further proceedings in this Record (printed a little out of its due place,
before these ensuing proceeding it in time, could be transcribed.)

It seems every Jew in that age had his proper Seal to Seal Charters, Stars and
Obligations therewith, which yet were good in Law if really sealed by him
though with any other Seal than his own.

In the 5 year of King John, the Jews of London being assaulted, disturbed and
misused by the people against the Kings protection and peace, thereupon the
King at their request, sent this sharp Letter to the Mayor and Barons of
London, committing the Jews there to their protection and defense. and
threatening severely to punish, and require their blood at their hands, if they
should suffer any injury through their default.

Pat. 5. Joh. Regi. m. 7. n. 18.
Rex, etc. Majori and Bar. London, etc. Semper dileximus vos multum, and jura
and libertates vestras been observari fecimus, unde credimus vos nos
specialiter diligere, and ea quae ad bonorem nostrum, and pacem and
tranquilitatem terrae nostrae eduntur, libenter velle prestare. Verum cum
sciatis, quod Judaei in speciali nostra protectione sint; miramur, quod Iudaeis
in civitate London morantibus malum fieri sustinetis; cum id manifest sit
contra pacem Regri, and terrae nostrae tranquilitatem: Ita quidem magis miramur
et movemur, quia alii Iudaei per Angliam ubicunque moram fecerunt, exceptis
illis qui sunt in villa vestra, in bona pace consistunt. Nunc id tamen diximus
pro Iudaeis nostris, pro pace nostra, quia si onidaem tantum pacem nostram
dedissemus, debetur inviolabiter observari. De caetero autem Iudaeos in
civitate London morantes, vestrae committimus custodiae, ut si quis eis malum
facere attentaverit, vos manu forti eis subsidium facientes, eos defendatis.
Vestris enim manibus eorum sanguinem modo requiremus, si forte per d^fectum
vestri aliquid mali eis acciderit, quod absit. Scimus enim ben^ quod per fatuos
Villae et non per discretos hu^usmodi eveniunt, et debent discreti fatuorum
Stultitiam compescere. Test meipso apud Montem fortem 29 die Julii.

This smart Letter demonstrates the Kings cordial affection to the Jews, though
more for his own advantage than theirs.

Fines 6. Jo. Reg. m. 3. Warwic.
In the Fine Rolls of the 6 of King John I find this Kecord.

Galfr. de Salvage dat 10 Mar. ut Willus de Hardreshal acquietet ipsum versus
Jacob. Iudaeum Northampton de ptegagia debiti, unde pleg. Willi. fuit versus
eundem Iudaeum, ^^^^de queritur, quod pro defectu ejus distringitur: Et mandat.
est licent. quod si ipse Willus non fuerit, et ipse Galfr. ips^ sect. etc.

In the Clau^e Rolls of the 7 and 9 years of K. John I find these 3 short
r^cords manifesting the Kings power both to remit their usury, due upon
contracts, and to respite their debts themselves.

Claus. 7. Joh. Reg. m. 26.
Rex Constabulario Wallingford, etc. Praecipimus tibi quod pacem habere facias
Roberto de Maure de usuris debiti Iudaeorum de termino quem monstrare poterit,
quod fuerit in servicio nostro cum equis et armis ultra mare per praeceptum
nostrum. Test meipso apud Wodestoke 25 die Maii, per Iusticiarios.

Claus, 9. Joh. Reg. m. 5.
Rex W. de Warren et sociis suis, etc. Mandamus vobis, quod quietum esse
faciatis Abbatem sanct: Radegunde de usuris debitorum Iudaeorum, de duobus
annis proxime praeteritis usque ad instans Pasche anno reg. nostri 9. dum fuit
in servicio nostro, per praeceptum nostrum. Et Summoneatis Iudaeos quibus ipse
debita debet, quod sint coram Iusti^iario nostro G. fill. Petri, and coram nobis
a die Pasche in 15 dies, ad recipiendum ab eo finem debitis illis. Et mandetis
Vicaquibus necesse fuerit, quod nullam interim districtinem faciant eidem
Abbati pro debitis illis reddendis, T. G. fill. Petri apud Suth. 25 die Marcii.

Claus. 9. Jo. Reg. m. 6.
Rex W. de Warren et sociis suis custodibus Iudaeorum, etc. Mandamus vobis quod
quietum esse faciatis Rogerum Wesperill de usuris debitorum quae debet Simoni
Iudeo Oxon. ab hoc inst. Pasce anno Reg. nostri 9. usque ad Pasche prox.
sequent. et interim ei respectum habere faciatis de praedict. debitis. T.
Aaron. Norwic. apud Clarenden 21 die Marcii, per eundem.

By these 3 Presidents it is apparent, that the Jews Usury was condemned, and
no ways favored by King John and his Justices in that age, long before either
the Statute of Merton 20 H. 3. c. 5. or De Iudaismo 3 E. 1. c. 1. were enacted,
and that the King would by no means permit it to run against any whilst
actually employed in his service, nor others whom he favored, to whom he
released the Usury at his pleasure, and his Judges likewise by his command.

In the Roll of Fines of the 9 year of King John I find these two cases
concerning extents of Lands for the debts of Jews in that age.

Fines 6 Joh. Reg. in 2 Dors.
Margareta de Lucy dat quinque marcas pro habenda haereditate de Kerchel, et de
Hammes quam Robertus de Lucy quondam vir ejus invadiavit Iudaeis in vita sua;
and quod Iudaei capiant se a debito, quod idem Robertus eis debuit super
praedictum vadium, ad haeredem ipsius Roberti, qui haereditatem suam tenet. Et
mandatum est Vicecomiti, quod accepta ab ea securitate de praedictis 5 marcis,
faciat ei habere plenariam seisinam de praedicta haereditate sua, quae capta
fuit in manum Domini Regis occasion praedicta. Et mandatum est Iusticiariis
Iudaeorum, quod de praedicto debito capiant se ad haereditatem praedicti
Roberti, quam haeres ejus tenet.

The husband morgaged his wives inheritance to a Jew for a debt, and dies, for
which the wives land* being taken by way of extent into the Kings hands, upon
the Wives suit and fine of 5 marks, her land is discharged, and the husbands
land descended to his heir charged with, and extended for it; all the lands of
the Jews Debtors on that age (before the Statutes of Acton Burnel, or de
Mercatoribus 13 E. 1.) being liable to extents for their debts, as this Record
of the same year resolves, especially if assigned, forfeited to, or seized by
the King.

Fines 9 Joh. Reg. m. 5
Mandatum est Baronibus de Scaccario, quod omnes terras quas Jollarius de
Anumdevil habuit tempore quo ipse mutuo accepit debita de Aaron Judaeo,
capiantur in manum Dom. Regis quicunque illas teneat, pro 200 and 72 libris,
quas ipse Domino Regi debuit de debito Aaron; and similiter districtionem
faciatis de omnibus aliis quae Dom. Regi tenentur de debito Aaron de 26 lib. 8
sol. and 9 d.

By this Record it appears, that debts to Jews in that age were in the nature
of Judgments and Statutes, binding all the debtors lands he had at the time of
the money borrowed, into whose hands soever they came afterward.

The King at this time claimed such an absolute jurisdiction over the Jews
debts, that he used to discharge or release them absolutely, or for life, and
to respite them as he pleased, as this and other presidents mani^est.

Patents 10. Joh. R. m. 5.
Rex omnibus, etc. Sciatis quod quietavimus Roberto silio Rogori tota vita sua,
de omnibus debitis Judaeoorum, Willi de Chesney patris Margaretae uxoris
ejusdem Roberti; and praecipimus quod inde sit quietus, tota vita sua: and in
hujus rei testimonium, has literas nostras Patentes ei fieri fecimus. Test
meipso apud Wimo, 19 die Augusti.

In the 13 year of King John (of which there are no Rolls or Records in the
Tower) I meet with this notable Record in the Treasury of the Exchequer,
touching the Jews assignment of their debts to Christians and extents upon them
by Judgment of the Justices assigned for the custody of the Jews, whom the
assignee thereupon vouched to warranty in this case.

Linc. ss.
Placita a die Sancti Michaelis in 15 dies Anno Regni Regis Johannis 12. capta
apud Westmonasterium, inter alia sic continetur, and sequitur, Rotulo secundo
Assisa venit recogn. si Robertus de Kanvill injuste and sine Judicio
disseseivit Willielmum Couse and Beatricem uxorem ejus in Lincoln infra
Assisas, and Robertus venit and dicit, quod Assisa non debet procedere, quia
ipse babet seisinam inde per preceptum Domini Regis, ut ille qui fecit finem
cum Judaeis quibus idem Willielmus debuit debitum super tenementum illud: unde
ipse profert Cartas Judaeorum, quas ipsis acquietavit per finem illum: and
vocat Justiciarios Judaeorum ad Watrantum, quod habuit inde seisinam per eos ut
de vadio suo: Quia nihil Juris clamat in tenemento illo, nisi ut de vadio, and
Justiciarii Judaeorum sic warrantizant: ideo consideratum est, quod Willielmus
in mis^ricordia and Robertus teneat in vadium suum.

By the Clause Roll of the 15 of King John it appears, that the King then
seized, granted, and sold the houses of the Jews at his pleasure (as a Lord his
Villains) without any other Title but his absolute Sovereignty over them,
witness these Writs of his compared together.

Claus. 15. Jo. Reg. m. 3.
Rex Majori and Vicecom. London, etc. Sciatis quod dedimus dilecto and fideli
nostro Com. de Ferrariis domum Isaac Judaei de Norw. etc. in London in parochia
Sanctae Margaretae, cum redditibus and omnibus pertinentiis suis, and Cartam
nostram eo modo fieri fecimus. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod secundum tenorem
ejusdem Cartae nostrae ei sine dilatione plenam seisinam habere faciatis. T.
meipso apud Craneborn 8 die Julii.

Claus. 15 Jo. Reg. m. 2.
Rex Vicecom. and Praeposit. Oxon. salutem. Sciatis quod ad petitionem
venerabilis patris nostri N. Tuscul: Episcopi Apostol. sedis. Legati,
concessimus Albrico fill. Isaac Judaeo domos suas, et domos quae fuerunt Isaac
patris sui in Oxon., quae non valent per annum nisi viginti sol. ut dicitur.
Unde vobis mandamus, quod plenam seisinam domorum illarum eidem Albrico fine
dilatione habere faciatis, nisi valiant per annum plus quani 20 s. T. W. Brewer
apud Freemer 11 die November.

This year the King laid an heavy Tax upon the Jews, at Bristol, which some
Jews in Southampton refusing and delaying to pay, the King thereupon issued
this Writ to the Sheriff of Southampton to apprehend and send them prisoners to
Bristol, unless they presently paid it.

Claus. 15. Jo. Reg. m. 3.
Rex Vic. Suthampton, etc. precipimus tibi quatenus omnes Judaeos de Balliva tua
qui nondum peracquietaverunt se de Tallagio apud Bristol super eos posito, vel
qui statim se nunc acquietare noluerint ad Castrum de Bristol per literas tuas
sine dilatione remittas, et eis ibidem Constabulario nostro liberari facias.
Significavimus autem illi quod eos recipiat cum illuc venerint, et omnes
denarios quos de illis recipisti vel recepturus es, sicut teipsum diligis,
habeas in Scaccario nostro apud Westminster. in crastino assumptionis beatae Mariae.
T. meipso apud Beneden 26 die Iulii.

See my First Demurrer p. 16.
These Jews no doubt were ordered thus to be sent to Bristol Castle, to meet
with such a Toothdrawer as one of them there found some years before.

This year King John sent these Letters to his Governers and Officers in
Rochel, Oleron and Zaunt, to cause the Jews to surcease their exaction of usury
there, which you formerly heard he discharged here at home.

Pat. 15. Jo. Reg. pars 1. m. 20.
Rex Majoribus et praepositis Rupellae, de Aloron, et de Zante, salutem.
Mandamus vobis, et singulis vestrum, quod Iudaeos Balliva vestra cessare
faciatis ab exactione usurarum quam faciunt. Therefore their usury was
suppressed, condemned long before the Statute de Iudaismo in 3. E. 1. This
Precept of the Kings I find thu seconded by a Decree of the Popes Legate in
those parts, made in the Council of Bordeaux against the Jewish Usury, and
rancked in the Van of all the other Decrees there enacted.

Pat. 16 Joh. Reg. Dors. 15.
Haec sunt Statura quae venerabilis Pater Robert: de Tur. sarrosanctae Romanae
Ecclesiae Leg. sancti Stephani in monte Coelio Presbyter Cardinalis statuit
authoritate Legationis suae, in Concilio celebrato apud Burdegal, cum aliis
quae in Francia statuit. Sicut praecepit Dominus per pro. in locis suis de
Judaeis, ita fiat, ut scilicet Barons omnes quae tenent Judaeos compellant
ipsos remittere usuras cruce signatis: Et si hoc efficere contemnunt,
compellantur omnes mercatores per censuram ecclesiasticam, ne aliquam
communionem cum eis, aut in contractibus, aut in mercimoniis impendant, aut in
quibuslibet; Si autem super hoc Barons incorrigibiles inveniantur censura
simili percellentur.

In the Fine Rolls of the 17 of King John pars 1 there is this pardon of a Jews
debt, which this King seized to his own use.

An. Dom. 1215.
Dominus Rex pardonavit Nicholao de Wancy 10 lib. quas ei debuit de debitis
Iudaeorum; and mandatum est Baronibus de Scaccario, quod ipsum Nich. de
praedict. 10 libr. quietum esse faciant; T. apud Windsore 16 Julii.

In the 18 and last year of King John, I find his Writ to the Barons of the
Exchequer to allow upon the account of Hubert de Burgo, amongst other things,
Claus. 18. Jo. Reg. m. 24.
Carnarium Judaeorum and Iudaearum in castro de Lossins. It seems some Jews of
both Sexes were then strictly imprisoned, either for their Taxes, or some
misdemeanors not mentioned in the Record.

These are the most material Records I have found in my search relating to the
Jews affairs, during the not long, but unfortunate troublesome reign of King
John: I proceed to those of Henry the 3 his Son and Successor, which are more
copious, various and delightful both for matter and rarity.

In the very first year of King Henry the 3. being (then an Infant under the
wardship of the Earl Marshal his Protect,) some Jews being formerly arested and
imprisoned, there issued forth these Writs and Mandates for their release, the
cause of rheir imprisonment not appearing.

Pat. 1. H. 3. m. 8. De Judaea deliberanda.
Mandatum est W. Marescai juniori, quod sine dilatione deliberari faciat Cheram
Iudaeam de Winton, quam Galfred de Laurton, et Fr^nket servientes sui ceperunt,
et captam detinent, et ut permittant ipsam Cheram sine impedimento venire usque
Winton, quia Dominus Rex plenam pacem suam ei concessit. T. Com. ( to wit W.
Earl Marshal then Protector) apud Winton 22 die Aprilis, Anno reg. Dom. Regis
primo.

Et mandatum est praedictis G. et Franket, quod ipsam Cheram sine dilatione
deliberent, et sine impedimento permittant venire ad Winton. T. eodem.

Ibidem.
Rex Iosceo de Plugenap, salutem. Mandamus vobis firmiter precipientes, quod
sine dilatione et occasion aliqua deliberetis, et quietum abire permittatis
Ioppe fill. Iocei de Wilton Iudaeum quem cepistis et captum tenetis. Et in
hujus rei testimonium, etc. T. Comite apud Winton 21 die Aprilis An. reg.
nostri primo.

Ibidem.
Rex Rico fill. Rog. salutem. Mandamus vobis sicut alias mandavimus firmiter
praecipientes, quod sine dilatione et occasion aliqua deliberetis Isaac fill.
Solomonis Iudaeum quem cepistis apud Winton, ipsumque mittatis quietum ad
Comitem VV. Marescallum Rectorem nostrum et regni nostri apud Winton. In cujus
rei restimonium, etc. Test Com. apud Winton 21 die April. an. reg. nostr.
primo.

King Henry in the second year of his reign, being informed by his Counsel what
great advantage he might make by the Jews upon all occasions, by the advice of
his Counsel sent forth thse special Writs and Lerters Patents to 24 Burgesses
in each Town where the Jews resided, to protect them and theirs from injury;
appointed special Justices for their custody and affairs, and likewise
confirmed all their former Liberries for protection of their persons and
Estates from violence, and exempting them from the Bishops Jurisdiction, and
all other Courts and Judicatures whatsoever, but those Justices he specially
appointed for their custody. And likewise commanding all the Jews to wear two
white Tables in their breads that thereby they might be manifestly
distinguished from Christians, and the better known and secured from injury and
violence by those their new Protectors.

Claus. 2. H. 3. pars 2. m. 10. De Custodia Judaeorum Gloc.
Rex Constabulario et Praepositis Gloucest. salutem. Mandamus vobis, quod ^ine
dilati^ne liberetis Jud^os nostro^ Gloucest. 24. Burgensibus Gloucestriae
custodiendos; Nec permitta^is quod i^si Iudaei ab aliquibus vexentur, and
maxim de Cruce signa^is vel aliis. Nomina autem Burgensium quibus illos
commiteritis custodiendos imbreviari faciatis. Et ipsi etc. T. Com. apud Glouc.
x die Martii. Anno reg. nostri secundo.

Claus. 2. H. 3. pars 2. m. 9. P^o Judaeis Linc.
Rex. Vic. Lincoln salutem. Praecipimus tibi quod eligas 24. de meloribus et
discretionibus Civibus Lincoln, qui custodiant Iudaeos nostros Lincoln, et qui
non permittant, quod aliquis eis malum vel injuriam faciat, de Cruce signatis
vel aliis: and qui, etc. T. Com. apud Oxon, 30 die Marcii.

Pat. 2. H. 3. m. 3. De Justic. Iudaeorum.
Rex omnibus Ballivis, et fidelibus suis, salutem, Sciatis, Nos de communi
Consilio nostro, attornasse dilectos et fideles nostros Ric: de Doli, Magist.
Alex. de Dorset, and Elyam de Suvinges ad Scaccarium Iudaeorum custodiend: et
ad omnia negocia nostra quae pertinent ad officium illud rectand: per totam
Angliam. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod praedicto Ric: Alex. et Elye sitis
intendentes, and in omnibus quae spectant ad officium illud, sicut fieri
solebat tempore Whom they suceeded.
Will: de Wartun, Thom. de Nevil, and Galfr. de Norwic. T. Com. apud West: 8.
die Maii.

Not long after, the same year, there were several writs sent to the Sheriff of
Hereford and others, to protect the Jews persons and estates from violence,
which the people were prone to offer to them, and to preserve them from all
suits and arrests against them for contracts or other things both in the
Bishops Ecclesiastical Court, and before the Sheriffs, or Kings ordinary
Justices and Judges; but only before the Justices specially designed for their
custody, as in the time of King John, which writs were all sent them in this
form.

Pat. 2. H. 3. pa^s 1. m. 3.
Rex Vicecomiti Hereford salutem: Scias, quod de communi Concilio nostro
concessimus Judaeis nostris, ut ipsi maneant in Hereford, sicut solebant
tempore Domini Johannis Regis Patris nostri, and quod talem habeant communionem
qualem habere consueverant inter Chris^ianos. Et ideo tibi praecipimus, quod
eos custodias, m^nnrene^s protegas, non eis infetens vel inferri permitte^^^
a^iquod gravamen vel molestiam, and si aliquis (...) forisfecerit, id eis sine
dilatione facias (...) clamari facias per totam Ballivam tuam, (...) pacem
nostram dedimus, non obstante (...) ^^bitione inde facta, ab Episcopo Hereford,
quia nihil ad ipsum pertiner de Judaeis nostris. Et pro^ibemus tibi ne manus
mittas in eos, aut in Catalla eo^um, nec eos capias aut imprisones, nec in
Placitum trahas, aut a Justiciariis nostris ab aliquo trahi permittas; Sedu
a^iquid fecerint quare poni debeant per vadium and plegios, tunc illos and
eorum excessus attachies, quod ^^nt coram Jus^iciariis nostris ad Custodiam
Judae^rum attornatis, inde responsuri, and hoc facias per vi^um legalium
Christianorum and Judaeorum; Et non permittas quod placitentur in curia
Christianitatis occasion ^^cujus debiti. Et haec omnia fieri facias, sicut
fieri solebant tempore Johann. Regis patris nostri. Test Com. apud T^^rom
London 19 die Junii, Anno etc. secundo.

Eodem modo scribitur Vicecomiti Wigorn. Vicecom. and Civibus Eborum.
Vicecomiti and Constabulario Lincoln, (...) de Stanford, and Constabulario
Bristol. pro Judaeis de Bristol, and Vicecom. and Constabul. Gloucest. pro
Judaeis Gloucestriae, and Vicecom. and Constab. Northamton: and ^^cecom.
Suthampton and civibus Winton pro Judaeis: There (...) Jews then residing in
all these places.

I^ the 2 year of King Henry the 3. I find this Kings ^rit to several Sheriffs
where the Jews resided, to procl^^m, that all the Jews where ever they did walk
or ride, should on their upper Garments wear a white ^ab^es on their breasts,
made of Linen Cloth or parchment, as well within the Town as without, that so
they might be known from Christians.

Rex Vicecomiti Wigorni^ salutem: Pr^cipimus tibi, ^ Claus. H. 3 m. 1^. (...)
quod ^lamari and observari facias per totam Balliva^ t^^m, qu^d omnes Judaei
deferunt in superiori indumento suo, ubicur (...) ambulaverint aut equitaverint
infra villam vel ex^ra, qua^^ duas Tabulas albas in Pectore, fact as de lineo
p^atano, vel d^ parcameno: Ita quod per hujusmodi signum manifest po^sint
Iudaei a Christianis discerni. T^ste C^mite (to wit. William Marshal Earl of
Gl^cester the Kings Guard^an and Protector) apud Oxon. 30. die Martiii.

Item mandatum est Vicecomit. Glocest. Warwick, Lincoln, Oxon, Northampt.
Majori and Vicecomitious London.

F^ne 2 H. 3. m. 7.
In the Fine Roll of 2 H. 3. there is a writ directed to the Barons of the
Exchequer by the King; reciting, Constat Nobis per inspectionem rotulorum
Iust^ciariorum de Iudaismo, etc. that King John his Father released Mirabilia
the wife of Ely a Jew, of all Debts due to him by her Husband: Ita quod omnes
Cha^^e qu^e fuerunt ipsius Eliae, and debita in eis contenta ipsi patri n^stro
rem^neant: that King John upon Elye his death, sei^ed and granted ^ll his
houses, except two, which Mirabil^^ by agreement was to have, paying a fine of
15 marks to his Father* which was not yet paid; which agreement he confirm^d
and thereupon orders the Sheriff to ^^y the said Fine and Debts. T. Com: apud
Gloc. 3. die Ian.

It appears by many Rolls of ^. (and also of 3 4 and 5.) H. 3. that King John
sei^ed and ga^e away ^o other the Houses of diverse Jews, both in Gloce^ter,
Oxon. No^thampton, and that King H^n^y likewise di^po^ed of them; as escheated
to him, either by the Jews deaths, o^ ^o^ some other causes: Take these two
pres^dents for all the rest.

Claus. 2 H. 3. part 2. m. 2. Claus. 3. H. 3. pars 1. m. 12. Claus. 4. H. 3. m.
13.
Rex Fulk: de Breant, salutem; Mandamus vobis quod sine dilatione habere fac.
Pho: Marc. domum quae fuit Isaac Iudaei de Eboraco in Northampton, et domum
quae fuit Isaac Judaei Oxon in Oxon, quas Dom. Jo. pr. noster dedit Galf.
Luterel, cujus terrae et haeredis custodiam concessimus eidem Pho. T. Com. apud
West. 17 die Jan. per ipsum Com. coram Dom. Winton.

Eodem modo scribitur Vic. Oxon. pro eodem, et Ballivis Iudaeorum Oxon. pro
eodem.

Claus. 3. H. 3. pars 2. m. 2. De dom^bus Judaeorum Glouc.
Rex Vic. G^ouc. salutem; Constat n^bis per inspectionem Rotulorum nostrorum,
quod Dom. J. Rex, pater noster, dedit Guiberto de Rue Domum quae fuit Elye
Iudaei Gloc. etc. cum quadam placi^a quae fuit Mostei Judaei cum pert. suis: Et
ideo tibi praecipimus quod eidem Guiberto de praedict. domo and placia
plenariam seisinam sine dilatione habere fac. T. Dom: Pet. Winton apud Novum
Templum London, 23. die Sept. per eundem.

In the 3d. year of King Henry the 3. some Jews coming into England from
foreign parts with their goods to reside there, the Wardens of the Ports of
England seized upon the persons and estates of these unwelcom Guests; which
occasioned these new Writs to be sent unto them for their free admission into
England without impediment or seizure, upon such security and terms as are
expressed in the Writs, and prohibiting the transportation of any Jews or their
Chattels out of this Land into foreign parts, without the Kings special Letters
and Licen^e, being once within his power.

Pat. 3. H. 3. pars 2. m. ^.^.1.
Rex Custod^bus Portuum Angliae. Praecipimus vobis quod Judaeos qui venturi
sunt in te^ram nostram Ang^iae de tra^^^ia tri^is part^bus ad morandum in terra
nostra Angliae, cum catal^is suis, libere, et sine impedimento in portu nostro
^cc^dere permittatis, accepta ab eis sufficienti securitate, secundum L^gem
Judaeorum per fidem eorundem, quod quam c^ritis poterint, veniant ad
Iusticiarios nostros ad custodiam Judaeorum assignatos ad inrotuland: nomina
eorum in rotulis n^st is. Et si aliquem Judaeum qui de partibus transmarinis
venerit, sicut praedictum est, retinueritis, ipsum et catalla sua sine
dilatione deliberari faciatis. Si quos autem inveneritis Iudaeos de terra
nostra qui ad vos venerint ad transfretandum usque ad parts transmarinas sine
literis nostris de licentia transfretandi, ipsos cum catallis suis arrestari
faciatis, donec a Nobis, vel a Iusticiariis nostris ad custodiam Indaeorum
assignatis inde aliud mandatum habueritis. T. Petro Winton Episcopo apud
Westminster. 13 die November. Anno Regni nostri tertio.

Diverse Debtors of the Jews made a fine with king John in the 10th. year of his
reign to be paid at certain terms, of which payments they failing, the Jews
thereupon paying the fine had these debts assigned them by king Henry the 3.
and a precept to extend all the lands they had in 10 of king John, prohibiting
the taking of any use from them before the kings assignment, but allowing use
afterward, as this Record demonstrates.

Pat. 3. H. 3. m. 6. de Debitis Judaeorum.
Rex Vic. Lincoln et Eborum salutem. Quia Gilb. de Bercumworth, Norm: de Arecy
(and 5 more there named) non servaverunt terminos suos de fine quem fecerunt
cum Dom. Rege patre nostro de debitis Iudaeorum: Nos de consilio nostro die
Sancti. Martini, An. reg. nostr. 3. Liberavimus Helie de Linc. Iudaeo, debita
eorundem de quibus finem fecerunt, per finem quem idem Helie nobis fecit. Ita
quod de eisdem debitis, exigere possit totum catallum suum sine lucro quod sibi
de cetero proveniet. Et ideo praecipimus G. de Bercumworth quod sine dilatione
reddat eidem Helie 316 l. 10 s. ( cum lucro quod sib^ excreverit a praedicto
die sancti Martini) Item praecipimus Norm. de Arecy quod sine dilatione reddat
eidem Helie 23 l. 17 s. etc. (reciting the other 5 deb^s at large) cum lucris
quae de praedictis debitis excreverit a praedicto termino. Et nisi fecerint,
tunc sine dilatione seisiatis ipsum H. ( and the rest) de omnibus terris ei
redditibus quae fuerunt praedict. debitorum in Balliva vestra, An. regni Dom.
I. regis patris nostri decimo, quae scil. terrae et redditus sunt vadia nostra
pro praedict. debitis, sicut contineretur in rotulis nostris in quibus Cartae
and Cirographa omnium praedictorum irrotulentur, et ipsum in seinna illa
custodiatis, et manuteneatis; non ei inferentes aut inferri permittentes in
seisina illa aliquod gravamen vel molestiam. Istud autem mandatum nostrum ita
diligenter exequamini, ne pro defectu vestri debita nostra ad terminos eidem
Helie Statutos remaneant insoluta, etc. T. P. Winton Epo. apud Winton. 13 die
Nov. An. reg. n. tertio.

After which follows this Patent reciting that Isaac of Norwich a Jew made a
fine of 10000 marks to King John (a vast sum in that age) to be paid by a
mark every day till it was satisfied.

Pat. 3. H. 3. m. 6.
Rex Baronibus de Scac. salutem. Sciaris quod recepimus per manum Vener. Patris
nostri P. Wynton, Epis. in 15 dies post Nativ. Sancti. Iohis. Baptistae, an.
etc. 2. Usque ad festum St. Martini An. etc. tertio. Utraque die computata,
quolibet die 1 marc. de fine quem Isaac de Norw. fecit nobiscum pro 1 marc.
nobis singulis diebus reddend. pro fine 10 mil. marcarum quem fecit cum Dom.
Ioh. Rege patre nostro, Et rei hujus, etc. per ipsum Com. et ipsum Wynton.
Epis* An. etc. 3.

The Jews in that age and before, used to assign over Debts to the King, to
satisfy their Taxes, and other duties: whereupon the King gave them a
discharge from being sued for these debts but only before himself, his Chief
Justice* or the Justices assigned to them; witness this Prohibition.

Pat. pars 2. an. 3. H. 3. m. 1.
Rex omnibus Ballivis, etc. Prohibemus quod non permittatis quod aliquis Judaeus
vel Judaea, in Balliva vestra trahat in Placitum Mossaeum fill. Isaac de
Colecester Judaeum, de debito W. Hastings, quod ei liberavimus per finem quem
modo nobiscum fecit; quod quidem debitum idem Mosseus et fratres sui, haeredes
praedicti Isaac, liberaverunt quietum in Thesaurarium nostrum in salvatione
debiti quod dictus Isaac debuit Domino Johanni Regi patri nostro, nisi coram
Nobis, vel Capitali Justiciario nostro, vel Justiciariis nostris ad custodiam
Judaeorum assignatis: sine eo quod inde speciale mandatum nostrum habuerint. T.
H. de Burgo, etc.

In the 5 year of Henry the 3. The King granted the Custody of a Jews house in
Melchstreet escheated to him till his full age by this writ.

Claus. 5. H. 3. m. 17. De Dom. Judaeorum.
Rex Rico de Dol. et Magist. Alex. de Dorset, et sociis suis ad custod.
Judaeorum assignatis, salutem. Sciatis nos concessisse dilecto nostro Luce
Capellano, H. de Burgo Justiciarii nostri, custod. domus et terrae cum
pertinentiis quae fuerunt Solomonis de Melchstreet Judaei, quae sunt in manu
nostra sicut escaeta nostra occasion Judaeorum, usque ad aetatem nostram. Et
ideo vobis praecipimus quod eidem Luce plenam seisinam sine dilatione habere
faciatis. T. H. apud Turr. London 7 die Ian. an. reg. n. 5. per eundem

In the 7 year of this King the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of Lincoln
had issued forth Precepts, That none should buy any thing of, nor sell any
victuals or necessaries to the Jews, nor have any communnion with them (being
excommunicated persons for their infidelity and usury by the Laws of the
Church:) whereupon the King issued forth this ensuing Writ to the Sheriffs and
Mayor of Canterbury and Lincoln, and the like Writs to others upon the Jews
complaint, commanding all to sell them victuals and other necessaries, and
apprehend and imprison those that refused, notwithstanding the Bishops
inhibition.

7. H. 3. part 2. m. 2. dors.
Rex Vicecomiti Lincoln, and Majori Cantuariae, salutem. Ostenderunt nobis
Judaei nostri Lincolniae, quod ratione praecepti Venerab. patr. S.S.
Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, et Episcopi Lincoln. facti de Judaeis, ne quis eis
victualia vendant, nec communionem habeant cum eis, nec inveniant aliquem qui
eis aliquid vendant: Ideo vobis praecipimus quod visis Literis istis, praecipi
et clamari faciatis ex part nostra in Balliva vestra, quod vendantur eis
victualia, et alia necessaria in Civitate Cantuariae et alibi illum capiatis,
et corpus ejus salvo custodiatis, donec aliud mandatum praeciperimus. Test H.
etc. apud Westmon. 10 die Novembris.

Eodem modo scribitur Majori and Praeposito Oxon. de Iudaeis Oxon. et. Ballivis
de Norwic. de Iudaeis Norwic.

In the Fine Rolls of 7 H. 3. I find several respites of Debts demanded from
the Jews by the Kings Officers by proce^^e out of the Kings Exchequer for the
Jews, till the next account upon several grounds, take these two instances for
all the rest of that nature in this Roll, which I shall omit.

Fines 7 H. 3. m. 2. pars 1. Ebor.
Mandatum est Vicecomiti Eborum, quod Demandam quam facit Eustachiae de
Courtenay de debitis Judaeorum per summonitionem Scaccarii, in respectu ponat
usque super proximum Compotum suum ad festum Sancti Michaelis anno, etc. 7. ut
tunc coram S. Justiciar. ad custodiam Judaeorum assignat. discutiatur, utrum
ipsa de debitis illis respondere debeat, cum ipsa nihil teneat de tertis quae
fuerunt Willielmi filii Anceturi quondam viri sui, qui debita illa bebuit, nisi
nomine dotis. Test, H. etc. apud Westminster. 7 die Sept.

Ibid. Kanc.
Mandatum est Vicecomiti Kanciae, quod demanda 46 solidorum et 8 denariorum quam
facit VVillielmo Cissori nostro de debitis Judaeorum, per summonirionem
Scaccarii nostri, in respectu ponat usque super prox. Compotum suum ad festum
Sancti Michaelis, Anno reg. nostri septimo. T. ut supra per eundem.

Four Jews committed for killing an English man, were bailed and delivered to 9
other Jews, their bail, by this Writ in 9 H. 3. and their goods, writings,
Letters rents seized in the interim.

Claus. 9. H. 3. pars 3. m. 7.
Rex vic. Sathamt. salutem. Praecipimus tibi quod Abrahamum de Cant. Samaris
fill Lumbard, Eliam fill. Chierie and Abrah. fill. Aiare Iudaeos, cap^os and
detentos in prisone nostra per praeceptum nostrum, pro morte Willi. fill. Rici,
sil. Gervasii, unde idem Ricus eos appellat, tradas in Ball. Lumbardo
Duleberigint, (and 5 others there named) Judaeis nostris Wint. cum omnibus
catallis quae sunt Judaeorum de morte praedict. appellatorum, quas ipsi habeant
in terris, redditibus, Cirographis, Talliis et rebus al^is in manum nostram
capiatis, Et per visum hominum Legalium imbreviatis, usque ad prox. adventum
nostrum apud Winton. and praedictos Lumbard. etc. qui praedictos Judaeos de
praedicta morte appellatos in ball. ceperum, et corpora dictor. Judaeorum
appellatorum ad veritatem inde before attirgena. et dic praedicto Rico. quod
tunc sit coram vobis appellum suum versus eos inde prosecuturus. E^ habeas ibi
h^c breve. T. R. apud Winton 12 die Julii, An. 9. coram Justic.

In the 10 of H. 3. I find this Record containing an agreement with some Jews
concerning a Debt which the King commands to be observed, because enrolled.

Claus. 10. H. 3. m. 3. De quodam fine in Judaismo tenen^^
Mandat. est Justice, ad custodiam Iudaeorum assignatis quod finem quem VVillus
de Lancaster fecit coram eis pro Rogero de Leiburn cum Bonefaunt de Glou.
Mirabile matter ejus Iud^i, (and 6 more Jews there named) de debito quod ipse
Roger eis debuit, qui quidem finis irrotulatus est in Rotulo Scac. Iudaeorum ut
dicitur, sicut recordatus fuit coram ipsis Iusticiariis, et irrotulatus, teneri
faciant. T. R. apud Gaytington 17 die Julii Anno R. n. 10.

Fines 10. H. 3. m. 9. Respite is given Benedicto Crespen, and aliis Iudaeis,
to pay a great debt annually to the King at certain terms by set sums, and the
Justices for the Jews to allow it. And Ibid. Dors. 4. Memorandum quod Dom. Rex
pardonavit Roberto de VVolfraton 9 marc. quas debet Leoni Iudaeo Linc. unde
loquendum est ei cum eodem Iudaeo ad Scac. Dom. Reg. coram Justice. ad custod.
Iudaeorum assignatis, et quod charta sine dilatione ei reddatur, that so he
might not sue him on it afterward.

In the 11 of H. 3. one Augustine a Jew turning a Christian Convert at
Canterbury, the King commanded the Sheriff to restore him his house, (which was
forfeited upon his conversion) by this Precept.

Claus. 11 H. 3. m. 21.
Mandatum est Vic. Kant. quod habere faciat Augustino converso quandam domum in
Iudaismo in Cant. quae sua fuit antequam ad fidem converteretur, non obstanteeo
quod conversus est. T. Rege apud Red. 17. die Jan.

Anno 14. H. 3. some Jews were sent up Prisoners to the Tower and ordered to be
speedily tried for stealing of cloth and clipping of money, as this Warrant
manifests.

Claus. 14. H. 3. m 14. De Judaeis custodiend. in ^urre London.
Mandatum est Constab. Turris London, quod Iudaeos subscriptos quos Rex ad eum
mittit, per Adam Custard, and Richard de Done, Servientes Vic. Salop:
Viuianum: and Bell: uxor: ejus, Isaac and Ann. uxor. ejus, et Aguinam Judaeam,
et Aaron, rectatos de latrocinio panni et Tonsura Denariorum, recipiat, et
ipsos in Turre London salvo custodiat, quousque Stephanus de Sedgrave venerit
London; cui Rex mandavit, quod in primo adventu suo usque London, ipsos Judaeos
coram se venire faciat: et si ipsos inde culpabiles invenerit, de ipsis fieri
faciat quod secundum consuetudinem Angliae fuerit faciendum. T. Rege apud
Reading 3. die Martii.

Et mandatum est ipsi Stephano quod in primo adventu suo London loquelam illam
audiat, et de illis quos inde culpabiles invenerit fac. judicium fieri secundum
Legem et consuetudinem Regni, non expectata super hoc praesentia Regis, et de
aliis qui non sunt culpabiles, faciat quod viderit faciendum, etc. T. ut supra.

In the 15 of H. 3. the King sent this Writ to the Sheriff of Kent commanding
him to summon 6. of the richest and potentest Jews of Canterbury, and so many
more of Rochester, to appear before him at Westminster to hear his command, and
to bring up with them all their own and the other Jews arrerages of Canterbury
and Rochester, of the 8000 marks, and likewise of the 6000 marks, (not long
before imposed on them) with the arrears of the 1000. marks promised to him by
the Jews of England to respite their debts, witness the Record it self.

Claus. 15 H. 3. m. 16. dors.
Mandatum est Vicecom. Kanc. quod sicut seipsum et omnia sua diligit, venire
faciat coram Rege apud Westminster. a die Pasche in 15 dies, Sex: de ditioribus et
potentioribus Iudaeis villae Cantuariae, et totidem de villa Roff. ad audiendum
ibidem praeceptum Regis. Ita quod ad eundem terminum habeant ibidem omnia
arreragia sua propria sine omni dilatione, simil^ter et arreragia omnium
Iudaeorum praedictarum villaru^, quae Dom. Regi debent, tam de Tallagio 8.
millia marcarum, quam de Tallagio 6 millia marcarum, et preterea id quod ad
Iudaeos praedictaru^ villarum adhuc pertinet Regi reddendum de mill marcis
quae Regi promissae fuerunt nomine omnium Iudaeorum Angliae pro respectu
habendo debitis quae ab eis exigebantur: Ea diligentia hoc praeceptum Regis
executur: ne pro defectu suo ad eum Rex se graviter capere debeat. Et habeat
ibi nomina illorum sex Iudaeorum, et hoc breve. T. Rege apud Clarendon, 26 die
Marcii.

Anno 16 H. 3. I find this Grant of a Jews house by the King.

Claus. 16. H. 3. m. 7. De domo cujusdam Judaei in London dato Rico. Capellae.
Rex concessit Richo. de Sancto Johanne Capell: domum illam cum pertinentiis in
vico de Pater noster Church London, quae fuit Rici^le Ailer, et modo est in
manu Jacobi Iudaei London, et Floriae uxoris ejus: habendum de dom. Rege sibi
et haeredibus suis, vel cuicunque ea dare, vendere, vel aliter assignare
voluerit. Et mandatum est Justic. ad custod: Iudaeorum assignatis, quod eidem
Rico: de domo praedicto cum pertinentiis, plenam seisinam habere faciant,
sicut. praedict. est. Test Rege apud Westmonast. xviii. die Iulii.

Fines 16 H. 3. pars 1. m. 7. Ibid. m. 7.
Pro quibusdam Iudaeis to pay their fines and debts by certain portions at some
terms.

In the 17 year of H. 3. the King imposed a Tax upon the Jews of 10000 marks;
which they being unable to pay presently, had certain days assigned to pay it
in, by several sums mentioned in this record, some special Jews excepted.

Pat. 17. H. 3. m. 6. pro Judaeis Angliae.
Rex concessit Judaeis Angliae (exceptis Isaac de Norwic. et Ursell, et fratris
sui haeredibus Ham. de Hereford) quod de 10 mill marcis, quas Regi debent de
ultimo Tallagio, solvant ad Scacc. Regis ad festum Sancti Michaelis, An: 17.
500 l. et ad Pasche prox: sequent: 500 l. and si been respondeant Regi de
dictis mill libris ad praedict. terminos, et de aliis arreragiis quae Regi
debent; tunc solvant similiter de eisdem 10000 marcis, anno proximo sequent:
1000 l. ad eosdem terminos scil: ad festum Sancti Michaelis Ann. 18. 500 l. et
ad Pasch. prox. sequen: 500 l. et postea per annum 2000 marc. ad eosdem
terminos, donec dictae 10000 marc. sic Regi plene solvantur. Concessit etiam
Rex eisdem Judaeis, (praeter dictis Isaac, et fratribus ejus) quod interim
quieti sint de Tallagio scil: quousque dictae 10000 marc. persolutae fuerint,
sicut praedict. est. Ita tamen quod illi Judaei qui manuceperunt pro omnibus
Iudaeis Angliae Tallagium 8000 marc. Regi plene respondeant de arreragiis
ejusdem Tallagii, and quilibet Judaeus respondeat pro se de arreragiis Tallagii
6000 marc. quia tunc Talliati fuerunt per capita, and de aliis debitis et
finibus quae Regi debent, non obstante hoc fine interim Regi respondeant. In
cujus etc. T. Pet. Winton Episc. apud Westminster. 2 die Martii. Per eundem and
Justic.

It is evident by this record, That there were 3 several Taxes lately imposed,
one by the Pol on every particular Jew, who was obliged to pay his proportion:
the other of 8000 marks, imposed on all the Jews generally throughout England,
which some of them were engaged to see paid to the King, the other of 10000
marks to be paid at certain days, by parcels as aforesaid. The Arrears of all
which, besides other Debts and Fines to the King lay charged all on them at
once.

In the pleas of the 18 year of King Henry the 3. I find many things touching
the Jews and their affairs. As namely, that memorable Plea, concerning the Jews
circumcising a child at Norwich; in the Placita 18 H. 3. rot. 21. kept in the
Treasury of the Exchequer; which because I have printed at large in the 2
Edition of my former Short Demurrer, etc. p. 19, 20, 21. and for that it is
briefly touched in Mr. Samuel Purchase his Pilgrimage. Edit. 3. lib. 2. c. 10.
sect. 7. with this observation on it, out of Celsus, l. 7. c. 25. That by
Surgery the skin of a circumcised child may be d^awn forth again to an
uncircumcision: I shall here pretermit, to avoid repetition and prolixity.

The Jews were such unwelcom Guests to all Towns and places in England where
they resided, that King Henry granted this (as a special Privilege) by his
Charter to the Town of New Castle, and their heirs, that no Jew from
thenceforth should remain or reside in their Town, during the reign of him and
his heirs, as is evident by this record in the Tower.

Claus. 18. H. 3. m. 16. See Cartae and 18 H. 3.
Rex Vicecomiti Northumberland: salutem: Sciatis, quod concessimus and Carta
nostra confirmavimus probis hominibus nostris de Villa Novi Castri super Tynam
and haeredibus eorum, Quod habeant hanc Libertatem, quod nullus Iudaeus de
caetero Tempore nostro, vel haeredum nostrorum maneat, vel residentiam aliquam
faciat in eadem Villa, ^^cut before continecur in Carta regis quam eis modo
fieri fecimus: and mandatum est eidem Vicecomiti, quod dictam cartam in pleno
comitatu suo legi et clamaoi faciat, et Praedictam Libertatem eis habere
permittat, sicut praedictum est. Test Rege apud Kenit. Quarto die Iulii, per
Godfrid: de Crancumb.

If then it were a great Privilege, Liberty, Benefit, happiness to the Town of
New Castle and their heirs, to be thus perpetually exempted from the residence
and cohabitation of any Jews amongst them under this King, his heirs and
Successors, certainly by the self-same reason it must be so likewise to all
other Cities, Towns, and the whole realm of England; and a great violation of
their Liberties, and impeachment of their prosperity now again to introduce
these blasphemous old banished Jews amongst the English, against their wills
and consents.

Placita apud Wallingford in Octabis Santae Trinitatis, Rot. 1. Dors. and rot.
10.11.
In the Plea-rolls of Anno 18 H. 3. There are many things concerning the Jws
affairs, sundry complaints and Inquisi^ions concerning the oppressions and
exactions of Peter de Rivallis, Stephen de Segrave, and Robert de Passelew
Justices of the Jews, and for their Bribes received from the Jews, against whom
Simon Cirographarius Iudaeorum petit Literas; And in rot. 17. and 20, dorso.
Peter de Rivallis being then under a cloud, amongst other things proffered to
surrender up to the King, totam Forestarium Angliae et Iudaismum, which the
King had granted him.

In the 19 H. 3. the King sent this writ to prohibit all Jews hereafter to be
obedient to Robert de Passelew* as their Justice, being discharged of his
office for his bribes and misdemeanors.

Claus 19. H. 3. pars 1. m. 21. de Judaeis.
Mandatum est Constabulario Turr: London, quod scire faciat Iudeis London, et
aliis Iudeis qui apud London venient, quod de caetero in nullo sint intendentes
vel respondentes Roberto Passelewe de hiis quae ad custodiam Iudaeorum
pertinent, donec Dominus Rex aliud inde praeceperit. T. R. apud Gloc. 30 die
Maii.

This year also the Jews accused and imprisoned at Norwich for circumcising a
child at Norwich the year before, were commannded to be removed thence to the
Tower of London, as this record assures us.

Claus. 19 H. 3. pars 2. m. 23. De Judaeis mittendis usque London.
Mandatum est Vic. Norf. quod Iudaeos de Norwic. captos et detentos in prisona
Regis pro transgressione quam fecerunt de quodam parvo Christiano
circumcidendo, ut dicitur, suis literis mitti faciat ad custos eorum, usque
London; liberandos ibidem Constabulario Turris London, cui Rex praecepit per
literas suas quas eidem Vic. mittit ei mittendas, quod eos recipiat, First
Demurrer, Edit. 2. p. 19.20.21.
et eos salvo custodiat. T. R. apud West. 21 die November. The Indictment and
whole Proceedings against them I have Fines 19. H. 3. m. 15. Norw. de Respectu
Judaeis Iudaeorum Norwic.
elsewhere at large related.

And this respit of their trial for which they paid a fine.

De Respectu. Rex Justice. suis itinerant. in Com. Suff. salutem. Mandamus vobis
quod Iudicium quod faciendum est de quibusdam Iudaeis de Norwic. qui capti sunt
et detenti in prisona nostra pro transgressione quam fecerunt de quodam puero
Christiano circumcidendo ^ponatis in respectum coram nobis apud London usque in
15 dies a die Sancti Hill. An. r. n. 19. accepta prius securitate de praedictis
Iudaeis de centum marcis ad opus nostrum reddendis, pro hoc respectu habendo,
Et habeatis tunc coram nobis recordum, illius loquelae. Mandamus enim Vic.
Norf. quod cum festinatione praedictos Iudaeos mitti faciat usque Land.
liberandos ibidem Constabulario Turris nostrae London. T. R. apud Westminster. 21 die
November.

The same year the King sent this writ to the Sheriff of Northfolk and Suffolk
to proclaim, That no Jew should lend any money from thenceforth to any
Christian that held any Demeasne Lands of the King, in Socage or Villenage upon
the lands themselves, but only upon their chattels and movables, under pain of
losing the money lent, or falling under the Kings amerement.

Claus. 19. E. 3. pars 1. m 9. Dors. De Judaeis,
Rex Vicecom. Norf. and Suff. salutem. Praecipimus tibi quod clamari facias per
totos Comitatus tuos, Quod nullus Iudaeus de caetero aliquam pecuniam credat
alicui Christiano, qui teneat de nobis in Dominicis et Maneriis nostris, per
servicium Scocagii uel Villenagii, super tetram vel tenementum aliquod quod sit
de Dominico nostro, set si ipsi Christiani mutuam videlicet a Iudaeis pecuniam
recipere vellint, illam recipiant super vadium catallorum, et rerum mobilium:
Et si aliquis contra hoc praeceptum nostrum in posterum venire presumpserit,
Iudaeus pecuniam sic creditam amittat, et in misericordiam nostram incidat, et
Christianus similiter tenementum suum in perpetuum, videlicet illud quod tam
temere contra praeceptum nostrum obligaverit. amittat. Test Rege apud Certes 1
die Sept. The same year

Claus. 19. H. 3. pars 1. m. 23. De Judaeis avendis de VVicham.
Mandatum est Vic. Buck. quod non permittat quod aliquis Judaeus de caetero
maneat in villa de VVeycumbe sed Iudaeos qui ibidem sunt manentes sine
dilatione amoveri fac. et maneant in aliis villis, in quibus prius manete
consueverant. T. R. apud Herwic. 28 die November.

This year I find this notable proclamation.

Claus. ^9. H. 3. m. 24.
Mandatum est Vicecomiti Norf. et Suff. quod in Civitate de Norwic. et singulis
bonis v^llis Com. suorum, clamori faciat, quod nulla faemina Christiana de
caetero serviat Iudaeis ad alendos puerul^s suos, vel in aliquo alio officio.
Test R. apud Westminster. 20 die Ian. per ipsum regem.

Fines 19. H. 3. m. 3.
Vrsilla filia Hamonis de Hereford Judaei, pays a fine of 5000 marks, pro
habendis terris, domibus, et omnibus debitis et catallis quae fuerunt praedict.
Hamonis to be paid at certain days.

Such Fines of Jews to enjoy their fathers houses and chattels, are frequent in
the Fine Rolls.

Ibid. m. 12.
Isaac a Jew was this year fined 100l. de pluribus transgressionibus de quibus
convactus fuit coram Justic. Dom. Reg. ad custod. Iudaeorum assignatis.

In this year also the King discharged Aaron a Jew of York from all Tallages
whatsoever during his life, paying annually into his Exchequer one hundred
marks yearly at two terms for his exemption.

Pat. 19. H. 3. m. 14. Pro Aaron Judaeo Ebor. de quietant Tallagii
Rex omnibus ad quos presents litterae perveniunt, salutem. Sciatis quod
concessimus Aaron de Ebor. Judaeo, quod ipse toto tempore vitae suae quietus
sit de Ta^lagio; reddendo p^r annum ad Scac. nostrum Cent. marc. ad duos
terminos, scil. 50 mar. ad fest, Pasch. et 50 marc. ad festum Sancti Michis.
Ita quod de debitis quae nobis debuit de quibus finem fecit nobiscum, reddend:
per annum ad Scac. nostrum cent. solidos qutetus erit per praedict. 100 mar.
an. In cujus, etc. T. R. apud Suthan 13 die Feb. Et mandatum est Iusticiariis
ad custodiam Iudeorum per literas clausas, quod ita fie^i et irrotulari
faciant. Which exemption is frequently mentioned and ratified afterward, and
yet availed him very little, as I have First Demurrer p. 25. Edit. 2.
elsewhere manifested out of Mat. Paris.

Fines 20 H. 3. m. 13.
Aaron de York to pay 100 marks per an. to the Kings Exchequer to be free from
taxes during all his life.

In 20 H. 3. I find this pardon of Usury due to a Jew by the King.

Rex pardonavit Roberto de Pedtiling totam usuram debitorum quibus tenetur
Isaac Judaeo Nottingh. et Benedicto Judaeo Warwic. salva praedictis Judaeis
^orte predict. debitorum. Et mandatum est Justiciariis ad custod. Judaeorum
assignatis, Claus. 20. H. 3. m. 10. de pardonatione Usurae.
quod de usura praedicta ipsum Robertum quietum else, et ad sortem eorundem
debitorum praedict. Judaeis redendam eidem Roberto rationabiles terminos habere
faciant. T. Rege apud Winton 10 die Iunii.

This year the Inhabitants of Suthampton being weary of the Jews company, who
intruded themselves into the Town, procured this grant from the King to be quit
of them (unless by special command) for the future.

Ibid. m. 10. De Junaeis non remanend. in Suthampt. sine speciali praecepto
Regis.
Rex concessit Burgensibus suis Suthampton, quod nullus Iudaeus de caetero
maneat apud Suthampton sine speciali praecepto Regis: Et mandat. est.
Iusticiariis ad custod. Iudaeorum assignatis, quod illinc nullum Iudaeum
mittant ad manendum ibi, nec aliquem ibi remanere permittant sine speciali
praecepto Regis. T. Rege apud Winton 21 die Iunii.

I conceive all corporations in England will be as unwilling to entertain any
Jews now to dwell amongst them, as the Inhabitants of Suthampton (and those of
Newcastle, and Wickham forementioned) were to receive them in that age.

In this year I find one Jew extending the lands of another Jew for a debt, by
this Writ to their Justices for that end.

Claus. 20 H. 3. m. 10 De extinctu sacienda,
Mandatum est Justice. ad custod. Iudaeorum assignatis. quod per Sacramentum
proborum et legalium hominum extendi faciant Domos et terras Aaronis Benedicti
Suthampton in Suthampt. et in la Hull, videlicet quantum valiant per annum in
dominicis, redditibus, serviciis. villenag. et omnibus aliis exitibus: et fac.
extendi praedict eidem Aaroni rationabilem finem, et rationabiles terminos
habere fac. ad debita in quibus tenetur David Iudaeo Oxon. et Deuleben fill.
Urse^. Iudaeo Winton, secundum valorem praedictar. domorum et terrarum. et
quantitatem praedictorum debitorum, ita quod interim cessent usurae (which here
one Jew took of another) T. R. apua Winton 11 die Jun.

Hen. the 3 in the 21 year of his reign gran^ed the Presbyt^ry of all the Jews
of England (which I conceive to be rather the Custos Rotulorum, or Controlers
place in the Kings Exchequer of the Jews, than the Priestly function) as this
Record attests.

Claus. 21. H. 3. m. 18. Pro Aaron Judaeo Ebor.
Mandatum tst Iusticiariis ad custodiam Iudaeorum assignatis. Quod Rex
concessit Aaron Iudaeo Ebor. Presbyteratum omnium Iudaeorum Angliae, cum
omnibus pertinentiis suis tenendum tota vita sua: Et quotiens Aaron intendere
non possit ad sedend. ad Scaccarium Regis ad officium illud (therefore
certainly it was a temporal office in the Kings Exchequer, not an
Ecclesiastical Priesthood in the Jewish Synagogues) Ioceu fill. Copin loco suo
recipiat, ad ea facienda ad Scaccarium regis quae ad officium illud pertinent
(therefore a temporal office only to be executed in the Exchequer, and that by
Deputy as well as in proper person, which the Jewish High Priesthood could nor
be) Rotulos etiam qui fuerunt Joc^i Presbyteri praedecessoris sui (his Office
therefore was to keep the Rolls, as Comptroler) eidem Aaron, vel praedicto
attornato suo habere faciant. T. Rege apud Clarendon 29 die September.

Which record, together with that of Claus. 27 H. 3. ^ars 2. m. 3. hereafter
cited, does most fully convince me upon second thoughts, that the Presbyteratus
omnium Iud^orum totius Angliae granted by King John's Charter forementioned, in
the 1 year of his reign to Jacob the London Jew, was not an ecclesiastical high
Priesthood E^^scopacy, or Priestly Aaronical Function, but exercised over all
the English Jews in their Synagogues, as Sir 2 Institutes p. 507, 508
Edward Coook, Mt. Seldom, Mr. Purehas, Purchase Pilgrimage Edit. 3. l. 2. c.
10. sect. 7. and Pilgrims l. 9. r. 5. sect. 1. p. 1441.
Dr. Fuller, and others generally assert, as a thing beyond disspute, whose
venerable Authorities at first induced me to that opinion, but a mere secular
Office in the Kings Exchequer of the Jews to keep the Rolls of Comptroll, which
this Aaron had now granted to him in the selfsame words, as are used in King
John's Charter, Church Hist. l. 3. p. 84.85.
and his Predecessors before, and successors after him enjoined by like
Charters from the K. A thing now clear to me upon consideration, that the
Jewish Priesthood in the old and new Testam. Latin Authors, and Records, is
never styled Presbyteratus, but See Pat. 41. H. 3. m. 4.
Sacerdetium, nor their Priest not High Priest; Presbyter omnium Iudeorum; but
Sacerdos, Pontifex, max. summus Sacerdos, etc. and upon my comparing of several
records together since the 3, 4, and 5. pages of this second Demurrer printed
(which I could not transcribe, nor compare together till afterward) that it is
past all dispute.

This year the King imposed a Tax of ten thousand marks upon the Jews, from the
immediate payment whereof no Jew was to be excused or respited, but by the
Kings special Writ, as these two Records inform us in this very year.

Claus. 21 H. 3. pars 1. m. 19.
Mandatsm est Iusticiariis ad custod. Iudaeorum assignatis, quod de arreragiis
Tallagii Iudaeorum, de 10 mill marc. quae colligi precipit rex, nullos Iudaeos
quietos. esse permittant, nisi Tallagium illud ad Scac. regis pacaverint, vel
literas regis de quietancia inde habuerint, vel aliud rationabile Warrantum
producant, quod eis de jure sufficere debeat. Test Rege apud Marleburge 13 die
December.

Pat. 21. H. 3. m. 6. Pro Aaron Iud^^.
Rex quietum clamavit Aaron Iudaeum Ebor. de plegiag. 10 mil. marc. de Tallagio
posito super Iudeos. unde idem Aaron fuit unus de 10 plegiis. In cujus, etc. T.
R. apud Westminster. 18 die Iunii: per Archiepisc. Ebor.

It seems 40 rich Jews were pledges to the King for the due payment of this 10
thousand marks Tallage, whereof Aaron being one, was now discharged by this
royal instrument.

Some Jews in Oxford were this year imprisoned for forcibly taking away a
Jewish child, converted and baptized; who b^ing afterward found, they were
released by this writ.

Claus. 21 H. 3. pars 1. m. 22. Pro Judaeis Oxon deliberandis.
Mandatum est Constab. Oxon: quod omnes Iudaeos quos cepit et captos tenet in
Castro Oxon: occasion cujusdam parvi conversi et baptizati, qui dicebatur per
ipsos Iudaeos raptus esse, et qui jam inventus est apud Oxon, sine dilatione
deliberet. Test Rege apud Westminster. 4 die Novem.

In 22 H. 3. there was a new heavy Tax imposed on the Jews, which some Jews in
Bristol to avoid, thought to fly the Land, whereupon they were there
imprisoned; and at last released, upon giving security not to depart the Realm
and to pay the Tax; as this record attests.

Claus. 22. H. 3. m. 18. De Judaeis deliberandis.
Mandatum est Constabul. Bristol, quod si Lumbard et Isaac Iudaei Bristol capti
et in prisona Bristol detenti, eo quod fugere volebant e terra Regis, fecerint
eum securum, quod moram facient in terra Regis, et quod reddent in medio
quadragesimae Ann. etc. 22. id quod ad eos pertinet de Tallagio Regis, tunc eos
ita deliberet e prisona. T. R. apud Westminster. 5 die Martii.

There are several records this year for extending lands for the Debts of Jews,
take one for a president of the rest.

Claus. 22. H. 3. pars 1. m. 17. De terra extendenda, and Claus. 22 H. 3. pars
2. m. 9. Fines 23. H. 3. m. 3.
Mandatum est Justieiariis ad custod. Judaeorum assignatis quod extendi faciant
terram Roberti de Ardern, quae est vadium Crispini, and aliorum Judeorum, et
secundum valorem et quantitatem debiti, rationabiles terras eos habere faciant,
T.R. apud Merleburge 25 die Martii. The like extent ( mutatis mutandis) is
granted this year against the lands of William Marschal.

Claus. 22 H. 3. ms 10. Dorso.

Fines 23 H. 3 pars 1. m. 20. dors.


In the Clause rolls of 22 H. 3. and in the Dorse of the Fine roll of 23. I find
this notable case in Law, reciting and expounding the Statute of Merton 20 H.
3. c. 5. concerning Usurie, made but two years before it.

* Rex Vic. Ebor. salutem. Ostendit Regi Ric: de Watervill, quod cum in Curia
Regis coram Justiciariis suis apud Westminster. per considerationem ejusdem Curiae,
recuperasset versus Rogerum de Colevill, custodiam terrae quae fuit Odmelli de
Albano in Dalton usque aetatem haeredis ejusdem Odmelli; Aaron de Ebor. Judaeus
cujus vadium dicta terra dicitur esse, postea per Breve Regis recuperavit
seisinam ejusdem terrae, tanquam vadium suum. Quia vero Rex generaliter
concessit in regno suo, ^0 H. 3. c. 5.
quod haeredibus infra aetatem existentibus non current usurae super terras
suas quae vadia sint Judaeorum, nec hujusmodi invadationes auferre debent
Dominis feodorum custodiam terrarum quae de eis tenentur per servicium
militare. Mandatum est Vic. Ebor. quod praedict. Nicho. de praedicta terra
nomine custod: talem seisinam faciat qualem inde habuit antequam praedicto
Judeo per praeceptum Regis seisinam inde habere fecit. T. R. apud Windsore 17
die Junii.

If Sir Edw: Cook had been so well seen in records as most deem him, he would
certainly have remembered this in his Commentary on the Statute of Merton, cap.
5.

I meet with these four records in 23 H. demonstrating what fines Releifs the
Jews heirs paid to the King to enjoy their Estates after their decease, etc.

Fines 23 H. 3. pars 2. m. 11.
Aaron Judeus Ebor. and Benedictus fill. Jossei haeredes Samuelis fill. Joscei
Judei, finem fecerunt cum Rege pro habendis terris et catallis quae fuerunt
praedicti Samuelis pro centum libris, de quibus reddit xx l. per annum: scil. x
l. ad Pasch. An. 23. and ad festum Sancti Michaelis Anno eodem x l. et sic de
anno in annum, et de termino in terminum, donec praedict. 100 lib. plene
fuerint solutae. Et mandatum est Justic. ad custod: Judaeorum assignatis, quod
ita irrotulari, and omnes terras et catalla praedicta eisdem Aaron et Benedicto
deliberari faciant; salvo uxori ejusdem Samuelis rationabili dote sua, secundum
Legem et consuetudinem Judeorum, quam quidem dorem idem Justiciar, ei sine
dilatione facient assignari. T.R. apud Woodstock, 18 die Novembris.

Ibid. m. 9. Pro quibusdam Iudaeis.
Rex Baronibus suis de Scac. salutem. Sciatis, quod concessimus Ursello fill.
Hamond de Hereford, et fratribus suis, quod de sine quem fecerunt nobiscum pro
habendis terris ^t catallis praedicti Hamonis patris sui, habeant eosdem
terminos quos eis prius concessimus, et tantundem Nobis reddent per annum
quantu^ reddere debent per praefatam concessionem nostram eis prius factam, ita
quod primus terminus eorum incipiet ad Pasch. an. r. n. 23. and sic deinceps
reddant nobis de termino in terminum tantum denar. per ann. quant: reddere
debuerunt per praedict. concessionem, donec totus finis nobis persolvatur, non
obstante eo quod praedicti Ursell: et fratres sui terminos suos quos eis
concessimus non observarunt, T. R. apud Westminster. 18 die Ian.

By these two Presidents (and many others in the Fine Rols of this Kings reign,
which I pretermit) is is apparent, 1. That all the Jews goods, chattels,
houses, lands, upon their decease remained in the Kings hands, neither could
their children enjoy them till they had made a special Fine with the Kings
Justices for them, and thereupon had a special Writ of restitution awarded to
give them actual possession of them. 2ly. That those Fines were usually
ordered to be paid by certain portions half yearly, till satisfied by their
heirs. 3ly, That all the Jews sons were equally heirs to their Fathers lands,
houses, Chattels. 4ly. That their wives were endowed of their lands and houses,
and that by special assignment of the Justices assigned for the custody of the
Jews. 5ly. That if they failed of paying their Fines according to their first
composition, they must purchase a New order for confirmation thereof, else all
was null.

In the Clause roll of 24 H. 3. pars 1. m. 9. scedula. there is a writ to the
Sheriff of Gloucester to receive the debts and goods of one Vinion a Jew of
Gloucester, in sundry Abbots, his wives and others hands, to the Kings use, and
deliver them to the Clerk of the wardrobe.

It seems this year the Sheriff of Gloucester had arrested all the Jews of
Gloucester upon some occasion, whereupon this writ to restore them issued.

Claus. 24 H. 3. pars 1. m. 10.
Mandatum est Vic. Glouc. quod Iudeis Glouc. liberam administrationem de
cattallis suis mobilibus and immobilibus quae arestatae fuerunt, habere f^ciat
sicut habere debent secundum assisam regni nostri et solent, ita quod occasion
nullius mandati prius habiti non impediantur. T. etc.

I find this Writ the same year for extending lands for a Jews debt by the
Kings Almoner.

Claus. 24. H. 3. pars 1. m. 17.
Rex Vic. Kant. salutem. Sciatis quod Elias le Eveske Iudaeus London concessit
Fra^ri G. Elemosin. nostro. et custodi Hospitalis nostri de Offspringe, pro
fine quem idem frater G. fecit cum eo totum debitum quem Andr: Kinkerel et Rob.
de Syrycon debuerunt praedict. Iudaeo. Et ideo tibi precipimus quod eidem
fratri G. plenam seisinam habere fac. de Manerio de magna Delte cum
pertinentiis, quod est vadium ipsius Iudaei pro dicto debito, et eundem fratrem
G. iu^ seisina praedict. Manerii manuteneatis, donec a nobis aliud recipies
praeceptum. T. R. apud Westminster. 24 die Ian.

In the 25 year of Henry the 3. I find this Writ to several Sheriffs, to summon
6 of the richest Jews out of all Counties and Towns wherein the Jews resided to
come to treat with the King at Worcester, as well concerning his as their
benefit, and to seize as well their bodies as chattels, if they made default
herein.

Claus. 2^. H. 3. dors. 19.
Rex Vic. Northampt. salutem. Praecipimus tibi, quod sicut teipsum et omnia tua
diligis, et sicut vis quod ac te gravissime non capiamus, venire facias coram
nobis apud Wigorn die dominica prima ante Cineres, sex de ditioribus et
potentioribus Judaeeis nostris Northampt. et de singulis villis comitatus tui,
in quibus Judaei maneant, vel duos Judaeos, secundum numerum eorum: ad
tractandum nobiscum, tam de nostra quam sua utilitate. Sciturus quod nisi illuc
ad terminum praefatum venenerint, Ita manum nostram tam erga corpus quam
catalla tua aggravabimus, quod tuo perpetuo te sentires non mediocriter
praegravari. T. R. apud Merleberg. 24 die Jan.

Eodem modo scribitur Vic. Salop, Kanc. Lege, Ebor. Suthampt. Worcest. Linc.
Essex, Canteb. Bedford. Herf. Warwic. Gloucest. Buck. Huntindon. Heref. Oxon.
et Vicecom. London. quod praedictis die et loco venire faciant sex de
di^ioribus, et potentioribus Judaeis London ad tractandum, etc. T. ut supra.

Here we have a Record of a Parliament of Jews summoned out of every County and
Town where they inhabited, to treat with the King about that which concerned
both his and their profit, but the issue proved far otherwise to them, for they
were there constrained to submit unto a Tax of 20 thousand marks imposed on
them by the King, to be paid that year, whereof these Jews themselves were made
both the Assessors and Collectors, and to levy it by most rigorous distresses
from their fellow Jews togethet with the Sheriffs by the terms prescribed,
under pain of forfeiting their goods and estates, and the greatest penalties,
to the terror of all others, as appears by these memorable Records concerning
it, wherein most of the principal Jews then in all places of England are
recorded by name (being as I conceive those summoned by the former Writ to
appear before the King at Worcester.)

Claus. 25. H. 3. Dors. 20. De Tallagio Iudetum colligendo.
Rex Ursello fill. Ham. Leoni fill, Ham. Moss fill. Ham. Jacobo fill. Iaeobi,
Manasser Leveske, Iacobo de Moster Judeis Hereford, salutem. Sciatis quod
constituimus vos Ballivos nostros una cum Vic. nostro Hereford cui idem
mandavimus, ad distringend. omnes Judaeos de Balliva vestra ad solvend. nobis
Tallagium nostrum de part quae vos et illos contingit de hoc ultimo Tallagio
nostro, viginti millium marcarum. Et ideo vobis firmiter precipimus, quod sicut
corpora vestra, uxorum et puerorum vestrorum, et omnia catalla sua diligitis
talem districtionem faciatis ad praedict. Tallagium nostrum terminos Statutis
tam a vobis quam ab aliis de balliva vestra, per manum ejusdem Vic. nostri
nobis ad Scac. no^^rum before solvatur secundum extractam quam eidem Vic.
nostro vobis mittimus ostendendam. Scituri quod a vobis requiremus, si quid de
praedicto Tallagio nostro in terminis nostris deficerit, et tam graviter contra
vos manum nostram aggravabimus, quod poena vestra erit omnibus ad terrorem. T.
R. apud Westminster. 1^ die Maii.

Rex Vic. Hereford salutem. Sciatis quod potestatem dedimus praedictis Judaeis
ad distingend, omnes Judaeos Hereford ad solvendum nobis Tallagium nostrum de
part quae universis contingit de hoc ultimo Tallagio nostro viginti mill.
marc. Et ideo tibi praecipimus, quod sicut te et omnia catalla tua diligis,
talem districtionem facias, una cum praedictis Judaeis ad hoc deputatis quod
praedict. Tallagium nostrum terminis statutis, tam ab ipsis Judaeis praedict.
quam ab aliis de eadem villa per manum tuam nobis ad Scac. nostrum plene
solvetur secundum extractam quam tibi mittimus praedictis Vrsello et sociis
suis ostendendam; sciturus, quod si contigerit quod de praedicto Tallagio
aliquid in terminis praedict. defuerit, tam ad corpus tuum quam ad catalla tua
nos graviter capiemus. T.R. apud Westminster. 13 die Maii.

Eodem modo scribitur omnibus subscriptis Vicecomitibus; et Judeis de Tallagio
regis colligendo.

The names of the Jews appointed to levy it in all places are thus subscribed
under th^se Writs.
London. Benedictus Crespin, Jacobus Crespin, Aaron fill. Abraham, Aaron Blund,
Elias le Eveske. Leo Blund. Ebor. Aaron fill. Jocei, Leo le Eveske, Joseus Nepos
Aaron, Joseus de Kent. Ursel fill. Sampson, Benedictus nepos Aaron. Linc. Leo
fill. Solomon, Abraham fill. Solomon, Judas de Franceys, Joceus de Burge, Abraham
de Solitoster, Duelcusce fill. Elie. Cantuar. Salom. fill. Joce, Magist. Aaron
Benomy Cop^rus, fill. Mulkane, Mess fill. Sampson, Abraham fill. Leonis. Winton.
Elias fill. Chere, Deidegrand Lumbard se^ex, Manasser fill. Ursell, Ayaye de
Wal^ingford, Kendone fill. Ursell. Stamford. Jacob gener. Eman: Jacob fill. Elye,
Mey^r fill. David, Samuel fill. Cok. Dus^faut fill. Cok. Aaron gener Pictaum.
Norham. Elias de Pontefracto, Isaac Pickether, Sampson fill. Deulesara, Samps.
fill. Samps. Deud. fill. Vines, Pech fill. Sam de Ivelcester. Bedeford. Manser
fill. Benedicti, Abraham fill. Benedicti, Ursel fill. Isaac Bovenfunt. Cantebrig.
Isaac fill. Samuel, Jacob fill. Deusestra, Aaron fill Isaac Blund, Josce de
Wilton, Dyaye fill. Magistri Levi fill. Solomon. Norwic. Samuel fill. Isaac, Isaac
de Warewic. Aaron Hen Jurninus fill. Jacobi, Deulecrese fill. Dyaya de
Manecroft, Dure de Resing. Warewick. Benedictus de Kanc. Elias fill. Abrah.
Benedictus de Evesham, Lion fill. Deule Be^ere, Dungeun de Warwick, Pettemo fill.
Mossi. Wigorn. Hake Isaac senior, Hake Moss fill. Deulo Heneye, Abrah. fill.
Abraham, Isaac gener. Samu: Abraham fill. Jude. Bristol. Lumbard Bonefi de
Bristol, Salom de Ivelcester, Isaac fill. Jacob, Mile le Eveske, Isaac de Bath.
Colecester, Aaron de Colecester, Arcel de Colecester, Isaac fill. Benedicti
Jacob fill. Vinis. Notingham. David Lumbard, Dendone fill. Deule Cresse Sampson
Leve, Benedictus Pinkennye. Exon. Jacob de Exon, Benefand fill. Jude, Joce fill.
Abraham Doule, Cresse le Eveske. Dorset. Solomon de Dorcester, Benedictus fill.
Vivian. Wilts. Solomon fill. Iosse, Isaac de Herleb. Sa^om de Merleberg, Abraham
Battecoke, Isaac fill. Iesse. Oxon. David de Linc. Bonami fill. Copin, Copin fill.
Bonefei, Moss fill. Dyaye, Vinis fill. Copin, Samuel fill. le Franceys. Glou^.
Bonefaund fill. Elye. Garsie gener. Belie, I^aac fill. Moss de Paris, Elias fill.
Bonef^nt. Vines fill. Bonenf^nd, Elias fill: Isaac.
One of the Jews here nominated for London, excusing himself, thereupon others
were substituted in his place by these writs.

Claus. 15. H. 3. dors. 9.
Rex Elie Blunde Judeo London salutem. Scias, quod loco Benedicti Crespyni
assignavimus te una cum Vicecom. London, et Jacobo Crespin, Aaron fill. Abraham.
Aaron Blunde, Elia le Eveske, et Leone Bl^nde Judeis London ad districtionem
faciendam circa tallagium nostrum terminis statutis nobis plenarie reddendum.
Et ideo tibi praecip mus, quod sicut teipsum et catalla tua diligis una cum
ipsis viril^ter te intromittas ad hoc quod praedict. Tallagium termin^s
Statutis nobis plene reddatur, sicut ipsis vic. and aliis Iudeis sociis tuis
dedimus in mandatis. Ne pro defectu tui paena omnibus tremenda tibi infligatur,
T. etc.

Et dirigunter Literae patentes praedictis 4 Judeis sub hac forma.

Rex Constabulario Turris London, Cre^pin, etc. salutem. Sciatis quod loco
Benedicti Cre^pini quem pr^us assignavimus vobiscum ad districtionem facierdam
circa Tallagium Judeorum London, terminis Statutis nobis reddend: assignavimus
vobis Eliam Blundum Iudaeum London. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod amoto
praedict. B. loco ipsius ipsum E.B. admittatis.

This insupportable great Tax being not ^e^yed b^ the time prefixed* thereupon
the King issued these rigid Writs, to apprehend all the^e Jewish Collectors
Dis^rainers persons, together with all their Wi^es and Infants, and bring them
prisoners before the King, and to seize all their goods and chattels into the
Kings hands, and keep them safe in their hands, as these two records
demonstrate.

Claus. 25 H. 3. m. 9. De Judei.s
Mandatum est W. de Havershall, quod scire faciat omnibus Vic. qui Iudeos
habent in Balliva sua, quod omnes Iudeos de balliva sua qui manuceperunt
solvere nobis Tallagium suum, una cum uxoribus et infantibus suis, habeant
Londini a die Sancti Mic. ad unum mensem; ad respondendum nobis de arreragiis
Tallagii sui, et quare Tallagium illud non solverunt terminis statutis sicut
manuceperunt: Et omnia catalla ipsorum capiant in manum Regis, et salvo
custodiant donec Rex inde preceperit. T. R. apud Westminster. 26 die Sept.

Another writ issued to imprison them and all those Jews who had not paid the
Tax in the Tower of London.

Ibidem m. 5. De Judeis.
Mandatum est W. de Havershal These. Regis, quod omnes illos Iudeos, qui
denarios Regi debent de Tallagio Iudaeorum de hoc termino Sancti Johannis
Baptist. prox: praeterito, et etiam illos qui deberent distrinxisse ipsos
Iudeos ad terminum praedict. observand. venire faciat usque Turrim London, et
ibidem in prisona salvo custodiri, donec Rex aliud inde praeciperet. Test Rege
apud Theokesbury 1. die August.

Hereupon some Jews assigned over Debts to the King in satisfaction of their
Tallages; whereupon the King pardoned and released so much as their Debts
amounted to, as appears by 3 pardons to 3 Jews in one Schedule, claus. 25 H. 3.
m. 17. and purchased special Licenses to be exempted from these severe
proceedings and distresses upon promise to pay their Taxes at the terms
appointed, upon which their arrears were released, as this Roll informs us,
Dors. 9. de respectu Iudaeorum, etc.

Ibid. m. 6,
Rex Baron: de Scacc. salutem. Mandamus vobis, quod si Isaac fill. Elye terminos
suos observaverit de debito in quo nobis tenetur ad Scaccarium nostrum, et
quamdiu dictos terminos observabit, tunc omnia bona et catalla sua ei in pace
demittatis, nullam inde facientes districtionem. Ita quod secundum quantitatem
et valorem Catallorum suorum quae irrotulata sunt in rotulo quae Jere. de
Caxton and W. Hardell de Tallagio Iudaeorum Linc. Vobis liberaverunt, Tallagium
super ipsum assedi faciatis. T.R. apud Theokesbury, 8. die Aug.

The Jews of London advancing part of this great Tax by assignment of Debts to
the Kings Exchequer, had this Writ to the Barons to allow it in their first
payments.

Claus. 25 H. 3. Roll m. 8. Pro Judaeis.
Rex Baron. suis de Scac. salutem. Monstraverunt nobis Judaei nostri London,
quod quendam finem fecerunt nobis cum aliis Judaeis pro 20 millia marca^. pro
Tallagio nostro, unde debent solvere 10 millia marcarum ad quindenam Nativ.
Sancti Iohis Baptist. An. r. n. 25. et 10 millia marcarum ad sancti Michis Anno
eodem, concessimus eis quod id quod receptum est ad Scac. vel in traba per
manus suas, vel per manus Christianorum, pro tertia part catalloram suorum eis
facietis allocari in primo termino 10 mill. marcarum. Et ideo vobis mandamus,
quod si praedicti Judaei London plene nobis persolverint quod ad eos pertinet
de primo termino praedictar. 10 millia marc. usque ad summam quam per manus
suas, vel Christianorum ad Scac. vel in Garderoba praedicta tertia part nobis
reddiderunt, pro residuo illius termini non distringatis, donec aliud a nobis
habueritis mandatum. T.R.

The same year the King issued this writ to the Mayor and Sheriffs of London,
to prevent the Jews and other Goldsmiths exchange and abasing of silver,
contrary to the assize of the Exchange, and seize those who were guilty of it,
and their silver.

Claus. 25 H. 3. m. 6.
Rex Majori and Vic. London, salutem. Praecipimus vobis quod in praesentia
These. nostri, et custodis Cambii nostri, venire faciatis coram vobis Adam de
Shoredich, Thomam de Stanes (and four more named) Aurifabros London, et ab iis
Sacramentum capiatis, quod nec per se, nec per aliquem alium Christianum vel
Judeum, cambient vel ement, vel vendent argentum aliquod vel in plata, vel in
mina, vel in aliquo alio argento, contra assisam et constitutionem Cambii
nostri, nec cambiri; nec etiam procurabunt, nec permi^tent, nec per se, nec per
alium; et quod diligenter inquirent and inquiri faciant, si qui aurifabri
Christiani vel Judei talia temptaverint, et ex quo aliquem cambientem, ementem
vel vendentem invenerint contra assisam praedicti Cambij, corpus ipsius, cum
argento et catallis suis attachiari faciant, donec aliud inde praeceptum. T. ut
supra.

This year I find a Writ to the Justices of the Jews to free one from paying
Usury to a Jew upon the ground expressed in the record, relating the Jews
unconscionable dealing, usual in such cases.

Claus. 25. H. 3. m. 13. Dors.
Rex Justiciar. ad custod. Judaeorum assignat. salutem. Monstravit nobis
Magister Laur. Travers, quod cum die Pentec. An. r. n. 24 quandam summam
pecuniae mutuo recipisset a Benedicto Judaeo Oxon. quam infra mensem a quo
pecuniam illam mutuo recepit per manum ipsius Magistri ad Judeum solvend.
transmisit; dictus Judeus eo quod tempore illo pignora ipsius Magistri quae
signata erant in Cista Judeorum signo nostro restituere non valebat, pecuniam
illam non admisit, et de pecunia illa de toto tempore ejusdem non soluta,
usuras exigit a predicto Magistro, ac si per incuriam ipsius et defectum
remaneret per tantum tempus solvend. Quia vero eidem Magistro non est
imputandum, quod pecuniam illam tempore debito non solvit, et iniquum videtur
quod inde usuras solvere debet. Vobis mandamus, quod si idem Magister monstr.
poterit ^er ^e ^el per attornatum suum quod res ita se habeat, tunc ipsum ab
usurarum prestatione quietum esse faciatis a tempore quo dictam pecuniam
paratus fuit eidem Judeo solvere. T. R. apud Windl. 18 die October.

The same year I find this Writ to the Constable of the Tower to send some Jews
of Bristol imprisoned in the Tower for a murder, to Bristol Castle, to be there
tried for it before the Justices Itinerant.

Claus. 25. H. 3 m. 9. dorso.
Rex Constabular. Turr. London, salutem. Precipimus tibi quod Puentam uxorem
Iacobi de Custantes, Iacobum fill. Iacobi, et Bestotam uxorem ejus Iudeos
Bristol captos et detentos in prisona nostra predict. Turris, pro motte Alic
fill. Eve, cariari fac. usque Bristol: ad custus Burgensium nostrorum Bristol:
Ita quod sint ibi a die Sancti Ioh. Bapt. in 15 dies, ad standum inde recto
coram Justice. nostr. ibid. in prox. Itineraturis; eosdemque Iudeos liberari
fac. Constabulario castri nostri Bristol cui praecipimus quod eos cum ibidem
venerint recipiat. T. etc. Et mandatum est Constab. Bristol quod eos recipiat.

In the 26 year of H. 3. these Records concerning the Jews are yet extant, the
first showing they were then enforced to give their wives and children for
hostages.

Claus. 26. H. 3. pars 2. m. 9. Pro Samaritano Judeo.
Mandatum est Justice. ad custod, Iudaeorum assignatis, quod si Samaritanus
Iudeus Winton invenerit eis omnem eam securitatem, quae coram W. Ebor. Arch. de
consilio Regis; provisa fuit et ordinata, pro qua securitate invenieud. dedit
uxorem suam et filios suos obsides, qui tenentur in Turr. Regis London, tunc
praedicto Samaritano praedictos uxorem et filios deliberari fac, per eundem Ar.
a VVimnodham 25 die Iun.

The King this year appointed a new Keeper of the Jews chest at Winchester,
not being well kept by the former, by this Writ.

Ibid. m. 7.
Quia Rex audivit quod Archa regis Iudeorum Winton, minus been custodiatur tam
ad opus Regis quam Christianorum and Judeorum, Mandatum est Vic. Suthampt. quod
per consilium Roberti Passelewe quem Rex illuc mittit, alium cust. ad hoc
apponi fac. T. etc. The tax not being paid the King at the times appointed,
this year he commanding the Jews Chests to be locked up, so that their
creditors could not pay their debts to them, nor they their debts to the King,
whereupon he granted his Writ to Claus. 26. H. 3. pars 2. m. 7.
Samuel fill. Isaac a Jew, upon his complaint, that they should pay their debts
to the King at the terms formerly appointed, at the rates there expressed at
large.

Claus. 26. H. 3. pars 2. dors. 8.
Rex Just. suis ad custod. Iudeorum assignatis, salutem. Monstravit nobis Oliva
quae fuit uxor Rob. de Fraynicto, quod cum ipsa cum nuper estemus apud
Colecester probasset coram venerabil. in Christo patre W. Ebor Arch. et aliis
de consilio nostro, tam per Christianos quam per Judaeos, praefatum virum suum
reddidisse Aaron et Ursello Judaeis Colecestr. totum debitum quod eis debuit
ante inceptionem itin. sui in terram sanct. et injunctum es^et eisdem Judaeis
quod reddent prefato, Ol. Cartas confect. de debito memorato, licet eidem Judei
quasdam Cartas mem. restituerunt, adhuc tamen unam ei detinent maliriose,
praetendentes Cartam esse Londini in depos. ut sic fraud. machinentur et
laboribus frangent dictam mulierem. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod praedictos
Judeos per terras et catalla distringatis, ad restituendam prefatae mulieri
sine dilatione cartam praedictam, Et vos eidem pedem illius Cartaerestituatis.
Ita vos in hac part gerentes, quod de cetero nullam inde audiamus querelam. T.
W. Ebor. Arch. apud Moreclae 29 die Iulii.

This Record manifests, 1 The manner of the Jews proving their debts both by
Jews and Christians. 2 Their Jewish dealing one with another, in detaining
goods after debts satisfied. 3. The usual way of recovering such Bonds from
them when the debts were paid. This year the King removed the Jews and their
chests from one place to another at his pleasure, as this Record besides others
informs us.

Claus. 26 H. 3. pars 1. m. 19. De Judeis removend. ab uno loco ad alium.
Rex concessit Com. Pict. and Cornub. quod Judei regis qui manent in
Berchamested, transferant se usque Wallingford, et ibi remaneant, secundum
easdem consuetudines Judeorum secundum quas apud Berkhamested habere
consueverunt, Archamque quam fuit apud Berkhamsted simi^iter habeant apud
Wallingford, et eodem modo quo ipsam habuerunt apud Berkhamsted. Et mandatum
est Justic. ad custod. Jud. assignatis, quod sic fieri permittant. T. R.

How the Jews heirs after their decease made fines to the King for their real
and personal estates, and how their wives were endowed, this Record will
manifest, of the same year with the former.

Claus. 25. H. 3. pars 1. m. 3.
Rex Baron. suis de Scac. salutem. Mandamus vobis quod distringatis Maiden, quae
fuit uxor Jacob. Crespin, ad reddend. Moss. fill. praedict. Jacob. et Isaac
fratri suo terras, domos, redditus, catalla, et omnia debita quae fuerunt
praedicti Jacob. patris sui, pro quibus ipse Moss. et Isaac. finem fecerunt
nobiscum, sicut per alias litetas nostras vobis significavimus. Et cum
praedicti Moss. and Isaac seisinam habuerint de praedict. terris, domibus,
redditibus, catal. et debitis, tunc eidem Maiden rationabilem dotem suam a
praedict. Moss. et Isaac faciatis assignari. T.R. apud Merewel. 2 die Maii.

In the 27 year of King Henry, the King issued this precept to have a Convert
Jew instructed in the Christian Faith and learning in any place where he might.

Claus. 27. H 3. pars 2. m. 2. Pro Martin^ converso.
Mandatum est Ebor. Archiepiscopo et VV. de Cantelup. (then Commissioners or
Justices for the Jews affairs) Quod Martino converso faciant administrari in
aliqua villa ubi possit, tam de fide Catholica, quam literarum scientia
feliciter erudiri. T. R. apud Burdegal 3 die Febr.

The same year the King commanded the Executors of the Bishop of Winchester by
his Writ, to pay to W. de Haevenshel and Edward son of Odo 100 l. ad terras
emendas ad opus Conversorum London ad sustentationem eorundem, Claus. 27. H. 2.
pars 2. m. 9.
T. R. apud Burd. 12 die Aprilis. Et mandatum est praedictis VVillo. et Edwardo
quod denarios illos ab illis recipiant, et terras ad opus praedictor.
conversorum emant, Ita quod terrae praedict. emptae fuerint citra festum Nativ.
sancti Iohis, Baptistae. Such was the care and charity of those times for the
converts support.

This year Claus. 27 H. 3. m. 10.9.5. Schedula p. 1.
the King pardoned several debts of particular Engli^hmen owing to particular
Jews, respited the payment of other D^bts for a time to others by several writs
to the Justices assigned for the Jews: And Claus. 27 H. 3. pars 2. m. 3.
likewise assigned and granted the Office of Aarons Presbyteratus Judeorum
Angliae in the Exchequer ( Claus. 21 H. 3. pars 1. m. 18. Here p. 25.
forementioned) to Elie le Eveske a Jew of London, or his Attorney, with all
the Rolls of the Exchequer belonging to Aaron, in as ample manner as Aaron
formerly had them: commanding the Justices assigned for the Jews custody to
invest him in this office of Aaron: Et nullam decetero summonitionem facere de
aliquo debito de quo debetur responderi coram eis, nisi per visum et
testimonium predicti Elye, vel illius quem ad hoc loco suo attornaverit (which
clearly proves, that the Presbyteratus omnium Iudeorum totius Angliae, granted
to Aaron, and now transferred to Elye, was nothing else but the Custos
Rotul^rum, or Controllership of the Exchequer) Et mandatum est eisdem, quod
quotiens idem Elyas intendere non possit ad sedendum ad Scac. Joreum fill:
Copini loco suo recipiant ad ea facienda, ad idem Scac. quae ad Presbyteratum
Iudaeorum pertia ut. Rotulos etiam qui fuerant Jocei, predecesso is sui cidem
Elye, vel attornato suo habere faciatis, T. apud Westminster. 21 die October: per Will.
de Cantil. and Edward fill. Odonis.

Claus. 27 H. 3. pars 1, m. 6. Pro Abrah. Judaeo Berkhamsted.
Quia Abraham Iudeus Berkhamsted clamat partem in debito quod continetur in
cartae Johannis de Brabini confect. inter ipsum Johannem et praedict. Abraham,
et Mosseum Iudeum Hereford: Mandatum est Cirographariis and custod hus Archae
Judeorum Hereford, quod praefata Carta per praefat. Mosseum, vel per alium
nemini liberetur donec Rex aliud inde praeciperit. Which shows that one Jew
could not discharge the debt due jointly to him and another Jew, but by the
others consent.

In the 28 of H. 3. two Jews being wrongfully arrested for a Debt due by
another, the King sent this writ to discharge them, and imprison the Jewess
that owed it.

Claus. 28. H. 3. m. 6. Pro Judeis.
Rex Justic. ad cust. Iud. assignatis, s^lutem. Sciatis, quod probatum fuit
coram nobis apud Stanford, quod Gentilla viduae Judea de Stanford, debet R.
Com. Cornub. fratri nostro illas 13 lib: pro quibus Coc. and Samuelem Judeos de
Stanford arrestari fecistis in villa praedict: ita quod eam cap. et in prisona
detineri p^^cipimus, don^c solverit pecuniam praedict. Et ideo vobis mand^mus,
quod praedict. Coc. and Samuel. ceterosque omnes Iudeos de St^nford, de
praedict: 13 lib. quietos esse faciatis. T. Rege apud Not. 10 die July.

This year Aaron a Jew of York assigned a Debt of 500 l to the King, in part of
a debt which he owed the King, Claus 28. H. 3. m. 17.
which the King commanded Hugh Bygod, who owed it in right of his wife, to pay
into the Exchequer. And likewise commanded all the Jews to be removed out of
Nuberry and Spenhamland by this writ.

Claus. 28. H. 3. m. 17.
Mandatum est Vic. Berks, Quod Judeos qui manent in Villa de Nubury, et in villa
de Spenhamland, remittat sine dilatione usque Winton, et ibi maneant sicut
prius solent, nec de caetero maneant in Villis praedictis. T. R. apud Reading,
27 die December.

A Jew accused for clipping and falsifying moneys fled for refuge to the King,
who thus remanded him.

Claus. 28. H. 3. m. 1. dors.
Rex W. de Ebor: prepos. Beverley, and Hen: de Bath salutem. Quia intelleximus
quod vos mandaveritis Vic. nostro Hereford, ad capiend. Cok: Judeum Hereford,
tanquam falsarium et retuntorem Denar. et idem Judeus venit ad Curiam nostram
apud Reading, quaerens subterfugium captionis suae. Nos ipsum Judaeum fecimus
arrestari, ad vos mittentes eundem; ut vos super eo quod ei imponitur secundum
quod videritis expedire faciatis T. R. apud Reading, 12 die May.

After which follows this record.

Claus. 23. H. 3. m. 4. dorso.
Rex W. de Havershull Thesaur. suo, et Constab: suo London salutem, Mandamus
vobis quod Judeos assignatos ad custodiam catallorum and debitorum quae fuerunt
David Judei Oxon distringatis: ita quod illi Judei qui manuceperunt finem 5000
marc. quem Licoric quae fuit uxor praedict. David fecit nobiscum pro habendis
catallis et debitis ipsius David ut eum habeamus terminis assignatis de
Tallagio Iudeorum nobis solvend. et ipsam Licoric. a prisona deliberari
faciatis: Ita tamen quod nullam habeat administrationem de catallis and debitis
praedictis ante instans festum Nativitatis beat. Mariae, con^c post eundem
festum vobis inde mandaverimus. Et Sciatis quod remissimus Aaron Judeo Ebor.
custodiam praedict. catallorum, et debitorum pro fine quem propter fecit nobis,
et quae solvit in Garderoba nostra, et loco ejus subrogavimus Bondum Judeum
Cant.

By which Record it is apparent, That no Jews wife or other Jew could
administer or meddle with her Husbands or Parents chattels or debts without
paying a vast fine for them (as here 500 marks) and that at such time as the
King assigned, that the custody of their Goods and debts were in the mean time
committed to other Jews to be responsible for them; and that their persons were
imprisoned, and their administrations suspended, if they failed in paying the
fine at the terms appointed.

Claus. 29 H. 3 m. 2.
In the 29 of Hen. 3. the King sends writs to his Justices for the custody of
the Jews, and to Sheriffs to levy the Debts due to him from the heirs of Hamond
the Jew of Hereford, and that Crespin a Jew should pay him 28 marks, to be laid
out in silk and cloth of gold for Westminster Church as his Alms.

Ibid.
Mandatum est Baron. de Scacc. et Iusticiariis ad custod. Iudeorum assignatis,
quantum poterint apponant ut 4000 marc. quae Regi debent Iudei ad hoc festum
sancti Michaelis tunc omnibus modis solvantur, Thesaur. and Camerar. ad
faciend. inde quod Rex injunxerit: et si forte in solutione earund 4000 marc.
defecerint ad terminum praedict. tunc capiant aliquos de ditioribus Iudeis, ut
corpora eorum mittant ad R. usque Gannock non omittando illuci pro aliquo
custo, et Rex illos faciet deliberari Justice. Hyberniae, ducendos in Hyberniam,
et ibidem in prisona detinendos. T. Rege apud Gannock in castris, x. die Septem.

By which record it seems the Jews were taxed to pay 4000 marks at Michaelmas
to the King; and if they failed, then some of the richest of them were to be
seized on, and sent prisoners to the King into his camp, and from thence into
Ireland, and there imprisoned til it was all paid: Such was the rigor then used
in levying their heavy Taxes: Another 4000 marks was then likewise to be paid
by them at Christ's Nativity the same year, and commanded by this writ to be
effectually levied by the Justices of the Jews.

Claus. 29 H. 3. m. 18.
Mandatum est Justic. ad custod Judaeorum assign: quod sicut corpora et catalla
sua diligunt, et ab indempnitate et periculo maximo volunt conservari,
provideant quod 4000 marc. quae Regi debentur de Judaismo reddendas citra
festum Nativitatis Dom: citra festum illud reddantur, quia si in eorum
solutione aliquis inveniatur defectus id solummodo negligentiae suae
imputaretur. T. Rege apud Woodstoke 4. die Dec.

Mandatum est Thesaur. et Camerar. quod de illis 4000 m. deliberent Magistro
Militis Templi in Anglia, 2000 marc. deponend. in domo sua ad opus Comitissae
Provinciae sicut alias eis mandat. est, and de resid. mill marc: quantum se
extendunt satisfaciant mercatoribus Vinorum et aliis de debitis in quibus Rex
eis tenetur. T. ut supra.

Ibidem. Dorso 2. There is a command to the Justices of the Jews to respit a
suit there pending against one Mansel by two Jews, for 40 l. and an horse.

In this 29 year of Henry the 3. this writ was issued to the Justices of the
Jews to proclaim in all Counties, that no Jews wife or child should fly from,
nor obscure himself in the places he or they resided, for one year then next
ensuing, and that they should be there readily found by the Kings Officers,
under pain that their husbands, as also their wives and children should be
outlawed, banished, and all their lands, rents, and chattels, forthwith
forfeited to the King, and presently sold to his use, and they banished never
to return again into England without his special license.

Claus. 29. H. 3. m 17 De Judaismo.
Mandatum est Justiciariis ad custodiam Judaeorum assignatis, quod statim visis
Literis, clamati faciant per omnes Comitatus Angliae ubi Judaei Regis sunt,
quod si aliqua Iudaea uxor alicujus Iudaei, vel pueri sui diffugiant, vel fugam
capiant, vel aliquo modo lateant a Villa ubi fuerint manentes ad festum Sancti
Andreae Anno regni Regis 29, usque in unum annum proximo sequentem, Ita quod ad
Summonitionem Regis vel Ballivorum suorum in quorum Ballivis ipsi fuerunt
manentes prompti inveniti non possint; quod vir ipsius Iudeae, et etiam ipsa
Iudaea, et omnes pueri sui statim utlagentur, et omnes terrae, redditus, et
omnia catalla sua in manum Regis capiantur, et incontinenti vendantur ad opus
Regis: Et quod de caetero non redeant in regnum Angliae, sine speciali licentia
Regis.

The King had then a design to tax all the Jews wives and children by the
poll, which occasioned this strict proclamation, that they might be always
ready to be polled and fleeced at his pleasure, there being an heavy Tax then
imposed on them.

In the same year and Roll this Precept was directed to Aaron the Jew of York,
then taxed (as it seems) at one hundred pounds.

Claus. 29. H. 3. m. 19.^
Mandatum est Aaroni Iudaeo de Ebor. quod sicut diligit corpus suum, statim
visis literis, tradat latori illarum viginti marcas Regi deferendas, de
arreragiis centum librarum quas Regi solvisse debuit in festo Nativitatis
Sanctae Mariae, proximo praeterito. Ita quod hoc quemlibet lateat praeter ipsum
Aaronem et latorem supradictum. Test Rege apud Woodstock, quinto die Decembris.

In the 30 of H. 3. I find these Records concerning the Jews.

Pat. 30. H. 3. m. 1. pro Judae^
Rex concessiit Iacobo fratri Elie le Eveske Judeo London pro laudabili servicio
suo quod Regi et Reginae impendit sedendo a Scac. Judeorum, domos quae fuerunt
Iocci de Colecester Iudei Linc. in Oxon. quae devenerunt in manum Regis tanquam
escaeta Regis; tenendum tota vita ipsius Jacobi. Reddendo inde singulis annis
Conversis Land. 10s. viz. 5s. ad fest. St. Mich. et 5s. ad Pasch. In cujus etc.
T. R. apud VVodestoke 10 die Sept. Et mandat. est. Vic. Oxon. quod de praedict.
domibus cum pertidentiis, ei plenam seisinam habere faciat. T. ut supra.

Pat. 30. H. 3. m. 7. The King agreed to receice a fine of 3000 l. of Mass son
of Hamond a Jew of Hereford Pro habenhis catallis et bonis, of his deceased
Father, to be paid at certain times, part whereof is there assigned.

This year many Jews Men and women were accused and ordered to be tried for
clipping of money, as appears by Claus, 30 H. 3. pars 1, m. 9. Mandat. est
Justiciariis ad custodiam Iudeorum assign. quod Iudeos, et Indeas rectatos de
retonsura denariorum, venire faciant coram Justic. de Banco. Ita quod sint ibi
in octabis S. Johis. Baptistae ad Iusticiam de ipsis faciendam: Quia mand^t.
est Iustie. illis quod una cum eis ad hoc intendant,

Also Claus. 30 H. 3. pars 1 m. 9.
Rex pardonavit Tho. de Pulton 8 lib. quas idem T. debet Mosseo Crespin Iudeo,
una cum omnibus usuris quae inde proveniant, post quam eas ab eodem Iudaeo
mutuaverat. Et mandat. est Baron. de Scac. quod ipsum inde quietum esse, et
cartam suam pro praedicto debito impignoratam eidem Iudeo deliberari fac. Et
mandatum est Edwardo fill. Odonis quod totam pecuniam suam quam rex eidem Tho.
donat pro domibus suis occasion praedict. debiti arrestatam, e^ deliberantur.

The King this year imposed a Tax of sixty thousand marks upon the Jews, as
appears by these seisures of their debts toward the payment thereof.

Claus. 30. H. 3. pars 1. m. 10. Pro Iudeo.
Mandat. est Ed. fill. Odonis etc. quod solvat ad Scac. Regis 23 l. 5 s. 8 d.
quas Tho. de Pulton debet Mosseo Crespin Iudeo; in part solutionis debitorum
quae idem Iudeus reddere ten^batur ad Pasche proximo preterit: de portione
tallag. 60 mil. marc. eundem Jud. contingent. T. R. apud Wind. 4 die Iunii. It
seems part of this Tax or another was payable the next year, by this Mandate.

Claus. 30. H. 3. pars 2. m. 4.
Mandatum est Iusticiar. ad custodiam Judeorum assignatis quod non distringant,
aut distringi permittant Aaron fill Abraham de tallagio 10 millium marc. de
termino sancti Michis. An. r. n. 31, nisi pro 53 marc. et dimid. ipsi inde de
eodem termino contingent. T. R. apud Winds. 23 die Augusti.

These tallages were usually imposed on the Jews in their absence, being not
privy thereto, unless specially admitted, as appears by this Record concerning
the Jews of Canterbury, who gave the King half a mark of gold that one of them
might be present at the imposing of the next tax.

Claus. 30. H. 3. pars. 1. m. 10. Pro Judeis.
Quia Iudei Cantuarii ded^runt dimid. marc. auri quam Regi prae manibus
reddiderunt, pro eo quod conced^ret eis, quod unus Iudeus ejusdem villae
Cantuar. intersit tallagio assidendo quod assideri debet apud Northamp.
Mandatum est Iusticiaris ad custod. Iudeorum assignatis, quod unam ex ipsis ad
hoc eligi, et dicto tallagio assidendo interesse faciant. T. R. apud Feversham
20 die April.

Amongst the records in the Treasury of Receipts in the Exchequer, I find this,
Inter Placita et Assis: capt. apud Northampton. in crast. Nativ. Sancti Johan.
Baptistae, Anno Regis Henrici etc. 23. coram Rogero de Thurkelby, et sociis
suis rot. 38.

Ivo fill. Abraham de Stanford Iudeu: rectatus de retonsura denariorum venit, et
dat Domino Regi 20 s. quod possit esse sub placito respondend. ad preceptum
Dom. Regis Plegii sui Solomon fill. Sancho fill. Isaac, and Benioy. fill. Aaron de
Stanford. Whether he were condemned or acquitted for this his clipping of money
for which he was then bailed I find not on Record.

In the 32 year of Henry the 3. Claus. 32 H. 3. pars 1. m. 9. Pro quodam Judeo.
I meet with these Records concerning the Jews.

Rex mandavit Justic. ad custodiam Judaeorum assign. quod non distringant, vel
^istringi permittant Aaron fill. Abrahami de Tallagio 60 millium marc. pro
duobus milibus marc. de termino sancti Michis anno 32. nisi pro quinquaginta et
tribus marcis et dimid. ipsum inde de eodem termino contingentibus, sicut ipse
talliatus fuit ad pasch. proximo pretericum. Et si forte ipsum ad plus
talliaverint, illud re^axari, et super communitatem Judeorum assidi. faciant.
Test Rege apud Farendon 29 die Augugusti.

By which it appears the Jews were taxed at sixty thousand marks in this one
year. A vast sum in those days.

The same year the King grants respestum de quibuslibet veteribus debitis
Iudei, etc. Particularly. Ibid. m. 9.


Ibidem m. 9. Pro Aaron Judeo Ebor.
Rex dedit respectum Aaron Judeo. Ebor. de centum libris quas Regi solvisse
debuit. ad scac. Pasch. anno regni Regis 32. usque ad quindenam paschae sancti
Iohannis Baptistae anno eodem, et mandatum est Baronibus de Scaccario, quod
respectum illum ei habere faciant. T. R apud Rading 17 die Maii.

There is this record this year concerning the Jews of Canterbury.

Iudei Cantebr. liberaverunt in Garderoba regis apud sanctum Edmundum die Lunae
prox. post cineres quinque Marc. de quibus praedicti Judei promiserunt regi
respiciendas in adventu regis apud Cantebr. Ibid. m. 10. Pro Judeis Cantebr.
Et mandat. est Justic. ad custodiam Judeorum assignatis, quod pro predictis
quinque marc. ipsos Judeos non distringant. Test Rege apud Windesor. primo die
Maii.

Ibid. m. 11.
Mandar est, etc. quod distringi faciant terras quae fuerunt Mathei Peverel,
etc. for a debt due to a Jew; and to others to answer a debt to Aaron the Jew

In the 33 of H. 3. I find these records concerning the Jews.

Claus. 33 H. 3. pars 1. m. 1. pro Roberto de Munteny.
An Extent of Robert de Muntenay in Littlebar of a Jews land, per Sacramentum
proborum et legalium hominum extendi fac. etc.

The King himself in that age appointed the Jews Bailiffs in the Eschequer, as
is evident by this record.

Claus. 33 H. 3 pars 1. m. 7. pro Judeis.
Mandatum est Justic. ad custodiam Judeorum assign. quod non permittant quod
aliquis Judeus habeat aliquam Ballivam ad Scacc. Judeorum, praeter Jacobum
Episco^um, Abrah. fill. Vines, et Jacob fill. Flurye: et si Elyas Episcopus, qui
prius fuit ad dictum Scac. resideat ad idem Scac. per preceptum Regis, tunc Rex
vult, quod re^ipiant Aaron fill. Abraham, tanquam socium suum. T. R. apud Westminster.
xi. die Julii, anno etc.

The King then likewise appointed the Clerks of the Jews Exchequer, and the
Cirographers of their public Chests, as this record does manifest.

Ibidem m. 7. pro quodam Judeo.
Rex vult, quod Abraham fill. Vines sit clericus Regis in Scac. suo Iudeorum, et
quod sit Cyrograph. Archae Regis Cyrograforum Iudaeorum apud London, loco
Abrahamae fill. Muriell. Et ideo mandatum est Justic. ad custodiam Judeorum
assignatis, quod acceptis ab eodem Abrahamo fill. Vines sufficientibus plegiis
de fidelitate, ipsum ad praemissa Officia admittant, et clavem Archae
Cirographorum quam Abraham fill. Muriel habet, eidem liberari faciant. T. R.
apud Westminster: xxix. die Junii.

Ibidem m. 8.
Rex vult, quod Aaron fill: Abraham Iudeus London resideat ad Scaccarium Regis
Iudeorum tanquam Vines, etc. ut supra. T. R. apud Winton, 26 die Maii.

The same year I find an Extent of John of Coniz of Brewineston his Land for a
Debt to a Jew, per sacram, proborum et legalium hominum extendi fac. etc. T. R.
apud Westminster. 9 die Maii.

Ibidem m. 10.
The same year Aaron of York agreed again with the King to pay a certain Tax to
him yearly, expressed in this Patent.

Patent 33. H. 3 m. 3. Pro Aar. fill. Abr. Judaeo.
Rex omnibus etc. salutem. Sciatis quod concessimus Aaroni filio Abrahami Iudeo
quod sicut talliatus fuit ad december and octo libras coram Nobis ad terminum
Sancti Michaelis, Anno etc. 33. sic tallietur ad quatuor Annos sequentes ad
triginta et sex libras singulis annis praedictorum quatuor annorum; videlicet,
ad festum Paschae, Anno etc. 34 to. ad 18 libras, et ad festum Sancti
Michaelis* proximo sequ^n^, ad 18 libras, et sie DE ANNO IN ANNUM, ad eosdem
terminos ad 36 libras. Ita quod post praefatum terminum praedictorum quatuor
annorum ad majorem pecuniae summam modo talli^tur. In cujus etc. Test Rege
apud Windsor, 21 die Sept.

In the Fine Rolls of this year I find these Passages relating to the Jews, who
all jointly and severally made great fines to the King this year,
particularized in the Fine rolls, what sum every Jew (whose name is there
entered at large) was to pay to the King: whereof take this brief account of
some few, as a pattern of all ^he rest.

Fines 33. H. 3. m. 7.
Mandatum est Vic. Kanc. quod si Judei Cantua^. invenerint securitatem
sufficientem de 7 l. 8 s. 8 d. de novo Tallagio super eos assesso, and de 11 l.
17 s. 5 d. de veteri Tallagio super eos assesso, ad aurum Regi inde emendum,
unde alias recepit mandatum Regis, ita quod pecuniam illam habeat in manu sua
quod inde Regi respondere rossit ad Scacc. Regis in Crastino Sancti Michaelis,
tunc praefatos Judeos permittat in pace, ita quod eos non distringat pro aliquo
alio Tallagio donec aliud a Rege acceperit in mandatis. T. R. apud Merton 12
dle Sept.

Fines 33. H. 3. m. 3. De Tallag^o uper Judeos Ebor.
Mandat est Vic. Ebor. quod sicut se ipsum diligit, habeat ad Scac: Regis in
Octabis Sancti Michaelis de Aaron de Ebor. Judeo de novo Tallagio ^uper eum
assesso 16 l. 11 s. Et de eodem de veteri Tallagio uper eum assesso unde Vic.
alias recepit mandatum Regis, 26 l. 7 s. et de caeteris Judeis Civitatis Ebor.
de novo Tallagio 14 l. 11 s. et de ei^dem de veteri Tallagio, unde Vic. alias
recepit mandat. Regis 23 l. 7 s. ad aurum Reg. inde emendum. T. ut supra.

Eodem modo scribitur de Iudaeis Exon de Tallag: Vic. Devon, De Iudeis Bedford,
Merlebr. Bristoll, Warw. Glocest. Cantebr. London, Norwic. Colecester, Winton,
Wigorn, Hereford, Oxon, Nottingh. Northampton, Lincoln, and other Towns; and to
their respective Sheriffs, to levy the particular sums both of the New and Old
Tallage forementioned, there specified, in like manner as to the Sheriff of
York, which particulars fill up an whole roll well nigh.

Ibidem pro Judaeis.
In the same Roll the King respites Jacobus Le Eveske a Jew, and Flora his
daughter, a fine of 45 l. 6 s. 8 d. pro Relevio, et aliis finibus: and sundry
other Jews there named paid the like Fines pro Relevio upon their Parents
deaths to enjoy their estates; to be paid at certain times ^here limited into
the Exchequer: Et mandatum est Baron. de Scac. et Justic. ad custod. Judeorum
assignatis, quod ^ic fieri et irrotula^i faciant. T. R. apud Guldeford, 13 die
Sept. The like Fines for relief, pro terris and catallis Patris eorum ratione
relevii Regi contingentibus; Fines 34 H. 3. m. 2. Pro Judaeis.
paid by sundry Jews, I meet with in 34 H. 3. and many Fine Rolls else
throughout his reign, and in Edward the 1. which I pretermit: it being entered
of some. Dederunt Regi 20 s. auri (or some other sum of gold) prae manibus.

In 34 H. 3. There was a tax of ten thousand marks imposed on the Jews, and
this composition made between the King and Salmon Bishop, a Jew concerning it,
and future Taxes, thus entered in the Fine roll of that year.

Fines 34 H. 3. m. 2. Pro Salmone Episcopo Judeo London.
Rex concessit Salmoni Episcopo Judeo London, quod de Tallagio 10 mil. marc.
per annum sit ad 20 l. dum. Tallagium Judeorum sit in tali statu; et si crescat
Tallagium Judeorum crescat ejus portis quae ipsum continget de Tallagio
praedicto, et si decrescatur simili modo. Ita tamen, quod si tota Communitas
Judeorum Regi g^avetur de Tallagio praedicto, aut summa X. millium marc. debeat
decrescere, eo quod idem Salmon est ad talem summam, respondeat idem Iudeus ad
liberatum librae suae de praedict. 20 l. sicut alii Judei faciunt in tallagio
suo. Et reddat Regi praedict. 20 lib. annuatim ad duos terminos, viz. 10 l. ad
Scac. S. Michaelis, and 10 l. ad Scac. Paschae. Et mandatum est Iusticiariis ad
custod. Iud: assignatis, quod sic fieri et irrotulari faciant, et pro licentia
concessionis dedit Regi unam marcam auri. T. R. apud Wyndes, 1. die October. et
habet inde Literas Patentes per eadem verba. The like compositions were made
with the King by Aaron of York, and many other Jews in this and other years.

In the 34 year of King H. 3. I find this recital in a writ, That the King by
the long received custom of the Realm ought to succeed the Jews themselves in
all houses and other Lands which they should purchase within the realm, (upon
their deaths, outlary, or departure hence,) and that he might grant them to
whom he pleased, (as well as tax them, and seize their goods at his pleasure.)

Claus. 34 H. 3. m. 19. dorso
Rex Vicecomiti Norff. salutem. Licet de consuetudine longeva dicatur obtentum
in regno nostro, quod Nos in Domibus et aliis quas acquisiverint Iudaei in
regno nostro succedere debeamus ipsis Iudaeis; aures tamen nostras precibus
Edmundi Kake de Norwic. Capellani misericorditer inclinantes, concessimus eidem
Edmundo, de gratia nostra, quod non obstante consuetudine praedicta, habeat
Messuagium illud in Norwic: de quo nuper seisinam fieri fecimus Magistro
Benedicto, et quod Seigumet Iudaeus utlagatus tenuit de praedicto Edmundo in
eadem villa de Norwic. Et ideo tibi praecipimus, quod eidem Edmundo de
praedicto messuagio, sine dilatione plenam seisinam habere facias. T.R. apud
Clarendon 13 die Decembris.

In the same roll I find a writ to attach both the body and goods of a Jew, and
to bring them both before the Justices assigned for the Jews.

Claus. 34 H. 3. m. 11. dorso.
Mandatum est Vicecomiti Dorset, quod habeat coram Iusticiariis regis ad
Custodiam Iudeorum assignatis apud Westminster. in Crastino Sanctae Mariae Magdalenae
corpus Solomonis Iudei de Dorcestria, cum omnibus catallis ipsius Iudaei sub
sigillo suo. T. R. apud Merleberge 21 die Junii.

In the Patent roll, of this year, the King granted this License to the Masters
of the Law of the Commonalty of the Jews in London to excommunicate such Jews
as refused to contribute that subsidy they had promised toward the sustaining
of their common Churchyard in London, whom they could not excommunicate without
his leave.

Pat. 34. H. 3. m. 3.
R^x Iusticiariis suis ad Custodiam Iudaeorum assignatis, salutem. Sciatis,
quod concessimus Iudaeis nostris London quod Magistri legis eorundem Iudaeorum
in Ciuitate London promulgare possint summam Excommunicationem in omnes illos
Iudaeos, qui subsidium aliquod promiserunt ad Cimiterium London sustinendum, et
illud non solverint; Ita quod Nos and non alii de Judaeis excommunicatis
sufficientes emendas recipiamus, T. R. 28 Die Julii.

In the 35 of Henry 3. there are these records touching the Jews.

Claus. 35. H. 3. m. 7. Pro R^ginaldo de Salinis Valetto Regis.
Mandatum est Philippo Luvel, et Sociis suis Justiciariis Judaeorum sicut alias,
Quod de Tallagio X. milium Marcarum assesso super Communitatem Iudaeorum
Angliae, faciant habere Reginaldo de Salinis 40 ^ibras ad terras inde emendas
ad opus suum, vel ad commodum suum alio modo faciendum prout sibi viderit
expediri, et illas in eodem Tallagio faciendo allocari Communitati praedictae.
Et Rex been vult quod eadem 40 l. Ricardo de Salinis allocantur in debitis quod
debet in Judaismo pro eodem Reginaldo, dum tamen idem Reginaldus securus sit de
portione sua. T. R. apud Wherwell, 25 die Maii. Per ipsum Regem.

The wives and children of the Jews often times used to be distrained and
imprisoned for their Debts, as appears by this record to respite such
proceedings against them for a time Anno 35. H. 3.

Claus. 25. H. 3. m. 5. Pro quadam Judea and pueris suas.
Mandatum est Vic. Devon. quod non distringat, nec distringi permittat uxorem
Boneufaunt, Judei Exon. vel pueros suos per corpora sua, ipsos imprisonando
occasion alicujus debiti seu demandae tangentis ipsum Boneufaunt de fine 100
marc. auri, quia Rex vult ipsam Iudeam cum predictis pueris suis esse in pace
usque ad octabis Sti. Mich. prox. futuri. Et si ipsos imprisonavit, eos interim
deliberari faciat. T. R. apud Windsore 2 die September. per ipsum regem.

This year there was a tax of 10000 marks imposed on the Jews, as is evident by
Pat 35. H. 3. pars 2. m. 4. De tallagio Iudeorum assidendo, for assessing it,
and this Ptecept concerning it.

Claus. 35. H. 3. m. 7. De Tallagio Judeorum Regi reddendo.
Mandatum est Baron. de Scac. ad custodiam Iudeorum assignatis, quod provideant
et ordinent inter se qualiter illa 10 millia marc. quae regi debentur de
Tallagio Iudeorum regi persolvi possint.

And in the same membrana there is this command to buy gold with the Jews money
for the Kings use.

De auro emendo ad opus Regis de denariis Judaismi
Mandat W. de Hoverhull These. reg. Edward de Westminster. et Phil. Luvell quod de
omnibus denariis de Judaismo provenientibus aurum ad opus regis emi faciant,
sicut rex eidem Philippo dudum injunxit, et sicut T. Espernon eis exponet ex
part regis T.R.

What great sums of gold the King received of some Jews this year to be
exempted from taxes, paying set rates for 4 years space, will appear by this
record.

Claus. 35 H. 3. m. 11. Pro Judaeis.
Mandatum est Justiciariis ad custodiam Judeorum assignatis quod illas 10 mil.
marcas auri, quas Elias Judeus London regi dedit pro sic, quod a festo St.
Mich. An. 34. usque in quatuor annos prox. sequentes completos, non talliaretur
nisi ad centum libr. per annum, dum Tallagium regis duraret eidem inde,
proximis terminis suis Tallagii sui fac. allocari. Ita quod de cetero
respondeat in tallagio suo Judeorum secundum facultates suas sicut rex alias
eis manda it) non obstanre gratia regis quam ei concesserit pro donatione
predicti auri. T. R. apud Clarendon 10 die Iunii.

Consimiles literas habet Aaron fill. Abrah. Judeus London de 25 marc. auri
allocari, ut supra continetur eisdem Justic. directas T. ut supra, per ipsum
regem.

Et quia Aaron de Ebor. affirmavit coram rege quod predict. aurum prefatis
Aaron et Eliae alia vice, per mandatum Regis de quo Rex non recolit, fuit
allocatum; Mandat. est prefatis Justic. quod super hoc regem fine dilatione
certificent. Scituri quod dictus Aaron Regi promisit 200 marc. argenti, nisi
predicta summa auri praedictis Iudeis per regem fuit allocata in Tallagio suo,
T. R. etc. per ipsum regem.

The King this year allows a Jew to sue for the remainder of a debt which the
King had pardoned, and the Bond to be taken out of the Chest by this Writ.

Claus. 35 H. 3. m. 5. dorso.
Rex Justic. ad custod. Iudeorum assign. Cum nullus Iudeus debeat plac. de
Cirograf. in Archa Iudeorum inventa et catal. Abr. de Berchanster quae capta
fuerunt in manum nostram ex toto credebamus ad opus nostrum retinere, quoru^
residuu^ ad petitionem R. Com. Cornub. eidem remissimus, licet alias dederimus
vobis in mandatis, quod inquiraretis per sacr. legal hominum, qualem summam
pecuniae Galfr. Mansell de dicto Abr. recepit et dict. G. de usuris forte solum
quietum remaneret: Volumus tamen cum dictus Iudeus residuum catallorum suorum
recuperaverit quod dict. G. distringi faciatis ad plenam solutionem totius
residui dicto Iudeo faciend. secundum formam Cyrogr. sui. Et ideo vobis
mandamus, quod sic fieri et irro^ulari fac. Ita quod dictus Iudeus totam summam
in part sua Cyrogr. contentam cum debito integre possit recuperare. Et licet
Cyrogr. alias per preceptum nostrum ab Archa sit extract. hoc facere non
omittatis. T. apud Harding 25. die August.

The Jews in that age could not (without the Kings special license) remove
themselves or goods from one City to another, and acquainting the Justices
assigned for the Jews of his royal pleasure therein, and were enforced to give
security for one another to pay their Taxes to the King, as this record of 36
H. 3. will evidence.

^laus. 36. H. ^.
Rex concessit Iacobo filio Boneufaunt Judeo, quod libere recedat a Villa
Gloucestriae, et moram facere in civitate London; Et quia idem Judeus fecit
regi securitatem per Iacobum le Eveske Iudeorum de tallagio suo ad quod
tallietur, ad festum sancti Martini regi reddendo. Mandatum est Vicecom. Glouc.
quod ad ipsum, aut ad familiam suam, aut catalla sua manum non apponat, sed
ipsum cum omnibus praedictis a Vil^a Gloucestriae libere recedere permittat.
Te^te Rege apud Woodstoke 19 die Augusti per ipsum regem.

Et mandatum est Ius^iciariis ad cus^odiam Judeorum assignatis, quod ipsum
inter Iudeos regis in ci^itate praedicta manner permittant, Te^^e ut ^upra.

Ibid.
Mandatum est ei^dem, quod faciant habere Iacobo le Eveske Iudeo residentiam in
Scaccario Judeorum in servicio regis, et quod ad ipsum per^inet: secundum legem
Scaccarii regis, sicut et predecessores ^ui c^erici regis ibidem habere
consueverunt. Test, ut supra per R. Waker.

The Jews could not then reside nor enjoy any office in the Jews Exchequer
without the Kings special grant and license, Neither could they sue for any
debt (especially upon an Obligation out of their common Chest) without the
Kings express license and grant. Witness the president in the selfsame Roll,
and others forecited.

King Henry in the 36 of his reign granted by Pat. 36. H. 3. m. 11..
Patent to Aaron of York, Elye le Eveske de London, and Solomon le Eveske, that
for 4 years next ensuing they should not be taxed above set sums a year there
mentioned, to be paid half yearly by them into the Exchequer, and that their
set sums should be allowed in the original taxes assessed upon the commonalty
of the Jews, and be ab^ted proportionably as their tax was abated; Yea he
granted this exemption to Aaron, his Wife and children not to be distrained and
imprisoned for their debts or taxes, ^o long as he had goods to satisfy them,
and to sue for goods and debts, though out of the chest.

Pat. 36. H. 3. m. 10. Pro Aaron de Ebor. m 1.1
Rex omnibus salutem. Sciatis quod concessimus Aaron de Ebor. Iudeo nostro,
quod neci^se, nec uxor ejus, nec eorum pueri dist^ingantur per corpora sua nec
imprisonentur, quamdiu catal. a sua sufficiant ad districtionem faciend. pro
debitis nostris. In cujus etc. duratur: per bieunium. T.R. apud Westminster. 15 die
Marcii: Et mand^t. est Justice. ad custodiam Iudaeorum assign. quod sic fieri et
irrotulari faciant. T. ut supra per Regem.

Rex omnibus, etc. Sciatis quod concessimus Aaron de Ebor. Iudeo nostro, quod
possit placitare coram Justice. nostris ad cust. Iud. assign: pro catallis et
debitis suis recuperandis, et ea petere sine occasion, usque ad summam 400
lib. sine recept^one Usurae, licet catalla illa, et debita fuerunt extra Archam
C^rogr. In cujus, etc. T. ut supra.

Claus. 36. H. 3. m. 7, 8. claus. 37 H. 3. m. 20.
The like License to sue for Debts and Chattels out of the Chest to ^uch a sum
sine receptione Usurae, I ^inde granted this year to Copin a London Jew, and to
other Jews the same year; with a writ to deliver a Jew out of prison committed
upon a false complaint: and this pardon of two Jews wives for flying to avoid
imprisonment for their husbands taxes.

Claus. 36. H. 3. m. 24. Pro Judeis.
Rex pardonavit Floriae uxori Elye Blundi, et Pigonae uxori Aaron Blundi,
Wayn^tiam quam meis Justiciariis promulgarunt pro fuga quam fecerunt pro Tallio
super praedict. Elye et Aaron assesso: et mandat. est praedict. Justic. quod
praedict. Floria et Pygona propter hoc non occasionentur. T. R. apud Windsore
12 die Feb. Per ipsum Regem.

There was likewise this year a precept to the Justices to give a Jews wife her
full and reasonable dower of her husbands chattels.

Claus. 36. H. 3. m. 26. Pro quadam Judea.
Mandatum est Iusticiariis ad custod: etc. quod si Rosa quae suit uxor Leonis
Epi: Iudei Ebor. nondum plene habuit Dotem suam de catallis quae fuerunt
ejusdem Leonis, tunc eidem Iudeae plenam et rationabilem dotem suam habere
faciant, secundum legem et consuetudinem Judaismi Regis, T. R. Per ipsum Regem.

This year the King assigned certain Jews of London to tax the rest of the Jews
upon a common tax then imposed on them; in this manner.

Claus. 36. H. 3. m. 7. De quibusdam Judeis assignatis ad assidend. Tallagium
super Communitate Judeorum.
Rex assignavit Eliam Epis: et Aaron fill. Abrah. Iudeos London, ad assidend.
Tallagium super Communitate Iudeorum nostrorum London; ita videlicet quod
communitas illa eligat ipsis tercium idoneum ad Tallagium illud una cum dictis
Eli and Aaron assidend. Et mandat. est Constabul: Turris London; quod ipsum
tercium sic electum eis faciat associari; firmiter in^ungendo eis quod taliter
ipsi provideant de Tallagio illo assidendo, quod Rex illud terminis Statutis
habeat, et quod pro defectu eorum non oporteat regi graviter se capere ad
Talliatores praedictos. Test per Philip Luvel.

It seems this tax then assessed amounted to 3500 marks by this ensuing record
that year.

Claus. 36. H. m. 32. dors.
Rex Justice. ad custod. Jud: etc. Sciatis, quod Manuel Blund Judeus obtulit
nobis dimid. marc. auri ut de Tallagio 3 mill. marc. et 500 marc. talliaretur
secundum catalla sua, sicut ceteri Iudei de Communitate London talliantur. Et
ideo vobis mandamus quod si judicetis hoc esse ad commodum nostrum sic fieri
faciatis. T. R.

How strictly this tax was levied, appears by this writ to destrain the Lands,
Revenues, wives, children and chattels of all the Jews in York, and for the
arrears of Aaron too, notwithstanding his former exemption.

Claus 36. H. 3. m. 26. dorso.
Mandat. est Vic. Ebor: quod distringat Aaron de Ebor: Iudeum, et omnes alios
Judeos Ebor. per terras, et tenementa, catalla, uxores et filios, et omnibus
aliis modis quibus melius poterit, ad reddend. Regi Tallagium suum de terminis
Sancti Martini et St. Hillarii, prox. preteritis, et id sicut seipsum diligit
non omittat. T. R. apud Notingh. 14 die Ian.

I find a Precept of the King this year to detein a convert Jew in prison,
accused of a Rape and other Trespasses, such Converts were they then.

Claus. 36 H. 3. dorso 22.
Mandatum est Vic. Linc. quod M. conversum commorantem apud Tornie capiat, et
in prisona Regis salvo custodiat, donec etc. per Orfanna de Geterleg. apellat:
de raptu, et pace Regis fracta. T. R.

And this year Ibid. dors. 14.
Edw. de Westminster. Will. de Bretun, and Tho: Espernu^, assignati sunt ad
Inquisitionem fac. de concelamentis Iudaismi, tam in London, quam alibi.

Anno 37 H. 3. The Jews advancing 5000 marks to the King beforehand for his
passage into Gascoigne, he thereupon made this Grant to them, to be exempted
from taxes till Easter, and granted them writs in form of appeal, if
over-taxed; witness this record.

Claus. 37. H. 3 m 6. Pro Jud^is Angliae.
Rex conc^ssit omnibus Iudeis Angliae, quod pro 4000 marc. quas regi
praemanibus ad passagium suum in Vascon: pacaverint, et pro 1000 marc. quas
Regi Ric. Com. Cornub. ad dictum passagium pro eis solvit, quod sint qu^eti de
Tallagio facto ad passagium regis in Vascon: pro pred. 5000 marc. et quod non
tallientur citra Pasche, et omnes Iudei qui utlagati sunt pro dicto Tall. si
placare voluerint quod debeant de dicto Tall. Rex conced^t eis quod ad pace^
Regis veniant. Rex tamen vult quod nullu^ Breve allocationis valeat alicui
Iudeo in isto Tallagio, quia R. Com. Cornubiae 1000 marc. de dicto Tallagio
habere debet. Rex etiam vult, quod si aliquis Iudeus aggravetur de dicto
Tallagio, quod gravamen suum alteri imponatur qui melius far pos^it. Et super
hoc scribitur These. et Baron. de Scac: et Justice ad custod. Iud: assign: T. R.
apud Portsm. 7. die July, per Hen. de Wengham.

Hereupon some Jews complaining they were over-taxed in their tallages procured
this writ for their ease herein.

Ibid. m. 7.
Monstravit Regi Manuel Blundus Judeus London, quod ipse superoneratus est in
uItimo Tallvgio suo, et solvit plus ad demidium, quam solvisse debuit, et quam
alii solverint, secundum facultates suas. Et mandatum est, Philippo Luvel, et
Justiciariis ad custod. Jud. assign. quod si ita est, tunc superonerationem
illam in praesentia ipsius Judei assidi faciant, super alleviatos Judeos regni
nostri in Tallagio predicto, et pro eadem superoneratione reddenda districtonem
fieri, et praedict. Man: returnari fac. sine dilatione. Ita quod inde querelam
rex non audiat pro defectu Justiciae. Consimiles Literae habet Solomon Epis.
Judeus London.

The same year, Claus. 37. H. 3. m. 7.
Rex concessit Hake, fill. Ioscey Iudeo, quod habeat pacem regis, et salvum ire
and redire, licet se substraxerit pro quibusdam plateis argenteis ei
impignoratis, ut dicitur. Ita quod plegios regi inveniat quod stabit recto
secundum legem Judaismi. Et super hoc scribitur Justice. ad custod. Jud.
assignatis. T. R. apud Harwic. 2 die July.

Also. Claus. 37. H. 3. m. 13. Pro Judeo.
Rex per finem quem Mossi de Hereford Judaeus fecit cum rege, pardonavit ei
transgressionem quam fecit, pro eo quod illicentiatus a rege recessit in fine
Scac. regis Sanct. Hillarii, pro qua transgressione ipsum capi jusserint
Justic. ad custod. Judeorum assignati. Et mandatum est eisdem Justice. quod
ipsum propter hoc non occasionari nec capi faciant. T.R. apud Harling, 7 die
April.

Febr. 15. The Ib. m. 17.19.
King writes to the Justices of the Jews to allow a Debt to two several
Christians and Jews, (which he had pardoned the Debtors to these Jews) in their
Taxes they were to pay.

This year a Jews wife proving a convert Christian, her husband was attached
for her goods, by the King, as belonging to him upon her conversion; who
thereupon paid a fine to have this New case judicially determined in the Jews
E^chequer, as this record attests.

Claus. 37 H. 3. m. 18. Pro Judeo.
Cum Abraham Batekot Iudeus attachiatus esset ad respondend. regi de catallis
Amiciae Judeae, quae fuit uxor sua, quae quidem catalla post conversionem suam
ad regem pertinebant, ut dicitur. Idem Iudeus finem fecit cum rege pro dimid.
marc. auri quam regi solvit, ut secundum legem et consuetudinem Iudaismi ad
Scaccarium Iudaeorum super hoc deducatur. Et m^ndatum est Justice. ad custod.
Iud. assignatis, quod citra festum S. And: ad Scaccarium Iudeorum, quod justum
fuerit de catallis praedictis fieri facian^, sicut praedict. est T. per R. de
Essington.

King Henry in this 37 year of his reign provided and ordained these memorable
Laws and ordinances for the better regulation of the Jews in England,
restraining their Jewish rites, erection of new Synagogues, or Schools,
defection from, or disputing against the Christian faith, entertaining any
Christians as Nurses, servants, and communion wi^h Christians, to prevent their
leavening of Christians with their Iudaisme, distinguishing them from them by
wearing a white Table on their breasts, in joining paying of tithes to the
Christian Minister where they lived, etc.

Claus. 37. H. 3. m. 18. De Provisione facta per Regem de Iudeis Angliae.
Rex providit et statuit, etc. Quod nullus Judeus maneat in Anglia, nisi
servicium Regis faciat. Et quam cito aliquis Iudeus natus fuerit five sit
Masculus sive faemina serviar Nobis in aliquo. Et quod nullae Scholae Iudaeorum
sint in Anglia, nisi in locis illis in quibus hujusmodi Synagogae are here
meant by Scolae.
scholae fuerunt tempore Domini Iohannis regis patris regis. Et quod uni^ersi
Judei in Synagogis suis celebrent submissa voce, secundum ritum eorum, Ita quod
Christiani hoc non audiant. Et quod quilibet Judeus re^pondeat Rectori
Eccl^^iae, in cujus parochia maneat, de omnibus parochialibus ad domum ipsius
Iudei spectantibus. Et quod nulla Nutrix Christiana de cetero lactet aur
nutriat puerum alicujus Iudei, nec asiquis Christianus, vel Christiana serviat
alicui Iudeo vel Iudeae, nec cum ipsis comedat, vel in domo sua commoretur. Et
quod nullus Iudeus vel Judea comedat aut emat carnes in Quadragessima. Et quod
nullus Judeus detrahat fidei Christianae, vel public disputet de eadem. Et
quod nullus Iudeus habeat secretam familiaritatem cum aliqua Christiana, nec
aliquis Christianus cum Judea. Et quod quiliber Iudeus ferat manifestam
Tabulam. Et quod nullus Judeus ingrediatur aliquam Ecclesiam vel aliquam
Capellam nisi transeundo, nec incis moretur in vituperium Christi. Et quod
nullus Judeus impediat aliquo modo alium Judeum volentem ad fidem Christi
convertere. Et quod nullus Judeus receptetur in aliqua villa sine speciali
licentia regis, nisi in villis illis in quibus Judei manner consueverunt. Et
mandatum est Justiciariis ad custodiam Judeorum assignatis, quod sic fieri, et
sub incursione bonorum praedictorum Iudeorum firmiter teneri faciant. Test
Rege apud Westminster. 31 die Ianuarii.

Per REGEM Et CONSILIUM. These are the most memorable Constitutions of all
others I have met with, made by the King and his Counsel for restraining the
insolences, rites, and preventing the Leprosy and leaven of the Jews, except
those of 7 E. 1. (which I shall recite in due place) derived from these, which
none of our Historians mention.

In the 39 year of H. 3. I find this large record touching the assessing of a
Tallage upon the Commonalty of the Jews in London and other places, assessed,
levied, with all diligence and all sorts of new devises.

Pat. 39. H. 3. m. 2. dorso.
Rex Constab. Turris suae London, salutem. Precipimus tibi quod statim visis
literis istis, starim in presentia tua eligi fac. tres de legalioribus et
discretioribus Iudeis de communitate Iudeorum London, de assensu Iudeorum
eorundem, ad assidend. super eandem communitatem 472 marc. quae ipsam commun.
contingunt de Tallio mill libr. super Iudeos nostros Angliae assesio de
termino sancti Martini prox. futuri, et assidend, super eandem communitatem 50
marc quae ipsam contingunt de portione Tallag. Aaron de Ebor. Iudeo de Tall.
predict. cui concessimus ad instantiam dilecti fratris et fidelis nostri Rici.
Com. Cornub. quod hac vice propter See Claus. 39. H. 3. m 3. Pro Aaron de Ebor.
Iudeo. to discharge him hereof for his poverty.
nimiam suam paupertatem de praedicto Tallagio sit quietus. Et distringas omnes
Iudeos et Iudeas de Com. praedicto, omnibus modis quibus modis sciveris et
poteris per corpora et catalla sua infra Archas Cyrograph. London et extra
inventa, ad reddendum Regi ad opus dicti frattis nostri portionem quae eis
continget de praedict. 522 marc. Et si contigerit quod aliquis Iudeus vel Judea
defecerit in solutione porcionis quae ipsum Judeum vel Iudeam contingit de
tall. et portione predictis, tunc accedas ad Arch. praedict. et extrahi facias
de melioribus et clarioribus debitis suis in Atchis illis inventis, usque ad
portionem quae ipsum Iudeum vel Iudeam continget de tallio et portione predict.
ad distringendum omnes debitores eorundem debitotum, ita quod habeas omnes
denari^s illos albos et integros per manum tuam propriam apud Wallingfo^d in
vigilia St. Andr. Apostoli an. r. n. 40. li^erand. ^raedicto Com. vel ipsis qui
per ipsum Com. ad haec fuerint deputati, et habeas ad eosdem diem et locum de
arreragiis Tallagii 100 l. de termino Sancti Trinit, praeter: de Coc. fill.
Aaron (and 20 other Jews there named ordered to pay special sums there
specified as due from each of them) liberandos per manum tuam praedicto Com.
vel ipsis qui ad hoc fuerint deputati, unde alias recepisti mandatum nostrum,
quod non es exercutus habeas. etiam ad eosdem diem et locum, corpora Eliae Epi.
Aaron fill. Abraham, Solomon Epi. et Jacob Epi Iudeorum, plegios de tallio
praedicto, una cum corporibus illorum Iudeorum and Iudearum quae aliqua
arreragia debuerunt de Tallagio praedict. Et Ita te habeas in hoc mandato
exequendo, quod pro defectu tui ad te graviter capere non debeamus nec de
terris et catallis tuis praedicta debita levari faciemus. T. meipso apud Westminster.
24 die October. an. r. n. 39.

Eodem modo mandatum est Vic. Linc. Wigorniensis. Oxon. Suthampt. Linc. Ebor. Devon.
Wilteshire. Gloucest. Cantebr. Norff. Bedeford, Essex, Hereford, and Constab.
Bristol. to levy other particular sums upon particular Jews there mentioned,
too tedious to transcribe, containing an whole Roll, where all who please may
view them at their leisure, and the Jews too names being many.

Then follows Quia Com. Cornub. supplicavit Regi quod mittat aliquem de suis
usque Wallingford in vigil. St. Andr. prox futur. qui intersit solutioni tunc
faciendae ibid. de Tallagio et debitis Judeorum (formerly particularized at
large.) quae ei concessit in part solutionis debitorum in quibus ei tenetur.
Mandatum est Tho. Espernon, quod omnibus negotiis pretermissis eidem solutioni
dictis die and loco inretersit ad eam videndam et irrotuland. and hoc non
omittat. T. ut supra. Eodem modo mandat. est Cyrogr. Arch. Iudeorum Winton,
quod adjuvantes sint, et consulentes Vic. Suth. ad levand. ad opus dic. Com.
Cornub. de 160l. 12 marc. quae communitatem Judeor. Winton contingunt de
Tallagio nulle libr. super Iudeos Angliae assess. de termino St. Martini prox.
preter: et quod permittant predict. Vic. Visis literis ipsis habere liberam
administrationem debitorum in Archis illis inventorum ad levand praedict. 160
l. 12 marc. and hoc sicut se et sua diligunt non omittant. T. ut supra, Eodem
modo mandat. est Cyrograph. Archae Iudaeorum Colecester, Wigorn, London, to
levy other particular sums there specified in like manner. And Dors. 4. there
are the same writs in all things pro assidendo and levando upon the Commonalty
of the Jews of London 247 mar. and of other sums upon all Jews of England in
form aforesaid.

In Claus. 39. H, 3. m. 7: There is order for Vines a Jew to recover his debts
owed by creditors, by reason of his poverty, Also Commands to Sheriffs to seal
up the Jews Chests, and to others to open and view their writings.

Claus. 39. H. 3. m. 13. De Archis Iudeorum
Mandat. est Cyrogr. Christianis and Judeis Hereford, quod petmittant Vic.
Hereford. and Hug. de Pylardington habere accessum ad Arch. Cyrogr. er illam
sigillis suis signare, et quod permittant Will. Mansell. Vic. War. and
praedict. Hug. predict. sigilla frangere, and Cyro. in praedict. Archa invent.
videre et irrotulare prout injunxit, T. per Philip Luvel. Eodem modo mandat.
etc. Cyrogr. Christ. and Jud. et Vic. Wigorn. statim visis literis accedat ad
Arch. Cyr. Wigorn. and illum sigillo suo signet, and quod capiat corpota Hake
de Wigorniensis. Iud. et Aar. et Samps, fill suor. et eos duci fac. Land. and ibi
custod. Turr. R. Land. T. ut supra, The like command is to the Sheriff of
Hereford, to seal up the Jews Chest there, and for Hugh P. to search it.

In So it was noted when I read it, though mistaken in the year.
Claus. 39 H. 3. pats 2. dors. 16, 17. There is a large Catalogue of the Lands,
Houses, Rents, Morgages, real and personal estate and debts of Abraham a Jew in
several Counties, amounting to a vast sum, taking up near two Membranes, which
were all imbreviated and confiscated to the Kings use. And a proclamation by
the King, that No Jew should be suffered to depart out of the realm of England.

In 40 H. 3. the King by his Letters Patents authorized Commissioners to sell
the houses, and enquire after the goods and chattels of the Jews, condemned for
See First Demurrer, Edit. 2. p. 29, 30, etc.
crucifying a child at Lincoln.

Pat. 40 H. 3. m. 5 De domibus quorund. Iudeorum vendendis.
Rex omnibus, etc. Sciatis quod constituimus dilect: et fidel. nostros Simon
Passe^eiw, et Will: de Leighton, Vic. nostri London, ad vendend: per visum et
testimonium legalium hominum, domos quae fuerunt Judaeorum Linc. suspensorum
pro parvo crucifixo ibidem, prout commodo nostro magis viderint expedire, et ad
inquirend. quo devenerunt catalla eorundem Iudaeorum, et qui ea habeant, et
quantum valiant. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod eidem Simoni et Vic. ad hoc sitis
intendentes et auxiliantes cum ab eis requisiti fueritis. In cu us, etc. T. R.
apud Woodest. 20 die Aug.

It seems some of these Jews that crucified this child turned Christians to
save their lives, for which I find this kind of pardon granted to one of them
at the suit of a See Mat. Paris, p. 622. First Demurrer, p. 33
Friar.

Pat. 40. H. 3. m. 18. Pro Joh. Converso.
Rex omnibus, etc. salutem. Sciatis quod ad instantiam dilecti nobis in Christo
fratris Iohannis de Dorbuton, pardona^i Iohanni Converso sectam pacis nostrae
quae ad nos pertinet, pro morte pueri nuper crucifixi apud Lincoln, dum
predictus Iohannis fuit Iudeus ejusdem Civitatis, unde rectatus est, et firmam
pacem nostram ei inde concedimus. Ita tamen quod stet recto in Curia nostra, si
quis versus eum inde loqui voluerit. In cujus etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 10 die Jan.

The same year there issued a precept to the Sheriff of Lincoln, to send the
Chest of the Jews of Lincoln to London, belike for the same crucifying of this
child.

Claus. 40 H. 3. pars 1. dors. 16.
Mandat. est Vic. Linc. quod statim visis literis istis mittat usque London
Archam Cirogr. Lincoln, sub salva custodia liberand. Ph. Luvel Thesaur. Regis
et Justic. ad custodiam Iud: assignatis, et quod venire fac. ibidem, cum eadem
Archa omnes Cyrographarios ejusdem Villae, tam Christianos quam Iudaeos, et hoc
non omittat.

This year the King ordained a New Justice for the Jews, who took an Oath of
Fealty to the King, due to his Office, and was formally invested in the place,
as this record relates.

Claus. 40 H. 3. pars 1. m. 15. De Justic. constit. ad Custodiam Judeorum.
Rex constituit Adam de Greenvile, Iusticiarium suum Iud^^rum, et ab eo recipit
Sacramentum fidelitatis Regi debitum pretextu officii sui. Et mandat. est Phil.
Luvel Thesaurar: regis, etc. quod ipsum in locum suum, tanquam Justice. Regis in
Scac: Iudaeorum sine dilatione ponant. T. R. per R. Walis.

Ibidem dors. 9. Pro Judeo.
Cok. fill. Aaron Iudeus London, cum instantia supplicavit regi, Quod super Fine
quem nuper fecit coram Philip. Luvel These. et Henrico de Bathon, ad opus regis
pro 20 marc. auri, eidem Iudeo literae Patentes fieri fac. Et mandatum est
eisdem Philippo, et Ric: quod formam Literarum Patent. quas pred. Judeus inde
habere debet ad terminos solucionis ejusdem auri sub sigillis suis significent,
ut Rex literas illas eidem Judeo fieri et consignari faciat. T. R. apud
Clarend. 3 die Iulii. It seems these Justices directed all the Jews Patents of
this nature.

In the 41 year of King Henry the 3d. Elyas Bishop, the High Priest of the
Jews, as Hist. Angl. p. 888. See my first Demurrer. p. 28.
Mat. Paris styles him, for a certain Transgression against the King, and his
Brother King of Almaine, was judicially deprived of his High Priesthood and
Priestly Office, by the judgment of the Kings Justices assigned for the
custody of the Jews in the Exchequer, and of all his other Offices formerly
granted him by the King; and that he should never be capable to receive or
execute these Offices again: whereupon the King for a Fine of 3 marks of gold
paid by the Commonalty of the Jews, granted unto them by his Charter, that from
thenceforth none should be their Priest, but by the common election of the said
Commonalty of the Jews; and that upon the death of every Priest, they should
have free Liberry to choose another Priest, and of presenting him to the King,
that he might obtain his assent and savor therein; as this memorable record
informs us, wherein the names of the Justices assigned to the Jews are
specified.

Pat 41. H. 3. m. 4. no. 6. Pro Communitate Judaeorum Angliae.
Rex omnibus, etc. Cum Elyas Episcopus here, I conceive to be a surname, as Le
Eveske, the same in French, and Bishop then was, and at this day is both
amongst the Jews, French and English, not a name of Office, as is generally
mistaken.
Episcopus Iudaeus noster London, pro t^ansgressione quam feci^, tam Nobis,
quam dilecto fratri nostro Regi A mannorum a sacerdotio communitatis Iudaeorum
Angliae coram dilectis and fidelibus nostris Philippo Basset, Philippo Luvel,
Henrico de Bathonia, Simon Passelew, and caeteris Iusticiariis ad custodiam
Iudaeorum assignatis, quos ad Transgressionem illam convincendam Iusticiarios
nostros assignavimus, Per Iudicium eorundem ad Scaccarium nostrum Fuerit
abjudicatus, et de ejusdem Sacerdotii Officio, et etiam de omni modis al^is
officiis et Ballivis quas a Nobis prius obtinuit sit depositus; Nos de consilio
e rundem Iusticiariorum concessimus praedictae Communitati Iudeorum nostrorum
Angliae, per finem trium marcarum auri quem Cresse et Haginus fratres ejusdem
Iudaei, nobis pro eadem Communitate fecerunt, quod praedictus Elyas Sacerdotium
illud nunquam in posterum habeat et recuperet: Et quod nullus de Communitate
illa de caetero sit Sacerdos nisi per communem Electionem Communitatis ejusdem.
Quod illa Communitas post decessum cujuslibet Sacerdotis sic electi, alium
eligendi quemcunque voluerint Sacerdotem liberam habeat facultatem, ac ipsum
Nobis praesentandi, ut nostrum super hoc assensum optineat et favorem. In
cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Wodstoke, 20 die Iulii.

I observe in this Record, that Elyas, is styled, only, Sacerdos, not Presbyter
Iudeorum his only Priestly office called, Sacerdotium communitatis Angliae. and
Sacerdotii officium; not Presbyteratus omnium Judeorum totius Angliae, as Here
f. 3.23. b.
Jacobs and Aarons forementiontioned Offices are. And he that should succeed
him by common election, is still here styled Sacerdos, Sacerdotis, Sacerdotem,
thrice together, not Presbyter at all: Therefore certainly these offices were
distinct, the one ecclesiastical, the other temporal in the Exchequer only as I
formerly manifested.

What Elias his offense was, for which he was thus deprived of his Priesthood,
is not expressed in the record, but most probably it was his stout and bold
speech to the King, Earl Richard and the Lords, in behalf of the Jews the year
before, when they exacted an intolerable tax from them under pain of a most
loathsome prison, Page 28.29.
hanging, and an ignominious death, recorded at large by Hist. Angl. p. 887.902.
Matthew Paris and in the first part of my Demurrer, which I shall not repeat,
What power the King and his Justices then had over their Jewish Bishop, and
Priests themselves is sufficiently evident by this Record.

In the Rolls of 41 H. 3. I find the King Pat. 41. H. 3. pars 1. m. 8.
at the intercession of his Brother King of Romans, acquitting Cresse, and two
other Jews of London for 5 complete years then next ensuing, Ab omnibus
Tallagiis and auxiliis ad Nos pertinentibus, pro una marca auri et dimid.. to
be paid by each of them yearly into the Wardrobe, And at the instance of the
Queen he granted this exemption Iacobo le Eveske Judeo, and to his Son Benedict
after his death. Quod toto tempore vitae suae quietus esset de omnibus
Tallagiis, auxiliis, et aliis demandis ad nos pertinentibus, pro 5 marc.
argenti nobis annuatim reddend. ad Scac. nostrum, Ibid. m. 13 and 17.
salvo tamen nobis and haeredibus nostris misericordias in quas inciderit pro
forisfacto aliquo personam suam tangente. Likewise he granted by Patent to Cok.
a Jew license to sue for his fathers debts, for which he paid a fine to the
King, and to extend his Debtors lands for the debts, sine aliqua usura. Yea I
find this pardon of an Outlawry to a Jewesse the same year.

Ibid. m. 17. Pro Roesia Crespin Judea.
Rex omnibus, etc. Sciatis quod per finem quem Roesia Crespin Judea London
fecit nobiscum, remissimus ei vtlagariam in ipsam promulgatam, et malas
occasiones pro eo quod ipsa non venit ad mandatum nostrum. Et ideo vobis
mandamus quod ipsam contra hanc concessionem nostram non vexatis. In cujus,
etc. Test R. apud Winton 4 die Novembris.

This strange Precept was sent the Constable of the Tower, not to bail the Jews
upon any Justices Precept.

Claus. 41 H. 3. m. 6.
Mandat est Constab. Turris London, quod nec Vic. nec Judeum, vel Judeam
arrest. pro debitis Ri. Romans R. deliberet admandatum Justiciariorum, vel
alterius cujuscunque, sine assensu et voluntate Cresse and Abrah. Judeorum
attornat. praedict. R. Alemanniae. T. R. apud. Winds. 17 die Jan.

In Cl. 41. H. 3. m. 7. There is respite of a debt granted to Kok a Jew, And
Writs to the Justices of the Jews, for some Jews Claus. 41. H. 3. pars 1. m.
12. Pro quibusdam Judeis.
Quod non ponantur in Tallagio, quamdiu terminos suos tenuerint of their annual
compositions to be exempted from taxes: with this prohibition to the Kings
Justices itinerant, not to hold Plea of any matter belonging to the Jews.

Ibidem. See Claus. 56. H. 3. m. 3, 4.
Quia Rex non vult quod Judei sui placitent vel implacitentur alibi quam coram
Justic. Regis ad custod. Jud. assignatis. Mandatum est Rogero de Thurks et
sociis suis Justiciariis Itiner. in Com. Linc. quod omnia placita tangentia
Hagium Jud. Linc. coram eis, ponant coram Justic. praedict. ut ipsi eidem Judeo
et aliis de eo contingentibus Justiciam exhibeant, secundum legem and
confretudinem Judaismi. T. R. apud Westminster. 7 die Ian. Per Phil. Lovel, and
Simonem Passelewe Justice. Iudeorum, who had power to grant prohibitions to the
Justices in such cases.

If the Jews were sued before their Justices, and made default, and could not
be found to be distreined, the Justices thereupon used to seize their Charters
and Debts In the Chests, yea houses into the Kings hands, as till they
appeared, as this record of 42 H. 3. attests.

Claus. 44. H. 3. m. 13.
Quia Rex accepit per inquisitionem quam per Rog. de Marcio, Simon Passelewe,
Claus. 42 H. pars 1. m. 13 Pro Judeo.
and Will. de Haslebech fieri fecit, quod duae Cartae quae fuerunt Manuel fill.
Elie Iudei Linc. inventae in Archa Cyrograph. regis Ebor. captae fuerunt in
manum regis pro defaltis quas fecit verse. Will. de Kinedal. personam Ecclesiae
de Martin Lingeslet in curia regis coram Iusticiariis nostr. ad custod.
Iudeorum assign. apud Westminster. eo quod non potuit alio modo distringi and
attachiari, and quod idem Iudeus propter timorem defaltarum illarum, and pro
paupertate sua substraxit se a Villa Linc. and non ob aliam causam. Rex ad
instantiam Alfonsi Reg. Castile and Legionum illust. remisit quantum ad Regem
pertinet, eidem Iudeo substractionem praedict. and ei praedict. cartas
reddidit, ita quod in dicta villa Linc. vel alibi inter Iudeos regis libere and
in bona pace morari possit, and stare juri quando et ubi debuerit, secundum
legem and consue^udinem Iudaismi regis. Et mandat. est Thesaur. and Baron.
Scac. Et Justice. quod sic fieri and teneri, and dicto Iudeo praedict. cartas
suas restitui fac. and de domibus ad ipsum Iudeum spectantibus in praedict.
villa Linc. plaenam et celer^m Iusticiam exbibeant eidem, secundum legem and
consuetud. Judaismi praedict. T. R. apud Merton 10 die Junii. per Justice.
Mansell, and alios de concilio,

It appears by this and former Records, that the Jews gold could procure Kings,
Queens, and other Grandees to be their Intercestors upon all occasions.

It is plain by this Record, that the Jews claimed an exemption from suits for
their Tallages before the Barons of the Exchequer.

Fines 42 H. 3. m. Pro communitate Judeorum,
Rex de consilio suo provide concessit, quod de 500 marc. assesso super
communitatem Judeorum Regi de tallagio suo arentata de termino St. Michis de
an. 44. de quibus Barons de Scac. summonitionem fieri fecerunt Vic. R. per
Angliam ad respondend. inde coram praedict. Baron. ad praedict. Scac. eidem
Vic. respondeant ad Scac. R. Judeorum coram Hugone le Bygod. Justic. Angl. and
Justic. R. ad custod. Judeorum assignat. Et mandat. est praedict. Baron. quod
sic fieri et teneri faciant. T. R. apud Woodst. 15 die August. per ipsum regem
et Consilium.

This year diverse Jews being imprisoned, the King and his Council gave order
for their release till further provision made concerning them.

Claus. 42. H. 3. dors, 6. Pro Iudeis.
Quia Rex intendit ordinare de Judaismo suo per consilium suum die Dom. prox.
post fest. S. Mar. Magdal. Provisum est per consilium regis, Et mandatum est
Ballivo de Wallingford, Constab. Castri Winton, and Turris Land. quod omnes
prisones Judeos in custodia sua detentos deliberent quousque provisiopraedicta
facta fuerit. Et mandat est Hugoni de Cresse Judeis Lincoln, quod nullam
interim districtionem faciant super praedict. Judeos sed deliberationem illam
ipsam ipsi permittant.

(Anno 43. H. 3. A Jews Wife being banished out of England, the husband paid a
fine in gold to have license for her to return and dwell there.

Fines 43. H. 3. m. 10. Pro Judea Russel.
Ex part Judeae uxor Abrahae Russel quondam Judeus de Wilton, factus est finis
cum rege pro 20 ralent. auri pro habenda licentia Regis revertendi in Angliam,
and ibidem vivendi in pace, in rot. claus. T. Rege.

After this the Jews giving the King 500 marks toward his passage into France,
there issued this Patent for the speedy and violent assessing and levying of it.

Pat. 43. H. 3. m. 4. De districtione fac. super Judeos
Rex Constab. Turris London. salutem. Cum Iudei nostri Angliae dederunt nobis
500 marc. sterling. ad passagium nostrum in Franc. quod erit, deo voleute 1 die
Sept. instantis, tibi precipimus, and in fide qua nobis tener. firmiter
injungimus, quatenus sicut honorem nostrum diligis, et indignationem et grave
dampnum tuum volueris evitare; statim visas literis absque omni dilatione
facias assidi per Coc: fill. Aaron, Man: Blundum, et Leon. Preciosae 100 l.
super Commun: Judaeorum London, quae eis contingunt de praed. 500 mar. Quibus
festinanter assessis statim distringas tres praedictos assessores, quam omnes
alios Judaeos praed. villae per terras, catalla, et corpora eorum, uxorum and
puerorum suorum, et omnibus modis aliis quibus melius scieris et poteris, ad
reddendum hoc ad opus nostrum, portionem quemlibet eorum contingentem de praed.
100 lib. Ita quod eashabeas plenarie penes te per praedict. assessores Judeos
apud Turrim London, die decol. Sancti Iohannis Baptist. prox. instanti: et ita
quod praedict. passag: nostrum ad praedict. diem pro defectu praedict.
denariorium nullatenus impediatur. Sciturus certissime, quod nos in omnibus
mandatum nostrum adimplendis tam graviter ad te capiemus quod plus ex hoc
senties te gravatum, quam si de tuo proprio solveres pecuniam memoratam. Quia
^uum gravamen dabit aliis timorem delinquendi. Et habeas ibi tunc hoc breve. T.
R. Archidiac Bed. These. nostro apud Westminster. 6 die Augusti.

Pat. 43. H. 3. m. 15.
Mandat. est Constabul. Turris London, (and three more there named) quod omnes
Archas Iudaeorum in pred. Turri oxistentes apariri, et omnia catalla et debita
in eisdem inventa distrahi et aperte irrotulari faciant; et ea quae ibid.
invenient Regi constare faciant. In cujus, etc. T. R. apud Westminster: 5. die Nov.

Anno 44 H. 3. Cok and his Brother, two Jews, Pat. 44. H. 3. pars 1. m. 7. Pro
Cok. fill. Aaron Iudeo London, and Fratre suo.
having four years before made a fine of 2000 marks in silver, for the goods of
their Father, except the Chattels the Queen would take for her gold, etc. The
King granted them for a fine to pay the arears of the 2000 mark at certain
times, and in the mean time to be freed from all Taxes, unless only for their
own proper goods, Claus. 44 H. m. 14.17.
as appears by a special Patent; part of which monyes they were to pay, and
paid in gold into the Wardrobe.

This year there issued a Precept to seize and levy all the Jews Debts.

Claus. 45 H. 3. pars 1. m. Pro Rege de Iudaismo.
Mandatum est Justic. ad custod. Iud. assignatis, quod omnia debita, tam ea
quae sum in Thesaur. Judaismi Regis, qua^ ea quae manent in summonitione
contenta, in rotulis Scacc. Iudeorum quae scil. debita excedunt 20 mar.
liberent sine dilatione Thesaurario et Baronibus de Scac. ponend. in
summonitionem ibidem, retentis tamen penes ipsis Justice. transcriptis eorundem.
T.R. apud S. Paulum London 9. die Maii Per H. le Bygod.

Anno 45 H. 3. Pat. 45 H. 3. m. 3.
The King at the Queens Petition granted Solomon Eveske of London to be free
from all Taxes for two years; he also issued forth these Letters Patents to
search, inroll and inquire after all Jews debts, pawns, estates, etc.

Pat. 45. H. 3. Dors. 9.
Rex Vic. Constabular. Castrorum, Majoribus, Ballivis, Cirographr. et omnibus
Ministris suis de Wilton, Merleberge, Glouc. Bristol, and Exon, et omnibus
aliis presents Literas inspecturis, salutem. Sciatis, quod assignavimus
Magist. Robert: de Meleel, et Radul: de Hocest. ad Archas Citogr. Judaeorum
aperiendas et scrutandas, et ad omnia d^bita in eisdem inventa irrotulanda; et
ad inquirend omnibus modis quibus melius viderint expedire, de bonis et
catallis praed. Judeorum, mobilibus et immobilibus extra Archas: viz. quantum
singuli habeant in auro et argento, vadiis, jocalibus, terris, redditibus, et
omnibus rebus aliis, and in quorum manibus vel custodiis fuerint et devenerint,
tam in Civitatibus, Villis, domibus religiosis, quam ab omnibus locis aliis; ut
de predict. debitis et catallis, et eorum quantitate certificari possumus. Et
ideo vobis mandamus, quod ad omnia praedicta exequenda et expedienda predicto
Roberto, et Radul. sitis intendentes, consulentes et auxiliantes in omni forma
quam vobis dicent et injungent ex part nostra. In cujus etc. T. R. apud Turr.
London, 16 die Iulii.

Consimiles Literas Pat. habet Simon Passelewe Archis Winton, Oxon. Bed. and
Northam. Georgius de Dover, Willielmus Hamselbech apud Cant. Essex, Norff:
Suff. et Canteb. Roger de la Lie, apud Stanford, Lincoln, Not: et Ebor. de
Her^ford, Warwick, Wigorn.

This year the King granted this Patent of Safe conduct for a time to Solomon a
Jew, who had abjured the realm, to return for a season for his special service.

Pat. 45. H. 3. m. 13.
Rex omnibus etc. salutem. Licet Solomon le Eveske Judeus abjuravit regnum
nostrum, tamen quia inter homines terrae pro quibusdam negotiis nos specialiter
tangentibus in Angl: revertat, concessimus ei quod salvo et secure venire
possit in regnum nostrum. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod eidem Judeo in veniendo,
morando, ceu recedendo malum non inferatis, vel inferri permittatis,
impedimentum, dampnum vel gravamen. Et si quid, etc. In cujus, etc. Duratatur^
usque ad Festum Sancti Trin. prox: futur. T. R. apud Turrim London 16 die April.

This year the Wardens and Constable of the Tower of London claimed this
privilege by prescription, that they ought to have the atachment and
imprisonment of all Jews, Jewesses of London, and other places, and of all
Christians and Jews that were to be attached or imprisoned by the judgment of
the Justices and Exchequer of the Jews, for any matters concerning Judaisme;
and likewise to hold Plea in the Tower of all Debts of Jews under 40 s. which
privilege the King allowed, and commanded to be observed by this Writ.

Claus. 45 H. 3. pars 1. m. 11. Pro Custodia Turris London.
Rex Justic. suis ad custod Iud. assign. salutem. Quia Custodes et Constab.
Turris nostrae London semper habere consueverunt omnia attachiamenta tam
Iudeorum quam Iudearum London; quam aliorum Iud: nostrorum forinsecorum; et
etiam imprisonamentum. tam Christianorum quam Iudeorum, quos occasion Iudaismi
Prisonae nostrae contigerit adjudicari, vel per preceptum nostrum, vel per
considerationem Scac. nostri Judeorum. Quia etiam predicti Custodes et Constab,
tenere consueverunt placita inter Christianos et Iudeos, de vadiis usque ad
summam 40 s. Providimus and volumus, quod de cetero sic fiet in omnibus. Et
ideo vobis mandamus, quod omnes tam Christianos, quam Judeos; quos contigerit
per preceptum nostrum, vel considerationem praedicti Scac. nostri Iudeorum
catcerali custodia ratione Judaismi quoquo modo committi, eos liberari faciatis
Constab. Turris nostrae, et per ipsos et Ministros suos praedict. faciatis
attachiamenta de Judeis, et placita vadiorum reneri sicut praedict. est. Ita
quod nullus, nisi Constabulatius predict. Turris nostrae de caetero se
intromittat de hujusmodi attachiamentis vel imprisonamentis, vel placitis
vadiorum praedict. Et hoc faciatis firmiter teneri et observari. T.R. apud
Sanctum Paulum London, 26 die Maii

Which record fully sets forth the Jurisdiction of the Keepers and Constable of
the Tower of London, over the Jews persons and affairs in that age.

Ibidem m. 17. Pro Cresseo Iudeo Wilton.
Rex Justice. ad Custod: etc. Monstravit nobis Cresse Iudeus de Wilton qui
decimo anno preterito finem vobiscum fecisset per aurum ad opus nostrum, ut
sine occasion implacitare posset coram vobis Galf. de Winelesford de debitis
quae ei debet extra Archam Judaeoru^; quod idem Galf. recognovisset coram vobis
se debere praefato Iudeo X. libr: attamen quidam prefat. Iudeo invidentes ipsum
super dicto debito frandulenter et maliciose inquietare et molestare nituntur.
Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod si scrutatis rotulis Scac. nostri Judeorum
inveneritis ipsum Judeum finem predict. fecisse, tunc finem illum secundum
irrotulat. praedict, et consuetudinem Judaismi nostri remanere fac. sine
occasion. T. R. apud Winds. 5. die Febr.

The King wanting present moneys this year, sent forth this writ.

Ibidem dors. 15. Pro denar, de Judaismo mittend. ad Regem.
Quia Rex plurimum indiget ad praesens pecunia. Mandat. est Justic. ad custod.
Iudeorum assignat. quod omnes denarios de Judaismo regis quos reservant ad
autum inde emend. ad opus Regis, sine dilatione liberent in Garderoba Regis
Aberico de Fischamp, and Petro de Winton Cler. et faciend. inde quod Rex eis
injunxit.

Fines 46 H. 3. m. 14.
Anno 46 H. 3. I find 18 several Jews paying several fines to the King for
Patents, and that they might abide within certain Towns: As likewise a Precept
to the Constable of the castle of Gloucester, to seize all the chattels houses,
Lands, and tenements of Caupon a Jew of Gloucester, and keep them safe till the
King gave farther Order; with this further command to the Barons.

Fines 46 H. 3. m. 13.
Mandatum est Baron de Scac. Quod omnes Cartas, Tallias, et instrumenta inventa
in Archis Regis Cyrographariis de debitis Judeorum per Angliam, Regi relictis
seu concessis post ultimum scrutinium et proventum fact: de debitis predictis,
per illos quos Rex ad hoc deputavit, coram eis venire faciant, ad praedicta
debita ad usus Regis levanda secundum quod Rex eis injunxit. T. etc.

He likewise made several grants to Jews, not to release, pardon, respite, or
extend their Debts, in this form.

Pat. 46. H. 3. m. 14.15.
Rex omnibus, etc. Sciatis, Quod per finem quem Benedictus de Lincoln Judeus
fecit nobiscum, et de quo nobis satisfecit in Garderoba nostra, concessimus
eidem Iudeo quod de nullis debitis suis, quae eidem debentur, aliquam extentam,
aut terminorum prorogationem, quietantiam, seu donationem aliquam faciemus
infra quinquennium, a tempore confectionis praesentium literatum. In cujus,
etc. T. R: apud Windsore 15. die Maii. The like Patents were then granted to 4
other Jews, and to 8. Jews more on the 19th of February.

The Jews of Canterbury complaining to the King of violence offered to them by
the people in Canterbury, who broke open their doors, beat them, and intended
to burn their houses with fire, in the night, issued this commission to inquire
out the Malefactors, that they might be punished.

Pat. 46. H. 3 m. 19. dorso.
Cum Rex ex part Judaeorum Cant. gravem accepit querimoniam; quod quidem
malefactores et pacis Regis perturbatores, tam Clerici, quam Laici, ejusdem
civitatis nuper venerunt noctanter ad domos eorundem Judeorum in eadem villa,
et ostia et fenestra eorundem domorum securibus exciderunt et fregerunt, et ad
domus illas comburendas ignem ibidem detulerunt, and postmodum quosdam ex
Judeis praedictis enormiter verberaverunt, and maletractaverunt contra pacem
Regis. Rex assignavit Walt. de Bersted ad inquirend. per sacram: etc. qui
transgressionem praedict. fecerunt: and quid per eandem inquisitionem invenerit
regi in propria persona sua sine dilatione scire fac. ut ad insolentiam
predict. malefactorum reprimendum et correctionem debitam de transgressionibus
predict. faciendam de consilio suo faciat, quod super fuerit faciendum. Et
mandat. est Vic. Kanc. etc.

The Justices of Assize this year proceeding notwithstanding a Prohibition from
the Justices of the Jews to stay the proceedings in a suit for a Jews house in
Colchester, which was recovered by his default, notwithstanding the
Prohibition, thereupon there issued this writ of restitution for the Jew.

Claus. 46 H. 3. pars 2. m. 2. Pro Hanekino de Flem. et socio suo Judaeis.
Rex Vic. Essex salutem, Cum Willielmus de Ponte nuper Arraniavit per Breve
nostrum quandam Assisam novae disseisinae coram Nich. de True et sociis suis
Justic. nostris ultimo Itin. in Com. Essex, verse. Hanekun de Flemeg. et
Ursellum Judeum de Colecester, de ten: in Colecester: ac per Iohannem de
Weston, et Tho. de Pynkesden, Justice. ad custod. Iud. assign. eidem Ursello sit
inhibitum, ne alibi quam coram eis super aliquo respondere praesumeret; per
quod idem Ursell: coram praefato Nicho. et sociis suis Justice. nostris
comparere non audebat praefato Willielmo inde respondere. Cumque Assisa illa
per defaltum praefati Urselli tunc capta fuisset, ac idem Willus. seisinam de
tenem. predicto per ret. Assisae praedict. recuperavit. Attendentes absentiam
praefati Iudaei occasion, Inhibitionis praedict. sibi factae ei non debere
imputari; tibi praecipimus, quod praefato Iudeo tenem. praedict. cum
pertinentiis rehabere fac. tenendum absque destructione vel absque alienatione,
aliqua inde facienda, vizt. usque in crastinum Epiphaniae Dom: prox: futur. ita
quod tunc vel citra, per praedict. Mich. Johan. and Tho. quos Justice. nostros
ad hoc assignavimus, exhibeant in praemissis utraque part Iusticiae
complementum. Et tu ipse provideas, quod per judicium supradictum de tenemento
illo nulla fiat alienatio seu domorum deterioratio, nec aliquo modo inde fiat
destruction, per quod tenementum illud interim deteriorari contingat. T. apud
Westminster. 20 die October.

This year the King committed all the Jews to his son Edward, granting him the
use of the Seals of his Exchequer, to seal his Writs, and a new Prison, as
this Record informs us.

Claus. 46. H. 3. pars 1. m. 4.
Rex Thesaur. et Baron. suis de Scac. salutem. Sciatis, quod concessimus Edwardo
fill. nostro. cui Judaismum nostrum commissimus, quod Justic. sui ad custod.
Judeorum assignat. habeant Sigillum Scac. nostri Judeorum penes se, and quod
omnia brevia et mandata ad Iudaismum illum spectantia subsigillo Scac. nostri
Judeorum mittant, ad sigilla nostra de cancellaria, vel de Scaccario nostro.
Ita quod brevia et mandata praedict. ibi sine difficultate consignantur. Et
mandamus Magistro I. de Chishal Cancellario Scac. nostri, quod brevia et
mandata illa sine difficultate consignari fac. et a^tornatos ejusdem filii
nostri omnes denar. inde provenient. percipere permittat ad opus ejusdem fill.
nostri, Volumus etiam quod idem fill. noster habeat ptisonam ad Judeos et a^ios
distringendos et Justiciandos, prout secundum legem et consuetudinem regni
nostri fieri debet et consuevit. Et ideo sic fieri faciatis. T. R. 12 die Iulii.

Mandatum est I. de Chishal. Cancellar Scac. reg. quod omnia brevia and mandata
quae Justic. ad custod. Jud. assign. sibi mittant sub sigillo Scac. reg.
Judeorum, fine difficultate consignari fac. Et attornatos Edwardi fill. reg. cui
rex Iudaismum suum commisit; et omnes denarios de praedictis brevibus et
mandatis provenientes percipere permittat ad opus ejusdem fill. regis. T. ut
supra.

This year the King issued out this Writ to extract quoddam feodum out of the
Chests of the Jews of Maile Claus. 46 H. 3. pars 1. m. 19. dorso.
a Jew of Canterbury, which the King granted to another, directed Cyropraph.
Justiciariis and Iudeis Cant. and illum habeatis coram Justic. nostr. ad custod
Iudeorum assign. at a set day, per unum ex vobis sub sigillis vestris, praedict
Iusticiariis nostris liberand. ad faciend. inde praeceptum nostrum, Et habeas
ibi hoc Breve. T. W. Bagod. apud Westminster. 4 die Iun. There are 3 more the like
Writs this year.

Cart. 46. H. 3 m. 4. De feodis Judeorum
The King by his Charters this year granted sundry fees and annuities of several
Jews by their assents (specified in their Charters, in which several persons
were obliged by their Charters to these Jews and their heirs) unto Robert
Walerand. Habend. and tenend. eidem Roberto, and haeredibus suis libere and
quiet, integre and in pace, sine reclamatione nostri and haeredum nostrorum,
and Iudeorum praedictorum in perpetuum, secundum tenorem praedict. Cartarum,
etc. Dat. per manum nostram apud Westminster. 2 die Febr.

King Henry in the 47 year of his reign confirmed Prince Edwards grant of the
Jews (to whom he formerly assigned them) unto the Caturcenfian Merchants (to
whom the Jews and Judaisme were morgaged for moneys advanced on them) by this
Patent.

Pat. 47. H. 3 m. 9.
Rex universis ad quos, etc. salutem. Cum Edwardus noster dilectus Primogenitus,
ex praecepto, assessu et voluntate nostra concesserit and tradiderit insolurum
Petro Ceraudo and Willo Bernand. frarribus, pro seipsis, and eorum sociis
civibus et Mercatoribus Caturcens. pro mutuo per Dom. Edwardum ab eisdem
Mercatoribus habito and recepto London, pro negotiis ipsius Edwardi and regn.
nostri gravibus and arduis, totum Iudaismum nostrum ipsius regni nostri cum
Scac. ejusdem Iudaismi, et omnibus et singulis aliis proventibus et exitibus
ceteri^que ad idem Iudaismum spenctantibus. Habend. et tenend. a die
confectionis instrumenti interdict. Edwardum et prefatos mercatores super dicto
mutuo confecto usque ad quindenam sancti Iohis Baptistae. Anno Dom. 1265. Prout
in instrumento praedicto Patente seu literis dicti Edwar. quod seu quas eidem
Mercatores penes se habent before continetur. Nos praedict. concessionem et
traditionem ratas habentes et gratas, eisdem praedict. mercatoribus pro nobis
et haeredibus nostris inviolabiter concedimus, ac etiam in omnibus confirmamus.
Promittentes nos praedict. concessionem et traditionem, prout in praenominato
instrumento, seu literis sunt contentae, warrantizare, protegere, seu defendere
contra omnes, pro nobis et heredibus nostris. In cujus rei testimonium has
literas nostras eisdem Mercatoribus fieri fecimus patentes. Dat apud London 11
die Iunii. An. r. n. 47. his Testibus Dom. Rico. rege Aleman. fratre nostro.
Humfred. de Bohun. Com. Hereford et Essex, Tho. Basset Justic. nostr. Angl.
Hugh le Bygod. John Mansel These. Ebor. Rob. Waller, Ebulone de Montibus, Perro
de Essevel, et aliis.

This year some Jews were indicted before the Justices itinerant, and
imprisoned and outlawed for receiving stolen goods, as this Record informs us
to stop the Utlawry.

Claus. 47. H. 3. m. 12. etc. Pro Manuel^. Judeis.
Rex Vic. Sussex salutem. Cum Manuel de Maford et Jacob fill. Benedict. Iudei
nuper indictati coram Justice. nostris ultimo itinerantibus in com. tuo de
receptamento latrocinium se reddiderunt ad prisonam nostram, parati inde
secundum legem and consuetudinem regni nostri stare juri, and tibi preceptum
fuit ab eisdem Justice. nostris ipsos de Comitatu in commit. propter contumaciam
suam exigi, and praeter modum utlagari. Tibi praecipimus, quod ab utlagaria in
ipsos promulgata desistas, and bona eorundem Iudeorum ad opus nostrum
reservari, and salvo custodiri fac. donec aliud inde tibi praecipimus. Test
Rege apud Westminster. 14 die Febr.

King Henry, Anno 48. made this Proclamation to prevent all violence against
the Jews in Winton, and other places, and preserve them and theirs under his
peace and protection, as well as his other subjects, threatening loss of life
and Member to all such as should hurt or molest them, as this Patent manifests,
committing them to the protection of 26 of the chief Citizens of Winchester by
this Patent.

Pat. 48. H. 3. is. 11. Pro Judeis Winton.
Rex Willo. Fromund (and to 25 more there named) Ci^ibus suis Winton, salutem.
Cum di^ina cooperante gratia, Pax in regno nostro or^inata sit, firmata, et
ubique per ipsum regnum proclamata; ac de consilio Baronum nostrorum provisum
sit, et ex part nostra, et ipsorum public sit inhibitum, ne quis sub poena
exhaeredationis et periculo vitae et membrorum super aliquem currat, nec
homicidia vel incendia, de predationes vel roberias, seu alia hujusmodi faciat
enormia, nec cuiquam damnum inferat contra pacem nostram. Cumque Judeos nostros
Winton in nostram defensionem et protectionem specialem suscepimus, una cum
familiis, rebus, et omnibus possessionibus suis, et ad tuitionem, et majotem
securitatem eorum, vos de consilio Baronum nostrorum ad custodiam ipsorum
Judeorum assignavimus. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quatenus per totam
Civitatem praedict. ex part nostra, et Baronum nostrorum praedict. public
proclamari, et firmiter inhiberi faciatis, ne quis sub periculo vitae et
membrorum praedictis Judeis vel suis fami^iis in personis vel rebus suis
inferat dampnum, molestiam vel gravamen. Et vos ipsi Judeos ipsos, familias
suas, res, terras, et omnes possessiones eorum infra praedictam civitatem, et
extra, quantum in vobis est manuteneatis, protegatis, et defendatis, talem ad
hoc diligentiam apponentes, quod vos inde merito commendare possumus. Test
Rege apud St. Paulum, London 14 die Iunii.

The King by the like Letters Patents committed the Jews of Nothampton to 26
Burgesses of the Town, to be guarded and protected by them, whose names are
specified in the Patent, which recites: Pat. 48. H. 3. m. 12. Pro Iudeis
Northamp.
Cum propter turbationem nuper habitam in regno nostro, et maxim propter
conflictum nuper habitum apud Northampt. Judei Northampt. ad cast. fugerunt,
and ibidem pro timore moram hactenus fecerunt Castrum illud exire non audentes,
de quo jacturam non modicam jam incurrimus, ac sedata turbatione praedicta, et
inspirante gratia divina, pax inter Nos et Barons nostros ordinata sit ac
firmata, ac in regno nostro public proclamata; propter quod de consilio nostro
providimus, quod eidem Judei redeant in villam praedict. ibidem moraturi, sicut
prius morari consueverunt. Ac etiam ad tuitionem et majorem securitatem
eorundem, vos ad custodiam eorum assignavimus. Vobis mandamus, quod Judeos
illos, et omnes possessiones suas manuteneatis, etc. ( as in the former.)
Cyrographariis autem, et custodibus Archae Judeorum in villa praedicta cum opus
fuerit consulentes sitis et auxiliantes ad ea facienda et exequenda quae ad
officium suum pertinent in eadem villa, pro quo diligentiam vestram merito
commendare debeamus. T. R. apud St. Paulum 2 die Iun.

The like Pat. 48. H. 3. m. 12. Pro Judeis London.
Patents were sent Majori and Vicecomitibus London, reciting the public peace
proclaimed, as the first Patent does, th^n adding. Cumque Iudeos nostros
London, pro timore turbationis supradict. adhuc existentes apud Turrim nostram
London, in nostram defensionem et protectionem sufcipimus specialem, una cum
familiis, rebus, et omnibus possessionibus eorundem, ac ipsis Judeis
concessimus, quod ad domos suas infra Civitatem praedict. libere redire, and
eas secure et absque aliquo impedimento inhabitare possint, sicut prius ante
turbationem praedict. fieri consueverunt. Vobis de consilio Baronum praedict.
mandamus firmiter injungentes, quatenus per totam civitatem praedict. ex part
nostra, et Baronum ipsorum public proclamari et firmiter inhiberi faciatis, ne
quis sub periculo vitae et membrorum praed. Judeis et familis suis in personis
vel rebus eorum inferat dampnum, molestiam, vel gravamen. Vos autem eos de
caetero infra Civita^em praed. ^quam extra quantum in vobis est, manuteneatis,
protegatis, et defendatis, pro quo vos specialiter recommendare debeamus. T. R.
apud St. Paulum London, 11 die Iunii.

The like Patents were granted to most other Towns where the Jews resided, who
by reason of the late troubles fled into Castles to preserve their lives and
good^ from plunder during the ci^il wars between the King See Stowes Chron. p.
220. The first Demurrer. Edit. 2. p. 35.
and Barons, wherein many of them were pillaged of all their estates, and some
killed.

In the Fine Roll of 48 H. 3. I find sundry releases made by the King to
diverse English men of the Fees and debts belonging unto Jews, running in this
unusual form.

Fines 48. H. 3. m. 1. See Fines 49. H. 3. m. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Where are more
presidents like this
Rex Justic. ad custod. Judeorum assign. salutem. Sciatis Nos de gratia nostra
speciali remisisse di^ilectis et fidelibus nostris Rogero Bertram (and sundry
others there named) Ut nobis devotiores, et ad obsequium nostrum promptiores
efficiantur, omnia feoda, in quibus ipsi aut eorum antecessor. teneb.
quibuscunque Judeis nostris Angliae. Pardonavimus etiam prefatis R. etc.
fidelibus nostris praedict. omnes usuras et poenas in quibus ipsi vel sui
antecessores eisdem Iudeis per cartas suas tenean^ur. Ita videlicet quod in
pecunia quam praedict. R. etc. a prefatis Judeis mutuo ceperunt, eisdem Judeis
reddere teneantur, super qua quidem pecunia prefat. R. etc. sacramento suo
coram vobis prestito, et aliorum fide dignorum ad hoc juratorum credantur. Et
ideo vobis mandamus quod omnes Iudeos qui in regno nostr. existunt pres^ntes,
vel haetedes eorum qui mortui sunt, quibus iidem fideles nostri in aliquo
debito tenebantur certis diebus et locis coram vobis venite, et omnes cartas,
per quas omnibus Judeis Angliae tenebantur in aliquibus debitis vel feodis, ab
Archis Cyrograph. Judeorum extrahi, et eisdem liberari, et ipsos de predict.
feodi^ de ^^^is et usuris quietos esse, et sic fieri et irrotulari sac^^t^^.
Ita tamen, quod dict. pecunia sic a Iudeis praefat. mutuo accepta, praedicti R.
etc. eisdem Iudeis ad rationabiles terminos, quos eis assignabitis
satisfaciant, Ita quod dicta pecunia sic mutuata non usuret, et si praefati
Judei, vel aliqui ex ipsis fuerint mortui, ita quod catalla sua sunt nostra
escaeta, tunc praedicti R. etc. nobis inde satisfaciant ad Scac. nostrum. T. R.
apud Westminster. 28 die October. The like I find to this in Fines 49 H. 3. m. 6

Anno 49 H. 3. I meet with this Record about a Charter supposed to be forged by
a Jew.

Claus. 49. H. 3. m. 4. De quibusdam Judeis habendis coram Just. ad Custod.
Iud: assign.
Rex Majori Northam: salutem. Cum ad suggestionem tuam. Johannem fill: Eustach.
etc. Isaac de Burd, etc. Iudeos pro quadam carta falsa confecta per te
arrestari, et salv^ ^t custodiri praecipimus, et Th. de Brampton, etc.
manuceperunt coram nobis, ad habendum praefat. Johan. etc. coram Justice:
nostris ad custod: Iud assignat. a die etc. ad standum recto si quis versus eos
inde lonqui voluerit. Tibi praecipimus, quod praefat. Iudeos in propria persona
tua habeas coram praefat. Justic. die praedict. ad standum recto de crimine
supradicto. Et hoc sicut te et omnia tua diligis, nullatenus omittas, et habeas
ibi cartam praedictam, et hoc B^eve. T. R. apud Hereford, 12 die Maii. There is
the like writ for others in the same case.

The same year this writ issued to seize all the Jews and Judaism into the
Kings hand, formerly granted to Pr. Edward, because he had joined with some
Rebels against the King, allowing some, displacing other of his Officers, and
commanding them not to obey the Prince.

Claus. 49 H. 3. m. 4. De Judaismo capiend. in manum Regis.
Rex Thesaur. et Camerariis suis salutem. Quia Edwardus fill. n. cui Judaismum
nostrum s^cut nostis, ad tempus commissimus, nostro prorsus ac Magnatum et
fidelium nostrorum spreto consilio, subito et ex inopinato jam recessit ad
quosdam rebels nostros se transferendo, qui nos gravare, et pacem Regni
nostri perturbare proponunt, dictum Iudaismu^ capimus in manum nostram. Et ideo
vobis mandamus, quod assumpto vobiscum Magistro Thom. de Cantelupo Cancellario
nostro si adhuc Londini existat, Tallagium nuper assessum super Iudaismum
predict. per Tho. de Irpergue ad hoc assignat. per praedict. fill. nostr.
videri, et illud ad opus nostrum colligi, et salvo custodiri fac. donec aliud
inde praeciperimus. Adam vero de Winton socium Roberti de Crep: ab officio suo
amoveatis, et loco ejus Will. de Hachelbeche substituatis. Ita, quod idem
Willielmus et Robertus officio Iusticiariae Iudeorum amodo intendant, donec
aliter inde duxerimus ordinand. et eisdem Justice. firmi^er injungatis ex part
nostra, ne praefato fill. nostro, vel suis, in aliquo intendant, et quod ab
omnibus Iudeis Angliae hoc idem scire faciant. Et hoc non omittatis. T. R. apud
Hereford; 30 die Maii.

In the Fine rolls of Ann. 49. The King pardons R^^^ de la Hyde his debts, etc.
whose lands and tenements were not sufficient to satisfy the Debts for which
they were obliged to sundry Jews there named.

Fines 49 H. 3. m. 1.
Omnia debita, usuras, poenas et feoda, in quibus tenetur Iudeis praedictis in
aliquibus debitis, usuris, poenis vel feodis ab Archis Cyrograph: Iudeorum
extrahi, et praef. Rico. liberari, et ipsum de predict. debitis, usuris, poenis
et feodis quietum esse, et sic fieri et irrot. faciant. T. R. apud Hereford 19.
die Iunii. Per Regem et Justic.

The like to this and the former in Fines 48. I find frequent in this Fines 49
H. 3 m. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Fine roll: to above 20 other several persons, after the battle of Jews
therein specified.

In 50 H. 3. Claus. 50 H. 3. m. 1.
Mandatum est Th. Bacun, quod rotulos et brevia Iudaismum tangentia, quae sunt
in custodia sua, liberet Justice. ad custod. Iudeor. assign. custodiend. quamdiu
Rex aliud inde praeceperit.

This year the King writing to Hagino a Jew of London, to deliver monyes of the
Merchants of Flanders there arrested and left in his Custody, begins thus. Rex
Hagino fill. Mossei Iudeo London, statum vitae melioris, Cum per literas
nostras, Claus. 50 H. 3. m. 2.
etc.

Ibidem, Pro Aaron le Blund Judeo.
The same year the King granted to Aaron le Blund, a Jew, liberty to sue for his
debts, which he formerly pardoned his debtors, Non obstante pardonatione nostra
de debitis dicti Rogeri praefato Judaeo facto.

The Jews sustaining much loss by the Barons and Kings enemies, I find this
recital thereof by the King, who granted them other Jews debts for their
relief, as this and other presidents manifest.

Claus. 50 H. 3. m. 5. Pro Hagio fill. Mossei Judeo.
Rex Justice. suis ad custod, etc. Soiatis quod pro dampnis et jacturis quae
Haginus fill. Mossei Iudeus London, pro nobis sustinuit in turbatione habita in
regno nostro, Nos in auxilium relevationis suae status, dedimus ei 50 lib. in
quibus Willielmus de Dyve defunctus per cartam suam tenebatur Jacobo fill.
Ladonis Iudeo London, nuper defuncto, cujus debita et catalla devenerunt ad
manum nostram ratione mortis ejusdem. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod praedict 50
lib. secundum consuetud. Judaismi nostri leuari, et eidem Hagino, una cum carta
supradicta liberari faciatis de dono nostri. T. R. apud Westminster. 1 die April. The
like grant of another Jews debt upon the same account, was this year made to
Elyas, son of Moss a Jew, to be allowed in his Tallages and other debts to
the King.

Ibid. m. 10. The King pardons Peter de Novel and Andrew de Winton the debts
they owed to Jews.

The Jews in London both before and after the battle of Jews, being spoiled of
their houses and goods there during the Civil wars, by the Kings Enemies and
the Barons then in arms against them; he thereupon in the 50 year of his reign,
enabled them to sue for, and recover their goods and houses again, (except such
as himself had sold and disposed of) and restored them to the self-same
condition they were in before the battle of Jews, by this ensuing writ and
grant.

Claus. 50 H. 3. m. 10. Pro Judeis Angliae de statu suo recuperando.
Rex Hugoni filio Ottonis Custodi Civitatis suae, London, salutem. Cum pro
variis dampnis et injur^is Iudeis nostris Angliae in turbatione regni nostri ab
Inimicis nostris illatis, de Consilio Magnatum nostrorum qui sunt de Consilio
nostro, Concessimus omnibus et singulis Iudeis praedictis, quod ipsi quoad bona
et possessiones suas recuperanda sint in eodem statu quo fuerunt die conflictus
de Jews; ac quidem inimici nostri in turbatione in Regno nostro habita domos
Iudaeorum nostrorum London in eadem Civitate tam ante bellum praedictum quam
post occupaverint: Ac etiam quidam deorum praedictorum pro timore turbationis
praedictae domos suas in eadem Civitate reliquerunt, et ad alias parts se
transtulerunt: Nos eisdem Judaeis gratiam uberiorem facere volentes,
concessimus et reddidimus singulis Iudaeis nostris London, omnes domos suas
praedictas ante bellum praedictum, et post bellum illud occasion turbationis
praedictae occupatas and detentas; exceptis Domibus quorundam Judaeorum
praedictorum London, quas in eadem Civitate quibuscunque prius concessimus. Et
ideo vobis mandamus, quod praefatis Iudaeis de Domibus suis praedictis in
quorumcunque manibus existunt, plenam seifinam habere facias, sicut praedictum
est. T. R. apud Westminster. 14 dii Novembris.

In the Patents 50 H. 3. m. 6, 8, 20, 25, 31, 34.41.
Patent Rolls of this year, the King grants the Houses and Debts of several
Jews escheated to him by their deaths or othewise, to several Jews,
impoverished dampnis et gravaminibus sibi ad inimicis nostris illatis tempore
turbationis habita in regno nostro, etc. volens eis gratiam facere specialem.

Besides, upon this account I find this general Patent and Proclamation of
protection for the Jews of London.

Pat. 50 H. 3. m. 21. Pro Judeis London.
Rex Rich. de Ceual (and 45 more there named) civibus London salutem. Quia
Iudei nostri London tempore turbationis in regno nostro jacturas quamplurimas
et enormia sustinuerunt, nos d^spendiis et jacturis eorum compatientes ipsos,
terras, res, domos, reddi^us, et omnes eorum possessiones in defensionem et
protectionem nostram suscepimus specialem. Nos ad eorum Majorem tuitionem et
securitatem custodiam e^ protectionem vos assignantes. Et ideo vobis mandamus
firmiter injungentes quatenus per totam civitatem praedict. London public
proclamari fac. ne quis sub periculo vitae et membrorum praedict. Iudaeis in
personis vel rebus suis dampnum inferat molestiam, aut gravamen et vos ipsi
Iudeos illos, familias suas, terras, vel redditus, domos, et omnes possessiones
suas, et eorum bona infra civitatem praed. et extra quantum in vobis est
manuteneatis, protegatis et defendatis, non inferentes, etc: (as in the former)
Et si quid etc. talem diligentiam apponentes ut vobis, etc. donatur per
vicecomitem T. R.

Consimiles literae habent Iudei Cantebr. Ballivis et probis hominibus Cant.
directae durant, ut supra.

Pat. 50. H. 3. m. 38.
This year the King granted the custody of the Jews Rolls, and a salary for it
by this patent.

Pat. 50. H. 3. m. 21. De Rotulis et Brevibus Iudaismi commissis.
Rex omnibus, etc. Sciatis quod commissimus dilecto Clerico nostro Tho, Wabrun.
rotulos et brevia nostra Iudaismi nostri custodiend. quamdiu nobis placuerit,
ita quod capiat per annum ad Scac. nostr. 10 lib. vid. 100 s. ab Scac. nostr.
St. Michis. et 100s. ad Scac. nostr. Pasche ad se sustentandum in officio
praedicto quamdiu fuerit in eodem.

The same year the King by Pat. 50. H. 3. m. 34.33.38, 41, 42, 44.
Patent granted leave to sundry Jews, presently to sue for, and levy their
debts upon their Creditors, and distrain them for them, and likewise that he
will not release, pardon nor respite the debts due to them from sundry
particular persons expressed in the Patents, in form like those already cited
elsewhere.

Yea I find this Writ for electing a new Cyrographer in the place of one that
was dead, issued this year.

Pat. 50. H. 3. m. 46.
Rex Constab. castri Winton et Ballivis ejusdem villae, salutem. Quia Petrus
Westman Christianus unus Cyrogr. Arch. Iud. Winton diem clausit extremum, ut
rex accepit. Vobis mandamus, quod per Sacramentum 12. tam Christianorum quam
Iudeorum villae praedict. eligi fac. loco praedict. Pet. unum alium Coffrarium,
qui praestito sacramento sicut moris est. officio illo de caetero intendat, et
nomen ejus Regi scire fac. T. R. apud Cant. 26 die Oct.

And this recital of the Kings grant of his Iudaisme to the Prince, and a
confirmation of his grant to a Jew.

Pat. 50. H. 3. m. 42. Pro Hagino Judeo London.
Rex omnibus, etc. Sciatis quod cum dudum commiss rimus dilect. primog. nostro
Judaismum nostrum Angliae, habendum ad certum terminum, cum omnibus ad
Judaismum illum pertinentibus; item quod idem fill. noster omnia inde medio
tempore illo perciperet Judeorum, tam ratione mortis Iudeorum, aliunde quam
eodem modo quo nos percipere debuissemus, si Iudaismum praedict, in manu nostra
tenuissemus, et dictus fill. noster tertiam partem omnium catal. et debitorum
quae fuerunt Deulecres filius Aaron qui tunc in fata concessit, ad ipsum filium
nostr. ratione mortis e^usdem Deulecres, sicut moris est in Iudaismo
pertinentem occasion nostrae concessionis antedict. dederit et concesserit
Hagio fill. Moss Iudeo London, una cum custodia catal. et debitorum pertinent.
ad pueros and haeredes ejusdem Deulacres de catallis et debitis supradictis.
Nos praedict. donationem and concessionem ratam habemus and acceptam. Volentes
etiam eidem Hagino gratiam facere specialem, concedimus eidem quod de debitis
antedictis extentam, vel etiam prorogationem seu quietantiam, aliquam vel donum
non faciemus infra quinquennium a tempore confect, presentium. In cujus, etc.
T. R. apud Westminster. 26 die November.

In 51 H. 3. I find this grant to diverse plundered Jews of Lincoln, and other
parts to recover their pawns which they could prove though their Charters were
lost or not extant on Record.

Pat. 51. H 3. m. 10. Pro diversis Iudeis.
Rex di^ectis et fidelibus suis custodibus pacis in Com. Linc. North. Ebor. and
Vic. eorundem Com. et Vic. Norf. Suff. et Rutland, et omnibus Ballivis et
fidelibus nostris quos, etc. salutem. Volentes Manfro (and to sundry other Jews
there named) Iudeis Linc. et aliis Iudeis nostris ejusdem Civit. pro dampniset
gravaminibus eis ab inimicis nostris illatis in insultu habito apud Linc: nec
non et in turbatione regni nostri gratiam facere ad praesens. Concessimus quod
Vadia sua nominata in Cyrogr. inter ipsos et debit. suos confect. de debitis
quae sibi rationabiliter monstrari poterint, in quorumcunque manibus existent
vadia illa in manus suas secundum legem et consretudinem Iudaismi nostri
seisientur, donec debita illa levantur et persolventur eisdem sicut praedict.
est; nisi debitores illi rationabiliter monstrare poterint, quod de debitis
illis debent esse quieti. In cujus, etc. T. R. apud Windsore.

Pat. 51. H. 3. m. 30.
The like Patent he made to Aaron the son of Lion le Blund a Jew of London this
year upon the same grounds, being plundered by the King enemies in London and
elsewhere.

Pat. 52. H. 3. m. 6. Pro Hagio fill. Magistri Mossei Judeo London.
In 52 H. 3. the King confirmed the grant of Sam. a Jew of York to Hagino a Jew
of London, of certain houses in York, and grants to him further: pro nobis et
haeredibus nostris sibi et haeredibus suis, quod supra domos praedict. nulla
fiat districtio pro aliquibus debitis in quibus Aaron (the father of Samuel)
nobis tenebatur die quo in fata concessit. T. R. 30 die Aug. He likewise Pat.
52. H. 3. m. 13, 16, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36.
ratified the grant of a Jew of Wilton of a debt due to him to Tho. de Irpeign,
with the grants of several houses in Winton by sundry Christians and Jews to
Benedict a Jew of Winton, Pardons a fee to a Jew, and grants some Jews that had
suffered for him leave to levy their debts on their debtors lands.

There is likewise Pat. 52. H. 3. m. 26.
mention of what moneys were delivered into the Kings Wardrobe this year out
of the profits of his Judaisme, and an acquittance thereof to his Justices.

This year the Pat. 52. H. 3. m. 34.
King granted to Hagino fill. Mossei, and some other Jews, that they should be
exempted and quieti de omnibus auxiliis et Tallagiis super ipsis assidendis, et
de quibuscunque debitis in quibus nobis tenentur, Claus. 52. H. 3. m. 3.
from the feast of St. Andrew usque in terminum proximo sequent. T. R. apud
Clarendon 27 die November.

Claus. 52. H. 3. m. 4.
In the Clause Rolls this year I find fines made by the Jews to the King, to
enjoy the goods and debts of other Jews; Ibid. m. 6.
Prohibitions to the Justices i^inerant, not to suffer any Jews to be vexed or
prosecuted before them; cum sicut nostis Iudei Angliae, coram aliquibus.
Justice. nostr. de aliquibus Judaismum nostr. tangentibus non debean^ placitare
vel respondere, nisi coram Justice. nostris ad custod. Iud. assignatis. A grant
to some Jews not to pardon acquit prorogue, or extend their debts for 5 years,
with a confirmation thereof, and repeal of all subsequent grants to the
contrary. Ibidem 10.
And a Grant of one Jews debt to another, and power to levy it, notwithstanding
any former pardons and releases thereof.

In the Plea Rolls of Hilary Term, Anno 52 H. 3. in the Treasury of the
Exchequer, there are several Legal suits. and proceedings before the Justices
of the Jews in the Exchequer, some whereof I shall transcribe.

Placita Hilarii Anno 52 H. 3. rot 5
Decanus et Capitulus Linc. per suum attornatum opt. se 4 die versus Mosseum de
Warwic. de placito, quod injuste ab eis exigit debitum per quandam cartam
falsam, et contra Assisam Iudaismi confectam, ut dicunt; et ipse non venit. Et
praeceptum fuit Constabulario, quod ipsum attachiari faciat, ita qued haberet
corpus e^us coram Justiciariis, etc. Upon which the Constable returned, Quod
dictus Mosseus Non est inventus, etc. Et similiter praeceptum est Vicecomiti
Linc. quod attachiari faciat, ando.

In this Roll there are diverse Actions against Jews, De Placito acquietationis
debiti, etc. to discharge them of Debts, and to deliver up their Charters,
Pawnes and Morgages, pretended to be discharged, released, pardoned, or
satisfied.

Ibid. rot. 6. in dorso.
Done de Walingford petit versus Henricum Cobbe, custodem haeredis et terrarum
Nicholai Cuppins medietatem unius Messuagii in parochia Sancti Petri in Winton,
quae quondam fuit Dyay viri sui; unde ipse Dyay vir ipsius ipsam secundum Legem
et consuetudinem Iudaismi dotavit, etc.

Ibid. rot. 7.
In the 7th Roll there is a Confirmation of the Kings of certain Debts and
Annuities assigned by Hagino Son of Moses, a Jew, to Adam of Stratton, and this
ensuing Writ to the Sheriff of Essex and elsewhere, to discharge one Peter
Fitz-Roger of all Debts due to the Jews, after proclamation made in the Schools
and Synagogues of the Jews two or three Sabbaths, and not suing for them within
a prefixed time, after such Proclamations returned.

Praeceptum fuit Vicecomiti Essex, quod clamari faciat per Scolas Judeorum
Colecester, per duo vel tria Sabbata, si aliquis Judeus vel Judea aliquod
Debitum exigere poterit de Rogero filio Petri, filii Gilberti, de debito suo
proprio, vel, etc. tunc essent ad compotum. Et Vicecomiti mandatur tam Litera
Latina quam Hebraica, quod nullus Judeus vel Judea aliquod Debitum exiget de
predicto Rogero, etc. Eodem modo praeceptum fuit Constabulario Castri Norwic.
and others, by writs both in Latin and Hebrew; and the certificate returned
upon these writs was made both in Latin and Hebrew; The usual form in that age
in such cases.

In like manner, Praeceptum fuit Constabulario Turris London, quod clamari
faciat per Scolas Judaeorum London, per duo vel tria Sabbata, si aliquis Iudeus
vel Judea aliquod Debitum exigere poterit, etc. that then they should come in
ad computandum, etc. and the returns of them are in Hebrew and Latin.

In the same Roll there is a recital of a Charter made by the King, dilecto
fratri et fideli nostro Willielmo de Valence, et haeredibus vel assignatis, of
an Annuity of 50 marks yearly, wherein Peter Fitz Matthew was bound to Aaron
ben Abraham a Jew of London, usque in finem saeculi, (the usual form of the
Jews charters, in cases of fee simple) which Annuity the Jew had given to the
King. In the end of the Charter the King warrants the gift, Secundam Assisam
Iudaismi.

In the dorse of the same Ibid. rot. 7. in dorso.
Roll, there is a Confirmation by the King of an Assignment of Annuities and
Debts, to William Charles, by Sampson Son of le Mestre a Jew; and a Writ
Iusticiariis ad custodiam Iudaeorum assignatis, to inroll the Patent, dated ad
Clarendon: with diverse other writs of that nature.

In the 8 Roll * of the Pleas that year, there is this writ to the Sheriff.

Ibidem Rot. 8.
Henricus Dei gratia, etc. Vicecomiti Essex salutem. Constat Justiciariis
nostris ad custodiam Judeorum assignatis per inspectionem Rotulorum de
Scaccario nostro, scilicet, quod Aaron filius Duessad vendidit et demi^^t
dilecto et fideli nostro G. de Clare, Com. Glouc. et Hereford, unum debitum de
20 l. de feodo, sub nomine Willielmi de Bernham, et Magistri Elye Iudei,
together with other Debts, etc. Et quod praedictus Aaron habuit seisinam per
praeceptum nostrum de terris and tenementis quae fuerunt praedictorum.
VVillielmi et Roberti (another of the Debtors) in Borham, pro debitis
praedictis, quam quidam seisinam praefatus Comes habuit per praeceptum nostrum,
occasion venditionis praedictae de terris et tenementis praedictis. Ac
postmodum Iohanna quae fuit uxor Will. de Berneham, et Johannes Anger in Curia
nostra coram Nobis recuperaverunt seisinam de praedictis terris and tenementis
per Judicium Curiae nostrae praedictae. Et quia eadem seisina sic prefatis
Iohannae et Iohanni adjudicata, etc. nihil debet praejudicare predicto Comiti
quin secundum Assisam et Consuet udinem Judaismi nostri habeat talem seisinam
de terris et tenetis praedictis qualem prius habuit occasion dictorum
debitorum ut predictum est, Tibi praecipimus quod seisinam quam praefatus Comes
prius habuit de terris et tenementis predictis, eidem rehabere facias, etc.

In the same Roll there is this Inquisition made upon the Murder of a Jew slain
at Oxford.

Ibidem rot. 8.
Praeceptum fuit Constabulario Castri Oxoniae et Cyrographo Christiano et Judeo
Archae Cyrograph: ejusdem; quod per Sacramentum 12 Iudeorum inquirant, quae
bona et catalla Iacobus Baseni de Oxon: Judeus Oxon interfectus, habuit die quo
interfectus fuit. Eodem modo preceptum est Ballivis Oxon: quod per Sacramentum
12 Christianorum inquirant quae catalla dictus Iacobus habuit die quo
interfectus fuit, etc.

Which will well explain the Articles in the ancient Eyres, and the manner of
Inquiry and proceedings thereon, See Tottles Magna Charta f. 151. and The first
part of A short De^urrer, Edit. 2.^.48.56.
De catallis Iudaeorum occisorum, etc.

In the Plea Rolls of the same year and Term there is this record, manifesting,
that all Debts and Stars of converted Jews belonged to the King.

Placita Hill. An. 52. H. 3. rot 9.
Iospin fill. Solomon de Merlebridge shows to the Court that Iocette his Sister
was married to Salom filius Lumbard. of Kirkland: Et quod ipsa habuit in Archa
Cyrogr. Merlebridge, unum Cyrographum de 32 marcis sub nomine suo et Hugonis
Lovel Rectoris Ecclesiae de Rudburn; that Iocette became a convert Christian,
and then did Solomon alter the Deed in his own name; Quae quidem Carta fuit
Domini Regis, per conversionem praedictae Jocettae, et quod hoc totum sit
verum, obligat omnia bona etc. (out of spite to his Sister for that she was
turned Christian to make her forfeit this debt) Et preceptum est Vice-comiti,
quod venire faciat praedictum Hugonem et Cyrographum Christianum Archae
Cyrographorum Merlebrige, et 6. Christianos de Merlebrig etc. Et postea ipse
Iospinus non est prosecutus. Ideo omnia catalla dicti Iospini capiantur in
manum Domini Regis, prout ipse obligavit, etc. A just requital of his malice.

Ibidem. m 9.
Praeceptum fuit Cyrograph. Christianis et Iudaeis Archae Cyrogr. Norwic. quod
ad Archam accedant, etc. and there take out 20 l: D^bt. for Edward the Prince
due unto him, etc.

Ibidem dors.
Praeceptum est Cyrograph: Christian. and Judeis Archae Cyrogr. Norwic. quod ad
Archam praedictam accedant, and there take out all the Charters, Pawns, and
Rolls belonging to Abraham a few of Norwich for the Kings use, because he had
not paid his Tallage of ten pounds to the King.

Rot. 10, 11, and 12. of the Pleas of Hill. 52 H. 3. consist for the most part
of Stars of the Jews: some whereof are assignments of Debts, and Sales of
Annuities by Jews to Adam de Stratton, Simon de Zouch, and other Christians,
ratified by the Kings confirmation: Others of them, releases of Debts by way of
Acquittance. These Stars usually began thus: Solomon de London Judaeus,
cegnovit per Starrum suum, etc.

In the 53 year of King Henry the 3. a certain Jew abetted by the other Jews,
in high con^empt of Christ crucified, in the solemn Procession at Oxford on
Ascension day, threw down and brake in pieces the Cross that was carried
before the University in Procession, and then fled. Whereupon by the Kings
special command all the in Oxford were apprehended, and their goods secured,
till they out of their own goods and chattels erected a new standing beautiful
high Cro^se, adorned with guilt Pictures of Christ and our Lady, in the place
where this wickedness was perpetrated, and made another rich portable silver
gilded Cross, to be carried before the University of the Masters and Scholars
of Oxford in their Processions, which were to be made by a time prefixed, for
the public manifestation of the honor of God in this behalf, as these Records
at large inform us, though not mentioned by any of our Historians.

Claus. 53. H. 3. m. 12. De duabus Crucibus de bonis et Catallis Judeorum Oxon.
faciendis.
Rex Vic. Oxon. salutem. Cum Judaei nostri Oxon. nobis adhuc non responderint de
corpore illius Judei qui in vituperium crucifixi Crucem in solem^ni processione
die A^centionis Domini prostra vit et fregit, per quod tibi pluries
praecipimus, quod omnes Ju^eos praedictos sine dilatione caperes, et salvo
custodires, et quod non permitteres eos aliquam administrationem habere de
bonis et catallis eorum donec sufficientem tibi prestarent securitatem, quod
sumptibus suis quandam Crucem marmoream pulchram et altam, been et decenter
incisam et pollitam cum imagine crucifixi in capite ex part una, et cum
Imagine beatae Virginis cum filio suo ex part altera, convenienter sitis, et
auro depictis, una cum causa predicta manifest superscripta, in loco ubi
scelus praedictum extitit perpetratum. Et quandam aliam Crucem portatilem
argenteam been et subtiliter et decenter fabricatam, et deauratam, cum hasta
sine baculo, ejusdem magnitudinls cum crucibus honorificis quas Archiepiscopi
coram se faciunt deportari, deferend. ante Universitatem Magistrorum et
Scolarium Oxon. deferenda in processionibus suis facerent, Et quod provid. quod
pecunia ad praemissa facienda, cito levaretur, et quod omnia praemissa cum omni
festinatione qua fieri posset expleres, et praedict. Crucem portatilem
Procuratoribus Universitatis praedictae custodiendam liberares; ita quod
praemissa fierent citra festum sancti Edwardi, quod erit in vigi^ia epiphan.
Dom. proximo futur. Ac tu quosdam de Judeis praedict. juxta mandatum nostrum
praedict. ceperis, qui ante captionem suam bona et catalla sua diversis
hominibus Civitatis praedictae liberaverunt, per quod tu mandatum nostrum
praedict. minus plene exequi potes Nos volentes, quod praemissa modis omnibus
fiant in forma praedicta, tibi praecipimus, quod assumptis tecum Majore villae
praedict. et Coffrariis Judeorum nostrorum ejusdem villae in praesentia
proborum et legalium hominum de vi^la praedicta per quo^ rei veritas melius
sciri poterit, diligenter inquiras ad quorum manus bon^ et catalla praedictorum
Judeorum de^enerunt, et qui ea ^enent, et de bonis et catallis praedictis in
quo rumcunque manibus existant omnia praemissa fieri facias per visum et
testimonium hominum praedictorum, pro^t melius et citius videris expedire, et
si necesse fuerit, bona et catalla praed. ad hoc vendas, et taliter te habea^
i^ hoc mandato nostr. exequendo, quod id quod ad honorem Dei intendimus, in hac
part mauitestetur public per effectum, et quod praemissa fiant sine mora, T.
R. apud Winton, 27 die December.

The money hereupon being levied on the Jews to make these Crosses, and the
King being informed that the marble Cross could not be erected in the place
prescribed, without damage and prejudice to some Burgesses of Oxford, whereupon
they purposed to ^rect it just over against the Jews Synagogue there. The King
and his Counsel concei^ing that place inconvenient, ordered it to be set up
within the place of M^rton College near the Church, and the other portable
Cross to be delivered to the Scholars thereof, to be kept in their said house,
by this Writ.

Claus. 53. H. 3. m. 10. De Cruce marmorea erigend. in placia Scholar. De
Merton. Oxon. de quadam cruce portatili eisdem liberand. in domo sua.
Rex Vic. Majori Ballivis and Coffrariis suis Oxon. salutem. Cum Judei nostri
Oxon. quandam Crucem quae in solempni processione die Ascentiones Dom. per
villam nostram Oxon. deferebatur, in vituperium crucifixi prostraverint ec
fregerint, per quod vobis alias praecipimus, quod sumptious Judeorum praedict.
fac. quandam Crucem marmoream pulchram et altam, been incisam et politam cum
imagine Crucifixi in capite ex part una, et cum Imagine beatae Virginis cum
filio suo ex part altero convenienter sitis, et auro depictis. una cum causa
praedicta manifest superscripta, in loco ubi scelus praedictum extitit
perpetratum, et quandam aliam Crucem portatilem argenteam been subtiliter et
decenter fabricatam et deauratam, cum hasta sine baculo, ejusdem magnitudinis
quam habent Cruces quas Archiepiscopi faciunt coram se deportari, ante
Universitatem Magistrorum et Scolarium Oxon. deferendam in Processionibus suis.
Et post modum intellexerimus, quod Crux praedicta marmorea in placea ubi scelus
praedictum extitit perpetratum sine dampno et nocumento quorundam. Burgensium
ejusdem villae erigi non posset, per quod vobis alias praecepimus, quod Crucem
praedictam in alia placea, ubi sine dampno et nocumento ejusdem villae fieri
possit, erigi faceretis, quod ex opposito Synagogae Iud, ejusdem villae facere
provid. ut accepimus nos p^rpendientes, quod hoc indecens et inhonest. esset,
de confilio Edwardi primogeniti nostri, et aliorum fidelium nostrorum, qui sunt
de concilio nostro, volumus, quod praedicta Crux marmorea erigatur in pracea
Scholarium de Merton, juxta Ecclesiam suam St. Joh. Baptistae in villa praed.
Et ideo vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod Crucem praedictam marmoream
modo praedicto factam in placea praedictorum Scholarium erigi, Et praedictam
Crucem portatilem praedictis Scholaribus liberari faciatis, custodiend. in domo
sua ibidem; Ita quod eam deferri facian in solempni Processione coram Magistris
et Scolaribus praedictis sicut praedictum est. Et hocnullatenus omittatis. T.R.
apud Westminster. 3 die Febr.

I have transcribed these two Records at large, for these reasons: 1. Because
they are not remembered by any of our Chronicles. 2ly. Because they fully
manifest the bold and desperate enmity of the Jews in that age against our
crucified Savior, in throwing down and breaking his Image, and representation
of his passion and Cross, even in the solemn Procession of all the University
and Scholars of Oxford on Ascension day. A very bold attempt in that Popish
age, which might have endangered all their lives. 3ly. Because they evidence
the Kings and his Councils zeal to punish this their malicious wickedness, and
to perpetuate the memory of it to all posterity, at the Jews own costs, by the
making of these two Crosses, on which their wickedness was to be engraven in
marble, that it might be had in perpetual memory. 4ly. Because it discovers the
malice of the Jews in hiding their goods, and conveying them to others hands,
to prevent the making and erecting of these Crosses. 5ly. Because they make
mention of the Jews Synagogue at Ox^. by name, which no other Records remember.
6ly. Because they fully discover the form of the Popish Crosses and Crucifixes
used in that age, which though made at the Jews cost, yet they held it both
undecent and dishonest to erect the standiig Cross ovet against the Jews
Synagogue, who were such inveterate enemies to Christ's Cross and passion. 7ly.
Because they make much for the Honor and Antiquity of the Univ^rsity of Oxford
my Nursing-Mother, and Stepmother to though superiors unjust commands.

This year the King for the fine of 1000 pound per annum paid to him by the
Commonalty of the Jews, granted them this exemption from Taxes for 3 years.

Claus. 53 H. 3. pars 1. m. 6. De fine facto p^r Jud^is Angliae. Pat. 53 H. 3.
m. 12.
Rex These. et Baron. suis de Scac. et Justic. suis ad custod: Iudeorum assign.
salutem. Sciatis, quod per finem mill librarum quam Communitas Judeorum
nostrorum Angliae nobiscum fecit, concessimus eisdem Judeis, quod a tempore
confectionis praesentium per triennium sequens respectum habeant de Tallagio
super ipsos assidendo, nisi nos, aut filii nostri juxta votum nostrum interim
proficiscuntur ad terram Sanctam, ad quod necesse habeamus super communitatem
predict. Tallagium assidendi. Ita quod de fine predict. reddant Nobis die
Martis prox. posi octabis Sanctae Trin. 500 marcas, et in festo Nati^. prox:
500 marc. and in festo Sancti Michaelis prox. sequenti residuas 500 marc. Et
ideo vobis mandamus, quod concessionem predict. in forma predict. coram vobis
irrotulari, et pecuniam predict. ad terminos illos de Communitate predicta ad
opus nostrum levari fac. Et quia pauperes Judei commun. predict. ratione sinis
praedic^i ultra quam facultates suae suppetant nimi^ exenerari possint, nisi
finis ille circumspecte et fideliter super eos assideatur, vobis mandamus quod
divitibus Iudeis nostris in contributione facienda ad finem predict. non
parcatur, et quod panperes Iudei ultra facultates suas non graventur. T. R.
apud Winds. 26 die Maii. Yet notwithstanding at the same time he granted this
writ to search their Chests and Charters.

Claus. 53 H. 3. pars 1. m. 6.
Rex dilectis et fideli suis Johan. de Westminster. et VValtero de Croce assignatis
ad Archas Iudeorum Angl: scrutandas salutem. Sciatis, etc. (relating the
agreement and fine aforesaid.) Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod omnia debitae in
Cartis, et aliis munimentis infra Archas predict. contenta irrotulari faciatis,
prout vobis injunximus viva voce. Et eum praemissa feceritis Coffrariis
Archarum predict. Archas illas liberetis cariandas et reponendas locis quibus
prius repositae extiterunt. Ita quod tam Christiani quam Iudei Archarum illarum
administrationem habeant, sicut alias habere consueverunt. T. R. ut supra.

This year the King called the Justices of the Jews to give an account of the
profits of his Judaism, as this record informs us.

Claus. 53. H. pars 1. m. 13. De Compot. Justic. ad Custod. Jud assign.
audiendo.
Rex These. et Baron. suis de Scac. salutem. Mandamus vobis, quod ad certum diem
quam duxeritis assignand. audiatis compotum Justice. nostr. ad custod Iudeorum
assignat. de exitibus e^usdem Iudaismi, a tempore quo dictis Justice. cust.
ejusdem Iudaismi commissimus custodiend usque ad festum Sancti Martini, an.
reg. n. 53. Et cum compotum predict. vobis reddiderint sicut predict: est,
nobis significatis qualiter nobis responderint, et in quibus finibus stetit
compotus eorundem. Mandavimus enim eisdem Justice, quod ad diem quem eis sciri
fac. coram vobis accedant cum Rotulis, Talliis, et aliis compotum suum
contingentibus, ad compotum suum predict. reddendum in forma praedict. T. R.
apud West. 8 die Nov. Per Regem et totum Consilium.

Et mandatum est prefatis Iusticiariis, quod coram prefat. Iusticiariis
accedant in forma predicta. Per Regem et totu^ Concilium.

This year the Jews without license straggling abroad and settling themselves in
diverse places where they had no chest, nor former residence, whereby they did
many mischiefs, and seduced and dishinherited many, thereupon the King issued
this writ to reduce them, and rectify these abuses.

Claus. 53. H. 3 pars 1. m. 8. dorso.
Rex Vic. Oxon et Berks salutem. Quia pro certo intelleximus, quod per Judeos in
diversis regni nostri partibus extra Civitates, Burgos et Villas, ubi nulla*
est Communitas Iudeorum, nec Cyrograph. Archa, sparsim habitantes in
contumeliam redemptionis nostri, et periculum animarum, nec non et multorum
exhaeredationem malificia plurima committuntur. Nos hujusmodi periculis ne
ulterius invalescerent volentes salubriter providere, tibi praecipimus firmiter
injungentes, quod per omnes Civitates, Burgos, and Villas in Balliva tua, ubi
expediens fuerit, ex part nostra public proclamari, and firmiter inhiberi
facias; Ne quis Judeus vel Judea per se alibi quam in Civitatibus, Burgis and
Villis ubi sit communitas Iudeorum, vel Cyrograph. Archa, super gravem
forisfacturam nostram de cetero presumat habitare. Et hoc sicut te et tua
diligis non omittas. T. R. apud Winds. 23 die Aprilis.

One of the principal things of Note concerning the Jews, this year, is the
Ordinance concerning the Jews, made by the King, by the advice and counsel of
Prince Edward his Son, and other honest men, for the relief of the
christians, touching the grievances they sustained in their Debts and Fees
morgaged to the Jews, and against the Jews assigning of their debts to others,
without the Kings special License first obtained. Which I find enrolled in
French in a very fair hand, in the Dorse of the Clause and Patent Rolls of 53
H. 3. and in the Red Bocke of the Exchequer in the Remembrancers Office, fol.
242. with this Title there prefixed to it.

Provisiones de Iudaismo liberatae ad Scaccarium, per Dominum Walterum de
Merton. Claus. 53. H. ^3 3. pars 1. m. 10 dorso, and Pat. 53. H. 3. m. 25. dors.
A la feste de Seint Hillayre del an du regne le Roy Henry fiz le Roy Johan.
cinquante tierz, purvieu est per memes le Roy, et per le conseil Sire Edward
son fiz eyne, et de ses autres prodes hommes, a lamendement de la Tere, Et
Reliever les Crestiens des Grevances que il ont eu par la Iuerye de Angletere,
Re totes les Dettes a Gyvues qe sont foez, et qe aparmenes sunt as meines de
Gyvus, et ne sont done a Crestien, ne vendu issint qe a vaunt ceo Jur. seent
confirm par le Roy, vel arroule al Eschekker, soent quites a Crestiens qe les
deyvent et a lour Eyres a tuz Jurs. Ensement les arrerages et les chartres par
la ou eles serrunt trouees des avaunt dites detres de foez, seent renduz a
Crestiens de ke les dettes sont dues ou a lour eyres. Et si par aventure acune
Chatre fust mise en huche ou troue des ore, mes null lu ne tyene. Et qe null Gyvu
de ceo jur en avaunt tell manner de debt de foe ne ne preigne, ne ne face. Et
ensement qe null Gyvu ceo Feo a Crestien ne venda de cest jur. en avaunt sur
forfeiture de vie et de chatel, ne Crestien ne lachate sur forfeiture de son
chatel et de son heritage.

Et ensement est purveu par lavant dit Roy, et par le conseil Sire Edward, et
des avaunt dit prodes homes, qe null Gyvu des ore mes ne puse vendre sa debt a
Crestien si il ne eyt primes le conge le Roy. Et si Crestien la chate par le
conge le Roy rien ne pusse plus aver ke le Roy ne averoit si la debt eust en
sa mein, ceo est a saver, le chatel qe est troue en chartre saunz Usure.

This Ordinance within few months after, Anno 54 H. 3. was commanded to be put
in execution by this writ to the Barons of the Exchequer, which thus recites it.

Claus. 54 H. 3. pars 1. m. 8. dorso.
Rex Baron. de Scac. salutem. Quia provisum est per Nos, et Edwardum
Primogenitum nostrum, et alios fideles de consilio nostro ad meliorationem
status terrae nostrae, et ad relevationem Christianorum a gravaminibus, quae
hactenus habuerunt per Judeos et Judaismum nostrum Angliae; Quod omnia debita
Judeorum quae sunt feoda, et quae die Sancti Hillarii An. r. n. 53. fuerunt in
manibus Judeorum, et quae non fuerunt data et vendita Christianis, ita quod
ante diem illum essent confirmata per nos, vel irrotulata in Rotulis nostris ad
Scac. nostrum Judeorum, quieta sint Christianis qui ea debent et eorum
heredibus imperpetuum, una cum arreragiis eorundem debitorum: et quod Chartae
de hujusmodi feodis ubicunque erunt inventae sint liberatae Christianis qui
talia feoda debent, vel eorum heredibus: et quod si forte aliqua hujusmodi
Carta sit inventa in Archa Cyrogr. vel. extra amodo nullius sit valoris. Et
quod nullus Judeus a predicto die inantea, talia debita de feodo recipiat vel
faciat. Et similiter quod nullus Judeus talia feoda Christianis vendat a
predicto tempore, super forisfacturam vitae suae, et catallorum ipsius, nec
Christianus ea emat super forisfacturam catallorum ipsius et suae haereditatis.
Vobis mandamus, quod omnia Cyrographa super hujusmodi feodis per quoscunque
confecta, coram vobis ad Scac. nostrum venire faciatis, et ea quae ante
praedict. diem Sancti Hillarii non fuerunt per nos confirmata, nec in rotulis
nostris ad Scac. nostrum Judeorum irrotulata, prout superius est expressum,
cancellari faciatis, et creditoribus, vel eorum haeredibus quieta reddatis.
T.R. apud Westminster. 14 die Maii.

The later part of this Ordinance (here omitted) against selling debts without
license, is frequently recited in special Licenses granted by the King to Jews
to sell their debts, the very next year after its making, and proved very
gainful to the King and his Officers.

Pat. 54. H. 3. pars. 1. m. 16. Pro Jacobo. Judeo, and Gals. de Lukenor.
Rex omnibus etc. salutem. Cum nuper de consilio Edwardi primogeniti nostri, et
aliorum fidelium regni nostri in praesentia nostra provisum esset, quod nullus
Judeus debitum aliquod, quod sibi a Cristiano debetur alicui vendere possit
nisi prius a nobis optenta super hoc licentia speciali: et si Christianus*
aliquis debitum hujusmodi de licentia nostra emat, nihil plus inde habeat, quam
nos haberemus si debitum illud esset in manu nostra, viz. Catallum quod
inventum est in Carta inde confecta SINE USURA. Nos Jacobo fill. Moss Iudeo
Oxon, dedimus licentiam vendendi Galf. de Lukenore debitum illud in quo Laur.
de Cheleston eidem Iudeo tenetur per cartam suam: Et etiam idem Galfredo
dedimus licentiam emendi idem debitum a praefat. Judaeo in forma provisionis
supradictae. In cujus, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 7. die Maii.

Claus. 54 H. 3. m. 10. in sc^ed. there is a writ, to discharge some debts of
the King out of the estate of a deceased Jew, directed to the Justices assigned
for their custody. In the Patent Rolls of this year, I find this recital of the
Kings grant of Aaron a Jew to his Son Edmond, and of Edmonds grant and
infranchisement of Aaron, and the Kings confirmation thereof.

Pat. 54 H. 3. m. 1. Pro Edmundo fill. Regis and Aaron Judeo.
Omnibus, etc. salutem. Inspeximus Cartam quam Edmundus fill. noster fecit Aaron
fill. Vynes in haec verba. Omnibus praesentem cartam visuris vel audituris,
Edmundus illustris Regis Angliae filius, salutem. Cum Dom. Rex pater noster
dederit et concesserit Nobis Aaron fill. Vynes Iudeum, cum omnibus bonis,
debitis, and catallis suis liberam et quietam de omnibus Tallagiis, auxiliis,
prestitis et demanmandis quibuscunque, ita quod eum, cum omnibus bonis and
catallis suis habeamus, et teneamus, cum omnibus libertatibus, legibus, et
consuetudinibus Iudaismi Angliae, prout hujusmodi concessio in praedicti patris
nostri carta super hoc confecta before continetur. Nos eidem Aaron Iudeo
specialem gratiam facere volentes, ipsum cum omnibus bonis debitis et catallis
suis tenore praesentium donavimus libertati, concedentes eidem quod ipse toto
tempore vitae suae liber sit de nobis ab omnibus Tallagiis, auxiliis, prestitis
and demandis, reddend. nobis quamdiu vixerit quolibet anno ad festum Pentecost.
unum par caelcarium de aurator. pro omnibus exactionibus and demandis. In cujus
rei testimonium sigillum nostrum fecimus apponi. Dat. Winton. 11 die Augusti
Anno Reg. Dom. patr. nostr. praedicti. 54. Nos autem praedictas donationem and
concessionem, etc. pro nobis and haeredibus nostris, quantum in nobis est,
concedimus et confirmamus sicut carta praedicta rationabiliter restatur. T. ut
supra.

Here the King grants a Jews person, with all his goods, debts, and chattels to
his Son, like an absolute Villain, and his Son, thus infranchiseth him
afterward by this Charter, which the King confirms, and is mentioned in 18 E.
1. * hereafter cited.

This grant of Aaron by his Son, is recited in this Patent Roll, with this
addition.

Pat. 54. H. 3. m. 7.
Volumus etiam quod idem Aaron habeat Archam ad reponend Cyrogr. sua loco quo
in terris ipsius filii nostri moraturus fuerit, secundum legem et consuetudinem
Judaismi nostri, et quod ministri nostri levari faciant eidem Iudeo debita sua
quae ei debentur vel debebuntur de debitoribus suis in regno nostro, prout
rationabiter monstrare poterit per Cyrogr. sua vel per literas patentes quod ei
in debitis illis teneantur, and prout de jure, and secundum legem et
consuetudinem Judaismi praedict. fuit faciendum.

I find this Patent of the Kings this year, contradicting his Title to a Jews
house, as escheated to him by his death, and ratifying the Jews demise thereof
by his last Will.

Pat. 54. H. 3. m. 3. Pro Cresse fill. mag. Mossei Iud, London.
Rex omnibus, etc. Quia accepimus per Inquisitionem quam per Constab. Turris
nostrae London, et Majorem and Vicecomites nostros London fie^i fecimus, quod
Domus illa cum pertinemiis in Vico de Melchstreet in Civit. nostra London quae
fuerunt Cress. fill. Mag. Mossei quondam Iudei Lon^on, non sunt nec esse possunt
Eschaeta nostra per mortem illius Cress. and quod nunquam in vita sua in aliquo
deliquit contranos, sed tanquam bonus et fidelis Iudeus been et fidelitermore
Judeorum vixit, et testamentum suum, secundum consuetudinem Judaismi nostri
fecit, et domos praedict. cum omnibus pertinentiis suis Cok. fill. suo legavit
in testamento praedicto. Nos eidem Cok. domos praedict. cum pertinentiis,
quantum ad nos pertinet concessimus et reddidimus; tenend. et habend. in forma
Testamenti supradicti, salvo jure cujuslibet. In cujus, etc. T. R, apud Winds.
29 die Sept.

This year some Jews of Winchester fearing an assault upon them, by reason of
some differences between them and the Citizens, the King granted this new
special protection, and committed them to the custody of sundry Citizens
thereof, to protect them from violence and damage.

Pat. 54. H. 3. m. 18. Pro Iudeis Winton.
Rex dilecto sibi in Christo Simoni le Draper, (and to 25 others there named)
salutem, Quia per quandam contentionis materiam inter quosdam de Civibus
nostris ejusdem villae, et Benedictum fill. Abrah. Iudeum nostrum illius villae
nuper habitam, multi homines de dicta villa praedicto Benedicto, and aliis
Judeis nostris in eadem villa commorantibus, de corporibus suis manifest
minati, sunt ut accepimus; Nos volentes dictorum nostrorum Judeorum
indempnitati prospicere, ipsos homines, terras, domos, res, redd^tus, et omnes
possessiones eorundem in nostram protectionem et defensionem suscepimus
specialem, vos ad eorum ma^orem tuitionem et securitatem custodes et
Protectores suos assignantes. Et ideo vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod
per totam Civitatem nostram praedict. public clamari faciatis, Ne quis sub
periculo vitae and membrorum praedict. Judeis in personis vel rebus suis
dampnum inferet, vel gravamen. Et vos ipsi praedict. Judeos, familias suas,
terras, domos, res, redditus, et omnes possessiones eorum tam infra dictam
Civitatem quam extra, quantum in vobis est, manuteneatis, protegatis, et
defendatis. Non inferentes eis vel inferri permittentes injuriam, molestiam,
dampnum, vel gravamen. Et si quid eis forisfactum fuerit id eis sine dilatione
faciatis emendari. Volentes etiam quod praetextu istius mandati in nullo vos
intromitttais de placitis quaer^lis aut aliis ipsos Iudeos tangentibus, quae ad
Constab. Castri nost^i Winton pertinent, and hactenus pertinere consueverunt.
In cujus T. R. apud Westminster, 26 die December.

Patents 54. H. 3. m. 24. The King grants to Benedict, a Jew, that he will not
prorogue, release, pardon or extend any debts due unto him for 5 years space,
and by his Charter confirms a grant of an Annuity in fee made by two Jews
Alardo de Hermigsham et haeredibus suis.

In the 55 year of H. 3. I find Claus. 54. H. 3. m. 2.7.
two Prohibitions to the Justices itinerant in Sussex and Kent, to hold pleas
of the Jews in Sussex or Kent, or concerning Iudaismum nostrum, contra legem
and consuetudinem Iudaismi suprapraedicti. T. R. apud Winds. 28 die Sept. Also
Ib. m. 6.
a Pardon of all usury and penalties due to Jews by some poor Debtors. A
grant of 30 l. to one Martin out of the debts of Jews. A Writ of respite of
fines not paid by some Jews out of mere poverty at the times appointed them, to
the Justices of the Jews Ib. m. 6.
quatenus termiuos suos praedictos taliter admensuretis, q^od salvo
contenemento suo possint nobis de eo quod aretro est de fine praedicto
satisfacere, and etiam Tallagio nostro, simul cum aliis Iudeis contribuere, and
ne per defectum mendicare. T. R. apud Westminster. 26 die April. Some other
particulars concerning the fines of Jews are in this Roll.

In the Patent Rolls of this year, there Pat. 55. H. 3. m. 4, 5, 11, 14, 15,
16, 17, 28.29.
are diverse releases of the King of the debts, usuries, and penalties due to
Jews, and confirmations of grants of Houses and Debts assigned by Jews to
others, Licenses for sundry Jews to sell their debts, according to the
forementioned Ordinance of 53 H. 3. all running in the same form with that
already cited; And a grant to some Jews not to pardon respite nor extend their
debts. But the more special things therein are these two.

First, this License to a Jew to dwell where he pleased, amongst any Jews, in
what Borough of England he listed.

Pat. 55. H. 3. m. 29. Pro Aaron fill. Vyn.
Rex omnibus, etc. salutem. Sciatis quod ad instantiam Edwardi fill. nostri
carissimi concedimus Aaroni fill. Vynes Iudeo, quod in quocunque Burgo Regni
nostri voluerit, ubi alii Judei habitant, morari possit pro voluntate sua sine
contradictione nostra, vel Ballivorum nostrorum quorumcunque. Dum tamen tanquam
bonus et fidelis Judeus se gerat et habeat in eodem. In cujus, etc. T. R. apud
Winds. 30 die October. An. 55.

Next, this morgage of Judaisme for payment of 2000 marks to Richard King of
Almain.

Pat. 55. H. 3. m. 12. De Judaismo Angliae.
Rex omnibus, etc. salutem. Cum ante recessum cariss. fill. Edwardi primogeniti
nostri, versus terram sanctam dederimus eidem Edw. 6000 marc. de Judaismo
nostro in subsidium peregrinationis sux, de quibus 6000 marc. 4000 marc.
exceptis quibusdam arreragiis solvuntur eidem; Ita quod 2000 marc. et eadem
arreragia adhuc sibi reddenda supersunt; and ipse filius noster moram saciens
in terra sancta non mediocriter pecunia indigeat ad expensas suas, propter quod
car. fr. and fid. n. Ricus. Rex Alemani: illustris illa 2000 mar. quae aretro.
sunt, etc. fill. nostro credidit ad parts nostras. Nos eidem Rico. pro
praedicta Curialitate dict. fill. n. facta concessimus, quod ipse vel executores
vel assign. sui hab^ant et teneant Judaismum nostrum, et Judaeos nostros
Angliae, a Festo sancti Michis An. 1271. usque ad Festum sancti Michis prox.
sequent. per unum An. completum pro praed. 2000. marc. dicto fill. n. creditis.
Ita Scil. quod Iudei nostri Angl. illa 2000 marc. dict. fratri nostro terminis
subscriptis solvant infra praedict. An. Then he limits the time for she Jews to
pay it by several sums. Et si pretextu nostro, vel mandatorum nostrorum huic
concessioni nostrae contradictorum dictus frater noster fuerit impeditus, quo
minus dictam pecuniam dictis terminis levare possit, tunc liceat ei tam diu
Judaismum nostrum in manu sua tenere, donec super principale debito, et paena
praedict. fuerit sibi satisfactum. Hanc autem concess. dicto fratri nostro
fecimus, salvis nobis and haeredibus nostris placitis, perquisitis, and
eschaetis dicti Judaismi nostri ad nos pertinentibus de toto tempore praedict.
etc. Nec volumus quod praedict. frat. n. infra terminum praedict. aliquam
faciat pardonationem, quietantiam, vel alienationem de debitis Judaismi nostri
memorati, nec tempore praedict. aliquod aliud recipiat de Judaismo nostro nisi
debitum praed. 2000 marc. etc. In cujus, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 15 die Iun.

Anno 56. H. 3. In the Clause Roll I find Claus. 56. H. 3. m. 1.7, 8, 9, Sched.
m. 13.
Many licenses to Jews to sell their Debts, wherein the Ordinance of 53 H. 3.
is recited, A Release and grant of some debts of Jews, and to take the
Charters of them out of the Chest. Respites of other debts due to them, pardon
of usury to others, and an extent of Creditors Lands at reasonable rates.

But the most material things in this Roll are. The Claus. 56. H. 3. m. 4.7.
Kings assignation of 1000 lib. to Prince Edward out of the Tallage of the Jews
this year, de quibusdam certis personis praedict. Iudeorum percipiendas, some
of which having paid their proportion to the Prince are thereupon discharged of
former sequestrations on them and their estates. And this gift of the Jews
Synagogue in London to the Friars penitents in London, whom the Jews with
their Howlings in it disturbed at their Masses, and Divine services; yet
licensing them; if they pleased, to build another Synagogue in any convenient
place that should be elsewhere allotted them.

Claus. 56. H. 3. m. 3.
Rex Majori and Vic. suis London. Quia dilecti nobis in Christo fratres de
paenitentia Jesu Christi London commorantes per strepitum Judeorum confluentium
ad Ecclesiam suam quae contigua est Oratorio dictorum fratrum ibidem, et etiam
pro ipsorum Judeorum continuam ululatum in eadem Schola, juxta ritum suum,
impediantur quo minus ea quae ad Officium spirituale pertinent exercere
possint, circa celebrationem divinorum, et praecipue hora confectionis corporis
Jesu Christi, sicut per testimonium fidelium accepimus. Nos ad divina inibi
quietius celebranda, volentes predict. impedimentum modis omnibus amoveri, ob
salutem animae nostrae, et animarum predecessorum, et haeredum nostrorum, de
gratia nostra speciali dedimus et concessimus predictis fratribus and
successoribus suis in augmentum mansi sui ibidem, predict. Scholam, una cum
fundo ejusdem: Habend. and tenend. eisdem fratribus and successoribus suis
imperpetuum. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod eisdem fratribus de Scola illa sicut
praedict. est, plenam seisinam sine dilatione habere faciatis. Sustinentes quod
predicti Judei sibi aliam Scholam alibi, ubi ad minus nocumentum dictorum
fratrum, et Ecclesiae suae, et Ecclesiarum alirum fieri poterit facere, vel
construere possint si voluerint, et sibi viderint expedire. T. R. apud St.
Edmundum. 6. die Sept.

There being some few poor Jews converted this same year, and the revenues of
the House of the Converts being swallowed up by rich Jews not living in it, and
the poor Converts there like to starve for want of relief, and enforced to beg
from door to door; thereupon the King assigned to a convert Jew and his wife, a
certain annual pension out of some houses in London belonging to the House of
the Converts, and issued a Commission to inquire of and regulate the abused
revenues of the House of Converts which he had founded, and to bestow them on
the poor Jews, etc. as these Records at large relate.

Pat. 56 H. 3. m. 15. pars 1. Pro Conversis London.
Rex omnibus, etc. salutem: Sciatis quod cum de propriis bonis et elemosinis
nostris fundaverimus quandam domum in honor sanctae Trin. infra suburbium
civitatis nostrae London, ad usus Conversorum ab errore Judaico usque ad fidem
Christianam, quosdam redditus nostros ad sustentationem eorunde^ assignando,
Concessimus pro nobis et haeredibus nostris, quantum in nobis est, Nich.
aurifabro London, et Matildae uxori ejus conversis, quod ipse Nich. singulis
septimanis december denar. et ipsa Matilda singulis septimanis octo denar.
habeant. et percipiant per manus suas ad sustentationem suam quoad vixerint, de
redditibus predictis dictae domus, a nobis assignatis infra civitatem
predictam: videlicet, de domibus Walteri de Vallibus in parochia Sanctae
Wyburge duas marcas: de quatuor shopis ejusdem Walteri in parochia Sancti
Matthew. de Fridaistreet, viginti solidos: de domibus Hugonis Mothon in parochia
de Aldermanchirche, viginti solidos, et de tenementis Will: Bokerell viginti
solidos, et quatuor denarios debitis terminis quibus iidem redditus reddi
debent et consueverunt. Ita etiam quod quandocunque alter praedict. Nich: et
Matild. diem suum clauserit extremum, porcio predicta ipsum Nicholaum seu ipsam
Matildam contingens ad predictam domum integre revertatur imperpetuum. In cujus
etc. Test Rege apud Westmonasterium 28 die Aprilis.

Patents ^ 6. H. 3. pars 1. m. 19. de inquirendo de redditibus Conversorum
London, and eisdem redditibus pauperioribus Conversis assignandis.
Rex dilectis sibi Majori London, et Magistro Johanni de Sancto Dionisio clerico
suo, Custodi domus Conversorum London, salutem. Ex part pauperum Conversorum
nostrorum London, nobis et consilio nostro est ostensum, quod cum nihil habeant
unde sustentari possint, nec fit, qui eis in aliquo subveniat hostiatim
mendicare coguntur, et quasi fame moriuntur; Et cum certos redditus ad
sustentationem ipsorum in Civitate London et alibi assignari fecerimus, ipsi ex
hiis nihil percipiunt, set quidam alii Conversi divites alios redditus et
possessiones habentes qui etiam non morantur, nec conversantur in domo nostra
predicta, redditus ipsos pro magna part percipiunt, et ad usus suos pro
voluntate sua convertunt, quod ulterius sustinere nolumus, nec debemus, maxim
cum predictos redditus dictae domui, non pro divitibus set pauperibus et
egenis, et ex causa necessitatis fecerimus assignari. Volentes igitur premissa
in melius reformari: vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod per Sacramentum
proborum and legalium hominum de civitate and suburbio London diligenter
inquiratis, qui sunt redditus et bona predicta? and quantum valiant per annum?
and quis vel qui ea percipiunt? and a quibus et qualiter hactenus distributa et
di^pensata fuerunt? and quae super premissis corrigenda et reformanda
videritis, sine dilatione corrigatis. Proviso quod bona et redditus domus
predictae prefatis conversis qui magis indigent juxta merita necessitatis
ipsorum, decetero assignentur: de aliis etiam quae ad servicium and debitum
statum Capellae nostrae ibidem, ac domus praedictae in melius reformandum
pertinere noscuntur, provideatis in omnibus prout melius et honestius videritis
expedire. Volumus etiam, quod sicut predicti redditus dictae domui ad
sustentationem commorancium in eadem specialiter assignati sunt; Ita etiam ad
domum deferantur et distribuantur ibidem, sicut predictum est; Et si quos vobis
aut ordinationi vestrae resistentes aut contradicentes inveneritis, eos per
sequestrationes porciorum suarum et aliter, prout opus esse videritis,
compescatis. T. R. apud Wesm. 26 die Febr.

This year the King granted this ensuing Pardon to a Jew for selling a
pretended Debt for which he had no Charter, to another; for which he was
committed Prisoner to the Tower, and for making an escape from thence, without
License; for which pardon he paid a Fine to the King.

Pat. 56 H. 3. pars 1. m. 17.
Rex omnibus etc. salutem. Sciatis quod cum Abraham filius Jocei Judeus Ebor.
pro quater viginti et undecim libris argenti, quas Thomas de Basing civis
noster London, versus eum disrationaverat in Curia nostra coram Iusticiariis
nostris ad custodiam Judeorum assignatis, eccasione cujusdam debiti in quo idem
Abraham dixerat Will. de Dyve, sibi teneri, quod quidem debitum ipse Judeus
dicto Thomae vendidit; unde nulla Carta inter ipsum Judeum et predictum Will. in
Archa nostra potuit inveniri; per praeceptum Justic, eorundem caperetur et
infra Turrim nostram London detineretur, et eidem Abrahamo a quibusdam Emulis
suis sit impositum, quod ab eadem Turri sine licentia custodis sui sive
warranto temere recessit; licet per literas nostras fecissemus eum deliberari,
Nos per finem duodecim bisanciarum quas predictus Abrahamus nobis solvit
praemanibus, pardonavimus eidem Abrahamo transgressionem quam fecisse dicitur
vendendo debitum praedictum sine Carta, et etiam transgressionem quam fecisse
dicitur recedendo a Turri praedicta tempore detentionis suae praedictae. Et
ideo vobis mandamus quod praedictum Abraham occasion transgressionum
praedictarum non occasionetis in aliquo vel gravetis. T. R. apud Westminster. 26 die
Martii.

Pat. 56. H. 3. pars 1. m. 19.
This year I find a special License for a Jew to assign his Debt, according to
the Provisions in 53. H. 3. therein mentioned in form above rehearsed.

This year the King appointed this special form of Manucaption, body for body
for the Jews then imprisoned in the Tower for their Tallages, and petitioning
to be bailed; discovering how strictly the King dealt with them in levying
their heavy Taxes.

Pat. 56. H. 3. pars 1. m. 10.
Rex These. and Baronibus suis de Scaccario, salutem. Sciatis nos de Consilio
nostro talem formam manucaptionis Iudaeorum incarceratorum apud Turrim London
providisse, videlicet, quod manucaptores manucapiant ipsos Iudeos quos
manucapere volunt; habendo corpora praedictorum Iudaeorum quos manuceperunt a
die Sancti Johan. Baptistae, in 15 dies corpus pro corpore, liberand.
Constabular: Turr. praedictae carceri mancipanda ad voluntatem nostram, donec
nobis satisfecerint de Tallagiis suis super ipsos assessis, nisi praedicta
tallagia solvere velint ad terminos subscriptos* videlicet medietatem ad
quindenam Sancti Johan. Baptist. prox: futur. et aliam medietatem ad festum
Sancti Jacobi Apostoli prox. sequent. Ita quod si praedecti manucapti
praedictam solutionem fecerint ad praedictos terminos, quieti sint praedicti
manucaptores. Et si in solutione praedicta in toto vel in part defecerint ad
eosdem terminos, et praedicti manucaptores habeant corpora manucapta ad
praedictum terminum in forma praedicta. tunc similiter quod sint de
manucaptione sua. Ita tamen quod praedicti Manucapti quicquid prae manibus
solverint de praedicto tallagio, vel etiam ad aliquem terminorum praedictorum,
nisi totum solverint illud penitus amittant, et nihilominus corpora sua, una
cum omnibus catallis et debitis suis nobis incurrantur ad voluntatem nostram
inde faciendam; et si manucaptores corpora manucaepta ad praedictum terminum
non liberaverint, nec manucapti Tallagium suum solverint, sicut praedictum est;
tunc corpora manucapientium, una cum omnibus Catallis et debitis suis
incurrantur ad voluntatem nostram inde faciendam sicut praedictum est. In cujus
etc. T. R, apud Westminster. 21 die Iunii.

In the 57 and last year of King Henry the 3. I find Claus. 57. H. 3. m. 11.
only a special license for a Jew to sell his Debt to a Christian, wherein the
ordinance of 53 H. 3. is recited.

I have now run through all the most material Records of King Henry the 3 his
long and tedious reign, relating to the Jews and their affairs, pretermitting
some few only of less moment and private concerment in some of the Fine,
Clause, and Patent Rolls, where those who are not fully satisfied with these
already recited may glean them at their leasures.

I now proceed to the Records in the reign of King Edward the first, omitting
all passages of the Jews in the Fine Rolls of his reign, as of less moment,
seeing the Patent and Clause Rolls afford us much plenty and variety of matter
concerning our English Jews affairs, their final banishment out of England, and
sale of their houses eascheated by their exile, which Records were never yet
published to the world in print and are unknown to most men.

King Henry the 3 deceasing, and his Son Edward the 1 succeeding him, Anno
1272. thereupon he constituted Hamon Hattayn and Robert de Ludham Justices for
the custody of his Jews, commanding the Treasurer and the Barons of the
Exchequer to deliver to them the keys of the Jews Chests, together with the
Rolls, Writs, and other things belonging to the Jews, as they had formerly done
to other Justices, by this Writ.

Claus. 1. E. 1. m. 10. De Justiciarits Judaeorum.
Quia Rex constituit Hamonem Haittayn et Robernum de Ludham Justiciarios suos ad
custodiam Judaeorum suorum; Mandatum est Thesaurario et Baronibus de Scaccario,
quod eisdem Hamoni and Roberto claves Archarum Judaismi, una cum Rotulis,
Brevibus, et omnibus aliis Judaismum illud contingentibus liberent, prout aliis
Justiciariis ibidem prius consuevit. Dat. per manum W. de Merton Cancellar.
apud Westminster. 27 die Ianuarii.

These new Justices were constituted not above 5 weeks after Kings Henry's
death, and they were, as all their Predecessors in that Office (first
instituted by King See the 1. part of the Demurrer, p. 14, 15. Hoveden Annal.
pars posterior. p. 745.
Rich. the 1 Anno 1194.) Iusticiarii sui ad custodiam Iudaeorum suorum, to show
that the Jews were nothing else but the Kings own Wards and Villains, and
under his custody and protection only as such, to tax and plunder them at his
pleasure, as his Father and Grandfather had done before him.

It appears by the Liberate of 1 E. 1. m. 1. and 2. that the King allowed 20
marks a year to these Justices of the Jews for their Salary; And the custody of
the Rolls and writs of the Jews were committed this year to William Middleton,
as is evident by this Record.

Claus. 1. E. 1. m. 9.
Cum Rex commiserit Willielm. de Middleton Rotulos and brevia Iudaismi sui quae
sunt in custodia Thesauri and Baronum Scaccarii, custodiend: quamdiu Domino
Regi placuerit. Mandatum est eisdem Thesaurario et Baronibus, quod eidem Will.
Rotulos and Brevia liberent sicut praedictum est.

The same year this King in the beginning of his reign caused his peace and
protection to be publicly proclaimed, as well to all the Jews as others within
England, and other his Dominions, as this record recites for the Jews in B^uges
in Flanders.

Claus. 1. E. 1. m. 7. Dorso De Judaeis de Burges.
Rex Vicecomiti Mall. salutem. Cum nuper pacem nostram per totum Regnum nostrum
public proclama^i fecimus, ^et eam omnibus et singulis de regno nostro tam
Iudaeis, quam Christianis observari praecepimus, and praecipimus quod Iudaei
nostri de Bruges in Balliva tua manuteneas, and defendas, ita quod eis pax
nostra, prout ejus per totum regnum nostrum proclamari fecimus, inviolabiliter
observetur. Et non exigas vel exigi permittas ab eisdem redemptiones vei alias
extorsiones ad opus nostrum, vel alicujus alterias, nisi quatenus ad debita
nostra, seu Domini Henrici Regis patris nostri, seu Tallagia, aut alia ad quae
de jure tenentur ab eis levanda, de nostro, aut ejusdem Domini Henr. patris
nostri mandato Warrantum habueris, Datum etc. apud Westminster. 15 die Iunii.

Yet notwithstanding this protection and peace granted them by the King, the
very same year, the King grants out this Writ to search all their Chests, to
enroll and certify him of all their debts and estates, that he might tax them
all proportionably at his pleasure, as he did soon after.

Patent 1. E. 1. m. 18. De debitis levandis.
Rex dilecto and fideli suo Thomae de Espernon, salutem, Quia de debitis in
Archa Cirogtafforum Winton. Oxon. Ma^leberg. and Wilton contentis volumus
certiorari, vobis mandamus quod ad certum diem quem ad hoc provideritis, ad
Archas praedictas accedatis, and easdem per visum Cirograf. Archarum
praedictarum, tam Christianorum quam Judaeorum aperiatis, et omnia debita in
eisdem contenta diligenter scrutari et inrotulari faciatis. Mandamus enim
Cirograffariis nostris Archarum praedictar, quod ad certum diem quem: eis scire
faciatis ad hoc faciendum vobis assistant et intendant. In cujus, etc. Dat.
etc. apud Westminster. 20 die. Feb.

Conami^es Lite^ae diriguntur Hamoni Hatayn de debitis in Archa Cirograf.
Northampt. Nottingh. Ebor. Lincol. St^inf. conrents.

Item Consimiles Literae diriguntur Ade de Winton, de debitis in Arca Cirograf.
Judaeorum Bristoll, Oxon, Gloucest. Wigorn. Hereford et Warw. contentis.

Item consimiles Literae diriguntur Roberto de Ludham super hujusmodi debitis
contentis in Archis Cirograff. Judaeorum Bedef: Cantebr. Colecester, et Sudbury.

In all which Cities and Towns the Jews then inhabited, and had common chests,
wherein their Debts and Morgages were reserved.

Also according to the former Custom of the Jews in England, not to remove
into any town where they did not anciently inhabit, he sent this Writ to the
Barons and Bailiffs of Winchelse, to remove some Jews thence who had taken up
their habitation there, without his special license.

Claus. 1. E. 1. m. 7. Dorso, De Judaeis Angliae inhabitantibus Villas.
Rex Baronibus and Ballivis suis de Winchelse salutem. Quia secundum
consuetudinem Iudaeismi nostri Angliae, in aliis Civitatibus Burgis aut Villis
habitare, vel morari non debent, quam in illis in quibus antiquitus habitare
consueverunt and morari, and quidam Iudaei, ut intelleximus, villam nostram de
Winchelse sunt ingressi, and eam inhabitent, in quam nullus Iudaeus aliquibus
retroactis temporibus habitare consuevit, vel morari; Vobis mandamus, quod si
verum est, tunc Iudaeos ab eadem villa, absque damno de corporibus seu rebus
suis eis faciend. sine damno faciatis amoveri. Dat. apud Westminster, 18 die Iunii.

This King that he might not seem altogether unjust, granted forth a Writ to
the Sheriff of Oxford in behalf of one Lumbard a Jew of Oxford taken and
imprisoned for a fine of fifty marks imposed on one Lumbard a Jew of Bristol
for a Trespass against the Kings Exchange, ordering him to be bailed, and the
mistake examined.

Claus. 1. E. 1. m. 9. Pro Lumbardo de Krikelad. Judaeo.
Rex Vicecom. Oxon. salutem. Ostensum est nobis ex part Lumbardi de Krikelad.
Judaei nostri Oxoniae, quod quum quidam Lumbardus Judaeus Bristol amerciatus
esset coram Justiciariis Domini Henr. Regis patris nostri ad custodiam
Judaeorum assignatis ad quinquaginta marcas pro transgressione excambii ejusdem
patris nostri, et ipse Lumbardus Judaeus Oxon. de eadem transgressione nunquam
calumpniatus, nec de praedicta pecunia oneratus extiterit, tu easdem 50 marcas
ab eodem Lumb. de Oxon. Judaeo exigis, et omnia bona sua in Balliva tua ea
occasion cepisti in manum nostram, et insuper ipsum cepisti, et in prisona
nostra Oxoniae detines. Et quia non est juri consonum, nec est voluntatis
nostrae quod ipse Lumbardus de Oxonia sit in poena pro debitis alterius, unde
ipse Lumbardus de Oxonia penitus est immunis, ut dicitur. Tibi praeci^imus,
quod si ipse Lumbardus de Oxonia invenerit tibi sufficientem manucaptionem
perconsuetudinem Judaismi nostri, de veniendo coram Justiciariis nostris ad
custodiam Judaeorum assignatis, a die Pascha in 15 dies, ad satisfaciendum
nobis de praedictis 50 marcis, nisi ibidem ratio inabiliter ostenderit, quod
non ipse sed alii de dicta pecunia debent onerari, tunc ipsum Lumbardum per
eandem manucaptionem a prisona qua detinetur, deliberari facias, and omnia bona
sua ea occasion capta in manum nostram interim sine distractione, and sine
dampno dicti Judaei reservari facias. Et habeas ibi nomina manucaptorum suorum
and hoc breve. Datum, etc. apud Sanctum Paulum London 4 die Aprilis, and Dat 20
s. pro hoc Breve habendo.

No sooner had he provided the foresaid Justices and Guardians for the Jews,
but he presently imposed new heavy annual Taxes and Tallages on them,
appointing special Collectors to levy them and their arrerages upon all their
goods, chattels, debts, and to banish and abjure the Realm all such Jews,
together with their wives and children, as were rebellious and refused to pay
them as these ensuing Patents of his, in the 2 year of his reign demonstrate.

Rex dilectis, and sidelibus suis Fratri Stephano de Foleburn, Ade de Stratten
and Willielmo de Middleton salutem. Patent 2. E. 1. m. 5. De Tallagio Judaeo^um
levando.
Sciatis quod assignavimus vos ad omnia arreragia Tallagii super Judaeos
nostros Angliae ultimo assessi ad opus nostrum levanda, prout citius and
commodius videritis expedire. Dantes vobis potestatem Arreragia illa de bonis,
catallis, and debitis Judaeorum quos dictorum arreragiorum inveneritis
detentores, levandi, and nostro nomine adnuandi, nec non and dictos Judaeos qui
in hac part Rebels fuerint vel contradictore^ per exilium and abjurationem
Regui nostri, si necesse fuerit compellendi, ad dicta arreragia pro porcionibus
ipsis inde contingentibus nobis sine difficultate qualibet solvenda. Et ideo
vobis mandamus quod premissa faciatis in forma praedicta. Et si forte vos tres
ad hoc intendere non poteritis, duo vestrum praemissa ficut praedictum est,
nihilominus exequantur. In cujus, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 20 die Octobris.

Pat. 2. E. 1. m. 3. De Arreragiis Tallagii, super Judaeos assisi, levandis.
Rex dilectis et fidelibus suis fratri Stephano de Foleburn electo Waterford,
fratri Luce de Hemmington et Willielmo de Middleton salutem. Sciatis quod
assignavimus vos ad omnia arreragia Tallagii super Iudaeos nostros Angliae
ultimo assessi ad opus nostrum levanda, prout citius et commodius videritis
expedire, Dantes vobis potestatem arreragia illa de bonis, catallis, et debitis
Judaeorum, quos dictotum arreragiorum inveneritis detentores levandi, et nostro
nomine adnuandi; nec non et dictos Judaeos qui in hac part Rebels fuerint
vel contradictores per exilium et abjurationem regni nostri, si necesse fuerit
compehendi ad dicta ^^retagia nobis pro porcionibus ipsis contingentibus, sine
difficultate qualibet solvenda. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod praemissa faciatis
in forma praedicta. Et si aliquis Judaeorum illorum ad diem per nos sibi
prefixum in solutione porcionis suae defecerit, faciatis ipsum, cum uxore, et
pueris suis exceptis puerisillis, qui sunt in Tallagio, et solverint, eri^s
regnum nostrum Angliae, et assignetis ei portum Douorum, quod infra tertium
diem post diem solutionis suae sibi per nos praefixum, sit ibi exiturus sicut
praedictum est, et nunquam rediturus. Salvis tamen nobis terris Domibus,
Redditibus, et omnibus catallis suis et suorum. Nota.
Et si aliquis Judaeus post tertium diem sibi assignatum, sicut praedictum est
inventus fuerit alibi in Regno nostro quam apud Douorum, faciatis de eo
Judicium tanquam de illo qui furtive and propria catalla nostra asportaverit.
Et si forte vostres ad hoc intendere non poteritis, duo vestrum praemissa
nihilominus exeqauntur. In cujus etc. Test Rege apud Luton, primo die
Novembris.

By this imposed penal banishment and abjuration of the Realm, prescribed by
the King in these two Pateuts to such Rebellious contradictory Jews, their
wives, and children, as refused to pay the arrears of this last imposed Tax, it
is more than probable, that their total See the first part of the Demurrer
Edit. 2. p. 46. to 64.
and final general banishment and expulsion out of England by the King and his
whole Parliament in the 18 year of his reign (16 years after) was as compulsory
and penal to them as this, and no ways voluntary of themselves, as Sir Edward
Cook has fansied it, against all our Records and Histories.

In the Clause Roll of this year I find this writ to two of these Collectors,
for the present levying part of these Arrears upon Elias a Jew of London, and
paying it into the Wardrobe.

Claus. 2. E. 1. m. 2. Pro Magistro Elia filio Magistri Mossei Judaeo London.
Rex dilectis and fidelibus suis fratri Stephano de Foleburn electo de
Waterford and Willielmo de Middleton, ad arrerag. Tallag. Judaeor. ultimo super
eosdem Judaeos assesso levanda assignatis, salutem. Mandamus vobis quod illas
septies viginti marcas quos Richardus de Tany debet Magistro Eliae filio
magistri Mosseo Iudaeo London, sine dilatione liberari facias in Garderoba
nostra, and eas eidem Judaeo in dicto Tallagio suo allocari facias. Test Rege
apud Westminster. 20 die Octobris.

It is observable, that the first person named as a Collector of the Arrears of
this Tax of the Jews in all these 3. Records, was a Friar, and Bishop Elect of
Waterford in Ireland. How the Jews who neglected, refused, or were unable to
satisfy their Taxes, were handled by these Collectors, and imprisoned in the
Tower of London till they either paid or secured them to the King out of their
best Debts, these Records of the ensuing year will discover.

Claus. 3. E. 1. m. 8.
Rex Thesaurario et Baronibus suis de Scaccario salutem. Mandamus vobis quod
Sampsonem filium Magistri Miles de Stanford; Samuelem fill: Maneser de Lincoln;
Vnim. fill. Garflye, Abrahamum fill. Droye de Holms, Elyam fill. Vrssellae de
Lincoln, et Abrahamum fill. Samuelis, captos et detentos in prisona nostra
Turris London Pro Tallagio suo, deliberari factatis. Ipsos etiam de corporibus
suis pacem habere permittatis usque ad quindenam Sancti Michaelis prox: futur:
et praedictorum Judaeorum Tallagium super eos assessum de clarioribus debitis
suis Interim levari faciatis. Ita quod nisi in quindena praedicta de praedicto
Tallagio suo ad plenam satisfecerint, ad Prisonam nostram praedictam
revertantur; ibidem gratiam nostram expectand: Test Rege apud Kenynton X. die
Julii,

Claus. 3. E. 1. m. 12. pro Rege de Judaeis.
Mandatum est Justiciariis ad Custodiam Judaeorum assignatis, et Willielmo de
Middleton quod executionem Brevium Regis quae pro diversis Judaeis receperunt
super allocationem vel respectum de Tallagio super ipsis ultimo assesso habend:
per ipsos faciend: supersedeant omnino, nisi aliud eis inde duxerit
demandandum. T. R. apud Westminster. X. die Iunii.

Ibidem. m. 12. pro Hako, fill. Roes Judaeo.
Rex Justiciariis ad custodiam Judaeorum assignatis, et Willielmo de Middleton
salutem: monstravit Nobis Hakus fill: Roes de Ebor. Iudaeus, quod cum ipse Nobis
de Tallagio super ipsum ultimo assesso satisfecerit ad plenu^, vos occasion
quorundam Catallorum sub nomine Solomonis fill: Isaac dudum defuncti in manu
nostra existent: quandam pecuniae summam occasion dicti Tallagii exigitis
minus just. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod si Nobis constiterit quod catalla
praedicta fuerunt in manu nostra die quo dictum Tallagium assessum fuerat, et
quod dictam pecuniam a praefato Hako occasion Catallorum illorum et non alia
exigatis, et quod Nobis de toto Tallagio suo praedicto satisfecerit ut
praedictum est; tunc corpus suum ea occasion detentum prout justum fuerit
deliberari faciatis. T. R. apud Westminster. X. die Iunii.

Claus. 3 E. 1. m. 13.
Rex eisdem et Willielmo de Middleton, ad Tallagium super eosdem Iudaeos
Angliae nuper assessum colligendum deputatis, salutem. Mittimus vobis
Petitionem Aaronis Crespyn Judaei nostri London praesentibus interclusam. Vobis
mandantes quatenus retentis in manu nostra de clariobus debitis ipsius Iudaei
in Thesaur: nostra existentibus usque ad summam Arreragiarum Tallagii super
eundem Iudaeum ultimo assessi, et aliis debitis suis secundum tenorem
Petitionis praedictae; tunc debita illa ad opus nostrum levari, et ipsum de
dictis arreragiis quietum esse, et residuum Catallorum suorum occasion dicti
Tallagii in Thesauraria existentim, sibi liberari faciatis, and corpus suum ea
occasion in pace esse permittatis. T. R. apud Westminster. V. die Iunii.

Claus. 3. E. 1. m. 16. De debitis Regis levandis.
Rex Justiciariis suis ad custodiam Judaeorum assignatis, and Will. Middleton
salutem. Quia constat Nobis per recordum vestrum quod tertia pars unius debiti
triginta librarum sub nominibus Ricardi Pauncefoot et Aaronis le Bland Iudaei,
est debitum Urselli fill: Isaac Iudaei, et quod unum debitum duodecim libraru^
sub nominibus eorundem Ricardi et Aaronis, est debitum Belie de Gloucest.
Iudeae, per quod Nos pro arreragiis Tallagii super praedict. Ursellam et Belyam
ultimo assessi, tertiam partem praedicti debiti triginta librarum, et dictum
debitum duodecim librarum cepimus in manum nostram: Vobis mandamus quod debita
pro arreragiis Tallagii praedicti ad opus nostrum levari, et dictos Iudaeos de
Arreragiis dicti Tallagii, quatenus debita illa sufficerent, extunc in pace
permittatis. T. R. apud Westminster. 20 die Maii.

Claus. 1. E. 1. m. 17. De Tallagio Judaeorum levaudo.
Rex Hammoni Hautyn, et Roberto Ludham Justiciariis suis ad custodiam Judaeorum
assignatis, salutem. Quia quibusdam de causis, volumus quod vos de caetero
intendatis ad Tallagium super Iudaeos nostros Angliae assessum et arreragia
ejusdem levand. Vobis mandamus, quod omnes Rotulos, Cartas, Tallias, Brevia,
Starra, et omnia alia praedict: Tallagium contingentia quae in custodia
dilectorum and fidelium nostrorum fratris Luce de Hemington and Will de
Middleton hucusque remanserunt, ab eisdem admittatis, et Tallagium illud una
cum Arreragiis ejusdem, prout magis ad commodum nostrum videritis expedire, una
cum praedicto Willielmo: quem ad hoc una vobiscum assignavimus, levari
faciatis. T. Rege apud Westmonast. XV. die Maii.

Claus. 3. E. m. 19. Pro. Willielmo fill. Robert. de Middleton.
Rex Justiciariis suis ad custodiam Iudaeorum assignatis, et Fratri Luce de
Hemington, and Willielmo de Middleton, Collectoribus Tallagii super quosdam
Judaeos Angliae nuper assessi salutem. Compatientes paupertati Will. fill.
Roberti de Middleton, qui Jospino fill. Solomon: de Merleberge Iudaeo tenetur in
diversis debitis, ad quorum solutionem bona sua et catalla non sufficiant, ut
accepimus: dedimus eidem Willielmo respectum de debitis illis praefato Iudaeo
rendend usque ad quindena Paschae prox: fut: Ita quod penae et Vsurae inde
cessant usque ad terminum supradictum. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod eidem
Willielmo respectum illum interim habere faciatis in forma praedicta: et terras
et tenementa in manum praedicti Iudaei occasion debitorum praedictorum capt:
replegiari faciatis. T. R. apud Windsore 6. die Martii.

Claus. 3. E. 1. m. 21. Pro Magistro Elia fill. Mossei Judaei London.
Rex Thesaurario et Baronibus suis de Scaccario salutem. Sciatis quod cum
Magist^r Elyas fill. Mo^^aei, Judaeus noster London nobis in trecentis et
quinq^aginta marcis pro Tallagio ipsum conting^nte, de Tallio super
Communitatem Judaeorum nostrorum anno Regni nostri secundo per praeceptum
nostrum assesso ^eneatur. Et cum Matter nostra A. Regina Angliae eidem Elye in
tanta pecunia teneatur, ut asserit, et concesserit quod praedict: 350 marcas
Nobis pro praedicto Iudaeo solvit ad Scaccarium nostrum praedict. in crastino
Sancti Michaelis prox: futur. Vobis ad instantiam ejusdem Matris nostrae
mandamus, quod pradictum Iudaeum de praedictis 350 marcis quietum esse
faciatis. T. R. apud Windsore 10 die Feb.

I have recited all these Records at large: partly to inform the world, how
strict, rigorous, and earnest this King and his Officers were in levying their
heavy Taxes upon the Jews, by imprisonment and banishment of their persons, and
seizing all their Charters, Debts, Obligations, which they were enforced to
assign over to the King, for want of ready moneys to help discharge their
Tallages, for which they had some respite given them where they had assigned
real debts for to pay them. And partly to acquaint those of the Long Robe, how
little confidence they ought to repose in Reverend Sir Edward Cook his
citations of Records in his Institutes and Reports: who from these very 2.
Instit. p. 206.
Records of Rot. Pat. 3. E. 1. m. 14, 17, 20. (which he mistakes for Claus. 3.
E. 1.) William Middleton reddit Compotum, (when as William Middleton is not so
much as named in these Patent Rolls, but only in the Clause, where he renders
no account at all but what you have read) makes this confident conclusion: (in
his 2 Institutes p. 506. upon Statutum de Iudaismo) What benefit the Crown made
before the making of this Act appears by former Records, take Rot. Pat. An.
3. E. 1. m. 14.27.20. William Middleton reddit Compot.
one for many, from the 17 of December in the 50 year of H. 3. until the
Tuesday in Shrovetide the 2. year of Edw. 1. which was about 7. years, the
Crown had four hundred and twenty thousand rounds fifteen shillings and 4
pence, De exitibus Iudaismi: at which time the Ounce of silver was 20 d. and
now it is more than treble so much: When as there is not one syllable of this
to be found in the Patent Rolls of 3, E. 1. he cites in his Margin (which are
only licenses to Jews to assign their Debts) nor any thing more in the Clause
Rolls of this year that I can find, than what you have already heard, and no
such Account of Middletons de Exitibus Iudaismi for any set time, much less
from 50 H. 3. till Tuesday in Shrovetide, 2 E. 1. as he here fancieth. That
which I conceive led Sir Edward Cook into this mistake, was this Note in one
of the Kalenders in the Tower: Rex recepit iiij C. iiij millia libr. de
exitibus Judaismi, ab An 50 H. 3. usque An. 2 E. 1. Pat. 4. E. 1. m 12. citing
Pat. 3. E. 1. m. 14.17. just before it, with reference only to Quod nullus
Iudaeus vendere debitu^ possit, nisi Regis Lacentia, which Sir Edw. mi^applied
to the following clause (a gross oversight:) when the Kalend^r refers only to
Pat. 4. E. 1. m. 12. to prove this vast sum levied of the Jews from the 50 year
of H. the 3. to 2 E. 1. in which Membrane and whose Roll there is no such thing
at all appearing, nor ought relating to the Jews Taxes or Middletons account,
as I dare affirm upon my double diligent perusal of that whole Roll, neither is
there any such Acount that I can find in any other record that I have met with
in my search. Doubtless this reverend Judge, and Great Ornament of the Law,
took many, if not most of his Records upon trust, without examination, and so
frequently miscites, wrests, or misapplies those he quotes, especially in
brief, (and some he cites at large too) that those Judges, Lawyers, and young
Students, who rely upon him and his Quotations as infallible Oracles, and deem
it a disparagement once to question them, will but deceive both themselves and
others, as I have undeniably manifested in his gross mistakes concerning the
Statute de Iudaismo, and Jews banishment out of England in my former Demurrer,
and in his mistake in this very Roll. Wherefore I shall ad^ise them all still
to try his Records and Quotations before they trust them, and to practice that
Rule himself so frequently urges, but yet overmuch forgot. Tutius est petere
fontes quam sectari rivulos, having never met with so many gross Misquotations
and mistakes of Records in any Man's writings, as I have found in his, though
otherwise a Man of rare abilities in points of Law, but no such Antiquary,
Record-man, or Historian as the world esteem him; Which I no ways publish to
disparage his honorable Memory or useful Publications, but to caution all of
his Profession (for whose benefit and information I have published these
Records) to take heed they be not seduced by his venerable authority to embrace
or rely upon his frequent mistakes, misquotations of Records and Antiquities
for undoubted verities. But to return from this necessary digression to my
former Text.

In these Patents Rolls of 3 E. 1. I find frequent mention of the forcited
Ordinance of 23 H. 3. (recorded in the red Book of the Exchequer) prohibiting
any Jews to grant or assign their debts of Christians to any Christians,
without the Kings special license first obtained, etc. together with sundry
special licenses granted by the King to assign and grant their debts to
Christians, and to them to receive such assignments of them. Take these few
presidents of this kind instead of many oother.

Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Pat. 3. E. 1. m. 4. De Licentia vendendi
debita.
Cum tempore Domini Henrici Regis Patris nostri provisum esset; Quod nullus
Iudaeus debitum aliquod quod sibi a Christiano debebatur vendere posset alicui,
nisi prius super hoc ab eodem Patre nostro obtentis gratia and licentia. Et si
quis debitum hujusmodi ex licentiasua ab aliquo Judaeo emeret, non plus haberet
in eodem quam ipse Pater noster, vel nos haberemus, si debitum illud esset in
manu nostra, vel in manu ejusdem Patris nostri, videlicet Catallam contentam,
in Carta super hoc confecta, sine Vsura. Nos Mosseo filio Jac. de Oxon. Josceo
filio Benedicti and Jacobo Sablyn de Eboraco Iudaeis, gratiam facere volentes
specialem, dedimus eisdem licenti^m vendendi dilecto Clerico nostro Thomae de
Gunes quod^^m debitum quadraginta and septem Librarum in quo Thomas de
Tausterne de Eyton et Walterus de Rodistan eisdem Mosseo, Jo^ceo et Jacobo
tenentur per Cartas suas. Dedimus etiam Licentiam eidem Thomae emendi debitum
illud a Judaeis in formae Provisionis supra-dictae. In Cujus, etc. Test Rege
apud Them 24 die Julii.

The like licenses were granted the same year in the selfsame form to Isaac de
Prouyns a Jew of Lincoln, Pat. 3. E. 1. m. 17.
and to Aaron de la Rye a Jew of London, to sell their respective debts
specified in the Licenses, to R. Bishop of Bath and Wells; and to him to buy
them, reciting the foresaid Ordinance of Henry the 3. And in the Patent Rolls
of 4 E. 1. m. 12. and 22. And in diverse other Patent Rols afterward in this
Kings reign, I find sundry Licenses to other Jews to sell their debts therein
specified, and to Christians to buy them, all running in the very same form,
and reciting the foresaid Ordinance in the selfsame Words; which proved very
gainful to the King and his Officers, who would not grant such Licenses gratis.

As the Jews could not assign nor dispose of their own debts to others without
the Kings special License and grace, so the King on the other side could
dispose of, respite, and release their debts, inquire of and search after them
at his pleasure, and grant them to his own Queen, or others, as these Records
in 3 E. 1. inform us.

Claus. 3. E 1. m. 13. Pro Alinora Regina Angliae Consorte Regis.
Rex Justiciariis suis ad Custodiam Judaeorum assignatis salutem, Cum nuper
concessimus carissimae Consorti nostrae Alienorae Reginae Angliae, omnia debita
in quibus Norman de Arsy tenebatur quibuscunque Judaeis Regni nostri, and vobis
mandaverimus quod dicta debita secundum legem and consuetudinem Iudaismi nostri
levari and praefatae Consorti nostrae habere faceretis: ac eadem Consors
nostra, debita de quibus dictus Normannus tenebatur Aaroni de la Rye, et
Mossaeo de Clare nondum habuerit, ut accepimus. Vobis mandamus quod Cartas
praedictas ab Archa Cirograph. extrahi, et cum irrotulatae fuerint reponi, et
debita illa secundum Legem et consuetudinem Judaismi praedicti levari, et
praefatae Consorti nostrae habere, et sic fieri et irrotulari faciatis. Itaquod
praefata Consors nostra eisdem Cartis commodum suum facere possit, prout magis
viderit expedire. Test Rege apud Westminster. 4 die Julii.

Claus. 3. E. 1. m. 23, De Rotul. Scaccarii Judaismi scrutandis.
Mandantum est Justiciariis ad Custodiam Judaeorum assignatis quod Scrutatis
Rotulis de Scaccatio Judaismi nostri, Regi sub Sigillo suo ejusdem Scaccarii
sine dilatione ^on^^are faciant, quibus and quot debitis Willi^mus de
Appledresfeld tenetur in Judaismo Regis, vel Judaeis suis quibuscunque per
Cartas suas, vel alio modo. Et hoc Breve remittant T. R. apud Bellum locum
Regis 24 die Ianuar.

Ibid. m. ^3. P^o W. de ^ppl^dre^f^ld.
Praeceptum est Vicecom. Suthampt. quod demandam quam de dicto VVillo. de
Appledresfeld fac. per summonitionem Scaccarii Regis de Judaismo pro debitis
quibuscunque Regis, vel aliquibus Judaeis Regis solvend. ponat in respectum
usque in tres Septimanas, post Festum Purificationis bearae Mariae prox.
furtur. Test ut supra.

Ibid. m. 23. Pro codem Willo. etc.
Rex Justiciariis ad Custodiam Judaeorum assignatis salutem. Volentes dilecto
and fideli nostro. VV. de Appledres. gratiam facere specialem; Vobis mandamus
quod demandam quam ei faci^is per breve nostr. Scaccatii nostri de Judaismo pro
debitis quibuscunque nobis, vel aliquibus Judaeis nostris solvendis, ponatis in
respectum usque in tres septimanas post festum Purif. Bea^ae Mariae prox.
furtur. Ita quod ex tunc de debitis illis respondeat prout de jure and secundum
legem Judaismi nostri fuerit faciend. T. R. apud Bellum Locum Regis. 25 die Ian.

These Writs fully manifest the manner of proceedings and respects in cases of
Debts and Obligations before the Justices appointed for the Custody of the
Jews, in the Kings Exchequer for the Jews.

In this 3 year of King Edward the 1. were the Statutes de Iudaismo made and
enacted in Parliament by the King and Nobles, as I The first part of my sho^t
Demu^re^* (...). 2. p. 35. to ^2.
have elsewhere proved at large, not in the 18 year of his reign, as Sir 2.
^^stit. p. ^06, 507.
Edward Cook very grossly mistakes, which I shall infallibly evidence by these
two Records in 4 E. 1. (the very next year after their enacting, which I have
formerly touched and shall here transcribe at large) expressly citing these very
Statutes, and awarding execution according to their prescription and words.

Claus. 4. E. 1. m. 8. Pro Gamaliele de Oxon. Judaeo
Rex Justiciariis suis ad Custodiam Judaeorum assignatis salutem. Ex part
Gamalielis de Oxon. Judaeo London, Nobis est ostensum, quod cum nuper Sacro de
Geregrave, per diversas Cartas quandam pecuniae summam mutuasset, et idem
Saerus qui tunc temporis pro libero habebatur servilis conditionis nunc
existens, ut dicitur, omnes terras et tenementa sua quae libere dare, vendere
potuit and obligare, ad voluntatem suam, post confectionem praedictarum
Cartarum in tantum vendidit diversis Christianis adhuc eadem tenentibus, quod
nihil penes ipsum remansit praeter quandam portionem terrae quam nunc tenet in
Villenagio, et quam vendere nec alicui obligare potuit, per quod dictus Judaeus
de praedicto debito suo minus just elongatur. Volentes igitur eidem Judaeo ad
debitum suum recuperandum, pro ut justum fuerit subvenire, ita quod in hac
part sibi non fiat injuria. Vobis mandamus, quod licet sic fuerit, quod dictus
Saerus terras et ten. quae tempore confectionis praedict. Cart. libere tenuit
post illud tempus vendidit, and nunc servilis conditionis extiterit, propter
hoc non omittatis quin per Sacramentum. 12 liberorum and legalium hominum, per
quod rei veritas melius sciri poterit, et qui nulla assinitate attingunt
praedictum Saerum, vel tenentes terras and tenem^nta praedicta, diligenter
inquiri faciatis, quas terras redditus and tenementa dictus Saerus habuit
tempore confectionis praedictarum Cartarum, quae tunc aut postea libere dare,
vendere and obligare potuit ad voluntatem suam: and qui praedictas terras,
reddit us and tenementa quae sunt vadium praedict. Judaei pro praedicto debito
nunc tenent, and quantum valiant per annum, and quantum quilibet inde tenet. Et
tunc inspectis debitis dicti Judaei, ad quantum videlicet se extendunt Nota.
SECUNDUM STATUTA NOSTRA IUDAISMI, omnes quos praedictarum terrarum reddit: et
tenementer, quae idem Saerus libere dare et obligare potuit tempore praedicto,
ut praedictum est, et quae sunt vadium ipsius Judai, per praedictam
Inquisitionem tenentes invoneritis in quorum manibus exllant, di^tringi
faciatis; viz. tam praefatum Saerum si aliquam liberam terram teneat, quam
alios singulatim, pro portione ipsum de praedicto debito contingente eidem
Judaeo solvend. Et si idem Saerus aut aliquis Christianus de praedictis
tenentibus aliquod Starrum acquietantiae, vel r^cepti de praedicto Judaeo
ostendere poterit, illud eidem faciatis allocari. T. R. apud West. 6. die Junii.

Claus. 4 E. 1. m. 11. P^o Gamaliele de Oxon Judaeo.
Rex Thesaurario et Baronibus suis de Scaccario, et VVillielmo de Middleton
salutem. Cum Secundum Assisam et Nota.
Statuta Iudaismi nostri, Judaei nostri in Regno nostro habere debeant a
Christianis deb^toribus medietatem terrarum redituum et Catall^rum sucrum
quousque debita sua perceperint, ac Willielmus de Lascel de Oteringham qui
Gamalieli de Oxon Judaeo per plures et diversas Cartas in centum et
quinquaginta Libris et amplius tenetur, non habeat terras aut tenementa in
quibus distringi possit, nisi viginti libras, quas Johannes fill. Mart. de
Oteringham ei debet et centum solides et duodecim quarteria frumenti annui
redditus percipiend. a dicto Johanne ad terminum vitae ipsius Will. Volentes
praefato Iudaeo ad debita sua praedicta recuperanda subveni^e, Vobis mandamus
quod si ita est, tunc praedicto Judaeo Nota.
Secundum Statutum praedictum, habere facias medietatem dictarum 20 librarum;
et medietatem dictorum centum solidorum, et 12. quarter: frumenti per annum
quousque di^tus Iudaeus Nota.
Iuxta Statutum Nostrum de Iudaismo editum debitum suum perceperit antedictum.
Et nolumus quod praedict. Willielmus possit dare, vendere, vel alienare
medietatem dictarum 20 librarum, nec medietatem dicti annui redditus quousque
dict. debitum praefato Judaeo plenarie per solvatur, T. Rege apud Westminster. 14 die
Maii.

In these two memorable Records Anno 4 E. 1. we have an express recital of
the Statute de Iudaismo no less than 4 several times, not only in words and
substance, but by name, by th^^e various styles. Statuta nostra Iudaismi;
Statuta Iudaismi nostri; Secundum Statutum praedict^m; Juxta Statutum nostrum
de Iudaismo editum. Therefor beyond all contradiction this Statute could not
be first made in the 18 year of King Edw: the 1. as 2 Instit. p. 506.507.
Sir Edw Cook mo^^ confidently affirms 3. or 4. several times in his slight
Commentary upon it (being 14 years after these Records, which could not recite
and command execution upon it, so long before its making) but in the 3d. year
of his reign, as I have fully e^inced elsewhere, both by Hi^^ories, reasons,
and a brief touch of these Records; which mistakes with others forecited, I
doubt not but himself would have publicly retracted had he been living, upon
my clear discoveries of them, which I now presume will henceforth mislead no
persons since his decease, as they have done most heretofore.

This stumbling block of his touching the true date of the Statute de Iudaismo
being removed, I shall proceed to other Records of the same year, pertinent to
my Subject.

Claus. 4. E. 1. m. 7. Pro Benedicto de Winton Judaeo.
Rex Iusticiariis suis ad Custodiam Iudaeorum assignatis, salutem. Quia
accepimus, quod Dominus Henricus Rex Pater noster habere solebat in Scaccario
suo Iudaeorum quendam Iudaeum intendentem Officio Escaetariae de tenementis et
catallis quae ad ipsum Patrem nostrum accidere debent per mortem vel
transgressionem Iudaeorum, vel quacunque alia ratione. Et quod Nos nullum
Iudaeum seu alium habemus nec habuimus post mortem ejusdem Patris nostri qui
Officio praedicto intendat, propter quod damnum non modicum hactenus
sustinuimus, ut accepimus. Nos indempnitati nostrae prospici volentes in hac
part, assignavimus Benedictum de Winton Iudaeum ad Officium praedictum
exequendum in forma praedicta. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod accepto ab eodem
Sacramento corporali, quod fideliter se habebit in Offiicio praedicto quamdiu
steterit in eodem, ipsum Benedictum ad Officium illud ^dm^ttatis in forma
praedicta, T. Rege apud Westminster. xix die Iulii.

In this Record we have both the Office, Oath and employment of the Kings
Escheator of the Jews expressed to the full, which no Histories or Law Books
mention. In the same Roll and Membrana there is this ensuing record, reciting
the Kings authority to release or assign the Jews Debts at his pleasure, and
the Tallages imposed on them which were some times satisfied by Bills.

Claus. 4. E. 1. m. 7. Pro Magistro Elia, etc. et Gamal. Judeis London.
Rex Justiciariis suis ad Custodiam Judaeorum assignatis salu^em. Cum celebris
memoriae Dominus Hen: Pater noster dudum in recompensationem arreragiorum quae
restabant reddenda Philippo de Arcy de annuo feodo viginti Librarum quod a
dicto Patre nostro dudum recipere consaevit et quae idem Philippus dicto Patri
nostro ex toto remisit, pardonavit eidem Philippo quoddam debitum centum
librarum quod debuit Magistro Elye fill. Magist. Mossei et Gamelino Judaeis
London, et quoddam debitum viginti libra^: quod debuit eisdem Iudaeis de annuo
feodo: et idem Pater noster vobis madavit, quod eundem Philippum de praedict:
debitis quietum esse et Cartas per quas dictis Iud is tenebatur in debitis
praedictis ei restitui, et eisdem Jud is in Tallagi^s suis vel aliis debitis
quae Dom. Patri nostro debuerant praedicta debita allocari faceretis, sicut per
inspectionem Rotulorum Cancellariae praedict. Patris nostri Nobis constat, and
quaedam pecuniae summa de praedict. seodo vigint. librarum praedict. Iudaeis
adhuc restat allocanda: Vobis mandamus, sicut alias mandavimus, quod eisdem
Iudaeis id quod adhuc restat allocand: in hac part in Tallagio suo super ipsos
assesso tempore nostro, vel in debitis si quae nobis debent, allocatis. T. R.
apud Estwode 13 die Julii.

William Middleton one of the chief Collectors of the Jews Taxes and Arrears in
this Kings reign, was so employed in keeping the Records of the Common Pleas
this ^ear, that he could not well attend his Collectors office, which
occa^ioned there ensuing writs to discharge him from this Office, and for
others to execute it, and for him to deliver up the keys, writs, and rolls of
them and the Jews to others employed therein.

Pat. 4 E. 1. m. 9. Pro Will. de Middleton.
Rex dilecto Clerico suo Will: de Middleton salutem. Advertentes quod vos
Officio Custodiae Rotulorum nostrorum coram Justiciariis nostris de Banco
taliter estis onerati, quod levationem arreragiorum Tallagii Judaismi nos^ri,
vel Vicessimae Nobis concessae commode vacare non potestis, et volentes Breve
exhonerationis in hac part providere, vos ab Officio levationis arreragiorum
praedictorum tenore praesentium duximus absolvend: In cujus, etc. T. R. apud
Westminster: 23 die Julii.

Pat. 4. E. 1.14.

De Clavibus Vicessim. and Tallagii Judaeorum liberandis.


Rex dilecto Clerico suo Will: de Middleton salutem. Advertentes quod vos ex
Custodia Rotulorum et Breuium nostrorum, ac aliorum Instrumentorum placit:
Banci nostri Westmon. tangentium, quae vobis custodiend: commissimus taliter
estis onerati, quod examinat: collectionis vicessimae nostrae cum dilecto
Clerico nostro Nicolao de Castro vel collect: et levat: Tallagii nostri
Judaeorum Justiciariis nostris ad Custod: Judaeorum assignatis, diutius absque
dampno vacare non potestis. Nos vestri exonerationi volentes in haec part
provideri, Vobis mandamus, quod Claves quas de praedicta vicessima, et de
praedicto Tallagio penes vos habetis, liberetis Baronibus nostris de Scaccario,
ut ipsi claves illas aliis, qui de praedictis Officiis fideliter se
intromittant committere possint, prout ad opus nostrum viderint expedire. In
cujus etc. T. Rege apud VVestmon. 23 die Julii.

Pat. 4. E. 1. m. 9. De R^tulis and Brevibus Judaismi liberandis.
Manndatum est, VVil: de Middleton, quod Rotulos and Brevia Judaismi Regis
liberet Ade de Wynton: custodiend: quamdiu Regi placuerit. Et hoc nullatenus
omittat: In cujus, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 9 die Junii.

You have frequently heard before of the public Chests of the Jews VVritings
and Charters, wherein they were all reserved, for the searching of which for
several ends either to ascertain the King of their estates, or to deliver up
stars and obligations in them that were really satisfied to the parties bound
in them, or to search for and take out their particular writings and debts upon
every occasion, we have several Presidents in sundry Rolls, especially in this
4 year of King Edward the 1. three whereof I shall only recite.

Pat. 4. E. 1. m. 11. De Chrograph. Judaeorum London. Scrutandis.
Rex dilectis and fideliibus suis Gregorio de Rokesly, Barthol. de Castello,
and Radulpho de Broghton salutem. Sciatis quod assignavimus vos ad Archas
Cirograf, Judaeorum nostrorum London scrutandas, and ad Cartas quas quietas
inveneritis and de hoc vobis veraciter constiterit ab eisdem Archis extral
endas. and in quadam alia cista per se, and ad alias Cartas nomine
Christianorum bellicatas, and nondum quietatas in alia cista per se, and ad
alias Cartas in quibus debita clara consistunt, in tertia cista per se
reponendas. Ita quod cistae illae sigillis vestris sigillentur, et salvo
custodiantur donec aliud inde praeciperimus. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod
praedista faciatis in forma praedicta. In cujus etc. T. R. apud Odiham 6 die
Augusti.

Pat. 4. E. 1. m. 25. De Archis Judaeorum Colcestriae aperiendis et scrutandis,
et alibi.
Rex dilectis sibi in Christo Abbati de Colcest. et Walt. de Essex salutem.
Sciatis quod assign. vos ad Archas Cirograf. Judaismi nostri Co^cest. et
Suthbiry aperiend. et ad scrutand. and examinand Cartas ad omnia debita in
Archis illis inventa, et ad omnia illa irrotulanda, et ad plenum scrutinium
inde faciend. et ad omnia ea nobis ap^rte et distinct sub sigillis vestris
referenda. Et ideo vobis mandamus qu^d ad certos dies quos ad hoc provideritis,
Arch. praedict as aperiatis, et Cartas, et omnia debita in eis inventa
diligenter scrutemini, et facto scrutinio illo diligenter illa irrotuletis, et
Archis illis sic secure reclusis, eas sigillis vestris sigilletis, Ita quod non
aperiantur, donec aliud inde duxerimus Ordinandum. Proviso insuper, quod nullas
Cartas extra easdem Archas existentes ponatis in easdem, ^^c aliquas infra
easdem Archas existentes, ab eisdem extrahatis, vel aliquo modo extrahi
permittatis. Et si quas Cartas in manibus Cirografforum nostrorum inveneritis
extra Archas illas, eas per se irro^ulari, et in securo loco reponi faciatis.
In cujus rei, etc. T. Rege apud Turr. Land. 27 die Novembr.

Eodem modo assignatur Rogerus de Northwode una cum aliquo asio fideli Regis
quem sibi associaverit ad aperiendas Archas Cirograf. Judaismi Regis Cantuar.

Eodem modo assign. Robertus de Ludham et Willus. Gerebert. ad aperiendas
Archas Cirograf. Judaismi Regis Winton, Oxon. et de Devisis.

Eodem modo assign. Nicholaus de Stapleton et Abbas sanctae Mariae Eborum, ad
aperiend. Archas Cirograf. Judaismi Regis de Ebor.

Eodem modo assign. Prior Sanctae Katerinae extra Lincoln, et Robertus de
Blund. ad aperiendas Archas Cirograf. Judaismi Regis Lincoln and Stainford.

Eodem modo assign. Abbas Sancti Augustini Bristol, et. Bartholm. le Ieovene
Constabularius Castri de Bristol, ad aperiend. Archas Cirograf. Judaismi
Bristol.

Eodem modo assignatur Bartholomeus de Suthleye, una cum aliquo alio fideli, ad
aperiend. Arch. Cirograf. Judaismi Wigorn. In cujus, etc. Test ut supra.

Pat. 4. E. 1. m. 36. De Archis Judae^rum Norwici scrutandis, et aperiendis et
alibi.
Rex dilecto sibi in Christo Priori Norwici, et dilecto Clerico suo VVillielm.
de Middleton salutem. Sciatis quod assignavimus vos ad aperiend. Archam
Cirograf. Judaismi nostri Norwici, et ad scrutand. et examinand Cartas, et
omnia debita in illa Archa inventa, et omnia debita illa irrotulanda, et ad
^lenum scru^inium inde faciend. et ad omnia ea nobis di^^incte et aperte sub
sigillis vestris referenda. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod ad certum diem quem ad
hoc provideatis, Archam illam aperiatis, er Cartas, and omnia debita in eadem
inventa diligenter scutemini, et facto scrutinio illo, praemina omnia
irrotuletis, et Archa illa secure reclusa, eam sigillis vestris sigilletis. Ita
quod non aperiatur don^c a^iud inde duxerimus Ordinandum. Proviso, quod nullas
Cartas extra eandem Archam existentes ponatis in eandem, nec aliquas ibidem
inventas ab eadem extranatis, vel aliquo modo extrahi permittatis. Et si quas
Cartas in manibus Cirograf. nostrorum extra Archam illam inveneritis eas per se
irrotulari, et in securo lo^o reponi faciatis. In cujus, etc. apud Turr.
London. 24 die Novembris.

Eodem modo assignatur Walt. de Helynn una cum aliquo alio fideli Regis quem
sibi assignaverit ad aperiendas Archas Cirograf. Judaismi Regis Hereford et
Gloucester.

Eodem modo assignatur Iohannis Wigorn. et Roger de Evesham ad aperiend. Arch.
Cirograf. Judaismi Regis Exon. et ad scrutand. ut supra.

Eodem modo assignatur Hugo de Stapleford, una cum aliquo alio fideli Regis,
quem sibi associau. ad aperiendas Archas Cirograf. Judaismi Regis Huntindon,
Bedford, Northampt. and Oxon.

Eodem modo assignatur Prior de London et Willielmus de Stirkeslegh. ad
aperiend. Archas Cirograf. Judaismi Regis Lincoln et Stainford. In cujus, etc.
Test ut supra.

I have rehearsed all these Patents and Commissions at large, because they vary
some thing from each other in form, prescribe general and universal searches of
the Jews common Chests and Writings, and manifest, how and where they were
dispersed into most of the chief Cities and Towns of England and where they had
Chests, more exactly then most other Records.

This year there falling out some difference between the Jews and the Sheriff
of Oxford who had the Custody and Regulation of the Oxford Jews, thereupon at
the Jews procurement there issued forth this Patent to the Mayor and Bailiffs
of Oxford to keep the peace between the Sheriff and them, and to have the
Protection and Government of them till the next Parliament.

Pat. 4. E. 1. m. 12. Pro Custodia Judaeorum Oxon
Rex Majori ad Ballivis suis Oxon. salutem. Cum ad occasionem turbationis inter
Vici: nostrum Oxon. and Judaeos nostros ejusdem Villae jam exortae, sicut
dicitur tollendam, et ad pacem in Judaismo nostro, ibidem quietius
conservandam, assignavimus vos ad Custod. Judaeorum nostrorum e^usdem villae
usque ad Parliament. nostrum post instans fest: Sancti Michaelis: Vobis
mandamus quod sicut de vestra diligentia et fidelitate specialiter confidimus
custodiae illi diligenter intendatis. Ita quod Pax nostra in Iudaismo
praedicto, et in aliis quae statum ipsorum Judaeorum in eisdem partibus
tangunt, vestro mediante juvamime et Consilo been et inviolabiter conservetur.
Mandavimus enim Vicecomiti nostro praedicto quod ad inform^^^^nem status
ipsorum Iudaeorum non praesumat aliquid attemptare, nec de eisdem in aliquo
interim se intromittat. In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Windsore 31 die Julii.

King Edward the 1. in the 5 year of his reign appointed Commissioners to
impose a Tax upon all the Commonalty of the Jews throughout England, whose
names and authority are thus expressed in a Commission granted to them for this
end.

Pat 5. E. 1. m. 13. De Judaeis Talliandis See Rot. Finium 5. E. 1.
Rex dilectis et fidelibus suis Ioh. de Cobham, et Phil. de Wileby et Will. de
Middl. salutem. Sciatis quod dedimus vobis potestatem obligandi universos et
singulos Judaeos regni nostri, secun^um quod vos vel duo vestrum videritis
ex^edire. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod vos omnes, vel duo vestrum, omnes
predictos Judaeos tallietis, secundum quod ad opus nostrum melius videritis
expedire. In cujus, etc, T. R. apud Windsore, 30 die Maii.

Hereupon all the Jews were summoned from all parts up to London to be taxed,
and thereupon all Inquisitions against them during their attendance there upon
this occasion and afterward were suspended, unless by special command of the
King or his Justices for the Jews, or these Commissioners, and those to be made
both by Christians and Jews, as was anciently accustomed, as this Writ does
evidence, issued soon after.

Claus. 5. E. 1 m. 4. pro Judaeis Oxon,
Rex Vicecomiti Oxon. cum assignavimus quosdam fideles nostros London, ad
Tallagium super communitatem Judaeorum nostroru^ Angliae assidend: per quod
oportet Iudaeos nostros Oxon ibidem interesse ad mandatu^ fidelium nostroru^
praedictorum. Tibi praecipimus quod Inquisitiones aliquas super dictos Iudaeos
dum ibidem fuerint, vel postquam inde redierint non facias, sine mandaeto
nostro, vel dictorum fidelium nostrorum, seu etiam Iusticiariorum nostrorum ad
Custod: Iudaeorum assignat: and hoc per Christianos and Iudaeos sicut
temporibus aliorum Vicecom. ibidem fieri consuevit. T. Rege apud Beckell, 22
die Iunii.

These incessant heavy annual Taxes ^^^trarily assessed on the Jews without
intermission by Egyptian Taxmasters so impoverished many of them, that they
were unable to pay them, and thereupon all their goods and debts were seized to
satisfy them, so far as they would reach, leaving them only a bare subsistence
and the residue respited to be annually paid; as this record informs us.

Claus. 5. E. 1. m. 6. Pro Mosseo de Clare Judaeo.
Rex Insticiariis suis ad Custod. Iudaeorum assignatis salutem. Quia ex
testimonio fide dignorum accepimus, quod Mosseus de Clare Iudaeus, tam pro
Tallagio nostro super ipsum assesso, quam pro aliis debitis quae nobis solvit
post adventum nostrum in Angliam, non sufficit ad residua debita in quibus
nobis adhuc tenetur, tam de tempore Domini Regis Henrici patris nostri, quam
nostro, nobis ad praesens solvend: Vobis mandamus, quod scrutatis rotulis de
Iudaismo nostro de debitis in quibus Nobis tenetur ad Scacc: Judaismi nostri
praedicti, de debitis suis usque ad summam praedictum debitorum ad opus nostrum
in recompensationem eorundem capiatis vel sibi juxta quantitatem catallorum
suorum in Archa Cirografforum Iudaeorum exeuntem rationabiles terminos ad quos
d^bita illa solvere possit; salva sibi et familiae suae sustentatione sua
assignari faciatis, et catalla sua ea occasion in manum nostram capta sibi
interim restitui faciatis. Test meipso apud VVind^ore 28 die Maii.

If the rich wealthy Jews in foreign parts have a desire to be impoverished and
fleeced of all their wealth by uncessant arbitrary annual Taxes imposed on them
at the Assessors pleasures, let them now come into England for that purpose,
where they shall find persons more skillful and powerful to tax and excise
them now every month or two, then those who taxed these their Ancestors only
once a year, till they have scarce a subsistence left them.

The Jews Usury being totally suppressed to please the Christians by the
Statute de Judaismo, the King to enable them to pay their Taxes, and subsist,
granted general Licenses to them to exercise merchandising according to that
Cap. 8. See The first part of my Demurrer, Edit. 2. p. 40.
Statute, as this Record demonstrates.

Patent. 5 E. 1. m. 13. Pro Judaeis Angliae.
Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Cum propter Inhibitionem quam ad
commoditatem Christianorum de Usuris and poenis Judaismi nostri Nuper fieri
fecimus. Concessimus, quod Judaei regni no^^ri Merchandi^as legales exercere
valiant in eodem r^gno Iuxta formam Statuti inde de Consilio nostro provisi.
Volumus and concedimus, quod Magister Elya^* fi^. Magistri Mossei, Cresseus
fill. ejusdem Elie, and Aaron fill. Vynes Judaei nostri London, hujusmodi
Merchandisas exerceant in regno praedicto; et quod debitores suos qui eisdem
Judaeis per scripta vel alio modo legitime obligati fuerint, ad mercandisas, et
alia quae eis rationabiliter debuerint soluenda per Justiciarios ad custod:
Judaeorum assignatos distringantur, secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni
nostri. In cujus, etc. T. R. apud Windsore 30 die Maii.

By this Record of 5 E. 1. it is most apparent, that the Statute de Iudaismo,
prohibiting Usury to the Jews, and enabling them to exercise Merchandise, was
not made in 18 E. 1. as is erroniously affirmed by Sir Edward Cook being 13
years after this Patent, which twice precisely mentions it, in these words,
Inhibitionem quam, etc. nuper fieri fecimus; and Juxta formam Statuti inde de
Consilio nostro prouisi: but in the 3 year of his reign, scarce two years
before it: as I have here formerly manifested by two other records in 4 E. 1.
the very next year after it. And it is likewise evident by this record, that
the banishment of the Jews Usury out of England by this Statute, did not cause
them voluntarily to banish themselves out of England, as he grossly asserts,
since they continued here 15 years after, notwithstanding all their Usury was
suppressed.

In this last Patent the King seems to speak to the Jews with Jacobs Voice,
but in the very first Patent concerning them the next year after he discovers
his Esau's hands, imposing an heavy Tax upon their decayed estates with
greatest rigor in the exacting of ir, witness this memorable Commission to
their Egyptian Taskmasters, which I fear some now of late do imitate, even
toward their English Christian Brethren.

Patent. 6 F. 1. m. 8. De Tallogi^ assidendo super Communitate Judaeorum
Angliae.

See Rot. Finium. 6. E. 1. ^


Rex dilectis and fidel: suis Fratri Josepho de Chancy Priori Hospit. Sancti
Johannis Jerusalem in Anglia; Waltero de Helynn, Johanni de Cobham, and
Philippo de Willeby salutem. Sciatis quod assignavimus vos ad assidendum
quoddam Tallagium super Communitatem Iudaeorum nostrorum ad opus nostrum, quam
citius et commodius videritis expedire, et prout vobis injunximus viva voce.
Dantes vobis potestatem praedictum Tallagium de bonis, catallis, et debitis
praedictorum Judaeorum levandi, et nomin e nostro adnuandi: nec non et
hu^usmodi Iudaeos, qui in hac part Rebels fuerint Per Exilium et
Abjurationem Regni, Nota.
^i necesse fue^^^^ compellendi ad dictum Tallagium, pro proportionibus ipsos
contingentibus Nobis sins Difficultate qualibet persolvend. Et ideo vobis
mandamus quod praemissa faciatis in forma praedicta. Test Rege apud Windsore
15 die Iulii.

Et mandatum est universis et singulis Iudaeis infra regnum Angeliae
constitutis quod eisdem Josepho, Waltero, Johanni, et Philippo in praemissis
intendentes sint, et respondentes in forma praedicta. In cujus, etc. Test ut
supra.

We may perceive by this Commission how intollerably the poor Jews were taxed
and fleeced by the Kings Tax-masters every year, and what rigorous penalties
and assessments were extorted from them; yet neither these heavy, uncessant
annual Tallages, nor the banishment of their Usury by the forementioned Statute
would expel or force them hence, before a direct Edict of Parliament and
Proclamation for their exile by a set day, under pain of hanging (some years
after this enjoined banishment and abjuration to such as refused to pay this
T^llage) ferretted them all out of England.

In the 7th year of King Edward the first, I find this memorable Writ,
Proclamation and Edict of his to (...) Justices, for the inhibiting and
punishing the Blasphemies of the Jews (then frequent) against Christ crucified,
and the faith of Christ Jesus, with loss of Life and Member, with other strict
Orders for preventing their Apostacyes and propagation of their Jewish Rites,
and all communion betwixt them and Christians, worthy our special observation.

Claus E. 1. m. 6. De Judae.
Rex dilectis et fidelibus suis Stephano de Pentecester, VValtero de Helynn,
and Johanni de Cobham Iusticiariis suis ad Placita Transgressiorum Mon^tae
audienda et terminanda assignatis, et dilecto Clerico suo Philippo de
VVylegheby salutem. Quia datum est Nobis intellig^, Quod quidam Judaei Regni
nostri fidem Ca^holicam et Sacra Ecclesiastica hactenus diversimode Blasphemare
non formidarunt, nec adhuc formidant, in Divini nominis contumeliam, et totius
Christianae professionis opprobrium. Nos hujusmodi Blasphemias sicut Principem
Catholicum decet reprimi cupientes; Volumus, Quod nullus Iudaeus taliter de
caetero blasphemare praesumat: videlicet, aliquod erroneum, detestabile aut
abhominabile dicendo vel faciendo in Blasphemia Crucifiri, fidei Catholicae,
seu beatissimae matris Mariae Virginis, seu Ecclesiasticorum Sacramentorum.
Volumus etiam, quod hoc per omnia loca Regni nostri in quibus Iudaei morantur
public proclamatur: et ne aliquis Iudaeus sub periculo Vitae et Membrorum
talia facere vel dicere praesumat. Et si quis notorius Blasphemat or
inveniatur, ita quod per Inquisitionem per Sacramentum Christianorum bonorum et
graviorum inde convinci possit evidenter; Volumus quod quilibet talis puniretur
secundum quod in hujusmodi casibus alias fieri consuevit.

Idem fiat de ipsis qui aliquando ad fidem Catholicam conversi, baptisati
fuerunt, et postmodum ad Iudaicam pravitatem perversi, ab eadem fide Apostatare
praesumpserint.

Volumus etiam quod Mulieres Iudeae de caetero portant signa in superiori vest
sicut Iudaei Mares.

Et quod Iudaei de caetero nullos habeant servientes Christianos mares aut
faeminas secum in quibuscunque obsequi^s commorantes, nec in domibus propriis,
nec aliis in Civitatibus, am locis aliis ubi morantur, set ipsi Iudaei sibi
invicem in omnibus sibi serviant et ministrent: Et hoc ubique precipiatur tam
Christianis quam Iudaeis sub gravi forisfactura nostra.

Volumus etiam quod omnes Christiani qui pignora sua inter bona Iudaeorum
dampnatorum inventa redimere voluerint, hujusmode pignora per testes fideles et
bonae famae probent esse sua, et ea per certa signa et indicia describant, and
hujusmodi Testibus eatenus credatur quatenus ipsis ma^oris vel minoris famae
esse constiterit. Et si forte pignora illa sua esse per testes probare non
possint, eo quod testes defuncti vel absentes sunt, ita quod eos habere non
possint, vel quia secret et absque testimonio impignor atae fuerunt, tunc ad
pignora illa recuperanda sufficiat tantummodo Sacramentum ipsorum, quorum illa
existunt, dum tamen pignora illa certis signis et indiciis desc^ibant sicut
praedictum est. Et hoc propter lapsum anni a tempore impignorationis hujusmodi
nullatenus omi^tatur. Volumus insuper, quod omnes illi qui per Testes fide
dignos probare possint debita sua pro suis pignoribus persolvisse, et pignora
illa propter certam aliquam rationem per ipsos coram vobis ostendendam, aut
propter maliciam ipsorum Iudaeorum ab eisdem Iudaeis non recipisse, ad iteratam
solutionem debitorum illorum faciendam nullatenus compellantur, and testibus
illis credatur juxta famam personarum, additis testibus aliis si necesse fuerit
juxta discretionem vestram. De libris autem apud Oxon impignoratis volumus quod
nullum fiat judicium usque ad Festum omnium sanctorum prox: futurum.

Volumus etiam quod per Civitates, Burgos, Villas mercatorias et alias public
proclametur, ne quis bona Iudaeorum dampnatoru^, seu dampnandoru^ recipiat, seu
jam recepta celet vel occultet, sedea Nobis restituet citra Fest: beati Petri
ad vincula prox: futur: Alioquin Nos versus ipsos tanquam ad caelatores et
occultatores Thesauri regni graeviter capiemus. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod
omnia praedicta fieri et firmiter observari faciatis in forma praedicta. T.
Rege apud Westmon. x. die Maii.

Consimiles Literae diriguntur. Barth: de Sutlegh, Will: de beof, and Ade de
Boteler, and Ioh: de Fauconer.

Consimiles Literae Breve diriguntur. Ioh. Beks, Alex: de Kirketon, and
Ranulpho de Dacre, and Hugoni de Kendale.

In this 7th year of King Edw. the 1. (as our Historians The first part of the
Demurrer, Edition 2. p. 41.42.
elsewhere cited record) there was a Parliament held at London, principally to
inquire after the great clipping and falsifying of the Kings coin, and prevent
it for the future; during this Parliament most of the Jews throughout England
were apprehended, and hundreds of them by several Inquests* found guilty before
the Justices (mentioned in these Writs) specially appointed for that end, for
clipping counterfeiting, and corrupting the Kings money, whereof 294 Jews in
London alone were convicted and soon after executed, and multitudes more of
them in other places throughout the Realm; which occasioned these Writs and
Proclamations (made most probably by advice of the Parliament, and approved by
it) to be issued forth and put in execution for the just punishment of the
blasphemous Jewish Malefactors, and better discovery of their concealed
confiscated estates for the Kings greater advantage, and likewise for releif of
such sub^ects who had any pawns or goods in the then condemned Jews possession.
As those Jews who were legally convicted for clipping and corrupting the Kings
coin, were executed for it in all places; so many more of them were accused,
imprisoned for the same crime, much oppressed, maligned generally by the
people, and enforced to make fines and ransomes to the King, and the houses and
estates of those who were executed sold and strickt inquiry made after all
concealments of their estates, as the last, and these ensuing Records will at
large inform us, far better than any of our Historians. I shall begin with that
which is most large.

Claus. 7. E. 1. m. 7. De sine recipiendo a Iudaeis.
Rex dilectis, et fidelibus suis Stephano de Pentecester, Waltero de Helynn, et
Ioh. de Cobham Justiciariis ad placita Transgressionis Monerae audienda,
salutem. Quia omnes Judaei nuper rectati, et per certam suspicionem indictare
de retonsura monetae nostrae, and inde convicti cum ultimo supplicio puniuntur;
and quidam eorum eadem occasion, omnia bona et catalla sua satisfecerunt, et
in prisona nostra liberantur, in eadem ad voluntatem nostram detinendi. Et cum
accepimus quod plures Christiani ob odium Judaeor. propter discrepantiam fidei
christianae, Nota.
et ritus Judaeorum, et diversa gravamina per ipsos Judaeos christianis
hactenus illata, quosdam Judaeos nondum rectatos ^^ indictatos de
transgressione monetae, per leves et voluntarias accusationes accusare et
indictare de die in diem nituntur, et proponunt, impouentes eis ad terrorem
ipsorum, quod de hujusmodi transgressione culpabiles existunt super ipsos
Judaeos faciendae et sic per minas hujusmodi accusationis, ipsis Iudaeos metu
incutiant, et pecuniam extorqueant ab eisdem; Ita quod ipsi Judaei super hoc ad
legem suam saepe ponuntur in vitae suae periculum manifestum. Volumus quod
omnes Iudaei qui ante primum diem Maii proxim. praeterit. indictati, vel per
certam suspicionem rectati non fuerunt de transgressione Monetae predictae, et
qui facere voluerint finem juxta discretionem vestram, ad opus nostrum facere
pro sic, quod non occasionentur, de bujusmodi transgressionibus factis ante
primum diem Maii propter novas accusationes christianorum post eundem diem inde
factas non molestentur, sed pacem inde habeant in futurum. Proviso, quod Iudaei
indictati, vel per certam suspicionem rectati de hu^usmodi transgressione ante
praedictum diem Maii, judicium subeant coram vobis, juxta formam prius inde
ordinatam and provisam. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod fines hujusmodi capiatis,
et praemissa fieri, et observari faciatis in forma praedicta. Test Rege apud
Cantuar. 8 die Maii.

Consimiles Literae diriguntur Barthol. de Sulley et Sociis suis justiciar. ut
supra, T. Rege, ut supra.

Consimiles Literae diriguntur Johan. Beks et sociis suis Iusticiariis, ut
supra, T. Rege, ut supra.

Claus. 7. E. 1. m. 7.
Rex dilect. et fidel. suis Stephano de Pentecester, Walt. de Helynn, and Ioh.
de Cobham Justiciar. ad placita Monetae audiend. et terminand. assignatis
salutem, Quia Omnes Judaei nuper rectati, et per certam suspicionem indictati,
de retonsura Monetae nostrae et inde convicti, cum ultimo supplicio puniuntur,
et quidam eorum eadem occasion, omnia bona et catalla sua forisfecerunt, et in
prisona nostra liberantur, in eadem ad voluntatem nostram detinendi. Volumus
quod omnes illi Judaei qui bona et catalla sua forisfecerunt ut praedict. est,
et qui in prisona nostra ea occasion detinentur, et qui pro deliberatione
corporum suorum finem facere voluerint vobiscum ad opus nostrum, hujusmodi
finem juxta vestram discretionem facere possint. Et quod mulieres Judeae, quae
fuerunt uxores Judaeorum dampnatorum, et etiam uxores Judaeorum, quorum bona et
catal. forisfact. sunt, et quae habent unde redimi possunt, similit. fin.
facere possunt vobisc. ad opus nostr. juxta discretionem vestram, et juxta
quantit. bonorum quae viri sui habuerunt, et quae nondum inventa, et per eosdem
Judaeos occulte deponantur; et sic per hujusmodi finem a prisona, qua occasion
praedict. detinentur. deliberari. Ita quod Judeae pauperes quae fuerunt uxores
hujusmodi dampnat, Judeorum, et similiter uxores Judaeorum quae bona et catalla
sua forisfecerunt, et quae non habent unde redimi possunt, per vos absque
redemptione deliberentur a Prisona. Volumus insuper et mandamus, quod citra
festum sancti Ioh. Baptistae de terris et tenementis Judaeorum hujusmodi quae
sunt escaeta nostra, diligenter inquiratis in quibuscunque locis existent, et
pro quanto vendi possint, et quis plus dare velit pro eisdem, et nobis precium
inde citius persolvere. Ita quod inde infra Terminum praedict. ad plenam nos
cerciorare possitis. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod fines hujusmodi a dictis
Judaeis tam Masculis quam femellis, et omnia praemissa faciatis in forma
praedicta. Test. Rege ut supra.

Consimiles literae diriguntur Johan. Beks, et sociis suis Justiciariis ut
supra, T. R. ut supra.

Consimiles literae diriguntur Barthol. de Suleye et sociis suis Justiciar. ut
supra, T.R, ut supra.

Besides these Patents to the Justices, the King then issued forth special
Patents and Commissions to diverse others, to sell the Houses and Tenements of
the condemned and hanged Jews for his best advantage in this form.

Pat. 7. E. 1. m. 1. De Domibus Judaeorum suspensorum vendendis.
Rex omnibus, etc. salutem. Sciatis quod dedimus potestatem dilectis et fidel.
nostris Thomae de Sodyngton, Hugoni de Lendale, et Majori Eborum, ad domos
nostras quae sunt escaeta nostra in civitate Eborum et extra, per feloniam
quorundam Judaeorum ibid. et alibi nuper suspensorum, et tenementa quorundam
aliorum Judaeorum qui se in patriam ponere renuerunt vendendi, et homines inde
feoffandi, prout ad opus nostrum magis viderint expedire. Dedimus etiam
potestatem dilecto et fideli nostro Hamoni Hauteyn praedict. Hugoni et Thomae
fill. Roberti ad hujusmodi domos in Civitate Lincoln, et extra vendendi in forma
praedicta. Dedimus etiam potestatem eisdem Hamo^i, Hugoni. and Gilberto de
Cestreton ad hujusmodi domos in Villa Stanford et extra vendendi in forma
prae^icta. Dedimus etiam potestatem eisdem Hamoni, Hugoni, and Vic^comiti Warw.
ad hujusmodi domos in Villa Warw. et extra vendendi in forma praedicta. Ratum
habituri et firmum quicquid praedicti fideles nostri, vel duo eorum in singulis
Comitatibus and Villis praedictis nomine nostro duxerint faciendum. Nos enim
factum eorum in hac part per Literas nos^ras Patentes ratificabimus. In cujus
etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 17 die November.

The like Letters Patents and Commission were then issued forth to others, to
sell the condemned and executed Jews houses, lands, rents in other places.

Pat. 7. E. 1. m. 11. De Potestate vendendi Domus and redditus Judaeorum
dampnatorum.
Rex dilecto and fideli suo Willielmo de Braybeof salutem: Sciatis quod dedimus
vobis potestatem vendendi omnes terras et redditus Judaeorum dampnatorum pro
transgressionibus sibi impositis in locis in quibus vos ad inquirendum de
hujusmodi Transgressionibus assignati estis, prout vobis injunximus viva voce,
et prout ad opus nostrum magis videbitur vobis expedire. Et ideo vobis
mandamus, quod hujusmodi domos, terras, et redditus Judaeorum sic dampnatorum
vendatis in forma praedicta: Ita quod de Exitibus venditionis illius Nobis
respondere possetis ad mandatum nostrum. In cujus, etc. T. Rege apud Brehul: 1
die Aug.

When the Jews had all made fines and ransoms for their Trespasses with the
Kings Justices and Commissioners as aforesaid; then he sent forth a
proclamation that they might freely exercise their lawful Trades, Merchandises
with Christians and one another as formerly, and buy victuals, with other
necessaries, and have such communion with Christians as they were wont;
prohibiting any to lay violent hands upon or molest them, as this Record (with
others of the like nature to other Sheriffs, attests.

Claus. 7. E. 1. in Schedula: pro Judais Ebor,
Mandatum est Vicecomiti Eborum, quod in pleno Comitatu Eborum, et in Civitate
praedicta public proclamari faciat, Quod Judaei ibidem de rebus et mercan.
disis licitis cum omnibus tam Christianis quam Judaeis libere negociari
possint, et victualia, and alia necessaria ab omnibus emere, et inter
Christianos conversari, prout premissa facere consueverunt temporibus
retroactis. Firtuirer etiam inhiberi facias, ne qui in eos manus violentas
injiciant, vel alias eis malefaciant contra pacem Regis.

King Edward the 1. in the 8. year of his reign issued forth these Letters
patents following for the sale of all the condemned Jews houses Lands, and
Tenements in London, and 14 other several Counties named in them, in all which
they had Lands, Tenements and Possessions amounting to no small value.

Pat. 8. E. 1. m. 28 De potestat^ vendendi domos, terras and tenementa
Iudaeorum.
Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Sciatis quod dedimus potestatem pro Nobis
and haeredibus nostris, dilecto and fideli nostro Waltero de Helynn vendendi
nomine nostro omnes domos, terras and tenementa cum pertinentiis, quae fuerunt
quorumcunque Iudaeorum, quae ad manum nostram tanquam Escaeca nostra per
forisfacturam eorundem occasion transgressionum monetam nostram tangentiu^
devenerunt: videlicet in Civitate London, and Comitatibus Middle. Sussex, Surr.
Kanc' Essex, Hertf. Norf. Suff. Cantuar. Hunt. Bucks. Bedf. Oxon. and Berks.
Ita quod ipsi qui ea emerint a praefato Waltero ea habeant et teneant sibi et
haeredibus suis in perpetuum. In cujus, etc. T. Rege apud Windsore, 28 die
Novombris.

As the King sold the Houses of these condemned Jews, so he likewise took into
his hands the Debts of the other Jews to satisfy their Debts due unto him for
their Taxes, which he levied to his own use, and then allowed them for their
arrears.

Claus. 8. E. 1. m. 1. Pro Bonamy Judaeo Eborum.
Rex Thesaurar* and Baronibus suis de Scaccario, salutem, Sciatis quod cum
nuper capi fecerimus in manum nos^^^m quoddam debitum quinquaginta marcarum in
quo Robertus de Percy per Cartam suam in Archa Cyrographar: apud Ebor:
existenti tenebatur Bonamy de Ebor: Iudaeo: Et quod levari precipimus ad opus
nostrum: Concessimus eidem Iudeo, quod si praedict. debitum ad opus nostrum
levatum fuerit, vel in manum nostram captum, sicut praedict: est. Idem Iudaeu^
pro dicto debito 50 marcarum in recompensationem habeat a^ 40 marcis in
veteribus arreragiis, tallagiis and aliis debitis quae nobis debet ad
Scaccarium praedictum. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod si ita est, tunc eidem
Iudaeo in hujusmodi veteribus arreragiis, tal^agiis, and aliis debitis quae
nobis debet ad idem Scaccarium allocationem de praedictis 40 marcis habere
faciatis in recompensatione praedicti debiti 50 marcarum sicut praedictum est.
T. R. apud Westminster. 13 die November. By which the King got x. marks clear from
this Jews over and above his pretended debt and arrear for which this debt was
seized and levied.

King Edward in the 8. year of his reign at the supplication of the Friars
predicants in England, who desired to preach unto the obstinate Jews, thereby
to convert them to the Christian Faith, and turn them from their ancient
errors, blindness and unbelief, procured this notable ensuing Writ and Patent
to all his Sheriffs, Bailiffs and other Liege people, commanding them to induce
the Jews in all places to resort unto and hear their preaching, without
blasphemy or disturbance, at such times and places as these Friars Predicants
should direct, etc.

Pat. 8. E. 1 m. 27. Et Praedicando Judaeis.
Rex Vicecomitibus et omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis salutem. Cum dilecti
nobis in Christo Fratres de Ordine Praedicatorum in Anglia. Judaeis, quorum
mentes vetustas erroris et perfidiae obnubulat et obc^^cat, praedicare
proponunt verbum Dei, quo facilius interveniente gratia Spiritus sancti, ad
fidei Catholicae converti valiant unitate^; and ob hoc dilectus nobis in
Christo, Prior Provincialis ejusdem Ordine nobis supplicaverit, ut vobis demus
in mandatis, Quod omnes Iudaeos ubicunque locorum in Ballivis vestris
conversantes efficaciter moneatis et inducatis, quod in locis ubi vobis de
Consilio Fratrum ipsorum magis expedire videbitur, ad audiendum verbum Dei
conveniant, et illud ab eisdem Fratribus absq* tumultu, contentione, vel
blasphemia, audiant diligenter and benign. Et si forte Altissimus velamen
duritiae a cordibus eorum aufereus aliquibus vel alicui ipsorum Iudaeorum
gratiam dederit convertendi, quod caeteri Iudaei eis super hoc non impediant,
nec per alios impediri procurent. Nos praeat^tum ^^opo^^tam ipsorum ^ratrum
alten^entes pium et salubre et precibus predicti Prio^is favor^biliter
annuentes in hac part vobis ma^damus Quod omnes Iudaeos in Ballivis vestris
conversantes, ad praemissa facienda efficaciter moneatis, et eos ad hoc modis
quibus melius sciveritis inducatis, prout unicuique vestrum inspiraverit
Spiritus veritatis. In cujus, etc. quamdiu Regi placuerat duratur. Test Rege
apud Winton. 2 die Jan.

What good effects this zealous, pious project of the Friars preachers, and
Patents of the King in pursuit thereof produced in converting any considerable
number of the Jews to the Catholic faith, I find not mentioned in Histories or
Record, but their universal banishment hence 8. years after, See the first
Demurrer, Edit. 2. p. 44, 65.90, etc.
principally for their infidelity, sufficiently manifests, that all the
endeavors then used for their conversion, by drawing them to these Preachers
Sermons, and the provisions made by the King for the Converts support hereafter
specified, were very successlesse. Wherefore those Zealots and Enthusiasts who
so earnestly plead and write for their readmission amongst us now, upon the
future probability of their Conversion by their powerful preaching to, and
exemplary conversation amongst them, are like to find no better success than
these preaching Friars then did, and other eminenter Divines than themselves,
of late years, and now, do find in foraign parts where the Jews reside: where
they may do well now to try what good they can do by preaching and conversing
with them abroad, before they practice upon them at home, as these Predicants
Friars formerly did without any such success as they expected.

King Edward the 1, to promote the Jews conversion, and for their better
maintenance and corroboration when converted to Christianity, did this very
year by two several Patents grant, That whereas all the estates and goods of
the Jews con^erted to Christianity did of right and custom become forfeited to
the Crown, that from thencforth the Jews should jnjoy the moity of them for
their own sustenance, and that the other moity of them should accrue to the
house of the Converts, for the better sustentation of the Converts there; And
further granted the moity of all the forfeited estates of the Jews that should
any ways accrue unto him and all Deodands to be distributed in alms amongst
the Converts, and employed toward the maintenance and repair of the Society
and house of the Converts (now the Rolls) erected by his father, as these two
Patents of his this year most fully relate.

Pat. 8. E. 1. pars 1. m. 15 dors. Pro sustentatione Judaeorum convers^^
Rex Thesaurario, et Baronibus suis de Scaccario, salutem, Quia ad augmentum
fidei, et cultus nominis christiani conversionem Judaicae pravitatis ad fidem
Catholicam potissime credimus operari, Nos ut illi qui jam a caecitate
hujusmodi ad lucem Ecclesiae sunt conversi, in ipsa fidei firmitate
roborarentur, et alii qui adhuc in errore illo persistunt, libentius et
promptius ad gratiam fidei de caetero convertant; disposuimus auctore Domino de
ipsorum sustentatione salubtiter providere. Licet igitur omnia bona et catalla
Judaeorum quae convertuntur ad fidem, ad nos plenarie de jure et consuetudine
pertinent, volentes tamen eis postquam filii et fideles Ecclesiae sunt effecti,
Dei intuitu gratiam facere specialem, medietatem valoris omnium bonorum suorum
ubicunque in regno nostro ad sustentationem suam concedimus de dono nostro;
aliam autem medietatem bonor. hujusm. bona etiam et Catal. Judaeor. ex nunc
quacunque occasion dampnandorum, una cum bonis et catallis, quorumcunque
Judaeorum quae ex quacunque ratione Nobis sorisfieri contigerit, nec non et
Elemosinam nostram quae Deodanda vocatur (post tempus concessionis nostrae
Fratribus predicatoribus de Elemosina illa facta) una cum That is Polmony, or
the Fine every Jewish villain paid for the acknowledgement of his slavery to
the King.

See Spelmans Glossary Cowels Interpreter Chevagium Lambard. Cooks 1 Instit. f.
140. a Bracton l. 1. c. 10. Britton. f. 79.


Chevagio Judaeorum nostrorum Angliae, quae omnia colligi, et deferri volumus
ad Scaccarium nostrum, ad sustentationem Conversorum et convertendorum qui
honestae conversationis extiterint usque ad septennium completum duximus
deputanda, eisdem per vos et custodem Principalem domus praedictae plenarie
assignanda. Et quia cura domus praedictae aliquo viro discreto, qui continue
resideat, et negociis dictae domus personaliter intendat, indigere dignoscitur,
volumus, quod a^ ^uram hujusmodi aliquis Presbyter idoneus et discretus dicti
custodis arbitrio deputetur, qui capellae nostrae ibidem, cum uno socio
Presbytero honesto converso, seu, alio et Clerico seu Clericis fibi necessariis
personaliter deserviat ibidem continue residendo, qui redditus praedictae domus
collegat, bona etiam et catalla, una cum commemoratis elemosina et chevagio ad
dictum Scaccarium recipiat, et hujusmodi conversis et convertendis porciones
suas distribuat, et gerat negotia dictae Domus in omnibus tam infra quam extra
de consilio custodis praedict. Illi autem conversi qui habiles fuerint ad
artificia seu Ministeria secularia addiscenda, volumus quod ad ea decaetero
deputentur, per custodem praedictum, et de portionibus suis eisdem ut dictum
est assignatis sustententur, donec de Artificiis et Ministeriis suis valiant
competenter sustentari; et extunc praedictae portiones subtrahantur, et ad
fabricam et reparationem Capellae nostrae praedictae, vel ad sustentationem
aliorum conversorum arbitrio custodis Principalis praedicti assignentur.
Proviso etiam, quod bona praedicta quae ultra portiones ad sustentationem
conversorum praedictorum assignatas superesse contigerit ad fabricam praedict.
Capel. et usus ejusdem necessarios convertantur. Dictus autem Presbyter
rationabilem sustentationem suam, et Concapellani sui ac Clerici, seu
Clericorum suorum, de bonis et Catallis praedictis percipiet annuatim. Volumus
autem, quod fi^^in domo praedicta capellanus conversus Idoneus et honestus
extiterit, qui capellae nostrae ibidem deserviat, illum retineat in socium,
quibuscunque extraneis praefarend. Praefatus etiam Presbyter onera capellae
praedictae, tam ordinaria quam extraordinaria sumptibus dictae domus totaliter
sustinebit, et de receptis et impensis suis compotum reddat de anno in annum
cum vobis ad Scaccar. praedictum, prout rationabiliter fuerit faciendum; Et
ideo vobis mandamus quod medietatem bonorum illorum Judaeorum qui ad fidem
amodo se convertent; bona etiam et catalla Judaeorum quorumcunque ex nunc
quacunque occasion dampnandorum, una cum Chevagio Judaeorum Angliae, et
elemosina nostra praedicta, quae Deodanda vocatur, statim cum accederint
plenarie ac diligenter colligi, et levari faciatis, Et custodi principali
praedicto seu Presbytero liberari faciatis, conversis et convertendis
praedictis distribuend. in forma predicta, and compotum praedicti Presbyteri de
anno in annum inde audiatis, prout superius est expressum. In cujus, etc. Test
Rege apud Westminster. 26 die Maii.

The King soon after these Letters Patents to the Treasurer and Barons of his
Exchequer, constituted John de Saint Denis Archdeacon of Rochester Custos or
Guardian of this house of the Converts, and thereupon directed these Letters
Patents to him, agreeing in substance with those to the Treasurer and Barons,
which I shall infer^ at large, as most fully setting forth his Office of any
Record I have seen.

Pat. 8. E. 8. pars 1. m. 15. Pro sustentatione Judaeorum conversorum.
Rex dilecto Clerico suo Johan. de sancto Dionisio Archidiacono Roffens.
Custodi Domus conversorum London, salutem. Quia ad augmentum fidei, et cultus
Nominis Christiani conversionem Judaicae pravit^tis ad fidem Catholicam
potissime credimus operari. Nos ut illi qui a c^^citate hujusmodi ad lucem
Ecclesiae sunt conversi in ipsa fid^i firmitate roborentur, et alii qui adhuc
in errore illo persistunt liben^ius et promptius ad gratiam fidei decaetero se
conve^tant; disposuimus auctore domino, de ipsorum sustentatione s^lubrit^r
providere. Licet itaque omnia bona and catallae Judaeorum qui convertuntur ad
fidem ad Nos plenarie de jure and consuetudine pertinent, Volentes tamen eis
postquam filii and fideles Ecclesiae sunt effecti Dei intuitu, gratiaem facere
specialem, medi^tatem valoris omnium bonorum suorum ubicunque in Regno nostro,
eisdem ad sustentationem suam dono nostro concedimus: aliam autem medietatem
bonorum hujusmodi, bona etiam et catalla Judaeorum ex nunc quacunque occasion
dampnandorum, una cum bonis et catallis quorumcunque Judaeorum quae ex
quacunque ratione nobis foris fieri contigerit, ^ec non et Elemosinam nostram,
quae Deodanda vocatur (post tempus concessionis nostrae Fratribus
predicatoribus, de elemosina illa facta) una cum Census Capitis or Poll or
Headmony. See Statutum de Judaismo, 3 E. 1. c. 4. First part of the Demurrer.
Edit. 2. p. 39.
Chevagio Judaeorum nostrorum Angliae: quae omnia colligi et deferri volumus ad
scaccarium nostrun, ad sustentationem conversorum et convertendorum qui
honestae conversationis extiterint, usque ad septennium completum duximus
deputanda, eisdem per Thesaurarium et Barons de Scaccario nostro per vos
proportionabiliter assignanda. Et ut circa Domus conversorum nostrorum Land.
quo ad praemissa propensius, et cum majori solicitudine pertractetur, Volumus,
quod provideatis de aliquo idoneo Presbytero de cujus industria et discretione
merito confidend. sit, qui in domo ipsa continue resideat, et capellae nostrae
ibidem cum uno socio capellano honesto et uno vel duobus Clericis personaliter
deserviat, redditus ad dictam domum pertinentes colligat, et bona et catalla
supradicta ad praedict. Scaccarium nostrum recipiat, ac portiones conversis et
convertendis assignatas distribuat, et ad alia negocia dictae domus fideliter
procuranda, quotiens vos abesse, vel ad hoc personaliter vacari non possetis,
de consilio vel ordinatione vestra diligenter intendat, qui etiam rationabilem
sustentatationem suam pro se, et socio suo, ac Clerico vel Clericis memoratis,
ad servicium capellae necessariis, de redditibus et bonis praedictis recipiat,
et de omnibus receptis et misis suis compotum suum reddat coram Thesaurar^o et
Baronibus de Scaccario de anno in annum, secundum quod literis inde dictis
Thesaur. et Baronibus directis before continetur. Et si in domo praedicta
capellanus conversus idoneus et honestus extiterit, volumus quod Presbiter seu
Procu^ator praedictus ipsum prae cae^eris in socium retineat ad administrandum
una secum in capella praedicta; Si qui autem de conversis et co^vertendis,
habiles fuerint ad doctrinam, volumus quod Scelus exerceant: Laici etiam quos
ad artificia seu Ministeria secularia addiscenda aptos esse noveritis, adeo
decaetero deputentur, ut habeant singuli eorum sustentationes suas de
portionibus eisdem de bonis praedictis rationabiliter assignandis. Quod si
praedicti Scolares clerici aliquod beneficium Ecelesiasticum adipisci valiant,
de quo sustentationem suam rationabilem habere possint, subtra^^antur eis ex
tunc portiones praedictae, and eas aliis conversis seu convertendis
indigentibus facias assignari. Et hoc idem fiat de Laicis supradictis, quam
cito se possint de artificiis seu ministeriis suis sustentationem competentem
habere. Proviso inter caetera, quod de redditibus and bonis praedictis quae
ultra sustentationem conversorum capellanorum et Ministrorum Ecclesiae
superesse contigerit, ad fabricam and ornatum Capell^ predictae, and divini
cultus augmentum faciatis ibidem Provide deputari. Et si quae in domo praedicta
in personis aut rebus corrigenda seu reformanda videritis, ea corrigi and
reformari cum omni diligentia facias, prout indempnitati et honestati dictae
domus magis videbitis expedire. In cujus etc. T. Reg. apud Westminster. 3 die Junii.

Yet all this care and diligence both of the King and Preaching Friars
forementioned, made very few Jewish Converts in that age, and those only of the
poorer sort, rather to get a livelihood to sustein them in this house, than out
of any real affection to Christ or Christianity.

In the Plea Rolls of the Kings Exchequer for the Jews in the 9 year of his
reign, I find this Guardian of the House of the Converts suing forth this
ensuing Writ for the moity of the goods and chattels of one Belager an Oxford
Jew converted to the Christian faith, by virtue of the forementioned Patent:
whereupon they wete deli^ered unto him for the use of the House, as the Record
it self will more largely express.

Placita apud Scaccarium Judaeorum and Termino Pasche, Anno Regis Edwardi nouo
part. 7.

Pasche, E. 1. rot. 7.
Johannes de sancto Dionisio Custos Domus conversorum tulit Breve Regis de magno
sigillo in haec verba. Edwardus, etc. Justiciariis ad custodiam Judaeorum, etc.
assignatis salutem. Ex part conversorum domus nos^rae London. nobis est
ostensum, quod cum medietas bonorum and catallorum Jud^orum conversorum sen
convertendorum ad fidem Catholicam ad conversos Domus nostrae praedict. ratione
concessionis nostrae eis inde factae pertineat, alia medietate illis qui sic a
tempore concessionis nostrae praedict. convertunt reservata: ac Belager Judeus
Oxon. nuper ad sidem Catholicam se converterit, etc. Thereupon the King
commanded that according to his former Charters, the one moiety of the goods
should be delivered to the convert for his iustentation, and the other moity to
the House of the converts. T. Roge apud Woodstock 25 die Aprilis, An. Regni
nostri nono.

Per hoc Breve liberantur eidem Johanni bona and catalla subscripta, videliz et
de bonis and catallis praedicti conver^ sorum, viz. vnus liber Pressed. Constit:
precii 12 d. unus Grecismus precii 6d. una Legenda precii 10d. unum Doctrinale
magnum precii 1 d. quidam liber Constitutionum precii 4 s. quidam codex, precii
16 s. quoddam insciatum precii 16 s. etc.

In the Plea Rolls of this Term and year (Pasche 9 E. ^. rot. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10.) there are very many actions brought by Jews against Christians, and
Christians against Jews, and one Jew against another, and many STARS as well of
Grant and Release, as Obligatory and by way of Morgage, pleaded and recited at
large, and issues joined upon them, whether they were their Stars or Deeds, or
nor, when denied by them to be their Deeds; which issues were tried by a Jury
of 6. Legal Christians and 6 Jews. Their Starrum and Starra, as they are there
styled, began in this form.

Solomon Judaeus de Stanford cognovit per Starrum suum, etc. that he was
obliged to such a one in such a sum, or that he had assigned and granted such
a Debt, Star or Morgage to such a one; or that he had released such a Debt,
Star or Morgage. And in their Stars of Release they added this clause. Et si
inveniatur Carta salis, vel obligatio in Archa Cirografforum, vel extra nomine
praedicti Solomonis, etc. quod quieta sit, et nil valeat, and quod recognoscit
hoc idem sigillo suo. When issue was joined upon Non est factum, concerning any
of their Stars or Deeds, the entry upon the trial by 6 sworn legal Christians
and Jews in those Rolls, was usually in this form.

Et Inquisitio inde venit a die Pasche in tres Septim: nunc per Thomam Clinch,
Johannem Hubbard, Abraham Sampson etc. et alios probos et legales homines and
Iudaeos, (expressing all their names) Qui dicunt super Sacramentum suum, quod
praedictum STAR: est factum praedicti Solomonis, et litera Ebraica manu sua
p^opria signatum, and quod dictum STARRUM fecit tempore quo habuit liberam
administrationem bonorum suorum, etc.

I shall transcribe only one of these Records as a Pattern of most of the rest,
whereby the form of the Legal Process and Proceedings before the Justices
assigned for their Custody, will be more fully manifested to the Readers,
together with the form of their Stars of Relea^e.

Pasche ^ E. 1. rot. 4.1 Norf. scil.
Cum Alicia quae fuit Uxor Clementis de Poringland districta fuisset pro xl. s.
ad opus Regis de Debito Gente quae fuit uxor Ayey: fill: Deulegin: Eadem Alicia
venit* et clamat habere quiet antiam de dicto debito per quoddam STARRUM coram:
etc. in haec verba. Isaac filius Jurn: et Muriel. Leveske Judaei redantur, quod
Gente de Glocest. concedit, quod Alicia quae fuit uxor Clementis de Poringland
et haeredes sui quieti sint de ipsa et haeredibus suis de omnibus Demandis
Calumniis and Placitis a creatione seculi usque ad Pentecosten Anno Edwardi
4to. Et si aliquis Judaeus, homo vel faemina, quid exigat, vel calumniatur
versus praedictam Aliciam occasion alicujus Debiti quod eidem Gente debebat a
principio seculi usque ad praedict. festum Pentecost: supradict: Gente eam est
acquietare, defendere and warrantizare. Et praedicti Jud^i testantur, quod
eadem Gente spontanea voluntate hoc recognovit, et quod istud STARR: est factum
pr^dictae Gente, and factum quo tempore habuit liberam administ ationem bonorum
suorum; et petit quod inquiratur. Ideo praeceptum est Vicecomiti, quod venire
faciat coram Justiciariis sex probos et legales homines Christianos, et sex
legales Iudaeos de Civitate Norwic. ad dies, etc. Et quia constat per
praedictam Inquisitionem (upon the trial) quod praedicta Alicia quiet^i est de
praedicto debito per praedictum STARR: quod est factum ipsius Gente de debito
tempore factum, etc. Consideratum est, quod de praedicto debito xl s. cedat
quieta, etc.

The like trial is in Rotulo 5. of this term in dorso. Kanc. Eustachius de
Peckham; and Rot. 6. Suthampt. between Solomon ben-Solomon and others; with
sundry more, overtedious to insert, since I intend not to be a Reporter of all
their Cases, but only of the form of their Law proceedings, for which these
with the former Instances may suffice.

In the same 9th year of King Edward the 1. I find these Records relating to
the Jews in the Clause and ^^tent Rolls in the Tower of London. The first of
them in time, is concerning a fine made with the Kings Commissioners by a Jew,
which another Jew undertook to satisfy for him to the King, whereupon there
issued this Writ to the Receiver of their goods.

Claus. 9 E. 1. m. 7. Pro Aarone fill. Vines Judaeo London.
Rex dilecto Clerico suo Philippo de Wyleby Nuper Receptori bonorum Iudaeorum
dampnatorum in diversis Comitatibus salutem, Quia Aaron filius Vynes Iudaeus
London, manucepit solvere nobis 40 s. in quibus Abraham fill: Elye filii
Magistri Mossei Iudaei London, et quinque Marcas in quibus Mosseus fill: Hugonis
nobis tenentur pro fine quem nobiscum fecerunt coram dilectis and fidelibus
nostris Stephano de Penecestre, and sociis suis tunc Justiciariis nostris ad
Placita de Transgressionibus, monetae nostrae andiend: et terminand: assignatis
pro Transgressionibus monetae. Vobis mandamus, quod praedict. Abraham de
praedict. 40 s. et praedict. Mosseum de praedict. 5 marcis quietos esse facias.
Et scire facias Justiciariis nostris ad custodiam Iudaeorum assignatis, quod
praedict. 40 s. and 5. marc. decidant praefato Aaron in debitis quae eidem
Aaroni concessimus in recompensationem cujusdam debiti in quo Galfridus Pecche
eidem Aaroni tenebatur. Et quod idem Aaron carissimae Consorti nostrae, et
Alianorae Reginae Angliae nuper remisit. T.R. apud Westminster. 28 die Maii.

The like writ in effect issued for Sarra a Jewesse of London concerning a like
Fine the same year, to the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer.

Claus. 9. E. 1. m. 3. Pro Sarra de London Judaea;
Rex These: et Baronibus suis de Scaccario, salutem. Cum Sarra de London Judea
Northampt: teneatur nobis in quinque marcis, per quas finem fecit nobiscum
coram dilecto Clerico nostro Hugo de Kendale ad hujusmodi fines recipiend:
nuper assignat: pro Hak: fill. ejus Judeae, pro quibusdam transgressionibus
monetae eidem Hak: impositis, ut dicitur; ad quarum solutionem bona et catalla
ipsius Sarrae ad presens non sufficiant, ut accepimus. Nos paupertati ejusdem
Sarrae quae occasion debiti illius in prisona nostra Northampt. detinetur
compatientes, et in co super hoc gratiam facere volentes; Concessimus eidem
Sarrae, quod de illi^ 5 marcis solvat nobis per annum ad Scaccarium nostrum,
viz. ad Scacc. nostrum Pasche prox: futur: unam marcam, et sic de anno in annum
ad eundem terminum unam marcam, quousque dictae 5. marcae nobis fuerint
persolutae. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod eidem Sarrae terminum illum habere, et
sic fieri et irrotulari faciatis: and ipsam Sarram a prisona praedicta, si ea
occasion, et non alia detineatur in eadem, sine dilatione deliberari faciatis.
Test Rege apud Winton, 12. die Octobris.

The Jews by the custom formerly used, and the Statute de Iudaismo, could not
sell any of their Houses (no more than their debts) without the Kings special
license first obtained in writing, for which take this president of the
foresaid year.

Pat. 9. E. 1. m. 5. Pro Samuele de Elor. Judaeo.
Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Sciatis, quod de gratia nostra speciali
dedimus licentiam Samueli de Eborum Judaeo London, vendendi cui voluerit
quoddam Messuagium suum in Civitae Ebor: quod est in vico de Conyng-street,
inter domum Paulini de Munbray, ex una part, et domum A de Verdeuel ex altera:
dum tamen idem Sam: messuag: illud ad manum mortuam non ponat, contra formam
Statuti nostri. Dedimus etiam licentiam ei qui Messuag: illud ab eodem Samuele
emere voluerit illud emendi, prout magis viderit expedire, nisi Messuag: illud
fit Escaeta nostra, vel alio modo jus habeamus in eodem. In cujus, etc. Test
Rege apud Winton, 12 die Octobris.

The like Licenses to sell houses I find in other Patent and Clause Rolls.

This year the King to search out all the Debts owing to the condemn^d Jews or
others, sent forth this Commission to search all the Chests of the Jews, and
the Stars and writings in them, and to recover all the Debts that were due on
them, somewhat different from those formerly granted.

Pat. 9. E. m. 1. De Archis Cirograff. Judaismi scrutandis.
Rex dil: and fidel. suis Hamoni Hutteyn, Roberto de Ludham, et Magistro
Henrico de Bray, salutem. Quia volumus quod omnes Cartae, Starra et munimenta
omnia Iudaeorum dampnatorum, et alia quocunque modo ad Nos ratione Iudaismo
pertinentia per vos scrutentur, videantur, et tunc transcribantur distinct et
aperte. Ita quod extractae fieri possint inde ad debita illa ad opus nostrum
levanda, prout de jure et secundum legem et consuetudinem Scaccarii Iudaismi
nostri fuerit faciend. et prout ad opus nostrum magis videritis expedire. Et
ideo vobis mandamus quod ad certos etc. praemissa fac: in forma praedicta. Et
de Cartis, Star^is, munimentis et debitis illis tres Rotulos faciatis, quorum
unus liberetur Baronibus nostris de Scaccario; alter ad Scaccarium Iudaismi
nostri, et tertius remaneat in custodia vestra Magistro Henrico nobis
liberandus. In cujus, etc. T. R. apud Guildeford 21 die Octobris.

A like Patent to this, with little variation, De Archis Cirographorum
aperiendis et scrutandis, etc. I find in the patent Roll of 14 E. 1. m. 20.
where all may peruse it at leisure.

This same year the King confirmed the Grant of his Deodands to the House of
the Converts in London, toward the repairing of the Chapel and buildings
there by this Writ directed to his Justices itinerant.

Claus. 9. E. 1. m. 1. Pro Conversorum Domo London de Deodandis.
Rex Justiciariis itinerantibus in Com. Lincoln. salutem. Cum nos dudum pro
salute animae nostrae, et animatum Antecessorum nostrorum Regum Angliae,
concessimus dilectis Nobis in Christo Fratribus Praedicatoribus London,
Elemosinam nostram quae Deodanda vocatur in Regno nostro Angliae, in subsidium
translationis Domorum suarum usque ad finem triennii percipiendam, et post idem
triennium, eandem Elemosinam dei intuitu concessimus Conversis domus nostrae
London, ad fabricam Capellae suae, quam Dom. H. quondam Pater noster Rex
Angliae fundavit, ibidem persiciend: et in subventionem reparationis et
sustentationis edificiorum loci illius. Vobis mandamus, quod praedictam
Elemosinam nostram de Itinere vestro in Com: praedict. et in caeteris
Comitatibus in quibus itineraturi estis, habere faciatis dilecto Clerico nostro
Joh: de Sancto Dionisio custodi Domus praedictae ad fabricam et sustentationem
ad reparationem praedict: inde faciend: T. R. apud Westminster. 13 die Novembris.

Consimiles Literae diriguntur Justiciariis proximo Itineraturis in Com. Devon.
pro conversis praedictis. T. ut supra.

King Edward in the 10th. year of his reign, safely to protect the persons and
goods of the Jews in Hereford from the violence of the people there, committed
the protection of them to 24 of the chief Burgesses of Hereford (as he did the
Jews in other Towns throughout England) an^ proclaimed, that none should
damnifie or mo^est them in their persons or goods under pain of losing his
goods, as this Patent manifests.

Pat. 10. E. 1. m. 15. Pro Judaeis Hereford.
Rex dilectis sibi Waltero de la Bar, Hugoni de Clear, Reginaldo Comwood,
Thomae de Anesye (and to 20 more particularly named in the Patent) Burgensibus
suis Hereford salutem. Cum suscererimus in protection^m et defens^onem nostram
Judaeos nostros Hereford, res and omnes possessiones suas, and ad tuitionem and
ma^orem securitatem ipsorum vos assignavimus ad custodiam eorun^em. Vobis
mandamus, quod per totam villam praedictam public proclamari and firmiter
inhiberi faciatis ex part nostra: Ne quis sub periculo omissionis bonorum
suorum, praedictis Judaeis in personis aut rebus suis, inferat dampnum
molestiam seu gravamen. Et vos ipsi Judaeos illos, res et possessiones suas
infra villam praedictam et extra, quantum in vobis est, manuteneatis,
protegatis et defendatis. In cujus, etc. quamdiu Regi placuerit durat. Test
Rege apud Devises 10 die Aprilis.

It appears the Jews were then very odious and grievous to the English, that
they needed so many Gardians to protect their persons and estates from their
plunder and violence.

Soon after this some Jews of Hereford, being there imprisoned for Trespasses
done to some English there, the King sent this Writ to the Sheriff of the
County to release them upon their putting in of Bail to answer it, and to
restore their goods if seized.

Claus 10. E. m. 4. Pro Aaron de Blund, and aliis Judaeos in Breve.
Rex Vic. Hereford salutem. Quia Mosseus le Blund, Iosseus filius Manasses
Judaei Hereford, and Mosseus fill. Jacobi Judaeus London, manuceperunt habere
apud Westminster. coram Justiciariis nostris ad Custodiam Judaeorum assignatis Aaron
le Blund, and Mirabiliam uxorem ejus, Fautinum filium praedicti Aaron, and
Bonam uxorem ejus, Cresseum filium Jacobi and Floriam uxorem ejus, a die sancti
Iohis. Baptistae in tres Septimanas ad standum recto super quibusdam
transgressionibus quas dicti Judaei fecisse dicuntur Ade de Peyntur and
Margeriae filiae ejusdem Ade, si ipse vel eadem Margeria versus eos loqui
voluerit, tunc prae ictos Aaron, Mirabilem, Fautinum, and Bonam, et Cresseum,
and Floriam et eorum familiam, si ea occasion, et non alia, in prisona nostra
detineantu^, dictis manucaptoribus interim tradas in Ballium, et catalla
praedict. Judeorum, si quae occasion praedicta ceperis in manum nostram, eis
interim restituas per manacaptionem praedictam, and de corporibus eorum
Judaeorum, seu de familia aut catallis eorundem occasion transgressionis
illorum, te non intromittas, donec aliud inde preciperimus, and habeas ibi hoc
Breve. T. Rege apud Salop 2 die Junii.

The Jews (most likely to avoid the rage and plunders of the English
Christians) having left the wearing of their Tables on their upper garments,
formerly prescribed by sundry forecited Writs and Ordinances, and the Statute
de Iudaismo, to distinguish them from Christians, were now by this new
Proclamation from the King sent to the Justices, strictly enjoined to wear
them, as well women as men, and likewise prohibited to sell any flesh to
Christians by any means, or to retain any Christian man or woman in their
houses or elsewhere in their service under great penalties.

Claus. 10. E. 1. m. 8. Quod Iudeae portant Tabulas sicut and Jud^s.
Rex Justiciariis suis ad custodiam Judaeorum assignatis, salutem. Cum nuper
pr^ciperimus and public proclamari fecerimus; Quod omnes Judaei regni nostri,
Tabulas deferant in indumentis suis exterioribus, ut a cultoribus Catholicae
fidei evidentius decernentur. Volentes hoc idem de Judeabus ejusdem regni
generaliter and firmiter observari; Vobis mandamus, quod tam in Ci^itate no^tra
London, quam in aliis Civitatibus, Burgis, and villis alibi infra Regnum
praedictum ubi Judaei conver^antur, public proclamari faciatis sub gravi
forisfactura nostra; Ut omnes and singulae Judeae ejusdem Tabulas hujusmodi
public deferant in forma quae provisa e^t de Judeis praedictis. Facias insuper
inhiberi and public proclamari per totum regnum praedictum, Ne aliquis Judaeus
quascunque carnes quoquo modo presumat vendere Christianis, Nec Christianum
secum in hospitio ^uo, seu alibi in servicio suo audeat decaetero re^inere.
Test Rege apud Westminster. 1 die Decembris.

In the 11 year of King Edward the 1, Upon complaint of the Jews clipping and
falsifying his coin, and other Merchants trading with them therein, the King
issued forth this following Commission to inquire thereof, the hanging and
punishing of so many of them but three or four years before for the like
offenses, not reclaiming the Survivers of them from this their usual Jewish
practice.

Pat. 11 E. 1. m. 22. De his arretandis qui cum Judaeis mercantur de falsis
platis.
Rex dilecto and fideli suo Hamoni Hauteyn, et aliis, salutem. Q^ia ex relatu
fide dignorum nostrorum intelleximus, quod quidam Judaei nostri mercantur cum
quibusdam Mercatoribus extraneis and aliis in Platis de Retonsura Monetae
nostrae fundatis, and etiam falsis platis de Stagno exterius deargentatis.
Vobis mandamus, quod diligenter super hoc faciatis inquisitionem quotiescunque
videritis expedire: Et si vobis constare poterit ita esse, tunc Mercatores
illos, and alios quoscunque hujusmodi platas mercantes, vel a Judaeis nostris
emendas petentes, arrestari, and salvo custodiri faciatis, donec super hoc
al^ud duxererimus ordinandum. Et Judaeos illos a quibus ^ujusmodi platas
petierint emendas dummodo hujusmodi venditioni seu emptioni non fuerint
consentientes, per talem munucaptionem qualem videritis optimam ponatis: in
cujus, etc. Test Rege apud ^othele 6 die Febr.

In the 12 year of King Edward the 1. I find these 4. several Writs and Records
concerning the Jews in one Schedule. The first, prohibiting them to live or
reside in any City, Borough or Town where they had no common Chest, and
commanding their Jus^ices to remove them thence. The second, commanding the
Collector of the condemned Jews goods and estates and his Clerks, to give an
Account thereof, and of the sum they amounted unto. The 3d, commanding the
Sheriffs in all Counties where they resided, with two discreet and ^egal
Knights of the County, to seal up and secure all there Chests and Charters in
them, till farther order. The 4th commanding the Justices assigned for the
Custody of the Jews, to certify the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer the
state of all the Jews Debts, and to distinguish which were clear debts, and
which not, that so they might be there recovered for the Kings use. I shall
recite them in order as they are recorded, the Writs bearing date the (11th)
year before.

Claus. 12. E. 1 m. 8. (...) Schedula a^^ensa. De quibusdam Brevibus
^angentibu^ Judaismum.
Edwardus, Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Aquitaniae,
Justiciariis suis ad custo^iam Judaeorum assignatis, salutem. Quia secundum
consu^tudinem Judaisminostri, Iudaei nostri in aliis Civitatibus, Burgis aut
Villis habitare aut morari non debent, quam in illis quibus Archa Chirographar:
Iudaeorum existat, et diversi Iudaei diversas villas in Regno nostro sunt
ingressi and eas inhabitant, in quibus hujusmodi Archa non existat, per quod
eosdem Iudaeos ab hujusmodi villis volumus amoveri. Vobis mandamus firmiter
injungentes, quod univers^s and singulos Iudaeos in Civitatibus, Burgis et
Villis, in quibus dicta Archa non existit habitantes seu morantes, absque d^mno
eis de corporibus, seu de rebus suis faciendo, sine dilatione facia^is amoveri
ab eisdem: Ita quod ipsi Judaei ab eisdem villis modis omnibus amoveantur ante
quindenam Pasche prox: futuram, Non permittentes ipsos in hu^usmodi villis
habitare decetero, vel morari. Et ita vos habeatis in hoc mandato nostro
exequendo, quod non oporteat Nos vobis iterata mandata nostra di^igere, ex hac
causa. T. Rege a^ud Newark, 28 die Jan. Anno Regni nostri 11.

Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, etc. Dilecto et fide^i suo, Waltero de
Warham, nuper receptori bonorum and catallorum quorundam Judaeorum dampnatorum,
salut^m. Quia quibusdam de causis super summa exituum bonorum et catallorum
praedict. volumus certiorari. Vobis mandam is quod die Pasche proximo futuro in
quinque Septimanas; s^tis coram Thesaur. and Baronibus nostris de Scaccario,
una cum clericis et rotulis vestris de bonis et catallis illis, ut iidem
Clerici compotum reddant tunc ibidem de exitibus praedictis; et ulterius
faciant ea quae compotum et nego^ium illud con^ingunt. T. R. ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est Ioh. Beks, Ade Kirketon, and 7. others more there
named.

Rex Vio: Midd. salutem. Praecipimus tibi quod assumptis tecum duobus de
discretionibus et legalioribus Militibus e^usdem Comitatus, in propria scil:
persona tua accedas ad universas and singulas Archas Cyrograf. Judaeorum in
Balliva tua existentes, et eas sigillis eorundem Militum, et sigillo tuo (...)
ig^ari facias. Ita quod Archae illio sic consignatae, cum Rotulis in locis,
quibus nunc existunt, sub tua costodia remane^ant, donec aliud inde
praeceperimus, et hoc nullo modo omittas T. ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatur Vic. Linc. Cant. Hunt. Kanc. Warw. Leicest. Norff. Suff.
Wigorn, Northampt. Surrey, Suffex, Colcest. Oxon, Berks, Hereford, Essex,
Hertford, Glocest. Darby, Bedeford, Notingh. Devon. Cornub. Wilts, Suthampt.
Exon, Devises and Ebor.

Rex Justiciariis suis ad Custodiam Judaeorum assigna^as, salutem. Quia volumus
quod. Thesaur. and Barons nostri de Scaccario, super omnibus debitis quae
nobis de^entur ad Scaccarium Judaismi nostri, ex quacunque ^^^sa per vos ad
plenum certificentur; Vobis mandamus, quo d^d certum diem quem praedict.
Thesaur. and Barons vobis scire facient, coram ipsis in Scaccario praedicto,
cum ^otulis vestris veniatis, ad certificandum ipsis super debitis praedictis,
quae videlicet sunt clara, et quae non clara, ut ex tunc debita illa levantur,
secundum consuetudinem Scaccarii praedicti, et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. ut
supra.

Moreover, In the Patent Rolls of this 12 year, the King granted this ensuing
Commission, to enquire of all the concealed goods and chattels of those
formerly condemned, and of their clipping, falsifying, counterfeiting money,
and trading with others in such deceitful coin.

Patents 12. E. 1. m. 4. Schedula. De Inquisitione facienda de bonis and
catallis quorundam Judaeorum dampnatorum* etc.
Rex dilectis and fidelibus suis Solomoni de Roff. Magist. Hen: de Bray, et
Hen: de Waleyes salutem. Scratis quod assignav^mus vos ad inquirendum per
Sacramentum tam Christianorum quam Judaeorum, per quos, etc. de omnibus bonis
et catallis quorumcunque Iudeorum dampnatorum nobis concelatis, et modo, et ad
quorum manus hujusmodi bona devenerint. Et etiam de Mercatoribus et Iudaeis
invicem venden^ibus, et ementibus, seu cambientibus platas argenteas, et falsas
platas de stagno, et alio metallo conflatas, et exterius deargentatas, et de
omnibus aliis circumstantiis negotium illud qualitercunque contingentibus,
prout magis videritis expedire, and ad plenam et celerem Justitiam inde
faci^ndam. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod ad certos dies et loca quos ad hoc
provideritis, praemissa faciatis in form^ praedicta. Mandamus enim Majori and
Vicecom: nostris London quod ad certos dies et loca quos eis scire faciatis,
venire faciant coram vobis, tam Christianos quam Judaeos, per quos rei veritas
in praemissis melius sciri poterit, et inquiri. In cujus, etc. T. Rege apud
Cestr. 15 die September.

This Inquisition (as was usual in the case of Jews) was to be made as well by
Jews and Christians, and so were their trials ordinarily per Medietatem
linguarum, as in the case of other Foreigners, for the greater indifferency,
and prevention of Injustice through malice or emulation.

In 14 E. 1. Patent. 14. E. 1, m, 20.
I find a Commission issued out for opening and searching the Chests of the
Jews, and inrolling and certi^ying their Debts, agreeable with those already
cited. And likewise a Writ to the Treasurer and Barons of the Kings Exchequer,
to discharge John de Sto. Dionisio, Custos Domus Conversorum Regis London, from
giving any Account of his Office and Receipts before them; Quia compotus
hujusmodi nunquam in Scaccario hactenus a Predecessoribus suis custodibus Domus
praedictae fieri consuevit. T. Rege apud Westminster. 24 die Feb.

This John of St. Denis, Custos Domus conversorum, dying in the 16 year of Edw.
1. the King thereupon granted the Custos Office of this house to Robert de Pat.
16. E. 1. m. 4.
Scardeburgh Clerk, Quamdiu Nobis placuerit: and commanded that he should be
permitted to dwell in this house, and that all the Converts therein should be
intendent and obedient to him, as their Governor. His Patent bearing date the
13 of October.

This same year the Jews still persevering in their Trade of clipping and
counterfeiting the Kings coin, thereupon there issued out several Letters
Patents and commissions to diverse Justices to make inquiry thereof, and of all
concealed goods and chattels of all the Jews forfeited to the King, as this
following commission of Association, to pretermit all others, will resolve us.

Pat 16 E. 1. m. 16. De Inquisitione fac. de platis Argenteis, etc.
Rex dilecto and fideli suo Hugoni de Cressingham, salutem. Quia dilectus et
fidelis noster Henricus le Waleys, quem nuper cum dilectis et fidelibus nostris
Solomone de Roff. and Magistro Henrico de Bray assignavimus ad quasdem
Inquisitiones faciendas de omnibus bonis and catallis quorumcunque Judaeorum
dampnatorum Nobis concelatis and forisfactis, and etiam de Mercatoribus and
Judaeis invicem vendentibus and ementibus, seu cambientibus plateas argenteas,
and falsas plateas de stagno and alio metallo conflatas, et exterius
deargentatas, and de aliis circumstantiis negotium illud qualitercunque
contingentibus, prout in literis nostris Patentibus, quos eisdem Solomoni,
Henrico and Henrico inde fieri fecimus before continetur, nobiscum in partibus
transmarinis pro quibusdam negotiis nostris specialibus quibus ibidem intendit
moram facit; per quod idem Henricus le Waleys ad praemissa una cum prefatis
Solomone and Magistro Hen. facienda, non potest intendere ad praesens vos loco
ipsius H. le Waleyes ad praemissa una cum prefatis Magist. Henrico ad
praedictas Inquisitiones faciendas juxta tenorem literarum nostrarum patentium
praedictarum. Et ideo vobis mandamusquod ad praemissa facienda, una cum
praedictis Solomone, and Magistro Henrico intendatis in forma praedicta.
Mandamus enim eisdem Solomoni and Magistro Henrico, quod vos ad hoc in socium
admittant, sicut praedictum est. In cujus rei, etc. Test Ed. Comite Cornubii
Consil. Regis apud Westminster. 26 die Jan.

This year I find a strange case, A Jew and his wife complained to the King,
that some had maliciously defamed the Wife, in reporting that she had turned
Christiand was baptized, to their great prejudice and grievance, when as it was
a malicious scandal; Whereupon they procured this Writ from the King to the
Justices of the Jews to inquire the truth thereof by an Inquisition of
Christians and Jews, and to do them right if slandered.

Claus. 16. E. 1. m. 10. Pro Mosseo de Heref. and Suetecota uxor ejus Judeis
London.
Rex Justic. suis ad custodiam Judaeorum assignatis salutem. Monstraverint nobis
Mosseus de Hornden and Suetecota uxor ejus Judaei Land. quod cum ipsa Suetecota
christiana non sit, nec aliquo tempore fuerat baptizata, quidam Emuli eorum
maliciose confingentes ipsam Suetecotam baptizatam fuisse inter duo bella de
Jews and Evesham, eam super hoc defamarunt, in ipsorum Mossei and Suetecotae
dampnum non modicum and gravamen. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod inquisita inde
before veritate per Christianos and Judaeos, sicut mos est; Si inveneritis
praedicta Suetecota non fuit baptizata, sicut sibi imponitur, tunc eisdem
Mosseo and Suetecotae, juxta officii vestri debitum, pacem habere inde
faciatis. T, Com.

If the Jews deem it so great a scandal and grievance to them, for others to
report them to have been Christians and baptized, there is little hopes of
their real general conversion to Christianity now.

The Jews were such absolute slaves and villains to our Kings, that they
sometimes granted them with all their goods and chattels to others by their
Charters, as they did their other villainies, as this memorable Record of 17 E.
1. will inform us.

Claus. 17 E. 1. m. 6. Pro Aaron fill. Vynes Judaei London.
Rex driecto and fideli suo, Rado de Berners Constabul. Tur. London salutem. Cum
Dom. H. Rex pater noster per Cartam suam dederit and concesserit Edmundo fratri
nostro carissimo Aaron fill. Vynes Judeo London, una cum omnibus bonis et
catallis suis, er omnibus quae ad ipsum patrem nostrum ratione ipsius Judaei
quocunque modo possint pertinere; et nos postmodum eandem donationem et
concessionem continuari volentes, ipsam prefato fratri nostro confirmavimus per
nostras literas Patentes; ac idem Frater noster manuceperit habere coram nobis
eundem Aaron ad voluntatem nostram adstandum recto super omnibus quae ipsum
Aaron contingunt, quandocunque nos vel alii versus ipsum in aliquo loqui
voluerimus; per quod eidem fratri nostro per manucaptionem suam praedictam
concessimus, quod omnia negotia ipsum Aaron contingentia, et quae examen
judiciale requirunt coram nobis, et eodem fratre nostro audiantur, et prout
justum fuerit terminentur. Vobis mandamus, quod de bonis et catallis ipsius
Aaron, aut aliquibus ipsum tangentibus vos in nullo intromittatis, contra
donationem, concessionem, et confirmationem supradictas, nisi ex voluntate
fratris nostri praedicti. T. Edmund. apud Westminster. 24 die Maii.

Eodem modo mandatum est, Iohanni de Breton custodi civitatis London. T. ut
supra.

In the 18 year of King Edward the 1. I find this grant of his on the 12 day of
June of all his Deodands to the House of the Converts, for the better
maintenance and support of the Converts, Chapel and edifices thereof, during
his pleasure only.

Pat. 18. E. 1. m. 25. Pro Conversis domus London de Deodandis.
Rex Iustieiariis and omnibus aliis Ballivis et fideli^^ suis, etc. salutem.
Cum nos dudum concessimus Conversis Domus nostrae London, ad sustentationem
ipsorum, Deodanda, quae nobis accidere, and coram quibuscunque Iusticiariis
nostris adjudicari contingent, ad certum terminum jam transactum: Nos
concessionem illam intuitu Dei pradictis conversis and convertendis coutinuare
volentes; concessimus eisdem conversis et convertend^s, ad sustentationem
ipsorum, et fabricam Capellae suae et aedisiciorum suorum perficiendam, omnia
Deodanda quae Nobis ubicunque in Regno nostro Angliae accidere, et coram
quibuscunque Iusticiari^s seu Ministris nostris, adjudicari contingent. Habenda
and percipienda quamdin Nobis piacuerit. T. Rege apud Westminster. 12 die Iunii.

On the 17 day of the same month and year, I find this special grant made by
the King to Auntlera a Jewesse, to sell the inheritance of a Garden in London
to any Jew and his heirs, and for them to purchase it of her without being
questioned or molested for it, by any of his Officers, which without such
license she could not sell, nor he purchase of her without seizure or
forfeiture.

Pat. 18. E. 1. m. 23. Pro Antlera quae fuit vynes uxor, etc. Judaei London.
Rex omnibus, etc. Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali Licentiam dedimus
Auntlerae quae fuit uxor Vynes fill. Magistri Mossei Judaei London, quod quoddam
Gardinum suum quod habet in Civitate nostra London, in parochia sancti
Laurentii in Cattestreet, vendere possit cuicunque Judaeo Gardinum illud emere
volenti, habendum et tenendum eidem Judaeo and haeredibus suis in perpetuum:
and eidem Judaeo quod praedictum Gardinum ab eadem Auntlera recipere possit,
tenore praesentium similiter licentiam concedimus specialem. Nolentes quod
eadem Auntlera vel haeredes sui, ant praedictus Iudaeus aut haeredes sui,
ratione venditionis seu receptionis Gardini praedicti, per nos vel haeredes
nostros, Justiciarios Ballivos aut alios Ministros nostros occasionentur,
gravantur in aliquo, seu molestantur. In cu^us, etc, T. R, apud West. 17 die
Junii.

The ^ike Patent ^^nd to Aaron the Kings Brothers Jew forementioned, to sell
his house and rents in fee to any Christian who should purchase them by his
Lords license, even after the Edict past, and Letters of safe conduct granted
for the Jews banishment and departure hence, as appears by comparing their
dates.

Pat. 18. E. 1. m. 1.4 Pro Aaron fill. Vynes Judaeo fratris Regis, Licentia
vendendi demos, etc.
Rex omnibus, etc. salutem, Sciatis quod concessimus and licentiam dedimus
Aaron fill. Vynes Judaeo Edmundi f^atris nostri carissimi, quod ipse domos et
redditus suos tam infra Civitatem nostram London, quam infra Regnum nostrum, de
licentia and voluntate praedicti fratris nostri Domini s^i vendere possit (upon
his banishment hence:) quibuscunque Christiaenis voluerit, absque impedimento
nostri, vel aliorum nostro^um quorumcunque, and eisdem Christianis quod domos
illas and redditus ab eodem Iudeo emere valiant, similiter licentiam concedimus
specialem, iure cujuslibet in omnibus s^mper salvo, In cujus, etc, T. R. apud
Langeleye 28 die Julii. (After the date is the Letters for the Jews safe
conduct out of Enlgand to the Sheriffs.)

It is very observable, that these three last Patents were made but a very
little before, and the last of them clearly after the Jews universal banishment
voted, resolved both by the King and Parliament. For when as the King, his
Justices and Parliament by all their Inquisitions, Commissions, Care,
Providence, and Execution of so many Jews in all parts, could no ways suppress
their ^lipping and falsifying of the Money of the Realm nor yet reform the
manifold other wickednesses and misdemeanors of the English Jews, nor all the
industry and pains of the Friars Preachers, nor all that liberal provisions and
grants of the King forecit^d to the House of Converts for their comfortable
^^p^ort, maintenance and confirmation in the Christian faith, so far operate
upon their obstinate, obdurate hearts, as to convert any considerable number,
or any persons of note amongst them to the Christian faith, from which many
Converts apostatized, nor yet suppress their continual blasphemies against our
crucified Savior, the Christian faith, Sacraments of the Church and blessed
Virgin; Thereupon the King, at the earnest frequent solicitation, of the
Commons assembled this year in Parliament, after the Feast of St. Hilary,
enacte and published an Edict or Decree in Parliament for the total, universal,
and final banishment of all these wicked, blasphemous, unbeleeving Jews out of
England, then generally execrable, detestable to all the people, who were so
desirous to be for ever quit of their company, that they granted the King the
15 part of all their goods and movables for their banishment and expulsion out
of England, as I have formerly proved at large by a full grand Jury of
Historians, and several Records in my former Edit. 2. p. 44 to 63.
Demurrer, against Sir Edward Cooks gross assertion, that they only
voluntarily banished themselves, because their usury was this year suppres^ed
by the Stat. de Iudaismo; which I have proved was made full 15 years before,
and to be no cause at all of their exile now. In pursuance of this
Parliamentary Edict and Decree, now no where extant on Record (all the
Parliament Rolls before 5 Ed. 2. being who^ly lost, and many since, by the
carelessenesse or iniquity of the times, except only an old Parchment Book of
some Pleas in Parliam. in E. 1. and one Statute Roll of K. Ed. the 1. Ed. 2.
and Ed. 3. wherein the Statute De Iudaismo, with many other printed Acts, are
not to be found, no more than this Edict for the Jews banishment, though
mentioned in many Histories and Records) the King in this very mon^th of July
sent several Writs, Letters and Patents to the Sheriffs of Counties, Mayors of
Towns, Bailiffs and Barons of the Cinqueports, and likewise to Mariners,
reciting, that he had prescribed a certain time, term, day to all and every of
the Jews within the Realm, for their departure out of it into foreign parts:
commanding them, not to do nor suffer any injury, molestation, grievance, to
be done to them by any in their passage beyond the Seas, for which he had given
them safe conduct, but to grant them their wives and children a safe and speedy
passage, within the time prefixed them, at the Jews own costs, paying
reasonable rates for their freights and passage, without immoderate exactions
especially on the poorer sort of them, lest their passage should be hindered by
such immoderate and unreasonable exactions. I shall transcribe these Writs and
Letters at large out of the Records themselves, as most pertinent to my
intended Theme, beginning with those to Sheriffs.

Claus. 18 E. E. 1. m. 6. De Judaeis Regno Angliae exeuntibus.
Rex Vic. Gloucestrie, etc Cum Iudaeis Regni nostri universis certum tempus
praefixerimus a Regno illo Transfretandi; Nolentes quod ipsi per Ministros
nostros, aut alios quoscunque, aliter quam fieri consuevit, indebite
pertrectentur; Tibi praecipimus, quod per totam Ballivam tuam public
proclamari, et firmiter inhiberi facias, ne quis eis intra terminum praedictum,
injuriam, molestiam, dampnum inferat, seu gravamen. Et cum contingat ipsos cum
catallis suis, quae eis concessimus, versus parts London, causa
Transfretrationis suae, dirigere gressus suos, salvum and securum conductum eis
habere facias sumptibus eorum. Proviso, quod Iudaei praedicti ante recessum
suum, vadia Christia^o^um quae penes se habent illis quorum fuerint, si ea
acquietare voluerint, restituant, ut tenentur. Test Rege apud Westminster. 18 die
Iulii. Anno 18. E. 1.

Consimites Literae diriguntur Vicecomitibus Essex, Ebor. Northampt. Lincoln.
Test ut supra. Item Vicecomitibus Hereford, Suthampt.

The form of the Letters for protection and safe conduct to particular Jews and
their Families, (which the richer sort of Jews purchased at dear rates) was
this.

Pat. 18. E. 1. m. 14. Pro Bonamico Judaeo Eborum, et familia sua.
Rex Majori et Ballivis Eborum, salutem, Quia certum diem praefixerimus Iudaeis
nostris Angliae regnum nostrum exeundi, et se ad parts alias transferendi;
Vobis mandamus, quod Bonamico Judaeo Eborum, uxori, pueris, vel familiae suae,
in personis aut rebus interim nullam moles^iam inferatis, set ipsos quantum in
vobis est, manuteneatis, protegatis, et defendatis. Et cum idem Bonamicus cum
uxore, pueris et familia sua, post Terminum Proclamationis factae de vadiis
Christianorum acquietandis, ad parts maritimas causa transfretandi, divertere
se voluerint, sibi et suis salvum conductum, cum ab eo fueritis requisiti, suis
sumptibus habere faciatis; ne eis super bonis, quae secum defer contingerit
periculum emineat, pro defectu conductus hujusmodi faciendi. T. Rege apud Lang.
26 die Julii. Et sunt Patentes.

By this Patent it appears, First, that the Jews had a certain day prefixed
them by the King to depart out of the Realm of England into Foreign parts, of
which they all had general and particular notice. 2ly, That the wealthier Jews
thereupon to preserve their own persons, wives, children, families from
corporal violence, and their goods from plunder, purchased particular Letters
of Protection and safeconduct from the King to Mayors and other Officers. 3ly,
That the King published a general Proclamation upon the Edict of their
banishment, that all the pawns of Christians to them should be redeemed and
discharged before their departure, or left behind them when they departed hence.

The next day after this private Letter of Protection and Safeconduct, on the
27 of July, the King sent these Letters to the Bailiffs, Barons and Seamen of
the Cinque ports, for the Jews safe conduct, passage and transportation out of
England, within the term which he had prefixed to all and every of them, being
general for all the Jews.

Pat. 18. E. 1. m. 14. De Passagio and Conductu Judaeorum Angliae.
Rex omnibus Baliivis, Baronibus, et Nautis Quinque portuum suorum, salutem.
Cum certum terminum omnibus et singulis Iudaeis Regni nostri praefixerimus idem
Regnum exeundi. Nolentes quod ipsi in rebus seu personis interim aliqualiter
injurientur: Vobis mandamus, quod eisdem Iudaeis cum ipsos ad Portus
praedictos, cum uxoribus, pueris, and Catallis suis venire contingerit ad
transfretand. (...) critical conversion; and such converts mostly we are like
to find them, and none other. Whereupon the 2 Council of Nice, Canon. 3.
decreed, That no Jews should be admitted suddenly into the Christian Church,
nor baptized, unless they publicly certified, that they were converted, out
of a pure sincere faith, with all their heart, and utterly renounced their
judaical rites. And the Council of ^gatha Can. 34. decreed, That the Jews who
desired to turn Christians should remain for 8 months space amongst the
Catechimeni, for trial of the sincerity of their conversion before they were
baptized, upon this ground, because they frequently returned to their
infidelity and vomit again Judaei qui eorum per fidia FREQUENTER ad vomitum
reddit. Which Alexander Alensis summa Theolog. pars 2. qu. 161. approves. 7ly.
If any private Jews out of mere conscience or sincere desires of being
converted to the Christian faith, shall upon that account alone desire
admission into England, to be instructed by our English Divines, I suppose no
English Christians will oppose, but further their desires herein, and
contribute both their prayers and best endeavors for their conversion, and if
there be cause, admit them also into our Churches Communion upon real
testimonies of the truth of conversion in, and work of grace upon them; which
is as much as they can desire at our hands; But to admit whole multitudes and
Colonies of infidel Jews at once into our Nation, who neither desire nor
pretend conversion to Christianity, (but the quite contrary) together with the
free use of their Jewish Synagogues, Rites, Ceremonies, (which they strongly
in-sist upon) to establish their Judaism, make way for their long expected
Messia his coming, increase their wealth and traffic, and enable them to
recover their ancient Country and Kingdom again, the only things they now aim
at as Menasseh Ben Isreal's printed addresses proclaims to all the World, is
such an Impious, Unchristian, Antichristian dangerous president (glossed over
only with a possibility of their future conversion) as no sincere English
Christians can approve of, nor the Jews themselves desire: For as the Jews by
Deuteronomy. 7.5. Exodus 23.35. c. 34.13, 14.2. Chron. 30.14. c. 31.1 c. 34.3. to 9.33
Levit. 17.12. c. 24.16.22. Nurin. l. 5.16.30, 31. Deuteronomy. 31.12. See Mr. Seldom.
de Jure naturali and Gentium, juxta Disciplinam Eorum. l. 2 and 3. Judaei non
permiserunt Gentiles secummanere qui Gentilitiis ritibus semerebant, at eos
permiserunt qui uberum Deum. colebant. Thomas Waldenses Doctrinales Fidei. l.
3. c. 5. Sect. 1. p. 4.18.
Gods own Laws, and their own Jewish Rabbis precepts, neither might, nor yet
would permit any Heathen Gentiles heretofore to dwell among them, nor to set up
any Altars, Images, Idols, Groves, or exercise any Idolatrous worship amongst
them, or to blaspheme, reproach their God or Religion, under pain of death, if
they transgressed therein; There being the selfsame Law of God in these things
both to Gentiles, and Jews: And like as they afterward would not permit the
Apostles and Christians in Jerusalem, or any other Cities, for to preach the
Gospel, and exercise the Christian Religion freely, but raised up present
tumults against and persecuted and cast them out thence, as 1 These. 2.14, 15,
17. the whole History of the Acts, and premises abundantly testify: So by the
very self same justice and equity, they can neither now demand nor expect that
we, or any Christian Realm or State should tolerate or connive at, much less
openly countenance and protect them in the public or private exercise of their
Iudaisme, or Jewish Rites, and Blaspemies against our crucified Savior, and
his Gospel: All then that English Christians can do for them, is to Romans 10.1.
1. Tim. 1.1. p. 3.
desire, and pray for the conversion of all Gods elect amongst them in his due
time, by such means as he shall think meetest, and to instruct them in the
faith, by learned Ministers sent to them, if they desire it; but not to admit
them (and perchance many disguised Jesuits, Papists and Friars with them)
promiscuously into our Nation; to undermine our Church and Religion, and undo
many thousand Souls, it being our duty, 1 Cor. 10.32.
as to give no just offense to the Jew, so neither to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God, whom their admission amongst us, especially upon Manasseth
Ben-Israels motives and addresses, (tending nothing at all to Piety or their
converversion,) but worldly gains and obstinate perseverance in their Jewish
Antichristian Rites and Superstitions will (...) 10. day of October. being the
next day after it An. 1290. just 21 days before the feast of All Saints, by
which day they were all to depart out of England under pain of death; and
accordingly departed, as I have elsewhere manifested; except some few poor
converted Jews, who remained like Almesmen in the House of the Converts, and
were not banished with the rest, whose Infidelity was the chief cause of their
exile, as our Historians attest.

The King on the 27 day of October (but 17 days after the Jews final departure
from London out of England) committed the custody of this Domus Conversorum and
the Converts in London to Walter de Agmodisham during pleasure, by this his
Patent.

Pat. 18. E. 1. m. 4. De custodia Domus conversorum London Commiss.
Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Sciatis quod commissimus Waltero de
Agmodisham custodiam Domus nostrae Conversorum London, and conversorum
nostrorum, (therefore not banished with the rest) habendum quamdiu nobis
placuerit, cum omnibus ad custodiam illam pertinentibus, sicut Johis de Sancto
Dionis. quondam Archidiac. Roff. eam dum vixit habere consuevit. Ita quod idem
Walterus domos illas in quibus idem Archidiaconus morabatur ibidem inhabitet
pro voluntate sua, etc. T. R. apud Kingest clipton 27 die Octobris

On the 16 day of December following the King granted the custody of this house
to Richard de Clunpynges by this Patent, which manifests that the converted
Jews were not banished with the rest.

Pat. 18. E. 1. m. 45. De custodia Domus Conversorum London commissa.
Rex omnibus et singulis Conversis Domus suae London salutem. Sciatis quod
commissimus ditecto clerico nostro Rico. de Clunpynges custodiam Domus
praedictae, habendum quamdiu nobis placuerit, cum omnibus ad dictam custodiam
pertinentibus, eodem modo quo Johis. de Sancto Dionis. quondam Archidiaconus
Roffensis defunctus eam dum vixit habere consuevit; Ita quod dom. illas in
quibus idem Archidiaconus morabatur ibidem pro voluntate sua inhabitet. Et ideo
vobis mandamus quod eidem Rico. tanquam custodi vestro in omnibus que ad
custodiam illam per^inent, intend^n es sitis et respondentes, sicut praedictum
est. In cujus, etc. T. Rege apud Odyham 16 di^ Decembris.

The very next year after the Jews banishment within four months of their
departure hence, I find these Letters Patents directed by the King to all his
Sheriffs, Bailiffs and Lieges, expressly mentioning their banishment hence, and
the Kings designing of all the rents and profits of their houses, from the time
of their banishment to be collected, and disposed to pious uses; as Hugh de
Kendale Clerk should appoint, specially entrusted with the management of this
affair.

Pa^. 19. E. ^^. m. 20. De Iudaismo.
Rex Vicecomitibus, and omnibus aliis Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos, etc.
salutem. Cum assignavimus totam pecuniam provenientem de Domibus quae fuerunt
Judaeorum nostrorum in Anglia in quosdam pios usus convertendam, per quod
volumus quod totum commodum perveniens ex Domibus illis a tempore exilii
eorundem, ut ex conventione Domorum eatundem, and rebus a^iis, in eosdem usus
applicetur: Assignavimus dilectum Clericum nostrum, Hugonem de Kendale, ad
inquirendum de conductionibus, et omnibus receptis hujusmodi plenam veritarem,
et ad onerandum Vicecomites, Ministros, et omnes receptores pecuniae inde
provenientis, a tempore exilii praedicti, et ad pecuniam illam in tuto loco
reponendam per Vicecomites, vel alio modo prout melius viderit expedire. Et
ideo vobis mandamus quod eidem Hugoni intendentes sitis, credentes and
respondentes. Test Rege apud Asherugge 22 die Ianuarii.

King Edward presently after the Jews banishment hence, seized upon all their
Houses, Lands and Revenues throughout England as escheated into his hands by
this their sentence of banishment, and pr^sently within few months after made
sale of them to English men by several Letters Patents, as appears by a special
Pat. Roll of the sales of their houses made in the 19 and 20 years of his
reign, thus endorsed. Carta de Judaismo. Li^^re Paten^^s de domibus Iudaeorum
concessis Post eorum Exilium de Anglia; wherein are near one hundred parti^ular
Patents o^ sa^es of them to several persons, running in the selfsame form (
mutatis mutandis) all mentioning their Banishment hence, and this Kings title
to them thereby, by way of Escheat; take one in the 19. year for an example of
all that ensue that year.

Pat 19. E. 1. Concessionibus fectis De Domibus quae fuerunt Judaeorum in
Anglia ^. 4.
Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Sciatis quod concessimus pro Nobis and
haeredibus nostris Isabellae, quae fuit uxor Ade de Sancto Albano Junior: Domos
illas cum pertinentiis in London, quae fuerunt Leonis fill: Cressey: fill:
Magistri Eliae Judaei, de parochia Sancti Martini Pomer: in Ismongerstane* Per
Exilium ejusdem Iudaei a Regno nostro, tanquam Escaeta nostra in manu nostra
existentes, (...) ad qu^t^^ marcas extenduntur: Haben^^m and tenendum eidem
Isabellae et haeredibus suis de Nobis et haeredibus nost^is imperpetuum.
Reddendo inde Nobis and haeredibus nostris unum denarium per manum Vicecomitis
ejusdem Civitatis singulis annis ad Scaccarium nostrum Pasche, et facien^o
aliis Dominis feodi illius servicia inde debita et consueta. In cujus, etc.
Test Rege apud Ashe^igge 27: die Decembris, Anno regni Regis Edwardi filii
Regis Henrici xix.

This Patent bears date within two Months next after the Jews actual departure
hence, upon the Decree and Edict for their banishment. After which follow near
one hundred Patents of their houses made this year, wherein was the same
recital of their banishment as in this transcribed; Then follow many other
Patents made of the Jews houses by the King in the 20 year of his reign,
entitled in the Roll and Margin. Patentes de Domibus Judaeorum concessis, Post
eorum Exilium ab Anglia; the first whereof in Memb. 2. runs thus.

20 E. 3. m. 2.
Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Sciatis quod concessimus pro Nobis et
haeredibus nostris Willielmo de Tab^rer de Bedeford, and Katerinae uxori ejus,
Domos illas quae fuerunt Cok: filii Benedicti de Bedeford Per Exilium ejusdem
Iudaei a Regno nostro, tanquam Escaeta nostra, in manu nostra existentes, et
^u^ae ad sex soudos extenduntur. Habendum et tenendum eisdem Willielmo and
Kater. et haeredibus suis, vel cui ilias* secundum consuetudine^ villae
praedictae donare vel assignare voluerint de Nobis and haeredibus nostris
imperpetuum. Reddendo inde Nobis and haeredibus nostris unum denarium per manum
Vicecom. nostri Bedf. singulis annis ad Scaccarium nostrum ad festum Sancti
Michaelis. Et faciendo aliis dominis feodi illius servicia inde debita and
consueta. T. Rege apud Westminster. 29 die November.

After which follow near 20 patents more of other Jews houses, made that year
in the same form.

Therefore by the unanimous irrefragable verdict of all these manifold Patents;
the Jews were legally and judicially Banished out of England, and by this their
Judgment of Banishment (both by the King and Parliament) all their houses and
lands actually escheated into the Kings hands, who thereupon seized and sold
them to others in fee, upon this very Title of Escheat by their Exile out of
England: which had Sir Edward Cook known or observed, I am confident he would
never have asserted this untruth, that they voluntarily banished themselves out
of England, only because their Usury was banished thence.

To these Records I might annex the case of the Prior of Bridlington, which 2
Instit. p. 508.
himself cites in the Placita Parliamenti post Pascha apud London, 21 E. 1. rot.
4. recited again in alio Rotulo, Anno 22 E. 1. rot. 5. wherein there is this
double recital of the Jews exile hence, and of a Debt of 200 l. due to the King
thereby, which he had Judgment to recover against the Prior. Et quia
praedictus Prior cognoscit, quod praed^cta pecunia praed: Judaeo debebatur, nec
ei solvebatur, Ante Exilium Iudaeorum; et quicquid remansit eorum debitis and
catallis in Reg^^ Post eorum Exilium Domino Regi fuit: Consideratum est, quod
Dominus Rex recuperet pecuniam praedictam. An unanswerable evidence of their
judicial, legal, actual Banishment hence, here twice together repeated in this
Plea in Parliament but three years after their exile.

I have now traced the History of the English Jews through the obscure,
untrodden, generally unknown, and almost forgotten path of our English Records,
yet remaining in the Tower of London, and Exchequer, from the very first year
of King John, where our yet extant Records begin, to the 22. of King Edward the
first, full 4 years after their universal Banishment out of England; which as
it then put a period to any further memorial of them in our subsequent Records,
so it now sets a final conclusion to this my Chronological Collection of such
Records as concern the generality of the English Jews and their affairs. To
which I shall only annex some few Records in succeeding times, relating to some
particular Jewish Converts since their general banishment hence, and to the
forementioned house of the Jewish Converts (now the Rolls in Chancery Lane)
which are some ways pertinent (like so much gleanings after the Harvest) to
the Jewish History, and so draw toward a conclusion of this my Undertaking.

There being a great want of Jewish Converts after the Jews banishment hence to
receive the Alms, Revenues formerly settled on their house by the premised
charters of our Kings, I find King Edw. the 3d in the 18th year of his reign,
by special Patents* granted to other poor people who had nothing to live on,
both the benefit and easment of the Houses and Gardens of the House of the
Converts, together with a penny a day out of the Exchequer, and so much besides
as any one Convert there received out of the Rents and profits of the house.
Parti^ularly he granted to one Alianor, Quae non habet unde (...), Pat. 18 E.
7. pars 1. m. 2.3. and pars 2. m. 47.
quod habeat tantum in omnibus pro sustentatione sua iam de pecunia ad
Scaccarium, videlicet per diem 1 d. et pro aisiamento Domorum and Gardinarum,
sicut una Conversorum habet et capit, ac de Deodandis and al^is proficuis quam
de Redditibus and Tenementis Conversorum Domus London, et alibi infra Regnum
Angliae commorant, etc. quantum una Conversa inde percepit.

After this a converted Jew, John Castle by name, coming over into England in
the 30 year of King Edward the 3d. the King thereupon granted him such
admittance into, and sustenance in this house of Convertr, as other Converts
had in former times received, by this ensuing writ of Privy Seal.

Claus. 30. E. 3. m. 13. De Conve^so admittando in Domo Conversorum London.
Rex dilecto Clerico suo Hen: de Ingleby, Custodi Domus nostra Conversorum in
civitate nostra London, salutem. Quia volumus quod Johannes de Chastell, a ritu
Judaeorum conversus, qui in Regnum nostrum Angliae nuper venit, habeat talem
sustentationem in Domo nostra praedicta de Elemosina nostra, qualem alii
ejusdem conditionis in eadem ante hoc tempus habuerunt. Vobis mandamus, quod
ipsum Johannem in domum nostram praedictam admittatis, et ei sustentationem
hujusmodi pro uno converso consuetum de eadem domo liberari and habere facias.
T. Rege apud Westminster. primo die Iulii.

Per Breve de privato Sigillo. This Henry de Ingelby afterward resigning his
Office of Keeper or Guardian of the House of Converts to the King, thereupon
King Edward the 3. in the 45 year of his reign granted this Office to William
de Burstall Clerk, during his life, by this following Patent.

Pat. 45. E, 3. pars 2. memb. 28.
Rex omnibus ad quos etc. Sciatis quod dedimus and concessimus dilecto Clerico
nostro Will: de Burstal custodiam domus nostrae conversorum London, vacantem
per resignationem Hen. de Ingleby ultimi Custodis domus praedictae, et ad
nostram Donationem spectantem: habendum and tenendum cum omnibus ad custodiam
illam quoquo modo spectantibus ad totam vitam ipsius Willielm. In cujus, etc.
T. R. apud Westminster. 22 die Julii.

Per ipsum Regem. Et Mandatum est Vicecomit. London, quod ipsum Will. in
corporalem possessionem Domus praedictae inducant vel induci faciant, habendum
juxta tenorem Literarum Regis praedictarum. Test ut supra.

Per ipsum Regem. This house with the Chapel and other Edifices being greatly
ruined after the Jews banishment, through the negligence of former Guardians,
William Burstal being made keeper thereof, bestowed much money upon the
repairing of it out of his own purse; which done, upon consideration thereof,
and to keep the same in constant Repair for the future, upon the supplication
of the said William, then Keeper likewise of the Rolls of the Chancery, he
procured King Edward to annex the house and Chapel of the Converts to the
Custos of the Rolls of the Chancery and his Successors for ever, in the 51 year
of King Edward the 3d. by this Patent.

Patent. 51 E. 3. m. 20. De Domo Conversorum in suburbio London Officio
Custodis Rotulorum Cancellarii Regis anvexanda.
Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem: Sciatis quod Nos considerantes qualiter
Domus Conversorum, in Suburbio Civitatis nostrae London, de Patronatu nostro
existens, et Capella, Edificia and Clausura ejusdem tempore quo dilectus
Clericus noster Willielmus de Burstall custodiam ejusdem Domus ex collatione
nostra primo habuit, per negligentiam et incuriam aliorum, qui antedictum
Willielmum custodiam Domus illius habuerunt, et ibidem morari, seu inhibitare
non curarunt multipliciter debilitata, and quasi totaliter in ruina extiterunt.
Et quod praedict. Willielmus tempore suo de bonis suis propriis grandes fecit
custus et expensas super reparatione et emendatione Domus, Capellae,
Edificioru^ and Clausurarum praedict. At etiam super factura novarum Domorum
ibidem. Nos, ut Domus Conversorum, capella, edificia, clausurae et novae Domus
supradicta compatentur sustententur, and custodiantur in futur. ad
supplicationem praedicti Will: (qui Custos Rotulorum Cancellariae nostrae
existit in praesenti) concessimus de gratia nostra speciali, pro Nobis and
haeredibus nostris, quod post mortem ejusdem Willielm: dicta Domus Conversorum
cum suis Juribus and pertinentiis quibuscunque, remaneat et moretur in
perpetuum Clerico custodi Rotulorum Cancellariae nostrae, et haeredum nostrorum
pro tempore existenti, Et sit annexa ad idem Officium imperpetuum. Et quod
Cancellarius Angliae, vel Custos sive custodes Magni Sigilli nostri, et
haeredum nostrorum Angliae, pro tempore existentes, post mortem ipsius Will.
habeat et habeant Potestatem ad quamlibet Vacationem dicti Officii custodis
Rotulorum per mortem, cessionem, vel mutationem personae, quocunque tempore
futuro, instituendi successive Custodes Rotulorum praedictorum in dicta Domo
Conversorum, et Custodes illos ponendi in possessionem ejusdem, cum suis
juribus et pertinentiis quibuscunque. In cujus, etc. T. Rege apud Shene x. die
Aprilis.

Per Breve de privato Sigillo. Since which by virtue of this Patent, this house
of the Converts has continued annexed to the Custos and Mastership ol the
Rolls of the Chancery, yet still liable and subject to the first charitable
uses for habitation and sustentation of such Jewish and other Converts, to
which it was at first designed: For which I shall now only recite one president
more already printed by Survey of London, 1633. p. 435,
John Stow out of the Records of 5 R. 2. One William Pierce a Jew that became a
Christian, and was baptized, was by this Kings Charter in the 5 th of his
reign, admitted and received into this ancient Domus Conversorum, and had there
2 d. a day allowed him by the King during his life: And by the self-same
Equity, if the Jews be now readmitted into England, and any of them shall
chance to be converted to Christianity and baptized, either upon real, or
hypocritical, or politic grounds, they ought to be there received and
maintained in the self-same manner as they were in former times.

I have now (courteous Reader) presented thee and the world with the exactest
Chronicle and History of the English Jews (from the 1. year of King John, Anno
Dom. 1599. till their total and final banishment hence in the 18 year of Edward
the 1. Anno Dom. 1290, and some years after it) hitherto published in any age,
sincerely collected (with no little diligence, pains, search, and cost) out of
the most excellent Rolls and Records of those times, yet extant in the Tower
and Exchequer, all which I diligently perused with mine own eyes, and faithfully
transcribed, not taking them upon trust, as others commonly do, and so
frequently miscite or mistake them: all which Records (being diligently entered
very year successively under these Kings reigns, by public Clerks and Notaries
employed for that end, and faithfully relating every thing concerning the Jews,
and all other transactions, public or private, as they were then really acted)
are the truest, best, most unerring guides that posterity can follow, the
infalliblest evidences they can surely rely on, or any Historians make use of
in relating the History or proceedings of former ages; the ignorance of which
Records has occasioned many mistakes both in matters of fact and Law in most
of our Historians, Chronicles, and Law Books; Some whereof, (relating to the
English Jews) I have here rectified in the by.

From all the Records here printed in their own words and language, give me
leave in brief to observe for thy better information, these few general heads
concerning the Jews, to which they are reducible.

1. That though our Kings by their forementioned Charters, Writs, and
Proclamations, granted many large Privileges, Protections, Immunities to the
Jews, especially in the beginning of their reigns, as if they were their only
favorites and darlings, above all other of their Subjects; yet these their
Royal Protectors, and their Justices specially appointed for their custody,
soon after, notwithstanding all their former Charters, Declarations, and
promised Liberty, Peace, Protection, proved their most unsatiable, merciless,
perfidious, tyrannical Exactors, Fleecers, Oppressors, Taxmasters, Tormentors,
almost without any intermission in one kind or other.

2 That the Jews under all these Kings reigns, notwithstanding all their
indulged Liberties, were but their most absolute Bondslaves, and exquisite
Villains, in all respects, as these particulars will evidence: First, their
names were all enrolled in the Kings Exchequer for the Jews, and they confined
to live and abide only in such places as the King and his Justices assigned for
their custody should prescribe them, from which they might not remove without
special license. 2ly, They were to be there constantly resident, that the Kings
Officers might there find both them and their families upon all occasions.
3ly, They were translated from place to place at the Kings pleasure, and
permitted to reside in no place but where they had a common chest. 4ly, Their
persons, wives, children, infants, families, were imprisoned, distrained, sent
to remote Prisons, Castles, banished, executed, tormented, put to fines and
ransoms upon all occasions, especially for their Taxes and Debts to the King.
5ly. They were both by poll and wholesale granted and sold to others like
Bondslaves and Villains in gross by the King, and morgaged to those who would
purchase them, or advance any moneys upon their assignment. 6ly, They were
always to wear a badge and Table on their outmost garments, as well females as
males, wherever they rod or went, to distinguish them from Christians, with
whom they were to have no intimate communion, (who were prohibited to be
servants, nurses to any of the Jews in any kind:) and were all of them to be
slaves and servants to the King in one kind or other. 7ly, They were all
prohibited to depart the Realm, when once entered, without special license,
which they could not obtain; and imprisoned yea put to fines and ransoms when
they attempted it, to avoid their Taxes. Such was their Vassallage in respect
of their persons. As for their real and personal estates, they were wholly at
the Kings disposal. First, the King could seize all their Lands, Houses, Rents,
Annuities, Fees, Morgages, Debts, Goods, Chattels, go^d silver, and sell,
grant, release, give them unto whom he pleased at his pleasure. 2ly, All their
real and personal estates, chattels, debts escheated to the King upon their
deaths, neither could their children, wives, heirs, executors enjoy them,
without making Fines, reliefs, and compositions with the King for them, at high
rates. 3ly, They could not sue for any debt, morgage, house, fee, duty, nor
assign, grant, sell, give, release them unto others, without the Kings special
license, for which they paid such fines as he thought fit to impose. 4ly, The
King could stay their actions, debts, usury, respite them for what time he
pleased, order them to be paid at other Terms, and by other sums than those
expressed in their charters and obligations: and finally pardon, release them,
and deliver up their Charters to their Debtors, when and where he pleased. 5ly.
The King seized, searched, enrolled, sealed up all their public Chests,
Charters, Writings, Debts, Goods, Chattels, Estates, and disposed of them to
his own use upon all occasions, notwithstanding all Grants and Charters to
them; and appointed all their Judges, Officers, Cyrographers, Cofferers,
Escheators, Presbyters, Priests and Tallagers at his pleasure: yea enforced
them to tax, distrain, imprison one another, under pain of perpetual
imprisonment, banishment, confiscation of all their estates, and the severest
penalties, as the premised Records assure us.

3ly, They always lived under uncessant, perpetual, arbitrary unsu portable
Taxes and Tallages, imposed on them (without any act of Parliament, or their
common assents) by our Kings and their griping Officers at what rates soever
they pleased, sometimes 5000. or 6000. sometimes 20000. and 60000 but commonly
8000. and 10000. marks or pounds by the year; levied with the greatest rigor,
which some of the richest Jews in all places were commonly engaged to see
punctually paid in at the terms appointed, and when any of them opposed, or
neglected to pay or levy them, their persons, wives, children,, families,
infants were all distrained, imprisoned, their estates, Debts seized,
confiscated, some of them sent Prisoners into Ireland, and frequently menaced
with perpetual banishment hence and lost of their estates, their taxes being
levied by the strictest menacing warrants, and all rigorous violent ways the
King and his instruments could possibly invent, And are not their Taxes (in
case they will now return again) like to be more high, frequent, oppressive,
since the very English themselves, after all their late contests, wars,
consultations, and prodigal expenses of their blood, treasures, estates, are
now brought under heavy, uncessant, monthly arbitrary Taxes, Excises, Imposts,
decimations, levied with the greatest rigor, and such as dare oppose them out
of conscience or defense of public liberty, though in a legal way, imprisoned,
close imprisoned, ruined, yea threatened with perpetual banishment, even by such
who pretend themselves the Patrons, Protectors of the English liberties,
franchises, Properties from such Egyptian and Jewish Bondage, and greatest
Antagonists against such arbitrary exorbitant Tyranny?

4. That besides these constant annual Taxes, our Kings upon all occasions
enforced them by way of Loans, to lend what sums they demanded, under pain of
imprisonment, confiscation of their estates, seizure of all their Debts, Pawns,
Chests: And frequently seized, searched, released, granted, sold all their
gold, silver, chests, debts, houses, fees, annuities, pawns, and imprisoned
their persons, wives, children, to extort and raise moneys upon all
extraordinary necessities.

5. That when they had fleeced them to their very skins, and could expect no
more moneys from them, then they morgaged and sold their persons, estates, and
the revenues proceeding from them unto others, to ad^ance present moneys before
hand, like so many Slaves and Villains. And though many of them,
notwithstanding all their endless Taxes, Extortions, Squeezings, fleecings,
grew rich again in a short time through asury, broccage, clipping and
falsifying coin, plate, frauds and extortions of all kinds, and their base
parsimony, industry, frugality; yet their wives, children, heirs, friends
enjoyed little or no benefit at all by it, but the King and his Officers
commonly fleeced them of al they gained, by one device or other. So that
England was little better ^han a second Egypt, and our Kings and their griping
Officers nothing else but so many new Pharoahs and Egyptian Tax-matters to
them, during all their continuance here, they ha^ing no assurance of lives,
liberties, e^tates under them by any Charters, Grants, Protection, Engagements,
which they made no conscience to revoke and violate at their pleasures, as some
of fate have done, even to their own Christian Brethren, in as high a degree as
they did to the Jews.

6. That they were so exceeding execrable and detestable to the people in all
places where they resided, both for their infidelity, blasphemies, apostacies,
enmity to Christ and Christianity, circumcising and crucifying Christian
Children, clipping of coin, falsifying of Charters, extortion, brokage, usury,
frauds, unconscionable Jewish cutthroat dealing, and discrepancy of manners
from the English, that many places and ports opposed their coming over, other
Towns, (as Newcastle, Winchelse, Wycombe, Newbury, Berkhamsted, Suthampton, and
other places) purchased exemptions or removals of them. And those Towns where
they resided, frequently rose up in a tumultuous manner against them, burning
their houses, beating, abusing, kiling their persons, pillaging their goods,
and forcing them to fly to the Kings Castles for Sanctuary, notwithstanding all
the Kings Charters, Proclamations, Provisions of all sorts for their protection
and defense against violence, and committing them to the protection of the
Sheriffs, Majors, Chief Officers and Burgesses of the places where they
resided. But especially they were above measure assaulted, beaten, slaughtered,
pillaged by the Cruce-signati and Saint-like Soldiers of that age, who listed,
crossed themselves for the Holy-Wars,, and by the Barons, Soldiers who took up
arms against their Sovereigns under pretext only of defending the Great
Charters, Laws, Liberties of the Church and Realm of England, usually stiling
themselves See Cart. An. 17. Joh. Reg. dors. 27.
exercitus Dei et sanctae Ecclesiae in Anglia. Neither were they free from
violence, plunder, nor the common people satisfied till their universal final
banishment hence, which they often solicited, their implacable enmity against
them being such, that the symptoms thereof yet continue amongst us in our
proverbiall speeches. I hate thee as I do a Jew. I would not have done so to a
Jew. None but a Jew would have done so, and the like.

7. That notwithstanding all the Injuries, Oppressions, Indignities, cruelties
they here sustained both from our Kings, their Officers and the generality of
the people by Gods just curse and vengeance on them fot their sins, yea
notwithstanding all means used by our Kings, Magistates, Bishops, preaching
Friars, and others, both for their reformation and conversion to the Christian
Faith, yet the generality of them continued, persevered still in their wilful
obstinacy, infidelity, blindness, enmity, malice, blasphemies, despite against
our crucified Savior, and Christianity; which they manifested upon all
occasions in public and private by circumcising and crucifying chistian
children, breaking the Crucifix in Oxford, and trampling it under foot in the
midst of the Universities soleme Procession, and otherwise; expressed at large
in the forementioned records: as likewise in their extorsions, clipping and
falsifying moneys, Charters, usuries, frauds, rapes, murders, forgeries, very
few of them turning Christian converts, and that either to save their lives, or
prevent some imminent dangers to their persons, families, estates; and those of
the poorer sort for the most part, to get a present livelihood from the
Christians, who frequently turned Apostates, or flagitious malefactors, to the
scandal of religion.

8. That the Jews here had their Synagogues, Schools, Priests, Presbyter and
Comptroller of their Exchequer, Escheator, Cofferers, Cyrographers, Attorneys,
Bailiffs, with their proper Judges and Court of Exchequer, (wherein only they
were to be sued proceeded against, and by whom they were Judged) their Prisons,
Attachers, Tax-Masters, Record-Keepers, ordered in all things according as the
King by his Writs and Letters directed. All which Offices were appointed by the
Kings special Patents, Writs,, whose Names, Powers, Jurisdictions, Salaries,
together with their legal trials and proceedings of all sorts civil, criminal,
the forms of their Stars, Charters, Extents of Lands, assignments of Debts,
Releases, Reliefs, Fines, with the names of the chiefest Jews, are registered,
and most clearly, fully related in the forecited Records, and in no other
prin^ed History or Law-book whatsoever.

9. That the Jews were exempt from all other Temporal and Ecclesiastical Courts
and Jurisdictions but the Justices specially appointed for their custody, and
the Kings Exchequer for the Jews; yea from all public Taxes imposed on the
English, and could not be excommunicated by the Masters of their Law, without
the Kings special license.

10. That the Jews usury was no ways coun^enanced nor approved, but generally
condemned, and frequently released by our Kings long before the Statute de
Judaismo. which most infallibly appears to be made in 3 Ed. 1. not in 18. 2
Institutes. p. 506, 507, 508.
as Sir Edward Cook very grossly mistook. And that the banishment of their Usury
by it, was not the cause of their voluntary banishment hence, as he most fondly
conceited.

11. That the Presbyteratus Judeorum totius Angliae, was not the High Priests
spiritual function, as Ibidem.
Sir Edward Cook and others affirm, but only a temporal office and
Comptrolership in the Kings Exchequer of the Jews.

12. That our Kings and Ancestors in times of Popery made and published ^undry
excellent Ordinances against the blasphemies, abuses of the Jews; and were very
zealous, industrious to convert them to Christianity, and careful to maintain,
support, confirm, and provide for them when converted in their Domus
Conversorum; That King Edward the first remitted his right to all the goods of
convert Jews, (by an unchristian usage confiscated formerly to the Crown by
their very conversion) allowing all Converts the moity of their estates to
maintain them, and granting the other moity of their Estates, together with his
Deodands, and all forfeitures and Chevages of the Jews, for the support of the
Converts, and their House, Chapel, Chaplains; Yet very few of them were
converted.

13. That King Edward the 1: in the 18 year of his reign, did by public Edict
of Parliam. actually banish all the Jews out of England, except the Converts,
by a set prefixed day, beyond all contradiction, much against the Jews good
wills; as I have undeniably proved by sundry Records forecited here; and by
multitudes of Historians, in my first Edit. 2. p. 44. to 64.
Demurrer against Sir Edw. Cooks gross error. A truth so clear, that the very
Jews themselves (as I am informed by those best versed in their Manuscript
Antiquities) do make special mention of this their Banishment out of England in
their Chronicles (in Manasseh Ben-Israels custody) taking their later
computations of years from thence, as a time very remarkable and ominous to
their whole Nation; And well might they do so, seeing learned Mr. Edward
Brerewood, in his Enquiries, touching the diversities of Languages and
Religions throughout the chief parts of the world, London 1614. c. 13. p. 92.
assures us, that The first Country of Christe^^om whence the Jews were expelled
without hope of Return, was our Country of England, whence they were Banished
Anno 1290. by King Edward the first. (By which example) Not long after they
were likewise banished France, Anno 1307. by Philippus Pulcher: Only of all the
Countries of France, in the Jurisdiction of Avignon ( the Popes State) some are
remaining. Out of Spain, An. 1492. by Ferdinand; and shortly after out of
Portugal, Anno 1539. by Emanuel. Out of the Kingdom of Naples and Sicilie Anno
1539. by Charles the V. (as he there writes) Out of which Sir Edward Cook might
have as well averred, they only voluntarily banished themselves, as that they
voluntarily banished themselves out of England, without any special Edict for
their exile thence.

What other particulars of les^er moment concerning the Jews occur in these
Records, I have formerly touched in their respective places, and shall here
omit. Having thus completed my JUDAISMUS ANGLICANUS REDIVIVUS, if I may so
style it, or Chronological Collections of the Historical and Legal affairs of
the English Jews, out of the rich unknown Magazine of our generally neglected,
slighted precious old Records; which Hugh Peter's, (the great New-modeller, See
his Epistle and Title to his Good Work for a Good Magistrate.
Reformer of our former Laws, Liberties, Government, Kingdom, Republike,
Church, Religion, Justice, Law, Merchandise, Navy, the Poor, and what not but
himself) out of his rash fiery Zeal and transcendent ignorance, would now make
all new Martyrs, but yet be none himself; For which end, in his Good Work for a
good Magistrate, London 1651. after his proposal of A short Model for the Law,
p. 28. etc. he concludes with this advice, as a Good Work fit for his good
Magistrate, p. 33. This being done, It is very advisable to burn all the old
Records, yea even those in the Tower; the Monuments of Tyranny: that so his New
Whim^es only might be known and adored for our English Laws and Monuments in
all succeeding ages; I shall therefore crave Liberty to inform the World and
this Ignoramus, of the incomparable Excellency, Utility, Necessity of
preserving these Records, which he has so brutishly devoted to the fire,
before he either knew their contents or worth, which our Ancestors (even in all
former Wars, Revolutions, as well as times of peace and settlement) preserved
with much care and cost, as the richest Pearls, Treasures, and Jewels of the
Nation.

To which I answer^ 1. That all our wisest Kings, Parliaments, Ancestors,
Statesmen in former ages had ever a special care to record all businesses of
public or private ocncernment, and to preserve our ancient Records as the Sea
Cooks 2 In^tit. p. 70, 71, 72.
choicest Treasures, appointing special Treasu^ies, places to preserve them in,
and Custodes R^tulorum, Treasurers, Chamberlains, Registers, Clerks to keep
them safe from injury, corrupting and embe^^l^ing and enacting many Statutes
for this purpose, wi^ne^^e not only the Chests, Cyrographers, Officers and
others forementioned, for keeping the Records and Charte^s of the Jews and
their Rolls, but also 13 E. 1. c. 25.30. 1 E. 3. c. 4. 5 E. 3. c. 12. 9 E. 3.
c. 5. 6 R: 2. c. 4. 13 H. 4. c. 7. 2 H. 5. c. 8. 4 H. 6. c. 3. 8 H. 6. c.
12.15. 10 H. 6. c. 4. 18 H. 6. c. 1.9. 27 H. 8. c. 16. 32 H. 8. c. 28. 34 H. 8.
c. 22.28. 37 H. 8. c. 1. 2 E. 6. c. 10.3 and 4 E. 6. c. 1.1 and 2 Phil. and
Mar. c. 2. 23 Eliz. c. 3. 27 Eliz. c. 9. 31 Eliz. c. 3. 1 Jac. c. 6. with other
Acts, And must they now, after all these Statutes be all ma^e a burnt-offring
unto Vulcan, upon the crack-brain'd Motion of an Ignatian Incendiary?

2. The Statute of 8 H. 6. c. 12. See Co^ke ^ I^stit. p. 70, 71, 72, 73.
still in force: O^dai^s, That if any Record or parcel of the same, writ,
retori^, pa^el, process, or warrant of Attorney in the Ki^gs Cou^ts of Chancery,
Eschequer, the one Bench or other, or in his Treasury, be willingly stolen
taken away, withdrawn or avoided by any Clerk or other Person, by cause whereof
any judgment be reve^sed; (...) ^al^r taker away, wi^hdr^^^ (...) and avoider,
their Procurers, Counselors and Abettors, being thereof ina^^ted, and by
process the^eupon (...) thereof duly convict by their own confession, or by
enquest to be taken by legal men, whereof the one half shall be of the men of
some Court of the same Courts, and the other hal^ of ^^her, shall be judged for
Felons, and shall incur the pain of Felons. And that the Iudg^s of the sai^
^our^^^ of the one Bench and of the other, have power to hear and det^rmine
such defaults before them, and thereon to m^ke due puni^hment, as is aforesaid.
And now Hugh Peter's (if I may be thy Counsel^or) in sober sadness look to thy
neck: which as thou have often endangered, forfeited by thy late Fireworks, to
blow up Kings, Kingdoms, Parliaments, Lords, our old fundamental Laws,
Liberties, Government, (as Straffords, Canterburies late Impeachments,
Sentences, with Mr. St. John's and others Arguments at their Atta^nd^rs, will
resolve thee) and thy open treasonable advising, abetting the seizing,
imprisoning of my self, and above 40 more Members of Parliament, in Hell, on
the bare boards, December. 6. 1648. (whose names thou did then list with an
iron Sword under thy arm, instead of the Sword of the Spirit:) So this thy
Iesuitical Project to burn all our old Records, (whereby all former Judgment,
Titles, Fines, Recoveries, etc. will be nulled* reversed) which thou publicly
abettest, counsellest thy Magistrate to effect in Print; proclaims thee by
thine own Confession, without other evidence, a Notorious Felon within this
Act, in the highest degree. The burning, avoiding of all our Records in
general, being a more transcendent Felony, (yea Treason,) to the whole Kingdom,
Nation, than the embezelling only of one or two private Records or Writs,
relating but to one private person. And if ever thou be brought to a legal
Trial for it, before such a Jury, and such Judges as this Act prescribes, thou
art sure to undergo a Halter-Martyrdome at Tyburne; which all will cry up
(according to thy Pamphlets Title) for A good work of a good Magistrate, and a
short cut to great quiet; for thy devoting all our old Records to a fiery
Martyrdom in Smithfield; which I trust they shall never undergo; And that upon
these en^uing weighty Considerations,

First, the^e old Records which he would have burnt, contain in them all the
ancient Rights, Titles, Evidences, Charters, Agreements, Leagues, Compacts of
the Kings, Kingdom, Nation and people of England, to all their pristine and
present Dominions, Jurisdictions, Prerogatives, Preheminences, Privileges,
Hereditaments and enjoyments, both at home and abroad, by Land and by Sea, as
they are a Kingdom, Nation, Republike and body Politic in general; and that
both in relation to themselves and their own intrinsecal affairs at home, and
as they have been, owned, reputed, negotiated, treated with upon special
occasions as a Kingdom, Nation, Republike, by any foreign Kings, Princes,
Kingdoms, States; whose ancient undoubted Rights, Titles to all or any of our
Dominions, Territories, Jurisdictions, Royalties, cannot otherwise be legally
c^eared and judicially evidenced upon any emergenr occasion or controversy
between our Kingdom, Nation and other Foreign States and Realms, or between
our selves at home, but by our old Records, the only public evidences of the
whole Kingdom and English Nation, as necessary to defend, maintain, justify
their common public Rights, Dominions, Possessions, Jurisdictions, Claims,
privileges upon all occasions, as any private Noble or Gentleman's ancient
Charters, Records, Writings are to defend, manifest his right and Title to his
private Inheritance and Enjoyments; witness the Sea Tho. Wasingham, Hist. Ang.
An. 1292, etc. 1302. page 18, 49. to 56. Ypodig. Neustr, p, 86, to 95. Henry de
Knyghton de Eventibus Angliae, l. 3. c. 2.
famous Letter of the King, Parliament and Nobles of England, written and sent
to the Pope, Anno 1302. to clear the subordination of Scotland to the Crown of
England, and the Homage of the Kings of Scotland made for their kingdom to the
Kings of England as their superior Lords from time to time, manifested by the
ancient Histories and Records of England beyond all contradiction; Mr. Seldom
his Mare Clausum, proving the Dominion and Jurisdiction of the Kings of England
over the Narrow Seas by Records, and Sir Robert Cottons Posthuma. Therefore it
must necessarily be as bad and mad a work, for a bad and mad Magistrate to
burn all the public Evidences and Records of the whole Kingdom and Na^ion,
(upon the frantic motion of a Bedlam in this particular) as for a Great landed
Nobleman to burre all the old Charters, Evidences of his Lands and Honors; or
for a rich Usurer to burn all his Bonds and Morgages, which all wise men will
repute an act of Frenzy, and Hugh Peter's too in his right senses.

2. They contein in them all the great public Charters, Contracts, Agreements,
Leagues, formerly granted or made by the Kings of England, to or with the
Prelates, Earls, Barons, Freemen, Commons of England, Ireland, Scotland,
Wales, Gernsey, Iersy, Man, and all other Isles and Dominions belonging to the
Crown of England in general: all Charters, Patents Grants, Contracts, Writs,
Releases, Gifts, Pardons, Offices, Honors, Liberties, Franchises, Customs,
Privileges, Faires, Markets, Inheritances, Rents, Revenues, Licenses,
compositions formerly granted by our Kings to the respective Counties, Cities,
Towns, Buroughs, Villages, Hundreds, Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Chapters,
Prebends, Abbeys, Priories, Nunneri^s, Colleges, Hospitals, Free-schools,
Universities, great Officers, Chancellors, Generals, Admirals, Marshals,
Justices, Nobles, Gentlemen, Citizens, Merchants, Societies, Fraternities, most
private persons both in England, Ireland, Wales, Scotland, all the British
Isles, and other Territories anciently belonging to England. All whose
particular patents, grants, evidences though under sea^ (if alleged to be
false, forged, sophi^^ticated) must be tried only by their exemplifications or
inrollments on record. They likewise comprise all the Judgments, Fines, Common
Recoveries, Verdicts, Trials, Suits, Statute Merchants and Staple,
Recogni^an^^s, Inrolments, yea in any of the private Conveyances, Contracts
between our Kings and private subjects, and one subject and another. What a
universal confusion, subversion then disinherison, destruction of all Rights,
Titles, Interests, Inheritances, Privileges, the burning of all our old
Records would immediately bring upon all and every County, City, Corporation,
Nobleman, Gentleman, Inheritor, Freeholder of the Realm of England, and all the
subordinate Dominions thereto annexed, let this Short Cutter himself, and all
Wise men determine, who hold or claim any thing by matter of Record, their best
and surest evidence.

3ly. All the good old Laws, Statutes for the Government, Peace, safety,
defense and welfare of the Nation are originally contained in our Records, by
which they must be tried, examined. Yea all the perambulations and
deafforestations of our forests, All the Limits, Bounds, Extents, Contents,
Jurisdictions, Customs, Privileges, Tenures, Rents, Services of all Counties,
Cities, Buroughs, Ports, Honors, Manors, Parishes, Courts of Justice,
Offices, Officers Civil, Military, Ecclesiastical, Marine, all the Pedegrees,
Discents, Successions (by which all Heirs, Successors hold or claim their
inheritances) are for the most part defined, ascertained, evidenced, proved in
and by our Records alone, wherein they are enrolled: And if they should all be
burnt together, what a taxies, confusions, contentions, oppressions, suits,
quarrels, frauds, Disinherisons would thereupon immediately ensue, all wisemen
may prognosticke. The mighty Nymrods and Grandees of the times will then soon
question al men's Titles, devour their less potent neighbors estates,
inheritances adjoining near to theirs; all potent Landlords will exact what
services, rents, customs, heriots, releifes they please from their poor
tenants: all superior, inferior Courts, Officers, Corporations claim,
exercise what extravagant Jurisdictions, powers they think meet, and all legal
means of defending men's rights, liberties, inheritances against malicious,
potent, vexations Adversaries, will be utterly abolished by Salt Peter's new
Firework to burn all our old Records to ashes.

4ly. Whereas this Ignoramus in ou^ Records (the most whereof he never yet saw,
and cannot so much as read) produces this only reason for their burning, that
they are the monuments of Tyranny; I would demand of rhis bold blind Bayard
(who judges of coulors he never yet saw) how he can make good this notorious
untruth? The greatest part of our Records are the two great Charters of the
Liberties of England, and the Forest, or sundry subsequent confirmations of
them in several Parliaments: the good old Laws, Statutes, Ordinances made by
our wisest Kings, Nobles, Commons upon long advise and serious debates in our
English Parliaments, for the Government, Peace, defense, welfare of the
people; The proceedings, debates, Judgments, Resolutions of our sagest
Parliaments, Judges, Courts of Justice, in all matters, cases, public,
private, civil or criminal, formerly debated or resolved in them. Old Charters,
Commissions; Patents, Writs, Concords, Fines, Recoveries, Statutes, Judgments,
Extents, Indictments, Offices, Grants of Liberties, Lands, Franchises, Fairs,
Offices, Pardons to particular persons and corporations; all matters advancing
the defense of the Realm by Land and Sea in times of danger, war, according to
the ancient Laws and Customs of the Realm: Negotiations, Truces, Leagues with,
Embassies, Letters to and from forain States; All particulars concerning
Merchants, Merchandise, Trade, Coin, Bu^lion, Measures, weights, wools,
Staples, Ships, and the like. Now how all or any of these can be styled
Monuments of Tyranny, let this Lindsy-Wolsy great Clerk demonstrate at his best
leisure. Besides, I here averr, ex certa scientia against this Imposture; That
most of our old Records (especially in the Tower are so far from being
monuments of Tyranny, that on the contrary, they are the chiefest badges, the
clearest evidendences of those good old English Liberties which our noble
Ancestors claimed, purchased, and transmitted to us as our richest Birthrights,
yea the principal Bulworks Fences against all sorts of Tyrannical usurpations,
encroachments on the Peoples Liberties, Rights, Properties, in any kind
whatsoever. To put this out of Controversy, I shall appeal only to the many
excellent See a learned and necessary Argument against Impositions in the Parl.
of 7 Iac. printed 1641. Mr. Will. Hakewell his Liberty of the Subject, against
Impositions, London 1641. The confer^nce at the Committee of both Houses
concerning the Rights and Privileges of the Subject 3 and 4 to Caroli London.
1642. Judge Crooks and Huttons Arguments against Shipmony. The Remonstrances of
the Lords and Commons against tho Commission of Array. Exact Col. p. 386. etc.
450.890. Ephemeris Parliamentaria London. 1654.
old Reeords produced and most insisted on by the Commons and others in the
several Parliaments of 7, 8 and 21 Jacobi, and 3, 4, 17. Caroli against all
Impositions, Tunnage, Poundage, Customs, Excises, Loans, Taxes, demanded,
imposed and exacted from the Subject, without common consent and Act of
Parliament: against imprisoning Subjects by King or Council Table, without any
legal cause expressed in the warrants, and not bailing them in such cases:
against Shipmoney, Court and Conduct money, the Bishops late Canons and Oath,
Commissions for executing martial Law in times of Peace, impressing and
billiting Soldiers, the Commissions of Array, with other late Grievances,
Monopolies, and the arbitrary proceedings of Strafford, Canterbury, the old
Council Table, Star Chamber and High Commission, printed in sundry Treatises,
in Sir Edw. Cooks 2 and 4 Institut. Sir Robert Cottons Posthuma, and in my
Legal, Historical, Vindication and collection of the good old fundamental
Liberties, etc. of England. to which I shall refer the Reader and Hugh Peter's:
who if he had St. Augustines ingenuity, has as much cause and more than he, to
write a book of Retractations, especially of this his rash sentence passed
against our old Records, devoting them to the fire, which his and others
New-Medles better deserve than they.

Now that I may the better excite, encourage all generous English Spirits
(especially Lawyers, Statesmen, Historians, Heralds, and Divines who have
opportunity) not only to the diligent preservation, but inspection, study,
perusal of our ancient over much neglected slighted Records, so rashly devoted
to the fire by Peter's, I shall in brief acquaint each of them, what hidden
Treasures and rare precious pearls are locked up in these old Parchment
cabinets.

1. All grounded Students and Professors of the Law, upon diligent search, may
find in our old Records the several Writs of Summons for our Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Dukes, Earls, Viscounts, Barons, (...) Citizens,
Burgesses, Merchants, and all other Members to our ancient English Parliaments,
Great Councils of State, Synods, Convocations, with the several prorogations,
adjournments, dissolutions of them, and for Knights and others wages. The
Speeches, Proceedings, Petitions, Debates, Consultations, Orders, Ordinances,
Statutes, Judgments, Pleas, Demands, Grants, or Refusals of Aides, Subsidies,
with all transactions, resolves concerning peace, War, Government, Trade,
Merchandise, Bullion, Coin, Weights, Measure, purviances, Customs, Tunnage,
poundage, Imposts, Fishing, Shipping, defense of King or Kingdom by Land or
Sea, Liberties, privileges, properties, regulation of abuses, supplies of
defects of Law, Justice, and all other matters formerly discussed in our
English parliaments. Which if faithfully transcribed and methodically digested
into a Parliamentary Chronicle, would for rare useful matter, Excellency,
certainty far exceed all Histories, Statute-Books, Law Books, Chronicles ever
yet compiled, rectify many gross mistakes in most of them, and make more
able, knowing Lawyers, Judges, parlamentmen, Statesmen, than former ages have
produced. Besides the old Records, in the respective Treasuries of the Tower,
Courts at Westminster, and the Rolls, faithfully relate at large the
Institutions, Jurisdictions, procedings, Judgments, Writs, Formalities,
Debates, commissions, Law-cases, Judges, Officers names, customs, Fees, of all
the great courts of Law. Justice, Equity (civil, Ecclesiastical, Military,
Marine) Justices Itinerant, Justices of the Forest, Justices of Assize, Oyer
and Determiner, and of most other inferior Courts and Commissioners both in
England, Wales, Ireland, Scotland, Gascoyne, Normandy, Poyters, the Isles of
Man, Gernsy, Iersy Alderny, Serk, Silly, and other Isles; the Stanneries in
Cornwall, and in most Corporations, Counties, Hundreds, Honors, Manors in
them. Record all sorts of commissions, charters, Writs, Warrants, Instruments
relating to Law, Justice, Trade, peace, Wa^. The Courts Jurisdictions,
privileges, Manors, Lands, Fees, Rents, exemptions, Liberties, Royalties,
Tenures, Services, customs, Offices, Successions, pedigrees of the Kings,
Princes, Queens, Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Chapters, cities, corporations,
Fraternities, Gui^ds, Nobility, Gentry, Fre^holders of England, Ireland, Wales,
Scotland, and all Dominion, Isles annexed to them, with sundry other
particulars necessary for an accomplished Lawyer: out of which industrious
Lawyers, (if countenanced by authority, and encouraged by a a public Salary)
might collect such a rare new Body and Systeme of the Laws, customs, courts,
and ancient legal proceedings in all the courts of Justice throughout our
Dominions, as would as far excel all other Abridgements, collections, Reports,
Institutes, Registers, Law Books, hitherto published, for use, excellency, as
the richest Diamond exceeds the basest pibble, and bring more honor, benefit
to the English Nation, than all the Shepherds Calenders, and New-corps or
Models of our old English Laws, attempted by Hugh Peter's, Swordmen, and ^ome
bold illiterate Ignoramusses of the Law, who never yet perused any of our old
Records, nor read over half our English Law Books, and yet will be reformers
(or deformers rather) of what they never exactly knew nor understood. In brief,
the exact knowledge of our Records wi^^ furnish industrious Lawyers with such
rare useful materials of all sorts, for the public service of their Nati^e
country, upon all emergent occasions, the benefit, information of their
clyents, the honor of their profession, and their own reputation, advancement,
profit, as will enable them to outshine all others of their robe unversed in
the Records, as far as the Sun and Moon outshine the lesser stars, which lose
all their borrowed splendour when ^hey once ap^ear in place. Witness Mr. Noy,
Mr. Seldon, Mr. Littleton, and some other Lawyers of late times, whose real,
and Sir Edward Cook, whose borrowed superficial insight in Records, advanced
not only their Names, Fames, Arguments, Books, but practice and employments
likewise (whiles they practis^d) above all others of their Profession, and has
immortalized their memories to posterity. A sufficient Argument to engage all
generous Students, and Practisers of the Law to spend some years, or long
Vacations at least, in the Study of our almost forgotten Records; which, though
it may hinder their present gains and practice for a time, will abundantly
increase them afterward; the longest Studies in this kind (like Merchants
longest voyages) being recompensed with the richest returns.

2. All persons of quality desirous thoroughly to enable themselves to serve
their Sovereign or Country in any public great State-Offices, Employments, at
home or in foreigne parts, may out of our Records furnish themselves with all
former public Negotiations, Embassies, Treaties, Truces, Leagues, Contracts,
Agreements, Transactions, Letters, Missives, Commissions, Instructions, Claims,
Controversies, Debates between the Kings, Parliaments, Nobles, Clergy,
Merchants, Kingdom, People of England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, and Dominions
thereunto annexed, or any of them; and any other foreign Kings, Kingdoms,
Princes, States, Cities, Ambassadors, Agents, Legates, Merchants, relating to
Peace, War, Amity, Trade, Marriages, Alliances, Government, mutual aid,
Jurisdictions, Soveraigntie, Regulation of Injuries, Abuses, Depredations, etc.
and likewise between themselves: All Passages, Writs, Commissions, Debates,
resolves relating to the Parliaments, Judicatories, Laws, Justice, Trade,
Merchandise, Man^factures, Navy, Shipping, Ports, defense, Militia by Land or
Sea, Coins, Weights, Measures of England, Ireland, and other our Dominions
formerly specified: with all other particulars fit for an accomplished
Statesman, no where extant but in our Record, wherein they are faithfully
registered for the information and benefit of posterity.

3. All Heroic English Spirits desiring exact knowledge in the History and
Chronology of England, may find in our old Records all the choicest materials
relating there un^o faithfully recorded, with all the particular dates,
circumstances of time and place: All Grounds, Occasions, Commissions, Summons
of Arrayes, Armies, Navies, Fleets, Ships, Fortifications of Towns, Castles,
Con^ultations, Articles, Instructions, transactions relating to our Civil and
Foraign wars by Land or Sea, with the Names of the Generals, Officers,
Marshals, Admirals, and persons of greatest eminency in them: All Truces,
Leagues, Embassies, Contracts, Agreements, Letters, passages of State,
Parliamentary affairs, Coronations, Charters, Patents of our Kings; and what
ever may complete, adorn our English History, exactly registered; which if
faithfully transcribed and digested into order, would make a far more
useful, complete, excellent English History and Chronicle, then any yet
published or compiled. And if all the Charters, Patents, Commissions, Records,
Writs, Mandates, privileges, Le^ters granted, sent, written by our Kings,
Parliaments, Counsel, and Officers of State, relating to England, Wales,
Ireland, Scotland, Jersey, Gernsey, Man, and our other Isles and Dominions, and
to the particular Counties, Hundreds, Cities, Corporations, Ports, Officers,
Bishoprics, Monasteries, Colleges, Hospitals, Free Schools, Parishes,
Churches, Noblemen Gentlemen, and particular Manors, places in them, were
judiciously collected, digested after the moddel of Mr. Cambdens Britannia, I
dare affirm, they would as far excel it in use and benefit, as it transcends
all former publications of our British world and Monarchy.

4. Such Gentlemen as are addicted to Heraldry may find a Rich Magazine of all
choice materials belonging to the Office and Study of an English Herald;
relating either to the Regal, Noble, Gentile families, Great Officers,
Pedegrees, Marriages, Successions, Coats, Titles of Honor, Chivalry, etc. of
England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and other parts of our English Dominions.
The Coronations and Solemnities of our Kings, the creations of our Nobles,
Knights, Officers of all sorts, with their Formalities, Robes, etc. Most of our
English Heralds having been either Keepers of our Records, or Clerks under
them, out of which they extracted most of their knowledge.

5. All Divines studious of Newly deceased Bishop Ushers study and dilig^nt
perusa^ of our ancient Manuscripts and Records of all sorts, made him more
^mine^tly learned, (...), fam^^s at home and abroad, ^^en any other of our
Divines: as it did (...). John Fox, Matthew Parker, before him, at home; and
Gerardus Vo^^ius, Salmasius, Sir^^nd (...) and (...).
eminency in the Church History of England, may read in our Records many
excellent Letters, Embassies, passages, Debates between our English Kings,
Parliaments, Prelates, Clergy, Councils, Synods, and the Popes, Cardinals,
Legates, Court of Rome, and foreign Councils, Synods, Princes, Pre^^tes*
concerning the Popes Ecclesiastical and Tem^^ra^ usurped Jurisdiction, formerly
claimed, usurped in England; his Legates, Bulls, Excommunications,
Interdictons, Peter Pence, Tenths, First Fruits, Palls, Provisions, Letters,
Taxes: all Disputes between our Kings, Nobles, Parliaments, Judges, and the
Pr^la^es or Clergy of England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales: and betwixt our
Prelate^ and Clergymen themselves, concerning their Jurisdictions, Courts,
Privileges, Possessions, Pr^cedency, Visita^ions Exemptions, Taxes, Tenths,
First Fruits, Elections, consecrations. Investitures, etc. And all Charters,
Priviledg^s Exemptions, Glebes, rents, (...) ^^^onging to the Bishoprics,
Monasteries, (...) clergy of England Ireland* ^^les, Scotland, and the (...);
which, if ^ige^ted into an History, would not only ^dorn, but exce^ all
Ecclesiastical Histo^ies of Engl^nd hither^o p^blish^d, and rectify some
mistakes in ^any of them.

Upon all which consid^rations, I hope (...). 16.22. (...). 10.
the God of the Spi^^^s of all fle^h wi^^in this stupid, selfish, degenerated
age, raise up some heroic active public English Spirits of all these ranks,
not only to preserve our precious ancient Records from Hugh Peter's designed
Martyrdom, but likewise diligently to study and extract such useful collections
out of them, as I have hinted, for the benefit, honor of their Native country,
and advantage of succeeding ages, of which I have here given them a leading
president in these Historical, Legal, Chronological collections relating only
to our English Jews; the transcendent malice of my former causlesse Enemies, in
See my New Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny.
debarring me by a special old Council Table Order from all access to the
Tower Records, during my 5. years Imprisonment in it, (made the very next day
after my commitment thither, to deprive me of their benefit;) seconded with
above 3. years close imprisonment and exile in remotest Castles; and the Sea
my New Discovery of of Free State Tyranny.
late ungrateful, despiteful, unrighteous Oppressions of some of their new
Whitehall Successors, (though my pretended great Friends) in seizing all my
Papers, Writings, Records, they could meet with, both in Lincolns Inn, and the
Country, and keeping me close Prisoner in ^, rem^^e Castles under stri^t^st
armed Guards near full 3. y^ars space, wi^hou^ any accusation, hea^ing, or
cause expr^ssed, ^ither th^n or since; (of purpose to hinder me from our
R^cords, (...) ^ublishing any thing for the common good; as ^ome of them have
ac^nowledged;) having so long deba^^ed, so much impo^e^ished, so ^far disabled
me from the^e Noble Undertakin^s, (de^er^ing all encouragements even ^^on ^
common public pur^e and account) that I must recommend the pursuit of them to
some other Gent^emen of l^sser years, but far greater abilities and estates
then my self, who may both demerit, receive in after ages far better rewards
for their Labors and Publications herein, then long tedious Imprisonments,
close imprisonment, Pillories, Stigmatizing, Fines, Exiles, Degradations,
Affronts, Losses, discouragements of all sorts; the only Encouragements,
Guerdons, Recompenses, I ever yet received for all my useful publications, my
unmercenary faithful Services and Sufferings for the public, upon all
occasions.

I shall close up all with some Scripture-Texts discovering the excellent use,
benefit of old Records, and what high esteem the wisest Kings in the Old, and
Paul himself in the New Testament had of them.

The first Text I shall cite, gives us a true character of the Jews seditious
carriage, then manifested by Records.

E^ra 4.14, 15. Now because we are salted with the Salt of the Palace, and it
was not meet for us to see the Kings dishonor; therefore have we sent and
certified the King, that search may be made in the Books of Records of thy
fathers; so shall thou find in the Book of the Records, and know, that this
City is a Rebe^lious City, and hurtfu^l unto Kings and Provinces, and they have
moved sedition within the same of old times, for which cause was the city
destroyed: which appeared true upon search made in the Records: verse. 19.20.

Esther 6.1. On that ni^ht could not the King sleep, and he commanded to bring
the Book of Records of the Chronicles. and they were r^^d be^o^e the King.

Neh. 12.22.23. The ^evites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, etc. were recorded
chief of the Fathers; also the Priests to the reign of Daruis the Persi^^: The
Sons of Levy the chief of the Fathers were recorded in the Books of Chronicles,
etc.

2 Timothy ^.1^. When thou come bring with thee the books, bu^ especially the
Parchments which the Latin Translators, a^^^end^ Membranas, ^ Parchment Rolls
Upon which words ^^e^^o^e^t, Oecum^mus and others thus comment; M^xime
Membranas, Interp. and Enar. in 2 Timothy 4.13.
Membranas Latina magis voce, volumina, sive Chartas volubiles appell^^^i I^
complicatis en^m involutis Chartis habebant olim quae ad divinam spectant
Scripturam Quemadmodum ^tiam ad ^re^^n^^m a^^us (...) p^u^ima habent.

If then a^l our parchment Membran^es, Rolls, Records, must be burnt, Hugh
Peter's and his good Magistrate, to accomplish this good Work must first burn
the old original parchment Membranaes and Rolls of the Old and New Testament
(the ancientest of all others) which St. Paul was so careful to preserve, and
then those of the Kingdom next; And whether this will be a Good or christian
work, for a Good or christian Magistrate or Minister, let all sober men
resolve: seeing it will totally deprive us of all sacred, all civil Antiquities
and Records, and be matter of greatest rejoicing, advantage to our common
Romish Enemies and the Jesuits, the original projectors of this infernal
Jesuitical design and practice, as Ludovicus Lucius Hist. Iesuiticae l. 1. c.
6. p. 144. manifests and records.

What therefore our Savior himself concludes of old Wine, that will all
learned, discreet, sage men determine of our good old English Laws, Liberties,
Records compared with Hugh Peter's and others New Models, Instruments, papers
relating to the public.

Lu. 5.39. No man having drunk Old Wine streightway desires New for he says
the Old is better.

FINIS.
Errata and Omissions.
KInd Reader, Take notice, that the Records of Edw. 1. being transc^ibed before
the later of King John and those of Henry the 3d. and printed at guess before
them, they amounting to above double the sheets conjectured, thereupon from C.
p. 13. to H. p. 53. the folioes only are figured, and some sheets altogether
w^^hout figures. Wherefore I shall desire thee to page them all with thy p^n,
from p. 13. to p. 53. that so thou may the better correct those few Errataes
which have escaped the Press in some Copies, here noted as if they had all been
paged in order.

In the Epistle: p. 2. l. 27. read Endeavorer. In the Book, p. 3. l. 32.
Priesthood^. P^esbytery. p. 11. l. 33. together, p. 13. l. 6. preceding, p. 16.
l. 1. on r. in, l. 14. Statutes, p. 18. l. 30 thu^ p. 20. l. 3, Fra^ket. p. 24.
l. 13. placia, p. 25. l. 32. lucio. p. 27 l. 37 victu^lia, et si quem
inveneritis quae deneger eis victualia, etc. p. 34. l. 36. ^s^nd, p. 37. l. 10.
reddendam, p. 38. l. 36. but, then. p 43. l. 1. Jews Cha^reis, p. 44. l. 37.
^e^minis, p 49. l. 14. marcar. p. 52. l. 28. goods, r. bonds, p. 68. l. 15. r.
nisi in, ^. 21. ^^um, folutis, p. 75. l. 5. inte^sit, p. 76. l. 18. executus,
l. 33. names too, p. 81. l. 1. priestly Office only, p. 83 l. 1. (...) as, p.
90. l. 2. earundem, p. 97. l. 11. salvos, p 102. l. 1. quam al^unde, p. 104. l.
4. there. p. 108. l. 7. the Jews, p. 1 9. l. 8. quaerelis, p. 122. l. 3. p^o,
per, Now follow the Errata after H. as the ^ages are printed, p. 54. l. 17. r.
de, p. 55. l. 20. r. lu^ae^ in, l. 23. quidam, p. 54. c. 13. exequuntur, p. 64.
l. 10.33. r. 53. p. 65, l. 37. m^ndatum, p. 82. l. 19. indictati, l. 21. ^oris
fecerunt, l. 27. in. r. nec. l. 33. r. Judaeis metum, p 92. l. 29. continue, p.
94. l. 9. F^: (...) l. 28. conversi, p. 105. l. 18. alio. l. 31. and, as, p.
108. l. 19. ^ecto, l. 36. Converts, p. 109 l. 1. fidelibus, p. 110. l. 19. in
the, of his, p. 114 l. 22. ipsis, l. 10. dele et, p. 115. l. 19. causa, ausa,
p. 126. l. 30. competentur. p. 136. l. 19. dele Law.

Marg^r. p. 36. ^. 1. Claus. 19 H. 3. p. 41. l. 1 r. 20 H. 3. p. 43. l. 7. r.
Claus. 25 H. 3. p. 114. l. 1. Claus. 53 H. 3. H. 3. p. 89. l. 6. Conversorum.


