SOME POPISH ERRORS, unadvisedly embraced, and pursued by our ANTICOMMVNION
MINISTERS.

Wherein is Discovered The dangerous effects of their discontinuing the
Frequent public Administration of the Lords Supper; the Popish Errors whereon
it is bottomed; persuading the frequent Celebration of it, to all Visible
Churchmembers, with their Free-admission thereunto; and prescribing some legal
Regal Remedies to redress New Sacrilegious detaining of it from the people,
where their Ministers are obstinate. With a New discovery of some Romish
Emmissaries, QUAKERS.

By William Prynne of Swainswicke Esquire, a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

John 10.10. The Thief comes not but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy.

Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 49. Ex ipsis veris Ecclestis frequenter exeunt
Seductores. Propterea nec ipsis omnino credendum est, nisi ea dicant, vel
faciant, quae convenientia a sint Scripturis.

August. contra Faustum Manich. l. 19. c. 10. In nullum nomen Religionis, seu
verum, seu falsum, coagulari homines possunt, nisi aliquo Sacramentorum
visibilium consortio colligentur.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas at his
Shop at the sign of the Adam and Eve in Little-Britain, 1658.

A New Discovery of some Romish Emissaries, Quakers and others; as likewise of
Popish Errors, Practices lately embraced, pursued, avowed by some Zealots, and
Grand Deformers, in secluding their Parishioners sundry years from the Holy
Communion of the Lords Supper, etc.
THe sad Complaint of old, to and of Constantius the Arrian Emperor, ( who
Athanasius epist. ad solitariam vitam agentes. See Dr. Bilson his True
Difference between Christian subjection, and unchristian rebellion. part 2. p.
182, 183.
made his exorbitant Will, the only Law, and used this Papal Speech to
Paulinus, and other Orthodox Bishops convented before him, for refusing to
communicate with the Arrians upon his command, as being against the
Ecclesiastical Canons: At quod ego ^olo pro Canone sit: Ita me lequentem^
Syriae Episcopi sust^n ut; aut ergo obtemperate, Aut vos quoque exules estote)
made by St. Hilarie concerning the frequent changes of the Christian Faith, and
multitudes of Religions under his arbitrary Tyrannical Government, viz.
Hilarious ad Constantium. l. 3.
Faith is come now, rather to depend upon the Time, than on the Gospel. Our
State is dangerous and miserable, that we have now as many faiths as wills, and
as many Doctrines as manners, whiles Faiths (...) so written as we list, or so
understood as we will. We make every year, and every month, a new faith, and
still we seek a faith, as if there were yet no faith. Hilarious, l. 1. Contra
Constantium.
This O Constantius would I (...) know (...), what faith at length thou
b^lievest? Thou have changed so often, that now I know not thy faith. That is
^amed to th^^ which us th^^ fellow (...) if all builders, ever disliking their
own doings, that thou still pullest down that thou art still setting up. Thou
subvertest the old with new; and the new thou rentest in sunder with a newer
correction; and that which was once corrected. thou condemnest with a second
correction. O thou wicked one, W^^^ a mockery do thou m^ke of the Church,
etc? May now be the dolorous just complaint of every sincere English Christian,
touching the manifold changes of Faiths, the multiplicities of Religions in our
Vertiginous, unstable, arbitrary and Tyrannical Age; wherein too many of all
Degrees, make their own exorbitant lawless wills, the only Laws, Canons by
which they act; making Faith to depend rather upon their pleasures (yea worldly
designs) than on the Gospel; setting up of late years amongst us as many Faiths
as Wills, as many Doctrins, opinions, as we have Manners, Sects, coining,
venting, professing, what New Faiths they list, and understanding our ancient
Creeds as they please to interpret them; new-making, or at least embracing a
new Faith every year, if not almost every month; running from one New Sect,
Faith, Opinion to another, still seeking after the newest Faith, as if they had
quite lost the old; changing so often, that none know of what Faith or Sect
they are; being one month Presbyterians, the next Independents, the 3d.
Anabaptists, the 4th. Quakers, the 5th. Ranters, the 6th. Seekers, the 7th.
Arrians, Anti-Trinitarians; the 8th. Socinians, the 9th. Arminians, the 10th.
Antinomians, the 11th. Antiscripturists, and the 12. professed Atheists.
Subverting their old Church, Religion, Faith, Sect, wi^h a New one, that New,
with a Newer, that Newer, with the Newest and last broached, (as our
Fashion-mongers change the shape of their garments) till they have utterly lost
all Faith, Piety, Religion, Conscience; and made the Church of Christ a mere
Mockery; yea Christ himself, a Fable.

Neither are they less giddy or unstable in their State-Mutations than in
their Ecclesiastical or Religious, still changing from one misshapen New-Model
to another; so as what Variae Historiae l. 5. c. 13.
Aelianus records of the ficklepated seditious Athenians (the first inventors
of New State Governments) is as really verified of these English Innovators.
Athenienses omnino ad commutandos Re^publicae status erant versatiles, and
omnium propensissimi ad vicissitudines, etc. In which respect Iam. 1.8.
(...) James his character of a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways, is
now become their proper^^t Mo^^o, unless they like Jude 12, 13* 16, 19.
St. Iudes better; These be spots in your Feasts of Charity, feeding themselves
without (...): Clouds they are without water, carried about with winds: Trees,
whose fruit withers, without fruit, twi^e dead, plucked up by the roots:
Raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame: wandering stars, to whom
is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever: Murmurers, complai^ers,
walking after their own lusts, etc. These be they who separate themselves,
sensual, having not the Spirit; though they proclaim themselves, the only
Saints having the Spirit* which I grant most true, if meant of 1 John. 4.6.
the Spirit of Error* or that Isay 19.13, 14.
Spirit of perversities (or giddinesses) the Lord mingled in the midst of
Egypt, and the Princes of Zoan, which caused Egypt, ( and now England) to
err in every work thereof, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit.

That subtle Romish Non Doctores, sed sedlictores; non Pastores, sed
Impo^ores. Bernard.
seducing Emissaries, Jesuits, Franciscans, Popish Priests, Friars of all
sorts, disguised under the Vizors of Independents, Anabaptists, Dippers,
Quakers, Ranters, Seekers, Soldiers, Factors, M^rchants Artificers, and
mechanic Professions of all sorts, have been the principal Instruments to
infuse this Spirit of Giddiness into our intoxicated besotted English brains;
the original Plotters, Broachers, Fomentors, Propagators of all the deplorable
Wars, Divisions, Errors, Sects, Heresies, Bl^sphemies, New Faiths, Changes of
Government, which have of late years miserably rent both our Nations, Churches,
Kingdoms, (heretofore 1 Iacobi c. 1, 2.3. Iac. c. 1.
happily united in Christian Amity, Unity, under one Hereditary Sovereign) into
diverse incoherent pieces, Schisms, Factions, Churches, irreconcilably divided
from and against each other (threatening Mat. 12.25.26. Gal. 5.15.
our inevitable speedy ruin, without Gods infinite, reconciling, reuniting
Mercy, beyond all human probabilities) I have at large demonstrated by
irrefragable Evidences formerly published in In my Cozens his Cozening
Devotions, Quenchcole, The Popish Royal Favorite, Romes Masterpiece. Hidden
works of Darkness brought to public Light. Canterburies Doom. Speech in
Parliament. Memento: A Gospel plea. Ius Patronatus, Epistle to a Seasonable
Legal Vindication, etc. A New Discovery of Free State Tyranny: The Quakers
unmasked.
sundry printed Pieces: to which I shall add some other Fresh Evidences, to
open the closed eyes, awaken the Drowsy spirits of our infatuated, stupid
English Nation, and reclaim them (if possible) from those ways of desolation,
in which they run on headlong, without deliberation, discretion, fear or wit.

1. It is worth our special observation, that in See D^. John White his way to
the True Church, and Preface before it: and My Quakers unmasked.
Lancashire and those other Northern parts, where Popish Priests, Friars,
Recusants formerly most abounded, there our last, newest, up-start Sect of
Quakers first sprung up, and now most of all abound; sending out their Popish
Romish Emissaries thence into all other parts of the Realm, to seduce the
people, and openly to revile, traduce, affront, disturb our Ministers in their
Churches, Pulpits, Houses; in going to, returning from their Churches, and in
the open streets, in a more insolent manner, and with greater impunity, than
ever the Popish Priests, Friars, or Papists in those parts, affronted, reviled,
disturbed them heretofore, when they were most countenanced or connived at by
our late Kings, or their Officers; being encouraged thereunto by many in
greatest Authority in those parts, of which I have seen late sad complaints in
Letters of Ministers thus insufferably abused, disturbed daily by them, to
their great vexation* not only against See Lamberts f. 19^ 333.416. Da ^on, p.
124, 115. Complete Justice, p. 223.
the ^uo St^tute of 1 Mariae, c. 3. but the ancient Fundamental Laws of England
before the Conquest, Hoveden Annalium pars posterior, p. 601, 602. Lambardi
Archaion. Spelmanni Council. p. 619, 620. See 8 H. 6. c. 1. Rastall^ Parl. 12.
presented to William the Co^queror himself upon Oath, by the famous Grand
Erquest of 12 of the principal men chosen out of every County, and ratified by
him in Parliament in the 4th. year of his reign; providing for the peace and
quiet of the Ministers and people too, against all affronts and disturbances,
both in their going to, continuance in, and returning from their Churches, or
Synods (as well as to our Parliaments, and other Courts of Justice) still in
full Legal vigor; by which, all such disturbers may, and ought to be fined,
imprisoned upon conviction, according to the quality of their offenses, as well
as See Daltons Justice of Peace, c. 38.
other disturbes, infringers of the public Peace, and bound both to the Peace
and good behavior for the future, ere released, with sufficient sureties.

2ly. It is remarkable, that these New Quakers were sent from those Northern
Counties, into other quarters of the Kingdom, two by two, at first; no doubt by
the direction of their Popish Provincial, just as the Franciscan Friars are
sent out by their Provincial. In the Sea My Royal Popish Favorite. Romes
Masterpiece. Hidden works of Darkness brought to public Light. Canterburies
Doom.
years 1638, 1639, and 1640. there were sundry Franciscans, with whole swarms
of I^suits, Benedictins, and other Friars sent from foreign parts, into England,
Scotland, Ireland, Virginia, St. Christophers, and other English Plantations,
to reduce the people back to Rome, toward which we were then running post. The
Original Instruments of some of their Missions, with sundry of their Letters,
Papers under their own hands and scals, relating their intentions, proceedings,
(seized in the Capucins Cell, adjoining to the late Queens Chapel at
Somerset House, and in Maryland, (by a Sea-Captain my Client) where the
Jesuits erected a New College and Society, the whole History whereof, and of
their proceedings in those parts, was comprised in their Letters) Gods
providence brought into my hands, when they, and their seduced instruments were
most busy in reforming, new-modelling our Church, Religion, Parliaments,
Realms, Government, after the prescribed patterns of Robert Parsons the Jesuit,
Thomas Campanella the Friar, and Richelieu the French Cardinal; as I have My
Speech in Parl. Memento; Epistle to my ^us Paronatus; and Historical Lae^al
Vindication.
elsewhere demonstrated beyond contradiction. The chiefest of these
Instruments, Letters, Papers (of great concernment to our Church, State,
Religion) I intended long since to have published. But See a New Discovery of
Free State Tyranny.
Io. Bradshaw and his Whitchall Associats (out of their transcendent zeal to
our Religion and Republike) in the end of June, 1650, by special warrants
directed to Soldiers, plundered me of those, and all my other Papers, Letters,
Writings, Records in my Study at Lincolns Inn, and at Swainswicke, which they
could seize on; and then shut me up close Prisoner under strictest armed
Guards, in 3. remote Castles, near 3. whole years, without any particular cause
then or since expressed, or the least hearing or examination of me, only to
hinder my Discoveries and publications of this Nature; whiles these Romish
Emissaries, in the mean time, wandered freely up and down throughout our
Dominions without restraint, See the Beacons fired.
published many thousands of Popish, heretical, blasphemous New Books; and some
of them were Soldiers in pay in their very Guards; no doubt to help extirpate
Popery, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, and for the Preservation, Defense, and
Reformation of the Protestant Religion, the preservation of the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, the Liberties of the Kingdom, the Honor,
Happiness, Defense and Preservation of the Kings Majesty and his Posterity,
according to the A Collection of all Public Ordinances p. 424, 425.
Tenor of the Solemn League and Covenant, the quite contrary way; and promoting
their New Engagement, diametrically repugnant thereunto. Yet, notwithstanding
all their diligent Searches, by Gods providence, they left one of those
Original Popish Missions in Parchment, under Seal, undiscovered, (which I
lately found in my Study at Lincolns Inn^) whereby two Franciscans were sent by
their Provincial of Britain, in the year 1639. to St. Christophers, and other
Western Islands where we had plantations; who ended their progress at
Somerset House, (where this Instrument was seiled;) which because it may give
some light toward the Discovery of our Quakers Missions in like manner two by
two, I shall here print verbatim out of the Original in my custody; seen by
many of my Friends.

Admodum Venerabili Patti Fratr^.
F: Hugoni Ancenisiensi, Ordinis Fratrum Minorum, Sancti Francisci Capucinorum,
Sacerdoti, Frater.
F: Ra^hael Nannetensis ejusdem Ordinis, et In Provincia Britannia
Provincialis, licet immeritus, Salutem, In eo qui est vera Sa^us.
CUm divino incensus a more, et animarum Salut is sollicitudine pulsus, ex hac
nostra Britanniae Provincia ad Insulas Occidentales per longa maris pericula
^is vela facturus, ut illius regionis populos in umbra mortis sedentes, in
lucem veritatis Christianae omni cum studio adducere valeas; Nobisque ex
regulae Seraphyci Patris Francisci praescripto incumbat, de mittendorum
idonietate judicare, et a sancta Sede sit Nobis concessum, quos ad tale
Apostolicum munus obe undum dignos censuerimus, illuc dirigere. Te, cujus
Pietas et fervor animi animarumque Zelus Nobis innot^it, ad id munus, cum
salutatis obedientiae merito et RR. PP. Definitorum applausu, ad Insulam Sancti
Christopheri, Martiniam, aut aliam Insulam Occidentalem; Ibique commorandi, si
opus fuerit, Confessiones excipiendi, caeteraque tui muneris Apostolici Officia
exercendi, donec per Nos vel Successorem nostrum tibi aliter innotuerit; Una
cum V.P.F. Epiphanio Alenconiensi, in nomine Domini mittimus et deputamus. Ut
amem digne quantum fieri poterit in tam celebri Missione peragenda te geras,
omnibus facultatibus per nostra Privilegia concessis, ga^dere atque uti, in
quantum se extendit nostra authoritas, libenter tibi concedimus. Monentes te,
ut cum omni studio, vigilan^ia, zelo, alacritate ac fidei fiducia, nec minus
P^etate, ac cum proximis Evangelica conversatione, quam doctrina, instanter ad
hoc eximium, Deoque, ^c Seraphyco Patrinostro Franciso acceptum opus te
accingas. Rogamus autem omnes Christi fideles, ad quos in Itinere te divertere
contigerit, aut quorum auxilio, consilio et favore indigueris, ut te tanquam
unum obedientiae ^ilium cum omni Charitate recipiant; fidem facientes omnibus
praesentes Li^eras inspecturis, de tua in fide constantia, doctrinae puritate,
necnon Religiosae vitae immaculata observantia. Vade igitur in pace, De^mque
pro Nobis deprecare.

Datum in Conven^u nostro Nannetensi die septimo Novembris Anni 1639. F.
Raphael Provincialis. Ims.


The Seal affixed to these Letters Missives is Oval, near 3. Inches in
compass, having St. Francis and another Friars Portraitures cut in it,
standing over against each other, with a Book held up between them in their
hands, and the holy Ghost, in form of a Dove, standing upon it, with his wings
spread abroad over it and them, and a Coat of Arms at their Feet, with this
Inscription in Capital Letters round about the Seal, Sigillum Pro. FF. in Capuc
Provinc. Britan..

Those who will diligently compare these Letters Missives with our Quakers
Missions and Practices, may doubtless discern A Franciscan Provincial, and
Franciscan Friars, to be the principal original Contrivers, Directors of, and
activest instruments in their late Missions two by two into all our Dominions,
to distract, seduce the people with their Franciscan Tenants or Evangelical
Perfection, etc. their Franciscans coarse habi^s, Haircloth, Fasts,
Mortifications, Revelations Practices, railings against our Ministers Persons,
Callings, Doctrines, Tithes, etc. which I have My Quakersunm^s ked. Edit. 2.
elsewhere more largely detected, and The Newcastle Ministers, Mr. Farmer, Mr.
Baxter, and others.
others insi^^ed on in print, to whom I remit the Reader for fuller
information. And to this relation of a Gentleman lately arrived at Bristol from
Marcelles in France, whose name is Mr. Charles Chester: who informed some
persons of credit in Bristol, (from whose months I had it) That at his being at
Marcelles, there came thither two Franciscan Capuchin Friars in their habits,
who begged some relief from him and other English there, pretending they were
Englishmen, newly come forth of Eugland, and traveling toward Rome upon some
occasions: whom he entertaining with good English beer (a rarity in those
parts) when they were a little warmed with it, they began to discourse more
freely with him upon his demands, how long, and in what parts they had been in
England, and what persons they knew there? They answered, that they had been in
England some years space, and particularly in London, and Bristol; that they
were very well acquainted with sundry particular persons in both places, whom
they named to him (some whereof are the principal Male and Female Quakers in
Bristol, whose names I forbear) that they went there under the name of
North-Country men (as the Ringleaders of the Quakers all do) but in truth they
were Irish-men born; and when they had dispatched their business at Rome,
intended to return shortly into England again. And upon his first relation he
added; That himself saw and heard them speak to the Quakers at the Red lodge in
Bristol, at one of their meetings there.

If we add to this relation, that passage in Thomas Campanelia De Monarchia
Hispanica, cap. 25. ( De Anglia, Sectia, and Hiber^^a, how to reduce them under
the Spaniard and Pope, by reducing them from Kingdoms (...) an Elective
Kingdom, or into the form of A Commonwealth, etc.) Where he thus writes of
Ire^^^d p. 207. Quod in Regno illo, seu Insula, Catholici maxim monachi
ordinis S. Francisci summopere deamentur, etc. Comparing it with the late
monstrous increase of Jesuits, but especially of these Friars and Monks in
Ireland, before the wars there brake forth, in which they were most active, as
I have Hidden works of darkness brought to public light, p. 93.102, 101, to
214.218, to 252.
elsewhere discovered in folio by undeniable evidences, to which I refer the
Reader: And then compare them with the late extraordinary growth of Anabaptists
and Quakers throughout Ireland, who have overspred that kingdom since the wars
there ended, by means of those Jesuits, and Franciscan Capucin Friars, who turn
disguised Anabaptists and Quakers to undermine our Church, Religion, Ministers,
and seduce the people under these disguises, with more freedom, safety,
countenance, success, than ever they did formerly by any other Policies, or
the open profession of Popery; we may doublesse conclude, that they are the
original erectors, the principal Ring leaders, Fomentors of these increasing
New Sects throughout our Dominions; as Ramsy the Scottish Jesuit (under the
mask of a Converted Jew) confe^sed in his considerable Examination taken at
New Castle, printed 1653. p. 4, 5, 11, 12, 13. and Mr. Edwards in the third
part of his Gangrena p. 99. Yea, O. Cromwell himself (a witness beyond all
exception) in his printed Speech in the Painted Chamber (before the last
Assembly there) Sept. 4.1654. p. 16, 27. have published to the whole world.

To put this out of further question; I shall here unto subjoyn one late
discovery of an Irish Franciscan Friar, and Missionary of the Pope, now in
Prison at Bristol, which I shall more at large insist on, and desire all
cordial well wi^^^rs to the Protestant Religion, and their Native Country, to
take special notice of.

On the 20 of November last 1655. the Mayor of Bristol examining a Malefactor
there brought before him, was informed by a by-stander, that there was one
walking over against them, whom he saw in this Malefactors company, and seemed
to him a suspicious person. Whereupon an Officer was sent to bring him to the
Mayor; Giving no goo^ account what he was, or whence he came, he was there upon
ordered to be further examined and searched. Upon which he feigned a present
necessity to ease Nature, and withdrawing himself for that end to an House of
Office, the Officers attending him, imagining it was but an excuse, to convey
away some things he had about him, perceived him to thrust his hand up under
his doublet into his bosom, and in^o the linings of his hose, to take some
things thence to convey into the Jakes. Whereupon laying hands on him, and
narrowly searching him, they found sundry Papers and Letters in his Hose and
Bosom; and these large Faculties granted to him by the Provincial of the F^iers
Minorites, Under Hand and Seal, which I lately transcribed with my own hand
before some persons of Quality, out of the Original Instrument it se^f,
remaining in the custody of the Town-Clark of the City of Bristol, discovering
the quality of the party, and the large Popish Faculties conferred on him,
suited to the present times, most of them worthy our special observation.

Facultates venerando admodum Patri Fratri.
F. Mauxicio Conrio, Sacrae Theologiae Lec^ori, etc. Communicatae.
I. See Declaration de Pere Basil. A Sedane 1639. p. 116*
REconciliandi Haereticos, and Absolvendi in omnibus Casibus ac Censuris, and
in Bulla Coenae Domini; omnes etiam Ecclesiasticos and Regulares.

II. Dispensandi cum Clericis super Irregularitate quacunque occasion
contracta, praeterquam Homicidii volunrarii.

III. Tenendi and Legendi Libros Haereticos, and quoscunque Prohibitos, ad
effectum illos oppugnandi; Ita tamen ut praedicti Libri non extrahantur extra
Regionem. Quod si opus fuerit Laicis eandem facultatem faciendi, non fiat
absolute, sed ad certum terminum majorem vel minorem, pro ratione personae.

IV. Administrandi Sacramenta omnia Parochialia, omissis pro necessitate
solennitatibus and Ceremoniis solitis, non tamen necessariis.

V. Ubi Breviarium ferri non possit, vel recitari officium absque periculo,
recitandi Rosa^ium Beatae Mariae Virginis, vel alias Orationes, ac Psalmos,
quos memoria te^et.

VI. Consecrandi Calices, Patenas and Altaria Portatili^, oleo tamen ab
Episcopo benedicto* benedicendi Paramenta ad Missae sacrificium necessaria: nec
teneantur inquirere, an Altaria portatilia contineant Reliquias necne.

VII. Celebrandi Missas, quocunque loco decenti, and sub dio, subtus terram,
tribus horis ante lucem Hyeme, una hora post Meridiem, bis in die, ubi
necessitas postulaverit; and coram Haereticis, aliisque personis
excommunicatis, dummodo Minister non sit Haereticus.

VIII. Hostiam Consecratam servandi in loco decenti, sine lumine, aliisque
Ceremoniis quibus utitur Ecclesia.

IX. Commutandi quaecunque vota, etiam jurata, exceptis Castitatis, and
Religionis: and relaxan^^ juramenta, modo non fiat ad prejudicium ^ertii.

X. Dispensandi ob magnam Necessitatem in tertio gradu; modo etiam ante
contractum Matrimonium.

XI. Concedendi Indulgentiam plenariam in prima Confessione, et quotannis in
Festis celebrioribus, et in mor^is articulo, et quotiescunque Generalem
Confessionem peccatorum fecerint, etiam Indulgentiam 40. aut 50 di^rum ad
libitum.

XII. Imprimendi et edendi Libros Catholicorum, tacito Nomine Authoris, loci,
Typographi, ac reliquorum, Non obstante Concilio Tridentino, modo fuerint
approbati a Nobis, vel ab aliis per Nos delegandis.

XIII. Dispensandi cum Conversis ad fidem Catholicam, super fructibus Bonorum
Ecclesiarum male perceptis.

XIV. Absolvendi Haereticos cujuscunque Nationis morantes in Anglia: non tamen
ex partibus in quibus exercetur sanctae Inquisitionis officium in foro
conscientiae.

XV. Applicandi piis usibus bona restituenda incertis Dominis.

Poterit ad tertium Ordinem administrare, modo instructiones similes et ubique
conformes adhibeantur. Et habeant Registrum nominum receptorum, annum et diem
tam receptionis, quam Professionis qu^^ ad capitulum Provinciale deferet.

De Uniformitate Fratrum.
Pro majore Devotione populi ordinatur, (...) Sacerdotes in Celebratione Missae
graviter et religiose observentur omnia quae ad hoc instituuntur in Ceremoniis,
Missalis.

In audiendo vero Missam observent Ceremonias nostrae sacrae Religionis,
uniformiter, in quantum ratio temporis permittit; praesertim in singulis
Elevationibus oscu^entur terram.

In recitatione Officii divini, pro more fiat ante Altar. In Psalmis et
Lectionibus, sedeant; Let those who use these Ceremonies still observe it.
surgendo et inclinando Ad Gloria Patri, etc. surgant etiam ad Evangelium,
Capitulum et Hymnos in cornu Altaris. Ad Magnificat vero, Nunc Dimittis,
Benedicti, Te Deum, cum Collectis, ad medium Altaris.

Post Commemorationes Ordinis in Completa^io, semper dicant, Tota pulchra es,
etc. in honorem immaculati Conceptionis: adjungendo versum; Memento
Congregationis tu^. Resp: quam possedisti ab initio; cum Collecta.

Omnipotens aeterne Deus Custos Jerusalem Civitatis supernae, aedifica and
custodi nos et Ordinem nostrum, Re^em, Fegnum, et domum istam, cum omnibus
Fratribus ^abitatoribus suis, ut perpetuum sit in illis domicilium salutis,
Charitatis et Pacis^ per euudem Christum Dominum nostrum: Amen.

Ante Missam Principalem.
Pro Conversione Patriae semper recitentur Litaniae Laur^^aneae.

Singulis Feriis sextis in honor Passionis Dominicae Curent in quantum
commoditas loci fert omnes Domesticos convocari, et quas Letanias majores quae
quotidie pro ^^ore recitantur, actum Con^ritiori solennem sicut in
instructionibus habetur Choratim repeti.

An Act of Contrition.
O My Lord Jesus Christ, true God and Man, my Creator and Redeemer, thou being
whom thou art, and for that I love thee above all things, it grieveth, it
greiveth me, it grieveth me from the bottom of my heart, that I have offended
thy divine Majesty, and I firmly purpose Never to sin any more, and to sly all
occasions of offending thee, to confe^e my sins, and perform the Penance
enjoined me for the same. And for the love of thee, I do freely pardon all mine
Enemies; and do offer my life, words, and works in satisfaction for the same.
Wherefore I most humbly beseech thee, trusting in thy infinite Goodness and
Mercies, that by the Merits of thy precious Blood and Passion thou would
pardon my Offenses, and grant me Grace to amend my life, and to persevere
therein till death. Amen, Jesus.

U^ haec omnia prout ^acent observentur ^raecipio, et pro ma^ore firmita^*
Provinciae majori sigillo, et proprio Chirographo communio haec. 23. Feb. An
Dom. 1654.

That is, Frater Daniel a Sancto Iohanne (St. John) Minorum Provincialis.
Fr: Dan: a S. Ioanne M^r. Prlis:

Over against the Provincials name there is the Provincial Seal in red wax with
a white paper over it, in an Oval form (like the former) about 3. inches in
compass; with the Picture of St. Francis (as I conceive) carved in the midst
of the seal, and an inscription in Capital Le^ters round about the Seal, most
of which are so bruised, that they are not legible; but sigillum Prove: seems to
be engraven on that side of it which is least defaced; as in the formentioned
Letters Missives to Friar Hugo.

1. By these Faculties under Seal (written in Paper, not Parchment) it is most
apparent, that this Maurice Conry, to whom they are Granted, is: First a person
of very great note and esteem; as the manifold and large Faculties, powers
granted to him; and the 4. first words, Facultates, Venerando admodum Patri,
etc. import. 2ly, That he is by his Order, A Friar Minorite, or Capucin, or
Saint Francis Order* 3ly, That he is a Professor of Divinity; as his Title
Sacrae Theologiae Lector, etc. his 3d. Faculty, to refute Heretical Books which
he reads, and 12. To print and publish Books, etc. manifest him to be. 4ly.
That he is a great Scholar in the repute of the Provincial and others who
granted him these Faculties; and himself confesses in his Examination, that he
was a Student for two years in the University of Paris, and after that went to
Prague from thence. 5ly, That he is most certanly a Seminary Priest in Orders,
as is evident. 1. By his first Faculty; To reconcile, and absolve Heretics in
all cases. 2. By his 4th; To administer all parochial Sacraments. 3ly, By his
7. To celebrate Masses in all convenient places; yea, in the open fields, and
in any Vault or Cellar under the earth; and that twice a day, if there be
necessity; and that before Heretics and Excommunicate persons, at cer^ain
hours there prefixed. 4ly, By his 8. To keep the consecrated Hostia in a decent
place. 5ly, By his 9. To commute any Vows, and release Oaths. 6ly, By his 11.
To hear Confessions, and grant Indulgences in such form as is there expressed.
7ly, By his 14. Faculty of absolving Heretics of what Nation soever residing
in ENGLAND: where (as this Clause imports) he was principally to exercise his
Priesthood, and all these his Faculties. 8ly, By all the subsequent
instructions and ceremonies he was prescribed to observe in the saying of
Masses and Letanies. All ard every of which, by the Sea Gratian, de Consecrat.
distinct. 1, 2. Summa Angelica and Rosell^. Tit. Absolutio, Confessio, Missa,
etc. Bochellus, Decreta Eccles. Gall. l. 1. Tit. 6, 7. l. 2. Ti^. 7.
Canons, Missals Pontifical, Ceremonial and Penitentiaries of the Church of
Rome, are proper and peculiar only to their Priests in sacred Orders, and none
others. 6ly, That he ha^h more than Priestly, and no less than Episcopal power
granted him in the 1.2.6.9.12.13. and 15 Faculties: To reconcile and absolve
He^eticks, and all Ecclesiastical and Regular persons: To dispense with the
irregularities of Priests in all cases but of wilful murder: To consecrate
Chalices, Patens, Altars, and all things necessary for the sacrifice of the
Mass: To commute vows; release oaths; Dispense with marriages in the 3d degree;
For the perception of the profits of Ecclesiastical goods: To apply goods
restored to pious uses; and to admit to the 3d. Order (the Papists See Summa
Angelica and Rosella, Tit. Ordo. Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 3. Tit. 2.
D^ Ordine. Peter Lumbard. Sent. l. 4. did. 24. qu. 1.
Schoolmen have 7. and their Canonists 9. distinct Orders.) All which the
Laur. ^ochellus, Dec^eta Eccl^s. Gall. l. 5. Tit. 8. l. 4. Tit. 1. Gratian de
Consecratione, Distinct. 1. Panormitan, Hostiensis, Angelus de Clavas^o, Thomas
Zerula, Antonius Corsetus, and others, Tit. Episcopus, Consecratio Altaris, etc.
Popish Canons, Canonists, Schoolmen, appropriate only to Archbishops and
Bishops, and not to any mere Priests alone, but by a special delegated Power
from the Pope; as does the Roman Pontifical and Ceremonial. All which
considered, no doubt this Friar is a very considerable Person, and Arch-agent
for the Pope and See of Rome* to reconcile, reduce us back unto it; therefore
fit to be thoroughly examined and inquired after. And so much the rather,
because he confeseth in his Examination, he was employed and sent over into
England from Germany about 3. years since, under the name and garb of A Captain
and soldier, (under which no doubt many hundreds of Friars, Priests, Jesuits
now lurk and march freely amongst us) to raise men in England and Ireland, and
transport them into Flanders for the service of the King of Spain; That he was
oft^t the Spanish Ambassadors ^n London, where he served (...)rd; and that he
received these Faculties from a Gentleman at the Spanish Ambassadors, to carry
to another of his Name. Besides, h^ ha^h 3. or 4. Passes written in French and
Spanish, from the Governor of Flanders* and other Officers and Commanders of
the King of Spain, under their Hands and Seals, for his Free passage without
danger or molestation, and assistance in his affairs, to all under their
commands, and for his passage into England: Therefore, no doubt, a special
dangerous Agent, if not Spy and Intelligencer for the Spaniard, as well as a
seducing Priest and Friar, under the vizor o^ a Captain and Soldier, as even
his own Provincial styles him in a Latin Letter found about and writ to him,
when he sent him some Books and these large Faculties, congratulating his good
successes, and great Harvest here, and encouraging him to proceed therein. True
i^ is, in his Examinations, he confesses his Name to be Maurice Conry, born at
Ardkillin in the County of Roscomon in Ireland; and that he was a Student in
the University of Paris, etc. but denveth himself to be the same party
mentioned in the Faculties, which were delivered to him by a Gentleman (whose
name he knows not) at the Spanish Ambassadors in London, to carry to another of
his Name, without acquainting him, where he lived, or how to find him, or any
Letters to him; he promising to send him further Instructions afterward (which
yet he has not done) where to deliver them to him. But this very improbable
figment, that any Gentleman he knew not, should deliver a stranger such
Faculties of importance to carry to another of his name; without acquainting
him where to find him, or without any Letters to him, or present Instructions
where to deliver them; his sewing them up between the linings of his hose; his
endeavors to convey them into the house of Office when seized; the Latin
Letter directing them to himself under the Name of a Captain and Soldier; his
5. Pa^se-ports all under the same Name to himself alone (not any other) found
all together with it about him; with the Latin Popish Treatise found about him,
Against Priests deserting their flocks and pastoral charge in times of
persecution, unless in some special cases; etc. besides other circumstances;
infallibly prove him to be the self-same person to whom they were directed, and
such a one as they describe him: he being between 30 and 40 years of age, as is
conceived, professing himself a Roman Catholic^* and refusing the Oath of
Abjuration. He pretends his stay in England of late, and his intended passage
to Ireland (for which end he came to Bristol) was to compound for his Estate in
Ireland: Which doubtless is a fiction; he confessing he was not there in many
years before, and went from Paris, where he studied, etc. into Germany to seek
his fortune; where he turned Soldier* which fortune he would not have sought
in Germany, had he a fortune in Ireland. Yea, his last refuge to dispro^e
himself a Priest, seems to me a strong evidence against him. After many Letters
and solicitations by Friends to procure his enlargement without trial, there
is a lewd woman sent down from London to Bristol with a great Belly, and there
newly delivered of a child, who avers he is her lawful Husband; and therefore
can be no Priest, or Friar, having a wife. But there being already some proofs
against her, no proof at all when, where, or how long they have been married, or
lived together, she is more likely to be his harlot (which Cornelius ^grippa,
De Vanitate Scientia^um. c. 63. Espencaeus de Continentia, l. 3. c. 4. and in
Tit. 1. Gravaminia Germaniae.
Popish Priests have, or may have all Licenses to keep) than wife. And if any
marriage between them can be proved; it will be See Bishop Jewels Defense of the
Apology, part. 2. c. 8. Divis. 3. p. 188. to 195.
no strange nor new thing for Popes to dispense with Priests and Friars
marriages in t^is age, only to secure them from Justice, and palliate them from
the knowledge or discovery of the common people, and ignorant Officers
unacquainted with their disguises: and that if they consider the manifold
dispensations granted to this Maurice Conry in these Faculties; the second
thing considerable in them worthy special observation.

1. Faculty 3. He is dispensed with the keeping and reading of Haeretical
Books: and has power to grant the same. Faculty where there is need to
Laymen, for a larger or lesser time, as he shall think meet, Against the Sea
Laur. Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 1. Tit. 10. De Libris Vetitis. Gasper
Quiroga; Dr. James and others.
express Decr^es of many Popish Councils, Canons, Popes Bulls, and Indices
librorum Prohibitorum et Purgandorum. And by such dispensations most Jesuits,
Priests, Friars, and Roman Catholics in England, keep English Bibles, and some
Protestant Books in their Houses, and resort to public and private Meetings,
to preserve them from detection, apprehension, and Sequestration as such.

2ly, Faculty 4. He may Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 1. Tit. 6. l. 2.
Tit. 1. De Sacramentis: and other Canonists of that Title.
omit all Solemnities and usual Ceremonies in administering all Parochial
Sacraments in cases of N^cessity, Prohibited by Bochellus Ib. l. 1. Tit. 9. and
p. 1339.
sundry Canons, and Councils, the Roman Missal and Ceremonial.

3. Faculty 5. Where he cannot ^^rry his Breviary, or recite his Office without
danger; There he may rehearse the Rosary of our Lady, and other Prayers and
Psalms without ^ook: And omit his Breviary and Mass. Against sundry Canons, and
the Rules of his very Order.

IV. He may consecrate portable Altars, without inquiring whether there be any
Sts. Relics in them. Faculty 6. Contrary to Gratian de Consecrat. did.
Bochellus, Decret. Eccles. Gal. l. 4. Tit. 1. and 5. Summa Angel. Consecrat.
Eccl. and Altaris.
Popish Councils, and the Pontifical.

V. He may celebrate Masses in any place; in a Hall, Chamber, Barn, Wood,
Field, Lane, Celler, Vault, Under ground (as well as in a Consecrated Church or
Chapel, where Masses by Gratian De Consecrat. Did 1. and 2. Bochellus Decret.
l. 1. Tit. 6. lib. 9. Tit. 1. Sum. Angel. Tit. Missa. and Cons^crat Eccles.
Popes and Popish Councils Decrees are only to be celebrated, and by the Romish
Missal, Pontifical, and Ceremonial) Faculty 7.

VI. He may reserve the consecrated Host in any decent place, without a Taper
burning before it, or other Ceremonies used, though prescribed by the Church of
Rome, by Boch^llus Decret. l. 3. Tit. 1. p. 363, 364, 372. and 554.
many Councils, Canons, Decrees, Missale Pontificale and Ceremoniale Romanum.
Faculty 8.

VII. He may say Mass before Heretics and other excommunicated pers^ns,
Bochellus Decr. Eccl. Gal. l. 2. Tit. 14. and others hereafter cited.
contrary to sundry Canons of Popes and Popish Councils.

8. He may print and publish the Books of Catholics, concealing the name of
the Author, place of the Printer, and other circumstances, non obstante the
Council of Trents Decree to the contrary. Faculty 12. And those who will now
give such a professed Non obstante in positive terms to the Council of Trent it
self, and grant dispensations in all these 8 particulars to their Priests,
against this and sundry other Councils, Popes Decretals, the very Canon of the
Mass it self, their own Pontifical, Ceremonial, Breviaries, and Rules of their
Religious Orders, to disguise their Priests; Friars, keep them from being
detected, convicted, and circumvent, seduce over-credulous Protestants of
chiefest ranks, as well as the ignorant vulga; will they not dispense with a
Priests, Jesuits, Friars, pretended marriage by collusion, with one of their
own Religion, or a loose common strump^t, for the self-same ends? or connive at
it, if done without a precedent dispensation, as they did at the marriage of
Father Mena, a famous Jesuit in Valladolid in Spain, Anno Dom. 1607. who
married a Spanish Lady there, alleging See Bishop Jewels Defense of the
Apology, part. 2. c. 8. divis. 3. Bishop Halls honor of the injured Clergy.
many Proofs out of Scriptures and Fathers, that Priests and Jesuits might have
wives as well as other men: The story whereof is recorded at large by Jews
Owen; in his Speculum Jesuit cum, London 1629. p. 5, 6, 7, 8. who adds; that if
diligent inquisition were made, and the truth known, there would be some
English Ladies and Gentlewomen found to be married unto Jesuits and See Bishop
Jewel. ib. Io. Ba^e his Acts of English Votaries. Cl. Espencaeus de
Continentia. Nic. de Clemangis onus Eccl. Alvarez, Pelagius, Aventinus, and
others.
a very many that have had Bastards by them, especially such as have any good
estates or portions, whereof they convey many into Flanders, Brabant, and other
Countries to be Iesuitesses. There being (then) in Liege, a sumptuous College
built by the English Jesuits; and hard by that two houses of English
Iesuitesses, etc.

The 3. thing observable in these Faculties, is, That they make present great
necessity and danger ( Number. 3, 4, 5, 7, 10.) the ground of all the precedent,
and other dispensations and powers granted to this P^iest, (and by consequence
to all others lurking amongst us) against their own Councils, Popes Decretals,
Canons, Missals, Pontificals, Ceremonials, Orders, Oaths; and not only a
lawful warrant to violate them all, but to commute, release, d^spense with any
Vows, Covenants though sworn, and absolve Oaths themselves. And let See my
Epistle to my ^ Speech in Parliament.
those, who of late, and present times have imitated, equallized, out-acted
them herein, and justified these their practices, in public printed Papers,
Pamphlets, upon the self-same grounds, or present great necessity and danger,
now sadly consider whose Disciples they are, and who have been their Tutors
herein.

The 4. remarkable thing from number. 14, 15. is this, That these Friars Minorites
have a power now in England, to receive others into their order, society, and
Profession: A Register wherein to record their names, with the dates of the day
and year of their reception and profession, and their Provincial Chapters and
Assemblies, whereunto they are to be sent. And that of all sorts of Nations
residing in England, (except Spaniards, and such who live under the
Inquisition, where it is exercised) be they Irish, Scots, French, Dutch,
It^lians, etc. And by the Latin Prayer therein it is most apparent, They have
their private houses in England, and other our Dominions, whereunto all the
Friars of this Order within certain precincts, resort at certain times,
especially on Fridays (or Sa^urdays) every week, and use the special prayers
and Letanies herein prescribed, privately amongst themselves, For the
preservation and advancement of their Order, House, all their Friars, etc.

The 5. thing of Note therein is, That before the principal Mass they are
always enjoined to recite the Lauritan Letany (some late one of that name) for
the conversion of the Country unto Rome, and Popery, here precisely required in
positive terms, to which all these other faculties and their endeavors tend.

The 6. extraordinary in it, is; The inserting of most of the Ceremonies these
Friars are uniformly to observe in their Masses, into this instrument, taken
out of the Roman Missal, Pontifical, Ceremonial: and Missal^ parvum pro
Sacerdotibus in Anglia itinerantibus, printed in Quarto, Anno 1623: specially
inserted after ^hese Faculties in this instrument (as I conjecture) because
they cannot now conveniently carry any Missals, Brevtaries about them, for fear
of being detected by them, as the 5. Faculty resolves in direct terms. Amongst
these Ceremonies 3 are observable, which our See my Canterburies Doom. p. 64,
65.
Popish Prelates much practiced, pressed of late, and some yet observe, and
begin to revive amongst us. And that is standing up at Gloria Patri: Bowing (to
wit) at the naming of Jesus, couched in the, etc. relating to it, and clearly
prescribed in Missale and Ceremoniale Romana, etc. And standing up at the
Gospel read.

The 7. observable is this, that however these disguised Friars seem outwardly
to comply with the late and present Government and Governors to effect their
own pernicious designs; yet they do not pray for them, nor their New Republike,
though See my Speech in Parl^ament, and Epist. to my Historical and Legal
Vindication of the Fundamental Rights and Laws of England.
instrumental in the New modelling of it: being here directly prescribed this
ordinary form of prayer, wherein they prefer themselves and their Order before
the King and Realm (another remarkable) Aedifica and custodi nos and Ordinem
nostrum, Regem, Regnum, etc.

The 8. that in the prayers here specified, there is not one syllable of
Prayers to Sts. expressed, and all merits of their own, and Justification by
works disclaimed, and relying upon the infinite Goodness, Mercies and Merits
of Jesus Christ, and his precious blood and passion for the pardon of all sins,
insisted on in the English pray^r; Yet in the self-same prayer, there is an
offer of their lives, words and works, in satisfaction for their sins, (as if
Christ's merits, blood, passion, were not sufficient) and a particular
Manuscript Treaty in Latin, found with these faculties about him, pleads for
Merits and Justification by works, against justification by Faith alone: yea
prayer to Saints is tacitly prescribed, Faculty 5. In the use of the Rosary of
blessed Mary the Virgin, and other Prayers, and in the use of his Beads found
with him.

The 9. That these Faculties and Instrument, prescribe Confession, Absolution,
An Act of contrition and penance, as well as Masses, Altars, and Popish
Ceremonies, where they may be conveniently used, without danger of discovery.

The 10. observable is, That these Faculties proclaim all Protestants to be
Heretics sundry times, and excommunicate them as such. Yet they dispense with
this Priest, number. 7. To say Mass before Heretics, and other excommunicate
persons; so as no Minister which is an Heretic be there (for fear perchance he
should detect him for a Priest, notwithstanding the omission of most of his
Mass Ceremonies here dispensed with) which I desire Dr. Drake to take special
notice of; who pleads for the admission not only of scandalous, but actually
excommunicate persons to be Auditors, and Spectators of the celebration of the
Lords Supper, when administered, but in no case to be actual receivers of it; as
these Heretics and excommunicated persons are mere Auditors and Spectators,
but not receivers of the Sacrament in these their Popish Masses. And thus much
for this Instrument and those faculties, and the person to whom they were
granted; worthy special consideration, which I shall close up with this
Observation. That the Pope about the year 1637 made choice of 20 Capucins to
send abroad with entraordinary Authority to preach and hear Confessions in
places he should deem most necessary, and thereupon gives charge to their
Provincial, with mature advice, with the chief of the Fathers of the Province
to elect fit persons for this special service, which was then done. Amongst
these one Clovet a Frenchman, (usually styled Pere Bastle) was elected, and
sent forth as the Popes Missionary (the eminentest of all the rest for piety
and learning) who had 13 extraordinary Privileges and Faculties conferred on
him by the Pope, confirmed by his Bull; which he soon after turning Protestant,
printed at large in French in his Declaration, showing the reasons he had to
separate himself from the Church of Rome, and to join himself to the Reformed,
A Sedane 1639. (whiles I was prisoner in Iersey, where I met with this
excellent acute Declaration) chap. 17. p. 116, 117. The 7 first of his
faculties there, are the very same in substance, if not in terminis, with the
1, 2, 3, 7, 9, and 10. Faculties in this Instrument, as I find by comparing
them together. Whereupon I conclude, that this Conry is such an extraordinary
Missionary of the Pope, and has these unusual Faculties granted to him
originally by the Popes special Bull, as Pere Basile had then, being one of the
self-same Order.

I shall only give you a brief account of what other Papers were found about
this Maurice Conry, with his Faculties, and conclude this discovery.

1. There were several Latin small Treatises found with him, concerning
Original sin, Justification, etc. concurring exactly with the Quakers new
Franciscan Tenets: And it would be worth inquiry, whether he has not been a
Speaker amongst them, in some place or other, during his near 3 years abode in
England; as well as others of his Order have been?

2. There were sundry Physical receipts, and Chirurgical Medicines found about
him, most worn and used, with receipts to drive away, catch and kill Rats, Lice,
and other Vermin; which makes me conjecture he professed himself a Physician in
some places, a Surgeon in others, a Rat-catcher in a third; since his
pretended employment as a Captain, and Soldier, to raise men for the King of
Spain, were out of date, by a breach with Spain; as one Iervis a Priest,
haunting our Quarters, has a long time passed under the disguise of a
Watchmender, and Physician.

There were three or 3 are plain and legible, the 4 th. unlegible in regard of
the character and language.
4 Passe-ports and safe conducts granted to him under hand and Seal by the King
of Spains Officers.

4. There was this Passe-port in English amongst the rest, under hand and Seal,
dated two months space before these extraordinary Faculties granted to him,
which probably might be a great motive of the Popes and his Provincials
granting him, and his soliciting for, and receiving such ample Faculties, with
so many new-coyned dispensations to conceal him from detection. THese are to
require you to permit and suffer this bearer Mauriee Conry, quietly to pass
from London into Ireland about his lawful occasions, and to return without any
trouble or molestation.

Given under my Hand and Seal the 28 of April 1653. To all Officers and
Soldiers under my command; and to all Captains and Commanders of Ships. O.
Cromwell.




Conry being examined how he obtained this Pass? answered, that An Irish
Footmaen of the Lord Protectors obtained it for him, from his Master.

5. There was a Letter of a late date from one of his Irish Footmen (belike he
who procured this Passeport) directed to another Irish Footman of his Sons,
Henry Cromwell, in Dublin in Ireland; specially recommending this Conry to him,
as his indeared Friend, to do him all the Favors in his power, which he should
interpret as done to himself; with other Letters of like recommendation in his
Favor to some Military Officers in Ireland from some others in England. It is
very observable, that the Irish Capucins, and Franciscans, are some of the best
and nimblest Footmen in the world, trotting on foot day and night from Ireland
and England to Rome, Spain, France, and other foreign parts, and back again and
from one part of Ireland and England to another, with greatest celerity, under
the disguised habits of Soldiers, Merchants; Footmen, with My Hidden works of
Darkness, etc. p. 218. to 252.
private Messages, Missives, Letters, upon all occasions, especially immediately
before, during, and since the late Irish wars. And therefore it may be justly
suspected, that some of them are become principal Footmen to the greatest
persons at Whitehall and Dublin; the procuring of this Pasport by such Irish
Footmen, and these their Letters, giving great suspicion, that this Conry and
they are of the same Fraternity; which it concerns others whom they serve now
strictly to examine upon this Discovery, for their own discharge and safety, as
well as our Religious, and Nations.

It is to be justly feared, that many such Passeports and Protections (so much
Exact Coll. p. 115, 116, 117.
condemned in the late King) have been surreptitiously procured by such
disguised Irish Footmen and Soldiers, for other Friars, Priests, Jesuits; And
so much the rather, because when I was a Prisoner at the Kings head in January
1648. under the Army Officers, (who forcibly seized me, and above 40 other
Members of the Commons house, as we went to discharge our duties in it to God,
our Sovereign, Country, and those for whom we served) some Friends of mine in
London, being then Convented before the General Council of Officers of the Army
at Whitehall (as they then styled themselves) for saying there were diverse
Priests and Jesuits in the Army, the chief contrivers of the designs and
changes then acted; and there justifying the same; thereupon procured a Warrant
from Sir Thomas Fairfax then General, to seize such Jesuits and Priests as
they found in the Armies Quarters, as well Soldiers as others; whereby they
presently apprehend two Jesuits, and put them in ward that night; who (as they
then and since informed me upon their credits, being honest, godly,
conscientious persons) produced two Protections under the self-same hand that
granted this Pass; which they then saw, and complained of; And were thereupon
answered, that they were granted by misinformation and surprise: however those
Jesuits got themselves released the next day; whereupon they thought it
bootlesse and dangerous for them to seize any more of them (having discovered
many they knew to be such) and so their good in^entions were frustrated, and
the others sad designs carried on, under which we yet shake and languish in a
most unsettled and divided condition.

Upon which considerations and presidents, I can give no better advice to all
our swaying Grandees of all sorts now, than I did then in print in my Memento
upon that occasion; to tender the Oath of Abjuration to all Officers,
Commanders, Soldiers, Mariners, and persons desiring Passeports or
Protections, that are not of known Integrity in our Religion, and frequent not
the public Ordinances of God in our Parochial Congregations; which will detect
for the present, and prevent for the future, the creeping in, the wandering
abroad of such dangerous Romish vermin, and Spanish Factors, as this Conry and
his Confederates; in whose Detection I have been more large; because of the
Novelty of some of his Dispensations and Faculties, (which I never met with
before in any printed Books, or Popish Instruments I have perused) and because
it may give light to others, to make the like or greater discoveries of their
persons, practices, in this and future ages.

It is very strange and grievous to all true Zealous Protestants, that this
extraordinary disguised Missionary of the Pope, should procure such Letters of
recommendation, Passe-ports, Protections under hand and seal; and that the
Antichristian Infidel Jews themselves should Menasseth Ben-Israel, his Humble
Addresses and Declaration.
be specially invited to come in and reside amongst us, and find many Grand
Court-Patrons publicly to plead for their free readmission, See My Short
Demurrer against the Jews Remitter part 1. p. 43. to 66. part 2. p. 111. to
125, 135.
against former Parliamentary and Regal Edicts for their perpetual Exile, in
these times of Reformation: and yet that all Protestant Ministers of our own
Nation, adhering to the late King, (though never so orthodox, learned, pious,
painful, peaceable) should at My short Demurrer, p. 103, 104, 105, etc.
the self-same time, by a public printed Declaration, Nov. 24. 1655. and
special Instructions in writing to our New Bashaes, without any hearing,
impeachment, conviction of any new Crimes, after sundry years Liberty to
preach, and that some call an Act of Oblivion (only for this their old
pardoned Delinquency) be all at one instant specially prohibited, from and
after the 1. day of December last, TO PREACH in any public place, or private
Meeting of any other persons, than those of their own Family: or to ADMINISTER
BAPTISM, or THE LORDS SUPPER, or TO MARY, or KEEP ANY SCHOOL public or
private: or so much as to be kept as CHAPLAINS or SCHOOLMASTERS in any formerly
sequestered persons Houses (when utterly ejected out of their own Houses,
Benefices, Schools, Colleges by this New Edict:) and to be punished as Rogues
or Vagrants (if they wander abroad, when thus enforced to beg their bread;)
And that every such person offending in any of the premises (their very
preaching, teaching, administering Baptism, the Lords Supper, or marying, being
now become capital unpardonable Offenses) shall be proceeded against and
imprisoned 3. months for his first, 6. months for his 2 d. and banished his
Native Country for his 3 d. Offense: Which uncharitable, unchristian,
unevangelical restraints are still continued upon many of them (and more
particularly on Dr. Reeves our eminent learned Lecturer of Lincolns Inn)
notwithstanding the earnest frequent solicitations of devout and learned
Archbishop Usher, (to the shortning of his days through grief, as some
conceive) the frequent, joint, and several Petitions, Addresses of these
Ministers themselves and their Friends, the timely Petition of the whole
Society of Lincolns Inn, and Mediations of all the Grand Officers of Justice,
State, of the Society, for their Lecturers liberty to preach; to the great
rejoicing of our Popish Adversaries; to the great grief, prejudice,
coffeehouse of their Auditors; the undermining of our Protestant Religion,
dishonor of our Church, Nation; the ruin of some hundreds of those Protestant
Ministers and their Families formerly breaking unto us the bread of life, who
now want daily bread to feed them: when as disguised Popish Emissaries,
Jesuits, Priests, Friars, Quakers, Dippers, Heretics and Blasphemers of all
sorts, have Free liberty, and Protection to preach, teach, dip, re-baptize,
administer the Sacrament, meet together and do what they list in public and
private Conventicles, without the least restraint. And is this to defend,
propagate, (or not rather avowedly to supplant, tread down) the Protestant
Religion, A Collection of Ordinances, p. 424, 425, 426, etc.
we covenanted and took up arms formerly to maintain; thus to Mat. 26.31.
smite, silence, starve, ruin so many orthodox Protestant Shepherds, Pastors
at one blow; and to threaten inexorable Imprisonments, yea banishments to them,
if they but once presume to teach, preach, or administer Sacraments ( according
to their Mat. 28.19, 20. 1 Cor. 9.5, to 20. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3.
obliged duty, and Christ's own Injunction) in public or private, for the
peoples edification, or their own or families supportation? When thousands of
Romish Wolves, Heretics, Sectaries of all sorts are so busy in all parts, to
seduce, devour their flocks, now left Man. 6.34.
like Sheep without a Shepherd in many places? The Lord give those whom it most
concerns, and the whole Nation, eyes timely to discern, and hearts to bewail,
reform this Soul-devouring barbarous cruelty. And let those who have been
instrumental Contrivers of, or Actors in it, consider and remember, Mat. 7.2.
With what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye
mete, it shall be measured to you again: and James 2.13. For he shall have
judgment without Mercy, that has showed no mercy; but this extremity of
cruelty even to the Minsters of Christ himself, and all those they deem their
Enemies, is contrary to the express precepts of Christ himself, Mat. 5.44, 45.
Romans 12, 20, 21.

It is very remarkable, that See my Antipathy of the English Lordly Prelacy,
part. 2. chapter 6. p. 305, 306.
Dr. William Pierce late Bishop of Bath and Wells, who in the ruff of his
Episcopal Power and Pride, presuming on his great Court-friends, suppressed all
Lectures and Lecturers, both in Market towns and elsewhere, glorying in this
his impious Tyranny; and thanking God, that he had not a Lecture left in his
Diocese. And when he absolved Mr. Devenish Minister of Bridgewater, (whom he
suspended ab officio and beneficio, only for preaching a Lecture in his own
Parish Church on the Market day, which had continued above 50 years without
interruption) used this speech unto him, intimating, that preaching a Lecture
was as heinous a crime as committing adultery: John 5.14.
Go thy way, sin no more, (in preaching a Lecture) lest a worse thing happen
to thee: was by Gods just retaliating judgment soon after, quite stripped of
his Episcopal Power and Revenues upon his Impeachment in Parliament, committed
Prisoner to the Tower, sequestered, and now reduced to such extremity, that in
November last, he came to an honorable Knight of mine acquaintance in
Westminster, complaining to him, he had not bread for him and his to put in
their mouths; entreating his favor to procure any Lecturers or Curates place
for him, though never so mean (which he by all the Friends he had could no
where obtain) to keep him from starving. Who thereupon minded him of these his
former Speeches, and cruelty toward other Lecturers and Ministers, whom he
reduced to extreme poverty; wishing him, to take special notice how God had
justly requited him in his own kind, so as himself would now turn Lecturer, or
the meanest Curate under others, in his old age, to get but a mere subsistence,
and yet none would intertain him, as himself confessed, in any place. So as the
judgment threatened against Ely his posterity, 1 Samuel 2.36. (And it shall come
to pass, that every one that is left in thine House, shall come and crouch to
him for a piece of silver, and a morsel of bread, and shall say; Put me I pray
thee into somewhat about the Priesthood, that I may eat a piece of bread) was
now actually fallen on this great Prelate. And let others now greater than he
in his highest condition, consider it, though never so well fenced with Guards
and armed Forces by Land or Sea, lest God reduce them and theirs to the like
extremities, as they have reduced these Ministers of Christ, with sundry
others: and that upon the serious consideration of this memorable History,
recorded in Variae Hist. lib. 6. c. 12, 13.
Aelian concerning Dionysius the younger, in these very words. Dionysius
junior, imperium habebat optime constitutum, munitumque hoc modo. Naves
possidebat non pauciores quadringentis; hexeres et quinqueremes. Pedestres
copias ad centum millia hominum, equitum novem millia. Civitas vero
Syracusanorum maximis portubus erat instructa et moenibus altissimis
circundata, atque in promptu habebat omnem apparatum bellicum ad alias Naves
quingentas. Reconditum etiam habebat frumentum ad centum medimnorum myriades;
et armamentarium scutis, gladiis, hastis, tibialibus innumeris, thoracibus and
catapultis plenum refertumque catapulta autem inventum fuit ipsius Dionysii.
Praeterea sociis infinitis vigebat. His rebus confidens Dionysius, ADAMANTE
FIRMATUM IMPERIUM OBTINERE SE PUTABAT. Sed ipse primum fratres suos morte
affecit. Vidit etiam filios suos crudelissime mactari, et virgineum pudorem
filiabus eripi, atque deinde nudas trucidari. Breviter, nemo ex ejus propagine
sepulturam justam adeptus est. Nam alii vim combusti sunt, alii dissecti, and
in mare projecti sunt. Id adeo evenit ei, cum Dion, filius Hippa^ini, imperium
invasisset. Ipse vero IN EXTREMA PAUPERTATE senex mortuus est. Theopompus dicit
eum nimiae meri potationis vitio ejus oculos laborasse, ita ut caecutiret, et
sedisse in tonstrinis, risumque scurriliter hominibus commovisse, atque in
media Graecia turpiter and praeter decorum versatum miserrimam vitam
traduxisse. Ita non leve documentum extitit mortalibus, ad amplectendam
temperantiam et morum honestatem, Dionysii ex tantis opibus in tam miserum
statum, rerum vicissitudo. Pulcherrime a Diis immortalibus comparatum est, ut
nullam Tyrannidem usque ad tertiam generationem propagent, sed aut confestim
Tyrannos tanquam proceras piceas perdant et extirpent; aut liberos eorum
viribus denudent ac spolient. If God deal thus with Heathen, will he not deal
more severely with Christian Tyrants, and underminers of his Gospel, who
condemn others for that wherein they now exceed them. Romans 2.1, 2, 3?

And here (having done with my Discoveries) I cannot but seriously lament, to
consider, that as many of the late over-zealous New Modellers of our State, to
accomplish their own self ends, have (contrary See my Speech in Parliament,
Memento, New Discovery of Free State Tyranny, Epistle to an historical and
Legal Vindication of the Fundamental Liberties and Laws of England, and the
History of Indepency.
to all their former Protestant Principles, Oaths* Protestations, Covenants,
Remonstrances, Commissions, Trusts, Obligations) ignorantly, or wittingly
embraced, pursued, justified, imitated, practiced, if not out-acted the very
worst and most dangerous, seditious, treacherous, Antimonarchical positions,
practices, politics of Antichristian Popes, and Machiavilian Jesuits. So
diverse overrigid Presbyterian, independent Ministers, and Reformers of our
Church, out of a preposterous zeal and scrupulosity, have blindly, rashly, or
unadvisedly taken up, maintained, practiced the erroneous Tenets, and
exorbitant Practices of Popes, Romish Priests, Prelates, Jesuits, against the
very Doctrine, Institution, usage, precepts of Christ himself, the Primitive
Fathers, Church, Christians, in discontinuing the frequent administration of
the holy Communion to their people, and secluding all or most of their
Parishioners from it sundry months, nay years together, by their own new Papal
Authority, without any lawful cause, hearing, trial, or excommunication,
judicially denounced against them ^or any scandalous sins, whereof they are
duly convicted, when as they freely admit them to all other public Ordinances,
without the least suspension from them; instead of inviting, exhorting,
compelling them ( Mat. 22.1. to 11. Luke 14 12. to 25. ^armony of Confessions,
c. 10. to 16. Articles of England, c. 22. to 31. And exhortation in the Common
Prayer Books. Thomas Beacons Catechism. Concordia Lutherana, p. 542. to 550.
Practice, of Piety. Mr. Humfrey of Free-Admission and Rejoinder to D^. Drake.
according to their duties) to the frequent participation of this
Soul-converting, heart-refreshing, Grace-communicating heavenly Supper, wherein
the remembrance, fruits, benefits of our Saviors passion are most lively
represented to their senses, and applied to their Souls: which Antichristian,
Sacrilegious, new kind of Reformation (to advance their own interests, Power,
no^ Christ's Kingdom, Glory,) is principally founded on these ensuing erroneous
Popish Principles, all bottomed on and flowing from that monstrous absurdity of
Transubstantiation, and Christ's corporal presence in this Sacrament, which all
Harmony of Confessions, c. 14. Bishop Jewels Apol. and Reply to Harding: Bish.
Morton, Peter Moulins, and others.
Protestants abominate, refute, renounce.

1. That Christ, and God himself, are more really, immediately present, and
conversed with by Christans in the Lords Supper, than in any other public holy
Ordinance whatsover; asser^ed generally by all See Bochellus Decr. Ecc. Gal. l.
3. Tit. 1. Summa Angel. Tit. Eucharistia: Gratian De Consecratione, Distinct. 2.
Popish Councils, Schoolmen, Jesuits, Canonists, Casuists in their Decrees,
Masse-books, Offices, Manuals, Treatises, Controversies touching the Eucharist,
Sacraments, Mass, and Transubstantiation: and more particularly by See Bishop
Jewels Defense of the Apology, c. 14. Divis. 1. p. 260, 261, 264.
Mr. Harding against Bishop Jewel; who refutes it in the Name of the Church of
England: Yet now professedly avowed of late in A Brotherly and Friendly Censure
of my 4. Quaeres, p. 8. in Dr. Drake his Anti-Quaeries, and B^undary to the
Holy Mount, and sundry others, as their chief ground of keeping, suspending,
all those they deem unworthy from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper alone, but
from no other part of Gods worship. This opinion first sprung from Popish
Transubstantiation; which as it introduced Bish. Jewels Reply to Harding, p.
282 to 301. See my Canterburies Doom, p. 63, 64. Q^enchcole; Pleasant Purge for
a Roman Catholic, p. 140. to 180. Bochellus Deer. Eccl. Gall. l. 3. Tit. 1.
Adoration of, prostration, kneeling, bowing to, toward, before the
consecrated Elements, Altars, and railing in Altars in the Church of Rome: so
it See My Q^enchcole. Canterburies Doom, p. 62, 63, 79, 80, 81, 101. to 125*
474, 475, 486, 487.
lately brought into our Cathedrals and Parish Churches, prostration, kneeling,
bowing to, and before the Sacramental Elements, and railing in of Altars, Lords
Tables at the East end of our Quires, in imitation of the Romanists, by our
Popish Prelates and Priests; Witness Archbishop Lauds own words, in his Speech
in Star Chamber, An. 1637. p. 47. The Altar is the greatest place of Gods
residence upon earth; I say, the greatest; yea, greater than the Pulpit. For
there it is, Hoc est Corpus meum, This is my Body; But in the Pulpit, it is at
most, but Hoc est Verbum meum, this is my Word. And a greater Reverence ( Yet
Hierom in Psalm. 147. and Bishop Jewel in his Treatise of the Sacraments, p.
276. write, Quando audimus sermonem Domini, Caro Christi, and Sanguis ejus in
mentes nostras infunditur.
no doubt) is due to the Body, than ^o the Word of the Lord. And so in relation
answerably to the Throne where his Body is usually present, than to the Seat,
where his Word uses to be proclaimed. which Popish dotage of his, seconded by
Dr. Pocklington, Dr. Heylin, Dr. Laurence, Edmund Reeve, Shelford, and other
Popish Innovators, I have In My Quen^hcole. Canterburies Doom, p. 198, 199,
200, 201, 474, 475. A pleasant Purge for a Roman Catholic, p. 159, etc.
elsewhere at large refuted.

2. That the Lords Supper is more holy, dreadful, excellent, venerable, and
more dangerous, damnable to such who unworthily approach unto it, than any
other Sacrament or divine Ordinance whatsoever: And therefore necessarily
requires a greater measure, degree, and another manner of worthiness,
fitness, preparation, qualification, self-examination, confession of sins,
faith, repentance, Grace, Holiness in those who are to be admitted to receive
it, than Baptism, Prayer, hearing, reading of the Word, thanksgiving, fasting,
or any other part of Gods public worship; to which they (and our rigidest
Presbyterians) freely admit all their Parishioners, without any trial, or
transcendent worthiness, fitness, or preparation. Hence Bochellus Decreta
Eccles. Gall. l. 3. Tit. 1. c. 2, 3, 4, 10.43.63.69, 70, 71, 72, 7^, 82, 84,
85, 88.90, 93, 96, 98.101, 105, 106, 107, 124.140.150. Petrus Aureolus: and
other Schoolmen, in l. 4. did. 9. qu* 2. Summa A^gelica Eucharistia 13.
Popish Councils, Writers, style the Lords Supper, Excellentissimum
Sacramentum: quia continet in se, actorem totius Gratiae et Sanctificationis
Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum: et verum Christi Corpus, et sanguinem. And
thence infer. Excellentia hujus Sacramenti requirit dignum mysterium; et ideo
volens recipere vel conficere tantum Sacramentum, debet se praeparare, per
Contritionem, et veram Confessionem peccatorum suorum, ac puram devotionem.
Statuimus quod nullus deinceps ad Eucharistiae Sacramentum teneatur aliquem
admittere, nisi prius illum audierit in Confessione, aut prius sibi fide facta,
quod more fidelium poenitentiae reciperit Sacramentum. Nemo sine speciali
Contritione, Confessione, et Satisfactoriis operibus digne praemunitus, ad
Eucharistiam sumendam accedat. Moneantur conjugari non ni^ praeparata aliquot
dierum continentia ad Eucharist^ sumpsionem accedere, etc. Which very Popish
Doctrine and Consequence of an extraordinary transcendent degree of worthiness,
preparation, etc. are professedly asserted by the Authors of the Antidote to,
and Brotherly friendly censure of my four Questions; Dr. Drake in his
Anti-quaeries, boundary; Mr. Collins in his Juridical Suspension, and others.

3. Upon these precedent false Principles, and the extraordinary danger of
unworthy receiving, the Popish Priests and Prelates infer Bochellus Decret.
Eccles. Gal. l. 3. Tit. 1. c. 71, 72, 73.105, 107. Summa Angelica Eucharistia,
3 Richard. in 4 sentent. Distinct. 9.
That they are bound to admit none to the Lords Supper, but such whom they upon
a precedent private examination and Confession of their sins to themselves, or
such as they appoint, shall absolve and deem worthy, and prepared to receive
it. And their Councils Decree. Nullus Parochus ad hujus Sacramenti sumptionem
quempiam admittat, cujus conscientiam non noverit, aut ipse, aut ab eo ei
negotio praefectus. Nec quemquam Parochi seu Curati ad Communionem admittant,
nisi quem privs sciverint confessum fuisse peccata, aut ipsis, aut eorum
Vicariis, seu Sacerdotibus deputatis. And upon the self-same grounds as the
Church of Harmony of Confessions, sect. 14. p. 336.337.327.
Saxony in the beginning of Reformation, admitted none to the Communion,
unless they were first examined, heard, tried, and absolved of the Pastor and
his fellow-Ministers: Complying herein overmuch with the Papists; So now
Divine Right of Church Government, p. 252, 353, etc.
Mr. Rutherford, Boundary to the holy Mount.
Dr. Drake, Iuridical suspension.
Mr. Collins, and other over-rig^d Presbyterians assert; They are bound in
duty, conscience, prudence, first, to try, examine the knowledge, faith,
graces, repentance, lives and visible worthiness of all their Parishioners,
before they come to the Lords Supper; to admit none thereto, but such whom they
and their Presbyteries upon trial shall deem worthy and prepared to receive it,
and to seclude all others from it: concurring herein with these Popish Priests
and Prelates.

4. That there is See Gratian Cause. 11. Q^. 3. and the Glossers on it.
Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gal. l. 2. Tit. 14. Summa Angelica, and Ros^lla.
Hostiensis, Th. Zerula, Antonius Corsetus, and others. Tit. Excommunicatio.
a letter Excommunication, whereby the Prelates and other Officers of the
Church, are authorized, empowered judicially, by way of Church Censure, to
suspend and keep back scandalous, ignorant, unconfessed, obstinate
Church Members, who refuse to submit to the examination and orders of the
Church, from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper only, without any actual
sequestring of them from any other public Ordinances, in which they may freely
communicate with other Christians; distinct form that Excommunicatio major,
which totally secludes Christians from entering into the Church, and all
Christian fellowship and Communion in any public Ordinance, and all private
society with Christians. Which lesser Excommunication, was first introduced by
Popish Councils, Canonists, Casuists, only for lesser mortal sins, and
conversing with persons lying under the censure of the greater Excommunication;
And is now most eagerly asserted by Divine Right of Church Government.
Mr. Rutherford, Aarons Rod blossoming.
Mr. Gillespy, Antiquaeries and Boundary.
Dr. Drake, Iuridical suspension.
Mr. Collins, Considerations and Cautions, July 9. 1646. p. 5 etc.
The Ministers of Syon College, and others as committed to Chu^ch-Officers and
Presbyteries by the will and testament of Jesus Christ; though no ways
warranted, but contradicted by all the Scripture test^monies they produce to
warrant it, and by the practices of the Primitive Church, as I have proved at
large in A Vindication of a serious Questions. Suspension suspended.
former publications. The only memorable particular example recorded in ancient
Ecclesiastical Histories, of a public excommunication denounced by a Bishop
for a scandalous crime (especially against his Sovereign) is that of St.
Ambrose, Bishop of Millain, against the Emperor Theodosius the first, thus
recorded by Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 17, 18. Sozomen lib. 7. c. 24. Utropius,
Zonaras, Oxmeerus, Pedro Mexia, Grimston in his life, Baronius, the Centuries
of Magdeburg, Dr. Bilson, The true difference, etc. part. 3. p. 369, 37^. etc.
Theodoret, and others. The Inhabitants of Thessalonica (a rich, populous City
in Macedonia) in a popular tumult slow their Judges and all who took part with
Theodosius in the Government: Wherewith he being highly incensed, so far
exceeded the bounds of justice and reason in the punishment thereof, that he
caused his Soldiers, without sea^ching out the Malefactors, to slay
prom^scuously in a rage no less than 7000 of the Citizens; putting no
difference betwixt the guilty and innocent. After this bloody execution, at the
Emperors next coming to the Church of Millain to pray, and do his devotions,
as of custom he used, St. Ambrose stepping to the Church-door, as he was about
to enter into the Church, with much boldness prohibiting him to enter, used
this speech unto him. Thou seem, O Prince, not to understand what a
monstrous slaughter of people is committed by thee, neither does rage suffer
thee to weigh with thy self what thou have done; yet must thou know, that from
dust we came, and to dust we shall. Let not therefore the brightness of thy
Robes hide from thee the weakness of flesh that is under them. Thy Subjects
are of the same metal that thou art, and serve the same Lord that thou do.
With what Eyes therefore will thou behold the house of this Common Lord, and
with what feet will thou tread on his holy pavements? Will thou reach those
hands, dropping yet with the blood of Innocents to receive the most sacred body
of the Lord? Will thou put that precious blood of his to thy mouth, which in a
rage have spilt so much Christian blood? Depart rather, and heap not one sin
upon another. Neither refuse this Bond (of Excommunication) which the Lord of
all does ra^ifie in heaven. It is not much, and it will restore thee the health
of thy Soul. All which the Emperor hearing with great patience, returned
presently to his Palace, without entering the Church, obeying the
excommunication, and there continued above 8 months space, without coming any
more into the Church, or putting on his Emperial Robes. After which, upon his
earnest request and public repentance for this crime, and his enacting this
Law by St. Ambrose his advise, by way of penance (as some write) That from
thenceforth no man whom he or his Successors should condemn to dye should be
executed within thirty days after the Sen^ence of death denounced against him:
he being absolved from his excommunication, came again into the Church, and
there making his prayers, and performing his devotions, received the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper. From which History it is apparent,

1. That Excommunicate persons in that age, were not suspended only from the
Lords Supper, but secluded from entering into the Church it self, and from all
public See Capit. Carol. Mag. 5. c. 42. Trrtullian de paenitentia. Dr. Hammond
of the power of the keys. chapter 4. Sect. 43.44. etc. My Vindication of 4. serious
Questions, and Suspension suspended.
divine Ordinances used in it, as well as from the Lords Table, and from (...)
Christian Communion. Hence Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 2. Tit. 14. c 1,
2, 3.36, 37, 38.45.48, 58, 64, 65, 71, 85, 92.121, 126, 136.138.142.145.
sundry Councils since, with Cause. 11. Q^. 3.
Gratian, and all Panormitan, Hostiensis, Angelus de Clavasio, Ant. Corsetu^,
Lyndewood, Summa Rosella, Tho: Z^rula and others, Tit. Excommunicatio.
Popish Canonists resolve and decree, Major Excommunicatio Separat ab ingressu
Ecclesiae, a Sacramentis, et a Communione fidelium. Excommunicatus non potest
interesse Divi^is Officiis, aut cum aliis orare in Ecclesia; Nec debet extra
ita prope stare quod audiat. And if any such excommunicate person come into the
Church, he is presently to be thrust out of it, and the Priest must give over
his begun Mass, Prayers, Preaching, and not proceed therein, till ^e depart
the Church: Neither may any Christian wittingly eat, drink, confer, or trade
with such a one, under pain of Excommunication: Yea our own Statute of 5 E. 6.
chapter 4. against such as fight and strike in the Church, Enacts That such an
Offender shall be excommunicate, an^ be excluded from the fellowship and
company of Christ's Congregation: This Excommunication our Laws, See Fitzh.
Brook, ^sh, Title Excommengment, Cooks 1 Instit. f. 133, 134, 3 Instit. c. 81.
p. 177. Bracton. l. 5. f. 425, 426, 427. F^^t^ l. 6. c. 44. Capit. Caroli et
Ludovici, l. 5. c. 23.28.42. l. 7. c. 216.361.373.
Lawbooks take notice of, which likewise disables men to sue in any Civil Court
of Justice, if pleaded in bar against them under Seal.

In brief: the 33 Article of the Church of England, ratified by the Statute of
13 Eliz. c. 13. and Subscriptions of all our Ministers, Defines Excommunication
to be a cutting off from the Unity of the Church, and whole multitude of the
faithful, who ought to avoid an excommunicate person as an Heathen and a
Publican, until he be openly reconciled by Penance, and received into the
Church, by a Judge that has Authority thereunto. And the Confessions of
Bohemia, c. 8.14. Of Helvetia, c. 16. Of the French Churches, c. 32, 33.
Describe Excommunication to be, a removal of wicked, scandalous, obstinate
Sinners from the Holy Fellowship of Believers, a throwing them out from the
Church, and delivering them to Satan by Ecclesiastical punishment. And
absolution of such upon repentance, to be, A taking them again into the Church,
to the Communion of Saints and Sacraments. Therefore the Newfound Suspension
and Excommunication of scandalous persons only from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, without seclusion from the Church and other Ordinances, now so much
contested for, is but a mere Popish Innovation, not warranted by Scripture,
Antiquity, our own Statutes, Articles, or other Protestant Churches Confessions.

2. That in that age all Church Members freely admitted to the public prayers
of the Church, and not thus actually excommunicated from all Ordinances and the
Church it self, were freely admitted to the Lords Supper, and all
excommunicated persons too, upon their absolution.

3. That the Lords Supper in that age was usually received by all
Church Members, when ever they publicly assembled to pray or hear Gods word:
and no other, no greater worthiness, holiness, qualification, preparation, or
self-examination required for Christians free admission to the Communion, than
to other public duties, which it did then daily accompany.

This president of St. Ambrose his excommunicating this godly Emperor
Theodosius, and keeping him above 8 Months space from the Church and all
public Ordinances; only for his over-rash execution of Justice upon his
rebellious mutinous subjects, upon so great a provocation, notwithstanding his
present humiliation and sorrow for it upon the first reprehension, and that
without any precedent, private or public admonition; as is no ways waranted
by any precept or president in Gods word, nor parallel example in the Primitive
Church, and censured by sober See the Centuries of Magd. Cent. 3. and 4. D^.
Bilsons True Difference, part 3. p. 376, etc.
Protestants, as over-harsh, indiscreet, rash, and too Pon^sical; yea such, as
might have then produced See Aug. contr. Petil. l. 3. c. 2.
a dangerous Schism in the Church, to the great prejudice of Religion, had not
this godly Emperor been more humbly patient, prudent than St. Ambrose; So it
has in later ages been a Defense of English Catholics, c. 5. I. E. his
Treatise of the Right and Jurisdiction of the Prelate and Prince. Ba^omus
Annal. Tom 3.4. See Bi^sons True Difference between Christian Subjection and
Unchristian Rebellion pa^^ 3. p. 369. to 379.
much abused, and insisted on by Antichristian Traiterous Popes, Popish
Prelates, Jesuits, Priest to justify their many illegal, unchristian,
unrighteous Excommunications of Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes; their
deposing them from their Empires, Crowns, Kingdoms* their absolving their
subjects from their allegiance to them, and taking up arms against them, to the
great disturbance of most Christian Empires, Realms, States, Churches.
Therefore it can be no justification or proof at all for any of our Protestant
Ministers wilfully to ab^^ain from the celebration of the Lords Supper, and
seclude excommunicate all their Parishioners from it, not only 8. whole
Months, but almost so many years together upon the forementioned Popish
principles* or any other ground; especially not being all actually
excommunicated or secluded from the Church and all other public ordinances as
he was, but freely admitted by them to the Church, and all other public
Ordinances but the holy Communion, which he was not. The s^d effects whereof,
instead of making their people more worthy, more prepared to receive this
Sacrament, and more regardfull of it, I have Suspension suspended, p. 25 26.36.
elsewhere touched and shall more largely insist on in its due place. Only here
I shall desire our Ministers to observe, what Concilium apud Langes, and
Synodus ^adigavensis, An. 1281. apud R^^bellum De^^ et. Eccl. Gall. l. 2 Tit.
14. de Excommunicatione, cap. 90, 91. p. 294, 295.
two Popish French Councils heretofore have noted, ^ouching the debarring
particular persons only from the Lords Sapper for a years space or two, by
virtue of actual Excommunications judicially denounced against them, and the
dangerous effects it has produced, instead of working any reformation in them
or others. Quia nonnulli Excommunicationum Sententias, et quod detestabilius
est, Dominici corporis Sacramentum contemnentes (...) temporibus in Sen^entus
morantur De participatione Dominici corporis non curantes, etc. Quonian multos
reperimus in^urato animo claves sanctae matris Ecclesiae vilipendentes
excommunicationis se^temi^im diutius sustinere, Corpus Christi in Ecclesia in
Biennio vel Triennio non suscipere, vel etiam non conf^^eri. Praecipimus
omnibus et singulus Rectoribus, etc. ut in tal^bus salubre Consilium apponatur.
If these their judicial excommunications of particular persons, instead of
reforming their lives, made many of them only to contemn the censures of the
Church, and the very Sacrament of the Lords body, which is more detestable; and
not to care to receive it in two or three years space; which they reputed a
horrid mischief fit to be redressed by wholesome Counsel: Then certainly our
Ministers Antichristian, undiscreet, Cum timerent ne Principatum ammitterent,
cum Legum Latores, ut majores esse viderentur, multa innovabant; quae ^es ad
tantam pervenit nequitiam, ut precepta sua custodirent mag^s quam mandata Dei,
Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 52.
wilful keeping back, excommunicating of whole Churches, Parishes, Cities,
from the Sacrament two or three years space together, or more, without any
actual excommunication legally denounced against them for any scandalous sins,
must ne^ds b^ a more detestable Crime, and make the generality of the people
not only to neglect, contemn their Authority, Ministry, Church Censures; but
even the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in self, yea totally to withdraw
themselves from it, and all other public Ordinances, yea from our Churches
too, as many thousands of them have done of late years, since debarred from
this Sacrament, under pretext of making them more fit and worthy to receive i^
ere admitted to it. It is an ancient proverbial experimental truth in most
other things and Christian duties, and so in this; Qui non est body, Cras
minus aptus erit.
Those Parishioners whom our Ministers deemed unfit, unworthy to receive this
Sacrament the first year they withheld it from them; they find more profane,
unfit, neglectfull to receive it the next year, yea much more the third and
fourth year, than the second; Upon which account they have wholly cast this
Sacrament aside for sundry years; and must do so till Doomsday, against Christ's
own command, their Ministerial office, and the Primitive Churches, Fathers
practice in frequent administering the Communion to all their people. Let them
therefore henceforth learn this politic, safe Lesson, even from their Popish
Tutors; who debating these Questions, Rich. de Media Villa, in 4. Sent. Did.
9. Aquinas, 4. pars qu. 80. Angelus de Clavas^o Sum. Angel: Eucharistia, 3.
sect. 20, 21, 22.
Utrum Presbyter peccet mortaliter dando Eucharistiam ei quem scit in peccato
mortali constitutum? And, Nunquid esset minus malum dare tali Hostiam non
consecratam, vel non consecrare, quam Eucharistiam tali dare? Resolve
negatively, with some distinctions, as to the first; and to the last without
any distinction, thus. Summa Angel, Eucharisti^^, 3. sect. 21. C. de Homine de
C^le: Miss (...) Jewels Des^^^ of the Apology, p. 3^^.
Resp: Quod Non: Ideo dicitur, prorsus quidem falsa remedia sunt absicienda,
quae veris et manifestis periculis sunt graviora: as this debarring the people
from the Sacrament for so long a space has experimentally proved; occasioning
many more grievous sins, mischiefs, than it has prevented: being a remedy far
worse, and more dangerous than the diseases it should cure. Wherefore since D^
^nitate Ecclesiae, ^.10.
St. Aug. r^^olve^; Ne Catholicis quidem Episcopis consentiendum est sicubi fo
te f^lluntuc, et contra canonicas Scripturas al^q id setiant: And Ad Rector.
and (...) C^^lon. ^sp^^^^^sis P^^al. (...): p. 435.
Pope Pius the 2d. concludes, Re^stendum est quibuscunque in faciem, sive
Paulus, sive ^^^^us si, qui ad Veritatem non ambulat Evangelii: with whom
Defense of the Apology part. 5. c. 12. divis. 2. p. 502.
Bishop Jewel concur. I hope none of our Ministers guilty of this Crime, can
or will be offended with me for his my plain dealing with them. And I shall
entreat all such indiscreet over-rigid Ministers seriously to consider, the
Popish Principles forementioned whereon thi^ their false remedy is founded* with
the bi^ter fruits it has produced: And seeing it is an unquestionable sin in
themselves not to administer or ^^ke; an^ in their people, not to receive the
Sacraments many months, nay years together, (as well as not to pray, preach,
read, hear, sing Psalms, and praise God for his mercies, nor neglect baptism:)
let them now at last repent, reform without delay, and no longer excuse, much
As Mr. D^^ke, M. Collings, and others do in printed Books.
less defend this Sacrilegious unchristian sin, since ad Romanas, c. 2.
Primasius, and Defense of the Apology, p. 347.
Bishop Jewel resolve; Nemo periculosius peccat, quam qui peccata defend^t* And
St. Romans 3.8.
Paul himself determines, tha^ there damnation is just, who do evil (yea so
great an evil as this* to rob whole parishes of the Lords own Supper, Table,
Cup, Body, Blood for diverse years) that good may come of it: much more if they
persevere imp^nitently therein, after all admonitions to the contrary. The Sea
Sextus Aurelius and Dion in his Life: Bishop Jewels Sermons, p. 183.
Emperor Domitian intending a Reformation of the Empire, which before his time,
Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, and other wicked Emperors had spoiled and defaced,
asked Apollonius Tyanaeus, a Philosopher, What order were best to be taken
therein? Who made him answer; Sir, You must do as the Musician bad his Scholars
do. How is that? said Domitian: Sir, quoth Apollonius, There was a cunning
Musician, that set his Scholars to an ignorant and homely Minstrel to learn
Music of him; but before he sent them out, he gave them this Lesson;
Whatsoever ye see your Master do, see that ye avoid it; he is unlearned, and
his Lessons and manner of singing naught; therefore see ye do the contrary.
Even so may I say; Whatsoever we see that they have done, who were our late
Masters before us, that have almost destroyed our Churches and Realms too, by
their unskilfulnesse, erroneous Doctrines, Illegal Practices, Innovations,
Oppressions, Schisms, tolerations of all Religions: etc. Let us now do the
quite contrary, to repair, restore them to unity, tranquillity, prosperity,
safety. More particularly, set all our Ministers combine together henceforth
duly and frequently to administer the holy Communion to their people (being the
chief means, bond of Christian love and unity: yea Signum demonstrativum
unitatis Ecclessae cui homines aggregantur per ipsam; as the Summa Angelica
Tit. Eucharistia, 1. Articles of England, Ar. 28. Harmony of Confessions, sect.
14.
Schoolmen, Canonists, our own A^ticles, with foreign Protestant Churches
resolve; See my Suspension suspended: and Vindication of 4. Serious questions.
a chief means of begetting, continuing, increasing, confirming grace and
holiness of life:) and likewise diligently to exhort, excite, persuade, compel
their people to repair frequently, constantly, with due preparation, and
self-examination to this heavenly banquet; yea in no wise to neglect it when
administered; and that in obedience to Luke 14.23. etc. Matt. 22.1. to 12. 1
Cor. 11.23, etc.
Christ's command, and upon this consideration of the Apud Lau. Bochellum,
Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 3. Tit. 1. c. 101. p. 376.
Council of Bu^deaux, Ann. 1582. Quemadmodum corporibus, Sic and animis, sua
sunt alimenta tribuenda; ne si multo tempore jejum, languidique permanserint,
in laboriosa vitae humanae peregrinatione et vi^ deficiant. Ideoque pane vitae
quae de coelo descendit, nimirum sa^^^ sancto Christi corpore, quod in
Eucharistia continetur, Parochi populos sibi commissos pascere satagunt, et
assiduis cohoriationibus ad hunc coelestem cibum invitent, etc. And if this
will not prevail, let at least the consideration of this notable Canon of the
Popish Council of Rhemes it self, Anno 1583. induce them thereunto. Bochellus
Decreta Eccles. Gall. l. 3. Tit. 1. c. 105.
Cum nihil habeat Christiana religio Sacramento Eucharistia prastantius and
augustius, nihilque ad sancte et inculpate vivendum efficatiu: Nota.
ejusdem frequentissima participatione, dolemus tantam esse Christianorum hujus
temporis incuriam, ut semel tantum in anno sumant tam salutaris Sacramenti
substdia. Quare Paroe^i et qui ad divini (...) pr^^trationem asciscuntur
deinceps. de frequentis Communionis antiquo usu, ejusdemque miris fructibus et
utilitate disserant, Nota.
^t fidelibus persuadere ^itantu^ ^^ra^ mark ^^ nullum esse modum aptiorem et
compendiosiorem, quo sopitis et extinctis Haeresibus, Ecclesiae Apostolicae
facies nostro seculo redeat. Nos quoque fi^eles omnes hortamur, et per ^^scera
m^sericordiae D^i nostri obsecramus ut quam saepissime, saltem vero Diebus
solennibus communicent, et quotiescunque postulaverit ingruens necessitas, quae
vitam humanam ^n discrimen et periculum adducat.

And seeing there is in Psalm. 109 7. P^ov. 28.9. Isa. 1.13, 14, 15. c. 66.3, 4.
1 Cor. 2.15, 16.
Prayer, hearing, and all other sacred Duties as well as this, a like double
danger; the one in neglecting, contemning them, which is the Mat. 10.14, 15.
Luke 10.13, 14, 15, 16. 1. Thessal. 4.8. Heb. 10.28, 29.
greater; the other in the unworthy performing of them, which is the lesser
sin; let our Ministers in this case press both of them together on their
people, and not the lesser danger only of unworthy receiving, without the
greater peril of contemning or neglecting to receive the Sacrament, when
publicly administered; according to the Decree of the Bochellus ib. c. 20. p.
360.
Council of Cavailon under Charles the Great, An. 800. In perceptione Corporis
and Sanguinis Domini magna discretio adhibenda est. Cavendum est enim ne si
nimium in longum differatur, ad perniciem Animae pertineat; dicente Domino;
Nisi manducaveritis carnem filii hominis et biberitis ejus Sanguinem, non
habebit is vitam in vobis. Si vero indiscrete accipiatur, timendum est illud,
quod ait Apostolus: Qui manducat et^bibit indigne, judicium sibi manducat et
bibit. Iuxta ejusdem ergo Apostoli documentum, probare se debet homo; et sic d^
pane illo manducare, et de calice bibere. And according to that Epistle of
Bochellus, Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 3. Tit. 1. c. 23, 24 p. 360.
Theodulphus Aurelianensis Episcopus, Anno 835. ad Fatres et Compresbyteros
suos Au^e^ianensis Parochiae Sacerdotes: who thus advised them. Admonendus est
populus ut ad Sacrosanctum Sacramentum Corporis et Sanguinis Domini nequaquam
indifferenter accedat, Nec ab hoc nimium abstineat: sed cum om^i diligentia
eligat tempus, quando aliquandiu ab opere conjugali abstineat, et vitiis se
purget, virtutibus exornet, elecmosynis et orationibus insistat; et sic
adtantum Sacramentum accedat. Quia sicut periculosum est, impurum quemque ad
tantum Sacramentum accedere. Ita etiam periculosum est ab hoc prolixo tempore
abstinere: Salva ratione illorum, qui Excommunicati, non quando eis libet, sed
certis temporibus communicant, et religiosis quibuseunque Sancte viventibus,
Qui pene omni die id faciunt. Singulis diebus Dominicis in Quadragesima,
praeter hos qui Excomm^nicati sunt, Sacramenta Corporis et Sanguinis Christi
sumenda sunt, et in Coena Domini, et in Parasc^^e, in vigilia Paschae, and in
die Resurrectionis Domini penitus ab omnibus communicandum, ^t ipsi dies
Paschalis hebdomadae omnes aequali religione colendi sunt. The like advise of
pressing the people to the frequent receiving of the Lords Supper, yet with due
preparation, and admonishing them withal of the danger of neglecting the
Sacrament, as well as of the unworthy receiving it, is given by the Synod of
Lingen, Anno 1404, and the Council of Bochellus ibid. c. 72, 75.
Bordeaux, Anno 1582. (As also by the Church of England in her Liturgy
confirmed by Parliament:) And this Synod of Lingen withal resolves, That if
any person for any great Offense or enormous sin be adjudged but not declared
and published Excommunicate, if he come publicly to receive the Sacrament, his
Parish Priest may then thus admonish him in secret: Amice, tu s^is quod
fecistitale quid, propter quod tu es excommunicatus; caveas quid tu vis facere.
Tu enim si accepis corpus Christi, sumes in tuam damnationem: Persuadeat sibi
quod desistat a perceptione (...) O^od si ille non vult desistere, tunc
Sacerdos sibi ministret; quia in publicis negotiis sacerdos non debet illum
excludere; sed in privatis non debet secum par^^^ (...). Which I wish our
Non-communicating Ministers to consider. The reason is, because he is still a
Churchmember, till actually denounced excommunicate^; and so not to be
actually secluded from any public Ordinance, to which he has a just right, as
a Churchmember; even as every Member of a Kingdom or State, though guilty of
any Capital crimes deserving death, out-lawry, disfranchisement, or banishment,
enjoys the benefit of all the Laws, Liberties, Privileges of the Kingdom,
State, whereof he is a Member, and cannot be justly debarred of them, ^ill
actually and judicially o^t-lawed, disfranchised, exiled, or condemned to death
for his Offenses, by the lawful Magistrate. I have lately A Legal Resolution
of two Important Quaeres.
published in print, what Legal Writs, Remedies, all injured Parishioners
illegally debarred whole years together from this Sacrament, by a worse ^han
Papal Sacrilege and usurpation over them, may have, to compel their refractory
Ministers to administer the Lords Supper to them at accustomed seasons,
according to our Laws, and the Articles, Rubricks of our Liturgy, confirmed by
Parliaments; To which I shall only add, That I am clear of Opinion, that
Parishioners in such cases, may sue out a special Writ upon the Statutes of 1
E. 6. c. 1. and 1 Eliz. c. 2. De Sacramento Eucharistiae Parochianis
deliberando; Or, De Parochianis ad Eucharistiae Sacramentum admittendis; By the
self-same Justice, Law, Reason, Equity, as the Register Pars 2. f. 58. 4 E.
4.37. Prohibition 8. Fitz. Not. Brev. f. 43. E.
Register, and our printed Law Books resolve; they may sue forth a Writ De
Copia Libelli deliberanda, to the Bishop, Official, or Dean of the Arches, upon
the Statute of 2 H. 5. c. 3. Commanding them to deliver to the parties
prosecuted a Copy of the Libel without difficulty, where grantable by Law, when
they refuse to do it, contrary to this Statute; Or, a Writ, See Register pars
2. f. 30, 31, 32, 33, 66. Fitzh. Not. Brevium, f. 163 164.228, 229. etc.
De admittendo idoneam personam ad Ecclesiam; Or, De Cautione admittenda: Or,
Quare Impedit praesentare: Or, Quare non admisit, to Bishops and other
Ecclesiastical persons, where and when they refuse to adm^t their Clerks to
those Benefices to which they present them; or to absolve them upon caution
tendered to them, contrary to Law and their duties. Or Writs Register pars 2.
f. 19.27.28.164.172.198. Fitz. Not. Brev. f. 156, 157. Cooks 2 Instit. f.
99.100.
De Clamea admittenda in Itinere; Or, De At ornato admittendo et recipiendo; to
Justices in Air, Sheriffs, and other Courts, when they refuse to admit their
Claims, or Attorneys, contrary to Justice, Law, and the Statute of Merton, c.
10. The very Common Law of England gives every Landlord these several Writs,
Register pars 1. f. 159.153, 173, 174. Fitz. and old Natura Brevium.
De Consuetudi^bus et Serviciis; De Secta ad Curiam; De Secta ad Molendinum, to
compel their Tenants, to perform the accustomed Services, Suits, and Duties
which they owe unto them by their Tenures, though they concern only their
Temporal Estates: And will it not by like Writs, Justice, Reason then,
constrain our refractory Parsons, Qui tarde de dit, et diem de die extrahens
prosuit, non ex animo fecit. Seneca de Beneficiis, p. 10.
Vicars, Ministers to perform the accustomed Spiritual Duties, Services, and
administer the Holy Communion to their Parishioners, at usual seasons, (as
themselves and their Predecessors have constantly done heretofore time out of
mind, and they are still obliged to do) which concern the very spiritual
comfort and salvation of their Souls, and ought not to be denied or deferred to
them any longer? Our Common Laws, Lawbooks, Statutes have provided these
several special Writs, for the inviolable preservations of the Liberties,
Privileges, Rights, preventing, redressing the injuries, and recovering the
Tithes, Dues of Clergymen, that they may the more freely, cheerfully discharge
their Ministerial Duties, and diligently administer the Sacraments to their
people. Register, pars 1. f. 146, 147, 148, 151, 175.179, 180* 184, 187 260,
281. Fitzb. old Natura Erevium.
De Clerico infra Sacros Ordines constituto non eligendo in Officium Ballivi,
Bedelli, etc. De Viris religiosis, quod non veniant ad visum Franciplegii. Quod
Clerici non ponantur in Assisis. De Clerico per Statutum Mercatorium non
capiendo. De Clerico capto per Statu^um Mercatorium deliberando. De Clerico
convicto deliberando Ordinario. Quod personae Ecclesiasticae quieti sint de
Theolonio. Quod Ecclesiasticae personae non amercien ur secundum Beneficium. De
Decimis solvendis Parsonis et Vicariis Ecclesiarum pro possessionibus
alienigenarum: All which we find in the Register, and our Printed Law Books;
Besides sundry Writs in Par. 10. H. 3. dors. 9. Claus. 12. H. 3. pars 1. dors.
7.3. Pat. 20. H. 3. m. 24. Claus. 20. H. 3. m. 3. and 19.10.15. Claus. 32. H.
3. dors. 15. and Pat. 4 H. 3. pars 1. m. 1. Claus. 4 H. 3. m. 4, and dors. 16*
Claus. 5 H. 3. m. 14. and 6. Cart 6 Johan. Reg. m. 12.
other Records, for the due payment of Tithes out of the Kings own Demeasn
Lands, Mills, Parks, Forests, to those Ministers, Bishops, Abbots to whom they
were due, or formerly granted. Claus. 18 H. 3. m. 5. A Writ to exempt
Clergymen from paying Toll and Customs for goods bought of, sold by them for
the sustentation of themselves and their Families. And Claus. 39. E. 3. m. 8. A
special Writ, Quod viri Ecclesiastici non contribuant pro clausura Villae de
Coventry, there being a Commission issued to assess the Inhabitants to wall
this City, toward which they would Tax the Clery. Therefore by the self-same
Justice, Reason, Equity, our Common Laws will provide special Writs, and
Remedies for the people, to enforce their Parochial Ministers, Vicars, by power
of our Temporal Courts of Justice, to administer the Sacraments duly to them,
according to their bounden duties, and render them this their Spiritual food at
the Lords Table; especially seeing they have now no legal remedy to enforce
them to it, and punish them for neglect thereof in our exploded Ecclesiastical
Courts, as they might do heretofore.

Trin. 17 Iacobi B. R. The Parishioners of Sutton Valence in the County of
Sussex, according to their Custom chose two Churchwardens; the Bishops
Official at the visitation refused one of them, and swore another Churchwarden
in his place, which had been Churchwarden before 5 years together, and was very
contentious, and a maintainer of Suits before the Official. After much debate a
Writ was awarded out of the Kings Bench by the judgment of the Court to the
Official, to admit and swear the Churchwarden the Parishioners had elected,
according to the President of 26 E. 3. where the Bish. of Exeter was commanded
to confirm the Children, and send Crism to the Parishioners of St. Burian in
Cornwall, which he denied them: And Fitzh: Not. Brev. f. 200. where a Mandatory
Writ issued to the Mayor of Oxford to enroll a demise; and to the Ordinary to
prove a Will, and to the Lord to hold a Court: as they are obliged to do by Law
and Right. Mich. 22. Iacobi B. R. Mr. Noy moved the Court for a Mandatory Writ
to the Ordinary, for the Parishioners of St. Thomas in London, to admit two
Churchwardens which they had elected according to their ancient custom; against
which the Parson objected the Canon, that he was to elect one of them: which
upon consideration of the precedent cases, was granted. The like Writ to admit
Churchwardens chosen according to custom, was granted to the Parishioners of
St. Magnes in London, Tr. 7 Caroli B. R. And to the Parishioners of St.
Ethelboroughs London, Tr. 15 Caroli B. R. wherein the custom of electing
Churchwardens by the Parishioners was adjudged a Good Custom in Law, which the
Canons made in Convocation, Anno Dom. 1603. Canon 89. could not impeach or
deprive them of being a temporal right and inheritance settled in them. The like
President was in Pasc. 4 Caroli, B. R. rot. 420. and Tr. 7 Caroli, rot. 1391.
Mr. Noy in the case of St. Thomas Parish, cited such a Writ to the Convocation
House 21 E. 3. reciting, that they affirmed our Lawyers held a damnable
opinion, because they would by Writs. De Cautione admittenda, compel Bishops
and Ordinaries to grant absolutions to Excommunicate persons without amends,
upon sufficient Caution tender^d, which sufficiency was issuable, and to be
tried at the Common Law. Judge Whitlocke M. 22. Iacobi B. R. and Pasc. 2. Car.
B. Regis, cited one Midlecotes case adjudged in the Kings Bench to this effect.
A Constable was elected and sworn in a Court Leet; the Justices of Peace at the
Sessions refused him, and elected and swore another. Wher^upon the Lord of the
Leet sued out a Writ of Restitution to the Justices of Peace, to allow of and
restore the Constable chosen in the Leet, being the Lords inheritance: So if a
Town Clerk, Alderman, Burgess, Recorder, or Mayor of a Town, be unjustly kept
out, or removed from his place, or disfranchised; A Writ of Restitution will
be, and ought by law to be granted out of the Kings Bench, to restore them to
the possession of their places, as it is resolved in Sir James Baggs case, Trin.
13 Iacobi. Cooks 11 Report. f. 93. etc. in Audlyes Case, Pas. 2. Caroli, B. R.
in Bostons case; the case of an Alderman of Coventry; Mr. Manniptons case,
Recorder of Launceston in Corrwell, and sundry others in King Charles his
reign. Therefore by like Law, Justice, Reason, a like writ of Restitution will
lie for all those Parishioners, to restore them to the frequent use and actual
enjoyment of the Lords Supper, who have been injuriously, unchristianly, and
sacrilegiously (without any Legal sentence of Excommunication for any Legal
cause) kept from it, by their imperious Ministers, against the Laws of God and
the Realm: It being resolved in Cooks 11 Rep. f. 98. a.
Bags case, That the Court of Kings Bench has authority, not only to
correct judicial Errors in proceedings, but other Errors and Misdemeanors
extrajudicial, tending to the breach of the Peace, or Oppression of the
Subjects, or to the raising of Faction, Controversy, Debate, or to any manner
of Misgovernment; so that No wrong or injury whether public or private, may be
done; but that it shall be there Reformed, or punished by due course of Law.

I find in the Pars 2. f. 50. b.
Register of Writs, a recital in a Consultation; that the Archdeacon of Norwich
anciently in his Spiritual Court, sued a Parishioner, ex Officio, for
substracting his accustomed Oblations at Easter, Christ's Nativity, and All
Saints, etc. Et viaticum quod a singulis Catholicis semel in Anno recipi debet,
cessante legitimo impedimento, per multos annos recipe^e recusavit, in
perniciosum exemplum al^orum. Who procuring a Prohibitien to stay this suit,
and prevent the corporal punishment to be inflicted on him for these Offenses,
pro salute animae: Thereupon the King granted a special consultation to the
Archdeacon, to proceed in this cause, notwithstanding the Prohibition; to
punish this Notorious delinquent, who refused to pay his oblati^ns, and to
receive the Lords Supper for many years, (which See The Canons, Anno 1603. Can.
21.112.
ought to be received by all Christians once a year at least) to the pernicious
example of others: Therefore by like Justice (now these Ecclesiastical Courts
are suppresed) ought special Writs to be issued out of our Temporal Courts, to
correct, punish all such Ministers, who ( to the pernicious example of others,
the scandal of our Church, Religion, and prejudice of their peoples souls) for
sundry Months and years together, have peremptorily refused to administer the
Lords Supper to their Parishioners, though importuned by them to do it; and
likewise to punish all such Parishioners, who have obstinately, Schismatically
or profanely refused, or neglected to receive it, in such places where it has
been duly administered; And that See Lamberts Justice of Peace, f: 616: The
Complete Justice, p. 286.
by the very Statutes of 1 Ed. 6. c. 1. 1 Eliz. c. 2.13 Eliz. c. 12.3 Jac. chapter
3, 4, 5. Which I trust will henceforth be put in vigorous execution against all
such obstinate offenders, who shall persevere in the Sacrilegious
Non-administration, or impious Non-reception of the holy Communion, after these
my weak, and other pious Men's endeavors to convince them of, and reclame them
from these their Unchristian Practices: I shall conclude with that of Gratian,
de Consecratione Distinct. 2.
S. Hilary; Si non sunt tanta peccata ut Excommunicetur quis, non se debet a
medicina corporis et sanguinis Domini seperare* and with Fredericus
Lindebrogus, Codex Legum Antiq.
Capitularia Caroli et Ludovici Imperat^r: lib. 7. c. 371. Placuit, ut omnes
^ui Ecclesiam Intrant (nisi a suo fuerint Excommunicati Sacerdote) communicent.
Si qui autem hoc facere no^uerint, tamdiu a Communione et Christianorum
consortio habeantur alieni, quamdiu per satisfactionem Ecclesiae a proprio
mereantur per manus impositionem reconciliari Episcopo, and sanctae restitui
Communioni: And that of the whole Surius Conci^. Com. 1. p. 712. Gratian de
Consecrat. Distinct. 2. Iuo Carnotensis, Decret. pars 2. c. 33.
Council of Agathen, about 441. years after Christ: Seculares qui in Natali
Domini, Pasca, Pentecoste non communicaverint (and by consequence, Clerici qui
tunc Eucharistiam Secularibus non administraverint Catholici non credantur, nec
inter Catholicos habeantur; but ought to be reputed as mere Heathens,
Publicans, Excommunicate persons, unworthy the name of Christ's Ministers or
Christians.

Swainswicke, July 25. 1656. WILL. PRYNNE.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Title page line 16. regal, read real. p. 1. l. 5. r. Reformers. p. 21.
l. 33. or, r. of. p. 23. l. 3. Romanum. p. 25. l. 31. two. r. ten. p. 39. l.
11. form, r. from* p. 42. l. 4^ r. 12. p. 47. l. 3. singing, r. fingering. l.
32. satagant.

Margin. p. 21. l. 8. injured, r. married. p. 35. l. 17, Independency. p. 39. l.
39. Opmerus.


