BLACKLO'S CABAL Discovered in several of their LETTERS Clearly expressing
DESIGNS INHVMANE against Regulars, VNIVST against the LAITY, SCISMATICAL
aganist the POPE, CRVEL against Orthodox Clergy men And ovvning the NVLLITY of
the Chapter, their opposition of Episcopal Authority Published By R. PVGH I.
V. DOCTOR.

Nihil absconditum quod non reuelabitur The second edition enlarged in some
fevv Notes.

PERMISSV SVPERIORVM.

MDCLXXX.

The Epistle to the Catholic Reader.
I Here present you with a collection of some Letters written by several of
the Prime secular men of our nation: which discover their secret Designs
against Regulars, -- and the Papal Authority in England, without sparing those
of their own Body, who were not susceptible of their schismatic spirit as
may be seen in their procedure against Dr. George Leybourn legally installed
their Vicar General by the Bishop of Calcedon, whom they endeauord to get
killed or at least banished by the Rebellious Parliament not for Religion, but
as a spy, a Broullion, a factious man, and what else they pleased to represent
him to the state.

The Authors of these Letters are Very well known to most of our Ancient
clergy men, yet because they may fall into some hands who may be strangers to
them I will here give a short Character of them.

The first, and as it were Primum mobile of all, is Mr Thomas white of Essex,
commonly known by the name of Blacklo: who haueing studied his Humanity at S
Omers, his Philosophy, and part of his Divinity at Valladelia, and the rest at
Louen, all under the Jesuits, was thence invited to Doway College by Dr
Kellison when he set up schools, to teach Philosophy, where he began to employ
the Doctrine he had learnt Under the Jesuits to impugn them: yet he professed
there only rigid Thomistry which name to avoid that of a nouellist he affected
ever after, even when he had framed h^s new fangled system of Philosophy and
Divinity although he left scarce any footsteps of S. Thomas's Doctrine in either
Being invited to Lisbo to teach Divinity in the English College, he began to
discover some of those many errors which he then was hammering out, which
coming to the Knowledge of the Inquisition, and his printed Conclusions being
forbidden fearing the severity of that Tribu^al he fled into England and was
shortly after admitted into the Chapter.

The first remarkable Action I knew of him after this, was his Approbation of
the book Deus, natura, Gratia: A thing so odious to the till then orthodox
Clergy, that at the next general meeting Mr. Broughton, and several others of
the abl^st refused to meet, unle^s he were removed. To reestablish his credit,
he printed some Controuersiall Dialogues, composed by Mr. Rushworth, whose name
they bore: a treatise good in its self, yet he left the print of his foot in it
by foisted errors namely that of Scriptures being of no more use to dispute,
then a beetle is to cut with, or a straw to knock a nayl: which R. S. Bishop of
Calcedon deservedly called a Blasphemy. Howeuer this and some others of the
same nature past unobserved amongst many good things contained in the book
which buoyed up his credit again, the book being attributed to him, and he
either not at all, or but weakly disowning it

His next work was to strengthen himself in the Chapter, by introducing into it
his disciples, who out of respect to their master, and Gratitude to their
benefactors would stand to him, which succeeded even beyond his own expectation
for in a short time by the death of the ancient orthodox men, and numbers of
other new ones, he became so powerful in it, that nether the opposition of the
Bishop, and his officers nor the censures of Doway first, and Rome afterward of
his writings nor the dislike of the Catholics nor the dreadful death of
several of his A bettors without the Sacraments, a visible hand of God
appearing against them, as Dr Leybourn truly said were able to put a stop to
the Progres of his noueltys.

His temper was a deep melancholy which he increased by his Continual studyes.
He had a good wit, yet clouded with a certain natural obscurity, which
accompanied him in all his writings, which he found too tough an imperfection
for him to overcome, some think he aff^cted it, that his sentiment not being
Understood might be more esteemed: others, that that might give occasion of
diue^s interpretations of his meaning, and beget several schools, as there
are several in Aris^otle. In his Conversation he affected a certain gravity or
stoicall Apathia when he was amongst his admirers: but when he met with such as
disliked his doctrine, none more uiolent then he, as appeared by what he writ
against Dr. Leybourn, my self, Dr. Daniel, the Cardinals, and the Pope him
self, so he verifyed his own saying, unto Divum parcimus vlli: At last in a
very great age, when he had outliued his greatest disciples, his Doctrine and
his own understanding (he was grown a mere child again) he dyed as several of
his chief disciples had done, sine crux sine lux, without giving any sign of a
Christian. Which shall appear more at large in his life which I have almost
ready for the Press Doctor Henry Holden was as his own soul, for the uniformity
of sentiments: A sun Dial does not more exactly mark the motions of that
Planet, then Holden represent the Doctrine of Mr. Blacklo. Besides his title of
Dr. of Divinity of Paris, he had little to make him esteemed. He never Could
write ten lines of true latin: and his Philosophy and Divinity were
proportional, yet his presumption was so great that he thought none equal to
him, except the all knowing Blacklo, as he used rash^y to call him, applying to
that proud man one of Gods Attributes. He writ a book called Analysis Fidei^,
Blacklo haueing furnished him with the materials, and af^^rwards corrected the
style to salve Priscians head lamentably broken in it to which he added a
chapter concerning things in which Princes are to be obeyed, and in which they
ought to be resisted. A ticklish Point, and which required a greater moderation
then his hot head was capable of in such a dangerous coni^^^^^re of affayrs,
when the People of England had cut off their king and kingship, and that of
France seemed to design the same, if God had permitted it. So the chancellor
of France caused the book to be examined; which shortly after was burnt by the
Hangman, and the Author obliged to retract in an Assembly of the faculty of
Divinity, and would have been banished France, had not Abbot Montagu interceeded
for him.

This punishment would have made another wife but not him for naturam expellas
furca licet vsque recurret, Yet he meddled no more with Temporal Princes for
fear of their sword; but spent his Pragmatical humor upon the spiritual
Superior from whom he apprehended no such danger. This appears by his letters
and Instruction for the Government of the English Catholics which, you will
find hereafter.

R. S. late Bishop of Calcedon used to say of him, that he was an Unlearned
Presumptuous rash man. His letters make good this Character.

A third was Sir Kenelme Digby, a man of parts deserving all esteem, had they
been accompanied with Judgment: of a great natural wit a tenacious memory a
graceful elocution, skillful in many languages, and expressing him self very
well in several, but in English admirably, perhaps none before him and few
after him more happily. This he knew and being above measure ambitious of
honor he was easily wrought upon to help to bolster up and spread the Atomical
Philosophy, which Blacklo persuaded him would shortly preuail in the Christian
world, and banish Aristotle: which Honor they said, he should have of founding
this new doctrine, and divinity it self, which was to be new modeled also,
according to these unheard of Principles of that sacred science which till then
had acknowledged no other then the Revealed word of God and the Decrees of the
Holy Church.

This conceit of him self engaged him in several negotiations of great
consequence in all which he miscarried through lack of Judgment in the managing
of them. In so much as he was quickly forsaken by all who had employed him,
seque and sua solus amauit: unless perhaps Mr. Blacklo was acorriual in that
love: although some with probability enough think his love was rather
concupiscentiae then Amicitiae, rather grounded on interest, then any other
quality: indeed in most of his letters we find many to be one ingredient, even
when Sir K. was at so low an ebb of Fortune that it seemed to threaten his
Bulging on the sands.

The last Person, who furnishes any considerable number of letters to this
Collection is Mr. Peter Fitton vere Biddul^h of Biddulph in staffordshire, of a
very ancient family. A man of competent learning, moderate, and truly orthodox:
although b^ing made President of the English College in Paris, and Dean of the
chapter, and obsessed by Mr. Blacklo and D. Holden he was so far wrought upon
by the importunity of the others, as to ground a suspicion, that for some time
he sided with the Faction vltra fas, and Ius, yet I hope he retained even then
his orthodox sentiments, because we find at that time Mr. Blacklo wishing he
were deromanized, which shows he was not so: and he soon renounced all dealing
with the affairs of that dogmatizing party, and retired to Florence, where he
continued till his Dying day with an honorable Pension from the Great Duke, who
commended to him the care of his Medalles.

Some others are mentioned en passant as Dr. Georg Leybourn, Mr. Walter Montagu
Abbot of Nantuil in Poietou, Dr. Humphrey Waring, or Ellis, Richard Russel,
Bishop of Portlegre in Portugal, etc. who being partly alive partly very lately
dead, are known enough to the greatest part of our English Catholics, fama
bona as is Mr. John Sergeant alias Holland, mala.

I publish these Letters out of the originals in their own hand writings, which
for the satisfaction of such, as like S. Thomas, will believe nothing but what
they see, I deposited in the English Jesuits College at Gant, fearing the
danger of being seiz^d on or lost in England, should I keep them by me. Thos^
who shall take the pains to visit them, will see my Fidelity in following the
originals, which I here present thee: as also that there are several others of
a much more odious nature, then any I here publish.

My earnest request is that what is here in contained odious, be not attributed
to the whole Body of the Clergy, whose hon^ur is dearer to me, then my own
life, but to the Blackloistical Party, under whose tyranny Orthodox m^n groan.

Some things I have said of this Party already in my Letter de retinenda Cleri
Anglicani in sedem Apostolicam obseruantia: so me thing in My Amuletum
Excantationis: more I will say in the life of his Patriark Mr. White: which is
almost ready for the Press. Many things have been said by others, viz Dr.
Leybourn, Mr. Coniers, Jonas Thamo, and others, yet nothing seems to bear so
much of conviction as th^se Letters: where in they speak their minds them
selves freely and deliver such sentiments, which none would have believed, with
out such an undeniable evidence. Indeed these maxims although contained in their
other writings yet they are so obscurely delivered that they can not be clearly
proved upon them.

We shall see here that Bishop of Calcedons authority which they pres so much
against Regulars trampled on: the Chapter, which they recommend as canonical,
to be with out any foundation or right to govern, or give Facultys: the
opposition of Episcopal Authority when offered by his Holiness, so odiously
charged on Regulars, owned to be their own Action, and laid at their own doors:
that they are Acephali, have no Authority no superiority no Government no
subordinaton. In fine, that they resemble rather the confusion of Caluins
synagogue then the union of the Catholic Church: as we shall see in the 14
Letter written by Dr. Holden, Aug. 30. 1647.

Which may suffice to excuse my self and such other orthodox Clergy men as out
of a principle of conscience refuse Obedience to those to whom none is due,
even by their own confessions and acknowledgments: and who do not own
facultyes, nor receive Dispensations or Power to give them, from such, as
certainly have no Power at all. As also that such Catholics, as have care of
their souls, their greatest concern, take heed of relying even for ordinary
absolutions on them, whose Power is so disputable, and uncertain, or certainly
null. Read and Judge, and pray for

Thy hearty well wisher and servant in CHRIST Robert Pugh
Postscript:
Note that the greatest part of these Letters came to my hands from Abbot
Montagu whilst I lived with or near him: some very few were by him sent to me
after my retreat from his service into a more laborious employment.



A Copy of a LETTER Of Mr. White to Dr. Holden.
Monsieur.
THough I had nothing from you this week, but a notaries Act, yet I must write
unto you. The occasion is a word you writ to sir Ken. that F. Hardiquan thanked
you and that monsr Bernardiere was the cause. The which I wonder you should
write: for the effect being against the Queens intention, that is our state for
the present, you cannot have deserved thanks if you have done according to her
intention. The which nevertheless I suppose you have done, both because you have
taken the trust upon you, and because you are none of those, who think that
private men under pretense of Religion may dispose of Kingdoms, the which they
do who think that Ireland must be put in its own hands, and our King to rely
upon their faiths. For the Pope, or strangers to order things so I easily
conceive it no inconvenience: But for an English man. I know not how he can do
it with mantaining his duty to his country, that is, to God. God has set
diverse degrees in our country, and haueing given the charge of governing to
some eo ipso has taken it from the rest who are to promote their Religion all
they can, under and not oppositely to the steerage of the common. This I write
to be showed to mr. Fitton whom when I was in Paris, I found vehement in that
kind: and told him then as much, as I write now, but fear I moved him not.
Let him consider that if Ireland be made a souerain, both England and Ireland
will be ruined temporally, and England by all probability also in Religion: for
both will be engaged in a perpetual war, and England hardened in heresy by
opposition, as we see it has happened in Holland. But if the King for despayr,
or necessity submitt to the Parliament and all the forces of Scotland and
England fall upon Ireland? If the good of Ireland be to keep England in war, are
they English men, that shall second this good of theirs? If I apprehend
ryghtly, it is an easier matter to set England right, then to putt the Scors
out of Ireland: This is to be don by sieges of as strong places as any be in
Holland, that by a Field, or two. England helped brings in Ireland: Ireland set
up makes the helping of England more hard. If Religion have any footing in
England, it will be mistres in Ireland, but it may be mistres in Ireland, and
have no footing in England. For love of God be wise, and let all helps march
together; for if one draw one way, and others other ways, all will be too
little. And if all must go one way, it must be the Queens way: for fittinger
it is we should submit, then she. you have my sentiment, and I shall be glad,
if you do not like it at lest that you should know what constructions others
make.

On the Back. Copy of Mr. white his Letter to Dr. Holden 29 May All in Sir
Kenelmes Hand. 1645
Annotation. What occasion Dr. Holden gave for this Letter, I cannot tell:
certainly it must be of a very odious nature, otherwise the whole discourse of
this Letter is nothing to the purpose: probably Dr. Holden with his usual
rashness gave some ad^ice relating to Ireland, which displeased Mr. Blacklo,
who was a Patriot even vltra aras beyond Justice and without due regard to
right. Which appeared by his book of obedience and Government: where he
pretends the King's right to his Crown to cease, when it cannot be recovered
without disturbance of the Commonalty. Preferring the Peace of a few cittisens
before the just right of his King, the Nobility, and a great part of Gentry who
were at that time trampled upon by the meanest of the Commons, in whose favor
he writ that book.



Sir. Ken. D. to Dr. Holden. Epist. 2.
Sir,
I have yours of the 3. current: for which I humbly thank you. we need not
trouble our selves about the vncertanties, and disorders of our Letters, for
now that commerce will be at an end: within two days after the next posts
arrival I hope to be gone hence, and then shall make all possible have to you,
possible to so many as I travel with, 15. or 16. If It seems that Sir.
Kenelme himself, how true soever he were to the Blackloistical party, could not
escape this man's centsure
you understood my way of negotiation, you could not dislike it: and to censure
an important action, without knowing its principles, mr. Blacklow says it is
french Leuity. Upon occasion of your so mutch disliking what I do, I may
without vanity say, that more is done for our good in this Court, then could
have been expected and it is enough to go thorough with our business: nor is
it in their power, you mislike, to hinder it. And what is given to them is
accounted thrown jnto the river, but necessary to make them propitious to
permit the work be done. Cerberus must have offam, to let Aenoeas, and other
pious souls pass by him. But you will still Leap over the style, A true
censure of Dr. Holden's procipitant way of proceeding in all things. This
complaint is well grounded.
before you are at it. Give me leave then to say, it were both honesty, and
wisdom in those friends you mention c. to forbear ^ugling under board, to
embroyl my businesses when peradventure I work upon the same principles, as
they, and for many reasons know better then they, how to conduct it dexterously.
But nothing serves their turn, that is not don their own way. Remember what
I say to you: This is akind of Prophesy: for jn reality it happened as he
foretells: as we shall see Letter 46.
At the end of my negotiation, I shall be ruined (as much as the world can
ruin me, which I value not a straw) for doing the just contrary of what you
tax me for. And jn the mean time those from whom I shall expect the most
correspondence, make my negotiation uncomfortable to me by false biases, and
foisted cards. A very ungrateful proceeding of Dr. Holden's friends.
Sinc^ they once thought me fit to be trusted with a business, they should
have relied some what upon my dexterity in the managing of it, who though I
be no wise man, yet they know I am not a natural fool. Neither should they
think it became me at every time, and to every person to reveal the secret
springs I wrought by: they should be content to see it done to their mind jn
the end: and jn the mean time permit me some times, (without taking alarmes)
to look one way, vvhiles I rovved another. But the best js, I care not how
any body takes what I have done, from the highest to the lowest; nor what
becomes of me, vvhither applauded, or scorned. I am sure I have done my duty
honestly, and with some measure of Prudence: and God has blessed me with
better success, then at the beginning I could have hoped: what he hoped for
God knows; but it js certain he succeeded jn no one point of his negotiation,
nether for the church, nor state: for he nether did the queene's business, nor
the secular clergy's. He nether got a Bishop, nor the chapter confirmed. He
disturbed all English residing jn Rome, disordred all their negociations,
troubled the ministers of that Court, Labored to banish this man, and to
affront that. And at last after much time, and many spent jn vain, with the
queene's consent, he returned to France, leaving a bad opinion of his Person at
Rome and bringing away with him a perfect hatred of the place and court: which
he often expressed in virulent terms to many, and was for that sharply
reprehended even by moderate and civil protestants, jn Particular by my Lady
Countess of Denbigh.
And I should have yett had better, jf these over wise sticklers for Religion
would have been quiett, for by raising diffidence, they have made my
conditions the harder, which js all well, jf the King assent to them; but jf
we make him blanck at them, we ruin our business. And herein js the exercise
of reason that gives Judgment, not only upon good appearing jn one regard;
but omnibus pensatis. But enough of this. I hope to see you shortly.

On the back: Part of my Letter to mr. Holden of the 26. 9 ber 1645.
Most noble Sir.
The Parliament of England has endeauored to sell some men's estates, but none
will venture to buy them. It js thought they will give a general pardon, and
so get a round sum of money by composition, since that they cannot get it by
selling. I hear that the Scots have delivered three querys to the Parliament.
the first whether they jntend to depose the King or no; The 2. whether they
jntend to settle the crown upon the Prince. The 3. what js the reason that
they do not establish Church Government according to the Covenant. The Scots jn
Ireland are very vveak, and Preston js now entered jnto Vlster with his army,
having reduced all to Conough. This is the sum of our nevvs. And now Iam
called upon to recommend unto you our humble suit concerning the chapter jn
England. They cry out on all sides for want of superiors: Hence it appears
that none of any side were satisfied with the settlement of the Chapter,
otherwise they would not have been on all sides so clamorous for superiors, as
having some already. This we shall see confirmed jn the following Letters. Now
if the chapter from its beginning was not canonical, how could it become so
after ward^? Non firmatur tractu temporis, quod ab jnitio jure non subsistit:
Is a Rule of the Law.
and none can be made until the chapter be settled. 6. Thu^ with my wonted
respects to your noble self I cease 21. sept.

your most humble servant Peter Fitton.

on the back from Mr. fitton 21. sept. 1646. b. The secular clergy may then
set their hearts at rest and be content never to have any superiors, for it js
a folly to expect a Confirmation of their Chapter (without which there can be
no superiors made) seeing the Chapter js so leauened with the Blacloist
doctrine, and settled upon such a foundation, in opposition to the Papal
Authority, that it can never hope for any Confirmation thence.

Mr. White to Sir Ken. D. Epist. 4.
Most Hon: Sir.
This is only to acknowledge the honor you did me by yours of the last of
sept. I think you will do God good service, and the King also, jf you can get
the Pope to employ 40 - of our own sails, Take notice here of the Pragmaticall
spirit of this good man, who although not called to it, must be giueing Directions
to the Queene's ministers without, and probably contrary to here is and the
King's orders.
for by good managing they will become a fleet for him, and Religion. If you
can further procure that he should send such orders, or rather such a man jnto
Ireland, that may conserve the peace, and seek more after the substance then
after the outside of Religion your Iourny will be well employed though you
obtain no farther. As for my follyes, I sent you half the first part by Mr.
Skinner: the second half goes to back this. The Appendix had been ready also
but that a peddler had more monyes then I, and so a Catechism, that he had to
sell at the next fair made my work stay. There may have been other motives for
that retardment that the Printer had so much Learning as to see that work
contained Errors and so much zeal as to be willing to take any pretense to
delay its printing, although thorough hopes of gain he was unwilling to Lay it
quite aside.
I hope it will be ready for my next Letters unto you* so with my best
respects to your self, and your Coronel I rest this 25. of october.

Yours as ever to my power. Thomas White.

On the back, from Mr. White 25. october. 1646
Mr. Fitton to Sir K. D. Epist. 5.
Most Noble Sir.
I Have yours 19. nou. And your hopes of a good success in our business does
beget an assurance of it in Dr. Holden, and my self. As for our adversaries
they object the same against us, which the Parliament obiecteth against Bishops
in England, and with as little reason as they do. And if possibilityes of
impertinencys may cross the discipline of the Church, there should be no
Chapters, nor Bishops in any part of the world: and if there be more fear of
such impertinencyes in England, then in any other place, it is because we have
been abridged of that authority, Here he ownes that our English secular clergy
know not how to use Episcopal authority, jf they had it amongst them. And
jndeed it appeared so, by the success of the Late Bishop, whom they engaged jn
several controuersyes, to the great scandal of catholics and no less danger
to Religion.
And so peradventure may in the beginning commit some errors in the managing of
it, but this danger will be the greater, the longer we are deprived of that
which we must have at last and the sooner we have it, the sooner we shall be
acquainted how to use it without committing the objected impertinences.
Howsoever the fear of impertinences be it never so great ought not to deprive
us of the thing it self, but rather such caution is to be used as may prevent
the Impertinences, and yet conserve the authority entire. I doubt not but you
have procured this already. And as for our businesses since you do so kindly
accept of the trouble, we shall not acquaint any body with them, but your self,
when they are of importance, as this is, nether have we acquainted Mr. skinner
with this in particular, nor does our clergy intend him to be their Agent,
although my Lord Bishop has styled him such jn his Letter to the Protector: I
suppose he means, that he js his Agent. Howsoever he expressed a great
willingness when he went from hence to jndeauor to procure us a pension, for
our house here, and I could not refuse his courtesy, for I have found it that
the discreetest men are not always the best beggars. But I leave it wholly to
him self, to do what he pleases jn it as holding it desperate, yet foolish By
co^uersing with Dr. Holden, something of his censorious spirit did work jn him:
Other wise so moderate a man, as Mr. fitton would not have thus censured Mr.
skinner.
persons do some times prevail jn this kind contrary to all expectation. Mr.
White goes to morrow from hence b. This was Mr. James skinner, known to some
by the name of Bently: a ^ery orthodox man, and no friend to Blacklos Noueltys;
And for that reason grateful to the Bishop of Calcedon, a professed enemy to
them.
toward you he offered him self to assist us jn procuring an English Bishop.
we have accepted of his curtesy with many thanks, when time shall require it:
but we jntend not to meddle jn that until this business of the chapter be
over, nor then nether, unless you do advise us to it. This is the zeal for
the Discipline of the Church and that Dignity established by Christ our Lord:
which they by these words make to depend on the pleasure of a Lay man. No
Bishop till the chapter be settled, that he may act nothing but what it shall
appoint him. And no Bishop after that settlement, unless sir Kenelme like of
is: So here is given to Sir Kenelme Digby an authority more then Episcopal,
then Archi Episcopal, then Patriarchal, or even Papal: all these being by the
Institution of Christ bound to provide Bishops, in due time where they are
wanting; which here is left to the Determination of a Layman. Let the secular
clergy boast as they please of their Endeauours to procure a Head to the
English Church, and charg amongst their deluded disciples the Regulars with the
odium of hindering it, never any Regular thought that grand affair So
indifferent as to be left to the Caprichio of a private secularman, nor resolved
to have it stand, or fall by his verdict.
you must charg Dr. Holden to send you French news, etc. 14. Dec. your most
humble and faithful servant Peter Fitton. On the back: from Mr fitton 14.
Dec. 1646. This was Richard White Esquire elder Brother to Mr. Blacklo, who
resided long jn Rome.
Here we see, who they are that oppose the making of a Bishop: although they
odiously cry out on the Regular Clergy, as the only opposers of it. It js the
Chapter they seek to get confirmed, and till that be done, ^ill admit of no
Bishop: and have opposed a Bishop as often as he has been offered. som^times
excepting against the Person, sometimes against his Authority, as contrary and
cons^quently displeas^ng to the state. They are jmlued with some principles of
Independantisme: unwilling to obey, after they have so long commanded, without
control of any.


Dr. Holden. to Sir Kenelme Digby. Epist. 6.
Sir.
Mr. Fitton's arguments ought to preuail, if the Pope be head of the Church,
but not otherwise, for then the next Provincial Bishops ought to provide
Hereis a pleasant condition put: If the Pope be head of the Church; but not
otherwise. Is then the Pope's being Head of the Church brought to Iffs, and
Ands? Is his supremacy become such a Topicke, as to be made to stand only as an
Hypothesis by supposition, which way any impossibility may be said with Truth,
as Sophists say of this other proposition: if a man flies he has wings. what
shall we say to the 2. general Council, acknowledging the Pope to preside over
the Fathers of it as the Head presides ever its Parts? To the Council of
Florence in which even the Greeks acknowledged it. To that of Trent which
expressly defined it? wither will these men Lead their Followers? upon what
quick sand will they build, haueing rejected the Rock? in what Cock-boat will
they sail, having abandoned the ship of S. Peter? To what flock will they ioin,
who forsake that of Christ.
for their neighbors.

Adieu this 28. Of December 1646. H. H.

On the back in Sir K. D. Hand: from Dr. Holden 28. December. 1646.
Epist. 7.
Most honored Sir.
I presume to enclose this in one to my Brother, though it be an answer to
yours of the 24. of Dec. because it bears nothing of have. Idesire you to
consider that the notes de Origin m^ndi are not a treatise, but an appendix
added to show how Divinity depends of Philosophy, and so has all its grounds
in the former work, without memory whereof it is not well vnderstandable. I
thought once to have cited the places of the Institution, but finding it would
have caused some brouillerie with my printer, I easily declined to the
sloughfull side. Who shall consider, that nothing conformable to nature has
hitherto been delivered of that subject, will require no ample discourses to
make the Project probable. For my expr^ssions of your worth, they are far short
of what I desired, and could have done afterward. But I am a clod of Earth,
and feel my self governed by fitts and weathers, and what I putt in my preface
was the best that occured then. As for Divinity since the finishing of my
Printing, partly expectation of my Brother, and providing for him, partly the
weakness of my head, have kept me from such contemplations, and I fear will
for some time. God knows what is best. I send you the catalogue of some more
errors then are expressed in Print. I dare not say all, though the Printed
were enough to shame us all, who had care of the Printing. God reward you for
what you labor for the Clergy: though I do not understand why they desire it.

Your most affectionate and humble Servant. Thomas White.
I pray upon occation press my brother to Print.



On the back from Mr. White; but no date. It seems to be an answer to Sir
Kenelme's of the 24. Dec. 1646. and so to have been written in Ian. 1647. It
seems he regarded not in his Panegyric ^r. Kenelme, what his merits were, but
what the Panregyrist could say: for he does not say his words were proportioned
to the object; but to his own capacity. A pretty way of Prays^ng indeed, in
which much Sincerity is to le expected, when Reason is (...) of d^res. and the
only will consulted, yet if we consult the Practice of that party, and consider
the Panegyricks they make of their own, and the ir^^cti^es of Others, we shall
f^nd that Mr. Blacklo is no^ the only, nor the chief offender in that kind.

Mr. Fitton to Sir K. D. Epist. 8.
Paris 1. feb. 1646. Most noble Sir.
I have yours Ian. 7 And as for a Bishop, I think it not convenient to move for
one until our Chapter be confirmed, Here is the reason alleaded Letter 3. l. ^.
Which is of greater consequence. Nor then nether, until the times grow better,
that we may have wherewith to mantaine him. Here is a another reason, why they
would not have a Bishop: they have not means to mantaine him: nor can have,
till times grow better. yet Bishops are chiefly necessary in time of
Persecution, in ill times, because of the Sacrament of Confirmation, cheifely
necessary in th^se times: (still supposed that the Bishops presence be not
cause of the persecution) as these same persons often said in defense of the
Bishop of Chalcedon. Now to refuse one barely upon the score of lack of
maintenance for him, is so new in the Church, that I defy the whole party, to
produce out of Ecclesiastical Hystory any one President for it. And moreover
it is an affront to the body of English Cathholicks to surmise them unwilling
to make him partaker of their Temporals, who Communicates unto them spiritual
Graces.
.

On the back: from Mr. Fitton 1. Feb. 1647.
Epist. 9.
Most noble Sir.
I am glad to understand by yours feb. 18. That that busy man What you may
have heard, and from whom, I cannot tell: but sure I am that F. Courtny stayed
in Rome after Sir Kenelme's retreat thence and never left that place till his
dying day.
Is commanded to leave the City. It is now no secret here, for F. John writ
it to F. Paul in these terms: F. Courtney is commanded by the Pope to retire
himself to Liege, and is banished Rome, at Sir Kenelme his procurement by order
from the Queen of England. Yesterday I spoke to my Lord Iermin concerning him,
and told him what I knew. Mr. Grant is now dispatched, and I hope he will
settle all in Ireland, if Ormond prove not false, that is, if he turn not
Parlamentiere. Mr. Bennet does also return back with particular instruction to
my Lord Digby. As for your self I have given Mr. Grant a note to remember to
dispose the Irish and the Nuncio according to your desire in your last Letter.
The news from Ireland are these: the general Assembly sits, but as yet has
not published any thing: they were at first disunited by the Marquis of Ormond,
and Clanrichards, faction: but afterward by means of the Nuncio they were
united again Clanrichard is in Dublin, and has declared himself for Ormond.
Where upon the general assembly sent a body of horse into Gallaway to plunder
all his Tenants, and adherents as they did accordingly, only those excepted,
who took the oath of Association, and now they are quartered upon his Lands. I
am affrayde Mr. Grant will come too late to dissuade Ormond from adhering to
the Parliament, for Ormond writes in his Letter to the Parliament they should
dispatch succors to Dublin, with all speed, because he cannot hold out longer
then the 10. of March: in the mean time the Irish are sending both Preston and
Oneale to besiege Dublin again. I understand now that Mr. Bennet his Iourny
does not hold, and that my Lord Digby is expected shortly. Dr. Holden will
write unto you how F. Paul bestirrs himself against our chapter, but I believe
to little purpose. He is affrayde that F. John Father John never stirred out of
Rome: so Sir Kenelme had as ill success in procuring his banishment, as that
of F. Courtney.
will be sent after F. Courtney. Thus with my wonted respects I cease

15. March. Your most humble servant Peter Fitton.

On the back. from Mr. Fitton 15. March 1647.
Mr. White to Sir Ken. D. Epist. 10.
Most Noble Sir.
These are to thank you for yours of the 25. Of march and for the trouble This
trouble was occationed by some copyes of Blacklow's Philosophy which being sent
to Rome were seized on by the Inquisition, which Sir Kenelme labaured to
retriue.
you have had for me. I am sorry for your indisposition, which I hope summer
will cure. I pray thank Sir Michel Angelo when you see him for his, and tell
him I intended not to deserve so much honor as he does me. I p^^y remember
me al so to Monsieur Bourgeois Monsr Bourgeois was the Champion of the
Iansenists in France, and sent to Rome to defend their Errors,
And monsr Duchesne. What you tell of metaphysics is a long winded business.
I pray all so commend me to F. John Points his Prayers. You see he was in
Charity with one Regular, and thought his Prayers worth the asking.
I doubt not but you will easily answer the Fathers Authorityes, which they can
bring, for there is none Thus he rashly pronounces without knowing what was
alleged against him
of which will come home. When you give me notice of S. Basil's, authority in
particular, I shall give you the best account I can. But I fear it not with a
like rashness he says, he feared not S. Basils authority, although he knew not
what it was. The business then in dispute, blamed in Mr. Blacklo's Philosophy,
Was whither Accidents could subsist without a subject? The Church teaches, they
can, this Mr. B. denied. Against him were produced 1. Council of Constance,
which in express words condemned that error, in Wiclef. 2. S. Basil: As
appears by this following paper composed by Dr. Heart, as the inscription on
the, back in Sir Kenelme's hand, proves.
My brother has written to me, that my book will not sell in Rome, because
of the opinion of the motion of the Earth. So that I may not trouble my self
with sending the 72, disciples, unless you can putt him in a better way, then
he knows any. I told him he must get a stationer there to send to his
correspondent here to take so many books, as he could vent eitheir upon ready
money, or upon a day.

But he despayreth of it. The Jesuits have been beaten here also a little:
but they will still fall on rheir legs. My health has been so doubtful
that I resolve as soon as I can get money to take some waters, I beliue it
will be about July. In the mean while I rest

this 18. Of April. Your most affectionate servant. Thomas White.

On the back: from Mr. White 18. April 1646.
Testimonium Concilij Constantiensis et S. Basilij. Quod accidens possit
existere absque omni subiecto
In Concilio Generali Constantiensi Sess. 8. sub Anathemat is interminatione
prohibetur o^nibus et singulis Catholicis ne de caetero 45. Articulos Wicleffi
vel eorum aliquem audeant public praedicare, dogmatizare, tenere
velquomodolibet allegare. Nisi ad eorum reprobationem:

Inter hos articulos: numero 2. habetur: Accidentia pani^ et vini non manent
sine subiecto in sacramento Altaris. Et ne quis dicat hanc censuram non vrgere,
aut premere eos qui dixerunt Impossible esse Accidentia sine subiecto manner:
^o quod dicta Censura prolata sit sess. 8. quando nondum erat definita quaestio
de Legitimo Pontifice Rom^no supremo totius ecclesiae Catholicae Capite, a
cuius approbatione decreta Concilioru^ firmitatem ac robur habent, sed lis
pendebat inter Ioanem XXIII. Gregotium XII. et Benedictum XIII. quis eorum
verus ac legitimus Pontifex esset: Sciunt omnes Martinum Quintum in eodem
Concilio sess. 45. quae est vltima praedictam Caensura^ ac damnatioem
approbasse ut videre est in epistola dicti Martini; ad finem concilij.

Neque releuat si quis instet Concilium et Pontificem voluisse tantum reprobare
Wiclefum, quod docuerit in Sacramento Altaris post Consecrationem sub speciebus
panis et vini manner substantiam panis et uini: quod etiam intendit Lateranense
sub Innocentio III. Cap. Firmiter. Tridentinum. Sess. 13. Can. 2. Et Textus. De
Consecrat. D. 2. Cap. Species. etc. Nos autem. Vbi damnatur qui dixerit in
Sacrosancto Eucharistiae Sacrme^to re^anere substantia^ panis et vini vn^ cum
Corpore et Sanguine Christi: et negauerit conuersionem totius substantiae panis
et vini in Corpus et Sanguinem Domini manentibus dumtaxat speciebus panis et
vini. Ex quibus non colligitur accidentia manner sine omni subiecto, sed solum
non esse substantiam panis et vini, in qua, tanquam in subiecto recipiantur:

Hoc inquam, non releuat: nam Pontifex, et Concilium in dicto Constantiensi
loco allegato distinguunt duos articulos Wieleffi: et 1. reprobant vnum quo
dicit Post Consecrationem manner substantiam panis et vini: Deinde reprobant
alteru^ tanquam Articulum distinctum quo asserit: Accidentia panis et vini non
manner sine subiecto in Sacramento Altaris.

Atque haec ex Concilio circa accidentium extra subiectum existentiam in ssmo
Eucharistiae Sacramento. Vnde Conibricenses express dicunt esse conclusionem
de fide, de quo Christiano Philosopho dubitare non licet, posse deum conservare
accidentia extra subiectum.

Alia possunt afferri testimonia ad probandum accidentia posse extra subiectum
existere ac conservari ^ Vnicum adducam ex S. Basilio Hom. 6. De Opere sex
dierum. Vbi docet in prima rerum creatione lucem solia productam fuisse 1. mo
die et mansisse tribus diebus sine subiecto ac tandem quarto die productum
corpus solare, in eoque lucem illam primogeniam positam fuisse.

Verba Auctoris sunt: Tunc (id est primo die) ipsa natura Lucis producta est:
Nunc autem (id est quarto die) hoc s^li^ corpus conditum est ut illi
primogenitae Luci vehiculum esset. Haec ille. Ac ne quie exiscimaret ipsum
nomine Lucis intelligere aliquam substanriam Lucidam, non qualitatem
accidetalem; Addit paulo post: incredibile nemini videatur and a fule obhorrene
quod a me dictum est: Aliud nimirum quiddam esse a luce splendorem: aliud item
corpus subsidens Luci et subiectuns. Primum enim res onmes a nobis dividi
solent in ipsam essentiam suscoptricem, et i^ eam qua ipsi accidit qualitatem.
Vt igitur diversa sunt natura, Albedo (inquam) et corpus dealbatum: sic et ea
quae modo diximus, differunt quidem, vnita tamen sunt potentia Creatoris.
Itaque ne mihi dixeris fieri non posse vt lux a corpore solis separetur. Neque
enim ego huius a solis corpore separationem mihi ac tibi possibile^^ esse dico:
Sed asserendum esse censeo, quae mentis solius agitatione cogitationeque
(supple a nobis) disparari a se possunt, ea reipsa seiungi facultate Creatoris
vtriusque natura posse.

Neque dicas S. Basilium eo loco velle tantum Lucem solis differ a sole,
sicut vis vstiva ignis differt ab eius splendore, et posse divinitus separari,
ita vt maneat sol absque Luce: sicut splendour ignis manner potest in igne
absque eo quod vrat: deo (vt Scriptura loquitur) intercidente flammam. Aliud
est autem solemn existere sine Luce; aliud Lucem solis existere absque sole vel
alio subiecto.

Respondeo. Licet Basilius hoc etiam ibidem asserat nimirum posse solemn
divinitus tantum separari a luce, in quo distinguit solemn a luna, quae etiam
naturaliter potest carere luce; tamen asserit etiam aliud; scilicet lucem solis
tribus diebus mansisse extra corpus solis sine omni subiecto, vt constat ex
verbis paulo ante citatis.

Hoc testimonium Basilij, magni faciendum est. Siquidem in concilio Florentino
sub Gregorio. IIII. Qucestio circa S. Spiritus processionem a Patre et Filio
disputabatur auctoritatibus SS. Patrum, et praesertim Basilij vt vid re est in
disputatio nibus Marci Ephesini et Provincialis Lumbardiae a collatione 14. ad
vigesimam. Praeterea S. Thomas. 1. p. q. 66. a. 3. Ait caelum Empireum non
posse naturali ratione investigari, sed poni propter authoritatem Basilij,
Bedae, et Strabi. Alia ad hanc rem de Basilio dici possunt.

Ex his patet Wicleffum mentitum esse 2. part sermonum, sermon. 58. Dum ait esse
mendacium scandalosum dicatque ante Innocentium III. nunquam auditum fuisse
accidens extra subiectum esse nam Basilius dixit inculcavitque accidens extra
subiectum posse existere, and extitisse. Floruit autem Basilius sub Valente
Imp. Anno Christi 360. Innocentius vero tertius anno. 1198. Othone IV. Imperium
tenente. Ex Genebrardo in chronicis.

Epist. 12.
Most Honored Sir.
These are to give you account of the Journey I intend to make, to wit first to
the waters of Pougues, which are of vitriol. Thence I intend to see Paris,
where if you please to command me any thing, I think the answers of these may
find me. From thence if the wars do not hinder me, I think to go to Doway,
whither the President has invited me to pass a uacation. He is a very able
man, and all things considered peradventure behind none of our Clergy. He
accounts himself extremely beholding to you, and imputes it to me, who^ am
not as yet guilty, but if occasion serve hereafter I shall be very glad to
incur any obligation for him. My intention is to see whither I can plant any
impression Tou see how he Labored to so^ D^rnel amongst the good Corn in that
Field. How far he prevailed I cannot tell. Dr. Hyde seconded his desi^ne and
countenanced his Labors; but he soon after dying, Dr. Leybourne his successor
weeded those tares out. Amongst the venerable Fathers, of the H. Order of S.
Bennet, he made one Proselite, but by the Authority of R. F. Rudesin Barlow,
and the industry of R. F. Stapleton, then professor of Philosophy, and since
Dr. of Divinity and worthy President general of the whole congregation that one
man was removed, and that doctrine quite banished your house.
of my doctrine in that college for I conceive it may in time get a great
root, if it were set constantly on foot therein. Old Mr. Smith passed by, and
the good old man gave me order to testify his great obligations to you very
heartily, and both his company, and all others, who past here give extreme good
reports of your person. But they tell me, that you would have a care of my
health, have none of your own. Be it for the great pains you take, or as
they think, that the air does not agree with you. I Leave here a packet of an
hundred copyes to be sent unto you. The address is to your self, the
recommendation to Mr. Trichett whom my brother and Signor michael Angelo both
know. It is your goodness, that is cause of your trouble. I doubt it will be a
good while before they come. I pray let Dr. Bacon have 4. which I promised
him. and if my brother desires any, I must not deny him. Of your self I say
nothing, supposing you know you are master of all. Although I think you will
not now Think of removing so soon (these last news having set new doubts upon
your affairs) yet I shall observe your order of leaving a bill at my Lodging,
and at the Escu de France. I have no news, but only that Plutark de Placitis
Philosophorum L. 3. C. 17. attributes my opinion It is no news to any, who are
conversant in the works of ancient Authors, that Blacklo 's opinions should be
found in them: for they will find them all in those works: Blacklo only
reviving antiquated errors, which he exposes as of his own inventions,
suppressing the Authors, from whom he borrowed, or stole them. Now he mentions
those, whence he took that de Aestu maris to flop the mouths of the Italians,
who accused it of Nouelty.
de aestu maris to Aristotle, and Galisaeus to one Saleucus a mathematician:
which peradventure will astonish your Italians, who take them for new
inventions. Mr. Bourgous either is not yet passed, or at least called not upon
me. The Jesuits it seems have been to strong for him even in Paris It is no
great wonder that in the town of Paris so Orthodox and zealous for the Faith of
their Ancestors, monsr Bourgeois, who defended all the Errors of Iansenists,
and Arnauld, in his book of Frequent Communion, should be worsted. He had many
supporters, and very powerful Patrones; but Magna veritas and preualet. And
the Jesuits having in that controversy Truth, and the God of Truth, and the
Church, which is the Pillar of Truth on their side, might easily overcome him.
No more but that I rest

this 4. Of July. Your most humble and affectionate friend and servant. Thomas
White.

On the back: from Mr. Blacklow 4. July 1647.
Epist. 13.
Most noble Sir.
I have yours Aug. 5. And I am glad that our business is in way toward an
end: and I do not wonder that monsigneur Albize, and Padre Hilarione plead
against us, being men altogether ignorant of the state of our country, and who
never had their ear^es open to any but to our Enemies. I wonder more at P. Luca:
but when I consider, that he is a Friar, A pretty flurre on that whole Holy
order.
he may be excused. That which does most astonish is the weakeness of their
motives. As first that they should call this an innovation in the Church, I am
sure it is not, and for us in particular it has been practiced amongst us
these 25. years. As for the 2. it is no wonder if they repented still the
Government they gave us, for they never gave us any Yet they had given them two
Bishops.
that was canonical, as this is. As for the 3. if they please they may chang
the title of Calcedon, and call him the Bishop of England: for my part I see no
inconvenience in it. Howsoever the Pope may erect our Chapter, Here again the
Chapter is vvrged; and the Bishop postponed.
and give us a Bishop, when he thinks it expedient. The 4. is of little force,
for not withstanding Card. Millinos actiuenesse in procuring such denials from
the congregation, I am sure the congregation did never intimate to us any order
to suppress our Chapter, or any mislike His Holiness and the congregation
have always expressed a mislike of the Chapter.
of it 5. if they are fryghted to offend the English Regulars, they have no
reason to discontent the Clergy, who I am sure will in the end be more able He
is nether a Prophet nor son of a Prophet.
to do that court service, or disseruice then the Regulars can be. And lastly
whereas they apprehend danger of making Before long we shall see them nibling
at that very thing, or some thing worse.
a Patriark it is so childish, that I know not what to say to it: but if any
thing can put us upon such courses certainly it must be when we find by
Experience, no hope of obtaining from that court any request we make, be it
never so just. Yet after all this I cannot despair of a good success of our
business, as long as I consider that our Protecteur, and your self are Actors
in it, and so I will pass from it to a matter that concerns us more nearly.

You must know that at last not only the Independents, Here begins the treating
with the Independants of which much hereafter.
but the King himself do give us solid hopes of a liberty of conscience for
Catholics in England in case that we can but give security, that our
subjection to the Pope shall bring no prejudice to our allegiance toward his
Majesty or that state: it is true the King will not appear in it; but would
have the Army to make it their request unto him: and so I understand he has
advised the Catholics to treat with the army about it.

The business will be to frame an oath of Allegiance (for this it is which the
army requires of us) and I believe we shall do it without advice from that
court, for we have found by experience so little success there in any
business that tends to the good of Catholic Religion, if it be not joined
with their interests there, who proceed upon principles of Policy, and are
oftentimes guided by factious persons, as that we have little encouragement to
hazard the embroyling of a business of concernement by putting it in to their
hands before it be fully finished. Howsoever you may do well to see if you can
discover any underhand dealing in that court concerning that business, for I
doubt not but that the Jesuits, and Benedictins there will be tampering
underhand about it, yet I can assure you they will have little to do with it in
England. This cleares Regulars from the blame of dealing with those Rebels, and
charges it on the secular clergy, and the chapter Party.
You may also of your self take occasion to try the pulse of that court, and
see how they will relish it if we declare that the doctrine of deposing Princes
is no article of faith. To which I suppose, Monsig. Albizi will reply 1. That
we are heretics. 2. That we will nether preach, teach, nor persuade that
doctrine. 3. That we will discover all such as shall preach, teach, or persuade
it. 4. That in case the Pope should actually free subjects from their
allegiance in England, This all Catholics, even Regulars subjects to his
Majesty, will readily sign.
we will renounce any such discharge from him. Some such thing as this I
suppose will be done, if we cannot get it at a cheaper rate: and so i. nether
monsigneur Albizi, nor any can think, the Deposing Power to be an article of
Faith: and so could not call any Heretics for denying it.
you may do well to dispose that court to it, but without taking notice as if
any such thing were actually on foot; but only by supposing to his Holiness
and others that you conceive the Independents will in conclusion exact some
such thing as this from us. You may also make advantage of this business to
get some thing from the Pope to oblige the Queen, and to keep the King in a
good mind toward us. Ireland is in a poor case etc. Thus with my wonted
respects I cease

30. Aug. Your most humble and faithful Servant Peter Fitton.

On the back: from Mr Fitton 30. Aug. 1647.
Letter of Dr. Holden to Sir K. D. in French Epist. 14.
Monsieur
Ayant veu celle que vous auez pris la peine d'escrire a Monsieur Fitton, and
me trouuant a dine chez Here is a compendium of the three states of France
brought on the stage to Judge of Clergy's government in England. A Bishop for
the clergy: A President for the nobility, and the Doctor for the third state.
No wonder, that the Poet, who disposes the farce should make them say, what he
please.
un President de mes amiss de cette ville, ou il y auoit un Euesqne and un
Docteur de nostre faculte, and leur faisant raport des peines que vous prennes
d'obtenir l'establissement de quelque authorite chretienne and canonique en
Angleterre, ilz se mirent tous a vous lover, and dirent des merueilles de vos
beaux talents. Car vous estes cognu de presque tous ceux quy estoyent a table.
Et comme le leurs ay conte quil y a plus de vingt ans de ma cognoissame quil y
a en Angleterre plus de six cent pretres seculiers, and trois au quatre cent
Religieux, and beaucoup de milliers des Catholics laiques, and tout cela sans
Euesque, sans authorite, sans superiorite, sans subordination, sans
gonuernement, This is false: for within those twenty years there were two
Bishops: the later was then actually alive, and had his vicar General, in
England: besides other subordinate offices. And the Chapter was then in Being:
whose authority they recommended to those who depend on them, at the same time,
that in corners they own it to be nothing.
chacun dit, chacun fait ce qu^il luy plaist, viuants pelle melle sans order,
and sans regime and qu'auec toutes les supplications, and toutes les
solicitations, que nous auons peu fair en court de Rome, pour auoir quelque
authorite, and quelque Jurisdiction canonique nous n'auons Iamais sceu rien
obtenir, and que vous meme y trouuez des difficultes insuperables. Le President
dit en cholere tout haut, The case having been so ill stated, no great wonder
the Gentleman should dislike the Proceedings. Yet such words as these relish
more of Dr. Holden's spirit and passionate heat then of a President of the
Parliament of Paris. Here is an embrio of schism which the faction has ever
since been licking into some shape.
Ces bougres d' Athees veullent ilz encore perdre ce peu qui rest de Religion
en Angleterre? nous sommes heureux de n'estre suiets au maudites maxims de
ceste court simonique and infame. Et le Prelat me diti Monsieur vous deuez vous
addresser au Clerge de France, c. ayant prealablement faitresoudre la question
en sorborme, que cela se peut, and se doit fair. Ie vous asseure, Monsieur,
cette Procedee dela Court de Rome fait crier vangeance a tout le monde, and
ruin l'authorite Papalle. C'est peu de chooses quela confirmation de nostre The
confirmation of such a Chapter as that of England is of so vast consequence,
that it can never be hoped for by any wise man.
chapitre, vous nous deuez fair donner quatre ou cing How unconstant these men
are in their desires. Sometimes no Bishop, till they can mantain him; new
nothing but four or five will content them: sometimes they solicit them from
France; now Sir Kenelme must procure them from Rome: sometimes they must have
titles in Partibus; now their titles must be English. And still clamors against
Rome for not cond^scending to every request, whilst these men blame to day
what they demanded earnestly yesterday, and will to morrow condemn, what they
solicit for to day: proceeding with their spiritual superiors, the Pope, as
the sectarys at the sametime did with their Temporal superior, the King
Petitioning for what they please, and resolved before hand to be dissatisfyed
with the Answer, whither it were a Grant, or a Refusal.
euesques titulairs du Pais, que pourroyent gouuerner leurs Eglises selon
l'institution de Jesus Christ, and l'ordre du droit. Iesuis resolu de voir ce
qui dira nostre faculte a ceste question, que Ie vous enuoye cy iointe, car
iamais il ny auoit tant d'apparence de liberte pour les Catholics en
Angleterre qu asteure, and il est par trop insupportable de viure tousiours
soubs un ioug si pesant, and dans un desordre si effroyable: nous resemblons
plustost ala confusion du synagoge de Calvin, (deest aliquid) a l'vnion de
l'Eglise Catholic. How the secular clergy will like this description of their
state from one of their chief Brethren, I cannot tell: but should any Regular
have made it, he would have heard of it with both his ears.
En fin vous scauez que extremis malis extrema remedia, ce que vous ne pouues
effectuer a Rome, l'espere le fair a Paris, ou Ie seray en attendant vostre
retour, plus que Iamais

Monsieur votre tres humble and tres affectione seruiteur Holden
De Paris ce 30. Aoust 1647. g. He was deceived in his expectation: for nether
Rome nor Paris thought convenient to grant such a favor to such a body of men.

On the back: from Dr. Holden (in French) 30 Aug. 1647.
A Question to be proposed to the Sorbon.
Quaeritur an supposito quod sumus Pontifex respueret vel a. The Barbarisines,
and solecisines contained in this writing, show its Author, who could never
write five Lines without, them, as these who knew him very well assure.
negligeret Catholicos Angliae, 1. e. numeroso fidelium Anglorum gregl
Episcopos prouidere, quodque iam per multorum annorum spacium exhibitis in hunc
finem sedi Apostolicae infinitis propemodum supplicationibus, and variorum
prestitis nunciorum sollicitationibus, dira constaret experientia, liceat ne
sexcentum and amplius Sacerdotibus saecu laribus, and millium aliquot
Catholicis Laicis omni superioritate jurisdiction Let the secular clergy take
notice what opinion this man had of their Bishop, and Chapter, to which they
exact obedience from others.
Regimine privatis vicinos Galliarum Episcopos appellare, ac deprecari, vt
iuxta Conciliorum and Canonum decreta, acephalis sibi, ac perturbatis and
incompositis Episcopos providere dignentur.

Hanc ego proponam quaestionem facultati nostrae, cui haud ignoro quam mihi
datura responsionem. Nempe appellationem licitam esse, and Episcopos Normanniae
tanquam vicinioris provinciae posse ac teneri iure Canonico, and charitatis
praecepto acephalis hisce, and incompositis Presbiterorum and fidelium Laicorum
numerosis turmis Episcopos providere.

Hoc facile praestabit, cum saepius sese obtulerit Archiepiscopus His Grace
never would do any such thing: he was cleare-syghted enough to see the
consequence of such an attempt, so contrary to the Practice of the Church.
Rhotomagensis. Effectum vero sustentabit parliame^tum He reckned without his
host here: the Parliment's intentions were far from so much kindness f^r any
Bishops, or Papists, sufficiently appeared by the following persecutions in
which the s^cular Clergy, notwithstanding their humble Applications to it,
found little more favor, then the Regulars, who did not bend their knees to
that Baal
Angliae. Quibus si quis restiterit, non Religionis; sed factionis causa
puniendum, and ablegandum esse iudicabitur.

On the Back: Dr Holden's question with his Letter of the 30. Aug. 1647. c.
The concealing of the Answer of the faculty if the question was ever proposed.
and that no effect followed it. shows that it was far different, from what he
promised himself so considently.
f. Catholics may here see, what meek men they are like to find the
Blackloist faction, if they ^et Power, or credit with those who have it. Here
is Punishment, and Banishment, designed for all, who should not have
acknowledged that illegal, and vncanonicall Government. And to bereave those
Catholics of the Comfort of suffering for their Conscience, (although that alone
should move them to refuse to adore those Idols) they should be banished not for
Religion but for Faction. Which is so fit a description of what Catholics
have of late suffered, that we may think the contriuers of the Persecution took
their Idea from this man. Which conjecture will be more confirmed, out of
Larger explication of this design, in Dr. Holden's Instruction.


Dr. Holden to Sir Kenelme Digby Resident for the Queen of Great Brittany at
Rome 6. of Sept. 1647. Epist. 16.
Sir
I have yours of the 12. of the last which came to me a week too late, for had
it come before I sent you my Latin Question, and my French Letter, I should
sure have written in a strange style. It could scarce be in a stranger style,
then this is.
Upon the Proposition of an Oath of Allegiance in England Mr. White, i. e.
Blacklow, and I met at Mr. Fitton's to whom we proposed the Oath of the
Dialogue or discourse you mention: but he like a Roman could not digest it: we
stood so strongly for the Justice of the cause, that we declared no less should
be offered, and so nothing is don. In the interim in England my Lord Brudenall
the chief Actor with the Army in this business, and who consults only with
Jesuits, and Mr. Montagu whose zeal and phansy is stronger then his knowledge in
this case, having discussed the business, and maturely considered all things,
are sending or have sent to Rome, for his Holiness Very elegant, acute, and
witty.
Bulls to beget English Calves. I am so mad at them, that I am going back to my
hermitage, that I may hear of such fools, and factious fellows These Noble men
are much obliged to him, for his character of them.
no more. I hope to be 15 days absent, and by that time I hope my choler will
be appeased. I could find in my heart to go straight to the Independents Army,
and make them demand He presumes very much on his credit with the Independants.
what either the Catholics should perform, or else be banished for Traitors; not
for Religion. And the very truth is, Sir, that could I persuade my self the
Independents would settle the Kingdom, I would have been in England ere this,
I should either unite the foolish Catholics, More discouerys of h^s kindness
to Catholics: before he would have them banished; now hanged: if they did not
submit to his dictamens. It is well the Cursed cow had short horns.
or hang them; but I can not imagine that England must be settled This unsettled
condition of the Nation saved the Catholics from the storm, with which this
blustering man threatened them. The Clergy is much obliged to you, for your
honorable opinion of them.
thus. The Presbiterians may make head, the Independants may be divided, and
many other things may be which I fore see not, I can only confess my
ignorance. Mr Fitton will be more careful of his correspondence hereafter, but
I would have you come away, unless you can get a subsistence there, for our
Clergy is not worthy I never heard of any that Dr. Holden wrought unless it
were that writing, and talking at the rate we see here, none should have
returned his civilitys in some way proportionable.
the pains you take for them: nor will never dare go to the close stool
without a Breue from Rome. I told you in my last, I wished you in England,
there you might do good indeed, and if ever the Catholics have wit to make
themselves considerable, now is the time. But Preston in Ireland and Sir John
Cansfeld in Rome will never work g. miracles. I suppose its Dr. Leybourne Dr.
Leybourn is very much in the books of the Blackloists: we shall hereafter find
it; and have occasion to wonder they should treat in such a manner a worthy
man, and a Brother.
puts Cansfeld on. I was going about to reprint the dialogue with the Petition,
and Protestation of Fidelity, but there is no good to be don where the
Instruments have such maleuolcus, or malignant influences into a business.
There Is no money to be got any where, nether out of England, nor in France.
Here Is a letter from your son as I believe. The secrets sentiers dellamour de
Dieu, shall be bought because this is the third time you have written for them.
Here Is Mr. Fitton's Letter which will tell you all news. A dieu this 6. of
September.

On the back, in Sir Kenelme's hand. From Doctor Holden. 6. Of Sept. 1647.
Mr. Fitton to Sir K. D. Epist. 17.
Most Noble Sir
I have yours of Aug. 19. And as for our business I do now in a manner give
it over for desperate. The truth of it is I do wonder at that court, and I do
not understand it, if we would make as little account of our duty toward that
court, as they do of Justice toward us, I assure you we have at this present
an occasion offered us to give them as deep a wound, as they do us, if we will
but ioin with the Independents It seems all of that gang had great Confidence
in the kindness of the Rebels.
and use their assistance, to vindicate our s^lues; and yet we need to do no
more, then what shall be most justifiable in conscience. Besides I am certain
at this present that if we will, it is in our power to thrust the Jesuits It
seems the Jesuits were not so much in the favor of those Rebels. and I easily
believe ^^. Yet I shall nether enquire what introduced the secular Clergy, nor
excluded the Regular from that favor.
out of England. What we shall do, or attempt I know not, only this you may
assure his Hol. That if what we have so long desired be now at last denied us,
I believe we shall have little commerce To deny communication, or commerce with
any Person or Church, was the old form of Excomunication, and when betwixt two
churches it was a schism. This is threatened here because he says they resolved
to have little commerce with Rome: not declared because they would retain some.
How conscionable this is I need not to say, much less how far from Piety. The
hing speaks of it self.
hereafter with that court: but relying upon the Justice of our cause, we
shall seek to redress our selves the best way we can, and I hope we shall not
be blamed, if we chance to set certain questions on foot Hinc illae Lachrimae.
This is the root of all those Exotic opinions concerning Purgatory,
Indulgences, the Pope's Authority, the Oaths, etc, which have been set on foot,
and asserted with great boldness by the Secular Clergy of late, and almost
ever since this ti^e. I wish all who hear them advance such Noueltys, knew,
that when they plead for their truth all their reasons are Non causa pro causa:
for the true and only reason is that they are offended with the Pope: and do
not intend to asserta Truth; but to satisfy their Passion.
which the Divines on this side of the Alps do hold may be disputed without
breach of unity of the Church. But now to other business. The proposition of
the oath goes on This is a Flea put in his Holiness ear, with design to
alarm him: Yet I never heard his H. was moved there with.
and several ones are already framed by us. If his Hol^ chance to take it ill
that we do not advertise him, of what we are doing in this kind, as I suppose
the Jesuits, and others do, you may tell him, that we have no encouragement to
deal with that court in any thing, considering how they have dealt with us upon
all occasions ever since the beginning of this schism. Howsoever let him not
fear that we shall do any thing, but what shall be approved of by Learned and
Catholic Divines. I easily believe Mr. Fitton was really persuaded of what he
here writes otherwise he would have detested the whole, for which he pleads,
whose persons he Loved; but much more the Church. Yet certainly the sequel
has proved, that there was ground to fear they would teach such doctrines, as
no Catholic Divine ever taught Viz, that of Purgatory. Catholic Doctrine is
like an Arch of which each part has both a connection with, and a dependence on
all the rest: and no one can be removed without the fall of the whole, nor
loosned, without shaking all. I am persuaded that scarce any of the Heresia^kes
foresaw all the Errors, they breached at last* they thought only some
particular Truth, which they thought salua Fidei Compage, might be denied. Then
by natural consequence they were brought to question other Points, till little
was left unstirred. So seditious men seldom propose open Rebellion, and a
total dissolution of the Government, at the beginning of their commotions. They
design to be free from some inconvenience, eased of some burden, redressed in
some either real or pretended wrong: but when they are once engaged, they knew
not how to withdraw, nor where to stop, and so are persuaded to persevere, and
defend one seditious Action by another.
.

My Lord Brion is newly com out of Ireland etc.

I am your most humble servant Peter Fitton.

On the back. From Mr. Fitton 13. Sept. 1647.
Dr. Holden to Sir K. D. Epist. 18.
13. 7 ber 1647. Sir.
I thought to have been in my solitude ere this, but I have differred it until
monday Laboring to think of some means how to free our foolish English
Catholics Mark the opinion this good man has of the Catholics of the whole
Nation.
not only from losing that liberty which they were never in such hopes of since
Queen Mary's days, but from that ruin, which they will run into for want of a
little wit, or knowledge. Had you been in these parts some weeks a go that
you might be in London now whateuer become of business, The business, he
speaks of, and desires he had neglected, other he had undertaken them, were
those of the King, and Kingdom, recommended to him, by the Queen, which he
th^^^ promoted (with what earnestness is easily imagined) ^ Rome.
you would easily have laid such grounds, as that an unspeakable good to
Catholics would follow in time, though not presently. And truly could I
persuade my self that the Independants would be able to settle the state, I
would be in London within 10. days. I suppose Mr. Fitton will tell you that now
Mr. Haggerston is dead, Mr. Brudenell the elder, Mr. Smith, etc, are our Agents
sent down to the Army. I cannot read with patience the Letters our friends
write. My former to you will fit the subject you write of to Mr. Fitton, and
if the Independants do continue to second us I fear not but Rome will content
us, if not we shall find satisfaction else where. They build very much upon
their Credit with Independants which what a quicksand it was, did appear soon.
I here send you a sheet, This sheet never fell into my hands: so what it
contained I know not. But the Instructions. follow this Letter.
I have caused to be printed, whereof I have sent some copyes into England with
those Instructions in writing which I here send you also; you know how secret
all this must be. These I have sent will I hope come to Parliament men's hands.
I conceive you may freely give out the Independants By the effects we may
guess at the intenti^n of the Independants better then by their words.
intend us an absolute tolleration, and that they declare themselves already,
and that they will let Catholics have their Bishops, and the rather to
counterpoint the Protestant Bishops, and therefore desire they may be titular
of the Kingdom: that less then six will not be sufficient in England. Which
if you make any stay there, and that the Independants go, and that the Pope
will do what he cannot refuse, or what at least must be don without him, I
shall easily specify here after the Bishoprics which are to be desired, Here
the good man takes upon him by Authority Patriarchal, and Hyper-Patriarkal to
dispose the whole Government of the Catholics to name Bishops, assign them
their Residences, divide their Dioceses prescribe their limits, determine their
Authority, and restrain their Power. By whose Commission does he this?
with the shires of other Bishoprics, which are to be annexed unto them de
presenti with the names of those, who are fittest to be promoted. This you see
I have already complotted the whole business in my idle Brain. But as soon as I
get into the forest of Beaumo^t, I shall forget all these thoughts. I have got
les secrets fentiers etc, but the Anatomia Animae is not to be found here. I
should wish you to g^tt such a Breue as you got for Madame de Chamberge, that
is leave to enter into the monastery of Saint Marie au Fa^bouig some times a
year with one companion for Domina Lucia dela Roche foucault vid^a Domini de
T^uruille, Domina adhono^^s Illustrissima Principis de Conde, etc. But I fear
it will not be worth the labor: it is Mrs M^. G^rbier puts me on. What will
become of her two sisters, I cannot tell you as yet. Here Is one, from England,
I know not from whom. I would you, and I were both of us there, though I know
not as yet what effect the best endeauours would have. John Lee is newly come
to London, and he has undone me by his too long absence. I fear that Friar,
and Be the book binders will cosen me of Mr. VVhite's books, because John
Lee was so long absent, and the books were out of my hands, before I knew that
they make difficultyes to pay me. Here Is one from your Son. I am just now
called upon to go into the town and therefore Adieu.

Yours as ever H. H.
13. 7ber 1647.
On the back: from Dr. Holden. 13 Of 7ber 1647. It seems the heat of his
zeal is like a straw fire it quickly vanishs otherwise a Iourny of three
hours riding could not blot all th^se thoughts out of his mind. Whether these
transports were an effect of Passion, or zeal, let others guess. Their
inconstancy shows them very imperfect.

Dr. Holden's Instructions.
If it shall please the Parliament to suffer the Roman Catholics to live
amongst them with liberty, and freedom let it likewise please them to take
this advice from a Roman Catholic for their greater and better security.

First Let no foreigne King or state intercede for them, nor meddle in the
compounding of businesses for Catholics; but let the Catholics see the
Parliament gives them freedom merely out of their own disposition, and good
will toward them.

Secondly By what Authority does he propose this Oath, under pain of
Banishment?
Let this Oath sent her with in print be universally taken by all Catholics
of what profession soever. And if there shall be found any one Ecclesiastical
or Secular, Religious or Lay who should refuse it Let him be desired to
withdraw himself out of the Kingdom as an unfit member of the Common wealth, as
things now stand. Thirdly let the Catholics have, or rather oblige them to
have six or eight Bishops more or less by whom they may be governed. Let the
Bishops be titulars of the Kingdom, causeing them to renounce, expressly by
Oath all rents, revenues, and temporalityes belonging to those Bishops. By the
first part of this clause th^se Bishops will be sufficiently Independent How
can having titles in the Kingdom, make them Independent on Rome, seeing all
Bishops heretofore were dependant, although titulars in it?
of the Pope, which otherwise they cannot be; and by the second all suspicion
of pretending to or hindering from the disposal of those Bishoprics, or
Bishops estates will be taken away.

These Bishops will be (as all other ordinary Bishops are) in the belief of
all Catholics successers to the Apostles, having authority immediately Can
yours, or the Parliaments nomination make their Authority, ^e immediately
received from Christ; and not the nomination of the Pope*
from Christ Jesus himself, and consequently independent of all other
spiritual power, even of the Pope himself. For though all Bishops are bound to
acknowledge the Pope their head or the ch^ife Paster, yet he cannot impose any
special command upon them of what nature soever unless both they, and the
common wealth in which they live do think it fit. And this has been the
practice heretofore in Catholic times in England, is now in France, and in
all other Catholic states and Kingdoms.

Let all clergy or Ecclesiastical men, be they secular or Regular depend Here
is another iniu^ction contra^y to the Canons of the Catholic Church, imposed
under pain of Banishment.
on these ^^shops, and make them renounce d. all immediate dependence of any
other whomsoever out of the Kingdom. And this because diverse Regulars pretend
to be exempted by the Pope from all ordinary Episcopal power, and Jurisdiction
and to ^e immediately subject to the Pope, or the C^^^^all of their order ^n,
and of a foreign nation. Wherefore let all Priests both s^cular and Regular
take an Oath, and oblige themselves thereby not to exercise ^^y Eccles^asticall
Function, or any spiritual authority, or Jurisdiction, but by the leave and as
derived from the said Bishops. Which whosoever shall withstand, or sh^l pretend
to depend immediately of any foreign Prelat or power whatsoever, let him, or
them be wished to with draw themselves out of the Kingdom, as unfit members of
the common wealth, as now things stand.

All the lay Catholics of the Kingdom (according to the belief of all
Catholics) will be truly, and by Christ's institution Where did Christ
ordain, that all Lay Catholics be sabiect to Bishops not canonically male; but
nominated by such a Pragmatical Man, as this is? and confirmed by a Rebellious
Parliament?
subject to these Bishops in all spiritual things, and consequently these
Bishops may be in some sort made answerable What Law can oblige a Bishop to
answer for all the Crimes of his subjects, unless they are chargeable on him,
for having commanded, counseled, or abetted them, or that they are Committed
through his negligence of his function? what Country ever Called Bishops, or
any other superiors to account for the faults of their subjects, except on
those scores?
for all their subjects Crimes (if any should happen) against the state. And
Least these Bishops should extend their spiritual authority Here he takes upon
him to restrain that spiritual Authority of the Bishops, which before he taught
was independent of the Pope, and not restrainable by him. For he takes to
himself, and gives the Parliament a greater power over them, them he ownes in
the Pope the head of the Church. So his Power is Hyper-Papal.
too far especially in things, which have relation to the Temporal Government
as in probats of wills; disposal of pious Lega^yes, judgments of marrages etc,
It will be easy to limit their Jurisdiction in these occations as it may be
thought sit in the discussion of particulars.

Now because Mr. Fitton in his Letter of this day speaks of an admirable
advantage they had over the Jesuits, and that it was in their power to thrust
them out of England. (See Letter 16.) and Dr. Holden very charitably proposes
it to the Parliament. But the Parliament had other business to think on, then
this: and by sl^ghting these maliteus suggestions, showed more discretion, then
to follow or regard such lgnes Fatuos.
the Jesuits do seem to be the most dangerous body, and are thought to be most
factious by all Christian states not Catholic, if they, or any other Regular
Order refuse either the Oath here with sent in print, or to be subject to these
Bishops as before, let them be thought unfit members of the common wealth, as
now things stand, and therefore let them be wished to withdraw themselves out
of the Kingdom, not for their Religion. Here we have another hint at such a
pers^cution, as Catholics suffer at present, not f^r Religion, says the Gazet;
but for the state, and the susp^tion it may have of them. Suppose after the
Jesuits, the Clergy should be under a like pretext banished? Is it not possible
it may in a like manner give suspicion to the state? Has it not effectually
don so, even in Catholic times? What Policy is here to dig a pit for another,
inten^ich they themselves may as well f^l^?
But for the saspition the state may have of them, which the rest of the
Catholics will not oppose, Catholics, who have a care of their souls will not
willingly part with Regulars as long as they see the secular Clergy promote so
many erroneous dogma's contrary to Faith, and these schismatic principles
contrary to Charity.

VV^re this scribler a live, I should desire to know of him, by what Authority,
by whose commission he makes this address to the Parliament? It contains
things concerning all the Catholics of England, it imports the design of an
Ecclesiastical Government unheard of in the Christian world from Christ's time
till this day, and all imposed with so great a penalty as Panishment, had he
an Order from Catholics to offer it? Had he their advice? Did he so much as
communicate it to them, or the mayor, and chiefir part of them? Not one word of
that. What does this rashness deserve in a private man, to deal such
businesses of so general concern of his own head?

Addistion to these notes: Is there not reason to suspect, that this design did
not dye with Dr. Holden; but Live still in that party? and that Mr. Sergeant's
great design in his going for England, is this some.


no more then they did in venice, and other Catholic states, much less in a
Kingdom not Catholic.

On the back: Doctor Holdens instructions into England sent me with his Letter
of the 13. 7ber 1647.

Larger Instructions in Dr. Holden's hand VVriting.
If it shall please the Parliament to suffer the Roman Catholics to live with
the same freedom and enjoy the same liberty which the other free borne subjects
of the Kingdom do, and which their natural birth right seems to challeng as
due unto them Let it please them to take into their consideration these few
heads proposed unto them by a Roman Catholic, who knowing the principles and
maxims of the Roman Church, and belief, conceiueth them fit to be thought of,
for their better satisfaction, and greater security of the state.

First let no foreign King, nor state be suffered to interceede or meddle in the
behalf of Catholics, to the end the Catholics may see their freedom does
only proceed from the Parliaments gracious disposition and willingness to
settle universal liberty, and consequently that they are not to depend, nor
hope, nor be obliged to none but them for their freedom.

2ly, that such an Oath of Allegiance be framed (if it be thought necessary
that any be requisite) as may stand with the principles of Catholic Religion
(whereof there is a draught in Print will be easily made fully satisfactory)
which may be universally taken by all Catholics of what profession soever,
and if any either Ecclesiastical, or Lay should refuse it, let him be banished
out of the Kingdom, Here Banishment is clearly commanded in case any presume
not to conform to his injunctions: whichin the other. Instructions was
expressed more sweetly, Let them be desired to withdraw out of the Kingdom.
But the sense in both is the same.
as an unfit member of the Common wealth.

3ly. Let the Catholics be obliged to have six or eight Bishops more or
less, by whom they may be governed in matter of Religion and conscience. Let
these Bishops have some of the ancient national titles of the Kingdom
according to their several districts, and consequently have ordinary
jurisdiction over the Catholics. By these means, that is for as much, as
these Bishops have national titles, and consequently are ordinaryes (as we
call them) the Parliament is secured, the Pope can have no Po^er over them to
the prejudice of the state. For they being ordinaryes he cannot deprive them
of, nor limite nor touch their Jurisdiction at all; being a general tenet
amongst Catholics that all Ordinaryes are successors to the Apostles, and
have their authority immediately from Jesus Christ, and consequently a^
immouable, and absolute in their kind, as the Pope's in his. So that all
immediate influen^e from the Pope upon the Catholics of England is cut of by
this means, and therefore no fear of the Pope's arbitrary power, which can be
only suspected, and dangerous to the state. These Ordinaryes will govern the
consciences, and souls of their flocks by their own proper authority, which we
hold to be innate into their offices and persons Iurediuino. Hence it follows
that these Ordinaryes are not bound to obey or receive any special command
from the Pope of what nature soever, if either contrary to the customs, or
canons of the Church or prejudicial to the temporal laws, and government of
the state, whereof the state it self is to be judge. It is true these Ordinaryes
must acknowledge the Pope the first Bishop, and head Here is a new kind of
head, without any authority, or Influence over its Body. A thing monstrous in
Natural, and much more in mystical bodies.
of the Church; but not receive any of his commands without the leave of the
state. Whereupon these two general tenets may be exacted of these Ordinaryes,
and of all Ecclesiastical, and lay Catholics of the Kingdom. First that no
Catholic of what profession soever shall acknowledge any foreign, or
outlandish authority, or superior either Pope, or other over his person, or
personal actions in any civil or temporal practice, or business whatsoever.
Secondly that no act of command, or authority either spiritual, or temporal
from the Pope, or any other outlandish person of what quality soever shall be
received, or admitted by any Catholic of what condition soever, without the
knowledge, and consent of the civil magistrate.

4ly Where as these Ordinaryes above mentioned, who may and ought to oblige
themselves not to receive any commands or orders from the Pope as above,
without leave from the civil magistrates (which has been the practice
heretofore in Catholic times in England is in now in France, and all other
states and Kingdoms) whereas I say these Ordinaryes might seem by reason of
their titles, to give suspicion of their pretension to the temporalityes of the
Bishoprics where of they should bear the titles, (which connot be justly
suspected) the lands being sold by order of Parliament yet may they be obliged
by oath to renounce all claim and title to the lands, liueings, or
temporalityes of those Bishoprics under what pretense soever.

5ly where as several sorts of Regulars or Religious are sent from the Pope to
exercise Pastoral functions, and guide the Consciences of lay Catholics who
pretend to be exempted by the Pope from all ordinary Episcopal power and
jurisdiction, and to be immediately subject to the Pope himself, or to the
General of their order in, and of a foreign country, let all such and all
other Ecclesiastical and clergy men whatsoever oblige themselves by oath to
depend immediately on the aforsayd Ordinaryes, as they ought to do by the
canons of the Church, and not to exercise any Ecclesiastical function, or
spiritual jurisdiction but by the leave, and as derived and received
immediately from the said Ordinaryes. Nor shall any pretend to have any
spiritual power, or faculty immediately from the Pope in any either spiritual,
or temporal affair whatsoever, or from any other outlandish person
whatsoever, save only from the above mentioned Ordinaryes, or their officers
natives of England. Which whosoever shall refuse, or withstand, or will pretend
to depend immediately of any foreign Prelat, or Power let him be banished out
of the state.

6ly. Where as the lay Catholics of the Kingdom will be subject in matter of
Religion and conscience to these Ordinaryes, who are their true and lawful
Pastors (according to the doctrine of the Catholic Church) and this by
Christ's institution, and express command (as all Catholics do believe) and
are therefore answerable for souls: and farther are obliged both by the
principles of their Religion, and by their particular interests to be watchful
over the persons, and actions of the Priests whom they appoint under them, to
g^ide the consciences of the layety; It will be of no small security to the
state to admonish, and charge these Ordinaryes to be vigilant, and careful,
that nothing be complotted, nor attempted against the state, and to discover it
if they suspect or hear of any such thing, they being in some sort answerable
to the state for such crimes, as may be committed by their subjects against the
temporal power, or Government through their negligence, or conniuence, either
by the Priests, whom they appoint, or by any of the Catholic Layty.

7ly least these Bishops should extend their authority too far, especially in
spiritual things, which have a near relation to the temporal Government, as
in probats of wills, disposal of legacyes, Judgment of marriages, etc, it will
be easy to limit their jurisdiction in these occations, as the state shall
think fit in the discustion of these particulars.

8ly. If any Catholic Ecclesiastical, or secular, or Regular shall refuse to
submit to these Thus this Dictator enacts laws, with severe Penaltys, which our
nation never owned the King himself could do, but in Paliament.
particulars, let them be banished out of the state, as unfit members of the
common wealth: the state declaring their banishment not to be for their
Religion, but for the suspicion it has of their loyalty, whereat other
Catholics can take no exception, no more then they did at the expulsion of
the Jesuits out of the state of Venice, and else where, nay much less
considering a state not Catholic has more reason to be cautious, and wary of
such persons, then a Catholic state has.

Besides these general heads, Haueing determined by his own head the
substantial points, he leaves some circumstances to be discussed by the body
of Catholics, when the general heads require greater discussion, and more
mature deliberation then the particulars.
wherein many particulars are comprehended, which would require several
discussions and resolutions, there be many other particulars, which are to be
referred to those who treat, and agitate this business with order, and
Commission. As to what is to be don in case the Pope refuse to give Bishops to
the Catholics upon these terms, conceiving twill exclude his power out of
the state, and prejudice the greatness of his Court by giving such a president
to other states to do the like, whether in case of refusal the Clergy and
Layty may not have recours to France, or Ireland to have Bishops from thence?
and whether some Priests may not be appointed in the interim, whose power by
the state's assistance may be Equiualenr What a rash, and unheard of
Proposition, is this: that an Heretical assembly of R^bels can inuest ordinary
Priests with heretical Authority equivalent to that of Lawful ordinary
Bishops? What opinion had he of the Authority of Bishops who aduances this?
^et this man must be thought the Assertor of Epscopal Authority?
to this in effect?

Whether these Bishops should not make known to the state the places of their
ordinary abode?

Whether the clergy should not make known to the state both at the first, and
afterward from time to time the names, and persons of those whom they choose
to be Bishops, to the end that none be promoted: against whom the state may
have any just exception?

How, and in what manner the Catholics may have their Assemblyes of Divine
service, for number places, etc?

What habits their Bishops, and Priests may wear openly?

Whether and how the Catholics may be admitt^d to any public charg? or bear
any office in the common wealth?

What course is fit to be suffered for the education of Catholics Children in
Learning, or other qualityes, that they may not be sent over Sea to be brought
up amongst forraines and strangers, mantained upon the Pope's and other Princes
pensions which draw many inconueniencyes into their dispositions.

No writing upon the back, till of late about 3 Years a go: but is all in Dr.
Helden's hand writing. Note, that there is a copy of Instructions in Mr.
Fitton's hand, blotted and interlined, so as it seems to be the first rough
draught of them. But the penaltyes annexed to non conforming Catholics are
blotted out, yet so as they may still be read. I think this attempt of one or
two private men to prescribe Laws to the whole nation A rash Presumption, not
to be paralelled by any in sacred or Profane Hystory.


Mr. Blacklovv to Sir K. D. Epist. 21.
Most Hond Sir
These are to humbly thank you for yours of the 29. of July: which I received
at Paris, and to give you account of my return to Lions. The wars about Doway
hindered me from going thither, and so missed of my mark yet I hope I have
done some good at Paris As for the business of Ireland, by some discourse with
Mr. Bennet I perceive that Marquess Ormond had truly a design to keep low, if
not ruin Catholic Religion by setting a division betwixt the nobility and
^lergy, he supporting the N^bility to ruin the Clergy. Also that Owen Oneale
is a man both of wit, and martial skill I am sorry you are so greatly
troubled with the Clorgres business, the which I wish to go well A very
zealous man, for the Clergy, who regards less, how their general concern goes,
then for the Personal concern of Sir Kenelme!
cheifely because you are engaged in it. My waters would have don well with
me, had I not been fixed on my Iourny, which caused me rather to stay, th^n
take them. So I stayed to days: yet I conceive thus much refreshed my body. I
am not yet so Skillfull in my disease, as to be able to give a good account of
it, and therefore spoke but in common to Dr. Fludd of it I am glad you take
that course with objections of Philosophy and Divinity, to examine them Joint by
Joint: for that will carry you thoroughall: but am sorry you are inportuned in
the kind. I shall be glad, and humbly thank you for what soever you shall do,
for Mr. Hyde. I should be sorry you should venture there another winter, with
so troublesome health Vix Priamus tanti The King is much obliged to this man
who thinks, he does scarce deserve, that for his service Sir Kenelme should
hazard his health!
God send your business done in good time, that you be not putt again to a
winter Journey. At my coming from Paris I found a letter from Mr. Chanron of
Grenoble, in which he says he can give you satisfaction concerning the Mercury
of Saturn I intend to send him word, that he be very well assured of it, and
for the rest I shall expect your order. There is growing a business, wherein
peradventure you will be importuned, concerning an Oath, the which Catholics
should take to have the penal laws renuersed. But I hope it will not stay you
there. For neither do I apprehend this present state will stand, nor that any
thing will be done in Rome concerning such a subject, with that expedition or
rationality as is necessary for our affairs: neither that there is the place
to treat such a business which imports the circumcizing of Papal
Authority. I had not the honor to see your son George at Paris, for while I
was at S. Germans his vacation came in and he was sent into the Country. Mrs.
Mary Capland it seems has found the way to apply Mathematical abstractions
to materia sensibilis, which I fear her master will be long a doing. I am
here out of news, the which I doubt not but these times daily afford you store
of: wherefore I rest as ever. Lions Septem. 19.

Your most affectionate and obliged friend and servant Thomas White.

On the back: from Mr. White 19. Sept. 1647.
Sir Ken. D to Sir John VVintour.
Rome 30. 7ber 1647. Sir
Epist. 22.
Till yours of the 5. Aug. (which I conceive you mistake for September) I had
not heard of your 4. weeks absence, and therefore was in pain at your long
silence. My business here would allow me the like, for I have nothing to write
to you about. But my respect will not see you remain long untroubled by me.
Yet too I have a word to say unto you, concerning F. Courtney: See on the other
side the Annotation. a.
He is hugely mortifyed, and afflicted that you should have showed my Long
letter concerning his submission to the Queen, unto some body in Paris, that
has written hither to his General out of it things extremely to his
prejudice. But I bad him rest secure on that hand, for that I know your
prudence so well, and your understanding, so entirely what belongs to a
Princes secretary, that you never showed to any body Letters of secret advice
that concern the Queene's service, and much less such as might blast those
whom the Queen receives into her graces and is pleased to make use of upon
occasions. This comforted him a little, but withal I was feign to go to his
General yesterday to do him good offices there: for upon his return to her
maiestys service, all those who were formerly his declared friends, and
supporters, are now his violent This is most malicious against the whole Court
of Rome, as representing it to be fall of most bitter enemies to the Queen
which is not only false, but incredible also and the easy acceptance of Sir
Kenelme's intercession for F. Courtney proves the contrary.
enemies; and will in the end remove him with mortification from hence, This
predictionis as false as the relation: they never did remove F. Courtney.
if her majesty avow not powerfully her protection of him, which as things
stand in this court, and particularly with him, is most for her service that
she do. Therefore of any thing be broken out in your quarters to his prejudice
from my letter, I pray you silence it the best you can. The late defeat of
Ireland makes all Rinu^uenis friends, and most of this court hang the head.
They now repent the breach of the peace with my Lord Ormond. In fine, they are
much mistaken, who expect any good from this court, otherwise then merely for
their own interests. Therefore our English Catholics are very simple, What
follows is conform^be to Blacklo's spirit false, rash, and tending to schism.
that treat here any allowance of what they are transacting with the Army in
England. Let them guide themselves by what is in it self just, and fit: for if
they introduce this court into the treaty, they shall be cosened, and the
business will be foiled unless it be manag^d wholly in pursuance of their
end^: and th^n I am sure it will be very auerse to ours. For they care no more
for what Catholics suffer in England, then the Marechal de Gramont or my Lord
Powis, A great and groundless reproach to those noble men: wh^ being parts of
the mystical body of Christ, cannot but be sensible of what it suffers any
where.

Here we have a tale of a tub, without sense, reason, or Probability: F.
Courtney to be banish^, and yet stard there: the motive of his banishment, his
submission to the Queene's orders, and Devotion to her service; yet stopped, and
the sentence reuersed upon a word spoken in her name. All his friends changed
into bitter enemies, because he promoted her concerns; and changed again to be
his friends, because they were told her Concerns required it. What a sick
man's dream does this great wit relate, being awake!

What is certain is, that Sir Kenelme going to Rome as the Queene's Minister,
undertook the business of the secular Clergy, which he thought required the
remouall from that place of all such as were not well affected to it, such as
^e thought were F. Courtney, and F. John, the one of the Society, the other a
Benedictin. In this he thought to have prevailed once, as appears by Mr.
Fitton's Letter of the 15 of March of this year. (vide lit. 9.) It is now no
secret here, for F. John writ it. He knew it therefore before, tho as a secret.
And probably to procure it, he had used her Maiesty's name, tho doubtless
without her order. At last finding his negotiation fruitless, (F. Courtney
being too well known, and seated in that Court, to be removed upon such
frivolous reasons, as were alleged against him) to save his own credit, he
pretends, F. Courtney was converted to the Queene's service (to which he never
was auerse although he had been represented otherwise by her Minister to her) and
that it was necessary for her service, he should be taken into her protection,
and was stopped in Rome by his interest. Thus he colors the ill success of that
undertaking, and when he was really foiled, proclaims himself victorious, as
the vnlearn^d Pretender to Learning does in Lucian.


or other such good natured men, do care for what the Christians suffer in
China, or I^pan. God send us once wise, and to stand upon our legs. We shall
then be upon good terms, with God, our Prince, our country, and all good, and
wise men in the world though peradventure this court (not the Church) of Rome
will scold at us. I pray you see my Letter to my Lord Iermin, and I rest.

Your most humble and faithful servant Kenelme Digby.

On the back: To Sir John Wintour 30. Sept. 1647.
Sir Ken. D. to Mr. Fitton Epist. 23.
Rome 30. 7ber 1647. Mosthonoured Sir
I humbly thank you for yours of the 6. cadent. And am right glad to hear of
so good disposition of the Independants Of this good disposition we never had
any real effects.
toward us. For Gods cause let us not forfeit it by tamparing indiscreetly
with this court, to limit our duties to the King, and state. In such cases they
consider not us, but their own fordid ends. It is a shame to see how deaf
they are to true charity and piety, A very Charitable representation of the
Persons in Rome.
and how eagle eyed to their own temporal emoluments. Some good men here say
it has not bin always thus in this court, in so extreme a degree. But that it
is your zealous friend Innocent and his tender conscienced Sister-in-law, that
have brought all things to their own bias; according to the old law, Regis ad
exemplum totus I hear the Pope has already been written unto in the name of
the English Catholics about what they have in agitation with the army. But I
cannot believe it, much less, that Mr. Montagues hand is in it, who knows
with what a disrespect it were to the Queen to bawke her and her minister here,
in such a case. Besides in the business it self we shall suffer much, if it be
so treated.

On friday last I gave the Pope a memorial for his resolution (after our so
long patience) in your business: upon which he has promised a speedy meeting
of the Congregation about it, and a final determination of it. I beseech you
thank most humbly and heartily Sir John VVintour in my name for his forwardness
to oblige me in my business. I beg of him to continue his favor therein, and
to get her Maiesty's order to effect it; which I doubt not but he will have
upon his first moving it to her Majesty. And so with my humble and best
respects to you, I rest.

Your most humble faithful servant. Kenelme Digby.

On the back: To Mr. Fitton 30. 7bre 1647.
Postcript. You can hardly imagine how troublesone, and malicious Sir John
Cansfild is against all you of the Clergy, and any settlement for you; and in
particular beyond all measure against poor Hyde: whose fame he ^eareth, and
prosecuteth with all violence every where, sharply condemning the Clergy for
making him President of Deway College, an heretical minister, a man of unfound
opinions in matters of faith, wrote, or signed some thing in England of that
nature, unfit for Government, and God knows what not. And from him infers
how unfit it would be that the Clergy should be trusted with any more important
form of Government, then as yet they have, since they still make use of, and
boulst^r out Vnorth^d^x men: I wish from my heart there was no real ground for
this accusation; and that it were truly a Calumny. But when we consider how the
Chapter Faction first boulstred out Mr. Blacklo, afterward Mr. Sergeant his
professed disciple, and how they fear the Reputation of their Orthodox brethren
such as Dr. Leybourne: we must own this to be a great Truth.
This is his constant language not only to Cardinal Capponi, and publicly in
his Anticamera where all the English repair; but every where else, even by way
of Clamor among Italians the Pope's Ministers, and F. Luke: so as he has
pre^sed it into the Pope's Ears, and gives him sh^ewd doubts of him: even so
much, that his Hol. asked me very odd questions of him, and showed much
vnsatisfaction. in his particular, upon occasion of my moving him at my last
audience about his Chanonry. In earnest he, and Fa. John, and the others of
their party, show themselves very factious both against you, and against the
Queen, He never mentioned any one particular thing done, or said by Sir John
Cansfeld, F. John against the Queen. which silence proves that to be a calumny.
and insult most insolently of their defeating, as they believe, your Chapter
business, though her Majesty recomend it with efficacy, and I solicit it with
all earnestness.

I pray you see what I write to Sir John VVintour concerning Fa. Courtney; and
silence all prejudicial rumors in Paris against him.



On the back: the Postcript of my letter to Mr. Fitton 30. 7bre 1647.
Another Postscript. Sir John Cansfeld's and Fa. John's discourse of the
English Deane and Chapter is that the Pope nether can, nor ought do it, for it
is against his own interest and, authority: and that therefore he refuses it.
For the Clergy uses to be insolent, I wish there were no other proofs of
this, but the words of those two persons. f. The Regulars accommodate
themselves no further to the Pope's will, then it is conformable to the will of
God and the Laws of the Church, and all rules of Conscience. And so far the
Secular orthodox Clergy ownes obedience to him.
and stand upon their own ryghts and legs: But the Re^ulars his Missionarys
depend wholly upon his f. will; and to that accommodate themselves in every
thing. M^nday 30. 7ber 1647. After I had written my Letter. Dr. Bacon.



Epist. 24.
Most Noble Sir
I send you here a copy of a paper signed by the Prouincialls and by diverse
Secular Priests as also a copy of an Oath intended to be presented by the
Catholics to the Parliament. For my part I do not approve, nether of one, or
the other: howsoever you may do well to show them to his Hol: and to the
Protector of England: and in case they dislike them, you may tell his Hol that
until he give the Clergy a superior, and settle Ordinary jurisdiction How
strangely is Mr. Fitton altredl the Last year he was so indifferent for a
Bishop, that he seemed rather to desire there should be none (s^e Letter 3. and
5.) and now Religion cannot stand without one.
. amongst us, worfer things will be done, then this is: For besides animosity,
that must needs be in the Clergy, by reason of the injustice (as they
conceive) of that court toward them, in denying them their right, they being
to suspect that that Court intends to introduce, and impose upon them an
arbitrary way of Church Government, which they can no more brook. A fit
comparis^n betwixt the Obedience of the s^culare Clergy, to the Pope, and that
of the Parliament of the King.
then the Parliament would do arbitrary Government in the state: and so it is
not to be wondered, it they fall into some extr^u^gances especially considering
that there is no superior to restrain them, from doing what they please.
Nether will they admit of any superior without Ordinary Jurisdiction, and
which is worse, I fear they will not ^^^e any more to that court for a
superior, if you come down without effecting some thing to their satisfaction;
but se^ke it else wh^re as well as they can. If you please you may give these
very words I write unto you, to our Protector, and to whom else you please, as
from me As for my self I do not write to our Protector, or to any other,
because (as long as things stand thus) I will not assume upon my self to meddle
further in that which concerns the common, th^n the rest of my brethr^n do:
and so that court must not expect any account from us, but take their
informations from whom they can get them, and if they be misinformed (as
happily they may be as well as they have been hitherto) let them blame
themselves.

Now you must know, that this Paper, which is signed, is to be dispersed
amongst Catholics, and was signed only for that end, that the Catholics may
know how to answer to these three propositions, which were sent from the army
to my Lord Brudenal in these very words as they lie here. There is a more ample
answer to be drawn for the satisfaction of the army, and the Parliament with a
discourse touching every proposition in particular. The best jest is, that the
Benedictins, who were always suspected to favor the Oath, do now scruple to
sign this paper, and (as I imagine) seeking to carry favor with Rome, have
refused to do it, and yet not withstanding their own refusal, they give leave
to my Lord This noble man before was said to consult only Jesuits now none but
Bened^ctins.
Brudenal to answer as it is signed.

As for news etc.

Oct. 4. Your most humble servant Peter Fitton

On the back: from Mr. Fitton 4. October. 1647.
Oath
I A. B. Do acknowledge, testify, and declare in my conscience before God, and
the world, that our soueraign Lord K. Charles is lawful King of this Realm,
and all other his Maiestys Realms, dominions, and countries. And I do promise,
vow, and protest, that I will bear all faithful, and true allegiance to his
Majesty, his heirs, and lawful successors, and him and them will defend to
the uttermost of my power against all Conspiracys, and attempts whatsoever
which shall be made against his, or their persons, crown, and dignitys. And I
will do my best endeavor to disclose and make known to his Majesty, his
heirs, and lawful successors all treasons, and traitors, or conspiracys,
which I shall know, or hear to be intended against his Majesty, or any of them.

And I do ab^ure as false, and most erroneous both assassinations of Prince,
and People, and that Faith is not to be o^serued with all sorts of People. And
I do detest them both as most repugnant to humanity, and not to be allowed by
any Religion whatsoever. And further that I shall be most ready to mantain, and
defend with my power, life, and fortunes all my countries libertys, the just
ryghts and Libertys of Parliaments, the subjects lawful ryghts, libertys, and
property, the peace and union of his Maiesty's three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and in all just, and honorable ways endeavor the
Punishment of those, that seek to work the contrary, as a dutiful and loyal
subject is bound to do, and as a tru-born lover of his Country is oblidged.
And that nether for hope nor fear, or other respects I shall relinquish this
promise, vow, or protestation which I make heartily, willingly, and truly,
without any equivocation or mental reservation whatsoever. From which as I
shall not desire absolution, so I hold and believe no power on earth can
absolve me in any part. So help me God.

Points.
Upon the ground given in the 12. th proposal printed Aug. the 1. 1647. by
Authority from his Excellence Sir Thomas Fairfax that the penal statutes
enforce against Roman Catholics shall be repealed. And farther that they shall
enjoy the liberty of their Consciences by grant from the Parliament, it may be
enacted that it shall not be lawful for any person, or persons being subjects
to the Crown of England to profess, or acknowledge for truth, or persuade
others to believe the ensuing propositions.

1 That the Pope, or Church has power to absolve any person, or persons
whatsoever from his, or their obedience to the civil government established in
this nation.

2 That it is lawful in it self, or by the Pope's Dispensation, to break either
word, or oath with any Heretic.

3 That it is lawful by the Pope's, or Church's command, or dispensation to
kill, destroy, or otherwise iniure, or offend any person, or persons
whatsoever, because he, or they are accused, condemned, censured, or
excommunicated for error, schism or heresy.

The premises considered, we under written set our hands, that every one of
these three propositions may be lawfully answered unto in the negative.

On the back: The Oath Points.
Sir Ken. D. to Mr. Fitton Epist. 26.
Rome 7. 8ber 1647. Most honored Sir
You would be extremely to blame, beyond all capacity of Pardon, Here is a new
sin against the Holy Ghost, not to be forgiven in this world, (...) the next,
to retain any consideration for the Sea Apostolic.
if for any weak respects to this court (which yield you none) you should
forbear making use of that happy coniuncture of affairs to procure your own
advantages, which God Here the disorders caused in England by the Rebels, are
called a happy coniuncture of affairs and attributed to God which although it may
be true through God's Permissiue will, yet as commonly taken, they beget another
sense, and that very bad.
has opened you a door unto. The Pope, and his ministers apprehend you will
not but I conceive you will do, what wise men in your cases would do. And
therefore the Pope is in mind to send a Person to reside about the Queen who
under pretense of her service may get countenance from her Majesty, besides the
authority he shall bring with him from his master to keep you in aw^, and
embroyle your This is a malicious interpretation of the Pope's intentions, to
frustrate the good he designed by that Legacy, by making the Legate be suspected.
affairs The person he has pitched upon is sight. Ferrante Cappeni, whom I
conceive you know well. But this, as from me, you must keep exceeding secret.
For as yet if it be vented, whiles only three persons in this court besides my
self do know it, there might ensue great harm to who is my confident. Knowing
his end, and his instructions, I do what I can by all dextrous means to
suspend his going, that you may have time to do your business first with the
Army and Parliament. I must with all give you account of another thing, but in
as great confidence as I can say any thing, and I conjure you let no body but
Mr. Holden know any thing of this no more then of the former secret. It is that
le P. Giles Chaissy at London is the man that mouldeth, and manageth all the
Catholics business with the state there and sends a weekly account hither,
and receives weekly Instructions from hence. You look upon my Lord
Brudenall, and Mr. Montagu; but it is Monsieur de S. Giles (or le Pere Giles)
that is the soul, who guides those Organs. And he disposes all he can to have
a strict dependence of the sea of Rome, expecting speedily from hence a
Bishopric in reward How could he know, that Father Giles was moved with such a
sordid design; and not rather with a desire to procure some ease to Catholics
without preiudicing their consciences?
of his Labors. Believe this is a certain truth, for I know it. Only make use
of the advice in the governing your own affairs, and in speedy putting them to
an issue.

I hear nothing from Sir John VVintour, or any of our court this week. I
slacken no endeaueurs for your service here. So humbly thanking you for yours
of the 13. past I rest

Your most humble faithful servant Kenelme Digby.

On the back: To Mr. Fitton 7. october. 1647.
Epist. 27.
Rome 7. of 8ber 1647. Sir
I most humbly thank you for yours of the 13* past, and rejoice to see that our
unhappy country is not yet so forlorn, but that there is one man of wit, and
courage, seasoned with piety We see the opinion Sir Kenelme Digby had of Dr.
Holden, for penning as be did those Instructions. How justly he deserved this
elogium let others guess. Tha^ he showed Courage, I grant, and also some wit;
but I deny that there is any footstep of Piety in it.
who has care of it. Your printed paper, and written instructions were all
dictued by the Holy Ghost. Yet I believe nether the one nor the other will ever
be admitted into the Canon of H. Scripture.
But act: let not all end in, designing, and discournsing. By any means print
again your former Dialogue. Close with the Independants. A good advice for one
who was actually employed by the Queen!
Make them see their interest to strengthen themselves, by union with Catholic
party, which may adhere to them, when after the Parliament and Army dissolved,
the Presbiterians will grow too hard for them single. And do all you can
justly to compass fit conditions and advantages for us, without mingling this
wicked and interessed court He must always have a fling at Rome: so dutiful a
son is he of the Roman Church.
in our treaties: for I dare assure you, they will cooperate nothing to your
good, but dependently of their own ends; and will endeavor to keep us always
like Wards in a very servile pupillage. I wish with all my heart I were now in
England: for in this great work I would gladly employ not only my pains, but
my fortune, and my life. And under your direct on I should hope, that the
interest I have with the now ruling He flattred himself extremely with the
opinion of his interest: which how inconsiderable it was we shall see Letter 46.
persons, and such little knowledge as I have in affairs of the world, and
particularly of this nature might produce some good worth leaving a desert for
at least for so long a time, as would take up that treaty. And I should not
care whom I displeased, This zeal, and contempt of Humane respects, would be
commendable, if directed by Prudence, and subject to true Charity to promote the
common good, but being restrained to the illegal designs of one part, (which
he calls Just ends) it is factious, and blame worthy.
so I compassed the Catholics just ends. But God knows best who, and what
is best for every person and business. And to his providence I quietly submit
all.

I pray you use your utmost endeaueur to get P. Barbanson's Anatomia Animae, by
means of your book sellers or friends from Flanders, or Cullen; for I hear it
is the best, the solidest, the subtilest, and the highest book that has ever
been written in that kind.

I shall have extreme difficulty, (if not impossibility) It is strange, that he
who so lately boasted of his having the whole Court of Rome at his beck, who
could banish, or retain men as he pleased, should now think it impossible to
procure so slyght a business, as this, viz, Leave for a Lady to enter into a
monastery of women!
to get the license you ask for Dna Lucia de Roche foucault. Therefore I will
expect your peremptory command to do all I can perfas and nefas to purchase it,
before I embarke my self with engaging all my strength for it. That is,
consider of your self whither it be of that importance or no, to be worth the
labor.

Mr. VVhite's book will certainly be censured if I do not a miracle to preserve
it. That business was very ill cast, that the faggot of books was not directed
to me; but loosely turned into the Dogana in a bookesellers bale. It will be
necessary that he dilate, and confirm the doctrine there of Original sin,
and of non existence of Accidents without subjects. I pray God preserve Mrs
Girbiers from all misfortunes; but I fear the worst. Indeed the Abbot has bin
much too blame.

I am Entirely yours Kenelme Digby.

On the back: to Dr. Holden 7. 8ber 1647.
Epist. 28.
Rome 14. October. 1647. Most Hond. Sir
I humbly thank you for yours of the 20. past. My chief business It Is strange
that the chief business of a public minister of so great a Princess, who
had so many then on her hands should be to solicit private concern of one part
of the Kingdom. Had he no other? or did not regard any other? Deberet forte
esse Persecution.
is now, and has bin this good while to press for a resolution, on or off, of
your Chapter business as conceiving I may have speedily order to depart from
hence and that it is as good as lost, if I leave it then depending. But all my
industry and Art has not as yet bin able to obtain other answer, but that his
Holiness is resolved forthwith to give all satisfaction to the English Clergy,
as that which he The bulk of the English secular Clergy, deserves this, and
greater commendations: and it is Lamentable those of virtue and learning should
be trampled on by the blackloistical and factious part.
esteems in a high mesure for their Piety, their constancy in their great
prosecutions, and their Eminent Learning. But he does nothing in the business,
nor will enter into the particulars of it: but accords me all in general,
and refers me to the Congregation to draw up, and a just particulars: And
this Benedetta Congregatione I can never get to meet. So inconsiderable had he
made himself, by embraceing blindly all the concerns of that Faction.
Card. Capponi does his utmost to procure their assembling, assuring me, that
they nether can, nor dare deny what you ask. But withal his E^^in. beleiueth
they will seek what they can to sh^ft it off for the present, and lay hold of
all pretenses for delay. Yet he is confident he shall drive them from all their
Euasions, though he stand single for you, and all the rest be joined against
you. The Pope since the creation of the Card. Of Aix langheth Here is non causa
pro causa. From the beginning his Holiness little regarded those threats of
Bishops from France. He knew too well their zeal for the unity of the Church,
to fear that. Other things alleged by Sir Kenelme moved him more viz, the
credit of the Party with the Independants. But finding that to be imaginary, he
looked on all those threats as words, and no more.
at all that has been insinuated unto him, of the English Clergy procuring
Bishops from the French, which at first did move him vehemently. Bu^ now he
makes account he has France at his beck: he says himself he has that
Kingdom in suo pugno: and that now Card. Mazarin for his Brothers promotion
will obsequiously, and implicitly obey whatsoever his Ho: shall wish him to do.
So that he speaks confidently, that if the Arch Bishop of Rouen should but
entertain any suit of our Clergy's to such purpose, as has bin whispered here
to him, the Card. Mazarin upon the least word of his Ho: would send him
prisoner to the Bastile, or any other should dare to countenance the English
Clergy to stand upon their own legs. Truly I conceive upon the whole
matter that business is now upon such terms, as if you should not have fair
Satisfaction before I depart from hence, it imports both the Queen and you,
and all the Catholics of England, to proceed in such a course as reason and
Justice shall warrant you in: and that without it, after such intimations (not
to say threats) of what you will do, you must ever henceforward expect Here he
exhortes the Secular Clergy to lay aside all thoughts of redress from Rome:
and charges the bad success of his negotiation not on his ill management of
it, nor on the threats with which it was accompanied, and which to superiors
are always most odious; but on the Little regard that court had for the Sec.
Clergy. Which either is false, or if true, it was caused by the faults of the
prevailing factious Party in it, and would be changed, as soon as the offending
cause was removed. It was therefore his Duty to have represented to those men
the true ground of that alienation (if there were any) of his Holiness and his
Ministers from the English Sec. Clergy. But this he would not do, the Doctrine
of his Oracle, Mr. Blacklo, being concerned in it. And his own: For the
Divinity of this Man is drawn, not out of Scripture, Tradition, Councils,
Decretals, Fathers, the usual and only fountains, of all Divinity; but as he
says himself, out of the DIGBEAN PHILOSOPHY.
to be very ill used, and trodden upon. And so I pray God to send you all
happiness, resting

Your most humble and affectionate servant Kenelme Digby.

On the back. To Mr. Fitton 14. October. 1647.
Epist. 29.
Most Noble Sir
I Hope that this Letter will find you yet in Rome, which if it do I would
entreat you in case that our business is not come to a conclusion, that you
would procure at Leastways a Letter from our Protector to this purpose, that
we may proceed on with our deanes and chapter, The desperate condition, which
this Letter represents the chapters Confirmation to be in proves my conjecture,
that the true cause of the miscarriage of that affair was the threats they used
hoping thereby to quicken the dispa^ch, which f^ll out quite otherwise: for
from that time their hopes ^isibly diminisht, ^ill ^^ last they quite vanished.
And those, whom lately nothing could satisfy, but an absolute acknowledgment
of their vncanonical Chapter, and Many Bishops, would now be satisfied with an
ordinarily Letter from the substitute of the Protector, (Cardinal Barbarin the
Protector being absent) with a prouisional allowance of the Chapter, till the
Pope provide another Governor. I wish by this lamentable experience they would
learn, that sturdy Beggars are odious, and that Petitioners ought not to
threaten with a Cudgal, as not demanding; but commanding.
as we have don hitherto until such time as it shall be otherwise ordained by
his Hol: and that in the mean time the Dean may enjoy the facultyes formerly
granted to the Arch priest. This is a thing which the Protector may do without
recurring to the congreg. by speaking a word only to his Hol. and by receiving
order from him vivae vocis oracule: or if you your self could propose it to his
Hol. I doubt not but he will tell you we may; which will suffice us without
proposing to the congr. who in all likelihood will deny this as they have done
all the rest. You may show his Hol. or our Protector the necessity of it,
because otherwise we shall be left for the interim without all Government
Subsumo: but there was no such Letter granted: ergo the Secular Clergy is left
without all Government. I wish those would consider this, who stand so stiffly
for the Authority of the pretended Chapter, and call all those seditious men,
who doubt of its authority: although there is none, who understands it, but must
doubt of it.
which must needs breed great harm and confusion, and there can be no
prejudice to the Pope to grant this, it being only for an interim.

I send you here the copy The Paper follows after this Letter. The Petition I
could never find.
of a Paper delivered to Cromwell and Ireton signed by 5. or 6. Lord's and 50.
other gentlemen of quality, together with this paper they delivered a petition,
which Cromwell and Ireton promised to deliver to the Parliament, in du time, as
a thing avowed and approved by the whole army.

I suppose you have seen a printed paper set forth by Dr. Holden, which is much
cried out against in England, and as I hear intended to be disowned by the
Catholics. No less could be expected from any wise, and moderate men, then a
dislike in General of such an attempt of a private pragmatical man in a
business of general concern, in which he ought not to have meddled without the
order, or at least advice of the rest: I wonder Mr. Holden did not in a huffe
go over into England, to the Army, and either unite to his semiments the
foolish Catholics, or hang them. As he very meekely said in his Letter of the
6. of September. Vide Lit 15.
Mr. Montagu in particular I hear is extremely offended at it although the
things that exception is taken against I suppose Upon what is this supposition
grounded of Regulars opposing this Act, but that all things which displease
these men must proceed from Regulars, and ^e charged on them? Carnet the King
^e dis^^osed to see himself ranked with the Parliament, that is a Soueraign
with his subjects, unless he have a Benedictin, or a Dominican^ at his elbow,
to (...) him to it? Cannot the Catholic Nobility be offended to see the Pope
and his Ministers accused and censured and their Catholic Ancestors condemned,
unlese a Franciscan, or Jesuit stir them to it? Has nether King, nor Lord nor
Gentleman, nor Commoner any sense of wrongs don to them, the Church, or state,
but what they receive from Regulars? But it seems Regulars must be charged
with all odious; and displeasing matters, right or wrong, it matters not. No
wonder Protestants should charge all mischeifs on Papists. They deal with them,
as the secular Clergy a^ with Regulars.
the greatest opposition proceeds from Regulars out of animosity, are 1.
those words: except perhaps in the Pope his Dominions. 2. Those words: Some
rigorous proceedings of the court of Rome, and several seditious combinations,
etc. 3. Those words: If you find amongst your Petitioners any dregs of those
pragmaticall plotters etc 4. those words: (which being a pure gift of God ought
not to be forced, or violented upon any) Lastly the King is offended that he
Joines him, and the Parliament together. I thought good to advertise you of
this, because it may be, you will hear more noise of it there. etc.

Your most humble servant Peter Fitton.
Being ready to seal up my Letter, I received your of sept. 23. And assure you
self that if an Oath be necessary, we shall do (as you advise) that which is
just, let that Court think of it what they please.



On the back: from Mr. Fitton 18. october. 1647.
This Act was deluered to the Army by 5. or 6. Lords and some 50. other
persons of quality.
The Roman Catholics of this Kingdom taking into consideration the 12.
proposal in the declaration of his Excel Sir Thomas Fairfax lately published
this present year 1647. And how prejudicial and destructive it might be to
them, at this time tacitly to permit an opinion (by some conceived) of an
inconsistency, in their Religion with the civil Government of this Kingdom, by
reason of some doctrines and positions scandalously laid upon them, which might
thereby draw on persons, that cannot conform themselves to the Religion here
established, an incapacity to receive, and be partakers of a General benefit
intended for the ease of tender consciences: have thought it convenient to
endeavor the just vindication of their integrityes therein: and to remove the
scandal out of all the minds, and opinions of moderate, and charitable
persons, do declare the negative to those propositions following.

1. That the Pope, or Church has power to absolve any persons, or persons
whatsoever from his or their Obedience to the civil government established in
this Nation.

2 That it is lawful by the Pope's or Church's command or dispensation, to
kill, destroy, or otherwise injure any person or persons, under his Majesty's
dominions, because he or they are accused, or condemned, censured, or
excommunicated for any error schism or heresy.

3 That it is lawful in it self, or by the Popes dispensation to break either
word, or oath with, any persons abouesayd, under pretense of their being
heretics.

And in further testimony that we disavow the said precedent propositions, as
being no part of our faith, I do not believe, that ever any Catholic Doctor
thought, writ, or taught that those Positions, or any of them were to be held
for articles of the Catholic Faith, delivered by Christ to his Apostles, and
by them, and their successors handed thorough all ages down to us.
or ever taught us by our Pastors, we have here-ratifyed the same under our
hands.

On the back: The Act signed by the Catholic Lords, and others.
Agentis Cleri Supplicatio ad sumu^m Pontificem Ex Italico translata.
Beatissime Pater.
Agens Cleri Anglicani humiliter expo^it Sanctitati vestrae, quod in Anglia ob
defect^m Episcopi, vel alterius, qui rebus Ecclesiasticis praesit, aut pro
Superiore agnoscatur, omnes functiones sacrae obeuntur confuse and inordinate
administra^turque Sacramenta sine facultate, and jurisdiction, cum nemo certus
sit in regno, a quo obtineri queat, nec recurri possit ad Superiores
transmarinos ob multas and notas difficultates. Ex quo oriuntur indies praeter
innumera alia inconvenienti^ and scandala, nullitates and invaliditates
Matrimoniorum, Confessionum, etc. cui vt in posterum occurratur, supplicatur
humiliter Sanctitati vestrae, vt dignetur benign deputare vnum vel duos
Sacerdotes in reg^o qui provisionaliter concedant and communicent aliis
facultates necessarias ad legitim^nt administrationem Sacramentorum, donec
Sanctitas vestra vlterius quid resoluat circa Concessionem Episcopi, vel alius
Superioris legitimi dictorum fidelium, and Cleri. Quod etc. Quam Deus etc.
Note: when this Petition was presented to his Holiness I cannot tell:
certainly it was since the return of Sir K. D. re infecta. We see here an
acknowledgment like that of Mr. Fitton in his foregoing Letter, of the nullity
of the Chapter


Sir Kenel. D. to Dr. Holden. Epist. 32.
Rome 21. 8ber 1647. Sir
After my late Letter from hence (in which I have given account of the state of
affairs here) and upon your knowledge how I have long expected my reuocation
(and therefore it were unseasonable to engage my self in new business) you
will expect by this post little more from me, then to acknowledge the receipt
of yours of the 26. past. Yet I press for an issue and conclusion of the
Clergys business: So that I hope to obtain speedily a meeting of the
Congregation, and a resolutior. Yet I must tell you, that if I prevail to have
the Cardinals meet it is an act of mere importunity and violence: for nothing
can be more against their minds. They dare not give us a flat denial The Pope
has great reason to stand in awe of half a dozen Blacloists.
of that Church Government which Christ settled in his whole Church. And on the
other side they are so ^imbued with a belief of the secular Clergys
refractory, and turbulent spirit, I think this is true.
that if it be possible, they will euade coming to a conclusion. Sir John
Cansfeld has been much to blame* and very injurious to you. He cries a main
of your whole ceconomy of Government, and against the persons of your
G^uernours: Mr. Gage and Mr. Hide are two principal marks, he aim that. He
has much blested the later to hi^der his obtaining a Canenry. And it is
reported here from his mouth, that there are not above 8. Alumni at Deway, and
that the allowance which the Pope makes unto that College is converted to far
different uses, then is intended by the giver. Indeed he is a very froward
spirit, which makes me be very sorry, that he has gotten an employment, and
Letter, and money from this court into Ireland: for he professes he will set
all on fire. If he had not bin recommended hither by the Queens Letters he
would not have had the credit to do th^se mischeifes: But for her Majestys sake
he had respect, and credence here especially when he made use of it according
to the sentiments of the People. The French Ambassador neth^r can, nor will do
any thing for him. Much less can I, who would most heartily, nor any man else.
This Pope will do no graces: who of all men living has least reason to put him
self upon the rigor of Gods justice, if it be true that is said of him. I have
nothing to trouble Mr. Fitton with particularly this week: and I make account
that what I say to one of you I say to both. I humbly thank him for his of the
same date with yours, and I pray you tell him, you of the Clergy are out of the
way, The Secular Clergy will be well guided, if it follows Sir K. D.
directions.
as long, as you solicit to have any good from hence. Abandon not your selves.
And when Justice is denied or de laid you here, seek it elsewhere. And
remember, that they are only duped here, who have a mind to be so. It is true
his Hol. is grown confident, and bold, and begineth to speak big language and
expresses a great contempt of us, and what we can do, I have elsewhere given
the tru^ reason of this chang in the Pope's Language, viz, the vain menace used
in the name of the English Clergy.
since he has oblidged Card. Mazarin by promoting his Brother: beleiueth
himself now able to dispose of all France at his Beck: and that an Arch Bishop
of Rouen* or even the whole Clergy of France and College of the Sorbone will
be made say any thing he desires upon a bare Letter to Card. Mazarin. But I
hope better of the Cardinals Prudence and Piety, and of your Church (men's
Judgment, and courage, then that we shall be abandoned to neglect, and sold
into the servitude of our enemies, at the price of a red Cap.

Just as I was writing what is above, F. President John Wilfrid This K. Father
was to be banished with F. Courtney, had Sir K. prevailed: but failing he
faignes a submission, ^o save his own credit.
came to see me, with great protestations of duty, and affection to the Queen,
and of respect to me. Unto which I replied that I had no ill talent to his
person even when I Labored with my utmost industry that no offices or
endeauours of his might prejudice either her Majestys service, or the Clergys
interest.

I intendere long to return him his visit. Upon which I hope Sir John VVintour
will be well satisfied of me: who has written to me several times with much
earnestness, to receive, and use him fairly, if he should come with respect
unto me. It is now time for me to leave you to your better thoughts. Only I
must entreat you to get for me le facturm de Monsieur le Marechal de la Motte
Houdancourt co^^re Monsieur le le Procureur General du Roy au Parliament de
Grenoble. And so remembering my humbly service to Mr. Fitton, and hoping ere
long to see you (therefore after your receiving this write no more to me) I
take my Leave, and rest

Yours entirely Kenelme Digby.

On the back. to Dr. Holden 21. 8ber 1647.
Epist. 33.
Rome 28. 8ber 1647. Most honored Sir
I have yours of the 4. current, which I humbly thank you for: I cannot discern
what it is you mislike in the Oath, and Propositions, unless it be that you
fear they are not home enough to satisfy the Independents: for I see no cause
for Catholics to make any scruple at them. We do weakly to hazard our undoing
for this court, that has no Piety, nor Charity for us, nor considers us
beyond their private sordid interest. Without all doubt these Propositions, as
they are universal ones, and not limited to particular cases, ought to be
subscribed by every good subject. Fa. John (who now is most kind to me, and
visits me daily) is of that mind. And you shall hereafter see the Benedictins
as forward, as any of the pack. Father Rector here of the Jesuits has given in
a copy of all, and asks directions how to steer in this sea, and there is a
congregation of 16. Divines (but hitherto very private) to fit upon it, and
give their opinions to the Pope. It is a great fault to ask leave, when we
need not, and where we are sure to have the question pared, and Limited to
their own self interest. Though I have served you little here, I am not out of
hope of being considerably vs^full to you in England, He flatters himself with
expectations of great success in England: where as hard fate expected him, and
much harder as we shall see his letter 17. 1650.
as things stand. Card. Capponi has given me his Letter to you, and to your
canons These are not such Letters as Mr. Fitton demanded Letter 28.
in England. They are the same, (as he tells me) that he showed me 9. or 10.
months ago, and differed them till now, upon expectation every week to have
your Chapter business done to your mind. But he has now lost all credit at
court, I may safely say, for yours, That that good Cardinal lost his credit,
favoring Blackloists, I easily believe, but that his zeal for the Queene's
service should prejudice him, is improbable.
and the Queene's sake, in both whose interests he has appeared boldly, and
spoken lowdly. Yet I send you not the Letters till next week, conceiving it
possible there may be some sudden change here in resolutions Concerning us. I
am withal sincerity Your most humble and faithful servant. K. Digby.

On the back. To Mr. Fitton 28. october. 1647

Mr. Thomas White to Sir K. D. Epist 34.
Most honored Sir
These are to humbly thank you, for yours of the 14. of october. and more for the
pains I have unluckily put you unto by sending you my books. The packet
whereof had no other address from me, but unto your self: howsoever for its
l^ttlenesse I suppose it was put into a greater to Mr. Trichet. I do not care
what they do with the books, and should not be much sorry How little does he
regard the Roman Censures!
if they censured them. Only it troubles me to have put you into an harsh
business. If the refusal of the Chapter can Deromanise Mr. Fitton, Do these
words speak an undervaluing of the approbation of the Chapter, or a desire of
Mr. Fitton's abandoning Rome? Anger spocke them, that their affairs in Rome
should be disappointed.
it will do more good, then the Confirmation would have done. Mr. Hide is
extremely bound unto you, and I upon new respects for the good will you show
him. But I should be sorry you should stay an howr in Rome to the prejudice of
your health, for any of our occasions. I fear you will be troubled with the
council of Constance. For the rest I fear not what will be cited out of F F.
and CC. Those who write against the motion of the Earth, or indifferently,
generally conclude that scripture Mr. Blacklo foisted said Dr. Leybourne into
Rusworth's dialogues a more general Error, viz, that S^ripture was no Fitter
to convince any thing, then a Beetle to cut, or a straw to knock with. Which
R. Smith late Bi^hop of Calcedon s^rd was a Blasphemy: and expressly contrary
to the Apostle: Omnis Scriptura divinitus inspirata vtilis est ad redarguendum.
convinces nothing which nevertheless is the ground of their decree, as
Morinus, Gassendus, and I think Fromondus. I am told that a Jesuit in this
town has a L^^d-stone so strong, that if a man keep the Iron from it with all
his force, it will draw man and all to it self. I shall see what news I can get
from Mr. Chanrond against your coming. There is another in town has promised
me the same, and says he has two other secretts, the one to tinct Luna to
yield 30. for one: the other to draw a crown of gold out of an ounce of Luna.
He is poor, but not needy, and has a modest caraige. By the time you com I
shall see whither he be worth your acqvaintance. Mr. Skinner presents his
humble respects unto you, and desires you would permit one of your Laquais to
carry this enclosed to Mr. H^rt. God send you well and soon back.

Your most humble and affectionate friend and servant Thomas White.
Lions october. 31. It is long since I am acquainted with sendovigius upon Dr.
Mores recommendation. But I fear I shall understand little in him.



On the back. From Mr. White 31. 8ber. 1647.
Sir Ken. D. to Dr. Holden. Epist. 35.
Rome 18. nou. 1647. Sir
This is in answer of yours of the 25. of 8ber. your commands in which of
making what have I can to you, shall be obeyed by me. And if under your wing
and directions, I may do any good there, I resign my self in your hands: do
with me as you please, and in all things I will steer by the compass you
shall assign me. He will then sail in danger of shipwreck.
I cannot sufficiently admire at the folly Another exhortation to break from
Rome, that is, to a schism.
of our Enlish Catholics, who will depend so contemptibly upon this wicked
interessed court, that neither cares for them, nor esteems them. But I am
persuaded this Pope will do great good in this particular if God permit him
(for the advantage of his Church) to live a little longer: for his infamous
covetousness, and neglect of Gods service is so gross that every body
begins to be weaned from this Childishness, and to detest those Mamons of
iniquity, and to do their business To embrace which (schism) he alleadges the
example of others; which no body heard of besides himself unless it were from
him.
qvietly by themselves. I had long discourse yesterday with the Pope about Mr.
Whites book, and gave him a memorial concerning it: I know not yet what will
be the effect. The Magister Sacri Pala^ij is a scrupulous dry Pedant He
bestows his Censures very liberally: and no wonder, for none can please him,
but the All-knowing Blacklo. These Censures speak Sir Kenelme's Humility.
and is now busy censuring a Jesuits book of Palermo, that holds a like
opinion to Mr. Whites concerning the appearing accidents in the Blessed
Sacrament. I gave Sir John Cansfield more respect, then belonged to him. But
such intolerable pride, and self conceit e. as he has is never satisfied. My
former letters will have told you, I can do nothing for Monsueir le Gras.

And this will assure I am Entirely yours Kenelme Digby.

On the back: to Dr. Holden 18. nou 1647.
Epist. 36.
Rome 18. nou. 1647. Most honored Sir
I am indebt to you for Letters of the 9. and 30. of Aug. and of the 20. 7ber.
My slow payment has proceeded from my weekly hopes of obtaining the promise
of a Chanonry for you, (notwithstanding all your enemies opposition) that so my
Letter might be the more welcome to you, then whilst it should carry with it
barren expressions of my respects. And this my near hopes fluttering still
before me has drawn me into this great arrear: for which I humbly ask your
pardon. Yesterday I got the Popes promise for you of the chanonry vacant by the
death of Monsieur del Clef, who dyed 14. 8ber last. I had notice of it by Mr.
Fittons Letter just as I was going to my audience: and so I hastily scribled a
note my self, whereby to fix the Popes promise so as to ground upon it the
speeding of the bulls, without danger of his saying afterward he forgott it
and had there-vpon given it a another. I have also sent for Signior Zutti to
follow it at the Datary; and I have spoken to Dr. Bacon to do the like: and
have already likewise recommended it to Card. Capponi, to lend his hand to it,
if there should arise some difficulty: which truly I doubt not, but in such
cases, in these times one cannot be to sure.

The french Ambassador has spoken efficaciously Of those we never saw any
sign, but in this Letter.
to the Pope to confirm your Deane and chapter; and further to give us Bishops:
so far he is from what is told you. I had large discourse yesterday with his
Hol. here abouts: and he allows positively all I ask; only he is advised to
delay time before he settle things, till he see what plye the affairs of those
in England will take. Yett he assured me yesterday he would before my departure
take some order to give content to the Clergy. He is of a nature easily
diverted from doing any thing, in any kind. But he is so inefficacious Of late
there has been no Pope, to whom this could be less reproached, as appeared
by many instances.
in all things of action (excepting accumulating money) that such thoughts
usually pass not beyond impotent wishes. There was never any the least
declaration of the Congregation against the Deane and chapter. They dare This
is said to encourage the Party in their h^ffing way, which has ruined their
credit in Rome.
not discountenance it, much less deny it. But all the Cardinals of it
excepting C. Capponi, and Monsigneur Albizi, are so divoted to the interests of
some Regulars (and for some other regard) that they seek to cool the he^te
which my pressures putt in the business, by gaining time, especially till I
should be gone: and then they hope they shall rest a while vnmolested: for I
spare them not. But rest you confident that happen the worst that may be, they
neither can nor will, nor They both dare and have declared against them, when
they condemned all Blackloe's books, whose Protection they had undertaken.
dare declare any the least blemish against you, whatsoever they may whisper,
and murmur amongs themselves. I must do the Pope, and our Cardinal Protector
this right, upon this occasion, that truly the former is well affected toward
you, and your business: and the latter is passionate, and earnest for you. I
may chance go now away from hence with both giving and receiving some disgus^:
for I have dealed very freely and planely with the Pope, as Mr. Fitton can
inform you more particularly: And it is not new that truth frankly spoken
should beget Enemies. I reckon them not, as long as that raises them, be they
never so powerful. He that neither hops, nor fears any thing in this
world, has a great advantage. And as little I am moved at the various
discourses, which pass of me, to my prejudice. But much to see your great
kindness and frendlinesse to me which I beseech you continu, and believe me to
be worthy Sir Your most humble and affectionate servant Kenelme Digby.

On the back: to Dr. Hyde President of Doway 18. nou. 1647.
Epist. 37.
Rome 25. neu. 1647. Most honored Sir
I have yours of the 4. cur. The thought of sending Signeur Ferrante was
charged unto Monsieur de C^ri^antes, who (to tell you true) I thought by no
means so fit (all things conssidered, for he is Card Spada's creature, and
Monsigneur Albezi's botome friend) as the other: therefore I represented to him
the rocks he might run upon, and steered him as dexterously, as I could to take
hold of greater hopes, that dawne to him by accompanying the Duke Gvise, to
Naples: where he now is the Minister for the Crown of France: for the D. of
Gvise, goes upon his own score with the Napolitanes without any dependence of
France, but their leave to advantage himself what he can, expecting only
assistance, and countenance from France, for their own interests in infeebling
the Monorky of Spain. So that now the treaty is come back upon Signeur
Ferrante against, whose great rubb is matter of money, for he will not spend of
his own in such a public employment, and this prodigal Pope can find none to
employ upon the penitus toto divisos orb Britannos. If he go, rest a.
confident he shall be armed with instructions from hence In all beginnings of
negotiation he promises much; but in process performs little Parturiunt
montes, nascitur mus.
to your mind, and besides you must know I shall have a great strok with him,
for I know how to wield the ressorts that govern him. But keep this to your
self. I am laboring to get such a declaration from the Pope, as you desire, in
an interim, for your Dean and Chapter, and for the Arch Priests Facultys to you
till all be settled: and I am not out of hope of obtaning it. I make it my own
proposition (not to engage you, in case I should be refused) and will make this
Court beholding to me, Still magnificent promises. But where is the effect?
to get you to accept it. Therefore be sure you keep your own secret, that if I
should be refused you may disclaim me, and not seem to go less in your just
requisitions. This court is inwardly much displeased When h^ saw reasons fail
to show the Lawfullnesse of acti^g independantly of Rome, he endeavors to
persuade it is the desire of that Court we should do so.
(though they must not show it) with some of our English asking their
directions how to govern themselves about the Oath, and propositions. For this
engages them to make some declaration (which yet they will avoyde if they can)
against what is both lawful, and fit, (and so conceived here) for us to do in
England, as matters stand. But they here must not declare a public allowing of
what will be of huge consequence to the retrenching of their own pretenses
elsewhere. They would have bin glad it had bin don without asking leave: and
then if there appear a necessity for them to take notice of it, they would
have seemed to be unsatisfied at it, and so have letten it fall, without doing
any thing. In deed they all condemn our discretion in not seeing this: which
they did before hand plainly enough intimate to all of us, and warn us not to
engage them in a matter, that of one side might force them to do what would be
odious a broad, or on the other would be prejudicial to themselves at home.
This was singly by Fa. Rector's work: who is so stitick, so formal, and so
hidebound, that he is very unfit for any prudentiall charge. I must do F. John
and F. Courtney this right, that they are mainly for doing what is proposed,
and reqvired, of us, and do publicly declare themselves so, and have writt^n
discourses to mantaine it. But they need not to convince the prudent
Cardinals, and Prelates here: for they avow where they may be confident, that
they have the same sentiments herein, as we have; but withal say it is not fit
for them to declare so much. There have been several Congregations about this
matter, and they last very long, many hours at a time, and are kept mighty
secret.

You are not well informed of P. Giles interest and power among English
Catholics: He governs wholly Mr. Modtagu, but that of late he seems to
allow a greater liberty to what we may do, then Mr. Montogus devotion will
digest. Besides he governs all the Ambassadors negotiation for Catholics,
and has a great hand with several of the Army and Parliament, and has
treated often with them, by order of the Ambassador, Mr. Montagu, my Lord
Marquis of Winchester, my Lord Brudenall, and the King himself, and has gone
several times between the King, and the Ambassador, (all with great secrecy)
in this business. He is well affected to us, and has not bad principles of
Judgment. But he would fain have his Bishopric dispatched, and till then will
not displease this court. It is now resolved on, and the Breife for his
Consecration is speedily intended to be sent to your Nantio: upon which he is
to come to reside in France. I pray you be sure to do him no prejudice in his
own private pretensions: but make use of what I tell you to have your eyes
open. But take no notice to an, body else: and know that I shall be able to
steer him to all that is sit.

Card. Capponi has answered your Letter, and I have sent them to you a Post,
or two a gone. Your Postscript shows clearly how much it import^th us not to
trifle in giving the state satisfaction of our fidelity unto it, without such a
blind dependence on a despotick Authority of theirs, as is conceived. For Gods
Love let no time be lost in our doing our utmost endeavors to root out that
misconceit. Truly it is undutifully don of our Jesuits Rector in regard of the
Queen, as well as imprudently in regard of all our Catholics to move such a
business of state of his own head, without acquainting her Majestys ministers
with it. I have not else to trouble you with, but rest

Your humble and faithful servant Ken. Digby

On the back: To Mr. Fitton 25. nou. 1647.
Epist. 38.
Rome 13. Ian. 1648. Sir
As a fever welcomed me to Rome, so it vshereth me out. But Doctor F^nseca,
and Gio. Giac^mo (Mr. Fitton's acquaintance) put me in hope, that upon once or
twice Letting blood and two purges more then what I have made already, I shall
be well. Howeuer I will set out, though in a litter, asloone as I have the
answer of the congregation, that sat close on friday and is to sit again this
week upon our affairs. If at least they will give me any answer, for I have
so put them past excuses, that in truth they can give me no rational answer
(as I hear most of the Cardinals do declare) but doing what I desire: And
that the Pope cannot find in his heart to do, for it will cost him money, and
will justify the existence of a society of honest men, that will not be fit for
this courts sordide and impious ends. Nether my head, nor hand serve me well to
write now: Therefore for more particulars I refer you to Sir John VVintour,
who will have seen my Letter to my Lord Iermin. And so I rest

Your most obliged and entire servant Ken. Digby.
My hearty respects to Mr. Fitton. If I were out of this accursed air, and
vexatious business, I should surely be presently well. Which I have not been
(not thoroughly well) one single day, since I came hither.



On the back. To Dr. Holden 13. Jan. 1648.
Epist. 39.
Sir
Yester night I received yours from Rouen of the 24 of the last, 1649. and at
the same time this enclosed, but from whence, or whom, I know not. I sent you
some letters, and writ unto you saturday last by the ordinary post for England,
which I should be very glad to hear you had received. At the same time I sent
one to Mr. Watson. This Watson was I think Scout master General to Cromwell, a
great Confident with the Blackloists.
I have little to add either concerning your private affairs, or the public
occurrences of these parts to what I then signified unto you. I have nothing to
say to your kind expressions, but that I should be infinitely glad to be assured
of your safe arrival.

I suppose you will know before this come to your hands that Dr. Leybourne went
over hence from our English court well furnished with monys by them, and with
order, and instruction This is not true: he had nether Commission, nor
Instruction from the English Court. Yet this is sard to set all the Rebels on
his back.
to hinder the Priests, and Catholics of England not only from obliging, or
engaging themselves to any subjection or fidelity to the present state of
England; but even from receiving any favor from the Independants in matters of
Religion. To fortify and strengthen his person, and power in this business, he
has procured my Lord of Calcedon to make him his Vicar General over all
England, This is true.
which my Lord has given him by Patent. What dangers may hence follow both to
Religion in general, and to the Clergy in particular, How strangely solicitous
was the Cabal for their cause, and to sicure their footing in the Chapter when
they could not endure one Orthodox man should be employed by their Bishop!
you may easily imagine. Mr. Fitton, Mr. Cur, and others here are extremely
offended at this unfortunate accident. To prevent the future mischeife which
will infallibly follow this weak man's ambition thus employed, you may do well
not to open your mouth of it, to any Catholic, save only in common terms
(for your freedom of speech Medi^e cura ^eipsum^ What freedom Dr. Holden gave
to his tongue, and pen appearres by his Letters, and discourse.
ruins all your affairs) and advise secretly with Mr. Watson You see his
Goodwill to a Prime clergy man, and their vicar General.
what course to take to have him at least sent back by the state. He was sent
into Ireland, he was always on the Presbiterian faction, All this is false Dr.
Leybourne never joined with Presbiterians, or any Rebels.
and a professed enemy to the Independants, and a chief author of all those
horrid and wicked reports, which ran current here against your self, Mr.
Watson, Mr. Fitton, and I as causers of the King's death, and as laborers to
submit the Catholics of England to the Independent Government I fear you will
find Mr. Montagu infected by Mr. Leybourne's informations, bringing him Letters
from the court here to persuade his concurrence with him: I doubt not but if
Mr. Watson be ryghtly informed in the business, he will easily do us all that
right as to procure means to prevent the harms which this factious and proud
spirit This is the full intent of these bloody informations: to prevent all
opposition to the Faction.
will effect. If those who now govern be informed of him, I fear they will
not think his return in the way of banishment sufficient: and therefore I wish
the business were discreetly He sees these informations may cost Dr. Leybourne
m^re then banishment.
managed, and above all things that nothing be objected against him for
Religion, Here is an Idea of the present Persecution: we may think (this
present severe Persecution being a copy of what is here suggested) that some
disciple of this man assisted in the Contrivance of it.
that whatsoever he suffer, it may be as a spy, a brovillon, and a factious
fellow. But you will over do this, if you meddle in it your self, and I pray
therefore go along with Mr. VVa^son in the managing of it, and nether appear
your self, Thus having thrown a stone which might dash out the Doctor's
brains, he hides his hand^: that he may se^me to have done nothing.
nor any other, but such as are ministers of the public affairs. I have often
repented my self (for I must tell you all I think) that I gave you (against the
dictamen of my own Judgment) the paper of the Catholic Government in England
in my own hand writing, If the paper be good and such as all Catholics are
bound to consent to, why was he affrayde it should be seen? If it be bad* why
did he comp se it, and show it to Parliament men?
for you can nether hold your tongue, nor your hand. We hear your stay was
long in Diep by reason of danger by Sea. And though I fear not your security
once landed, We shall find hereafter, that notwithstanding all this assurance
grounded on their compliance with the Independants, Sir K. D. could find no
safety in England: for as Sir K. writes on the 31. Aug. 1649 upon his arrival
at London, he was ordered by the Parliament to depart the nation within twenty
days, and not to return without Leave upon pain of death, and confiscation of
his Estate.
yet I shall not be fully quiet in mind, until I hear from you, and of your
safe abode at London. Let not Mr. Watson How solicitous the good man is for
the safety of that Cromwellianl
hasten to fast over, let these vehement streams of men's Passions be a little
allayed: for one told me this day to my face, that had he been here at the
news of the Kings death, Henc it appears that this Letter was written a while
after that exccrable Parricide committed by Rebels on the Person of their King.
she would have helped to have stoned him. Adieu. Yours as you know H. H.
Nothing written upon the back anciently. And though it has no date, yet I
believe it was written before that of the 24. of March, because this accuses
Dr. Leybourne of having acommission from the Queen and that other retracts it.
It was written a while after the Execution of his Late Majesty.

Mr. Dr. Holden to Sir Ken. Digby. Epist 40.
Paris the 24. of March 1649. Sir
I have little to answer to yours of the 19 but that I am glad you have
received the letter you mention, and I wish you would make good use of what I
writ concerning your freedom of speech He spares not Sir K. D. you see.
if you knew what prejudice it is to you, and what is said of it, you would be
more careful. What I writ of Dr. Leybourne He had been sent into England by
the Bishop of Calcedon, as his vicar General*
is most certain, that is, for his Vicarship to my Lord of Chalcedon for his
commission from the Queen, Here he retracts what he had written in the forgoing
Letter.
that is said, but cannot be certainly known, but from himself, or those who
gave it him, who I suppose can hold their Peace. Howeuer because I am certain
he will be doing, it were fit his busy head were prevented. Mr. Watson has
sufficient information of him, By this hint we may see what good offices were
done by the Cabal for Dr. Leybovrne a prime officer of the Secular Clergy. By
which we may guess what favors such men, as Regulars may expect from their
hands: which are hands of Esau, though they affect Jacob's voice.
but I know not whether he will act in such a business, unless he be dealt
withal by word of mouth. In the Letter I sent to you, to London (as supposing
you would be there as soon as it) there was nothing of consequence, nor any
Letters from Italy, for here they are. Monsieur La Mague has received none of
yours. Mr. More will let you have 40. pistols upon my score. For your
negotiation in England, I will hope well, nor can there be any hazard in them,
save only by too much freedom with one, or the other party, for nether the
Catholics, nor the Independants (if they settle) must know the means you
intend to set on foot, to effect what you may declare to be your design, as
being just in it self, and contenfull to both sides, I mean an assurance of
the Catholics Fidelity to the common wealth, they are to live under. I cannot
sent you any news of our English court, for I never enquire after it. Mr.
Fitton must do it. I believe your passage by Calis would be much more secure
for the Sea: but by Land I know not.

I will send this morning to Mr. Ferrier. Our Deputyes are still treating, and
are to continue until friday. I much fear we shall have no Peace. All your
friends here salute you.

Adieu Yours as ever H. H.

Nothing written ancienly upon the back.
Epist. 41.
Most honored Sir
I received one from you without date of time or place. But to give it
satisfaction my residence is at the Hague. My business at the present Geometry
whereof I intend to set forth some few resolutions to whet the printers
appetites This had a quite c^ntrary effect, for the demonstrated faults of his
Geometry proved evidently his Divinity was stuffed with like or worse errors,
seeing he aduises his Reader by that writing to Judge of this.
to my Divinity, which as yet will not go down with them. I pray God I find
means to continue until I can perfect it. I write with these a letter to Mr.
Du Bose to get some monyes One point of most of his Letters, is this, want of
money.
to hold out these hard days, for my Ink freezeth in my pen. I perceive well
I grow old, yet must I loose time even against my will wanting money, and being
put to shift to get some. I have a project to get monys from Mr. du Bose, but
it will be Easter first, and I doubt whither I can expect so long, or no. As
for your opinion of the Blessed Sacrament, if it please God to make us meet,
we shall discourse to the purpose, then I shall understand your grounds: and if
I can get my Divinity to the press, peradventu^e you will see my intention the
better therein. I am wondrous glad of your good health of body, and mind,
though Dr. H^lden be not so credulous of this last, It seems Dr. Holden did
not spare Sir K. and indeed whom did he spare?
I mean of the strength you promise your self, and wishing you all happiness I
rest this 21. of ^ec.

Your most affectionate and humble servant Tho. White.

On the back: from Mr. White 21. Dec. 1649.
Epist. 42.
Most honored Cousin.
I have sent a letter to the post for you. And since my doing so, I have
received that which you have don me the honor of writing me on thursday, your
7 of this month. I am infinitely oblidged to you for the friendly care you are
pleased so nobly, and so charitably to take of my interests. And am ashamed of
the troubles I so continually cause you. But I see your goodness is not to be
wearied out.

I concur with you in all that you say in this letter, and profess my self to
have the same sentiments you so judiciously express. So that your writing this
to one as supposing me to be of a different opinion, and consequently, your
endeavoring to persvade me hereby (for my good) to be of yours, shows I have
not in my former letters clearly expressed my self: And therefore I will make
bold to say a little now imediatly and directly to what is the subject of this
letter of yours. My other letter of this morning seems unto me to say somewhat
to this tenor: and I think that most of my former ones do continualy inculcate
the unhappiness of my condition, that to save me and children from staruing,
did cast me upon courses and employments which I forsaw would cause exceptions
against me. This I would have prevented, If I could but have had means
otherwise to live. But being thrown upon these rocks, I could not avoid
Guess by this how zelously he served the Queen, wh^ employed him.
hearing sometimes things that went much against my Nature, and saying others
that being malevolently interpreted might cause ill odor of me, and complying
for outward decency with persons whose ends I no ways concurred with. For all
these things I humbly beg a favorable construction. And do beseech those who
shall look upon my life and actions, to consider the main bulk of them, and
the active part of them, and what effects have resulted out of them; And by
these to judge of my intentions; And according to my intentions (which have
ever been sincere and cordial to the state) to ground their opinion of me. If
in any thing through indiscretion I have given cause of mistaking me, or that
through error of Judgment I have fallen into any error, so as offense may have
been taken at it (which I protest was ever far from my intention) I do in most
submissiue manner beg indulgence and remission, and that it may be graciously
passed by: And (let me borrow one further expression of the Papists doctrine)
If I have, in running through so may straights and necessities and rocks,
committed venial sin, I crave pardon for it, and that long and heavy Purgatory
for so many years ^ay be deemed sufficiently expiatory for it. But as for
mortal sin. I will crave no pardon for such. They admit none. They must
proceed from a depraved and aversed mind from the state: such a one, as is not
capable of favor and mercy: And upon which nothing but death and ruin ought
to follow. For these it is that I standso peremptorily upon my justification.
And which if I should admit but a possibility of having committed, by craueing
favor for what I may have don in this kind, I should exclude my self from
all favor; for I should not deserve the least. But for all other frailties,
errors of Judgment, mistakes and vnhappinesses that my extreme necessities and
the natures of my Employments have cast upon me; as I acknowledge my weakness to
lay me abundantly open to such beyond my intention; so I beg grace and pardon
for them. And do humbly beseech the state, and those it shall design to sift
and judge my actions, to look upon the effects of them, and to examine if ever
any of them were in the least manner prejudicial to it; and accordingly to
determine of my intentions: and by them to let me standor fall. This I direct
my solicitor and Council and Friends to offer and crave in my behalf; whiles
in the mean time, they put me upon my rigourous justification for these things
which properly deserve the name of crimes. To all which I shall ever positiuely
plead not guilty. And it must be legal proofe^ only, that can attaint me of
these. Without such the Law declares the accused person innocent.

Ill opinons and auersions, may be entertained of one for only the forms;
which though they punish not directly, yet they carry great weight and
prejudice with them; and one time or other, before the year be ended they will
come home to his door. So that he is in an vnhapy condition, who lives under
them. But I hope my ingenuity and submission in order to the things that may
begett them, will preserve me free from that burden and misfortune, so as
(Dear Cousin) you will still honor me with your advises, and assistance, and
the good offices of your friends: on which three, I repose the good success of,
my cause. And whatsoever it be, I rest with all the greatest obligation that
can be to you; and pesigne my self entirely to what God shall be pleased to
dispose of it and me, now that I have used all the di^ligence that I am aware
of (as I conceive I am bound in my duty to my self to do) adding this only to
be represented unto them who shall decide it, that if they relieve me not I am
utterly and irrecoverably ruined; the maine stock of an ancient family is
destroyed: and if they will be so good as to preserve me, they will preserve
one who will employ his life and fortune and all that they shall enable him
with in their service. All that I have written in this letter, I beseech you
represent to as many as you can, where it may concern me: and be pleased to
order my solicitor to do the like unto others where he shall judge it may
import: as also to instruct my council to make use of it in due time and place.
As I doubt not but he will do the like with what else I write to him, or that
you are pleased to let him see of my writing to you. I beseech you join my
humble thanks with your obliging ones, to that noble genleman, who for your
sake did so worthily put by the calumny which would have been brought upon the
stage against me. Truly, he is one of the galentest generosest persons, I have
ever received fouours from. They are all upon your score. Therefore you are in
obligation of making high acknowledgments of them. I take up too much of your
time for one post-day; and the packet-boat is ready to be gone. Therefore remitt
unto my next, the reflecttions I make upon what you and your Cousin have
Philosophically reasoned. By my two to you of the 19 of this Month, and by my
third of the 14 you will perceive I have received those letters of yours which
you mention in this now. But you will have reason to say I have no mercy, but
weary you beyond all limitts of good manners and discretion. Therefore without
further lengthening your troble by making an apology, I humbly take leave and
rest

Your most humble and faithful servant and most affectionate kinsman

Kenelme Digby

Loose not courage for that in my business you find so great difficultes; and
that daily new ones arise; It is the nature of all great businesses, to
encounter with great difficultes. And this is the greatest I ever had or can
have. All my liuelihood, and future well-being of my whole family depends of
it. Industry and patience with Gods blessing will mastter all. And then, the
harder we were put to it, the greater will be our comfort and joye.

Sir K. D. his case is not to be considered barely upon the blunt proofs as
they lie before the Barons in an ordinary legal course (although even in that
consideration, it stands fair; since, punishments ought not to be inflicted,
but where the crime is evident and undoubted:) for that were too narrow a
compass, for a business, and a person so much looked upon as this has been.
Such as these are not only objects of private Justice; but do also carry with
them the force of public examples; whereby the minds and apprehensions of
multitudes of men are quieted and secured, and are encouraged to apply their
industries to merit of the state; whose Justice and magnanimity (that has
larger and nobler rules, then do belong to a particular tribunal) is thence
rendered conspicuous and beloved by all men. In this case then, (where the
actions in controversy, have passed upon an eminent stage) the supreme Judges
may please to consider, 1. the time, and the Persons behavior before those
actions; 2ly. The circunstances that he was in, when his behavior seemed
doubtful. And lastly, his carriage ever since. The first, compriseth all the
time from Sir K. D. his entering into the management of public affairs, and his
comportment in them, till his going out of England from Winchester house, by
allowance of the Parliament. During all this time his carriage was such, as
made him be looked upon as one Sir K. D. pretends to have been accused to the
Court even before the Civil wars.
endewed with the public spirit of a true Patriote, and averse to the byas
and private interests of those who were in power and swayed in all that season;
as may be evidently made to appear, by many notable examples in his management
of the Navy, and of the Ordinance; by sundry actions of his out of England, and
by several other Employments at home; if any one shall doubt there of: But no
proof can be stronger, then that in the beginnings of the distempers between
the Parliament and the late King, when all those who were affected to the ways
of the Court embarked themselves in the interests of it. Yet he behaved him
self so, that at his going then out of England, when he was allowed the honor
of taking leave solemnly of the Parliament he received from it the greatest
demonstration of kindness and the most obliging civilities, that it ever did to
any private person; and withal, declared him innocent of all crimes that he
stood accused of against the state (for even then, there wanted not some few
who were adverse unto him) and ordered him the quiet possession of his estate,
and g^ue him license to carry over what he pleased of his goods; as may be seen
in the Registers of the Orders of both Houses then.

For the 2. Consideration; They may please to be informed how his unhappiness
was such, that he was no sooner gone out of England; but some of the country
committies who were not rightly possessed upon what fair terms he went a way,
but understood his departure as a banishment, and s^ayed by popular Rumers, and
took advantage of his absence sequestered his estate: so that he had not
wherewithal to subsist abroad; and to maintain his 3 sons that he had by him
then in France. Hereupon he often petitioned both houses, expressing the
distressed condition he was in, and beseeching leave to return and justify
him self of any crime might be objected against him, or receive punishment in
his person as well as in his estate if he should be found guilty. But the great
affairs of the Parliament could never allow the leisure to take his petition
into consideration. Whereupon he wrote several letters to some of the
eminentest Members of both houses, to acquaint them with the extreme necessity
and exigents he was in, and with what was proposed to him to give him means of
subsistence; namely an Employment (the mysteries whereof, and the reasons of
pitching upon him, he has informed several of the Parliament) for France He
pretends, that he was sent to Rome by the Queen of France, then Regent. How true
this pretense is, let the world judge.
(but under the Queen of Englands name) to Rome: which he was very unwilling to
accept of; fearing the misconstructions at home that might follow such an
Employment. tho he was resolved and certain that in it he should do nothing in
effect that was unfit for a faithful servant He was then resolved to be very
faithful to the Q. who employed him
of the state. Thus, extreme necessity, to be able to live himself, and to
give his Children bread, forced him (after frequent advertisments thereof at
home, to deliver him of it, if it might be) to engage him self in that
Employment which is the only thing that has begoten any doubt concerning him:
Infine, such a necessity, as ever by the law of Nature and of Nations, allows
a man to take by violence, to break open doors, to steal food to keep himself
and children alive when they are ready to starve. And yet the heaviest
accusation against him lays not to his charge, any particular negotiation
wherein he may have deserved ill of the state (which certainly would have
broken out to light in this long time; if he had acted in any) but only
suspicions arising from a third persons letter, written in general terms, and
upon God knows what particular designs of his own; and from the course he
was in, which he could not avoyde: And which the rather clears the candor of
his mind toward the state; since in such difficult circumstances, he behaved
himself so as nothing rises to bear evidence against him.

The last and most important consideration of all is how Sir K. D. has behaved
himself ever since his leaving to walk in those mysty paths, that afforded
some ground for suspicion. In which it is to be observed that as soon as he had
settled a correspondence between France and the Court of Rome to which he was
employed, he presently came away from thence. If those interests which are
contrary to this states interests, had carried him thither; they would still
have kept him there, for they daily pressed more and more. But as soon as a
French Ambassador was settled there, he presently returned: which makes it
clear that his employment was but in order to that, and to the consequences
thereof. As soon as he had given an account of his employment to the King and
Queen of France that sent him (as they themselves do witness) he continued his
former industries to have leave to return home, to justify himself, or
undergo any severe punishment if he should be found guilty of any objected
crime. It was then an active and busy time with the state of England; which
caused, that few private businesses could be heard; and among others, his had
no answer. Whereupon he came over himself into England, to encounter all that
could be objected against him, without any protection or security at all, but
what his Innocence and a clear Conscience could give him.

Whiles he was there, all, that he petitioned for, was to be heard, to have
severest Judges examine his cause, and to afford him nothing of Grace, but bare
Justice. He was Where was that credit of which he boasted whilst he was in
Rome with the Prime Independants.
commanded away, not for any thing imputed against himself, but for suspicions
accasioned by others behavior; which now since, by tract of time (that
brings darkest matters to light) appears to have had no solid reflection
upon him. But he has still continued by his son and nearest friends, to press
for Justice, and to be brought to further punishment if he deserve it. In the
mean time he has been exposed to all the sufferances, dangers and extremities,
that want and dislike of those, near whom he has been forced to live, have
cast him upon. Add to these, invitations that cannot fail of having been
offered to a person whose parts and experience in the world are sufficiently
known. Yet all this has not begot any impatience in him, nor tempted him to
steer any other course, nor made him slack in endeavoring to do very
important services to the state (as several in the Parliament do know very
particularly) And, for a plenary proof and evidence of this candor and
integrity to the state; they all know that during these 5 years that he has
been returned from Rome, in which time so many discoueries have been made of
the closest men's darkest tempers and designs, by the taking of so many papers,
by the surprising and examining of so many of their Enemies Agents, and
particularly now at the vpshot of all by the perusal of all the King of Scots
papers, and of all his secretest friends letters to him, from his first entrance
into affairs to this last attempt) taken at Jersey; Not the least shadow
appears of any thing to be suspected This proves, that the Royal, Party had
little esteem of Sir K. D.
in Sir K. D. which is an argument of so great an Innocence and integrity and
soundness of heart in him as blows away and clears any mist of suspicion
that upon any doubtful action of his, long since done, may be raised against
him.

Therefore, upon the whole matter; since acts of state in punishing eminent
persons, are to be looked upon rather as public medicines and examples for the
future, then as expiations for particular offenses past long ago, (which is
too narrow a consideration for the supreme body of a great state) certainly it
belongs to the majesty and honorablenesse of such a noble state as that of
England, to pass generously over such few dark steps of his life as necessity
did long since cast him upon, and that peradventure some narrow and scrupulous
natures might a while stick at; And resolve to make use (some way or other) of
the tallents of such a person, as all men know has been in a course that may
have enabled him to be serviceable to his He has a great esteem of of his
own parts as also Blacklo. But I think nobody else esteemed him.
country; Or at least to allow him to live quietly and retiredly under the
protection of the state, which he has been so industrious to serve (and with no
small hazard to himself) as several in the house do know Sir K. D. has been.
This proceeding will win the affections of multitudes, He thinks the world much
concerned for his case: so a boy who sold matches in Paris folling into the
Seine, and being in danger of drowning said, what will beco^e of Paris if I am
drowned?
when they shall see that, even in doubtful cases, a good temper of their
minds will draw upon them the benignity and favor of the state; and that all
men are not exposed indifferently to the lash and severity of the laws but that
the state is so generous as to make favorable constructions of such enforced
actions as the necessity of broken times have cast well-meaning men upon, to
keep themselves alive in a storm; which admits not a regularity in every
piece of a man's behavior: It will settle many wavering hearts: It will secure
and quiet many men's fears: And in a word, it will work a like effect in the
state of England, as the absoluing of Fabius Maximus did in the Roman state;
which is so judiciously observed by one of the wisest historians that ever was,
in these words: Non minus firmata est R^sp^blica Romana P^ri^ulo Quinti Fabij
Maximi, quam supplicio mis^rabili Titi Manlij. The freeing of men (who have
merit or ability to plead for them) from punishment, in doubtful cases;
conduces as much to the settling of the laws and Justice in a co^ non wealth,
as the pu^ishing of guilty persons.

If there should be any clause in the exceptions of the Act of Oblivion, that
may possibly be contrued to reach me (in case my business be not ended before
it come out) Methinketh it should be a very good ground for my friends to move
the Parliament in my behalf, that when so many thousands of delinquents are
made happy by the grace and pardon of the state, it does not suit with their
high goodness and nobleness and gentleness, to let a person remain in want and
misery and all kinds of discomfort (through some casual shortness of the act
of Oblivion in his particular) that has showed so much constant affection to
the state; And is therefore looked upon with great animosity by the enemies of
the state.

Paris 27. March. 1652.

In Mine of the 20. I sent you the heads of such considerations as I conceave
are most important for my friends in the house to reflect upon; who, as being
the judges of my cause, are to consider and speak of it in a higher strain
and upon nobler and larger principles, then belongs to Advocates or lawyers
in a plain way; who attend only to what is positively proved in that precise
cause which they plead in; without looking so far to the consequences and
dependence of it, and to the Rules of Generosity that belongs to a state or
to a King. For I make account, that the Senate of Rome (unto which ours now is
conformable) or Julius, or Augustus Caesar; were swayed, in cases pleaded before
them, by other and higher notions, then such as were to govern the private
Tribunals under them.

Paris 30. March. 1652.

I have no more to add concerning my business, but that you put my agents in
remembrance of a consideration I have often writ unto them; which I conceave is
one of the importantest and most moving ones to get me a good dimission of my
seqvestration, that can be used. And it will come seasonably in, at the close
and winding up, after the justice of my case has been made to appear by some
friends speaking in my behalf in the house. And it is; to represent to the
state that in freeing me of delinquency, and in taking of the sequestration of
my estate, they relinquish nothing that they already have; nor do give me, or
part with ought that they have possession of, or can ever be in away or
possibility to possess, but by first enabling me to be owner of it. For, my
estate is now out in mo^tgage, and engaged for other debts that must succeed
the mo^tgage; so that nothing will be to come to me (and consequently not to
the state neither) in 20. years, and more, if it be let lie as it is. And all
this while they have no tie upon my good behavior; for, whatsoever I should do
or attempt, I can be in no worse case then I am. Whereas setting me upright.
And upon fair terms with the world, they will put me in a condition to make
me use industry to recover what I can of my estate, and to pay my debts upon
better advantage then to let them eat themselves out; And my Mother will do
something for me, when I may be better for it. And thus the state will have a
solid tie (of some considerable fortune) upon me, to oblige me to duty and
respectful behavior to them, as well as the motives of affection and honesty
in me.

On the back: Reflections upon my case for some of my friends in the house.
Sent to my Cos. Digby, and my son 20. 27. and 30. March 1652. All in Sir K.
D.'s hand. This Letter is not printed in the order of its date; but after that
other of the 21. Feb. 1650. It being a further explanation of it.
Sir K. D. to Monsieur Du Bose. Epist. 43.
Sir
I cannot forbear writing to you; and yet I know not what to say. Such is the
effect of extreme greifes, that they can neither be silent, nor speak to the
purpose. In a letter yesterday from Mr. Holden I received news of the
tragical accident befallen in your family; which almost struck me dead too.
Believe me, Sir, I bear a great share in the excessive grief, you most needs
have upon this occasion. As soon as I could recover my self out of my
astonishment, I betook my self presently to adore his Providence that keeps
an exact account of every hair of our head, and without which not a sparrow
falls to ground. In a deep and entire resignation unto that, is all the
comfort we can find in such bitter strokes. I wish you as many helps, and as
great and true ones as I can to my own heart. But least I should be importune
to you, holding you too long with my broken sighs, I will turn them from you
to God Almighty in your behalf; who only can give ease to your Just sorrow.
Whiles I shall have a deep sense of all that concerns you, and shall ever be

Sir your most humble and most faithful servant Kenelme Digby
Calais the 9. Feb. 1650.
On the back: To Monsieur Du Bose, when his son killed his own sister (that
was with child) and then himself.
Sir K. D. to Mr. Blacklovv Epist. 44.
Calais 25. Feb. 1652. Most hononred Sir
Your letter of the 21. December. appeared to have made a circuit about, for it
was of an old date before I received it. And it has layne longer by me: for I
made account every week to have from England means to answer it better then
by bare acknowledging the receipt of it. But it is Gods will, that when my
desire is strongest and my own need, and my best friends most urging, I
should then be most destitute and forsaken. You would not easily believe what
distresses and wants I have endured here, even in such necessary thing, as a
person living in the world, cannot well be without. His blessed name be praised
forit. My Mother assisteth me what she is able. But she is in apittifu^l sad
condition her self: God help her. My friends in England bid me hope for a
speedy releife out of my estate. But as yet it comes not. And there is great
animosity against me. I do what I can, and use all the Art and Dexterity, I am
capable of, to become master of some thing, that I may transplant it among
Christians. But the tide runs strong against me. Yet I am confident, that
with patience, and with constant and steady using those industryes I pursue, I
shall bring my business to a reasonable issue. In the mean time I suffer not
a little. I thank God my doing so is not the least trouble, or affl^ction to my
mind. Nor, in regard of my self singly, would I cast away one bare hours
thoughts, or care to remedy it all. But I conceive it is my duty to use those
diligences I do: for I see very great goods that I might set on foot, and
advance, if I had my own transferred into these parts. God has bin very
merciful to me in weaning me by little, and little and in process of time,
and by an admirable providence, (that I can read plainly in the great variety
of accidents which have b^ fallen me) from all desires, and affection to the
world: not by a deep melancholy, upon any sharp misfortune, as once before,
which made only the present face of things become displeasing to me; but by a
through Change of my taste: Here are good dispositions to virtue, if he had
fallen upon an orthodox, and able Instructor.
not wrought of a sudden; but after many vicissitudes in a long course of
time, upon mature, and deep consideration of the emptiness, and
vnsatisfyingnesse of present, and fading goods, and of the reality and
fulness of future ones. I long to be, where I may be instructed by you at
leisure, and at full of these things: for I believe I am grown more capable
of them, then you have ever yet known me to be: I find in my self the
powerful effects of solitude, and silence: which I enjoyed (upon the matter)
now above a year. In which time they have much ripened the seeds, that have
bin long sowed, and slowly growing in me. For though I have bin often obliged
to negociate my business with others (and other conversation then such I have
avoided, and have not had) yet that has not at all slackened or laid a sleep
my love of retirement. But rather has much increased it, by reason of the
displeasingnesse, and vncouthnesse of such employments. Those only which be
pleasing ones, do endanger the relenting, or eneruing of ones mind. Yet
withal the distasteful busying of ones thoughts does beget a disorder in ones
soul, which hinders it from being efficacious in good, though it win it not to
a compleasance in what is bad. So that besides my natural incapacity and
weakness, the dust that is rayled in me by irregular motions of business
hinders me from advancing much, though through the mist of it I desery which
way my Journey lies. Paciencia con la P^z (that Gregory Lopez so much
recommendeth, and that I hope I am not far from being in a condition to be
able to enjoy) will assuredly allay the one, and in the other I promise my
self a happy betterment by your charitable help. What may be done at a
distance, cannot be (I confess) so efficacious there unto, as what I shall
learn from you when we may notas audire and reddere voces. Yet in the mean
time I will beg of you to set down in writing some such considerations, as
you who know my palate, and grounds (as having formed the one in me, and given
me the other) may judge will be profitable and moui^g to me. Without such I
should, not lie, if I s^yd, that your redeeming me out of vulgar ignorance,
has b^n in some regard a misfortune to me: As the cure of madnesses was to the
poor wretch, who then saw his misery, whereas before he lived contentedly, so
your vnsieling my eyes has rendered those motives of Devotion, and Charity
which work strongly upon others. Most unsavory, and flat to me, and such as
will by no means down with me. The only way to releieve me out of this
distress, is to give me solid and true ones. I acknowledge I am not altogether
unprovided of such from you. But I would be glad to have a complete body of
Considerarions and Meditations upon weyghty and subsisting grounds, to raise a
strong love of the Vnum necessarium, and a prime and close adhesion to it. When
I read in the spiritual books I meet with, Here he gathers such opinions as
were insipid to his Palate, by reason of the taste. Mr. Blacklo had framed in
him. Which (opinions) being for the most part taken out of Scripture, and
commended therein by the Holy Ghost, it is ablasphemy to vilisy or contemn
them. He blames, that in spiritual writters, some Actions, are said to please
God others to displease him. And why should they not say so, seeing God commands
some, and forbids others, and by consequence is pleased with the first, and
displeased with the second? And he punishes the later sort of Actions, and
rewards the former, we read Mat. 25. And that he is astrict Judge, is clear,
for he will exact an account even of every idle word. Mat. 12. 36. That aliqua
opera operata, actions themselfes, cancels sins, and increase Grace, is defined
in the Council of Trent: and by them, and our own sup^eatural Actions, d^ne in
o^edience to the Law of God, the Merits and price of Christ's P^ssion is
applied to us, as we learn from the same Council. Why he should loath these
(which he ownes to be Truths) seeing the Holy Ghost, and the in^reated wisdom
did vs^ them, as Motives to virtue, I cannot see, but but that his stomach, and
Palate was very much disordred, and cut of taste: Otherwise how could these
things recorded in Scripture, as vs^full to Piety, make him forward, and be
rebutted with devotion?
how pleasing some actions are to God almighty, how displeasing others: how he
punishes these, how he rewards the others: how the merits, and price of
Christ's passion is to be applied to us, how strict a Judge he will be, how
material actions, and opera operata do cancel sins, and increase Grace, and
what they describe Grace to be, I grow froward, and am rebutted with Devotion,
instead of being inflamed, as they intend it. Such discourses as usually dry
spiritual masters are stuffed with, do move me as much, as Rhombus his
Mocke-oration in Sir Philip Sidny's entertainment of the Queen (as intended by
a foolish Pedant, for a pattern of Eloquence) did move the hearers. Yet I
acknowledge that all they say of positive doctrine is true: but God knows it
is true in a quite other sense, then as they afterward explicate it. They
unfold these high, and excellent Mysteryes (out of the knowledge whereof
resulteth our way to beatitude) in a pitiful low strain, proportionable to
their Narrow capacityes, and mean learning. I would have them lively
delineated accordingly as truly they are, without any figurative speakings, and
doctrines grounded upon the mistaken senses of the words, which in their
genuine sense we are bound to believe. I would be glad to What he here
desires, viz to see, the Economy of God's making and Saving us: what he is,
what we are, etc, orderly set down, he may find it orderly set down in the
spiritual Exercises of S. Jgnatius, or any of those others who follow him: and
that with such reflections, as may move us to embrace that vnum necessariu^, in
case ryghtly applied. But all these humble, plain and substantial
Considerations, in those works are fastidiously despised by the Blackloists,
as they were in Scripture by the Pagans, both out of a motive of Pride, and of
their own contempt of what had not the character of the spirit, which animated
them. Although God knows, of all the considerable number of men in the world, the
Blackloists have the least reason to harbor such diminutiue thoughts of
others, who are no ways inferior to their best, either in Piety, or Learning. I
will say nothing of the Disciples, their master himself what has he of his
own besides shameful errors? What is good in him, is translated from
others, and impaired by the translation. He has printed a small book of
Meditations, all borrowed of and to be found in the meanest of those Authors,
whom Sir K. D. treates so contemptibly, except some v^ch tritable (and
therefore very unfit) reflections on Religious virtues so that nothing but
their ignorance occationed the groundless esteem they have, for that Person.
Now si Lumen quod in te est tenebrae sunt, ipsae tenebrae quantae erunt? If
their Doctor be so ignorant, what are the Disciples? If their high Cordial be
such dead Beer, what is their small Beer. To use his comparison.
see the whole economy of Gods making and saving us, and the considerations
that are entayled upon that (as what he is, who we are, and the like) ord^rly
set down, in the method of Causes, and effects connaturally relating to one
another: and due reflection upon them, to stir up affections, and resolutions
in us. And for a crown of all, what is to be done on man's part, and what
considerations he is at last to six upon, to bring himself into a disposition
to receive at Gods liberal hand (which is never scanty, where it finds adue
preparation) the gift of contemplation, and of prayer without intermission,
that S. Paul recommendeth unto us, and that the prodigious Gregory Lopez so
hyghly practiced. When one tells me barely, you must do such an action, beaufe
God commands it. Or forbear such a one, because he forbad it, also he will
be angry with you, and cast you into Hell, to be tormented by ugly Divils, and
burned with fire and brimstone, and that if you will say such prayers, and
communicate in such a Church on such a day, you shall gain a plenary
Indulgence, and thereby balke Purgatory. I grow sick with hearing him, and my
head aketh, and I become as one that should stand in need of some high
Cordial, and a silly Physician gives him small beer to comfort himself with.
But when one shows and conuinceth me, how no created That no created good can
fill the capacity of our soul, is no new thought of Mr. Blacklo. S. Austin has
it: Creasti nos Domine ad te, and inquietum est cor nostrum d^nec ^equiescat in
te. S. Bernard, our soul Creatis rebus occupari potest, satia^i non potest.
These and many such are cited by masters of spirit, in the contemplation of the
love of God: of whom Mr. Blacklo Learnt it. The same I say of th^se other
Considerations, of the goodness beauty, order, and excellence of all Creatures
in God, that Infinite goodness, beauty, etc: in all which Mr. Blacklo had been
in the dark, if he had lyghted his taper at then T^^ch.
good can satisfy. and fill the infinite capacity of the soul, and that what
affections soever it goes out of the body with, But it is peculiar to Mr.
Blacklo that all the soul's affections when separated from the body, remain
indeleble for all Eternity. And that all its torment is to retain those, As he
says, tho he teaches, the soul joys in them, and in all other qualitys, it
pos^esses, as much as they deserve, although they deserve more joy, then all this
world can afford: this I say inpeculiar to him, and is so far from diverting
men from unlawful Affections, that it is no weak incentiue to them. For as
Saints Love God, and love this Love of God, and des^re it may never be changed;
So wicked men Love unlawful objects, and Love that Love, and desire it were
perpetual, and are cooled in their Love when they think it may be Changed. And
were men persuaded, there was no other Hell, nor other pains in Hell, but to
enjoy those Affections; nor Ioys in Heaven, but to be free from them, I fear
many would prefer Hell to Heaven in the life to come, as they prefer sinful
affections to those which are pious, in this. And I have known some, who said,
having read, and weighed these Doctrines: could I believe him I would play the
Roman, and kill my self. Viz, to com sooner to th^se Ioys which he promises in
the world to come, even to profligate sinners so weary would they be of the
body of this death, and so desirous of that life, which at worst, is better and
more happy, then all the joys in this life united can make: and yet they
remain void of all Love of God, or true virtue.
they remai^e eternally indeleble in it, and that the Activity of a separated
one is infinitely beyond what is in an imbodyed one, whereby the pleasure and
sorrow of it becomes inexpressible, then I confess, he sets me on fire to
learn carefully what affections, and Judgments I am to store my self with in
this world: and he makes me despise and hate all the obi^cts I converse with
here, which may hinder me from happiness hereafter. When he goes a little
further, and makes me have some glimmering of an infinite good, that will not
only fill, but infinitely overreach the utmost capacity of the Largest
intellectual created nature: In whom the goodness, beauty, order, and
excellence of all creatures is resumed in an infinitely higher strain, then
shines in them, and whereof what they have are but faint shadows, and
streaming from that substantial fountain: To whom all time, place, and
Actions are present, as flowing in an inconceivable manner from him, from whom
all things that are have received their being: And that all these truths, and
that infinite others do spring up in us from the consideration of this simple
selfe-Being. And that our understanding, and soul and Being will be so
enlarged, and stretched out by this self Being, and eternal truth, as to
become one with it, and be in a manner transformed into it, if we set our hearts
entirely upon it, and make this affection the principle from whence all our
actions proceed, and banish from our commerce all those objects that may draw
us an other way. I then gr^w weary of the woeful, and wretched employments the
Earth confines her children unto, And I become impatient, that I find none to
deliver me from the body of this death, and to release me out of this prison,
that I may take my flight to that happy state I see before me. And this I say
only to give you some hinte of what it is I would be a^t, wherein I crave your
ass^stance, and instructions. I doubt not, but you have framed unto your self
an entire series of such considerations; and have at least beaten them often in
your daily thoughts. But if you have not as yet committed them to paper, or
reduced them to an ordely method, it will not be time l^st to your self
(whiles it will be a great charity, and contentment to me) that you vouchsafe
att^n^y request to take your pen now and then (when you have entire leisure.
and disposition of mind for it, and compose them into Meditations, and divide
them into points, and several jointes: and set down practically those
particular and familiar rules, which are necessary for one that intend^th a t^u
spiritual life, after an intelligible, and solid manner in the most
^fficatious way he can propose to himself, capable of. It may paraduenture
seem unto you (if I have not expressed my self well) that I entreat what you
have already done, in that excellent treatise you wrote some years agone to
me: (which I would to God you would give me leave to publish in print for an
universal good) But you see I have my thought upon that whilst I desire this,
and therefore you will conceive it is some thing else, which I now desire. That
is a complete and perfect p^^ce in its kind. But to form a complete spiritual
man, it requires this other be added to it. That anatomiseth thoroughly the
theory of what is to be aimed at in a spiritual life, and extends to the
practical part likewise in some degree: but it descends not to such
particulars, as I wish to have, and need. It leaves off there, after it
addresseth to them in general. To do this will be no tedious, nor voluminous
work. A few considerations well chosen, and well pursued will serve the turn.
And a few Rules will be sufficient to practice. In the making of which let me
put you in mind of what I have often heard you say in commendation of Sales
his Introduction, that you judged it the best book has been written of that
kind, because it descends to sundry minute practical directions, which have
a great influence upon ones actions, and which all other writers do slide
over. When you shall take this matter into your thoughts, I beseech you employ
them also particularly in composing some meditations for receiving the B.
Sacrament, The receiving of the B. Sacrament, is indeed the highest action of
Christian Religon, by which we are in some manner concorporated with Christ, as
S. Cyril of Jerusalem says in his Catechism. And our spiritual writers have
not neglected the dispositions necessary for it. And besides that previous, of
being free from sin (which S. Paul requires by those words: Prob^t seipsum
homo) they require a great Faith, beleiving it to be, what it is, the true body
of Christ. 2. Great Humility, which the Church recommends saying thrice: Domine
nonsum dignus, when she gives the Communion. 3. Great Charity, to answer that,
which Christ manifested in the Institution of this Divine Sacrament, giving
himself to us. These I say we find in our spiritualists, and what Mr. Blacklo
ever did say equal to these, if he would say any thing different from them, I
cannot tell.
to instruct one to perform that byghest action of Christian Religion in such
manner, as one may hope to obtain by it the happy fruit of it. I am now the
more emboldened to entreat this Charity of you, because I understand you are
ere this or are expected at Doway; where (for the time you design to stay)
your mind will not be so much in suspense, and disquiet about disposing of
your self, as whiles you were in Holland. I shall be glad to hear from you,
of your being there, and how long you are likely to continu so, and how you
do, and are in circumstances to your liking. What I believe it was not long
before Sir K. D. knew the Fate of those Geometrical Propositions, which no
sooner saw the Light, but their deformity being discovered, they were by their
publisher condemned to perpetual darkness. And doubtless the same Fate
attends the Divinity of the same man: that being a like false, (and of a more
dangerous nature,) tho it may be a little longer lived, because its Falsehood is
not so easily discovered.
becomes of your Divinity? And what of your Geometrical Propositions, that in
your last, you told me you were publishing? I pray you cast now to loose as
little time, as you can from the great design you have projected. And remember
the first line of Hyppocrates his Aphorisme^: Ars longa vita brevis. What
comes of me, you shall hear from time to time. If you be at Doway, I pray
remember my respects and service to worthy Doctor Hyde. And recommending my
self to your good prayers, and craving pardon for my tedious letter, which is
spun out to this length before I am ware, I rest

Your most affectionate and most obliged humble servant and true friend Kenelme
Digby

Father Clarke at Newport desires much you should see his Poem, which he has
now finished, and put his last hand unto it, unless you cut him out new work.
I write nothing to you, of Monsieur du Bose, because I make account Dr. Holden
does all that is requisite. He is very bare of money (as we are all at present)
and has had lately a very great affliction in the loss of his children? And
what say you to him? Those of his coat speak wonders of him: but you know
their geese are all swans. And by the bulk of his book (as it is described to
me) I should suspect, the Author is too heavy, and has too little fire for so
a yery at ask.

On the back: to Mr. White 25. Feb. 1650.
Sir Ken. D. to Mr. Jacob Boeve. Epist. 45.
Most Worthy Sir
Your most obliging Letter of the 30. of Sept. had a long Journey about: for it
went first to Paris, and after some delay there it was sent me hither. So that
I received it not till yesterday. I have written twice to you since my arrival
here: As being confident you were restored safe to your own home, since both
Winds, and Seas and all the Elements, and whole Nature her self have an
interest in preserving so excellent a person, What a sawning hyperbolicall,
abominable flattery, have we here.
borne for an universal good. But now that I read under your own hand the
difficultyes and dangers that God delivered you from in your passage, I must
again congratulate and rejoice with you for so signal a deliverance. And I do
pray God you may enjoy long life for the comfort of your friends, and the
benefit of all mankind: for they are not narrow circumscribed thoughts, that
fill your noble breast. I would I had the soul of Ae^^ulapius in me, to
contribute the better to that wished end. But such poor knowledge as I have
acquired by Long experience (and cheifely upon my self) I shall always most
readily Sacrifice unto you. Now to what you enquire of me in your Letter.

Now Sir concerning the deafenes I am informed this is a good remedy, and
therefore I print it as such. For the common good.
of the person you write of contracted some years since by a great cold. I
conceive it likely to be some flegmaticke and viscus humor, that is congealed
and hardened in the passage of the ear, and so hinders the perception there of
the airs motion. I will tell you an easy and familiar remedy for this: of
which I have seen admirable and sudden effects, even in persons of 20. or 30.
years deafness. Make a posset drink with one part of a pretty good spirit
of wine and two parts of new milk, throwing away the curde. Before you use it,
drop a little oil of sweet Almends into the deaf ear, and let it soake
in, for half an hour or an hour, laying that ear in a fit posture for that
effect. Then with a siringe without a little long pipe at the end; but blunt,
so as to fill the orifice of the ear, to keep the liquour from rebounding too
easily out, inject some of the posset drink lukewarm, do this as often as
you shall see cause (not above twice at a time; but intermitting half aday
between) and always when you have done, stop the ear with black wool dipped
in a little civet, distempered with oil of sweet Almonds. If both ears
needs cure, apply it to the second when the first has received its
injection. I have seen at the first syringing a hard substance two Inches long
(not unlike the pith of Elder) start out of the ear.

I would be glad to see an act of Oblivion, or forgetting the molestation of
persons that have never bin delinquents: Here we see how much he was mistaken,
when he boasted so much of his credit with the prime Rebels: seeing he could not
obtain from them so much as security for his own person.
for this is my case, as I doubt not of making it appear as soon as it shall be
heard, which is all I Labor for, asking no favor, but only justice. The act
to take away laws against Papists, concerns me not, for there never was any
proceeding against me, as a Papist, so that in that regard I stand rectus in
curia. Upon the whole matter I am confident it will not be long before I be
allowed to return home, when one of my greatest contentment will be the
happiness of enjoying often your excellent He continues in his abject sordid
flattery.
Conversation. I wrote to you from hence the 5. of this month, by Mr. Ayliffe:
and the 7. by John Lee. And I have with my tediousness trespassed too long
upon you now. And I cannot of a sudden break off the conversation of a
person I esteem, and honor so much, as I do you. I now committ you to Gods
blessed Protection, and with all respect do take leave of you and rest

Calis 11. Nou. 1650. Your most humble and most affectionate servant Kenelme
Digby.

On the back: To Mr. Jacob Boeve 14. 9ber. 1650.
Mr. Blacklovv to Sir K. D. Epist. 46.
Most honored Sir
Yours of the 12. of Nou. came to me on the 19. the very writing time which
made me guilty of my own slownesse to differr the answer until this next
post. Your motion of writing a rule of Doctrine is very good and a thing I
desire to do before I stire out of Paris. But S^heper Daniel having brought my
packet so late, my hands are at the present full with reading over those
papers, which I desire God willing to print in Paris by your assistance.
Howsoever I desire to make it ready for your sight against you come, that you
having perused it we may the better discourse of what is contained in them,
whereof you seem to be curious. In those papers I believe will be some things
which will make the Iansenists in part side with me, and the treatise you
speak of will come out with more authority if the Author be famed before.
Besides this my brother has written that he thinks to be shortly here, and
therefore I am not unwilling to refresh some geometrical notions, to give him
content withal. As for desires of your return they easily frame in me without
my own seeking, by the sole power of the object. But for hopes of it, I know
not how to measure them, being not able to judge of the circumstances. As for
my entertainment, I have more ado to keep of excess then defect, and nothing
is wanting but your company. There lies Rovens 18. livres for the Charthusians
of newport from Mr. More in my command, if I could get an acquittance for
which I have sent often to Doway, but get no answer. If you can get their
acquittance sent, I shall see the monyes delivered here, or in Doway, to whom
they please. No more but that I am as ever Paris 23. of Nouem. 1650.

Your most affectionately humble servant Tho. White

On the back: from Mr. White 23. Nou. 1650. We see here a design to
strengthen himself with the favor of the Iansenists, which those Papers would
procure him: and he needed not to doubt of the success, they being ready to
join with any Novellists, to increase the Difficultyes against the Church.
Mr. Blacklovv to Sir Ken. D. Epist. 47.
Most honored Sir
These are not to complain of your long stay, the which I know to be very
necessary, though ungrateful to him, that sees himself by this means to
spend your goods without affording you that comfort you seemed to aim at in
his service. But to have your advice in an occasion proposed unto me from
London. Whitaker a stationer, who printed my Institutiones Peripateticae is
not so weary of that bargain, but that he is willing to print my Divinity. Mr.
Austen, whom I believe you remember at Rome, promises to be the correctour. I
have answered for the present, I could do nothing, because of your absence,
and some engagement I had put you into. But being uncertain of your stay
there, I thought it good to take your advice. I am not fond of Whitaker, for I
saw a copy of my Institutions, which me thought were nether good paper, nor
correctedly printed. But likewise your last letter has put me out of heart with
^esse, seeing you characterize him to be the proprius of the sraterie which
supposed it is impossible the book should not be suppressed before divulged.
The reasons for which I desire your presence before I resolve this affair are
chiefly two. The one to consult what were best for the book, and the divulging
it here: which I think to be a circumstance of importance, and may be best don
now when the Iansenists begin to print books without approbation. The other is
that your self might have the perusing of it whilst I am with you: for besides
the ambiguityes which I might clear to you, I apprehend you may find in this
book what you wrote to me for in Doway: for I account true Divinity to be
nothing, but the vnueyling of those considerations which God has prepared for
the steering of our souls This is true, and appears eminently in the writings
of the Fathers, and several school Divines, if not all. Yet how far Mr.
Blacklos Divinity is from that, I refer to the Judgment of those who have read
it. I never knew any one the better man for reading it. It nourishes Pride,
Faction, Contempt of Superiority, stubbornness in judgment, and will,
extinguishes feeling Devotion, and sense of Piety, and disposes to schism, and
heresy. It may be known by its siuits. For amongst his Disciples little of ^^u
christianity is to be found, whose life, is Charity, which is banished by a
root of bitterness springing up out of it, Radix amaritudinis sursum
germinans. Which is knewne by the perpetual calumnyes against all who dislike
their doctrine, without sparing even the eminentest Men amongst their own
Brethren, as we have seen in Dr Holden against Dr. Leybourne, and do daily
see, and hear in the ordinary dis^ourse against Regulars. Can the T^^e be
good, which brings forth such Antichristian Fruit? See my annotation on Sir
K. D.'s Letter 25. Feb. 1650. you will there find some reasons, why this man's
Divinity is contrary to true Piety. Indeed two Passions have a maine influence
on all our Actions, Hope and Fear which may be termed the two wheels, on
which all our Affections turn, or the two general fountains of all our
Actions. By these God himself in his Divine Scriptures Endeavors to debarr us
from bad, and stir^ us up to good Actions. (vide Ecclei. 15. 18.) Setting
before our eyes the Greatest of Evils, Hell fire designed for the wicked: and
the greatest of good things the Heavenly Kingdom prepared for the good, and
virtuous. Mat. 25. 34. and 41. Now this Hope, and this Fear is extiinguishe by
the Doctrine delivered in this Divinity of Mr. Blacklo: which contains
nothing, but mere Philosophical Notions mingled with some terms taken out of
Christianity, or Scripture, but handled more as a proud Pagan then an humble
Christian: and savouring more of an Epicurean Libertinisme, then Catholic
submission of the understanding to the yoke of Faith. This sentiment all must
frame of it, who read it with a mind not prepossest; but at liberty to judge of
it, and not ablind submission to his sentiments, which is due to none but God,
and his Church.
to its last End. This is my Proposition: the Judgment yours, I to obey as

Your most affectionate and humble servant Thomas White.
December. the Last.
On the back: from Mr. White 31. Dec. 1650.
Mr. Blacklovv to Sir K. D. Epist. 48.
Most honored Sir
These are to accompany my Brother for bienseance, your goodness not
permitting that he should need any company. Withal to have advice about a
little treatise I intend to print unless your opinion be contrary. I intend to
call it Institutionum Peripateticarum pars Theorica, and if you like of it, I
would add that it is admentem of the author of the Immortality of the soul.
There will be some matter of which our Divines may except against He guesses
very right: f^r aspirit of singularity, and Novelty accompanyes him in all his
writings: which must needs give occasion of exceptions to Divines; who are
taught to tre^d in the footsteps of their Anc^stors, and cum dicunt (...), non
dicere nov^, as Vinc^ntius Lirin. Has it, to deliver old things in a new
manner.
but peradventure will not whilst I live out of Action, and therefore I
advertise you, that you be not engaged unawares, although for all this title
you may disavow any part of the doctrine, seeing I may mistake your mind. I
think the book will be at the hygh^st a Cardescu book. I could wish therefore
to know how many you would advise me to print, 750. or only 100. for friends.
This later way the cost will be less but wholly lost. The former way, if I can
putt them of, there may be some profit. But my writings are such No great
wonder: for he writes unknown Doctrines in an ungrateful, insipid style. Dr.
Holden in a letter to Sir K. D. of the 9. of nouem. 16^6. sa^^: I fear that
Mr. White will neither accept of the place you design for him, nor will be fit
for it. It is lip learning which prevails amongst men: and we have so few
mortal Angels, that all invisible knowledge is for the D^serts. Thus he,
sp^aking of the obscure and unpleasant way of delivering his mind used by Mr.
Blacklow both in ordinary discourse, and writing which way rebu^tes those, who
retain to themselves a Liberty of discerning Gold from Copper, Truth from
Fables, yet has been of as great use to entertain his Disciples in the
admiration of his sentiments, when they were but trivial, or worse, as the
obscurity of the oracles meeting with minds prepossest with an opinion of their
Truth, served to entertain the D^luded Idolaters in that erroneous veneration,
although the answer were such as did not sarpasse the reach of an ordinary wit
accompanied with craft.
as take with few. For other things my Brother can give you a better account
then I whose chief worth is to be ever, (2. of July)

Your most humbly affectionate friend and servant Le Blanc.

Nothing on the back, anciently. I suppose it to be of the year 1651. seeing on
nou. 23. 1650. he spoke of his Brother as to come, who now was past.
Epist. 49.
Most noble Sir
I have received your Letter by my cosen Dermer, upon whom I have waited every
day since his arrival at this city, which was this day seven right,
endeavoring to comply with your commands according to my power. The G. Duke,
and his brother are absent from Florence, and have been so ever since he came,
and so he could not come to ^^isse their hands. But this will be supplied at
his return, for he intends to pass all the summer in this court. This morning
he is gone for Rome. Thus much touching my cosen Dermer, and the obligation I
have to serve him upon your recomendation. But there is another favor for
which I connot render you sufficient thanks, which is the present you were
pleased to make me of Mr. Blacklo his Learned Divinity which at last I have
received together with his other Opus^ula. I did not think to have given you
an account of this, until I had perused them all; but I find that the work is
too tough, to be run over curscrily, it must be read with attention. I know
not how it will relish amongst our Italian Divines, especially when they read
his doctrine of Purgatory^: as yet I hear no talk of it, it seems either that
they have not seen his book, or else they find it too hard a task to read it
over. For my part I do not see how it can stand with that maxim of Tradition
Mr. Fitton dislikes Blacklo's opinion of Purgatory. His first reason.
which is the ground of all our beleif^: and although some of the ancient
Fathers might have been of the contrary opinion, This is not true; for not one
of the Ancient Fathers h^ld what Blacklow teaches of Pugatory.
yet that ought not to prejudice the present doctrine which for many ages has
been held nemine contradicente, and has been Confirmed by the universal
practice of the Church. For upon the same ground it might be denied also, that
the Saints departed shall see God before the day of Judgment, for the same
Fathers were also of that opinion. Secondly His second reason.
if all shall remain in Purgatory till the day of Judgment, without any
alteration for want of their bodies to work it, what avayleth it to pray for
souls in particular, and yet it has been practiced in the Church for all ages
from the times of the Apostles. 3ly His 3. reason.
Mr. Blacklo's Purgatory as I conceive it must needs be most grevious to
those, who have most Charity, and were less charged with sins whilst they
lived in this world, in regard that they have a greater desire to see God, then
one who has less charity and consequently a greater pain, then ane, who has
Less: and yet the one is to endure as long as the other.

But to let this question pass till I see Mr. Blacklos book, which I
understand he has written of this subject. I shall make bold to beg a favor
of you for my own particular, having understood from my cosen Dormer that you
inte^d short-to see England: wherefore you may be pleased to know that there is
a debt due to me -- etc, with my most humble respects to your self, I remain
Florence 30. oct. 1653.

Your most humble and most obliged servant Peter Fitton.

On the back: from Mr. Fitton 30. 8ber. 1653. Of Purgatory etc.
A Letter of the chapter to Abbot Montagu about his being Bishop. Epist* 50.
Honorable and Right Reverend.
We have according to our Order formerly observed by our General Assemblyes
nominated six to be presented at Rome out of whom a Bishop is to be elected at
his Holiness his pleasure; and with an unanimous vote your Honorable Self in
the first place. Of whose vnexceptionable worth, and inclinations toward our
Chapter, and Body we have that assured esteem, that our naming any other
besides is rather an effect of our respects to His Holiness, then a deemed
competition or ballanceing of any second with your worthiest self. We heartily
wish there were no more difficultyes to be overcome, then on our sides; where
the resolution was so readily, and heartily made, that it was not judged worthy
to admit any the least debate. Perhaps we may fear some difficulty at Rome to
obtain that Authority, which only we dare admit, that is an Ordinary, or
Bishop; but we more fear a modest disinclination on your part; whose very name
and Person we with good reason hope might otherwise be a means to obtain us
the thing we sue for. We become therefore humble suppliants to your Lordship
by your goodness, and by the affection you bear toward us your Brethrren, (of
which we are very confident) that you would please if his Hol. so think good,
not to refuse a Charge, for which inward personal Endowments concurring with
circumstantiall considerations represents you to the eyes of the world as every
way most fit. The rest of our Consultations and Orders, your Lordship will
understand from our Common Letter, which accompanys this, and from our Agent,
Mr. Holt; whom we have enjoined to communicate our Intentions particularly with
your self. Recommending the welfare of our Chapter, and Body to your Lordship's
Condescendency to our Petition and your self to the Protection of the Almighty,
we rest

Your Lordship's most affectionate Brethren and most humble servants in Christ
Humphrey Ellis Deane.
Aug. 23. 1667. By order of the Deane and Chapter John Holland Secretary. Note:
This Letter is a forerunner of several others, and mentioned in them, and for
that reason is here published.
Epist 51.
29. July 1667. My Lord
This day only I received your Lordship's civil Letter in one from Monsieur
Tilier, to whom I am extremely obliged for his civility and curtesyes toward
me, in so much that I believe with the help of your Lordship's interest my
petition presented to his most Christian Majes^y, and the Queen in order to
this Community may find the success we desire. As to the Information your
Lordship mentions, ^y Letter to Mr. Cl^fford, and Mr. Carre will doubtless
afford fulness of satisfaction unto your Lordship, and our good friend Dr.
Gough. As to my proceedings to expulsion, truly it is not in my power to expel
That Power was taken from the Presidents of Doway, College by a decree of the
Congregation de Propaganda, anno 1662.
any Alu^^us without express order from the Cardinals of the Congregation de
Propaganda side, to whom I have not hitherto writ, In order to the faction
Seditious practices of Blackloists against their Superiors.
Mr. Blacklows spirit (which is crept into this family) has raised to expel
me, if it had power enough, and really I wish it had, for these 15. years I
have been tormented with it, and would esteem my self happy to be
separated, as far, as R^me from it: and to that Purpose I have for 2. years,
and more Solicited our Protector, and the sore said Cardinals; but now my
design is to go thither my self, since Letters will not prevayle. Vrget
pras^ntia T^^ni. The enclosed It follows this Letter.
is the paper I offered to be subscribed, and it was rejected. Then I desired of
our spirited two ghostly Fathers, which be the heads of the Faction, to refer
themselves to your Lordship, Dr. Gough, Mr. Clifford, and Mr. Carre. And 'twas
replied saying will they refer themselves to the Chapter. Which reply did much
displease me. Nevertheless some two days after, they signified unto me, that
they were content to refer themselves, and write to Mr. Carre unto that effect:
but doubtless they have not, for they are pinched with the paper, and seek
evasion after Evasion. This day they offered to take the oath of Pius 5. Pope
which importes a Profession of Catholic Faith. To which I ans^ered that I had
order from the court of Rome to keep out Mr. VVhites Blacklos.
spirit out of the house; but not to offer them Pius 5. Oath. Yet I wish them
to write to the Cardinals, and if that would content their Eminences, it
should content me. They be at their wits end, and can invent noe lie, nor
plausible evasion for their preservation. And this day they endeavored to make
a quarrel, They talk of Peace, yet hate it, and banish it from all places,
where they prevail seeking quarrels, as little agreing with their brethren as
with others.
saying I called them Schismatickes, for refusing to subscribe the paper. I
ans^ered I did not call them Schismatics, but that they would be esteemed for
such. And wi^hed them to consult the chief Doctors of our University, who I
assured me would wonder they should refuse such a paper, and judge it an
argument of a Schismatic spirit. This is all I have to say at present in
order to your Lordship's civil letter: relying on your Lordship's goodness, that
you will be pleased to peruse what I have sent to Mr. Clifford, and Mr. Carre,
that is my own letter, tho disorderly with my letter directed to the Chapter,
in answer to one they writ me, and Mr. Gage his Letter writ me from Rome, when
he was Agent there: and thereby judge how prudently my said Letter to the
Chapter was made the ground of a Faction. I profess Dr. Leybourne's sincere
intentions for the public good frustrated by the Chapter Faction.
to your Lordship sincerely I had nothing before my eyes, but an earnest desire
of a good intelligence with the Sea Apostolic, and thereby union amongst our
selves: which will never be, if we continue in this Thy is most certain.
Schismatic exerc^se of authority and Jurisdiction. I say Schismatic,
which I have always a fore concealed: and I thus demo^strate it to your
Lordship.

Reasons, why the pretended Chapter's Authority cannot subsist. 1. The Late
Bishop of Calcedon had no power to establish the Chapter.
Our Bishop of Calcedon was only Delegatus habent eam p^testatem and
Iurisdictionem in Regnis Angliae, and Sco iae, quam habent Ordinarij in suis
civitatibus, and Diaecesibus. And the Pope as appears by his Breve conferd on
him this power of an Ordinary, and consequently this Ordinary Power was a
Personal Grace, which of necessity expired with him. Which our last worthy
Bishop knew The Bishop himself judged the Chapter to have no power canonical.
well: for some years before his death, he ordered me, his Grand Vicar, as
also Mr. Clifford, to confer facultyes to the chief of our Clergy, saying:
when I am dead, I knew not how they will come by them. And therefore thought
fitting to give them, when he was alive, and in power. Out of these premises
it is Evident, that the Chapter did not succedere in ordinaria Jurisdiction
Episcopi defuncti: that Ordinary Jurisdiction in him being a Personal Grace,
that of necessity expires, the Bishop dying. This is the doctrine of all
Catholic, Orthod^x Doctors. But now let us suppose this ordinary power did not
expire in the death of the Bishop; and suppose also that his Chapter had been
Confirmed, and consequently did succedere in hac petestate Ordinaria,
nevertheless though it were a Chapter as good and valid, as that of S. Peter's
at Rome, or as that of our Ladys Church at Paris, it could not succedere A
third reason of illegality of the Pretended Chapter's proceedings, their
usurping without any grant from Rome, or color of law, the extraordinary
Facultys granted by a special deed to the late Bishop. To which no Chapter how
Canonical soever, ever pretended.
in Episcopi autheritate, and Jurisdiction extraordinaria, that is such a
Chapter could not lawfully exercise their Bishops Facultyes extra sortem,
granted by the Pope, unless his Holiness gave express leave thereunto: and
without his said Holiness Leave, and approbation such exercising of such
Facultyes is Schismatic, erroneous, k. A second reason of the nullity of the
Chapter: all Doctors condemn it, Dr. Leybourn after the said Bishop's Death
consulted the ablest Doctors of Divinity, and Can^n-Law concerning the
pretended Chapter: who a^ vnan^musly (tho unknown to one another) answered,
that the Chapter was Null: which he here hints at. Nay the chief Canons know
this nullity, as appears by the Letter of Mr. Fitton to Sir K. D. 11. October.
1647. and the Petition of the Agent of the Clergy, which follows it.
and Sacrilegi^us. But our Deane and Chapter exercise our Bishops exterordinary
Facultyes, give our Bishops exterordinary Facultyes, and make Vicars, and
Archdeacons as many as they please, without his Holiness Leave, having never
asked of him either ordinary, or exterordinary Facultyes. When in England I
demanded of the Deane, Dr. Warren allias Ellis, Dr. Humphrey Waren, alias
Ellis, acknowledges the nullity of the Chapter, of which he was Dean, and acted
as such, who only pretended the Pope's knowledge of what they did. But he did
not take notice, that the Pope had expressed frequently, nay on all occasions,
his dislike of what they did as being schismatic Usurpation. With a like
reason the London Rebels might have excused their seditious Actings, because
the King knew what they did, Indeed that Rebellion in the State against the
King, and this in the Church against the Pope, began at the same time, (which
is worth the noting) and was defended in some sort with the same pretenses.
qua auctoritate, qua Conscientia he could give exterordinary, or indeed any
Facultyes? he replied, the Pope could not but know what they did: and that was
Sufficient. My Lord, how deplorable it is, that such a Clergy, as we are,
should have no better authority and Jurisdiction, as to exterordinary
Facultyes, then what is presumtive, and interpretative only, Deus bone in quae
tempora s^ruastinos! The thought The like sadness of heart this consideration
would give to all other Clergymen, would they weygh the pernicious
consequences, which flow from it: viz, Nullity of Dispensations, Inualidity of
Absolutions, and Sacriledges without number, of all kinds, which naturally flow
from unlawful authority, in matters so unlimited, as they pretend to, and
exercise. Let them consider what account they can give to God of the deluded
souls, who rely on them.
of this has given me often a sad heavy heart: and my Lord I will die A zealous
resolution in the pious old man.
rather then breed my Children to swear Obedience to such a Chapter: but the
two Confessarij; which have sworn obedience Another sacrilegious practice, to
take illegal vows of Obedience of Persons, in opposition to the legal
authority of their lawful superiors.
unto it, as I am now (too late) certainly informed, have gained the greatest
part of my young Priests, and Divines, to side with the Chapter. My Lord I have
now intrencht on your Lor^ships Patience: and therefore beg your pardon, and
swear Obedience to your Lor^ships commands, who am in all cordial manner

My Lord Your honors most humble and obedient serva^t Geo. Leybourne.
Haec raptim.
I would willingly write my Letters twice over,

but truly my hand shakes, and I am old.

The writing offered to be subscribed sent with this Letter. Infrascripti
Praeses, Profess^res, and Officiales Pontificij Collegij Duaci declaramus nos
esse paratos acceptare, and stontanee, and libenter amplexari eam autoritatem,
and Iurisdictionem* qu^n sa^ctissimus Dominus Noster Clemens 9. Papa
assignavit, and cersti^it pro Regimine Cleri Secularis in Anglia.



Opinion of the Clergy men in Paris Concerning the points in debate in Doway
College.
1 It appears upon reading the papers, and Letters directed to us from Mr.
President on the one side, and the Seniors of the College on the other side,
that both partys have sent their case to Rome: and therefore we judge it
altogether improper for us to pronounce any determinate s^ntence.

2 It seems to us most necessary not only in regard of the unsettled condition
of our Ecclesiastical affairs in England, but of the Seasonablenesse of this
conjuncture, wherein it has pleased God to give us a supreme Pastor, who has
a particular inclination to help us and does at this present express a desire
to be informed of our affairs (as we are informed by letters from Rome) that
an Agent be sent to his Holiness withal possible speed; which Person Although they
do not presume to decide the difference betwixt the two contending parties,
yet they approve what Dr. Leybourne required and tacitly condemn the
dissenters.
cannot appear usefully there without carrying with him the signature of some
engagement to the effect of this proposed paper, now in question, from the
Clergy of England, and together wi^h it from the College of Doway, and that of
Lisbone also, soon as it may be had.

3 In pursuance of this opinion of ours, we do presently write into England,
for the hasting away of a fit Agent with ample instruction, concerning the
state of our affairs and with the before mentione Subscription of the Clergy.

4. In the mean time for the peace of the College, we desire Mr. President
This provisionall advice to suspend the exaction of the subscription is no
blame to Mr. President who exacted it; but only a suspense of that affair, to
avoid greater disorders, which might be feared though the refractorinesse of
these, who having Vowed illegally obedience to the usurpation of the Chapter,
did adhere more tenaciously to that, then to their Duty their Lawful
Superiors, or the Pope, who appointed them.
to suspend the urging of any subscription, till the Agent be ready to go with
the Unanimous subscription of the Clergy, which we hope shall be hastened with
all possible expedition.

Wa. Montagu W. Clifford Thomas Carre Stephen Gough.


A Letter from Ab. Montagu to D. Ellis. Epist. 53.
Colombe. 27. Sept. 1667. Mr. Doctor Ellis.
I have conceived the readyest way, to convey my acknowlegment to all our
friends, He thanks the Chapter for their kindness to him, in naming him to his
Holiness, for their future Bishop: which he understood by their Letter of the
23. August 1667.
from whom I have received so great a testimony of their affection, and
esteem, is by your conueyance of my resentments, relying much upon your
particular friendship for the delivering of them to the best improvement of such
a return, and I must entreat you to represent to them the ingenvity of my
persuasion, which moves me to decline the Proposition. I have declared to Mr.
Car at large the reasons, that move me to this determination, and as he
professes himself satisfied, so he has promised me his offices toward the
persuading the rest of our friends of the justnes of my considerations in the
matter: and truly for no motive but that of securing the cause from prejudices,
which the notoriousness of my person, joined with the obnoxiousnes of the
office does determine me in the declining of it.

Wherefore He declines the Office.
I am persuaded that upon f^ll discussion of the question, you will all
conclude my motives to be justified by the sight of inconveniences, which are
so visible in the exposure of my person to the view of our aduersarys, and as I
presume your judgments will conclude with mine, in this point, so I must
entreat your opinions, to grant me the belief of my gratitude in this
occasion and my zealous application in all occurrencyes, wherein I may hope to
honor and serve there society.

I must now proceed to deliver the common sense of our brethren here upon the
consulting Mr, Holes Commission and Instructions: and we conceive you mistake
us much in the end of our proposal of the signature of that short profession
of obedience to our great superior. The true intention The intent of the
subscription misunderstood by the Chapter, as appeared by the the Instructions
given to Mr. Holt.
on our part being to conciliate and dispose the power we acknowledge to
determine that sort of Government we all desire, which is Episcopal, and we
are not determined by this civil advance of our dutys, to accept that form,
which we intend to decline as much, as you, so that our propose in this
general submission in our first address is to dispose our judge to conform
his sentence to our conveniences, which is certainly best provided for by a
general deference to his proposalls, which does not bind us, as to the first
offer, but rather give us a justifiable freedom to represent our sense, in
what shall be suggested to us.

And by this so acceptable entrance into the deliberation we may be very
confident, of a fair proceeding from our Judge, and of his concurrence with
our Unanimous judgment: and as to the scruple of our being concluded by this
civil address in what order soever shall be first discoursed, and offered to
us, we answer that this dutiful advance of ours does but dispose our superior
to a fair communication and debate of the matter, and not bind us up in the
first ouer^ures.

For these reasons, Sir which leave no apprehension of having that government
imposed upon us, which we do all unanimously decline, we do very earnestly
propose He vrges the subscriptioni
to you again the signature of this little subscription we sent you: and to
prevent all apprehension of public offense, in the rendering such an act
publicly notorious, we have conceived that expedient, which is that the
submission proposed to be signed only by the Deane and Secretary, as the other
addresses are, and this we undertake to have approved at Doway: Dr. Leybourne's
inclination to Peace on any just terms, not doubted of.
and we persuade our selves, that it will be sufficient with our superior, and
cannot endanger the notoriety you object, as dangerous in this conjuncture.

We therefore pray you to consider whether the proposal be not already in the
court we are to plead, and whither the difficulty of this concurrence will not
be strayned to a great vndutifullnes, and we pray you to judge what operation
this dissension in the submissive part will have in a court, to which an entire
conformity is appropriated, the debate being thus i^ argument already upon the
stage we are to enter, you may easily conclude what compliance we may hope
without this Uniforme respect and recommendation to our Judge.

We have therefore opend our Judgments freely to Mr. Holt, Mr. Holt approved of
the reasons for the subscription.
who has undertaken to represent them to you as efficatiously, as the
concurrence of his Judgment with ours c^n promise, and we aprove so much your
choice in him, as we promise our selves your concurrence with his and our
judgments in the matter. Upon all these we are confident of your sending to
overtake him with this subscription of the Deane, and Secretary, which may have
the same comprisure of the whole body, as the rest of his credentialls: and we
the proposers to you of this facilitation of our common wishes are so persuaded
of the Piety and Prudence of his proposal, as we will not doubt of your
present concurrence wherein if you shall make a dissenting difficulty, we
conceive our selves bound to declare to you, that we shall labor to inform
our superiors of our Judgment, and disavow Threatens not to communicate with
the Chapter, if they persist in their resolution not to subscribe.
our correspondence with the dissenting party.

And on the other side, if the paper of submission be sent to the Agent with
the instruction for demanding a Bishop, we are persuaded No danger to be feared
from the subscription.
that by the Queens mediation with his Holiness, and other remonstrances we
will offer, that the government you apprehend, will not be so much as offered
you, and though we are not ignorant of all the apprehensions of this
conjuncture, yet all circumstances considered, we are persuaded, that your
demand of a Bishop ought to be retarded.

Thus desiring all possible dispatch of your answer, we rest Your most
affectionate brothers, and s^rvants

On the back: Copy of the answer to the Clergy at London 28. Sep. 1667. All in
Abbot Montagus own hand.
A Letter of Dr. Ellis to Abbot Montagu. Epist. 54.
Oct. 3. Right Honorable.
We cannot but much resent, that the concurrence of unhappy circumstances
afford your Lordshp so strong and enforcing motives for the refusal of that
degree Of a Bishop.
amongst us, the acceptance of which would have rendered us all most happy. Now
we must rest content, that we have discharged our duty in offering our
Obedience, and in the Satisfaction we receive of your Lordships favorable
inclination of making us partakers of that happiness: for which we all return
our most humble thanks, and grateful acknowledgments.

We have had diverse Consults about that little paper of Subscription. In the
first consult we had resolved to comply entirely with your Lordships desir,
and to sign as you prescribed, and I my self, with the Secretary, had order
to sign, and seal it, and send it away by the next post. But before the next
post day came, other Chapter men He lays the fault on many Chapter-men which
was but of one: whom we shall find hereafter to be mr. John Sergeant.
coming to town, it was brought into debate again, and many difficultyes were
moved, so that we could never come to a resolution of it again. Wherefore we
bethought our selves of an other, and concluded in this, which I here send your
Lordship: which we hope may give satisfaction. I have not time at present to
give your Lordship an account more at large of our procedure: for just now we
ended our consult, wherein it was resolved: and now my letters are called for.
By the next post I shall give your Lordship a fuller satisfaction, and in the
mean while rest

Your Lordships most obedient servant Humphrey Waring
The writing proffered by the Chapter.

Ego Onuphrius Ellis^us S. T. D. and Decanus Capituli Ecclesiae c. These tw^
conditions make the whole subscription insignificant: it being always in their
power to decline any Authority appointed by Rome on those accounts.
Anglicanae* Sede vacant, meo and eiusdem Capituli nomine declaro, nos (vti
d^c^t Sacerdotes Catholicos) esse paratos acceptare, and spontance a^ libenter
amplexari, in quantum status regni, and res Catholicorum permittunt,
authoritatem, and Iurisdictionem, quam SS. Dominus noster Clemens Papa nonus
assignabit, and constituet pro regimine eiusdem Ecclesiae Anglicanae. d. They
do not promise to acknowledge any authority to govern the Secular Clergy, or
the Chapter, as resolving to continue in that way of Independence, into which
they entered on their own heads. Yet the chief necessity of a Bishop was that,
to prevent all those sinful inconveniences, which all good, and zealous men
deplore, as well as Dr. Leybourne, whose sentiments are expressed in his Letter
29. July 1667.




Epist. 55.
Right Honorable
By the last mondays post I gave your Lordship a breife account of our
resolves, and enclosed in my Letter a copy of the subscription, we had framed,
and sent to our Agent. I could not then enlarge my self thrrough want of time:
now I shall endeavor to give your Lordship more ample Satisfaction in the
carriage of that business.

Immediately upon the receipt of your Lordships Letter, I called a consult,
wherein it was resolved that we should comply with your Lordship's desire in
the subscription: and the Secretary, and my self had orders to sign and seal
it in the name of the whole Chapter. But before the post day came other Chapter
men coming to town, it was thought sit, that a business of so great concern
should be debated in a fuller consult: and our proceedings authorized with more
numerous votes. In this second Consult such difficultyes were raised By Mr.
Sergeant who would yield to no reason.
against that subscription, that in diverse succeding Consults they could not be
allayed: and so we were forced to lay it aside, and frame a another, which we
hoped might give satisfaction. It was urged that the two last general Chapters
had voted, and ordered that as far as lay in us, we should not admit of any
extraordinary authority, being Commanded so to do by Superior Powers. We
therefore, as being substituted to the Chapter, had not power to act against
their orders: which not withstanding, we had done, had we subscribed, that we
would accept of what his Holiness should impose upon us. Besides it was much
doubted whether the rest of our brethren would have approved that subscription,
and not have rather hyghly censured, and condemned us for such an attempt: and
have stood to their former resolves, and left us to make good what we had
subscribed, which we had obliged our selves to do. Hence by the rash
management of this affayre, we might have been guilty of a great Schism, and
division Can those be guilty of Division in the state, who adhere to the King?
Or in the Church, who adhere to its head?
amongst us, and whilst we endeavored to establish our government have quite
destroyed it. It was also represented, that if we made this subscription, it
would not Lu^ke so in darkness, but that it would come to public light in
Rome, and thence in Paris, Flanders, and England: and at length the state here
would have notice of it; who having been conscious, that we had formerly
engaged to them, This is a very remarkable point, discovering a secret never
owned by the Party before.
that we would not accept of any extraordinary authority, and knowing now that
we made this contrary subscription, would look upon us as so many knaves not
to be relied on, and those who hitherto protected us, would then with good
reason desert us, and leave us to the fury of our enimes who having even by
forgery, and calumnyes What farfetcht reasons are here! And all are non causa
procausa.
endeavored to fix upon the Catholics the burning of the City, and a
hundred treacherous plots, to the end they might raise a Persecution against
them, would certainly embrace this occasion and make good use of it, to drive
home their design to their greatest advantage. From hence also would follow,
that we should be made odious to all the Catholics of England, for drawing
upon them so great a mischeife.

This subscription was judged also Here is the true, and sole reason of their
dissent.
of dangerous consequence to our Chapter, and Government: for we we are not
ignorant, that the court of Rome, and the Holy Congregation de Propaganda Fide
are desirous that all Missionaryes should have a total, and immediate
dependence on them. How then can we be secured, that if we make that
subscription, by which we give up our own liberty, his Holiness will not take us
at our word, and reduce us to immediate subjection, independent of any other,
but himself, by annulling our Chapter, or imposing upon us a Vicarius
Apostolicus. It Is true we do not so much fear the later, because your Lordship
has engaged your promise to oppose it, and the very constitution of our nation
is like to exclude it: but for the former, we have much reason to suspect it
will come to pass, when we consider how unsuitable Mark this.
this Chapter is to the inclinations of the Court of Rome, how opposed by Mr.
Leybourne (who as we are informed was the first author of this Subscription out
of a design to ruin it) and other most potent and active adversaries: and how
we cannot be confident even of your Lordships Patronage, being you have given
us no promise to defend the rights of the Chapter; but only to oppose
extraordinary authority. That we stand therefore, can be attributed to nothing
else, but to Right of possession Here we have Dr. VVaring's acknowledgment
under his hand, that the institution of the Chapter is illegal, and against the
Canons.
of which we cannot be deprived without much disturbance: which if we deliver
up by this subscription, we cannot expect we should receive a refusal of so
solemn an offer.

Lastly we considered that the Court of Rome could never in reason This is a
censure of those who required the subscription, as demanding a thing
unreasonable, and of the Chapter it self, which at the first Consult approved
of it. So that of the Secular Clergy, none, but Mr. Sergeant, acted reasonably.
expect such a subscription from us, since it was never heard, or read of, that
any Ecclesiastical body ever offered up the like. And indeed it could only
suite with those, who after some great schism, or disobedience to his Holiness,
were now become very penitent, and sensible of their duty, and by such a
subscription would give an outward testimony of it. In us, who were never
guilty of any such crime, it would be esteemed only a fraudulent mask for some
design, especially seeing we have so lately made it known to his Holiness, and
the court of Rome by Mr. Lois his means that our Resolutions were quite
opposite to this subscription.

For these motives, my Lord which we co^ceive very rational, and convincing,
we thought fit to wave that subscription, and so to offer another which might
nether argu us imprudent nor convince us to be fraudulent; but yet might
satisfy the just, and rational expectation of his Holiness: the copy of which I
have here sent your Lordship. And we hope your Lordship upon serious reflection
will approve of our proceeding. How ever we are confident we shall not be found
so highly criminal, as to deserve that heavy punishment, with which your
Lordship is pleased to threaten us at the end of your letter, saying that you
will inform your superiors of your Judgment, and disavow all correspondence
with the dissenting party. My Lord your judgment, as to the point of Obedience,
and Submission to his Holiness is the same with ours: for your Lordship is as
much resolved to oppose any authority inconsistent with the good of this
Kingdom, As if that Subscription, which was demanded, was inconsistent with
the good of the Kingdom! Or Dr. Leybourne, and the rest, who required it, were
not as good Patritos, as the Blackloists who courted the Independants!
as we can be. We offer only, that your Lordship thinks it most conducing to
the end we aim at, to palliate that judgment, with a subscription signifying
the quite contrary; whereas we apprehending that subscription may involue us
in great mischeife, and prove a snare to entrap us, think best to avoyde it.
And with submission to your Lo^ship's better judgment, I do not understand how
this is a crime, that can deserve so great a punishment as breach of
correspendence with us. Nay I am persuaded, that if his Holiness understood,
that we made that subscription, meaning nothing less, then what it signifyes
(which is the way your Lordship A biting reproach to Mr. Montagu.
prescribes to us) he would be as much displeased with our Subscribing, as
your Lordship now is for the refusal of it.

My Lord, there is not a person in the world, whose good opinion we should
more ambitiously covet, then your Lordships; whose zeal we have to our great
comfort experienced, and whose power we know to be very transcendent. Had not
your Lordships demands endangered our very Being, we should not have been
backward in complying with them. But when they are of so dangerous consequence,
and, as we apprehend, tend to our ruin, let me humbly beg of your Lordship to
give us the liberty of Using our own reason, and follow the dictamen of it
without offense: and obtain the favor, that this may not be made a crime
lessening any of us in your Lordships esteem, and in particular

Your Lordships most humble and obedient servant Oct. 14. 1667. Humphrey Waring.

Epist 56.
My Lord
Your Lordships charitable designs for the good of our English Clergy puts me
on the confidence of Saluting you, upon the occasion of the Subscription, you
will have account of this post from Dr. Ellis. How much they are obliged to you
and I with them as an Englishman, (though my concern here be the least His
greatest concerns was his Bi^hoprick in Portugal.
) our humble thanks to you, and our prayers for you, can only testify. How many
meetings, and what pains it cost us to get a consent nemine Contradicente to
the subscription, Dr. Ellis may tell your Lordship. But because This guess was
very rational, and true: for indeed Dr. Ellis never named anyone in particular;
but charged the dissent on many.
I suppose he will not tell you, who used all his industry to hinder it, I
shall; that your Lordship may have an occasion to employ a little more of the
charity, which put you upon what you have already done: that the Clergy may
owe to you not only the having a Superior, but also their freedom, from a
troublesome Mark this.
spirit that disturbes them.

Their Secretary Mr. John Holland Mr. Sergeant.
used all the ways possible to disturb this business, for it being resolved
in the first Consult, he and the Deane should sign it, he when it was sent to
him (for he was absent) absolutely refused to sign it, with a most imperious
controwling letter, pretending strange You see who is the Author of all those
objections.
things to the Consult. Upon which at a second meeting I declared against the
proceedings of Mr. Holland, and resolved no more to come amongst them, Here is
another, who refused to communicate with them in business as Mr. Montagu, and
other Clergymen in Paris had done.
if this business passed not, nor own any more of their actions, as long as
Mr. Holland thus Lorded it over them, for that as I detested being a Novelest,
so I abhorred to be so esteemed: which I should not be able to avoyde, if I
continued amongst them, who suffered themselves The chapter governed, and
controuled by Mr. Sergeant, the professed disciple of Mr. White.
to be lead by Mr. Holland; the professed disciple to Mr. White. But Mr. Ellis
Mr. Curtis, and Dr. Godden conferring with me the next day, and promising all
should be mended, I was prevayled upon to give them another meeting, where we
agreed nemine contradicente, upon the Subscription. The clause in quantum
status regni, and res Catholicorum permittent was put in by the advice of a
great Lawyer, and Eminent Catholic, who was of opinion that without it we
might endanger all. This secret I trusted him with, because he is a person
trusts me with the secrets of his soul, as well as his temporal concerns.

Now my Lord it being thus, that the gravest part, and greatest of the Clergy
are sensible of the injury they suffer by Mr. Holland Most of the Clergy
displeased with Mr. Holland's being Secretary to the Chapter.
being, especially at this time, Secretary, if your Lordsh^p with advice of Mr.
Clifford, and Mr. Car, will but cause a letter to be written, signifying how
much it is to the prejudice of the clergy, that he is in that place, Mr.
Sergeant was shortly after displaced, and Mr. John Leybourne put into his
office, probably upon the Letter, which was demanded.

Here we see the true cause of Sergeant's being deposed, which was not by his
own request, that he might attend to his controversy writings, contrary to the
unanimous desire of the Chapter which was very well satisfied with his carriage
in it, as was alleged, as I hear, in the Attestation produced against the
Archbishop of Dublin, signed by Dr. Waring. and Dr Godden; but because many of
the prime Chapter men could no longer br^^ke his insolent controuling humor,
nor endure his err^neous sentiments. I am sorry, that those able men Dr. Ellis,
and Dr. Godden, should give such ground ^o surmise, they have little regard to
Truth, in the Attestations they give.


Comending Mr. Leybourne, as he is, as a fit person for it, I am very well
assured it will take effect, and your Lordship will have the merit, of setting
us in perfect tranquillity. For that I do assure your Lordship setting him
aside, here is a Clergy as well stored with able, judicious, virtuous That
there are very many such in the Secular Clergy, who deserve this c^r^cter, I
gladly believe: I wish the management, and direction of its affairs were put
into the hands of such, and others, of contrary Principles were not employed in
all places of Trust, or at least that they were so far discountenanced, as to
prevent that generally malignant Influence they have on all transactions of
common concern. For whilst these are permitted their full swing, their
stubborn resolutions, and violent carri^ge does disharten moderate, and
Orthod^x men from d^fending the better Part, and forcibly draw them either to a
real or seeming consent, to what they interiorly dislike: As Bishop Russel
complains that Mr. Sergeant (tho alone, and against all the Chapter-men.
assembled) did by ^^ffing, and H^ct^ring in the business of the Subscription.
So Factious men make a figure, and honest men are mere cyph^rs, whose value
depends on the figure, and stand of them selves for just nothing.
persons, and as full of Obedience, and submission to the Sea Apostolic, as I
believe any Clergy in the world. I humbly beg your Lordships pardon in this and
desire you will advice about what is fit to be done with the two persons I
named. For my part, who am independent on England I am vnconcerned: but still
as an English man, and Brother seeing things tending so prosperously to quiet,
and establishment, and that only this thing is wanting to perfect it, I
confess I could not contain my pen (though I incur the censure of a too
forward person) from letting fall from it to your Lordship these Lines, the
trouble whereof your own charitable goodness has drawn on you. Thus
commending this business to your Charitable Consideration, and your Person to
the fountain of Charity, I rest

My very good Lord Your Lordships most devoted and Humble servant Rich. Russell.
This Letter has no date, but by its contents it appears to have been written
on the same day, with the latter of Dr. Ellis Dean of the Chapter, that is,
Oct. 14. 1667.
FINIS.
PReface linea 2. secular men. r. secular clergy men. Page 19. l. 17. your
house, r. that house. Page 35. fine: the same. r. the same. viz. to get all
Regulars banished.

P. 40. linea 30. heretical authority, r. spiritual authority.

P. 41. L. 23 to stay. r. to essay.

P. 46. L. 2. knows with. r. knows well.

P. 47. L. 17. fear r. tear.

P. 49. L. 10. curry savor. r. curry favor. Ibidem L. 3. of the King. r. to
the King.

P. 57 L. penult. Although etc. r. Although I suppose the greatest opposiion
proceeds from Regulars, out of animosity. The things that exception is taken
against, are, 1.

P. 65. L. 2. 17. r. 17. Ian.

P. 97. L. 14. forward. r. froward.

P. 98 L. 11. children. Add. Have you seen Gregorius a S. Vincentio de
Quadratura Circuli.


