A Short Sober PACIFIC EXAMINATION of some Exuberances in, and Ceremonial
Appurtenances TO THE Common Prayer;

ESPECIALLY, Of the Use and Frequent Repetitions of Glosy be to the Father,
etc. Standing up at it, at Gospels, Creeds, and Wearing white Rochets,
Surplises, with other Canonical Vestments in the celebration of Divine Service
and Sacraments; whose Originals, Grounds of Institution and Prescription, are
here truly related, and modestly discussed, for the instruction of the
ignorant, the satisfaction of all Contenders for, or Oppugners of, and
preventing future Contests about them, for our Churches Union in Gods Public
Worship.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE Esquire a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

Romans 14. 13. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for
Peace, and things wherewith one may edify another. Let us not judge one another
any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an
occasion to fall in his Brothers way. Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. If there be
therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like
minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be
done through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem
other better than himself. Look not every one on his own things, but every man
also on the things of others. Caelestini Papae Epist. ad Episcopos Galliae,
cap. 1. Didicimus quosdam Domini Sacerdotes superstitioso potius cultui
inservire, quam mentis vel fidei puritati. Habent tamen istum forsitan cultum,
morem potius quam rationem sequentes. Discernendi a plebe vel caeteris sumus
doctrina, non vest; conversatione, non habitu: mentis puritate, non cultu.
Rudes ergo fidelium mentes ad talia non debemus inducere. Docendi enim potius
sunt, quam illudendi: Nec imponendum est eorum oculis, sed mentibus infundenda
praecepta sunt. London Printed by T. C. and L. P. and are to be sold by Edward
Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1661.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, CHARLES the IId.
By the Grace and admirable Providence of GOD, of Great Britain, France and
Ireland KING, Defender of the Faith; and all sincere Professors of it, within
His Dominions.
HAving had the Honor on last Easter-Eve, to present Your Majesty with a Brief
Account of my Service that week in the almost-accomplished Great-good-work of
Paying and Dis^^^^ding Your Majesty's Army and Navy (which for (...) Months
space engrossed all my time from Mor^^ng till Night, and often till Midnight) to
Your Majesty's great content, and your Peoples ease from future ^^cessant heavy
Monthly Taxes; I humbly crave ^^ave to prostrate at Your Royal feet my
Easter-holydayes studies, to exonerate the Backs of hundreds, (...) truly
tender Consciences of thousands of Your ^^yal, pious, sober-minded Protestant
Subjects of all Degrees, from some Exuberances in the Commo^^^ prayer Book, and
superfluous Ceremonies, Vestments ^^ tending it, (which give them offense, and
may w^ be laid aside, if your Majesty and your approachi^^ Parliament shall
judge convenient) for our Ch^^ ches future peace, union in Gods public
worship, pursuance of Your Majesty's late most Gracious, ^^ous, Prudent,
elegant Declaration to all Your Lovi^^ Subjects of Your Kingdom of England and
Dominion Wales, concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, which ga^^ Life and Birth to
this Publication.

It is very observable, that albeit the Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 218, 251,
381, 382. Tom 2. p. 588. 589. Tom. 4. ^ p. 453.

Bellarmine De Romano Pontif. and de Conciliis, l. 2. c. 2. Gregde Valentia
Com. Theolog Tom. 3: p 247. Dr. John Whites Way to the true Church Sect. 17. p.
45. and Defense of the Way, c. 47, 48,


Popes Rome, and their Flatterers, hold themselves infall^ in their Chair, and
their Church, Councils inerrab^ yet they all accord, that their Public
Missals, ^turgies; though made, confirmed by their joint a^ vice with greatest
care and diligence, are amendab^^^^ alterable upon just occasion: Witness their
la^^ Council of Sessio 22. Decretum de observandis and evitandis in
Celebratione Missae, Surius Tom. 4. Council. p. 962.
Trents Decree for the correction, ame^^ment of their formerly established
Catechism, Miss^^^^ Breviary; and the subsequent emendations of the^^ and
institution of A NEW MASS BOOK, ^Pope Pius the 5. with the advice of learned
m^ expressed in his Bull dated at Rome July 1557. p^^ fixed to Missale Romanum,
ex Decreto Sacro-sa^^ Concilii Tridentini RESTITUTUM; Pii 5. P^^tificis Maximi
jussu editum, printed at Rome t^ year ^ enjoined by that Bull, to be
universally served, without any subsequent addition, alteration, mutation,
under pain of his Papal indignation:^ notwithstanding by another Bull of his
own, da^^ at Rome 17 December 1570. beginning with t^^ memorable Clause; Ad hoc
nos Deus unxit oleo lat tiae, ac haereditatis suae participes effecit, ut ad
ipfiu, Sacerdotium vocati tanquam Aaron, non solum ea quae ad divinum cultum
pertinent salubriter disponamus; Ve^um etiam ea quae aliquando per Nos statuta
suerant, salubrius mode remur, ac alias desuper disponamus, prout rerum and
personarum qualitate pens^ta, conspicimus in Domino salubriter expedire.
For this purpose God has anointed us with the oil of gladness, and made us
partakers of his Inheritance, that being called to his Priesthood like Aaron,
we should not only wholesomly order these things which pertain to divine
worship; but should also more wholsomly moderate those things which have been
formerly enacted by us, and moreover alter and dispose of them, as upon serious
consideration of things and persons, we discern to be wholesomly expedient in
the Lord; He did (upon this account) by reason of some difficulties concerning
the use of this New Missal, arising in the Kingdom of Spain, tendered by some
Grave men sent to him from Philip their Catholic King, to which he gave
undoubted credit; of his own mere motion, without the instance of any Petition
tendered to him thereupon, out of his certain knowledge and plenitude of
Apostolical power, think fit to reform several things in this New Missal, as to
the Kingdoms of Spain, and alter, dispense with it in no less than 21.
particulars ( expressed in this Bull) notwithstanding all his former Bulls and
Prohibitions to the contrary. After which Pope Gregory the 10, his immediate
Successor, by another Bull ( dated at Rome 30 December. 1573.) to take away some
other new scruples and differences about this Missal in the said Kingdoms of
Spain ( upon the motion of other Delegates sent thence from that same King
Philip) granted several other dispensations and amendments of this Missal in
sundry Particulars, comprised in his Bull; Notwithstanding his Predecessors
Letters, and all and singular clauses, prohibitions, and Decrees to the
contrary; Which two Bulls of theirs, are printed before Missale Romanum, etc.
Cum licentia and privilegio, Salmantica 1589. Some thirty year after Pope
Clement the 8. observing diverse Errors to be crept into this Missal of Pope
Pius the 5. by the Trent Councils Decree; through the Printers Errors, and some
alterations in the Epistles, Gospels, Psalms according to the vulgar Edition
different from the Original Text, commanded his learned Cardinals to revise and
correct this Missal according to the original copy of Pius Quintus: Verum in
illo munere peragendo factum est, ut nonnulla ex diligenti librorum antiquorum
collatione in meliorem formam redacta, and in regulis and rubricis aliqua
uberius and clarius expressa, quae tamen ex illorum principiis et fundamentis,
qu^si deducta, illorum sensum imitari potius and supplere, quam aliquid novi
afferre videantur: Missam itaque quod idem Pius 5. ediderat, sic RECOGNITUM in
nostra Typographia quam emendatissime imprimi, and ad communem utilitatem
publicari jussimus.
which task they undertaking, put some things into better form in the Missal it
self, and expressed some things more clearly and fully in the Rules and
Rubricks; which being notwithstanding deduced from their principles and
foundations, may seem rather to imitate and supply their sense, than to induce
any innovation. Which being thus revised, amended, enlarged with new Masses for
new canonized Saints, and proper Masses of saints expressed at large for the
easier benefit of those who celebrated them, he caused to be most exactly
printed in the Vatican, and published for the common good, in the year of our
Lord 1604. as he declares in his Bull praefixed to this Missal dated at Rome
the 7. of July the same year; with this additional Title; -- Missale Romanum ex
Decreto Sacro-sancti Concilii Tridentini Restitutum, Pii 5. Pont. Max. jussu
editum; Clementis 8. auctoritate RECOGNITUM. ET CUM MISSIS NOVIS DE SANCTIS a
Paulo 5. Gregorio 15. and S. D. N. Urbano 8. ordinatis. Missae propriae de
Sanctis OMNES AD LONGUM POSITAE SUNT PRO FACILIORI CELEBRANTIUM COMMODITATE.

If therefore the Council of Trent it self thought meet to reform the ancient
Roman Catechism and Missal formerly established, Sessio 22. Decretum de
observandis et evitandis in celebratione Missae. Surius Council. Tom. 4. p. 961.
into which it confesses, either by the vice of times, or unwariness or
dishonesty of men, many things had crept, which were far from the dignity of so
great a Sacrifice, and had need to be reformed, that due honor and worship to
the glory of God and edification of faithful people might be restored to it.
Yea, to set out a new Masse-book by authority of Pope Pius the 5. and this
Pope, within few years after, held it necessary and expedient to make some
alterations, and dispense with other things in it, relating to the Kingdoms and
Church of Spain; and Pope Gregory the 13. within 3. years after, to dispense
with some other Formalities and Rubricks thereof upon the same reason: And Pope
Clement the 8. (about 30. years after) held it necessary to revise the whole
Mass book, to correct the Printers errors, the Mistranslations of the
Epistles, Gospels, Psalms therein varying from the Original Text; and add new
Rules, Rubricks to it, explaining, supplying the defects of the former,
together with New Masses, for New Saints, notwithstanding all former printed
Bulls, Prohibitions, Decrees to the contrary, and the pretended Infallibility
and Inerrability of their Chairs, Church, Councils; Then by the selfsame
Presidents and better Reasons, Your Majesty, with advice of Your pious, learned
Divines and Parliament, who have by 13 Eliz. c. 12
Law established these Articles of our Churches Belief (to which all Bishops,
Ministers have subscribed) A^tic'c 2: 34
That (not only Popes, but) General Councils may err, and sometimes have
erred, even in things pertaining to GOD. That it is not necessary that
Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one, or utterly like; See Centur
Magd. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, P 3, c. 6. where this is proved at
large.
FOR AT ALL TIMES THEY HAVE BEEN DIVERSE, and MAY BE CHANGED ACCORDING TO THE
DIVERSITY OF COUNTRIES, TIMES, and MEN'S MANNERS, so that nothing be ordained
against Gods word. Every particular or National Church, has authority to
ordain, Change and abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church (and Liturgies
too) ordained only by Man's Authority, so that all things be done to edifying;
may with much more Justice, Piety, Prudence reform all errors, mistranslations
of the Epistles, Gospels, Psalms, and obsolete or unfit expressions in the Book
of Common Prayer, 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 1. 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 1. 1 Eliz. c.^^
twice altered, reformed in some particulars, in few years after its first
publication by authority, Acts of Parliament) yea, change, abolish such
unnecessary Rites, Ceremonies attending it, which have given just offense, and
occasioned much Schism, Dissension in our Church between the Protestant Members
of it, as well of the Clergy as Laity, ever since its first establishment in
the 3d. year of K. Edw. the 6. till this very day, and will do so in
perpetuity, if not removed by your Majesty's Piety and Wisdom, according to
the purport of your late Incomparable Declaration (for which the whole House of
Commons and all Your Protestant Subjects whom they represented, returned Your
Majesty their most cordial, public Thanks by their November ^ 1660.
Speakers own mouth) the blessed fruits whereof they all now hope and long to
reap; not only without the least prejudice to our Religion, Church, and main
Fabric of the former Liturgy, but with great advantage to them all.

It is a received Maxim among all Politicians, Artists, that no human
Institutions, Laws, Inventions, Edifices are so absolutely exact, useful,
wholesome, necessary, but that they may upon just reasons of Policy, piety,
sundry emergent occasions and necessities be amended, altered, with wisdom,
honor, safety, an public utility. Your Majesty since your most happy
miraculous restoration, have with great prudence and glory, made some laudable
alterations in Your Royal Palaces, Walks, Parks, of Whitehall, Hampton Court,
and in Westminster Hall itself, as well for Convenience as Delight (though very
noble, useful, complete before) without any prejudice to their Structures,
Foundations, Soil: And those Bishops, Deans and Chapters who seem most
opposite to the least alterations in our public Liturgy, or Ceremonies, have
yet very much altered, improved their old Rents (and Tennants likewise) to
which they will not be confined by Your Majesty's late Declarations, or
Commissions: yea they daily violate and dispense with the very Rubricks in the
Common Prayer Book, and several 2 and 3 E. 6 c. 1. 21. 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 1. 12.
1 Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eliz. c. 1.
Acts of Parl. by selling Licenses to marry to all sorts of people for filthy
lucre, without asking the Banes three several Sundays or Holy Days in time of
Divine service, the people being present, after the accustomed manner; In
reading the Epistle, Gospel and second Service at the Communion Table when
there is no Communion; and in not receiving the Communion in their Cathedral
Churches every Sunday at the least, though they have no reasonable cause to the
contrary, as the Rubricks enjoyne them. And may not your Sacred Majesty then
with as much wisdom, honor, and all your Bishops and Cathedral Clergymen with
far more piety, justice, prudence, (in obedience to Your late Royal
Declarations and Engagements to all Your Subjects) dispense with the Oath of
Canonical Obedience, the use of Surplises, and other Ceremonies for which there
is no Rubric, Statute, or known Law of the Land; the reading of Psalms,
Epistles, Gospels in the Church, according to the New Translation of Your Royal
Grandfather of famous memory, KING JAMES; yea freely admit all able, godly
Ministers ordained only by Presbyters during the late unhappy Differences and
Confusions of Government, to Benefices, Fellowships, Lectures, Cures of Souls,
without a Reordination by Bishops, as well as admit reclamed Popish Priests
ordained by Bishops in the Church of Rome, without the least opposition,
contest, for future Peace, Amity, Unity between all Your Protestant Subjects of
different persuasions in these dividing particulars? To facilitate, promote
this much desired work, I have spent my few vacant Holy Day hours in compiling
this seasonable, short, sober, pacific Examination, consisting principally of
4. Particulars (discussed in several Sections) to wit; the Use, and Frequent
Repetition of Gloria Patri; standing up at it, and at Gospels, Creeds, Wearing
of Surplises, with other Pontifical and Sacer dotal vestments in the
celebration of Divine Service and Sacraments; in the last whereof (because most
peremptorily insisted on from pretended grounds of Scripture, Reason by many
Romanists, and some Protestant Prelates, and Peter Heylyn, his History of the
Reformation of the Church of England, p. 91, 92, 93. History? of Queen M^^y,
and Queen Eliz. p. 59, 60. 115, 116, 131, 132, 164, 165, 166, 176^
Divines) I have most expatiated, I hope, without the least offense to moderate
sober Christians, or your Sacred Majesty, and good satisfaction to all
judicious perusers.

We all use to alter the proportion, matter, quality, fashion, number of our
Garments, Attires, according to the several ages of our lives, the seasons of
the year, the temper of the Climates where we live, and extraordinary
occasions of solemnity, joy, grief or humiliation; not only without offense to
others, or prejudice to our healths, lives, but with much applause, and that
for the necessary preservation both of health, life, and humane society. The
like we do in our corporal Food: Why may not we then use the same Liberty
(by your Majesty's and your parliaments public Authority or Indulgence) in the
controverted case of Ecclesiastical Garments, Ornaments, Food, now under
public consideration, provided always they be 1 Cor. 14. 40.
decent, orderly, wholesome, and Isay 8. 20. Lu. 16. 29. Gal. 6. 4. 16.
not repugnant, but agreeable to the holy Scriptures?

If this poor Mite, (humbly presented to Your all-piercing favorable Eye, and
Gracious acceptance, as a Monument of my bounden Homage to Your Sacred
Majesty, at this most joyful, triumphant Solemnity of Your CORONATION, (the In
the Second Part of my Signal Loyalty and Devotion of Gods true Saints etc. to
their Sovereigns. p. 225. etc.
Form whereof I humbly dedicated and presented to Your Majesty soon after your
Glorious return to Your Royal Palace) shall contribute any assistance to the
accomplishment of Your Majesty's healing, uniting Design of all disagreeing
parties in points of Ceremony, Liturgy, Worship, (the only end of its Compiling
and publishing;) I shall heartily bless God for its good success, and always
continue my cordiallest daily prayers to the 1 Timothy 6. 15. Rev. 17. 14. c. 19,
16.
King of Kings, for Your Majesty's long, most pious, just, peaceable, glorious
reign over all your Dominions upon Earth, for the advancement of the true
reformed Religion, the protection of all real, zealous Ministers, Professors of
it, and all Your Subjects Tranquillity, Felicity: til You shall exchange that
fading Ps. 21. 3.
Crown of pure Gold, (which GOD himself has now set upon upon Your Anointed
Head, to the unspeakable Joy of all Your Loyal Subjects, maugre all
Oppositions, Conspiracies of Men or Devils to prevent it, and that with greater
Magnificence, Splendour, than any of Your Royal Progenitors have been crowned,
which God grant You always to wear with most transcendent Renown) for an
eternal 1 Pet. 5. 4. c. ^. 4.
Crown of Glory in the highest Heavens, which fades not away.

Your MAJESTY'S most humble, devoted Subject and Servant, WILLIAM PRYNNE.
Lincolnes Inn, Apr. 23. 1661.
A short, sober, pacifique Examination of some Exuberances in, and Ceremonial
Appurtenances to the Common Prayer.
ALthough I have in my judgment and practice always approved the use of
set-forms of public Prayers, and Administration of the Sacraments in Churches,
as warranted by Number. 6. 22, to 27. Deuteronomy. 26. 13, 14, 15. c. 33. 1, to 47. ps.
92. ps. 66. and 67, and 68, ^ 78, and 79, and 90. Joel 2. 17. Hos. 14. 2, 3.
Mat. 6. 9, 10, etc. Lu. 11. 1, to 5. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3.
Scripture, the ancient Practice and Liturgi^ S. S. Patrum, Liturgi^ Basil^i,
Chysostostomi, Gregorii Theologi, Cyri^^ Alexandrini, etc. Paris 1560. and
August. Vind. 1604. Liturgicae Latino^unt, Colon 1571. Antiquitates Liturgies,
Duaci, 1605. Bibliotheca Patrum, T. 1. 2, 3. and 15. Cassandri Liturgica.
Liturgies of the Greek, Latin, Gothic, Aethiopick, and other Churches (some
whereof are spurious Impostures, others interlaced with modern Sophistications
and Superstitions by Popish Innovators) and of all or most Churches at this day
throughout the Christian world, whether Epipiscopal or Presbyterial, Papists or
Protestants; and albeit I was never an Oppugner of, or Sep^ratist from the Book
of Common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, established in the
Church of England, whereunto I have constantly resorted; yet I must ingeniously
profess I am clear of opinion,

1. That a set standing form of Common Prayer and Sacramental Administrations,
is not absolutely necessary for the being, though See 2, and 3 ^, 6. c. 1. 3,
and 4 E. 6. c. 10. 5, and 6 Ed. 6. c. 1. 1 Eliz. c. 2.
convenient for the well-being, and unity of a National Church. Therefore not
to be prescribed as a thing of absolute indispensible necessity; but only of
convenience, decency, as tending to public unity.

2. That there are and may be Acts 15. 24, 27, 28. c. 16. 4, 5. Ephesians. 6. 18.
Phil. 4. 4. 6. 1 These. 5. 17. See the several Offices, Hours, Missels.
Precessionals, Liturgies, Books of Devoti^n, in ancient or present use among
the Papists, 3, and 4 E. 3. c 10. Officium beat^ Mari^ secundum usum Sarum;
secundum usum Dang^^; secundum usum Walsingham, Lincoln, used in England; 2.
and 3 E. 6. c. 1. The diverse forms of Lieugits and Administrations used in the
Protestant Churches of England, Scotland, France^, Germany, Helvitia, Denmark,
and in the Greek, Russian, Ethiopian Churches.
several set-forms of public, as well as of private Prayers and Devotions,
used in several Provinces, Kingdoms, National Churches, and that all Churches,
Nations are no more obliged to use one form of public Prayer and
Administration of Sacraments, than all private Christians are to use the
self-same form of Private Prayers in their several Families, Closets, or one
kind of Grace before and after meat: but are all left at liberty to embrace or
establish what forms they deem most beneficial for the Peoples spiritual
edification, best conducing to their salvation, and union in Gods public
worship.

3. That no one form of public Liturgy is so complete, exact, or unalterable,
but that upon grounds of Piety, Prudence, and sundry emergent occasions, it may
be altered, Ephesians. 6. 18. c. 3. 14, to 22. ^em. 15. 30, 31. Phil. 1. 4, 9, 10,
11.
varied, amended, or totally set aside; and a new form of Common Prayer
established in its stead; (at In their Broks^ prefixed to Missale Romanum,
Salm. 1588. and Antw. 1630.
Pope Pius the 5. and Clement the 8. acknowledge) being only of human and
Ecclesiastical, not Divine institution.

4. That the prescription or use of set-forms of public Prayers ought not to
suppress, discontinue, interrupt, or disparage the exercise of the gift or
grace of conceived, extemporary Prayers or Thanksgivings by Ministers and other
Christians in public or private upon ordinary or extraordinary occasions; nor
yet to hinder or disturb the constant preaching of the Word in season, and out
of season; as is evident by the whole Book of Psalms, the 1 Chr. 6. c. 20. 5,
to 14. c. 32. 24. c. 33. 12. Ezra 7. 27. c. 9. 6, etc. Neh. 1. 4, to 11. c. 9.
throughout. Esth. 4. Dan. 9. 3, etc. Joel 2. 9, to 18. Hos. 14. 2. Lu. 11. 1,
2, ^. Matthew. 14. 23. John 26. 39. John 17. 9, etc. Acts 1. 14, 24. c. 3. ^^ c.
4. 24, to 31. c. 8. 22 c. 10, 1, 9. c. 12. 5. c. 13. 3. c. 14. 23. c. 16. 25.
c. 20. 36. c. 21. 5. c. 28. 8. Romans 1. 8, 9. 10. c. 8. 26. c. 15. 30, 31. c.
16. 24, 25, etc. 1 Cor. 14. 15. Ephesians. 1. 16, 17, etc. c. 3. 13, to 21. c. 6. 18.
Phil. 1. 4, 9, 10, 11. Col. 1, 3, 9, 10, etc. 1 The^. c. 2. c. 5. 17. 2 The^ 2.
16, 17. c. 3. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. c. 5. 5. Philemon 4. 24. Rev. 5. 8. c. 8.
3, 4. Jude 20. ^ Acts 2. 42, 46. c. 4. 1, 2, 18, 19, 20. c. 5. 19, 20, 21, 28,
29, 42. c. 20. 10, 31. c. 19. 8, 9, 10. c. 28. 30, 31. Romans 15. 19, 20. Luke
21. 36, 37, 38. Justin. Martyr, and Tertul. in Apologia.
special Prayers and Thanksgivings of Moses, David, Solomon, Nehemiah, Ezra,
Hezekiah, Daniel, Jeremiah, in the old, and of (h) Christ and his Apostles,
recorded in the New Testament; being all compiled and used upon extraordinary
occasions; the (i) public Prayers in the Primitive Church never secluded or
diminished the use of private conceived prayers or preachings; Therefore they
should not do it now.

5. That the bare-reading or chanting of Common Prayers in the Church (which
every Parish-Clerk, Chorister, Singing-man, Scholar, or Parishioner who can
read, may and can perform as well as any Archbishop, Bishop, Dean, Prebend, or
Minister;) and wearing of Canonical Vestments is no principal part of a Bishops
or Ministers Duty, as many now of late suppose it: but only the Mat. 10. 7. c.
28. 19, 20. Mar. 16. 15.
constant, frequent preaching of the Gospel, and administration of the
Sacraments; wherein too many Bishops and Ministers are over-negligent, as if it
were the least part of their Function; whenas their Ministerial and Episcopal
Office consists principally therein; as is evident by Christ's own first and
last Missions of, and charges to his Disciples, Go ye into all the world and
preach the Gospel to every Creature, Teach all Nations, baptising them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. By Mat. 26. 55. Mar. 14.
49. Lu. 19. 47. c. 22. 52. ps. 62. 11. Lu. 4. 18, 19, 31, 43, 44.
Christ's and his Acts 2. 46, 47. c. 4. 1, etc. c. 5. 42. c. 16. 5. c 17. 11,
17. c. 19. 9, 10. c. 20. 18, 19, 20, 21. Romans 1. 15, 16, 17. c. 15. 15, to 26.
c. 16. 25. 2 Cor. 11. 28. 1 Cor. 9. 13, to 27. Heb. 3. 11.
Apostles daily constant preaching the Gospel publicly, and from House to
House, in all places where they came, without intermission. By Paul's
asservations, 1 Cor. 1. 17. c. 9. 16.
Christ sent me not to baptize, (that is principally, or in the first place,
nor yet to read, or chant Common Prayer in a Cathedral Tone) but to preach the
Gospel. For though I preach the Gospel, yet I have nothing to glory of, for
necessity is laid upon me, yea, Woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel; And
that dreadful injunction of God himself by Paul to Timothy, (whom our See
Bishop Downh^ms Consecration Sermon; Bishop Halls Remonstrance, and Divine
Right of Episcopacy; Mr. Sudburyes; Mr. Sandcrofts, and Dr. Allest^yes Sermons
at the last Consecrations of Bishops, 1660.
Bishops and their Chaplains, as well in their late as former Consecration
Sermons and Discourses, will needs make to be a Diocaesan Bishop or
Motropolitan by Divine institution, upon whom they found their Episcopacy, and
therefore must be equally liable to this injunction, as well as Timothy) 2 Timothy,
4, 1, 2, 3. fully refuted in my Vnbishoping of Timothy and Titus
I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom, preach the Word; be
instant in season, out of season, rebuke, reprove, exhort with all
long-s^ffering and doctrine, Do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of
thy Ministry. Thus seconded by his Charge to the Bishops of Ephesus, Acts 20.
28, 20, 21.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over the which the
Holy G^ost has made you Bishops, to feed the Church of God (by teaching
publicly, and from House to House) which he has purchased with his own blood.
The due consideration whereof should terrify and amaze all Non-preaching, or
Rare-preaching Bishops and Ministers, who by their Curates or Choristers read
or sing Common Prayers once or twice every day or Lords day at the least, and
yet seldom personally preach the Gospel to their People once a Month, Quarter,
Year; yea cry up Common Prayers to suppress frequent constant preachings; when
as the Sessio 24. Decr. de Reformatione, cap. 4. Surius Council. Tom. 4. p. 976,
9^ 7.
Council of Trent it self resolves, That preaching of Gods word is the
principal part of a Bishops Office, and belongs chiefly to Bishops; Whereupon
it enjoins them, and the Parish Priests throughout their Diocese, to preach
every Lords day, and Holy day, and in the time of Easts, Lent, and Advent, to
preach the word of God daily, or at least thrice a week, and at all other times
whenever it may be oportunely done, for the salvation of this people, whom they
are diligently to admonish, that they repair to the Church to hear Gods word,
when ever they can conveniently do it. Yea Sermo 10^ De Observanti^ ^abbat^.
Bernardinus Senensu, a famous Popish Friar, is not afraid to assert, That the
People are more obliged to hear, and Priests to preach the word of God, than to
hear or say Mass; and that experience manifests, that the People will
incomparably suffer more prejudice both in faith and manner, and grow more void
of the fear, love, knowledge of God, and veneration of the Sacraments, and more
overgrown with the stench and horror of sins, by the want of preaching, than
by the want of Mass and Common Prayer; concluding, Sic utique est populus sine
divino verbo licet etiam Missae frequententur, sicut mundus s^e sole, That the
People without the preaching of Gods word, although they frequent Mass and
Common Prayers, will be but like the World without the Sun. And therefore all
our Bishops, Ministers should much more diligently press and apply themselves
to the diligent frequent preaching, and all People to the assiduous hearing of
Gods word, than to the reading or hearing of Common Prayers, which too many
esteem the principal means to instruct and save their Souls, and more necessary
than preaching of the Gospel of Christ, though Romans 1, 16, 17. c. 10. 13, 14,
15. 1 Cor. 1. 16, 17, 21.
the Power of God unto salvation, and principle means of faith, of converting
and saving the Souls of those who believe it.

6. That there are somethings in the Book of Common Prayer very necessary and
fit to be amended; As 1. the mis-recital of Ezech. 18. 21, 22. in the very
beginning of the Book, which many much abuse, to the deferring of their
repentance. 2ly. The continuance of the old English Translations of the
Psalms, Epistles, Gospels, and other Texts of Scripture, according to the
Versions of Mr. Tyndal, Thomas Matthews, and Mr. Coverdale, which are not so
exact, so agreeable with the Original, and Dialect of this Age, as the more
complete, refined Translation made by King James his Command, now only read and
used in our Churches, and most private Families: Therefore most fit to be used,
and henceforth inserted into the Common Prayer Book, to take away all former
controversies and exceptions against the old Translation, as well by Mr. Thomas
Cartwright, the Lincoln-shire-Ministers, the Assembly of Perth, and others
heretofore, and of His Necessity of Reformation of the Public Worship, Rites,
Ceremonies, London 1660: (...) In nomine Jesus omne genu flectatur.
Dr. Cornelius Burgess, with sundry more of late times; especially against
that of Psalm. 105. v. 28. (occasioned by the Printers omission of one syllable,
to wit, obedient, for disobedient,) not the Translators. Only I shall observe,
that the old Translation of Phil. 2. 10. in the Epistle for Palm Sunday;
according to the Greek Original, all Latin translations but one, all English
Versions whatsoever but the Geneva, and that of King James, (which ought to be
amended in this particular) truly rendered the words, That IN (not AT) the Name
of Jesus every knee be bowed, or should bow (in the passive, not active verb
and sense) of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth, etc. till corrupted and turned into AT (not IN) the name of Jesus every
knee should bow, etc. in the active, not passive signification, by Dr. Cosins,
about 25. years past: expressly against the Original, the Latin, and most other
translations whatsoever, the old English translations of Trevisa, Tyndall,
Matthews, Coverdale, the Bishops Bible, Dr. Fulke, Mr: Cartwright, the Epistles
and Gospels printed in English at Paris, Anno 1558. yea against the very sense
and scope of the Text it self, and our English dialect; (...), In Nomine, etc.
being never rendered or translated At, but IN the name alone, in all Texts,
Liturgies, Collects, Writs, Warrants, Histories, Authors whatsoever; and the
phrase At the name, never heard of, read, used in any English, Latin, Greek,
Hebrew, Syriack, A^ abick, French, Spanish, Italian, German, Sclavonian, or
other Writer whatsoever, but only in this text; and all to justify the
Ceremony of bowing the head, and putting off the hat at the sound, or hearing
of the name Jesus: first introduced and prescribed by Pope Gregory the 10.
about the year of Christ 1272. at the reading of the Gospel only; after that
enjoined by other Popes, Popish Canons, Decrees and Masse-books, with
indulgences annexed for the users thereof to induce them thereunto; though
never intended nor prescribed by this text, nor practiced in the Primitive
Church for above 1200 years space, nor in the Reformed Churches abroad, nor
enjoined by the Common Prayer Book, or any Injunctions or Canons of our Church
confirmed by Parliament, to make them valid, as I have In the Appendix to my
Anti-arminianism, concerning bowing at the name of Jesus, Lame Giles his
Haltings, Certain Quaeres propounded to the bowers at the Name of Jesus, Anno
1636. Canterburies Doom, p. 64.
elsewhere proved at large.

3ly. The frequent repetition of the Lords Prayer, purposely instituted,
prescribed to prevent much babbling, and vain repetitions in prayer, (in 1 Kings
18. 26, 27, 28. See Ecclesiasticus 7. 4.
use only among the heathens, who thought they should be heard for their much
speaking) expressly prohibited by our Savior, Mat. 6. 7, to 16. and by Eccles.
5. 1, 2. Prove. 10. 19. Which Repetitions seem to countenance the Sea my
Plassant purge for a Roman Catholic.
Papists vain Battologies and abuse of the Lords Prayer in their Missals,
Offices, Rosaries, Psalters, Beads, by many successive rehersals thereof,
against the express command and institution of Christ.

4ly. The often rehearsals of Good Lord deliver us; We beseech thee to hear us
good Lord, by all the People in the reading of the Letany: Which Antiphonies
and Responsals between Minister, Clerk and People (except Deuteronomy. 27. 15. 1 Chronicles
16. 36. Neh 5. 13 c. 8 6 Psalm. 41. 13. Ps. 72. 19. Ps. 89. ^3. Ps. 106. 48. Rom
1. 25. Mat 6. 13. 1 Cor. 14. 16. Phil 4. 20. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Rev 5. 14. c. 7. 12.
c. 19. 4.
Amen at the cloze of every Prayer) have no precept nor president in Scripture
or solid Antiquity, but only in Popish Missals, Pontificals, Offices,
Processionals, Ceremonials, Psalters, Primers.

I shall not at all insist upon kneeling at the Sacrament, the Cross in
Baptism, the Ring in Marriage, for which there is neither command nor example in
Scripture or the Primitive Church next after the Apostles, which Mr.
Cartwright, Mr. Knewstubs, the Lincolnshire Ministers, Mr. Parker, Mr. Paybody,
Doctor Burgess, Archbishop Whitguift, Master Hooker, Doctor Prideaux, and
sundry others have at large debated, pro and contra, and may be omitted, or
left arbitrary to all; but only confine my self to some few Particulars, which
others have but slightly touched, not satisfactorily discussed.

SECT. I.
Of the frequent Repetition of Glory be to the Father, etc. at the end of every
Psalm, and in the midst or end of some Prayers, Canticles, Songs, Scriptures,
to which God never annexed it; and at the close of Athanasius his Creed.
THe first thing I shall here examine, is the reasonableness and Grounds of
this Rubric in the beginning of the Book of Common Prayer, At the end of every
Psalm throughout the year; and likewise at the end of Benedictus, Benedicite,
Magnificat, Nunc Dimittis, (and after O Lord make haste to help us, Quicunque
vult, O Lord arise help us, and deliver us for thy name sake, the Psalm for the
Churching of Women etc.) Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost; As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without
end. Amen. Which is repeated (especially where the Psalms are short) six or
seven times one after another every Morning, and as often at Evening Prayer; and
that by way of Antiphony and Responsals both by the Minister, Clerk and People,
though the Rubric prescribe it not, but only orders the Priest to say it,
without the People or Clerk.

This Rubric and practice seems very needless, superfluous, unreasonable,
offensive, unlawful, and fit to be redressed, to many judicious,
conscientious, sober Christians who resort to Common Prayers, as well as to
Seperatists from them, upon these ensuing considerations.

1. God himself never prescribed nor annexed this form of Doxalogie, nor
annexed it to the end of any one Psalm, much less of every parcel of Scripture,
Song or Ganticle, to which the Rubric, and Common Prayer Book inseperably
annex it, when read in Churches Morning or Evening all the year long without
omission or intermission; which seems to many to be an Addition to Gods sacred
Word (of which the ignorant Vulgar, and ignorant Priests repute it a Part, as
they do the postscripts to Paul's Epistles) expressly prohibited by God himself,
Deuteronomy. 4. 4. 2. c. 12. 32. Josh. 1. 7. Prove. 30. 6. Rev. 2. 18. Ye shall not add
to the Word which I command you, nor diminish from it, that you may keep the
commandment of the Lord your God. Add thou not unto his Words, lest he reprove
thee, and thou be found a liar. If any man shall add unto these things, God
shall add unto him the Plagues which are written in this Book. Yea, a making
of our selves wiser than the 1 Timothy 1. 17.
only wise God, who would have added Glory be to the Father, etc. to the end of
every Psalm, Song, Scripture, had he reputed it necessary or expedient for us
to use and repeat it, when they are publicly read in the time of his solemn
worship.

2. It seems to be a mere humane-invented will worship and tradition, never
particularly prescribed nor required in any part or text of Scripture, in
regard of manner, form, or frequent usage; and so condemned by Matthew. 15. 9. In
vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. Isay
1. 12, 13. Who has required this at your hands? Bring no more vain Oblations,
I am weary of them. Col. 2. 20, 22, 23. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ
from the rudiments of the world, why as though living in the world are ye
subject to Ordinances, after the rudiments and doctrines of men; which things
have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship, and humility.

3. It was never thus used by Gods people in any parts of his public worship
in the Old, or New Testament, nor by any of the Apostles, Primitive Churches,
Bishops, or Christians for above 300. years after Christ; Therefore not just to
be so peremptorily enjoined or practiced now. De Divinis Officiis, c. 39. 40.
Deinde imponitur Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritoi sancto. Quae verba ad
divisionem Psalmorum, qui prius indifferenter canebantur. B. Hieronymus, Damaso
Papa Petente, composuit. Sed cum nequaqu^m id sufficeret, praedicto Apostolico
suggerente, addidit adhuc, sicut erat in principio, etc. et hoc ad nutum
Diaconi dicit Cantor.
Alcuinus, Flores Histor. An. 376. p. 139.
Mat. Westminster, Mr. Acts and Monuments, vol. 3. p 11.
Fox, Bellarmin de Messa. l. 2. c. 16.
others relate, and Mr. Ecclesiastical Poli^y, l. 5. sect. 42.
Hooker, Dr. Exposition of the Liturgy in his Works, p. 7.
Boys confess Pope Damasus in the year of our Lord 376. (or St. Ierom at his
request, as some fable) was the first who introduced Glory be to the Father,
and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, appointing it to be repeated in the
Church at the end of the Psalms. And Decreta Eccles. Gall. l. 1. Tit. 7. cap.
7, 8.
Laurentius Bochellus informs us, That as it was in the beginning, is now, and
ever shall be, etc. was added to Gloria Patri long after, by the 2. Provincial
Council of Vasio in France, in the year of Christ 450. not before; Seeing then
God himself commands us, Ier. 6. 16. 1 John 2. 7. Matthew 19. 8. Lu. 5. 39.
To stand in the ways, and ask for the old Paths, where is the good way and
walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your Souls; And to keep the old
Commandment, even the Word which we have heard from the beginning; And De
Praescriptionibus, advers. haereticos.
Tertullian assures us, Illud verius quod antiquius; We ought not to follow
this Innovation so long after the Apostles time, introduced by a Popes
authority.

4. It was first inserted into, and prescribed to be used in and by Popish
Missals, and Mass-books after every Psalm, Hymn, Prayer, in the self-same
manner as it is in the Common Prayer Book, into which it was originally
transplanted out of these See Ordo Romanus Antiqu. de Divinis Officiis, Bibl.
Patr. Tom. 8. p. 392, etc.
Romish Missals; as is evident by Officium, and Processionale secundum usum
Sarum, Missale Romanum, ex Decreto sancti Concilii Tridentini restitutum, Pii
5. Pontificis Max. jussu editum. Salmanticae 1588. Rubricae Generales Missalis.
Missale Romanum, Clementis 8. aucthoritate recognitum. Antuerpiae 1630, and De
Divinis Officiis, c. 39, ^0.
Alcuinus; Pontificale and Caeremoniale Romanum,

5. The frequent use and repetition of it after every Psalm, Hymn, some
Prayers, Creeds, at least 8. or 9. times every Morning prayer, seems to be a
vain babbling and repetition, prohibited by Eccles. 5. 1, 2. Prove. 10. 19. and
Matthew. 6. 6, 7, 8. And an imitation, if not justification of the Papists use of
the Ave Mary after every Pater noster, which they have annexed to the Lords
Prayer, as well as Gloria Patri to the end of every Psalm and sacred Hymn,
with an addition to the Ave Maria it self; which makes it a See my pleasant
purge for a Roman Catholic
Prayer to her; when as in it self it is but a bare salutation, and prayer for
her.

6. This daily use and frequent repetition of Gloria Patri, etc. is a mere
unnecessary super^luity and exuberancy which may well be spared: for if it were
originally introduced and still continued in the Church only as a
paraphrastical exposition of To. 11. 36. to See Basil. Epist. 78. Theodoret
Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 24. Sozomen, l. 4 c. 19.
manifest our sound judgment concerning the sacred Trinity against the Arrians;
as Ecclesiastical Polity, l 5. sect. 42.
Mr. Hooker, In his works, London 1622. p 7.
Dr. Boys, and other Patrons of it affirm. And if, As it was in the beginning,
etc. was superadded thereunto by the 2. Provincial Council of Vasio, and yet
continued, by reason of the incredulity and craft of Heretics, who
blasphemo^sly affirmed, Dei filium non semper cum Patre fuisse, sed a tempore
caepisse; That the Son of God was not always with the Father, but to have his
beginning from Time, as this Council and Decreta Ecclesiae, Gal. l. 1. Tit. 7.
c. 7, 8.
Bochellus assure us; It is then humbly submitted to the judgment of all
impartial Christians who acknowledge, glorify, and worship the Trinity in
unity. and believe the eternity of our Saviors generation: Whether the single
rehearsal of one or more of these sacred Texts of Scripture at the beginning,
middle, or end of Morning or Evening Prayer, viz. 1 John 5. 7. There are three
that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost, and these
three are one. Mat. 28. 19. All power is given unto me both in Heaven and
Earth; Go therefore and teach all Nations, baptising them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Rev. 4. 8. Holy, Holy, Holy Lord
God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. John 1. 1, 2. In the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; the same was in
the beginning with God. Heb. 13. 8. Jesus Christ, yesterday, and to day, and
the same for ever. Rev. 1. 8 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending
says the Lord, which is, which was, and which is to come. Romans 9. 5. Christ,
who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen. Prove. 8. 22, 23. The Lord
possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old: I was set up
from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was: When there were no
depths, I was brought forth; before the Hills was I brought forth, etc. When he
appointed the Foundations of the earth, then I was by him, as one brought up
with him, I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him. Whether these
Texts rehearsal would not far more clearly, satisfactorily manifest, testify
our judgment concerning the right worship, eternal being, generation, and
Deity of Christ, than this invention and frequent repetition of Glory be to the
Father, etc. being no Canonical Scripture as these Texts are, and a mere humane
invention? (wherein the Leo^^ius Anti^chiae Episcopus cum Cle^um et etiam
L^icorum multitudl^nem in du^s parts divisam cerneret, et alteram quo lauds
Filii magis celebrarent hanc conjunctionem, et, exhibere: alteram autem hanc
praepositionem, Per in ^odem ponere, et cum ad Spiritum Sanctum ventum esset,
praepositionem In adjicere, (viz. Gloria Patri per filium, in Spiritu sancto)
ipse totam glorificatione^ tacitus secum recitavit, ade^ ut qui prope eum
erant, solum hanc particulam, In saecula saeculorum, audirent. Theodoret
Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 24. Sozomen l. 4. c. 19.
first inventors were much divided among themselves.) Besides, the soundness
of our Faith in the blessed Trinity, and our Saviors eternal Generation, is
more fully, clearly expressed every Morrning and Evening Prayer, by the
rehearsal of the Apostles, the Nicene, Athanasius Creeds, inserted into the
Common Prayer Book, by the very beginning of the Letany read every Lordsday,
Friday and Wednesday; by the form of Baptism constantly used every day in great
Parishes, and by the Psalms, Lessons, Collect, Epistle and Gospel on Trinity
Sunday, than by Gloria Patri; etc. Therefore it may very well be spared as a
needless superfluity in our Church.

7. This Addition to Gloria Patri by the Council of V^sio, As it was in the
beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen. on purpose to
express the eternal being and generation of Christ, and refute those
Heretics who denied it, if judiciously examined, is very defective in it
self, and incongruously annexed to Glory be to the Father. For 1. there is no
mention at all of Christ, not one syllable in it concerning his eternal
generation, as there is in Prove. 8. John 1. and other forecited Texts. 2ly. It
seems clearly to exclude Christ, and to relate to something else; As IT (not
Christ) was in the beginning is now, and ever shall be, imports. 3ly. Christ's
eternal generation in the beginning, cannot properly be said, is now, and ever
shall be world without end, without some incongruity and contradiction. 4ly. As
it is coupled with the precedent clause, Glory be to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost, it must See Basilii Epist. 78. Theodoret Eccles.
Hist. l. 2. c. 24. Sozomen l. 4 c. 19. Hookers Ecclesiastical Poli^y l. 5.
Sect. 42.
necessarily relate to the three Persons alike, and not to Christ alone, much
less to his eternal Generation, of which there is no mention in the first
clause. For since the Father and the Holy Ghost are not begotten, but only the
Son; and this Clause refers to the Father and Holy Ghost as much as to the Son;
it cannot peculiarly express or declare the eternal Generation of the Son, but
rather the eternal being and immutability of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
in a true Gramatical and Logical construction. 5ly. Any Heretic may easily
evade this Clause by applying it only to the Father who is first, or to the
Holy, last mentioned in Gloria Patri, and not to the So^. 6ly. The illiterate
Vulgar, yea Ignorant reading Priests, Vicars, Atheists, do no ways understand
it of the Sons eternal being and Generation, but rather in a litteral and quite
other sense, than the Original Contrivers of it intended, even according the
sense and language of those Atheistical S^^ffers prophesied of by St. Peter in
these last days, (who hold the World to be eternal, and to have no end,
contrary to Psalm. 102. 25, 26, 27. Hebr. 1. 10, 11, 12. Isay 34. 4. Mar. 13.
19, 40, 49. c. 34. 3, etc. 1 Pet. 4. 7. 2 Pet: 3. 6, to 14. Rev. 6. 12, 13.)
saying, Where is the promise of Christ's coming (to judgment) for since the
Fathers fell asleep ALL THINGS CONTINUE AS THEY WERE FROM THE BEGINNING; and do
so now, and ever shall do world without end; whose Atheistical Scoff and
Opinion these words do more serve to justify and corroborate, than the eternal
Generation of our Savior; Therefore not fit to be still continued in our
Church now there are so many Atheists profane Scoffers and Deriders of
Christ's second coming, and the worlds approaching Dissolution, whom Peter
largely refutes, 2 Pet. 3. 6, to 14.

8. If the use of Gloria Patri, etc. was first instituted and inserted into
public Liturgies (as some conceive) to render Glory and Praise to God, and the
Trinity in Unity; no doubt this may be far better, and more effectually
performed without the least exception, by the recital of the Song of the Angels
and Heavenly ho^t, at our Saviors Nativity, Luke 2. 14. and that of Luke 19.
38. Glory to God in the highest, etc. (inserted into the Common Prayer, and
repeated at every Celebration of the Lords Supper, with some additions of like
nature) prescribed to be used in Churches and Liturgies by Surius Conciliorum,
Tom. 1 p. 185. Honorius Augustodunensis. Gemma Animae, l. 1. c. 93. Gratian. De
Consecrat. distinct. 2. and distinct. 4. cap. Statuimus. The. Waldersis. Tom.
^. Tit. ^. c. 31. sect 7. Gulielmus Durantus Rationale Divinorum l. 3. Fox Acts
and Monuments, vol. 3 p. 7 and Missale Romanum.
Pope Telesphoru^, in the year 139. long before the invention or prescription
of Gloria Patri, by Pope Damasus. Of Romans 11 36. Of him, and through him, and
for him are all things, to him be glory for ever Amen, of which Doctor Boys
and others make Glory be to the Father, etc. a mere Paraphrastical Exposition,
Gal. 1. 4, 5. According to the will of God, and our Father, to whom be glory
for ever and ever Amen. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal,
invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever Amen. 2 Timothy 4. 18. And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will
preserve me unto his Heavenly Kingdom, to whom be glory for ever and ever Amen.
Heb. 13. 20, 21. Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus, etc. make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in
you that which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
for ever and ever Amen. Romans 16. 27. To God only wise, be glory through Jesus
Christ for ever, Amen. 1 Pet. 5. 10, 11. But the God of all grace, who has
called us into his eternal glory through Jesus Christ, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, settle you; To him be glory and dominion for ever and
ever Amen. Rev. 4. 9, 10, 11. c. 5. 12, 13, 14. And when those Beasts give
glory and honor and thanks to him that sat on the Throne, who lives for ever
and ever, the 24. Elders fall down (not stand up) before him that sat on the
Throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns
before the Throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and
honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they
are and were created. And I heard the voice of many Angels round about the
Throne, and the Beasts and the Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand
times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; saying, with a loud voice,
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and wisdom, and riches,
and honor, and glory, and blessing. And every Creature which is in heaven, and
under the earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in them, heard I,
saying, Blessing, honor, glory and power, be unto him that sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever; And the four Beasts said, Amen.
Rev. 7. 9, 10, 11, 12. After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which no
man could number, of all Nations, and kinreds of people and tongues stood
before the Throne, and before the Lamb clothed with white robes, and palms in
their hands; and cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which
^itteth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb; And all the Angels stood round
about the Throne, etc. and fell before the Throne on their faces, (not stood
up) and worshipped God, saying, Amen. Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and
thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and
ever. Amen. The reading or reciting of one or more of these Canonical
Doxalogies at the beginning, middle, or end of Morning of Evening Prayers,
would certainly be more Canonical, expedient, useful in and to our Churches,
and less subject to exceptions, than this frequent Repetition of Gloria Patri,
etc. a mere superfluous humane invention and tradition, which ought to give
place to these forecited sacred Texts.

9ly. The annexing of Gloria Patri to, and repetition of it at the end of every
Psalm, is either incongruous, impertinent, or superfluous at the best. The
greatest part of the Psalms are either Supplications, Intercessions, Prayers,
Exhortations, Imprecations, Lamentations, Instructions, admonitions, or
penitential Confessions of Sin, and Gods judgments inflicted for the same; and
to repeat Glory be to the Father, etc. at such Psalms cloze, seems to
considerate Christians a great Incongruity, impertinency, and absurdity;
especially when Caeremoniale Episcopor^^n, Parisi^s 1633. l. 1. c. 28. p. 140.
sung with Organs and the Quire in Cathedrals, as Caeremoniale Romanum requires
it. Compare this Doxalogy with the last Verses of Psalm. 1. 6. 9, 10. 12. 14.
15. 19. 20. 22. 25. 31. 33. 36. 38. 39. 40. 46. 47. 49. 51. 55. 70. 76. 78. 80.
81, etc. and you shall at first discern how little coherenoe, harmony there is
between them. The residue of the Psalms are for the most part gratulatory,
consisting of Praises, Thanksgivings, and Gratifications to God for his
Spiritual, Temporal, and eternal Mercies and Deliverances; concluding with
Psalm. 7. 17. Ps. 9. 1. Ps. 30. 1 1. Psalm. 33. 1. and 34, 1. and 42. 11. and 43.
5. and 45. 17. Ps 4^. 1 and 59. 17. Psalm 75. 1. and 66. 1, 2, 20 Ps 68. 35. and
72. 18, 19, and 75. 1. and 89, 52. and 97. 12. and 100 1. 103. 1, 2. 21, 22.
Ps. 104. 1, 25. Ps 105. 145. Ps 106. 1. 48. Ps 107. 1. Ps 111. 1. and 112. 1, 9
Ps. 115. 18. Ps. 116. 19 Ps 117. 1, 2. Ps. 118. 1. 29. Ps. 135. 1. 19, 20, 21.
Ps. 145, 10 Psalm. 150.
Praise ye the Lord, or beginning with it: and to annex Gloria Patri to them,
is either a mere unnecessary superfluity or Tautoligy, an adding of Water to
the Ocean, and of human inventions to Divine Thanksgivings.

See Bibliotheca Patrum, col. Agrip. 1618. Tom. 12. p. 1034. G. 1050, 1051.
Honorius Augustodunensis, flourishing about the year of Christ, 1120. in his
Gemma Animae, sive de Divinis Officiis and antiquo ritu Missarum) out of which
Gulielmus Durantus has borrowed most part of his Rationale Divinorum) lib. 1.
c. 121. Yea Ritus Celebrandi Missam and Missa pro Defunctis.
Missale Romanum, set forth by Pope Pius Quintus, and revised by Pope Clement
the 8th. with others inform us, That at the Mass of the Dead, Gloria Patri, and
Allelujah, which signify gladness, are not sung or used, because this Mass
imitates sorrow: and we are thereby admonished that we came into the world with
sadness, and shall depart thence with sorrow. If then Papists, Popes, and
Missals themselves repute Gloria Patri incongruous and absurd to be sung or
said in Masses for the Dead, upon this account; it must by the self-same reason
be as incongruous and absurd for any to chant or repeat it at the end of
penitential, supplicatory, lamenting complaining Psalms, or Palms that are
read at Funerals. The same Honorius, l. 2. c. 2, and 10. informs us, Hi Psalmi
sub (...) Gloria Patri canuntur, quia susti illis temporibus Trinitatem
coluisse creduntur. Singuli Psulmi cum Gloria Patri canuntur, qui^ singuli
supradicti ordines Trinitatem adorasse scribuntur. Ideo etiam et tres Psalmi
canuntur, Antiphonae tern^.
That the 1, 2, 3, and 6. Psalms (which he applies to the generation from Adam
to Noah in general, and to Abel, Enos, Enoch and Lamech in special) are all
said under one Gloria Patri, because the just men of that Age are believed to
have worshipped the Trinity. And that all Psalms are sung with Gloria Patri,
because all the foresaid orders, (of Priests, Judges, Kings, in the several Ages
from Adam to Christ) are written to have worshipped the Trinity; and therefore
three Psalms and three Anthems are likewise sung. This is the only reason I
meet with for the chanting and repeating Gloria Patri after every Psalm, which
how Monkish, weak, and ridiculous it is (since upon the same account it ought
to be sung or read after every Chapter in the Old and New Testament, or else it
implies, that the Penmen of those Canonical Texts and Chapters after which it
is neither sung nor read, did not adore the Trinity) let the impartial Readers
judge: since the Apostles and Christians in the Primitive times next after
Christ would have used it after every Psalm and Canticle upon this Account,
which they never did; and we ought not to be Prove. 26. 5. 12. 1 Cor. 3. 18, 19,
20.
wiser in our own concrets than they, in matters which concern Gods immediate
worship.

10. Gloria Patri, etc. coupled with As it was in the beginning is now, and
ever shall be, etc. intimates, that the Doxalogy was used from all eternity in
honor of the blessed Trinity by Saints and Angels, before either of them were
created, or at least from the Creation till this present time, without
variation or intermission, which is both false and absurd to assert: Yea
literally taken Archbps, Bishops, Deans, Chapters, Prebends, Cathedralists who
are most zealous for its continuance, have least reason of any other Christians
to practice, chaunt, repeat it, since they have so much degenerated, swarved
from the Bishops, Ministers in the Apostles age, and Primitive Church in their
daily Preaching, Manners, Habits, Vestments, Ornaments, Church-musick, Piety,
Humility, Jurisdidictions, Temporal possessions, Ceremonies, Government, ( by
See Davidis Blondelli Apologia pro sententia Hieronymi De Episcopis and
Presbyteris. And my Vnbishopin^ of Timothy and Titus.
a joint Council of Presbyters) Ecclesiastical centsure; Of neither whereof
they can truly say, As it was in the beginning is now, nor yet and ever shall
be world without end, Amen; which they should henceforth discontinue, unless
they will really conform themselves in all things to the primitive Bishops and
Ministers, in point of worship, doctrine, disciplne, administration of
Sacraments, Cereremonies, Vestments, Church Service, and contempt of Worldly
Pomp, Riches, Honors, Heavenly conversation; and comply with his Majesty's
most gracious Declarations touching Ecclesiastical affairs, and the endowment
of poor Vicaridges with competent maintenance for the benefit of the Peoples
souls and bodies, to which they are very a verse.

11. The usual custom of repeating Gloria Patri, etc. As it was in the
beginning, etc. interchangably by the Ministers and People; the Minister
sometimes reciting the first clause, and the Clerk and People the latter;
sometimes the Clerk and People rehearsing the first part, and the Minister the
last, by way of Dialogue, Antiphony and Responsals; as it is contrary to the
Rubric, which prescribes the Priest alone to rehearse it, not the People, who
are but to say Amen thereto; So is it contrary to the practice of Gods Church
in the first and purest times. And the recital thereof with a loud obstreperous
voice as well by Women as Men, repugnant to the Apostles express precepts, 1
Cor. 14. 34, 35. Let your Women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not
permitted unto them t^ speak; for it is a shame for them to speak in the
Church; Therefore most fit to be reformed for the future, and laid quite aside.

12. The repetition of Glory be to the Father, etc. after every Psalm, Hymn
and Versicle, according to the Rubric in times of Divine service, has
introduced a New disorderly, confused Custom and Ceremony in Cathedral and
some other Churches, (though prescribed by no Rubric, Law, Sanction, or Canon
of our Church) of starting and standing up at every rehearsal of it, and
quatting down again as soon as it is repeated; which gives a great offense to
many, therefore I shall next discuss it.

SECT. II.
Of Ministers and Peoples rising and standing up at every Rehearsal of Glory be
to the Father, etc.
THough the Gesture of rising and standing up during any part of Divine
Service, simply considered in it self, be a thing indifferent, and lawful, as
well as kneeling or sitting, as the 2 Chronicles. 20. 13. Ier. 15. 1. Numb. 23. 6. 1
Kings 13. 1. 2 Kings 11. 14. c. 23. 3 1 Kings 18. 54, 55. 2 Chronicles. 6. 3. c. 20.
5, 20. Ezec. 1. 21, 24, 25. Luke 18. 11. 13. 2 Chr. 30. 16. c. 34. 31, 32. c.
35. 10. Neh. 8. 7, 8. Exodus 20, 21. Neh. 8. 5, c. 9. 2, 3, 4. Ezr. 10. 10. Luke
4. 16. Acts 1. 15. c. 11. 28. Genesis 11. 22. Deuteronomy. 4. 10. Rev. 7. 9. c. 8. 2.
Marginal Scriptures evidence, yet the customary, constant usage thereof at
Gloria Patri in all Cathedral, most Parish Churches, Chapels, newly revived,
gives great distaste to many sober Christians, upon these ensuing
Considerations, which make them to disgust the use of Gloria Patri it self, as
an unnecessary superfluity which may well be spared.

1. Because there is no precept nor president for any such usage or custom, in
the old or new Testament, nor in the Primitive Church, when purest, devoutest,
for above 700 years after Christ.

2. There is no Rubric, Law, legal Canon or Injunction for it in our own
Church since the Reformation of Religion, as there was before in times of
Popery; it being exploded upon the Reformation and Establishment of the Book of
Common Prayer, though since introduced by Degree^ in Cathedrals and Parish
Churches, by innovating Prelates, and Prelatical Clergymen, without any Law,
against the minds of our first Reformers who exploded it.

3. Because the frequent sudden starting and standing up in the reading of the
Psalms, and other parts of the Liturgy, at and during every Rehearsal of Gloria
Patri, and pronouncing it promiscously with a loud voice, as well by Men as
Women, who are to keep silence, and not suffered to speak in the Church, whiles
others sit as before, (because this Ceremony is not prescribed) and then
quatting down again, to the disturbance of those who sit by or near them, and
offense of those who scruple, dislike this illegal Innovation, as an undecent
and disorderly custom, introduced without any solid reason, contrary to the
Apostles prescription and direction, 1 Cor. 14. 33, 34, 35, 40. and 1 Timothy 2.
11. 12. Let all thingste done decently and in order, for God is not the Author
of confusion but peace; Let your women keep silence in the Churches, etc. This
chaunting and rehearsing of Gloria Patri by all the people with a loud voice,
together with the Priest at the end of the Psalm, was long since thus censured
as a strange disorderly Innovation, by Cassianus Institut l. 2. c. 8. Friderici
Londebrogi Glossarium Tit. Gloria Patri.
Cassianus a Presbyter of Marselles. Illud autem quod in hac Provincia vidimus,
ut uno cantante in clausula Psalmi, omnes adstantes concinent cum ^amore,
Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spirituisancto, nusquam per Orientem audivimus; sed
cum silentio omnium, ab eo qui cantat, finito Psalmo or ationem succedere:
Therefore most fit to be Reformed now, there being no Rubric, Law or Canon
that prescribes it in our Church.

4. Because it is directly contrary to the president and practice of the 24.
Elders, and the great multitude of Saints of all Nations, and kinreds and
people, Rev. 4. 11, 12. cap. 7. 10, 11, 12. Who when they gave praise and glory
unto God, did all fall down on their faces (not stand up upon their feet)
before the Throne, and him that sat thereon, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord,
to receive glory, and honor, and praise: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and
thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and
ever Amen. The same in substance and words almost with Gloria Patri, etc. at
which all now use to rise and stand upright, instead of falling down on their
faces; Yea rise up not only from their seats, but knees, when they are praying,
O Lord make haste to help us, to Chant or say Glory be to the Father, etc.
subjoyned to that and other Prayers.

5. Because this starting and standing up at Gloria Patri, was originally
introduced, prescribed by Popish Missals, Councils, Canons, Priests, and taken
up in imitation of Popish Prelates, Priests, Monks, Papists, in their
Celebration of their Masses, in which they all stand up together when Gloria
Patri is repeated at the entrances of their several Masses, the end of every
Psalm, and other parts of their Mass. When and by what Popes and Councils it
was first introduced, I cannot certainly define. Chronicon Reichespengense, In
his Glossarium. Tit. Gloria Patri. Fredericus Lindeb^gus Codex Legum Antiq. p.
840. and his Glossarium. Gloria Patri.
Fredericus Lindebrogus, with others forecited, inform us, That Pope Damasus,
Anno 368. in fine cujusque Psalmi Gloria Patri cantariprimus invenit and
constituit: But that he enjoined all or any to stand up when it was thus sung
or read, no Author once records. The Capitularia of the Emperor Charles the
Great, and Ludovicus Pius, collected by Abbot Ansegisus, and Benedictus Levita,
l. 1. Tit. 70. De fide Presbyterorum ab Episcopis discutienda, ordani; ut
Episcopi diligenter discutiant per suas Parochias, etc. Vt Gloria Patri cum
omni honor apud omnes cantetur; and ipse Sacerdos cum sanctis Angelis and
populo Dei communi voce, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus decantet: But that they
should stand up when they sung it, there is not one syllable in this
Constitution, nor in any Here p. 9, 10, etc.
forecited Council or Decretall, that enjoins the use of Gloria Patri.
Therefore it was not practiced in that age; The first Council I have yet found
that prescribes standing up at Gloria Patri, is the Provincial Surius Council.
Tom. 4 p. 740, 741. Laur. Bochellus Decret: Eccles Gal. l. 1. Tit. 7. c. 31. p.
63.
Council of Senns in France, in the year 1528. cap. 18. De horis Canonicis
distinct, reverenter and honest in Ecclesia decantandis, which enjoins, that
in Cathedral, Collegiat and Conventual Churches, (not Parochial or Chapels) cum
dicitur Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spiritui Sancto, omnes consurgant; but why
all should thus rise and stand up together when Glory be to the Father, etc. is
said, it renders no reason at all, nor any Council else I have yet perused;
neither can I find any probable reason for it, but that which is intimated in
Ritus celebrandi Missam, prefixed to Missale Romanum, revised by Pope Pius the
5th. and reformed by Pope Clement the 8th. De Principio Missae, sect. 3.
Sacerdos cum in fine Psalmor ^m dicit, Gloria Patri, etc. caput Cruci inclinat;
that the Priest when he says Gloria Patri in the end of the Psalms, may the
better bow Ordo Romanus Antiquus. Bibl. Patrum, Tom. 8. p 397, 398
his head to the Crucifix or Altar, (and the people together with him) which he
and they could not so conveniently perform, unless they stood up and raised
themselves from their seats. This Council of Senns, immediately subjoyns in the
same Canon, Cum nominatur illud nomen gloriosum Jesus, in quo omne genu
flectitur (in, not at which every knee is bowed, in the passive, not active
sense) coelestium, terrestrium and infernorum, omnes caput inclinent. A Canon
contrary to the words of the Text, Phil. 2. 9, 10. which requirs, that every
knee, not head should be bowed, as well as repugnant to its sense, which is
only this, that God has highly exalted Jesus Christ to be the Sovereign Lord,
not only of his Church, but all other Creatures; and that in the general day of
judgment not only all Angels, Saints, but Devils, damned persons, should
actually be subjected to his Sovereign power, as their supreme Lord and Judge,
not Jesus or Savior, (he being no Savior, but only a Lord over Devils, damned
persons, and all other Creatures but men) and actually confess him to be their
Mat. 25. 37, 44. Rev. 5. 18.
LORD, to the glory of God the Father: the genuine scope and meaning of this
much abused, mistaken Text, as is evident by the words, and Isaiah 45. 23. Romans
14. 9, to 15. c. 2. 5, to 17. Mat. 25. 31, to 46. c. 28. 18, 19. Ephesians. 1. 19,
to 23. Heb. 1. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8. c. 2. 8. Col. 1. 15, to 20. Acts 2. 34, 35,
36. c. 10. 36, 42. Col. 1. 15, to 20. Rev. 1. 5, 6. c. 5. 11, to 14. c. 20. 12,
13. 1 Timothy 6. 14, 15. John 5. 20, 21, 22, 23. which fully explain this Text, as
I have Appendix to my Anti-arminianise concerning Bowing at the Name Jesus.
Lame Giles his Haltings. Quaeres pronounded concerning Bowing at the Name Jesus.
elsewhere largely evidenced. The next Council I find prescribing standing up
at Gloria Patri, (and bowing at the Name Jesus jointly together) is that of
Bourdeaux, (Concilium Bituriense) Anno 1584. thus registered by Decret. Eccl.
Gal l. 1. Tit 3. c. 38. p. 86.
Bochellus. In fine Psalmorum and ubicunque Gloria sanctissimae Trinitati
redditur, omnes consurgant: that is, in the end of psalms, and wheresoever
Glory is rendered to the most holy Trinity, let all rise (or stand) up
together, and in invocatione nomine Jesus genu flectant; which last clause may
be more properly interpreted of kneeling or bowing the knees to Christ, in the
invocation of his Name in Prayer, then at the sound or mention of his Name
Jesus, when not invoked in the Gospels, Epistles, second Lessons or Sermons.
These are the only Councils and Canons I know, (and those but of late years
made by Popish Provincial Councils) enjoining all to stand up when Gloria Patri
is said or sung, and that principally in Cathedral, Collegiat and Conventual
Churches, without any solid reason rendered for it: Which being a practice
generally taken up and used only by Papists, Popish Prelates, Priests, Monks,
and Popish Churches in Foreign parts, and in no reformed Churches beyond the
Seas, nor prescribed by any Law, Rubric, Injunction, or legal Canon of the
Church of England, I humbly submit to the Judgments, Consciences, of all
zealous, sober, judicious Protestants, Prelates and Cathedralists, whether upon
consideration of the Premises, they may not with more reason and descretion
henceforth give over not only their rising and standing up at Gloria Patri, but
likewise the freequent Repetition, if not the use thereof for the future, and
quite expung it out of the Book of Common Prayer, then any longer continue it
to the offense and scandal of thousands of their Protestant Brethren, who are
both pious, peaceable, learned, judicious, and no Enemies, but Friends to a
well-reformed public Liturgy, wherein they may all heartily accord.

SECT. III.
Of standing up at the Reading of the Gospel, and Three Creeds.
I Am yet of opinion, that the Decretals and Canons prescribing standing up at
Gloria Patri, were the true original of those for standing up at the reading of
the Gospel, and prefacing it with the Repetition of Glory be to thee O Lord,
prescribed by See Rubricae Generales Missalis, and Ritus Celebrandi Missam,
prefixed to Missale Romanum, Pii 5. and Clementis 8. Honorius Augustodunensiis,
Gemma Animae l. 2. and 3. Gulielmus Durantus. Rationale Divinorum l. 4.
Roman Missals, Ceremonials, Pontificals, Popes Decrees, Popish Writers, and
derived from them to those who now practice it in our Church, being the same in
substance with Gloria Patri, which being now generally used in all our
Cathedrals, and revived of late in many Parish Churches and Chapels, though not
prescribed by any Rubric in the Book of Common Prayer, nor binding Law or
Canon of our Church, by innovating Clergymen, and such as are overmuch
addicted to Ceremonies and Formalities; I shall next calmly examine the
original grounds, lawfulness, decency, and expediency thereof.

The original of standing up at the reading of that we call the Gospel,
specially appointed at the Communion on Sundays and Holy Days, is attributed
by some to Pope Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 66. 6.
Clement the 1. and inserted into his spurious Apostolical Constitutions, in
these words, Cum Evangelium legitur, omnes Presbyteri, Diaconi, and Laici
Allurgant, cum magno silentio, Scriptum est enim; Deuteronomy. 5. and 27.
Tace and audi Israel. Et rursum, Tu vero hic sta and audies. Deinde vero
moneant Presbyteri populum, ut sede^t. But this Constitution, 1. As it was none
of the Apostles, so neither this Pope Clements, but a spurious Imposture of far
later days, as Mr. Cook in his Censura Patrum, Dr. James, and sundry others
have evidenced. 2ly. The standing up thereby enjoined, is not at the reading of
that we now call the Gospel, but of the Second Lesson or Chapter out of one of
the 4. Evangelists, as the preceding words demonstrate. And why all Priests,
Deacons, and Laymen should stand up together at the reading of that we now
usually call the Gospel, because taken out of the Gospel, rather then at the
Second Lesson or Chapter being the Gospel as much as it, or at the Reading of
the Gospel only, rather then of the Epistle, (which is part of the 1 These. 1.
5. c. 2. 2, 4, 8. Gal. 1. 6. c. 2. 2, 5, 7. Phil. 1. 5, 12, 17, 27. c 2. 22.
Col. 2. 5. 2. These. 2. 14. 1 Timothy 14. 6, 59. Romans 1. 15, 16, 17. c. 2. 16. c.
15. 16, 29. c. 16. 25. 1 Cor. 4. 15. c. 3. 17, 18. 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. Heb. 4. 2.
Gospel, and New Testament, as well, as much as any Chapter or part of a
Chapter taken out of the 4. Evangelists) or any other part or Chapter of the
Old or New Testament, being all alike, sacred, Canonical, and to be read,
heard, embraced, believed, obeyed, with the like attention, reverence,
devotion, affection, faith; no sober Christian or Divine can render any solid
convincing reason. 3ly. This Constitution, enjoined all to rise up with great
silence; When now all rise up with a loud voice, saying, Glory be to thee O
Lord; quite contrary thereunto. 4ly. The Texts produced out of Deuteronomy. 5. 31. c.
27. 12, 13. to justify this standing up at the Gospel; are meant only of
reading the Law; at which all now usually kneel on their knees, not stand up;
which is very preposterous and opposite to these Texts.

Others attribute the Original of standing at the Gospel to Gration de
Consecratione distinct. 2. Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 518. Thomas Waldensis,
Doctrinalis, Tom 3. Tit. 4. cap. 3^. sect. ^. f. 66, 67. Gulielmus Duramus
Rationale Divinorum, l. 4. c. 5. de Evangelio Centur. Mag 4. Baronius,
Spondanus, and others.
Pope Anastatius the 1. (or Athanasius, as some style him) about the year of
our Lord 404. who thus decreed its future use; Significastis, quosdam
sacerdotes in Ecclesia, quando leguntur Evangelia sedere, and Domini Salvatoris
verba non stantes, sed sedentes audire, and hoc ex majorum traditione se
accipisse narrant; quod ut nullatenus deinceps fieri sinatis, Apostolica
authoritate mandamus. Sed dum sancta Evangelia in Ecclesia recitantur,
Sacerdotes et caeteri omnes praesentes, non sedentes, Sed venerabiliter curvi
in conspectu sancti Evangelii stantes, Dominica verba intent audiant, et
fideliter adorent. If this Decree be not forged (as most of this Nature are)
yet I shall observe from it, 1. That a Pope was the first Author, Broacher of
this Ceremony. 2ly. That it was not used before his time. 3ly. That certain
Priests used to sit, not stand, at the reading of the Gospells; and that they
received this practice by tradition from their Ancestors, which this Pope
denied not, yet decreed the contrary by his own Papal authority, without advise
of any Synod or Council. 4ly. That he peremptorily prohibits any to fit, and
commands all (whether Priests or People to stand during all the reading of the
Gospel, though aged, weak, lame, sickly: in which Cases Waldensis, Durantus,
and others grant, they may sit down when they are unable to stand, or weary of
standing up, notwithstanding this Decree. 5ly. That the Gospells (in the
Plural, not Singular Number) here intended, are not those we now call Gospells;
but any Lessons or Chapters whatsoever read in the Church out of the four
Evangelists or New Testament. Therefore to confine it only to that now styled
the Gospel, not to any other Chapter, Lesson read out of the Gospel, is to
contradict this Popes Decree. 6ly. That the end why they are commanded to stand
at the Gospells was, That they might more attentively hear and attend to it;
which reason, as it is good and laudable, so it holds as well at the reading of
the Epistles, 10. Commandments, Psalms, Chapters out of the Old Testament, or
any other Texts of Scripture, Lessons taken out of the four Evangelists, as at
the Gospels, at which all should equally stand, as well as at these Gospells.
7ly. If any stand up on this account, to adore the Gospells, or yield them more
reverence, attention, adoration than other sacred Scriptures, (of equal
authority with them) as the last clause of the Decree intimates; it is
doubtless not only a Superstitious, but irreligious practice, contrary to the
Gospel and these sacred Texts, 2 Timothy 3. 16. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Mar. 12. 44. John 5.
39. Acts 17. 2, 11. c. 18. 28. Romans 1. 2. c. 10. 11. c. 15. 4. c. 16. 25, 26 2 Timothy 3. 15. 8ly. It is observed of our Savior himself, Lu. 4. 16. that coming
to Nazareth, as his Custom was, he went into the Synogogue on the Sabbath day,
and stood up to read, not the Gospel or any of the four Evangelists, (then not
written) but the Book of the Prophet Isaias; out of which when he had read his
Text standing; he closed the Book, gave it again to the Minister, and late
down, and preached to the people in the Synagogues, who all fasined their eyes
on him, v. 20, 21, etc. Moreover we read of Christ, Mat. 13. 2. c. 15. 29. c.
24. 3. Mar. 4. 1. c. 13. 3, etc. Lu. 5. 3. Jo. 6. 3. c. 8 2. that when he
taught, or preached the Gospel to the people, or his Disciples, he usually sare
down, not stood up, whence he uses this expression, Mat. 26. 55. I sat daily
with you teaching in the Temple, and ye laid no hold on me. How then this Popes
Decree can well stand with our Saviors own practice, let the Impartial judge.

Gulielmus Durantus in his Rationale Divinorum, 1. 4. Rubrica, de Evangelio,
writes thus of the original of standing up at the Gospel, and the reasons of
it, and other Ceremonies accompanying it: Sane Evangelium stando, and non
sedendo auditur, sicut statuit Anastatius Papa, de Consecr. Did. 1.
Apostolica, ut ad Praelium pro Christi fide servanda promp^itudo notetur, unde
Lu. 22. Q^^non (...) gl^^lium vendat tunicam and emat illum. Et ex quo standum
est, apparet, quod nec jac^re, nec appodiare d^bemus Evang^lium audiendo.
Reclinatoria ergo tun^ relinquuntur, ad not andum, quod non debemus considerare
in principilus, nec sustentare interrenis, quia, vanitas vanit atum and omnia
vanit as dixit Ecclesiastes. Et secundum ipsum Anastatium, stantes cur^i manner
debemus, ut humilitatem quae a D^^uno doceti^ eviam corpore demonstremus.
Auditur etiam Evangelium in silento, quia omnia soluta sunt in Evangelio quae
in Lege and Prophetis promissa erant. Deponuntur etiam ^un^ caculi and arma.
Primo, ne imitemur Iudaeos in co^spechi ^^^fixi erundines and arma ferentes.
Secundo, ad not ^ndum quod Christo praedicanto omnes legales observantiae quae
per ^aculos significantur, deposit ^ sunt. Tertio depositio baculorum and
armorum humilitatem not at, and Christian per fectionis csse non se vindicare
sed Domino (...) vindiciam. And then he proceeds to sundry other Ceremonies,
Customs, Crossings of the Body in several places, and antique gestures which
Priests and Prelates are to use in reading the Gospel, fitter for the Stage
than the Church or Gospel, and to provoke laughter than Devotion.

It seems this Custom of standing at the Gospel began of late to be
discontinued or neglected even by Popish Priests and Laics; whereupon the
(...) Tit. ^. c. 115. p. ^^.
Popish Council of ^hemes in France, Anno 1583. reinforced it by this Canon;
Dum legitur Evangelium, vel Praefatio, omnes assurgant; Let all stand up whiles
the Gospel, or Preface is read.

Thi^ Ceremony or Gesture of Standing, is likewise customarily used by most at
the respective rehearsing of the Creed, commonly called the Apostles, Nicene,
and Athanasius Creeds, though not prescribed by any Rubric, Law of our Church,
nor yet by any Popish Canons or Decrees to my remembrance, as standing up at
Gloria Patri, and the Gospels, are. If it be only used out of pure devotion,
more attentively to hear, mind what is read, or spoken, no prudent Christian
can justly censure, but approve it; But if done merely out of Custom, or
Quoniam Synbolum verbum est Evangelium quoad sensum, ideo stando illud audire
sicut and Evangelium and illo dicto signum Crucis facere debemus. Gul.
Durantus, Ratio. Divimrum, l. 4 De Symbolo Rubrica.
because the Creed is the word of the Gospel, according to its sense, or to
distinguish between the recital of the Creed, and other parts of Divine
worship; or, to advance the Creeds composed by men out of the Scriptures
themselves of Divine inspiration, authority; before the sacred Fountains from
whence they flow; or to Psalm. 94. 16.
stand up for, or 2 Chronicles. 34. 32.
stand to, or 1. Cor. 16. 13. Gal. 5. 1. 2 These. 2. 5.
stand fastin them (as we use to speak) more than to any other parts of the
Neh. 9. 2, 5. Deuteronomy. 27. 12, 13. Ps. 122. 2. Ps 134. 1. Genesis 18. 22 Lu. 4. 16 1
Kings 8. ^4, 15. Lu. 18. 11, 13. Rev. 7. 9.
Scripture, being all of like sacred inspiration, and Divine authority: it is
no ways excusable, much less justifiable by any understanding Christians.

To close up this Discourse touching standing up at Gloria Patri, Gospels and
Creeds, it is unquestionable, that the posture of standing is in it self
indifferent; and may b^ Neh. 9. 2, 5. Deuteronomy. 27. 12, 13. Ps. 122. 2. Ps 134. 1.
Genesis 18. 22 Lu. 4. 16 1 Kings 8. ^^, 15. Lu. 18. 11, 13. Rev. 7. 9.
lawfully used in any part of Divine public worship; so as it be not done out
of singularity, opposition to decency and order, or for superstitious or
unanswerable grounds, but only to raise up our drowsy bodies, hearts, spirits
more attentively, fervently, devoutly to read, hear, pray, and discharge that
part of Gods worship wherein we use it. The Primitive Christians, and Universal
Church for above Eight hundred years after his Nativity, in memory of Christ's
resurrection, did use to pray on all Lords days, and between Easter and
Whitsontide, and worship God standing, not kneeling, nor bowing their knees at
all when they prayed or worshipped; which they prescribed; prohibiting kneeling
on these days by sundry Councils, and reputing it a kind of crime or impiety:
Whence they styled their Meetings on the Lords day, Stationes, a stando;
Stations from this their standing at them; and the Christians of those times
Stationarii, as Tertull^ an de Corona Mii^tis lib. De Iejunio lib. ad Vxorem,
l. 2. and Apologeticut. See La Cerda and Beauss Rhenanus Ibid.
Tertullian (b) Cyprian, Sermo de Oratione and Pamei^us. Ibid.
the Council of Nice, Can. 20. the 6. Synod of Constantinople in Trullo. can.
90. the Synod of Towers under Charles the Great, can. 37 the Council of
Aquisgrane under L^dovicus pius, c. 47. the Century writers, Cent. 3. cap. 6.
col. 153. and Centur. 3, 5, 6, 7. c. 6. with sundry others attest. From whence
it is apparent, 1. That they held this gesture of standing lawful, and that
they stood at the reading of the Psalms, Epistles, and all Lessons out of the
Old Testament, as well as at the Gospels, making no distinction between them.
2ly. That they received the Lords Supper standing, not kneeling. 3ly. That they
neither bowed their knees nor heads at the Name JESUS, when ever read or heard;
first introduced by Surius Council. Tem. 1. p. 347. Tem 2. p. 1052 T^m. 3. p.
277.
Pope Gregory the 10th. Sexti Decretalia, l. 2. Tit. 23. c. 2. See my Appendix
to Lame Giles his Halting.
about the year 1272. who restrained the use of it only to the Celebration of
the Mass, and never practiced before his time for ought appears by
Ecclesiastical Historiaus, Fathers, Councils, or Decretals of Popes themselves.
Yet notwithstanding this ancient universally received Custom of the Church,
though ratified by sundry Councils, of praying, performing all parts of Gods
public worship, only standing, not kneeling, on every Lords day, and between
Easter and Whitsontide; is long since quite laid aside in all, or most
Christian Churches; and therefore the use of Gloria Patri, Of standing up at
it, and at the Gospels and Creeds, not so ancient nor universal, nor grounded
on so good reasons as these Stations, (together with the late cringing and
bowing at the name Jesus) may now with much more reason be set aside and
discontinued for our Churches Peace, Settlement, and Unity in Gods worship.

SECT IV.
Of the use of white Surplisses, Rochers, with other Episocopal and Sacerdotal
Consecrated Vestments in the Celebration of Divine Service and Sacraments in
Churches.
THe last thing I shall examine, is the pretended necessity, decency or
expediency of Bishops, Ministers, D^acous, Scholars, Choristers wearing of
white Surp^isses, Rochets, and other sacred Vestments, Habits, Ornaments in the
celebration of Divine service and Sacraments which many have formerly, and now
of late over-rigidly contended for, refusing to admit such into Fellowships or
Orders, who out of scruple of Conscience refused to wear them, and silencing,
deprivi^g many godly, orthodox, painful, learned preaching Ministers, who
could not in judgment or conscience submit to use them.

Not to enter into any General discouse concerning the several uses of Apparel,
as 1. To Genesis 3. 21. ^ 9. 23. ^ Chron. 28. 15. Met. ^5. 36, 38, 43, 44, Can 2.
15, 16 Rev. 3. 18.
cover our nakedness. 2ly, To Hig. 1. 6. 2, Cor 11. 27. Job 31. 19.
keep our Bodies warm, and defend them from cold, heat, rain, wind, tempe^ts,
3ly. To Rev. 21, 2. Isay 61. 10, ^ Fim 3. 9, 10. ^ Pet. 303, ^, 5.
adorn our Bodies in a modest, decent, comely manner; without lasciviousness,
^rodigality, or fantastickness, 4ly. To Dent. 2^. 5. Ester 5. 1 c. 6. 8, 10
Acts 12. 21. 1 Sai^. 13. 18 L^. ^. 25. 2 Chren. 18. 9. See Aretii Prolemata
Lacus, 120, DeVest^tu.
distinguish the Male and Female Sexes, and some Ranks, Callings of men from
others of a different Degree, or Profession. I shall only premise these 13.
considerations, which I suppose must be acknowledged by the most zealous
Contenders for these Pontifical and Ecclesiastical Vestments, and Habits,
without dispute, when duly pondered.

1. That there is no particular kind, fashion, form of holy Garments
instituted or prescribed by God in sacred Writ to Bishops, Ministers or Deacons
in and under the Gospel, as there was to Exodus 28. 2, 3, 4. c. 29. 5. 21, 29.
c. 35, 19, 21. c. 42. 13. Levit. 8. 2, 30. c. 16. 4, 32. Ezr. 2. 69. Neh. 7.
70. 71. Ezr. 3. 10.
Aaron the High Priest, and Jewish Priests and Levites under the Law.

2ly. That there is no one Text throughout the New Testament, nor authentic
Testimony to prove, that either Christ or his Apostles, or any Bishops,
Ministers, or Deacons in the Apostles times, (or for some hundreds of years
after them) were distinguished by their Quali genere vestitus ust sunt
Apostoli, autasii Christiani, non est annotatum. Cent. Magd. 3. cap. 6. col.
106:
Apparel from other Christians, or Believers; or that they preached, prayed or
administered the Sacraments in any consecrated Vestments whatsoever, (much less
in such Rochets, Surplesses, or other Pontifical Habits, as are now so eagerly
contested for) but only in their ordinary wearing Apparel, the fashion or
color whereof is no where particularly described, much less prescribed in the
Gospel to all or any Ministers, Bishops or Deacons. And why should not all
Prelates and Ministers be content to imitate and conform themselves to their
Example, (as they are enjoined, Ephesians. 1. 2. Phil. 3. 17. 1 Pet. 2. 21.)
unless they will be reputed, as in truth they are, the greatest
Non-conformists.

3ly. The Gospel being commanded to be preached to all Nations, who were as See
Docmus de Moribus Gentium, Alexandri ab Alexandro, Gen Dierum; Par has his
Pilgrimage and Voyages Cent, Mag. 2, to 13. cap. 6.
different in their Manners, Habits, Fashions, Customs, Laws, Ceremonies,
Governments, as in their Climates and Languages, it was neither possible,
convenient nor reasonable to prescribe any one set-form of Bishops, Ministers
or Deacons Vestments, Liturgy, or Administration of Sacraments to them all, but
to leave them arbitrary and indifferent, with this general limitation, 1 Cor.
14, 40,
Let all things be done decently and in order.

4ly. That though all Qualifications and Duties of Eangelical Bishops, Deacons,
(and their Wives too) be most fully and particularly set down in the Epistles
of Timothy and Titus, yet there is not one syllable in them concerning the
form or color of their Ordinary or Prieslly Vestments, Accounterments; which
if so necessary, expedient, decent as they are now pretended, would certainly
have there been specified, recommended, or prescribed to all succeeding Bishops
and Deacons.

5ly. That the Apostle in this very Epistle to Timothy where he most
particularly enjoynes the use of public and private Prayers to Bishops,
Ministers, and all other Christians, and the manner how they should perform the
same; uses only these expressions, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 10.
I exhort therefore that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Iutercessions,
and Thanksgivings be made for all men; for Kings, and all in Authority, that
under them we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godlyness and
honesty. I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy Hands, (he
would doubtless have added, putting on holy Garments, Rochets, Surplesses,
Albees, Hoods, etc. had they been necessary, decent, expedient) without wrath
or doubtings: In like manner also that Women adorn themselves with modest
Apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety, (now almost quite out of fashion even
in Churches as well as Theaters) not with broydred or plaited hair, or gold, or
pearls, or costly array, (or spots, or patches, now much in fashion both in
and out of Church) but (which becomes Women professing godlyness) with good
works. Let the Women learn in silence, etc. This transition from Ministers,
Deacons, and men's praying in every place with pure hands, to women's apparel
(especially in the Church, as the last words evidence) without one syllable of
M^ns, Bishops, Ministers or Deacons apparel, or Church-vestments, before or
after it in this Epistle, or any other, is an unanswerable argument in my weak
judgment against the necessity or peremptory prescription of any Rochets,
Surplesses, or other kind of Vestments since invented, enjoined by Popes, or
Popish Prelates, Priests, Monks, or any other Prelates, in the celebration of
Divine Service, Masses, Sacraments.

6ly. That our Savior himself Mat. 6. 24, 26. I. u. 12. 22, 23.
gave this special charge to his Disciples, recorded by two Evangelists; Take
no thought for your life, what you shall eat, or what you shall drink, nor yet
for your body what you shall put on: Is not, or (for the) life (is) more than
meat, and the body than raiment? If then the Apostles and Disciples themselves
were thus specially prohibited to take any thought for their ordinary necessary
Raiment and wearing Apparel, much more then for any extraordinary, unnecessary
Surplesses, Rochets, Canouical or Pontifical Massing Vestments, wherein they
preach, pray or administer the Sacraments. Of which Popes, Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Cathedral-men have been heretofore, and some now
be so over-carefull, so immoderately zealous, as by Gratian De Consecrat. did.
1. Bochellus Decret. Eccl. Gal. l. 1. Tit. 7. l. 3. Tit. 1. -- l. 6. Tit. 17.
sundry successive Councils, Synods, Canons, Decretals, Injunctions, Rubricks,
Censures, indispensibly to impose, yea force them upon their Fellow-Ministers
and Christians, against their judgments, wills, consciences, or else to
deprive them of their Ministry, Gods public Ordinances, Sacraments, contrary
to this express Inhibition of Christ himself, whom they highly atfront therein.

7ly. That God by St. Paul gives this Divine Precept or Admonition to Timotby,
and all other Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, Christians, 1 Timothy 6 6, 7, 8.
Godlyness with contentment is great gain, for we brought nothing into this
world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out. And having food and raiment
(though ordinary, course, mean,) let us be therewith content. O that all
over-covetous, worldly, pompous Prelates and Clergymen, would seriously
ponder, believe, practice, and preach over this Text by their heavenly
world-contemning lives, instead of vexing, disquieting, discontenting
themselves, and all others, with Law-sutes, Citations, Injunctions, Censures
about their Lorldly Manors, Palaces, Temporalties, Pontifical Ornaments, and
Priestly Vestments! This would make all to love, honor, reverence them with
and from their souls, who now repute them the worldlyest, the proudest, and
most avaritious of all men professing Christianity, even when they are
departing out of this world, and dropping into their very Graves, if not into a
deeper Pit, to the scandal of the Gospel, and their holy Function. Let me only
mind them of two conclusions from this Text. 1. That if all Bishops and
Ministers ought to be contented with bare necessary raiment, as well as food,
then they ought not to lade and cloth themselves with so many super^luous,
unnecessary Pontifical robes and Priestly vestments, as now they wear and put
on, even in Gods own presence, House, whiles they are discharging their Duties,
and performing Divine services unto him; much less to force or impose them
upon their Brethren and Fellow-Ministers, who are and would be content with
their ordinary Garments, without these superfluities, and are highly
discontented, that they are enjoined to put them on against this Precept, the
forecited Texts, yea the very dictates of their own Judgments and Consciences.
2ly. That they must speedily leave all their worldly Temporalties, Episcopal
robes, Priestly vestments behind them, and shall neither carry them hence into
their Graves, much less to Heaven, or another world; why then should they
either trouble themselves with them, or their Fellow-Ministers and Christians
about them, who take no contentment in them, and desire to officiate and serve
God in their Ministry without them.

8ly. (Which is most observable,) That when Christ himself commissioned and
sent forth his Disciples to preach, teach, and discharge their Ministerial
function, he expressly enjoined them among other things, Mat. 10. 13, 10. Mat.
6. 9. Lu. 9. 3.
not to provide, take, or put on two Coats, neither to have two Coats a piece,
as being an impediment to their preaching and Ministry. In obedience to which
command, the most laborious preaching Gospel-spreading Saint Parl, whiles he
was traveling from Country to Country, and City to City, to preach the Gospel,
2, Tim. 4. 13
left his Cloak at Troas with Carpus, as a cumbersom impediment to his
Ministry, which he sent for after he was P^isoner at Rome, when he could no
longer walk abroad to preach. With what color then of Piety, Decency,
Expediency or Necessity, can Popes, Patriarks, Metropolitans, Archbishops,
Bishops, when they go to say Mass, read Divine service, preach, baptize,
celebrate the Lords Supper, confer Orders, keep Visitations, consecrate
Churches, Chapels, Vessels, Vestments, Kings, put on, adorn and load themselves
with See Hen^rius Augustodunensis his Ge^^^a Animae, l. 1. c. 89. 198, to 235.
Gratian, cause. 21. qu. 4. de Consecratione Distinct. ^. Gultelmus Durantus,
Rationale di^in^rum, l. 3. de Indumentis, Tho. Wa^densis, To^^. 3 Tit 4. ^ 29,
30. Pontifi^ale, Ce^^moniale (...), Mssa^e Ram ^spam^ 17.
Miters, Caps, Cossacks, Gowns, Rochets, Surplesses, Copes, Hoods, Stoles,
Planets, Palls, Dalmaticks, Pectoral Crosses, Girdles, Colobiums, Chymers,
Gloves, Sandals, Handkerchiefs, Scarsses, without which, by their own Canons,
Decretals, Missals, Pontificals, Processionals, Ceremonials, they neither may
nor must officiate; and enjoin all Ministers, Priests, Deacons, under se^erest
censures and deprivations, to wear Cassockes on their ordinary Apparel,
Girdles, and Gowns upon them, Surplisses, or Copes upon their G^w^es, and if
Doctors and Gradnates, Hoods, Scarfes, and Tippets upon them (which hinder and
make them unapt to preach or discharge their Ministry) against these reiterated
Precepts of our Savior, recorded by three Evangelists for their own and all
other Ministers immitation? or how can they ever answer in the great day of
judgment, when they shail appear naked before the Tribunal of our Lord Jesus
Christ, their ^igh contemptious, wilful violations of this his sacred
injunction, their hating, reviling, persecuting, rejecting, dep^iving any of
his faithful, painful Ministers, Servants, as Piaecisians, Puritans,
Non-conformists, Scismaticks, or Fanatics, only because they will not or dare
not in point of Conscience, against the precedent sacred Injunctions, conform
in every punctilio to those superflous Vestments, Disguites, which their
Fantastic frothy brains have invented, prescribed in Gods worship, against and
beside, hi^ Word, and Acts 4. 19, 20. c. 5. 29.
obey God rather then men.

9ly. That John the Baptist (our Saviors immediate forerunner) gave this
command to Priests and Clergymen, as well as the people, Luke 3. 11. He that
bath two Coats let him impart to him that has none; which John the Evangelist,
Paul and James have seconded in substance, if not in words, 1 John 3. 17. Rom
12. 13. Iam. 2. 15 16. How then can Bishops, Deans, Prebends, Ministers, heap
living upon living, and one Coat, Vestment upon another, when so many poor
Christians are naked and destitute of clothing, to whom their Honorius
Augustodunensis Gemma Animae l. 1. c. 237. Th. Waldensis, Tem. 3. Tit. 4 c. 30.
Sect. 5, 6. Gul. Durantes, Rationale Div^norum lib. 3. My Signal L^yalty and
Devotion p. 219, 243.
Laws, Decreetals resolve, they must not impart any of their consecrated Coats
or Vestments, though old and quite worn out, but burn them rather, because fit
for, and to be worn by none but sacred perfons. Yea pull off the Coats of their
fellow-Ministers, and strip them of their Livings, Ministry, because they will
not heap Coat upon Coat, and one Vestment upon another, when they are to pray,
preach, administer Sacraments, and the Coats of their own poor Stipendary
Curates too, who, discharge their duties and take all the pains in their
Commendaes, Appropriations, Pluralicies, Benefices on which they are for the
most part Non-resident, by allowing them such contemptible Salaries as will
scarce provide them Clothes, much less a competent subsistence for them and
their Families.

10ly. Romans 3. 11. 1 Pet. 1. 15. c. 2. 3, 4. Act. 10. 34. Iam. 2. 1, to 6. c.
1. 27.
That God being no respecter of persons, and taking no notice of Bishops,
Ministers, or Christians Vestments in his Worship, Service, but only of their
Hearts, Spirits, Graces, Sincerity, Diligence and Fidelity. Yea St. Peter
himself resolving, That in every Nation he that fears God and works
righteousness, is accepted of him: and St. James particularly repiehending
Christians, for having the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory in
respect of persons, and preferring those who come into their Assemblies with a
gold Ring, and goodly Apparel, (as Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Prebends, and
other Pompous Clergymen use to do) and contemning poor Curates, and
conscientious humble world contemning Ministers, who come into the Church (to
preach, officiate, or celebrate the Sacrament) in ordinary or vile raiment; The
discriminating of Ministers from other Christians, and Popes, Patriarchs,
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans, Prebends from one another, and from
other Ministers, by their different habits, and Sacerdotal Vestments, as more
honorable, holy, dear, near, acceptable to God then other inferior Ministers
or Lay-Ch^^^tians, and reputing Sermons, Prayers, Sacraments, preached, made,
read, administered in Surplises, Rochets, Copes, and other Church Vestments,
more Canonical, holy, decent, acceptable both to God and Men, then those
preached, read, celebrated without them, and that those Priests Feccat graviter
qui ^^tur in Missa vestibus non ^en dictis. Sylu^ (...) verbo Miss^nu. 2. Summa
Angelica Missa sect. 3. S^ to in 4. sent did. 13. qu^ (...) Astensis. T. t.
14. ar. 4., suult Armilla. verba Missa nu. 6. Navar. cap. 25. nu. 24. Thomas
^erulae Pra^is Episcopalis part 1. Tit. Vestimenta Sacra: M^ssale Pontificale
and Ceremoniale Romanum. Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 1. Tit. 7. ^l. 6.
Tit. 17.
grievo^sly sin against God, who officiate without them, is certainly a most
gross, dangerous mistake, dishonorable to God, Religion, Christianity it
self, and diametrically contrary to these sacred Texts and 2 Timothy 4. 2, 3, 4, 5.

11ly. That St. Peter himself with all the other Apostles, Elders, Brethren,
assembled in the first Synod and Council under the Gospel, Acts 15. resolved
upon solemn debate, Acts 15. 19. 20, 28, 29, ^. 16. 1, 4.
not to trouble them which from among the Gentiles were turned to God, with
Circumcision, or any other Jewish Ceremonies instituted by God himself, and to
lay upon them no greater burden then those Necessary things comprised in their
Letters which they sent and delivered by their Delegates to all the Churches of
the Gentiles, whereof Bishops or Priests Vestments were none; being never
reputed Necessary things by that Council, or by Christ or any of his Apostles,
as Popes, Prelates, and others now repute them. To prescribe, enforce them
therefore as Necessary things, and to revile, suspend, censure, silence such
Ministers, Scholars, Christians, who repute them Unnecessary or Superfluous,
is to affront, repeal this first Apostolical Council and Decree, and to advance
themselves above the Apostles.

12ly. That our Savior himself when he commissioned his Disciples and sent
them into all the World to teach all Nations, and preach the Gospel to every
Creature, gave them no instruction at all concerning Pontifical or Sacerdotal
Vestments, or any other, Ceremonies now coutested for, but only enjoined them
Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mark 16. 15, 16. compared with Eccles. 12. 13. Fear God and
keep his Commandments, for this is THE WHOLE DVTY OF MAN, especially in his
Worship.
to teach and baptize all Nations, teaching them to observe all things what
soever he had commanded them, not their own fancies or decrees, as Popes,
Prelates, and too many Ministers do now. Yea, St. Paul where he particularly
treats of preaching the Gospel, of administering and receiving the Lords Supper,
and of Church Assemblies, 1 Cor. c. 9. and 11. and 14. delivered and prescribed
to them, only that which he received from the Lord, without one syllable of
those Vestments, Rites, Ceremonies which now infest the Churches unity and
peace. Therefore they may and ought to be set aside, by Christ's and his
Apostles own precepts, practice, who neither enacted nor commanded them to be
used in any part of Divine Service or Worship.

13ly. That Christ himself sharply reprehends all such Mat. 15. 9. Col. 2. 20.
who teach for Doctrines, the Traditions and Ordinances of men: yea his
Apostles, Apostolical Elders and Brethren in their first Council, blamed those
Ceremonial Ministers who went out from them and taught the Brethren and
converted Gentiles, Acts 15. 1, 2, 24.
that they ought to be circumcised, and keep the Law; thereby troubling them
with their words, and subverting their souls, because they gave them no such
Commandment. Till therefore Popes, Archbishops, Bishops and Prelatists can
show or produce an express command from Christ or his Apostles, for the use of
Surplises, Rochets, Palls, with other Pontifical, Sacerdotal Vestments, in time
of Divine Service, Preaching and Sacraments, they must lay them quite aside,
and no longer contest for, much less impose or enforce them upon any
Ministers, Scholars, Christians, as they will avoid Gods, Christ's, and their
heavy displeasure, censure.

These Scriptures and reasons premised, I shall in the next place proceed to
show the true Original, prescription, use of Surplisses, Rochets, and other
Vestments in Divine Offices, Churches; then answer the Arguments, Reasons
produced for their use and continuance.

It is ingenuously acknowledged by Gemma Animae, l. 1. c. 11 8.
Alerinus de Divinis Officiis, c. 38, 39. Rationale Divinorum, l. 3.
Honorius Augustoduncnsis, Gulielmus Durantus, Doctrinalis, Tom. 3. Tit. 4.
cap. 29, 30.
Thomas Waldensis, some Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gal. lib. 6. Tit. 17.
Popish Councils, and the very Roman Pontifical and Missal, That white
Surplisses and other Prntifical, Sacerdotal Vestments under the Gospel, were
originally assumed from Aaron, and the Levitical Priests garments under the old
abolished ceremonial Law. But who first invented, or enjoined them to be worn
in time of Divine service, Mass or Administration of Sacraments, they do not
mention, nor yet the various mystical significations, groundless grounds, and
frantic reasons of their several Institutions. I find in a spurious Decretal
Epistle attributed to Surius Council. Tom. 1. p 253. Gra^an (...) Consecratione,
Did. 1, 2. Summa Angelica. Tit. Vestis; Sylvester. Tit. Benedictio 1.
Pontificale and Missale Romanum, Centur, Magi, 3. col. 246.
Pope Stephen, Anno Christi 2 6 1. this general Clause concerning Priests
Vestments, That the Garments wherein Priests and other Ministers of the Church
ought to celebrate Divine service, and minister unto the Lord, ought to be
consecrated, and decent, and applied to none other use, nor yet to be worn or
touched by any but sacred Persons. But what these Vestments were he
particularly defines not. If Surplisses, or white Rochets, as some conceit,
then they ought not to be touched by Scholars, Choristers, Singing-men, and
others who are no consecrated Priests, nor in sacred Orders, as they are now in
Cathedrals, and some Colleges in our Universities, against this Popes and
other his Successors Decrees. This Decree the Century writers style idle,
s^perfluous, altogether disagreeing with the word of God, and savouring of the
mystery of Iniquity; Flaccus Alcuinus, De Divinis Officiis, c. 38, 39, 40.
Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gal, l. 1. Tit. 7. l. 6. Tit. 17. Honorius
Augstodunensts in his Gemma Animae, l. 1. Gulielmus Durantus, Rationale
Divinorum, l. 3. Tho. Waldensis, Tom. 3. tit. 4. cap. 29, 30. Franciscus Zerula
Paxis Episeopalis, pars 1. Pontificale and Missale Romanum, with sundry others,
have large discourses concerning the several sacred Vestments of Popes,
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deacons, Priests; and particularly of Albees and
Surplisses. But who first introduced them into Christian Churches is a Question
not easily resolved.

The next Authority I meet withal is the Decree of Pope Fusebius about the
year 309. first recorded by De consecratione did. 1.
Gratian, and Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 311. Centar. Magd. 4. c. 6. col. 480, 1
2 ^ 1.
others out of him. Consulto omnium statuimus, ut sacrificium Altaris non in
serico panno aut tincto quisqvam celebrare praesumat, sed in puro lineo vel
linteo ab Episcopo consccrato, terreno scilicet lino procreato atque contexto,
sicut corpus Domini Jesus Christi in Sindone linea mundo sepultum fuit. John 19.
40. Mar. 15. 46. Mat. 27. 59. Lu. 23. 53. But this Decree of his, as it is
forged, spurious, repugnant to the History of that Time, the phrase, tenent,
and practice of that Age, and superstitious, as the Century writers prove and
style it; so the reason produced by the Author of it, why Priests and Clergymen
should celebrate the Sacrament of the Altar, not in a silken or died, but in a
pure white linen Garment made of Flax, engendered out of the Earth; because
Christ's body was buried in linen clothes, is very absurd.

Had Christ celebrated his last Supper, or preached, prayed in a linen
Surplisse whiles he lived, the inference had been tolerable; But since he
never did it, for ought appears; and the Evangelists precisely record, that at
his Mat 17. 1, 2, 3. Mar. 9. 28, 39.
miraculous transfiguration only, when he went apart up into a high Mountain
with three of his Disciples alone from all other company, his Raiment (formerly
of another color) became shining, exceeding wht^c as snow, so as no Fuller on
earth can white them; and that only till his transfiguration was past: the
Argument recoyles upon the Author of this Imposture with great disadvantage.
For 1. Christ never preached nor celebrated his last Supper in a white linen
Garment or Surplisse whiles he lived; Therefore no Priests, Bishops or
Ministers, (who are his 2 Cor. 5. 20. ^ Pet. 11. 23. ^ John 2. 6. ^ph. 5. 1.
Phil. 2. 5. ^ Po^. 2. 21.
Ambassadors, and should imitate his Example) ought to do it after his death.
2ly. Christ did not put on these linen Garments himself, or to officiate in
them; but Joseph of Aramathea and N^^bodemus, wrapped his dead Corpse in them to
bury it; Therefore Bishops, Priests, Deacons should never put on white Rochets
or Surplisses on their backs to preach, pray, or celebrate the Lords supper
whiles they live, but only their dead Corpse be wrapped up in them when they are
interred. 3ly. These white linen Garments wherein Christ's body was wrapped
were only his Winding Sheet and Grave-cloaths, not a Surplisse, Albee, Stole or
Rochet: neither were they consecrated by a Pope or Bishop, not worn in a
Church, but only in a Scpulchre: yea our Savior left them lying in his
Sepulcher when he role again, John 20. 5, 6, 7, 8. and never wore them
afterward: Ergo Bishops, Priests, Deacons, should only wear unconsecrated
Winding-sheets, and sine linen Garments in their Graves when dead; and there
leave them when they riseagain; not consecrated Rochets, Surplisses, Albees,
Stoles in the Church when living; ^ly. Christ's body was not wrapped in these
linen cloa^^ in any relation to his Priestly office or function; but only as a
mere dead Corpse to be interred, it being thenfual manner of the Jewe thus to
bury dead Corpse, as well Laymen as Priests: witness John 19. 29 (quoted by this
impostor) Then took they the body of Jesus, and (...) it in linen clothes,
with the spices, as the manner of the Ie^es is to bury: compared with John 11.
44. So the (...)
Nasamones, Graecians, Spartians, Argives, Syra^s^^ns, Sycionians, and other
Nations wrapped the dead bodies of their deceased Friends in white linen
clothes, with spices and balmes, and so intorred them. Therefore if this reason
be solid, all Men and Women as well Jews as Genti^es, Pagans as Christians
should wear whice Rochets, Surplisses, Albees, Stoles in Churches, as well as
Popes, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and Deacons, because they are all alike
interred and wrapped in white linen Grave clothes, when buried in their Graves.

The first probable authority in any true Antiquity, for Bishops, Ministers and
Deaeons wearing white Vestments in the celebration of the Lords Supper, is that
of Hierom, about 410. years after Christ, Advers. Pelagiano, 1. 1. c. 9. Vnde
adjungis, genera vestium and ornamentorum Deo esse contraria. Quae sunt, rogo,
inimiciti^ conira Deum sr tunicam habuero mundiorem? si Episcopus, Presbyter
and Diaconus, and reliquus ordo Ecclesiasticus in Administatione Sacrificiorum
cum candida vest processcrint^ Cavete Clerici, cavete Monachi, viduae and
virgins, periclitamini nisi sordidas vos atque pannosas vulgus aspicerit.
Ta^^o de hominibus saeculi, quibus aperte bellum indicitur, and inimicitiae
contra Deum, si pretiosis atque nitentibus utuntur Exuviis. And in his Tom. 5.
p. 875. D.
Commentariorum 1. 13. in Ezech, e. 44. Vestibus lineis utuntur Aegyptii
Sacerdotes, non selum intrinsecus sed and extringsecus, (he means their Pagan
not Christian Priests,) Porre He writes it of the Jewish Priests, not Christian
Minister's
re^^gio divina, alterum habitum habet in Ministerio, alterum in usu vitaque
communi. Which compared with his former passage, intimates, that some
Ecclesiastical Persons did then wear white Vestments, in the Religious public
exercise of their Ministry, and Administration of the Sacrament: which is
further evidenced by St. Chrysostont, ad Tom. 5. col. 338. D. and Tim. 2.
Populum Antioehiae, Sermon. 60. Wherein he applying his Speech to the Ministers
who distributed the Lords Supper to the people, uses this expression, Hoc
vestra dignitas, hoc securitas, hoc omnis Corona, (to keep scandalous unworthy
persons from the Lords Table) non ut albam et splendidam tuntcam circumeatis
induti. Which he repeats again in his 83. Homily upon Matthew. 26. Haec est
dignitas vestra, haec stabilitas, haec Corona praecipua, non nt tunicam induti
candidi^mant per Ecclesiam ambuletis. Whence the Cent. Magd. Tom. 5. c. 6. Col.
652.
Century Writers observe, Candidae vestis meminit tantum obiter Chrysostomus,
dum de Sacramenti corporis ac sanguinis Dominici administratione disserit. From
these passages of Hierom, and Chrysostom, Retionale Divinorum l. 3.
Durantus, Ecclesiastical Policy l. 5. sect.
Mr. Hooker and others justify the Antiquity, use of Surplisses, though they
do not positively define these white Garments to be Surplisses; nor can they
prove they were constantly and universally used by, much less prescribed to
all Ministers, Deacons, and Ecclesiastical persons in that age, or some
hundreds of years after, by any Ecumenical, National or Provincial Councils.
See Cent. Magd. 6. c. 6. Col. 337.
Gregory of Towers in the 4th. Book of his Histories, c. 60. makes mention of
the Archdeacons putting on the Albe upon the Bishop when he officiated, which
some take to be a Surplisse, about 640. years after Christ, but for Bishops or
Priests constant use of them by any Canon or Law in that age, I yet remember
none. About 700. years after Christ, Pope Cene. Magd. 7. Col. 153. 154.
Sylvester and other Popes brought in the use of Stoles, Surplisses, with other
Priests Massing Vestments by degrees, and soon after turned their Masses and
Divine Services, by their manifold disguised Vestments, Ceremonies,
Processions, Bowings, Crossings, ridiculous, antique, fanatic innovations,
gestures, into a mere Pagentry or Interlude, as is evident by Bibl. Patn^^.
Tom. 8. p. 397. 398, etc. ^
Ordo Romanus Antiquus de Divinis Catholioae Ecclesiae Officiis, said to be
compiled about 800. years after Christ: by Abbot Alcuinus, Tutor to Charles the
Great, De Divinis Officiis cap. 38, 39. published about the year ^02. where he
at large describes the use, original, and reason of instituting the several
sorts of Pontifical and Priests Vestments, both under the Law and Gospel,
paralelling them and the grounds of their institution together. After whose
time I find Bochellus Decret, Eccles. Gal. l. 1. Tit. 7. ^^ 3. Tit. 1. l. 6.
Tit. 17.
several Canons made in diverse Provincial Councils in France, for the use of
Albees and Surplisses in the Celebration of Masses and Sacraments; the use of
them being continued, and successively prescribed in all Popish Churches ^ince
that age to this very day, which not only make the putting on or Cent. Magd. 9.
10, 11, 12, 13, etc. cap. 6. Batonil Annals Spon. danus, Missale, Pontificale
and Ceremoniale Romanum.
wearing a Surplisse by every Priest in the Act of his Ordination, and of a
Rochet, with sundry other Episcopal Vestments and Ornaments upon Bishops, a
principal part, badge of their Cousecration, as the Roman Pontifical and
Ceremonial prescribe in their Rubricks, but likewise in their Missals,
Pontifical and Ceremonial of Bishops, enjoyne set forms of Prayers and
Crossings to be used by Bishops in the consecration of, and putting on of
Rochers, Albees, and other Trinkets when they are to officiate, or discharge
their Ministry in them; which I shall here insert, that all may discern their
superstition and vanity. I shall begin with their consecration of these
Garments.

At the end of M^lla^^ I^^manuin. Ex (...) ete Sacre Concilii T^^d (...) Resor
matum, ^c. An tu^rpiae, 1630. Benedictiones Diverts p. 101, 10^. Pontificale
Romanum. (...). p. 357, 358.
Benedictio Sacerdotalium indumentorum in genere.
V. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini. R. Quifecit Caelum and terram. V.
Dominus vobiscum. R. Et cum spiritu tuo:

Oremus.
OMnipotens and sempiterne Deus, qui per Moysen famulum tuum pontificalia and
sacerdotalia, seu levitica vestimenta, ad explendum in conspectu tuo
ministerium eorum, ad honorem and decorem nominis tui fieri de crevisti: adesto
propitius Innovationibus nosteis, had been better.
invocationibus nostris: and haec indumenta sacerdotalia, desuper irrigante
gratia tua, ingenti benedictione per nostrae humilitatis servitium Here they
make ^. Crosses.
purifi^^care, and bene^^dicere, and conse^^crare digneris ^^tit divinis
culribus and sacris my steriis apta and benedicta existant: his quoque sacris
vestibus Pontifices, and Sacerdotes; seu Levitae tui induti, ab omnibus
impulsionibus fell tentationibus malignorum spirituum muniti and defensi esse
mei eantur: tuisque mysteriis apt and coneligne servire and inhaerere, atque
in his tibi placite and devote perseverare tribue. Per Christum Dominum
nostrum. R. Amen.

Oremus.
DEus, invictae virtut is triumphator, and omnium rerum creator ac
sanctificator: intend propitius preces nostras; and haec indumenta leviticae,
sacerdotalis and pontificalis gloriae, ministris tuis fruenda, tuo ore proprio
bene^^dicere, sanctifi^^care, and conse^^crare digneris; omnesque cis utentes,
tuis mysteriis aptos, and tibi devote ac laudabiliter servientes, gratos
efficere digneris. Per Dominum nostrum.

Oremus.
DOmine Deus omnipotens, qui vestimenta Pontificibus, Sacerdotibus: and
Levitis, in usum tabernaculi soederis necessaria, Not Aacon, Priests, Po^es or
Bishops.
Moysen famulum tuum agere jussisti, eumque spiritu sapientiae ad id peragendum
replevisti: haec vestimenta in usum and cul^u mysterii tui bene^^dicere,
sancti^^ficare, and conse^^crare digneris; atque ministros altaris tui, qui
eainduerint, septiformis Spiritus gratia dignanter repleri, atque castitatis
stola, beata sacias cum bonorum fructu operum ministerii congruentis
immortalitate vestiri. Per Christum Dominum. R. Aman.

D^inde aspergit ipsaindumenta aqua benedicta.

Specialis Benedictio cujuslibet Indumenti.
V. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.

R. Qui fecit coelum and terram.

V. Dominus vobiscum.

R. Et cum spiritu tuo.

Oremus.
DOmine Omnipotens bonarum virtutum dator, and omnium benedictionum largus
infusor, Supplices te rogamus ut manibus nostris opem tuae benectionis
infundas, and has Caligas and Sandalia, vel Amictum, vel Albam, vel Cingulum,
vel Stolam, vel Manipulum, vel Tunicellam, vel Dalmatieam, vel Planetam divino
cultui Praeparata, vel praeparatum, vel praeparatam) virtute sancti spiritus
bene^^dicere, sancti^^sicare, and conse^^crare digneris, and omnibus eis (vel
eo, vel ea) utentibus gratiam sanctisicationis sacri mysterii tui benignus
concede, ut in conspectu tui sancti, immacnlati atque irrepraehensibiles
appareant, and auxilium misericordiae tuae acquirant. Per Dominum nostrum Jesum
Christum filium tuum, qui tecum vivit and regnat in unitate spiritus sancti
Deus, per omnia saecula saeculorum. Amen.

Deinde aspergit ea aqua benedicta.

Before and after which follow several Chapters and forms, De Benedictione
Mapparum, sou Linteaminum sacri Altaris, De Benedictione Corporalium, De
Benedictione novae Crucis, De Benedictione Crucis Pectoralis, De Benedictione
Imaginum aliorum Sanctorum, De Benedictione vasorum and aliorum vasorum in
genere. De Benedictione Tabernaculi sive vasculi pro Ss. Eucharistia
Conservanda, De Benedictione Capsarum pro Reliquiis and aliis Sanctuariis
includendis, De Benedictione and impositione primae lapidis pro Ecclesia
aedificanda, De Ecclesiae Benedictione seu Consecratione, De Altaris
consecratione, De Benedictione Tobaleorum, Vasorum and Ornamentorum Ecclesiae
and Altaris consecratorum, De Altaris consecratione quae sit sine Ecclesiae
dedicatione, De Altaris consecratione, cujus Sepulchrum Reliquiarum est in
medio summitatis stipitis, De Altaris portabilis consecratione, De Benedictione
Cimaeterii, De Reconciliatione Ecclesiae and Cimaeteris, De Reconciliatione
Caemiterii, sine Ecclesiae Reconciliatione, De Consecratione Patenae and
Calicis, De Benedictione Signi vel Campanae: (One Consecration and Superstition
still engendring another almost in infinitum according to Popes and Prelates
fanatic devises.) All which train and beadroll of consecrated particulars
must dance attendance on massings Priests and Prelates, to make their Popish
Mass, and Divine service completely meritorious, that I say not impious,
theatrecal, ridiculous, and their Bishops, Priests, little different from, if
not far worse and more antique than common Stageplayers; as those who seriously
peruse their Roman Pontificals, Ceremonials, Missals, and Durantus his
Rationale Divinorum cannot but conclude: And therefore should resolve with the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 11. When I became a man, I put away (these) childish
things, which old childish Prelates, and his pueri senes, overmuch admire and
contend for, as if all Religion and Devotion consisted in such Fopperyes.

When all these Massing Utensils are thus consecrated, and these Episcopal and
Sacerdotal Garments hallowed by Bishops; yet neither Priests nor Bishops must
presume to put any of them on to say Mass, or administer Sacraments, without
the use of special Prayers prescribed by, and thus registered in the Praeparatio
ad Missam, prefixed to all the Roman Missals, set forth and revised by Pope
Pius the fifth, and Clement the eighth.

Orationes dicendae ab Episcopo, quando in Pontificalibus celebrat. Ad Caligas.
CAlcea Domins, pedes meos in praeparationem Evangelii pa^is, and protege me in
velamento alarm tuarum.

Cum exuitur See Spelmanni Glosserium, Tit. Coppa.
Cappa.
EXue me, Domine, veterem hominem cum moribus and actibus suis: and indue me
novum hominem, qui secundum Deum creatus est in justitia, and sanctitate
veritatis.

Cum lavat manus.
DA Domine virtutem manibus meis ad abstergendam omnem maculam immundam: ut
sine pollutionc mentis and corpotis valeam tibi servire.

Ad Amictum.
Or Impone Domine, Capiti meo Galeam Sa^ lutis,
POne Domine galeam salutis in capite meo, ad expugnandas omnes diabolicas
frauds: inimicorum omnium versutias super ando.

Ad Albam.
DEalba me, Domine, and a delicto meo munda me: ut cum his qui ^tolas suas
dealbaverunt in Sanguine Agni, gauliis persruar sempiternis.

Ad Cingulum.
PRaecinge me, Domine, cingulo fidei, and virtute castitatis lumbos meos, and
priosts marriage would do this better than a Girdle, 1 Cor. 7. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9.
extingue in eis humorem libidinis, ut jugiter maneat in me vigor totius
castitiatis.

Cum accipit Crucem Pectoralem.
MVnire digneris me, Domine Jesus Christ, ab omnibus insidiis inimicorum
omnium, signo sanctissimae Crucis tuae: ac concedere digneris mihi indigno
servo tuo, ut sicut hanc Crucem Sanctorum tuorum reliquiis refertam ante pectus
meum teneo, sic semper mente retineam and memoriam passionis, and sanctorum
victorias Martyrum.

Ad Stolam.
Read mihi, Domine, obsecro, stolam immortalitatis, quam perdidt in
praevaricatione primi parentis: and quamvis indignus accedere praesumo ad tuum
sacrum mysterium cum hoc ornamento, praesta ut in eodem in perpetuum m^rear
laetari.

Ad Tunicellam.
TVnica jucunditatis, and indumento laetitiae induat me Dominus.

Ad Dalmaticam.
INdue me Domine indvmento salutis, and vestimento laetitiae, and D^lmatica
justitiae circunda me semper.

Ad Chirothecas.
CIrcunda Domine manus m^as munditiae novi hominis, qui de caelo descendit: ut
quemadmodum Jacob dilectus tuus, pelliculis hoedorum opertis menibus paternam
benedicticnem, oblato patri cibo potuque gratissim^, impetravit; sic and oblata
per manus nostras salutari ho^^ia, gratiae ^^ae^^nedictionem m^rear. Per
Dominum nostrum I^s^m Cl^ristum filium tuum, qui in similitudinem c^rnis
peceat^ prono^is ^^tuli^ semetipsum.

Ad Planetam.
DOmine, qui dixist^, Iugi^ m meum suave est, and onus meum leae: praesta ut
illud portare val^am, quod p^ssim conscq^i tuam gratiam.

Ad Mitram.
MItram, D^mine, and salutis galeam impone capiti mco: ut contra antiqui
hostis, omniumque inimicorum mecrum insidius in^ff^nsus evadam.

Ad Annulum cordis.
COrdis and corporis mei, Domine, digitos virtute decora, and s^ptisormis
Spiritus sanctificatione circumda.

Ad Manipulum.
MErear, precor Domine, manipulum portare mente flebili, ut cum exultatione
portionem accipiam cum justis.

Orationes dicendae cum Sacerdos induitur Sacerdotalibus paramentis.
CVmlavat manus; Ad Amictum dum ponitur super caput; Ad Albam, cum ea induitur;
Ad Cingulum, cum se cingit; Ad Manipulam, dum imponitur brachio sinistro; Ad
stolam dum imponitur collis; Ad Capsulam cum assumitur. Are the same with those
forecited, which the Bishop uses when he puts them on.

If these respective Vestments and Prayers be necessary or convenient for
Priests and Bishops, then certainly for all other Christians too.

The P. 12, 13, 30, 32, 38, 39.
^oman Pontifical, in the Title De Clerico faciendo, prescribes, that when any
Clerk or Clergyman is to be made, quilibet or dinandorum habere debet suum
Superpelltccum super brachium sinistrum, and candelam in ma^^ dextra: and after
their shaving by the Bishop in four places in their heads, and some Prayers,
Crosses and Benedictions, (there at large recited) the Bishop fitting with his
Miter, and taking in his hand the Surplisse, says unto them all. Induat novum
homincm, qui secundum Deum creatus est, injustitia and sanctitate varitatis,
and mox imponit illud (Superpelliceum) cuilibet repetendo. Induat te, etc.
immittens usque ad scapulas, and immediate trahens, si unum tantum sit
Superpelliceum, sicque facit usque ad ultimum, qui co totaliter induit^r. After
which, in the Title, De Minoribus Ordinibus, follows this Rubric: Orainandi
tm^es ad quatuor minores Ordines, effe debent Supecpelliteis indutt, cum
candela in manu dextra. And in the Rubric De Consecratione Diaconi and
Sac^rd^tis, it writes, Fisigitur amictu, Alba, cingulo, and manip^le parat^, ac
stolam in sinistra manu, and candelam in dextra, ac dalmaticam super brachium
sinistrum tenentibus, etc. the Archdeacon presencs them to the Bishop to be
ordained. Post haec Pontifex ^^cipiens Stolam, etc. et Dalmaticam, induit ea
que mlibet successive usque ad humeros, and sic usque ad ultimum, and hoc, si
una tantum sit Dalmatica: Si vero quilibet suam habet, tunc singulos sua
totaliter induit, dicens cuilibet; Accipe stolam candidam de manu Dei, etc.
Induat te Dominus indumento salutis, and vestimento laetitiae, and Dalmatica
justitiae circumdet te semper, in nomine Domini, R. Amen. Their Ibid. p. 49, 58.
Ordination being ended, in loco convenienti facras vestes deponunt. So in the
Consecration of a Bishop elect, among other things, Vestments for his
Consecration, there are prepared, Pontificale Romanum, p. ^7, to 81.
Item Paramenta omnia Pontificalia, coloris tempori and Officio Missae
convenientis, videlicet, sandalia, amictus, alba, cingulum, crux pectoralis,
stola, tunicella, dalmatica, chir^thecae, planeta, mitra auriphrygiata, annulus
pontificalis, baculus pastoralis and manipulus, etc. Adsunt duo ad minus
Episcopi assistentes, qui induuntur Rocheto, and si sint regulares,
superpelliceo, amictu, stola, pluviali, coloris tempori and Officio Missae
convenientis, and mitra simplici alba, and quisque habeat suum Pontificale.
After many Prayers, Crossings, and other ridiculous Ceremonies, Episcopi
assistentes ducunt Electum ad Capellam suam, and ibi deposito pluviali,
Acolythi induant illum sandalia, ipso Psalmos and orationes consuetas legente.
Deinde tunicella, dalmatica, casula, and manipulo induitur, quibus indutus
incedit ad suum altar, etc. After which his Miter, Ring, Pastoral staff are
consecrated, put on, and delivered to him by the Bishop, with many Prayers,
Solemnities, Crossings, Bowings, Kneelings, Prostrations, changes of habits,
places, and antique Gestures, fitter for a Stage then a Church. When an
Archbishop is consecrated, he has a Pall put on, and super added to all these
forecited Vestments, which must be used only upon certain special feasts and
occasions, put on with the like superstitious Ceremonies and Formalities,
recorded in the Roman Pontifical: the serious perusal whereof, and of Durantus
his Rationale Divinorum, l. 3, 4. is sufficient to make all grave, judicious,
sober Christians, to nauseate such theatrical disguises and Vestments, on which
grave old Bishops overmuch dote, as little Children use to do on their Babies,
Toys and Rattles.

The first foreign Synod wherein I find the use of white Garments and Surplisses
prescribed to Priests, Canons, Chaplains, is that held under Bothellus Decret.
Eccles. Gal. l. 6. Tit. 7. c. 24, 25. p. 1030, 1221.
Galo and Simon the Popes Legates in France, Anno Dom. 1215. which among other
Decrees reproving the luxury, pride and excesses of Priests Garments, expressly
prohibited them to wear Garments of any other color but white; or black, or
red, and commanded, ut sine Suppliciis (Superpelliceis) vel tunicis lineis, vel
capis clausis extra domos suas de caetero non incedant; that from thenceforth
they should not walk abroad out of their Houses without Surplisses, or linen
Coats, or close Hoods: But this Decree relates rather to their ordinary wearing
Habits, than to their sacred Vestments, and enjoynes them to wear
Surplisplisses and white Garments as well in their Houses as in the Church;
wherefore it adds, Bochellus Decret. Eccl. Gal. l. 3 Tit. 1. De Eucharistia,
cap. 32. 15. 62. Sec c. 43, 44, 45.
Nullus permittatur deservire altari nill in Superpellicio vel capa clausa.
After which it subjoynes, Sacerdos sive Diaconus corporalia saepe abluat,
indutus Superpelliceo, in vase mundo specialiter ad h^c deputato; omnes vero
ablutiones, si fieri potest, in piscina reponantur, vel saltem primae, caeterae
autem in baptisterio. Here Priests and Deacons are made Lawndresses to wash
their Corporals, arrayed in their Surplisses when they wash them, and the water
wherein they wash them must be reserved in a consecrated Cisterne, or in the
Font as holy, and one superstition, foppery begetting another, till endless, it
proceeds further; Irem linteamenta Altaris and induments Sacerdotalia non nisi
a Sacerdote vel Diacono, vel aliqua bona matrona vel virgin, sine appositione
aliorum pannorum, convenienter, quando opus fuerit abluantur, ita ut munda and
nitida conserventur; qui^ nimis absurdum, sordes esse in vestibus sacris, quae
dedecerent etiam in profanis. Bochel. ibid. c. 114, 115, 116, 117, 118.
The like concerning their washing, was decreed in the Synod Ecclesiae
Trecensis in France, Anno 1427. and by other French Synods.

The next Synod (prescribing the use of Surplisses under pain of
Excommunication) in the time of divine service, is the Popish Synod of
Poictiers in France under Americus, Anno 1367. which thus decreed, Bochel.
Decr. Eccl. Gal. l. 6. tit. 17. c. 31. p. 1322.
Praecipimus sub paena excommunicationis, quod cum Clerici, seu Capellani in
Ecclesiis parochialibus adstant administrantes cum divina celebrantur, honette
Superpellici^s sint tnoutt.

The Bochellus Decret. Eccles Gal l. 3. Tit 1. c. 5. p. 364.
Synodalia Ecclesiae Trecensis in France, An. 1427. thus decree the wearing o^
Surplisses by Priests, Attendat etiam Sacerdos vel Clericus ministrans in
Missa, ut se habe at honest, and si fieri potest, capam habeat seu
Superpelliceum quo sit iudutus, maxim in solenn^tatibus. They subjoyn, if the
Priests nose in saying Mass chance to bleed, and any of the blood fall upon
his Surplisse, after the blood stopped, he is to proceed in his Mass, having
first washed his hands in silence, mutatis tamen prius vestimentis Sacer
dotalibus, and pannis altaris, si sint sanguine maculati.

Bochellus Dec^e^ Eccles Gal. l. 1. Tit. 6. c. 54. p. 60.
John Damboise Bishop of Lingon, in a Synod held in France, Anno 1491. made
this Decree, That all having Benefices with Cures should wear Surplisses at
Mass, Vespers, and in the Celebration of all Divine Offices. Praecipimus
omnibus and singulis Presbyteris benefici^ Curats habentibus aut regentibus, ut
dum ipsus pro Missa, Vesperis, aut aliis Officiis Divinis in eorum Ecclesiis
Celebrandis aut dicendis interesse contigerit, sint decenter et honest
Superliciis indut^, et sine ipsis ad Divina Officia public accedere non pra
sumant.

Boehellus Decret. Eccles Gal. l. 3. T^t 1. c. 78. p. 371. c. 114. p. 318.
Synodus Senonensis in France, An. 1524. enjoynes the Priest to wear a
Surplisse when he carries the Sacrament to sick persons. Quotiens contigerit
Sacerdotem deserre sanctam Eucharistiam ad infirmos, habeat Sacerdos
Superitceum et Stolam, and incedat tam eundo quam redeundo usque ad Ecclesiam
in habitu deccnti, faciatque ante se deferri lumen, and campanulam pulsantem
praeire.

Ibid c 79. p. 3^1. c. 91. p. 3^4.
Synodus Carnotensis in France, An. 1526. ordained the like in these words,
Ordinamus, quod ubi ad instrmos deserendum erit corpus Christi, Sacerdos
delaturus primum lavet manus, deinde induat Superliceum, et stolam superponat,
incedensque cum honestate, reverentia and honor, orationes and preces ad Deum
fundat, faciat lumen ante se deferritam eundo ^uam redeundo, and campanulam
pulsari.

The Synod of Paris, Anno 1557. decreed Surplisses to be worn at Mattins,
Masses, public Prayers, Litanies, Consessions, and at Celebration of the
Eucharist, Marriage, and extreme Vaction. Bochellus l. 6. Tit. 17. de ^^stibus
and Dornatu Cleri^o^^n, c. 20. p. 10^0.
Parochi cor^m Vicarii and caeteri Sacerdotes, in divinis absequiis Missarum
Matutinarum and Vesper arum, in supplicationi^us pu^licis, Litaniis and
consessionibus Suppliciis utantur, in ^ucharistiae vero, Matrimonii, and
Extremi Vnctionis administratione, stolam addant Suppellic^is. After this
Bochellus l. 3. Tit. 17. c. 14. p. 1018, 1019.
Synodus Aquensis in France, Anno 1585. made this Decree concerning Clergy-mens
wearing of Surplisses and other Vestments, Clericalis ordinis homines, cum
Ecclesia versantur quo tempore Superpelliceum induere non debent, ne sint sine
toga exteriori, praesertim horis quibus divina celebrantur, aut populus ad
Ecclesiam accedere solet: Nec vero absque oa etiam in Diaecesanis locis, vicis
aut pagis prodeant, nist cum cos pedibus iter facientes viae difficultas and
longitudo aliter cogit, Superpelliciis, cum Ecclesiae ususid postulat, omnes
utantur, quae non lacera sint, non sordida, et quae ctiam manicas habeant.
Superpell^cea autem illa quae manicis carent, and quae non Superpelliceorum sed
Mantil^um nomine potius digna sunt, omnino prohibemus. Canonici vero
Cashedralium and Collegiatarum, quo tempore Cappa induuntur, ii ^ocheto
induantur sub Cappa Clerici autem cum Superpellice^s fuerint induti, nullo modo
in manibus flores, nec aliud quod statui suo and Ecclesia non conveniant,
habeant; non vagentur per Ecclesiam, nec deambulent, nec circumcursitent, sed
graves semper sint in incessu and statu. Singuli autem praeterea praesertim qui
in aliquo minorum saltem ordinum sunt, proprium Superpelliceum habeant, quo
etiam in Ecclesia, cut ascriptt sunt et alibi, cum ipsi suis fungi muneribus
contigerit, uti possint. Si quis personatus, vestes Clericales aut monachles,
vel ad eorum formam induerit, and is qui cas assumpserit, and is qui
accomodarit, graves, poenas subeant. Qui vero Clericus, cuiusuis etiam gradus
ordinis, dignitatis in aliquo de praemissis non obtemperaverit, is praeter
poenas jam inflictas, aut salutari poenitentia, aut pecunia, a^t suspensione ab
ordinum munere, et beneficiorum administratione, aut ipsis etiam beneficiis,
aut carcere, aut exilio, aut pluribus simul ex iis paenis, aut gravioribus pro
modo culpae, Episcopi arbitratu mul^tetur. Qui iterum in eadem re pec^dverit,
duplicata paena pro ratione criminis, ab eodem pleetetur.

This Synod likewise decreed, that the Parish Priest who is to carry the
Eucharist to sick Persons, do wear a Surpliss, and proceed in this manner,
Bochellus, 1. 3. Tu. 1. c. 79. p. 373.
Vbi manus laverit, tum Superpelliceo, Stola, pluvialt ubi potest indutus, ad
altar genibus flexis oret. Sacerdotes verocaeteri Clericive qui comitantur
Suptrpellieieum adhtbeant. Si Canonicorum capitulum sit, cappam vel almutiam,
aliudve indumentum, ut illis in ^boro moris est. Reliqui fideles bini
prosequantur capite aperto, and quamplurimi candelis accensis, ac primo loco
viri, in quibus scholares sanctissimi Sacramenti praecedant, postremo foeminae:
Omnes, praesertim Ecclesiastici homines, hymnos and Psalmos paenitentiales,
aliosve intina animae pietate, simul cum Parocho, sed alternatim pronunciant,
atque alii etiam religiosiorent. It likewise adds, Bochell. Decr. Eccl. Gal.
l. 1. Tit 7. De celetratione Missae, c. 5. p. 60.
In celebratione Missae Sacerdos ne se conferat ad altar, nisi Clericum in
decenti habitu, and cum Superpelliceo mundo cum manicis, sibi inservientem
habuerit; injoyning the Parish Clerk to wear a Surplisse as well as the Priest.

This last French Popish Synod prescribes the constant use of Surplisses to all
Canons, Prebends, Parish Priests and Curates under several Ecclesiastical and
Temporal punishments, with greatest rigor and severity; when as Ordo Romanus
Antiquus de Divinis Officiis, and Missa, the Roman Pontificals, Ceremonials,
Missals, in their Rubricks of saying or singing Mass, prefixed to them, do
only enjoin their use without any penalties Ecclesiastical or Civil expressed
in them, to be inflicted on Non-Conformists thereunto.

For the use of Surplisses in our British Churches, during the Britons or
Saxons times, I remember nothing in Canons or Histories; only our Al^^uinus,
Tutor to Charles the Great, An. 800. De Divinis Officiis, c. 98, 39. writing of
the several Vestments wherewith Priests were clad in the Old Testament,
observes, Opera Lutitiae, 1617. col. 1085, etc.
Habent etiam nunc Ministri Ecclesiae Christi superhumerale quod amictum
vocamu^, quando ad altar ministrant; quod fit ex lino puriss^mo. Per linum
quod ex terra sumitur, and per multos labores ad candorem ducitur, designatur
corpus humanum, quod ex terra constat. Sicut ergo linum per multos labores ad
candorem reducitur, ita corpus humanum multis calamitatibus attritum, candidum
et purum esse debet ab omni sorde peccatorum. Postea sequitur Poderis, quae
vulgo Alba dicitur; significat autem perseverantiam in bona action. After
which he mentions the Stola, Dalmatica, Casula, used by Priests; and pallum
Archiepiscoporum, to distinguish the Archbishop from his Suffragans,
subjoyning, Stephanus natione Romanus ex Patre Lobio (ut legitur in gestis
Pontificalibus) constituit Sacerdotibus Levitisque Uestes sacras in us^
quotidiano non uti nisi in Ecclesia, Whether any of these Garments were then
used in England, or the same with Surplisses for fashion, as color, I cannot
define. The first mention I observe in our Historians of Surplisses and their
wearing by that Name, is in the year of our Lord 1237. the 21. of Henry the 3d.
where Hist. Angl. Tiguri. 1589, p. 431, 432, Londini, 1140.
Mat. Paris records, That Otto the Popes Legate summoning all the Popish
Bishops, Abbots and Clergy to a Council in Paul's Church, London, to which he
went in great pomp, entering the Church; he put on his Pontifical Garments, and
among the rest a Surplisse, which he thus expresses; Pontificalibus se induit,
scilicet Superpellicco, et desuper cappa Chorali pellibus variis furrata, et
mitra; et praecedentibus Archiepiscopis Cantuariensi et Eboracensi eum cum
precessione solemni, ^um cruce et caeriis accensis et cum Letaria. The second
day the Council being begun, missi sunt exparte Domini Regis, Comes
Lincolniensis Johannes, et Johannes filius Galfridi, et Gulielmus de Raele,
Canonicus sancti Pauli, ut dicto Legato ex part Regis et Regni inhiberent, ne
ibi contra Regiam Coronam et Dignitatem aliquid statuere attemptaret, et
remansit ibi, ut hoc observaretur, Gulielmus de Raele Capa canonica et
Superpelliceo, aliis reedentibus. By which it seems the Canons sat in this
Council in their See Spelman. and Gul. Somneri Glossa^i^um Tit. Capa, Cappa.
Simeon Dunelmensis Hisi. Col. 61.
Canonical Caps, or Coules and Surplisses, as well as the Popes Legate himself.
About the year 1290. John Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury, appropriating the
Church of Preston to the Monks of Canterbury, and endowing a perpetual Vicar in
it, granted in the Instrument, that the Monks, Chronica W. Thorn. Call. 2120.
Onera reparationis et refectionis Concelli praedictae Foclesiae de Preston
intus et exterius, necnon et inventionis librorum, Uestimentorum
Superpelliceorum, et ornamentorum dictae Ecclesiae, quae per Ecclesiarum
Rectores inveniri et reparari debent aut solent, subeant. Which intimates that
Priests and Vicars did then use to wear, and find their own Surplisses, and by
the same Archbishops Provincial Constitutions, who decreed, Provincialis
Gulielmi Lindwode 1 ^n De Eucharistia fol. ^80.
Dignissimus ut Sacramentum Eucharistiae circumferatur cum debita reverentia ad
Egrotos, Sacerdoti saltem induto Super^elliceo gerente orarium cum lumine
praevio in lucerna, cum campana, ut populus ad reverentiam debitam excitetur
qui ad prosternendum se, vel adorandum saltem humiliter, informatur Sacerdotali
prudentia, ubicunque Regem gloriae sub panis latibulo evenerit deportari, The
original ground of kneeling at, as well as to the S^crament. This is the 1.
Constitution in our Church I have yet observed, prescribing Priests to wear
Surplisses when they delivered the Eucharist, or carried it to sick persons, on
which Lindwode has this Gloss, Et sic tolerare potest licet Minister
Sacerdotis non sit indutus Superpelliceo, licet honestus sit quod ipsius
Minister Superpelliceo induatur considerata qualitate Beneficii et facultatibus
ejusdem. Which intimates that Parish Clerks should wear Surplisses as well as
Priests.

Robert Winchelsie, his next successor in the Sea of Canterbury, Provincialis
Gul. Lindwode l. 3. De Ecclesiis edificandis, f. 182. Ioannis de Aton
Constitutiones Provinciales, f. 146. b.
as Lindwode, or Simon Is^p, as John de Aton records, about the year 1300.
decreed, what Popish Trinkets, Books, Ornaments, Vestments should be provided
in every Parish Church by the Parishioners, amongst which he enumerates,
Dalmatica tunica et cum Capa de Choro, tria Superpellicea, unum Kochetum: On
which Lindwode has this Gloss, Tria Super^epllicea ad usum scilicet trium
Ministrorum Ecclesiae, vizt. Sacerdotis, Diaconi and sub-diaconi. Rochetum,
quod differt a Superselliceo, quia Superpellicium habet manicas pendulas, sed
Rochetum est sine manicis, and ordinatur pro Clerico Ministraturo Sacerdoti,
vel forsan ad opus ipsius Sacerdotis in Baptizando pueros, ne per manicas
ipsius bra^hia impediantur. His next Successor Walter Raynods, decreed,
Provincialis Gul. ^ ynchrode^l 1. De Officio Archi-dia^on^. fol. 38.
That Arch-dea^^ons amongst other things, should take care that there should be
in every Parish Church, ad minus duplicia Sacerdotalia Vestimenta (the one for
Lords days, the other for holidays, as Lindwode Glosseth it) and ut honor
debitus divinis Officiis in omnibus impendatur, praecipimus etiam, ut qui
altari ministrat Suppelliceo induatur. On which Lindwode has this Gloss,
vizt. Presbytero celebranti assitens, it idem in Missae tempore ministrans: vel
potest intelligi de Sacerdote quovis tempore accedente ad altar ut aliquid
faciat vel disponat circa corpus Christi, ut videlicet, illo tempore sit
indutus Suppelliceo, et juxta communem intellectum die supplicio, i. e. vest
linea ad talem usum praeparata, de qua tamen vest non memini me legisse in
toto corpore Iuris Canonici vel civilis, nec etiam in sacra Scriptura: ^it
tamen de eo mentio 1. de Eccles. edif. c. ut Parochiani, et potest significari
per tunicam Lineam qua induebantur filii Aaron, in veteri lege, de qua legatur,
Exodus 28. ac finem, sed estimo quod proprie Suppellicium est indumentum de
pellibus confectum, sed in nostro communi usu, intelligatur ut prius dixi.

The use of these Rochets, Surplisses, and other Massing Vestments introduced
by Popish Councils and Decrees to celebrate the Mass, and Mass Priests,
Prelates officiating in them at their consecrated Altars, (who likewise clad and
wrapped up their consecrated Host or Breaden God in a pure white linen
Corporal, by the prescription of the self-same Constitutions, Canons, Missals,
Pontificals, Ceremonials, Rituals, which enjoin Rochets, and Surplisses)
continued in our Church till the abolishing of all Romish Masses, Pontificals,
Missals, by K. See. ^ E. 6. c. 1. 2, and 3 E. 6. c. 1. 3, and 4 E. 6. c. 10. 5,
and 6 E. 6. c. 1. Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 2. p. 658, to 670.
Ed. the 6. and his Parliaments, by certain steps and degrees in the 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, and 6. years of his Reign, not without some oppositition, and an open
Rebellion in Devonshire, Cornwall, and other places, by Popish Priests and
their Confederates. In the first Edition of the Book of Common Prayer, enjoined
to be publicly read by the Statute of 2, and 3 E. 6. c. 1. not only all See
Dr. Corn. Burges his reasons showing the necessity of Reformation p. 33, 34.
Bowings to, and toward the Altar, and Hostia, praying toward the East,
standing up at Gloria Patri, the Gospels, Creeds, bowing at the Name of JESUS,
reading second service at the High Altar when there was no Sacrament there
administered, with other Ceremonies prescribed by former Massbooks, Breviaries,
Pontificals were abolished and left out of the Rubricks, as superstitious,
useless, offensive; but likewise the wearing of Palls, Planets, Chimeres, Lawn
Sleeves, Sandals, Copes, Hoods, and other Vestments, (except only a Rochet, to
be worn by Archbishops, Bishops, and Surplisses only by Priests and Deacons)
were totally laid aside as Popish superfluities, or unnecessary Disguises; and
it was generally expected by diverse zealous Protestants, that Rochets,
Surplisses, and square Caps, would have been then likewise taken away upon the
same account, being all appurtenances to the Mass, Mass Priests, and only
prescribed by Popes and Popish Missals, Pontificals, Canons, Decretals. But the
King and Commons not holding it necessary or convenient to reform all things at
first, but by degrees; Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 3 p. 146, ^ 47, Dr. Heylins
History of the Reformation of the Church of England, p. 90, 30 98.
Mr. John Hooper (a learned Divine in great reputation with the People, Lord
Protector, and others for his excellent constant daily preaching and piety)
being soon after elected Bishop of Gloucester, scrupling to wear a square Cap,
Rochet, Surplisse, and refusing to be consecrated in his Pontificalibus,
reputing them as TRIFLES, tending rather to SUPERSTITION than otherwise: and
learned Peter Martyr (then Regius Professor in the University of Oxford) though
a Prebend of Christ-Church, constantly refusing to wear a Surpliss in the Quire
there at any time; and in a Letter to a private Friend, July 1. 1650. (desiring
his judgment concerning square Caps and Surplisses) declaring, That though
they were things indifferent in themselves, which make no man of themselves
godly or ungodly by their use or forbearance; yet he thought it most expedient
for the good of the Church, that they and all others of that kind should be
taken away when the next opportunity should present it self: because where such
Ceremonies were so Stiffly contended for, which were not warranted and supported
by the word of God, commonly men were less Solicitous of the substance of
Religion, than they were of the circumstances of it. And John Alasco, Tyms, Mr.
John Rogers, Mr. John Philpot, and other learned Protestant Ministers then
denying to wear these Vestments, yea decrying them as Superstitious, Popish,
Massing attire, altogether as unfit for the Ministers of the Holy Gospel, and
Evangelical Bishops, as those other Vestments then abolished; And Mr. Calvin,
Excogitavit haec avaritia quae fe Hyp^creseos fuco ad hunc modum vinditat.

Nobis Christus unice spectandus est. Quicquid aliter geritur atque ipse
gessit. flagitium est De luxu mundi Ecclesiastici justus liber extruandus est
siquis digne velit confutare. Zumgliu, De Ca^ne Missae Epicherisis operum, pars
s. f. 187.


Zuinglius, with other eminent Protestant Divines, quite exploding their use in
foreign Churches, and declaring their judgments against them to the Lord
Protector, Cranmer, Ridly, and other Bishops; thereupon in the Parliament of 5,
and 6 E. 6. c. 1. the Common Prayer Book was revised, amended in sundry
particulars, and See Dr. Corn. Burgess his reasons showing the necessity of
Reformation, (...) c. p. 33, 34.
the use of the Rochet, Surpliss, Caps and Vestments prescribed by the Book of
2, and 3 E. 6. quite laid aside, the reason whereof are expressed in the
Preface to that Book, why some Ceremonies were continued, and others laid
aside, and in the Articles of Religion set forth by Edward the 6th. Anno 1552.
Artic. 21. 23. Neither were they actually or legally revived by the
Common Prayer Book revised, corrected, ratified by the Statute of 1 Eliz. c. 2.
that Act injoyning all things to be done according to the Book of 5, and 6 Ed.
6. and none other or otherwise, in which there was nothing concerning these
Garments.

What hot unchristian Schisms, Contests about Rochets, Surplisses, the form of
Bishops, Priests ordinary Vestments, and Formalities afterward sprung up
between our most zealous Protestant Bishops and Ministers, in the first 7.
years of Q. Elizabeth's reign; you may read at leisure in See p. 115, to 122.
132, 133, 134, 139, 140, 158, 259, 164, to 269, 174, 175, 176.
Dr. Heylins late partial History of the Reformation of the Church of England,
and of Q^. Elizabeth, wherein he lays many black aspertions upon K. Edw. the 6
himself, his Government, the L. Protector, sundry of our godly Bishops,
Martyrs, Divines at home, and Peter Martyr, Calvin, Zuinglius, Alasco, Beza,
with other chief Protestant Divines of reformed Churches abroad, worthy the
Ferula. These controversies about Church vestments etc. continued all her
Reign, growing every year higher and higher, every Parliament in her time (as
appears by the Journals) being troubled with many Petitions, Bills against
them, which the Bishops by their power in the Lords house suppressed; and the
world was filled with Books proet contra concerning them; as the Books of Mr.
Cartwright, Mr. Vd^ll, Penry, Martin Mar-Prelate, Altar Damascenum; A Brief
Discourse against the outward apparel, and ministering Garments of the Popish
Church, printed 1578. A Discourse, whether it be a mortal Sin to transgress the
commandments of Civil Magistracy, concerning the Apparel of Ministers. The
Declaration of certain Ministers in London, refusing to wear the Apparel
prescribed. Mr. Philip Stubs, with sundry more on the one side, and Queen
Elizabeth's Advertisements in the seventh year of her Reign, by her High
Commissioners advice, Archbithop Whitegift; his Answer to the Admonition to the
Parliament; and Defense of his Answer against the Reply of T. C. 1574. in
Folio. Dr. John Bridges his Defense of the Government now established in the
Church of England, 1584. Mr. Richard Hooker of the Laws of Ecclesiastical
Policy, 1593. with others on the other hand, evidence.

Neither did these unnecessary, unhappy Controversies, about Priests Vestments
and Ceremonies, which perplexed our Church, and gave great advantage to our
Romish Adversaries, expire with Queen Elizabeth, but survived, and grew to a
height at the beginning of K. James his Reign; who to silence or allay them,
appointed a special S^c the Conference at Hampton Court, printed 1604. p. 76,
etc.
Conference at Hampton Court, between the Bishops and Non-Conformists Party
(whereof Learned Dr. Ranolds was one) about Reformation of Church matters, Anno
1603. which many hoped would have put a period to these Contests; but instead
thereof did much increase them, through the Bishops obstinacy, potency, pride;
who refusing to comply with the moderate, just desires of their
Fellow-Ministers, and Protestant Christian Brethren in some superfluous
Trifles, particularly concerning the wearing of the Surpliss, then, and yet
commonly termed A Raggc of Popery: soon after in their Convocation held at
London 1603. prescribed the constant wearing of Surplisses, (and Copes, Hoods
besides) not only to Cathedral Churchmen, but likewise to all Ministers,
Curates reading Divine Service, or administering the Sacraments, in Parish
Churches or Chapels, and likewise to Fellows and Scholars in the Universities;
(for which there was no former binding Law nor Canon) by these ensuing
Constitutions.

Canon 16, and 17. In the whole Divine Service, and Administration of the Holy
Communion, in all Colleges and Halls in both Universities, the Order, Form and
Ceremonies shall be duly observed as they are set down and prescribed in the
Book of Common Prayer, without any omission or alteration, (even in the faulty
old English Translation) all Masters and Fellows of Colleges and Halls, and all
the Scholars and Students in either of the Universities, shall in their
Churches and Chapels, upon all Sundays, Holy Days, and their Ev^s at the time
of Divine Service, wear Surplisses, according to the Order of the Church of
England, (which had no such Order that I can find before) and such as are
Graduates, shall agreeably wear with their Surplisses, such Hoods as do
severally appertain to their Degrees.

Canon 24. In all Collegiate and Cathedral Churches, the Holy Communion shall
be administered upon principal Feast-dayes, sometimes by the Bishop if he be
present, and sometimes times by the Dean, and at sometimes by a Canon or
Prebendary, the principal Minister using a decent Cope, and being assisted with
the Gospeller and Epistolar agreeably, according to advertisements published by
Queen Elizabeth An. 7.

Canon 25. In the time of Divine Service and Prayers in all Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches, when there is no Communion, it shall be sufficient to wear
Surplisses, saving that all Deans, Masters and Heads of Collegiate Churches,
Canons and Prebends, being Graduates, shall daily at the times both of Prayer
and Preaching, wear with their Surplisses such Hoods as are agreeable to their
Degrees.

Canon 58. Every Minister saying the publ^ke Prayers, or ministering the
Sacrament, or other Rites of the Church shall wear a decent and comely
Surplisse with Sleeves, to be provided at the charge of the parish. And if any
question arise touching the matter, decency or comeliness thereof, the same
shall be decided by the discretion of the Ordinary. Furthermore, such Ministers
who are Graduates shall wear upon their Surplesses at such time, such Hoods as
by the Orders of the Universities are agreeable to their Degrees; which no
Minister shall wear (being no Graduate) under pain of Suspension.
Notwithstanding, it shall be lawful for such Ministers as are no Graduates, To
wear upon their Surplisses instead of Hoods, some decent Tippet of Black, so it
be not silk. After which follows this 74. Canon, prescribing the form, species
of their ordinary wearing Apparel.

The true, ancient and flourishing Churches of Christ being ever desirous that
their Prelacy and Clergy might be had as well in outward reverence, as
otherwise regarded for the worthiness of their Ministry, did think it ^it by a
prescript form of decent and comely Apparel, to have them known to the people,
and thereby to receive the honor and estimation due to the speical Messengers
and Ministers of Almighty God. We therefore following their grave judgment,
and the ancient Custom of the Church of England, and hoping that in time
new^anglenesse of Apparel in some factious persons will dye of it self, do
constitute and appoint, That the Archbishop and Bishops, shall not intermit to
use the accustomed Apparel of their degrees. Likewise all Deans, Masters of
Colleges, Archdeacons, and Prebendaries in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches,
(being Priests or Deacons) Doctors in Divinity, Law, and Physic, Bachelors in
Divinity, Masters of Arts, and Bachelors of Law having any Ecclesiastical
living, shall usually wear Gowns with standing collers, and sleeves straight
at the hands, or wide sleeves as is used in the Universities, with Hoods or
Tippets of Silk or Sarcenet, and square Caps. And that all other Ministers,
admitted or to be admitted into that function, shall also usually wear the like
Apparel, as is aforesaid, except Tippets only. We do further in like manner
ordain, That all the said Ecclesiastical persons above mentioned, shall usually
wear in their journeyes Cloaks with sleeves, commonly called Priests Cloaks
without Gards, Welts, long Buttons, or cuts. And no Ecclesiastical person shall
wear any Coif, or wrought Nightcap, but only plain Night-caps of black silk,
Satin, or Velvet. In all which particulars concerning the Apparel here
prescribed, our meaning is not to attribute any holiness or special
worthiness to the said garments, but for decency, gravitie and order, as is
before specified. In private houses, and in their studies, the said persons
Ecclesiastical may use any comely and Scholar-like Apparel. Provided, that it
be not cut or pinckt, and that in public they go not in their Doublet and
Hose, without Coats or Cassocks: and that they wear not any light-coloured
Stockings. Likewise poor beneficed men and Such are most of our Bishops, Deans,
Chapters Curates, to their infamy.
Curates (not being able to provide themselves long Gowns,) may go in short
gowns of the fashion aforesaid.

Those who will take the pains to compare these Canons of our Protestant
Bishops and Clergy with the Canons and Constitutions of our Popish Archbishops
forecited, or John Peckhams and John Stratfords Constitutions, See Joannis
Langecrusius, de vita and honestate Ecclesiasticorum l. 2. c. 2, 3, 4.
De habitu and honestate Clericorum, recorded by John Aton, and William
Lyndwode; the premised Popish French Synods, Canons, and sundry others
collected by Laurentius Bochellus, Decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae, l. 1. Tit. 7.
l. 3. Tit. 1. l. 6. Tit. 17. Shall at first view discern, that they were almost
verbatim taken out of them, and more extensive than they in relation to all
Scholars and Students in both Universities, who were never before by any Popish
Councils, or Popes Decrees enjoined constantly to wear Surplisses in time of
Divine Service and Sacraments.

These Constitutions and Canon^ (never approved nor assented to by the Lords
and Commons then or afterward assembled in Parliament, but by the King alone
under his Great Seal, and so not binding to the Subjects in their Liberties or
Freehold, against Magna Charta, chapter 29. and sundry other Acts recited in
Rastal, Tit. Accusation, and the Petition of Right) instead of allaying,
composing the Spirits, wounded the consciences, and augmented the number of
Nonconformists, many hundreds of godly preaching Protestant Ministers,
Scholars, who could not conform unto them, being thereupon suspended, deprived,
and thrust out of their Benefices, Curatships, Fellowships, Scholarships, to
their own and their Families ruin, and many learned hopeful Scholars enforced
to desert our Universities, decline the Ministry, and betake themselves to
other callings, and persons of less piety, worth, merit, thrust into their
places, and the Ministry, by our Bishops and High Commissioners, and some of
them imprisoned, fined, forced to forsake the Kingdom, and fly to foreign
Countries or Plantations, to the great grief and discontent of their people,
friends, allies, and moderate Protestants; which occasioned See Tho Whetinhall
of the Abuses now in the Church of Christ 1606. See a most indifferent
Conferrence between the Prelates and late silenced Ministers 1606. The
Lincolnshire Ministers Apology, Dr. Burgess his Necessity of Reformation, and
hundreds m^re.
many new Books of Controversy and Apologies on both sides touching Church
vestments, Ceremonies, and many great complaints, animosities against the
Bishops and High Commissioners, during all King James and King Charles late
Reigns, till at last they were both suppressed by public Acts, Ordinances, and
ejected by force of Arms in England and Ireland as well as Scotland, which
their moderation and prudence in dispens^ing with these unnecessary
Formalities, might easily have prevented, and their rigorous re-inforcing of,
or over-eager contending for them, against the Letter and purport of his
Majesty's late pious and gracious Declarations, after so long a discontinuance
and universal dislike by all sober-minded men in this time of discontent, may
without Gods infinite mercy and miraculous Providence, end in their second
subvertion, and future suppression, which they should timely consider, as well
for their own preservation, as his Majesty's and his peoples general
satisfaction, and the Churches public Peace, Unity, after so many dangerous
Schisms, and Convulsions.

Having given you this account of the true original institution, prescription,
progress, forms of consecration, and putting on of these Pontifical and
Sacerdotal Vestments in the Churches of Christ, of the principal Papal,
Episcopal Decretals, Councils, Canons, that enjoin them, and Scriptures,
Arguments against them, I shall in the next place examine, answer the Scripture
Texts, Arguments produced by Popish Prelates, Canonists, Schoolmen, and our
own Protestant Bishops, Writers, for their use and continuance in the Church,
which in my apprehension are very impertinent, weak, contemptible, unable to
satisfy any tender Conscience, or judicious sober Christians Judgment, though
highly magnified and cried up with great gravity, seriosity by some Reverend
Prelates and Clergymen, as well as many illeterate Novices.

The 1. Texts produced for the institution, use of these Priests Garments under
the Gospel, Argum 1.
are Exodus 28. 2, to 43. c. 29. 5, to 30 c. 31. 10. c. 35. 19, 20, 21. c. 39.
1, 14. c. 40, 13, etc. Levit. 6. 11. c. 8. 2, 13. c. 16. 4, 23, 24, 32. Numb.
20. 16, 18. Neh. 7. 70, 72. F^zra 2. 69. Ezech. 42. 14. c. 44. 17, 19. Where
God commanded Moses ( the chief civil Magistrate) to make holy Garments for
Aaron the High Priest, for glory and honor, to minister before God in the
Priests Office, ( which Garments are there at large described;) and to make
Coats, Bonnets and Girdles for Aarons sons, for Glory and Beauty, and to make
them linen Breeches to cover their nakedness, which should reach from their
loins even to their thighs, and to put them upon Aaron and his Sons when they
come into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, or when they come near unto the
Altar to minister in the holy place, and to consecrate and sanctify Aaron and
his Sons, that they minister to God in the Priests Office, that they bear not
their iniquity and dye. And to take of the blood that is upon the Altar, and
put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron and his Sons, and upon the great
toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood and the anointing oy! (there
prescribed) upon Aaron and his Sons, and their Garments, and he and they shall
be hallowed and their Garments with them. Which Garments being accordingly made
by Bezaliel, by Gods prescription, were put upon Aaron and his Sons, who were
consecrated by Moses, together with their holy Garments, wherein they and the
succeeding Highpriests, and Jewish Priests usually ministered to the Lord;
whence they were styled, Priests Garments, and holy Garments, which they were
to put on when they ministered to the Lord and to put off when their
ministration was ended, as these Texts at large attest; From whence Alcuinus de
Divinis Officiis, c. 38, 39. Honorius Augustodunensis, in his Gemma Animae l.
1, 8^ 2. Thomas Waldensis, Doctrinalis Tom. 3. Tit. 4. c. 29. De sacris
vestibus quibus Sacerdos intrat ad Missam, Gulielmus Durantus, Rationale
Divinorum, l. 3. the Roman Missal, Pontifical, Ceremonial, and all who write of
Bishops and Priests Vestments under the Gospel, and their Consecrations, derive
both their pattern and legitimation.

To which I answer, Answ.
That these Texts are so far from justifying, that they are the strongest
Arguments that can be against the Vestments of Priests and Prelates now
contended for, upon these several accounts.

1. All and every of these Aaronical Vestments under the Law, were particularly
invented, prescribed, together with their matter, form, color, use, by God
himself in precise terms, not by Moses or Aaron and his Sons alone, according
to their own fancies. But the Vestments, Garments, Rochets, Surplisses of
Popes, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons now contended for, were neither
particularly invented, prescribed by God himself, or Christ, either in respect
of their matter, form, color, use, directly or indirectly, nor by any one Text
in the Old or New Testament, but merely invented, prescribed by Popes,
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Monks, according to their own vain doting
fancies. Therefore no ways justified but condemned by these Texts.

2ly. All these Garments were made, and the constant use of them in Divine
services and administrations, punctually enjoined by Gods special Command,
warrant, law, not by Popes, Bishops, Councils, Decretals, Injunctions,
Constitutions, Canons, Visitation Articles, alone, as all Pontifical,
Sacerdotal Garment^, Rochets, Surplisses, Hoods, and other such Trinkets are.

3ly. They were all put on Aaron and his Sons, and both of them consecrated
together, by Moses alone, the chief civil Magistrate; not by any Pope, Bishop,
Priest or other Ecclesiastical person, who now only See Pontificale Romanum,
Caeremen^ale Episcoporum. My Vnbisho ping of Timothy and Titus Bishop Halls
Divine Right of Episcopacy and Remonstrance. Mr^ Sandcrofts Consecration Sermon
on Tit 1. 5. newly printed.
ingrosse and claim the right of ordaining, consecrating all Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, Ministers, Deacons, Ecclesiastical persons, together with the
hallowing of their Garments, Rochets, Surplisses; and deem it no less than
Sacrilege and Usurpation for Kings or Civil Magistrates to ordain or consecrate
any of them, or order ought concerning them, but at their requests, and as
their Substitutes.

4ly. These Garments of theirs were different both in matter, kind, form,
fashion, from Rochets, Surplisses, Albees, Hoods, Planets, Dalmaticks,
Chymeres, Palls, Stoles, Pectoral Crosses, Cassockes, Gowns, Black Silken
Girdles, Copes, Miters, square Caps, and other Vestments now used, contended
for by Ceremonial Prelates and Clergymen. Therefore not warranted but
condemned by these Texts.

5ly. These Garments were prescribed to Aaron and his Sons to put on only when
they went in to the Tabernacle, Altar, Temple, to offer up Levitical Sacrifices
and Services unto God; not when they prayed, preached, instructed the people in
their several Cities, Synogogues, or in their Kings Palla^es, as these Texts
resolve. Therefore no presidents for Bishops, Priests, or Deacons to imitate
when they preach, read Prayers, officiate or administer Sacraments in
Cathedrals or Parish Churches and Chapels.

6ly. Aaron the High Priest and his Successors, with his Sons, and Jewish
Priests Sacrifices, Priesthood, Altars, Vestments, were all temporary, typical,
utterly abolished by the incarnation, passion, sacrifice, res^rrection,
ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ, (whom they typified, shadowed,) as
inconsistent with, and not fit to be continued under the Gospel; as on the
Epistles to the Hebrews, Galatians, Romans, Collossians, Acts 15. and whole New
Testament, all Commentators on them Old and New resolve; especially Hebr. 7,
and 8, and 9, and 10. Therefore these Vestments may not, ought not to be
revived, continued under the Gospel, unless we will revive the Aaronical
Priesthood, High Priest, Priests, Levites, with their Sacrifices, Altars,
Tabernacle, Temple, and all other Levitical Ceremonies, Vestments in specie,
and renounce both Christ himself, with his Priesthood, Ministry, and the
Gospel.

7ly. None were to put on or wear these holy Garments but Aaron and his sons,
who were all Priests by birth and succession, not election and ordination, as
all Apostles, Bishops, Ministers, Deacons were, and yet are; who being none of
the Tribe of Levy, or Sons of Aaron by natural generation, can claim no Title
by the Law to their Priestly Garments, much less by the Gospel, which thus
expressly resolves, Hebr. 7. 12, 13. For the Priesthood being changed, there is
made of necessity a change also of the Law: For he of whom these things are
spoken pertains to another Tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the
Altar, and of which Tribe Mosco spoke nothing concerning Priesthood. An
unanswerable Text against all Evangelical Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, claims
and pretenses (especially being Gentiles, not Jews by birth, and Christians by
regeneration) to Aaronical, Levitical Priestly Vestments or Ornaments; which
Text I desire them all to answer at their leisures.

8ly. If any allege, Objection.
they only use these Garments by way of allusion and imitation, not
prescription.

I answer Answer.
1. That they have no Precept nor warrant in the Gospel for this their allusion
or imitation, but direct Precepts, warrants, cautions against it, as
inconsistent with the Gospel, and Salvation too, Hebrews 6. and 7, and 8, and
9, and 10. c. 12. 27, 28, 29. c. 13. 10 11. Col. 2. 1 ^, to the end. Phil. 3.
2, 3. Tit. 1. 10. 11. Gal. 4. 30, 31. c. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 11, 12. Acts 15. 2ly.
They have no President from the Apostles, or primitive Christians, Churches for
above 300. years after Christ. Exodus 28. 42. c. 19. 28. l. cv. 6. 10. c. 16. 4.
23. 32. 1 Samuel Ezech. 44. 17, 19. 2 Chronicles. 5. 11, 12.
3ly. If our Bishops, Priests, Deacons will imitate them in their Garments, it
must be in fashion, species, form, end, use, as well as matter and color, the
best, realest imitation. Out Bishops, (or the Pope, who pretend themselves the
High Priests Successors, though they can never prove it) must then wear a
Brestplate, ephod, robe, broidered coat, ^^iter, girdle, of the same materials,
form as Aarons were. And our Priests, Deacons, must wear fine linen Ephods,
Breeches, Bonnets, and none but linen, Ezech. 44. 17, 18.
not woolen Garments on them, whiles they minister, nor any thing that may
cause sweat. and lay aside all their Surplisses, Hoods, Gowns, Copes, Caps,
Cassocks of wool, silk, satin, sarcenet, velvet, which now they use; else they
do not imitate, but prevaricate from this president. 4ly. Then none but
Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, not any Scholars in Colleges, Halls, nor
Singing-men, Choristers, and others not in sacred Orders, must wear Surplisses,
as now they are enjoined by the Here, page 67.
forecited Canons, since none but Aaron and his Sons alone were to wear these
holy Garments.

5ly. All these their Garments must be consecrated in the self-same manner as
theirs were. 1. By Moses the chief Civil Magistrate; not by Missale Romanum,
Benedictiones div^rsae and Pontifi^ale Romanum.
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests or Presbyters. 2ly. With sprinkling of blood and
holy anointing oil upon the Tip of their Ears, Bodies, Garments, after they
are put upon their Backs, without any solemn Prayers, Holy Water sprinkled, or
Crosse^ made on them, as their Episcopal Vestments, Surplisses, and Albees are
now hallowed, not upon their bodies, but before they must wear or put them on.

Upon all which considerations, they must now quite disclaim these Texts of
Scripture, and Aaronical, Levitical Garments, as fatally destructive to those
they contend for; upon what ridiculous reasons, similitudes, dissimilitudes,
and mystical Monkish reasons and mystical significations, you may read in
Alcuinus De Divinis Officeiis, cap. 38, 39. Honorius Augustodunensis in his
Gemma Animae, lib. 1. 2. and Gulielmus Durantus in his Rubric to his Rationale
Divinorum, lib. 3. De Indumentis, seu Ornamentis Ecclesiae Sacerdotum, atque
Pontificum, and aliorum Ministrorum; which I shall here at large insert in his
own words for the Readers information, conviction, reformation, or shame of all
over-eager Contenders for these Vestments and Ceremonies, grounded upon most
strange, absurd, fanatic reasons, allusions, and superstitious ridiculous
mystical whimsies, frenzies, perversions of Scripture, which all sober
Christians cannot but reject with greatest contempt, though insisted on with
much gravity and se^iosity by some who would be reputed the Chief Fathers, and
Pillars of the Church.

IN quotidiano usu non est vestibus sacris utendum, Gul. Durantus (...).
Divino^um, l. 3.
ad notandum, quod sicut mutationem habit as secundum literam sacirnus, ita and
secundum spiritum agamus. Non ergo cum vestibus communis vitae usu pollutis in
sancta sancto^um ingrediamur, sed cum conscientia munda and ve. stibus mundis
and sacris sacramenta tract^mus, de Con. di. i. c. i. Unde Stephanus papa de
Con di. 1. Vestimenta. Statuit sacris vestibus, non nisi in Ecclesiasticis and
Deo dignis officiis uti and Ez^ chapter x^^iij. Non sanctificabant populum in
vestibus sui^. Habet ergo Hiero Religio divina alterum habi^um in
ecclesiasticis officiis, ^lium in communi usu, ut (...) p^^ulo Christiano
exemplum praebeat bonae conversationis: quatenus loti prius sordes novi Chri^to
fianc homines. Exuit enim tunc sacerdos Veterem hominem cum actibus suis, and
induit novum qui secundum Deum creatus est. Per vestes quoque quibus in sacris
utimur tantu^; non omnia sacramenta sore populo relevanda, intelligimus, xlij.
did. in mandatis.. si q.iij. nolite. Et nota, quod tempore Ludovici
Imperatoris filii Caroli magni, Episcopi and Clerici cingula auro texta,
exquisitas vestes and alia secularia ornament^ deposuerint.

Sacrae autem vestes a veteri lege videntur assumptae, praecepit enim Dominus
Moysi, ut faceret Aaron Sacerdot^ and filiis cjus vestes sanctas, in gloriam
and decorem, ut loti, and sacris vestibus induti fungerentur officio in sacris.
Exo. xxviij xxxi xxxv. and xl.c. Docuit enim Dominus Moysem per. xl. dies
facere Pontificalia and Sacerdotalia vestimenta Sacerdotibus, and Levitis suis
ornamenta quoque and linteamina: sed and Maria texuit and fecit illa in usum
ministerii Tabernaculi saederis Et Ecclesiasti. xlvij. dedit in celebrationibus
decus etc. Quaedam temen ab Apostolis sumuntur, sed tam illae quam i^^ae
virtutes designant, vel mysterium incarnationis. San^ Pontifex celebraturus
exuit vestes quotidianas, and induit mundas and sacras, Et primo sandalia
calciat, ut sit memor Dominicae incarnationis. Secundo, sibi ponit amitum, ut
motus and cogitatus fauces and linguam cohibeat, ut siat cor mundum spiritum
rectum percipiens in visceribus innovatum. T^r^io, alb^m talarem, ut habeat
mundiciam caruis perseverantem. Quarto, singulum, ut impetus luxuriae refrenet.
Quinto, stol^m in signum obedientiae. Sexto, tunicam jacentinam. i coel^stem
conversationem. Sept^mo, superindu^ Dalmaticam, id est sanctam religionem, and
carnis mortificationem. Octavo, Cirothecas, ut declinat van^m gloriam. Nono,
annulum ut diligar sponsam, i. Ecclesiam sicut se, Decimo, Casulam, i.
charitatem. Undecimo, sudarium, ut quicquid fragilitate vel ignorantia peccat
poenitentia tergat. Duodecimo, pallium supponit, ut ostendat se imitatorem
Christi qui langores nostros tulit. Decimotertio, mitram, ut sic agat quod
coronam mereatur perciper^. aeternam. Decimoquarto, baculum, i. auctoritatem
potestatis and doctrinae. Et postea tabeta calcat, ut terram despicere and
amare caelestia discat. Omnibus autem praemissis vestibus induitur a ministris,
quia ei ut vestes induat spirituales angeli suffragantur, vel quod vicarius est
Christi, cui angeli ministrant and omnia serviant. Rursu^, pontifex versus
aquilonem aspiciens, quamvis versus otientem seu versus altar si sit magis
accommodum re^picere possit, tanquam advocatus and pugil cum host pugnaturus
antiquo, vestibus sacris, quasi armis induitur, juxta Apostolum ut jam dicetur.
Primo, sandalia pro ocreis, habet, ne quid maculae vel pulveris affectionum
in^iereat. Secundo, amitus pro galea caput contegit. Tertio, alba pro lorica
totum corpus cooperuit. Quarto, cingulum pro arcu, sub-cingulum pro pharetra
assumit, and est subcingulum illud quod dependet a cingulo quo stola pontificis
cum ipso cingulo colligatur. Quinto, stola collum circumdat quasi hastam contra
hostem vibrans. Sexto, manipulo pro clava utitur. Septimo, casula quasi clipeo
tegitur, manus libro pro gladio armatur. De singulis etiam Where he gives other
mystical reasons for them.
aliter dicetur infra. Haec itaque sunt arma quibus Pontif^x vel Sacerdos
armari debet contra spirituales ne quiciat pugnaturus. Nam ut inquit Apostolus:
Arma miliciae nostrae non sunt carnalia: sed ad destructionem muniminum
potentia, Et in alia Epistola ad Ephesians.vi.c. Induite vos, inquit, armatura Dei,
u^ possitis stare adversus insidias diaboli. State ergo succincti lumbos
vestros, in veritate, and induti lorica justitiae, and calciati pedes in
praeparatione Evangelii pacis, in omnibus sumentes scutum fidei, in quo positis
omnia tela nequissimi ignea extinguere and galeam salutis assumere: and gladium
spiritus, quod est Verbum Dei. Haec quidem armatura est praemissa septuplex
vestis Sacerdotalis significativa, septiplicis virtutis Sacerdotis; and
representativa Christi vestium, quibus indutus suit ipse passionis, prout infra
dicetur. Provideat ergo diligenter Episcopus and attendat studiose Sacerdo^, ut
signum sine significato non ferat, i. ut vestem fine virtute non po^^^^: ne
forte similis sit Sepulchro a foris dealbato, intus vero omni spurcicia pleno.
Quisquis, n. sacris indumentis ornatur and honestis moribus non induitur quanto
ven^rabilior apparet hominibus, tanto redditur indignior apud Deum:
Pontificalem it aque gloriam non jam honor commendat vestium ^sed splendour
animarum: quoniam and illa quae quondam carnalibus blandiebantur obtutibus ea
potius quae in ipsis erant intelligenda poscebant: ut quicquid illa velamina in
fulgore auri, in nitore gemmarum and in multimodi operis varietate signabant,
hoc jam in moribus actibusque, clarescat: cum and apud veteres reverentiam ipsa
significationum species obtineret, and apud nos certiora sint experimenta rerum
quam enigmata figurarum, prout haec and alia in Pontificali, ubi agitur de
Episcopi consecratione, Ieguntur. Sic itaque munitus ad certamen cum spirituali
nequiciae in caelestibus, and pro fedanda in subditos judicis ira ad altar
procedit: and per confessione^ diaboli renunciat Dominio, and seipsu^ ac^usat;
populus vero quasi pro suo pugile oraturus in profestis diebus terrae
prosternitur, dum autem ille orationes and alia recitat, quasi totis viribus
cum diabolo pugnat. Dum diaconus in jejuniis ante Evangelium casulam super
humerum replicat, quasi gladium contra hostem vibrat. Dum Epistola legitur voce
praeconis, imperatoris edicta dantur; cantus sunt tubicinae praecentores,
chorum regentes sunt duces exercitum ad pugnam instruentes, quibus lascentibus
alii subveniunt. Gantus autem sequentiae est plausus seu laus victoriae. Dum
Evangelium legitur hostis quasi gladio vulneratur: aut exercitus post victoriam
dispersus adunatur. Episcopus praedicans est imp^rator victores laudans,
oblationes sunt spolia quae victoribus dividuntur. Cantus offertorii, est
triumphus qui^ debetur imperatori. Pax autem in fine datur, ut populi quies
host prostrato insinuetur. Et deinde populus data licentia per ite Missa est,
cum gaudio de victoria and pace obtenta ad propria redit: Celebraturus itaque
Missam Episcopus aut Presbyter, indumentis suo ordini congrueruen^ibus se
exornat and v^stium cultui actionis quoque conveniant ornamenta, c.
di-rationis. Circa quod notandum est quod fex sunt indumenta Sacerdotibus and
Episcopis communia, quia and sex sunt in quibus communis Presbyterorum and
Episcoporum potestas consistit. Novem vero sunt or^amenta pontifi ibus
specialia, quia and novem sunt in quibus spiritualis Episcoporum potestas
consistit. Per hunc ergo communium and specialium indumentorum numerum,
communitas and specialitas potestatum inter Episcopos and Sacerdotes
significatur, de quo in part praecedenti dictum est sub tit. de Episcopo. Hoc
etenim tam in novo quam in veteri testamento legitur constitutum, us Pontifices
praeter communes vestes habeant speciales, sed ibi quatuor erant communes, and
quatuor speciales prout dicetur sub ti, de legalibus indumentis, quod siquidem
ratio mis^ica postulabat: nam illae da^ae sunt carnalibus and mundanis, quoniam
quaternarius numerus convenit carni propter quatuor humores, and mundo propter
quatuor elementa. Haec autem spiritualibus and perfectis data sunt. Nam
senarius numerus qui perfectus est, quia redditur ex suis partibus aggregati^
perfectis convenit. Unde and sexto die perficit Deus caelum and terram, and
omnem ornatum eorum; sed and cum in plenitudine temporis sexta venisset aetate,
sexto die sub hora sexta redemit genus humanum. Senarius ergo numerus perfectus
est, quo suo ordine numeratus perficitur. Nam cum unum duo and tres dicuntur,
senarius numerus impletur; vel quia in tribus partibus dividitur, i. in sexta
tertia and dimedia, vizt. in uno duobus veltribus. Novenarius etiam
spiritualibus convenit, quia novem sunt ordines angelorum qui secundum
prophetam per novem gemmarum species designantur. Quindecim ergo sunt ornamenta
Pon^ificis, quindecim virtutum gradus ipso numero designantia, quo^ per
quindecim cantica graduum Psalmista distinxit. Vestes enim Sacerdotales
virtutes significant, quibus debent Sacerdotes ornarl, secundum illud
propheticum: Sacerdo^es tui induantur justitia and sancti tui exultent. Quae
talares dicuntur, quia talus finis est corporis, per quod ostenditur quod non
sufficit opus bonum inchoare nisi studeatur perseveranti fine compleri, prou^
sub ti. de tunica dicetur. Sic ergo noster Pontifex plura quam octo induit
vestimenta, quamvis Aaron non nisi octo habuisse legatur, quibus moderna
succedunt, quod ideo est quoniam oportet justitiam nostram magis habundare quam
Scribarum et Pharisaeorum, ut intrare possumus in regnum coelorum. Potest etiam
dici, quod noster Pontifex octo habet a capite usque ad pedes: exceptis
vestimentis pedum and manuum, scilicet amictum, albam, cingulum, and stolam,
duas tunicas, casulam and pallium: vestimentum potius pertinet ad nostrum quam
ad Aaron, quia nostris dictum est, euntes in omnes gentes, etc.

Denique praeter praemissas vestes sacris ordinibus and ministris deputatas,
est and alia quaedam vestis linea quod superplicium dicitur, quo quibuslibet
serviciis altaris and sacrorum vacantes super ve^^es communes uti debent, prout
in sequenti ti, dicetur. Superpelliceum autem propter sui candorem, mundiciam
seu puritatem castitatis designat. Juxta illud, Omni tempore vestimenta, id est
opera tua sint candida and munda, propter nomen vero suum carnis
mortificationem figurat. Dict^m est enim Superpellicium, eo quo antiquitus
super tunicas pellici^as de pellibus mortuorum animalium factas induebatur,
quod adhuc in quibusdam Ecclesiis observatur, representantes, qdAdam post
poccatum talibus vestitutus est pelliciis. Tertio, denotat innocentiam, and
ideo ante omnes alias veste^ sacras saepe induitur, quod divino cultui deputari
in ^ocentiam vitae cunctis virtutum actibus superponere d^b nt^ Juxta illu^
Psalm. Innocents and recti adheseru^t mihi. Quarto, propter sui latitudinem
cong^ue charita^ m designat. Unde super prophanas and commune^ vestes induitur
ad notandum quod chari^as operit multitu^inem peccatorum. Quinto, propter sui
formam quod in modum crucis formatur, passionem Domini figurat, qu^dque illud
gerentes crucifigi debent cum viciis, and concupiscentiis: Flunt autem
Superpellicia in quibusdam locis de crismatibus lineis, quae ponuntur super
infantulo^ baptizatos, exemplo Moysi, qui de purpura and bisso, and aliis a
populo in tabernaculo oblatis, secit vestes quibus A^ron and Filii, ejus
induerentur quum ministrabant in sanctis, Exodus xxxix.c. Est etiam and alia
vestis quod pluviale vel cappa vocatur, quod creditur a legali tunica mutuata.
Unde sicut illa tintinabulis, sic ista simbris infigitur, qui sunt labores and
hujus mundi solicitudines. Habet etiam caputium, quod est supernum gaudium,
prolixa est usque^ad p^des, per quod perseverantia usque in sinem significatur.
In anteriori part aperta est, ad d^notandu, quod sanctae conversantibus vita
patet aeterna seu quod ^orum vita patere debet aliis in exemplum, xi.q.iij. non
sunt in fine. Rursus per cappam gloriosa corporum immortalitas intelligitur,
unde illam non nisi in majoribus festivitatibus induimus, aspicientes in
suturam resurrectionem, quando electi deposita carne binas stoas
accipiente.i.e. requiem animarum and gloriam corporum. Quae capparecte interius
patula est, and nisi sola necessaria sibula insuta, quia corpora spiritualia
facta nullis animam obturabunt angustiis: fimbriis etiam subornatur, quia tunc
nostrae nihil decrit imperfectioni, sed quod nunc ex part cognoscimus tunc
cognofcemus sicut and cogniti sumus. Quidam autem haeretic^ garriunt, nusquam
reperiri in novo testamento, quod Christus vel Discipuli ejus praemissis
vestibus induerentur, repre^endentes nos temere, quia talibus utimur
ornamentis, quoniam sicut Jo, ait. Dom. surgens de caena posuit vestimenta sua
and postea alia nunquam accepi^ nisi sua. Nos vero, ut dicunt, plura alia quam
vestimus revestimus in missam qua caenam ipsam imitamur, and Dominus ab his qui
volunt ambulare in stolis, nos cavere praecepit, dicens; Cavete a Scribis qui
volunt ambulare in stolis; dicunt enim quod hoc facimus ut justiores and
excellentiores populis appareamus, contra illud, Vos estis qui justificastis
vos coram hominibus, Deus autem novit corda vestra, quia quod hominibus altum
est, abhominatio est apud Deum. Error autem iste ex praemissis apertissime
consutatur. Legitur quoque Ezech. xlii. and xliv. Cum ingredientur sanctuarium
meum and accedant ad mensam meam ut mihi ministrent and custodiant ceremonias
meas, vestibus lineis induentur, nec ascendet super eos quicquam laneum. Cum
ingredientur atrium extersus ad populum, exuent se vestimentis suis in quibus
ministra verant, and non sactificabant populum in vestimentis suis. Et nota,
quod hostiarii, lectores, exorcistae and accoliti vestibus albis utuntur,
videlicet Superpelliceo, amicto, and alba, and baltheo, ut Angelos Dei
ministros per castitatis mundiciam imitentur, and eis in carne gloriosa effecta
spirituali quasi in albis vestibus socientur. Inde est quod potius lineis
vestibus utuntur, quia ficut linum multo labor ad eandorem perducitur, sic
necesse est per multas tribulationes ad Regni gloriam pervenire. In concilio
Magon. xi.q.i. Episcopus Presbyter, statutum est, quod Episcopus in ordinatione
sua recipiat orarium baculum and annulum, Presbyter orarium and planetam;
Diaconus orarium and Dalmaticam; sub-Diaconus patenam and calicem, and cum
degradantur ea perdunt. Et in Concilio Toletano, xciij.di. Diaconus, in
conventu statutum est quod Diaconus tempore oblationis tantum, scil. quando
legit Evangelium, utatur Alba and Dalmatica. Notandum quoque est quod vestes
Evangelici Sacerdotis aliud designant in capite scilicet, in Christo; aliudque
figur^^t in membris, quamquam and caput and membra Sacerdotis nomine
nuncupantur^ad caput dicit Psalmigraphus: Tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secundum
ordinem Melchisedech. Ad membra vero dicit Apostolus; Vos estis genus electum,
regale Sacerdotium. Exponenda ergo sunt eorum mysteria. Primo secundum quod
membris, consequenter secundum quod capiti scilicet Christo convenient, prout
in quolibet capittulo distinguetur. De ornamentis autem and palleis and
vestibus Eccles^ae vel altaris, in prima part dictum est, ubi agitur de
picturis. Porro sex indumenta Sacerdotibus and Episcopis communia sunt haec;
amictus, alba, zona, seu cingulum, stola, manipulus, planeta. Novem vero
pontificibus specialia sunt haec, caligae, sandalia, succinctorium, tunica,
Dalmatica, Cirothecae, mitra, annulus, baculus pastoralis. De quibus ominibus
singulatim prosequimur, and etiam de sudario, and de pallio, and de coloribus
quibus Ecclesia in Ecclesiasticis utitur indumentis, and de legalibus
indumentis sive veteris testamenti.

After which he prosecutes at large in sundry distinct Chapters, the reasons of
instituting each of these particular Pontifical, Sacerdotal Vestments, and
their mystical tropological significations, with such frantic, ridiculous
conceits, and impious pervertings, wrestings of sacred Scriptures, as would
affect all conscientious sober Christians with grief and indignation, and
others with more laughter than any Interlude or Puppet-play. I shall only
transcribe his Chapter De Alba, or the white Surplisse, the Vestment now most
in question.

POst amictum, camisiam sive albam sacerdos indui^; quae membris corporis
convenienter aptata, nihil superfluum aut dissolutum in vita Saece^dotis aut in
eis membris esse debere d^monstrat. Haec ob speciem candoris mundiciam
demonstrat; secundum quod legitur; Omni tempore vestimenta tua sint candide.
Fit autem de bisso, vel lino, propter quod scrip^um est, bissum sunt
sanctificationes sanctorum. Est autem bissus linum egyptiacum. Sicut enim linum
vel bissus condorem quem ex natura non habet ^ultis tensionib^s attritum
acquirit per artem sic and hominis caro mundicia^ quem non obtinet per natural,
per exercitia bonorum operum multis cogitationibus macerata, sortitur per
gratiam. Sacerdos ergo secundum Apostolum, c^ stiget corpus suum and in
servitutem redigat, ne forte cum altis praedicaverit, ipse reprobus fiat. Habet
autem alba capucium, quod est professio castitatis. Habet etiam lingulam, quae
significat linguam sacerdotalem quae ligat contumaces and absolvit penitentes.
Ru^sus haec vestis quae in veteri sacerdotio lin^a, vel pedis greece, seu (...)
talaris dicebatur, stricta fu^sse describitur propter spiritum servitutis
Iudaeorum in timore. In novo vero larga est propter spiritum adoptionis in
liberate qua nos Christus liberavit. Quod autem aurifrisium and gramata
diversis in locis ac variis operibus ad decorem habet, illud insinuat quod
p^ophe^a dicit in Psalmis. Asti^^t regina a dextris tuis in vest ^eaurata
circa, vary. Rursus alba cingula stringitur, ut omnis voluptas carnalis
astricta intelligatur, diccente Domino: Sint lumbi vestri praecincti. Manicae
quoque tam albae quam etiam tunicallae convenienter debent esse strictae, non
minus laxae, ut labantur and brachia nudentur, habentes in summitatibus
aurifrisia, ad designandunm aureos torques, quia brachia nud^ beati Martini
missam celebrantis miraculose decenter operuerunt, prout in sexta part sub
ejus festo docetur. Per albam etiam qua corpus a sursum usque ad deorsum
tegitur, spes quem ex gratia provenit ecclesi^ defursum, and ex meritis
ecclesiae deorsum figuratur. De hac Apostolus ad Roman. viij. Spe salvi facti
sumus. Quia vere usque ad talos d^scendit, perseverantiam designat, prout
tactum est prope finem in prohemio hujus partis. Porro, secundum quod capiti,
scilicet Christo, advenit alba quae est lineum vestimentum longissime distans a
tunicis pellitiis, quem ex mortuis animalibus siunt, quibus Adam vestitus est
post peccatu^, novitate^ vitae signisicat quem Christus and habuit and docuit
and tribuit in baptismo; de quo dicit Apostolus; Exuite veterem hominem cum
actibus suis, and induite novum qui secundum Deum creatus est.

Nam in transfiguratione resplenduit facies ejus sicut sol, and vestimenta ejus
facta sunt alha sicut nix, semper enim vestimenta Christi munda fuerunt and
candida, quoniam peccatum non fecit, nec inventus est dolus in oreejus: Haec
etiam vestis representat albam vestem in qua Herodes illusit Christo. Luc.
xxiij.

In answer to all this Popish chaff I shall only propound the Poets
interogation to the Readers of this irrational Rationale, Spectatum admiss^
risum teneatis amici?

I now proceed to their second Scripture reason for the use of white Surplisses
and Rochets, A^g. ^words^
which is this, White, and white Garments are a sign or badge of holiness,
innocence, purity, joy, and gladness, as is evident by Psalm. 51. 7. Isay 1. 18.
Dan. 11. 35. Rev. 3. 4, 5, 18. c. 4. 4. c. 6. 2, 11. c. 7. 9, 13, 14. c. 19.
18. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Eccles. 9. 8. Therefore Bishops, Ministers and Deacons
ought to wear white Rochets, Surplisses and Albees in time of Divine service
and Sacraments. Thus Alcuinus, Honorius Augustodunensis, Thomas Waldensis,
Gulielmus Durantus, Archbishop Whiteguift, Mr. Hooker, and sundry other Writers
argue.

To which I answer, Answer.
1. That White is not always a sign, badge of Purity and Innocence, but often
times of Corruption, Defilement, Guilt, and that in the Scriptures, Priests and
Prelates account. As 1. in the Case of Leprosy (the worst, Levit. 13. 3. 8. 44,
45.
uncleanest of all Diseases) awhite scab, spot, skin, was a sign, symptom,
consequent of the plague of Leprosy; whence it is recorded of Levit. 13, and 14.
Miriam and Numb. 12. 10. 2 Kings 5. 17.
Gehazi, when smitten miraculously by God with leprosy for their Sins, that
they became leprous, and went out a Leper as white as Snow. 2ly. In the Case of
Hypocrisy, especially in false Prophets, Priests and Clergymen, against whom
Christ himself gives this description, caution, Mat. 7. 15, 16. Beware of false
Prophets, who come unto you in Sheeps clothing (which is commonly Eze^h 27.
18. Rev 1. 14. Isay 1. 18.
white, as Wool is) but inwardly they are ravenous Wolves, ye shall know them
by their fruits; compared with Mat. 23. 2, to 12. Mar. 12. 38, 39, 40. Beware
of the Scribes and Pharisees, which love to go in Long clothing, (long See
page 122.
white Surplisses, Gowns, Cassocks, Cloakes, as Bishops, Priests, Deacons use
to do) which devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long Prayers; But
all their works they do to be seen of men: They make broad their Philacteries
and enlarge the borders of their Garments: And love the uppermost rooms in
Feasts, and the Chief Seats in the Synogogues: And greetings in the Market
place, and to be called Rabbi, Rabbi: But be ye not called Rabbi, for one is
your Father which is in Heaven, and all ye are Brethren. Which Texts our famous
Apostle Wickliss Dial^g^r^m. l 4. c. 16, 17. De Papa c. 12.
John Wickliff and others applied to the Popish Prelates and Clergy, their
Surplisses and Vestments, as Doctrinalis, Tom. 3. Tit. 4. c. 29, 30.
Thomas Waldenesis, and others relate: together with that of Matthew. 23. 25, 27,
28. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye make clean the
outside of the Cup and of the Platter, but within they are full of extortion
and excess. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse that first within the Cup and
Platter, that the outside may be clean also. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites, for ye are like unto whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear White
(or beautiful) outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all
uncleanness: Even so ye also (in your long white Surplisses, and Priestly
Garments) appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisy and
Iniquity. Upon which account Paul styles Acts 23 3.
Aunanias a whited Wall. 3ly. Popes and Bishops themselves when they degrade
any Clergyman or Bishop for Heresy, Degradandus indumentis Sacerd^talibus, si
Sacerdos sit, induitui; and sic de reliquis Ordinibus, pontificale Romanu^ p.
456, 1^ 462. Fox Acts and Monuments, vol 3. p. 998, 999.
uncleanness, or any other scandalous crime, apparel him first in Surplisses,
Rochets, and consecrated Vestments; after which they disrobe him of them: and
when they inflict penance on Adulterers, Adulteresses, Whores, Bawdes,
Whoremasters, and other scandalous, unclean Offenders, they cause them to stand
in white Sheets or Surplisses in the Church before all the Congregation to
their shame, by way of punishment. Therefore white Garments even in Churches
are a badge of Guilt, Infamy, as well as of Innocence, purity and honor. 4ly.
St. Hierome himself, Lib. 1. Advers. Iovinianum.
and Caelius Rhodiginus out of him, censure the wearing of white Garments by
Monks, Antiqu. Lect. l. 5 c. 13. p. 220.
as a badge of Luxury and Pride, not Innocence, purity or humility. And is it
not so in Bishops, Priests, D^acons, who thereby will not only difference
themselves from, but advance themselves above Lay Christians; Pontisicale
Romanum, p. 13.
as appears by this prayer in the Roman Pontifical, when they put on their
Surplisses, and Priests Vestments at their ordination, as Clerks, Omnipotens
sempiterne Deus, ^ propitiare peccatis nostris, and ab omni servitute
saecularis habitus hos famulos tuos emunda, ut dum ignominiam saecularis
habitus deponunt, tua semper in aevum gratia perfruantur, etc. And these words
of the Archbishop to the King at the time of his Coronation, when he places
him in his Throne, My Signal Loyalty and Dev^tion of Gods true Saints etc. to
their Sovereigns. Part 2. p 287, 179, 190 231.
Stand and hold fast from henceforth that Place, whereof hitherto thou have
been heir by the succession of thy Forefathers, being now delivered unto thee
by the Authority of Almighty God, and all the Bishops and Servants of God;
(clad in their Pontificalibus) and as thou ^e^st the Cle^gy to come nearer unto
the Altar (than others, in their white Rochets, Surplisses,) so remember, that
in places convenient, thou give them greater honor. Finally if white Garments
be a token of Innocence, purity, then Porters, Carters, Grooms, Virgins and
Country Lasses, who usually go clad in White Frockes, Wastcoats, Garments all
the day, week, year long, should be more holy, innocent, pure than Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, who wear them only for few hours in the Church, and are clad
in Black Garments only all the day, week, year, which are as contrary to
Innocence, purity, as white is unto black.

2ly. White is not always a badge, or Garment of Joy, but often times of
Mourning and Grief, as in the Cases of penance and degradations forecited; and
in these ensuing Presidents. Geuialium Dierum, l 3 c. 7.
Alexander ab Alexandro, De Moribus Gen^ium.
B^emus and Romanae quaestiones.
others record, that the Grecians, Spartians, Argivi, Syracusians used to put
on Albas vestes white Garments, when they mou^ned for their deceased Friends
and Kings, in which they followed their Corpse to their G^aves, involved usually
in white Winding sheets and Cere-cloaths; Plutarch, and Problematus, Locus 120.
de Vestitu.
Areti^s out of him informs us, that the Roman Matrons, mourned in white
Garments. In Purchase Pil^grimage, l. 1. 4. cap. 19.
China at this day the Nobles and better sort of Women use to mourn in White
array; The better fort of Sands Europae Speculum, Purchase Pilgrimage, l. 3. c.
12.
Turks use to mourn in White; and in Iapan White is a Funeral color, Black a
Feastival; Yea, Linsch^t l. 1. c. 22. Purchase Pilgrimage, l 5. c. 15. p. 667.
at this Day the Benedicti Are^ii. Problemata Locus 120. p. 367 Gul. Stuckius,
Antiqu. Conviv. l, 2, c. 26,
Queens of France after their Husband Kings decease wear White Garments during
their Widow-hood, in token of grief and retiredness: and in many places of
England when any Maids dye before marriage, other Virgins use to accompany their
Hearse to their Graves in white Wastcoats, Gloves, Ribonds; Therefore white
Garments cannot be of themselves, a badge of joy, chearfullness, triumph, for
then white Winding-sheets should be so, wherein we all inter dead Corpse.

3ly. White Garments are no peculiar badge of Evangelical Bishops or Ministers
of the Gospel, and that only in Divine administrations; For as I never read
that Christ or his Apostles, or the primitive Evangelical Bishops, Ministers,
Deacons, for above 350. years after Christ used any such Vestments, Surplisses,
Rochets in divine Administrations, which doubtless they would have done had
they deemed them necessary, decent or expedient; so on the contrary. I read, 1.
That the Strabo, Solinus, Pemponius Mela, Alexander ab Alexandro Genesis Dierum l.
5. c. 18. f 291. and Bo^^^us De Moribu^ Gentium.
Tapyrae, Bactriani, Iberi, and other barbarous Nations about Hyrcania,
Alexander ab Alexandro Genesis Dierum, l. 5. c. 8. f. 263 lib. 6. c. 19. f. 664.
compel their Women to wear and walk ab^oad Albis Lunicis in White Coats, and
short cut hair; when as the Men only wear black vestments, and let their Hair
grow long. 2. That the Romans in their Circentian Plays had 4. Factions, clad
in 4. several sorts of colored Garments, (just like the Popish Priests and
Prelates) according to the four seasons of the year; to wit, in Green-coloured
Garments, dedicated to the Spring: in Rose-coloured Vestments, devoted to the
Harvest: in Violet-coloured; consecrated to Winter: and in White Garments,
dedicated to Autumn, when men (as well as fruits and leave^) usually drop into
their Graves. And that the Antiqu. Lect. l. 14. c. 16.
Romans used to resort to, and behold their Plays, Toga candida in a white
Gown or Surplisse, which was no act of Religion, but Pastime. 3ly. That those
who stood for any elective Offices among the Romans, were usually clad in white
Garments, from whence they were styled Candidati, as Caelius Rhodiginus proves
at large out of Hist. Romans l. 4.
Titus Livius, Problemata.
Plutarch, Hist. Naturaelis, l 8.
Pliny, Digestorum, l. r. De Officio Quaestoris.
Vlpian, Iuvenal and others; which Candidates Alexander ab Alexandro Genesis
Dierum, l. 3. c. 17. f. 153. Pa^lus Aemilius Consul legem tulit ad populum, qua
ne cui suffragii causa munus dare liceret mul^ipli^i poen^ interdixit Postea
lege Calphurnia his qui mercede corrupti aut inunere deliniti Candidatis obviam
issent, quiqise precio illos sectarentur; aut SI PRANDIUM AD CAPTANDOS ANIMOS,
AVT SI QVID MVNERIS EXHIBITVM FORET, praeter poenas legib^^ constitutas, etiam
PECVNIARIA MVLCTA FVIT. Id qu^d Fabia lege cautum, etc.
usually bribed the people to gain their Voices with money, meat, drink, feasts,
(notwithstanding many successive severe Laws made against it) as too many
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses now use to bribe their Electors before and at
every Parliamentary election, with Gifts, Feasts, and drunken entertainments,
for which they deserve expulsion out of the House of Commons, far better than
Cooks 4. Institutes, p. 23.
Thomas Long, who in the Parliament of 8. Elizabeth was expelled the Commons
House, upon examination of his Case, only for giving the Mayor of Westbury (in
Wiltshire) 4 l. to be elected a Burgess to serve in that Parliament for this
his corrupt dealing (which was to poison the very Fountain it self;) and the
Mayor fined and imprisoned; where as some now spend one, two, or three thousand
pounds apiece in Counties to be elected Knights: and others one, two, three,
four or five hundred pounds a piece or more to be chosen Citizens and Burgesses
for the last, and this approaching Parliament, in Bribes, Alexander ab
Alexandro, Genesis Dierum, l. 3. c. 17. Quoties contra ambitum illorum qui
appetunt Majestratus, pluribus legibus a Romany obvium item fit.
Wine, Ale, Bear, Tobacco, Feasts, and drunken entertainments, (which will
hardly produce a sober Parliament, and for which the Elements now mourn, yea
drop down showers of Wrath uponus) for which bribery they well deserve to be
cast out of the Parliament House, and fined treble the value of their Bribes
and expenses, to his Majesty; ^ince the Pagan Romans were so just as by the Law
of C. Petilius Tribune of the people, to impose a fine and penalty of ambition
upon Q. Coponius, quod vini amphoram ei cujus suffragio magistratum petebai,
dono dederat. And if his giving but a Quare or Pottle of Wine was reputed a
Bribe deserving punishment, what do they demerit who give whole Tuns, Buts of
Wine, and many Barrels of Ale, Bear to their Electors for their Voices? Yea
those Mercinaries who thus unworthily sell their Voices, deserve to be for ever
disabled to have any voice in future Elections; and this Roman Law is now fit
to be enacted among us, Vt in petendis honoribus, candidati sine toga ad
Comitia descenderent, ne pecuniis in sinu reconditis tribuum suffragia
merearentur. 4ly. That the idolatrous Hietom. comment. in Ezech. c. 44.
Alexander ab Alexandro, Genesis Dierum, l. 6. c. 12. f. 349. conference at Hampton
Court, p. 76.
Priests of Isis among the Egyptians, Gul. Stuckius Antiqu. Conviv. l. ^. c.
26.
when they sacrificed to this Idol, did shave their Crowns, and wear white
Surplisses, Garments, (just as the Popish Priests do now) above a 1000. years
before Christians took up this fashion; and the Alexander ab Alex. Genesis Dierum,
l. ^. c. 19. f. 364.
Roman Matrons in the Feast of their Goddess Ceres, did annually sacrifice to
her, vest candida, in a white Garment, ut tunc Diis gratum esse censerent, si
a laetis, nec a sunere pollutis celebraretur. 5ly. That the Bochellus Decret.
Eccles Gal. l. 5. Tit. 2. c 3 p. 702, 906 Seldens Titles of Honor, part 1. c.
8. p. 222.
four Monks of Saint Denis Abbey in France who carry the Canopy over the viol
of Holy oil (pretended to be sent from Heaven) at the French Kings Coronation,
albis induti, are arrayed in white Surplisses and Rochets, though not in holy
Orders. 6ly. That our Bishops themselves, and the Abbot formerly, but now the
Dean of Westminster, at our Kings Coronation, stripping off his ordinary
Apparel, put on him a My Signal Loyalty and Devotion of Gods true Saints and
pious Christians to their Sovereigns, part 2. p 131, 237, 242, 244, 253, 255,
391. Tho. Walsingham. Hist Angl p. 295, 296.
Collobium, Dalmatica, or close Pall, linen Gloves and Sandals, immediately
after his consecrating, as they use to do on Bishops and Priests, of whole holy
Vestments, these are parcel. Either therefore they must acknowledge our Kings
to be Bishops and Priests as well as themselves, or disclaim these Vestments as
proper or peculiar to Bishops, Priests and Clergymen.

4ly. Admit white Garments, Rochets, Surplisses a Badge of Innocence, Purity,
Holiness, as is pretended, and therefore fit to be worn in time of Divine
service and Sacraments by Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and other Ecclesiastical
Persons; Then it will certainly follow from hence,

1. That all Christians whatsoever ought to wear white Surplisses, Rochets,
Albees, as well as Popes, Archbishops, Metropolitans, Bishops, Archdeacons,
Deans, Prebends, Priests, Ministers, Deacons, and other Churchmen. 1. Because
they are all equally purified, washed from their sins externally by Baptism,
and internally by the blood of Jesus Christ, yea justified, sanctified, and
made holy without spot or blemish; as well as any Prelates, Priests or
Clergymen whatsoever, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Rev. 1. 5, 6. c. 7. 14. 1 John 1. 9.
c. 2. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Tit. 3. 5. Hebr. 10. 22. Psalm 51. 7. Isay 1. 18.
2ly. Because they are all commanded to be pure, holy, blameless, undefiled in
all manner of conversati^^, and godliness, even as God is holy, as well as
Clergymen. Upon which account they are usually styled Saints, holy men, holy
brethren; and redeemed by Christ for this very end, that they should walk
before and serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of their
lives, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. Romans 11. 49. c. 19. 2. c. 20. 7. 2 Pet. 3. 11. Ephesians. 5.
25, 26. Col. 3. 10, 11, 16, 17. 1 These 5. 16. 23, 27. Hebr. 3. 1. Rev. 1. 5, 6.
c. 3. 18. c. 7. 14. Lu. 1. 74, 75. Tit. 2 12, 14. Romans 1 7. c. 6. 1. 4, etc. c.
8. 10, 11, 29, 30. Ephesians 4. 24. c. 1. 4. Phil. 1. 1. Philem. 5. 7. 2 Cor. 1. 1.
c. 13. 13. Col. 1. 2, 4, 12, 26, Rev. 15. 3. c. 19. 8. Ps. 34. 1. Ps. 62. 8.
Psalm. 106, 3. 1 Timothy 2. 8. 3ly. Because they are all equally a chosen
generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people, yea made
Kings and Priests to God the Father by Jesus Christ, as much as Prelates and
Clergymen, 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10. Rev. 1. 5, 6. c. 9. 10. c. 20. 6. Exodus 19. 6.
4ly. Because God is no respecter of Persons, (especially in his immediate
worship, service) but in every Nation he that fears God, and works
righteousness is equally aocepted of him, Acts 10. 34, 35. 1 Pet. 1. 17. Ephesians.
1. 6. 5ly. Because all the Saints and redeemed of Christ, have equally washed
their garments, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, and are arrayed
in Spiritual (not Corporal) white garments, as well as Prelates and Priests,
Rev. 3. 4, 5, 18. c. 6. 11. c. 7. 9, 13, 14. c. 19. 8. Therefore if necessary,
decent expedient in Gods Divine service, all Lay Saints should wear them as
well as Bishops or Clergymen.

2ly. Then it will necessarily follow, that not only Prelates and other
Clergymen, but likewise all Christians should wear Rochets, Surplisses, and
white Vestments at all times, as well as in time of Divine Service, or
Sacraments administrations; especially in all their private Prayers, Devotions
in their Closets, Houses, Families, (where Bishops, Priests, Deacons themselves
use not to wear them) and in all places as well as in Cathedrals, Churches,
Chapels, since they ought to be always holy, innocent, undefiled, white, pure
in all their actions, conversations, shining as lights of the world in the
midst of a polluted and perverse generation, as Ephesians. 1. 4. c. 5 26, 27. c. 4.
22, 23, 24. Phil. 2. 15. 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. 2 Pet. 3. 11. and other forecited
Texts resolve.

3ly. It was an Cent. Magd. 4 c. 6. Col. 419, 420. Cent. 5, Col. 658. Cent. 6.
Col 334 Cent. 7. Col. 147 Cent. 8. Col. 189. Cent. 9. Col 324. Cent. 10. Col.
293. Cent. 11. Col. 262. Cent. 121 Col. 875. Cent. 13. Col. 596. To^ Waldensis
D^ctrinalis Tou. 3 Tit. 5. c. 52. Gul. Stuckils Antiqu. Convi^^ 1. 2. c. 16.
ancient custom in the Primitive Church (long before Bishops, Priests or
Deacons wore white Rochets, Surplisses, and linen Vestments) beginning before
300. years after Christ, and continuing near 1400, years space, or more, in
most Christian Churches, to put on long white Robes, Surplisses, Garments, on
all such Christians as were baptized, immediately after their baptism, in
testimony of their purification and washing from their sins in their baptism,
by the blood of Jesus Christ. Hence Lactantius flourishing about 300. years
after Christ, in his Book De Resurrectione Christi, has this elegant
expression, Rex sacer, ecce tuiradiat pars magna Trophaei
Cum puras animas sacra lavacra beant.
Candidus egreditur nitidis exercitus undis
Atque vetus vitium purgat in amne novo,
Fulgentes animas vestis quoque candida signat.
Et grege de niveo gaudia pastor habit.


This custom of apparelling Baptized Persons in white Robes and Garments, is
likewise attested by Gregory Nazianzen Oration 3. Ambrose De Sacramentis, l. 3.
c, 1. and De his qui initiantur, c. 7, 8. within 370. years after Christ, and
not long after by Olympiodorus in Eccles. c. 9. Gregorius Turonensis, Hist. l.
9. c. 4. and our Venerable Beda, Hist. Ecclesiastica Gentis Anglorum, l. 2. c.
14. where relating the History of our King Edwins and his peoples conversion to
the Christian Faith, and baptizing by Paulinus, Anno Christi 627. and of his
Sons soon after, adds quorum primi Albati adhuc (that is, whiles cla^ in white
Garments after their Baptism) erepti sunt de hac vitae. Abbot Alchuvinus
Scholar to Beda, and Tutor to Charles the Great, describing the forms and
Ceremonies of Baptism about the year of Christ 800. De Divinis Officiis c. 19.
De Sabbato sancto Virgil. Paschae Operum Col. 1062.
records, that the person baptized, after his baptism, elevatur de font, ut
per Gratiam surgat ad vitam. Deinde Albis induiiur Uestimentis propter Gratiam
regenerationis, et castitatem vitae, et Angelici splendaris decorem. Tunc sacro
chrismate caput perungitur and mystico tegitur velamine, ut intelligat se
Diadema Regni and Sacerdotis dignittem portare, juxta Apostolum, vos estis
genus electum, Regale, Sacerdotale, ^fferentes vosmet ipsos Deo vivo hostiam
sanctam and Deo placentem. Therefore they are entitled to wear white Garments,
Surplisses, Rochets, as well as any Bishops or Priests whatsoever, who upon
this account ought not to advance themselves above, or distinguish themselves
from other baptized Lay-Christians. De Institutione Clericorum l. ^. c. 29.
Rabanus Maurus, flourishing about 840. years after Christ, writing of the
Forms and Ceremonies of baptism, relates that after baptism, a white Garment
was delivered to every person baptized. Post baptismum traditur Christiano
Candida vestis, quae signat innocentiam and puritatem Christianam, quant post
ablutas veteres maculas statio sanctae conversationis immaculatam servare debet
ad praesentandam ante tribunal Christi. Cujus vero renati Albis induuntur
vestibus, ad mysterium resurgentis Ecclesiae futurum. Vtuntur vestibus albis,
ut quorum primae Nativitatis insantiam vetusti erroris pannus suscaverat,
habitus secundae regenerationis gloriae praeferat indumentum. The continuance
of this custom in after ages is attested by Vincentius Beluacensis, spec. Hist.
l. 23. c. 145. Erfordiensis, c. 66. Aponius, l. 6. in Cantica Cant. the Century
Writers, Cent. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. c. 6. Tit. De Ritibus circa Baptismum, and
to name no more, by our Thomas Waldensis, about the year of Christ 1420.
Doctrinalis Tom 3. Tit. 5. cap. 52. sect. 1, 2. De vest candida quam accipit
baptizalus, which he largely descants upon as a badge of their purification,
innocence, washing away their sins, and making them as white as Snow, and
putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, citing Romans 12. Ezech. 16. Psalm. 50. Exodus 24.
Heb. 3. Mat. 17. Isai. 1. Cant. 1. (all produced by him and other Papist^ for
Bishops and Priests white Rochets, Albees, Surplisses.) Dionysius Areopagita,
Origin, Ambrose and Rabanus, to justify this custom, from whence the Lords
day, Easter week, and the Feast of Pentecost, on which Christians heretofore
were usually baptized, and then clad in White Garments, Gul. Stuckius Antiqu
Convivialium l. 2. c. 26. Surius Co^rcil. Tom. 1. p. 8^, 788, 493 Tom. 3 p.
177. 683. 716. Tom. 3. p. 286, 365. Georgius Cassander. De Baptismo Infantum.
and sundry others, Cent. Magd. 4, 5, 6, 7. cap. 6.
were styled Dominica et feria in albis, and by our English Calanders, Nation
till this day, called White-sunday, and Whitesontide, because all persons
baptized on them, and Virgins too, were then usually clad in White Garments.
Feria 2. In albis, haec hebdomada (to wit after Easter) in albis vocatur, quod
Sabbato sancto baptizati, vestein candidam, quam in baptismo acceperant gestate
consueverint, ac in ea induti ac albati, usque ad alterum Sabbatum, quo solenni
ritu albas deponebant, writes Learned Preces Ecclesiasticae, Operum Pa^is^^s
1616. p. 348.
George Cassander. If then this ancient custom of Clothing all baptized persons
in white Robes, Rochets, Surplisses, so long continued in the Churches of
Christ, before any such Vestments wore by Bishops, Priests, Deacons, grounded
on the self-same Texts, reasons, and some better grounds then Bishops, Priests,
or Deacons wearing these Garments, be now totally laid aside, (through the
Pride, Usurpation of Popes, Prelates, Clergymen, who appropriate them only to
themselves by way of distinction from other Christians) without any scandal or
prejudice to Religion; then a fortiori Bishops, Priests, Deacons Rochets,
Surplisses, and other Vestments, may be discontinued and laid quite aside as
useless, superfluous, if not schismatical, dividing, discriminating Christians
from Christians, and Clergy men themselves from one another, raising many
unnecessary contests, inconsistent with our Churches peace and unity.

6ly. If a white color, or white Linen Garments be badges of innocence,
purity, chastity, and should mind those who wear them of, and excite them to
these virtues, as is pretended, then there is no need at all of white
Surplisses, Albees, Rochets or Lawnsleeves for these purposes. For 1. every
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and other man's white Skins, (the natural Garment of
his Body, which he wears upon him all his life) or his white linen Shirt,
Wastcoat he wears day and night all the w^ek, year long; his white linen Bands,
Cuffs, Handkerchiefs, and linings of his Dublet, Hose, or the white Sockes he
usually puts on every day, and not puts off till night, his white linen night
Cap, Sheets which he lies down and sleeps in everynight, the white linen
Napkins, Table-cloaths, Towels, he daily uses, the white bread, meat, milk,
eggs he eats every meal; the white wax or tallow Candles he burns; the white
sealings, walls, he beholds in his House, Church, Chapel every day; the white
paper wherein he writes, and all the Bibles, Missals, Common Prayers, and other
Books, Papers he reads written or printed; the white Corporals, Altar-cloaths
he beholds at every Sacraments; the white frocks of Porters, Carters, Millers,
Grooms, Hostlers they daily wear; the white Dublets of men, Wastcoats,
Peticoats, Aprons, linen Mantles of every Woman, the white sheep, beasts, foul,
birds, snow, hail, wool, flax, or radiant light of the Sun, Moon, Stars, and
viae lactea in the Heaven^, might abundantly mind every B^ Priest, Deacon,
(unless more dull and averse from purity, piety, innocence and sincerity than
any other sort of Christians,) and more effectually excite every Clergyman, or
pious, reasonable Christian, to innocence, purity, sincerity, than all their
Albees, Rochets, Surplisses, or other Church Vestments, which they wear only
for a short season, not constantly all the day, as they do their other
induments. And why white Rochets, Surplisses, Lawnsleeves alone, should be
badges, memorials of, or incentives to purity, innocence, chastity; rather than
all other white ordinary Vestments, Utensils, Meats, Creatures: or why
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Clergymen alone should wear them,
when as all wear white shirts, bands, cuffs, and other linen Garments, as well
as they, without distinction, no solid reason can be rendered to satisfy any
reasonable man's Judgment or Conscience.

7ly. If White be a badge of Innocence, holiness, chastity, purity, as is
pretended, then why should not Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and all
Cathedral-men wear white Hats, Caps, Gowns, Cassocks, Girdles, Dublets,
Breeches, Stockings, Shoes, (but only black, red or russet Vestments as sundry
Bochellus Decret Eccles. G^l. l 6. c. 17. lohannis de At^n Constit,
Provincia^^um, fol 129, 131, 135. Lyndewood Provincial. l. 3. c. 11. De vita
and honestate Cleric. Canon 6. 1603. Can 74.
Popish Councils, and our own Canons enjoin them) as well as white Rochets,
Surplisses, or Lawn-sleeves? Or why should they not wear only their shirts,
instead of Surplisses, Rochets, upon their Gowns, Cassocks and wearing
Clothes; or their Surplisses, Rochets, Lawn-sleeves under their other Clothes,
instead of shirts? It was a witty Question a Mr. John Badgers daughter of the
Inner Temple wh^ often related it to me.
prattling Girl of seven years old demanded of Doctor Laud when Bishop of
London, arrayed in his white Lawn-sleeves and Rochet. Pray Uncle why do you
wear your Shirt upon your Gown and Sleeves, when other men wear their Shirts
under them? At which the Bishop smiling, could return her no Answer but this,
That it was the custom of Bishops to do it. And had she demanded of him
further, how his white Sleeves and Rochet alone could be a badg of his
universal Innocence, purity, sanctity, when his Gown and all the rest of his
Garments were coalblack? or, whether his Innocence, purity, sanctity were not
put off together with his Lawn-sleeves, Rochet, and laid quite aside till he
put them on again? He could hardly have returned a satisfactory Answer to these
Demands.

8ly. If Bishops and Clergymen wear white Rochets, Surplisses in the Church
only to distinguish them from the people, and others not in Orders. Then 1. no
unordained Singing-men, Parish Clerks, Choristers, Scholars in our
Universities, should be commanded, as now, but prohibited to wear Surplisses in
the Church. 2ly. Bishops and Ministers respective Consecrations, Ordinatious,
presentations, inductions, installments to their Bishoprics, and Benefices,
perception of their Rents, profits, tithes, and their constant preaching,
praying, officiating, baptizing, administering the Lords Supper, and diligent
exercising of their Ministry in the Church, are sufficient of themselves
without any Rochet or Surplisse, to difference them from the people, As Mat 7.
16, 17, 20. Luke 6. 43. 1. Tim 4. 12, 14. 2. Tim. 4. 1, 2, 5. 1 Pet, 5. ^.
Phil. 3. 17, 20.
good trees are best known by their fruits, not leaves: so are good, pious,
holy Bishops, and Ministers of the Gospel, best known and distinguished from
the Laity by their good fruits by their diligent discharge of their Duties,
Functions; their exemplary, transcendent Piety, Charity, Humility,
Heavenly-mindednesse, and by renouncing the Pomps, vanities, riches, honors of
this present world, and all the sinsull lusts of the flesh, according to their
Baptismal vow, even as Pope Coelestine the 1. asserted long since in his
Epistle to the French Bishop, cited in the Title Page. The Spelinanni Council.
p. 293, 294, 259, 246, 264.
Council of Calchuth under our King Alfwoold, Anno 787. cap. 3. prescribes this
as the principal badge and duty of every Bishop, Priest, Vt diligenti cura ad
Gregem sibi commissum praedicet. The Council of Clovesho, An. 747. and the
Excerptions or Cannons of Egbert Archibishop of York, about the year 750.
Decree: Vt unusquisque Episcopus and Sacerdos omnilus Festis and diebus
Dominicis Evangelium Christi praedicet populo. Vt Episcopi nullatenus
secularibus negotiis, plusquam Dei servisiis (quod absit, as most have done)
subditi existant, sed maxim curani animarum habeant, ut secundunt Apostolum,
populum Dei suis exemplis been corrigant, and sanae quoque Doctrina Sermonibus
instruant; bonis utique moribus, alstinentie virtutibus, justitiae operilus,
doctrinae studiis adornati. Yea the Su^ims Council. T^m. 3. p 27 ^, 279.
2d. Council of Cavailon, under the Emperor CHARLES THE GREAT, about the year
810. cap. 1, 2, 4, 5. decreed, according to the Decrees of the holy Canons, and
the Doctrine of other sacred Scriptures; Vt Episcopi assidui sint in lectione,
and scrutentur mysteria verborum Dei, quibus in Ecclesiis Doctrinae sulgore
splendeant, and herborum Dei alimentis animas sibi subditas saciare non
cessent. Vt ea quae legendo persecut^ntur, opere compleant Mat 4 17.
juxta illud, caepit Jesus sacere and docere. Psalm. 102. Romans 2.
Et memoria ferentibus mandactum ejus, ut saciant ea. 1. Cor. 14.
Et quia non auditorees legis sed sactores ejus justificabuntur. Et ut Regnum
Dei non est in sermon sed opere, sint subditis n^rma vivendi, ita videlicet,
ut and verbis and exemplis populo ad aeternam patriam pergenti ducatum
praebeant; Vt vita eorum and doctrina nequaquam discordent, sed quod dicunt,
faciant, and quae faciunt docere studeant, et praedicatione assidua plebem
admoneant, and salee justitiae a credentium mentibus vitiorum spinas eradicent,
and verbi Deisemine agros me ntis eorum ad faecunditatem perducant. Vt
humilitatem atque religionem, and in vultu, and in opere, and in habitu, and in
sermon demonstrent. Vt juxta Apostoli vocem irreprehensibiles sint and moribus
ornati, and nequaquam turpibus luchris deserviant, 2 T^m. 2.
juxta illud quod ait Scriptura; Nemo militans Deo implicat se negociis
secularibus, ut ei placeat cui se probavit. The Surius Council. Tom. 3. p. 864.
Bishops in the Council of Paris under Lewis and Lotharius, An. 829.
unanimously decreed. Statuimus pari voto, parique consensu, ut unusquisque
nostrum dictis and exemplis, plebes parochiae suae attentius ad meliora
incitens, studeat, easque ut se a malis cohibeant, etc. solicit admoneant, cum
itaque praedicatores sieve cessatione populo Dei praedicare nec^sse sit, juxta
illud Isay. 58.
Isaiae. Clama, ne cesses, quasi tuba exalta vocem tuam, and annuncia populo
meo scelera eorum, etc. tum maxim) id facere necesse est, quando iram Domini
contra populum Dei, meritis exigentius, grassari perspexerint. Iuxta illud quod
Dominus per Ezechielem Prophetam loquitur, Ezech. 3. 17 etc. and c. 33. 7, 8,
etc Which is seconded by many other Ba^hell Decr. Eccl. Gal. l. 5. Tit. 18. De
Archiepiscopis and Episcop^s and l. 1. Tit. 3. De Praedicatione and expositione
verbi Dei.
Councils in and after that age. Hence Spelmanni Council. p. 416.
Odo Archibishop of Canterbury in his Constitutions about the year 943. cap. 3.
De Officio Episcopi, admonished all Bishops and Presbyters, Quatenus cum
honestate and modestia, bonis exemplis in sanctae religionis pietate
praedicent, and populum Dei Doctrina sua erudiant and informent, ut suas
Parochias omni anno cum omni vigilantia praedicando verbum Dei circumeant:
Absque ullo timore vel adulatione cum omni fiducia verbum Dei praedi^are, Regi,
Principibus populisui, omnibus dignitatibus, and nunquam veritatem subter
sugere. Upon which considerations our famous Martyr Henry de Knighton, de
Eventibus Angliae l. 5. Col. 2658, 2668, 2661.
John Purny preached at Bristow An. 1392. Quod quilibet Sacerdos magis debet
demittere Matutinas, Missam and Vesperas, and caeteras horas Canonicas quam
praedicationem verb^ Dei, eo quod solum traditione humana ordinantur; and
Nicholaus de Hereford then publicly taught, Nullus est vere Praelatus, nec
habilis ad Praelaciam nist sit doctor et praedicator, which positions our
un-preaching and rare-preaching Prelates then deemed Heretical, though the very
doctrine of St. Paul 1 Timothy 3. 2. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 4, 5. Acts 20. 28. The
discharge of these their Episcopal and Sacerdotal duties, would more adorn and
demonstrate them to be Bishops and Ministers, then all their Episcopal or
Sacerdotal Vestments, wherewith they now load and make themselves more unable
to discharge these duties. I shall close up this particular with the words of
our famous John Wicliff, Dialogorum l. 4. c. 17. De avaritia Cleri. f. 128. Sic
intelligunt aliqui dictum Christi, Mat. 10. Nihil tuleritis in vin, ne peram,
etc. Non enim debent viri Apostolici tardari cum aliquo temporali, quod vel
eorum ^ffectionem, vel occupationem, quo ad suum Officium impediret. Nuda autem
and moderata habitio per virgam gestam in manibus potest intelligi. Vnde sicut
oner atus multiplici vestimento est saepe per hoc indispositus ad iter: sic
(Episcopus and Sacerdos) oneratus temporalibus est saepe indispositus ad
prod^ssendum Ecclesiae: E^ (...) istum sensum dixit Christus ubi supra, neque
duas tunicas habeatis, and ista lex Christi est fundata in lege Naturae cum qua
nemo poterit dispensare: Therefore no Popes nor Bishops can dispense therewith,
much less Dec^ee against it.

9ly. For the objected Text of Eccles. 9. 8. Let thy Carments be always white:
if taken only in a See here, p. 7^. 7d.
mistical sense for purity of life, chastity, innocence, or justification by
the blood, robes of the righteousness of Jesus Christ, as some expound the
place, it is nothing to the purpose; If literally interpreted, it quite
subverts the Objectors. For 1. It is universal, extending equally to all
Laymen and Clergy men, not confined to Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and
Ecclesiastical person alone, to whom white Rochets and Surplisses are
appropriated. 2ly. It is universal in respect of time and place too, Let thy
Garments be always white, as well by night as by day; as well before and after
Divine Service, Mass, Sacraments, as during their Celebration; as well out of
Cathedrals, Churches, Chapels, as in them; as well in your eating, drinking,
feasting, and private Family, or Closet devotions, as in the Cathedral or
Parochial Church or Chapel, at Common Prayers or Sacraments; to which times
and places alone the wearing of Rochets, Surplisses is principally confind by
Popish Councils, and our Bishops Canons, against the words of this Text. 3ly.
This Text no ways relates to Common prayers, divine Service or Sacraments in
the Church, or to Bishops, Priests, Deacons; (not then in use) but to men's See
Gulielm. Stuckius, Antiqu. Conviv l. 2. 6. 26. Here p. 114.
feasting and joyful Conversations out of the Church, as is evident by the next
succeeding words, And let thy Head lack no ointment. Live joyfully with thy
wife whom thou love, all the days of thy Uanity, etc. and the words next
preceding, Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry
heart, for God now accepts thy works. Therefore to apply it only to Divine
service, Sacraments, and appropriate it to Bishops and Clergymen, their
Rochets and Surplisses, is a most gross abuse, and perversion of this Text,
and the Sea Bochel^us, Decret. Ecccles. Gal. l. 6. Tit. 13, 14. Claudius
Espensaeus in Tit. 2. and de continentia, lib. John Bales Acts of English
Vo^aries, Bishop Halls Honor of the ma^ried clergy.
Popish Canons prohibiting the marriage of Priests, prescribing the wearing of
black Gowns, Cassocks, by Bishops, Priests, Deacons, (if ever intended in this
Text) are diametrically repugnant thereunto. 4. The words are in the Plural
Number, Let thy Garments be always white; Therefore Bishops, Priests, Deacons
should always wear white Hats, Gowns, Dublets, Stockings, Shoes, as well as
white Rochets, Surplisses; yea wear their Rochets, Surplisses always as they
do their Shirts; not wear Black Coats, Gowns, Cassocks, Dublets, Hose at any
time, and their Rochets, Surplisses only in the Church, as their See Bo^helus
l. 6. Tit. 17.
Councills and Canons prescribe, point blank against this Text, under severe
penalties. 4ly. The Roman Missals, Pontificals, and Gulielmus Durantus
prescribe the wearing of other colored Garments, even in time of Mass, Divine
service, and Sacraments, beside White, and the laying aside of White Garments
in the Church it self on sundry Festivalls and days of public worship. As
namely black V^stments, (not white Rochets or Surplisses) all the Passion
week before Easter, on days of Affliction, and Abstinence for sin, in
Rogations, in Masses or Processions for the Dead, from Advent till the Vigills
of the Nativity, and on the Feasts of Innocents; on which Day some used to
wear Black, others Red; upou sundry other Lords days and Feasts they
prescribe Bishop and Priests to wear Red, on other days Green or Violet
Vestments, and White only on other Sundays, Festivals, in the Celebration of
Divine service and Administration of Sacraments; whence they style White, Red,
Black, Green, the Quatu^^ sunt principales colores quibus secundum propr etates
dierum, sacras vestes Ecclesia distinguit; albus, niger and violdis, etc.
Durantus Rat. Divin. l. 3.
four Principal colors used by the Church; to which they reduce these five
other Colors, used likewise in the Roman Church, viz. Scarlet, Silken, Violet,
Saffron, Rose-colour, producing several Textes of Scripture (miserably wrested
by them) for to prove the use of all these respective Colors in the time of
Gods public worship, as well as the use of White, seconded with sundry
mystical Reasons and significations, which those who please to make themselves
merry with, may read at large in Durantus. l. 3. De quatuor coloribus quibus
Ecclesia in Ecclesiasticis utitur indumentis. Now this objected Text, Let thy
Garments be always White, routs all these Romish Regiments of Blacke-coates,
Red-coates, Greene-coates, Blewecoates, Yellow-coates, Scarlet-coates,
Silken-coates, Rose-coats, at once, and White-coates too, as appropriated only
to Churches, Divine service, Sacraments, Bishops and Ecclesiastical Persons.
Therefore they must henceforth either renounce this their objected Text, or all
these their sacred Vestmentt and forecited Robes, to which they are so much
devoted.

The Third Scripture Argument for the necessary use of white Rochets, Surplices
in Divine Service and Sacraments administration, is from Dan. 7. 9. I beheld
till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit; WHOSE GARMENT
WAS WHITE AS SNOW, and the hair of his head like pure wool, etc. compared with
Matthew. 17. 2. Mark. 9. 3. Luke 9. 3. Jesus takes Peter, James and John and
brings them unto a high mountain apart, and was transfigured before them, and
his face did shine as the sun, and his garment was WHITE as the light: (So
Matthew) And his raiment became shining, exceeding WHITE as snow, so as no
Fuller on earth can white them; so Mark records it: Ergo, Bishops, Priests,
Deacons must wear white Rochets and Surplices in time of Divine Service and
Sacraments in all Churches, Chapels, is but a ridiculous Non sequitur.

For First, That Text in Daniel relates only to Christ sitting on the Throne
as a Judge, at the end of the world, not officiating as a Priest in the Church:
Ergo, all Judges must wear white Robes, Surplices when they fit on judgment,
is a better inference thence, then that Bishops, Priests, Deacons must wear
them when they minister in the Church. Secondly, His hair was white as wool, as
well as his garment, therefore they should all have white hair or Periwigs, as
well as white Rochets and Surplices, when they celebrate Divine Service or
Sacraments. Thirdly, Our See here, p. 10, 41.
Saviors Transfiguration was miraculous, not ordinary; but once, not weekly;
in a high mountain apart, not within a Temple, Synagogue, Church, Cathedral;
before three only of his Disciples, not the whole congregation or multitude:
and his ordinary wearing garments miraculously became white and shining as the
light, not as linen; and so exceeding white as no fuller on earth can white
them, and that only during his transfiguration, not afterward. Therefore this
miraculous president gives not the least shadow of warrant or president for
Bishops, Priests, Deacons ordinary wearing white Rochets or Surplices when they
read Common Prayer, or administer Sacraments in Churches; And they might, like
Christ, forbear such white garments, till by miracle their faces become shining
as the sun, and their black ordinary wearing garments become as white and
shining as his. Fourthly, Our Savior never put on a white garment, Robe or
Rochet whiles he publicly prayed, preached upon earth; nor did yet when he was
thus transfigured in the mount, nor did Peter, James or John, who were present
at, and witnesses to his transfiguration, nor any other of his Apostles, we
read of, wear any white Rochets, Surplices, or linen vestments when they
preached or celebrated the Lords Supper, or Baptism in imitation of our
Saviors white thining Garments; neither were they or their garments thus
transfigured or made white when present at Christ's transfiguration, or
afterward. Therefore Bishops, Priests, Prelates upon all these accounts, should
henceforth lay aside these vestments, since Christ himself and his Apostles
never used them; and no longer wrest our Saviors miraculous transfiguration,
and these sacred texts, beyond all bounds of reason, modesty, Christianity, to
maintain their own popish superstitious inventions, and abuse the ignorant
vulgar with such gross delusions, which all judicious sober Christians must
either abominate or deride.

The fourth plea insisted on for Bishops Rochets, and Priests white Surplices
in time of Divine Service and Sacraments, is that of Matthew. 28. 3. and Mark 16.
5. At the time of Christ's resurrection, an Angel of the Lord descended from
heaven, rolled back the stone from the Sepulch^^ and sat upon it: His
countenance was like lightning, and his raim^nt WHITE as snow. And his
Disciples saw a young man (to wit this Angel in a young man's shape) sitting on
the right hand of Christ's sepulcher, clothed in a long WHITE garment: who said
unto them, be not afraid, for ye seek Jesus of Nazareth which was crucified: he
is risen, he is not here: Ergo, Bishops, Priests, Deacons must wear white
Rochets or Surplices in Divine Administrations.

I answer, First, That the person thus clad in a long white garment, was an
Angel of the Lord descending from Heaven, not a Bishop, Priest Deacon or
Minister. Secondly, His long white garment was no Rochet nor Surplice. Thirdly,
He wore it not at all in any Temple, Church or Synagogue, but only at or in
our Saviors Sepulcher. And that but once, at his miraculous, resurrection, not
constantly or ordinarily: Fifthly, To roll away the stone, and instruct Christ's
Disciples of his resurrection, not to say Mass, preach, or read Common Prayer,
oradminister the Lords Supper. Sixthly, The Disciples who saw him thus clad
never imitated his white garment whiles they lived, muchless should Bishops and
Priests (who never saw him) after their decease, without warrant from Christ,
the Angel or Disciples. The self same Answer serves to the objection from Acts
1. 0. where two Angels in the shape of men stood by the Disciples in WHITE
apparel, whiles they beheld Christ's ascension into heaven, and spoke the words
there recorded to them: which Waldensis, Durantus and others impertinently
allege, for the use of long white Surplices, vestments, or Rochets of Bishops
and Priests in the Church.

5. The Fifth Text produced is that of Rev. 3. 4. Thou have a few names in
Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in
WHITE for they are worthy. Ergo, Bishops must wear white Rochets and Surplices
in time of Mass and Divine Service: Acute Logic, worthy of laughter rather
then reply.

For 1. These few persons in Sardis were neither Bishops nor Priests; these
words being not spoken to nor of the Angel of the Church of Sardis; (whom our
Bishops and Prelatists will needs have to be the sole Bishop of that Church,
but to others:) Therefore if any argument may be hence deduced for the use of
Rochets or Surplices, it is, that lay Saints who have not defiled themselves
with sins corruptions of the times, but kept themselves nude^led, must wear
Rochets and Surplices, not temporizing Bishops or Priests. 3. They are
promised, hereafter to walk in white with Christ in heaven, and that by way of
reward, witness ver. 5. He that overcomes the SAME SHALL BE CLOTHED IN WHITE
RAIMENT, and I will not blot his name out of the book of life, but I will
confess his name before my Father and his Angels; not commanded to say Mass, or
Common Prayer in the Church on earth by way of duty, ministry or distinction
from other Saints. 3. The white garments here meant, are only the robes of
eternal glory in heaven; not white Rochets, lawn sleeves, or material
Surplices, as the abusers of this Text pretend and must acknowledge.

6. The sixth text produced for Surplices and Rochets is Rev. 4. 4. And round
about the throne, were twenty four seats, and upon the seats I saw twenty four
elders sitting CLOTHED IN WHITE RAIMENT, and they had on their heads crowns of
gold. Ergo, Bishops must wear white Rochets, Miters of gold, and Priests white
Surplices.

The sequel is denied. 1. Because there is no Bishop but only Elders mentioned
in the Text. 2. These Elders are but twenty four, and they only had white
raiment. 3. They sat in heaven upon thrones in their white robes, not in any
Church or Cathed^al on earth. 4. They sat constantly in those white vestments,
and never did put them off. 5. They had no other raiment on them but these
white robes: Therefore all Bishops and Priests, if they will be like these
Elders, and pursue these presidents, must wear no black doublets, cassocks,
gowns, cloaks, Wastcoats, but only white Rochets, Surplices, as they did. 6.
They sat in them upon Thrones, and had all crowns of gold upon their heads: If
this then be a president for our lordly royal Prelates, and Clergies punctual
imitation, they must all ^it upon thrones with golden crowns on their heads,
like Kings, as well as with white Rochets, Surplices on their backs like
Prelates and Priests; which I presume they yet dare not do, and his Majesty
with his Nobility will not now suffer, should their pride and ambition prompt
them to it.

7. The seventh president insisted on is, Rev. 6. 9, 10, 11. Where St. John saw
under the Altar, the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for
the testimony which they held, etc. and WHITE ROBES were given to every one of
them.

If any consequences can be hence deduced, they are only these. 1. That those
Saints and Laymen, who suffer martyrdom for the Word and testimony of God on
earth, shall have white robes, not of fi^e linen, but of eternal glory, given
them by god for a reward in heaven. Not that Bishops and Priests alone, which
were never slain nor martyred for Christ, and none else but they must now wear
white Rochets and Surplices, on earth.

2. These souls lay interred, crying to God from under the Altar, to avenge
their blood on them that dwell on the earth. Therefore they are no presidents
or warrant for Bishops or Priests to wear Surplices or white Rochets when they
officiate at or upon their new erected Altars, and dispense Christ's body and
blood sacramentally to their people, in their Cathedrals and parish Churches.
3. These white robes were not material ones, made of lawn or linen by
Semstresses, nor bought with money; but spiritual and heavenly, made, and
freely given unto them by God himself: therefore Bishops and Priests who
contend for material Rochets and Surplices from this Text; must now quite
renounce them, and produce some better proof.

8. This they presume to do in the eighth place, from Rev. 7. 9, 13, 14. cha.
15. 6. and cha. 19. 14. which I shall couple together to make the proof more
strong. After this I beheld and a great multitude which no man could number of
all Nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues stood before the throne, and
before the lamb, CLOTHED WITH WHITE ROBES, and palms in their hands. And cried
with a loud voice, Salvation to our God which sits upon the throne, and unto
the Lamb, etc. And one of the Elders answered saying unto me, what are these
WHICH ARE ARRAIED IN WHITE ROBES? and whence came they? And I said unto him,
Sir, thou know: And he said unto me, these are they which came out of great
tribulation, and HAVE WASHED THEIR ROBES, and MADE THEM WHITE IN THE BLOOD OF
THE LAMB; Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and
night in his Temple, etc. And the seven Angels came out of the Temple, having
the seven plagues, CLOTHED IN WHITE, and having their breasts girded with
golden girdles. And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse, and he that
sat upon him was clothed in a vesture dipped in blood, and his name is called,
the Word of God And the Armies which were in heaven followed him upon white
horses, CLOTHED IN WHITE LINEN, FINE AND CLEAN. Ergo, Bishops and Priests,
ought always to wear white Rochets and vestments: in time of Mass, Sacraments,
and Divine service.

Can any wise men or fools either, forbear laughter at such a ridiculous
conclusion from these premises, as Durantus, Walden with other Papists, and
some of our own Prelates and Ceremony-mongers deduce from them with great
seriousness, but little candor and sobriety?

Especially if they well consider, 1. That those arraied in white robes, Rev.
7. 9, 13, 14. were not Bishops, Priests or Ecclesiastical persons alone, or
under any such capacity; but a great number which no man could number, of all
Nations and kindreds, and people, and tongues. Therefore if any proper
consequence can be hence deduced in relation to white Rochets or Surplices, it
is only this, That all sanctified, regenerate Christians, Saints, of what
nations, kindred, people and tongues soever, ought to wear white Rochets and
Surplices.

Secondly, All this innumerable multitude of all nations and people thus
clothed with white robes; stood clad continually in them before the Throne and
Lamb, serving God in them day and night, and never put them off, having no
other vestments besides, verse. 15, 16, 17. Therefore if this Text be pressed
home, in relation to Bishops, Priests, Ministers, they ought always to wear
their Rochets and Surplices day and night, but no vestment else, and never to
put them off; and always to stand before God in his Temple day and night, as
these Saints did; but never to sit in their thrones, stalls, Pues, nor yet to
kneel as they now usually do.

Thirdly, that Bishops and Priests ought always to have palms in their hands,
as well as long white robes and Rotchets on their backs in the Temple, because
all these white Saints had so.

Fourthly, These Saints white robes wherewith they were clad, were only
spiritual, not corporal or material; even their white and immaculate holiness
by the washing away of their sins in the blood of Christ; as is evident by the
Text, these are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, compared with Rev. 1. 5.
Ephesians. 5. 27, 28.

5. The seven Angels coming out of the Temple clothed in pure white linen,
had the seven plagues, and poured out the viols of Gods wrath upon the earth:
Therefore if real Bishops (as our Prelates pretend the Angels of the seven
Churches were, chapter 2. 1, 3.) who went constantly clad in their white robes, as
well out of the Temple as in. It will be no great honor to them to be thus
arrayed since they only carried the plagues, and poured out the vials of Gods
wrath upon the earth, when thus arrayed.

Sixthly, If the last Text be truly enforced, it will thence most properly be
inferred, That Bishops, Priests and Clergymen should always ride and march
about upon white horses, clothed in clean and fine white linen, not on black
or bay horses, nor in black canonical coats, cassocks, cloaks, as now they
usually do. 2. That they must march many together in Troops and Armies thus
arrayed. 3. That all other Christians following Jesus Christ (the Word of God)
should do the like, rather then that they should only say Mass, read
Common Prayers, Preach, administer the Sacraments in fine white linen
Garments, Rochets, Surplesses, in their Cathedral and Parish Churches, wherein
they never use to ride on horses, but only out of them. These are all the
Scriptures produced for the justification of the use, convenience and decency
of Bishops Rochets, and Clergymens Surplices; which though alleged with very
great gravity and seriousness, by those who pretend themselves the most
reverend, learned Fathers of the Church, are most palpable abusers, and
wretched perverters of Gods sacred Word, to countenance their own vain
Innovations and Superstitions, as the premises demonstrate.

To draw toward a conclusion of this discourse: I have often times admired, that
when most sorts of laborers, workmen, servants, set themselves to their
occupations and work, they constantly cast off their outward wearing garments,
and ordinary wearing clothes, as impediments thereunto, that yet Popes,
Bishops, Deacons, Ministers, when they are to officiate and labor in the work
of their Ministry, should put on far more garments on their backs, then they
had on before, contrary to the Apostles practice, and our Saviors command, who
bid them when he sent them forth to preach, Mat. 10. 10. Mark 6. 9. Luke 9. 3.
NOT TO PROVIDE, OR PVT ON TWO COATS APIECE: which would hinder them in their
Ministry. We daily see Watermen, when they intend to row and ply their oars,
that Carters, Threshers, Mowers, Reapers, Carpenters, Masons, Bricklayers,
Carriers, Tanners, Butchers, Fullers, when they buckle themselves to their
respective works; footmen, when they travel or run a race; yea, Noblemen,
Gentlemen, and others, when they seriously set themselves to their very
recreations in the Tennis-Court, or Field, do usually strip themselves to their
very shirts or Wastecoats, that they may more vigorously pursue their work,
callings and recreations. And why Bishops, Priests, Deans, Prebends,
Archdeacons, Ministers, Deacons, should not do the like when they are to
discharge the work of their Ministry; but on the contrary, load themselves
with Cassocks, Gowns, Copes, Surplices, Rochets; Girdles, Planets, Palls,
Chymeres, Pectoral Crosses, Hoods, Caps, Miters, Crosiers, or three or four
more Vestments then they had on before, seems a riddle unto all who seriously
consider it; of which no other true, solid reason can be rendered, but that they
intend to loiter, or do their work coldly, negligently, or by halves, rather
then vigorously, zealously to pursue it. This experience it self sufficiently
manifests to be the genuine reason; for ever since Popes, Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Chapters, and other Clergymen (contrary to the Apostles, primitive
Bishops, and Ministers practice) have loaded themselves with Cassocks, Gowns,
Copes, Palls, Rochets, Miters, Surplices, Hoods, and other superfluous
vestments, they have been very negligent and remiss in preaching, (the
principal work of their Ministry) in administering the Sacraments, fasting and
praying too, which they translate to their Curates and Choristers: Ingentos
Curati (as well as Curae) stupent, leves loquunt^^.
Yea, Popes, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Prebends, who have
greater Honors, Revenues, and more variety of vestments on their backs then
other Ministers, usually have been, and still are, less frequent, diligent,
zealous, fervent, and more cold, frozen, slothful, in preaching, praying, and
the work of the Ministry, then the inferior Clergy, and poorest Curates; it
being a general observation, that poor Country Curates, Lecturers, Ministers,
who have small pentions, benefices, and scarce money in their purses to buy a
Cassock, Gown, Hood, Surplice, or Canonical Coat, do Preach, Fast, Pray, read
Divine Service, baptize, administer the Lords Supper, Catechize, visit the sick
more frequently in one year, then Popes, Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Canons,
and other other rich Pluralists in ten or twenty years space.

It is a common observation, That the forehorse in the Team, which carries all
the Plumes, Bells, Trappings, usually draws and works the ^east; that Sumpter
Horses, which carry Kings, Nobles, Judges, Prelates, Commanders Robes,
vestments, when they travel, are more slow in their pace then Hackny horses,
which bear no such lumber; that Officers and Soldiers who are most laden with
multiplicity of offensive and defensive Arms, are slowest of all others in
their march, and like David in Saul's heavy armor: 1 Samuel 17, 38, 39, 40. yea,
most unweldy unserviceable when they come to fight; that the little Creepers,
not the great Brass shining Andirons, bear up all the wood, and heat of the
fire: And is it not so with Bishops and Clergymen, the more rich, great,
pompous they grow, the more pontificals, Priests vestments they wear, 1 C^r 15.
58. Ro^ 12. 1^.
the less spiritual work and service they perform; yea, so sloathful are they
(for the most part) in the work of the Lord, wherein they should always abound;
that instead of sweating in the Lords Harvest, they put on double or treble the
clothes they had before, when they are to read, preach, pray, or administer the
Sacrament, to keep them from freezing, even when they are at their honest
labor. God preserve his Church from such cold and frozen, Mat 9. 37, 38, and
10. 2.
unzealous, lazy workmen, and send forth more painful laborers (not so muffled
up in variety of vestments) into his Vineyard and Ha^vest, Nothing more (that
either I know or have read) can be objected for these surpl^and superfluous
Church Vestments, but their pretended Antiquity usage in the Church.

To which I answer, 1. That they were neither known to, Da^^ 7. 9, 22
nor used, nor prescribed by Christ himself, the ancient of days, nor his by
Apostles, nor by the primitive Christians, Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, for
above three hundred years after Christ; therefore they are all but modern
Novelties, in respect of Apostolical, real, primitive antiquity; and so rather
to be decried, rejected as Innovations, then approved for their pretended, See.
Thomas Beacons Relics of Rome^
not true Antiquity, as well as other old popish relics.

2. For their pretended Decency, I have not only read many learned, discreet,
conscientious, sober Scholars Treatises, censuring them as undecent as well as
superfluous; but heard some Ladies, Women, yea children, deride them as mear
antic disguises.

3. If Tertullians Book de Palli^, on 2 Timothy 4. 1^. may be umpire, a cloak
will be more ancient, decent for a Minister, Bishop, Christian, then a Rochet
or Surpless.

4. Antiquity is no plea at all in point of Vestments, P^^l 102, 2^^ See
Arelins, Prohl. locus 12^. de vestimentis.
whose form, Fashions, are always various and mutable with times and places;
whence the Holy Ghost himself uses this expression in sacred Writ, As a
Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed, but thou art the
same. Gul. Stuckins Antiq con. l 2. c. 26. 27.
That English man or woman who should now take up or retain the garments and
fashions used in the Britans, Saxons, Danes, Normans times; or but in the
Reigns of King Edward the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, Henry the eighth, Queen
Elizabeth, or King James, would be reputed a Cynick, Fantastic, or Fanatic
(especially at Court) and the very boys in the streets would shout at them. Why
then should not Bishops and Ministers Rochets, Surpl^ces, Church Vestments be
as changeable as other men's garments, or their own ordinary wearing clothes,
which they all change with the times? We know by experience, that all Nations,
Manners, Laws, Governments, Governors, Customs, Languages, are variable, yea
changed with times and occasions; that all things under the Sun are subject to
variation; why not then these Ecclesiastical Vestments, about which there has
been formerly so many frequent and fierce contentions, for our Churches and
Kingdoms peace? Our very humane bodies (and Bishops, Ministers bodies too, as
well as others) are daily subject to alterations: from infancy to youth, from
youth to manhood, from man hood to age, so to old age, from health to sickness;
and shall Bishops or Priests vestments only be immutable? though originally
grounded on Popes Decrees; instituted by them to adorn their exploded Sacrifice
of the Mass, and Altar-services, and founded upon strange perversions of sacred
Scriptures, or most absurd, ridiculous, monkish, fanatic Reasons, mystical
significations, crotchets, and the pretended transubstantiation of the Bread
and Wine into Christ's natural body and blood, which all Protestants cannot but
disclaim.

Since therefore what the Apostle concludes of meats, is likewise true of all
these Vestments: 1 Cor. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
But meat (a Rochet, Surplice, Hood, etc.) commends us not to God; for
neither if we eat (or wear them without scandal to others) are we the better;
neither if we eat (or wear them) not, are we the worse: Let all Bishops,
Ministers, Christians, upon the consideration of the premises, henceforth take
up the same Apostles resolution and inference from thence, recorded for their
imitation: But take heed left this liberty (or power) of yours, become a
stumbling block to those that are weak; and through thy knowledge shall the
weak brother perish, for whom Christ dyed? But when ye sin so against the
Brethren, and wound their weak consciences (by using or imposing these garments
on them, with rigor, against their wills and judgments) YE SIN AGAINST CHRIST;
Wherefore if meat (much more then if wearing these pontifical, Sacerdotal
vestments) offend, or make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh (much less
wear or impose all or any of these Church vestments) whiles the world stands,
lest I make my brethren to offend. And seeing these old Proverbs are most true,
inserted into the Canon Law it self, (...) aelius ^hodig Antiq. ^ect. l. 5.
and. 12. G^atian. Did. 40.
Cucullus non facit Monachum, non item Isiacos linostola; aut sacerdotes
amictus linei: Non Cathedra sacerdotem facit, sed Cathedram sacerdis; nec locus
seu vestis sanctificat hominem, sed locum and vestem homo. Upon which
considerations, the Surius caucil tom 4. p. 513, 514.
fourth Council of Carthage, Can. 15. and 45. decreed, Vt Episcopus vilem
supellectilem, and mensam ac victum pauperem habeat, and dignitatis suae
authoritatem, FIDEI and VITAE MERITIS QVAERAT, NEC VESTIBVS NEC CALCEAMENTIS
DECOREM QVAERAT, (which is since inserted by Gratian into the body of the Popes
Canon Law, though he truly adds in his gloss, Hoc hodie non tenet, quia modo
habent amplas possessiones.) I shall heartily, humbly, and importunately
beseech all Bishops, Ministers, Deacons and Christians whatsoever in general,
and all true members of the Church of England in special, upon serious perusal
of all the premises, from henceforth, not with the Roman Pontifical or Durantus
Magno conatu Nugas agere, as Popes, popish Prelates, Priests, Friars, and
little children use to do; nor yet to place the least holiness, piety,
necessity, or indispensible expediency in the use or wearing of Episcopal and
Sacerdotal Vestments, in celebration of Di^ine-service and Sacraments; nor any
longer rigorously to impose, or unchristianly to contend about them, they being
just like accidents in relation to the substance of Gods worship and true
Religion, which may be as well absent as present, without destruction of, or
prejudice to either; but rather seriously to fix all their meditations upon
those WHITE Windingsheets, wherein they shall all shortly be interred in their
graves, stripped naked of all those Priestly Rags, Robes, Vestments, about which
they now overmuch contend; and seriously to endeavor to put off those old
filthy rags of sin, and put on all those spiritual Garments, Armor, Graces,
which the Gospel it self in directs terms enjoins them to put on, and that
under pain of eternal damnation, in these ensuing texts (wh^^ewith I shall
conclude) about which there will, (...) can be no disputes, Romans 13. 12, 13,
14. Let us theref^^e cast off the works of darkness, and put on the Arm^^^^
light: Let us walk honestly, as in the day, not in (...) and drunkenness, not
in chambering and wantonness, not (...) strife and envying; but PVT YE ON THE
LO^^ JESUS CHRIST, and make no provision for the (...), to fulfill the lusts
thereof, Ephesians. 4 22, 23, 24. That ^e put off concerning the former
conversation, the old man, which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts;
and be renewed in the spirit of your minds; and that ye put ON THE NEW Man,
which after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness. Ephesians. 6. 11,
etc. PVT ON THE WHOLE ARMOVR OF GOD, that ye may be able to stand against the
wiles of the Devil: Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth,
and having on the breast plate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace; Above all, taking the shield of faith,
wherewith ye shalll be able to quench all the fiery darts of the Devtl: And
take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God: Praying always, WITH ALL PRAYER AND SVPPLICATION (not with common or Canon
prayer alone, to which too many now consine themselves and others) watching
thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints. Col. 13. 12,
13, 14, 15. PVT ON therefore (as the Elect of God holy and beloved) bowels of
mercy, kindeness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a complaint against any,
even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye: And above all these things, PVT ON
CHARITY, which is the bond of perfectness, and let the peace of God rule in
your hearts, to the which also ye called in one body, and be ye thankeful: Let
the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing
one anothee in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiricual Songs, singing with grace in
your hearts to the Lord: And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the
name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father through him. The
putting on of all these Evangelical, WHITE sacred garments, the using of such
Church prayers and music, in all Cathedrals, Collegiate and Parochial
Churches, by our Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, and others; and the abandoning
all Papal, unevangelical, illegal, dadgerous Oaths of Canonical obedience from
Ministers to Bishops, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Surius coucil. tom. ^. p. 279. 8. Laur.
Boch^llus Deneta. Eccl. Gal l. 3. tit. 2 c. 85 p. 402
not warranted by Law or Gospel, thus censured, inhibited, by the whole second
Council of Cavailon, under Charles the Great, about the year 112 ^ cap. 12.
Dictum est de qui ejusdam fratubus, quod eos, quos ordinaturi sunt IVRARE
COGANT, quod digni sint, and CONTRA CANONES NON SINT FACTVRI, ET OBEDIENCES
SINT EPISCOPO, QVI EOS ORDINAT, and Ecclesiae, in qu^ ordinantur: QVOD
IVRAMENTVM, QVIA PERICVLOSVM, O MNES VNA INHIBENDVM STATVIMVS; which are now
vigorously enforced, against his Majesty's Declaration, the Petition of Right,
3 Caroli, to support these superfluous Vestments and Ceremonies, will thoroughly
reconcile all disputing parties; put a period to all future controversies
concerning thepremises, and make us all the Temples of the living God; who will
then say, I will dwell in them, (walk in them) and I will be their God, and
they shall be my people.

Prove. 25. 2. The Honor of Kings is to search out a matter.

1 These. 5, 41, 22. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good, abstain
from all appearance of evil.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PR^y correct these Errors and Omissions at the Press in some Copies, p. 1. l.
15. read Episcopal. p, 4. l 35. ^or this, r. their, p. 8. l. 15. shall be
repeated glory, etc. l. 30. dele nor annexed, p. 13. l. 14. r. Holy Ghost, l.
20. r. to the, p. 17. l. 20. fo: thee, r. thus, l. 34. r. censures, p. 20. l.
5. for (...), r. is, p. 21. l. 18. r. ordain, p. 28. l. 38. for unanswerable, r
unwarrantable, p. 31. l. 29. for 1. r. 5. p. 38. for Ponter, r^ Pont. p. 15.
for nor^ yet, r. but only, l., 1. r. style, l. 3^. r. August. p. 40. l. 1^. r.
Praxis, l 1. r. munda, p. 42. l. 5. r, a nos, p. 49. l. 6. r. collo. p. 53 l.
15. r. ea, l. 26. r. Ecclesia, l. 33. r^ monachales, p. 54. l., 8, for 98. r.
38. p.^ 56. l. 8. ^^cancelli, l. 14. 1. and that, p. 59. l. 31. for 23. r. 33.
p. 68. l. 12. dele on, p. 71. l. 4. ^. revelanda, p. 79. l. 24. quo r. quod.

In the Margin, p. 2. l. 17. E. 3. r. E. 6. p. 3. l. 20. ad de Centur. Magd.
^^. ^0. 13. cap. 6. p. 55. l. 8. r. 1940.

AN APPENDIX To the Fourth Section, CONCERNING
The Use of White, Black, and other colored Garments, both by Pagans, Jews and
Christians, in Feasts, Funerals, Plays, Inaugurations, sacred Duties, and their
various mystical Significations, Excellency and Dignity.
BEcause, I would pretermit nothing, which may either inform, or satisfy the
learned Readers of this Pacifick Examination, relating to the use of White
Vestments, both among Pagans, Jews and Christians, upon several Civil and
Religious Occasions, Grounds, Reasons; I thought fit (by way of Appendix) to
annex this ensuing learned Discourse of Ioannes Gulielmus Stuckius, Tigurinw,
concerning White Garments, in his 2d Book, Antiquitatum Convivialium; cap. 26.
De Vestitu Conviviali; DE VESTIUM ALBARUM (QUAE IN EPULIS POTISSIMUM USURPARI
FUERUNT SOLITAE) ac in genere COLORIS ALBI USU, SIGNIFICATIONE, PRAESTANTIA AC
DIGNITATE: Editio secunda, Tiguri, 1597. f. 234. to 240. fraught with greatest
variety of Learning, of any Treatise I have read concerning this subject.

SEquitur nunc tertia corporis ad epulas futuras praepaerandi actio, Albi
coloris vestitum in convivi^s usitatum fuisse. Vestium candidarum usus apud
Iudaeos.
quae in vestitu consistit, etc. Equidem ex veterum scriptorum monumentis
faci^e colligi posse existimo, albi potissimum coloris vestitum in conviviis
usitatum fuisse, ita ut nigris vestibus accumbere apud gentes quasdam nephas
duceretur: unde and (...) Bachar, elegit nonnulli arbitrantur, compositum a
(...) and (...) chor, candidum, quod quae sunt candida, eligantur and
approbentur. Philo de vita Theoretica testatur, Judaeos olim dierum festorum
convivia (...), hoc est, albatos seu candidatos agitare fuisse solitos: ex quo
illud: Quovis tempore vestimenta tua candida sunt. Huc quoque referendus ille
mos Judaeorum decimum quintum diem mensis Ab celebrandi vestibus albis, atque
choreis: de quo sic scriptum extat in Tabanit fol. 26. p. 1. Deci^a quinta
mensis Ab, id est, Julii, filiae Jerusalem egrediebantur in vestibus albis,
quas qui non habebant, a ditioribus mut^o sumebant, ne, cui vestes deerant,
remorarentur, quo minus ad choreas venirent: omnes vestes lavabantur. Filiae
Jerusalem egrediebantur, and choreas ducebant in vineis. Quid ve^o dicebant?
Adolescens attolle oculos tuos, and vide quam tu velis eligere ex omnibus, ne
respicias pul^^ritudinem, siquidem fallax est, at eam, quae Deum timet, lauds.
Idem mos apud Romanos quoque usus vestium candidarum apud Romanos in diebus
festis.
fuit. Hinc Horat. lib. 2. Sat.

Ille repotia, natales, aliosve dierum.
Festos albatus celebret.
De usu vestium candidarum in diebus festis apud Romanos multa alia testimonia
praeter Horatii, extant apud auctores. Xiphilinus, die celebri Romae ob
ingressum Teridatis; (...), id est, populus albatus, and laureatus. Vopiscus in
Florian. Tantum illud dico: Senatores omnes ea laetitia esse elatos, ut domibus
suis omnes alb^s hostias caederent, albati sederent. Persius: -- Negato
Iuppiter hoc illi, quamvis te albata rogaret.


Prudentius contra Symmachum, Exultare patres videas pulcherrima mundi
Luminae, conciliumque senum gestire Catonum
Candidiore toga, nivium pietatis amictum
Sumere.
Et Ovidius, Vestibus intactis (usu nondum sordidis, aut obsoletis)
Tarpeias itur in arces:
Persius in re simili, Et populus festo concolor ipse suo est.
Scilicet hoc populo pexusque tog aque recenti
Et natalitia tandem cum Sardonyche albus
Se de leges celsa.
Idem Satyr. 2. Vo^a negato Iuppiter haec illi, quamvis a'bata rogant.


Id est, vestibus albis amicta. Cic. in Leg. Color albus p^aecipue As if God
were delighted with colors.
Deo decorus est, cum in caeteris, tum maxim in textili. Nec vero solum in
natalitiis, and repotiis, and nuptialibus aut sponsalibus, sed etiam in
funebribus coenis hanc consuetudinem servatam fuisse, locuples testis est M.
Tullius in Vatinium: ubi illi objicit, quod coenaverit atratus: verba ejus haec
sunt: Atque illud etiam scire cupio, quo consilio, aut qua mente feceris, ut in
epulo Cn. Arii familiaris mei cum toga pulla accumberes: quem unquam videris,
quem audieris, quo exemplo, quo more feceris? In coe^is fu^ebribus albati
accumbebant.
Dices, supplicationes te ill^s non putasse. Optime. Nullae fuerint
supplicationes, etc. Quis unquam coenavit atratus? ita enim illud epulum est
funebrae, ut munus sit suneris, epulae quidem ipse dignitatis. Sed omitto
epulum, populi Romani festum diem argento, vest, omni apparatu visendo: quis
unquam in luctu domestico, quis in funeri familiari c^enavit cum toga pulla?
cu^ de balneis exeunti (en consuetudinem balneandi ante epulas) praeter te,
toga pulla unquam data est? cum tot hominum millia accum^erent: cum ipse epusi
dominus Quintus Acius albatus esset, Balnea ante Epulas.
tu in templum Castoris te cum Caio Figulo atrato, caeterisque tuis suriis
funestum intulisti. Quis tum non ingemuit, etc. Hunc tum morem ignorabas?
nunquam epulum vi^eras? nunquam puer, aut adolescens inter coevos fueras?
Fausti adoloscentis nobilissimi paulo ante ex epulo magnificentissimo famem
illam veterem tuam non expleras? quem accumbere atratum videras dominum cum
toga pulla and ejus amicos ante convivium? Quae te tanta tenuit amentia, ut tu,
nisi id fecisses, quod fas non suit, nisi violasses templum Castoris, nomen
epuli, oculos civium, morem veterum (hinc constat morem hunc fuisse vetustum)
ejus qui te invitarat auctoritatem, parum putares testificatum esse,
supplicationes ^e illas non pu^asse. Ex gravi hac Ciceronis invectiva satis
constat, Romanos veteres convivia iniisse albatos, ita ut nephas ducerent
pullatum, seu atratum in convivio etiam funeb^i accumbere. Idem color albus and
Japponiis adhuc hod^e in luctu est usi^atus. Sidonius quoque Apollina^is ad
hunc albarum vestium in exequiis, epulisque exequi^libus usum alluoit lib. 5.
epist. ad Aumastum: Nam libenter, inquit, incedunt armati adepulas, albati ad
exequi^s, pelli^i ad ecclesias, pulla^i ad nuptias, castorinati (cas^oriis
pellibus induti) ad laetanias. Plutarchus testatur in Problematis, foeminas
antiquitus in luctu vestes, vittasque albas gestaffe (qui hodie Regina^um
Galliae lugentium mos est, In exequiis alque luclu.
test Polyd. Virgil.) and Argis quoque test Socrate, albas vestes aqua
elutas, in luctu gestare fuisse solitas. Ibidem cadaver quoque desuncti albo
tegmine involutum fuisse scribit. Apud Graecos, ut sc^ibit Alex. ab. Alex. lib.
3. cap. 7. sed sine auctore, foeminae, virique in candida vest cum coronis,
amplissimi viti exequias prosequuntur, and veluti in luctu publico complorant
promiscue. Quod fuit in more Syracusanis, qui candido amictu velati, and front
coronati, Timoleonem extulere. Sycionii similiter Aratum in vest alba, In
cadaveribus i^volvendis.
and coronis sepulchro intulere. In Imperatorum Roman. funeribus, vestes albas
adhibitas fuisse, Plutarch. and Herodian. testantur. Colorem album antiquitus
matronis in luctu fuisse usurpatum, Scaliger quoque testatur lib. 1. Poet. Sic
Blondus quoque Foroliviensis lib. 2. Romae triumphantis, and Urbinas ille, qui
libros de Inventoribus rerum scripsit, and alii non indocti viri, nulla
temporum adhi^ita distinctione, in luctu antiquas mulieres, albas semper vestes
usurpasse existimant. Verum hos errare, and pullas, fus^as nigras seu atras
(quas anthracinas Varro vocat, quasi dicas carbonarias) antiquissimis
temporibus fuisse ^^gentium vestes, Hieron. Magius lib. 3. Miscell. cap. 14.
veterum quorundam auctoritate probat. Varro de Vita Patrum, ut apud Nonium
legitur, de muliere: Propinquae, inquit, adolescentulae, etiam adolescentuli
proximi a niculo nigello, capillo promisso sequuntur luctum. Idem: Ut dum supra
terram essent, ^icinis lugerent, sunere ipso pulli pallis amictae. Erat autem
^icinum, ut Nonius ait, quod sua aecate masurtium dicebatur, palliolum
s^^mineum breve, cujus formam appingit ipsemet Varro lib. Alia testimonia de
vestium nigrarum usu in ex^qu^is.
4. de lingua Latina, Apul. lib. 2. de Asino aureo: Umbrosum, inquit,
demonstrat cubiculum, matronam slebilem, fusca vest contectam. Eadem quoque
apud Graecos consuetudo fuisse videtur: siquidem Iphigenia Euripidis
Clitemnestrae matri in jungir, ne suam ob mortem crinem lan^et: idemque ut suis
renunciet sororibus, scilicet ne quando nigris vestibus membra contegant. Unde
and Hon. Il. lib. 24. Thetim futuram filii necem deflentem, velo nigro tectam
Jovem adire facit. Niger enim color mortalis est, ut inquit Hippocrat. in lib.
de Morbo sacro, sive quisquis ille fuit, qui librum illum conscripsit, quem
Galenus Hippocratis esse negat. Theoc. in Epitaphio Adonidis, Venerem cyanea
stola indutam, ad lugendum Adonidis mortem invitar. Nigrarum vestium mos apud
mulieres Romanos mox obsolevit, ut Plutarchi testimonio intelligitur. Deinde
moribus depravatis, Color ^niger Ticinum quid.
and viros albas vestes in luctu usurpasse, colligere possumus ex his Julii
Pauli verbis lib. 1. Sententiarum, sub titulo de Sepulchris and lugendis. Qui
luget, inquit, abstinere debet a conviviis and alba vest.

Livius scribit, in luctu matronas Romanas nihil aliud quam purputam autumque
deponere, quae, cum eluxerun^, re^umunt. Dionys. Halicar. l. 5. refert, Romanas
matron^s Valerium Publicolam Brutumque luxisse annuum tempus, depositione auti
and purpurae, ut est illis luctus consuetudo in necessariorum cognatorumque
funebribus. Alex. ab Alex. In uatalitiis.
l. 5. cap. 18. sc^ibit diebus natalitiis and Calendis Januariis, nonnunquam
ludis Roman. albas lacernas praetextasque indutos incedere, and ludos spectare
fuisse solitos. Nam in vest pulla ludis interesse Augustus prohibuit.
Alexander Severus, test Lampridio, cum natalem diem commendaret, hostia
cruenta effugit, and ut se civiliter gerebar, ac permixtus populo erat, albam
ejus vestem, cum qua constiterat, cruentavit. Lacernis candidis usos fuisse
Romanos in spectaculis, In spectaculis.
ex illis Martialis carminibus constat, quibus ille perstringit Horatium, qui
nigra lacerna spectaculis interfuerat, Spectabat modo solus inter omnes
Nigris munus Horatius lacernis,
Cun plebs, and minor ordo maximusque
Sancto cum duce candidus sederet
Toto vix cecidet repent caelo
Albis spectat Horatius lacernis.
Augustus, In militia.
test Suetonio, habitum vestitumque pristinum reducendi studiosus, visa
quondam pro concione pullatorum turba; indignabundus and clamitans ait: En
Romanos rerum dominos, gentemque togatam. Negotium aedilibus dedit, ne quem
posthac paterentur in foro circove, nisi positis lacernis, togatum consistere.
Item, S^nxitque ne quis pullatorum media cavea (theatrali consessu, ubi populus
spectavit) sederet. De lacerna candida amphitheatrali, vide plura apud Lazium
li. 8. c. 10. Com. Reip. Plutarch. in Aemilio de Triumpho P. Aemilii verba
faciens, dicit: Omnes (...), id est, albis vestibus indutos) ludos spectasse.
Fuit candidarum vestium alius quoque apud Romanos frequens usus, tales enim
erant vestes castrenses, sacerdotales, atque muliebres.

De castrensibus Trebellius Pollio in Galeno sic scribit: In militia.
Jam primum inter togatos patres and equestrem ordinem, albatos milites (albis
vestibus indutos) and omni populo praeeunte. Sic candidatos milites Vegetius
rei militaris vocat principales, qui privilegiis muniuntur.

Vestimenta sacerdotalia similiter linea fuerunt and alba preriosa, In sacris.
nullo infecta color, pura. Virgil. 12 Aeneid. Procedunt castris, pur aque in
vest sacerdos
Ovid. Nunc Dea linigera colitur celeberrima turba.
Juvenal. Cum grege linigero circundatur, and grege calvo.
Martial. Linigeri fugiunt calvi, sistrataque turba.
Sic Flamen, ut Varro tradit, cum Jovi sacra ferebat, totus albatus erat, and
pileum etiam gestabat album. Item virgins Vestales suffibulo amictae
sacrificabant. Fuit vero suffibulum vestimentum album praetextum, Suffibulum.
quadratum, oblongum, quod illae in capite habentes sacrificabant, idque sub
mento sibula comprehendi solebat, unde nomen, Pierius lib. 40. Hieroglyph. De
calceamentis sacerdotum Romanorum, Atheniensium, and Alexandrinorum candidis,
vide Lazium lib. 8. cap. 13. Com. Reipu. Romans Aegyptiorum sacerdotum vestitus.
Talis Aegyptiorum quoque sacerdotum vestitus fuit, de quo Herod. sic scribit:
Sacredotes linea ferunt vestimenta induti, semper recens abluta, huic rei
semper vacantes. Iidem calceos papyraceos gestabant. Plin^ testatur li. 19.
vestes sacerdotibus Aegyptiis lineas gratissimas esse eo genere lini, quod
gosypon and xylon vocant, unde dicta xylina, quibus nulla sunt candore
mollitieve praeferenda. Apuleius caeremonias Aegyptiorum explicans, Influunt,
inquit, turbae sacris divinis initiatae, viri foeminaeque omnis dignitatis,
lineae vestis candore puro luminosi. Ab hac vest linea Poetae linigeros vocant
Sacerdotes Isidis Deae Aegyptiorum. Pierius tamen, nescio quo aucto re, Sacer
dotes, inquit, Aegyptii contra nostrorum mores cum supplicabant, nigris
utebantur vestibus, neque alias quam nigras vestes eum decere arbitrabantur,
qui Diis preces allegaret: quippe ut forma ipsum supplicare confirmarent, ex
qua mortales conformati sumus. Ea autem apud ipsos nigra figurabatur. De
Aegyptiorum Sacerdotum calvorum vestitu atque habitu candido, vide plura apud
Apuleium libro secundo and undecimo. Poteris hunc habitum, ut Beroaldus facit,
cum habitu sacerdotum nostri temporis confer. De vestibus religiosis, and
sacerdotalibus Judaeorum, vide Beroaldum in Suetonio ex Hieronymo.

Muliebria quoque vestimenta linea atque alba Romany fuerunt probata, Vostes
muliebres.
ut testatur Lazius libro octavo Commentariorum capite primo. Liaum candidum.
Unde proverbium: Linum candidum lucri causa ducio, in eum qui dotis causa
ducit vel deformem, vel anum. Linum autem vocat uxorem, vel quod apud veteres
solae mulieres lineis uterentur, etc. Erasmus in Adagiis. Turnebus in suis
Advers. in illum Horatii versum: Mirator cunni Cupennius albi: Ex pudenda,
inquit, part mulierem intel^igit, ex albo ingenuam: in ingenuis autem stupra
legibus vindicabantur, non item in libertinis. Ingenuae autem mulieres albatae
erant, libertinae atratae, nobiliores purpuratae. Unde Artemidorus: (...): sic
enim conijcit, somnia illa and visa Artimidorus, quod his essent solitae uti
vestibus ingenuae, libertinae, and nobiles.

Praeterea vestis candida apud eosdem manumissionis quoque insigne fuit. In
manumissionibus.
Moris enim erat Romae, ut servi facti liberti candidati ad coenam domini sui
admitterentur. Hoc perspicue docet Tertullianus libro de Resurrectione carnis,
his verbis: Oro te, si famulum tuum liberate mutaveris, quia eadem caro, atque
anima permanebunt, quae flagellis, and compedibus, and stigmatibus obnoxiae
retro fuerant: idcrico ne illa eadem pati oportebit? non opinor. Atque and ^See
la^ Cerda ibid^m.
vestis albae nitore, and aurei annuli honor, and patroni nomine, ac tri^u,
mensque honoratur.

Adhaec candida vestis signum erat petitionis honorum atque magistratuum, In
magistratuum petitione. Magistr^tuum petitores cur toga candida induti ^uerint.
quorum petitores candida toga induebantur, ac proinde dicebantur candidati,
unde ambitio cretata eleganter a Persio dicta est. Hoc autem ideo factitatum
esse Plutarchus in problem. existimat, ut magistratu dignos non genere, non
divitiis, non gloria, sed vulneribus, and cicatricibus judicarent, quae ut ab
his conspicerentur, quos ambiendo preusabant, in toga candida ad petendum
descendebant: vel quia corpus nudando, ac seipsos submittendo populum
captabant. De toga pura, qua tyrones, novaeque nuptae induebantur, sup^a dictum
est: de qua C^elius libro decimo quarto, capite decimo sexto, quibus add, quae
Calcagninus annotat. Pura toga, Toga pura.
inquit, quam exeuntes pueritiam adolescentes induebant non sine parentum
hilaritate, fuit color vel simplici, vel candido, aut in candoris animi
testimonium, aut quod gerendis magistratibus jam idonea aetas videretur.
Candidati enim magistratuum competitores comitia inibant. Vel certe, quod
nondum quicquam descriptione dignum gesserint. Nam sic and tyronibus prima
stipendia facientibus, alba parma, and pura hasta tradetur. De hac pura vest,
vide plura apud Bayff. de Re vestiaria, (...)
ubi probat, vestem (...), id est, puram, pro candida a Plutarcho usurpari. Sic
album vicissim, pro puro usurpatur; quia hic color est purissimus. Sic lintea
vestis alba supra caeteras vestes inducta, puellaris aetatis indicium fuit,
quod eo genere amiculi apud veteres puellae ante duodecimum annum utebantur,
Pierius. Toga, ut inquit Isidorus, candida, eademque cretata, in qua candidati,
id est, magistratum petentes, ambiebant, addita creta, quo candidior,
insigniorque esset. Pers^us hue alludens: -- Quem ducit hiantem
Cretata ambitio, etc.
Quae autem essent arts petitoriae (Cicero munus candidatorium dixit pro
officio and labor petitionis,) Vestis (...) Alb. 1:
hoc est, candidatorum, docet Mamertius in Panegyr. his verbis: Quis ignorant
tunc quoque, cum honores populi Romani suffragiis mandabantur, multos fuisse
candidatorum labores? As those now do who stand to be Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses in Parliament.
ediscenda omnia nomina tribulium, homines singuli salutandi, prehensandae
obviorum manus, omnibus arridendum, multaque alia propter honorem a^ipiscendum
agenda, quae alias virum honor dignum facere non deceret. Hinc Caesaris five
Principis candidatus, proverbium de eo, qui inani quadam confidentia and
securitate nixus, negligentius munus aliquod obit, de quo multa Caelius libro
decimo quarto, capite decimo sexto. De iisdem Cicero in oratione, cui titulus
est, in toga candida, Proverbium. Arts petitoriae.
quam dixit in Senatu in petitione consulatus, (hujus orationis meminit
Beroaldus in Suetonium, and Caelius libro decimo quarto, cap. decimo sexto)
olimtribuni legem promulgarunt, ne cui album vestimentum (sic ille togam
candidam appellat) addere petitionis causa liceret, sicuti tradit Livius in 4.
ab urbe condita. Pierius tamen in Hieroglyph. suis lib. 40. albam vestem
modestiae, animique sua sort contenti signum esse dicit: purpuram autem
ambitionis, animique sublimis, and vasti, amplitudinis, summique magistratus.
Hinc cum apud Alexandrum quidam Antipatri parsimoniam, atque modes^iam
commendaret: (...), inquit, (...). Paries dealbatus, Act. 2. 3. and sepulchra
dealbata, Matthew. 23. quid denotent. Purpura.
Cael. lib. 9. cap. 7. id est, Foris albo utitur pallio, intus ve o totus est
purpureus, fictam notans in homine ambitiosissimo, qui maxima quaeque
appeteret, modestiam. Sic paries dealbatus; Act. 23. and se pulchra dealbata,
Matthew. 23. hypocritae appellantur. Haec ille. Talesprofecto erant And are not
many Roman Prelates and Priests now such, and English too?
Romani illi candidati, qui candida vest animi candorem atque modestiam,
innocentiam prae se praeferebant, cum animi illorum essent purpurei, id est,
ambitiosi atque sanguinolenti. Purpuram autem Romanorum quoque magistratuum
insigne illud Martialis indicat: Divisit nostras purpura vestra togas. Et ab
eodem purpura usurpatur pro magistratibus, Purpura te foelix, te col^t omnis
honos.

Plin 20. de Gallis, ut plane digne aliti honoris tantum praebeat Romana
purpura, id est, magistratus Romanus. Hinc perfidi quoque Judaei Christum per
ludibrium (...), id est, purpura, ut Marcus, inquit, sive, ut Joannes loquitur,
(...), id est, vest purpurea induerunt, cum ille sibi vere, illorum autem
opinione falso, regiam dignitatem assignaret. Purpura Christi. Coccina tunica.
Fuit simul sanguinis illius effundendi symbolum. Eam vestem clamidem coccinam
Matthaeus appellat. Coccina tunica praelii ^uturi signum f^it Romanorum
Imperatoribus, test Plutarcho in Fa^io. Sic quoque vestis Christi coccina,
^uit signum praelii, quo Christus cum di^bolo, morte atque peccato erat
dimicaturus. Fuit etiam vestis purpurea, vestis triumphalis, ut Bayffius ex
Plutarcho probat. Fuit ergo illius simul futurae victoriae atque triumphi
symbolum. Purpurae appellatione coccum non contineri B^yssius ex Ulpione
probat, Evangelistae de purpurca illa sive coccinea Christi vest conciliantur.
Vestis purpureae and coccineae discrimen. Candidati, petitores non solum
Magistratuum, sed aliarum quoque rerum.
unde Evangelistae videntur a se in vicem dissidere, quorum unus, Matthaeus
nimirum coccinam, reliqui duo purpuream illam Christi vestem fuisse assirmant,
quam rem Sorbonicis Theologis dijudicandum relinquit. Vestem purpuream a
coccina differ Brodaeus probat, lib. 1. Miscell. cap. 8. Coccos enim, inquit
ille, est surculosus parvus frutex, cui grana seu lentes adjacent, test
Dioscorid. lib. 4. and Clusio de plantis Hispanicis. His colorem coccineum
fieri, eoque infecta vestimenta coccinea appellari puto. Purpura autem, ut
fatentur omnes, piscis est e concharum genere, qui florem illum tingendus ex
petitum vestibus in meoiis habet faucibus. Mihi quidem Matthaeus colorem (est
enim coccineus color idem fere cum purpureo) reliqui duo materiam videntur
expressisse, ut etiam Rondeletius sentit in sua His^oria piscium. Candidati
autem eleganter dicuntur petitores non solum magistratuum, sed aliarum quoque
rerum. Sic a Quintil. candidatus eloquentiae, a Plinio in Panegytico candidatus
gloriae, and immortalitatis: ab Hieronymo candidati fidei, catechumeni, qui ad
fidem instruuntur, and munerarius pa^perum, and egentium candidatus: and ab
Apuleio lib. 1. de Asino, candidatus (...), hoc est, qui crucem petit, sive qui
jam est futurus crucifixus, and (ut veteres loquebantur) directus, ut C.
Rabirius ille pro quo Cicero. extat oration: a Plauto cruci salus dicitur, quasi
in crucem saliens: and Libertus Icelus a Suetonio, summus equestris ordinis
candidatus: a Seneca homo multarum rerum candidatus appellatur, a quo fortunae
comitia dicuntur. Sic a Tertulliano simili translatione perelegantissime,
aeternitatis candidati appellantur Enoch, and Elias, libro de Resurrectione
carnis, and candidatus timoris, qui paulatim timorem Domini imbibit, libro
secundo ad Uxorem, and candidati diaboli dicuntur, qui idolatricis sacris sunt
initi^i, libro adversus Marcionem. Idem in libro de Baptismo, Baptismum
poenitentiae, quasi candidatum remissionis and sanctificationis in Christo
subsecutura vocat. Nam quod praedicabat (scilicet Joannes Baptista) Baptismum
poenirentiae in remissionem delictorum, in futuram remissionem enunciatum est.
Siquidem poenitentia antecedit, remissio subsequi^ur. Candida salutis, martyrii.
Ab eodem libro de corona candida salutis and candida martyrii eleganter pro
aeternae salutis p^aemio usurpatur. Item de S. Paulo verba faciens, dicit illum
gloriam carnis, notam circumcisionis, Pharilaeae candidae dignatem, pro
detrimento sibi deputasse: ubi candida metonymi^^s pro ordine, sive honor
videtur usurpari: vel forsan Pharisaei hypocritae, qui a Christo dealbatis
sepulchris comparantur, vestes albas seu candidas gestarunt. Verum de vestitu
Romanorum albo, plura tradit J^stus Lipsius Elect. lib. 1. cap. 13. lectu
dignissima, quorum haec est summa: Romany in vestitu placuisse colorem album,
Albus color in vestitu cur Romany placuerit.
sive quod is, ut Plato vult, lae^itiae sit proprius: sive potius quiaagrestis
illa and prima gens, spretis accersitis coloribus, lanae nativum retinuit, id
est, album. Ita toga Romanorum alba and Tunica fuit, and Calcei and omnis
cottidiana vestis. Togam albam fuisse, quam Graeci (...), and ad discrimen
praetextae, (...) vocant, Titinnii, Plauti, Statii, Persii, Martialis
testimoniis probat. At objiciat quis: Si toga vulgo alba, cur, qui prensabant,
induebantur toga candida, ut hac quasi nota intelligi and excerni possent a
reliqua plebe? Respondet, Albi and candi^^ coloris discrimen.
albi coloris togas vulgo fuisse, non candidi. Albus color nativus lana est:
candidus proprie splendens ille, and qui est ab art. Ideo Polybius aliquot
locis (...) dictam maluit petitorum togam, quam (...): and Latin commode
splendentem dixerimus. Nam petitores non contenti insito lanae color, cretam
addebant in vestem, ut splendesceret. Unde Isidorus, Fit toga addito quodam
cretae genere candidior. Objiciunt item de diebus festis, Romani inquiunt,
saltem per dies festos in vest alba erant. Non ergo cottidianas vestes
censendum albas. Respondet, non aliud fuisse in eo more, quam ut per dies
privatim aut public laetos, togas recentes sumerent, and usu nondum sordidas
aut obsoletas, qui mos plane gemmus est moribus nostris. Nec ve^o Romani solum
in laetitia aut in sacris adhihebant hunc colorem, sed etiam externi, Rhodii
Fullonum apud veteres creberrimus usus.
id quod de Rhodiis Livii testimonio probat, and de Aegyptiis Suetonii in vita
Augusti. Propter has togas albas fullonum apud veteres creberrimus usus, rarior
tinctorum. Fullonum, qui maculas scilicet and sordes e toga e^uebant, and
addiro furfure ac creta iterum candidam faciebant. Alba igitur toga, and ea
quamdiu in communi usu, discrimen nullum inter cives fuit a color vestis, nisi
quod divites, munduli elegantes semper in toga sua e fullone nivea: vulgus fere
sordidiores essent, and togis magis pallentibus, ac, ut proprie dicam,
obsoletis. Ideo Seneca epist. Sordido pro vulgo.
115. per sordidos intelligit vulgum. Mirari, inquit, non debes, corrupta
excipi non tantum a corona, sed ab hac turba quoque cultiore. Togis enim inter
se isti, non judiciis dissident. Sed and vi^i illustres ac nobiles rei facti,
per dies judicii sumebant hanc togam sordidam, Reorum t^ga sordida.
posita nivea, ut miserabiliores essent in vest plebeia. Iraque rei in
sordibus esse dicuntur aut sordidati: non pullati, ne quis erret, qui color
rantum, funebris. Vi^i etiam graves ac rigidi non amabant eximium illum
candorem. Unde simia ille apud Horatium, Exiguaque toga simulat tesquore
Catonem. Duo enim lauti homines amabant in toga laxitatem and candorem: In toga
duo amabantur.
spre verat Ut^umque Cato, arcta toga contentus and ea squallenti: Toga mutata.
Id enim Horat. tesquorem vocat, pro quo male vulgo legunt textorem. Postea
mutata Republ. and labente imperio, toga quae olim necessaria civibus,
Imperatorum temporibus, ad paucos remansit and non nisi honestiores. Vulgus
spreta ea, abiit ad Paenulas, lacern as aut tunicas solas easque color pullo,
id quod statim sub Augusto coepit. De paenulis, tunicis, lacernis, vide ibidem
plura. Pereunte toga, interiit color albus, and pullo plebeio omnes vestes,
Hinc discrimen natum inter cives, ignotum seculo priori, ut alii candidati
dicerentur, pullati alii. Pullati qui.
Candidati non ii, qui peterent (ut olim) sed honestioris ordinis cives.
Pullati, infima plebs sive vulgus.

Porro Naucratitas quoque testis est Athen. lib. 4. Naucratitae vestibus ^albis
usu fuerunt.
in Genethliis Vestae Prytanitidis in Pryaeneo epulantes, nec non in
Dionysiacis and Panegyri Comaei Apollinis albis vestibus usos fuisse, quas suo
quoque tempore Prytanicas vestes dicit fuisse appellatas. Cereris quoque
initiatos candidis, ut Bellonae nigris, and Saturni purpureis atque rubicundis
vestibus indutos fuisse, Vostium superstitiosarum apud ethaicos varii colores.
Tertull. testatur lib. de Pallio, his verbis: Cur istas non spectas? vel illos
item, qui novitate vestitus religionem mentiuntur, cum ob cultum omnia
candidatum and ob notam vittae and privilegium galeri, Cereri initiantur; cum
ob diversam affectionem tenebricae vestis and tetrici super caput velleris in
Bellonae montes suga^tur: cum latioris purpurae ambitio, and galatici ruboris
superjectio, Saturnum commendat: cum ipsum hoc pallium morosius ordinatum, and
crepidae Graecatae Graecatim Aesculapio adulantur. Alexand. ab Alexand. lib. 6.
cap. 19. Romanos scri^it in toga candida ludos spectare solitos fuisse, and
mulieres in vest alba Cereris sacrum facere solitas fuisse, ut tunc Diis
gratum esse censerent, si a laetis, nec funere pollutis celebraretur. Et tamen,
ut testis est Pierius in Hieroglyph. apud Arcadas Cere^i nigra vestis
induebatur. Sic Falacralis Flamen, test Pierio, nigro utebatur ^ileo: erat
enim Plutonis, cui cum immolabant vestibus utebantur nigtis, quem colorem aiunt
diis inferis dedicatum.

Ex his, quae adhuc dicta sunt, constat, vestes candidas apud Naucratitas, and
praecipue apud Romanos, non solum in conviviis, verum etiam in sacris, in
magistratuum petitione, in manumissionibus, in militia, in spectaculis, in
triumphis, in nuptiis: in luctu quoque and cada veribus involvendis adhibitas
and usurpatas fuisse. Vestis candidae praestantia.
Ac omnino vestes albas sive candidas, in sacris pariter atque prophanis
literis vehementer commendari constat, ceu insignia atque symbola, cum
virtutum, ut modestiae, puritatis morum, innocentiae, synceritatis, at que
integritatis: tum faelicitatis, beatitudinis, victoriae, libertatis, laetitiae
atque gaudii. Hinc prae^er supra commemorata exempla, Magi in Perside, test
Pierio, Deum ipsum non nisi albis vestibus delectari assirmabant. Et Plutarchus
problemate Romanorum vigesimo sexto M^gos adversus Plutonem, and tenebras,
lucido and illustri amictu se munivisse scribit^ In somniis quoque candidae
vestis somnium pro felici augurio habetur. Angeli semper candidati apparuerunt.
In sacris literis, angeli semper candidati appa^uerunt: id quod illorum cum
innocentiae, tum beatitudinis est argumentum. Sic, ut ex plurimis, unum
proferam, gloriosae Christi resurrectionis, quae diaboli, mortis, atque peccati
victrix extitit, primi testes atque p^aecones fue^unt angeli, albis vestibus
induti atque ornati. Ejus rei testes sunt Matthaeus vigesimo oct^vo, qui (...)
illius nivis instar (...) fuisse dicit: Marcidecimo sexto, qui illum (...), id
est, stolac andida amictum fuisse perhibet. Et Joannis vigesimo, qui duorum
angelorum mentionem faciens, illos (...), id est, candidis vestibus indutos
fuisse testatur. Christus ipse in monte Thabor (...), Mar 9. Matthew. 17.
Christus discipulis suis candidatus apparuit, (...).
vestituto candido, instar lucis, sive nivis, sese discipulis suis
conspiciendum p^aebuit, qui cum puritatis, tum victoriae, atque beatitu^inis
ae^ernae fuit symbolum. Sic Apocalypseos capite primo Christus candidatus
Joanni apparuit: Vestitus, inquit, erat (...) scilicet (...), vestem talarem,
sive ad talosusque demissam. (...) Suida, (...), tunica ad pedes usque demissa.
Eucherio est sacerdotalis vestis lintea corpori penitus adstricta, eademque
talaris, (...) appellata, quae and subucula dicitur. Per hanc, test Pierio in
Hieroglyphicis, quae aliis subjiciebatur, doctrinam sacratiorem intelligi,
veteres Theologi tradiderunt. Exodi: Et fecerunt vestimentum poderem sub
umbone, opus textile, totum hyacinthinum. Sequitur apud Joannem: Caput autem
ejus, and capilli erant candidi velut lana alba, and tanquam nix. Hic candidus,
niveusque Christi habitus sive vestitus, est indumentum illud salutis and
justitiae, quo ut Isaiae sexagesimo primo dicitur, sponsam, id est, Ecclesiam
suam vestit, tegit atque ornat: e^que suam imputando justitiam, and
fanctitatem, facit ut illa quoque alba and candidi, id est, justa coram Deo
appareat, sine ruga and macula, Ephesiorum primo: secundum illud Isaiae primo.
Si peccata vestra, etc. Huc quoque facit (...), vestis splendida, seu, ut
vulgatus interpres vertit, alba, qua Christus per ludibrium ab Herod fuit
indutus. Illa enim revera argumentum fuit Christi innocentiae and regiae
dignitatis, Luc. 23 (...)
Forsan, (...) id est, pura vestis a Plutar. pro alba usurpatur, sicut Bayf^ius
testimoniis quibusdam probat: sic (...) vocabulum eodem modo usurpatur, nisi
malimus p^rpuream vestem intelligere, eujusmodi vest a Judaeis per ludibrium
fuit amictus. Apoc. 3. Laodicensi ecclesiae Deus suadet, ut vestimentis albis
sese induat, ut non appareat dedecus nuditatis ejus, hoc est, ut Christum vera
fide induat, vitae morumque candori, and synceritate studeat. Et ab intio
ejusdem capitis: Sardenses Ecclesiae nonnulli esse dicuntu^, qui non
inquinaverant vestimenta sua, and additur: Et ambulabunt mecum in albis, qui
digni sunt. Qui vicerit, sic vestietur vestimentis albis, and non delebo nomen
ejus de libro vitae. En hic quoque candida, insigne est victoriae, coelestis
gloriae and felicitatis. Et capite ejusdem lib. 6. Martyribus dantur stolae
al^ae, ceu insignia illorum victoriae, libertatis atque beatitudinis. Ab initio
ejusdem cap. equus albus inducitur, and eques seu insessor ejus arcu, ac
sagittis armatus, and corona insignitus ceu victor. Equus ille albus,
(cujusmodi erant quatuor illi equi candidi apud Romans triumphalem cutrum
ducentes) ut and corona, insignia sunt victoriae, qua Christus de omnibus
hostibus suis potitur. Sic equi albi apud Virgilium cum belli tum victoriae
sunt insignia. Sic enim Anchises loquitur Aeneid. 3. Quattuor hic primum omen
equos in gramine vidi
Tondentes campum late, candore nivali.
Hoc A^chises interpretatur de bello, Bello armantur equi, bellum haec armenta
minantur. Sed paulo post, pacem candidam significare (spes est pacis) ait.
Latenter ostendit victoriam adepturos, ut Servius annotat. Huc facit illud
Graecum (...) Hinc quoque natum est proverbium illud, Equis albis praecedere:
and Plautinum illud, Nunquam aedipol albis quadrigis indipiscet postea, de quo
Erasmus in Adag. Sic equi illi albi, Zach. 6. Hieron. interpret, Machabaeorum
sub Antiocho Rege victoriam: aliis Judaeorum felicem statum sub Macedonibus:
aliis bonos angelos significat. Virg. tamen Georg. 3. album equi colorem
deterrimum facit: -- Color deterrimus albis. Servius, Equi albi.
Atqui alibi ait: Qui candore nives anteirent, Sed aliud est candidum esse, id
est, quadam nitenti luce perfusum, aliud album, quod pallori constat esse
vicinum. Iudic. 5. v. 10. asinarum candidarum fit mentio in illo Deborae
epinicio: Qui ascenditis asinas candidas: omnes fere interpretes mercatores
intelligunt, alii pingues, vel forsan quia asinae candidae erant meliores,
(...) albae.
robustiores, agiliores. Apocalyp. quoque 7. electi omnium gentium
innumerabiles coram throno coelesti and agno stantes, inducuntur amicti stolis
candidis and ferentes palmas in manibus suis Deum laudibus celebrantes. Et
pauso post, Hi sunt, qui venerunt ex afflictione magna and dilata verunt stolas
suas and dealbaverunt eas (hoc (...) videtur mundo atque rationi) per sanguinem
agni. Hae quoque stolae candidae martyrum and electorum symbola Stola albae.
sunt illorum munditiei, jusutiae, libertatis, victoriae, gloriae, beatitudinis
denique, quam agni illius immaculati, hocest, Christi sanguine fuerunt
consecuti. Hujus vestitus typus and figura fuit vestis aspersa sanguine
hostiae, de qua Levit. 16. Huc quoque referenda illa Tertulliani lib. 4.
adversus Marcionem: Nazaraeus vocari habebat secundum propheriam Christi
creatoris. Nazaraei.
Unde and ipso nomine nos Judaei Nazaraenos appellant per eum. Nam and sumus,
de quibus scriptum est. Nazaraei exalbati sunt super nivem. Qui^ scilicet ret^o
luridati delinquentiae maculis and nigrati ignorantiae tenebris. Regius ille
concionator capite nono sui libri, dum morum candorem and animi puritatem
persuadere vult, omni tempore, inquit, sint vestimenta tua candida: qui^us
verbis, interpret Pierio in hieroglyph. praecipit, nullam aetatem, nullum
officium, nullum otium and negotium toto vitae tempore synceritate and
innocentia (cujus symbola sunt vestimenta candida) vacuum esse debere. Loci
Eccles. 9. interpretatio.
Haec ille. Sic Hieronymus in suis Eccles. Commentariis interpretatu^: H^beto
corpus mundum, and esto misericors. Mihi quidem hoc ipso in loco Solomon simul
videtur alludere ad convivialem vestitum, quem apud Judaeos quoque (ut ex
Philonis loco sup^a citato videtur colligi posse) album fuisse veri^imile est.
Nam and versu proxime antecedente 7. panem cum gaudio comedendum, vinumque
hilari cord bibendum esse p^aecipit: and mox versu 8. vestium albarum mentione
facta, subjungit, oleum super caput tuum ne desiciat: cujus quidem in conviviis
quantus usus suerit, tum dictum est, tum pluribus dicetur. Omnino ergo cum
verse. 7. praecepisset in epulis atque^ conviviis laetitiae esse indulgendum,
mox ver. 8. sequente, duo laetitiae illius convivialis quasi signa seu causas
effectrices subj^^gir, vestes nimirum albas atque oleum: quorum utrumque cum
laetitiae partim significandae, partim e^^iciendae maximam vim habeat, in
conviviis adhibitum and usurpatum fuisse legimus, uti supra dictum est. Simplex
ergo sensus erir, sis semper laetus and hilatis: lame vivito, genio indulge.
Sisinnius Novitianorum Episcopus homomollis and delicatus cum and bis in die
lavaretur and candida semper vest uteretur, Nota.
and obid reprehensus esset a quodam, excusavit se cum hoc loco Ecclesiastis,
tum Christi, Heliae and Mosis exemplo, quos vestibus albis usos suisse dicebat.
Testis est Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 22. Hieron. lib. 2. epist. 14. Vestes pullas
aeque devita, ut candidas. Ornatus and sordes pari modo fugienda: quia altetum
delicias, alterum gloriam redolet. Cum ergo vestes albae non in prophanis
solum, verumetiam sactis literarum monumentis tantopere commendentur, ceu
maximarum and pulcherrimatum rerum symbola and insignia, mirum profecto non
est, Christianos primitivae Ecclesae easdem in sacris atque sacramentis suis
usu^passe.

Ut igitur apud Romanos, sicuti dictum est, magistratuum atque honorum
petitores erant candidati, sic in primitiva Ecclesia Baptismi candidati (qui
etiam competentes vulgo suerunt appellati) cum quadragesimae initio nomina sua
dedissent, and toto illo quadraginta dietum spacio atris vestibus, promisso
capillo, in sordibus and squallore jacuissent, pau^o ante Pascha lavabantur
(quod Augustinus Epist. 118. ad Januarium baptismum antebaptismum vocat)
tandemque loti candidisque induti vessibus, ad Baptismum accedebent. Baptiz and
o^um vestis cand^da.
Idem infantum quoque baptizandorum habitus fuit, de quibus elegante Pontius
Paulinus. Inde parens sacro ducit de font sacerdos.
Infantes niveos corpore, cord, habitu.
(Quos tamen versus Pierius Fortunato tribuit) Et Lactantius in carmine de
resurrectione dominica: Rex sacer ecce tui radiat pars magna trophaei
Cum puras animas sacra lavacra beant.
Candidus egreditur nitidis exercitus undis,
A^que vetus v^tium purgat in amne. nov^,
Fulgentes animas vestis quoq, candida signat,
Et grege de niveo gaudia pastor habet.
Meminit etiam Socrates lib. 7. cap. 17. candidae hujus vestis, quae dabatur
baptizatis. Loti semel salutifero font, nunquam stolam candidissimam, quam
suscipiunt in bap^tismate, inquinate docentur. Rabanus Mautus Moguninus
episcopus l. de instir. cler. 1. c. 29. Post baptismum traditut Christiano
candida (...), Nomina sancti lavacri.
designans puritatem and innocentiam. Nazianzenus ^n orat. de Sancto lavacro,
illud dicit a Christiauis va^^is nominibus appellari, nimirum(...), Et paulo
post, (...), id est ceu turpitudinis tegumentum. Hinc Ammonius monachus lib. 3.
de gestis Francorum mentionem facit pueri occisi, qui adhuc, ut ille loquitur,
erat in albis regenerationis, hoc est, qui recens erat baptizatus, nondum
baptismalibus illis atque candidis vestibus exutus. Nam qui baptizabantur in
vigila Paschatis incedebant vest candida induti per octo dies, ac vocabantur
albati, sive in al^is, atque octavo demum die vestem albani deponebant: quibus
add, quod ut Tertull docet, lib. de Corona milites, ex en die, qua erant
baptizati, lavacro quotidiano per totam hebdomadam abstinebant. Paschatis
hebdomada and domenica Quastmodo, in albis appellata. Ves^is candida i^
baptismo quale symbolum
Et quoniam Paschatis hebdomada, antiquitus plures una tingi consueverunt, ea
de causa feriae illae, quae ad hoc omnes institutae sunt, and quae subsequitu^
Hebdomada atque dominica quam nos, Quasimodo geniti nominamus, in albis fuit
appellata. Vestis haec candida in baptismo symbolum erat cum ipsius Christi,
quem electi fide induunt, secundum Paulum Ephesians. 4. Col. 3. tum illius munerum,
hoc est, justitiae, vitae puritatis and innocentiae, (Tertull. hoc indumentum
Spiritus sanctus vocat lib. de pudicitia libertatis, victoriae gloriae,
immortalitatis, quam ex aqua and spiritu regenerati consequuntur, de quo
pluribus disserit Ambrosius in lib. de iis, qui initiantu^ mysteriis cap. 7. Ut
ergo olim apud Romanos candida vestis qua servi a dominis decorabantur, erat
insigne illorum manumissionis: sic candida illa baptismi vestis signum erat
illos ex manibus diaboli atque peccati immanissimis esse liberatos, ut posthac
Deo ceu patrono suo fidelissimo, servirent vitae puritate ac sanctitate.
Praeterea, cum candidus color olim victoriae and triumpho fuerit consecratus,
candida haec vestis illos monebar, ut cogitarent sibi in hac vita ceu in
militia perpe^^o esse cum diabolo, peccato atque mundo dimicandum in Christo
and vincendum:

Jam vero in coenae quoque Dominicae administratione album vestitum antiquitus
adhibitum fuisse, exillis Hieronymi verbis videtur colligi posse libr. contra
Pelagianos, Quae sunt, rogo inimicitiae, inquit, contra Deum, si Episcopus
Prsbyter and Diaconus and reliquus ordo ecclesiassicus in administratione
sacrificiorum candida vest processerint. Verisimile est cum eos, qui
sacrosancti illius epuli communione f^uebantur: tum ejus administratores, hoc
est, sacerdotes atque diaconos albas vestes gestasse. Tunica choro appellata.
Harum autem vestium antiquarum vestigia sunt tunicae illae, quas choro and
albis vulgo nominant, in quibus missa Paschatis tempore celebratur. Sic nos
vestitum quidem veterum candidum retinemus, and imitamur: at religionis, Nota.
morumque candorem integritatemque jam pridem amisimus: contra vero (...) u^
ludas in sua epistola loquitur, hoc est, tunicam carnis contactu maculatam
gestamus.

Caete^um notandum est, Vestes albae duplices.
vestes albas esse duplices: alias, quae nativo color constant, qui leucopus
^icitur: alias, quae artificiali, quas volunt propr^e candidas dici. Leucopeati
dicuntur Martiali, qui rudiori alba vest, ac vili, ac nativi coloris induti
sunt.

Verum quoniam multa de candidae vestis usu, Cur vestes aliaeque res albo
color imbutae, in tanto suerint apud veteres pretio atque honor. Coloris albi
significationes allegoricae.
dignitate, significationeque mystica dicta sunt, de quo etiam Clem. Alexand.
paedagog. lib. 2. Cap. 10. legere potetis: consideranda etiam nobis videtur
ratio, cur vestibus illis tantum a veteribus tributum fuerit. Ea peti potest ab
^psius coloris albi sive canoida vi atque natura. Nam cumis color, secundum
Plutarch. problem 26. maxim sit naturalis, simplex, purus, syncerus, lucidus,
atque perspicuus, ut qui lucis plurimum habet (unde (...) album mihi (...), id
est, videndo videtur dictum) mirum profecto non est, illo (uti etiam lumine,
cui maxim est affinis, atque cognatus) cum mores ingenuos, puros, ac
simplices: tum laetitiam, libertatem, victoriam, foelicem denique quemuis rerum
statum atque conditionem, in prophanis sacrisque literis significari: ac
proinde vestes aliasque res color illo imbutas, in tanto fuisse apud veteres
pretio and honor. Album, inquit Pierius in Hieroglyph. est p^ima veluti
materia quaedam, in quam colores, quotquot volueris, perinde ac in universalem
illam possis omnes species inducere. Hinc ad Dei cultum alba plurimum
indumenta, omnium p^ne nationum consensu adhiberi solent: semperque albus color
sacris accommodatur. Atque ideo ait Persius: Quam vis albata rogarit. Sed quid
indigemus Persio, si Servatoris nostri indumenta, cum gloriam suam vellet
discipulis patefacere, alba sicut nix apparuere? Apud Cic. 2. de Legibus: Color
albus praecipue decorus Deo est, tum in caeteris, tum maxin e in textile. Et
nostra pietas canit, vel lineas, casque purissimas induti tunicas, sacra Deo
caneremus. Plato similiter colorem album vult laetitiae esse proprium, atque
deorum. Hinc veteres, test Platone, and Plutarcho, niveo splendore
spectabiles, ut deorum ^enerabantur silios. Cel. lib. 24. Cap. 26. Album por^o
and candidum pro bono: ut atrum and nigrum pro malo, passim accipitur. Juvenal.
Satyra 3. -- Maneant qui nigrum in candida vertunt. Id est vitium in virtutem:
virtutem in vitium, qui secundum Terentium in Phorm. recta prava faciunt:
secundum Isa^am, bonum malum: dulce amarum, and cont^a ^icunt. Persius. Per me
equidem sint omnia protenus alba, id est bona.
Ovid. Candida de nigris, and de candentibus atra.
Horat. H^c niger est, hunc in Roman caveto.
Candi^us sermo (...), id est, perspicuus: and (...) vox candida, quae sac^^e
hominum aures penetrat: and (...), rem clarius explicare. Sic apud S^ne^am
Asinius Po^^io Albutii sententias albas app^llavit, quod essent aperiae. Eras.
in Adag. Avis al^a, pro re nova and a^picata: Ciceroni epist. fam. lib. 7. Sic
allae gallirae silius Juvenali, hoc est, faeliciter natus (cui (...) apud
eundem: Nati infoelicibus ovis) quia Latini lae^, and auspicata, alba vocant:
ut contra inauspicata, nigra and atra: Erasmus in Adag. Cic. Nec minus niger,
inquit, nec minus confidens, quam ille, pro Caecinna de test Sexto Clodio.
Horat. in Sermon. Sani, an creta, an carbone not andi. Quem imitatur Persius in
5. Satyr. Quaeque sequenda, forent, and quae vitanda vicissim:
Illa prius creta, mox haec carbone notasti.
Sic candido calculo, lapillo, aut creta: aut contra nigro lapillo notare: de
quibus E^asmus in suis Adagiis. Dies albus, and alba faba, ibidem. Albi
calculi, absolutorii: ni^^, dam^^orii in proverb. (...), id est, al^um calculum
addere, id est, approbare. Novit quid album, quid nigrum, id est, recti,
pravique discrimen. Vultu mutabilis, albus and ater, id est, and bonus malus
est. Horac in extrema epistolae: -- candidum Pauperis ingenium. Idem Ode. 11.
Epod. Sic passim candor, pro integtitate animi: and candidus homo, pro syncero,
and ingenuo usu^ p^tur. Pythagoras aiebat, id quod esset color candido, ad
boni naturam: quod color atro, ad naturam ^ali pertinere, ut Erasmus annotat
in proverbia illa: Creta notare, id est, approbare: Carbone notare, id est,
damnare. Ve^um haec satis sint dicta de albi coloris vi, (...) dignitate atque
praestantia, ejusque significatione allego^ica, de qua multa passim in sacris
and prophanus li^e^is occurrunt, in quorum explicationem forsan non injucundam
and inutilem delapsus sum, occasion vestium canaidarum, quarum olim in
conviviis, atque etiam in re^iqua vitae humanae consuetudine creberrimus and
frequentissimus usus fuit, ut ex supra commemoratis tes^imoniis and exemplis
satis patet.

BY this learned Discourse of white Vestments, colors, the judicious Reader
may discern,

1. That White Garments, Rotchets, Surplices, are not peculiar to Divine
Services, Sacraments, or to Ecclesiastical Persons, or Christians alone.

2. That they have been, and still are made use of, by Heathen Priests in the
sactifices, Solemnities of their Idol-Gods, and by Pagans in their Feasts,
Funerals, Plays, Inaugurations, Manumissions, etc. as well as by Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, in their Divine Worship and Celebrations; and by all sorts of
Lay-Baptized Christians, as well as by Clergymen.

3. That the principal mystical significations, reasons, grounds, ends for the
Civil or Sacred uses of White Vestments, are equally common to all ranks and
degrees of men, of Christians, and not one of them proper or peculiar to
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, or Clergymen, or to public Prayers, Devotions,
more then to private. Therefore not to be used or worn by Bishops, Ministers,
Deacons, or Clergymen alone, as a badge of their distinction from, and
elevation above Lay-Christians.

FINIS.

