ADVICE TO A PAINTER.
Long since Proposed for the CONCLUSION Of this Year 1688.
By J. P.
COme Painter, take a Prospect from this Hill,
And on a well spread Canvass show thy Skill;
Draw all in Colors as they shall Appear,
And as they stand in Merit, place them there;
Draw, as the Heralds do, a spacious Field,
And as directed, so let them be Filled.
First, draw a Popish Army, Brisk and Gay,
Fighting and Beat, Destroyed and Run away:
Then draw a Hearse, and let it stand in View,
The Mourners more, far more than is in show;
Cursing their Fate, their Stars, and in this Fear,
Show, if thou can, how these Damned Sots prepare
To run away, or stay in Holes alone,
By them this Motto, Gallows claim thy Own.
Now, to the Life, let thy brisk Pencil show
Distinctly what they are, and what is their Due.
Now draw a Cloud, and Crowd of Priests to Run,
Like Broken Merchants, when their Stocks are gone:
Some howling out their Prayers, forget and say,
Save us, Saint Ketch, take all our Saints away:
Draw them in Hurry, running too and Fro,
Posting to Dover, Portsmouth, Tyburn To.
Next draw a Crowd of Lords; This Label by
Our great design is lost, Alas! they cry,
Who'd serve a Cause of such cursed Destiny?
Now draw four Priests, show how they Rome Adore
And each Man's Scarf hang to be seen Before,
And of near kin unto the Scarlet Whore.
Then draw Four Bishops falling to Despair,
Armed Ca-pa-pe, but going God knows where;
That all who see it done, may say it is well,
Then draw the Judges there, with thy best Skill,
In Caps and Gowns, as They in order sat,
'Twixt Heaven and Hell, do you them elevate,
Their Learned Noddles can Dispense with that.
Now draw the Little Rogues, the Scoundrel Crew,
Knights, Knaves and Beggars, they must have their due,
Gadbury, Butler, ay and Roger too.
Amidst this Crowd, on a fit spot of Land,
To Crown the Work, let a large Gallows stand,
All trembling by, armed with their Guilt and Fears,
Kneel to this Image, and pour out their Prayers,
And after Dye by Suffocation.

London, Printed in the Year, 1688.


