HOMER in a Nutshell: OR, HIS WAR BETWEEN THE Frogs and the Mice,
Paraphrastically Translated. In Three CANTOS. By SAMVEL PARKER, Gent.

-- Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus.

Hor. de Art Poet. LONDON: Printed for Tho. Newborough, at the Golden Ball in
St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCC.

To Sir R. L.
SIR,
YOU know the Sacredness of Liberty and Property. Now all straggling Apologues
fall to you as Lord of the Manor, and the very Ghost of Aesop (no very
agreeable Appartion, you may imagine) of Poggius, Abstemius, and my own old blind
Author too for Company, durst I withold the Due, would every Night draw my
Curtains 'till You had Justice done You. Besides as Duty and real Interest are
ever inseparable, so particularly in the present Instance it is the Privilege of
Your humble Imitators that by doing You Fealty they challenge Your Protection,
the very end of Government, when at the same time too our Tribute's but a
Peppercorn-rent, make the best on it, and Your Subjects are more beholden to You
for accepting, than You to them for paying their Acknowledgments.

I have frequently wondered at the Confidence of Authors in expecting to be
gratified for their Dedications, and oftener at the Weakness of Patrons, that
they will vouchsafe 'em those dishonorable Encouragements. For first, it is Ten
to One but the great Man catches a Tartar, or provides for a Bantling that is
not worth a Clout: Or secondly, if he has reason to be proud of his Purchase,
all the Glory and Encomium of the Epistle smells abominably rank of Confederacy
and Bargain. Maecenas but spoils his own Market while he makes a liberal Art a
mercenary one; and when the Orator or the Poet is to draw his Picture beyond
the Life, he cannot be contented unless he set for it with a Cap and Bells
forsooth! of his own providing. In a Word, the Fee should rather accrue to the
Patron from the Scribler, and little enough at last too considering what a
Cause he is obliged to attend: Now my little harmless homely Ditty Petitions for
no more than barely the benefit of the two Capital Letters aforesaid. It applys
in forma Pauperis, and the Translator will magnify Your Charity both in his
Author's Name and in his own, if You Will keep his Calliope in countenance
gratis. Nay indeed the whole is but a Cur'sy to my Dancing Master, pardon the
levity of the Allusion. You were my Apollo, my Helicon, and my Muses; that
Ocean of true Wit and good Sense from which the Drill, as to all that is
tolerable in it, derives itself, and into which it as naturally returns,
'though at the expense of its Acrimony in the Circulation.

But hold! it is high time to enter upon the main Business of an Epistle
Dedicatory, the Patron's Apotheosis. And what now must I extol? Your Integrity,
Constancy and Courage? Alas! it is a long time ago since these passed for
recommendatory Qualities; nay of very dangerous Consequence might it prove to
us Both, at this time of Day, should I blurt out a Syllable in favor of 'em.
Your Letters then, your Judgment, your Wit, your Prudence? That were as much as
to say all the World did not already admire 'em, ever excepting my Brother C
--; and I verily believe too, even he, could the Man have as good an Opinion of
any Body as of himself, would entertain it of you.

How then shall I manage my Address? Assume the modish Figure called Apophasis
or Whispering aloud, and run you a long Division upon your several Excellencies
with a Not to mention 'em? Or shall I tell you that your Modesty being a
Nuisance to the rest of your Virtues, I had rather be wanting in my Duty to
Them, than most inhumanely torture That? Nauseous, vile, pedantick Forms! and
as prostituted Common-places as Panegyric itself! What remains therefore but
the liberty of making this brief, bare, and simple, yet candid Profession, that
I am,

Honored SIR, Most sincerely and most humbly Your Servant, as obliged, S.
Parker.

THE PREFACE.
Gentle Peruser!
IN the first place the Translator would have thee know he never pretended to
the Character of a Poet, and as he desires to 'scape the Scandal of the Name,
so he will not value himself the more for any good Success, or the less for any
Disappointment; seeing after all, in Things of this Nature, every Man will be
his own Critic, and the People of nice Rule and quaint Observation, betray the
vanity of their Maxims, while scarce a Couple in the whole Pack agree about the
suitableness of any one Ingredient, but that which is most incompatible with
the true Scope of the Art, the Recommendation and Encouragement of Immorality
and Irreligion: However, finding himself disposed now and then to try his
Skill, and observing the Canto-cut has of late carried the Day, he thought good
to bestow a few Hours upon the Translation of a Poem which, and very
deservedly, has been celebrated for many Ages; a Poem, which for neatness of
Wit, liveliness of Description and regularity of Conduct, equals any part of
the Iliads, perhaps excells any part of the Odysses.

And yet as just and regular as I found this Poem, I perceived it would never
jump in English with the Humor of the Age, till I had spoild it by some
unwarrantable Alterations, which being printed in a smaller Character, the
Reader may observe without the trouble of Comparing. The two most material of
'em are these; first, That whereas, according to my Author, the Frog seems not
out of a treacherous Principle to have served the Mouse as he did, I have made
him design the worst all along, very consonantly too, if I mistake not, to the
Character the Poet fixes afterward upon him, where he makes him vindicate
himself by that egregious Falsity, v. 146. (...), etc. And not injuriously
neither to the Series of the Story: Then again, that almost upon the same
Inducements I have made him improve or rather explain the Stratagem, by which,
in the Conclusion of that Speech, the Frog proposes to defeat the Mice. Beside
these many slighter Alterations will occur, and here and there an Addition of
my own, Printed also in a small Character.
but which I hope he can as readily forgive as discern.

For what relates to the Scope and Import of the Fable, I am not persuaded with
Aristobulus, that Homer composed it only for the Diversion and Exercise of
Schoolboys; the Design appears to have been more momentous, it carries a Face
of Instruction upon the Matter of Civil Government, and the Moral is plainly
Political. In the occasion of the War between the Frogs and the Mice, we see
with what miserable Consequences the generous Credulity of a Prince on one hand
abused by the Craftiness and Treachery of a Neighbor on the other, is like to
be attended. On the part of the Mouse, 'twas imprudent to repose so great
Confidence in a Politician of a distinct or rather opposite Interest and
Temper, though on the part of the Frog 'twas not only a bold Violation of Divine
and Humane Laws to play such a Game, but still more impolitick to stir up so
Potent an Adversary, and dare the Vengeance not of Heaven alone (for he seems
to have troubled his Head little enough about that) but withal of so many
well-disciplined resolute Cavaliers, of which Commotions the Issue will ever be
fatal to their Author, how much soever Things may succeed to his Wishes for a
Season. The great Distributer of Dues loves to defer his Inflictions as long as
his Justice will permit; but when that Period's once expired, he sends down
both Principal and Interest upon the Heads of the Incorrigible. I confess, the
Poet has not intimated so much; nay, has described Jupiter as a malicious Enemy
to the Mice. But then we must remember he had represented him before in a State
of Indifference, resolved with his Family not to interpose in behalf of this
Party or that, nor to concern himself otherwise than as an idle Spectator.
Indeed, the freedom the Poet took with his Gods, was, in respect of himself, an
unpardonable Presumption, and nothing ought to be built upon it, or inferred
from it. Again, the Consummation of the Fray gives us to understand, That
Superiority and Dominion are the most slippery Things in the World, and have
their Vicissitudes of Rising and Sinking as necessarily as two Buckets in a
Well. The Mice at first are too hard for the Frogs, and 'twas but Reason to
imagine 'em so 'till they had taken their just Revenge: But then the Crabs came
upon the Mice in the very Pride of their Victory, and by a course kind of
Argument, convinced 'em in their turn of the Instability of Human Affairs. Nay,
there is yet a further meaning in the Close of the Allegory; for 'though the
Frogs deserved ten times more than what they suffered from the Mice; yet we
know, the Mice hod been as little remarkable for strict Morals as the most
profligate Animals that ever moved upon all Four. The Temptation of a moldy
Crust could prevail with 'em at any time to break through all Obligations of
Religion and Honor. The Suggestions of their Appetites they made the Rule of
their Duty, and pretended a Privilege, under the Notion of Natural Freedom, to
plunder their Landlords and One another as often as they pleased: How then were
the Caitiffs rigorously dealt with? What reason had they to expect more favor
than the Frogs? In good earnest, I think they had too much showed 'em before;
and 'twas an Act of special Condescension in Jupiter to lay the Frogs at the
Mercy of the Mice, and not the Mice rather at the Mercy of the Frogs. And so
much by way of Interpretation.

If the Critics should be displeased at any Grammatical or Poetical Liberties
I have taken, they would highly oblige me. And the longer Bill the^ prefer, the
better: Though let 'em distort Words, mangle Periods, and misapply Aristotle,
Horace, and Bossu, till they are out of breath, I Will lay 'em a Wager at last
they cannot discover so many Faults in the Performance as their humble Servant.
I earnestly beg of 'em to honor me with a Hiss, and shall be most proud of
their Condemnation, well-knowing their Sentence is always to be construed, like
O -- ts's Depositions, backward. Ever since I caught some termagant Ones in a
Club, undervaluing our new Translation of Virgil, I Have known both what Opinion
I ought to harbor, and what use to make of 'em, and since the Opportunity of a
Digression so luckily presents it self, I shall make bold to ask the Gentlemen
their Sentiments of two or three Lines (to pass over a thousand other
Instances) which they may meet with in that Work. The fourth Aeneid says of
Dido, after certain Effects of her taking Shelter with Aeneas in the Cave
appear, Conjugium vocat, hoc praetexit nomine culpam.

v. 172.

Which Mr. Dryden renders thus, She called it Marriage, by that specious Name
To veil the Crime and sanctify the Shame.


Nor had he before less happlily rendered the 39th Verse of the second Aeneid,
Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus.
The giddy Vulgar, as their Fancies guide,
With noise say nothing, and in Parts divide.


If these are the Lines which they call Flat and Spiritless, I wish mine could
be Flat and Spiritless too! And therefore to make short work, I shall only beg
Mr. Dryden's leave to congratulate him upon his admirable Flatness and Dullness
in a Rapture of Poetical Indignation,

Then dares the I desire these Appellations may not seem to affect the Parties
concerned any otherwise than as to their Character of Critics.
poring Critic snarl? And dare
The I desire these Appellations may not seem to affect the Parties concerned
any otherwise than as to their Character of Critics.
puny Brats of Momus threaten War?
And cannot the proud perverse Arachne's Fate
Deter the I desire these Appellations may not seem to affect the Parties
concerned any otherwise than as to their Character of Critics.
Mungrils ever it prove too late?
In vain, alas! we warn the I desire these Appellations may not seem to affect
the Parties concerned any otherwise than as to their Character of Critics.
hardened Brood:
In vain expect they will ever come to good.
No: They Would conceive more Venom if they could.
But let each I desire these Appellations may not seem to affect the Parties
concerned any otherwise than as to their Character of Critics.
Viper at his Peril bite,
While you defy the most ingenious Spite.
So Parian Columns raised with costly care
I desire these Appellations may not seem to affect the Parties concerned any
otherwise than as to their Character of Critics.
Vile Snails and Worms may dawb, yet not impair,
While the tough Titles and obdurate Rhyme
Fateague the busy Grinders of old Time.
Not but your Maro justly may complain,
Since your Translation ends his ancient Reign,
And but by your officious Muse outvy'd,
That vast Immortal Name had never died.
But asking my Reader's Pardon for my Impertinences, I have now no more to add,
but desire him to fall to, and much good may't do him.

ERRATA.
PAge 9. line 15. for Wight read Wights, p. 11. l. 15. for were r. we, p. 17.
l. 8. for fix r. fixed, p. 17. l. 20. for wreathing r. wreaking, p. 18. l. 13.
for Boaster r. Bogster.

Homer in a Nutshell.
CANTO I.
WHEN now the murmuring Vaulters of the Mead
Had climbed to Power, and reared a mighty Breed:
Doomed by Latona for a brutish Crime
To Stygian Mud and pestilential Slime,
'Till Application, Stratagem, and Trade,
A Blessing of the Malediction made;
And what with strenuous Limbs, and slight of Art,
Tough Lungs, auspicious Leaps, and hollow Heart,
More Wealth, more Splendour, more Command acquired,
Than if the Boors had never been bemir'd.
When now the little, shaggy, liqu'rish Race
Of Animals that scud from Place to Place,
Or galloping through pliant Grass and Wheat,
Or gluttonously buried in their Meat,
Still trembling, jealous, malecontent, although
Thrice happy, would they let themselves be so;
Grown up to a populous and potent State
Had surfeited on Tides of luscious Fate,
Nor valued foreign Friends, nor foreign Hate,
A dire Campaign commenced: Less veh'ment far
The outrageous Flame of the Titanian War,
Then when the lofty Boys of sullen Ops
With Dragon Feet oppressed the Mountain-tops:
Rocks pil'd on Rocks, from ruinous Ascents
Crowding they stormed Heaven's Sapphir-Battlements,
While the warm Gods bright Vollies fast returned,
And with vindictive Flames the hissing Ether burned.
Desert, harmonious Nine, your sacred Hill*
A Work divine proceeds: Inspire my Quill,
Inspire as when my Verse ye formed of old:
Verse that in loud Heroic Numbers rolled:
Your Bard invokes, propitiously disclose
From what malignant Seeds the Feud arose.
Grim Puss, the squeaking Nation's watchful Bane
Pursued a Mouse, and almost had o'rta'n,
Yet missed the Racer, whose laborious Flight,
Full near as fatal as Grimalkin's Bite,
Enforced with Fears had Nature's Tone unstrung,
And to his droughthy Pallat glu'd his Tongue.
The next cool Plash he seeks, and soon arrives
Where plunging deep his Beard the Wight revives.
But scarce was drenched when from the unwholesome Flood
King Bogrill issued, and thus croak'd aloud.
Soho! My Friend in venerable Fur!
What are you, say, and whence, Platonic Sir?
Fictions and Quibbles will disgrace your Coat:
But if you hold in one consistent Note,
You're welcome to the Monarch of this Ditch,
A Monarch, though I say it, renowned and rich,
By King Crocracro, when his Love was hot,
Upon the Body of Queen Skip begot.
And not to flatter, in that Sylvan Face
Methinks I read a brave Majestic Grace,
If my nice Optics grossly don't deceive,
Or Laws of Phis'nomy we may believe.
-- My Life on it, bred to War, and nobly steeled,
Thy Looks, my Lad, proclaim thee of the Field.
To him Illustrious Nibble: For your Sense,
I say no more; but your Intelligence
Imperfect is, or none; else at first view
You must have seen both whence I am and who.
From Pypick and Queen Curdylip I spring,
Great Snapcrust's Daughter, and my self a King.
My Royal Mother, Sir, was brought a' Bed
In Grange magnificent, and there she bred
Her Child so well, never Mousling better fed.
Figs, mellow Figs my Breakfast every Morn,
At Noon Plum-pudding, and at Night young Corn.
So fared long since the plain Pypickian Court,
But now we Diet in a daintier sort.
Then, with Submission, what your Highness croaks,
Though kindly meant, appears a Paradox;
That you, a Frog, and I should correspond:
For how should Frogs of Inland Mice grow fond?
Or We converse with Sprawlers of the Pond?
A most absurd Alliance it is we wish,
You cannot live in Meal, nor I with Fish.
Man's Meat is mine, and of each sort the best,
Rich Soops, Ragous, and Hashes nicely dressed:
Your Marmalets, your candy'd Peels I love,
The Ladies and my Self are Hand and Glove.
Sated with Kickshaws I the Gentry quit,
To taste below, for change, a coarser Bit.
Cream-cheese, cold Capon, Ven'son-Pasty, Chine,
Just so the Gods themselves would like to Dine;
For let Romantic Fools chant what they please,
Ambrosia's even Poor Jack compared to these.
What skill in Arms and Courage I Have expressed,
The Foe that felt their Force can tell you best.
Mounting a Mole, soon as the Charge we hear,
I still the foremost of our Troops appear.
Death undismayed in twenty Forms I meet,
And by my bold Example still defeat
Our Army's Flight, and all the Invader's Heat.
Nor Butlers me nor Bumkins can surprise;
My Courage bears proportion to their Size.
Or if ^^y turgid Nerves should chance to fail,
My vengeful Politics, be sure, prevail.
Does Cook-maid spy me mumping a Recruit,
And with a Woman's Fury pers^cute?
No sooner bouncing Bridget snoars in bed,
And dreams of Dalliances with Coachman Ned,
But up creeps Tit-mouse, ventures at a bite,
Disturbs imagined Sweets, and so good Night.
O could I once from Kites and Cats be freed,
Vermin by Fate armed to destroy the Breed!
Could I from that cursed Fabric be secure,
Dragged into which by some enchanting Lure,
Ourselves precipitate the impending Snare,
And block up all Retreats but black Despair,
Confined above by stubborn Canopy,
Hew'n from the Trunk of the dread Thund'rer's Tree,
Champing in vain our Adamantine Grate,
As unrelenting as the force of Fate!
O! might I get these Grievances redrest,
No Polycrates could be half so blessed!
'Till then my want of Manners you will excuse,
If such kind Invitations I refuse.
You much oblige me, Sir: But I profess
I never loved Duckry nor your Water-cress.
He said: The marshy Monarch grinning wide,
To his departing Stranger thus replied,
Yet stay, my Godlike Guest --
Let me for once your Majesty convince,
These Realms yield Belly-timber for a Prince.
On Dainties of the Garden or the Brook
We glut, and Nature our unerring Cook.
With foreign Guegaws and domestic stored
I Will furnish out, believe me, such a Board,
As might transport, could but the Trick be tried,
Sardanapalus in a Mouses Hide.
Only be pleased (and make no more ado)
To board my Back instead of a Canow,
Securely so, my Lord, you will ferry o'r,
And at the Pallace-stairs be set a'shoar.
Advising thus the Prince exposed his Back,
And Russet rode as soon a-pick-a-pack.
He smirks, he cocks his Ears, and works his Tail,
O'rjoy'd to think how rarely he shall sail;
'Till his Canow plunged all into the Deep,
And then the banter'd Knight begun to weep.
In rage he plucks his Furs, robustly spurns
With quivering Haunches, while at Soul he burns.
He felt his Honor had received a Wound,
And wished but for the sight of solid Ground.
Much he resents his Fate, but more he fears:
Now with stiff Tail he rows, and now he steers.
Witness, Immortal Powers, he cried, and Thou --
And then the Diver duck'd his Cargo low.
Restored to kindly Draughts of upper Air
He thus proceeds, Great Jove once proud to bear
Thy trembling Mistress on thy goodly Chine
Through frothy Tumors of the dancing Brine,
Behold! -- But ever that Word his Lips escaped,
A painted Floater, formidably shaped
Traversed the curling Tide, a hungry Pest,
With Jaws Tartarian and erected Crest.
The yellow Knight near Danger apprehends,
And biting poor Pilgarlick's Fingers-ends,
Breaks his Embrace, and into Mud descends.
In vain the vigorous Chief deserted sprawls,
Beats the vexed Element, and pants, and calls.
Thrice through the Abyss unwillingly he sinks,
Emerges thrice, yet soon chill Death he drinks,
For now the soaky Hide too ponderous grew,
And boding thus he bid the Light adieu.
Yes, Traitor, thou shall feel, and that ever long,
How much the offended Gods resent my Wrong.
Jove sends his Bolts on thy devoted Head,
My self infernal Scorpions from the Dead.
O! had thou called me to the Lists, and there
Approved thy Skill -- But, Slave, thou did not dare.
Expect avenging Squadrons on thy Coast
To sacrifice thee to my longing Ghost.
He spoke: Then with a mighty Plunge expired,
And down to Styx his angry Shade retired.
CANTO II.
Fixed on the mossy Bank an Ozier Shed
O'rlook'd the Lake, long time inhabited
By Tallow-lick, a Mouse of Life obscure,
An humble Rustic, honest, old, and poor.
He from his Lattice first discerned a'float
The extended Hero, and in pitteous Note,
Much injured Prince, he screams, nor stands to dress,
But up to Court flies with the sad Express.
Revenge and Grief, ever scarce the Tale was heard,
In each wild Face Competitors appeared.
Full-proof against the Toyls and Storms of State,
The good old King now sunk beneath this Weight:
To soothing Comforts deaf the frentick Queen
Tears off her Ermin, skulks and wo'n't be seen.
The py-bald Nymphs his every Grace recall,
And much deplore the Youth's untimely Fall.
Scarce was the King's cold Paroxysm spent
Of Woe, when Rage supplanting Discontent,
Four Heralds he around the Palace sends
To cite his faithful Counselors and Friends.
Soon to the Board the cited Council run,
Where thus aloud the impatient King begun.
Sirs, it is a public Wound. Not I Am alone
Deprived of the Heir and Colleague of my Throne.
My Subjects too have lost a mighty stay:
I miss my Child, but their Defender They --
Cursed Fate of a declining Sire! To see
Of three brave Sons the sad Catastrophe!
My First by tabby Cannibal destroyed,
My Second into Wooden Death decoyed!
And now the hopefull'st of my Stem is found
By a false Monarch in his Marshes drowned.
To Arms, to Arms! The Occasion checks Delay:
Old as I am my self will lead the way.
Scarce the gray Sage had closed his trembling Lips,
When from the Clouds the God of Battle slips,
And with rich Arms the zealous Wight equips.
A Coat of Mail to cover Back and Side,
He plaited from a Snake's forsaken Hide.
Dry Pescods, whose green Embryos once had lined
Their Bellies, now around their Shanks they bind.
Flat Cockle-shells on Gravel-Walk new laid
Impenetrable, radiant Corslets made.
Nor sought the assiduous Band in vain for Shields,
A Brazier's Shop a thousand Save-alls yields.
A Foot of Wire each haughty Pikeman trails,
And at their Hips hang (four a Penny) Nails.
Helmets of Acorn-cups their Fronts protect,
With Tags of Silk and waving Plume bedeckt.
Appointed thus through Labyrinths of Grass,
The Warriors to their Expedition pass.
Mean while preventing Fame, of eager Flight
As Northern Blasts, pernicious as their Blight,
A sprouting Ill, on her own Vitals fed,
At first a Dwarf, in Cells and Grotto's bred,
But soon the yielding Clouds receive her Head;
With Noise, and Lies, and Obloquys never cloyed,
All Ears, all Eyes, all Tongue, and All employed,
Alarms the amphibious People of the Lake:
To Shore the terrified Musicians make.
Grave Magistrates in a long reverend Train
Hop to the shining Capitol a main,
The noisy Mob expecting all around
The event of Consultations so profound.
But ever the august Assembly deep had dived
Into the Meaning, from the Mice arrived
A valiant Herald, portly Mumblebun,
Magnanimous Lapcustard's eldest Son,
Who boldly thus the Senators addressed,
My Lords, my Master would have scorned t'infest
Your happy State; but not to prosecute
So foul a Fact would make him Party to it.
On him the Guilt of Murder must devolve,
Did he not now by Force of Arms resolve
You Prince to punish, who but yesternight,
Spite of all National and Private Right,
Betrayed and Drowned great Pypick's gallant Heir:
For War, for hideous War, ye Frogs, prepare.
He menacing withdrew, and rugged Notes
Result confusedly from their laboring Throats.
Against the Aggressor loud Complaints arise,
Who thus evades the Charge with specious Lies,
Witness, ye Powers, to whose especial Care
The Rights of Truth and Faith submitted are:
Blast me with exemplary Plagues, and shed
Contagions thick on this perfidious Head,
If Bogrill ever has instrumental been
To the young Prince's Harm, or ever has seen
Or heard of his Mishap! A-lack-a-day!
I warrant you the Lad was got to Play,
And marking how the Pool were crossed and crossed,
He must be padling too, and so was lost!
Shall I then smart if such an Oaf as This
Must have his Frolic, and succeeds amiss?
Hard Fate of Innocence! to bear the Blame
Of blackest Crimes, because too meek and tame!
Yet if your Lordships will my Counsel take,
The Foe shall feel, Wounded it can awake.
A Project I Have conceived, which if pursued
Infallibly roots out the dusky Brood.
Ranged in a File, on some commodious Rise,
We Will watch their Troops, and to the Bank entice:
Then when their Onset they with Fury make,
Wheel off, and let 'em rush into the Lake:
Or, should they halt in Rear, our Wings defiled
Charge 'em behind, and drown each Mother's Child.
So shall one wavy Tomb the Herd embrace,
And with rich Trophies we the Conquest grace.
He said; but mist of the proposed Event,
The conscious Fairies published his Intent.
And now the applauding Troglodytes adjourn
To seek what Armor best may serve the turn.
As round their little Alps I Have often 'spy'd
Industrious Insects Aliment provide;
Here in stretched Mouth up steep unequal Ways
A single Slave a single Seed conveys.
There sable Troops confederating draw
One Grain of Wheat, or half an Inch of Straw.
With frugal Fervency the Work they press,
And baffle bleak December's near Distress.
Thus each brave Myrmidon designing Greaves,
Round his Supporters fibrous Mallows weaves.
Light Corslets broken Shells of Eggs afford,
And a tough springy Bulrush many a Sword.
For Targets empty Cockle-shells they found:
Their Heads high Periwinkle-Turbants crowned.
Adorned, the buxom Champions take their Post,
A menacing, proud, formidable Host.
Observing Jove, by Maia's active Son
Summons the Gods: To Council Board they run,
Whence the pleased Thund'rer shows the comic Scene
Of the new War, and what the Rivals mean,
The Conduct of the Generals, and their Strength,
The Invention of their Lances, and their length,
And how the strutting Bands with Pride advanced,
As towered the Foe the restiff Centaurs pranc'd.
Then jocundly inquired --
Say to which Interest, Gods, you are most inclined,
Bogrill's or Pypick's: Freely tell your Mind.
Minerva, what say thou, my Wench, speak out --
Ha! which do like, my Girl? -- The Mice, no doubt,
The witty, wanton Mice --
With Aristippick Zeal and sly Design
Frisking and bustling round thy Silver Shrine,
'Till Victims broil and unctuous Odours mount;
Their Vigilance then turns to good Account.
No, my dread Sire, replied the martial Maid,
That sacrilegious Crew I Will never aid.
Profane Poultrons! that all my Garlands spoil,
Steal to my Lamps, and lap away my Oil.
What strange, malicious Tricks, each Hour they play
'Twere tedious to relate. But the other Day
Upon my Tissue-Vest by Hands divine
Embroidered, did the hungry Caitiffs dine.
The Mercer (for my Priest had tick'd for Silk)
Duns as he were to break, and smells a Bilk.
Nor shall my Succor to the Frogs be lent,
The filthy Spawn of Nature's Excrement,
A loud, unfashion'd Species: Nay (t'evince
How just my Accusation) four Days since
Spent with the Trade of War, and in pursuit
Of gentle Morpheus for a kind recruit,
I laid me down upon an Oozy-bed,
When presently came droaning round my Head
Ten thousand Skip-jacks, and 'till Night's dull shade
Gave place to Day, renewed their Serenade.
The silent Power, obnoxious to Surprise,
Abhorred the Din, and fled my wishing Eyes.
Impartialy let us all the Event attend,
And neither Faction worry or befriend.
There Is Danger in the Engagement, for who knows
But should the 'Squires once come to Handy-Blows,
Rough Mars again might from a mortal Arm
Receive a pungent, rude, opprobrious Harm,
And Cytherea's Hand forfeit another Charm?
Supinely rather and unmoved survey
The various Feats and Fortune of the Day.
Thus She: The merry Powers the Advice approve,
And all to advantageous Posts remove.
CANTO III.
FOrth from each Camp two stalking Heralds came,
The near approach of Battle to proclaim.
Behind shrill Hornets, musical and large,
Tumultuous Clangors mingling sound the Charge:
While Saturn's Son their Arms to dignify
Rowls ominous Thunder through the rattling Sky.
First fell gigantick Crambeef in the Van,
A daring Chief, his length near half a Span,
Struck by a Lance from Gabberillo sent;
It pierced his Paunch and through the Liver went.
The Champion's Fall resounding Earth bespeaks,
And clotted Dust deforms his groveling Cheeks.
Rough Skulk a Javelin next at Bungy threw,
Hissing it passed, and through his Corslet flew:
Down, down he sinks; his eager Heart transfixed
Spews out sweet Life with purple Oceans mixed.
At old Lapcustard Grub a Shaft let fly,
Which glancing through his Temples reached his Eye:
An easy Conquest instant Fate obtained,
And closed the Luminary that remained.
At bulky Groggle fierce Bisketto cast
A Spear, which singing int' his Garbage past.
He grunts not long nor welters in his Gore,
Ever his grieved Soul finds out the new-made Door.
No sooner Bogrill had the Loss beheld,
But black Revenge his angry Bosom swelled.
Collecting all his Force, and straining often
The Monarch brandished with his Arms aloft
A wild, unhandy, ragged Peble-stone,
Which crushing Sculk athwart the Shoulder Bone,
Scarce left him a Reprieve to fetch a Groan.
His Son black Carrotscoop at Bogrill's Groin
Enraged took aim, nor mist of his Design.
No sooner the Disaster Wamble knew,
But to the Water parrying he withdrew,
While Carrotscroop pressed on, 'till Wamble reels
Into the Ditch, and pulls him in by the Heels.
Immerst their Blows the hardy Champions ply,
And Stripes of Crimson the Maeotis dye,
'Till trussed along the Margin of the Flood
Lay Wamble, and the Mousling in the Mud.
So when young Spaniel sent by clamorous Boys
A rough Athenian Fowl in Pond annoys,
The Philosophic Bird with Beak and Claw
Returns his keen Salutes of Tooth and Paw.
Now yelping Pups prevails, now hooting Madge,
And Plumes and curling Locks bestrow the liquid Stage.
Poppin at further distance from the Brook,
Assailed sage Butterbeard and Prisoner took.
Sleek Gobbletart engaged stout Specklebum,
But Speckle left his Shield and off he swum.
Morasse discharged a Slat, and with the stroke
Mump's Neck most diomedicaly broke.
From both his Nostrils mucous Brain distilled,
And blended with black Gore enriched the barren Field.
Wallow from Tallowlick received a Wound,
The Pike o'rturning fix him to the Ground.
On Egdrain then disturbed Treadwavio flew,
Tripp'd up his Heels, and into Puddle drew,
There by main Strength he held the Pilf'rer down,
Insulting thus, Drown, ravenous Monster, drown:
Since you're so good at sucking, call me Fool
If I don't give you now your Belly-full,
And dows'd him headlong down to Phlegeton.
But Pypick, now his dearest Friends were gone,
Driven by Revenge and rash Despair along,
As when Convulsions make a Patient strong,
Up to majestic Ambergillo made,
In the proud Croaker sheathed his wreathing Blade,
And forced him through the Infernal Mote to wade.
Soon as Codrillo the Disaster 'spy'd,
Grasping soft Clay and something soft beside,
The mellow Shot on Pypick he conferred,
Bung'd up his Eyes, and damnify'd his Beard.
Transported by fresh Injuries the King
Grop'd out a Stone, and with a veh'ment Spring
Against Codrillo sent, a rocky Stone,
Fit for a Pigmy-Leader to have thrown.
Codrillo's Ankles felt the batt'ring Mass,
And groaning hoarse he dropped into the Grass.
Duke Dabble brook'd not this unnat'ral Deed,
But fiercely brandishing his pointed Reed,
Inch-deep into the Cawl his Highness struck,
And with the Lance drew out Imperial Pluck.
Grave Brewis on a verdant Ridge reclined
To sooth his Wounds, felt greater in his Mind.
The mangled Monarch much his Sight offends,
And rather than be butchered like his Friends,
Into the Dike he cheerfully descends.
Old Snapcrust, as gay Bogrill vaunting stood,
Wounded his Foot: The Boaster saw the Blood,
Perceived the Smart, and took in have the Flood.
Snapcrust precipitantly to pursue
The unfinished Work of Death even stepped in too.
Stern Didap, when he saw the King distressed,
Through the wild Tumult of the Battle pressed,
And tossed his taper Weapon, though in vain;
The sounding Target sent it back again.
But none of the Pypickians might compare
For Backsword or Sasa with Scamblefare,
Undaunted Scamblefare the dear Delight
Of surly Mars, and Son to Gristlebite.
Boasting he stemmed the War's impetuous Tide,
Prevailing more than all the Mice beside.
On the raised Bank he struts: Thence threatening loud
Portends Excision to the croaking Crowd:
And had much more than menaced (for his Word
Was never too big or little for his Sword)
But Heaven's grand Sovereign saw the coming Stroke,
And melting into Pity Silence broke,
With solemn Nod: See there, ye Gods, see there
The attempts of bloody-minded Scamblefare!
Minerva -- Mars -- stoop with a rapid Flight,
And drive the fell Insulter from the Fight!
Thus Jove: To whom the God of Arms, Not I,
Nor She, nor all our Peers throughout the Sky
Can aid the Frogs: However we may try.
If our Joint-Pow'rs the Mischief cannot remove,
Still our Benignity we shall approve --
Or what if downward you a Bolt should dart,
A sputt'ring Bolt forged with laborious Art?
Such as on Phlaegra's execrable Plain
Besieged your vexed Divinity did rain,
When the tall Brood which Earth's damp Cayerns bore,
You riveted to Mountains whence their Arms they tore.
He said. The Son of Saturn rising hurled
A Lemnian Shaft, and stunned the upper World.
Down from the rocking Orbs the Tempest came,
Ushered by Preludes of diffusive Flame.
At first both Armies fear: Yet this Device
Affrights not from Hostilities the Mice,
The Froggish Name to extinguish boldly bent,
But squeamish Jove averse to their Intent,
Puissant Succors to the Buff-coats lent.
Deformed, ungainly, awkward, sideling Sholes,
Testaceous Tenants of the slimy Holes,
Waving four slender Feet on either side,
With jetty Claws and rocky Shoulders wide:
Their Backs in form of Snushbox-covers made,
And on their Chests Ebony Eyes inlaid,
Hight Crabs, whose worse than Cornish Gripes alarm
The Mice, and bite away Leg, Tail, and Arm.
Soon cooled this grisly Pest their active Heat,
And in Disorder forced 'em to retreat.
Thus that Campaign which with the Day begun,
Closed at the late Immersion of the Sun.
Advertisement.
SIx Philosophical Essays upon several Subjects, viz. Concerning 1. Dr.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth. 2. Wit and Beauty. 3. A Public Spirit. 4. The
We^ther. 5. The Certainty of Things, and the Existence of a Deity. 6. The
Cartesian Idea of God. By Samuel Parker, Gent. of Trinity-College in Oxford.
Printed for Tho. Newborough, at the Golden Ball in St. Paul's Churchyard.


