I The Time when the FIRST SABBATH was Ordained.

1 Negatively, Not in the Time of Adams Innocence, as many say it was.

2 Affirmatively, It was Ordained after the Time of Adams Fall and Re-creation.

II The Manner how the First Sabbath was Ordained.

1 By blessing the Seventh Day with many Spiritual Ordinances, both for public
and private use.

2 By Sanctifying that Day for the Exercise of the said Ordinances.

3 By Sanctifying the outward Rest of that Day, to be a Typical Sign both of
Gods Resting, and of man's Resting in the Seed of the Woman, that was promised
to break the Devils Head-plot, namely, by his Propitiatory Sacrifice.

And hence it follows,

1 That as the Sabbath was Ordained to be a Typical sign, so it must be
abolished, as soon as Christ had performed his said Propitiatory Sacrifice.

2 As it was Ordained to be the Sanctified Time, for the Exercise of the said
blessed Ordinances; so the next day of the week, into which it was changed,
must continue without intermission to the end of the world.

PART II.

III A Treatise of HOLY TIME, concerning the true limits of the Lords Day, when
it begins, and when it ends, is hereunto annexed.

By WILLIAM PYNCHON Esquire.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. and are to be sold by T. N. at the three Lions in
Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange, 1654.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THis Industrious and Judicious Author, does here present thee with two
distinct Tractates concerning the Christian Sabbath, or Lords Day: In the
former, the Divine Institution of it is clearly proved; In the latter, the time
of its beginning is particularly determined. In the former, the erroneous
conscience, which denies the morality of the fourth Commandment, is strongly
convinced: In the latter, the scrupulous conscience, which doubts of the time
when the Sabbath begins, is fully satisfied.

In both, the serious Reader will find great profit and delight; The whole
Discourse being illaborate and perspicuous, wherein besides the main points
intended in it, diverse other matters of important Cognizance are occasionally
decided, and discussed, and many obscure Scriptures are excellently explained
according to the genuine sense thereof.

And this learned Discourse has its birth in a very seasonable time, in
respect of that woeful defection and Apostasy that is among us, as from the
truth and ways of God in general, so in a special manner from the Religious
esteem and observation of the Lords day.

For never since the light of the blessed and glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ
shined upon this our Goshen, was the Sabbath Day so wickedly neglected and
profaned by the generality of people, and the Divine Institution thereof so
shamefully denied, and decried by many pretenders to Religion, as it is at this
day.

And therefore (Good Reader) we heartily commend this necessary and useful
work to thy diligent perusal, and thy self, and thy humble and sincere
inquiries after Truth, unto the guidance and blessing of the God of all Truth.

Tho. Clendon. Elidad Blackwel. Joh. Sheffield. Tho. Stevens, Minister of
Peter's in the Isle of Thanet.


To the Reader.
IF our Testimony be of any weight with the Judicious Reader, and may
contribute any thing to encourage his perusal of this Book, we have to signify
upon that acquaintance we have had with it, that we judge it very worthy the
publishing and perusing: both for that in the former part it does strenuously
plead for the morality of the Sabbath; and in the latter part gives occasion to
learned Brethren of a contrary apprehension to consider whether they have not
reason to captivate their judgments to the Authors, as touching the beginning
and ending of the Sabbath.

Samuel Slater. Tho. Walley.


A Table of the chief Heads.
CHAP. I.
PRoving by five Reasons, That Adam fell on the day of his Creation. Reason 1.
Because Moses joyneth man's Creation, Trial, Judgment, and Promise, to the same
day Page 1 R. 2. Because he fell at the very first instant that ever he eat any
thing p. 5 R 3. Because Adam being created after God in wisdom, would not in
wisdom have omitted to have eaten of the Tree of Life in the very day of his
creation, if the Devil had not first circumvented him by the unseen subtilty of
his Temptation p. 6 R. 4. Because the Devil had not deserved the name of a
subtle Serpent if he had left Adam at liberty to eat of the Tree of life but
one whole day together p. 8 R. 5. Because the Woman fell while she was a Virgin
p. 21 The time of the Fall of the Angels (now called the Devil) was when they
were commanded to attend upon Adam and Eve, at their first entrance into
Paradise p. 10 The true nature of the first Covenant stood in obedience, or
disobedience, not to a moral, but to a positive command p. 12 The Devil knew
the operation of the forbidden fruit better than Adam and Eve could do as long
as they stood in their unconfirmed Innocence p. 15

CHAP. II.
Proving by three Reasons that Adam was Re-created in the same day in which he
was created and fell p. 23 Reason 1. From the order of Gods dealing with him
immediately after his Fall p. 23 R. 2. From the new name Hevah, Life, which he
gave to his wife p. 26 R. 3. From the word Enmity which God put into her as a
holy qualification against the Serpent that had deceived her p. 28 The cool of
the day in Genesis 3. when God came to examine Adam, was about Midday p. 23

CHAP. III.
Proving, by a double Inference, that Adam and Eve were Re-created before the
seventh day p. 30 1 Drawn from the word Host and Finished, in Genesis 2. 1. p. 34
For if all the Host of Heaven and Earth were finished before the seventh day,
then it follows that Adam and Eve were Re-created before the seventh day p. 34
2 Drawn from the word Had made, in Genesis 2. 2. p. 35 For if God had made
something in the sixth day that needed a new finishing act before the seventh
day, as the Text speaks, then what can that finishing act else be but Adams
Re-creation by the Promised Seed? p. 35 Adam in his Innocence could not so well
honor all his Creators as after his Fall and Re-creation p. 37 The Mystical,
as well as the Natural Creation was made and finished before the seventh day,
and therefore Adam and Eve were Re-created before the seventh day p. 39 The
Creation of the Humane Nature of Christ, was the perfection of the whole
Creation, in the latter part of the sixth day p. 39. 46

CHAP. IV.
God could not be said to keep a perfect Rest on the seventh day, until he had
put out sundry opperations of his Eternal Providence for the finishing or
perfecting of that work which he had made but mutably perfect in the forepart
of the sixth day p. 42

CHAP. V.
This term [which he had made] in Genesis 2. 2. has relation to the Creation of
the Mediator, in two particulars. 1 In regard of his office, God created him to
be a Mediatorial Priest before he could keep a perfect rest on the seventh day
p. 46 2 In regard of his Humane Nature, he was virtually made flesh of the Seed
of the Woman before God could keep a perfect Rest on the seventh day p. 46, 39

CHAP. VI.
Proving, that the whole World was made for the honor of the Mediator, as the
right Heir of it all p. 50 And hence it follows. 1 That God could not keep a
perfect Rest on the seventh day, until he had put the Mediator as the right
Heir of all into his possession. 2 Hence it follows, that Adam must fall, and
be Re-created also on the day of his Creation, before the Lord could keep a
perfect Rest on the seventh day. p. 50

CHAP. VII.
Proving, that Gods Rest on the seventh day was such a perfect Rest, that
nothing could happen afterward that could any whit lessen, or d^sturb the
perfection of his Rest on the seventh day, as it would have happened, if God
had kept a Sabbath of Rest whiles Adam stood in a mutable condition p. 54

CHAP. VIII.
That the true nature of Gods Rest on the seventh day was his sweet content in
the Mediator p. 55, 56 All the Trinity rested, and were refreshed on the
seventh day, because they had perfected man's happiness by a Re-creation p. 57

CHAP. IX.
Proving, that God blessed the first seventh day with many sorts of spiritual
Ordinances, such as were apt to convey spiritual and eternal blessedness to
fallen man p. 59 God would never have blessed the seventh day with spiritual
Ordinances, if the Mediator had not been declared to fallen man before the
seventh day p. 60 God did not leave Adam and Eve to spend the first seventh day
in private speculations, but he blessed the first seventh day with variety of
Ordinances, both for public and private use, for their best spiritual good p.
60 God commanded Adam to preach every seventh day, either upon his miserable
Fall, or else upon the riches of Gods grace for his recovery by the Promised
Seed p. 62 God commanded Adam to join the duty of Prayer to the duty of
Preaching p. 63 Jesus Christ taught Adam by the Sacrifice of a Lamb, how he
should be the Lamb of God to take away the sin of the world p. 65 Two persons,
where no more can be had, may be called a true Church of Christ, and may
exercise Gods Ordinances after a public manner p. 68 The dis-regarding of the
Sabbath, and the Ordinances thereof is the high way to all Profaneness and
Apostasy p. 70 Private duties are commanded on the Sabbath days, as necessary
Handmaids to the public p. 72

CHAP. X.
Showing after what manner God did sanctify the first seventh day p. 73 1 By
ordaining it to be the separated time of his public and private worship. 2 By
ordaining it to be as a sanctified sign of his Rest, and of man's resting on the
Seed of the Woman for the breaking of the Devils Head-plot, by the work of his
Redemption and Reconciliation p 73 When ever God did sanctify any thing for
man's use, he did by that act command man to separate that thing to the Lords
use p. 74 When God did sanctify the first seventh day, he did thereby command
Adam to prepare himself for the better sanctifying of the said seventh day p.
75

CHAP. XI.
Showing that God did sanctify the outward Rest of the seventh day to be a
typical sign both of his own Rest, and of man's Resting on the Seed of the
Woman, for the breaking of the Devils Head-plot for man's Redemption p 78 Our
Redemption from Satan's Head-plot was the finishing act of the whole Creation;
and therefore it was the true reason of Gods Rest, and of his commanding Adam
to rest on the first seventh day p. 82

CHAP. XII.
Showing that God did make the first seventh day famous by honoring the number
Seven ever after with famous respects p. 85 1 By contriving the Typical
Ceremonies of our Redemption very often into the number of Seven, doubtless in
an honorable memorial of the first famous seventh day p. 86 2 By marking out
diverse rare and eminent holy persons by the number Seven p. 89 3 By contriving
several parcels of the Scripture Chronology into the number Seven, doubtless
in an honorable remembrance of the first famous seventh day p. 93

CHAP. XIII.
Proving, That though Christ has abolished the Seventh Day by his death, yet
he has not left the day of his public worship Arbitrary to particular
Churches, to appoint what day they please in the place of the seventh day, as
some unadvised Protestants do affirm, p. 94 And that Christ Jesus has made
three main changes in the ten Commandments, p. 99

CHAP. XIV.
Proving by several other particular grounds that Christ himself did appoint
the day of his Resurrection for the exercise of his public worship in the
place of the seventh day, p. 101 Things Remarkable. ^ Touching the number
eight, three things are remarkable, p. 113 2 That four Sabbaths did meet
together, and succeed each other at the Death and Resurrection of Christ, ibid.
3 The Resurrection of Christ was made famous by three remarkable days, p. 114

CHAP. XV.
Propounding some reasons why the Apostles did allow of the Jewish-Sabbath, or
seventh day in their Synagogues for a time after it was abolished by the Death
of Christ, as well as of the Lords day in Christian Churches, p. 116 The
opposition which some believing Jews made in Christian Churches for their not
observing the Jewish Sabbath, does fully prove that the Christian Churches had
cast off the Jewish Sabbath, and that they observed the Lords Day in the place
of it, p. 118

CHAP. XVI.
Being an Answer to several Questions. Q. 1. Whether Christians under the
Gospel are bound to observe the Lords Day as strictly from all work, and as
holily in the practice of all duties of Religion as the Jews were to observe
the Sabbath day? p. 129 Hence this Question is moved, Whether it be lawful to
begin to solemnize a Marriage upon the Sabbath? Answered no. p. 130 Q 2. Might
not the Jews kindle a fire on the Sabbath day to dress necessary food?
Answered Yes. p. ibid. Q. 3. To the same purpose; Answered p. 132 Q. 4. To the
same purpose; Answered p. 134 Q. 5. Are Christians bound to rest as strictly
from all Works, and Re-creations on the Lords day, as the Jews were on the
Sabbath day? Answered, Yes. p. 135 Q. 6. Were Re-creations on the Sabbath day
punished by the Magistrates among the Jews with the same kind of punishments
that working on the Sabbath was? Answered No. They used differing kind of
punishments p. 136 Also that Magistrates are bound to punish the profanation
of any part of the Lords day (whether it be by work, or re-creation) either by
scourging, or else by some Mulct that is equivalent p. 137 Q 7. Did not the
Jews hold it lawful to do works of mercy, or of present necessity upon the
Sabbath day? Answered, Yes p. 139

A TABLE OF Some Scriptures that are Explaned or Illustrated in this first
Treatise.
Genesis.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 26 37 1 28 36 2 1 30, 34 2 2 30 2 3 59 2 8 10 2 9 3, 7 2
17 14, 16, 17 2 19 10 2 23 26 2 25 14 3 1 5, 13 3 2 5 3 7 14 3 8 23 3 9 23 3 11
25 3 12 25 3 13 25 3 15 25, 35, 39, 50, 62 3 17 14 3 20 27 3 22 7 4 23, 24 90 4
26 69 5 24 90 6 6 56 8 20 67 10 21 91 10 25 91 22 4 115 22 6 92 32 24 47 49 6
69 Exodus.
16 5 130 16 23 77, 148, 134 16 27, 28 77 19 10 76 20 2 83 20 8 60, 77 20 11
31, 82 22 2 139 22 30 110 23 10, 11, 12 81 24 8 83 29 30 86 31 13 84, 124, 132
31 14, 15 84, 124, 133 31 17 31, 56, 80, 84, 32 25 25 34 21 138 35 3 130, 132
Leviticus.
4 6 86 8 11 86 8 33 86, 112 15 13, 14 112 16 14 87 22 27 110 23 3 126, 63,
130, 141 23 15, 16 104 25 4 93, 113 Numbers.
6 24, 27 71 8 17 74 10 10 125 11 8 134 D^u^eronomy.
5 14, 15 82, 83 17 6 31 ^5 9 31 32 4 41 1 Chronicles.
24 13 40 2 Chronicles.
2 4 125 30 22, 23 88 Neh.
8 18 112 Job.
22 15 90 42 8 67, 87 Psalms.
8 6 44 24 1 36 24 10 36, 44 49 12, 20 20 104 30, 31 56 110 3 36, 109 118 24
109 Proverbs.
28 13 68 30 1 49 30 18, 19 49 Esaias.
7 14 48, 49 53 10 92 56 4, 6 109 65 18 48 66 23 109 Jeremy.
6 4 76 31 22 47 Ezekiel.
34 26 76 46 4, 5 109 Daniel.
8 14 35 9 26, 27 98 Joel.
2 15 75 Amos.
5 21 112 8 5 138 Malachy.
1 11 100 Matthew.
4 2 6 11 29 81 12 5, 6 131 12 40 93 16 18 41 17 1 103 24 20 126 Mark.
2 27 60, 124 Luke.
1 69, 70 68 4 18, 19 28, 81, 114 9 28 103 13 32 93, 115 14 1 130 24 49 104
John.
1 3 40 5 22, 23, 27 52 6 53 47 7 22 111 7 37 112 8 44 19 10 22 124 19 19, 31
114, 158 19 20, 26 129 20 19 101 20 21 103 20 26 102, 103, 110 Acts.
1 12 141 2 1 102 3 21 68 6 14 98, 129 7 15 98 7 47 98 7 55 98 10 28 120 15 5,
24 116, 120 15 21 122 16 3 117, 120 17 4 118 18 17 118 19 9 118 20 7 117 21 20
116 120 21 21, 28 120 21 24 117 24 5 120 28 22 121 Romans.
3 23 16 5 13 52 15 25, 26 107 1 Corinthians.
9 20 120 11 23 107 16 1, 2 105 2 Corinthians.
9 2 106 11 1, 2 22 Galatians.
2 3, 4 120 2 5 120 4 9, 10, 11 121 Ephesians.
2 10 40, 42 Colossians.
1 15 40, 44 2 14 26 2 15 26 2 16, 17 123 2 18, 20 123 Hebrews.
1 3 36 1 6 50 2 10 44 2 14 20, 21 4 4 31 4 10 93 4 3, 9, 10 80, 81 5 5 46 7 12
99 8 13 122 9 10 99 9 14 65 9 19, 21 74 10 10, 12, 14 87 11 5 90 11 19 92, 114
12 23 112 James.
1 1 120 2 21 115 1 Peter.
4 19 41 2 Peter.
2 5 90 3 13 40 Jude 14, 15 90 Revelation.
3 12 27 3 14 44 5 11, 12, 13 45, 52 11 3 68

Errata in the first part of this Treatise.
Page 15. Line 32. presented, read pretended. 17. 36. (it self) blot out, and
read the light is subtracted. 19. 12. for the manner r. for the want of this
knowledge. 22. 22. so many r. so Mary. 51. 15. of, r. [for] man's Redemption.
53. 13. instating, r. installing him. 59. 13. The word And is to be blotted out
as superfluous.

THE PREFACE.
MAny do affirm that the Sabbath was ordained in the time of Adams Innocence:
But I shall endeavor to prove that it was not ordained till after Adams Fall
and Recovery.

And this I shall endeavor to make evident by proving these two points

I That Adam disobeyed and fell in the same sixth day in which he was created
and made.

II That God did recover Adam by a new creation, even in the same sixth day in
which he was created, and fell.

CHAP. I.
Proving, by five Reasons, that Adam Fell in the day of his Creation.

Reason 1.
MOses does manifestly declare that Adam fell in the day of his Creation,
because he joyneth Because Moses joyneth Adams creation, trial, judgment, and
promise, to the same day.
the story of his Temptation and Fall in Chapter 3. close to his Creation, and
seating in Paradise, in Chapter 2. without mentioning of any other matter to
come between.

Object. Here it may be objected, that Moses does first set down the story of
Adams creation, in Genesis 1. and then he does set down the Institution of the
Sabbath in the beginning of Genesis 2. 2, 3. which is in order of time before the
story of Adams Temptation and Fall, in Chap. 3.

Answ. Though Moses does place the Institution of the Sabbath, in Genesis 2. 2 3.
before the story of Adams fall; yet it is evident that he does place it there
only by the figure Hysteron Proteron (not because he had done with the story
of the Sixth day in the first Chapter, but because that story being large) he
would first in a brief sort lay down the story of all the seven days of the
week together, which he does from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the
third verse of the second Chapter, and then he returns again to speak of the
story of the sixth day more at large, and makes a larger Narration of the
Creation, and Fall of Adam, from the seventh verse of the second Chapter, to
the end of the third Chapter, with variety of inlargements more than was in the
first Chapter; for repetitions have usually many new additions; and so in true
Chronology, and in the order of story, the Institution of the Sabbath in Genesis
2. 2, 3. must be placed at the end of Genesis 3. as I have after discussed the
matter in that Text.

And the method of Moses in this large story of the sixth day, is very
observable, and lies thus.

1 He shows the Matter and Form of Adams Creation, in Chap. 2. verse. 7. but
this he had omitted in Chap. 1.

2 He shows Adams Lordship over the creatures, for God commanded all the
beasts of the field, and all the fowls of the air, to present themselves before
Adam as their Lord, that he might name them with names difining their nature,
and that they might wait upon him as their Lord and Master into Paradise, verse*
19, 20. but in a part of his Lordship he was restrained, because God did
prohibit him the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

3 He shows the matter and manner of the Woman's creation, of Adams Rib, verse.
18. which he had omitted in Chap. 1. and it is placed in Chap. 2. verse. 18. by
the figure Hysteron Proteron, because there was not to be found among all the
other creatures that were brought before Adam, a meet helper for Adam, verse.
20. she was the last sort of all the visible creatures of this world.

4 God brings the woman to the man, and joins them together in Marriage, as a
meet helper for him, verse. 22. This was omitted in Chap. 1.

5 He shows that the place of their creation was without the borders of
Paradise, verse. 8. 15. compared with Chap. 3. 23.

6 He describes the situation of that pleasant Garden of Paradise, which God
made for the place of their habitation, as an addition to their happy condition
by creation, verse. 8. etc. but this is to be marked, that Moses does by the
figure Hysteron Proteron, place their abode in Paradise, verse. 8. etc. before
the creation of the woman; which figure he uses very often in this Chapter,
and in the third Chapter.

7 He shows the special use of two Trees above the rest, by special names,
verse. 9.

8 He shows that God gave Adam and Eve a twofold command concerning these two
Trees: The first was a positive command, saying unto them in the singular
number (because of their Mariage-union) Of every Tree of the Garden thou may
eat, but of that Tree which does most concern the good of thy present condition
(I have named the Tree of life) therefore in the first place eat of the Tree of
life, and thou shall live for ever, for by the name of it, God did not only
show the use of it, but also he showed them their duty concerning it, verse 9.
compared with Chapter 3. 22. Secondly, By way of prohibition and commination,
God commanded them saying, Eat not of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil,
for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye the death, Genesis 2. 17.

9 Unto all these particulars in this order connexed together, Moses does
immediately proceed to speak of Adams temptation by the Serpent, Genesis 3. 1. and
of his Fall, Genesis 3 6. And thus after this sort, Moses does adjoyn Adams fall
fast to his Creation, and seating in Paradise, without making mention of any
other matter that came between.

This Reason is further strengthened by the consent of sundry good Authors both
ancient and latter.

Calvin says in Genesis 3. 6. It may be gathered by the Narration of Moses, That
Adam and Eve did not long keep their Dignity which they had received, for as
soon as he had but said they were made, making no mention of any other matter,
he passes to show the Fall.

Mr. Ainsworth also observes in Genesis 3. 1. That man's fall and misery is
immediately joined to his creation, and seating in Paradise.

Mr. Broughton also observes (in his Sinai-sight Tab. 1.) That Moses joyneth
man's Creation, Trial, Judgment, and Promise, to the same day before the woman
was called Eve.

M. Broughton also in his showing of corruptions in Religion p. 85. says, The
first day, in which Adam was made, he disobeyed, as all may see by the
continued narration for Eve, and for the Serpents Speech, and Temptation, and
Judgment for Curse upon all the Earth.

The Hebrew Doctors also do generally hold that Adam fell on the day of his
creation; Mr. Broughton says, in Consent of Scripture, that he never heard of
any one of them that was of a contrary judgment, and Mr. Ainsworth says in
Genesis 3. that the Hebrew Doctors hold that nothing (in that Chapter) was done
after the sixth day of Creation* and says Maymony, All our wise men do agree,
that this whole matter (in Genesis 3.) was done in the sixth day.

Rabbi Nathan does make the story of the sixth day remarkable, by joining many
things to the story of that day in sundry Rhetorical expressions, saying thus,
The same day that Adam was formed, the same day that he was created, the same
day that his fashion was fashioned, the same day that his mould was made, the
same day that his members were knit, the same day that his veins were opened,
the same day that life was put into him, the same day that he stood first upon
his feet, the same day that Eve was married to him, the same day that he gave
names, the same day that he entered into Paradise, the same day that God gave
him the Commandment, the same day he disobeyed, the same day he was driven out
of Paradise.

Perkins on the Creed, touching the time of Adams Fall, says, The received
opinion in former ages has been, that our first Parents fell the same day in
which they were created, and therefore Augustine writes, That they stood but
six hours; and though we cannot determine the certain time, yet in all
likelihood (says he) it was very short, for after that Moses had set down the
creation of man, he presently without the interposition of any thing else,
comes immediately to the fall.

Irenaeus Con^ra Haere. Lib. 1. speaking of the day of Adams Creation and Fall,
says, It is evident, that the Lord obeying his Father, suffered death in that
day wherein Adam being disobedient unto God dyed; for on the sixth day, the day
before the Sabbatb, was his Passion, which was the sixth day of the Creation of
the world when man was formed.

Chrysostom on Matthew. says, That Adam and Eve in the sixth day of the first
week, which was the very same day of their creation, were cast out of Paradise.

Diverse other Divines both Greeks and Latins are concurrent in the same
opinion, many of which are also cited by Mr. Broughton in his Consent of
Scripture, where he cites this as a common saying among them, That in one day
Adam was formed, and deformed.

And so consequently from this Reason it follows, that the Sabbath was not
instituted in the time of Adams Innocence, but after his Fall.

Reason 2.
Adam fell the very first time that ever he eat any thing, and therefore he
fell on the day of his creation; for in reason he Adam fell in the day of his
creation, because he fell the very first time of his eating.
would not abstain from eating longer than that day, seeing variety of meat was
created ready for him to eat, and an appetite created to desire food.

And that he fell the very first time of eating, it is evident, First, By the
Devils Question; and secondly, By the Woman's Answer.

1 The Devil in the Serpent, demands this Question of the woman, Has God
said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the Garden? Genesis 3. 1. mark how the
Devils demand, by way of Query, is of a thing to come: And indeed the Devil
had not deserved the name of a subtle Serpent, if he had demanded whether that
might be done, which had been done already.

2 The Woman's Answer to the Serpents Question runs still of a thing to come:
For the Woman said to the Serpent in Genesis 3. 2. We may eat, or we shall eat (so
the Hebrew is) of the fruit of the Trees of the Garden, except of the fruit of
the Tree which is in the midst of the Garden; intimating, says Mr. Perkins on
the Creed, that as yet she had not eaten when the Devil tempted her; and thus
the Devils Question, and the Woman's Answer of a thing to come, do both imply,
that as yet they had not tasted any part of the fruit of the Garden; and
doubtless Adam having variety of food set before him, and a created appetite
to eat, he would not abstain from eating longer than the day of his creation,
seeing the purest nature craves daily food, as we may see by our Saviors
hungring, and by all newborn creatures; neither was Adam necessitated to last
for want of food, for variety of food was set before him, and free liberty to
eat thereof, verse. 16. neither was Adams appetite hindered through any infirmity
of nature, for as God had created variety of food for their eating, so
doubtless he created a true natural appetite in them to desire food (at the
first convenient opportunity) though their appetite was not irregular and
painful to them as ours is to us.

And doubtless the devil was not ignorant that Adam and Eve had a true
natural appetite to desire food, and therefore without any delay he fitted his
temptation suitable to their natural appetite, and the like crafty policy he
used to our Savior when he was an hungry, and because there was no meat
prepared for him in a readiness as there was for Adam, he fitted his
temptation thereafter, saying, If thou be the Son of God, make this stone
bread, Mat. 4. So then it appears by this reason, that Adam would not forbear
eating longer than the day of his creation; and it appears by the Devils
Question, and the Woman's Answer, that as yet they had eaten no fruit till they
had eaten of the forbidden fruit, and therefore it follows, First, That Adam
fell in the day of his creation; And secondly, that the Sabbath was not
ordained in the time of Adams innocence but after his fall. Because Adam being
created after God in wisdom, would not in wisdom have omitted to have eaten of
the tree of life in the very day of his creation, if the devil had not first
circum*vented him by the unseen subtilty of his temptation.


Reason 3.
Adam and Eve being created after the image of God in Wisdom, had not deserved
the description of being made wise according to Gods Image, (if the devil had
left them but one day to the freedom of their own will) if they had not made
choice to eat of the Tree of life in the first place; First, seeing God had
commanded them to eat freely of every Tree of the Garden, verse 16. And
secondly, seeing God had commended unto them the Tree of life by name (for by
the special name of it God did teach them to prefer it) before all the other
trees in the Garden, for their best good: And it is evident from Gods
threatening in Genesis 2. 17. that seeing man must dye if he disobeyed by eating
the forbidden fruit, that Gods See Mr. Ball on the Covenant, p. 6.
Covenant was with Adam for life, if he had but first eaten of the Tree of
life, and this is manifest by the name of the Tree, in verse. 9. compared with
Gods Irony in Chapter 3. 22. for by the name of it God showed him what
operation it had by virtue of his Covenant And Mr. Burges in Vindiciae legis
lect. 13. and vindiciae faederis, by M^. Blake.
and Ordinance.

Therefore if the Devil had let Adam and Eve alone but one whole day to the
liberty and freedom of their own created wisdom, doubtless they would both
in wisdom, and in obedience to Gods command, and to Gods commendation of the
Tree of life for their best good, have eaten of the Tree of life in the first
place, as the chiefest and best food, for it tended directly to the
confirmation of them, not only in their present, but also in their future
happy condition.

And this the Devil knew right well, and therefore he knew that unless he
could by his subtle head-plot circumvent Adam and Eve, by enticing them to eat
of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, before they did eat of the Tree of
life, that he could never afterward beguile them by any temptation whatsoever.

And it is also evident, that Adam did well enough know the excellent use of
the Tree of life by the name of it, verse. 9. as it appears by the speech of the
blessed Trinity, in Genesis 3. 22. Behold say they, the man is become as one of
US, to know good and evil, and now lest he put forth his hand, and take also
of the Tree of life, and eat, and live for ever.

This speech of the blessed Trinity, though it be spoken by way of Irony to
Adam after his fall, yet it implies that Adam and Eve knew that if they had
but eaten of the Tree of life in their innocence, they had been confirmed in
their present perfect condition for ever, but now being fallen, God does mock
their conceit as vain to think so; for a modest Irony has always a contrary
meaning to that which is spoken, and the scope of such an Irony is to express
a just reprehension of some sin, as it may be observed in Judges 10. 14. 1
King. 22. 15. 1 King. 8. 27.

And because the Tree of life had that virtue in it at first by Gods Covenant
and Ordinance; Therefore by way of comparison thereto, Christ is now called the
Tree of Life, Rev. 2. 7. That whosoever believes on him, or feeds by faith
on his death, and expiatory sacrifice, or sacrifices of Atonement (by which he
has broken the Devils head-plot) he shall never perish, but have everlasting
life*

Reason 4.
The Devil had not deserved or merited the name of a subtle Serpent, if he had
not by his subtle and guileful head-plot, Because the Devil had not deserved
the name of a subtle Serpent, if he had left Adam at liberty to eat of the
Tree of life, but one whole day together.
circumvented Adam, to make him eat of the forbidden fruit, in the very first
place, even in the day of his creation, before he left him at liberty to eat of
any other fruit of the Garden.

For the crafty Devil in the subtle Serpent knew well enough that if he had but
left Adam and Eve to the liberty of their own choice, but one whole day
together they would in wisdom, and in obedience to Gods command (that had
commanded them to eat of every Tree, and in relation to Gods commendation of
the Tree of life above the rest of the fruit of the Garden) have eaten of that
Tree in the first place; and then the Devil knew well enough by the name of
that Tree, that if Adam and Eve had but first eaten of that fruit he had been
confirmed in his happy condition for ever, and that he could not have been
circumvented by any temptation whatsoever afterward.

This subtle and guileful head-plot of the Devil, lay not only in the
hiddennesse and unseen danger of his temptation, but also in the speediness of
the execution of it, for if it had not been speedily put in execution, the then
unseen danger had been prevented by Adams wisdom in eating of the Tree of life
in the first place.

But the Devil was so speedy in the transaction of this temptation that he gave
Adam no opportunity of time to go first to the Tree of l^fe; and this may
further be demonstrated from the antecedent Preposition in Genesis 3. 1. Now, or
Then, or And; this word of connection does conjoyn and knit together sundry
actions.

1 This word Now has relation to the woman's creation and marriage with Adam,
because among all the other creatures he found not a meet helper for Adam. 2.
It has relation to the time of their entrance into Paradise. 3 To the time of
the Devils fall. 4 To the time of the Devils entrance into the Serpent. 5 To
the time of their first eating.
All these things fell out together, even in the neck one of another, and all
of them as I conceive in the same order as I have ranked them.

1* God brought the woman to the man that he might name with a name defining
her nature, and that he might mary them her together as one flesh; and this
time of Adams marriage with Eve was just before his entrance into Paradise; but
some unadvised Expositors do confound this order, for they place the time of
Adams marriage (not before, but) after he came into Paradise; First, Because it
is said that Adam in the singular number was put therein, Genesis 2. 8, 15.
Secondly, Because the woman's creation and marriage is not recorded till after
mention of Adams seating in Paradise, verse 22, 23.

But a sensible reason may be given to both these; first, Under the name of
Adam in the singular number the woman is included, because God had made them
but one flesh by marriage immediately before their entrance into Paradise, and
in that respect the Seventy translate Ye, for Thou, in Genesis 2. 17. because
they understood both of them to be comprehended under the term Thou.

And therefore those Mariage-Books, says Mr. Broughton, have an oversight,
that say, The woman was formed in Paradise; for the Commandment Thou shall not
eat thereof, in verse. 17. went not before the creation of the woman (nor before
her marriage to Adam) but after; she had the Commandment as well as Adam, in
the same term Thou, as being but one flesh by marriage. See Bro. in principal
Positions Page 10. and the matter is out of controversy, for the woman does
testify that the Commadement was given to them both jointly; for thus says
she to the Serpent, God has said, ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye
touch it lest ye dye* Genesis 3. 3. in this sentence she does three times over
affirm that Gods prohibition was given to them both jointly.

The story of the time of Adams marriage lies thus: First, God in the sixth day
created all sorts of Beasts of the Earth, and all sorts of the Fowls of the
air: Secondly, Then he created Adam after his own Image, as the glory of all
his creation; And thirdly, then he brought all the said creatures before him,
that he might put suitable names upon them as their Lord, and that they might
wait upon him as their Lord, Genesis 2. 19, 20. But fourthly, Because among them
all, God did not find out a meet helper for Adams society, thereupon God as a
most expert Surgeon, did cast Adam into a deep sleep, and took out one of his
Ribs, and of that Rib, as a most mighty Creator, he made a woman; and this was
the last sort of visible creatures that God made. Fifthly, Then God brought her
unto Adam, to see what Adam would call her, and he being exquisite in
understanding said, This now is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, she
shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of man. And sixthly, At this
instant, God gave her in marriage to Adam, to be as one flesh, and to be a meet
helper to him. And therefore secondly, the only reason why the woman's
creation, and marriage, is not recorded till after the mention of Adams seating
in Paradise, is, because by the figure Hysteron Proteron, he would show the
close joining of the Devils temptation, and of their Fall, to their marriage.

2 This word of connection [And or Now] has relation to the time of Adam and
Eves entrance into Paradise, it was [Now] namely as soon as God had joined them
together as one flesh by marriage (which was done without the borders of
Paradise) he did without delay carry them both into Paradise, as to the place
of pleasure that he had in a special manner prepared for their delight and
comfort during the time of their innocence; There he put the man that he had
formed, Genesis 2. 8. And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the Garden
of Eden, Genesis 2. 15. and after his fall, thence, God sent him forth to till the
ground whence he was taken, Genesis 3. 23. From these Scriptures it is evident,
that as soon as God had given the woman in marriage to Adam, he presently
brought them both into Paradise, and commanded all sorts of creatures to attend
on them into Paradise, as on their Sovereign Lord, Genesis 1. 26, 28. Genesis 2. 19.
and this is also evident, because the Serpent was there ready among the other
Beasts of the field to do service to them, Genesis 3. 1. And because God had made
man to be the glory of his whole creation, he did command, not only his
earthly creatures, but his heavenly Angels also, to att^nd upon them into
Paradise, as it may be gathered, because God does still command his Angels to
attend upon such as he has The time of the fall of the Angels, now called the
Devil, was when they were commanded to attend upon Adam and Eve in Para^ise.
dignified to be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. Psalm. 91.

3 This word of connection [Now] has reference to the time of the Devils Fall;
For the heavenly Angels (that rejoiced at the hanging of the Globe of the Earth
upon nothing, Job 38. 7.) were now commanded to attend upon Adam and Eve into
Paradise, is well as the Beasts of the field; But many legions of these
heavenly Angels disobeyed that change, for they saw that man's body was but an
earthly substance, and that themselves were heavenly See H. Bro. in Ecc his
Chief Mark.
spirits, thereupon they not knowing the glory of man's Election in Christ,
refused to attend upon Adam and Eve into Paradise, and for that disobedience,
God deprived them of their pure qualities, and so they became dead in corrupt
and sinful qualities, and ever since they have continued to be an envious
company against the good of man: But it seems there was diversity of judgment
among them touching that service in attending upon our first parents, for there
were many legions of those Angels that despised man in comparison of themselves
(because God did not support them by his assisting grace) and there were many
legions that continued to do service to them, because God did support them in
their obedience by his assisting grace, but the millions of them that fell for
refusing to serve man, did without delay conspire together in one Head-plot as
soon as ever they were fallen to destroy mankind, and in that respect they are
collectively called Satan, the Adversary, by which name it is evident that
from the very first they were adverse to serve man.

Our minds (says Mr. Bro. in Req. of Consent. page 75.) cannot once think of
any other subject in God (who dwells in terrible light) against which the
Devil durst spurn, neither deals he but to hurt man; as still showing that
from hatred to man was his Fall.

Envy (says Lanquet) came first of Satan, for envying the felicity of man
whom God had created and set in Paradise, he changed himself into an Angel of
light, abusing the wisdom of the Serpent to deceive man. See Marbek's
Common-places, page 339.

At the creation of the woman (which was the last particular kind of all Gods
creation) the Angels were not fallen; for at the end of Gods visible creation
on the sixth day, It is said, That God saw all that he had made, and lo it was
very good, Genesis 1. 31.

From this Text it may certainly be gathered, that no creature was yet become
bad; and therefore that the Angels were not fallen when the woman was created;
but their fall was presently after the woman was created and given in marriage
to Adam; all which was done without the borders of Paradise, but then God
intending to bring them into Paradise, all creatures whom Adam had named as
their Lord were to attend upon him, and then God gave his Angels charge also to
atend upon them (as I have formerly noted it to be a chief part of their
office, from Heb. 1. 14. because God intended to dignifie man's nature, not
only above all his visible creatures, but even above Angels also, Heb. 2. 10.
But the Angels not knowing Gods eternal Counsel concerning man's dignity, which
should be so much advanced through Christ, dis-esteemed man (as being made but
of the basest element) in comparison of themselves that were spirits invisible,
and of a heavenly nature, and in that respect they refused to obey Gods
positive command, in refusing to attend upon Adam, and then as many of them as
refused that service and station in which God had set them, were by Gods
justice deprived of their moral perfections, and are ever since become an
envious company to man's good.

No other time I think can be found for the time of the Angels fall, but this,
as I have formerly noted; And therefore as soon as God had brought Adam and Eve
into Paradise, and all creatures both visible and invisible to attend him, then
that number of the Angels that fell for refusing to serve man, took special
notice of Gods Command and Covenant with Adam concerning the two Trees, and
concerning the condition of his nature The true nature of the first Convenant
stood in obedience, or in disobedience, to a positive, and not to a moral
command. See Bucan. in his 10 Com. place, and in his 15. Com. pl.
what it was, and what it should be in case he did first eat of the Tree of
life, or what it should be, in case he did first eat of the Tree of knowledge
of good and evil; namely, that his nature should be confirmed in his created
perfections for ever, in case he did first eat of the Tree of life; but in case
he did first eat of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, then his nature
should dye the death (that is to say) he should be deprived of his natural
perfections wherein he was created.

Adams Righteousness (says Bucanus) was the Righteousness of man's nature,
and not the Righteousness of a private person; If Adam (says he) had stood in
his original Righteousness, it had been derived to all his posterity; and
says he in his fifteenth Common place; Adams Righteousness was not so much
personal and proper to him, as natural, namely, as it was common to all men's
nature which were originally and naturally in the loins of Adam, and therefore
truly original, and so consequently in case of disobedience he should lose his
original righteousness, namely his natural perfections, and instead of it
should be possessed with a corrupt and sinful nature to all posterity.

I say the fallen Angels did take special notice of the true nature of this
first Covenant with Adam; and therefore without delay they did presently join
together in one head or head-plot to beguile the woman, by enticing her to eat
of the forbidden fruit before she might have the opportunity to eat first of
the tree of life; and the better to effect this head-plot of theirs, they did
first reason with God against the nature of Adam (as they did afterward
against Job) saying, That his nature was not more perfect than theirs was by
creation; and therefore that Adam would disobey Gods positive command as they
had done, if they might have but leave to try him. Now God being a cunning and
complete Workman would not be out-bidden by Satan's brags, and therefore he
gave Satan leave to do his worst (as he did afterward give him leave to do
his worst to Christ) for he knew that if his workmanship should fail upon the
trial, he could tell how to mend it, and how to make it better able to endure
the trial for time to come.

4 This Adverb [Now, in Genesis 3. 1.] has relation to the time when the devil
did first enter into the body of the subtle Serpent, and that was now
presently without any delay; and therefore though this Serpent was but a brute
creature without any natural power, to speak, discourse, and reason with an
intelligible voice about what was good or evil, yet the devil had received
such a power and commission from God, that he did make this Serpent to be his
lively oracle (as the Angel made Balaams Ass to be his) and therefore in as
much as the Serpent did speak and discourse with Eve, it is an infallible proof
that God had given the devil leave to tempt and to try Adams obedience to the
first positive Covenant by any slight he could devise (as he did after give
the devil the like leave to tempt Christ for forty days together) and
therefore the devils head-plot was now instantly put in execution without any
delay of time (even as soon as the Commandment and Covenant concerning the two
Trees was given) he did enter into the body of the Serpent, and did actuate the
tongue of the Serpent to speak his mind: And therefore in the first place, he
did most cunningly preoccupy the woman's objection; yea Moreover (said he) Has
God indeed said ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden? This word
Moreover shows that some other speech of the woman's, in opposition to the
Serpent, had gone before which the devil did now answer, by persuading her
that the forbidden fruit was therefore detained from them, because it was
better for their future good than the Tree of life was; For, says the Serpent,
it will make you excel in all kind of knowledge like God.

To this insinuating Interrogation (which doubtless the woman thought to be no
other but the voice of some good Angel or servant) ^he makes this reply, Of
the fruit of the Trees of the Garden we may eat; but of the fruit of the Tree
which is in the midst of the Garden, God has said, ye shall not eat of it,
neither shall ye touch it, lest ye dye.

Then the good Angel in the Serpent (for the woman knew not that any of the
Angels were fallen as yet) said to the woman, Ye shall not dye at all: for God
does know that in the day ye shall eat thereof your eyes shall be opened and
you shall be as This term Gods, was such an Equivocal term that it might well
deceive the woman, for she could not conceive it to have an evil sense from a
good Angel as she thought this ^o be; but she was deceived, for it was a fallen
Angel that spoke this to her, and meant that she should be as Gods, namely like
themselves (for the devils are called Gods, 1 Samuel 28. 13. 2 Cor. 4. 4. 1 Cor.
8. 5.) and that they should know by experience (as they did what good they
should lose, and what evil they should get, by eating the forbidden fruit; but
the woman taking this voice of the Serpent, for the voice and counsel of a good
Angel or Servant, was persuaded that her eating of the Tree of knowledge of
good and evil, would better her condition, for the woman knew that their state
and condition might be bettered, for she knew that her eating of the Tr^e of
life would better their estate, because it was ordained to confirm them in
their created perfections; and in that respect she seeing the Tree of knowledge
to be good, for meat, and a desire to the eyes, and a tree to be coveted to
make one wise, did take and eat, Gen 3. 6. and she was the more easily
beguiled, because she knew not that any of the Angels were fallen; Adam c^uld
not know (says P. Martyr) by reason in his mind that the Devil was fallen at
first; or else (says he) his will had been governed by his mind; and in this
respect Adam^ disobedience is called but a stumble, which may happen to the
wisest men, when they discern not the b^ock that lies hid in their way; and so
the first offense in Romans 5. 15. is translated the inco^siderate stumble (by
good Linguists) Adams inte^rity of nature was such by creation, that he was not
ignorant of any moral duty, and therefore he could not will any moral evil, but
he might will to eat any fruit that was good by creation; It was not a sin
against the law of his nature so to will, and therefore in ca^e he had forborne
the act of eating the forbidden fruit, he had not sinned by his desire to eat;
but because he knew not that any of the Angels were fallen, he could not but
think that the Angel that spoke in the Serpent, had received some new
Commission from God to persuade him to eat of the forbidden fruit for his best
good; and after this sort the devil in the old Pro^het persuaded the young
Prophet to eat and to drink in his house, though the young Prophet knew that
Gods pos^tive command was to the contrary, It is likely he thou^ht that the old
Prophet had received some new commission from God to persuade him, and so he
was deceived to his utter ruin and death, 1 King. 13.
Gods, knowing good and evil. And thus the fallen Angels did persuade the
woman that she should excel in the Theory of all kind of knowledge more than
she had by creation, if she did but once taste of the Tree of knowledge of good
and evil.

Now mark the Devils dexterity, how cunningly, and how speedily he fitted his
temptation to the woman's liking: First, It was most suitable to her natural
appetite of eating. Secondly, It was most suitable to her natural desire of
attaining a further degree of knowledge, which she might desire, and she knew
that she might also attain it, if she had but first eaten of the Tree of life;
The Devil knew the operation of the forbidden fruit, better than Adam and Eve
could do as long as they stood in their unconfirmed condition.
but the devil under the pretense of being an Angel of light, and of being her
faithful servant (in wishing her to eat of this fruit for her good) deceived
her, for he knew the operation of the forbidden fruit by his own spiritual
death, better than Adam and Eve could do as yet, namely as long as they stood
unconfirmed; for the Devil knew what that evil was by experience, which Adam
and Eve could not so well know until they had eaten; they knew that the Tree
of knowledge was called the Tree of evil death, and that it was death to eat of
it; and this they might have known more fully in the Theory of it, had they but
known of the fall of the Angels before they had eaten, but God was pleased to
conceal the fall of the Angels from them, and to let them do their worst to
make Adam fall, because he knew how to bring a greater good out of it at last,
than if they had stood still in their integrity.

5 The Adverb [Now] has relation to the time when the woman disobeyed, namely
it was now before she had tasted any other fruit in the Garden: This time of
her eating I have at large explained in my second Reason, and therefore do
refer the Reader thither.

But there are several things to be marked in the dexterity of the Devil in
taking hold of the very first opportunity of time to speed his temptation.

1 He beguiled the woman's apprehension on the sudden, by The Dev^^ ^as exceedir
^ nimble ^ speed h^^ temptat^^n, and the^^fore he comp^sed many a^^ together ^
basten the act of Adams disobedient eating.
his specious, though deceitful persuasions, for he persuaded her it was for
her greatest good to eat of the Tree of knowledge, and thereby he presented the
greatest amity to her that might be in a faithful servant.

2 He did at the same instant climb the tree (for Serpents have a nimble
faculty to climb trees) and made choice of the fairest fruit, and then he
presented it to the woman that she might view it, and look upon it.

3 By this means he gained her natural appetite to it; for the Text says, She
saw it was good for meat, and that it was a desire to her eyes, and that it was
a tree to be coveted to make one wise. And thus by this means her deceitful
servant got in upon her.

4 Upon this advice of her faithful servant she took thereof and did eat.

5 As soon as she was gained to the will of Satan, then at the same time he
made her his instrument to gain her husband, as soon therefore as she had
tasted of the forbidden fruit she reached out her hands, and gave some of it to
her husband, and he did eat without any suspicion of hurt from her that was
given to him to be a meet helper; and her act of giving was prevalent with him,
because instead of telling him that death was in her eating, she used words of
persuasion, as it is most evident, because he is said to hearken unto the voice
of his wife, Genesis 3. 17. and then the eyes of them both were opened, and then
they knew that they were naked; before this they knew that they were naked
without clothes, and yet they were not ashamed, because their created
nakedness was covered and adorned with pure created qualities, Genesis 3. 7. Genesis
2. 25. But now the case of their nakedness was altered by the justice of God,
for Gods determinate sentence was, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
dye the death; and this death was formally executed upon them, according to the
time and manner threatened; and now Adam knew what evil was, and what death was,
experimentally, as the fallen Angels did, for now they were made naked and bare
of their pure created qualities.

A digression to show that the death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. was executed ^e
death ^^^^atned in ^^^. 2. 17. was e^^^uted on m^^ nature in thr^^ degrees.
on man's nature in three degrees.

Consider that the first Covenant was made with Adam concerning man's nature in
general, as I have formerly noted, and accordingly did God execute that death
upon Adams nature, as it was the original of man's nature in general.

1 Therefore as Paul speaks, They were deprived of the glorious Image of God,
Romans 3. 23. And this deprivation, says M. Perkins, was inflicted by God as a
deserved punshment for the sin of Adam; and See P^^ins on the Cred. p. 162.
See. P. Martyr in Rom 5* and B^^an. in his Com. pl. p. 104.
this loss of Gods Image says Peter Martyr, was from the justice of God; and
I find it commonly held by other eminent Divines, that God for the sin of Adam
took away his created perfections from Adam (as he took away his spirit of
Government from Saul, because he spared Agag, against Gods positive Command, 1 Samuel 16. 14.) for they were not yet confirmed, and therefore they were but lent
him in case he disobeyed; but the Graces of Gods Spirit, which Christ has
purchased for the Re-creation of the Elect after Gods Image, cannot now be
utterly lost by the commission of many sins, because they are purchased to be
confirmed to them, and not to fail until they come to the fruition of an
eternal Paradise in heaven.

The Image of God wherewith Adams Nature was adorned, would have kept him, and
all his Posterity for ever from death, if he had but first eaten of the Tree of
Life; but because he did first eat of the forbidden Fruit, he was deprived of
Gods Image; And then secondly, Death in Sin fell upon his Nature.

When the Souls of men are Created and placed in their Bodies, (says Mr.
Perkins) God forsakes them not in regard of their substance, or faculties of
their Soul, but only in respect of his See Perkins on the Creed, p. 162.
own Image, whereof the Soul is deprived.

And he asks this question, How can the Soul dye the second Death? His answer
is, That the Soul dies not by being utterly abolished, but because it is as
though it were not; and because it cease to be in respect of Righteousness,
and Fellowship with God; and indeed (says he) this is the death of all deaths,
when the Creature has subsisting and being, and yet is deprived of all
comfortable fellowship with God.

2 The second degree of that Death threatened in Genesis 2. 17. was death in sin,
and this death fell upon Adams nature at the very See Perkins in the right way
of dying well.
instant, as soon as God had subtracted his Image from him; for we see by
experience, that as soon as the God of Nature has subtracted the light of the
Sun from our Horizon, there remains nothing but obscure darkness, and then no
Artificers, nor Scholars can work, or write after their Masters perfect Copy,
but instead thereof, they work, and act irregularly, and transgress against
their Masters copy; Even so, as soon as God in Justice had subtracted the
Light and Life of his Image from Adam, what remained but obscure darkness in
his mind, and then what could he do else but think and act irregularly, and
that continually, as long as he did continue in that darkness? and this
darkness after the light it self is mystically applied to man's corrupt estate,
Ephesians. 4. 18. Ephesians. 5. 8. being alienated from the life of God. Ephesians. 2. 1.

When the Soul is deprived of Gods Image, says Mr. Perkins, then follows a
defect, or want of righteousness, and I may also say, then follows a natural
proness to all kind of iniquity, so that the very thoughts and imaginations of
the heart are only evil, and that continually, and this frame is called
Original sin to us, though Adams Original sin was his actual eating of the
forbid-Fruit; and this is the second degree of that death threatened in Genesis 2.
17.

3 A third degree of that death was, that Adam was now under the power and
slavery of Satan (which had the power of death, Heb. 2. 14.) to do his will and
pleasure in all things to the full, and to be under the power of a Tyrant is
death, Psalm. 18. 4. But it pleased God in his eternal Counsel and Providence to
provide Jesus Christ to take possession of the world as the right Heir of it,
as soon as Adam fell, and so to uphold all things by the word of his power, Heb.
1. 2, 3. by which means both Satan's power, tyranny, and malice, and man's
corrupt desires and endeavors are restrained, and ordered so, that now they
cannot do that wickedness which else they would do; and were it not for See
Capel on Tempt. p. 55, 56. and see more in chapter 3. in R. 2.
this Government of Christ at the instant of Adams fall, no man can imagine
what destructive mischiefs would have fallen at that very instant upon the whole
Creation, which was the very thing that Satan aimed at in his temptation; but
blessed be God that provided Jesus Christ against that time of need.

But after this digression in setting out the degrees of the first Spiritual
death, as it must be understood, in Genesis 2. 17. I will now return to speak a
little more of the Devils speech and subtilty, in deceiving the Woman, and in
making her his instrument to deceive Adam; The Devil did not deal with the
Woman about any Moral disobedience (as he did with Christ, after he had tried
him with many other temptations for forty days together) for he knew that Adams
nature was framed after Gods Image in respect of Moral perfection, but he deals
with her about positive commands only, for he knew that she was not so perfect
in the knowledge of those things by Creation, as she was in all Moral things;
he knew that the Woman was ignorant as yet of the positive Law that was given
to the Angels to attend upon them, (as the visible Creatures were,) for they
being Spirits, their motions and actions were not subject to be discerned by
bodily senses, and in that respect also Eve was ignorant of their disobedience
and fall, and she was also ignorant that they had obtained leave of God to
tempt her about the Tree of Knowledge (which was a thing indifferent in its own
nature to be eaten, or refused) but if the Woman had but known of these things,
then her Moral and Natural wisdom would have fortified her will against all
Satan's temptations whatsoever; for we see by the example of Christ, that when
the Devil did persuade him by Peter's tongue to pity himself, and not to go to
Jerusalem to suffer, then Christ could not be deceived by his persuasions,
because he knew that Peter's tongue was acted by Satan, and therefore he said
unto Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me, Mat. 16. 23.
but for the manner of this knowledge, the Woman could not call this Angel
Satan, and therefore she could not resist so steadfastly, as else doubtless she
would have done; yea, if the Angels that fell had but known of Man's glory by
Gods election in Christ, they would not have refused to serve man, for in this
manner the Apostle does reason about the Sin of the Princes of this World, had
they but known (says he) of the hidden Wisdom of God, which he ordained before
the world unto our glory, they would not have Crucified the Lord of glory, 2
Cor. 2. 7, 8. so I may say of the Woman's Fall, if she had but known of the fall
of Angels, she would not have been deceived by the Serpent.

But because the Woman was ignorant of those positive Secrets (and God was
pleased not to reveal them to her as yet) she was deceived, and then she was
easily made Satan's Instrument to deceive her Husband; and then they did
experimentally know that some of the Angels were fallen, and that they had leave
of God to tempt them, and that the Devil was a Liar, and a Murderer from the
beginning, Joh. 8. 44. The Syriack on the word Beginning, is Men Breshith, that
is, by all Rabbis, within the days of Creation, and says Mr. Perkins, Our
Savior calls See Perkins on the Creed.
the Devil a Manslayer from the beginning, not from the beginning of the
Creation, or of Time, but of Man; and seeing (says he) it is the nature of the
Devil to show his malice (against Man) with out ceasing, no doubt but he took
the first occasion that might possible be had to bring man to the same
Damnation with himself.

And why is the Devil said to go up and down, or to walk aabout, seeking whom
he may devour, like a roaring Lion? but to express his speedy diligence in his
first temptation, as well as in his after temptations? 1 Pet. 5. 8.

And why is the Devil called the Old Serpent, Revel. 12. but from his ancient
deceiving of the understanding and will of our first Parents? And why is he
said to have the power of Death? Heb. 2. 14. but from his first prevailing
temptation, in prevailing with our first Parents to eat of the forbidden Fruit.
Why is he called the subtle Serpent? Genesis 3. 1. but from his subtilty in
deceiving Eve, while she was a Virgin, 2 Cor. 11. 3.

And thus Adam in Honor (Created after Gods Image) understood not (for as yet
he understood not that any of the Angels were become Devils, or that they spoke
with the tongue of the Serpent) he was like the Beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.
20.

Adam did not lodge a night in Honor, Psalm. 49. 12. for he was deprived of
the glorious Image of God, namely, of his Moral and Natural perfections, before
night came.

Theophilact says, As man was formed the sixth day, and did eat of the
forbidden Fruit at the sixth hour; so Christ healing the Fall, was fastened to
the Tree the sixth day, and the sixth hour.

Austin also is of opinion, that Adam stood in his innocence but six hours only.

From all this Discourse in this reason, though it be long, because I have
interlaced several collateral considerations, yet (I hope profitable to the
understanding of the weaker sort) this Conclusion follows, That the Devil had
not deserved the name of a subtle Serpent, if he had not presently, and
without delay, (namely as soon as Adam had received the Commandment, to eat of
all the Trees in the Garden, and of the Tree of Life above the rest) brought
him by his subtilty to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of good and Evil in the
first place, before he had so much liberty as to go first to the Tree of Life;
for the Devil knew that if Adam had had but a little time free from his
temptation, his created Wisdom was such, that he would have eaten of the Tree
of Life in the first place, and then the Devil had not deserved the name of a
subtle Serpent; but because the Devil by his speedy subtilty brought our first
Parents to eat of the forbidden Fruit in the first place, before they had
liberty in the day of their Creation, to eat of the Tree of Life, therefore it
follows,

1 That the Devil has justly deserved the name of a subtle Serpent. 2 Hence
it also follows, that the Sabbath was not ordained in the time of Adams
innocence, but after his Fall.
Reas. 5. Adam fell in the day of his Creation, because he fell The Woman fell
while she was a Virgin, therefore Adam fell in the day of his Creation.
while the Woman was a Virgin, namely before he knew her after the manner of
all flesh.
If Adam and Eve had slept but one night together in their innocence,
doubtless in wisdom they would not have omitted the act of Generation.

1 Because the desire of begetting Children to increase the kind is not only
something Natural, but it is the most natural thing in the world.

2 And more especially, because it was laid upon him by God as a necessary
duty; for God enforced his obedience to that act by an express command,
saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the earth, Genesis 1. 28. Hence it
follows,

1 That they would not have omitted the act of Generation as soon as they had a
fit opportunity, which they should have had if they had slept but one night
together in their innocence.

2 If they had but once done the act it would doubtless have taken effect, for
God had promised to bless it, and to make it powerful, (there cannot be any
barreness in innocence) and then Adam should have begotten, and Eve should have
conceived their firstborn Cain without sin; But the Scripture does tell us,
that never any man was so conceived and born but Jesus Christ alone, (whose
conception was not by the ordinary way of generation between Man and Woman, but
by the mighty power of the Holy Ghost) hence it follows,

1. That the Serpent had seduced the Woman before she knew her Husband after
the manner of all flesh. And

2. Hence it follows, That she was seduced in the very day of her creation.

Master Calvin says, If they had stood but a short time, the Sea Calv. on Genesis
3. 6.
Blessing of God had not been in vain for propagation.

And Paul may well allude to Eves being deceived by the Serpent, even whiles she
was a Virgin, for he writes thus to the Corinthians, I have espoused you to
one Husband, that I might present you a chaste Virgin to Christ; but I fear,
lest by any means, that as the Serpent beguiled Eve, so your minds should be
corrupted, 2 Corinthians. 11. 1, 2.

The Apostle compares the guiles of false Teachers to the guiles of Satan, and
he compares their sincere minds, as long as they kept fast to the Truth, to
the Virgin Evt, for so long as they kept their minds unpolluted with false
Doctrine, they were Virgin-like; but as Eve the Virgin was beguiled, and defiled
by Satan's fair but false Doctrine; so the Apostle feared lest their minds should
be corrupted, by the fair though false Doctrine of their false Teachers, from
that plainness that is toward Christ, for the Tempter did tempt them by many
seducing Teachers, 1 Thessal. 3. 5. and the Spirit (says the Apostle) speaks
evidently, that in the latter days, (namely in the days of the Gospel) some
should depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrins of
Devils, 1 Tim^thy 4. 1. as the Virgin Eve once did.

Erasmus makes this Comparison; As Evah a Virgin married and undefiled,
believed the speech of the Serpent, brought forth Disobedience and Death; so
many a Virgin married and undefiled, believed the Angel, brought forth
Obedience and Life.

Conclusion.
Having proved hitherto by five Reasons, that Adam fell in the day of his
Creation, it follows by good consequence, That the Sabbath was not ordained in
the time of Adams Innocence, but after his Fall.

CHAP. II.
Proving by three Reasons that Adam was Re-created in the very same day in
which he was Created and Fell.

1. IT is evident to me that Adam was Re-created in the very self-same day in
which he was created and sell, by the order of

For immediately after he had bitten of the forbidden fruit, and was thereby
dead in corruption and sin from the life of Gods Image in which he was created,
Then God of his rich mercy came to him in the The c^ol (or wind) of the day
means the Eventide as the Seventy translate it, which begins at Midday, for
the Evening begins when the Sun begins to decline, and then there does usually
arise a cooling wind (called a Seaturn) which the God of nature has ordained
to cool the air in hot Countries.
cool (or in the wind) of the same day, Genesis 3. 8. to confer with him, and to
enquire of him into what state and condition he had brought himself by eating
of the forbidden fruit, saying unto him by way of Query, Adam, Where art thou?
not in what particular place art thou? (as some ignorant persons do understand
it, for God was come to the very place where Adam was,) But into what case have
thou brought thy self by eating of the forbidden fruit? And unto this searching
Query, Adam made a plain Answer, saying in ver. 10. I heard thy voice walking
in the Garden, and I was afraid; and because I was naked of thy Image in which
I was created, I hid my self.

This plain Answer of Adam does imply two things; 1 His fear of Gods wrath. 2
The Reason of it.

1 His fear of Gods wrath in these words, I heard thy voice walkking in the
Garden; the word implies, That it walked along by him like roaring Thunder
among the trees of the Garden. And with such a dreadful voice Christ
manifested himself to the Israelites, when he gave the Law at Mount Sinai to
awaken and over-aw their sinful consciences, as Genesis 3. 8. compared with Ex.
19. 16. does manifest and explain the matter; and in this respect the dreadful
voice of Thunder is called Gods voice, Psalm. 29. 3. And this dreadful voice of
God did so terrify his guilty conscience, that it forced Adam to say, I heard
thy voice walking like Thunder in the Garden, and I was afraid; for the guilt
of his conscience told him that he had grievously transgressed against Gods
positive command in eating of the forbidden fruit.

2 He gives another reason why he hid himself among the trees of the Garden,
namely because I was naked both in body and soul of my created qualities, and
therefore I hid my self among the trees of the Garden.

And thus Adams conscience was convinced of his sin, and terrified with Gods
dreadful voice of inquiry concerning his sin and guilt, and thereupon he made
a plain confession, That he was afraid, and that he hid himself because he was
naked.

The Text runs thus, in Genesis 3. 8. They heard the voice of the Lord God walking
in the Garden in the cool (or in the wind) of the day: And Adam and his wife
hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God among the trees of the Garden,
verse. 9. And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou?
verse. 10. And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Have thou eaten of
the Tree whereof I commanded thee that thou should not eat?

And by this searching Q^ery, Adam, Where art thou? Adam was convinced, and
terrified with the sense of his sin, and with the dread of Gods wrath; and when
he saw that he could by no means escape it, he made a plain confession of his
sin and misery, and that he hid himself, because he was naked of Gods Image,
and subject to inordinate lusts, and thereupon to shame and horror of
conscience; and ^n like sort it is said that Aaron made the people naked to
their shame when he made a Molten Calf for them to worship as a God, Exodus 32.
25. for by that sin God was departed from them, and so they were made naked
both of Gods graces, and of Gods protection, and the like is expressed in Rev.
3. ^8. Rev. 16. 15. Ezekiel. 16. 22. Hos. 2. 3. 2 Cor. 5. 3.

God did purposely enter into a parley and communication with Adam, that thereby
he might prepare him for a Reconciliation, saying to him in ver. 11. Who told
thee that thou art naked? By this and the former searching Queries, God was
pleased to help Adam to search himself the more deeply, and to affect him the
more thoroughly with the sight of his sin, and with the sense of his miserable
spiritual death in sin, because he intended to show him mercy; but the Lord did
not propound any such searching Queries to the fallen Angels, because he
intended not to show any merciful Atonement or Reconciliation to them, though
notwithstanding he has showed some common mercy to them in that he has not
sunk them into the lowest hell as yet, Mat. 8. 29. But judgment without Mercy
to them he has deferred till the Day of Judgment, 2 Pet. 2. 4. 2 These. 1. 9.

And these searching queres made Adam and Eve to answer (as those that are
deeply convinced, and humbled in the sight and sense of their Spiritual
nakedness and misery) that they had eaten of the forbidden Fruit; and they
freely confessed (without any extenuation) after what manner they were brought
unto it; The woman (says Adam, in verse. 12.) which thou gave to be with me,
she gave me of the tree, and I did eat; even she that was made of my Rib, and
she that thou gave to be a meet Helper unto me, Genesis 3. 12* Genesis 3. 13.
she gave it unto me, and therefore I took it from her hand, (from whom I could
suspect no hurt) and did eat.

And the Lord said unto the Woman, what is this that thou have done? or, why
have thou done this? And the Woman said, The Serpent (whom thou gave to
attend upon us, as a diligent and faithful servant) be guiled me, and I did
eat, ver. 13. I thought the Serpent had been acted by a good Angel, that could
not persuade to sin; and by this word Beguiled the woman comprehended the whole
manner and order of the Devils deceitful temptation.

Some Interpreters I grant do conceive, That Adam and Eve in their several
answers, did not make a plain confession, but did rather labor to extenuate
their sin, by posting it off from themselves to others, but all circumstances
considered, their answers and confessions must needs be plain and naked, or
else they had not been fit to embrace the means of Reconciliation which God was
now pleased to manifest unto them.

And therefore without delay God did first curse the Serpent, as it was the
Devils instrument, in verse. 14. and then secondly, he curses the Devil
himself, in ver. 15. saying, I will put enmity between thee and the Woman, and
between thy seed and her seed; He, even He, shall break thy head, and thou
shall pierce Him in the foot-soals. Thus God did threaten the Devil in the
Serpent, namely, to break in pieces his subtle Head-plot by the work of
Redemption and Reconciliation, which should be wrought by the Seed of this
Woman, which the Devil had poisoned and corrupted, thinking thereby to destroy
all Mankind that should come of her to the end of the World; but God
threatened the Devil to break this Head-plot of his, and that he would put such
an enmity in the Seed of the Woman against him and his seed, as should prevail,
and bring them all to a deeper ruin at last; and as God did thus curse the
Devils Head-plot to ruinate it by the Seed of the Woman, in the hearing and
presence of Adam and Eve (to whom it was a Prophetical Prediction and a
Promise) so questionless he did not fail to instruct them more fully herein,
and after what manner this Seed of the Woman should break the Devils Head-plot,
namely, that through Death he should destroy him that had the power of Death,
that is the Devil, Hebr. 2. 14. and that he should spoil Principalities and
Powers, and make a show of them openly, triumphing over them in his Death on
the Cross, Col. 2. 15. for he overcame him that had the power of Death by
Death, for his Soul was not separated from his Body by the power of Satan, and
his instruments, and by the power of their tortures, but by his own power, and
in that respect his death was accepted of God as a propitiatory Sacrifice of
Atonement, and reconciliation. This good news of a Reconciliation by this
means was no doubt heartily welcome to poor dejected Adam and Eve; they being
fully lost and condemned in their own Consciences, did out of doubt receive
this Prophetical demonstration of their Redemption, and Reconciliation, wi^h
all gladness and joyfulness of Spirit, for true humbled sinners are fit to take
down such Cordials with joyfulness, and God was pleased to open their minds and
hearts to believe in this Seed of the Woman, and to embrace this blessed means
of their Reconciliation by his Death and Sacrifice, which he should accomplish
in due time, even then when the Devil should pierce him in the Foot-soals upon
the Cross, and by this means God was pleased to Re-create Adam and Eve in the
cool of the same day wherein they were created and fell.

Reas. 2 Secondly, it is evident that Adam and Eve were re-created Adam does
testify that he was R^c^eated in the day of his Creation and Fall, by giving
his wife the new name ^evah, life.
in the da^ of their Creation and Fall, because Adam did testifi^ both his
Wifes faith, and his own faith, by calling her Hevah, Life; for Adam gave this
new Name to his Wife as soon as God had manifested the destroying of Satan's
Head-plot through the work of Reconciliation by the Seed of the Woman.

Before the said threatening to break the Devils Head-plot by the Seed of the
Woman, Adam called his Wifes name Isha, Woman, or of Man, because she was taken
out of man, Genesis 2. 23. ^ut after the said threatening to ruinate the Devils
Head-plot, by reconciling Man by the Seed of the Woman, Genesis 3. 15. then in
verse. 20. Adam called his Wife Hevah, that is to say, Life, because she was the
Mother of Life, Genesis 3. 20. or the Mother of that Seed that gives life from the
death of sin, and in this respect she is also the Mother of all that are
elected to live the life of faith; and from this president it is usual in
Scripture to give new names upon new occasions, especially upon the
manifestation of some new work of Grace upon any, as Genesis 17. 5. Es. 62. 2.
Revel. 3. 12.

Adam was not so senceless as to give his Wife the new Name Hevah, because she
was the first living Woman, or the first Mother of Natural life to others, for
all men know that it cannot be otherwise; and therefore it follows by good
consequence, that Adam did give her that new Name by way of excellency, namely,
because she had now received the new life of Faith in that seed of hers, that
should break the Devils Head-plot. And secondly, because she was the first
Woman that did live by faith, therefore she must needs be the Mother of all
that should after live by faith in her Seed Christ, and in that respect she, as
well, or rather more fully than Sara, may well be called the Mother of all that
do live by faith, 1 Pet. 3. 6. Gal. 4. 22. 28. 31.

2 As Adam does testify his Wives faith, so also he does fully testify his
own faith in giving her the new name Hevah; his faith is fully evident by this,
because by this new name he did so clearly distinguish her present new
Spiritual condition from her corrupted condition.

Immediately before this, not only the Woman, but Adam also were Spiritually
dead in corruption and sin; but it pleased God to take such a speedy course for
their humiliation and conviction, and for their reconciliation and conversion
by the Seed of the Woman, that Adam thereupon, in testimony both of his own
faith and of his Wifes faith, did by way of excellency call her Hevah, and so
he changed her name from Isha to Hevah, that is to say, from woman to life.

And thus we have seen how the Seed of the Woman, Christ Jesus, did honor his
first Parents with the life of faith, and as he did honor them, so doubtless
he did continue to honor all his Natural Parents after the flesh (sooner or
later) with the like honor of the life of faith, and therefore they do ill
that mak^ the several wicked Kings of Solomon's house, in Matthew. 1. to be his
Fathers after the flesh; Christ came not of Solomon's house, as the Apostate
Jews, and some unadvised Christians do hold, but he comes of Solomon's brother
called Nathan (and all his Natural Fathers are laid down in Luke 3.) and I make
no question but he did honor every one of them with the grace of true faith,
according to his first example; and this may teach all good children to honor
their Parents with their best abilities.

Reas. 3. It is evident that Adam and Eve were re-created in the day of their
Creation and Fall, by the word enmity against The conversion of our first
Parents is record^^ in he Woman's enmity against the Se^pent and h^s Seed.
the Serpent; I will (says God) put enmity between thee and the Woman.

At the first the Woman looked upon the Serpent as a faithful and diligent
servant for her good, and that the Angel that gave it speech was a good Angel,
and therefore the Woman was in great amity with them, and with the Serpents
fair and specious persuasions; but now God told the Devil in the Serpent, that
he would from this time forth put enmity instead of amity betwixt him and the
Woman, and betwixt both their Seeds. This enmity between the D^vil and the
Woman arises from two contrary Principles:

1 The D^vils enmity against the Woman is, because by her re-creation, and
reconciliation, which was effected by her Seed Christ, he was disappointed of
his Head-plot, which was to bring the whole race of Man under his power and
dominion.

2 The Woman's enmity against Satan is manifest^d by seeking the ruin of his
dominion, by advancing the Kingdom and power of Christ in her Soul, by getting
an assurance of her Redemption from Satan's H^ad-plot, reconciliation with God,
pardon of sin, and power against corrupt affections for time to come.

This holy qualification of enmity, which God by his Spirit had now put into
Eves Soul against Satan's H^ad-plot, is another sure note of her sound
conversion, which was effected and brought to pass in the cool of the
self-same day in which Adam was created, and fell.

D^ubtlesse the Woman did now say in her heart as David once said in Psalm 139.
Do not I (O Jehovah) hate them that hate thee? and am not I grieved for those
that rise up against thee? with perfection of hatred do I hate them, they are
to me for ^nemies, Psalm. 139. 21, 22.

But though the woman was now converted, reconciled (and justified from the
condemning power of her sins) yet she was not freed from temporal afflictions
and chastisements; and therefore it pleased God to lay upon her certain degrees
of punishment for her humiliation, and upon all her sex for her sake; First,
because she was first in the Transgression, God made her desires subject to her
husband, Genesis 3. 16. Secondly, God made her, and all her Sex, to bring forth
children in pain and sorrow: But notwithstanding these degrees of her
humiliation, God has honored the woman with a certain special honor above
the man, because Jesus Christ the Mediator was conceived, and born of the seed
of the woman alone, without the help of man, and therefore Adam might not
reproach his wife, because she was first in the Transgression; but he must, and
did honor her, because she was to be the chief outward instrument of Christ's
Incarnation. And secondly, because she was made an heir as well as Adam of the
promise of life by faith, 1 Pet. 3. 7. and in that respect there is now no
difference between the male, and the female, but all are one in Christ Jesus,
Gal. 3. 28.

And the woman also may comfort her self in Christ, notwithstanding her painful
travel in Childbirth, that she shall be saved by the promised seed of the
woman, if she continue in faith and love, and sanctification, 2 Timothy 2. 15.

Conclusion.
Having in this Chapter made it evident by three Reasons (as I conceive) that
Adam and Eve were Re-created and effectually converted from Satan to God, in
the day of their Creation and Fall: It follows by good consequence, That God
did not ordain the Sabbath in the time of Adams Innocence, but after his Fall
and Re-creation by the Promised Seed.

CHAP. III.
Proving that Adam and Eve were Re-created before the seventh day, namely, in
the latter part of the sixth day.

I Will labor to make this evident by a double inference:

1 From the word Host, and Finished, Genesis 2. 1.

2 From the word Had made, and Finished, Genesis 2. 2.

But for the better discerning of the said Inferences, I will first labor to
explain the text in Genesis 2. 1, 2, 3.

Verse. 1. And the Heavens and the Earth were Finished, and all the Host of them.

Verse. 3. And before the seventh day, God had finished the work that he had
made; And he rested on the seventh day from all the work that he had made.

Verse 3. And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, because in it be
had rested from all his works which God had created and made.

Two things must be marked for the better understanding of these words.

1 Touching the translation of the word Before, in verse. 2.

2 Touching the circumstance of time: namely, after how much time, or
Chronology of story, the second and third verses concerning the Institution of
the Sabbath must be placed.

1 Touching the translation of the word [Before] the seventh day, verse. 2.

1 The Seventy Translators translate it thus; In the sixth day God ended all
his works, they put the sixth day into the Text instead of the seventh day, and
this they did, lest the Heathens, at whose request that Translation was made,
should think that God encled his works in the seventh day.

2 Therefore, to prevent this, and such like gross mistakes, I have made
choice to follow Mr. Broughtons correction of the Geneva Translation, where
instead of In the seventh day, he reads Before the seventh day, God had
finished the work that he had made.

He says that the Hebrew Preposition may be translated, sometim^s In,
sometimes After, and sometimes Before, as the true sense of each place where it
is used, will best bear it; and accordingly in this place he does translate it,
Before the seventh day, and not In the seventh day, as most suitable to the
sense of this place, For God had finished all his works, namely, all the
several sorts and kinds of creatures, Before the end of the sixth day, Exodus
20. 11. Exodus 31. 17. visible and invisible, Col. 1. 16. And he rested on the
seventh day (namely from the making of any other new kinds or sorts of
creatures) Exodus* 20. ^1. Exodus 31. 17. Heb. 4 4. Therefore it is most agree able
to the true scope of this Text, to read it Before, rather than In the seventh
day.

2 The word [Before] is better than the word [In] because it is more agreeable
to the sense of the words adjoining; for the frame of the next words are
delivered in the Pretertense, Had finished, Had made etc. These terms do carry
the work of the Creation to have been Finished, not In, but Before the seventh
day; as if Moses in more words had said thus,

That work which God had made but mutably perfect in the former part of the
sixth day, he had also finished it by a Re-creation most certainly perfect,
Before the seventh day; That is to say, in the latter part of the sixth day.

3 Mr. Ainsworth shows that the Preposition In, ought sometimes to be
translated Before, as in Exodus 17. 6. In the eyes of the Elders of Israel, is
better read thus, Before the eyes of the Elders of Israel, likewise in Deuteronomy.
25. 9. She shall spit in his face, is better read thus, She shall spit Before
his face, namely, Before the face of her husbands brother, in way of reproach
to him, because he refused to raise up seed to his brother and so the Hebrew
Doctors do understand her spitting to be, not In, but Before his face upon the
ground, as asign of R^proach to him.

I grant that the letter of this Preposition does differ from that in Genesis 2.
2. but yet by the rules of Grammar they must suffer the like variation, when
there is the like cause, the difference of the letter does nothing alter the
case.

So in the eyes of Jehovah, Deuteronomy. 4. 25 Deuteronomy. 31. 29. is better read thus,
Before the eyes of Jehovah; So in the New Testament it is said, In or within
the Ark was put the golden pot of Manna, and Asrons Rod, See Ains also in Genesis
36. 6. and P. Martyr^ Com. pl. p ^. c. 7. on Gen 2. 2.
Heb. 9 4. This place may better be translated thus, Before, or By the Ark [not
in it] for there was nothing put into the Ark but the two Tables of stone
only, 1 King. 8. 9.

So then from all these considerations, it is clear that the Hebrew Preposition
ought sometimes to be translated Before, and sometimes After, as well as In,
not only in respect of person and place, but also in respect of time; and
therefore this Text of Genesis 2. 3. ought to be translated thus, Before the
seventh day, God had finished (namely by a Re-creation) the work that he had
made; the Greek translate the work which God had begun to make, for at first it
was made but mutably perfect in the former part of the sixth day.

2 The next considerable Rule of direction for the right understanding of these
three verses, is the circumstance of time, namely after how much of the History
of Adam must these three verses succeed, according to the rule of true
Chronology.

This consideration is a Rule of great importance to find out the true sense of
these three verses.

Answ. My Answer to this Query is this, namely that these three verses must in
order of time be placed at the end of the third Chapter; As it has been well
observed, both by the Hebrew Doctors, and by sundry Christian Writers, as I
have noted it in R. 1. and p. 1. And see also Dr. Leightfoots Chronolgy for
this; and Samuel T^rshel in his Design about disposing the Bible into an
Harmony, he does in p. 10. direct us to place the three first verses of Genesis 2.
1, 2, 3. at the end of the third Chapter, and so does Mr. Bro. also.

I have also noted in Chap. 18. that the only reason why Moses does place these
three verses at the beginning of the second Chapter is this; namely, because he
had begun to set down the story of all the six working days in Genesis 1.
therefore he thought it meet to set down the story of the seventh day in the
next place; and so he has placed the brief story of all the seven days of the
week together, that so he might take the more liberty afterward to return
again unto the large story of Adams Creation, Fall, and Redemption, from the
seventh verse of the second Chapter to the end of the third Chapter: All which
story fell out upon the sixth day, and therefore the ordination of the Sabbath,
though it be set in Genesis 2. 2, 3. yet in the order of Chronology, it must be
set after the third Chapter of Genesis.

This consideration may serve as a necessary Rule to guide us in the right
apprehending, and understanding of sundry words in the said three verses, which
else cannot be fully and rightly understood; for we must expound these three
verses as if they had been placed at the end of the third Chapter.

And this is no new device of man's brain, but it is an usual thing for the
Penmen of the holy Scriptures, to make such like dislocations of Chapters and
verses; and in that respect the Hebrew Doctors do say, that there is no Order
of former and latter in the Law, for oftentimes the Penmen of the holy
Scriptures do set that which is after, Before; and so consequently we must by
the rule of Chronology place the Institution of the Sabbath after the third
Chapter, though Moses for the reason aforesaid, has set it in the beginning of
the second Chapter.

So then by this rule of direction, I hope it will be easy to discern that
these three verses must be expounded with relation to the story of Adams Fall,
Re-creation, and Reconciliation by the Promised-Seed. And therefore it follows
by necessary consequence, that Adams Re-creation by the Seed of the woman, must
be considered as the finishing act of the six days creation, before the
seventh day was ordained to be a Sabbath.

And by this Rule of Exposition, many words also in the said three verses must
be so expounded, as having a holy equivocation in them, namely, as having a
mystical sense, as well as a literal.

As for example, under this word Made and Created, must be understood the
mystical and spiritual Creation, as well as the literal and visible Creation:
And under the word Finished must be understood not only the finishing of the
visible Creation, but of the mystical and spiritual Creation also; which must
be finished, I mean some of that kind, by the Seed of the woman, before the
Host of Heaven can be said to be finished (for the Host of the third heavens
must be finished, as well as the Host of the visible heavens) before the end of
the sixth day.

The like mystical interpretation I shall give of the word Rested, Blessed,
etc. when I come at them.

In brief, I apprehend that there are ten several words in the said three
verses that must be expounded in a mystical sense as well as in a literal.

1 The word Heavens, 2 The word Earth, 3 The word Finished, 4 The word Host, 5
The word Made, 6 The word Rested, 7 The word Blessed, 8 The word Sanctified, 9
The word Sabbath, 10 The word Seventh.
But my work in this Chapter, is only to prove that Adam and Eve were
Re-created before the seventh day; that is to say, in the D^awn from Genesis 2. 1.
If all the Host of Heaven and Earth were finished before the seventh day, then
it must needs follow that Adam and Eve were Re-created before the seventh day.
latter part of the sixth day; and this I will endeavor to prove by a
necessary consequence drawn from the first verse, which runs thus, And the
heavens and the earth were finished, and all the Host of them.

Hence I reason thus,

If all the several sorts and kinds of creatures which appertained to the Host
of Heaven and Earth were finished before the seventh day; then Adam and Eve
were Re-created before the seventh day: for Gods Host was not finished until
some of that sort of creatures were finished, which did appertain to the Host
of the Church Militant here upon earth, and to the Host of the Church
Triumphant in heaven.

But all the several sorts and kinds of creatures which appertained to the
Host of heaven and earth were finished before the seventh day, as the text does
plainly speak.

Therefore Adam and Eve were Re-created before the seventh day, and did
appertain to the Host of the Church Militant here on earth, and to the Host of
the Church Triumphant in heaven before the seventh day, or else God did not
finish all the Host of heaven and earth before the seventh day, which is to
deny and contradict the words of the Holy Ghost.

It is out of question therefore that the souls of Adam and Eve were Re-created,
and made perfect by the Redemption of the Promised Seed before the seventh day
for that sort of creature does appertain to the heavenly Host as well as the
Angels, and to Gods spiritual Host and Church here upon earth, and in that
respect the godly converts are called (by the Figure Continent for the for the
thing contained) The new Heavens, and the new Earth, in which dwelieth
Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13.

And it is further evident that such redeemed persons are a true part of Gods
Host here upon earth, because the Scripture calls the Church of Israel when it
was redeemed out of Egypt, the Lords Host, Exodus 12. 41. Exodus 38. 8. Number. 1.
3. And wicked Antiochus is said to tread down Gods Host or Army underfoot when
he persecuted the Church, Dan. 8. 14. yea all, and every part of Gods Militant
Church here upon earth is called Gods Host or Army, Psalm. 110. 3.

Adam and Eve therefore must not only fall into the spiritual death of sin, in
the day of their creation, but they must also be Re-created the same day, as a
principal sort of those creatures, which God did create and provide, both for
his earthly, and also for his heavenly Host; for the Text says, That the
Heavens and the Earth were finished, and all the Host of them: which must be
understood of every several sort of Host, not numerically of the whole number,
but specifically of the several kinds of each Host, for no new thing of a new
kind was created after the sixth day.

Therefore seeing God did finish all the Host of heaven and earth before the
seventh day, he must needs Re-create Adam and Eve before the seventh day, that
so they might be a part of his Militant Church, Host, or Army, here upon earth,
to maintain an utter enmity against Satan and his seed, Genesis 3. 15. and so
from the first sixth day, and forwards, God will have a Militant Church to
continue here upon earth to fight the warfare of Christ against Satan and his
seed to the end of the world.

Reason 2. It is further evident that Adam was Re-created by the Promised Seed
in the day of his creation, by another Inference, If God had made something in
the former part of the sixth day that needed a new act of finishing before the
seventh day, then what else can that finishing act be, but Adams Recreation by
the Promised Seed
word Had made, verse. 2.

From the frame of these words as they are laid down in the Pretertense it is
evident, that before the seventh day, namely in the latter part of the sixth
day, God had finished some of that work which he had made but mutably perfect
in the former part of the sixth day; Hence I reason thus,

God had made some of his works so mutably perfect in the former part of the
sixth day, that there needed a new act of finishing, or perfecting the same
before the seventh day; and what else can that finishing act be, but Adams
Re-creation by the Promised Seed, and the putting of all the re rest of the
Creation at the very instant of Adams fall under the Dominion and Lordship of
the Promised Seed?

And this must needs be so, because God had made, appointed, or foreordained
Christ to be the right Heir of all his Creation, and to uphold all things by
the word of his powerful providence, Heb. 1. 2, 3. and in that respect, Adam
must fall and be Re-created on the day of his creation, that so the right Heir
Christ Jesus might come into actual possession of all the Creation, by means
whereof, the Heavens and the Earth, and all their Host, was finished, before
the seventh day; and in this respect Christ i^ eminently styled Jehovah
Sabbath, that is to say, The Lord of all Hosts, Ps. 24. 10. because they were
made for his service, that he as their proper Lord might rule them, and govern
them all, for it is said, That by him all things consist, Col. 1. 17. and in
this respect also, he is See also chapter 4 and chapter 6 at Sixthly.
called The Lord of all the whole world, and of all things therein, Jos. 3. 11.
Act. 10. 36. Phi. 2. 11. Ps. 24. 1. Neh. 9. 6. To him also does appertain the
Dominion of the Heavens, and of the heaven of heavens, the earth, and all that
is in them, Deuteronomy. 10. 14, 15. And because all Government is his, therefore it
is from him that Kings do reign and rule, Prove. 8. 15, 16.

It follows therefore that God ordained Christ to be the right Heir, and sole
Governor of all the Hosts both of heaven and earth, on the sixth day, and
before God could be said to rest on the seventh day.

1 God made Adam in the former part of the sixth day after his own Image, as
the glory of all his Creation, and gave him Dominion over all his visible
creatures, Genesis 1. 26. 28. But it pleased God in his divine Wisdom, to make
Adam but mutably happy, that so he might fall by the sleight of Satan, and
lose his pure qualities wherein he was created after Gods Image, and that he
might thereby also lose his Dominion over all the visible Creation, that so
Christ the right Heir might have the possession of all, for as soon as Adam
fell by his disobedience in eating the forbidden fruit, both Adam, and all the
Creation did presently fall into confusion and disorder: And thereupon Satan
might well triumph, and boast as he did in the days of Job, that he had walked
to and fro in the earth as the Lord and Conqueror of it, because he had not
only brought Adam and Eve into Captivity under the spiritual death of sin, and
the whole Creation into confusion and disorder, but also because he had robbed
the holy Trinity of all the glory of their glorious Creation.

2 God was pleased in his infinite Wisdom and Providence to let all this come
to pass, that so the holy Trinity might take occasion thereby to declare unto
fallen Man, how wonderful they were in Counsel, and how excellent in working,
in that they could tell how to make Man mutably perfect, and how to let Man
fall by the sleight of Satan, and how to break the Devils Head-plot by the
promised Seed, and how to reconcile and recreate Man, and how to make fallen
Man know, and honor his Creators, more than otherwise he could ever have done,
if he had stood still in his first integrity of Nature; for if Adam had still
continued in his Created perfections, he could not have honored the Mediator
(so as he did after his Fall) seeing he needed not a Mediator in that
condition; neither could he have so much honored Gods Mercy in the Mediator as
he did after his Fall and Re-creation.

3 By this time I think any man may easily see the reason why all the three
Persons in the Godhead had a hand in the Creation of the World, and more
eminently in the Creation of Man, Genesis 1. 26. surely the chief reason was, That
God might make Adam in his Innocence could not so well honor all his Creators
as after his Fall and Re-creation.
Adam by his Fall and Recreation the better able to know, and honor all the
three Persons in the Godhead as his Creators, for Adam could not honor all
his Creators so well in his Innocence as after his Fall and Re-creation, and in
this respect all the three Persons in the Godhead are called our Creators,
Eccles. 12. 1. Psalm. 149. 2. and our Makers, Job 35. 10. Es. 54. 5. and truly
such Creators could not rest on the Seventh Day from all the Works which they
had Created and made, until they had made man to know them to be their Creators
by a Re-creation, which Adam could not do as long as he stood in his Innocence;
but as soon as his Creation was finished and made perfect by a Re-creation,
then fallen man both knew and honored all his Creators; and the Mediator in
special to be the Mediator of his Re-creation, of his Reconciliation, and
eternal Redemption, and then God rested on the Seventh Day, because he had
finished his Creation by the promised Seed.

4 After Adams fall it pleased God so to question with Adam about his miserable
condition by his Fall, that he made him sensible of his misery; and then it
pleased God to make his Mercy known to him in the Mediator. It was a terror to
the Devil to hear, that the Seed of the Woman should break his head, Genesis 3.
15. but because it was a great comfort to fallen Adam, for God declared the
Mediator both in his Person and Office to fallen Adam, and by Gods description
Adam could not choose but know that his Person must needs be both God and Man;
he could not choose but know, that he that must break the Devils Head-plot must
needs be God, and that he that must be born of the Seed of the Woman must needs
be Man, and then for his Office he could not choose but know, that it must be a
Mediatorial office of reconciliation, or else such a miserable sinner as he
could never be restored again into Gods favor.

In all these respects fallen Adam could not choose but know, and honor the
Father for his great Mercy, in propounding such a Mediator; and he could not
choose but know, and honor the Mediator of his Redemption more than if he had
stood still in his innocence; and he could not choose but know and honor the
Holy Ghost, because his heart and mind was recreated, and made new by the
sanctifying work of the Holy Ghost for the sake of the Mediator, 1 Pet. 1, 2.
Fallen Adam of himself had no skill, nor will, to find out a Mediator, till
the Holy Ghost did enable him to believe that the Seed of the Woman should one
day give his Soul as a Mediatorial Sacrifice of atonement (even then when the
Devil should pierce him in the foot-soals) for the procuring of his Fathers
reconciliation, by which he should be eternally redeemed from the Curse due to
his disobedience, and from the guilt of his sin, and so be received into Gods
favor as his adopted son.

O the infinite Wisdom of God, that could tell how to augment man's happiness,
and his own praise, by Adams sinful disobedience! if Adam had continued still
in his innocence he should have been continued only in his Natural perfections,
and have been a Lord above all the rest of the visible Creation; but in that
condition he could not have so much honored all his Creators as he did after
his recreation; neither should he have attained to that degree of happiness as
after his Fall, by the Mediator; neither could the Holy Trinity have been so
glorious in his Soul as they were after his Fall and recreation.

5 This sentence, before the seventh day God had finished the work that he had
made, is a remarkable sentence, full of Spiritual weight and worth, because it
imports, that though Adam and Eve were created but mutably perfect in the
former part of the sixth day, yet that they were recreated and made perfect by
the promised Seed in the latter part of that day, namely before the seventh
day, and that this finishing act of Gods Creation by a Recreation was the
perfection of the whole Creation, so that nothing could be added to it
afterward, to make the Creation The Creation of the Human Nature of Christ in
the latter part of the sixth day, was the perfection of the whole Creation.
more perfect to the worlds end; for by the Creation of the Human nature of
Christ of the Seed of the Woman (which must be created in the sixth day) for it
is a Creature, and therefore it was truly existing in that Prophetical
declaration of it, Genesis 3. 15. I say, this addition to the Creation in the cool
of the sixth day, made the whole Creation perfect and entire, lacking nothing,
and so much the word had made, and had finished, must import; namely, it must
import such a finishing act and perfection of all the Creation, as must have as
full and as large a The Mystical as well as the Natural Creation was finished,
and made, before the Seventh day, and therefore Adam and Eve were re-created
before the seventh day.
sense as can be contained in the Scriptures; namely, it must have a Mystical
sense as well as a Literal, John says, Chap. 1. 3. All things were made by
him, even all things without exception that were made, were made by him in six
days, therefore we must not leave any sort of Creature out of the Work of those
six days, excepting him that did create them; so that whatever Mystical thing
is found in any part of the Scripture to be Created by God, in relation to Man,
or to the Mediator, it must be included as a particular Commentary, or
Exposition of these terms, had finished, had made, had created Before the
seventh day.

Arius denied Christ to be of the same nature with his Father, See the Sum of
Divinity, by Jo. Downham, p. 35. See also more here in chapter 5.
and made him only a Creature, yet he held him to be an excellent Creature (and
as it were a secondary God) Created before the World, and by whom God Created
the World, and saved Mankind, and therefore as a God in Office to be adored,
not in Essence. The like he says of the Holy Ghost.

But seeing it is plain that God made all Creatures in six days, both the Son
and the Spirit (if they were Creatures) must have been comprehended in that
work. Hence I infer, that seeing the Human nature of Christ was a Creature
(and differing much from fallen man, because he was conceived by the Holy
Ghost) it must be comprehended in the Creation of the sixth day; and therefore
his Human nature did exist in that Prophetical declaration of being made of the
Seed of the Woman to break the Serpents head.

John says, All things were made by him, (even his own Human nature) and
without him was nothing made that was made, John 1. 3. and the Apostle makes
Christ as Mediator to be the first of all things, that he might be the Head of
his Body the Church, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence,
therefore Adam and Eve must be Re-created in the day of their Creation, that so
from that day forward Christ might be the Head of his Body the Church, that in
all things he might have the pre-eminence, Col. 1. 15. to 19. and in this
respect also Christ is said to save us, and to call us by a holy Calling before
the world was, 2 Timothy 1. 9. because he was ordained to his Office before the
world was.

6 The very frame of the words in Genesis 22. (being delivered so often in the
pretertence) may assure us, that not only the first natural being, or existing
of the Creation is meant, but that the very best supernatural being thereof is
also meant; for if the adding of some Common gifts to Nature be called a
Creation, Eze. 28. 14, 15. then the super-adding of saving gifts to fallen man,
must needs be esteemed as the highest degree of all Gods Creation, as these
Scriptures do testify, Ier. 33. 26. Ezekiel. 43. 1. 7. 15. 21. Es. 44. 2. Ephesians.
2. 10. Psalm. 100. 3. Psalm. 102. 18. Hence it follows, that seeing the Heavens
and the Earth were finished after they had been made, it must be understood
that they were finished by the Redemption and Gubernation of the promised Seed
before the seventh Day, and therefore that Adam and Eve must necessarily be
recreated on the sixth day, and so (by the Figure Synedoche, and also by the
figure Continent for the thing contained) they must be a part of the New
Heavens, and of the New Earth, as well as all other re-created Souls are, Es.
51. 16. Es. 65. 17, 18. Es. 66. 22. Es. 41. 20. Psalm. 96. 11. 2 Pet. 3. 13.
Rev. 21. 1.

The finishing act of that which God had created in the end of the sixth day by
the promised Seed, may well be resembled to the finishing act of the Temple by
Joash and Jehoi^da, they employed faithful Workmen to repair it, after that
wicked Athaliah had destroyed it, and then it is said, That a Healing went up
upon the work, 1 Chro. 24. 13. that is to say, the breaches and decays thereof
were healed, repaired, and amended; for to heal a thing is to repair it, or to
make it perfect and sound again, 2 Chro. 7. 14. Psalm. 60. 2. 2 Chro. 34. 10.
and thus the Temple which had been made was re-created, finished, and perfected
by those faithful men, ver. 14.

In like sort, after that Satan by his malicious Head-plot had ruinated, and
broken down that glorious Temple-work of Gods Creation, by enticing Adam and
Eve to eat the forbidden Fruit, then God laid help upon one that was able and
faithful to repair it, for in the end of the sixth day God told the Devil by
way of threatening, and Adam and Eve by way of Promise, That the Seed of the
Woman should break this Head-plot of the Devil, by his Mediatorial obedience,
when he should make his Soul a propitiatory Sacrifice for his sin, even at the
same time when the Devil should pierce him in the foot-soals as a sinful
Malefactor; now God could not declare this but by his Sons pre-consent,
contract, and Covenant, upon his undertaking Gods Atonement, or Reconciliation
was procured, and the holy Spirit was procured thereby also for Adams
re-creation, and so a Healing went up upon the Creation by this faithful
Workman, and blessed Mediator Christ Jesus, the strong Rock, whose work is
perfect, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. and in this respect the Apostle Peter calls the Mediator
the faithful, Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19. whose work is perfect, but Peter's Greek
(Ctistes) is borrowed from the seventy, on 1 Samuel 22. and Psalm. 18. 2. where
the Hebrew is Rock, and there it is the attribute of the Mediator; and Christ
told his Apostles, that he would build his Church upon that Rock, and that the
gates of Hell should not overcome it, Mat. 16. 18.

Master Perkins on the Creed, page 154. says, God is called the faithful
Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19. because he did not leave his Works of Creation without
his faithful care and providence, as Masons and Carpenters leave their Houses
as soon as they are built, without any further care what becomes of them, for
God is a faithful Creator, that will not let his Creation go to ruin.

Thus we see that Adam and Eve were twice Created in one day; 1. They were made
perfect, but yet mutable in the former part of the sixth day (as it appeared)
for presently by the sleight of Satan they lost their first Created
perfections. 2. God did Re-create them with supernatural perfections by the
promised Seed, in the end of the same day; and this Creation was permanent,
because it was a Creation of God in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 10. and because
Christ undertook to make all perfect, therefore God rewarded Christ for this
his work, for at the same time the Lord put the whole Creation in subjection
under the feet of Christ; and when all this was done, then the whole Creation
was perfect, and entire, lacking nothing, and therefore Gods rest on the
Seventh Day was a perfect rest; But if God had kept his rest on the Seventh day
whiles Adam had stood in his mutable condition, as some Expositors would have
him to do, then Gods rest (especially on the first Sabbath) had stood but upon
a ticklish and litigious foundation.

CHAP. IV.
That this Sentence [Before the Seventh Day God had finished God did put out
sundry operations of his eternal providence in the sixth day, for the finishing
of that work which he had created but mutably perfect, before he could be said
to keep a perfect rest on the seventh day. The reason why God made Angels but
mutably perfect at first was, that they might fall, and so might become the
instrument of Man's fall.
the Work that he had made] does imply, That God, by his Eternal Counsel and
Providence (as the efficient cause) had contrived to put out sundry opperations
of his Eternal Providence in the sixth day, for the finishing, or perfect
settling of all that Work which he had made but mutably perfect at first, before
he could keep a perfect rest on the Seventh Day.

BY the event of things now made known unto us, we may in some sort see into
the Platform of Gods eternal Providence, how he had contrived to finish or
perfect that Work that at the first he had made, and created, but mutably
perfect, before he could keep the Seventh Day as a day of perfect rest.

If God by his eternal Counsel and Providence had not contrived to make Angels
mutably perfect as well as Man, then Angels had not despised to attend upon
Adam and Eve into Paradise (as their charge was) and then Angels had not become
Devils, and then Man had not been tempted by Satan, and then man had not
fallen, and then God had foreordained a Mediator in vain.

Therefore that God might make his Free grace glorious to fallen Man, and that
he might make the Mediator glorious to the Souls of the Elect, he made Adam at
the first but mutably perfect, that so he might fall, and that so he might take
occasion thereby to convince him, and humble him in the sight of his sin and
misery, and that so he might take occasion thereby to reveal unto his Soul the
way of eternal Salvation by the Seed of the Woman.

And for the more speedy effecting of all this, he did by his eternal Counsel
and Providence appoint his heavenly Angels, as well as his terrestrial
Creatures, to attend upon Adam and Eve into Paradise, for he fore-knew that if
he did but give his heavenly Angels charge to attend upon earthly Man, with
other earthly Creatures into Paradise, that many Legions of them would despise
Man in comparison of themselves, and would neglect their charge, that so in
Justice God might deprive them of their pure Natural qualities, and then he
knew that they would become an envious company against the glory of Man, and
that they would agree together in one deep Head-plot (altogether unseen to Man)
to seduce him, and persuade him to eat of the forbidden Fruit, that so they
might be brought into the same Spiritual death with themselves; and by this
speedy Head-plot of theirs they made account not only to corrupt Adam and Eve,
but also to destroy the whole Generation of all Mankind.

But God that was wise in Counsel, and wonderful in Working, who works all
things after the Counsel of his own Will, Ephesians. 1. 11. had contrived how to break
this Head-plot of the Devil in pieces by the Seed of the Woman; this Divine
H^ad-plot the Angels that fell knew not of, for if they had but known it, then
they would not have refused to attend upon Adam and Eve into Paradise; and thus
God by his eternal Counsel and Providence had contrived how to make this
Head-plot of the Devil to be an occasion to declare his goodness to fallen M^n,
both the goodness of Justice, and the goodness of Mercy, by making the Person
and office of the Mediator better known, and more admired and honored of
fallen Man, than if Adam had stood still in his innocence. As soon therefore as
Adam was fallen, God took occasion thereby to introduce the Mediator into his
Priestly Office virtually, that so he might reconcile and redeem Man, and put
him into a better estate again than he had by his first Creation, and that
thereby God might put all the rest of his Creation under the Government of
Christ, as the true Lord, and proper Heir of all things, for all things were
created for him, Col. 1. 16. or else if he had not restrained sin, and been
pre-ordained to be the Heir of all things, and to be ready at hand to take the
Government of all upon him at Adams Fall, the whole Creation had been instantly
confounded by a general Rebellion, and by a total Disorder, which was the main
thing that the Devil aimed at in his Head-plot, but it was prevented, because
he had ordained Christ to be the right Heir of all, to undertake the Government
of all at the very instant of Adams Fall, and so his Mercy is over all his
Works, as the Hen is over her Chickens, Psa. 145.

From the Premises I reason thus:

The whole Creation was made at first for that very end for which it now
serves, Psalm. 119. 91.

But now all the whole Creation serves to the honor of the Mediator, for God
has laid the Government of the whole Creation upon his Shoulders, Es. 9. 6, 7.
and has given him dominion over the Works of his hands, and has put all
things under his feet, Psalm. 8. 6. 1 Cor. 15. 24. to 28. and in that he has
put all things in subjection under him, he left nothing that should not be
subject to him, Hebr. 2. 8.

Therefore God had foreordained the Mediator, to restrain the violence of
corrupted Nature, and to take upon him the right of Government, as the right
Heir of all things, even from the first moment of Man's Fall, for all things
were created for him, Col. 1. 16. and therefore God could not keep a Sabbath of
rest until he had put the right Heir into actual possession, and in that
respect Christ is styled the Lord of all Hosts, Psalm. 24. 10. because all the
Hosts of Heaven and Earth were put under his Dominion, even from the day of
Man's creation; and in that respect also Christ is styled and called, The
beginning of the creation of God, Rev. 3. 14. Col. 1. 15. Psalm. 102. 26. Heb.
2. 10. for he was ordained before all things, and by him all things do
consist, Col. 1. 17. Heb. 2. 10. 1 Cor. 8. 6.

And this Dominion of the Mediator all creatures do, and have acknowledged ever
since the fall of Adam; and therefore the four and twenty Elders do cast down
their Crowns before him, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and
honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasures sake
they are, and were created, Rev. 5. 11, 12, 13. Psalm. 145, 10, 11, 12. Psa. 89.
5. and Rev 5. 11, 12, 13. See also chapter 6 at Sixthly.
our Savior Christ does still comfort his afflicted people with the constancy
of his providence, for their good, saying, I have made thee (namely by a
Re-creation) and I will bear thee (namely by my constant fatherly providence)
Es. 64. 4. yea Christ by his overruling providence does create, and make the
wicked to serve for his glory, and for his Churches good, by limitting and
ordering all their wicked actions; Behold (says Christ) I have created the
Smith, and I have created the Destroyer to destroy, Es. 64. 16. yea Christ does
order the very devils by his overruling providence, so that they cannot be so
malicious, as else they would be against man, as we may see in the case of Job.
So then, both Deceivers, and Deceived, all are from Him, and by Him, and for
Him, Romans 11. 35. Job. 12. 16. And thus we see that God has put all things
under the feet of Christ according to the purpose of him who works all things
after the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. Act. 2. 23. And therefore it
follows, that God by his eternal Providence did ordain a Mediator against the
day of Adams fall, Ephesians. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 20. 2 Timothy 1. 9. by whose Redemption
and Gubernation, the whole Creation was finished, perfected, settled, and
ordered before the seventh day; and therefore these terms (he had finished, and
had made before the 7th. day) do imply, that Christ the Mediator did put out
sundry operations of his eternal Providence in the sixth day for the finishing
and perfect settling of all the Creation (which at first he had made but mutably
perfect) before he could keep a contented settled rest on the seventh day. Mr.
Perkins on the Creed, Page 159. says, One of the greatest works of Gods
providence that can be, is about man's Fall and Restoration; First, by the just
permission of his Fall, Romans 11. 32. And secondly, by destroying this head-plot
of the Devil, Gal. 3 22.

CHAP. V.
That this term [which he had made, Genesis 2. 2.] has relation to the Creation
of the Mediator, in two particulars; 1 In regard of his Office as a Mediatorial
Priest. 2 In regard of his Humane nature.

GOD having provided a Mediator, by his eternal Providence, God created or
installed the Mediator into his Priestly office before he could keep a perfect
rest on the seven^h day.
against the day of Adams fall, for his Reconciliation, and Re-creation, was
pleased accordingly to exhibit the said Mediator to Adam in a gracious
declaration thereof to him, but yet it was in a way of threatening to the
Serpent, that this Mediator should be the seed of that deceived Woman, and that
he should break his head-plot, Gen 3. 15. namely by his propitiatory sacrifice,
or sacrifice of Atonement, even at the same time when the Devil by his
instruments should put him to death by peircing him in the foot-soals as a
sinful Malefactor on the Cross; and now God did not only threaten the Devil
to break his head-plot, and not only comfort Adam with the assurance of his
Redemption, but also he said to his Son, This day have I begotten thee, or
created thee into the office of a Priestly Mediator, Heb. 5. 5. with Psalm. 2.
7, 8. and in this sense God is said to make or create Moses and Aaron when he
installed them into the office of deliverers, The humane nature of Christ was
created and virtually made flesh of the s^ed of the woman before God could be
said to keep a perfect rest on the seventh day. See John Frith against Sir Tho.
Mo^^ p. 109.
1 Samuel 12. 6. and in this sense God could not keep a perfect rest on the
seventh day until he had created the Mediator into his Priestly office.

2 The humane nature of Christ was created, and exhibited in a gracious
declaration of Adams redemption (from the Devils Head-plot by the seed of the
Woman) as the perfection of all the Creation on the sixth day, his humane
nature is a creature, and therefore it was virtually made flesh of the seed of
the woman, before it could be said, That God had finished all his works which
be had created and made; and there fore before he could keep a perfect rest on
the seventh day.

Christ was as truly made flesh of the seed of the Virgin Eve on the sixth day,
as he was made flesh of the seed of David, Romans 1. 3. and his flesh was as
truly eaten by faith of Adam and Eve, and of all the godly Fathers that offered
Sacrifices of Atonement by faith, as it is eaten by us now; for this
Proposition is general, and belongs to the godly in all ages from the first
Promise, That unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, ye can have no life
in you, Joh. 6. 53. And for the confirmation of this first Promise (that Christ
should be made flesh of the seed of the woman) Christ did often appear to the
Fathers in the shape of a man, Genesis 32. 24. Prove. 8. 31. to assure them, that
as he was truly exhibited in a gracious promise to our first Parents, so he
would in due time take our nature upon him; and in this respect the humane
nature of Christ was called by the Prophet Jeremy, A new created thing in the
Earth, A Virgin shall compass a man, Jer. 31. 22.

This whole Chapter is a Prophecy of the days of the Messiah (as any
considerate Reader may easily discern) I put in the term Virgin, instead of our
translated term Woman, and yet I find no fault with the term Woman, provided
the interpretation be of a Virgin-Woman; but if the term Woman be taken for one
that has a Husband, in that sense I dislike the term, for it is no new created
thing for a woman that has a husband to compass a man-child in her womb.

2 I dissent from them that think the word Compass does mean the crafty
fetches of an immodest woman, seeking as an agent to circumvent some man or
other into the bond of marriage; This Interpretation cannot stand, because this
is no new created thing.

3 I dissent from them that make this Woman to be the generality of the Jews
that shall conquer the great Empire of the Turks, for this new device does not
make this new created thing.

But to me it is most evident that this new created thing is nothing else but
the humane nature of Christ encompassed in the womb of a Virgin; First, of the
Virgin Eve; And secondly, of the Virgin Mary: And at this new created thing, no
doubt but Adam and Eve did as much wonder, as the Angels did at the hanging of
the earth upon nothing, Job 38. 7. yea this new created thing may justly ravish
both Men and Angels with wonderment, as it does, 1 Timothy 3. 16 1 Pet. 1. 12.
Exodus 25. 20.

By this Vision the Prophet Jeremy did call backsliding Israel to consider this
new created thing (saying, by way of wonderment at their unbeleef) How long
will thou go about, O thou backsliding daughter? for the Lord has created a
new thing in the earth, A Virgin-woman shall compass a man.

Hence it is evident, that if this backsliding Daughter had but duly considered
this new created thing, it would have wrought true conversion in them as well
as it did in Adam and Eve (But who has believed our report, says the Prophet
in the like case, Es. 53. 1. Isaiah would have cured wicked Ahaz his unbeleef
with this sign, Es. 7. 14. but this new created thing did not work admiration
in his affections, as it did in Adam and Eve, and therefore it did him no good.

After Jeremy had propounded this new created thing for the conversion of
backsliding Israel, he said, I awaked, and behold my sleep was sweet unto me,
Jer. 31. 26. it wrought sweet affections of joy in the consideration of it; But
if Jeremy had conceived as some Interpreters do, that this woman had been a
subtle immodest woman, then I marvel how he could have had any sweet content
in that consideration when he awoke.

By this woman therefore I do not only understand the Virgin Mary, that did
actually compass the Humane nature of Christ in her womb, but I do also
understand the Virgin Eve that did virtually compass him in her womb by faith,
for God did exhibit the Messiah to her in a gracious Proposition in the cool of
the sixth day while she was a Virgin; And it is remarkable that the Prophet
Jeremy does speak of this new created thing both in the time past, and also in
the time to come; Behold, says he, the Lord has created a new thing in the
earth (and in the next clause he speaks of it as of a thing to come) A Virgin
shall compass a man, or a man-child (for a man-child is called A man, Job 3.
2. Joh. 16. 21.)

So then this phrase, God had finished his work which he had made before the
seventh day, includes all this that I have spoken of the Humane nature of
Christ, as I have also noted it in Chap. 3. R. 2.

Also the extent of this term created and made is very large, for it is often
applied to things that are new, mavelous, and glorious, Es. 65. 18. Ex. 34.
10. Number. 16. 30. also it is applied to Gods powerful acts, Deuteronomy. 3. 24. and to
things that are done in a miraculous manner above nature, Joh. 2. 9. In all
which regards the humane nature of Christ; (as it was compassed in the womb of
a Virgin that never knew man) may well be called a glorious, powerful, and
miraculous new created thing in the earth to the sound conversion of a true
considerate heart.

2 This new created thing the Prophet Agur does make to be the greatest wonder
of all the four which he does name, and compare together, in Prove. 30. 18, 19.

Three things (says he) are too wonderful for me, yea four that I know not; 1
The way of an Eagle in the air. 2 The way of a Serpent from a Rock. 3 The way
of a ship in the midst of the Sea. And 4 The way of a man in a Virgin. The
Hebrew word which is translated Woman in this place, does properly signify
such a woman as never knew man by carnal generation. This Hebrew word is never
used for a polluted Adultresse as some would have it to mean in this place. 2
Neither is this Hebrew word used for a married woman, but always for a Virgin
that never knew man: Examine the several places where this Hebrew word is used,
and that will confirm the truth of my observation; It is used but six times
only in Scripture, Genesis 24. 43. Ps. 68. 25. Cant. 1. 2. Cant. 6. 7. Es. 7. 14.
Prove. 30. 19. in the first five places no question is made by any to the
contrary; all the question is about this last place in Prove. 30. 19. and yet if
the scope of the Prophet Agur in this Chapter be well marked, there is no more
question of this place, than of the rest; for in this Chapter the Prophet Agur
does speak of Christ in our nature, and calls him Ithiel and Vcall verse. 1. Mr.
Broughton in Ecclesiastes, page 11. says, that Agur speaks of Gods dwelling in
Christ named Ithiel and Vcall, which signifies God with me, even the mighty; so
that we see the Prophet Agur does call the Mediator Ithiel and Vcall in the
very same sense that Esaias calls him Immanuel; the notation is much alike in
both places.

Therefore seeing the Prophet Agur does speak of Christ in our nature in the
forefront of this Prophecy, what lets but that he may speak also of his
wonderful strange conception in the womb of a Virgin? the wonderfulnesse
whereof he does illustrate by way of comparison to three other things that are
beyond the power of humane reason to find out; For first, who can find out the
pathway where a ship has gone in the midst of the Sea? Or secondly, the
pathway where an Eagle has flown in the midst of the air? Or thirdly, the
pathway of a Serpent from the Rock: Put fourthly, who can find out how a
Man-child can be conceived in the womb of a Virgin that never knew man? the
Prophet Agur makes this fourth thing a greater wonder than the other three. And
this last the Prophet Jeremy calls a new created thing in the earth; and seeing
all sorts of creatures were created in six days, it follows, that this new
created thing of the humane nature of Christ in the womb of a Virgin, was
created and exhibited to fallen Adam and Eve in a gracious Propetical
Declaration on the sixth day, before that God could keep a perfect rest on the
seventh day.

CHAP. VI.
Proving, that the whole world was made for the Honor of the Mediator, as the
right Heir of all; 1 Hence it follows, That God could not keep a perfect Rest
on the seventh day, until he had put the Mediator, as the right Heir of all,
into his possession. 2 Hence follows, That Adam must fall, and be Re-created on
the day of his Creation. This is proved by an induction of some particulars.

1 THe Angels were made to serve the Mediator even as he was ordained to be the
seed of the woman, Psalm. 91. 11, 12. Heb. 1. 6. and therefore they did sing for
joy, not only at the birth of Christ when he was born of the Virgin Mary, Luke
2. 14. But doubtless, they did as much rejoice to hear that joyful news to
fallen Adam and Eve, that he should be the seed of the woman to break the
Devils Head-plot; and ever since that day they desire to pry into that joyful
and glorious mystery, 1 Timothy 3. 16. 1 Pet. 1. 12.

2 The woman was in a special manner made for the Honor of the Mediator, as
well as for Admas Society, and Posterity; for without the woman's seed, Christ
could not have been promised to be the seed of the woman that was fallen, and
that her seed should break the Devils Head-plot, Genesis 3. 15.

3 The Sabbath was made for the Honor of the Mediator, for he was Lord of the
Sabbath, even as he was the Son of Man, Mar. 2. 28

4 The distinction of the natural day into Morning and Evening was so contrived
by Gods providence for the Honor of the Mediator, for the glad tidings of his
Propitiatory Sacrifice was constantly remembered, and typified by the Morning
and Evening, Sacrifices; for that division of the day into morning and evening
is a differing division from day and night (as I have showed at large in my
book of Holy Time) and therefore according to the usual time of the Evening
Sacrifice Christ performed his Propitiatory Sacrifice of Atonement, about the
midst of the first Evening, for the first natural Evening begins at Midday at
the first declining of the Sun, and continues till Sunset, where the night
begins, and in the midst of this evening, namely about three a clock in the
afternoon, Christ made his soul an Evening Sacrifice of man's Redemption.

5 The several sorts of Beasts and Fowls were made for the Honor of the
Mediator; and though some of them were by Gods Providence to be of a ravenous
kind, namely as soon as Adam fell, yet they could not destroy fallen man from
the face of the earth, neither could they wholly destroy their fellowcreatures
that were of a tame kind, because the Lord God had ordained a Mediator to be
the right Heir of them all, and to rule them all (by restraining their corrupt
desires, and guiding them) as soon as Adam fell, so that the hungry Lions could
not devour Daniel without his license; and as for the rest of the creatures
which were ordained to be of a more quiet and harmless kind, God called them
clean Beasts, and some of them he ordained for the use of Sacrifices, as the
fittest to typifie the innocence of Christ's humane nature, and the perfection
of his Sacrifice.

6 All sorts of creatures were made for the Honor of the Mediator; and
therefore as soon as Adam fell, God put all things in subjection under his
feet, And there was nothing that was not made subject unto him, Heb. 2. 8.
Psalm. 8. 6. Col. 1. 16. Ephesians. 1. 22.

Yea, God made him the head over the spirits of just men made perfect by the
Fathers forgiveness, that is to say, by the Fathers justification, Heb. 12.
23. and that Dominion is called the first o^ the chiefest Dominion, Mic. 4. 8.
and this Dominion God gave him in the day of Adams Fall and Re-creation.

Yea all creatures in general do yield obedience unto the Mediator as their
proper Lord and Governor, Rev. 5. 13. as I have noted more at large in Chap.
3. R. 2. and in Chap. 4.

Yea when the Mediator was here upon earth in his humane nature, all creatures
obeyed him as their Lord; for he rebuked the boy sterous winds, and the raging
sea, and they obeyed him; He commanded the liquid waters to bear him as the dry
land, and they obeyed him; He commanded a hundred fifty three great fishes to
come into Peter's Net, and not to break it, and they obeyed him, Joh. 21. He
commanded that fish that had swallowed a Stater to come to Peter's Angle to pay
his tribute, and that obeyed him; He commanded the Asse-colt whereon never man
sat to carry him with all gentleness to Jerusalem, as if it had been tamed by
former riding, and it obeyed him; He commanded diseases of all sorts to depart
from the sick, and they obeyed him: Yea he commanded the Devils to come out of
certain men and women, and they obeyed him; Yea at the time of Noah's flood, He
commanded all sorts of creatures, as well the wild ravenous kind, as the tame
kind, to come of their own accord into Noah's Ark, and to live quietly together,
and they obeyed him, Genesis 7. 8, 9. But the wicked world, because they despised
the Spirit of Christ in Noah, therefore Christ commanded a deluge of water to
seize upon their bodies, and their souls he sent to the prison of Hell, 1 Pet.
3. 19.

7 God gave the Mediator an absolute Dominion over all Tyrants, so that they
cannot do as much mischief to his people as they desire, For Christ rules even
in the midst of his enemies, Psalm. 110. 2, 5, 6, 7. Psalm. 2 9. 10, 11, 12.
Prove. 8. 15, 16. And therefore the Father has committed all judgment to his
Son, because all men should honor the Son, as they honor the Father, Joh. 5.
22, 23. And has given him Authority to execute judgment because he is the Son
of Man, Joh. 5. 27. And if he had not been declared to be the Son of Man just
upon Adams Fall, the Devil would have made a hellish confusion of the Creation
at that instant, but he was prevented by the right Heir that stood ready to
take the Government of all upon him, as soon as ever Adam fell.

From these, and the like considerations it is evident, that God created the
world for the Honor of the Mediator, and that he might rule it as the right
Heir of it; And the Hebrew Doctors have a common saying agreeing with this,
That the world had not been created, but for the Messiah; And therefore hence
it follows, That God could not keep a perfect Rest on the seventh day, until
he had put all things in subjection under the feet of Christ, as the proper
Lord, and right Heir of all the Creation; and therefore Adam must fall, and
also be Re-created before the seventh day.

Conclusion.
God did perfect the whole Creation on the sixth day, by ordering all things
according to the Platform of his eternal Counsel and Providence.

1 By ordering the Devils Fall. 2 By ordering Adams Fall. 3 By ordaining a
Mediator, and instating of him into his Priestly Office. 4 By creating a humane
nature for the Mediator, of the seed of Eve. 5 By his Office of Mediation he
purchased the Spirit of his Father for the Re-creating of fallen Adam and Eve. 6
By this means they were made a part of Gods heavenly Host. 7 By this means they
were made the chiefest part of Gods Host here on earth. 8 When all this was
done, then Christ was Heir of all things. 9 When all this was done, then
Satan's Head-plot was broken. 10 When all this was done, then, and not till
then, God could keep a perfect Rest on the seventh day from all his works,
because by this means he had finished that work that at first he had made but
mutably perfect in the former part of the sixth day: And therefore it follows
by good consequence, That the Sabbath was not ordained in the time of Adams
Innocence, But after his Fall and Re-creation by the Promised Seed.
CHAP. VII.
Proving that Gods rest on the Seventh Day was such a perfect rest, that
nothing could happen afterward that could any whit lessen or disturb the
perfection of his rest on the Seventh Day, as it would have happened if God had
kept a Sabbath of rest whiles Adam stood in a mutable condition.

THe Text says in the latter clause of Genesis 2. 2. That God rested the Seventh
day from all his Works which he had made.

But God could not be said to keep a perfect rest from all his Works which he
had made, as long as Adam stood in a mutable condition, for God knew from
Eternity that Adam and Eve would presently fall from their Created perfections,
through the temptation of Satan, and that thereupon the whole Creation would
fall into utter confusion, and that then God must either suffer Satan to take
the Dominion of the whole Creation, or else that he must begin again to make it
more perfect than it was before, by a new Creation.

Seeing therefore that one of these two things must necessarily follow upon
Adams fall, God could not keep a perfect rest on the Seventh Day from all his
Works, until he had installed the Mediator into his Office, and settled the
whole government of all things upon his shoulders, as upon our mighty God and
Prince of peace, Es. 9. 6, 7.

If God had rested on the Seventh Day, before he had settled the whole Creation
upon the Mediator, then the Devil might have rejoiced more upon the first
seventh day than God.

1 Because the Devil had made frustrate the glory of God in Man's Creation.

2 Because he had spoiled the glory of Gods order in the residue of the
Creation.

But God could not suffer this, and therefore it follows, that God could not
keep a perfect rest as long as Adam stood in a mutable condition; neither could
he keep a day of rest after Adams fall, until he had made Adam and Eve perfect
again by a Recreation, and until he had established all the residue of the
Creation upon that sure Rock whose work is perfect, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. But as soon as
God had re-created fallen Adam and Eve, as the first fruits of his Holy
Militant Church here on earth, and of his Church Triumphant in Heaven; then,
and not till then, God rested on the seventh day from all his Work which he had
made, and then his rest was a most perfect rest, so that nothing was lacking to
the perfection thereof, and therefore nothing could happen afterward that
could any way lessen or disturb his rest, because he rested upon that sure
Mediator, who had Covenanted to break the Devils Head-plot by his propitiatory
Sacrifice, or Sacrifice of atonement for fallen Adam and Eve, and for all the
Elect to the end of the world.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the true nature of Gods rest on the Seventh Day.

FIrst, It must be remembered, That Gods rest on the seventh day was not a
Natural rest, after the labor of his six Days Work; for the Creator of all the
ends of the earth faints not, neither is weary, Esa. 40. 28.

Secondly, Neither was Gods rest on the seventh day a bare cessation from
Creating any other sorts of Creatures, though some inconsiderate Professors
would have it to be no more, thinking thereby to warrant their Carnal ease, and
their careless keeping of the Lords Day; but such kind of rest as this is
Gods Soul does hate.

Thirdly, Neither was Gods rest upon the seventh day a bare contemplation of
his visible Creation, as others would have it, thinking thereby to warrant
their pleasant Re-creations, and Contemplations upon the Lords Day, by walking
out into the Fields to behold the Works of God, and to behold his eternal Power
and Godhead in the Creation; thi^ is not the true rest of the Sabbath, for
such duties as these a Heathen Philosopher may do upon the Sabbath Day, and yet
not observe the true rest of the Sabbath; but this sort of Persons are misled
by a false supposition, that the Sabbath was first ordained as a day of rest in
the time of Adams innocence for contemplation on the visible Creation only.

Fourthly, The true nature of Gods rest on the seventh day That the true nature
of Gods rest on the seventh day was his sweet content in the Mediator.
was his sweet content in the Mediator, because he had made all his Creation
perfect in the Mediator, and because he had established Adams happiness upon
the promised Seed, as upon a sure Rock, and firm Foundation, and because he had
put all the rest of the Creation under his feet.

As soon as God had thus renewed the face of the earth, Psalm. 104. 30. and
settled the government of all his Works upon the Person and Office of the
Mediator, then God rested on the seventh day, with infinite content, and sweet
satisfaction, rejoicing in the Works of his hands, Psalm. 104. 31. but the
thirtieth verse makes Gods Creation to be Spiritual as well as earthly, and so
does Psalm. 100. 3. Psalm. 102. 18. Es. 54. 5. Es. 65. 18.

This sweet satisfying rest which God took in settling all the works of his
hands upon the Mediator, is thus expressed by Moses, In six days Jehovah made
the Heavens and the Earth, and in the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed,
Exodus 31. 17. Gods resting was not from his weariness of labor in the work of
Creation, but from the heavy burden of Adams sin, which had spoiled all his
Creation till he had re-created Adam, and settled him and all the rest of the
Creation upon the Rock Christ, and in this respect God does often complain of
Man's sin as a heavy burden to his Soul, Amos 5. 2, 13, Es. 1. 14. And as the
sin of the old World did grieve God to the heart, Genesis 6. 6. so no doubt but
Adams sin above any other sin did grieve him to his heart, until God had
re-created Adam and Eve by the promised Seed, and put the whole Creation under
his government, and then God rested the seventh day, and was refreshed; that is
to say, the grief of his heart which fell upon him in the sixth day by reason
of Adams sin, was removed from him, by the Mediators undertaking to make a
reconciliation by his propitiatory Sacrifice of Atonement in the cool of the
sixth day, and from that day forwards God instructed Adam how to offer
Sacrifices of Atonement as a liverly memorial thereof; and thenceforth all
Sacrifices of Atonement are called sacrifices of rest to Jehovah, and sweet
sacrifices of rest, Genesis 8. 21. because Christ's Sacrifice does quiet and
pacifi^ Gods Soul, that was so exceedingly displeased and grieved for Adams
sin, and therefore the Seventy call sacrifices of rest sweet Sacrifices, which
phrase of theirs Paul does approve and use, Ephesians. 5. 2. they are also called
sacrifices of Atonement, or propitiatory Sacrifices.

Upon this new settlement of the Creation upon the Mediator, All the Trinity
rested, and were refreshed on the seventh day, because they had perfected man's
happiness by a Re-creation.
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost were refreshed; now all
the blessed Trinity, our blessed Creators and Makers, did rejoice in the works
of their hands.

1 The Father was refreshed with great joy of heart, because he had found out a
Reconciler, and because his lost Son was found again, Luke 15.

2 The Son rejoiced, and was refreshed, because he had taken upon him the
Person and Office of a Mediator, that so he might seek and save that which was
lost, Matthew. 18. 11, 12, 13, 14.

3 The Holy Ghost rejoiced, and was refreshed, because he had re-created the
heart of Adam and Eve, and filled their Souls with joy unspeakable, and
glorious, by inabling them to believe in the promised Seed, as the Procurator
of the Fathers Atonement by his propitiatory sacrifice.

And truly this work of Re-creation must needs be a ground of perfect rest, and
of joyful refreshing to such blessed Creators, that could tell how to find out
such a mysterious way to create anew that glorious work, that was so
confounded and spoiled by Satan's Head-plot.

The Angels also rejoiced at the conversion of Adam and Eve, saying, Glory to
God in the highest, and on the earth peace, and good will toward men, Luke 2.
14. and this must needs be so, because they rejoice at the conversion of every
sinner that repents, Luke 15. 7.

Adam and Eve did also keep a blessed rest upon the Sabbath; for their Souls
were rejoiced and refreshed, because they did by faith rest on the Seed of the
Woman for the breaking of the Devils Head-plot.

And thus the first seventh day was a joyful day of rest, and rerefeshing, both
to all the Trinity, to all the Elect Angels, and to repenting Adam and Eve; and
so it is to all true repenting, and believing sinners. Amen.

And it is further evident that Gods rest on the seventh day, was nothing else
but the quieting of his mind in Christ's Sacrifice of Atonement, because God is
said to rest in several types of Christ as well as in the seventh day, in
relation to his resting on the Mediator for man's Redemption from Satan's
Head-plot.

1 The Land of Canaan is called Gods Rest, Exodus 33. 14. Psalm. 95. 11. Heb. 4.
1. because God had appointed that Land to be the resting place of his
Tabernacle, and Temple, Jos. 22. 19. 2 Samuel 7. which did typifie the humane
nature of Christ, Joh. 2. 19. Heb. 8. 2. Heb. 9. 11. where his Sacrifices of
Rest might only be offered.

2 The Tabernacle is called Gods Rest, Psalm. 132. 8.

3 Zion is called Gods Rest, Psalm. 132. 13, 14.

4 The Temple is called Gods Rest, 2 Chronicles. 6. 41. and the house of his Rest
for the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 28. 2.

5 All Sacrifices of Atonement are called Sacrifices of Rest, because they
have a sweet savor that gives rest to the disquieted senses, Genesis 8. 21. Exodus
29. 18. Number. 15. 3. Ez. 20. 14.

But no man, I think, will say, that God did rest in any of these things
otherwise than as they were types of the Mediators Person and Sacrifice,
wherein only Gods soul does rest as in the only Mediatorial procuring cause
of his Atonement for man's Redemption from Satan's Head-plot.

The Tabernacle wherein God did dwell among the Sons of Israel was three times
over most carefully described by Moses. 1 In Exodus 25. 2 In Exodus 36. 3 In
Exodus 39. 32 to 43. This three fold telling of the Tabernacle, which God did
after cast off, says one of the Hebrew Doctors, was not to show, that God did
so highly rest in it for it self, but to show that he only rested in the
Tabernacle of the Messiah; and because the blessed Martyr Stephen knew that the
High Sanedrim did rest after an outward hypocritical manner in the Temple, he
did upbraid their foolish confidence, saying, The most High dwells not (or
rests not) in Temples made with hands, Act 7. 48. implying, that the most
High did only rest in Christ that was typified by the Temple.

So then the place of Gods rest, and of fallen man's rest, lies only in the
work of Reconciliation by the Mediators Sacrifice of Atonement.

Conclusion.
From all the Premises I conclude, That Gods rest on the seventh day, was his
satisfying delight, and his sweet content in Christ, because he was ordained to
be the Seed of the Woman to break the Devils Head-plot by his Propitiatory
Sacrifice of Atonement, and because God had settled the whole Creation upon the
Mediator, whose work was so perfect that nothing was lacking to the perfection
thereof; And therefore it follows, that God ordained the Sabbath, not in the
time of Adams Innocence, but after his Fall and Re-creation.

CHAP. IX.
Proving, that God blessed the first seventh day with many Spiritual
Ordinances, such as were apt to convey Spiritual, and Eternal blessedness to
fallen man.

THis sentence, God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, Genesis 2. 3. does
contain in it a full description how God did bless the seventh day for the
good of fallen man.

1 I will speak of the word Blessed in this Chapter.

2 I will speak of the word Sanctified in the next Chapter.

1 It is meet to inquire how God did bless the first seventh day; Did he
bless it with any natural blessing above the other six days? Has he bestowed
a greater blessing of fairer weather, or the like, upon that day more than upon
any other day in the week? no, but on the contrary he restrained his Manna from
falling on that day, and bestowed it upon the Jews on all the other six days
of the week.

Therefore the blessing wherewith God did bless the seventh day was not a
common natural blessing, but doubtless it was a spiritual blessing in relation
to the good of fallen man. Hence then we may conclude, that God did bless that
day with diverse spiritual Ordinances, such as tended to make fallen man blessed,
by opening the manner how the Seed of the Woman should break Satan's Head-plot
for man's Redemption.

Adam in h^s Innocence had no need of any such spiritual God would nev^r have
blessed the seventh day with spiritual Ordinances, so as he did, if the
Mediator had not been declared to fallen Adam before the 7 day.
Ordinances as God did bless the seventh day withal; neither could Adam in
his Innocence sanctify one day more perfectly than another, for by nature he
was pure without imperf^ction.

If there had been no other Argument in all the Scripture to prove that Adam
sell, and was Re-created on the sixth day by the Promised Seed, This sentence,
He blessed and sanctified the seventh day, had been sufficient to prove it; for
God would never have blessed the seventh day with such spiritual Ordinances as
he did, nor yet have sanctified that day for the time of his spiritual
Ordinances, if the Mediator had not been declared to fallen Adam before the
seventh day.

And this is further proved by some other Scriptures.

1 God does command us fallen men in the fourth Commandment to remember the
Sabbath day to sanctify it (and the reason is added) because in it he rested
from all the works that he had made: And (for that reason) Jehovah did bless
the seventh day, and sanctify it, Exodus 20. 8* 9, 10, 11.

2 The Prophet Isaiah says, That God did bless the Sabbath day (namely for
the good of fallen man) For (says he) Blessed is the man that keeps the
Sabbath, and polluteth it no^, Es. 56. 2.

3 Our Savior does tell us, that the Sabbath was made for man, Mar. 2. 27.
namely for the good of man in misery; but Adam in God did not leave Adam and
Eve to spend the seventh day in private specul tions, but he blessed the first
7 day with variety of Ordinances both for public and private use, for their
best spiritual good.
his Innocence was not in misery, therefore the Sabbath was not then made; but
as soon as he had eaten of the forbidden fruit he was in misery, for then his
soul was dead in sin, and his body full of corruption, and then the Sabbath was
made for man. Hence it follows by necessary consequence, that God did not
bless the seventh day in Adams Innocence, but after his Fall and Recreation.

2 God did not leave Adam to himself after his Fall and Recreation, to spend
the seventh day in his own private meditations as he thought best, but God
blessed the seventh day with several public Ordinances for the good of fallen
Adam, and instructed him in the right use of those Ordinances; if God had left
Adam to spend the Sabbath in his own private speculations as he thought best,
doubtless his Religion would soon have been no better than a Samaritan
Religion, for Adam by his fall was become so corrupt in his affections, and so
blind in his understanding of Gods will, that he would not, nor could not have
spent the Sabbath to his spiritual good.

It is a dangerous thing therefore to prefer a man's own private meditations,
and speculations, to public Ordinances upon the Sabbath; God would not leave
Adam to such a liberty to do as he thought best, such a liberty will soon open
a wide gap to Satan's delusions: But God blessed the seventh day with his own
public Ordinances, not excluding private meditations; God blessed the seventh
day both with public and private Ordinances; for public Ordinances are not so
much blessed as when they are attended with private preparation before, with
reverent attention at, and with careful rumination and application afterward*
If there be not this care added to the public Ordinances, the Devil will soon
steal away the seed that is sown, out of our hearts and souls.

Now the manner how God was pleased to instruct Adam and Eve in the exercise of
his public Ordinances, was by the lively Oracles of the Mediator, and
therefore doubtless as he was promised to be the Seed of the woman, so he
appeared to Adam in his humane shape, as he did to Jacob, Genesis 32. 24. And in
this regard, he is called, The word of the Father, even from the beginning,
Joh. 1. 1, 2. And the Father gave him a Commandment what to say, Joh. 12. 49,
50. And he it was that did instruct all the Fathers; And therefore Stephen
says, That he the God of glory appeared to Abraham in Ur of the Caldes, Act.
7. 2. and his apparition to Abraham was in such a familiar manner, that it did
work in him an inward regard and attention to his words, whereby his soul was
convinced and converted. In some such manner did he appear to Adam and Eve when
he did instruct them in the knowledge of his Person and Office, and of the use
of his public Ordinances wherewith he was pleased to bless the seventh day.

Now the several Ordinances wherewith God was pleased to bless the seventh
day, I will distinguish into two sorts, or ranks.

1 Into such Ordinances as were plain and manifest.

2 Into such as were Typical and Mystical.

1 I will speak of the plain and manifest Ordinances; These were often used
without the typical, but the typical could not well be used without some of
these were added thereto; By these plain and manifest Ordinances God appointed
Adam as a Prophet, by the exercise of them, to instruct himself, his wife, and
posterity, by opening the misery of his fall, and the remedy by the Promised
Seed.

1 The first sort of these manifest Ordinances, was in preaching and proclaming
his own miserable condition by his disobedience God commanded Adam to preach
every seventh day either upon his miserable fall, or else upon the riches of
Gods grace, for his recovery by the Promised Seed.
in eating of the forbidden fruit; how he had lost Gods Image by Gods just hand
of punishment, and how he was corrupted in all the parts and powers of his soul
and body by the poysonful counsel that Satan breathed into Eves soul.

2 Adam must preach, open, and declare to himself, and his wife (till they were
increased in number) the riches of Gods grace for his recovery by the Seed of
the Woman, which God had ordained to break the Devils Head-plot for their
Redemption; and in opening this, he could not choose but open and declare the
personal union of both the natures of the Mediator, and the excellent dignity
of his Office.

This blessed Doctrine Adam was commanded to study to explain and enlarge
(every seventh day) in all the branches thereof, and in all the several
benefits thereof to fallen man, according to the full extent of Gods Declaration
in Genesis 3. 15. and therefore he must open and explain how Christ should be the
Seed of the Woman, and how he should break the Devils Head-plot by his Priestly
Office, and by his Propitiatory Sacrifice of Atonement, at the very same time
when the Devil should endeavor to prevent it, by putting him to death, and by
peircing his foot-soals as a sinful Malefactor upon the Cross; and how he
being God as well as man, should destroy through death him that had the power
of death, that is the Devil, and how he should by that death (which he
performed as a Mediatorial Sacrifice) reconcile God to fallen man, and so procure
the Fathers Justification from the sentence of Condemnation, and his favor for
their adoption, and for their enjoying of his heavenly inheritance.

These and such like points as these, God instructed Adam to study and to
preach to himself, wife, and posterity, in season and out of season, but
especially upon every seventh day.

3 To this necessary duty of preaching, whereby God does God commanded Adam to
join the duty of Prayer to the duty of Preaching.
speak unto sinners, Adam was commanded to join the necessary duty of Prayer
and supplication, whereby sinners do speak unto God, and he must branch out
this duty of Prayer into all the several parts of it, as,

1 Into Confession of his miserable condition by his sin and disobedience, and
of the sinful corruption of our nature, together with our daily actual
rebellions, for the deeper abasing of our natural Pride, and self-conceited
righteousness.

2 Into Petition for several graces of Sanctification, but especially for the
inward testimony of our Reconciliation and Adoption.

3 Deprecation of evil, according to that Petition, Lead us not into temptation.

4 Thanksgiving for all favors received, but especially for those Spiritual
favors by the promised seed.

5 Singing of Psalms also must be added (sometimes at least) as an act of
Spiritual joy for Gods manifold savours, but especially for that Grand Mercy of
our Reconciliation, procured by the Mediators propitiatory sacrifice of
atonement; for by that means the Devils Head-plot is broken, and fallen Man
redeemed, and set free from the power of Satan.

These several sorts of Ordinances I call by the name of plain and manifest
Ordinances, because they often were and might be used without any addition of
Typical sacrifices, or ceremonies of cleaness.

And this is evident by Gods Command afterward to the Sea my Discourse
touching the Jews Synagogues order on this text.
Church of Israel, in Lev. 23. 3. The seventh day shall be a Sabbath of
Sabbatism, a Convocation of Holiness; it shall be a Sabbath to Jehovah in all
your dwellings.

This sentence [in All your dwellings] proves that God commanded them to
observe the Sabbath, not only at the Tabernacle where Sacrifices must be only
offered, but it must be kept in all their dwellings where no Sacrifices might
be offered, and yet by dwellings we must not understand every man's private
Tent, for God commands a Convocation of Holiness, and a Convocation agrees not
to every man's private Tent; therefore the meaning of these words, A Convocation
in all your dwellings means a Convocation of Holiness in all their several
Synagogues, which were to be conveniently placed in or among all their
dwellings, both during the time of their abode in the Wilderness, and also
wherever they dwelt afterward.

This commanded convocation was not given to the Jews in regard of their
Festival Sabbaths, which were observed with the solemnity of Sacrifices, and
other rites of Holiness, for their Festival Sabbaths were commanded to be
observed only in the Land of Canaan, at the particular place that God should
choose to place his Tabernacle or Temple in, after they should be settled in rest
therein; and indeed they could not observe their festival Sabbaths in the
Wilderness, neither could they every seventh day offer Sacrifices in the
Wilderness, for during the time of their travels in the Wilderness the Holy
things were folded up.

But yet notwithstanding their travels in the Wilderness, they were commanded
to observe every seventh day with a convocation of holiness, in or among all
their dwellings, namely in their several Synagogues, which must be placed for
their best convenience in or among all their dwellings.

And it is evident, that the Jews did observe the Sabbath with Holy
convocations in all their Synagogues, because our Savior did usually preach
every seventh day in their Synagogues, either in Galile, or in Judea, where
none of Aarons Ceremonies had any use at all.

By this command of God to the Jews, it is manifest, That God commanded Adam to
observe every seventh day with his plain and manifest Ordinances, and
doubtless oftentimes also with his Typiral and Mystical Ordinances, which at
the first were not tied to one special place.

2 The second sort of Gods public Ordinances were Typical, and Mystical, the
chiefest of all this kind of Worship was by propitiatory Sacrifices, or
Sacrifices of Atonement, which were of several sorts.

1 Burnt offerings, Levit. 1. 2 Peace Offerings, Levit. 3. 3 Sin Offerings,
Levit. 4. 3. 4 Trespasse-offerings, Levit. 5. 6.
All these several sorts of Sacrifices did typifie and represent the Mediators
Propitiatory Sacrifice of Atonement, by which he procured the Fathers
Atonement for fallen man's Reconciliation, Justification, and Adoption, and so
consequently for man's Redemption from Satan's Head-plot.

This blessed Doctrine of Salvation, Christ represented to Adams faith in the
very first seventh day, by causing Adam as a Priest to sacrifice some Lamb, or
some such like beast, and then doubtless he said unto him, Behold the Lamb of
God that takes away the sin of the world, Joh. 1. 29. for Christ was typically
slain from the beginning of the world, Rev. 8. 13.

Adam of himself could not tell how to offer sacrifice, and Christ Jesus taught
Adam by the Sacrifice of a Lamb how he should be the Lamb of God to take away
the sin of the world.
therefore doubtless Jesus Christ appeared to him in the shape of his humane
nature, and did instruct him by a lively Oracle, what the Office of a Priest
was, and how to build an Altar of earth (for that kind of Altar was first in
use, Exodus 20. 24.) and that all those places where such Altars were builded,
were holy places, as long as such places were in use for sacrifice, and
therefore Christ Jesus did usually sanctify such places, either by his
glorious apparition, or by fire from heaven to consume the Sacrifice, or by
both.

The Altar was holy in another respect, namely because it was ordained to be a
type of the Godhead of Christ, whereon he would one day offer his humane
nature, as a sacrifice of Atonement, Exodus 29. 37. Mat. 23. 19. Heb. 9. 14.

And doubtless Christ Jesus did kindle Adams sacrifice at first with fire from
heaven, for he did usually kindle the sacrifices of the Fathers with fire from
Heaven, as a sign and token to them, that his death was a propitiatory
sacrifice of Atonement, and that their persons were thereby received into full
favor, Lev. 9. 23. Judge. 13. 19, 20, 23. 1 King. 18. 38, 39. 2 Chronicles. 7. 1, 2,
3. Psalm. 20. 3.

And doubtless Christ Jesus told Adam that this fire from heaven did represent
his Eternal Spirit, by which his humane nature should one day be offered up
unto God without spot, as a propitiatory sacrifice for his eternal Redemption,
H^^. 9 14.

But afterward when Cain came to offer his sacrifice upon the same Altar,
Christ Jesus did not kindle his sacrifice from heaven as he kindled Adams and
Abels sacrifice; and by that Cain knew that God did not accept his person, as
he did his brother Abel, and thereupon he hated his brother Abel, because his
works were good, and his own evil, for Cain wanted faith in the Seed of the
woman, which was promised to break the Devils Head-plot by his propitiatory
sacrifice, which was taught, and typified by sacrifices: This mystery God kept
secret in types from such as wanted faith, even from the beginning of the
world, Romans 16. 25. and therefore it was kept secret from the Heathen Nations:
But in the fullness of time Christ Jesus sent his Apostles to publish the
unsearchable riches of this mystery, which from the beginning of the world has
been hid in God who created all things by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3 8 9. Col. 1. 26.
Col. 2. 3.

3 God instructed Adam in sundry other kinds of Ceremonial types that tended to
sanctification, before he came to present his person and sacrifice before the
Lord. As for example, Christ Jesus taught him, 1 How to purify his person by
washing his body, and his garments, in clean water, just like as he taught
Moses afterward, Exodus 3. 5. Exodus 19. 10. or else by changing his soul
garments for fair, as Jacob being first taught, did also teach his hous-hold to
do, when he went into Gods presence to worship, Genesis 35. 2.

2 God instructed Adam how to put a difference between beasts for sacrifice,
how he should refuse the unclean, and offer the clean, just as he instructed
Noah before he entered into the Ark, Genesis 7. 2.

It is absurd to think that God did bless the first Sabbath with differing
Ordinances from those in Moses, or that God did instruct Adam to worship him in
a differing way from that which he did after establish by Moses and the
Prophets. Doubtless therefore when God instructed Adam after what manner he
must offer sacrifices of Atonement, he also instructed him how to understand,
and how to open the plain meaning of all, and how he should preach it to
others, and how to pray either by way of confession of his sinfulness, or
petition for some special grace, or thanksgiving, or singing of Psalms, as he
did after instruct and appoint by Moses and the Prophets.

1 When God appointed sacrifices of Atonement, he appointed to join preaching
therewith (sometimes at least) and therefore he appointed the Levites to join
preaching to their sacrifices, for they are commanded to teach his judgments
unto Jacob, and his Law unto Israel, Deuteronomy. 33. 10. Lev. 10. 11. Mal. 2. 6. 7.

2 When they offered Burnt-offerings, Christ Jesus taught them to make Petition
and Supplication to the Lord for his favor in Christ, 1 Samuel 13. 12. Job 42.
8. Ezra 6 9, 10. and doubtless Christ Jesus taught Adam to do so; for this
kind of sacrifice was Job 42. 8.
chiefest, and it was first in use, even from the beginning of the world; for
Noah did offer his Burnt-offering, Genesis 8. 20. and Christ Jesus did appoint it
as the first and chief sacrifice in Moses, Genesis 8. 20.
Lev. 1. 2

3 When they offered Sin Offerings, or Trespass-offerings, they must lay both
their hands with all their might upon the head of their sacrifice; and confess
their sin to God over the head of their Sin-offering, and their trespasses to
God over the head of their Trepass Offering. But why must they impose both
their hands with all their might upon the head of these Sacrifices? The Answer
is, because by this Imposition, they were taught and instructed to rest and
repose their souls by a strong faith upon the propitiatory Sacrifice of Christ,
for the full Atonement of all their sins and trespasses of which they made
confession, as I have opened the point more at large in the Meritorious price
of man's See the meritorious price of man's Redemption on Lev. 4.
Redemption on Lev. 4. And touching the point of Confession, the Hebrew Doctors
have a sentence that is worthy of due observation, they say, That without
particular confession of their known sins, no Atonement is made for them by
their Sin Offerings, or by their Trespass-offerings. And this is just according
to the rule in Prove. 28. 13. He that hides his Prove. 28. 13.
sin shall not prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes them shall find
mercy; and no question but Jesus Christ taught Adam thus to do when he offered
his sin, or his Trespass-offerings.

4 When they offered Peace Offerings, they imposed their hands on the head of
their Peace Offerings; And secondly, then they made confession of their peace,
but especially they blessed God for their peace with God in breaking the devils
Head-plot by the Seed of the Woman, Lev. 3.

With these, and such like spiritual Ordinances God did bless the first
seventh day. And these blessed Ordinances could not choose but fill the souls of
Adam and Eve, with joy unspeakable and glorious, causing them to break out into
songs of praise, as Zachary did, Luke 1. 68. saying (in effect as he did)
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for be has visited and redeemed his people,
and has raised up a horn of salvation for us, etc. as he spoke by the mouth of
all his holy Prophets ever since the world began, Luke 1. 69. In these words
Luke 1 69, 70. Act. 3* 21.
Zachary does affirm these two things; First, That there have been holy
Prophets ever since the world began, and therefore Adam was a Prophet.
Secondly, That all the Prophets, even from the beginning of the world, have
spoken and rejoiced in this Horn of salvation, therefore Adam did speak with
joy of heart of this Horn of salvation, and made many Psalms of praise for the
Seed of the Woman that should break the Serpents head for his Redemption.

And doubtless God made these Ordinances to be a rich blessing to the souls of
Adam and Eve, for by them they were more fully instructed and confirmed in
their blessed condition by the Promised Seed.

And God is pleased still to bless his people all the world over by his plain
and manifest Ordinances, as the Conduit-pipes of his spiritual blessings in
Christ Jesus, Epb. 1. 3. for by these Ordinances it is published to the world
that Christ is the Seed of the Woman, in whom all Nations of the earth are
blessed, Genesis 12. 3. Act. 3 26. Gal 3. 14.

Object. But here it may be objected, That in likelihood, God did not ordain
any public Ordinances in the first seventh day, nor in many other Sabbaths
after, because for a long time there was no competent number of persons, to
make a public meeting; and after that Adam and Eve had children, yet for many
years they could not be able to understand the use and benefit of Ordinances;
and Ordinances cannot be called Public, where there is no more but two persons
to meet together; two persons cannot be called a public Church-Assembly. Two
persons where no more can b^ had, may be called a true Church of Christ, and
may exercise Gods Ordinance^, after a public manner Rev 11 3.


Answ. Two persons, where no more can be had, may be called a true Church of
Christ, and may exercise Gods Ordinances in a true public manner, for the
Church of Christ under the persecutions of Antichrist is called by the name of
Two Witnesses, Rev. 11. 3. though the Church of Christ were many thousands in
those times, yet it is called by the name of Two Witnesses, because by Moses
Law two Witnesses were accounted sufficient to confirm any truth, Deuteronomy. 17.
Hence I infer, that if no more but two can be had to testify the truth against
Ant^christ, they are to be esteemed as a true Church of Christ, and therefore
they may be called a true Church of Christ as well as two thousand; and our
Savior says, That where two or three are gathered together in his name, there
he will be present in the midst of them. Matthew. 18. Mat. 18. 19, 20.
19, 20.

Simeon and Levy made a Church when they agreed together to Genesis 49. 6.
destroy the Sichemites, for Jacob says of them thus, My glory, be thou not
joined with their (Rahal, that is to say with their) Church, Genesis 49. 6. Their
Church, I grant, was a Church of evil doers, but yet they were a sufficient
number to make a Church (though at this time overcome with the temptation of
revenge) then why might not Re-created Adam and Eve make a Church of Christ
much more, and so consequently enjoy Gods Ordinances as public Ordinances,
seeing God did bless the seventh day with Ordinances, and sanctify it, that
is to say, God did command them to sanctify it by the use of the said
ordinances?

I conclude therefore, that Christ Jesus did command Adam and Eve, to exercise
those Ordinances (wherewith he was pleased to bless the Sabbath) as a Church
of Christ, and from thenceforth he has and will continue his Church upon the
face of the earth to the worlds end, though it may, and has oftentimes been
brought to a very small number, as it was at the Flood, and at the building of
Babel, and in the days of Abraham, when God called him to come away from his
Country, and from his Idolatrous kindred, Genesis 12. and in the days of Job, and
in the days of Enosh, for after Seth had lived a hundred and five years, which
was Genesis 4. 26.
two hundred thirty five years from the Creation of Adam, then many of Adams
children did not abide in the Truth, they did not regard the Sabbath, nor the
Sabbath Ordinances, but they regarded the Daughters of Cain more than the
children of God, and took them wifes of all that they liked. And then grew
profaneness instead of calling upon the name of Lord, Genesis 4. 26. Godly Seth
for very grief of this profane generation called his son Enosh, that is to say
Sorrowful. So Tremelius in his Elder Editions does read the text (though Junius
has since altered him to a clean contrary sense) and so does Mr. Broughton
read it, and all the Hebrew Doctors in general, and Mr. Ainsworth comes near
them.

But if the children of the Church had but continued to regard the holy
Sabbath, and the Ordinances thereof, as they did in The disregarding of the
Sabbath, and the Ordinances thereof, is the high way to all profaneness and
Apostasy.
Adams first days before Abel was killed for Religion, they could not have
fallen into so deep an Apostasy as they did in the days of Enoch; for if men
will but reverently attend unto the exercise of those spiritual Ordinances
wherewith God did first bless the seventh day, they should doubtless be made
partakers of the spiritual blessing that Christ Jesus has annexed thereto; for
the good Shepherd Christ Jesus has promised to all his Sheep that will be
guided and governned by his Ordinances, That he will make them, and the places
round about his Hill, and to be a blessing, and that there shall be showers of
blessing upon them, Ezekiel. 34. 26. and so the Prophet Isaiah Ezekiel. 34. 26.
testifies, saying, Blessed is the man that keeps the Sabbath, and poluteth
it not, and that takes hold of my Covenant (as Adam did when he believed that
the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head) them will I bring to my
holy Mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer; their
Burnt-offerings, and their Sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar, Es.
56. 2, 6, 7. Hence it is manifest, that those that regard the Sabbath, and the
Sabbath Ordinances, shall be blessed with spiritual blessings in heavenly
things; And if God bless, who shall curse? for his blessing makes rich, Prove.
10. 22. it makes them rich with temporal blessings that diligently attend upon
their Civil employments, and so it also makes them rich with spiritual
blessings that diligently attend upon Gods Sabbath Ordinances; Gods blessing
did increase the Widows oil, and the five loaves, and two fishes; and therefore
his blessing is called Multiplication, Genesis 1. 22. and sometimes it is called A
rich reward, 2 King. 5. 15. and sometimes it is called (Gods) Liberality, Prove.
11. 25. compared with 2 Cor. 9. 5. Yea Gods blessing is so plentiful, and so
powerful upon his Sabbath Ordinances, that he is said to Command his blessing
upon Sion, and life for evermore, Psalm. 133. therefore his blessing wherewith
he blessed the first seventh day must needs be mighty in operation, even to the
Re-creation and Conversion of many ten thousand souls, Heb. 4. 12. Luke 11. 28.
and therefore David does by way of Exclamation cry out, O blessed are they that
dwell in thy house, Psalm. 84. 4. namely they are thus blessed that do as it
were dwell there by their frequent and constant resort to his Ordinances, for
his Ordinances are apt to convey blessings to the diligent soul. And therefore
Paul told the Romans, that when he should come unto them, He should come with
abundance of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, Romans 15. 29. The Apostle
made account that the preaching of the Gospel would enrich them with abundance
of spiritual blessings, and this blessing does arise from Gods blessing of the
first seventh day with Sabbath-Ordinances.

And therefore as soon as Christ Jesus had given order about his
Sabbath-Worship at Mount Sinai, and had in special commanded them to observe
the seventh day, by a holy convocation in or among all their dwellings (namely
in their Synagogues, as I have before expounded it) then he made a gracious
promise to his people, saying, In all places where I shall record my name, I
will come unto thee, and bless thee, Exodus 20. 24. and in this respect Christ
Jesus did appoint the Priests in the Sanctuary, and Zeliach Tzibbur in the
several Synagogues to pronounce a gracious blessing upon the assembly (that had
attended Gods Ordinances) at their departure, Numb. 6. 24. and to this blessing
the Lord was also pleased to add a gracious promise, in verse. 27. saying, They
shall put my name upon the Sons of Israel, and I will bless Numb. 6. 24. 27.
them; and this blessing is often remembered and repeated, as an encouragement
to all the godly to attend his Sabbath-Ordinances, Psalm. 115. 13. Psalm. 134. 3.
Psalm. 147. 13.

Object. You seem to apply Gods blessing to his Sabbath-Ordinances only, but
experience does tell us, that God does often bless the preaching of the Word
upon the Weekdays, to the conversion of many souls.

Ans. I answer, It is most true, that God does often bless the preaching of
his Word on the Weekdays, as well as upon the Sabbath days, to the conversion
of many thousand Souls; but that lets not, but that preaching must still be
accounted as one of his Sabbath-Ordinances* because God did first appoint it
for the Sabbath day, and it is now but borrowed to the Weekdays by the good
hand of God upon men's Spirits, as a furtherance to faith and holiness.

And I believe there are many thousand Souls that will readily witness to the
truth of this Doctrine, who by Gods blessing on the Word preached on the
Weekdays, have been turned from Darkness to Light, and from the power of
Satan to God; and such persons doubtless will with Nehemiah account the
Sabbath Day among the number of those special blessings that God bestowed upon
his people, as a sign of his special grace in Christ, Nebem. 9. 13, 14.

Hitherto I have spoken of Gods blessing the seventh day with public
Ordinances; now I shall speak something of private Ordinances, wherewith God
has also blessed the seventh day.

Gods blessing of the Sabbath, is his blessing at large, even his Private
duties are commanded on the Sabbath days, as necessary handmaids to the
public.
blessing upon the whole day, he blessed the seventh day with as large a
blessing as may be, namely, not only with public, but also with private
Ordinances, and therefore he sanctified the whole day to his service, he did
not sanctify that part only wherein his public Ordinances were dispensed,
but the whole day, and therefore the whole day must be set a part to his
service; and therefore when the public Ordinances are ended, private duties
must take place, that the whole day may be blessed to our souls, and sanctified
to the Lords service.

Let no man therefore mistake me, for though I do not make private duties to be
commanded in the first place, yet I believe that private duties are commanded,
and blessed of God, as necessary handmaids to the public, and there are good
reasons for it.

1 Our barten hearts, our stony hearts, our thorny hearts, will not suffer the
blessed seed of the Word the take root, and to th^ive there, unless we do
prepare them like to well-manured ground.

2 In hearing, Christ gives this caution, Take heed how you hear; and the
Hebrew Doctors say, When any go to hear the Law read See Ains. in Deuteronomy. 31. 11.
or expounded, they must prepare their hearts, and make their ears attentive to
hear with fear and reverence, and with joy and trembling, as in the day when
the Law was given on Moune Sinai; though they were great wise men, which knew
the whole Law every whit, they were bound to hear with great attentiveness,
and so God required a careful preparation of his people at the hearing of the
Law, Ex. 19.

3 After hearing, our Savior does exhort his hearers saying, Take heed what
you hear, Mar. 4. 24. Mar. 8. 15. and in this respect, the men of Berea are
commended by the Holy Ghost, because they seached whether those things which
Paul preached were so or no, Act. 17. 11. And of four sorts of hearers our
Savior makes but one good, Mat. 13. And Christ Jesus does exhort us by Moses,
saying, These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart, and
thou shall whet them upon thy children and shall speak of them when thou
sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thon lie
down, and when thou risest up, Deu. 6. 6, 7. Now if God required such diligence
as this every day, then much more upon the Sabbath day, and especially after
the public Ordinances are ended. And all this did Adam well understand, when
God is said to bless and sanctify the seventh day, as I shall further show on
the word Sanctify in the next Chapter.

CHAP. X.
Showing how God did Sanctify the seventh day.

1 GOD did not sanctify the seventh day, by putting any inherent sanctity into
that day more than into the other six days of the week, for God does not put
inherent sanctity into any earthly creature, but into the Elect number only, 1
Pet. 1. 12.

2 How then did God sanctify the seventh day?

Answ. In a twofold respect.

1 As the separated time of his public and private worship.

2 As a sanctified sign of Rest in the Seed of the Woman for the breaking of
the Devils Head-plot.

1 God did sanctify the seventh day for the separated time of his public
worship; and in this sense the word Sanctified does imply a double command of
God to fallen man.

1 It implies that God commanded Adam ^o set apart the seventh day from all
worldly uses, and to attend upon those spiritual Ordinances wherewith he had
blessed the seventh day.

2 It implies that God commanded fallen Adam to prepare his soul and body, to
come with all due care and reverence into the presence of God, to be partakers
of his Sabbath-Ordinances.

1 I will speak of the word Sanctify, as it implies the command of God to Adam
to set apart the seventh day from all worldly uses, and to attend upon those
spiritual Ordinances wherewith God had blessed the seventh day. And this is
evident,

1 Because God did never sanctify any thing for the use of fallen man, but he
did thereby command fallen man to sanctify When God did s^nctifie any thing
for man, he did by that ^ct command man ^o s^nctifie that thing, by separat^ng
it to the Lords use. Number. 8. 17.
it to the Lords use: As for example, when God did sanctify any persons to his
service, he did by that act command man to sanctify such persons to the Lord:
Every firstborn of the Sons of Israel (says the Lord) are mine, both of Man
and Beast; for in the day that I smote every firstborn in the Land of Egypt I
sanctified them unto me, Numb. 8. 17. that is, I commanded my people to
sanctify them to my service, which they did perform; First, By setting apart
some of the clean kind for Sacrifice; And secondly, by redeeming the rest with
money, which money God commanded to be employed to his service, either by
buying some Sacrifices of Atonement therewith for the public, or else it must
be for the repairing of Gods Sanctuary, as Exodus 13. does explain it.

2 When God did sanctify the Temple for the public place of his Typical
worship, 2 Chr. 7. 16. 2 Chr. 30. 8. he did thereby command man to sanctify
it, by performing every particular just as he commanded. Solomon might not
build the Temple after the fashion that he thought best, but he must do it in
all particulars as God commanded, 1 King. 9. 3. God did not leave any
sanctified thing that did any way appertain either to the service of the
Tabernacle, or of the Temple, neither to Moses discretion, nor to Solomon's
wisdom, but when God sanctified these places for his worship, he commanded
how, and after what manner Heb 9. 19. 21.
every thing should be done, Ex. 25. 8, 9, 10. Exodus 39, 42, 43. Heb. 9. 19, 21.

3 When God sanct^fied Cities of Refuge, he did thereby command his people to
sanct^fie them; it is said, that they sanctified Kedesh in Galilee for a place
of refuge, Jos. 20. 7. they did sanctify it, because God had commanded them to
sanctify it, Deuteronomy. 19. 2. they might not sanctify any City, but by virtue of
Gods command, as it is expressed in Number. 35. 6, 11.

4 When God sanctified Festival days, or Festival Sabbaths, he did thereby
command the Sons of Israel to sanctify them, Lev. 23. and Jeroboam is branded
as a wicked opposer of Gods sanctified Sabbaths, because he commanded a
standing Holy Day to the Lord of his own head, 1 King. 12. 32, 33.

From these, and such like examples, it follows, that when God sanctified the
seventh day, he commanded Adam and Eve to sanctify the seventh day in the use
of such Ordinances as he was pleased to bless the seventh day withal; Jesus
Christ did not leave the sanctifying of the seventh day to Adams discretion in
an arbitrary way how much time he would set apart for Gods service, but by
sanctifying the seventh day God commanded Adam to set apart the whole day for
his service in such public and private duties he had blessed the Sabbath
withal.

2 The word Sanctified implies another command to fallen When God sanctified the
seventh day, he did thereby command Adam to prepare himself for the better
sanctifying of the seventh day. Joel 2. 15.
Adam, namely to prepare himself to the sanctification of the Sabbath; First,
By an outward; And secondly, By an inward preparation: Sanctify a Fast, call a
solemn Assembly, Joel 1. 14. that is to say, Prepare your selves to meet me in
a day of public Fasting, as it is explained in Joel, 2. 15. Blow the Trumpet
in Zion, Sanctify a Fast, Call a solemn Assembly; that is to say, Warn the
people by a Trumpet to prepare themselves to sanctify a Fast, Joels three
terms in verse. 5. are all Synonima, and do all imply that Gods people must
prepare themselves for a day of Fasting; First, Outwardly, by sanctifying, or
washing their bodies and garments; And secondly, Inwardly, by true humiliation
of soul; and in this sense also God commanded Joshua to sanctify the people
against they came into his presence on the morrow, Jos. 7. 13. Now all that
Joshua did, to sanctify the people, was no more but to warn them by a
Proclamation through the Camp (which usually was attended with the sound of a
Trumpet) saying, Sanctify your selves, it is as much as if he had said, God
has commanded you to sanctify your selves; First, Outwardly, by washing; And
secondly, by inward repentance, against you come into his presence on the
morrow.

So when God commanded Moses to sanctify the people to hear the Law delivered
at Mount Sinai, Moses did no otherwise sanctify them but by commanding the
people to prepare themselves in a sanctifi^d manner, First, By inward fear and
reverence; And secondly, by outward washing, and by abstinence from their wives
two days together, for their more reverent attention of Gods Law, Exodus 19.
10. Jos. 3. 5. Exodus 3. 5. 1 Samuel 16. 5. Number. 11. 18. Exodus 19. 10. Jer 6 4.
So in like sort, when God said, Sanctify War, it is a command to prepare for
War, Jer. 6. 4. Jer. 51. 28.

From these, and such like instances, it follows, That when God sanctified the
first seventh day, he commanded Adam and Eve (for the more solemnity) to
prepare themselves for the sanctifying of the seventh day; God having made a
promise to them in the end of the sixth day, that the Seed of the Woman should
break the head of the Serpent, he sanctified the next day for a Sabbath of
rest, because he had blessed it with Ordinances, and thereby he did command
Adam and Eve to prepare themselves against they came into his holy presence on
the morrow, for sin had defiled them, and therefore they needed to prepare
themselves, not only by outward washing, but also inwardly by true repentance,
Act. 22. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 15. Es. 29. 23. or else instead of receiving good by
that blessing wherewith God had blessed the seventh day, they might expect a
curse, at least an outward curse upon their bodies, as it fell out upon Aarons
Sons, when they did not sanctify the Lord in his worship according to his
command, the Lord struck them with present death, saying, I will be sanctified
in all that come near me, Lev. 10. 3. and when some of Ephraim and Manasses did
come to the sanctified Passover in the days of Hezekiah, God was displeased
with them, because they had not prepared themselves thereto according to the
sanctified, or commanded preparation of the Sanctuary; but Hezekiah prayed for
them, and the Lord heard him, and healed the people, 2 Chr. 30, 18, 19, 20.

2 I will speak a little more of the word Sanctified, as it implies a command
to fallen man to prepare himself to sanctify the seventh day, for all
sanctified things must be remembered by way of preparation before hand, that so
they may be done in due time and order, or else God that is jealous of his
sanctified things, will be displeased.

And therefore one Reason why the word Remember was after added to the fourth
Commadement was (not to add a new sense to that Command more than it had to
Adam under the word Sanctified) but to increase the charge of preparation, with
more vehemence, which at the first was couched under the word Sanctified; for
now the people of God had forgotten the charge that was contained in the word
Sanctified; and therefore when Jesus Christ did give the fourth Commandment at
Mount Sinai by the Ministry of Moses, he added the word Remember, saying,
Remember the Sabbath day to sanctify it, Exodus 20. 8. for about three Exodus
20. 8.
weeks before this (as the time may be calculated by comparing Exodus 16. 1.
with Exodus 19. 1.) Christ Jesus (by Moses) had said thus to the people, To
morrow is the Rest of the Holy Sabbath unto the Exodus 16. 23.
Lord, Exodus 16. 23. Christ Jesus did not now speak these words to them by way
of a first Institution of the Sabbath, but by way of admonition to prepare
themselves to observe it as a holy or sanctified day already commanded; for how
else did the seventh day come to be now called the Holy Sabbath, but by a
former command? for every holy thing is first commanded of God; and therefore
that they might the better remember the holy Sabbath to sanctify it, Christ
Jesus restrained the falling of Manna, so that there was no Manna rained upon
that day, as there was upon all the other six days; by which wonder God did
charge the people to remember the Sabbath day, and to prepare themselves for it
by preparing the food of the Sabbath on the sixth day; and yet for all this, it
came to pass, that there went out some of the people to gather (Manna) and
they found none; thereupon the Lord Jesus said thus unto Moses, How long refuse
you to keep my Commandments, and my Laws, Exodus 16. 27, 28. Hence it is
evident, that Jesus Christ had made a Law for the keeping of the Sabbath,
before he Exodus 16. 27, 28.
gave the fourth Commandment at Mount Sinai, and no other time for that Command
can be found in all the Scripture, but Genesis 2. 3. and there it is couched under
the word Sanctified, therefore when God did sanctify the first seventh day, he
did under that word, not only command Adam to sanctify the seventh day, but
under that word he did also command him to prepare himself to sanctify it, for
that word contains as much, as if he had said to Adam, Remember to sanctify it
by the practice of such public and private Ordinances, as I have blessed the
seventh day withal, for thy good, and prepare thy self thereto with all
carfulness.

From all these considerations it is evident, that Jesus Christ has ever been
uniform in his command touching the sanctified use of the seventh day, even
from the very first institution of it, in Genesis 2. 3. until he had finished the
typical rest of it by his Death and Resurrection, and the Hebrew Doctors agree
thus far, for they say, That all the Fathers observed the Sabbath before Moses
time. See Rambam in Genesis 26. fol. 46. and Aben Ezra in Exodus 20.

Conclusion.
The word Sanctified in Genesis 2. 3. implies, 1 A Command to sanctify the
seventh day, in the practice of such Ordinances both public and private, as it
pleased Jesus Christ to bless the seventh day withal.

2 It implies a Command to prepare themselves for Gods presence, and so it
contains as much as the preface to the fourth Command does, Remember the
seventh day to sanctify it, for all sanctified things must be remembered by way
of preparation, or else God that is jealous of his sanctified time, will
destroy such as come unpreparedly into his holy presence.

CHAP. XI.
Showing how God sanctified the outward Rest of the seventh Day to be a typical
sign, both of his own Rest, and of man's Rest in the Seed of the Woman for the
breaking of the Devils Head-plot for man's Redemption.

GOd did not sanctify the outward rest of the seventh day as a typical sign of
his Resting from the labor of his visible Creation, as I have elsewhere noted.

But God Rested the seventh day, and sanctified that day of Rest, because his
soul did now rest upon the Rock Christ, who had undertaken man's Re-creation,
and the government of the whole Creation in opposition to Satan's Head-plot,
then Gods Soul rested on the seventh day, and was refreshed: If God had rested
on the seventh day whiles Adam stood in a mutable condition, his ^est had been
but an imperfect and uncertain rest, because of Adams speedy fall, God did not
therefore rest, nor sanctify that rest as a typical sign of his rest, and of
man's rest in the Seed of the Woman, till after Adams Fall and Re-creation, as I
have noted formerly.

And it is evident, that God did not ordain the holy Rest of the seventh day,
nor any other thing to be a sanctified sign of his grace in Christ, as long as
any of those things did lack any thing to the perfection thereof. As for
example.

1 When God sanctified the Tabernacle as a type of the humane nature of Christ,
he did not sanctify it, that is to say, he did not command it to be sanctified
as long as it lacked any thing to the perfection thereof, but as soon as it had
its perfection of being finished and reared up, he sanctified it, Number. 7. 1.

2 They did not sanctify the Altar until it was finished and made perfect,
neither might they offer any offering upon the Altar after it was made, until
it was sanctified by the holy anointing oil, etc.

3 God did not sanctify Aaron and his Sons, as a type of the Priestly Person
of Christ, until they had completely fulfilled all the typical Ceremonies that
did appertain to their Priestly Office, Ex. 28. 3. 41. Ex. 29. 1. 9. Lev. 8. 10.

4 God did not sanctify the firstborn of Israel to his service, until he had
perfectly redeemed them from the destruction that fell upon all the Firstborn
of Egypt, Number. 8. 17. but then after they were perfectly delivered, he
commanded Moses to speak to all Israel to sanctify them to the Lord, Exodus 13.
2. namely, after a new Moon had gone over them, for until a new Moon had gone
over them, they lacked of the time that God had appointed for their redemption,
and then their price was given to the Lord, Lev. 27. 6.

5 God did not command the Holy City to be sanctified until the wall was
finished, and the doors thereof set up, but as soon as all this was finished,
and perfected, then it was sanctified, and the Dedication thereof kept with
great joy, Neh. 3. 1. with Neh. 12. 27. etc.

Now from these, and such like Instances, It follows, that God, could not be
said to sanctify the outward rest of the seventh day to be a typical sign of
his Rest, and of man's Rest in the Mediator, as long as Adam stood in a mutable,
or unconfirmed condition: But as soon as God had perfected his Creation by a
Re-creation, and had established the Government of all upon the Rock Christ,
whose work is perfect, then God blessed and sanctified the seventh day, because
in it he had rested from all his Work which God had created and made.

But I shall yet a little further endeavor to make this point more evident,
namely, that the sanctified rest of the seventh day was ordained to be as a
sanctified sign of fallen man's resting on the promised seed by faith, for the
breaking of the Devils Head-plot for Man's redemption, and so consequently as a
sign of man's eternal rest in Heaven hereafter.

Reas. 1. Because the Sabbath (in respect of the strict rest of it) is called a
sign of the everlasting Covenant, Exodus 31. 13. 17. Exodus 31. 13 17 H^b. 4. 3,
9, 10
Heb. 4. 3, 9, 10. now there is no everlasting Covenant but that which is made
in the Blood of Christ, and this Covenant of bringing man to Life thereby, is
the only sure thing to rest upon, but this Covenant was not made with Man in
innocence, but after his Fall, therefore the Sabbath was not ordained to be a
sign of this everlasting Covenant, till after Adam fell, and therefore Adam
fell before the seventh day.

Reas. 2. Because God ordained sundry other things to be sanctified types and
signs of man's resting on Christ by faith, as Synonima to the rest of the
seventh day, as any that have their understandings well exercised in the
Scriptures may easily discern.

1 Consider this, that God sanctified the outward rest of all the Festival
Sabbaths, as the type of our resting on the Seed of the Woman by faith, for the
breaking of the Devils head-plot; and this is evident by Moses description of
them in Levit. 23. there he reckons up eight several Festival Sabbaths in
order, but he puts the seventh day first, because it is the chiefest of them
all, for it is the ground and foundation of all the rest; and it is to be
specially noted, that Moses does call the seventh day a Festival Sabbath, ver.
2. as well as all the rest, and yet it was no Feasting Sabbath in respect of
Belly-cheer, as the rest were, except in a Spiritual sense, and in that sense
the Holy Rest of them all did typifie the same spiritual resting on the seed of
the Woman, and the same spiritual feasting on the propitiatory Sacrifice of
Christ for Man's redemption, which was typified by their feasting on their
Peace Offerings on their Festival Sabbaths, and so the day of Atonement though
it were a day of strict fasting, yet it was a day of Spiritual feasting, and
resting on the promised Seed, as the seventh day was.

2 The sanctified rest of the seventh day did typifie the same things that
Josuahs rest did, for in six years War he conquered the Canaanites, and in the
seventh year the Land rested. The Apostle does make this rest, and the rest of
the seventh day to be both alike, Heb. 4. for he does first make them to
typifie our Spiritual rest on Christ by faith, and secondly to typifie our
eternal rest in Heaven at last, Heb. 4. 3. 9, 10. Heb. 4. 3, 9, 10


3 The Sabbatical years of rest in Lev. 25. and the Sabbatical Jubilee of rest
(which is also called a great Sabbath, in Levit. 25. 4.) did alike typifie our
resting on Christ by faith, for our full deliverance from the servitude of
Satan; just answerable to the typical rest of the seventh day, and in that
respect Moses does compare the typical rest of them all together, in Exodus 23.
Exodus 23. 10, 11, 12.
10, 11, 12.

None can be ignorant of the manifold great troubles that did often fall out
upon Gods people in the Land of Canaan, soon after the rest which it had in
Joshuahs seventh year; but yet notwithstanding so sweet was that rest which
Joshua obtained for them after six years War, that God was pleased to make that
year of rest to begin the Chronology of all their Sabbatical years of rest
from thence, till all ended in the Death and Sacrifice of Christ, who is the
true rest of all believing sinners; and by allusion to this typical rest, our
Savior does invite all poor and heavy laden sinners to come unto him, and
they shall find rest to their souls, Matthew. 11. 29. Es. 11. 10. Eze. 34. 15,
25, 27, 28, Jer. Mat. 11. 29
33. 15, 16. Jer. 30. 10.

And our Savior in Luke 4. 19. does expound the true nature of Luke 4. 18, 19
that spiritual rest that was typified by the Sabbatical rest of the Jubilee,

1 By calling it the acceptable year of the Lord; and

2 By telling us in verse. 18. that God had anointed him to preach the Gospel
to the poor, to heal the Brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives,
and recovering of Sight to the Blind, and that he should set at liberty them
that are bruised; this opens the sweet rest and refreshing of Soul, that every
poor humbled sinner does find by the seed of the Woman in breaking the Devils
Head-plot for their deliverance, help, and healing.

And this famous deliverance by the seed of the Woman was accomplished by his
propitiatory sacrifice in a Sabbatical year of Jubilee, namely in the twenty
eighth Jubilee, as may be seen in Brougbtons Consent.

4 The redemption of Israel out of Egypt (by the Typical sign of the Blood of
the Paschal Lamb) is laid down as the main reason why God did sanctify the
rest of the seventh day, in Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15. and that shows, that not the
Visible, but the Spiritual Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15
Creation was the true ground and reason why God blessed and sanctified the
first seventh day. Hence it follows from the Premises, that the Holy Rest of
the seventh day was a typical sign of our resting on Christ by faith for our
redemption from Satan's Head-plot.

Object. Why does God in Exodus 20. 11, command man to rest on the Exodus 20. 11
Sabbath Day from all bis Works, because he rested on the seventh day from
Creating, the Heavens and the Earth, and all things therein, visible and
invisible, Col. 1. 16. seeing in Deuteronomy. 5. 15. he gives another differing
reason, as the only ground of commanding man to rest on the Sabbath Day, Deuteronomy.
5. 15
because Jehovah thy God brought thee out of Egypt by a strong hand, namely by
killing all their first born, but delivering the first born of Israel by the
blood of the Lamb sprinkled on their door posts, as a sign of their redemption?
etc.

Answ. I answer, that the true ground and reason of Gods rest, and of his
commanding man to rest, in both places is alike, there is no difference at all
if the true sense of both places be rightly understood; for God rested not
from the works of Creaation Our Redemption from Satan's Head-plot was the last
finishing act of the whole Creation, therefore i^ must needs be the only true
reason of Gods rest, and of his commanding man to rest on the first seventh day.
until he had made the Heavens and the Earth, and all things therein, as
Christ does testify, Exodus 20. 11. now if all things in Heaven and Earth were
made in six days, then were the Souls of Adam and Eve Re-created in the said
six days, as a true part of that sort of Creature which appertains to the
spiritual Heavens, and to the spiritual Earth, and to the Church triumphant in
Heaven hereafter, and therefore seeing God made all things both in Heaven and
Earth in six days, he rested not on the seventh day till he had perfected Man's
Creation by a Recreation procured by the redemption of the promised Seed, which
doubtless was the finishing work of Gods Creation on the sixth day; so then,
our redemption from Satan's Head-plot was the last finishing act of the whole
Creation, and therefore it was the only true reason of Gods rest on the first
Sabbath Day, and of his command, why man should keep a holy rest on that day,
as it is also typified by the Redemption from Egypt, as in Deuteronomy. 5. 15.

Hence it follows by necessary consequence, that God ordained the sanctified
rest of the seventh day to be a typical sign unto fallen Man of his resting
upon Christ by faith, to break the Devils Head-plot, for his Redemption, by his
propitiatory sacrifice in the fullness of time, and then upon the performance
thereof the typical use of the rest of the seventh day must cease, and yet such
a way must be found out by the Wisdom of God, as that the seventh part of time
according to the account of the days of the Week must not cease, but it must
still be preserved for the exercise of Gods public Worship: for seeing it has
pleased God to continue his plain and manifest Worship still to the end of the
world, it has pleased him also to continue the seventh day for the exercise of
his public Worship to the end of the world; and no other way can be found out
to accomplish both these, namely the ceasing of the seventh day as it was a
typical sign, and the continuance of the seventh day without any intermission,
as it is the sanctified time of Gods public Worship, but by changing the
seventh day into the first day of the Week, as I shall hereafter show more at
large God willing.

And this answer to the abovesaid Objection is the rather to be credited,
because the Redemption from Egypt by the typical blood of the Lamb, is alleged
by Christ as the general reason to enforce his people to the observation of all
the Commandments, for the Angel of the Covenant says thus in Exodus 20. 2. I
Exodus 20. 2 Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15.
am the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt (namely by
the typical blood of the Paschal Lamb) therefore remember the Sabbath Day to
sanctify it; and so it must be applied as a reason to observe all the other
Commandments; and this sense is yet further enforced, because all the precepts
of the Law were sprinkled with the typical blood of Christ's sacrifice of
Atonement, Exodus 24. 8. which does plainly tell us, that he by his sacrifice
Exodus 24. 8.
of Atonement has procured his Fathers atonement for all our sins, against
all his holy Law.

5 God does account the violation of the Holy Rest of the seventh day by any
man's work to be an exceeding great profaneness in every place of their abode,
for whiles his people were in their travels in the Wilderness, he did as
deeply blame them for polluting the typical rest of the seventh day, as he did
after they were in a settled resting place in Canaan, Eze. 20. 13.

^sou was branded with the title of Pr^phaneness, for contem^ing his
Birthright in the Land of Canaan, because it was a type of the holy militant
Church here on earth, and of the holy triumphant Church in Heaven; and the Jews
were no less guilty of profaneness, for despising the Typical rest on the
seventh day, by doing their own works therein, for by doing their own works
they committed a double sin on that day; First, They profaned it as it was a
sanctified sign; and, Secondly, They abused it as it was the sanctified time of
Gods Worship, and therefore for this double sin God provided as it were a
double death, namely, 1. Stoning to death, Exodus 31. 14, 15. (for he that Exodus
31. 14, 15.
gathered sticks upon the Sabbath Day was stoned to death, Number. 15.) and 2.
After they were stoned to death, their dead Carcas was hanged upon a Tree, for
their deeper punishment, and for the greater detestation of their sin, as I
have showed elsewhere from the instance of the rebellious Son in Deuteronomy. 21.

Yea, God was so jealous for the holy rest of his Sabbath, that he would not
permit them to do any work at all about the promoting of the work of the
Tabernacle, though he had commanded that work to be done with all diligence,
Exodus 31. 13. as the place of his holy presence and residence among his people,
Exodus Exodus 31* 13
25. 8, 22. yet notwithstanding all this, they might not do any work (to
further the building of it) upon the Sabbath Day, and the reason is added,
because I (says the Lord) have ordained it to be a sign between me and you,
that you may know that I am the Lord that do sanctify you; that is to say, I
am the Lord that do command you to sanctify the Sabbath Day (as a sign of
resting on Christ) for when God does sanctify any thing for man's use, he does
thereby impose a command upon man to sanctify that thing, or to use it as a
sanctified thing, as I have erewhile noted in the beginning of this Chapter,
and therefore in this respect the Lord does in Exodus 31. again and again
enforce the observation of the Sabbath Day; First, By a fresh charge, Ye shall
keep the Sabbath; and Secondly, by a fresh reason, It is holiness to you;
namely, it is a sign of Sanctification to you, ver. 14. yea it is Holiness to
Jehovah, ver. 15. and therefore in Exodus 16. 23. it is called the rest of
Holiness to Jehovah, or an exact holy rest to Jehovah; and in Exodus 31. 17. It
is called a sign of the Everlasting Covenant between Exodus 31. 17
Jehovah, and the Sons of Israel, because Jehovah rested on the seventh day,
and was refreshed.

Conclusion.
It follows from all the Premises, that God sanctified the rest of the seventh
day, not only as the sanctified time of Gods worship, both in public, and in
private, but also as a sanctified sign of Gods resting, and of man's resting on
the Seed of the Woman for the breaking of the Devils Head-plot by his
propitiatory Sacrifice of Atonement, which he should accomplish at the very
same time when the Devil by his instruments should pierce him in the
foot-soals; and therefore as soon as the Seed of the Woman had finished that
sacrifice, the Holy-rest of the seventh day ceased (as well as all the other
types of Moses Law, 2 Cor. 3. 7.) namely, so far forth as it was a typical sign
of the said resting on the Seed of the Woman: But yet still, as the seventh day
was the sanctified time of Gods worship, so it must still continue for the
exercise of those Spiritual Ordinances, wherewith God has blessed the seventh
day for the use of all Nations to the end of the world, and because there must
not be any intermission of the seventh part of time according to the days of
the week, therefore the seventh day could not be changed to any other day than
the first day of the week wherein the Seed of the Woman arose from the dead as
an absolute Lord and Conqueror of Satan's Head-plot.

CHAP. XII.
Showing how God did make the first seventh day famous, by honoring the number
Seven ever after with famous respects.

1 GOD has made the first seventh day famous in three regards.

1 Because God did bless it with many Spiritual Ordinances, above all the
other six days, for man's best good.

2 Because God did sanctify it as so much time for the solemnity of his
public worship for ever.

3 Because God did ordain it as a sanctified type, or sign of fallen man's
resting on the Seed of the Woman for the breaking of the Devils Head-plot.

II. God does often use the number seven in an honorable memorial of the first
famous seventh day.

1 God has contrived many of the Typical Ceremonies of our Redemption to be
numbered by seven, in an honorable respect to the first famous seventh day.

3 He has marked out many holy men of special note by the number seven, in an
honorable remembrance of the first famous seventh day.

3 He has framed many parts of the Scripture Chronology to the number seven,
in an honorable remembrance of the first famous seventh day.

1 I will begin to open the first, touching the Typical Ceremonies 1 The
typical Ceremonies of our Redemption are often numbered by Seven in an
honorable memorial of the first famous seventh day. Lev 8. 33. 35. Lev. 29. 30.
of our Redemption.

Seven days were appointed for the consecration of the Priests into their
Priestly office, Exodus 29. 30. in all which seven days they must abide at the
door of the Tabernacle night and day, to keep the watches of the Lord, that no
defilement might befall them, or the Sanctuary, Lev. 8. 33, 35.

And the chief reason why their Consecration must last seven days, was because
the Sabbath (which was ordained as a typical sign of our sanctification by
Christ) might pass over them in that space; and therefore the Hebrew Doctors
say of this action, Great is the Sabbath, for the High Priest enters not upon
his service after he is anointed, until the Sabbath do pass over him.

And also from these seven days of their Consecration, the Hebrew Doctors did
gather, That the High Priest must be separated from his house before he might
do the service of the day of Atonement seven days every year. See Ains. in
the said places.

2 The Altar was seven times sprinkled with oil when it was consecrated to be a
type of the Mediators anointing, When he should make his soul a sacrifice for
our sins, Lev. 8. 11. Lev. 8. 11.


3 The blood of the Sin-offering, which the High Priest offered must be
sprinkled seven times before Jehovah for Atonement, Lev. 4. 6. And on the day
of Atonement he sprinkled the blood Lev. 4. 6.
of Atonement seven times before the Mercy-seat, Lev. 16. 14. and seven times
upon the Altar, Lev. 16. 19. This sevenfold Lev. 16. 14.
sprinkling of the blood of Atonement did type out the perfect Atonement that
the Seed of the Woman should one day make for all the true Israel of God by his
propitiatory Sacrifice of Atonement, and therefore it was offered but once for
all, because it was perfect at once. Heb. 10. 10, 12, 14. Heb. 10. 10, 12, 14.


4 The number of seven Sacrifices, was often used as a typical number that God
did much delight in; no doubt in relation to the first famous seventh day. As
for example, When David did fetch the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord from the
house of Obed Edom they offered seven Bullocks, and seven Rams, because the
Lord enabled the Levites to bear the Ark, 1 Chr. 15. 26.

And when Hezekiah caused the Levites to cleanse the Temple, then he (together
with the Princes) brought seven Bullocks, and seven Rams, and seven Lambs, and
seven He-goats for a Sinoffering, 2 Chr. 29. 21.

In like manner Jobs three friends brought unto Job (as the Priest in those
days) seven Bullocks, and seven Rams for a Burnt-offering, Job 42. 8. Job 42.
8.


And in the New Jerusalem the Prince shall offer in the days of
unleavened-bread, seven Bullocks, and seven Rams without blemish, daily at the
time of the seven days, Ezekiel. 45. 23.

And Balaam in imitation of such customs, and in imitation of the first famous
seventh day (which doubtless was famous a long time among the Heathens) he
caused Balack to build seven Altars, and to prepare seven Bullocks, Number. 23. 1.

5 In cleansing of Lepers, the Priest must sprinkle them seven times with
water, wherein the blood of the Bird that was slain was mixed, Lev. 14. 7. and
seven times with oil, before the Lord, verse. 16. 51.

6 Elisha the Prophet bad Naaman to wash seven times in Jordan, and then he
should be cleansed of his Leprosy, 1 King. 5. 10, 14.

7 God allotted seven days for the time of Purification from sundry kinds of
uncleanesse.

1 The Woman in childbed must be seven days separated from the company of her
husband, for a Man-child (just as long as she was separated in the time of her
menstruousnesse) and twice seven days for a female, Lev. 12. 2. Lev. 15. 19.

2 He that touched a dead man must be unclean seven days before he could be
purified.

8 God ordained every seventh year to be a Sabbath of Rest in the land of
Canaan, after that Joshua had given the people rest in the seventh year of his
reign; and when seven times seven years were complete, then began the Jubilee
with the fiftieth year, Lev. 25. 4, 8. 20.

9. The Lord ordained seven sorts of Festivial Sabbaths, besides the seventh
day, as they may be counted in Lev* 23. and the Feast of Unleavened bread, was
a Feast of seven days; and the seventh month was famous above other months,
because it had most Festival Sabbaths in it, and in the seventh month Solomon
kept the Feast of the Dedication of the Temple seven days, and seven days, 1
King. 8. 2. 65. and Hezekiah took order, because of the general uncleanness of
the Priests, and of the greater number of the people, in the first month, that
the Feast of Unleavened-bread should be put off unto the fourteenth day of the
second month, and then after they had kept the Feast seven days, the whole
assembly took counsel to keep it other seven days not with another Paschal
Lamb, but only with voluntary Peace Offerings; and by this means they kept
that Feast of Unleavened-bread seven days, and seven days, with joy, 2 Chr.
30. 22, 23. 2 Chr. 30. 22, 23.


10 God honored the seventh day by instructing Joshua how to subdue the City
Jericho by the divine art of Seven, he directed him to compass about the City
seven days with the Ark of Gods presence, and seven Priests must go before the
Ark, having seven Trumpets made of seven Rams horns; and on the seventh day
they must compass the City seven times; and at the seventh time the seven
Priests must blow with their seven Trumpets, and then the wall of the City
should fall down flat, Jos. 6. 4, 5.

This divine Miracle by the number seven, was doubtless so done, in honor of
the first famous seventh day, wherein God rested from all his works, when he
had made the Creation perfect and entire, lacking nothing, by the Redemption
and Gubernation of the Promised Seed.

11 It is not without a divine Allusion to the seventh day that the Golden
Candlestick was framed into seven branches, yea all the particulars of it were
so contrived, that when they are exactly counted, they do amount to just six
sevens, as the Hebrew Doctors have cast them; and they say that this number is
so necessary, that if it did but fail in one particular, it failed in all. See
Ains. in Exodus 25. 31.

And accordingly, if it be but regarded, the sixth day and the seventh day have
the most famous stories belonging unto them that are in all the Bible.

12 The number seven is made famous by the Holy Ghost in the Mystical
Revelation (which Christ commanded the Apostle John to write for the use and
benefit of his Redeemed servants) to the end of the world.

There the Vision of the seven Golden Caandlesticks represented the seven
Churches of Asia, and to the said seven Churches there does belong seven Stars,
and seven Angels; there are also seven Angels with seven Trumpets, and seven
Angels with seven Incense cups of wrath, pouring out seven plagues; there are
also seven Thunders uttering seven voices, and a Book with seven Seals; there
are also seven Spirits, seven Horns, and seven Eyes, Rev. 5. On the contrary,
there is given to the Dragon seven Heads, and seven Crowns, Rev. 12. 3. and the
seven Heads are the seven Mountains, Rev. 17. 9. and there are also seven
Kings, etc. Can all these particulars be without any allusion to the first
famous seventh day? I suppose that no advised Expositor dares affirm the
contrary.

2 I come now to the second thing to be marked touching the 2 Diverse (...)
persons of rare eminency in Scripture are marked cut by the number 7* in an
honorable remembrance of the first famous seventh day
number Seven, namely, that God has marked out many holy men of special note
by the number seven in an honorable remembrance of the first famous seventh
day.

1 Henoc is noted by the Holy Ghost, to be a Prophet, and to be the seventh
from Adam, Jude v. 14. He was rare in the faith of Christ, Heb. 11. 5. and he
was by the mighty power of God taken away from the wicked Apostate world
(because they were not worthy of him) when he was Three hundred sixty five
years old, Genesis 5. 23. just answerable to the days of the year (according to
the course of the Sun) and as he was the seventh Patriarch, so when he was
taken away, there remained seven Patriarchs alive as witnesses of his
Translation: And by his name it is evident that his Father did at his Birth
dedicate him to God, in opposition to those Apostate times; for the impiety of
those days is noted out to our hand by the Prophecy of Enoch in Jude v. 14,
15. Behold (says he) the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints, to give
Jude 14, 15
judgment upon all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among them of all their
wicked deeds which they have impiously committed, and of all their wicked
speakings which wicked sinners have spoken against him. The horrible impiety of
those days is also noted out unto us by the wicked tyrannical speeches of
Lamech and Cain in Genesis 4. 23, 24. and Genesis 4. 23, 24 Job 22. 25 2 Pet. 2. 5
their impiety and wicked speakings is also noted out unto us by Job 22. 15.
and by Peter, for he calls them the world of the ungodly, 2 Pet. 2. 5.

Obj. Here it may be demanded, how it can be proved that Enoch did Propbesy,
that the wicked world should be drowned by a deluge?

Ans. Jude says, that Enoch did Prophesy, saying, Behold, the Lord comes with
thousands of his Saints, to give judgment upon all men; and what other
Judgment did come in general upon all men, but the flood?

Secondly, His Prophecy that God would destroy the wicked World by a Flood, is
briefly, and yet plainly enough declared in the name which he gave to his Son
at his birth, for he called him, Meth-u-shelach, which in English sounds thus;
Meth he dies (or when this Child dies) [U] then, Shelah he sends, or, God
sends; and what else did God send but the Judgment threatened upon all men in
general (as I noted above) and what judgment was that, but the flood?

This famous Prophet is called the seventh from Adam, doubtless in an
Honorable remembrance of the first famous seventh day; Moses says, He walked
with God, Genesis 5. 24. but the Apostle Genesis 5. 24 Heb. 11. 5
does thus expound it, He pleased God, Heb. 11. 5, 6. for when he offered
sacrifice he looked to Christ the true Sacrifice which only pleases God, Mat.
3. 17. and in the course of his life he walked in obedience to Gods will.

Secondly, Eber was the seventh from Enoch, he was another rare man for grace
and godliness, for he kept the faith at the building of the Tower of Babel,
when all the other Families of Noah did Apostatise, therefore God has honored
his memonial in a double respect.

1 In communicating unto him the spirit of Prophecy as well as he had done to
Enoch, as we may gather by the name which he gave his Son at the building of
Babel, for it is said, that he called his Son Peleg, and the reason is added,
because in his days the earth was divided, Genesis 10. 25. Now he that could give
his Son Genesis 10. 2^.
such a name as to declare such an event, must needs be a Prophet; and by this
we may certainly know that he preached to the builders of Babel, that though
they had high imaginations to build a Tower whose top might reach unto Heaven,
that they might in a near distance worship the Sun, Moon, and Stars, thinking
thereby to get themselves another Sem, or name, for now they had rejected Sems
Tents, and had removed themselves (from Canaan where Sem and Eber lived) into
Babylon, in despite of Sem, who had the promise of the blessed Seed to come
from his Ioyns; therefore the Prophet Eber did tell them, that for that impiety
and Apostasy God would confound their Language, and scatter them upon the face
of the earth, and in memory of that Prophecy he called his Son Peleg, and
truly he must needs be a rare Sabbath-keeper, that kept the faith when all the
rest of Noah's family fell away.

2 God has honored Ebers memorial in another respect, namely in that all the
Nations of the Jews are called Ebrews after his name, Genesis 14. 13. Genesis 39. 14,
17. and it seems to me that his constant abode was in the Land of Canaan,
because the Land of Canaan is called the Land of the Ebrews long before the
Jews came out of Egypt to dwell there, Genesis 40. 15. And secondly, because his
great Grandfather Sem (who was the King of Salem in the Land of Canaan) is
called the Father of all the Sons of Eber, Genesis 10. 21. Sem was the Father of
many other Families Genesis 10. 21
besides Ebers, but for some special reason (namely, of their Co-habitation)
Ebers Sons are called Sems Sons, for Sem is called the father of them; which I
conceive is to note out unto us that Eber was a close cohabiter and familiar
with Sem in the faith of Christ, when all the other Families did Apostatise,
and depart from them to Babylon to worship new gods.

Master Broughton says, That the Hebrew Tongue remained only in the faithful
of Ebers House after the building of Babel, and in them is continued the name
of Ebrews, as perpetually opposite to the builders of Babel, to whom Eber
preached, that their tongues should be divided, Prin. Posit. p. 3.

3 Isaac was the seventh from Eber; his faith is famous, in his ready obedience
to be sacrificed, for he was at that time in the prime of his strength, because
he carried all the Wood for the Burnt-offering up the Hill, Genesis 22. 6. and
therefore he might well be Genesis 22. 6.
about thirty three years of age when he went with his Father Abraham up to the
Mount of Moriah to be sacrifised, and therefore also he was able by strength of
Nature, if he had been unwilling to be bound, to have withstood his aged
Father, who was now one hundred and thirty three years old, and therefore he
was in the declining of his Natural strength; and he might the more easily have
withstood his aged Father, because they two were alone, and none there to help
Abraham.

And now seeing Abraham's faith is recorded to be famous, in that he did so
readily obey Gods command, not sparing to sacrifise his only Son at his
command, Isaacks says is therewithal recorded to be no less famous, in that
he was so cheerfully willing to be bound, and to be sacrifised; they both knew
that God was able to raise him up again from the dead, Heb. 11. 19. Heb. 11. 19
and thus God made his obedience to be a sweet typical resemblance, not only of
the free and voluntary, but also of the actual obedience of Jesus Christ, to
make his Soul a sacrifice for our sins, Es. 53. 10. Es. 53. 10


4 Moses was the seventh from Abraham, by no less rare Providence of God than
Enoch was the seventh from Adam.

5 Joshua was the seventh from his Grandfather Ephraim, and David was the
seventh son of Jesse.

6 Judah was the seventh Patriarch, as the Hebrew Doctors do in this order
count him.

First, Abraham; second, Isaac; third, Jacob; fourth, Ruben; fifth, Simeon;
sixth, Levy; seventh, Judah; and in this respect the Hebrew Doctors do compare
him to the first seventh day.

Secondly, In another respect they do compare him to the fourth Commandment,
namely, as he was the fourth Son of Israel, and so both these ways they do make
his memorial Honorable by their allusion to the first famous seventh day. See
Ains. in Genesis 49. 12.

7 Bazaliel the Master-work-man of the Lords Tabernacle was the seventh from
Judah, as it is evident by his Genealogy in 2 Chro. 2. 5, 9, 18, 19, 20.

In all these holy Persons the providence of God ought to be sweetly
considered; for it does manifestly call to our remembrance the famousnesse of
the first seventh day, by his disposing of great matters, and gracious, most
often by sevens.

3 God has framed many parts and parcels of the Scripture 3 There are several
parcels of the Scripture Chronology that are f^amed to the number seven, in an
Honorable remembrance of the first famous seventh day. Levit. 25. 4
Chronology to the number seven, doubtless in an Honorable remembrance of
the first famous seventh day.

1 When Gods people neglected the holy Sabbath, and profaned the holy Rest of
it, then God did threaten to punish them with Sabbatical years of punishment,
as in the Captivity of Babylon with ten times seven years Captivity, that the
Land might rest and enjoy her Sabbaths all the time it lay desolate, 2 Chronicles.
36. with Ier. 25. and Levit. 26. and is it not a manifest allusion to the first
famous seventh day, in that God does call sevens of years Sabbaths of years,
Levit. 25. 4. and threaten them with Sabbatical years of punishment, for
profaning the rest of the holy Sabbath?

2 At the just end of these seventy years Daniel has annexed a Sabbatical
Chronicle, which does notably lead on, not only the Sabbatical years of rest,
but even the weekly Sabbaths also unto the death and burial of Christ, Dan. 9.
24. for,

1 Christ dyed for our Redemption, and rose again for our Justification in a
Sabbatical Jubilee, even in the twenty eighth Jubilee, and from the liberties
of the Jubilee the ancient Hebrew Doctors did foresee, and know, and say, That
the Divine Majesty will be to Israel in a Iubilee, Freedom, Redemption, and
Finisher of Sabbaths. See H. Bro. in Sinai Sight, 2560. and in Req. of Consent,
p. 13.

2 Daniel by his Sabbatical Chronicle does also lead on the weekly Sabbaths to
the death and burial of Christ; for First, Christ dyed on the first day of the
feast of unleavened Bread, which John calls a High Sabbath, Ioh. 19. 31. and
Secondly, on the next day, which was the weekly Sabbath, or seventh day, his
Body rested all that day in his Grave, and his Soul in Heaven, for as soon as
he had finished the Work that God gave him to do, he rested from all his Works
on the seventh day, as God did from his Heb. 4. 10
own on the first seventh day.

3 He rose again from the dead on the third day, for Christ did fore-tel this
to his Disciples, that on the third day he should be perfected, Luke 13. 32.
for as soon as he had performed Luke 13. 32 Mat. 12. 40
his propitiatory Sacrifice, or his sacrifice of Atonement, by which the
Devils Head-plot was broken, he was declared by his Resurrection to have made a
perfect Conquest over Satan, and a perfect Atonement with God his Father for
man's Redemption; and this day of his Resurrection was the first day of the week
by Paul, but John calls it, the Lords Day, because in it Christ rose from the
Dead, as an absolute Lord and Conqueror of Satan's Head-plot; and therefore now
seeing his Death was declared to be a perfect sacrifice of Atonement. God made
him both Lord and Christ, and thereupon Christ has ordained that day to be
the day of his public Worship in the place of the seventh day, to the end of
the world.

Thus have I declared the first seventh day to be made famous and honorable by
three several sorts of instances that have relation to Gods resting, and to
Man's resting on the seventh day, in relation to the work of our Redemption by
the promised Seed.

CHAP. XIII.
Proving, That though Christ has abolished the seventh day by his death, yet
that he has not left the day of his public Worship Arbitrary to particular
Churches, to appoint what day they please in the place of the seventh day, as
some unadvised Protestants do affirm.

I Have already showed you, that God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it,
because that in it he rested from all his works that belonged either to the
heavenly or the earthly Host, and that his finishing Act lay in this, namely,
in ordaining the Seed of the Woman to break the Devils Head-plot, and when that
Head-plot was broken then God rested, and was refreshed, and then also he
sanctified the outward rest of the seventh day, to be a sign both of Gods rest,
and of Man's rest on the Seed of the Woman; as soon therefore as the Seed of the
Woman had broken the Devils Head-plot, by his propitiatory sacrifice of
Atonement, the holy rest of the seventh day must cease, as it was a type or
sign of that which is now performed.

But yet withal I pray remember what I have said upon the word Sanctified,
namely, that thereby God commanded fallen Man to set apart the seventh day for
a double use; 1. As the sanctified time of that Worship wherewith he had
blessed the seventh day; and, 2. As a sanctified sign; in this last respect the
seventh day is abolished by the death of Christ; but in the first respect,
namely as it was set apart for so much time to be employed in the exercise of
such Ordinances both public and private, as God had blessed the seventh day
withal, so it must continue, namely, the seventh part of time according to the
days of the Week, in a constant succession to the first seventh day to the end
of the world.

And indeed the seventh part of time cannot be translated to any other day of
the Week, but to the next day after the seventh day; for if it had been
translated to any other day, God should have been a loser of his seventh part
of sanctified time, there would have been a vacuum in the revolution of the
seventh part of time, at least in the first translation of it to any other day
but the first day of the Week, and so the roundnesse of the seventh part of
time would have been spoiled, which must no^ be admitted; for as God did not
allow less than six parts of the Week for Man's civil employments, so neither
will he have less time for his public worship than he appointed at first.

Therefore it would have been a great dishonor to Christ, who is made of God
to be both the Lord of his Church, and the Lord of the Sabbath, if he had left
the day of his public Worship arbitrary to each particular Church, to
transfer it to what day they pleased; A man may with as good reason affirm,
That Christ has left the outward Form of his public Worship arbitrary to each
particular Church, as affirm, That he has left the day of his public Worship
arbitrary; there is as much reason for the one as for the other; for Jesus
Christ by his death has made as much alteration in the second Commandment, in
respect of his outward Worship, as in the fourth Commandment, in respect of
the change of the day.

Secondly, the very order of the Ten Commandments does plainly tell us, that
all Gods public Worship (which is fully comprehended in the second
Commandment) must have a public day appointed by God himself, for the
constant exercise of his said public Worship; and consequently it follows,
that as soon as Christ had abolished the seventh day by his death, he being the
Lord of his Church, and the Lord of the Sabbath, must establish another certain
day in the place of the seventh day to the end of the world, without any
intermission or loss of time.

The order of the four Commandments of the first Table, lies thus.

1 The first Commandment does enjoin us to worship the true God alone, in
Unity and Trinity, with the whole inward man.

2 The second Commandment does enjoin us to worship the true God with all such
outward worship as he had commanded at that present, or should command
afterward.

3 The third Commandment does enjoin us to worship God in a holy manner, both
publicly and privately, and with outward reverence, as well as inward.

4 The fourth Commandment does enjoin us to observe the seventh day, not only
as a sanctified sign, but also as the sanctified time of that worship wherewith
God had blessed the seventh day; as soon therefore as Christ the Seed of the
Woman had accomplished that work of breaking the Devils Head-plot, by his
Propitiatory Sacrifice, the seventh day, in regard it was a sanctified sign,
must cease; but as it was the sanctified time of Gods public worship, so it
must not cease, but it must still be continued, or else Gods public worship
must suffer loss and confusion, no other way can be found out, by which the
constant solemnity of Gods established worship may be continued, but by
translating the seventh day to the next day; for by that means only, God shall
still have the seventh part of time for his public worship, without
interruption; and by this means only the twofold manner of sanctifying the
seventh day, does attain its several ends.

2 Let it be a little further inquired into, To what end did God command all
his public worship in the second Command? and to what end did he command all
his public worship to be reverently performed in the third Command, if the day
of his public worship in the fourth Command be wholly obliturated?

3 Consider, that the command of Christ is that all his public worship must be
done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14. and seeing he does require that the
meanest circumstances of his worship be done decently and in order, no doubt
but he has taken order that the main things of his public worship should be
done decently and in order, and that cannot be without some public day be
uniform. But if Christ Jesus has left the day of his public worship abitrary
to his particular Churches, they will hardly agree upon a way of decency,
especially in respect of the solemnity of time, doubtless they will appoint
several days of the week as every Church shall think best for their own
conveniences; yea it may be that some particular Churches may grow so corrupt,
that they may think one day in a month sufficient, and others may think one day
in two or three months sufficient for Gods public worship; and who can prevent
such disorders as these, if Jesus Christ has not established a standing day?

There are some that profess Christianity that think that Jesus Christ has
not established a certain public day in place of the seventh day; and
therefore they do still hold the Jewish Sabbath, together with the Lords day;
As for example, The Melchites or Syrians (who are esteemed for number to be the
greatest Sect of Christians in the Orient) these do confound the day of Gods
public worship; for they, and the Maronites their neighbors, do observe the
Jewish Sabbath, as solemnly as the Lords day. See Brerewood in his Inquiries,
p. 129.

And the Habbissines of Ethiopia, who are another large Territory of
Christians, they also do reverence the Jewish Sabbath equal to the Lords day.
See Brerewood, p. 155. But blessed be God that has given the Churches of
Europe a cleerer understanding of his will touching the day of his public
worship, and yet notwithstanding, it is also much to be lamented, that some
Christians do not only hold the seventh day to be abolished, but also that
Christ Jesus has not established any public day in the place of the old.

But let me reason a little further, Can any man that is well acquainted with
the order of the Commandments of the first Table, think that Christ (who
blessed the seventh day with several Ordinances for the good of fallen man, and
that sanctified that day for the exercise of the said Ordinances) should now
obliturate that Commandment, and sanctify no day at all for the exercise of
his said Ordinances? Can any man think that Christ should now after his death,
be so far unlike to his first pattern? Surely me thinks none should be so
inconsiderate. The holy Rest of the seventh day as it was a typical sign, so I
grant it to be abolished, but not without any other in the place of it, but by
way of exchange for the next day; And this the blessed Martyr Stephen does
explain to be the truth; for when he was accused for affirming that Jesus of
Nazareth should destroy the holy place, and change the Customs that Moses had
delivered unto them, Act. 6. 14. his false witnesses did affirm this word Act
6. 14.
Change against Stephen, as if it had been an odious heresy to say so; but how
does Stephen answer to this Accusation? Does he deny it? No, he does
acknowledge it to be a truth in it self, and therefore in his Oration to the
High Synedrion, he does confirm this to be a truth, by saying thus to them;
Solomon built him a house, Howbeit the most High dwells not in Temples made
with hands, as says the Prophet (in Es. 66. 1.) What house will ye build for
me, says the Lord, or what place is it that I should rest in, Has not my hand
made all these things? Act. 7. 47. to 50. with these words Stephen does
conclude his Oration. In these words he does reprove the High Act. 7. 47.
Synedrion, because of their obstinate opposing the former Doctrine; for his
Doctrine tended to prove that God would not rest locally in a Temple made with
man's hands, and so consequently, not in any other outward signs, implying, that
God would only rest in Christ the true Temple, whom they had flain.

His false accusers did repeat (though at unawares) and as it were translate
the words of the Angel Gabriel in Dan. 9. 26, 27. Dan. 9. 26, 27.
namely, that the Messiah should by his death destroy the City and Sanctuary,
and cause Sacrifice and Oblation to cease; and this very thing in true effect
Stephen had taught, namely, that Jesus of Nazareth should destroy the holy
place, and change the Customs that Moses had delivered, and so consequently
change the Sabbath; and the Lord from heaven did justify Stephen for this
speech, even in the face of the High Synedrion; for as he looked steadfastly
into heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of
God; And as he avouched this before them all, Act. 7. 55, 56. they that sat in
the Council looked Act. 6. 15. Act. 7. 55.
steadfastly on him, and saw his face as the face of an Angel, Act. 6. 15. And
this does evince, that as Stephen did justify his Doctrine by the words of the
Angel Gabriel, so God did justify him by making his face to shine before the
Council, as the countenance of the Angel Gabriel, by which miraculous glory in
his countenance the Council might have seen that his Doctrine was warranted by
the words of the Angel Gabriel.

Stephen affirmed that which his false witnesses affirmed against him as a
blasphemous thing, that Jesus of Nazaret should change the Customs of Moses:
Hence I reason thus, If Jesus should do it, then he did not leave it to be done
in an arbitrary way by the discretion of particular Churches; But Jesus himself
did it.

Mark the phrase of speaking; Jesus of Nazaret shall change the That Christ
Jesus made three main changes in the ten Commandments.
Customs of Moses: And it is also observable, that Jesus of Nazaret did make
three main changes in the ten Commandments, two in the outward form of his
public worship contained in the second Commandment, and one touching the day
of his public worship in the fourth Commandment.

1 He changed Circumcision and all typical purifyings (which were commanded in
the second Commandment) into the Sacramental Seal of Baptism.

2 He changed the Passover, and all typical Sacrifices, which were also
commanded in the second Commandment, into the Sacramental Seal of the Lords
Supper.

3 He changed the seventh day as it was a typical sign, by translating it to
the first day of the week, wherein Christ rose as a Lord and Conqueror of
Satan's Head-plot, for the day of his public worship, as the seventh day was at
first.

And the Apostle Paul does reason much after the same manner as Stephen did; If
(says he) the Priesthood be changed, there must Heb. 7. 12.
of necessity be a change of the Law, Heb. 7. 12. but the Priesthood is changed
(for Christ was not of the Tribe of Levy, but of Judah, neither was he made a
High Priest by man according to the Law of the carnal Commandment, but (by
God) after the power of endless life) therefore Christ did not leave it to the
power of his particular Churches to change the Ordinances of Moses, but he had
power from God to do it; He takes away the first, that he Heb. 9. 10.
might establish the second, Heb. 9. 10. that is to say, Christ only had power
to take away Sacrifices, and all the other Customs of Moses, that so he might
ratify his own Sacrifice in the place of them all, and therefore for the
memorial of his Sacrifice, he has now ordained two Sacramental Seals, which he
has annexed to the preaching of his Gospel; the one he has appointed as a
Sacrament of initiation to his Church, and the other as a Sacrament of
confirmation to all believers: And therefore Christ Jesus has not now tied his
public worship, neither to typical persons, nor to typical places, nor to
typical days and times, for by his death he has ended all the Types of his
Death; and he has changed the Priesthood of Levy into the number of the
Elect, Jer. 33. 18, 21, 22. and the typical place of his worship into
particular Churches, and into godly hearts, saying, In every place Incense Mal.
1. 11.
shall be offered to my Name, Mal. 1. 11. Joh. 4. 23. Act. 10. 35. And thirdly,
he has changed all the typical Sabbaths of Moses into the Lords day; for
though the Sabbath was first given to Adam, the very next day after his
Creation and Fall; yet as the holy rest of it was a typical sign, so it must be
reckoned among the Customs of Moses, as well as Circumcision was, for (though
at the first, Circumcision was given to Abraham long before Moses, yet) it is
reckoned among the Customs of Moses, because he wrote first of it as it was a
typical sign; So in like sort, though the Sabbath was first given to Adam as a
typical sign, yet it is reckoned among the Customs of Moses, because he first
wrote of it as a typical sign, Exodus 31. 13. etc. and also Moses does reckon it
among all the other Festival Sabbaths, in Lev. 23. therefore it must be
abolished by the death of Christ, as well as all the other typical Customs of
Moses, by changing it into the Lords day, Col. 2. 16, 17. Gal. 4. 10. Act. 21.
21.

Conclusion from the Premises.
That it is not in the power of any particular Church, or Churches, to make
this change; Christ only has power to do it, and he has done it, as he is
the Lord of the Sabbath, and the Lord of his Church, and that day cannot be
altered by any Church or State to the worlds end.

CHAP. XIV.
Proving by several other particular grounds, That Christ himself did appoint
the day of his Resurrection, in the place of the seventh day, for the exercise
of his public worship.

1 I Do not mean that Christ left the day of his public worship Mary Magdalen,
and at her second coming to his Sepulcher, he bid her tell his Disciples, that
He was risen from the dead, Joh. 20. 17. 18.

Then he appeared unto two of his Disciples as they went from Jerusalem to
Emaus, Luke 24. and he proved his Resurrection to them from the Scriptures, and
opened their understandings to understand what he said; and this he did to draw
them back again to the rest of the Disciples, partly that they might testify
the certainty of his Resurrection, and partly that they might not be absent
from the Assembly when he should come unto them, to instruct them further
concerning his Death and Resurrection. And at that Assembly he also opened
their understandings that they might understand the Scriptures which he
alleged, for he said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ
to suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day, Luke 24. 45, 46.

I grant it was somewhat late in the evening ere Christ came unto their
Assembly; but yet that time of the evening is plainly called the same first day
of the week, Joh. 20. 19. But the particular Joh. 20. 19.
Scriptures, which he alleged to prove his Resurrection, are not recorded,
neither by Luke nor John; but yet we may gather by consequence, that when he
spoke of his Death and Resurrection, he might well speak how he had ended all
Moses Ceremonies, and so consequently how he had ended the typical use of the
Sabbath by his death, and then doubtless he would nominate some other day in
the place of it, for the use of his public Worship; or else he had left it to
disorder and confusion, if he had left it arbitrary to particular Churches.

2 As soon as Christ had ended all his instructions concerning Joh. 20. 26. and
it is evident Joh. 20. 26
that this was the second time of his appearing to their Assembly, because the
next time after this is called the third time, Ioh. 21. 14. I confess, if it
can be proved, that Christ had appeared to them on any other day between the
day of his Resurrection and that day seven-night, then his appearing on that
day seven-night had not been so remarkable; but seeing he did not appear any
more unto them till that day seven-night, it strongly argues, that he did
purposely abstain from them the whole week, to declare his election of that day
in the place of the seventh day; and I am the more confirmed in the truth of
this, because this second time of his meeting was not occasioned by any
Sabbatical feast of the Jews, for the last day of the feast of Unleavened bread
(which was a chief festival Sabbath) was past two days before this second
meeting, and none of the festival days (which doubtless his Apostles kept) was
any occasion of his meeting with them sooner than the same day sevennight after
his Resurrection; it argues therefore that this Assembly of the Apostles and
Disciples was done by Christ's directions; and Luke does testify, that Christ
did give certain Commandments to his Apostles after his Resurrection, being
seen of them at times forty days, and speaking that which appertained to the
Kingdom of God, Acts 1. 2, 3. now what those Commandments were, and what
those things were which he spoke concerning the Kingdom of God, is not
recorded; but yet it may be collected from the practice of the Apostles, in
that they used the first day of the week for Gods public Worship in Christian
Churches, that Christ did command them to observe that day in place of the
seventh day, as soon as they were separated from the Jews Synagogues into
particular Christian Churches; and we may the rather conceive this to be a true
collection, because he did at this present give unto his Apostles a new
Commission to preach the Gospel, Ioh. 20. 21, 22. and the Gospel Joh. 2^. (...)
was preached not only in Synagogues on the seventh day, but also in Christian
Churches on the Lords Day; yea and before his Ascension he did again command
them, to Preach and Baptize through all the world, Matthew. 28. doubtless
therefore seeing he ordained Baptism as an appendix to the preaching of the
Gospel, and as a badge of the Christian Faith in Christian Churches, he would
not fail to appoint a solemn day (seeing he had abolished the seventh day by
his death) in which day his command of Preaching and Baptising was ordinarily
to be performed.

And why does John say, That Christ did many other Signs in the presence of his
Disciples, which are not written? Joh. 21. 25. but to teach us that these two
times of his miraculous appearing to his Disciples on the first day of the
week, when the Doors were shut, are written, that we might believe that Jesus
is the Christ the Son of God, Ioh. 20. 30, 31. and that he has not only
abolished the seventh day by his Death, but that he has also established his
Resurrection-day in the place thereof, in which he arose from the Dead, as the
Lord and Conqueror of Satan's Head-plot.

Obj. You say, That the second time of Christ's appearing was the same day
seven-night after his Resurrection; but that cannot be, because John says it
was eight days after, Joh. 20. 26.

Ans. I answer, When John's eight days come to be rightly Joh. 20. 26
understood, it will appear to be no more but seven nights, and this may the
better be believed, because the Evangelist Luke does make such a kind of
reckoning of days as this is, in Luke 9. 28. Luke 9. 28
there he says, that the day of Christ's transfiguration was eight days after
his former Miracle, but yet in proper speaking it was no more but seven nights;
and this is evident, because Matthew does make the said space of time to be but
six days, Mat. 17. 1. Mat. 17. 1
This difference must thus be reconciled; Luke counts into the number of his
eight days the day of the former Miracle, and the day of the latter Miracle,
wherein Christ was transformed; but Matthew does not reckon, neither the day of
the first Miracle, nor the day of the latter Miracle, but only the six whole
days that came between them; so that if you will account Lukes eight days by
nights, then there will be found no more but seven nights; but if you will
reckon by days Artificial, then if you take a part of the day wherein the first
Miracle was wrought, and a part of the day in which Christ was Transfigured,
then it was eight days, but still it was but seven nights.

In like sort, it was eight days from Christ's first appearing to his next
appearing, as John speaks, if you count a part of the former, and a part of
the latter day into the number, but if you account it by nights, then it was no
more but seven nights; so that after a sort it was eight days, but yet in true
account of days natural, which is according to the account of the days of the
week, it was no more but seven nights. This Interpretation and Reconciliation
has the approbation of diverse learned Divines, both Ancient and Modern, and
none will oppose it but peevish persons that love to seek a knot in a Bulrush.

3 A third Reason that does persuade me that Christ has ordained his
Resurrection-day, as the day of his public worship in Luke 24. 49. Joh. 15.
26. Luke 24 49.
Act. 1. 4. Act 2. 33. For when the day of Penticost was come (they being all
as one together) there appeared unto them cloven Tongues like fire, and it sat
upon each of them, Act. 2. 1. This day of Penticost was the first day of the
week, in which he arose from the dead, as it may be calculated by the account
of fifty days which must take their beginning from the second Sabbath, that is
to say from the second day of the Feast of Unleavened-bread (or from the morrow
after the first Festival day, Lev. 23. 15, 16.) to the day of Penticost, Lev.
23 15, 16. Act. 2. 1.
so named of fifty days, Act. 2. 1. In the first Festival Sabbath Christ was
crucified, the morrow after was the Sabbath, or seventh day, in which he lay in
his grave; thence begins the reckoning to the day of Penticost.

Object. It may be objected, that Christ appeared with the promise of the
Father to his Apostles on this day, because it was the Festival day of
Penticost, rather than because it was the first day of the week.

Ans. I answer, That Christ had abolished the Command for the use of all
Festival Sabbaths by his death, and therefore his appearing now was not in
honor of that Festival Sabbath, but it was purposely because this day was the
first day of the week in which he arose as a Lord and Conqueror of Satan's
Head-plot, and because he had now ordained it as the day of his public worship
in the place of the seventh day, and in that respect also he made choice of
this day to gift them with the immediate gift of Tongues, for the more speedy
spreading of the Gospel all the world over, on the first day of the week, as
the constant standing day of his public worship.

I conclude therefore, that the same wonderful providence that did order the
Resurrection of Christ to fall out upon the first day of the week, did order
the day of Penticost to fall out at this time on the first day of the week.

And by this Miracle of fiery cloven tongues on this day, Christ did not only
testify that it was he that gave the Fiery Law at first, when he sounded out
the Law in fire at Mount Sinai (which time has ever since been called
Penticost) for the instruction of his people in faith and holiness, but also
that it was he that would sound out his Law of the glad tidings of the Gospel
to all Nations, by this new gift of fiery tongues which he bestowed upon his
Apostles whilst they were in a Church Assembly, for the more effectual, and
more speedy spreading of the Gospel in all Christian Churches in every first
day of the week; and as an earnest thereof there were three thousand souls
converted at this meeting.

4 A fourth Reason that does persuade me that Christ himself has ordained his
Resurrection-day for the day of his public Corinth to assemble together on
this first day of the week, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.


The Apostle Paul did not now by this Epistle first begin to appoint this
Church to meet together every first day of the week; for he says, Upon the
first day of the week when ye are met together, (namely according to your usual
custom) Let every one of you lay by him in store as God has prospered him,
that there may be no gathering when I come, 1 Cor. 16. 2.

Hence it is evident, that the first day of the week, when Christians met
together, (or as the Apostles phrase is, when they are met, namely, according
to their usual and constant custom) to worship God, then he did exhort them to
lay aside something for the poor, for that day was a good day for their souls,
and therefore that season was a good season to lay aside something for the poor
Saints that were at Jerusalem.

I grant that the word, Every first day, is not fully expressed in the Greek
Text, but yet it must necessarily be understood, as it appears by the
consequence, for the Apostle did glory of their willing mind to them of
Macedonia, saying, that Achaia (in which Country the City of Corinth was
seated) was prepared Ayeer ag^, and that their zeal provoked many, 2 Cor. 9. 2.
But how could the Apostle have thus gloried of their zeal, and of their willing
mind 2 Cor 9. 2.
to them of Macedonia, if they had laid up something but once only upon some
one first day of the week, and no more? (as some would have the Text to speak)
doubtless therefore they did lay aside something, either every first day of
the week (or at least usually) when they were met together for the exercise of
Gods worship, and in so doing, their zeal was exemplary to provoke them of
Macedonia to imitate their example; and this is the rather to be believed,
because the Apostle does still exhort them to perform that duty, 2 Cor. 8. 10,
11, 12.

I conclude therefore, that though the word Every be not fully expressed in the
Greek Text, yet that it must necessarily be understood, and therefore the
Geneva Translation that puts it in, is to be justified, because it is according
to the true sense of the place.

2 Touching this phrase, Let every one of you lay by him in store, I dare not
affirm that this is meant of laying up by the Deacons Collection, but I rather
think it was done by separating something by way of Vow for the use of the said
poor in every ones own hand, (which was as sure a course, as if it had been put
into the Box of the poor) for in this phrase [Let every one of you lay by him
in store.] The Apostle does Thalmudize, as relating therein to a certain
custom of the Jews in vowing something to the poor; for the Hebrew Doctors
say, That Alms is comprehended in the general of Vows; and therefore he that
says thus, Lo this Shekel (or this Shilling) is an Alms, he is bound to give
it to the poor out of hand; But if there be no poor present, he is bound to
separate it, and to lay it Up till he find some poor. See Ains. in Deuteronomy. 23 21.
The Apostle Paul did lay this duty of Vowing upon the Churches of Galatia,
Corinth and Macedonia, namely, That every one of them should separate something
for the poor, and lay it up on the first day of the week when they were met
together, for that day was a fitter day for that duty, than any other day of
the week: And the Hebrew Doctors do add this to their former speech, That if a
man had purposed (to give such a quantity to the poor) but in his heart only,
he was bound to pay it.

3 Hence it is evident, That the first day of the week, was by Christ's
Institution the day of public Worship in place of the seventh day, or else the
Apostle would never have given direction to the Churches to separate something
for the poor when they were me^ together on that day, for the Apostle does
profess that in such matters he ordained nothing in the Church, but what he
received from the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 23. And that the things which he wrote unto
them were the Commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14. 37. and therefore it
follows, that the Church of Corinth and 1 Cor. 11. 23.
all other Christian Churches did usually meet together on this day by the
special Command of Jesus Christ; And seeing the Churches of Macedonia did
contribute to the poor Saints of Jerusalem, as well as the Churches of Achaia,
no doubt but Paul did order them to do it on every first day of the week,
answerable to the Romans 15. 25, 26
Churches of Galatia and Achaia, Romans 15. 25, 26, 27.

And seeing Paul did observe the first day of the week to administer Act. 20. 7.
the Lords Supper to the Church at Troas in Phrigia, Act. 20. 7. It does
evidence that he was uniform in ordering all Christian Assemblies to be kept on
that day, for Troas was a neighbor Church to them of Galatia, and therefore
they kept the same day for Gods public worship as they of Galatia and Achaia
did, Act. 16. 6. with Act. 18. 27.

5 A fifth Reason that does persuade me, that Christ himself Jews did make in
Christian Churches about the observation of the Jewish Sabbath, for many of the
believing Jews were still zealous for the observation of Moses Laws, and this
contention of theirs does strongly persuade me that all Christian Churches had
laid aside the observation of the Jewish Sabbath, and that they did now observe
the first day of the week in the place of it, as I shall more fully explain the
matter in Chap. 15.

My sixth Reason, is taken from the title of the Lords day in Rev. 1. 10. This
title is an evident proof to all men that Jesus Christ himself did ordain the
day of his Resurrection in the place of the s^venth day; for John in his
Epistle to the seven, Churches of Asia, does name i^ the Lords day, as if it
were a day that was familiarly known to the said Churches, though they were
many miles distant from each other.

But if it had been a new title of a new day, not yet familiarly known to them,
John would have described it to them by some circumstantial demonstration, but
in as much as he does no more but barely name it the Lords day, without any
further description of it, It argues that this day (by this time at least) was
familiarly known, and grown into frequent use and practice among all the
Christian Churches of Asia (for at this time John wrote to the seven Churches
of Asia, in the reign of Domitian the Emperor, which was about four and fifty
years after the death of Christ) by this time I say, the name of the Lords day
was familiarly known among all the Churches of Asia, even as the first day of
the week was familiarly known long, before this to the Churches of Achaia,
Galatia, Phrigia, and Macedonia; and doubtless as these parts of the world, so
many others did know that Christ Jesus had ordained the first day of the week
for his public worship in the place of the seventh day.

And truly John might well call it the Lords day in a double respect.

1 In relation to the day of his Resurrection, because in it he arose from the
dead as the Lord and Conqueror of Satan's Head-plot, Romans 14. 9.

^ Because He as the Lord of his Church, and as the Lord of the Sabbath, did
ordain this day, to be the day of his Public Worship, in the place of the
seventh day, to the end of the world.

And in both these senses David might well say, This is the day which the Lord
has made, let us be glad and rejoice in it, Psalm. 118. 24. Psalm. 118. 24.
The Builders, the Scribes and the Pharisees, put Christ to death as an out
cast Malefactor; But thi^ stone which the Builders refused, is become the head
of the corner; for by his Resurrection he is become the Lord and Conqueror of
Satan's Head-plot, Now this is the day that the Lord has made, let us be glad
and rejoice in it. Compare with this Psalm, our Saviors Exposition in Mat. 21.

3* Why should not the title of the Lords day, be as good an evidence that
Christ was the Institutor of it in the place of the seventh day, as the title
of the Lords Supper is, That Christ was the Institutor of it in the place of
the Passover?

A seventh Reason that does persuade me that Christ himself

1 It was Prophesied that in the days of Christ, his people should come
willingly at the time of assembling in holy beauty, Psalm. 110. 3. I think none
will deny these words to be uttered as a Psalm. 110. 3.
plain Prophecy that the Christians of the New Testament must observe a
certain day for the exercise of Gods public worship in the place of the
seventh day, and of all their other Sabbaths.

2 God calls the worship of the New Testament by the name of the Sabbath, Es.
56. 2, 4, 6. implying thereby, that we Christians shall not only have a
certain form of outward worship Es. 56. 2. 4. 6.
according to the second Commandment, but also that we shall have a certain
known day for the exercise of the said worship according to the fourth
Commandment.

3 It is Prophesied that Christians shall have more Sacrifices in their
Sabbath, than the Jews had under Moses Law, Ezekiel. 46. 4, 5. Ezekiel. 46. 4, 5.
compared with Numb. 29. 9, 10. This mystical speech does imply, First, that
Christians shall observe a certain form of public worship: And secondly, that
they shall observe a certain day for the exercise of that public worship.

And truly it argues to me that God has given over such men to a senseless
mind, that though they are forced to grant that Christ has ordained a certain
form of public worship, yet do deny that Christ has ordained a certain day
for the exercise of that public worship: I cannot see how they can be
separated, without apparent hazard of barbarous confusion to Gods public
worship.

4 It is Prophesied that the peoples shall be gathered together, and the
Kingdoms, to serve the Lord, Psalm. 102. 22. And that from month to month, and
from Sabbath to Sabbath, all flesh shall come to worship before me says the
Lord, Es. 66. 23. Es. 66. 23.


These Scriptures do plainly teach us these two Doctrines.

1 The utter abrogating of all Moses typical worship in the days of Christ,
because it is not possible for all Peoples, and Nations to come to Jerusalem
from month to month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath, to worship before the Lord
there.

2 These words imply, that the Christians of the New Testament shall be very
active in Gods worship, and in the observing of some known public day for the
exercise thereof.

An eighth Reason that does much persuade me that Christ has ordained his
Resurrection-day, for the day of his public worship

1 No creature by the Levitical Law was allowable for sacrifice Lev. 22. 27.
Exodus 22. 30. Lev. 22. 27. Exodus 22. 30.


I cannot but wonder why the Lord did refuse it a^ seven days old, seeing the
seventh day was the day of Gods perfect rest from all his works, for then he
rested in Christ that had made all perfect again after Adams fall by his
Propitiatory Sacrifice of Atonement.

But when I consider again that his Propitiatory Sacrifice was not evident to
be perfect, until he rose again from the dead, as the Lord and alone Conqueror
of Satan's Head-plot on the first day of the week, which day is also called the
Eighth day by John, Joh. 20. 26.
Joh. 20. 26.

I say by this consideration, my wondering is staid, and I do rather wonder at
Gods wise Providence that would not accept any young beast as a perfect beast
for Sacrifice until the eighth day, doubtless it was in relation to the
manifestation of the perfection of Christ his Sacrifice by his Resurrection on
the eighth day. For though the number seven be a perfect number in some
respects, yet in other respects, the number eight is a more perfect number.

The Youngling must continue under the Dam seven days; during which space of
time the Hebrew Doctors did call it Lacking Time, because in that space it was
not perfect for Sacrifice, Although the Sabbath had passed over the head of it;
But on the eighth day it was accounted perfect, and then, and not till then, it
was accepted in Sacrifice. Therefore in the case of Sacrifices of Atonement
the number seven was not so perfect as the number eighth; And what can this
degree of perfection on the eighth day resemble fitter than the manifestation
of the perfection of Christ's propitiatory Sacrifice by his Resurrection on the
eighth day: And truly, if he had not risen from death to life the next day
after the seventh day, his Sacrifice of Atonement by his death had been lost
and vain, 1 Cor. 15. 17. And answerable to the said eighth day, John does call
the day of Christ his Resurrection, the eighth day, Joh. 20. 26. The Providence
of God so guiding his Pen, as pointing out unto us backward, to the perfection
of the mystical number eight in Moses Law.

My second Reason why the number eight did typifie the day Joh. 7. 22. And the
Hebrew Doctors do affirm that Circumcision in the time thereof Joh. 7. 22.
drives away the Sabbath; that is to say, A man must omit to keep the rest of
the Holy Sabbath to circumcise his child on the eighth day; if the Sabbath be
the eighth day, seven days together the young Infant was in his blood of
uncleanness, but on the eighth day it must be circumcised for the full
cleansing of it from all the pollution that did accompany it in the birth.

And Rab. M^nac^em on Genesis 17. says, Circumcision was therefore done on the
eigth day, that the Sabbath might pass over it, for there is no eighth day
without a Sabbath; and then as soon as it was circumcised, it was accounted as
a new creature, as if it were risen again from death to life, and this did
typifie our first resurrection from the death of sin, to the life of grace, by
virtue of Christ's Resurrection, whose Resurrection-day is called the eighth
day, as I have ere-while noted from Joh. 20. 26.

A third Reason is taken from the consecration of the Priests, office until
the eighth day, Lev. 8. 33. 35. Lev. 9. 1. Ezekiel. 43. 26, 27. In like sort, the
Person and Sacrifice of the Mediator Lev. 8. 33. 45.
was not declared to be fully accepted until his Resurrection on the eighth
day.

A fourth Reason is taken from the perfect cleansing of the Lev. 14. 8, 9, 10.
And from the cleansing of unclean Issues, Lev. 15. 13, 14. And from the
cleansing of the Lev. 15. 13, 14.
polluted Nazarite, Number. 6. 9, 10. And from sundry such like Instances, where
no perfect cleansing was made until the eighth day; then, and not till then,
their persons and sacrifices were acceptable unto God, as persons that were
newly risen from death to life; doubtless this full acceptance of them and of
their Sacrifices on the 8th day, did typifie the full acceptance of Christ's
Person, and Sacrifice, which was declared by his Resurrection on the eighth
day, for he rose from the dead on the next day after the seventh day.

A fifth Reason is taken from that special eighth day of the Feast John does
call it the great and last day of the Feast, Joh. 7. 37. Joh 7. 37.
And all the Tribes of Israel were bound to observe this day with a general
Assembly above the other seven days, Deuteronomy. 31. 10, 11. 2 Chr. 7. 9. Neh. 8.
18. And that Assembly is called a General Assembly Neh. 8. 18.
by the Seventy, in Amos 5. 21. And by allusion to that term the Apostle Paul
calls all the Israel of God, The General Assembly of the firstborn, Heb. 12.
23. Amos 5. 21. Heb. 12. 23.


And why was this eighth day made more eminent than all the other seven days?
but to type out unto us the eminency of the Resurrection-day of Christ above
the seventh day for the exercise of Gods public worship to the worlds end; and
the New Testament does tell us of a great number of Christians that were
gathered into a great Church Assembly on this day at Jerusalem Act. 2. 41. And
this great Assembly was from diverse parts, and quarters of the world, for many
of the dispersed Jews that did believe, resorted to Jerusalem from remote
Countries at Festival times, and many that were converted to the faith did
there continue, until they were dispersed again at the death of Stephen, which
dispersion God turned to the further enlargement of his Church for many of
these dispersed Disciples preached the Gospel in sundry parts of the world
where they traveled, and by that means a multitude, both of Jews and Heathens,
became Christians, and these Christians, in time made many Christian
Church Assemblies, and they all used to meet together on the first day of the
week, which was the next day after the seventh, and so it was the eighth day,
which was typified by the eighth and last day of the Feast of Tabernacles.

A sixth Reason is borrowed from the Jubilee Year which by Gods special
Providence was ordained to be in the eighth year Lev. 25. 4, 8, 20.

The seventh seven was the forty and ninth year, and the next Lev. 25. 4.
year after the seventh seven was the eighth year, and it was also the fiftieth
year, or the Jubilee year.

And both these Sabbatical years thus succeeding each other do most lively
point out unto us, how the Lords Resurrection-day (by which we have a full
Jubilee of deliverance from Satan's Head-plot) should succeed the Sabbath, or
seventh day.

Three things are remarkable touching the number Eight.

1 That the number Eight was mystical as well as the number Seven.

2 That the number Eight was a number of perfection as well as the number Seven.

3 That the number Eight was a Sabbatical number as well as the number Seven.

Now seeing these things have been made clear, and cannot be denied, how can it
be denied, but that the number eight must needs have relation not only to the
Resurrection of Christ on the eighth day (that is to say on the next day after
the seventh day) but also that the said day must be established as a Sabbatical
day among Christians in the New Testament in the place of the seventh day?

II It is no less wonderful that four Sabbaths did meet together and succeed
each other at the death and Resurr^ction of Christ.

1 Christ did make his soul a Propitiatory Sacrifice of Atonement for our full
Redemption from Satan's Head-plot on a Festival Sabbath (namely on the first day
of the Feast of Unleavened-bread) and this day John calls a High Sabbath, Joh.
Joh. 19. 31.
19. 31.

2 Christ rested all the Sabbath or seventh day, namely, his body rested in his
grave, and his soul in Paradise.

3 On the first day of the week he arose again from the dead as the Lord and
Conqueror of Satan's Head-plot; and in this respect, he being the Lord of his
Church, and the Lord of the Sabbath, did ordain it for the day of his public
worship in place of the seventh day to the end of the world.

4 God by his eternal Counsel ordained, and Christ in obedience to his Fathers
will accomplished his Death and Resurrection in a Sabbatical Year of Jubilee.

And this Sabbatical Jubilee is also called, The acceptable Year of the Lord,
Luke 4. 19. And from the typical signification of the Luke 4. 19.
Jubilee-deliverance, the Hebrew Doctors did foresee and fore-say, to the
admiration of considerate Christians, That the Divine Majesty would be to
Israel in a Jubilee, Freedom, Redemption, and Finisher of Sabbaths. See Z^har
on Lev. 25. Col. 2. 10. fol. 53. And to admiration also Kimchi upon Ezekiel 40.
says, That the Messiah Redeems in a Jubilee. See H. Bro. in Req. p. 13. and in
Sinai-sight, Year of the World, 2560.

III Who can but admire also at the wonderful Providence of God, 3 The
Resurrection of Christ fell out so, that it was made famous by three remarkable
days.
that the day of Christ's Resurrection should fall out so, as that it should be
remarkable by three famous days?

1 It fell out upon the first day of the week. 2 It fell out upon the eighth
day. 3 It fell out upon the third day.
1 Christ's Resurrection fell out upon the first day of the week wherein God
created light out of darkness, and on that day Christ did arise out of his
darksome grave to give light to the world, Joh. 1. 9. Joh. 8 12. and so he made
that day which was first in order in the Creation, to be first in dignity by
the work of his Resurrection; he made that day which was the first fruits of
time, to be the first fruits from the dead, 1 Cor. 15. Col. 1. ^6.

2 Christ's Resurrection fell out upon the eighth day, namely, on the next day
after the seventh day, which is the eighth day, the eighth day was ordained by
Moses Law, to be a day of perfection, above the perfection of the number seven,
which I have noted, might well be to typifie the day of Christ's Resurrection to
come in the place of the seventh day.

3 Christ's Resurrrection fell out on the third day after his death, and so
Christ opened and alleged from the Scriptures that he must rise again from the
dead on the third day, Luke 24. 45, 46. and doubtless the Resurrection of
Isaac on the third day, was a rare type of the Resurrection of Christ upon the
third day, for Isaac is said to have been offered, Jam. 2. 21. and to have been
raised up again from the dead after a sort on the third day, Heb. Jam. 2. 21.
11. 19. for it was the third day from their coming out to sacrifice, Heb. 11.
19.
when he and his Father Abraham came to the place of performance, and from that
action the Hebrew Doctors do gather that the third day is mysterious in
Scripture. There are many a three days say they in Scripture, of which one is
the Resurrection of the Messiah. See Ains. in Genesis 22. 4. See also H. Bro. in
his Reduction in Dan. 9. and Christ himself did fore-tel that On the third day
he should Genesis 22. 4.
be perfected, Luke 13. 32. his meaning must needs be that Mediatorial Luke 13.
32.
Sacrifice of Atonement should be declared to be perfect by his Resurrection
on the third day.

Conclusion.
From all the Premises it appears, that the day of Christ's Resurrection, was
the most glorious day that God had honored, and the most glorious day that
could be thought on among true Christians, and therefore it may persuade our
consciences, that if Christ has ordained any day for his public Worship in
the place of the seventh day, it must needs be that day of perfection, wherein
he arose as Lord and Conqueror o^ Satan's Head-plot, and therefore the
observation of it ought to be honored of all good Christians for evermore. Amen.

CHAP. XV.
Propounding some Reasons why the Apostles did allow of the Jewish Sabbath, or
seventh day, in their Synagogues, for a time after it was abolished by the
death of Christ, as well as of the Lords Day in Christian Churches.

THe Apostles knew well enough that Christ had ordained his Resurrection-day as
the day of his public Worship, in place of the seventh day, and therefore in
that respect they appointed all Christian Churches to observe that day for Gods
public Worship, and yet notwithstanding they still resorted to Gods public
Worship on the seventh day in the Jews Synagogues, for a certain space of years
after the death of Christ; I say, for some space of time the Apostles did allow
by way of permission the use of the Sabbath, or seventh day, yea they did allow
of the use of Sacrifices also in the Temple for a time, for they knew that as
long as Christ was willing to suffer the Temple to stand undestroyed, that he
was willing to suffer and permit the use of Sacrifices and Sabbaths, and
therefore for the weakness sake of many believing Jews, that did as yet remain
in their old Synagogues, the Apostles did see it convenient to allow of the use
of the seventh day for Gods public Worship in their Synagogues, according to
their ancient known custom; yea moreover the Apostles did see it convenient to
allow of the use of Circumcision, and of all the other Customs of Moses also
for a time, for the weakness sake of many ten thousand Jews that did believe
in Christ, because that many of these believing Jews did still continue to be
zealous assertors of the customs of Moses Law, Act. 21. 20. for many of these
believing Jews were Acts 21. 20
not only eminent for faith in Christ, but also they were eminent for zeal in
Moses Law, as we may see in the example of Ananias that opened Paul's eyes; It
is recorded of him, that he was a godly man, as pertaining to the Law, Act. 22.
12, and it is also recorded, that there were diverse other Jews that did believe
in Christ, and yet they still continued zealous not only for Circumcision, but
also for all the other customs of Moses, Act. 15. 5. Act. 15. 5. 24
and it was for the sake of these believing Jews that as yet remained in
Synagogues, that the Apostles did by way of permission allow of the use of the
Sabbath day in their Synagogues till a convenient time of Reformation.

And out of this consideration it was that the Apostles in their Decrees at
Jerusalem, did not absolutely forbid the use of Circumcision, Acts 15. and out
of this consideration it was, that Paul took liberty to Circumcise Timothy,
that so he might thereby win the affection of the said Synagogues where some
believing Jews were, to his person and Ministry, Act. 16. 3. Acts 16. 3


Yea a long space after the death of Christ, he did by the advice of the
Apostle James take upon him to be a Consort with four men, that took upon them
a Levitical vow, namely, the Nazarites Vow; and Paul did well-nigh observe all
the days of Purification according to the custom of Moses Law; and he was also
ready prepared to pay his part and share of their Sacrifice to be See Ainsw. in
Numb. 6. 18
offered in the Temple, had not the Malignant Jews hindered him, by
apprehending his Person, in a sudden rage against him for polluting the holy
Temple, as they surmised, Act. 21. 24. And for Acts 21. 24
this very reason the Apostles made no scruple at all to preach on the Sabbath,
or seventh day, in the Jews Synagogues, for in the Synagogues the Jews observed
no other day but the seventh day, as it is evident by Acts 13. Acts 16. Acts
17. Acts 18, etc. The Apostles therefore made no scruple, but did gladly take
the opportunity of their old Sabbath, to preach unto them in their Synagogues,
by the means whereof they converted many ten thousand Jews unto Christ; and
after conversion the Apostles l^ft them to continue still in their
Synagogue-Assemblies, until the malignant Jews did persecute them, and then
the Apostles did advise them to separate from the Synagogue, and so to join
themselves into particular Christian Churches, where they were directed to
observe the Lords Day in the place of the Jewish Sabbath, for in those Heathen
Countries where Paul preached in the Jews Synagogues, the Heathen Governors
(by Gods special providence) left the Jews to the free liberty of their own
Consciences, to use what Worship, and what day of Worship they pleased, and in
that respect the Christians had as much liberty to observe the Lords Day in
their Church Assemblies, as the Jews had to observe their Sabbath in their
Synagogues; and therefore as soon as the believing Jews and Proselites of
Thessalonica were persecuted by the malignant Synagogue, they joined into a
Christian Church-Assembly by themselves, Acts 17. 4. and so the believing Jews
and Proselites of the Synagogue of Corinth Acts 17. 4 Acts 18. 17 Acts 19. 9
did the like as soon as they were persecuted, Act. 18. 17. and the Christian
Jews and Proselites of Ephesus did the like, Act. 19. 9. These, and all the
other believing Jews of the other Synagogues, did separate themselves from the
malignant Synagogue as soon as they were persecuted, and joined themselves into
several Christian Churches, and then they kept their Church-meetings on the
Lords Day, and not on the Sabbath Day; for the Apostles did open and allege
unto them, that the Jewish Sabbath was abolished by the death of Christ, and
that Christ had instituted his Resurrection-day in the place of it, for the day
of his public Worship.

Obj. Here it may be demanded, How can it be proved, that the Apostles did
instruct the believing Jews and Proselites in the observation of the Lords Day.

Ans. It is evident enough by the opposition which some of the said believing
Jews did make against the Apostles, and the The opposition which some of the
believing Jews made in Christian Churches or their not observing of the Jew^sh
Sabbath does fully p^ove, that the Christian Churches had cast off the Jewish
S^bbath, and that they observed the Lo^ds Day in the place of it.
Christian Churches, for the not observing of the Jewish Sabbath, for it is
evident that many of the said believing Jews did still earnestly contend, not
only for the observation of the Jewish Sabbath, but also for the observation of
all the other customs of Moses; but if the said Christian Churches had not
altered the day of their public Worship, the said believing Jews had not had
any occasion at all to contend for the observation of their wonted Sabbath Day;
therefore by their earnest contending for the observation of the Jewish
Sabbath, it appears, That the Christian Churches did by the Apostles directions
observe the Lords Day for Gods public Worship; I say, the earnest contention
that some certain Jews which did believe, did make against the Christian
Churches for their not observing of the Jewish Sabbath, does fully prove to my
understanding, that the said Christian Churches had laid aside the use of the
Jewish Sabbath, and did make use of the Lords Day only for the use of Gods
public Worship, as I shall explain it by and by.

Bu^ yet I have also affirmed, that the Apostles did allow of the obse^vation
of the Jewish Sabbath in the Jews Synagogues, and that they did gladly embrace
the opportunity of that day, to preach unto them for their conversion to the
faith of Christ.

And so for a time the Apostles did observe two Sabbaths together, namely, the
Jewish Sabbaths, in preaching to them in their Synagogues, and the Lords Day,
in preaching to the conv^rted Jews and Proselites in their Christian assemblies.

And this their practice was as allowable for a time, as John's Baptism was with
Circumcision for a time; for Apelles was Baptized with the Baptism of John
after he had been Circumcised, Acts 19. 3. and Christ himself was Baptized of
John in Jordan after he had been Circumcised; yea which is more, it was after
that Christ had ordained John's Baptism, as a Sacrament of initiation into the
Christian Church; and Paul did Circumcise Timothy, who doubtless had been
formerly Baptized into the Church of Christ.

Obj. Why did the Apostle Paul circumcise Timothy, seeing he had formerly been
baptized into the Church of Christ?

Ans. Doubtless he did not Circumcise Timothy out of any Conscience to the
necessary use of Circumcision, as the Ie^s Synagogues did, but because Paul and
Timothy were to be conversant in the Synagogues, where they observed the
Sabbath, and Circumcision, therefore Paul did it merely out of Christian Wisdom
and Providence, that he might thereby win the Jews the more to respect his
Person and Ministry, Act. 16. 3. ^or Paul desired to be conversant in the Jews
Synagogues as much as might be, but he knew he could not be admitted to
converse with them in their Synagogue-Worship, having Timothy an uncircumcised
Grecian for his companion, unless he was Circumcised, for uncircumcised
Persons might not be admitted to familiar converse with them in the exercise of
Religion, Acts 10. 28.

Therefore seeing the Apostles saw cause to allow of the use of Circumcision by
way of permission for a time, after that Christ had ordained Baptism, as the
only Sacrament of initiation into his Church, they might by the same reason
allow of the Jewish Sabbath in their Synagogues, though not in their Christian
Churches, no more than they might allow of the use of Circumcision in their
Christian Churches, for Paul would not Circumcise Ti^us to please some zealous
Jews in the Christian Church, though he did Circumcise Timothy for the
Synagogues ^ake, Gal. 2. 3, 4. And in this respect (though the observation of
the Sabbath was fully ended virtually by the Death of Christ, and not permitted
in the Christian Churches, yet) Christ was pleased to permit the use of it to
his Apostles in the I^ws Synagogues for a time, namely, as long as they had
opportunity to preach to the Jews in their Synagogues, and in that respect it
pleased Christ Jesus to bless the preaching of the Apostles and Disciples in
their Synagogues upon their Sabbath Day, to the conversion of many thousand
Jews, though many of them after their conversion did still continue zealous for
the Law, even after separation into Christian Churches, Acts 21. 20. Acts 15.
5. 24. Jam. Acts 21. 20 Acts 15. 5. 24 Jam. 1. 1
1. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 1. and their zeal to Moses Law, they did witness to all men,
in that many of them did still resort to Jerusalem, to observe the festival
Sabbaths, as some of them did in Acts 2. 5. and in this respect it was that
Paul in relation to the Synagogue chiefly did tender their weak Consciences,
saying, To the Jews I became a Jew, that I might win the Jews, and to them that
were un^er the Law as though I were under the Law, 1 Cor. 9. 20. but in the
Christian Churches Paul would not allow of any Jewish customs, 1 Cor. 9. 20
Gal. 2. 5
Gal. 2. 5.

Now this practice of the Apostles in observing the Jewish Sabbath for a time
in their Synagogues, does no more dis-approve the changing of the Sabbath into
the Lords Day, than it dis-approves the changing of Circumcision into Baptism;
for after that Christ had ordained the Sacrament of Baptism as one of the Seals
of the New Covenant, the Apostles did still allow of the practice of
Circumcision (namely in relation to their Synagogues, but not in relation to
Christian Churches) and of all the other customs of Moses also by way of
permission, for a time.

But as soon as the Apostles did but once perceive that many of the said
believing Jews grew stiff and sturdy, for the observation of Moses Ceremonies
in Christian Churches, much like unto the malignant Jews in the Synagogues,
then Paul and the other Apostles also grew resolute to oppose the practice, not
only of Circumcision in the Christian Churches, but of the use of the Sabbath,
and of all the other customs of Moses also, Gal. 2. 5. and thereupon many
believing Jews did oppose Paul, but yet the other Jews of the malignant
Synagogues did hate P^ul much more for his D^ctrin, for they sought opportunity
to lay hands on him that they might put him to death, and therefore they
accused him to Felix, saying, Certainly we have found this man a pestilent
fellow, and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the World, and a
chief maintainer of the Sect of the Nazarites, Acts 24. 5. Acts 24. 5


In like sort Stephens Accusers testified against him, saying, that he had
affirmed, That Jesus of Nazaret should destroy their holy place, and change the
customs of Moses, Act. 6. 14. And when Paul came Acts 6. 14
to Rome, the Jews told him there, That this Sect was every where spoken
against, Acts 28. 22. and when Paul came to Jerusalem, Acts 28. 22
James told him, That the Jews were informed that he taught the Jews which
were among the Gentiles, namely the Christian Churches, that they should
forsake Moses, and not live after the customs, Acts 21. 21. and the Jews of
Asia said, This Act. 21. 21, 28
man teaches all men every where against the People, and the Law, and this
place, Acts 21. 28. By these, and such like testimonies it is evident, that
Paul did mightily cry down the observation of all Moses customs in all
Christian Churches.

And this is further evident also by Paul's downright reproofs to the Churches
of Galatia, Gal. 2. 3, etc. Gal. 3. 1. etc. Gal. 4. 9, etc. Gal. 5. 1, 2. but
especially mark the manner of his phrase in his reproof in Gal. 4. 9, 10, 11.
There he calls all the customs Gal 4. 9, 10, 11
of Moses but weak, and poor rudiments, whereunto as from the beginning ye
will be in bondage again (as from the beginning of your conversion, when you
lived in the Synagogues) Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years, I
am in fear of you, lest I have bestowed on you labor in vain. The Apostle by
four Phrases does enumerate all the solemn Holy Days that were commanded by
Moses, the observation of all which he opposes in Christian Churches.

1 Ye observe days; by Days he means, That some of the believing Jews among
them had persuaded the Churches of Galatia to observe their old weekly
Sabbath Days for the exercise of their public Worship.

2 By Months he means, That some of the believing Jews among them had persuaded
them to make conscience in observing the first day of every new Moon for the
public Worship of God.

3 By Times he means, That they contended for the observation of the three
solemn Festival Sabbaths, by resorting if they could to Jerusalem, where those
three Festival Sabbaths were to be observed. And,

4 By Years he means, That they contended for the observation of that solemn
Fasting-day, called the day of Atonement, which always fell out upon the tenth
day of the seventh Month. These were all the set Days, and solemn Times which
were commanded in Moses Law, in Levit. 23.

I do not mean that the said believing Jews did contend for the observation of
the two last-named Sabbaths, by offering sacrifices upon the days appointed by
Moses, in their Christian Churches, for all the Jews in general did hold it
utterly unlawful, yea they held it to be death to offer any sacrifice after the
Temple was built, in any Synagogue, or in any other place save in the Temple it
self.

But my meaning is, That the said believing Jews did contend for the
observation of the two first sorts of days in their Christian Churches, as the
only lawful and commanded days for Gods public Worship; for the manner of the
Jews was to observe every seventh day in their Synagogues, Acts 15. 21. and
their Acts 15. 21
manner was to observe every first day of their New Moons, not only at the
Temple, but also in their Synagogues, and places of public Worship, where the
Word of God was used to be preached, 2 King. 4. 23. but the Apostle Paul does
oppose the observation of these days in Christian Churches as much as he does
the other, and therefore he wrote to the dispersed Hebrews, that professed
Christianity, that the former Covenant which stood in the outward observation
of Moses ceremonies waxed old, and was ready to vanish away, Heb. 8. 13. and
also in Heb. 13. 9. He exhorts Heb. 8. 13
them, not to be carried ^but with diverse and strange Doctrins, (namely, not
to be carried about to the observation of Moses Ceremonies) for (says he) it
is a good thing that the heart be established with Grace, and not with Meats,
which have not profi^ed them that have been exercised therein; and in chap. 9.
10. he calls the observation of Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings, carnal
Ordinances imposed unto them, until the time of Reformation, which time of
Reformation was already come.

And also he exhorts the Colossians, saying thus; Let no man therefore judge
you in meat or drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the New Moon, or of
the Sabbaths, which are a shadow of things to come, but the Body is Christ,
Col. 2. 16, 17. Col. 2. 16, 17


In these words the Apostle does exhort them, not to let any man to rule over
them as Judges of their Christian liberty, by enforcing and persuading their
Consciences to the observation of Moses ceremonies, seeing they were but
shadows of something to come, namely, they were but shadows of something to be
fulfilled by Christ; for Christ the Body was already come in the place of them
all; yea says the Apostle, Let no man beguile you of your prize, Col. 2. 18 20
namely, of that precious liberty which Christ by his Death has purchased for
you, from the bondage of Moses ceremonies, v. 18. and then he passes his
sentence against the Authors of their disturbance, saying, They are but
self-willed in humbleness, etc. and then in ve. 20. the Apostles conclude
thus, If ye be dead with Christ from the decrees of the world (if you believe
that Christ by his death has ended decrees) why as though ye lived in the
world (namely in the observation of Moses ceremonies, which were composed but
of worldly things, and in that respect the Sanctuary is called a worldly
Sanctuary, Heb. 9. 1.) Follow ye decrees, etc.

That which I aim at by this discourse is this, namely, to declare, that there
were some believing Jews in the Church of Colosse that did earnestly contend
(not only for the observation of Moses ceremonies in general, but also that did
in particular contend) for the observation of the Jewish Sabbath, as the only
commanded day of Gods public Worship in Christian Churches; and hence I infer,
that these believing Jews needed not to have contended so earnestly for the
observation of the Jewish Sabbath, if the Apostles had not laid the observation
of it aside, and required Christian Churches to observe the Lords Day for their
Christian assemblies, in the place of the seventh day.

Obj. 2. I conceive these believing Jews did not contend for the observation of
the Jewish Sabbath, as you think, but for the observation of the other Festival
Sabbaths; against which only the Apostle does speak.

Ans. 1. If you will grant, That the Apostle does exhort the Church of Colosse
not to submit their Consciences to the observation of their Festival Sabbaths,
then much more does he exhort them not to submit their Consciences to the
observation of their weekly Sabbaths, or seventh day; for the weekly Sabbath
was a typical sign as well as their other Festival Sabbaths, and therefore the
death of Christ does abolish them all alike.

2 And more particularly I answer, That Paul's meaning by the word Sabbaths, in
Col. 2. 16. does not (as I conceive) point out Col. 2. 16
any other Sabbath but the seventh day only; for Paul does enumerate all the
several sorts of their Holy Days under these three several expressions; First,
says he, Let no man judge you in respect of a Holy Day; Secondly, Or of the
New Moon; Thirdly, Or of the Sabbaths.

1 Under the term Holy Day the Apostle does comprehend their three yearly
Holy Day Feasts; for there are no other solemn commanded Holy Days in Moses,
except the New Moon, and the ordinary Sabbath days, and these are not included
in the term Holy Day, because they are distinguished, and sorted out from them
by other distinct terms; neither does the Apostle comprehend any human
Holy Days in this number, such as were sometimes commanded by their Sanedrim
(upon some special occasions) as the days of Purim were, Est. 9. and as the day
of D^dication was, Jo^. 10. 22. for these temporary Holy Days must Joh. 10. 22
not be Copartners with the said yearly standing Holy Days of Moses; neither
do I think that the Apostle does now forbid the observation of such occasional
temporary Holy Days in Christian Churches; but the Apostle does out of all
doubt dehort them from the observation of their three Festival Holy Days;
therefore by the term Holy Day, which the Apostle distinguishes from the two
other sorts of Holy Days, namely from the New Moon, and from the Sabbath, he
must needs mean no other but the said three yearly F^stival Holy Days.

2 By the New Moon he Apostle means the first day of every New Moon, which the
Jews observed in all their Synagogues, as a constant Holy Day for the hearing
of Gods Word preached in all the costs of Israel, Numb. 28. 11. 2 King. 4 23.

3 Therefore the term Sabbaths must needs mean their weekly Sabbaths, which
some Christian Jews that still remained zealous for the Law, did labor tooth
and nayl to persuade the Church of Colosse to observe for the day of their
public Worship; but the Apostle told them, that all this Bill of Decrees
Christ had wiped away by his death, Col. 2. 14. Col. 2. 14


3 It is yet further evident that these three terms in Col. 2. 16. do fully
comprehend all the Holy Days that are in Moses, because Moses does comprehend
them all in three the like terms in Number. 10. 10. Ye shall sound an Alarm, (1)
In the day of your Gladness; Number. 10. 10.
And (2) In your Solemn Feasts; And (3) In the beginning of your months.

Though these three terms are not placed in the same order that Paul does his
in Col. 2. 16. yet they must needs comprehend all the Ceremonial Sabbaths, or
Holy Days of Moses: For first, by the day of their Gladness, Moses does mean
such a day of gladness, as he does distinguish from their Solemn Feasts, and
from their New Moons; which distinction ought not to be slighted; And
therefore Baal Hattarim understands it of the Sabbath day. And indeed no day
has the pre-eminence of gladness to this day, for it was first ordained to be
a day of rest to God, because he had established Adams happiness, and the
Government of the whole Creation on the Promised Seed, who had undertaken to
break the Devils Head-plot, and therefore he rested in the Mediator, and was
refreshed, and it was a typical sign of fallen man's resting on the Mediator for
his Redemption from Satan's Head-plot, and therefore it was the first great day
of gladness to fallen Adam, and therefore as I have formerly noted, the seventh
day is placed among the Festival Sabbaths in the first place, as the chiefest
day of gladness, Lev. 23. 3. Lev. 23 3.


And indeed no other day can be meant by the day of gladness, but the Sabbath
or seventh day, and the reason is plain, because all the other Holy Days in
Moses are fully comprehended in the other two terms.

4 Solomon in 2 Chronicles. 2. 4. does expound the said three terms, 2 Chronicles. 2. 4.
by showing the solemnity of all the sorts of Holy Days in the Temple-service,
for he built a Temple to the Lord, namely, To burn sweet incense before Him,
and for the continual Shewbread, and for the Burnt-offerings of the morning
and evening, (1) On the Sabbath days. (2) In the New Moons. And (3) In the
Solemn Feasts of the Lord. This is a perpetual thing for Israel. And moreover
the Hebrew Doctors say, That they did blow with the silver Trumpets in the
Sanctuary, (1) Over the Burnt-offerings of the Sabbaths. (2) In the New Moons.
And (3) in the Solemn Feasts.

By these two Scriptures compared together with Col. 2. 16. and with Gal. 49,
10, 11. It is evident that all the solemn Holy Days in Mose^ are comprehended
under the said three terms; And therefore by the term Sabbaths in Col. 2. 16.
as it is distinguished from the New Moon, and a Holy Day, must needs be meant
the weekly Sabbaths only, which some Christian Jews contended to have observed
in their Christian Churches in opposition to the Lords day.

Object. 3. It seems to me that our Savior did not ordain his Resurrection-day
in place of the seventh day, because our Savior in Mat. 24. 20. Mat. 24. 20.
does warn his Disciples to pray (at the time of their destruction by the
Romans) that their flight might not be, neither in the Winter, nor upon the
Sabbath day: Now if Christ had abolished the Sabbath by his death, as you
affirm, then be would not have given this caution of praying that their flight
might not be on the Sabbath day, so long after his death, for it was about
forty years after his death ere the City was destroyed by the Romans.

Ans. Christ did not give this caution to his Disciples in the nature of a
Command, or forbidding, but in the nature of a dis-allowing of the Jews
superstitious opinion of the outward rest of the Sabbath, so long after his
death: They might in that space have been better taught and instructed, if they
had not been enemies to the Gospel of Christ, but because they would not be
instructed, therefore our Savior told his Disciples, that the Jews of Judea in
general would hold such a superstitious opinion, both of the holiness of the
Temple, and of the outward rest of the Sabbath day, that it would be a grievous
calamity to them if they were forced to fly for their lives upon the Sabbath
day, more than upon any other day in the week: But yet this must be marked,
that our Savior speaks this to his Disciples, but as a Prophetical Historian,
foretelling them what would be the common opinion of the Nation of the Jews in
those days, namely, that they would be infected with such a superstitious
opinion of the holiness of the outward rest of the Sabbath, that they would
neither stir hand or foot to break the outward rest of the Sabbath by flight to
save their lives. This caution of our Savior to his Disciples must needs be
understood in this sense, because the whole frame of his speech is fetched (by
way of allusion) to a former like sad calamity, which fell upon them under
Anti^chus Epiphanes, who did purposely molest them upon the Sabbath day, as
also in the Winter time, and then they suffered extreme miseries by reason of
their superstitious opinion of the outward rest of the Sabbath day, which they
might have prevented, if they had held it lawful at first, as they did at last,
that in case of necessity they might either fight or fly for their lives upon
the Sabbath day.

Our Savior in this his speech to his Disciples does allude to the times of
Antiochus, and therefore he does mention the Winter as well as the Sabbath day,
for Judas Maccabeus did cleanse the Temple and the Altar in the Winter, Joh.
10. 22. and three years before it was polluted in the Winter, 1 Mac. 1. 54. And
secondly, it was also polluted upon the Sabbath day, 1 Mac. 2. 38. and now it
was a time of grievous calamity to the Jews, and therefore by way of allusion
to this calamitous time, our Savior bad them pray, That their flight might
neither be in the Winter, nor yet upon the Sabbath day, for then they would do
as they had done, neither fight nor fly to save their lives. This their blind
zeal our Savior reproves, 1 Mac. 2, 34. 36. 38. 41. and 2 Mac. 6. 11.

It follows therefore by good consequence, that our Savior did not now in
sadness teach his Disciples the continuance of the Sabbath so long after his
death, no more than he taught them the continuance of the service of the
Temple, by calling the Temple The Holy Place, verse. 15. But no man, I think,
will say, that Christ did then esteem the Temple to be the Holy Place, but he
names it so Docas^ic^s, because the Jews of Judea in general would then esteem
it and call it the Holy place, and in that respect also our Savior does call
the Romans that should enter into the Temple, The Abomination of Desolation,
just as Daniel had done, Dan. 9. 27. By this it is evident that Christ spoke by
allusion to former times: But he knew well enough that the holiness of the
Temple, as well as the typical Rest of the Holy Sabbath, were fully ended by
his death.

I grant, that the Temple was once truly called the Holy Temple, because it was
ordained to be a type of the holy humane nature of Christ wherein his Godhead
dwelt, Job. 2: But yet this typical holiness of the Temple must needs have an
end, as soon as the Holy of Holies did but enter through the vail of his flesh
into heaven to appear before God for us, Dan. 9. 24. with Mat. 27. 50, 51. Heb.
9. 14. and the goodlinesse also of the Temple must have an end as soon as he
that was greater than the Temple had finished his Oblation, Mat. 12. 26. and by
the like reason also the Sabbath, as it was a type of our resting on the Seed
of the Woman to break the Devils Head-plot, must end as soon as Christ had
finished his Sacrifice of Atonement.

I will therefore conclude my answer to this Objection, That Christ by this
speech of his to his Disciples did but tell them what would be the common
opinion of the Nation of the Jews at the time of the destruction of Jerusalem,
as I have already declared it; but he intended no more to teach them the
continuance of the Sabbath, than the continuance of the Holiness of the
Temple; neither did he by this Caution to his Disciples intend to prefer the
Sabbath above the Lords day, no more than he intended to prefer the Winter
above the Summer, of all which things he spoke by way of caution to his
Disciples what would be the common opinion of the Jews at the destruction of
Jerusalem.

Object. 4. If Christ had ordained his Resurrection-day as the day of his
public Worship in place of the Sabbath or seventh day, then me thinks the
Apostles in their Writings should have recorded it, with the Circumstances of
it, namely, the time when, and how he did ordain it; if this had been done, the
matter had been out of question to all men.

Ans. The Wisdom of God did not see it good to make all his Ordinances clear
to all men at the first sight; when our Savior was here upon the earth, he did
oftentimes open his mouth in Parables, that they which see not might not
perceive, and that his best servants might dig for his hidden Treasures: But I
may say also it is not recorded that Christ did instruct any of his Apostles of
the time when, nor of the manner how he did first ordain John to baptize, but
because all men generally held John to be a Prophet, therefore they concluded
that he had received some authority from heaven to baptize subjects for Christ,
against he came into his Kingdom, which he proclaimed to be at hand; and by the
like authority, we may conclude that the Apostles did command the observation
of the Lords day for Gods public Worship in the place of the seventh day,
because it was in frequent use in their days, as I have proved, and they being
Prophets, had special direction from Christ the Lord of the Sabbath so to
direct his Churches, which directions in all probability they received from him
at his first coming to their Assembly in the evening of his Resurrection-day,
or else in the evening of his second coming to their Assembly, on that day
seven-night, Joh. 19. 20. 26. for then he opened their understandings to
understand such Scriptures as he alleged concerning his Joh. 19. 20, 26.
Death and Resurrection, Luke 23. 54. 47. and then also he gave them a new
Commission to preach the Doctrine of the forgiveness of sins in his name, Joh,
20. 21, 22, 23. and then he gave Commandments unto them, and spoke of such
things as appertained to the Kingdom of God, Act. 1. 2, 3. doubtless
therefore he did then instruct them concerning the day of his public worship
wherein they must preach forgiveness of sins in his name to all the world; and
this Commission he did again renew unto them before his ascension, saying, Go
and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and
lo I am with you always to the end of the world. Whatsoever therefore the
Apostles commanded the Christian Churches to observe, they did it by virtue of
Christ's former command; and therefore Paul says, I have received of the Lord
that which I have delivered unto you, 1 Cor. 11. 23. The Commandments
therefore which the Apostles gave unto the Christian Churches, they were the
Commandments of Christ, among which Commandments, the observation of the
Lords day must needs be one in place of the Sabbath, which was fully abolished
by the death of Christ.

CHAP. XVI.
Being an Answer to several Questions, I whether Christians now under the
Gospel are bound to observe the Lords day as strictly from all work, and as
holily in all the duties of Religion, as the Jews were to observe the Sabbath
day.

THe Sabbath, or seventh day, must be considered, either as it observed as a
memorial that Christ has fully broken the Devils Head-plot by his Mediatorial
Sacrifice; and this he has declared to his Church by his Resurrection from the
dead on the first day of the week, and in remembrance thereof, he has now
ordained that day to be employed as the sanctified time of his worship in
attending upon his Ordinances both public and private, as strictly from all
work, and as holily in all Christian duties, as the Jews were to observe the
Sabbath day under the Law, and in remembrance thereof, John does style it the
Lords day, Rev. 1. 10.

Quest. 2. Might not the Jews so much as kindle a fire upon the Sabbath day to
dress necessary food? As Mr. Ainsworth seems to understand the Scriptures with
the consent of the Hebrew Doctors in Exodus 16. 5. and Exodus 16. 5. Exodus 35. 3.
in Exodus 35. 3.

Ans. I grant, that Mr. Ainsworth does so understand the Scriptures, and so do
some of the Hebrew Doctors: But yet withal, I say, that the Scriptures rightly
understood, did always allow the Jews as much liberty to kindle a fire for the
dressing of necessary food upon the Sabbath day, as it allows Christians on the
Lords day, as it is evident by the example of our Savior himself, for he went
to a Feast upon the Sabbath day into the house of a chief Pharisee, Luke 14. 1.
and at the same time the Pharisee Luke 14. 1.
had many other guests present, for our Savior marked them how they chose out
the chiefest rooms at this Feast, v. 7, 8. And this Feast I conceive was a
Wedding Feast, though I also believe that the new married parties were married
before this day, and not on this day, It is unlawful to begin a Marriage upon
the Sabbath day. Lev. 23 8.
for the Jews held it utterly unlawful to begin their Marriage upon the Sabbath
day. See Ains. in Lev. 23. 8. But yet they held it lawful to keep a Wedding
Feast upon the Sabbath day, and the reason is plain, because they held it to be
a lawful custom to keep a Wedding Feast for seven days together, of which
number the Sabbath day must needs be one, Judge. 14. 10, 12. Genesis 29. 27, 28.
And this is a common rule among the Jews, That whosoever marieth a Maid, he
shall rejoice with her seven days, not doing any work, but eating, drinking,
and making merry. See Ains. in Genesis 29. 27.

And none could keep such a Feast of many persons in the cold Winter without
the use of a fi^e to make their food comfortable to nature, according to the
nature of a Feast* And it is further to be noted, that whiles our Savior was
present at the Feast, he ^ound no fault with the act of Feasting, but only
withing corrupt circumstances which did accompany this Feast. 1 He found fault
with some of the guests, because they chose out the uppermost seats. 2 He
seemed to reprove the Governor of the Feast, because he invited his rich
friends only, verse. 12. But Christ told him it had been more suitable to the
Sabbath day if he had invited the poor to his Feast: And yet I believe it was
not sinful to bid the rich; for if it had been sinful, Christ would either
have declined the invitation, or else he would have born witness against it as
a sinful practice; but he did neither of these, therefore it was not sinful to
invite the rich to a Feast upon the Sabbath day, where the Feast must last
seven days together.

2 I answer, That it was as lawful for the Jews to kindle a fire upon the
Sabbath day to prepare warm food for infirm and weak stomachs (which are almost
in every family) as it was to do any other work of mercy: And it was lawful to
do works of mercy upon the Sabbath days, as it is evident by our Saviors
often showing of compassion to weak and sickly persons upon the Sabbath day.

3 I answer, that the Priests did hold it lawful to kindle new fires on the
Sabbath days for the use of their Sacrifices; I grant they had one constant
and continual fire that was always maintained by the side of the Altar; but
from this fire they used to kindle other fires for the burning of such parts of
their Sacrifices as they offered on the Sabbath days. Hence I infer, that
seeing Christ Jesus has told us that he does prefer mercy before Sacrifice, no
question but he allowed the Jews to kindle a fire for works of mercy, as well
as for the use of Sacrifices, on the Sabbath day, and therefore out of doubt
they might kindle a fire on the Sabbath day to prepare necessary food for such
as are infirm of nature. See Mat. 12. 5, 6. Mat. 12. 5, 6.


4 I answer, That the Priests did kindle new fires every Sabbath day to boil or
roast their portion of meat which was due unto them from each Sacrifice by Gods
allowance; for God commanded them to eat their part and portion in the same day
wherein the Sacrifice was offered, Lev. 7. 15. but they could not eat this
portion, unless they kindled a fire, either to boil it, or roast it.

5 On the day of Atonement (which was a Sabbath of Sabbatism, and therefore
every was as strict for rest as the Sabbath or seventh day was, yet) then the
High Priest (which must of necessity often wash his Body for the several
services of that day) might, in case he were an old man, or sickly, have his
water wherein he bathed his body made warm by the use of Fire; the Hebrew
Doctors say, They took off the cold from the water either by Irons made hot in
the Fire, or else by mixing of hot water with the cold. See Ains. in Lev. 16.
24.

By these and sundry such like instances it is evident, That the Jews might
lawfully kindle a Fire upon the Sabbath Day to prepare warm meat for the
comfort of the infirm, the aged, or sickly persons.

Quest. 3. Is it not plainly said in Exodus 35. 3. Ye shall not kindle a Exodus
35. 3.
fire in your Habitations upon the Sabbath Day?

Ans. Though some that are both godly and learned Christians, as well as some
later Jews, do hold it unlawful to kindle a Fire on the Sabbath Day to dress
any meat, yet the more ancient Rabbis, and many learned Christians also, do
restrain this Prohibition of kindling a Fire to Artificers only.

But for the better understanding of the true sense of this text, it is
necessary to compare it with the like prohibition in Exodus 31. 1, etc. where
the Lord commanded Moses to command Bezaliel to make the Tabernacle, and all
the appurtenances thereof, with all diligence; that is to say, with all
possible speed, without any delay, because it was to be for the place of the
Lords residence among them, Exodus 25. 8. 22. but yet notwithstanding this
careful diligence, the Lord commanded Moses, saying in ver. 13. Speak unto the
Sons of Israel, and say, Verily (or notwithstanding, Exodus 31. 13
as the Seventy read it) my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a sign between
me and you, throughout your Generations, to know that I am Jehovah that
sanctifies you.

In these words God gave a double reason why they might not do any work about
the making of the Tabernacle upon the Sabbath Day.

1 Because the Sabbath was the sanctified time for his public Worship, in
these words, Verily (or notwithstanding my command of your diligence) my
Sabbathe ye shall keep.

2 Because the Sabbath was a sanctifi^d sign between me and you throughout your
Generations, etc. ver. 13.

3 Unto all this, a threatening is added, in case any man did presume to do any
work about the Tabernacle, Every one that prophaneth it shall be put to dye the
death, ver. 14, 15. Exodus 31. 14, 15


This phrase implies, That for their double sin in profaning Gods sanctified
Time, and Gods sanctified Sign, they should be put to dye such a kind of
death, as was after a sort a double death; for 1. He must be stoned to death;
and 2. His dead body must be after his death hanged upon a Tree till Sunset,
for the greater detestation of that Sin, and for the greater terror of others;
for this is a thing upon Record in the Hebrew Doctors, That all such
Malefactors as deserved stoning to death must be hanged up afterward upon a
Tree, as it is manifest also by the instance of the rebellious Son, in Deuteronomy.
21. as I have opened the matter more at large elsewhere.

But if it be conceived by any, that if any man will now presume to gather
sticks upon the Lords Day, he should be punished with stoning to death, as the
man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath Day was;

I answer, There is not the like reason, because the Lords Day is not ordained
to be a sanctified sign of Gods resting, and of Man's resting in the Seed of the
Woman to break the Devils Head-plot, as the Sabbath was.

I conclude therefore, by comparing the work of the Tabernacle in Exodus 31.
with the work of the Tabernacle, as it is repeated in Exodus 35. that the only
reason why they might not kindle a fire in their Habitations on the Sabbath Day
was, to restrain them from their eager desire, from their rash or superstitious
zeal to prosecute the work of the Tabernacle, which was commanded to be done
with such careful diligence for the place of Gods residence among them; the
Lord does prefix a prohibition to restrain them from kindling any fire for that
work, and to prevent their rash and heady zeal a threatening is annexed;
Whosoever does any work (namely of his particular Calling) upon the Sabbath
Day, shall be put to death, Exodus 35. 2. therefore ye shall kindle no fire for
that business, ver. 3.

And as it was unlawful for them to kindle a fire for such works as belonged to
their particular Callings on the Weekdays, so out of all doubt it is as
unlawful for Christians to kindle a fire on the Lords Day to do any such
servile works as that was; but wherein can you find a prohibition wherein the
Jews are forbidden to kindle a fire on the Sabbath Day for the dressing of
necessary food for infirm or crasie bodies?

Quest. 4. It seems to me, that the Jews might not kindle a fire on the Sabbath
Day to dress any meat at all therewith; for Moses says thus, To morrow is the
Sabbath of Holiness to Jehovah, Bake that which ye will bake, and sees that
which ye will sees (namely in the sixth day, as it is in ver. 5.) and all
that remains over, lay it up for you as a reservation until the morrow, Exodus
16. 23. From this Scripture I think it is evident, That the Jews were
prohibited Exodus 16. 23
to kindle a fire upon the Sabbath Day, neither to bake or boil any of their
Manna, but all must be done on the sixth day, that so they might not kindle a
fire for it on the Sabbath Day.

Ans. This baking and boiling of their Manna before the Sabbath Day, does not
forbid them to heat their Manna with fire in the Sabbath, to make i^ fit for
infirm and weak stomachs; but the baking and boiling forbidden by Moses upon
the Sabbath Day, was such a baking and boiling as was accompanied with
laborious work, such as might and ought to have been done on the sixth day, as
it appears by Numb. 11. 8. there, after the people had gathered their Manna,
they did prepare it (with laborious Numb. 11. 8
work) several ways suitable to every ones taste or liking, and therefore they
did First grind it in Mills, or beat it in Morters. Secondly, Then they baked
it in Pans, and made Cakes of it. Thirdly, Othersome did boil it; and thus it
was several ways prepared and Cooked (according to every ones taste and liking)
with laborious work on the sixth day; now such kind of laborious works as these
were forbidden to be done in the Sabbath Day, because they might be done on the
sixth day; and in that respect the Hebrew Doctors say, Whosoever labors in the
evening of the Sabbath, he shall eat in the Sabbath. See Ains. in Levit. 16.
26. And truly I think there is no conscientious Christian that does hold it
lawful to defer, or put off such like laborious works as these to the Lords
Day, for it is all one as if a man should defer the grinding of his Corn, the
baking of his Bread, or the making of his Pies unto the Lords Day; but no
conscientious Christian that is judicious (I think) does hold it unlawful to
temper a Pudding of the Meal that was ground on the sixth day, or to heat a Pie
that was made on the sixth day, or to boil a necessary quantity of meat that was
killed and quartered on the sixth day, or to use that wood for fire that was
carted home, and cut ready for the fire on the sixth day, or to use Water that
was fetched home to the door on the sixth day; all these, and such like things
might as lawfully be done by the Jews on the Sabbath Day, as by godly
Christians on the Lords Day; and this is fully evident by our Savior, in that
he did justify his Apostles for their work, in gathering of certain ears of
Corn in other men's fields, and rub^^^g the said ears, to prepare it for food,
on the Sabbath Day, and doubtless after the said rubbing it was either parched
in the Fire, or boiled in Water, fit for the digesture of the stomach, or else
if they had eaten it raw it had been but course and hard food. Now if it had
been unlawful to prepare such a small quantity of food, as was fit for the
present support of nature, on the Sabbath Day, doubtless Christ would have
commanded his Apostles beforehand, to provide their Scrip full of Victuals,
namely on the sixth day; but in as much as he had not made such provision on the
sixth day, but did justify his Apostles for this work in the Sabbath Day, by
alleging the example of David in eating the Shewbread in case of hunger, he
did thereby confute and reprove the Jews superstitious opinion of the outward
rest of the Sabbath; alleging also, That the Sabbath was made for man, and not
man for the Sabbath, Mar. 2. 27. as if Christ had said Mar. 2. 27.
thus, If man had been made for the Sabbath, then man must have served the
Sabbath before his own necessity, but seeing man was not made for the Sabbath,
but the Sabbath for man, namely to serve man's necessity, therefore it follows,
that the Sabbath was made, ordained, or instituted, after man was in necessity,
and in misery, namely after Adams Fall, chiefly for the good of his sick and
sinful Soul (and therefore God did bless it with suitable Ordinances, and did
sanctify that day for the use of those Ordinances) but yet withal the Sabbath
was made to serve man in misery, in respect of his Body, that it might rest and
be refreshed with convenient food, Physic, and the like, and therefore godly
Wisdom will make all the godly careful to improve the Lords Day so, as that it
may serve to the best good both of their sinful Souls, and of their weak and
frail bodies also.

Quest. 5. Are Christians bound to rest on the Lords Day, as strictly from
bodily recreations, and from all things that are not work, as the Jews ^^re on
the Sabbath Day for the Hebrew Doctors say? That the Jews must rest on the
Sabbath Day from things that are not work; as from climbing on a Tree, riding
on a Beast (^^ the like;) from the judging of Civil causes, putting off the
s^^^e, and taking the Brothers Wife (spoken of in Deuteronomy. 25.) separating of
Tithes, first Fruits (and the like;) valuing of things (spoken of in Levit.
27.) and from speaking with a man's (...) on the Sabbath Day, what he will buy,
or how he will build his (...) the like, as it is noted by Mr. Ains. in Exodus
20. 10. and in (...) ^1. 17.

Ans. I have showed you on the word Sanctified in Chap. 10. That God sanctified
the whole seventh day for his service, not only the time of the public
Ordinances, but the whole day, and therefore it was sanctified for the use of
private Ordinances as well as for the public, and therefore no time may be
exempted from these holy Duties but in cases of necessary food, Physic, or the
like cases of necessity; and therefore before we address our selves to Gods
public Ordinances, we must be careful to prepare our Souls to come with fear
and reverence, and so in our Hearing, in our Praying, Singing, etc. we must
take heed how we Hear, how we Pray, and Sing; so likewise afterward we must
examine our selves, how our Soul ^ave profited by the public Ordinances, or
else we may look (...) Curse, rather than a Blessing from the said Ordinances.
Hence it follows by necessary consequence, That no good Christian can allow
himself liberty to do such kind of exercises as you have named, but they will
interrupt the efficacy of those blessed and commanded Ordinances wherewith God
has blessed the seventh day, and therefore such kind of exercises must needs
be as sinful to be done by Christians upon the Lords Day, as they were by the
Jews upon the Sabbath days.

Quest. 6. Were Recreations on the Sabbath punished among the Jews by the
Magistrates, with the same kind of punishments that working on the Sabbath was?

Ans. They did not punish all sins alike, but they made a difference, for they
punished the sin of working servile works (on the Sabbath) namely such kind of
works as belonged to men's particular Callings on the Weekdays, with the
heaviest kind of death that was in use among them, namely with stoning to death
(as I have noted it in Chap. 10. and 11.) But the said Recreations or things
that were not properly work they punished only with scourging, for Maymony
speaking of the day of Atonement (which was a Sabbath of Sabbatism, and
therefore in all respects it must be observed with as strict a rest as the
seventh day was) says thus; All work for which men are to be stoned if they do
it on the Sabbath Day, they are to be cut off if they do it on the day of
Atonement; and whatsoever is unlawful to be done on the Sabbath which is not
work, is unlawful to be done on this day, and if he do it, he is to be
scourged, as he is to be scourged for doing it upon the Sabbath Day. See Ainsw.
in Levit. 23. 20.

Thus we see that the Hebrew Doctors do make a difference of Sins and
Punishments, according to the difference of days and times.

1 They held, That servile working on the seventh day was to For cutting off,
see Ainsw. in Exodus 22. 20. Lev. 20. 10. 17, 18. Number. 9. 13
be punished with stoning to death.

2 They held, That servile working on the day of Atonement was to be punished
with cutting off (which is several ways to be considered.)

3 They held, That servile working on their other festival Sabbath^ was to be
punished with Scourging, or with Excommunication. See Ains. in Lev. 23. 5, and
7. But,

4 All other things that were done on the seventh day which were not work
(though in some sort Recreations, etc. are like work) the Magistrates punished
with Scourging only, or with Excommunication for a time, for these two were
esteemed among the Jews to be much alike equal punishments, as I have showed in
the Jews Synagogues Discipline.

And truly such kind of Recreations are as sinful to be used by Christians on
the Lords Days, as they were to the Jews on the Magistrates are bound to punish
the profanation of any part of the Lords Day, (whether it be by Work, or by
Recreations) either by Scourging, or by some Mulct that is equivalent.
Sabbath Day, because they take off the Heart from the advantage of improving
the public Ordinances to the Spiritual good of the Soul, which God intended,
when he blessed and sanctified the seventh day for man's best good; I say
therefore, that no conscientious Christian ought to take liberty to do such
things on the Lords Day, neither will any conscientious Magistrate permit such
things to be done on that day, though it be after all public exercises are
ended; yea I do believe that godly Magistrates will not only be grieved at the
practice of such sins, but they will be forward and ready to put out their power
to suppress such sinful practices, by punishing such Malefactors, either with
scourging, or with some mulct that is equivalent thereto.

Six days thou shall labor, and in the seventh day thou shall cease in Earing
time, and in Harvest thou shall cease, Exodus 34. 21. Exodus 34. 21.


Under these two words Earing time and Harvest, All, or any other works of a
man's particular Calling, are comprehended.

Hence I reason thus:

If the Plownan (by whom the King is maintained, Eccl^s. 5. 9.) must cease not
only from plowing, but also from the Inning of his harvest upon the Sabbath
day, yea though all the six days had been rainy weather, and that day fair,
then it follows, that works of less consequence, and of less necessity (as
civil Recreations, and the like) ought not to be done on the Lords day,
because it is the sanctified time of Gods public worship, as the seventh day
was; and therefore Christians are bound to have the like tender regard, and the
like tender care of it as Gods sanctified time (though it be not a sanctified
sign, as the seventh day was) and seeing God is pleased to give unto us six
whole days for our necessary works, and for our necessa^y recreations, he may
well require Christians to give unto him the full improvement of the seventh
day for the bettering of our souls by his public and private Ordinances, or
else we may expect a curse rather than a blessing, from the careless
observation of that day.

God is jealous of the profanation of any part of his sanctified time; for
when the greedy Earthworms among the Jews did but wish in secret in their
hearts, that the Sabbath were gone that they might set out their corn to sell,
A^os 8. 5. Amos 8. 5.


God took notice of their inward profaning of his holy time, and he was so
displeased with them for their Inward earthly wishes, that he Swear by the
Excellency of Jacob, saying, Surely I will never forget any of their work^;
Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that d^elleth therein*
verse. 7, 8.

Now seeing God was so displeased with them for their secret profanation of
the sanctified time of his worship by their worldly thoughts and desires (yea
though it were but after God^ public worship was ended) then doubtless seeing
Jesus Christ has still reserved the seventh part of time for his public
worship, he will not allow Christians now more liberty than the Jews had,
either to prophan^ thoughts, or to spor^ and recreate themselves on the Lords
day; no, though it should be after the public exercise is ended: God requires
the heart on that day, as well as the body, to be employed on spiritual things
only. The promise in Es. 58. 13. (to such as make conscience of sanctifying
the Sabbath in the inward man) I confess, is made to that Sabbath of Sabbatism
called the day of Atonement, but yet this day of Atonement must be considered
as it was a Sabbath of equal respect in regard of the sanctified time of Gods
worship to the seventh day, and therefore that which is unlawful to be done in
the one, is unlawful to be done in the other also, both in respect of the
outward, and also in respect of the inward man.

Quest. 7. Did not the Jews hold it lawful to do works of mercy and works of
present necessity on the Sabbath day?

Ans. 1. In the days of our Savior, some of the Jews were so supestitious of
the outward rest of the Sabbath, that they were often offended with our
Savior, because he did works of mercy, and works of necessity on the Sabbath
day; but it was not so with the Jews from elder times; Maymony says, If a
Thief dig through a house upon the Sabbath day, it is free for any to kill him
with any death they can put him to. See Ains. in Exodus 22. 2. This they allowed
Exodus 22. 2.
as a case of present necessity, it could not be deferred, as a Magistrate may
defer the putting off a Malefactor to death, until any one of the six days,
because the Magistrate has the Malefactor in safe custody in some sure prison;
and therefore they say, It is not lawful to put a Malefactor to death on the
Sabbath day, because it is written that no fire shall be kindled upon the
Sabbath day, Exodus 35. 3. namely not for the use of any man's particular Calling
(as I have already opened this Text) therefore no fire may be kindled upon the
Sabbath day for the execution of a Malefactor, for that was but the work of the
Magistrates civil Calling. See Ains. in Exodus 18. 22. and yet notwithstanding
See Ains. in Exodus 35. 3.
they held it lawful for the Magistrate to put a Malefactor to death upon a
Festival Sabbath (as it appears by their practice in Joh. 19. 31.
putting our Savior to death on a Festival Sabbath, for they did not hold
those Sabbaths to be equal to the seventh day) but if a Thief came to steal on
the Seventh day, and was taken in diging through an house, they held it lawful
for a private man to kill him on the Sabbath day (though they did not hold it
lawful for a Magistrate to kill a Thief then) because it was a case of present
necessity, for he might escape unless he were killed at that instant.

And truly Christians may do as much as this on the Lords day, and no more,
without sin.

2 Our Savior confuted the Jews superstitious conceit of the outward rest of
the Sabbath, by examples from their own practice; for when they took offense at
his miraculous cures upon the Sabbath day, he asked them why they held it
lawful to untie their Cattle, and lead them to the water upon the Sabbath day,
and so to give them Hay and Provender, and to pull a Sheep out of the pit upon
the Sabbath day; and therefore said he, Why may not I show mercy to a Daughter
of Abraham that is in misery upon the Sabbath day? And seeing they held it
lawful for Abiathar to give the Shewbread to hungry David, he asked them, Why
it was not as lawful for his hungry Disciples to pluck ears of corn and to rub
them, and prepare them for the sustenance of their present hunger upon the
Sabbath day; and after Christ had cured the Criple; he bad him take up his bed
and walk, to save it from spoiling, and from loss, upon the Sabbath day; and
when he cured blind eyes upon the Sabbath day with clay tempered into a salve,
he did it to warrant Chirurgeon^, and Physicians, that they might lawfully
temper their Potions and Plasters upon the Sabbath day to cure the sick and
weak.

By these, and such like examples in the New Testament, our Savior declared
what liberty God gave unto the Jews, to do works of mercy, or of present
necessity, upon the Sabbath day; and truly those Christians that will contend
for more liberty than this upon the Lords day, do in effect deny, that the
Lords day was ordained with any solemn sanctity.

3 Though the present Apostate Jews did malign our Savior for doing many works
of mercy, and in present necessity, upon the Sabbath day; yet the ancient
Hebrew Doctors, recorded by their later Doctors, held otherwise: They say, that
the peril of life puts away the Sabbath, and therefore to a sick person that
is in danger of death, they do all things needful for him upon the Sabbath
day. See Ains. in Exodus 20. 10. And though the Hebrew Doctors do affirm that
Circumcision in the time thereof does drive away the Sabbath, because there was
a necessity of doing it on the eighth day, (See Ains. in Genesis 17. 12.) yet say
the Hebrew Doctors, in case of sickness they do not circumcise him that is
sick, until he be well; (and again) they circumcise none but children that are
without sickness, for peril of life puts away all. See Ains. on Genesis 17.
13. And on the day of Atonement which was a Sabbath of Sabbatism for strict
rest, yet then they made ready provision of food for him that lead the
Scapegoat into the Wilderness, yea though that Sabbath was also an exceeding
strict Fasting-day; yet then at the end of every mile they said unto him that
lead the Scapegoat, Lo here is meat, and here is water, and if his strength
failed him, and if he had need to eat, he might eat. See Ains. in Lev. 16. 21.
The Hebrew Doctors also say, That if the High Priest were an old man, or
sickly, he might have the water made warm, wherein he washed his body on that
strict Sabbath of Atonement, either by Irons made hot in the fire, or else by
the mixture of some hot water with the cold. See Ains. in Lev. 16. 24. By
these, and the like testimonies, we see that the ancient Hebrew Doctors held
that the Sabbath was made for man in misery, not only for the curing of his
sick and sinful soul by those blessed Ordinances wherewith God did at first
bless the seventh day, but even for the curing and comforting of his weak and
sickly body; and these are the chief ends for which the Sabbath was ordained
from the very first Institution of it.

And the Hebrew Doctors were very careful to provide a remedy against
immoderate toil and labor to men's bodies in traveling to the public
Ordinances which were dispensed every Sabbath day in their Synagogues: For by
virtue of Gods Command, there was a necessity laid upon all the Jews to resort
to some holy Convocation in all their dwellings, Lev. 23. 3. namely, in all
their Lev. 23. 3.
Synagogues, which must be placed in the midst of their dwellings. Hence the
Hebrew Doctors knowing the Command of God for such holy Convocations in all
their dwellings; (and knowing the Command of God to rest on the seventh day
from all their works) did appoint a certain distance how far men might travel
on the Sabbath day to the Synagogue, and they thought good to restrain it to an
English mile, to prevent the labor of travel, and the weariness of men's
bodies which might unfit them for the reverend attention to Gods Ordinances;
and from this limited space, it is that we read of a Sabbath days journey,
Act. 1. 12. They did not ordain this Sabbath days Acts 1. 12
journey for any Civil businesses of men's particular Callings, but for the use
of Religious duties, and for works of mercy on the Sabbath day.

And this proportion of a mile they took from the example of Gods limits which
he allowed to the Suburbs of their Cities, for the Suburbs of their Cities
might not exceed two thousand Cubits by measure, Number. 35. 5. The like distance
God appointed between the Camp of Israel and the Ark of the Lords Covenant when
they passed over the River Jordan, Jos. 3. 4. From these eminent examples the
Hebrew Doctors ordained that no Tent should be pitched in the Wilderness, nor
no House in the Land of Canaan, above two thousand Cubits from their
Synagogue-assemblies, which is an English mile; and this distance they usually
called A Sabbath days journey.

And this order was a provident provision both for the propagation of the Word
(for by such short distances from their Synagogues they must have many
Synagogues) and in order to a work of Mercy to their bodies, that they might
not weary their bodies by long travel, when they came unto Gods presence to be
partakers of his holy Ordinances; but in cases of necessity (they
notwithstanding this restraint to a mile) when the means of Grace did by any
occasion fail in any of their Synagogues at home, then they held it without
scruple lawful to go further, as we may see by the liberty that the People took
in the days of Christ, for then they did leave their Synagogues to follow his
preaching from place to place; and if Christ had held their practice to be
unlawful, doubtless he would have reproved them, and bid them keep their own
Synagogues, and not follow him from place to place as they did; and for the
attaining of such excellent means of Grace, the people also held it lawful to
leave their own Synagogues, and to break the outward rest of the Sabbath by
longer Journies, and greater Bodily labor; and so we see that the Priests in
the Law did break the outward rest of the Sabbath by their laborious killing
and dressing of Sacrifices, and yet they were blameless, Mat. 12. 5. 1 Chro.
23. 31. and so also for their Bodily food, they did kindle Fires to Roast and
Boil the portion of their Sacrifices fit for their stomachs every Sabbath Day;
for their portions must be eaten in the same day in which the Sacrifice was
offered, nothing thereof must remain until the morning; but in case any part of
their portions did remain until the morning, it must be burnt, Levit. 7. 15.
Exodus 12. 10.

I conclude therefore, That the Jews had as much liberty in all respects to do
any thing on the Sabbath Day, tending to the good of their Souls, or to their
Bodies, either in cases of necessity or mercy, as Christians have upon the
Lords Day; but both sorts have corrupt hearts alike, and have alike need to
watch unto the sanctified improvement of the whole day; and both sorts have the
same Adversary the Devil to deal withal, and therefore both sorts have need
alike to keep a good watch over Satan, and over their own corrupt hearts, or
else the spiritual efficacy of Gods Holy Ordinances will be lost and vain,
which is the only thing that the Devil desires to effect, that he may rejoice
in the ruin of our Souls.

O that Christians therefore would submit their Consciences to the command of
Christ, to keep the Lords Day as strictly from outward works, and as holily in
all Christian duties, as ever the Jews did, or ought to have kept the Sabbath
Day.

And so Jehovah cause his face to shine upon every Soul that truly honors the
sanctified time of the Lords Day, and the solemnity of all public and private
holy duties. Amen, Amen.

The end of the First Part.
Holy Time: OR, The True Limits of the Lords Day.

I. Proving, That the Lords Day does begin with the Natural Morning, and that
the Morning of the Natural day does begin at Midnight; and so consequently
that the Lords Day must both begin with the Natural Morning at Midnight, and
end with the Natural Evening at Midnight.

II. Proving, That the Jews beginning of the Day at the Sunset Evening was
only in relation to the date of the Person purified from his Levitical
uncleanness.

III. That The Jews themselves did hold, That the Natural day did continue
after Sunset till Midnight.

Maymony says, Grateful is a Command that is done in the hour of the same; (so
say I, grateful is the sanctifying of the Lords Day in the hour of the same) In
his Treatise of Offering Sacrifice, Chap. 4. Sect. 1.

Part II.

By WILLIAM PYNCHON Esquire

Published by Authority.

Printed at London by R. I. and are to be sold by T. N. at the Sign of the
three Lions in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1654.

Grace and Peace to such as desire to know when the Lords Day does begin and
end;
To the end they might abstain from their own Worldly employments in the Lords
own Sanctified time.

THis point is the more difficult to be explaned, because I have not met with
any beaten road from other Interpreters.

But I have labored to make it evident,

1 That the Sanctified and separated time of the Lords Day is just according to
the Natural day.

2 I have labored to make it evident, That the Natural day begins with the
Morning.

3 That the Natural morning begins at Midnight.

4 That the Natural day, and so consequently the Lords Day, does begin with the
Natural morning, and does end with the Natural evening at Midnight.

And for the want of the knowledge of these things, I perceive that many godly
persons do the works of their ordinary Callings in some part of the Lords
sanctified and separated day, as those do that begin and end the Lords Day at
the Sunset Evening, and for their better information I forced my self to
compose this Treatise.

I find that the chief ground of their error does arise, First, from a
mistaken interpretation of the first Darkness, to be a full Night of twelve
hours; and Secondly, from a mistaken interpretation of the word Evening,
because they apprehend it to be nothing else but a full Night.

These and sundry such like mistakes, I conceive I have cleared, I presumed
therefore that this ensuing Treatise will be heartily welcome to every tender
Conscience, that does truly desire to give unto the Lord his own separated and
sanctified time.

Many godly Christians, to my knowledge, have been much exercised in their
Studies, and Meditations, to find out the true limits of the Lords Day, that
so they might abstain from the works of their particular Calling, in every part
of that sanctified and separated time, from the beginning of the day to the
full end thereof.

For their sakes also, and at the special request of some of them, I have
labored in this Treatise, to prove, That all the time of the first Darkness
was comprehended in the word Morning at last, and that it took its beginning
from the Midnight at last, namely, as soon as all the several parts of the
Natural day were shaped and set into their order.

And therefore the beginning of the Morning from the time of Midnight must not
be ascribed to the Romans, as the first Authors of it (as many unadvisedly do,)
no^ yet to any other Nation; but it is the most ancient Scripture-Computation
from the very first created day; and so consequently it must needs be the true
beginning of the Jews Sabbath.

This Tenent may happily seem strange at the first, to such as have long held,
both in their judgment and practice, That the Jews Sabbath (and so
consequently the Lords Day) did properly begin at the Sunset evening; and of
this judgment and practice are most of the Churches in New England, and in
that respect many Professors among them do without scruple take liberty in the
Sunset Evening of the Lords Day, to do the servile works of their particular
Callings, and others take liberty to use Recreations.

But it is worthy to be taken notice of, that whole Churches do many times
err, both in their judgment and practice, or else how could so much
Corruption, Superstition, Idolatry, and Profaneness creep in to several
reformed Churches, as there has done from time to time in sundry ages?

Being therefore entreated by some godly persons in New England, and being also
moved thereunto by the fear of God, I have taken this difficult Task in hand,
lest, to confute this corrupt judgment and practice, it should spread like
Leaven, to the corrupting of Posterity; and so I rest,

Thine in the Lord, WILLIAM PYNCHON.

The chief Heads of this Treatise OF HOLY TIME.
CHAP. I
PRoving that the first Darkness in Genesis 1. 2. was not a complete Night, By
three Reasons. Page 1 The true Definition of a complete Night: It is the
absence of the Suns shining for the space of twelve Hours. p. 3

CHAP. II.
Proving that Moses by the term Evening in Genesis 1. 5. does not mean the whole
Night, but the latter half of the Artificial day, and the first half of the
Night. p. 6

This Chapter is distributed into four Sections, and six Objections are
answered.

SECT. 1.
The Hebrew word Gnereb, translated the Evening in Genesis 1. 5. is explaned in p.
9 1 The first Darkness cannot be called the Evening in a proper sense. p. 10 2
Neither can the whole night be called Gnereb, the Evening, in a proper sense.
p. 10 3 Neither can the Twilight be called Gnereb, the Evening, in a proper
sense. p. 10. And therefore it is a great mistake in our larger Annotation in
Mat. 26. 20. to say that Harab properly signifies mixed, namely, the mixture
of Light and Darkness in the Twilight; and in that sense mis-applying Deuteronomy.
16. 6. which is meant of the time of sacrifising the Passover, and not of the
time of feasting. Our Ancestors held Gnereb, the Evening, to be at all times of
the year an even and equal part of time to Boker, the Morning. p. 16 Gnereb,
the Evening, is often put by the figure Synecdoche for the later half of the
Evening, which does always begin at Sunset, and end at Midnight. p. 16
Gnereb is often put by the figure Metanomia for the West, because the later
Evening begins at Sunset, which when it is in the Equinoctial does always set
in the West. p. 17 Gnereb, the Evening, is often put by the figure Metanomy for
the last days, and also for the last end of a thing, because it is the last
half of the natural day. p. 17

SECT. 2.
Gnereb signifies such a connection of several species, as does ever preserve
the said several species distinct and entire, without any confused mixture; and
so Gnarbaiim in the Dual number does explain it; and therefore Gnarbaiim is
eleven times over put for the two distinct parts of the natural Evening. p. 19
And because Gnarbaiim, the two Evenings, are but the two distinct parts of the
full natural Evening; therefore the Seventy Interpreters do translate them in
the singular, as one proper Evening. p. 22 And the Hebrew Text does often make
the two Evenings to be but one proper Evening. p. 23

SECT. 3.
Proving, by seven demonstrative grounds, that the natural Evening begins at
Midday at the first declining of the Sun. p. 24 The Jews divided the
Artificial day into four great hours, as they divided the Night into four
Watches. p. 27

CHAP. III.
This Chapter has three Sections, and five Objections are answered.

SECT. 1.
Proving that the time of the first Darkness was called Boker, the Morning, at
last, namely, after all the parts of the natural day were shaped, framed, and
set together. p. 35 Boker, the Morning, does signify Early. p. 35 Boker i^ put
for Gods early seeking out, either to punish the wicked, or to protect the
godly. p. 37 Boker is put for the first time, and for the first beginning of a
thing. p. 37 Boker is put for the Sunset Evening, because the time of Sunset
is the first beginning of the Jews Ceremonial day of Cleanness, for then the
person purified began the date of his day of Cleanness. p. 40, 56, 86

SECT. 2.
Proving that the Morning does begin in the dark night. p. 41

SECT. 3.
Proving that the Morning (in all likelihood) does begin at Midnight; besides
the former certain proof from the exact beginning and sending of the natural
Evening, from Midday, to Midnight, p. 44

CHAP. IV.
This Chapter has three Sections, and four Objections are answered.

Proving that the Jews Custom in beginning their weekly Sabbath at the Sunset
Evening, was occasioned by their Ceremonial Custom, because the persons that
were Ceremonially purified, were commanded to begin the date of their new day
of Cleanness at that point of time. p. 50. And hence it follows, 1 That this
accidental beginning, must not be accounted for the true beginning of the
natural day. 2 Therefore the Sunset Evening is not the right time for us
Christians to begin our Lords day. p. 50 The Jews were cleansed from their
Ceremonial defilements in two degrees of time. 1 In the time of the afternoon,
by washing or baptizing their bodies. 2 In the time of the second Evening,
which did always begin at Sunset, then, and not till then, they must begin
the date of their day of Cleanness. p. 51, 54 All Israel are called men of
Holiness, in regard of their outward purity by their Ceremonial Cleansings. p.
54 The Jews Morrow began at Sunset in Ceremonial respects only p. 56, 86 It
is disputed by some, that the Sunset Evening is not fully come until it be
full Twilight, or somewhat past; or else they confess, it cannot be proved
that Christ lay three days in his grave. p. 57, 104 The time of Sunset is
fully come as soon as the body of the Sun is gone out of sight; and therefore
before it is Twilight. p. 57 The time of Christ's burial was at Star light. p.
7. 105 They did not begin their Religious Festival Suppers until three Stars
appeared in the sky. p. 60 The Jews observed a double date of the day. 1 They
observed the date of their Ceremonial day. 2 They observed the date of the
Natural day, for several purposes. p. 61. 95, 96. at Object. 18

CHAP. V.
Proving that the Passeover-Evening did begin and end according to the Natural
Evening from Midday to Midd-night p. 63

And in this Chapter eighteen Objections are Answered.

Some think that no other Evening belonged to the Jews Sabbath but the Evening
before the Sabbath; but they are much mistaken, for that was the Evening of the
Sabbath, no otherwise, but only in relation to the date of the person
purified. But the proper Evening of the Sabbath it self begun at Midday, and
ended at Midnight, as the Passover Evening did. p. 64. 110. and 95. at
Object. 18. All Passeovers were Sacrifices, and therefore the blood of them all
must be sprinkled at the Lords Altar in his Temple. p. 69 Blood was the Lords
portion; and in that respect he did prohibit the Jews to eat blood, and
likewise some sorts of fat. p. 69 The Lord permitted many private Altars for
Sacrifice in the days of Samuel, for the use of a particular person or Tribe;
but he allowed but one public Altar, for the public Sacrifices of all the
twelve Tribes, such as the Passeovers were. p. 70 The Passeover-day was none of
the Jews Festival Sabbaths, it was but a half Holy Day. p. 72 No Levites but
Priests only must sprinkle the blood of the Sacrifice upon the Lords Altar. p.
74 It was not convenient for above twenty persons to make their count for one
Lamb-Passeover. p. 75 A digression to open some difficult phrases about the
Passover, because they are borrowed from the unusual known dialect of the
Thalmud. p. 77 The time of Christ's Burial was at Starlight. p. 83. 57. 105
Boker, the Morning, is put for the beginning of the Jews Ceremonial day, which
did exactly begin at Sunset. 86 The Jews accounted the first half of the night
to belong to the former day, as a true part thereof, in the case of their
Religious Feasting upon their Passeovers; and in other cases also. p. 90. 51.
64 110 The second part of the Passover Evening was the appointed season for
the time of their Religious Feasting from Sunset till Midnight. p. 93

CHAP. VI.
Proving, that the day of Reconciliation was an extraordinary long Fasting
Sabbath; and therefore the beginning of that day ought not to be produced as an
exemplary pattern, neither for the beginning of the Lords day, nor yet for the
beginning of any other Fasting day. p. 98 No Fasting day among* the Jews was so
long as the day of Atonement was. p. 110

CHAP. VII.
Answering their Objections more particularly, that hold the Lords day to begin
at the Sunset Evening. p. 103 Such as hold the Sabbath day to begin at the
Sunset Evening, can never prove that Christ lay three days in his grave. p.
104 Luke says, that the time of Christ's burial was when it began to be
Starlight. p. 105. 57. 83 The Hebrew Doctors held the Sunset Evening after
the Sabbath to be a true part of the Sabbath it self. p. 110. 50. 64 The Hebrew
Doctors allow no more but seven Furlongs and a half to an English mile. p. 114

CHAP. VIII.
Proving that the punctual time of Christ's Resurrection was in the Morning,
just at the time of Sunrising. p. 117

A TABLE OF Such Scriptures as are Illustrated or Explaned.
Genesis.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 2 35, 44 1 5 8, 16, 22, 31 14 15 58 24 63 51 32 2 21, 38
38 17, 18 12 43 9 12 49 27 17, 24, 37 Exodus
8 21, 22 13 12 6 19, 65, 79 12 7 68 12 8. 42 93. 95, 97 12 11 48 12 1, 2 61 12
14 62 12 22 47 12 27 69 12 29 48 12 33, 39 47 12 38 12 12 41 48, 76 12 45 74 13
3 49, 82 14 24 37 16 12 20 19 10 28 19 22 68 22 31 54 23 8 90 24 5 68 27 1 71
29 39, 41 19 30 8 20 30 19, 20 52 Leviticus.
15 69 1 9 64 1 11 ^4 3 17 69 5 2 50 6 9 89 6 20 24 6 26 102 7 2, 14 69, 74 7
15 61, 87, 97, 102 7 16, 17, 19 81, 86, 87 7 18 64, 89 10 19 88 11 15 15 11 24,
32 50 13 48 13 16 4 91 22 5, 6, 7 55, 60 22 9, 10 55, 87 23 4 5 22, 64 23 7, 8
49, 83, 101 23 11, 15, 16 87 23 15 18, 40, 56 23 20 63, 90 23 32 99 23 40 14 25
8, 9 61 Numbers.
7 1 55 9 3, 5, 11 64, 19 9 10, 11 94, 95 9 12 93 12 1 15 19 9 54 28 4, 8 19,
43, 64, 91 28 16 61 33 3 49, 76 33 48 17 Deu^eronomy.
8 15 14 11 24 59 11 30 17, 58 16 1 36 16 2, 4 80, 90 16 4 81, 86 16 5, 6 68,
69, 72, 76 16 15 88, 97 21 23 106 23 10, 11 51, 54 23 15 97 Joshua.
1 4 59 7 6, 13. 14 28, 53 8 29 106 10 3 96 24 4 59 Judges.
3 15 37 19 19 76 Ruth.
3 14 42 1 Samuel.
1 1 21 1 19 21 17 16 29 20 5 25 20 26 71 30 17 40, 56, 85, 87 2 Samuel.
5 6, 7 21 11 2 52 19 18, 19 21 1 King.
17 6 29 22 43 72 2 King.
3 20, 22 43 14 14 12 1 Chronicles.
7 28 25 2 Chronicles.
1 3 72 9 14 15 15 17 72 13 19, 20 53 35 14 62 35 10, 11 69, 74 35 18 75 Ezra.
9 2 11 Nehemiah.
5 3 12 8 10 88, 97 13 3 12 13 19 104 Job.
3 9 2 23 8, 19 45, 58 26 7 44 37 2 46 38 6, 7 40 Ps. Psalms.
5 3, 4 35 19 5 59 37 6 76 40 8, 9 13 50 1 59 51 18 21 55 18 51 78 9, 60 72 78
68 72 89 12 45 89 13 45 90 6 29 90 14 36 104 34 11 106 35 11 110 3 43 113 3 58
119 176 36 Cha. Proverbs.
3 24 11 4 18 76 6 1 12 7 9 2, 63 13 19 12 15 15 12 22 26 12 24 21 15
Ecclesiastes.
11 6 29 Esa.
2 2 37 11 12 45 13 20 15 15 7 14 16 3 7 21 4 39 24 11 18 37 7 13 40 3, 4 13 41
19 13 47 11 39 Jeremy.
2 6 14, 15 4 23 36 5 6 14 6 4 24, 31, 51 23 8 45 30 21 12 48 22 18 50 24 39
Ezekiel.
6 14 17 20 5 11 24 26, 27 115 27 13 11 27 17 11 33 21, 22 115 47 15 46 Daniel.
2 41 11 5 30 39 6 14 60 7 2 46 8 5 17 8 8 17, 46 9 21 37 Hosea.
10 15 36 Habbakkuk.
1 2 37 1 8 14 3 7 15 Zephany.
2 7 37 3 3 14 3 5 36 Zachary.
2 6 45 12 9 36 14 7 13, 28 Malachy.
3 4 11 Matthew.
12 40 104 14 15, 23 20, 25 24 31 46 26 2 79 26 17 77, 78 26 18, 20 75, 93 27
57 82, 10^ 27 62, 63 57, 85 27 66 85 28 1 18, 108, 111 28 2 118 Mark.
1 13 14 1 32 60, 106, 109 1 35 42 14 1 78 14 3, 12 79, 93 14 17 93 15 25 27 15
42 82, 105 16 1 108 Luke.
3 5 14 9 12 25 9 19 76 13 17 110 18 12 18 22 1 78 22 14 73 23 54 83, 105 23 56
65, 108 John.
7 55 53 13 12 89 14 19 113, 118 18 28 79 19 14 27, 79 19 31 82, 105 19 40 107
20 6, 7 107 20 19 104, 113 Acts.
10 41 118 21 26 53 26 13 7 28 23 29 1 Corinthians.
15 4 104 Galathians.
3 12 54 Hebrews.
10 7 13 Revelation.
1 16 76 7 1 46

Errata of the second part of this Treatise.
Page Line 11 18 read That for the 46 26 r. Northerly 51 28 r. departed ^6 ul^
r. meaning is 101 16 r. Lev. 23. 7. 107 23 r. come 109 8 r. but a bare

Other Escapes the Reader may mend.

HOLY TIME.
CHAP. I.
Proving that the First Darkness in Genesis 1. 5. was not a complete Night. By
three Reasons.

Reason I.
BEcause the first Darkness wanted a Twilight going before it, which is a
proper adjunct, and a true part, of a true created night; and therefore the
first created night was not without it; and our own experience does witness
that every complete night has a Twilight going before it in the evening as a
true part thereof as well as a Twilight at the end of it in the morning: But
the first Darkness, though it had a Twilight in the end of it immediately
before the light shined out, yet it wanted a Twilight in the beginning of it;
therefore it was not a full night: it was no more but a Synecdoche Membri, a
part of the first night.

And indeed there could not be a complete night at first, not until the
Artificial day was first completely formed by the shining out of the light
twelve hours together, and then at the end of the said twelve hours the light
went out of that horizon, and then there succeeded another darkness of twelve
Hours which began with a Twilight. The first half of this darkness made up
the first darkness to be a complete night of twelve hours; and the other
half went on toward the beginning of the second natural day.

And thus, after this order and manner the first night was created, shaped and
limited, with a double Twilight, and by this means it became a true pattern and
sampler to all the other Creation nights.

Mr. Thomas Wilson in his Mystical Cases, in Aenigmate 35. propounds this
necessary Question:

How can there be Darkness, where there is no Night?

The Answer hereunto (says he) must be referred to the first Creation only.

By this Answer of his, it is evident that h^ did not hold the first Darkness
to be a true night, as most Interpreters do, though much amiss in so doing.

The sum of what I have said, may be drawn up into this Syllogism.

No Darkness that wants the true shape and form of a complete night, can be
called a complete night.

But the first Darkness wanted the true shape and form of a complete night,
because it wanted a Twilight in the beginning of it, which is an inseparable
adjunct to the true shape and form of a complete night.

Therefore the first Darkness cannot in proper speech be called a complete
night.

The Proposition is so clear that I need not prove it, because no man I think
will deny it.

The Assumption is thus proved, God made the Stars to rule in the night, Genesis
1. 17. And the Stars were set first into their dominion in the Twilight Evening
of the fourth day, Genesis 1. 17. in respect whereof Job does call them the Stars
of the Twilight, Job 3. 9. But the Seventy Translators call them the Stars of
the night, because they held Jobs Twilight to be a true part of the night; And
Solomon does likewise make the Twilight of the Evening to be a term synonimous
with Darkness, and with the night, Prove. 7. 9. And Aben Ezra on Exodus 1^.
says there is the evening of the Sun, and the evening of the Night, when the
shining of the Sun is gone from off the Earth.

For the further proof of this, I refer you to Chapter 4. To my Answer to the
second Objection.

But I will hereunto add the description of a complete night, which may
further enlighten this truth. A complete night is the abs^nce of the Suns
shining for the space of twelve hours.


A complete night is the absence of the Suns shining from off the face of the
earth for the space of twelve hours, when the Sun is in the Equinoctial, as
the days were in the first Creation: This description of the Night agrees with
the testimony of Aben Ezra, immediately cited.

Object. Why do you set out the shape and form of the first Artificial day by
the shining of the Sun, and of the Night by the absence of the Suns shining?
Seeing the Sun was not created till the fourth day; It is likely that the
light that was created the first day did not then rule the day after the same
manner as the Sun did on the fourth day.

Ans. Though there was no Sunshine in the first day, yet doubtless instead
thereof the God of Nature, and the God of Order, did cause a certain light to
shine out of darkness, from the Element of Fire, in the self same manner and
order, as he caused the Light to do on the Fourth Day.

At the first, the general matter of the Globe, called Earth, was without form,
Genesis 1. 2. because it was void of all ornaments for a time; in like sort the
first Darkness was at the first a confused thing, and without any shape or
form of a night, for a time; but after the space of five or six hours God
said, Let there be light, and there was light, Genesis 1. 3. It were too gross
blindness, to think that God did cause this Light to break out of darkness
all on a sudden, like a flash of Lightning; no, God was now framing the First
Day, to be a Pattern, and Sampler to all the rest; and therefore the God of
Nature, and the God of Order, did cause the Light to break out of Darkness by
degrees, in the same order and manner as he caused the Sun to do on the
Fourth Day, and so by this means the God of Nature did first create a Twilight
to the first Darkness, before he caused the light to shine out upon the face
of the Earth, as he did by the Sun on the Fourth day; then also he caused the
Light to ascend by degrees, until it came to its height at midday, and then he
caused it to decline by degrees, until it went off from that Horizon, as the
Sun does now; and so by this means the Artificial Day was completely shaped,
and formed, before the whole Night could be shaped and formed.

But secondly, When the Artificial Day was thus* formed, by the shining of the
Light twelve hours, then there succeeded another Twilight, and twelve hours
Darkness more then the first Darkness; the first half of that twelve hours
darkness made up the first darkness a complete night of twelve hours, with a
double Twilight, and so it became a true pattern and sampler to all other
Creation Nights, and then the last half of the said twelve hours darkness
went on toward the beginning of the Second Day.

And except this order be observed, there cannot be found out a double Twilight
to make the first Night a complete pattern for all the other Creation nights.

Reason II.
It is evident that the first Darkness was not a complete night by the order
of that Dominion which God established for the ruling of the Artificial Day by
the Sun, before he gave Dominion to the Moon, and to the Stars, to rule the
night.

But if the first Darkness had been a full night before the Artificial day had
received its shape and form, then the Moon and Stars should have had their
dominion before the Sun, for doubtless the God of order would place them in
their dominion in the day of their creation, according to that priority of
order which the day had of the night, or the night had of the day. Genesis 1. 14.
19.

If the night of the fourth day had been first in order before the Artificial
day, then the Moon and the Stars should have had the priority of their dominion
to rule the night of the fourth day, before the Sun could have had its dominion
to rule the artificial day; and so by this account the Sun shall borrow its
light from the Moon as the chiefest in the dominion of the fourth day: Is not
this to make the God of order to be the God of confusion, in setting the Cart
before the Horse, by giving the first dominion to the Moon, and the last
dominion to the Sun; as they do that make the first darkness to be a complete
night.

Or else if you think to avoid this Rock, by saying that the Sun only was
created on the fourth day to rule the artificial day, and that the Moon and
the Stars were not created, and set into their rule and dominion till the fifth
night, is not this to run against the plain Text. For my part I shall think him
a good Logician (that holds the first darkness to be a complete night) that
can fairly get out of this Dilemma.

Reason III.
If the first darkness had been formed into a complete night before the light
was formed into a complete artificial day; Then doubtless Moses would have
called it Night (as the proper name of its perfect shape and form) before he
called the light Day: for it was Gods usual custom to give names to things in
the same priority of order, as they had priority of form and shape: As for
example, As soon as he had made man of the earth, he called him Adam, and as
soon as he had made woman of his Rib, he bid Adam name her; and as soon as he
had formed other creatures, he brought them to Adam, and bid him name them with
names, defining their natures; and so doubtless if the first darkness, had been
first formed into a complete night, he would have named it night in the first
place; but he called it nothing else but Darkness at first, saying the
darkness was, namely it was a misshapen and uncreated thing: But as soon as
he had put a shape, and limited it by a double Twilight, he called it night, as
the name of its perfect form and shape: But it could not receive this shape and
form until the light was first shaped and formed into an artificial day by its
orderly shining upon the face of the earth for twelve hours together, and then
he called it day, as the proper name of its perfect shape and form.

Hence we may clearly perceive, That Moses in Genesis 1. 5. does name all the
parts of the first natural day in their true priority of order as they were
shaped and formed, 1 Day, 2 Night, 3 Evening, 4 Morning. And secondly, hence it
follows that the first formed part of the natural day, was the artificial
day, and not the night.

CHAP. II.
Proving that Moses by the term Evening in Genesis 1. 5. does not mean the whole
night; But the latter half of the artificial day, and the first half of the
night.

LEarned Mr. Richardson says, That these two words Evening and Morning do set
our Divines to School to find out what is meant by them in the first Creation.

Most Interpreters say that the two Hebrew words, Gnereb and Boker, which we
translate Evening and Morning, in Genesis 1. 5. do mean nothing else but night
and day. But I must crave leave to differ from them in judgment, for these two
Reasons.

Reason I.

If Moses had called the first darkness Evening, and the artificial day
Morning, Then in reason he would have placed the said terms in the same
methodicall order in the end of the verse, as he had done in the beginning of
the said verse; but he does place them in a contrary order, for in the
beginning of the verse he names the Day before the Night, but in the end of the
verse he names the Evening before the Morning; and what else does this argue
but that he did thereby intend that Gods people should take notice that the
Evening and the morning were a differing division of the natural day from the
division of Day and Night?

Reason II.

If Moses had intended to call the first darkness Evening as synonimous to the
term Night, then doubtless some Scripture or other would have showed them to
be synonima, seeing the said terms are so often repeated in the Bible.

But though I have made diligent search, yet I cannot find where the ^^rm
Morning is made synonimous to the full artificial day, nor where the term
Evening is made synonimous to the whole night, in a proper sense.

Therefore seeing they are no where synonima, it is altogether unlike that
Moses does make them synonima in Genesis 1. 5. and no where else?

Object. Why might not the first Darkness be a full Evening, and so a full
night of twelve h^ures, though it wanted a Twilight in the beginning of it?
might not God dispense with the Twilight in the first ^igh^?

Ans. Why do you go about to make the most wise Creator and Governor of all
things, to be an imperfect Artist in his first pattern? for if you make the
first Night to want a Twilight in the beginning of it, do you not thereby make
him an imperfect Artist in his first pattern to the other creation days? for
it is manifest, that the shape and form of the first creation day was a true
pattern by which the rest were shaped and formed; for as the text expresses it
in verse 5. so was the Morning, and so was the Evening the first day; so in
like sort it is said of the second day in verse 8. and so it is said of the
third day in verse 13. and so it is said of the fourth day in verse 19. and so
it is said of the fifth and sixth days, all these days were shaped and formed
just according to the pattern of the first day.

The addition of the Sun in the fourth day made no new part of Light more then
the first day had, as I have noted it already, and therefore the manner how the
Light did break out of Darkness on the first day, was in the same manner and
order as we see the Sun does in the Equinoctial.

1 The Light ascended out of darkness by degrees, as the Sun does now, Genesis
32. 24. By means whereof it did first make a Twilight in the morning, so the
Hebrew phrase calls it in Psalm. 119. 147.

2 Then after a while it began to shine upon the face of the earth, Genesis 19. 23.

3 Then it ascended higher till it came to its height at midday, as Es. 16. 3.
Act. 22. 6. Act. 26. 13.

4 Then it ceased to ascend, and made a little stand for about half an hour.

5 Then it began to decline or go down by degrees till it went out of the
Horizon.

6 Then it made a Twilight, called the Twilight of the Evening, Prove. 7. 9.

7 Then succeeded twelve hours darkness, the first half whereof made up the
first darkness a full night.

8 Then the last half of the said twelve hours darkness went on toward the
beginning of the second day.

In this admirable order did the God of nature set together all the parts of
the first natural day: But I have again set it out more fully in Section 4.

Object. 2. Some learned men say, That Moses by the term Evening and Morning
in Genesis 1. 5. meant Night and Day, no otherwise, but by the figure Synecdoche
only.

They say that the Night is called Evening no otherwise, but because it is
begun of the Evening, and that the artificial day is called Morning no
otherwise, but because it is begun of the Morning, and so by this Exposition
they make no other part of time to be called Evening; but a little point of
time only at the beginning of the night, all the rest of the night is called
Evening (say they, but by the figure Synecdoche only. In like manner they make
no other part of the artificial Day to be called Morning; but a little point of
time in the beginning of the artificial day only, and this Exposition they
borrow from Tremelius Annotation on Genesis 1. 5. or rather from Junius, for it is
easy to make it appear, that Tremelius was of another judgment.

Ans. A man had need of more patience then ordinary that shall spend his time
to answer such fantastical conceits as this. But in brief, I think I have fully
confounded this Objection.

1 By proving that Moses in Genesis 1. 5. divided the first natural day into two
equal parts two several ways, as I have exemplified it by the lines of
longitude and latitude on a Compass Dial in Sect. 4. and see also the
gradations to the morning in Chap. 3. Sect. 2. at Sixthly.

2 I answer by proving that Gnereb the Evening is a connection of the latter
half of the artificial day to the first half of the Night, and so making it
to be an equal part of time to Boker the Morning. But the best way to answer
this, and many other Objections, is to lay down the true interpretation of
Gnereb, the Evening, in the various use of it in the Scripture.

I am not ignorant that Gnereb is usually interpreted to signify The Hebrew
word Gnereb, which is translated Evening, in Genesis 1. 5. explained.
a mixing, or mingling of things together; but I dislike this interpretation,
because it is not possible by this interpretation to find out the true form,
and shape of the Natural Evening, I have therefore made diligent search into
the various use of this word, and I find that Gnereb does signify (not a
confused mixing and mingling of things together, but) a connexing, conjoyning,
or coupling of two or more distinct things together, without confounding their
several species, or natures, and therefore Wine and Water mixed together
cannot be called Gnereb, neither can the confused mingling of Light and
Darkness together (as it is in the Twilight) be called Gnereb, and yet that
short time of Twilight is comprehended within the large limits of Gnereb,
because it is the partition of (Gnarbaiim) the two Evenings; but the Twilight
it self is ever expressed by two other several Hebrew words, and never by
Gnereb.

The thing I aim at in this Discourse is only to clear the true signification
of Gnereb, from a confused mixing or mingling of things together, and to make
it clear and evident, that it only signifies a conjunction of two or more
distinct things together, and therefore that Gnereb in Genesis 1. 5. must signify
the conjunction of the last half of the Artificial day to the first half of
the Night, and that these two distinct parts connexed are an even and equal
portion of time to Boker, the morning.

2. I will explain the true meaning of this phrase in Genesis 1. 5. so was the
Evening, and so was the Morning. First mark the dependence; in the former part
of the Verse, it is said, God called the light Day, and the darkness he called
Night; and then it follows, so was the Evening; but how was that? was it framed
out of the darkness only? No, it was framed and formed both out of the said
Light called Day, and out of the said Darkness called Night, Conjunctim, and
not Divisim, namely, the Evening was framed by conjoyning the latter half of
the Artificial day to the first half of the Night; and so was the Morning,
namely, it was in like sort framed out of the Darkness called Night, and out
of the Light called Day, by conjoyning the last half of the Night to the first
half of the Artificial day: and it is most evident that this was the true
meaning of Moses; because he does afterward explain Gnereb the single
Evening, by Gnarbaiim the two Evenings eleaven times over, and the reason is,
because the full Natural evening has two parts; namely the first half is Day,
and the latter half is Night, as I shall open the matter more at large, both in
this Chapter by and by, and in Chapter the fist.

And from this interpretation of Gnereb, in Genesis 1. 5. these three Conclusions
do follow.

1 That the First Darkness is not, nor cannot be called Gnereb the Evening.

2 That the whole Night is not, nor cannot be called Gnereb the Evening, in a
proper sense.

3 That the Twilight cannot be called Gnereb the Evening.

And the reason is, because none of these three have any distinct conjunction
of species to make them Gnereb; and from this interpretation of Gnereb I frame
this Argument.

The first Darkness by it self considered cannot be called Gnereb the
Evening, neither can the confused mixture of the Twilight be called Gnereb the
Evening, because Gnereb does signify (not such a mixture as is confused, but)
a connexing, or conjoyning of two or more things together, without confounding
their distinct species; and there are no other distinct species in Genesis 1. 5.
to be conjoined together, but the Light called Day, and the Darkness called
Night.

But the first darkness was pure darkness, and no other thing was connexed to
it til the Light was created, and that connection though at the first it might
have been called Gnereb, yet now it must not be called Gnereb, because it
pleased Good to call it Boker, the morning.

Therefore the first Darkness by it self considered, cannot be called Gnereb
the Evening, neither was it framed into any part of the Evening at all.

The Assumption will not be denied*

The Proposition I prove several ways.

But first I will begin it by a particular examination of the various use of the
Hebrew word Gnereb through out the Scripture.

1 Gnereb is put for the conjunction of two persons together in a contract of
Marriage, Ezra 9. 2. Psalm. 106. 35. it is also put for the connextion of Iron
and Clay in the feet of Nebuchadnezzars Image, Dan. 2. 41. 43. which connextion
is expounded to be the joining together of the Seleucida and the Lagida by
Marriages, in Dan. 11. 16, 17. in like sort that Phrase of going in to another
by way of Marriage, 1 King. 11. 1, 2. is called Gnereb in the Chalde, and the
going in to the Nations, Josh. 23. 7. is called Gnereb in the Chalde.

These instances do prove that Gnereb is a connection of two distinct Persons
or Species together, without confounding the Species.

2 Gnereb is put for Merchandise, because of the connection of sundry sorts of
Wares the Merchants use to join together, when they carry them to Faires or
Markets to sell, Eze. 27. 17. 19. 25. 27, 31. 34. Gnereb is also put for
Merchants by the Figure Metonymia, either because of the said connection of
sundry sorts of Wares, or else because of their manifold contracts with other
persons, which contracts are usually made by connexing their hands together,
Eze. 27. 13.

3 Gnereb is put for things that are sweet, or pleasant, by the Figure
Synecdoche; it is put for a sweet or pleasant voice, Cant. 2. 14. and for sweet
sleep, Prove. 3. 24. Jer. 31. 26. and for other sweet and pleasant things, Prove.
13. 19. Psalm. 104. 34 Jer. 6. 20. Hos. 9. 4, Mal. 3. 4. but none of these
things can be said to be sweet or pleasant until they be connexed to some of
the five Senses, or to some of the affections of the Soul; as for example,
Psalm. 104. 34. my meditation of him shall be sweet, or my meditation shall be
connexed to him, namely, with delightful thoughts.

4 Gnereb is put for a league of amity, or of confederation between two
parties, for offense or defense. Eze. 20. 5. Jer. 25. 20. 24. Jer. 50. 37. and
in this manner those Egyptians that joined themselves to the Israelites at
their departure are called Gnereb, Exodus 12. 38. and yet they might still be
distinguished from the Israelites; in like manner after their return from
their Captivity in Babylon, Nehemiah charged the Jews to separate the Heathen
people from them, which they had joined to them in way of Marriage, and they
are called Gnereb, Neh. 13. 3.

5 Gnereb is put for the connection of two parties in a contract of Suertyship,
Genesis 43. 9. Genesis 44. 32. Prove. 11. 15. and in this respect Gnereb is also put
for answering to another; namely, as a Surety with another, Prove. 6. 1. and so
Gnarbaiim in the duall number is likewise put for a contract between two
Persons, namely, when two persons do join their hands together in token of a
contract, Prove. 22. 26.

And in this respect also Gnereb is put for a pledge by a Metonymia of the
sign for the thing signified, because a pledge is given to bind the Covenant
or Contract between two Parties, Genesis 38. 17, 18, 20.

Gnereb is also put for Hostages, by the Figure Metonymia, because Hostages are
given to bind the Covenant, or Contract that is made between two Parties, 2
King. 14. 14. 2 Chro. 25. 24. Gnereb is also put for a Morgage, by the Figure
Metonymia, because the thing Morgaged is given to bind the Contract between
two parties, Neh. 5. 3.

Also a derivative of Gnereb is put for wicked persons, that join together in
a Conspiracy against lawful Authority, Prove. 24. 25. My son, meddle not with
them that are given to change; but it may be better read, Meddle not (by way of
association) with them that are Conspirators, for that is a dangerous
conjunction.

Gnereb is also put for any engagement by way of Covenant, Promise, or
Contract, and in this sense it is put for the conjunction of Christ's heart, in
a sweet Covenant to do his Fathers will, for Man's redemption, Jer. 30. 21. Who
is this that has engaged his heart to approach unto me says the Lord, or that
has connexed his heart, namely in a sweet Covenant, to approach unto me says
the Lord? and in the former clause Christ draws near unto God for all his
seed. See Ainsw. in Psalm. 148. 14. Lo I come (says Christ) to do thy will O
God, thy Law is in my heart, Psalm. 40. 8. Heb. 10. 7.

6 Gnereb is put for the woofe of any Cloth, because it is connexed to the
warp, Lev. 13. 48, 49. 51. 53. 56, 57. 59. but this connection may easily be
cleared from being a confused mixture, because the plague of Leprosy might be
in the Woofe distinctly, and not in the Warp. See Ains. in Lev. 13. 48.

7 Gnereb is put for a conjunction of several swarms of noisome Creatures,
which were miraculously combined together with one consent, to plague the
Egyptians, Exodus 8. 21, 22. 24. 29. 31. Psalm. 77. 44. Psalm. 105. 31.
Interpretors cannot find out the several kinds of these Swarms, because
they are not specified in the text; but in general, there were swarms of
venomous Flies that did plague them in their houses, and there were swarms of
venomous Creatures, and swarms of ravenous Creatures that did plague them
without doors in the Fields, for the twenty fourth verse does tell us, that
they were plagued in all the parts of the Land; but this conjunction of these
several sorts of swarms may easily be cleared from confounding their kinds,
for out of doubt every kind of Swarm did keep it self distinct from confused
mixture with other kinds; Swarms of Flies kept by themselves, swarms of
Serpents by themselves, swarms of Wolves, and swarms of Lions by themselves,
yet all these Swarms were connexed together in their endeavors to plague the
Egyptians. By this interpretation there was no confused mixture among these
Swarms, as some do very unadvisedly expound the word Gnereb in this place to
signify.

8 Gnereb is put for a Desert, or a Wilderness, Es. 41. 19. for a thirsty
land, Es. 35. 7. for a dry land, Jer. 50. 12. Ier. 51. 43. or for an unknown
land, Ier. 2. 6.

All these translated terms are Figurative, the continent is put for the
connection of the several things that are contained in it; and our Savior does
teach us how we must connex and couple the things of the Wilderness together,
in Luke 3. 5. compared with Es. 40. 3. 4. where the things of Gnereb are thus
connexed; Mountains and Hills are connexed to valleys, rough places are
connexed to Plains, or smooth ground, and there are diverse other connexions in
Gnereb the Wilderness, for there are diverse kinds of wild Creatures that are
connexed together in a Neighbourly cohabitation, without confounding any of
their distinct kinds, as Deuteronomy. 8. 15. Mar. 1. 13.

And there are also sundry sorts of Trees growing in a pleasant Neighborhood
together, in their several borders, Es. 41. 19. and therefore Willow trees are
called Gnereb, and Gnarbaiim in the duall number, either because of the
twyparty colored leaf, or else because they do usually grow on both sides of
the Brooks in a pleasant Neighborhood together, Es. 15. 7. Lev. 23. 40.

In Gnereb the Desert also, there is a connection of many miseries which do
often fall together on poor Travellours, Ier. 2. 6. with Deuteronomy. 8. 15.

And by the Figure Synecdoche any particular thing of the Desert may be called
Gnereb; as for example, the Wolf is called the Wolf of Gnereb, and the
Wolf of Gnaraboth, in the plural number, Ier. 5. 6. because all
VVildernesses are inhabited with VVolfes.

In this regard I cannot but wonder why some Translators do translate, Hab. 1.
8. and Zeph. 3. 3. the Wolf of the Evening, seeing Gnereb has relation to
any connexture, either of places, or of persons, or of things, as well as of
the two parts of time in the Natural day, and therefore Gnereb ought not to be
translated the Evening in any place of the Bible, but in those places only that
have relation to time, namely to the Evening of the Natural day; but the
Wolf is not, nor ought not to be called Gnereb in relation to the time of the
Evening of the Natural day, for the Wolf does not hunt after his prey more
in the Evening than in the Morning, nay he does rather seek his prey more in
the Morning than in the Evening, as Jacob does tell us in his allusive
Prophecy, Genesis 49. 27. it is fitter therefore to interpret the Wolf of
Gnereb, with relation to the place of his abode, namely to Gnereb the
Wilderness, rather than to Gnereb the Evening, and in that respect the
seventy Interpreters, in Hab. 1. 8. and in Zepb. 3. 3. do call them the
Wolves of Arabia, because of the manifold companies, and confederacy that is
among them in the Deserts of Arabia.

9 Gnereb is put for the Continent it self of Arabia, 2 Chro. 9. 14. because
in that Continent there were diverse sorts of people that had Kings over them
that were connexed, combined, and confederated together in leagues offensive,
and defensive, and in that respect they are called the Kings of Gnereb, or the
Kings of Arabia, the continent being put for the consederates therein
contained, for Arab, in 2 Chronicles. 9. 14. is written Aereb, in 1 King. 10. 15.
which does properly signify a connexed multitude. See Ainsw. in Genesis 10. 7.
and the Aethiopians in 2 King. 19. 9. and in 2 Chronicles. 14. 9. 12. are called
Cushites of Arabia, by Sir Wall. Rawley, p. 151. 154.

10 Gnereb is also put for several sorts of people, that lived in near
cohabitation together in Arabia, Es. 13. 20. and in that respect the Midianites
(because they were inhabitants in some part of Arabia) are called Arabians. See
Tremelius in Hab. 3. 7. and in that respect Moses his Midianitish Wife is
called an Ethiopian, in Number. 12. 1. and because in that continent there lived
diverse other sorts of people in cohabitation, therefore they are called Gnereb,
for there lived the Posterity of S^^a and Havilah, of Sab^ah, Regmah, and
Sabteca, and many others, all which are called Gnereb (or Arabians) that is to
say, a connexed people by a neighbourly cohabitation. See Ainsw. in Genesis 10. 7.
and in Genesis 37. 25.

11 The Raven also, and all sorts of Crows are called Gnereb, because all the
kinds of them are oftentimes connexed together in flocks, and also because
some of their kinds are party-colored; I have seen sundry sorts of Crows
together in flocks, and some of them were party-colored, namely, white and
black like Pyes, and Pyes are a sort of Crows. See Ains. in Lev. 11. 15.

These several instances do plainly evidence, that Gnereb must not be taken
for a confused mixing, or mingling of things together, whereby the distinct
species may be confounded, as wine and water mixed together are, but it must be
taken for such a mixing as is no other but a connection of distinct species.

This explanation of Gnereb does lead us by the hand to the right understanding
of Gnereb in Genesis 1. 5. namely, that it signifies the connection of the latter
half of the Artificial day with the first half of the Night; this part of
the Natural day our Ancestors did most fitly call the Evening; First, because
Ou^ Ancestors held Gnereb the Evening to be at all times of the year an even
and equal part of time to Boker the morning.
it was the even or equal part to Boker the morning. And Secondly, our
Ancestors held the Evening to be a distinct and differing portion of time from
the time called Night; and indeed experience does tell us, that the Night is
not always an Even part of time to the Artificial day, that it is many times
longer, and many times shorter than the day; but the Evening as it is taken
from midday to midnight, is always an even or equal part of time to Boker the
Morning, Summer and Winter, all the world over, and therefore our Ancestors
could not so fitly have called the whole night an Evening, in relation to the
Artificial day, as most would have them speak, though upon better advice they
will now think otherwise.

Obj. 3. What need is there to make Gnereb comprehend such a large portion of
time, as is the connection of the latter half of the Artificial day, to the
first half of the Night; will not that little piece of light which remains
after Sunset, and which is connexed to the Night, sufficiently serve to make
up the true composition of Gnereb the Evening?

Answ. Our dispute did arise at first about the first Darkness, whether Moses,
in Genesis 1. 5. did call it Gnereb the Evening or no? I told you no, because it
was pure darkness without any connection of light at the beginning of it, and
Gnereb the Evening is often put by the Figure Synecdoche for that half of the
Evening, called the latter Evening, which does always begin at Sunset.
when God created the Light to shine out of Darkness, God called that Light
(when it had run the course of twelve hours) Day, and the first half of it,
with the first darkness, he did at last call it Boker the Morning (namely
after the whole time of the Natural day had run its course, and after the
Darkness was formed into a Night.) Hence it follows, that the composition of
Gnereb was formed first from the latter half of the Artificial day, and from
the first half of the Night; but that little piece of light that remains
after Sunset is no part of the Artificial day (which is due to Gnereb) but it
is a true part of the Night, and it is presently confounded with darkness, and
it is therefore called Twilight, and therefore it cannot fitly be called Gnereb.

2 I answer; That seeing Gnereb is half Day and half Night, it often comes to
pass that any one of these parts is Gnereb the Evening is often by the Figure
Synecdoche put for the Sunset evening, so it is also put by the Figure
Metonymia for the West.
called Gnereb the Evening, by the Figure Synecdoche, and both parts together
is often called the two Evenings; the first Evening takes its beginning at
midday, and the latter Evening begins at Sunset, which does always set due
West when the days are in the Equinoctial, and in that respect our English
Translators do put the West for Gnereb, in Dan. 8. 5. but Tremelius does there
put Sunset for Gnereb, and the seventy in that place do put the South-west
Wind for Gnereb, (and that Wind is one of the four Winds of Heaven, into which
the Kingdom of Alexander was divided after his death, as Daniel prophesied,
Dan. 8. 8.) And truly, seeing the South-west Wind proceeds indifferently both
from the South, and from the West conjoined, it does most fitly answer to the
conjunction or connection of Gnereb; but it is evident that Gnereb is often put
for the West by the Figure Metonymia, 1 Chronicles. 7. 28. 1 Chronicles. 12. 15. 1 Chronicles.
26. 16. 18. 30. and often elsewhere, and in this respect the Twilight is
contained within that portion of time which is called Gnereb, but yet the
Twilight by it self is never called Gnereb, but two other Hebrew words are
used to express the time of Twilight, as I noted before.

3 Gnereb is Figuratively put by Translators for the plains of Moab, near
Jericho, Number. 33. 48, 49, 50. Numb. 36. 13. Deuteronomy. 1. 1. Deuteronomy. 11. 30. because
they lie West at the setting of the Sun, where the latter Evening does begin,
but the seventy in all the said places do put the West for Gnereb, because the
situation of the plains of Moab lay in the West part of Canaan, at the going
down of the Sun; from whence the latter evening does begin; but see more of
this latter evening in chap. 4. in the answer to Obj. 2.

4 Gnereb the Evening is Figuratively put for the last times, Gnereb the
Evening is often put for the last days, and for the last end of a thing.
Genesis 49. 27. because the time of Gnereb the Evening does follow after the time
called Boker the Morning. See more in Chap. 3. in Ans. to Obj. 1.

5 Gnereb is Figuratively put for the last days, even for the days of the
Gospel, called in Zach. 14. 7. the Evening time, In the Evening time it shall
be light; the allusion is most fit and proper to the first Evening, which does
always begin at Midday, at the first declining of the Sun, and then the Sun
is in its greatest strength both for light and heat; and then Christ Jesus
appeared to Paul for his conversion, that he might send him among the Gentiles
that sat in darkness, to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to God, Act. 22. 6, 14. Act. 26. 13, 18. and
he made the word of God to abound through a great part of the world, even from
Jerusalem to Illiricum, Romans 15. 19. In this evening time of the world, the
Gospel did shine in its full strength, for now Christ and his twelve Apostles,
and seventy Disciples, and diverse other Prophets and Teachers, did confirm
their doctrine with signs and wonders, to the conversion of many ten thousand
souls that formerly sat in darkness under the power of Satan.

6 Gnereb is put for the last end of a thing, as in Isa. 24. 11. The mirth of
the land is (Gnereb, that is to say) ceased or ended; And in this sense Matthew
puts the evening of the Sabbaths (in the plural number) for the end of the
week, Mat. 28. 1. for the Jews used to date all the days of the week from the
Sabbath day, in this order, the first of the Sabbath, the second of the
Sabbath, and so on till the week ended with the Sabbath it self. In like sort
they did sometimes call the whole week the Sabbath, and the seven weeks to
Penticost they called seven Sabbaths, Levit. 23. 15. and the Pharisee said, I
fast twice in the Sabbath, Luke 18. 12. or, twice in the week; now if the
Evening had been the beginning of the Natural day, then all these allusions
from Gnereb to the last times, or to the last end of a thing, had been very
improper and very absurd.

7 Gnereb, by the figure Synecdoche, is often put for any particular hour in
the afternoon, or in the beginning of the night, for the Jews were to transact
many Civil and many Religious actions in the several hours of Gnereb, the
Evening, and in that respect any of those hours may be called Gnereb, the
Evening: But at first when Moses did conjoyn and set together all the parts and
parcels of the first natural day, No question but he did use Gnereb in its full
and proper sense for the conjunction of the latter half of the Artificial day,
with the first half of the night, as the even and equal part of time to Boker
the morning; and that is the thing which I mainly aim at in all my discourse
upon Gnereb.

SECT. 2. It is further evident that Gnereb must be taken for such a connection
of things, as does still preserve the Species distinct, because Gnarbaiim in
the duall number is put for the connection of any two things without confounding
their species; But especially it is Eleven times over put for the two parts of
the Natural Evening.
I Find upon search, that Gnereb, the Evening, is eleven times over called
Gnarbaiim in the duall number, because the God of Nature had from the first day
divided the natural Evening into two parts, which are rightly called the two
Evenings by many Translators.

These two Evenings were famously known to all the Jews in Egypt; for when
Moses commanded them to kill the Passover between the two Evenings, Exodus 12.
6. he did not explain what he meant by the two Evenings, he did not make any
circumstantiall description of them, which had been necessary if they had not
been familiarly acquainted with the several limits of them; but he does only
barely name them as a thing that was familiarly known to them.

Five times over the Lord commanded them to sacrifise all their Passeovers
between the two Evenings, Exodus 12. 6. Levit. 23. 5. Numb. 9. 3, 5, 11. and
four times over the Lord commanded them to sacrifise the daily Evening
sacrifice between the two Evenings, Exodus 29. 39, 41. Number. 28. 4, 8.

Solomon Jarchi describes the two Evenings thus, from the sixth hour (which is
at Midday and upwards) it is called between the two Evenings, for that the Sun
declineth toward his going down, etc. between the Evening of the Day and the
Evening of the Night; The Evening of the Day is from the beginning of the
seventh hour, and the Evening of the Night, is when the night begins, See
Ains. in Number. 9. 3.

And Aben Ezra on Exodus 12. says, There is the Evening of the Sun, and the
Evening of the Night, when the shining of the Sun is gone from off the Earth.

And Rab. David in Perek Aboth chapter 5. says, There is the Evening of the Suns
declining, and the Evening of the Suns setting.

His meaning is according to other Hebrew Doctors, namely, that the Evening of
the Suns declining, begins at the first declining of the Sun at Midday, and
that the Evening of the Suns setting does begin then.

And Buxtorfius in his Hebrew Lexicon upon the word Gnarbaiim does cite other
Hebrew Canons to this very purpose; But I shall refer you to Chap. 5. for a
further description of the two Evenings, where I explain the Passover Evening.

I have already cited nine places of Scripture, where the term of two Evenings
is cited in the Hebrew text, and now I will cite two places more: The Priests
were commanded to light up their Lamps between the two Evenings, Exodus 30. 8.
and the Quails came between the two Evenings, Exodus 16. 12. Also I find one
clear example of the two Evenings in the New Testament, in one and the same
day; It is said in Matthew. 14. 15. When it was evening the Disciples came to him
and said, the time is now past (that is to say, it is now past dinner time)
send the multitude away; But Christ did not send them away until he had first
made them dine, and after they had well dined, then he sent them away: After
this Evening Christ went up into a mountain to pray, and then it is said
again, When the Evening was come, be was there alone, ver. 23. This Evening
in ver. 23. is another Evening besides that in verse. 15. and between these two
Evenings Christ did a long action, for he fed many thousands plentifully; And
thus I have proved by a Jury of twelve Witnesses that the natural Evening is
divided into two Evenings, and I have set out the limits of the first Evening
by the testimony of the Hebrew Doctors from Midday till Sunset, and the
latter Evening begins at Sunset, and ends at midnight, and both these
Evenings are called Gnarbaiim in the duall number; that is say, the Twy-party
Evening; for so Gnarbaiim in the duall number must be understood, as it appears
by the like form of speech, where the Scripture sets out the twy-party
connexture of other things, as for example, Ramath in mount Ephraim, 1 Samuel 1.
19. is called Ramothaim in the dual number, 1 Samuel 1. 1. some Translators
render it the two Ramaths in mount Ephraim, but indeed they are deceived, for
there is but one Ramath in Mount Ephraim, and that Ramath is called Ramothaim
in the dual number, because it had two parts, and so Jerusalem is usually
called Jerusalaim in the duall number, 2 Samuel 5. 6, 7. Psalm. 51. 18. not because
there were two Jerusalems, but because the City Jerusalem had two principal
parts; for first, There was the City of the people on the one part; and
secondly, There was the City of David and mount Zion on the other part; but
neither of these parts alone could properly be called the City of Jerusalem,
but both parts must be put together to make up the full City Jerusalem; and in
this respect it might well be called the double Jerusalem, or the twy-party
Jerusalem; the like may be said of Ramothaim, for there was but one City in
Mount Ephraim that was called Ramath, as verse. 19. tells us, But this City was
called Ramothaim in the duall number, because it had two principal parts.
First, There was the City of the people on the one part; And secondly, There
was Naioth in Ramath on the other part where the High place was, and where
Samuel dwelt, and kept a Prophets School, 2 Samuel 19. 18, 19. But neither of
these parts could properly be called the full City Ramath, but both of them
together did make up the full City Ramath. So also Diblath, Ezekiel. 6. 14. is
Diblathaim, Jerm. 48. 22. And so Gnereb the Evening is sometimes called
Gnarbaiim the two Evenings, but neither of those two Evenings taken a part can
properly be called Gnereb the full natural Evening, as it is meant in Genesis 1.
5. but both of them put together do make up the full natural Evening; and in
this respect Gnarbaiim may be translated the twofold evening or the twy-party
evening, as well as the two Evenings, because indeed there is but one natural
Evening, which is divided by the time of Sunset into two principal parts. It
is therefore but a wooden shift of some Scholars to call the first Evening an
improper Evening, and to call the latter Evening only the full natural
Evening: The like wooden shift it is to make no other part of time to be
called Gnereb properly, but the very beginning of the Night, or of the later
Evening only, as some do interpret Junius Annotation on Genesis 1. 5. to speak.

2. If the Holy Spirit had framed Gnarbaiim, to set out both a proper and an
improper Evening with one and the same voice and breath, then doubtless the
seventy Translators being Hebrew The seventy Interpreters do make the two
Evenings to be but one proper Evening.
Doctors would have found it out, and then they would have described the
various acceptance of the word, by some mark of distinction or other,
especially considering they took liberty to vary the term of their translation
from Gnarbaiim, for they do never fully express the term Gnarbaiim the two
Evenings in any place, but nine times over they translate it by the single term
Evening, and therefore if they had accounted the first part of it to have been
an improper Evening, and the latter part only proper, then doubtless they
would somewhere or other have given some mark of distinction whereby to know
them asunder, especially seeing they take liberty to alter the phrase; But it
seems to me they accounted both the parts of Gnarbaiim to be but one proper
natural Evening, because they do nine times over translate Gnarbaiim by the
single term Evening. I confess they do once after a sort set out the two
parts of Gnarbaiim in Lev. 23. 5. for there the Seventy read the Text thus. In
the fourteenth day of the month, between the middle of those things that belong
to the Evening; in this translation they do not fully name the two Evenings,
but yet after a sort they do name the two Evenings, because they say between
the middle of those things that belong to the Evening; their meaning must be
this* In the beginning of the Passover Evening, they in the first place did
offer the daily evening Sacrifice, burn Incense, trim the Lamps, etc.
Secondly, As soon as the latter evening was come (which did always begin at
Sunset) they began to feast upon the flesh of their Passeovers, and of their
Peace Offerings, in a solemn religious manner: Now between, or in the middle of
these things all their Passeovers were sacrificed. And thus by this
Interpretation it appears evidently that the seventy Translators held Gnarbaiim
to be but one proper natural evening divided into two princiall parts, because
they called that which was done between the two evenings, the middle of the
evening in the singular number. Therefore I may well conclude, that their
distinction is absurd, that make the first part of Gnarbaiim to be no more but
an improper evening, and that make the latter part only proper. I think no man
that is well advised can find any harmony in the Scripture by this
Interpretation.

3. It is also evident that Gnereb the Evening, is as large in length of time
as Gnarbaiim the two Evenings is; for not only The Hebrew text does make the
two Evenings to be but one proper Evening.
the Seventy do translate Gnarbaiim, by the single term Evening; but the Hebrew
Text it self does often put Gnereb for Gnarbaiim interchangeably, as for
example, four places of Scripture do command them to offer the daily evening
Sacrifice between the two evenings, but many more places say it should be done
or sacrificed in Gnereb the evening; five places command all the Passeovers to
be sacrificed between the two evenings, but more places say it shall be done or
sacrificed in Gnereb the evening; one place says, that the Priests must cause
the Lamps to burn between the two evenings, but other places say in the
evening; one place says the Quails came between the two evenings, but other
places say they came in Gnereb the evening: Therefore Gnereb and Gnarbaiim is
but one proper evening; Gnereb is as large in time as Gnarbaiim is, both parts
together make up the true and proper natural evening called Gnereb.

Hence I conclude, that the Hebrew word Gnereb does not The two parts of Gnereb
exemplified.
signify such a confused mixture as is between light and darkness in the
Twilight; but it signifies such a distinct connection of Day and Night together,
as may be called Gnarbaiim, the two evenings, and such a connection as may be
distinguished or severed from each other into two distinct parts: as I may
exemplify the matter by a party-colored coat, one half is white and the other
half is black; so is Gnereb the evening, the first half is white called day,
and the other half is black called night, and the time of Twilight that
couples these two evenings together, may be likened to the seam that couples
the white and black pieces together for the completing of the party-colored
coat. Or thus, the two parts of Gnereb may be exemplified by the cloud that
stood between the Israelites and the Egyptians, the one half of the cloud was
light toward the Israelites, and the other half was dark toward the
Egyptians, Exodus 14. 20. So is Gnereb, the natural evening, the first half is
light called day, and the other half is dark called night.

But if the natural evening had been nothing else but night, as most
Interpreters do affirm upon Genesis 1. 5. then all evening Sacrifices must have
been offered in the night time only; but the Hebrew Doctors will laugh that
opinion to scorn as a foul absurdity; for after Sunset (say they) the blood
of all Sacrifices became unlawful, see Ains. in Lev. 6 9. (^^y mean it only of
all evening Sacrifices) and therefore it was a foul mistake in K. James's
Translators to translate Gnereb by the wo^d night, ^n Lev. 6. 20. they say that
Aarons Meat Offering was offer^d half of it in the morning, and half of it at
night, so also they put night for Gnereb, in Genesis 49. 27. and in Job 7. 4. and
in Psalm. 30. 5. and the Geneva Translators do the like, in Gen 49. 27. and in
Lev 6. 20. and often elsewhere: but I believe, themselves b^t^er advised would
alter it, and though the 70 Translators do take liberty to render Gnereb in
differing terms, yet they never do translate Gnereb by the word Night, because
the night in propriety of speech can not agree to the composition of Gnereb, in
Genesis 1. 5.

SECT. III. Proving by seven d^monstrative grounds, that the Natural Evening
begins at Midday at the first declining of the Sun.
THe first Scripture by which I prove that the Natural Evening does begin at
Midday, at the first declining of the Sun, is from Jeremy, whose speech is
both plain and elegant, Jeremy speaks thus in the person of the Babylonian
Soldiers, Arise, let us go up at noon; woe unto us, for the day declineth, and
the shadows of the evening are stretched out, Jer. 6. 4. These words are
spoken by way of allusion; but yet two phrases are remarkable in this Text. 1.
The day declineth. 2. The shadows of the evening are stretched out; both these
terms are Synonima, and mean the same time of the day; for as soon as the day
begins to decline, the shadows of the evening begin to be stretched out. Hence
then it follows, 1. That the evening does begin as soon as the day begins to
decline. 2. That the shadows of the evening do begin to stretch themselves as
soon as the sun which rules the day, does begin first to decline.

Jeremy speaks these words in the person of the Babylonian Soldiers who made
haste to destroy the Jews by the Noontide, but when they were upon their
march they saw they were like to come short of the appointed time, and
therefore they ^ry out in an angry passion, Woe unto us, for the day declineth,
and the shadows of the evening are stretched out. The Prophet speaks this by
way of Prosopopeia; yet there must be a real truth in the allusion.

Secondly, I prove that the natural Evening begins at Midday, at the first
declining of the Sun, by Matthew. 14. 15. When the Evening was come; Luke
expounds this evening to be come, when the day began to go down or decline,
Luke 9. 12. So Mr. Broughton renders the Text: And when else does the day first
begin to go down or decline, but when the Sun that rules the Day does first
begin to go down or decline? as is above observed from Jer. 6. 4. And
experience does tell us, that the Sun does first begin to decline at midday,
and that it continues declining till Sunset; So then, from the term Evening in
Matthew described by this adjunct in Luke, when the day begins to go down or
decline, it may truly be gathered by necessary consequence, that the natural
evening does begin at midday, at the first declining of the Sun; and this
evening has two parts, the first part begins at the first declining of the
Sun, as I have already expounded, v. 15. and another evening does begin at
Sunset, in v. 23.

Thirdly, I prove that the full natural evening begins at midday, at the first
declining of the Sun, by Deuteronomy. 16. 6. Thou shall sacrifice the Passover at
Evening, at the going down of the Sun, at the season thou came out of Egypt.
This Text is very pregnant to prove the point in question; but because I have
occasion to expound this Text at large in chap. 5. Therefore I refer the Reader
thither.

Fourthly, I prove that the full natural Evening begins at midday by 1 Samuel
20. 5. David does there entreat Jonathan to meet him on the third day at Even,
and it appears that Jonathan was very careful to observe the punctual beginning
of this appointed evening, because it was a matter of weight, and because David
depended upon his punctual observation of the precise time, therefore Jonathan
did confirm his promise by an oath, ver. 13. besides, David did over and above
all this charge Jonathan to come to him quickly or diligently, that is to say,
to be exact, and to keep the appointed time diligently or punctually, and
accordingly Jonathan did manifest his diligence to observe the punctual time,
as it is evident, because he went out into the field on the third day in the
Morning, which (says the Text) was at the time appointed with David, v. 35.

Object, 4. How can you make Jonathans Morning to be the appointed time with
David, seeing David did not appoint Jonathan to meet him on the third day in
the morning, but on the third day at even, as v. 5. testifies?

Answ. Jonathans morning was the appointed time with David, because Jonathans
morning did end at midday, and David's evening did begin at midday, at the
first declining of the Sun: now Jonathan could not have come quickly,
diligently, exactly and punctually to the place appointed at the beginning of
the evening, unless he went out on the third day morning, that is to say, a
little before the evening began; but by his diligence in taking in a little
piece of the morning at the beginning of his Journey, he might well be at the
place appointed according to the punctual time of the appointed Evening; and
thus Jonathans Morning and David's Evening do meet together at Midday, and no
other resolution can be given, as I conceive, to make Jonathans morning and
David's evening to agree together at one and the same appointed time but this.

Object. 5. Why may not the appointed evening be understood of the
night-evening, and the appointed place be a great way off, and in that respect
Jonathan might begin his journey in the morning, that so be might come to the
place appointed at the time of the Sunset evening?

Answ. I perceive that men are loath to have any other evening, but the
night-evening, and therefore they are willing to raise what Objections they can
against the midday evening: But I will give you diverse Reasons why the
appointed evening cannot be meant of the Sunset evening.

First, If the place of meeting had been so far off as to cause Jonathan to
spend so much time in going thither as from morning till Sunset, then Jonathan
could not have had time enough left to return back again into the City in the
same day. But the Text in ver. 23. does tell us that Jonathan did return the
same day into the City; therefore the appointed evening cannot be understood of
the sunset evening.

Secondly, Jonathan returned alone without any company with him, for he had
sent his Boy back into the City before, which in reason he would not have done,
if the place of meeting had been so far off as you make it.

Thirdly, Jonathan knew that Saul was jealous of his familiarity with David,
and he knew also that Saul was much enraged against David at this time;
Therefore in wisdom Jonathan would not be so long absent from Saul as from
morning till Sunset; nay, it would have been Midnight ere he could have
returned, if the place appointed to meet at had been so far off as you would
make it, and then Saul might well have suspected that Jonathan might have had
some other errand into the field besides shooting at a mark, by his long and
late absence; but Jonathan pretended no other errand but to shoot at a mark,
and therefore he took his Boy with him to witness so much if need should be*

1. Hence it follows, that the place of meeting was but a little way without
the City; for what need had a man go far to shoot at a Mark? and so it asked
but a little time to go to it, and to return from it.

2 Hence it follows, that the appointed Evening must be understood of the
Midday Evening, and not of the Sunset Evening: And thus Jonathans Morning and
David's Evening did fitly agree to the same appointed hour at Midday.

In like sort one Evangelist says that Christ was crucified at the third
hour, Mark. 15. 25. But John says he was crucified at the sixth hour, Joh. 19.
14. this differing relation of time, may seem to have as great a difference as
is between Jonathans Morning and David's Evening, and yet there is no difference
a^ all when things come to be rightly expounded: For the Jews divided the
Artificial Day into four great Hours, just as they divided the Night into four
great Watches, Mark. The Jews divided the day into four great hours, as they
divided the night into four watches.
13. 35. every great hour contained in it three small hours; The first great
hour they called by the name of the third hour, because it ended with the third
small hour, which we call nine a clock; and their second great hour they called
their sixth, because it ended with the sixth small hour, which we call twelve a
clock; and thus as soon as the first great hour ended with our nine a clock,
the second great hour began with our ten a clock: And thus Peter Martyr in the
Judges, Mr. Godwin, and Mr. Weames, do accord these great hours with our small
hours, and just after this sort the end of Jonathans Morning in v. 35. and the
beginnings of David's Evening in v. 5. do fitly close and meet together at
Midday.

Fifthly, I prove that the natural Evening does begin at Midday, by Josh. 7.
6. There Joshua and the Elders fell down upon the Earth before the Ark of the
Lord till Even-tide, that is to say until Evening began.

Object. 6. This Even-tide must be understood of the Sunset Evening.

Answ. I answer no, it cannot be understood of the Sunset Evening, for Joshua
had much business to do after this, which must be done before the time of
Sunset, for the Lord commanded Joshua to sanctify the people against the
morrow, Verse. 13, 14. But Joshua could not sanctify them at the Sunset
Evening, for then the day of their cleanness must begin, by the order of the
Leviticall Law; they must therefore be washed from their defilements in the
afternoon, or else they could not begin the day of their cleanness at their
Sunset Evening; and in case they did not begin the new day of their cleanness
at Sunset, they might not come before the Lord's Ark on the morrow to beg
Atonement for Transgressors, as I have opened the matter more at large in
Chap. 4.

Now Joshua could not have sanctified the people in a fit manner to come before
the Lords Ark on the morrow, if he had lain still upon the earth till the
Even-tide at Sunset; for Joshua must have a large time to inform all the
people by a Proclamation through all the Camp, what was the cause of the Lords
anger, and what they must do by way of preparation before they could obtain the
Lords favor: The thing they must do by way of preparation was to sanctify
themselves from their Ceremonial defilements, by washing their Bodies and their
Clothes according to the Ceremonial customs, as they are set down in Exodus 19.
10. Genesis 35. ^. and this must be done in the same Even-tide wherein the Lord
spoke to Joshua and to the Elders, saying, Up, and sanctify the people, and
say, sactifie your selves against to morrow, Verse. 13. Now then consider the
time that must be taken up for this Proclamation throughout all the Camp, and
consider the time they must have for the washing of all their Bodies and their
Clothes before Sunset, and then it will necessarily force us to understand
this Even-tide of the Noontide Evening, and not of the Sunset Evening.

Sixthly, I prove, That the full natural Evening begins at Midday when the
Afternoon begins, because the Evening in Scripture is often put for the
Afternoon, as the morning is put for the Forenoon: In the morning sow thy seed,
and in the Evening let not thy hand rest, Eccles. 11. 6. Sol^mons meaning is,
that men should be as diligent in doing good at all times, as the Husbandman
is in seed-time; he will not rest from sowing his seed neither Forenoon nor
afternoon, because he knows not which will prove best. A wise and diligent
Husbandman will go out to sow his seed in the afternoon Evening, and not defer
it till the Sunset Evening; therefore by Solomon's account the Evening begins
with the Afternoon at Midday.

2. It is said Psalm. 90. 6. In the morning the grass flourishes and grows
up, but in the evening it is cut down and withers: The Husbandman does not
use to go out to mow his grass in the evening after Sunset, or if he
sometimes do so, yet it does not wither in the evening after Sunset; But
Husbandmen use to take the opportunity to mow their grass in the afternoon,
and then it withers, therefore the Evening begins with the afternoon.

3. It is said in 1 Samuel 17. 16. that Goliath drew near Morning and Evening
forty days together: But Soldiers do not use to call for a Pitched Battle in
the evening after Sunset, but either in the Forenoon or in the Afternoon
Evening.

4. It is said 1 King 17. 6. That the Ravens brought bread and flesh to Elijah
morning and evening: but the Ravens do not use to carry meat in the evening
after Sunset, for then they use to fly to their Roost, and so to continue
there all night; Therefore the Ravens carried meat to Elijah in the Afternoon
Evening.

Seventhly, Paul sent for the Jews in Rome to come to his lodging that he might
testify unto them the things of the Kingdom of God, and that he might
persuade them concerning Jesus, and they came at the day appointed, and then
Paul preached unto them from morning till evening, Act. 28. 23. But I think no
deliberate man will say that Paul continued his Sermon to that mixed multitude
from the morning light, till the evening at Sunset: The hungry bellies and
captious spirits of most of these Jews would not endure it; neither would
Paul's wisdom nor his strength suffer him to offer it, especially seeing the
Jews of this Synagogue had beforehand manifested to Paul their dislike of
this Sect, verse. 22.

These circumstances considered, this phrase from morning till evening must be
understood of a convenient portion of time for one Sermon. It is like they came
to Paul's lodging at the ordinary hour wherein they used to resort to their
Synagogues, about nine a clock in the morning, and it is like also that Paul
continued his Sermon to them till the Noontide evening, a little more or
less, as in wisdom he thought it convenient, all circumstances considered, and
in likelihood the Jews would not appoint to meet at Paul's lodging before the
ordinary hour of morning prayer, nor be contented to stay longer than
Dinnertime, when the Evening begins, at Midday; therefore it may be gathered
by probable conjecture, that the evening began at Midday in Rome as well as in
Judea.

The first Natural Day is divided two several ways by Moses in Genesis 1. 5.
1 Into Day and Night by the Line of Longitude. 2 Into Evening and Morning by
the Line of Latitude.


The Hebrew word Gnereb in Genesis 1. 5. was well translated the Evening by our
Ancestors, because it is a connexture of so much Day and Night together as
makes up an even and equal part of time to Boker the morning* And secondly,
Because the Natural Evening is half Day and half Night, therefore Moses does
eleven times over call it the two Evenings, as it in noted in Chap. 2. Sect. 2.

SECT. 4. Bring a Description of the twofold Division of the first Natural
Day, how and in what order every part of it was shaped, named and framed
together.
THe first Natural day in Genesis 1. 5, was twice divided by Moses, just according
to the Lines of Longitude and Latitude in the Globe, and i^ was shaped and
framed together in this order.

Take a p^^ce of paper and pourtray upon it the shape or image of a compass
Dial. Then first shadow out upon it the first darkness from the N^rth point
almost to the East point.

2. Then shadow out a little piece of Twilight to fill it up to the East point,
as a sign that the light did thence break out of darkness by degrees.

3. Then shadow out a piece of light of six hours long, for the ascending of
the shining light from the East point to the South point.

4. Then make a mark of distinction at the South point for the standing still
of the light for a little while at Midday.

5. Then shadow out another piece of light of six hours long for the declining
of the light from the South point to the West point.

6 Then write upon all this shining light from the East point to the West
point, the name Day, as the proper name of his perfect shape and limit; and in
this order was the first Artificial Day shaped out, limited, and named.

7. Then shadow out a little piece of Twilight, at the departure of the light
out of that Horizon, on the inside of the West point.

8. Then take twelve hours darkness, and shadow out the first half of that
Darkness from the West point until it meet with the place of the first
darkness at the North point.

9. Then write upon all that Darkness from the West point to the East point,
the name Night, as the proper name of its perfect shape and limit, and in this
order was the night last shaped out, limited and named. Then let the other half
of the last twelve hours Darkness be set upon the outside of the same
Compass Dial, from the North point to the East point, for the beginning of
the second Day.

10 Hence we may observe the Reason why the first Darkness could not be called
Night at first, namely, because it wanted the form and limits of a Night, for
it wanted the shape of a twilight going before it, and therefore until it had
obtained that, it was called nothing else but confu^ed darkness, and it could
not have this form til the last period of time belonging to the night was
finished; and it could not have that period till the first half of that twelve
hours darkness succeeding the Artificial Day had met with the first darkness
at the North point, and that conjunction occasioned a mark of distinction in
the middle of the night.

11. By these marks of distinction, the true Form and Figure of the two Lines
of Longitude and Latitude, from East to West, and from North to South, were
clearly marked out.

12. By this Line of division from Midday to Midnight the Natural Day was
again divided into two equal parts (in a differing manner from the division of
the Day from the Night) the first half from Midday to Midnight was called
Gnereb, the Evening, and the other half from Midnight to Midday was called
Boker, the Morning,

13. After this sort has the God of Nature halsed and quartered the Natural
day by the Lines of Longitude and Latitude.

14 By this method the God of Nature has not only made the natural day to be a
twiparty day, consisting of light, and darkness; But also Secondly, He has
made the Artificial Day to be a twiparty day, because he has made the one half
of it to belong unto the Morning, and the other half of it to belong unto the
Evening. Thirdly, He has also made the Night to be a twiparty Night, because
he has made the one half of it to belong unto the Evening, and the other half
of it to belong unto the morning. And in this regard the night is sometimes
called nights in the plural number, Psalm. 134. 1. Psalm. 92. 2. Fourthly, He
has also made the Natural Evening to be a twiparty evening, because it is a
connection of the latter half of the Day, to the first half of the Night; and in
this respect it is called Gnereb, a connection, and sometimes it is called
Gnarbaiim, the two Evenings, because of the two parts of it. Fifthly, He has
also made the Natural Morning to be a twiparty Morning, because it is a
connection of the first darkness, or of the latter half of the night, with the
first half of the Artificial day, and in this respect it is often called
Mornings in the plural number, Psalm. 73. 14. Psalm. 101. 8. Job 7. 18. Lam. 3.
23. Is. 33. 2.

15. The Reason why the first darkness could not be called either Boker the
Morning, or Gnereb the Evening, at first, was, because these names are names of
the perfect shape and limits given unto these two parts of the Natural day; and
the first darkness was a confused misshapen thing at first, therefore it
could not belong either unto the Morning or unto the Evening, until it was
first shaped and limited into a night; for Boker the Morning is constituted of
a part of the shaped Night, as well as of a part of the shaped Artificial Day;
and the first darkness could not be shaped into a Night until it had twelve
hours darkness succeeding the Artificial Day, by means whereof the first half
had a Twilight going before it, and then as soon as it met with the first
darkness at the North point, it First gave perfection of shape to the Night.
And Secondly, It gave perfection of shape to the Evening. And thirdly, It gave
perfection of shape to Boker the Morning.

And accordingly, every part of this day had its name as soon as it had its
perfect shape; as for example, when the shining light had finished its last
period at the West point, it was called Day; in like sort, when the darkness
had finished its last period at the North point, it was called Night: And then
also the Evening and the Morning was the First Day.

Pharez and Zara were Twins, and when they came to their Birth, Zara thrust out
his hand first, thereupon the Midwife said this is first, and she did mark it
out for the first by a red thread; yet notwithstanding Pharez did finish his
Birth first, and thereupon he was first named Pharez, and Zara was last named
though he begun his Birth first: Even so, the time called Morning began its
birth first, but yet notwithstanding the time called Evening was first
perfected in its shape and limits, and thereupon it was first called Gnereb.

O the wonderful variety of Gods wisdom in contriving and setting together all
the parts and parcels of this first Natural Day!

CHAP. III.
Proving that the time of the first Darkness was called Morning at last, namely
as soon as that Darkness was formed into a Night.

MOses does tell us, Genesis 1. 1, 2. That in the beginning God created the Heaven
and the Earth, and that darkness was upon the face of the deep, namely for the
space of six hours, before the light was created.

The Queston is, Whether this first Darkness was called Morning or Evening.

The Answer shall be framed into three Heads or Sections.

I. I will prove that the Creation began in that part of time which at last was
called Boker, the Morning. II. That the Morning begins in the dark Night. III.
That the Morning does begin at Midnight.
SECT. I. Proving that the time of the first Darkness was called Boker, the
Morning, at last.
FIrst, It appears to me that the first Darkness was called Boker, Boker the
morning does signify early.
the Morning, at last; namely, as soon as all the parts of the Natural Day were
formed: Because Boker, (the Morning) does signify Early, See Ains. in Psalm. 5.
4. and in this sense the Morning is put for the first opportunity of time for
any business, as in seeking unto God early by prayer, and in this sense David
says in Psa. 5. 3. Jehovah, in the morning (or early) I will direct my prayer
unto thee, and will look out (or epsy) as he that keeps watch and ward
expecting what God will answer; and the godly do often profess, that they will
look out early after God (by the term Morning) as in Psalm. 90. 14. and Psalm.
143. 8. and truly I conceive, that the only Reason why Bulls and Cows, And all
the Herds of that kind are called Baker (from whence Boker is derived) is from
their early seeking out for their meat from God, sooner than other Cattle use
to do: for in the Evening or in the beginning of the Night they use to sit down
and chew their Cud, but in the early Night-morning, they usually rise up and
seek out for food before other sorts of Cattle.

Object. 1. Boker, the Morning, is put for the beginning of the Artificial
Day, because that is the fittest season to seek out or (ear^h after things that
be lost, or after things that are to be sought after; men do not usually seek
after things in the dark, but as soon as the morning light appears, then they
begin to look and search after lost things, and hence the beginning of the
Artificial Day is called Boker, the Morning.

Answ. I see no Reason to restrain the signification of Boker to man's seeking
by the sight of his eyes, in the time of the Artificial Morning only, but
considering that Boker, the Morning, is placed among the works of Gods Creation
before man was created, it may be considered as Gods first early time in
ordering the Creation in the best manner; for God may be said to seek early
(after the manner of men) not for want of knowledge in particulars, but to set
out his Wisdom and Prudence, and Fatherly care, and the like, in the first
Creation, as these Scriptures do testify, Exodus 14. 24 27. Ezekiel. 34. 11, 12,
16. Psa. 30. 6. Psa. 90. 14. Isa. 17. 14. Psalm. ^19. 176. Zach. 12. 9.

For by Wisdom the Lord founded the Earth, and by Understanding he established
the Heavens, ^rov. 3. 19. and so by Wisdom and Understanding he formed all the
parts of the First Day, in such an exquisite O^der, that so it might be for an
exemplary pattern to all the other Natural days to the end of the world.
Secondly, Early seeking may be done by advice, counsel, and meditation, as well
in the time of darkness, as in the morning light. Thirdly, When it pleased the
Lord to uncreat Judab by his destroying Judgments (namely, by wars from the
Enemy) how did God order it to be done? but by his early looking out and
searching into things; For thus says the Lord, I looked upon the Earth, and
lo it was without form and void, and to the Heavens, and they had no light,
Jer. 4. 23. for by their wicked confused Government they had provoked the Lord
by wars to turn all their Commonwealth into a Chaos again. This form of speech
(by contraries) declares that God by his wise Providence did search out in the
time of the first darkness how to adorn the earth with light, and how to order
all the parts of the first day in the best manner, and in this respect Gods
early Providence is often set out by the term Morning, both in regard of his
early Judgments upon a people, and also in regard Boker, the Morning, is put
for Gods early seeking either to punish the wicked or protects the godly.
of his early Preservation of his own people.

1. His early and speedy Judgments upon the wicked are set out by the term
Morning, in Number. 16. 5. Zeph. 3. 5. Psalm. 73. 14 Ezekiel. 7. 7, 10. and so in Hos.
10. 15. In the morning shall the King of Israel be destroyed; and in this sense
I shall presently expound Isa. 47. 11.

2. The term Morning does often denote Gods early care and Providence in
looking out for the Protection of his people, Exodus 14. 24. Psalm. 46. 7.

Hence I infer, that seeing the word Morning does signify early seeking, or
early looking out, it may well denote unto us, that the first Darkness was not
comprehended under the term Evening, but under the term Morning, for Gnereb,
the Evening, is never put for early or first, but it is always put for late or
last, because it was the latter part of the Day, as I have showed in my Answer
to the third Objection of the former Chapter, and more by and by.

Secondly, It is further evident that the Morning time was first, As Gnereb the
Evening is put for last time: So Boker the Morning is put for the first time,
or for the beginning of a thing.
and the Evening last, by Genesis 49. 27. Benjamin shall ravine like a Woolf, in
the Morning he shall devour the prey, and in the Evening he shall divide the
spoil; The Seventy render it, The early Morning; and truly, seeing the first
Darkness had the priority of time before the Artificial Morning, it is not
proper to put the Artificial Morning for first in pre-eminence of time before
the first Darkness, and therefore in reason, the first Darkness must belong to
the early Morning, as well as the first half of the Artificial Day does, or
else Jacob did not make a proper Allusion to the Morning and to the Evening, if
the first Darkness had been Evening, for then the evening had been first in
order of time; search into the story of Events, and see how Jacobs Prophecy
does relate to the term Morning and Evening; the event of his Prophecy lies
thus.

1. Ehud of Benjamin was raised up by God like a Woolf in the early morning to
devour the Moabites, and to deliver Israel, Judge. 3. 15. Then God did also
raise up Hester and M^^decai or Benjamin like a W^olf as it were in the
Artificial Morning, to deliver the Jews, and to devour Ha^nan and all his
Confederates in a hundred twenty seven Provinces, Hest. 8. and Hest. 9.

2. In the Evening-time of the world God raised up Paul of Benjamin to divide
the spoil with the other Apostles, by the preaching of the Gospel, for Paul is
said to make the Word of God to abound from Jerusalem to Illyricum, Romans 15.
19. and it is further evident that the days of the Gospel are called the
Evening, by Zeph. 2. 7. the Prophet does there foretell that there shall be a
remnant of the Jews (namely of the dispersed Jews dwelling in several
Countries) that shall be called to rest or lie down in the Evening, and to this
remnant of dispersed Jews did Peter and James write in the Evening-time of the
Gospel to exhort them to rest and repose their Souls in Christ for Life and
Salvation.

Zachary also does use the term Evening for the last times, namely, for the
days of the Gospel, and in that respect the time of the Gospel is often called
the last days, Isa. 2. 2. Jer. 30. 24. Heb. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 5. 20. Zacharies
phrase runs thus, In the Evening time it shall be light, Zach. 14. 7. It is
very suitable to compare the last days of the Gospel to the Evening, because
it is the last half of the Natural Day; and it is most suitable also to compare
the light of the Gospel to the light of the Evening, for the Evening begins at
Midday at the first declining of the Sun, and then the day is most clear and
bright, and so it continues till almost Sunset; and in the last days, when the
Apostles had a Commission to preach the Gospel in all the world, the Gospel
gave a light most clear to many souls that sat in darkness: But if the Evening
had been no other time but the dark Night, as the most would have it, then
Zacharies Allusion to the light of that Evening, had been but a poor comparison
to set forth the light of the Gospel, for in such an Evening there is no other
light but Starlight, or Moonlight at the best, and that is but a poor light
to illustrate the light of the Gospel by, in the days of the Apostles.

Thirdly, As the Evening is often put for last, so the Morning is put for
first, in Dan. 9. 21. The man Gabriel whom I had seen in a vision at First, or
in the Morning, so the Hebrew speaks.

Fourthly, It is evident by another Allusion that the Morning is before the
Evening, because the term Morning is put for the very first beginning of a
thing; and in this sense Isaiah is most elegant, Isa. 47. 11. Evil shall come
upon thee (O Babylon) and thou shall not know the morning thereof (or the
beginning thereof.) The Hebrew word signifies the early Morning; but the Geneva
does render it the Beginning; and by this phrase the Holy Ghost did (by a
Periphrasis) describe the beginning of Babylons ruin by the early Morning.

Object. 2. Good Divines do take the term Morning here for the beginning of the
Artificial Day, and the word Morning in that sense does not hinder, but that
the first Darkness was Evening.

Answ. I have already answered this Objection immediately before. I told you
there, that if the first Darkness had been called Evening, then doubtless the
Evening would have been put for the first beginning of any thin^, and the
Morning for last, but because the Morning is put for the first beginning of a
thing, therefore it is out of all doubt to me, that the first Darkness did
belong to the Morning and not to the Evening.

2. I answer further, that the Morning of Babylons fall cannot be so
conveniently compared to the Morning of the Artificial day, as to the dark
early morning; because the Artificial Morning is apparent and perspicuous to
all men: But the ruin of Babylon was not perspicuous at first, but it was
carried on in a speedy and obscure manner by the Persians, so that the
Babylonians had no suspicion or discerning of their fall as yet; therefore the
Morning of the Artificial Day was not so suitable to exemplify the manner of
their speedy ruin, as the early dark Morning was, for it was done speedily ere
they were aware, Jer. 50. 24. as it appears by these two considerations.

1. Isay did foretell that Babylon should be destroyed in the Night, Isa. 21. 4.

2. Isay did foretell that Babylon should be destroyed in the early Morning,
Isa. 47. 11.

Put both these Prophetical allusions together, and then they will amount to
thus much, that Babylon should be destroyed in that Morning, that begins in the
Night; and the History of Events does tell us, not only that Belshazzer was
slain in the Night, Dan. 5. 30. but also it is apparent by the circumstances of
time that must be spent at that drunken feast before that Daniel could be
sought out and brought in, to interpret the vision, that it was in the latter
part of the Night, after the Morning was begun.

Take the early Morning of Babylons fall either in the former figurative sense,
or in the last proper sense (either way or both ways) and it does sufficiently
prove, that the time called Morning was first in order before the time called
Evening, or else this Allusion of Babylons fall to the early Morning had been
improper; hence it follows, that the first Darkness was comprehended under the
term Morning, and not under the term Evening.

Fifthly, Boker, the morning, is put for the first beginning of a Fifthly,
Boker, the morning, is put for the Sunset Evening, because the time of Sunset
is the first beginning of the Jews day of cleannesses.
thing, because it is put for the first beginning of the Jews Ceremonial day
(or for the Sunset Evening) as the Hebrew Doctors do witness. See Ains. in
Deuteronomy. 16. 4. This I have further opened in another place; and so in like sort
Macar, the morrow, is put for the first beginning of the Jews Ceremonial day
(or for the Sunset Evening) in 1 Samuel 30. 17. and in Lev. 23. 15. as it is
further opened in chap. 4.

Sixthly, It is evident that the morning was before the time called Evening by
the title that Job gives to the Angels, he calls them Morning-Stars, Job 38. 6,
7. These Morning-Stars cannot be meant of the Stars in the Firmament, for they
were not created till the fourth day, Genesis 1. 14. But these Morning-Stars are
said to shout and sing when the foundation of the earth was laid; Hence it
follows, that the Angels are called Morning-Stars, either because of the time
wherein they shouted at the first laying of the foundations of the earth, which
was done in the time of the first darkness, or else in relation to the time of
their Creation, which was also done in the time of the first darkness, as many
learned do accord.

But if the time of their Creation, or the time wherein they shouted at the
laying of the foundations of the earth had been Evening, then the Angels should
more properly have been called Evening-Stars, than Morning-Stars.

Object. 3. The Angels are called Morning-Stars, not in relation to the time of
their Creation, but by way of allusion to the excellency of their Nature, and
this is more suitable to be expressed by the light of the Artificial morning,
than by the first darkness.

Answ. If the Circumstances of Gods discourse with Job, and of Gods
Interrogations be well marked, there is no ground to say that God did only
intend to set out the excellent nature of the Angels by comparing them to the
morning of the Artificial day.

For the main thing that God aimed at by his Interrogations to Job, was, to
make him see his folly in desiring to dispute the cause of his afflictions with
God, God shows him that he is not able to find out the depths of his Wisdom in
the first laying of the foundation of the earth, because it made the Angels to
shout out with admiration, and therefore Job was much less able to search out
the reason of his dealings with him, in his present afflictions, and in that
respect God did pose him with this Interrogation, Where wast thou when I laid
the foundation of the earth, tell, if thou have understanding? Job 38. 4, 5, 6.
When the morning Stars rejoiced together, and when the Sons of God shouted,
Ver. 7. The Text does plainly call them Morning Stars, not so much in regard of
the excellency of their Nature, but in regard of the time wherein they were
created, or wherein they shouted at the excellency of Gods Workmanship when the
foundation of the earth was laid, either way or both ways do assure us that
the time of the first darkness was called Morning and not Evening. And that is
the thing that I aim at in this first Section of this Chapter.

SECT. 2. Proving that the Morning does begin in the dark Night.
FIrst, No man can deny but that the Morning is begun when the morning Watch is
begun, for the text does affirm it, Exodus 14. 24. 1 Samuel 11. 11. And it is a
known thing, that among the Jews they did always begin it just three hours
after Midnight, not only in the Summer time but also in the Winter time: Hence
it follows, that their morning Watch in the time of Winter must needs begin in
the dark night, not only in Judea, but also in all the habitable parts of the
world.

2. Hence it follows, that seeing the morning Watch did begin at three hours
after Midnight, then it will follow, that it must end just three hours after
Midday; for in common reason the morning must be as long as the evening,
namely, twelve hours long, or else the Evening may better be called an
Unevening, then an Evening to the Morning; but none that have their senses will
say that the morning does continue till three hours after Midday.

3 Hence it follows, that it is more agreeable to Scripture and to common
reason to begin the natural morning at the marked time of Midnight, rather
than three hours after, especially seeing it is then as dark all the winter
long as it is at Midnight, and therefore seeing the morning is begun with
darkness, why not with darkness at midnight, as well as at three hours after
midnight, seeing the world was created in the Equinoctial, and the Morning is
then as dark at three hours after Midnight, as it is at Midnight?

Secondly, Ruth lay at the feet of Boaz until the Morning, Ruth. 3. 14. and yet
she arose before one could know another. Hence it is evident that it was
Morning in the time of Barley Harvest, whiles it was yet dark; it may be it was
now in the end of our March, or in the beginning of our April; and though some
say that the Morning Watch was not so called from the first hour of it, but
from the last hour of it when it begun to be day light; yet this place of Ruth
calls it Morning whiles it was yet dark, and before one could know another.

Thirdly, It is said that Christ arose in the Morning a great while before Day
(or greatly in the Night) so the Greek speaks, Mar. 1. 35. Hence it is manifest
that it was Morning, whiles it was greatly or much in the night.

Fourthly, None can deny but that the morning is begun at the time of daybreak
in all the Inhabited Countries of the world. Hence it follows, that then it is
morning in some Countries near unto midnight, especially when the days are at
the longest; and known experience does tell us that in the North parts of
England the day does sometimes begin to break near unto midnight; and indeed
the daylight (when the days are at the longest) is scarce ever out of the Sky
in those parts, except a little while about midnight; Hence it follows, that
seeing it is daybreak sometimes near unto Midnight, then why may not the
morning begin at midnight all the year long as well in one Country as in
another, seeing the God of Nature has set such an eminent mark upon midnight,
and upon midday, which doubtless was to set out the bounds and limits of the
Natural morning, and of the evening?

Fifthly, Both Scripture and experience does tell us that there is a certain
Star called the Morning Star, which at some time of the year is seen to arise
not long after Midnight, and all men call it morning as soon as that Star is
risen, and in some parts when the days are at the longest it rises near unto
Midnight, but it always rises before it is day break.

Sixthly, It is evident that the morning begins in the dark night, by this
phrase in Psalm. 110. 3. The womb of the early Morning; I purpose not to meddle
with the mystical sense of these words, because it concerns not the Argument in
hand; but I will only meddle with the phrase, for the phrase sake only; for
this phrase must have some proper allusion to some natural truth: Mibschar, we
translate Morning, but says Mr. Ainsworth the letter M is a Preposition,
signifying [From or Before] and in that respect some translators do render the
text thus, Before the womb of the early Morning; this phrase must have an
allusion to some proper truth, and I can find nothing that may so fitly be
called the womb of the early Morning, as the first darkness was, for out of
this darkness God created the morning light, and in this respect the Morning
may well be divided into several degrees of time.

1 The first Darkness was the womb of the Morning light.

2 From the womb of the morning proceeded the Son of the morning, called the
morning Star, as soon as it was created, and it is now called the Son of the
morning, Isa. 14. 12.

3. Then follows the ascending of the morning or daybreak, Genesis 32. 24, 26.

4 Then follows the time of killing the morning Sacrifice, namely, when the
face of all the East is enlightened, which is between daybreak and Sunrising,
See Ains. in Number. 28. 4. And certain it is that the morning Sacrifice was not
only slain, but also offered before Sunrising, (because the Meat Offering
which was always offered after the Burnt Offering) was offered before Sun
rising, as it appears by 2 King. 3. 20, 22. and the Burnt Offering was always
first, Lev. 1. and then the Meat Offering, Lev. 2. now though the Morning
Sacrifice was offered before Sunrising, yet the Evening Sacrifices of all
sorts must be offered before Sunset. For the Hebrew Doctors say, that after
Sunset the blood of all Sacrifices became unlawful, See Ains. in Lev. 1. 6. 9.

5. Then follows the morning of the Artificial day at Sunrising, Psalm. 104.
22, 23. for God did appoint the Sun to rule and limit the Artificial day, Genesis
1.

6. Then followed the time of morning Prayer at the third hour of the day,
namely at our nine a clock.

First, By these gradations to the morning we may see the vanity of their
opinion that hold no other time to be called the morning properly, but a point
of time only, at the beginning of the Artificial day, all the rest they say is
called the morning improperly.

Secondly, By these gradations to the morning it is evident that the first
darkness was the root or womb of the morning, and therefore at last it was
called Morning.

SECT. 3. Proving that the Morning in all likelihood does begin at midnight,
besides the former certain grounds from the exact beginning and ending of the
Evening.
FIrst, I will endeavor to prove that the morning does begin at midnight by an
argument drawn from Job 26. 7. compared with Genesis 1. 2. Job says, That God
stretches out the North upon the empty; and says Moses, The Earth was empty
and void, namely, as long as darkness was upon the face of the deep; But as
soon as the light was created, the earth could not be said to be empty and void
any longer, for then the deep was adorned with the light as with a most
glorious ornament.

Object. 4. The first Darkness did continue twelve hours upon the face of the
deep, after the general matter called Earth was created: Or thus, how long was
the Earth empty and void before the light was created?

Answ. The answer is from Job, That the Earth was empty and void all the space
of time that the North point is stretched out upon a Compass Dial, namely, the
space of six hours, for the North point on a Compass Dial does stretch it self
out until it meet with the beginning of the East point, the four ends of the
two Lines of Longitude and Latitude do make the four Cardinal Points of the
Compass, North, East, South, and West: Hence it follows, that the North point
is stretched out to the East point, and that is just six hours by the Compass
Dyal, and so long says Job the Globe was empty; but as soon as God created
Light out of Darkness, which began to appear by degrees, first, By a Twilight,
and then shined forth at the East point, then the Earth was no longer empty and
void, but it was adorued with the light.

If any man can give a better Interpretation, for the stretching out the North
upon the Empty, I shall be glad to see it.

But if the first Darkness had been twelve hours long, then Job should have
said, that God stretched out the West point, as well as the North point upon
the Empty: but Job does not say so, but only that he stretched out the North
upon the Empty, and therefore it follows,

1 That the first Darkness was not twelve hours, but only six hours long upon
the face of the deep, before the light was created.

2 Hence it follows, that the first half of that twelve hours Darkness that
succeeded the Artificial Day, did make up the first darkness to be a just Night
of twelve hours, and after this manner both these parts of Darkness did meet
together at the North point, as I have exemplified the matter upon a Compass
Dyal, and the North Land in Jer. 23. 8. may according to the Hebrew be read
from the Land of darkness.

And why else does the Prophet in Psalm. 89. 12. begin the time of the first
Creation in order from the North point, but to remember us, where, and how long
the darkness did continue upon the face of the deep after the Earth was
created, before the light was created?

And so likewise for this Reason, Job does teach us in what order we must place
the four ends of the two Lines of Latitude and Longitude (now called the four
Cardinal Points of the Compass) by placing a man in this order to view the
Globe.

1 He calls the North point, the left hand. 2 He calls the South point, the
right hand. 3 He calls the East point, before. 4 He calls the West point,
behind. See Tremelius for this in Job 23. 8 9.
So then, He that desires to behold the Globe in a right order, how the God of
Nature did divide it and quarter it, must place the North point of the Globe at
his left hand, the East before, the South at his right hand, and the West
behind. See Ains. in Psalm. 89. 13. and in Numb. 2. 3, 29.

2 The holy Scriptures do often direct us to observe the four ends of the two
Lines of Latitude and Longitude.

1 Because they divide the whole earth into four quarters.

2 Because they divide the heavens into four quarters.

And in this respect the four quarters of the Earth are sometimes called the
four wings, or the four corners of the Earth, Revel. 7. 1. Numb. 24. 17. Isa.
11. 12. Ezekiel. 7. 2. Job 37. 3. and 38. 13.

2 The Heavens are divided into four quarters, and in this respect the four
Winds are said to come from the four quarters of Heaven, Jer. 49. 36. Ezekiel. 37.
9. Dan. 7. 2. and 8. 2. Zach. 2. 6. Mat. 24. 31.

And when the Lines of Latitude and Longitude are drawn upon a Compass Dyal or
upon a Globe, then they make the four winds in the four quarters of Heaven to
lie thus, and to be called thus, North-East, South-East, South-west, North-west.

And thus the Holy Scripture does force us to observe the various use of these
two Lines of Longitude and Latitude; and therefore doubtless Job was not
ignorant, but spoke as a man of knowledge, when he said that God stretched out
the North upon the Empty. First, He was not ignorant of the North point. Nor
secondly, How far it stretched. Nor thirdly, of the time of the Globes
emptiness.

3 Ezekiel does direct us to take notice of the North point as the first in
order of the four Cardinal points, because he does first begin the division of
the Land of Canaan from the North quarter, and so he ends it with the West
quarter, read Ezekiel. 47. from ver. 15. to the end of the Chapter; and in this
order also the Lord was pleased to let Moses take a view of the land, he stood
in the Land of Gilead, and from thence in the first place he viewed Dan which
was the furthest Northward and Northally in Galilee, which lay also Northward.
Secondly, Then he viewed the land of Ephraim and half Manasseh which lay
Eastward from him in the middle of the Land. Thirdly, Then he viewed the Land
of Judah to the South. And fourthly, Then he viewed the Land of Jerico which
lay in the West of Canaan. See Ains. in Deuteronomy. 34. 1, 2, 3.

Secondly, I will endeavor to prove that the Morning began with the first
darkness, and that the first darkness must be placed at the North point by
another phrase of Job, for Job does tell us that when the winds have purged the
Air, and made it clear from clouds and vapors, that then out of the North a
golden light does show it self, Job 37. 22. Our eie-sight may witness the truth
of this point, for in a clear Morning before Sunrising we may often see a
golden list of light stretching it self from the North point to the East; and
again after Sunset we may often see a golden list of light stretching it self
from the West point to the North point. This Observation, First, Of the golden
list from North to East, may teach us that the root of the Morning comes from
the North point, where the Midnight begins by the Compass-Dyall. And Secondly,
The golden list in the Evening after Sunset from West to North, may teach us
that the Evening does reach unto Midnight, or to the North point.

Thirdly, I prove that the Natural Morning does begin at Midnight, because the
morning of the fifteenth day of Nishan began at Midnight.

I collect it thus, Moses at the first passover in Egypt gave a very strict
charge to all the Israelites, that no man should go out of the door of his
house until the Morning, Exodus 12. 22. namely, not until the morning of the
fifteenth day was come; this was Moses express charge. Hence I reason thus, if
any man of Israel had gone out of the door of his house before the morning of
the fifteenth day was truly come, contrary to this charge (as those did that
went out of the door of their houses to gather Manna on the Sabbath Day
morning) they would have been condemned as Transgressors for it (as they were
that gathered Manna on the Sabbath day morning, Exodus 16. 27. 28.)

But all the people of Israel went out of the doors of their houses either at
Midnight or presently after, as it appears by ver. 33. and 39. and yet none of
them were condemned as transgressors for it: But on the contrary, their exact
obedience to all Moses commands is twice over testified in ver. 28. and twice
over again in ver. 50. The Text says, they did all things as God commanded
Moses and Aaron, so did they, Even as exactly as Noah did in making the Arc,
Genesis 6. 22. or as Moses did in making the Tabernacle, Exodus 40. 16. for their
obedience is alike set out by the same double expression.

Therefore seeing all the people were thus exact in their obedience to all
Moses commands; it follows, that they did not go out of the doors of their
houses until the morning of the fifteenth day was come, and yet they went out
of the doors of their houses at Midnight, or presently after, because they
knew that the morning of the fifteenth day was begun at Midnight.

Yea, It is evident that Moses intended they should all go out of their doors
in the Morning presently after Midnight, because he had foretold them, that
all the firstborn of Egypt should be slain at Midnight, Exodus 11. 4. 5. And
secondly, He had foretold them that the Egyptians would thrust them out of
Egypt, v. 1. and that the Nobles would come and bow down to Moses saying, Go
thou out and all the people at thy feet, Exodus 11. 8. Yea, Moses did prepare
them for a sudden departing from their houses, because he commanded to eat the
Passover with their loins girded, with their shoes on their feet, and with
their staves in their hands, and to eat it in haste, Exodus 12. 11. all these
things do testify that Moses intended they should go out of the doors of their
houses as soon as ever the morning of the fifteenth day was come, and he meant
it was come as soon as Midnight was come.

Object. 5. I grant that all Israel departed out of Egypt on the fifteenth day
of Nishan, Numb. 33. 3. But how prove you that they began their journey at
Midnight, or that the fifteenth day began at Midnight?

Answ. The circumstances of the Text do prove it plain enough; for as soon as
the Egyptians saw all their firstborn slain at Midnight, they feared lest
they should be all slain, and therefore they did urge the Israelites in all
haste to depart, and the Israelites knew all this beforehand, and accordingly
they prepared for their speedy departure, and because of this their preparation
they are said to depart out of Egypt in the night, Deuteronomy. 16. 1. compared with
Exodus 12. 29. 31, 42. The Egyptians therefore as soon as their firstborn were
slain at Midnight, urged the Israelites in haste to depart, and then also the
Israelites did depart out of the doors of their houses, because the morning of
the fifteenth day was come, but yet they could not fully depart out of Egypt
until the body of the self same day was come, namely, not till it was Midday.
See Ains. in Exodus 12. 41. they had many businesses to do after they went out
of the doors of their houses before they could fully depart; for they must
assemble together 600000 men besides women and children, and many connexed
people and cattle, and before all this could be put into a fit posture for
their orderly marching away, it was Midday, and yet they made extraordinary
haste to bring things thus soon to pass, and through their great haste they
took their Dough as it was unleavened, and carried it upon their shoulders,
ver. 34. and thenceforth the fifteenth of Nishan was commanded to be remembered,
and to be observed, as a Festival Sabbath for ever, and as the first day of
the Feast of unleavened bread, Exodus 13. 3. Lev. 23. 7. Deuteronomy. 16. 3.

Their Journey in the night began in this order, as soon as the firstborn of
Pharaoh and the Nobles were slain at Midnight, then in their perplexed fear
they did hastily call up Moses and Aaron to depart, and then they gave the
Alarm to the rest, and as the first of them marched through the land of Goshen,
the rest fell in by Troops, but before they could be all marshalled to depart
in fit order, it was Midday, and in this sort their march began at Midnight,
and was completed by Midday, according to Numb. 33. 3.

Conclusion.
From all the premises (which I have laid down under three Heads or Sections)
it follows, That the time of the first darkness (after the Creation of the
Earth) was Morning (and not Evening.) And secondly, That it began at that time
which the God of Nature made Midnight at last, namely, as soon as all the
parts of the Natural day were formed and framed together.

CHAP. IV.
Proving, That the Jews Custom in beginning their weekly Sabbath at the
Sunset Evening, was occasioned by their Ceremonial Custom, namely, Because the
persons that were ceremonially purified from their ceremonial Defilements, were
commanded to begin their new day of cleanness then; and hence it follows,
first, That that accidental beginning of the Day must not be accounted for the
true beginning of the Natural Day; And Secondly, Hence it follows, That it is
not the right time for us Christians to begin our Lords Day at the Sunset
Evening, as the Jews did by their ceremonial Custom only.

SECT. 1.
THe Jews were often guilty of sundry degrees of sins of uncleanness against
the Ceremonial Law (besides their sins against the Moral Law) as you may find
them noted and distinguished by Mr. Ainsworth in Lev. 11. 24, 25, 32. and in
Lev. 12. 6. and in Lev. 22. 7. compared with Numb. 9. 10. and with Lev. 13. 6.
and see also Lev. 14. 9, 17. and Number. 5. 2, 3. and Numb. 19. 2, 7, 11.

Secondly, Answerable thereunto, the Ceremonial Law did ordain several degrees
of purification, from these several degrees of ceremonial uncleanness; as you
may find them noted also by Ainsworth, in Lev. 5. 2. Lev. 14. 9, 15. Lev. 15.
14. Number. 5. 7. Number. 19. 18. Genesis 35. 2. and in Exodus 19.

Thirdly, Not only the manner how, but also the time when they must cleanse
themselves, was ordained and appointed by the Ceremonial Law.

Some kind of defilements might be cleansed in one day, but the greatest degrees
of their Ceremonial defilements required not only one, but many days for their
cleansing; but all were commanded to begin their cleansing in the Evening in
two degrees of time, according to the two parts of the Evening, for the natural
Evening has two equal parts (as I have showed in Chap. 2. and shall further
show it in the next. Chapter.)

In the first Evening (which does always begin at Midday) they must baptize or
wash themselves. The Jews were cleansed from their ceremonial defilements, 1.
By washing in the afternoon; And 2. By the Suns setting upon them after their
baptizing.


In the second Evening (which does always begin at Sunset) they did begin to
date the day of their cleanness.

For by the setting of the Sun upon them, after their washing, two things were
effected; First, Their cleanness by their former washing was confirmed or made
perfect; And secondly, As soon as their cleanness was made perfect, they began
the day of their cleanness.

Object. 1. Might not the unclean person baptize himself from his Ceremonial
defilements in the latter evening after Sunset, as well as in the time of the
first Evening before Sunset?

Ans. He might not, because God had appointed the time of the two Evenings for
two distinct degrees of their cleansing: The first Evening from Midday to
Sunset was allotted to them for the washing or baptizing themselves from their
ceremonial sins, and this was only as a preparation to the day of their
cleanness, And this I will labor to make evident several ways.

1. Moses in Deuteronomy. 23. 11. does command the unclean person to bath himself in
water, at the looking forth of the Evening, So the Hebrew phrase is, but it may
be demanded, what time is that, that is meant by the looking forth of the
Evening?

Answ. I have showed you in chap. 2. and in chap. 5. that the Evening does
first begin at the first declining of the Sun at Midday, and that it looks
forth toward his setting in the west from the very first declining of the Sun
from Midday until it depart from that Horizon, and to this sense I have
expounded the shadows of the Evening to look forth, in Jer. 6, 4. See Chap. 2.

In like sort it is said of Isaac, that he went out into the fields to
meditate at the looking forth of the Evening, Genesis 24. 63. In those days they
had no private upper Rooms to meditate in, because they lived in Tents, and
therefore they used to sequester themselves by going out into the fields to
meditate, where they had Groves of Trees for shade and refreshing, and thither
the godly used to go to meditate or to study divine mysteries in the heat of
the day, at the first looking forth of the Evening. See Ains. in Psa. 55. 18.

In like sort, they used to bathe or baptize themselves from their Ceremonial
defilements at the looking forth of the Evening, and then also the water was
well warmed by the Sun, and so made the more fit for bathing* I grant also,
that it was lawful for them to bathe themselves from their Ceremonial
defilements all the time that the Sun looked forth by his shadows toward the
West, till it was ready to depart out of that Horizon. But this is to be
marked, that none were commanded to baptize themselves in any part of the
morning (only the Priests were commanded to wash their hands and their feet
every morning, although they were clean before. See Ains. in Exodus 30. 19, 20.)
neither were they commanded to baptize themselves after Sunset, for except
they were baptized before Sunset, they could not begin the day of their
cleanness at Sunset, according to command.

2 It is evident, that the appointed season for baptizing themselves from all
their Ceremonial defilements was in the time of the first Evening, by the
Example of Bathshebaes baptizing herself.

The Text says, it was in the Evening when David arose from his bed and walked
upon the Roof of the Kings house, then he saw a woman washing her self, and the
woman was very beautiful to look upon, 2 Samuel 11* 2. This Evening when David
arose from his bed, cannot be understood of the latter Sunset Evening, for
then for want of Sun-light he could not have discerned her beauty from the Roof
of his house, but it must be understood of the afternoon Evening; for in those
hot Countries they used to sleep in the afternoon upon some Bed or Pallat, as
Ishbosheth did, 2 Samuel 4. 5. from whence he arose and walked upon the flat Roof
of his house, and thence he beheld the beauty of Bathsheba as she was baptizing
her self; hence it may be gathered, that the unclean persons did use to baptize
themselves from their Ceremonial defilements in the afternoon Evening.

3 It is also evident, that they baptized themselves in the afternoon Evening
from their Ceremonial defilements by a famous example in Josh. 7. for when the
Lords wrath was gone out against them, in that the men of Ai slew about thirty
six of Israel, because that Achan had stolen the excommunicate thing; then said
the Lord to Joshua at the Even-tide, Up, and sanctify the people, and say,
Sanctify your selves against to morrow, Josh. 7. 6, 13, 14, 15. and how else
must they sanctify themselves for the Lords presence at his Ark on the morrow,
but by washing themselves from their Ceremonial defilements, for there were
scarce any but they were defiled by one accident or other, and none might come
before the Lords Ark in their Ceremonial defilements upon pain of being cut
off; and before Joshua could make proclamation through the Camp for their
purification, and for their solemn meeting to seek the Lord for mercy on the
morrow, it would require a good space of time, therefore this Evening cannot be
understood of the Sunset Evening, but of the noontide Evening, as I have
explained the matter more at large in Chap. 2.

4 All Israel were warned when ever they came before the Lords presence in his
Tabernacle, to be cleansed from their Ceremonial defilements, especially at
their three solemn feasts; but they were not tied to the observation of their
Ceremonial baptizing when they resorted to their Synagogues on their weekly
Sabbath days, for in those places both the clean and the unclean might meet
together in Gods worship, as I have opened the matter in my discourse of the
Jews Synagogues Discipline.

But under pain of the Lords displeasure none might approach to the Lords
Sanctuary without their legal purifications, as it is manifest by the example
of Gods displeasure against some of Ephraim and Manasses when they came to the
Passover in the days of Hezekiah without their purifications; but as soon as
Hezekiah perceived their error (which doubtless the consciences of the visited
persons made them to acknowledge) he prayed to the Lord for them, and the Lord
was entreated, and healed the people, 2 Chronicles. 30. 19, 20. and for the better
avoiding of this error afterward, it was observed as a custom among the Jews,
to go out of the Country up to Jerusalem before the Feast of Passover, to
purify themselves, Joh. 7. 55. which purification was effected by two degrees
of cleanness: First, By baptizing themselves in the first Evening; And
secondly, By the Sunsetting upon them after their baptizing (as I have
formerly proved the matter) for none might approach the Sanctuary until they
could declare their purification to the Priests that were the Porters, 2 Chronicles.
23. 19. as Paul did, Act. 21. 26.

And the Lord did so much approve of their Ceremonial purity, both by their
actual baptizing and by their abstinence from unclean meats, and from all other
things else that might defile them: That for that very obedience he does call
the whole Nation, All Israel are called men of Holiness in regard of their
ceremonial purity.
Men of holiness, Exodus 22. 31. for all the Nation in general were very careful
to maintain this kind of holiness. And the Hebrew Doctors say, that if any man
of the common people did but say, I am clean to keep the sin-water, he was to
be trusted, for there is no man of Israel too vild for it, See Ains. in Number.
19. 9. that is to say, no man of Israel was too vild for it, if he were but
Ceremonially clean; and in this sense all Israel were holy, namely, to the
purifying of their flesh; for the Law is not of Faith, Gal. 3. 12. a man might
keep the Law to the purifying of his flesh, though they wanted saving-Faith to
apply the blood of Christ for the cleansing of their consciences from the guilt
of sin.

And thus much touching the first degree of time in which they must perform the
first degree of their Ceremonial cleanness.

SECT. 2.
I Come now to speak of the second degree of time wherein their Ceremonial
cleanness was perfected, and that was as soon as the Sun was set upon them
after their Ceremonial baptizing, and from that time also they began to date
the new day of their cleanness.

First, I prove that God ordained the Sunset Evening to be the time of
perfecting the cleanness of the baptized person, ere he None were complea^ly
purified by being baptized til the Sun was set upon them.
could begin the day of his cleanness, by Deuteronomy. 23. 10, 11. There Moses says
thus to all Israel, If there be in thee a man that is not clean by reason of an
accident in the night, then he shall go out of the Camp; and he shall bath
himself in water at the looking forth of the Evening (and what then, was he now
made clean as soon as ever he had bathed himself in water? The answer is, no,
he must yet stay a while longer without the Camp till his Sun be set,) and
then when the Sun is gone down he shall come into the Camp.

Hence it is evident that his Ceremonial purity was not complete until his Sun
was set, but then it was complete, and therefore he did then begin to date the
day of his cleanness.

Hence also I gather, that their Ceremonial baptizing might be done in any part
of the afternoon, provided it were done before Sunset, because the Sun did
look forth toward the place of his going down by his shadow, from Midday, til
it went out of that Horizon, as I have formerly explained the matter.

But if any were defiled by any accident in the night after his Sun was set
upon him, he must remain in that uncleanness until a new baptizing in the next
afternoon, and till a new Sunset Evening.

Secondly, It is evident, that none were completely purified till Sunset, by
Levit. 22. 5, 6, 7. Moses says thus, If any man (whether Priest or Israelite)
be made unclean by touching a dead creeping thing, (or the like unclean thing;)
Then (in ver. 6.) he shall be unclean until the Evening, he shall not eat of
the holy things. But first, He shall bath himself in water. And then Secondly
(says ver. 7.) when the Sun is gone down he shall be clean.

By this Text it is also evident, that he did not attain to a perfect
ceremonial cleanness by baptizing himself in water, until the Sun was gone down
upon him after his bathing: But as soon as his Sun was set, then he was
completely purified, and then also he began to date the day of his cleanness,
and then also he might eat of the holy things.

Thirdly, The Hebrew Doctors do abundantly testify that no baptized person did
begin the day of his cleanness until his Sun was set; for this is their common
and peculiar phrase, They shall be unclean until their Sun be set: But the
common phrase of the Ceremonial Law says thus, They shall be unclean until
the Evening. The unclean (says Maymony) may not eat of the Heave Offering
until their Sun be set. See Ains. in Lev. 22. 9, 10. And hence it is evident,
that they held the baptized persons to have some degree of uncleanness upon
them, until their Sun was set: And therefore Maymony says thus; He that is
baptized is the second in uncleanness, until his Sun be set; And he that is so
baptized (if his Sun be not set) may not eat or drink of the Trumah (or holy
offerings) nor of any meat or drink that is holy. See Ains. in Lev. 11. 32. and
in Lev. 7. 20, 21. and in Numb. 19. 19, 20, 21. This phrase in the Law, He
shall be unclean until the Evening, is eight times over repeated in Lev. 11.
and fourteen times over in Lev. 15. and often elsewhere: But the Hebrew Doctors
do usually express it, He shall be unclean till his Sun be set; they accounted
the term Sunset and the term Evening to be all one time. Hence then it
follows, that the date of their new day of cleanness did always begin at the
Sunset Evening.

Fourthly, It is evident, that the Jews began the date of their new day of
cleanness at the Sunset Evening; because the Sunset The Jews morrow began at
Sunset in Ceremonial respects.
Evening is called [Their morning] 1 Samuel 30. 17. David and his men are said to
pursue after the Amalekites, From the twilight unto the Evening of Their
Morrow; that is to say, from the Twilight in the Morning until their Morrow,
which began at the Sunset Evening; it was a custom that was proper and
peculiar unto them, and differing from other Nations, to date the new day of
their cleanness from the Sunset Evening; and therefore the Hebrew Text does
apply the word Their unto David and his men in special, calling it their
morrow; Dr. Willet does explain the word Morrow to be the next day after David
and his men were set forth to pursue the Amalekites; But the text does not say
so, but that David and his men fell upon the Amalekites and pursued their
victory, from the Twilight (in the morning) until the Evening of their morrow,
that is, till the Sunset Evening, for at that Evening began their Morrow, or
their new day to the person purified.

2. It is evident that the Sunset Evening was the Jews morrow, from the time
of their reckoning of the seven weeks to the day of Penticost.

They are commanded to begin that reckoning from the morrow of the Sabbath;
meaning by the Sabbath, the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, which
God commanded them to observe as a Sabbath, Lev. 23. 15. And by the Morrow of
the Sabbath, is meant the second day of the Feast of unleavened bread, which
began at the Sunset Evening, at the end of the first day, that Evening is
called the Morrow, (but this is observable also, that the seventh day of the
Feast of unleavened bread did not end at Sunset; but the holy feast of that day
continued in the night time after Sunset) and in this sense the word Morrow
must be understood in ver. 11. and 16.

The Hebrew Doctors say, they begin this reckoning from the beginning of the
day (not from the beginning of the Artificial day as most are apt to mistake
their meaning, but) from the night of the sixteenth of Nishan. See Ains. in
Lev. 23. 15. and it is a known thing (as I have explained the matter) that they
did account the night to begin at the Sunset Evening according to the date of
the person purified.

And in this sense the phrase of The next day in Matthew. 27. 62. must be
understood; then, the next day that followed the preparation, must be
understood of the Sunset Evening.

3. As Boker, the Morning, is put for the beginning of the day, namely, for the
beginning of the Natural day, and for the beginning of the Artificial day; so
also, it is once put for the beginning of the Jews Ceremonial day, or for the
Sunset Evening, in Deuteronomy. 16. 4. as I have opened the matter more at large in
Chap. 5.

These places do plainly evidence that the Jews had a double Morning, and a
double Morrow (as they had a double year) answerable to the Natural Day and to
their Ceremonial Day.

Object. 2. Though I am willing to grant that all purified persons did It is
disputed by some that the Sunset Evening is not fully come until it be full
Twilight, or somewhat past, or else they confess it cannot be proved that
Christ lay three days in his grave.
begin the date of their new Day at the Sunset Evening, yet learned men do
affirm, that the Sun is not set as soon as the Body of the Sun is gone out of
our sight; They say that as long as there does remain any light in the Sky the
Sun is the cause of it, and hence they assert, That the Sun is not set until
the Darkness in the Sky is more than the Light in the Sky; they say the Sun
is not set until it is full Twilight or somewhat past: and by this exposition
of the Sunset Evening, they say it way be proved that Christ lay three days
in his Grave, or else they confess it cannot be proved.

Answ. If this grand Objection (which is very great in some men's eyes) be fully
answered, then all the Conclusions that are built upon it must needs fall to
the ground with it.

I confess I cannot but wonder that any learned men should make the time of
Sunset and the time of Twilight to be all one, for if this be true, then all
Astronomers must go to School again to learn better how to set the Minutes of
the Suns rising and of the Suns setting. But see what I say further in answer
to this Objection, in Chap. 7.

And suppose a man that holds thus, should hire a laborer to work in his Garden
from Sunrising till Sunset, and suppose That the time of Sunset is fully
come as soon as the body of the Sun is gone out of sight, and before it be
Twilight.
this Laborer do contract with him to continue at his labor until the precise
time of Sunset, and accordingly he continues at his labor until the Body of
the Sun is gone out of sight, and then he leaves off and takes witness of it,
and presently goes to his Master for wages according to Contract; his Master
refuses to pay him because he did not continue at his labor until the precise
time of Sunset; he tells him, that the Sun is not yet set, because the Light in
the Sky is more in quantity than the Darkness; for says he, the Sun is the
cause of that light, and therefore it is not yet set, and he takes witness, and
so they part in discontent; and because they could not agree about the precise
time of Sunset, they refer this controversy to be determined by competent
Judges.

And first let Moses show his Judgment, what he means by the time of Sunset,
or by the Suns going down, for he does show his judgment by a familiar
example; He directed the Jews how to find out Mount Gerezim on the other side
Jordan, It lies (says he) behind the way, at the going down of the Sun, Deuteronomy.
11. 30* In these words Moses does give them a twofold mark of direction.

1. It lies behind, 2. It lies at the going down of the Sun, and I have showed
you in expounding Job 23. 8, 9. that this phrase behind is often put for the
West. And in this sense also see Ains. in Genesis 14. 15.

2. Moses says, It lies at the going down of the Sun; if you say this going
down of the Sun is not meant of the place where the body of the Sun goes out of
sight, but of the place of Twilight, then whither might the Jews wander by that
mark of direction to seek out Mount Gerezim? For when the darkness in the Sky
is somewhat more than the light in the Sky, the Jews might wander into the
North or into the South as well as into the West, for the time and place of
Twilight is but an uncertain mark to steer their course by to Mount Gerezim.

But to place the time of Sunset where the body of the Sun goes out of sight,
is a perspicuous mark for the West (when the Sun is in the Equinoctial, as it
was when this direction was given) and in this respect the time of Sunset is
often put for the West. See more in Chap. 2. in answer to Objection 3. And see
Ains. in Psalm. 113. 3. and this direction agrees to the first direction, it is
Behind, or it is due West.

On the contrary when Moses directed them to other places that Iay East, he
directed them thither by the Rising of the Sun, Numb. 21. 11. Numb. 34. 15.
Deuter. 4. 41, 47. Josh. 12. 1. Josh. 19. 27, 34.

Secondly, Let Joshua also show his judgment about the time and place of
Sunset, and he declares his judgment by another familiar example, for he
directed the Jews how to find out the West bounds of Canaan, not by the
confused, and obscure mark of Twilight; but first, by the perspicuous mark of
Sunset; and secondly by the hindmost Sea, Jos. 1. 4. he makes the hindmost
Sea, and the going down of the Sun to be marks Synonima for the finding out of
the West borders of Canaan; and he does also explain this hindmost Sea to be
the great Sea at Sunset, Jos. 23. 4. and Moses likewise does call this Sea the
Hindmost Sea, Deuteronomy. 11. 24. But the Greek and Chaldee call it the Western Sea.
So then from the premises it follows, That seeing the places that lie due West,
are marked out by the perspicuous mark of the going down of the Sun, we must
thereby understand that the Sunset Evening does begin as soon as ever the body
of the Sun is gone out of sight; and therefore hence it follows, that those
that make the time of Sunset, and the time of Twilight to be all one (for the
beginning of our Lords day) do build their opinion but on a sandy foundation.

Thirdly, The Hebrew Text does often express the time of Sunset by the going
in of the Sun, to lodge all night (as it were in its chamber) and it is said to
go in as soon as ever the body of the Sun is gone out of our Horizon. See Ains.
in Psa. 50. 1. on the contrary, as soon as the body of the Sun is risen upon
our Horizon in the morning, it is said to come forth as a Bridegroom out of his
chamber, Psalm. 19. 5.

Fourthly, Experience will tell you, that the Sun is set as soon as ever the
body of the Sun is gone out of sight; or else if it be not set till the
darkness in the sky is more than the light in the sky, then there is no
Sunset at all in the North of England when the days are at the longest, for
experience does testify that the light is hardly out of the sky there, all
the night long, except a little in the middle of the night, and yet experience
does witness that the Sun does truly set there every day.

Fifthly, Let all Astronomers show their judgment when the Sun does set, and
they with one consent do testify that the Sun does set as soon as ever the
body of the Sun is gone out of sight, for they describe the time of Sunset, and
the time of the Suns rising, by the first appearing of the body of the Sun in
the morning, and by the body of the Sun going out of sight in the evening, as
all their Almanacks do testify.

Sixthly, Let the Evangelist Mark show his judgment, for he describes the
Evening to begin at Sunset, Mark. 1. 32. but Luke speaking of the same action
says, It was when the Sun was setting, Luke 4 40. put this together, and it
implies that the time of the beginning of the Sunset Evening is as soon as
ever the body of the Sun is gone out of sight.

Seventhly, Joshua does testify that the Evening is come as soon as ever the
body of the Sun is gone out of sight, Jos. 10. 26, 27. and Daniel says, That
Darius did labor to deliver him till the going down of the Sun, Dan. 6. 14.
But the Seventy say, till Evening; and Moses says, The soul that touches a
dead creeping thing shall be unclean until the Evening, Lev. 22 6. but says
he, in verse. 7. He shall bathe himself in water, and then he shall be clean
when the Sun is gone down; from all these places it is evident, that the term
Sunset, and the term Evening, are terms convertible for the Sunset Evening.

Eighthly, It is evident by this reason that the latter Evening does begin as
soon as ever the body of the Sun is gone out of sight, because there is no
interim between the End of the first Evening, and the Beginning of the latter
Evening; and I have proved in Chap. 2. that the first Evening does end, as soon
as ever the Sun does leave off to make any more shadows upon the face of the
Earth: For the whole time of the first Evening is described by its shadows
looking forth toward the place of its Rest, or by the strotching out of its
shadows upon the face of the Earth, as I have expounded, Jer. 6. 4. and
therefore it follows by necessary consequence, that the latter Evening must
begin at that instant time. This consequence is so clear, that none that loves
plain truth can deny it.

But to prevent rash zeal, and unadvised haste in feasting upon the holy flesh,
the Hebrew Doctors advised to stay a little time after Sunset, They begin their
Religious Festival Suppers after Sunset, as soon as three stars appeared in
the sky.
for the Sun must go down upon the baptized person before his Purification was
perfected, and then he began the date of his new day, and then he was made fit
to eat of the holy flesh; yet they advised to stay a little time after Sunset,
namely till three stars appeared in the sky. Mamony says, That the unclean
may not eat of the Heave Offering until their Sun be set, and three stars
appear after the Sun is gone down. See Ains. in Lev. 22. 9.

Thus have I showed how God ordained the time of the two Evenings for the
effecting of two degrees of cleanness; and now I shall in the next Section
show, That all the latter Evening from Sunset till Midnight, was appointed
for the time of their Religious feasting upon their Passeovers, and
Peace Offerings; and that this part of the night was a true part of the former
natural day.

SECT. 3.
FRom the date of the new Day to the person purified at the Sunset Evening, we
may see the true Reason that did enforce the Jews to begin all their
Ceremonial Sabbaths at that time, and of all other days by occasion thereof.

But this beginning of the day was no more to be accounted for the beginning of
the natural Day, than the beginning of their year in Nishan was to be accounted
for the first month by Creation; for they began their year in Nishan upon the
occasion of their famous deliverance out of Egypt in that month; but from the
Creation the year began in Tizri, which now is called the Seventh month, and
this seventh month was afterward made famous again by Joshua's Conquest of
Canaan, and by his division of the land thereupon to the nine Tribes and a
half, in this seventh month, Jos. 14. and in remembrance thereof they began all
their years of Rest, and all their Jubiles from that month. See Ains. in Exodus
12. 1, 2. Lev. 25. 8, 9, 10. Exodus 34. 22. Deuteronomy. 14. 22. and likewise the years
of all Servants and Leases began at this time, Lev. 25.

And after this manner they observed a double date according to the beginning
of their double day. The Jews observed both the date of their ceremonial day,
and the date of their natural day for several purposes. See Ains. in Lev. 23*
20.


1 The person purified began the date of his day of cleanness from the Sunset
Evening.

2 They dated the time of their Religious feasting according to the natural day
till midnight after; for by the Law they were expressly commanded to eat the
flesh of their Peace Offerings in the same day, in which it was sacrificed,
Lev. 7. 15. now it was not possible for them (at sometimes at least) to eat the
holy flesh of their Passeovers, and of their commanded Peace Offerings, in the
same Ceremonial day, because the time of sacrificing their Passeovers and
Peace Offerings did many times continue until it was night, namely till
Sunset; and so it fell out in the time of Josias Passover, 2 Chronicles. 35. 14.
Hence it follows by a necessary consequence, That the command to eat the holy
flesh in the same day must be understood (not of the same Ceremonial, but) of
the same natural day; and in case any of the holy flesh had remained uneaten in
the same day in which it was sacrificed, it must be burnt, and then sometime it
must be all burnt, and none of it eaten, namely when it was sacrificed at the
point of Sunset.

Secondly, If the date of their Ceremonial day had born all the sway, then they
must not only have finished the killing of all their Sacrifices, but of all
their Religious feasts also, before Sunset, and then our Savior and his
Apostles had sinned, because they kept their Religious Feast after Sunset,
namely in the night wherein he was betrayed; for though they caused their
Passover to be sacrificed on the fourteenth day, yet they deferred the time of
their feasting till after Sunset when the fifteenth day was begun, according
to the date of the person purified. But if you will grant that our Savior did
not sin against that Command of eating their Passover in the same day, then
you must also grant that the same fourteenth day by Creation was not ended at
Sunset, but continued still till Midnight after.

Thirdly, Hence it follows, that seeing all Ceremonial Customs are now
abolished by the death of Christ; that Gods people ought not to Judaize, in
beginning the Lords day according to the Jews Ceremonial Customs, but
according to the beginning and ending of the natural day from midnight to
Midnight.

Objection 3. How could the Jews observe a double date of a double day in one
and the same natural day without confusion?

Answ. Their double date of their double day was not strange to them, no more
than their double date of their double year was to them; they could sort out
such things, as belonged to the beginning of the year from the seventh month
from the things that belonged to the beginning of the year in the first month,
without any confusion at all; so in like manner they could sort out all those
Religious duties that belonged to their Ceremonial date, from those duties that
belonged to the date of the natural day. They knew that the Baptized person
must begin his new day at Sunset, and that all Evening Sacrifices must be
finished before Sunset; and yet in respect of the time of Feasting, they knew
that the same Natural day did still continue till midnight; Maymony says,
That the Priests must eat the Peace Offerings of the Congregation in the same
Day, and in half the Night. See Ains. in Lev. 23. 20. Hence you may see, that
the Hebrew Doctors, whom Maymony follows, did hold that the same day (in the
case of Feasting) did continue till midnight; and indeed this time was
sufficient for the accomplishment of all their religious Feasts; in like sort
Solomon calls the Twilight evening of the night, the same day wherein the
Sacrifice was slain, Prove. 7. 9. but it was not the same Ceremonial day, for at
Sunset the Jews began their next day, or their morrow; but for a fuller
answer, see my answer in Chapter 5. to Obj. 8. and 14. and 17.

CHAP. V.
Proving that the Passover did begin and end according to the Natural Evening,
from midday to midnight.

I Have showed in Cha. 2. and Sect. 2. that the natural Evening was divided
into two equal parts, and now I shall show you, that the Passover was
solemnized in both the parts of that Evening.

First, All the Passeovers, and all the Peace Offerings that were annexed
thereunto, were all sacrificed in the time of the first Evening, and it was
utterly unlawful to sacrifice any Passover, either before this evening began,
or after this evening was ended, which did ever begin at Midday, and end at
Sunset.

Secondly, All the Passeovers of Canaan must be feasted on, with Religious
solemnity, in the time of the latter evening.

But first I will speak of the time of Sacrificing all their Passeovers, and
that was between the two evenings, namely, it was between the beginning of the
first, and the beginning of the latter evening; this was the precise limited
time for this work.

1 God commanded them to kill all their Passeovers in Egypt between the two
evenings, Exodus 12. 6.

2 God commanded them to kill all their Passeovers in the Wilderness between
the two evenings, Numb. 9. 3. 5. 11.

3 God commanded them to kill all their Passeovers in Canaan, between the two
evenings, Levit. 23. 4, 5.

This space of time is called the appointed season thereof, Numb. 9. 2. Levit.
23. 4.

Solomon Jarchi expounds the two evenings thus; From the sixth hour (which is
at Midday) and forwards, it is called between the two Evenings, for that the
Sun declineth toward his going down, etc. between the evening of the day, and
the evening of the night; the evening of the Day is from the beginning of the
seventh hour, and the evening of the Night is when the night begins. See Ains.
in Numb. 9. 3.

2 Maymony says thus; The killing of the Passover is after Midday, and if
they kill it before it is not allowable; and they kill it not but after the
daily evening Sacrifice, and burning of Incense, and after they have trimmed
the Lamps, then they begin to kill the Paschal Lamb, until the end of the day.
See Ains. in Exodus 12. 6.

Till the end of the day was, till the Sunset evening, for after Sunset
(says Maymony) the blood of all Sacrifices became unlawful. See Ains. in Lev.
1. 9. Lev. 6. 9. Lev. 7. 18.

Hence we see that the Hebrew Doctors held it as a Canon among them, that no
Passover was allowable, if it were killed either before Midday, or after
Sunset; but all the time between was Gods appointed season, Number. 9. 2. Lev.
23. 4.

Ordinarily they began to kill their Passeovers at half an hour after two a
Clock, but if the Passover day fell out to be the Some think of no other
Evening belonging to the Jews Sabbath, but the evening before the Sabbath; but
they are grossly mistaken, for that was no otherwise the evening of the Sabbath
but in relation to the new day to the purified person, but the evening of the
Sabbath it self began and ended as the Passover evening did from midday to
midnight.
evening of the Sabbath (namely, that evening of the Sabbath which began at
Midday) then they began to kill their Passover sooner; But (still this must
be remembered which Maymony often notes, that) they never killed any Passover
till after the daily evening Sacrifice, and some other services that did ever
accompany it. See Ains. in Numb. 28. 4.

But (say the Hebrew Doctors) God sets no particular hour, neither for the
killing of the daily evening Sacrifice, nor yet for the killing of the
Passover; but in general, he commanded them to be killed between the two
evenings.

Hence it follows, That if they killed the daily evening Sacrifice, or the
Passover, or the Peace Offerings, in any part of the afternoon, between the
time of Midday and the Sunset evening, they were allowable, and according to
Gods own limited time.

But because God requires that all his Worship in all the Circumstances of it
should be done decently, and in order, both in regard of time, place, and
persons; therefore the chief Rulers of the people, thought it their duty to
suit all the particular businesses about the Passover, and the daily evening
Sacrifice, to certain particular hours in the evening, so as all things might
be done with the best convenience, decency, and order, that one duty might not
shoulder out another.

The Hebrew Doctors in the Babylonian Thalmud say thus; the daily evening
Sacrifice was killed at the eighth hour and a half, and it was offered at the
ninth hour and a half (that is to say, at half an hour after three a Clock) But
in the evening of the Passover it was killed at the seventh hour and a half,
and offered at the eighth hour and a half (that is to say, at half an hour
after two a Clock) But if the evening of the Passover did fall out to be upon
the evening of the Sabbath, then it was killed at the sixth hour and a half
(that is to say, at half an hour after twelve a Clock) and it was offered at
seven and a half. See Ains. in Exodus 12. 6.

Buxtorfius also in his Hebrew Lexicon upon the word Gnarbaiim, does from the
Hebrew Doctors show, that if the Passover evening fell upon the Sabbath
evening, that then they began to kill the daily evening Sacr^fice at half an
hour after twelve a Clock, because of the manifold businesses that belonged to
the Sabbath, besides the killing of their Passeovers; therefore that the doing
of one duty might not thrust out another, their Wisemen did set an order of
time when they should begin to kill the daily evening Sacrifice, which in all
the days of the year was deferred to the last place, except^on the Passover
evening, and then it was ever preferred to the first place, and when ever the
Passover evening fell upon a Sabbath, then they began to kill it at half an
hour after twelve a Clock, and that was as soon as ever they could perceive the
shadow of the evening to be stretched out, or declined; and the only reason why
they began thus early upon the Sabbath evening, was, because they might have
sufficient time to finish all the duties of the Sabbath, and all their
Passeovers, before Sunset, for after Sunset the blood of all Sacrifices
became unlawful, because God had expressly commanded all evening Sacrifices to
be killed between the two Evenings, and because they had much work to do on
Passover evenings, especially when it fell on the Sabbath, they must begin to
kill the daily evening Sacrifice at the first declining of the Sun, or else
they could not kill all by Sunset; for in the time of Josiahs Passover, the
Passeovers, and Peace Offerings were so many, that the Priests could not finish
all till night, 2 Chronicles. 35. 14.

Obj. 1. You have often cited the Hebrew Doctors, as if they did all agree in
one, That the Natural evening did begin at Midday; but Mr. Thomas Shepherd in
his third Part on the Sabbath, Thesis 36. does affirm, that the Hebrew Doctors
testimonies are of little worth, because they do often contradict one another
about the beginning of the evening, for though some of them do say, that the
evening does begin at Midday, yet they are over whelmed with cross
testimonies, from the most of their Fellows, who begin it some about one, some
about two a Clock in the afternoon; and Josephus, who is one of most credit, in
his Writings tells us, That they began their first evening about three a Clock
in the afternoon.

Ans. I would Mr. Shepherd had cited the particular places, where the Hebrew
Doctors do cross one another about the beginning of the Evening, for then the
particular places should have been examined, by the help of such as are expert
in their Writings. I grant that some of them do speak of the beginning of the
Evening at one hour, and some at another, and yet all this without any
contradiction; for in regard of several duties that must be trans-acted at
several hours in the evening, they had just occasion to speak of the beginning
of the evening at several hours, in relation to the said several duties that
must begin at several hours of the said evening, as I noted it in chap. 2. in
answer to Obj. 1. at seventhly, and as I have noted it immediately before from
the Babylonian Thalmud.

But if it do appear true, that Josephus does precisely begin the evening at
three a clock and not in relation to some special duty, then I grant that such
a testimony is worthy of due consideration; but I believe that Josephus is some
way or other mistaken, for the Thalmud called Jerusalemie, which was finished
since Josephus See Ains. in Advertisement at the end of Deuteronomy.
wrote, namely, about the year of our Lord two hund^ed and thirty, and the
other Thalmud called Babelie, which was fi^ished about the year five hundred,
do record the Canons and Constitutions of the Jews, according to which the Jews
do live at this day; (and no question but they knew Josephus his opinion as
well as others, that were more ancient Doctors) and yet these do affirm that
the evening begins at midday. And Moses the son of Maymon, who lived in the
year of our Lord one thousand two hundred, has set down in plainer Hebrew, the
Expositions, Canons, and Traditions of the said Thalmuds, and of the more
ancient Hebrew Doctors, omitting the fabulous Discourses of the Thalmuds; and
this Maymony is of such esteem among the Jewish Nation, that of him it is said,
From Moses (the Prophet) to Moses (the son of Maymon) there was none like
this Moses; and from him also I have cited several testimonies, that the
evening begins at midday; therefore seeing these public and general Recorders
do testify, that the evening begins at midday; how can they be overwhelmed
with cross testimonies, as Mr. Shepherd does unadvisedly affirm? and I little
question but Josephus is taken in a wrong sense by Master Shepherd, and if the
place had been cited it should have been examined, and a more particular answer
returned; and take notice by the way, that I do not find any other Objection in
Mr. Shepherd that is of any moment, but it is already fully answered here and
there in this Treatise.

Object. 2. Why do you make the whole time of the first Evening from Midday to
Sunset, to be the time of killing all their Passeovers in Canaan, seeing Moses
makes the time of killing all their Passeovers in Egypt to be about the time
of Sun-sets for Moses says thus in Deuteronomy. 16. 6. Thou shall sacrifice the
Passover in the evening, about the going down of the Sun, in the season thou
came out of Egypt.

Ans. The time of killing all their Passeovers in Egypt, was commanded to be
between the two evenings, Exodus 12. 6. that is to say, between the time of the
first Evening, which began at midday, and the beginning of the evening, which
began at Sunset, so that they might have killed all their Passeovers presently
after Midday, or they might have staid till near Sunset, provided it were
done before Sunset; but they could not kill all their Passeovers in Canaan at
an instant, at the time of Sunset, as they might have done in Egypt; for.

1 In Egypt every firstborn of every family might kill the Paschal Lamb.

2 They might kill it in their own private house.

3 They might sprinkle the blood of it upon their door-posts without going to
the Altar.

But in Canaan they must have a longer space of time to do these works in; for,

1 The firstborn of every family might not kill their Sacrifices in Canaan,
but in their place the Lord chose the Tribe of Levy. See Ains. in Exodus 19. 22.
Number. 3. 12. 41, 45. Exodus 24. 5. and the number of this Tribe, I conceive, were
not so many as the firstborn were in Egypt, and therefore could not kill all
in so short a time.

2 The Levites had many more businesses to do about the Passover in Canaan
than in Egypt (especially if the Passover fell out upon a Sabbath) for says
Maymony, They kill not the Passover, but after the daily evening sacrifice,
and after the burning of incense, and after they have trimmed the Lamps, and
besides in Canaan they used to kill many Peace Offerings therewith: all this
would require more time than the firstborn of every family needed in Egypt for
the killing of the Paschal Lamb only, without these other services.

3 They might not kill their Passeovers in Canaan in private houses as they did
in Egypt; but all their Passeovers must be brought to be sacrificed at the
place the Lord should choose to place his brazen Altar at, which at first was
at Shilo, and at last in Solomon's Temple. See Ains. in Deuteronomy. 16. 5, 6. with
Exodus 12. 7. Deuteronomy. 12. 5, 11, 12, 14, 18. and in respect hereof the Hebrew
Doctors say, He that kills holy things out of the Court of the Sanctuary, if
he do it presumptuously, he is guilty of cutting off. See Ains. in Lev. 17. 2,
5, 8, 9. nay though a Priest did kill a Sacrifice in the Temple it self, yet it
might become unlawful, if the blood thereof were but carried out of the Temple
before it was sprinkled upon the Altar; for thus says Maymony, The blood of
the holy things that goes out of the Court becomes unlawful for Sacrifice,
yea though they bring it in again, and sprinkle it upon the Altar, yet it is
not acceptable. See Ains. in Lev. 1. 5.

If the Jews had thought it as lawful for them to kill the Passover in a
private house (ever since the destruction of the Temple) as they did at the
first Passover in Egypt, then doubtless they would not have omitted to
sacrifice the Passover now in all the places of their dispersion; but ever
since their Temple was destroyed, they have been without the Passover, and
without all other Sacrifices for the space of sixteen hundred years together;
And thus speaks Mr. Broughton from the Hebrew Doctors: He that shall kill the
Pascha, ever since Jesus Christ conquered Canaan, in a private house, had been
held an open enemy to the truth of God. And Maymony says, That now they can
have no sacrifice, because they can have no Temple, neither can they kill the
Paschal Lamb, but instead thereof they only use Unleavened bread with bitter
herbs, and wine in their private houses. See Ains. in Exodus 12. 8. Hence it
follows, that seeing all the Passeovers must be brought to one public place,
that it would require a longer space to kill one after another than they needed
in Egypt where every house might kill their Lamb at one hour.

Fourthly, In respect of the place of sprinkling, it must be all All Passeovers
were sacrifices therefore the blood of them all must be sprinkled on the Lords
Altar.
done at one Altar, and therefore it would require a longer time than they
needed in Egypt; for there every firstborn might sprinkle the blood upon the
door-posts of his own private house at one hour together, but the sprinkling of
the blood of all the Passeovers in Canaan could not be done in so short a
space, because all must be done at one Altar one after another, Lev. 1. 5. for
all Passeovers were Sacrifices, Exodus 12. 27. Exodus 23. 18. Exodus 34. 25. and
no Levites, but the Priests only, must sprinkle the blood of all Passeovers,
and of all Sacrifices, upon the Lords Altar, 2 Chronicles. 30. 16. 2 Chronicles. 35. 11.

And because the Lord did appropriate the blood of all Sacrifices Blood was the
Lords peculiar portion, therefore he prohibited the Jews to eat blood, and also
some sorts of fat.
to himself as his peculiar right to make atonement for men's souls, therefore
in that respect he did straightly prohibit the Jews that they should not eat any
blood. See Ains. in Lev. 3. 17. Lev. 7. 2, 14, 26, 27. Lev. 17. 6, 10, 11, 12.
Deuteronomy. 12. 27. and for this very reason also he forbad them to eat such parts of
the fat as he did, challenge for his own Altar; and in this respect also he did
challenge the fat of their Passeovers as much as of any other Sacrifice; all
which he commanded to be burned upon his Altar for a sweet ^avour of
Atonement, as the former Scriptures do testify.

Now from the consideration of these four Circumstances, it follows, that all
the Passeovets in Canaan could not be sacrificed in so short a time as about
the time of Sunset; and therefore this phrase about the going down of the Sun,
in Deuteronomy. 16. 6. must not be understood of the very time of Sunset, but of the
whole time of the Suns declining from Midday till it went down out of that
Horizon.

Object. 3. Though the Jews might not kill their Passeovers in Canaan in their
private houses as they did in Egypt, yet they might kill them at more Altars
than one; for the Lord was pleased to allow several Altars for Sacrifices in
several places; and by this means all the Passeovers in Canaan might be killed,
and the blood sprinkled just about the time of Sunset.

Ans. I grant that the Lord was pleased to permit the use of many Altars and
High Places in the days of Samuel; for there The Lord permitted many private
Altars in the days of Samuel, but he allowed but one public Altar for the
general Feasts of the twelve Tribes, and for the Passover day, and for the
daily Morning and Evening Sac^ifice.
was an Altar at Gilgal, 1 Samuel 10. 8. 1 Samuel 11. 15. Secondly, There was an
Altar at Betbel, 1 Samuel 10. 3. 5. Thirdly, At Mizpeh, 1 Samuel 7. 9. Judge. 21. 1,
4. Fourthly, At Ramab, 1 Samuel 7. 17. and there were several Altars also in the
days of Elijah; for he complained to God that Jezabel had broken down his
Altars; But notwithstanding all this, no Passover might be killed at any of
these Altars; for the Passover in Canaan was commanded to be observed as a
general Feast; but these Altars were private Altars only, raised by Gods
allowance by some particular person upon some special occasion, and were after
permited to be used by some adjacent Tribe or persons, and in that respect
these Altars were made but of earth or stone that was unhewn: But the Altar
that God commanded to be erected as the general public Altar of all the twelve
Tribes, was made of brass, at the cost of the twelve Tribes, and this was
placed at first in the Lords Tabernacle in the Wilderness; afterward this
Tabernacle, together with the brazen Altar, was placed by Joshua, and the whole
Congregation, in Shilo in the Tribe of Ephraim, Josh. 18. 1. and there it
continued for the place of the general Assembly of all the twelve Tribes for
three hundred and fifty years, till the death of Eli; but after the Philistims
had taken the Lords Aark, 1 Samuel 4. 10, 11. and slain the most valiant men of
Ephraim in that battle, Psalm. 78. 9. God was wroth with Shilo, and forsook it,
Psalm. 78. 60. for by that great destruction of all the valiant men of Ephraim,
Shilo was now become too weak a place to guard the holy Tabernacle, and the
holy Altar, and therefore it was by the Lords advice removed to Gibbeon, 2 Chronicles. 1. 3, 4, 5. which was a Royal City, and a place of great strength, Josh.
10. 2. lying in the Tribe of Benjamin, and it was allotted to the Priests,
Josh. 21. 17. and the Gibbeonites the ancient inhabitants were given to the
Priests to cut wood, and draw water for the house of the Lord, Josh 9. 21, 23.
27. and afterward in Solomon's days they were called Nethinims, 1 Chronicles. 9. 2.

And from henceforth this place was called the chief Highplace, because the
Lords Tabernacle, and the Lords Altar were placed therein, 1 King. 3. 4. and in
that respect David took care to provide a competent number of Priests to attend
it: But afterward when David had recovered the Ark from the Philistims, and
had brought it into the Tent that he had provided for it in Jerusalem, He
divided the Priests into two parts, and he appointed Asaph and his brethren to
minister before the Lord at Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. 16. 37. and he appointed Zadoc
and his brethren to minister at the Lords brazen Altar at his Tabernacle at
Gibbeon, 1 Chronicles. 16. 39.

But when Solomon had finished his Temple, he caused the Priests first of all
to bring the Ark of the Lord into its place provided for it in the Temple, and
then he caused the Priests to bring up the Tabernacle of the Congregation, with
all the holy vessels into the Temple, 1 King. 8. 4. and after this manner the
Lord refused Ephraim, and chose the Tribe of Judah and Mount Sion (of Benjamin)
which he loved. Psalm. 78. 68.

This brazen Altar was made and consecrated to be the public Altar for the
General Assemblies of all the twelve Tribes, Exodus 27. 1. Numb. 7. 1. and in
that respect where ever this Altar was placed, there was the chief High place,
until Solomon had made another brazen Altar in the place of it, 2 Chronicles. 4. 1.

At this Altar was offered the daily Morning and Evening sacrifices for all the
twelve Tribes, and the Passeovers of all the twelve Tribes, and they might not
be offered in any of the former private High places: The Hebrew Doctors say,
They sacrificed not the Passover in a private High-place (no not in the time
when private High Places were permitted) and whosoever offers the Passover
in a private High-place is beaten; for it is said in Deuteronomy. 16. 5. Thou may
not sacrifice the Passover in any of thy gates: we have been taught, that this
is a prohibition to kill it in a private High-place, although it be in the time
when private High Places were permitted. See Ains. in Deuteronomy. 16. 5. and such a
private Altar as this was at Bethlem where Ishai had a yearly Sacrifice, and
Feast for all the family, 1 Samuel 20. 26. and such a private Altar as this did
Saul build with stone, 1 Samuel 14. 35. And of these Altars it is said, that when
Asa and Jehosaphat destroyed the Idolatrous High Places, that they did not
destroy these High Places, 1 King. 22. 43. 2 Chronicles. 15. 17.

Now from all the premises it follows, That seeing they might not kill their
Passeovers at several High Places, nor sprinkle the blood on several Altars,
but at the general High-place, and at the general Altar only, That all the
Passeovers in Canaan could not be killed, and their blood sprinkled in so short
a time as about the time of Sunset, and therefore that Command in Deuteronomy. 16. 6.
at the going down of the Sun, must not be understood of the Sunset Evening,
but it must be understood of the whole time of the Suns declining from Midday
till Sunset, just according to the time of the two Evenings in Exodus 12. 6.

2. Let me add another Reason why the going down of the Sun in Deuteronomy. 16. 6.
cannot be understood of the time of Sunset; namely The Passover day was no
Sabbath, it was but a half holy day.
because the fifteenth day according to the date of the person purified, began
at Sunset; but no Passover might be sacrificed after the fifteenth day was
come, but all are commanded to be sacrificed in the fourteenth day at Even.

3. No other part of the fourteenth day was commanded to be kept holy, but the
Evening of the fourteenth day: The Jerusalemy, and the Babylonian Thalmuds say,
that men might follow their work and labor all the first half of the day; but
at Midday (say they) they must leave off, and begin their Rest. Maymony also
says, It is not unlawful to do work in the fourteenth of Nishan, save from the
midst of the day, and so forwards; But (says he) whosoever does work in the
Passover Evening after Midday, he is to be scourged o^ excommunicated,
because the Evening of the fourteenth day of Nishan, is not like to the Evening
of other Festival days, because in it is the Sacrifice, and the Feast. See
Ains. in Lev. 23. 5.

From these Testimonies of the Hebrew Doctors may be observed these four
Thalmudical Tenants.

1 That the fourteenth of Nishan was not a full holy day (as some do
unadvisedly affirm) it was no more but a half-holiday, namely the full Evening
only.

2 That the Jews observed two sorts of Evenings to every Sabbath; one before
the Sabbath for the date of the person purified; and another from Midday, and
so forwards; for the Evening of the 14. of Nishan (says Maymony) is not like
unto the evening of other Festival days, because in it is the Sacrifice, and
the Feast; But the Evening of other Festival days, meaning the Evening before,
had no sacrifice; but yet the Midday Evening of every Festival Sabbath was as
holy as the Passover Evening, and had Sacrifice, and feasting belonging to it.

3 That the Evening of the fourteenth day was the time of sacrificing all their
Passeovers.

4 That from the time of Sunset till Midnight was the time of Feasting on the
Passover, and that it belonged to the Evening of the fourteenth day.

Hence I conclude, that when Moses commanded them to kill all their Passeovers
in the Evening about the going down of the Sun, Deuteronomy. 16. 6. he did not mean it
of the Sunset Evening, but of the Midday Evening, for then the Sun does first
begin to go down, or decline.

Object. 4. If the business about the Passover was so restrained as you say
it was,

1 To be killed by the Priests and Levites only, 2 To be killed at one Temple
only, 3 And that the blood must be sprinkled at one Altar only,
Then I do not see how they could sacrifice all the Passeovers of Canaan
between the two Evenings from Midday to Sunset; for there could not be less
than a hundred thousand Passeovers and Peace Offerings, when all the twelve
Tribes met together, though you do allow twelve or thirteen persons to each
Passover.

Ans. I think I have made it evident already,

1 That all the Passeovers of Canaan were killed by the Priests and Levites
only. 2 In one Temple only. 3 That all their blood was sprinkled by the
Priests only. 4 On one Altar only, and all this was done in the appointed
season thereof, namely between the two Evenings.
And this was no impossible, but a fecible thing, if all circumstances of quick
dispatch be rightly weighed.

1 There was a competent number of Priests and Levites that waited upon this
service; for though at first the number of the Priests and Levites in the
Wilderness from thirty years old to fifty, was but eight thousand five hundred
and eighty, Number. 4. 48. yet at length they were so multiplied, that in the
days of David they were eight and thirty thousand men, 1 Chro. 23. 3. So many
hands therefore would make but light work of a hundred thousand Passeovers in
the time of the first Evening from Midday till Sunset.

2 The place where they killed all their Passeovers and Peace Offerings was not
strait, but conveniently spacious; for these kind of sacrifices might be killed
in any part of the Court of the Temple, because they were numbered among their
lighter holy things. But the most holy things, such as the Burnt-offering,
Sin-offering and Trespasse-offerings were, these must be killed nearer to the
Altar than the Passeovers and Peace Offerings were, namely upon the ground
close by the North-side of the Altar, Lev. 1. 11. Lev. 7. 2. But the light holy
things, such as the Passover, and Peace Offerings were, them they killed, and
received the blood in Bowls, in any part of the Courtyard, says Manymony. See
Ains. in Lev. 1. 11.

3 Though no Levite might sprinkle the blood of any Sacrifice upon the Altar,
yet for the quicker dispatch of many Sacrifices they might kill and receive the
blood in Bowls, and so bring it No ^evites, none but Priests only must
sprinkle the blood of the sacrifice upon the Altar.
to the Priests that stood ready at the foot of the Altar to receive it, and to
sprinkle it upon the Altar; for no Levite, but Priests only might sprinkle the
blood upon the Altar; for the sprinkling of the blood was of the Essence of the
sacrifice as the Hebrew Doctors do collect. See Ains. in Lev. 1. 5. 6. Exodus
12. 45. The Levites might kill, and flay, and receive the blood in Bowls, and
bring it to the Priests that stood ready to receive it at their hands at the
foot of the Altar, 2 Chronicles. 29. 34, 35. 2 Chro. 30. 17. 2 Chronicles. 35. 11. and
this occasioned the Priest to make the more quick dispatch; and especially
considering the Priests and Levites were so dextrous in their office they might
kill a hundred thousand Passeovers and Peace Offerings between Midday and
Sunset; and there is a clear example that all this was done in the time and
manner aforesaid in the eighteenth year of Josias, and yet there never was the
like Passover kept in Israel (namely not when Israel was joined with Judah,
there was not the like Passover, and yet doubtless, there were as many
Paschal Lambs, but never the like multitude of Peace Offerings that were added
to the Passover, and in that respect they were called the Passover, as they
are in Deuteronomy. 16. 2. 4.) from the days of Samuel the Prophet unto that day, 2
Chro. 35. 18.

Object. 5. How could so many thousand Passeovers be roasted in one Temple, and
how could so many thousand people sit there in companies to feast on their
Passeovers?

Ans. As for the great business of Rosting so many Passeovers, It was not tied
precizely to the Temple as the sacrificing was: for though there were many
Passeovers Roasted in the Temple, as there were in the days of Josiah, 2 Chronicles.
35. 13. yet that business might also be transmitted to any house in the Holy
City, as I showed a little before, and as the example of our Savior, and his
Apostles does testify; for our Savior was at Bethany, when he sent two of his
Disciples to make ready the Passover; 1 By carrying their Lamb to the Temple
to be sacrificed, and thence to a private house in the holy City to be roasted;
and as soon as the Sunset Evening was come, our Savior came to the place
appointed, and as soon as the hour for feasting was come, our Savior sat down
with the twelve, and he continued in feasting with the twelve first on the
Passover, and then 2 on their Peace Offerings, with his prayers and
exhortations, It was not convenient for above twenty persons to join together
for one Passover.
the full time of the latter Evening from Sunset till Midnight, Matthew. 26.
18, 20. By this example, we see that thirteen persons may conveniently join
together at one Passover, and the Hebrew Doctors say, That twenty may make
their account for one Lamb, Exodus 12. 4. but not above twenty.

By this means we may perceive that all the Passovers in Canaan might well be
dispatched in the Evening of the fourteenth day, in the first Evening they
might be all sacrificed, and in the second Evening they might all be feasted on
with Religious solemnity, without any doubt to the contrary.

Reason 3. I will now return to prove by a third Reason, that the going down of
the Sun in Deu. 16. 6. must be understood from the first going down of the Sun
from Midday till Sunset, because the next phrase will not suffer it to be
understood otherwise. At the season thou came out of Egypt.

Object. 6. Here it may be demanded what season was it in which they came out
of Egypt?

Answ. It was in the strength or in the body of the day, Exodus 12. 41. namely
it was about Midday. The Hebrew Doctors say, That as God brought Israel out of
Egypt at Midday, so he slew the firstborn of Egypt at Midnight. The
Israelites did not fly out of Egypt as persons frighted, either in the Sunset
Evening, or in the Twilight, as it were through stealth, or through fear, as
Zedekiah did out of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 12. but they went out of Egypt with a high
hand, in the fight of all the Egyptians, Numb. 33. 3. or they went out in the
strength or in the body of the day, for at Midday the Sun is in its greatest
strength, Prove. 4. 18. Psalm. 37. 6. Rev. 1. 16. but after the Midday is past,
namely as soon as the Sun is declined but a little toward the West, or toward
the place of Sunset, then the day is said to grow weak, so the Hebrew speaks,
Jud. 19. 19. for then the Sun has lost much of its strength which it had at
Midday, and then the day may be said to be spent, or to be bowed down, or
declined; all these phrases are used, and may be compared together, see Judge.
19. 19. with Mar. 6. 35. Luke 9. 19. and Luke 24 29.

Object. 7. Perhaps this phrase, At the season thou came out of Egypt, does
not mean the time of the day, but the time of the year when they departed, and
according to that time of the year Moses does command them to kill all their
Passovers.

Answ. This Objection argues great ignorance in the plain story: For the time
of the year when they came out of Egypt, was on the fifteenth day of Nishan,
Number. 33. 3. But Moses did straightly command them to kill all their Passeovers on
the fourteenth day of Nishan between the two Evenings; and this fourteenth day
was so strictly commanded that it might not be altered, though it fell out upon
a Sabbath day; Therefore this phrase, At the season thou came out of Egypt,
must not be understood of the time of the year, but of the time of the day
only, which was in the strength of the day, that is to say at Midday, in this
season they are commanded to begin to kill their Passeovers in Canaan, Exodus
12. 6. Lev. 23. 5. Number. 9. 3.

Object. 8. May not the sacrificing of the Passover be changed from the A
digression to open some difficult phrases about the passover, and they are the
more difficult, because they are borrowed from the Dialect of the Thalmud.
fourteenth day, to the fifteenth day; seeing Matthew. says thus, On the first
day of Unleavened-bread, the Disciples came to Jesus, saying, Where will thou
that we prepare for thee to eat the Passover, Matthew. 26. 17. Now the first day
of Vnleavened-bread was the fifteenth day of Nishan?

Answ. This day which is called the First day of Unleavened bread, cannot be
rightly understood without the knowledge of the Jewish ancient Customs, which
are now for our information recorded in the Thalmuds; and because this, and
many other phrases in the New Testament are recorded in the Thalmuds, we may
well say, That the New Testament does often Thalmudize, because it uses many
terms that are no where else to be found but in the ancient Hebrew Doctors,
and in the Thalmuds only.

Now for Answer in a more special manner, the Hebrew Doctors do comprehend
under the general term of the Feast of Unleavened-bread (and more especially
under the first day of Unleavened-bread) the Feast of the Paschal Lamb; for
though they are two distinct Feasts, yet they are also so interwoven together,
that they may well be called the one for the other; for though the Paschal Lamb
was always sacrificed on the 14. day between the two Evenings, yet the time of
feasting on that holy flesh, was after Sunset, which was after the fifteenth
day (called the first of Unleavened-bread) was begun, according to the date of
the person purified; and yet the Feast of this Evening was no part of the Feast
of Unleavened-bread, for the sacrifices of that day were not yet killed; but
this Feast was the proper Feast of the Passover belonging to the fourteenth
day, and with the Passover also they might not eat any Leavened (but
Unleavened) bread, and in this respect Maymony does call the Feast of the
Paschal Lamb, the Feast of Unleavened-bread, and sometimes he calls the seven
days of the proper Feast of Unleavened bread by the name of the Passover,
interchangeably confounding the termer. See Ains. in Lev. 23. 7. and in this
sense also Targum Jonathan calls the second day of Unleavened-bread, the day
that followed the first good day of Passover. See Ains. in Lev. 23. 15.

Hence* you see, that he calls the first day of Unleavened-bread, The first good
day of the Passover, and so interchangeably they call the proper feast of the
Pascha, the first day of Unleavened-bread; and from this usual dialect among
them the Evangelist Matthew says, That the Disciples came to Jesus Christ on
the first day of Unleavened bread, saying, Where will thou that we prepare for
thee to ^at the Passover? And thus the Evangelists speak according to the
Jewish Customs; sometimes they call the proper feast of the Pascha, the first
of Unleavened-bread, as Matthew. 26. 17. and Mark. 14. 12. and sometimes they
call the proper Feast of Unleavened-bread by the name of the Passover, as Luke
does, chap. 22. 1.

But yet secondly, The Hebrew Doctors do sometimes distinguish the proper Feast
of the Pascha from the first day of the proper Feast of Unleavened bread;
Charkumi calls the Evening of the first good day, and that Night, the
Passover; But (says he) the residue of the Feast from the first Night, and so
forwards, is called the Feast of Unleavened-cakes; See Ains. in Lev. 23. 6. and
according to this distinction speaks the Evangelist Mark, Mar. 14. 1. after
two days followed the Pascha, and the Unleavened-bread; and this distinction
does also agree with the twofold Command in Moses, In the fourteenth day of the
first month is the Passover; And in the fifteenth day (which begins at
Sunset) is the Feast, Numb. 28. 16, 17.

Object. 9. Mr. Weams and others, do affirm, That the Jews ate not the Passover
on the fourteenth of Nishan as Christ did, but transferred it to the fifteenth
day, and to the beginning of the sixteenth day; and he gives this reason for
it, because the next day (after Christ had eaten his Passover) is called the
Preparation-day to the Jewish Passover, Joh. 18. 28. Joh. 19. 14. Hence he
infers, that the Jews transferred the eating of the Passover till the next day
after Christ had eaten his. See Weams on the Ceremonial Laws, Page 89. and the
Annotat. of our old English Bibles in Mat. 26.

Ans. I believe that Mr. Weames and others have no better ground for this
tenent but some frivolous Authors, and therefore Mr. Godwin does put a note of
dislike upon such as follow such frivolous Authors; and indeed it is a great
impiety for us Christians to slander them with so gross a transgression as
this; I believe that the Jews, in their corruptest times before Christ, were
very strict in observing the letter of the Command, and more zealous also to
punish such as did openly practice the contrary; and it is most evident, that
they held so close to the letter of the Command, that they would not transfer
it to any other day, though i^ fell out to be on a Sabbath day; it is a
received Canon among them, that the keeping of the Pascha on the fourteenth of
Nishan does put away the Sabbath, as I have noted it formerly.

Secondly, The Evangelist Mark does testify on the Jews behalf against all
men, that they kept the Pascha in the very selfsame day that our Lord and his
Disciples did, for Mark does express it thus; In the first day of unleavened
Bread, [when they Sacrificed the Passeover] his Disciples said unto him, Where
will thou that we go and prepare that thou may eat the Passover? Mark 14.
12. this term [when they] namely when the Jews in general sacrificed the
Passover, then his Disciples said unto him, Where will thou that we go and
prepare, that thou (as well as they) may eat the Passover on the self-same
day as the Jews in general did.

Thirdly, Christ himself does bear witness, that the Jews in general did keep
the Pascha in the very self-same day that he did; Ye know (said Christ unto
his Disciples) that after two days the Pascha is kept, Mat. 26. 2. he says,
You know it, that the Pascha is then kept; it was a known custom among them,
that after two days the Pascha is kept, namely generally of all the Jews.

Fourthly, The Hebrew Doctors do protest, that they punish him that passes the
fourteenth day for the killing of the Pascha; Maymony says, it is an express
Commandment to kill the Pascha in the month Nishan, in the 14th. day, and
(says he) he that breaks this Commandment and kills it not in the 14th.
day, being not defiled, nor in a far journey, is guilty of being rooted out (or
cut off) thus the Jews protest against our slander. See Bro. in his
Advertisement of corruptions in Religion, p. 104.

Fifthly, This our gross mistake of the Jews practice does arise from our
mistake of the meaning of the word Passover, in John 18. 28. he says thus;
The Jews went not into Pilates common Hall test they should be defiled, but
that they might eat the Passover; and in chapter 19. 14. John says, It was the
preparation of the Passover, and about the sixth hour. Hence some that are not
well acquainted with the Jews customs, which are now recorded in their Thalmuds,
as the learned do observe, have collected this inference, that the Jews
transferred the Passover from the evening of the fourteenth day, to the
evening of the fifteenth day, and also to the sixteenth day; but indeed in this
term Passover John does Thalmudize, and therefore without the help of the
Hebrew Doctors it is not easy to spel John's meaning; they apply the term
Passover not only to the proper Feast of the Pascha, but (as I noted in my
answer to the former objection) they use it as a general term for the whole
Feast of unleavened Bread, and in that respect they count all the days of it as
if they were the days of the Passover; but more especially they did account
the first day of unleavened Bread to be a Passover day, because they did then
feast on the Peace Offerings belonging to the Passover, for they sacrificed
with the Paschal Lamb on the fourteenth day, certain Peace Offerings of Sheep
or Oxen, and these voluntary Peace Offerings they called the Passover, because
they were sacrificed together with the Paschal Lamb on the fourteenth day; and
by the Law they might be eaten for the space of two days and one night, Levit.
7. 16. now the Jews had eaten the Paschal Lamb the night before, but they had
not as yet ended their feasting on these Peace Offerings, which John calls the
Passover; the term Passover in this last sense is not understood of many; but
Mr. Broughton and Mr. Ainsworth have given special notice of the word Passover
in this sense, and that the Hebrew Doctors had grounded their common use of it
on the Law, in Deuteronomy. 16. 2. 4. and Mr. Broughton cites Solomon Jarchi speaking
thus in Deuteronomy. 16. If many belong to one Passover, then they add to it
Chagiga, Oxen, for the Holy Day feast, and says Jarchy (presently after) the
proper sense of the Scripture is, that the flesh of the Chagigah-Passeover,
which thou do sacrifice in the evening with the Lamb-Passeover, shall be eaten
in the fourteenth day, and in the fifteenth day (take notice by the way that he
makes no mention of the sixteenth day, as Mr. Weames does most falsely.)

Maymony also says, When they offered the Passover in the first Month, they
offered it with the Peace Offerings of the fourteenth day, Oxen, or
Flock-beasts, great or small, Male or Female; but they offered not the Chagigah
if the Lamb sufficed the company, and so it was voluntary and not forced by
(any affirmative) Commandment, and it was eaten two days and one night (and not
in the second night, as M. Weames does mistakingly say.)

In these words Maymony does tell us, that John spoke from the depth of
Thalmudique knowledge, and in this sense also does Mr. Ainsworth explain the
equivocation of the word Passover from the Hebrew Doctors, in Deuteronomy. 16. 2, 4.
and in Lev. 7. 16.

John says it was morning and they went not into P^ae^orion that they might
not be defiled, but might eat the Pass^over; not the Passover strictly taken,
for that was eaten the night before; but that they might eat their voluntary
Peace Offerings which they had sacrificed with the Lamb-Passeover the day
before, and which by the Laws allowance they might feast on all the next day
till Sunset, but no longer, Lev. 7. 16.

These Peace Offerings are called the Passover by the Lawonce, in Deuteronomy. 16. 2.
and they are also clearly comprehended under the term Passover in 2 C^ron. 35.
11. but they are most usually called the Passover in the Writings of the
Hebrew Doctors, and from their custom John does use the word Passover in their
sense.

John says it was morning, and it was the preparation of the Passover, and
about the sixth hour, which sixth hour, according to their account by their
great hours, began at our ten a Clock, and ended with our twelve a Clock, and
this time was called the Jews preparation in order to their Passover Dinner,
and in that respect they were afraid to come into Pilates Common Hall lest they
should be defiled, and so might be made unfit to eat the Passeovers
Peace Offerings at Dinner time.

Object. 10. You say that by the allowance of the Law the Jews might feast on
the Peace Offerings that were offered with the Passover, for two days and one
night, namely, till the next day at Sunset, but not after Sunset; but John
speaks of another preparation to the Sabbath, his words in chap. 19. 31. run
thus; The Jews then because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not
remain upon the Cross (for that Sabbath was a high day) besought Pilate that
their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken down.

Ans. This preparation is indeed a differing preparation from the former, the
former was their fore-noon preparation to their Passover Dinner, but this
preparation was nigh unto Sunset, and so consequently it approached apace unto
that festival Supper, that did properly belong unto the Feast of unleavened
Bread, and in that respect they besought Pilate that their legs might be
broken, and that they might be taken down, lest their cruelty, in suffering
them to hang longer on the Tree, should be a blot to their joyful Feast, for
this day was the first of unleavened Bread, which was the first and the chief
of all their High Sabbaths: Now as soon as the chief Priests had made this
request to Pilate, Joseph of Arimathea did wisely espy the advantage of time,
and then he also went boldly unto Pilate, requesting that he might have the
Body of Jesus in his own power to bury it. The time when this was done was when
the Evening was come, as two Evangelists do witness, Mat. 27. 17. Mar. 15. 42.
and so Tindall in his Bible does translate and expound Mark 15. 42. thus, When
night was come, because it was the evening that goes before the Sabbath.

This preparation therefore in Joh. 19. 31. must needs be in relation to their
solemn Festival Supper, which did properly belong to this High Sabbath, as John
does call it.

Before Dinner the Jews were careful lest they should be defiled, by going into
Pilates Judgment Hall, and so should have been hindered from their Festival
Dinner, and now also at Sunset they take the like care to avoid cruelty, etc.

If this Sabbath spoken of had been the weekly Sabbath, or seventh Day, then
though they had been defiled they might have resorted to their Synagogues, for
there the clean and the unclean might meet together every Sabbath, or seventh
Day, as I have observed in Chap. 4. but in case they had been defiled by any
accident whatsoever at Sunset, they could not have eaten of their festival
Sabbath-supper, for all Israel were admonished to be clean at every solemn
Feast, says Maymony.

Obj. 11. Why does John call the first day of the Feast of unleavened Bread a
high Sabbath? Joh. 19. 31.

Ans. All the seven solemn Festival Sabbaths in Levit. 23. 7. are called High
Feasts by the Geneva, in Eze. 45. 17. But secondly, this first day of the Feast
of unleavened Bread was the very first of all those seven Sabbaths, it was the
day in which the Lord brought them out of Egypt with a high hand, and
therefore the Lord did in a special manner charge them to remember this day for
ever, Exodus 13. 3. this Day and the weekly Sabbath have the word remember
prefixed before them more than any other Sabbaths, and in this regard the
Hebrew Doctors in Deuteroproton, and in (...) do call Pascha day a great
Sabbath, but they do not give this high title to the proper Passover day, for
that was no Sabbath, it was but half Holy Day, and therefore Moses does not
reckon it into the number of the Festival Sabbaths, in Genesis 23. but they mean
it of the first day of the Feast of unleavened Bread, this day they called a
great Sabbath, and Pascha Day, because in it they did festivally eat the
remainder of their Peace Offerings, which they had offered with the
Lamb-Passeover on the fourteenth day.

But though they held this day to be a great Festival Sabbath, and showed great
reverence to it now in their request to Pilate, because it was the^r
preparation time to their Festival Supper, yet in the morning they held it
lawful to judge Causes of Life and Death, as we may see they did in our
Saviors case, and after Sunset they held it lawful not only to bury, but also
to imbalm the Dead, as the godly persons did to our Savior. See Ains. in Lev.
23. 56. but they did not hold any of this work lawful to be done on their
weekly Sabbath, Luke 23. 56.

Obj. 12. Why does John use the term Sabbath twice over in John 19. 31. does he
speak but of one kind, or of two sorts of Sabbaths?

Ans. John speaks but of one high Festival Sabbath only, now it was their
immediate preparation to their high Festival Sabbath-Supper, and therefore
having satisfied their malice on Christ, they besought Pilate that their legs
might be broken, and that they might be taken down, for that Sabbath was a high
Sabbath. I grant also that the weekly Sabbath was now begun, according to the
date of the person purified, but not the seventh Day it self, for this high
Festival Sabbath was now in its full force, and in its solemn Feast.

Secondly, The time of Christ's Burial is noted by Luke to be when the said
Festival Sabbath did begin to lighten, Luke 23. 54 The time of Christ's burial
was at Starlight.
so does Mr. Broughton and Mr. Weames read it, and so does the Syriac read it;
in this phrase the Evangelist Luke does plainly Thalmudize, his words run thus;
That day was the preparation, and the Sabbath began to lighten; two things are
observable; 1. Luke says this day was the preparation, namely to their
festival Supper. 2. He describes the exact time when Christ was enclosed in the
heart of the earth; it was when this High Sabbath began to lighten, namely, in
the first place with the Evening Star, and that was a perspicuous mark of the
near time of their Festival Supper, but they did not begin their Festival
Supper till three Stars appeared, as I have noted in chap. 4. and Luke does
relate to this custom of theirs, in showing that the time of Christ's Burial
was, when the Sabbath began to lighten; but I believe the chief Priests did
defer the time of their feasting now somewhat longer than at other times,
because they had some business to do with Pilate before they could intend
their Festival Supper, for they went to Pilate to entreat him, that the
Sepulcher might be made sure until the third day, because this Deceiver said,
that he would rise again the third day, Mat. 27. 62, 63. This request of theirs
no doubt did occasion their delay to begin their High Sabbath Supper till more
than three Stars appeared in the Sky this night.

Obj. 12. You say the Priests went to Pilate to entreat him to make sure the
Sepulcher before they kept their Festival Supper; but it is out of doubt (I
think) that they did not go to Pilate till the next morning, for Matthew calls
the time of their going to Pilate the next day that followed their preparation,
Mat. 27. 63.

Ans. Ignorance of the I^wish Customs makes many misconstructions, the next day
began at Sunset, as I have sufficiently explained the matter in Chap. 4. Sect.
2. and this day followed their Preparation to their Festival Supper, for their
preparation in the afternoon was either by washing away of some light
d^filements, or else it was their preparation of holy flesh by offering
sacrifices, etc.

But Matthews meaning lies fair and round thus; The next day (after their
preparation) which began at the Sunset evening, they assembled unto Pilate to
make the foresaid request. Hence note, that they did not go to Pilate to make
this request till the next day, namely, not till after Sunset, and then also
they had commission to make him sure, by appointing such a Watch; and all this
they did after it was Starlight.

Their Satanical policy would not suffer them to stay so long as until the next
morning, for then Pilate would have said to them, Why did you neglect to set a
Watch about his Sepulcre over night, as soon as he was buried, for if his
Disciples had had any mind to steal him away they would have done it in the
first part of the night? and doubtless when the Soldiers came to the chief
Priests to tell them what had happened, the chief Priests would have said that
his Disciples stole him away before they began their watch; but the chief
Priests could not plead that excuse because they went presently to the
sepulcher, and made it sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch, Matthew. 27.
66. Hence it follows, that they went to Pilate in the beginning of their next
Ceremonial day, namely presently after Sunset before they began their Festival
Supper.

2 Pilates answer to their request implies that they came overnight, for Pilate
says, You have a Watch, go make it sure as you know. Hence it follows, that
they came to Pilate when Watches were wont to be set; but if they had not come
to him til the next morning, then in reason he would have said, Get Warders,
and make it sure. Hence it follows, that the next day in which they came to
Pilate was at the Sunset Evening, for that was their next day, or it was their
morrow, as I have opened, 1 Samuel 30. 17. and Lev. 27. 15. All these
considerations laid together make it evident that the time ere Christ was
enclosed in the heart of the earth, was when the Sabbath began to lighten with
stars.

Object. 13. How can you call their Festival Supper the proper Feast that does
most properly belong to the first day of Vnleavened-bread; had they not a
Festival Dinner belonging to this High Sabbath as well as a Festival Supper?

Ans. I grant they had a Festival Dinner belonging to this day, as well as a
Festival Supper; but my meaning is, that their Festival Dinner was not entirely
made of the sacrifices of this day, as their Festival Supper was: for part of
their Festival Dinner (at least) was made of the Remainder of those
Peace Offerings which were sacrificed in the former day with the
Lamb-Passeover, and so by that means their festival Dinner did partake of the
Sacrifices of the fourteenth day; but their Festival Supper was made entirely
of the Sacrifices of the fifteenth day, and yet this Sabbath-Feast was kept in
the night after the date of the Ceremonial beginning of the sixteenth day, in
which none of the flesh of their Chagigah-Passeover might remain, for that had
been to keep the holy flesh within the third day, which was plainly prohibited
by the letter of the Law: Hence it follows, that all the flesh of their
Chagigah-Passeover must be eaten at Dinner, or else if any of it did remain
until the beginning of the sixteenth day it must be burnt, Lev. 7. 17. and
therefore it follows that this high Sabbath-Supper was entirely made of the
Sacrifices of the fifteenth day, and in that respect, it was the most proper
solemn Feast of this High Sabbath.

Object 14. It seems to me that Moses does allow the flesh of the
Chagigah-Passeover to remain unto the morning of the third day, in Deu. 16. 4.
and that is a longer time than you speak of from Lev. 7. 17.

Ans. Boker, the morning, in Deu. 16. 4. must not be taken in a Boker, the
morn^ng, is put for the beginning of the Jews Ceremonial day at Sunset.
proper sense, either for the beginning of the natural day, or of the morning
of the Artificial day; but in this place, it must be taken figuratively for the
beginning of the Jews Ceremonial day at Sunset; for as Boker, the morning, is
properly put for the beginning of the Natural day, or of the Artificial day, so
also it is figuratively put for the beginning of any other thing (as in Chap.
3. I have given several instances) and accordingly in this place it is
figuratively put for the beginning of the Ceremonial day at Sunset; for Moses
in Deuteronomy. 16. 4. might not give a contrary Law to what he had before given in
Lev. 7. 17. There he does expressly say, that none of the flesh of the voluntary
Peace Offerings shall remain until the third day, if any thing thereof remain
until the third day it shall be burnt. Hence it follows by necessary
consequence, that Boker, the morning, in Deu. 16. 4. must be taken in a
figurative sense for the beginning of their Ceremonial day at Sunset, and
therefore none of the flesh of the Chagigah-Passeover, (Moses does not speak of
the Lamb-Passeover in Deuteronomy. 16. 2. but of the Cagigah-Passeover) of Sheep and
Oxen, which were sacrificed in the fourteenth day with the Paschal Lamb, none
of this flesh might remain until the beginning, or until the morning of the
sixteenth day at Sunset, for then the flesh would have remained until the
third day after it was sacrificed, and then might not be eaten, but it must be
burnt.

Secondly, The Hebrew Doctors testify, that the flesh of their voluntary
Peace Offerings must remain but one whole night after it was sacrificed, and so
consequently but one natural morning. Maymony says thus, By word of mouth we
have learned that this is a prohibition for leaving the flesh of the Cagigah of
the fourteenth day unto the sixteenth day, as it said [unto the morning] that
is till the morning of the second day. See Ains. in Deu. 16. 4. their meanings,
that it should not be kept until the beginning (or until the morning) of the
sixteenth day, which begins at Sunset; in these words Moses does truly, though
figuratively, call the Sunset Evening, the morning, in Deuteronomy. 16. 4. This is a
mystery that belongs peculiarly to the Ceremonial Law, which the inexpert
cannot presently perceive; the like mystery it is to call the beginning of the
Jews Ceremonial day, the morrow, as it is three times over called in Lev. 23.
11, 15, 16. and once more in 1 Samuel 30. 17. as it is explained in Chap. 4. and
it is called their next day in Mat. 27. 62.

And it is a further mystery also that the Jews Ceremonial day should begin six
hours before the Natural day is ended. As for example, The fifteenth day of
Nishan was the first day of Unleavened bread, and a high Sabbath, and by their
Ceremonial custom it began before the Evening of the fourteenth day was ended;
for the Passover of the fourteenth day was not feasted on till after Sunset,
namely, not till after the fifteenth day by their Ceremonial account was begun,
according to the date of the person purified. These are Riddles to such as are
not studious in the Jews customs: They could not keep their Religious Festival
Suppers in the same Ceremonial day, for then they must have kept them the night
before their Sacrifices were offered, which was impossible; therefore the night
after their Festival Sabbaths, was the proper night of the Sabbaths by
Creation, though not by Ceremony; for the Ceremonial day, in which the polluted
person must be purified against their festival Sabbaths, must needs begin the
date of their new day before hand; and yet they must also keep the Festival
Supper appertaining to the Sabbath in the night after, and so by this means,
the Ceremonial day was interwoven with the Natural day for the several respects
already named, and therefore this phrase, It shall be eaten in the same day, in
which the Sacrifice was offered, Lev. 7. 15. and Lev. 22. 30. must not, nor
cannot be understood of the same Ceremonial day, but it may, and must be
understood of the same Natural day.

Object. 15. What need had they to keep their Religious Feasts in the night
after the Sabbath? was not the whole day from Sunset to Sunset sufficient?

Ans. It was not sufficient, because they must feast upon their Evening
sacrifices, as well as upon their Morning sacrifices, but they could not feast
upon their Evening sacrifices until after Sunset, because many times the
Evening sacrifices were not finished till Sunset, 2 Chronicles. 35. 14. therefore
they must of necessity have the night after as the appointed season for the
solemnity of their Religious Suppers; and therefore the Sunset Evening before
was not the beginning of the Natural day, it was but the beginning of the new
day to the person purified, he must of necessity begin his new day then, or
else he could not partake in the solemnities of their Sacrifices the day
following; but the Sunset Evening after the Sabbath was a natural part of the
former day, and the proper Feast of the Sabbath was then celebrated; and the
Prophet Isaiah has reference to this Custom, when he says, Ye shall have a
Song as in the Night, when a holy Solemnity is kept, Isa. 30. 29. for they kept
their Religious Suppers till Midnight, and it is evident that all their
Religious Feasts were kept with songs and with such like expressions of joy in
the Messiah for his Redemption, Es. 23. 15. Deu. 16. 15. Judge. 21. 19, 21. and
in this respect, all kind of sadness and mourning was forbidden at their
solemn Feasts, because it did profane that joyful Ordinance, Lev. 10. 19. Neh.
8. 10.

Object. 16. You seem to limit the time of their solemn Festival Supper, but
until Midnight, but the prohibition in Lev. 7. 15. says, Ye shall not leave
ought thereof until the morning; This implies a permission to continue their
Religious Feasting, not only until Midnight, as you would have it, but
until daybreak, as the Hebrew Doctors expound it.

Ans. I confess the Hebrew Doctors do expound the word Morning in this Text to
mean daybreak, but yet they do also often correct that Exposition, for they
say more than once, that they feared it might be a transgression to continue
the time of their solemn Suppers any longer than till Midnight.

The Hebrew Doctors say, That not only the sacrifice of confession of
Peace Offerings (but of other kinds of sacrifices also) might be eaten all the
night long till break of day; As for example, The Nazarites Ram, and the bread
that came with it, whether it were the portion of the Priests, or the portion
of the Owners, These might be eaten all the night long til break of day; and
the same law they say was for the Sin Offerings, and for the Trespas-offerings,
and for the Peace Offerings of the Congregation, and for the residue of the
Meat Offerings: All these (say the Hebrew Doctors, may be eaten all the night
long till break of day: But yet (says Maymony) To keep men far from
Transgression, our wise men have said, They are not to be eaten, but until
MIDNIGHT. See Ains. in Lev. 7. 18.

In like sort, they say of the residue of the Burnt-offerings, that they might
lie burning upon the Altar all the night long until the morning; that is (say
they) till break of day, Lev. 6. 9. but yet they do also correct that
Interpretation; for they say, Our wise men have said, that the Priests might
not let the fats or pieces of the Burnt-offering lie burning upon the Altar,
but until Midnight, for fear of Transgression.

The Hebrew Doctors say also, that they might continue feasting upon the flesh
of the Paschal Lamb till morning, Exodus 12. 10. that is (say they) till break
of day; but yet they say also that none of the company might eat again after he
had slept, though it were in the beginning of the night. See Ains. in Exodus 12.
10. Hence it is evident that they did allow none to make any more but one
distinct meal of the Paschal Lamb; and truly so small a creature needed not so
long a time to feast on it (but their voluntary Peace Offerings which they
offered with the Paschal Lamb, and in that respect did call them the Passover,
they might feast upon that flesh till daybreak, for they had two days
allowance to eat them by the Law, Lev. 7. 17, 18.) therefore seeing they might
make but one meal of the Lamb-Passeover, why should any man think of a longer
time to feast on it than till the Midnight Morning? if it had been requisite
to feast on it till day break, our Savior would have improved the full time;
but it is evident that he did finish all by Midnight, not only the Supper of
the Paschal Lamb, but also the Peace Offerings, which he adjoined to the
Paschal Lamb, Joh. 13. 12. (This 12. Ver. says, when he was set down again,
namely, after he had ended the Lamb-Passeover in Verse 2. then he arose from
Supper, and washed his Disciples feet, Verse 3. then he sat down again to
feast upon the Chagigah-Passeover, Verse 12. At which Feast they used to drink
two or three cups of Wine, which our Savior improved for the institution of
his own Supper; they had no common Supper this night as some unadvisedly speak,
but all the flesh they ate was holy flesh, and all their Feasting was with
Religious joy for their Redemption) together with his long Exhortations,
Thanksgivings, Prayers and Psames. I apprehend it was much about the time of
Midnight, or rather before, when he had ended all.

And it does further appear that the Hebrew Doctors did fear it might be a
Transgression to continue at their Religious Feasting The Jews accounted the
first half of the night to be a part of the former day in the case of their
religi^us Feasting on their Passeovers.
on the Pascha till the morning at daybreak, because they do of ten limit the
time of their Religious Feasting, but until Midnight.

Maymony says, That the two Lambs which were presented as a Meat Offering,
together with the Two Loaves for the Peace Offerings of the Congregation, on
the day of Penticost, were eaten by the Priests in the Same Day, and in Half
the Night, as the flesh of the most Holy things were. See Ains. in Lev. 23. 20.
By this Testimony it is evident, that all their holy things were eaten in the
same day, and in half the night, except their voluntary Peace Offerings, for
they had allowance from the Law to feast on that flesh two days, and one
night, Lev. 7. 17, 18. Deuteronomy. 16. 2. 10.

Secondly, Consider this well; for though the Hebrew Doctors do sometimes say,
that the fats and the pieces of the Burntoffering may lie burning upon the
Altar all night till break of day, yet they do also say, that their Wise men
did advise the Priests not to continue the burning upon the Altar any longer
than till Midnight, and in Exodus 23. 8. the Lord says, The fat of my Feast
shall not remain until the morning therefore it must be wholly consumed with
fire before daybreak. And indeed, they might not continue the burning any
longer than til Midnight without manifest Transgression, esp^cially at
festival times; for at festival times, says Maymony, The Priests must take
away the ashes from the Altar at the beginning of the third part of the night;
But on Reconciliation-days they took away the ashes at Midnight. See Ains. in
Lev. 6. 10. By this Hebrew Canon it is evident that they could not continue the
burning of the fats and pieces of the Evening sacrifices until daybreak
without transgressing this necessary order in cleansing the Altar by way of
preparation to the morning sacrifices, for they might not do any other work
about the morning sacrifice till the ashes were taken from the Altar, for that
was the first work in order to the morning sacrifice, and they could not do
that work until the burning of the fats, and of the pieces of the Evening
sacrifices were finished; therefore they might not continue the burning any
longer than till Midnight (at sometimes at least) without Transgression,
especially in the night before the day of Reconciliation, for then the Priests
must take away the ashes from the Altar at Midnight; and by this it is evident
that the ancient Hebrew Doctors held that the morning (namely the root of it)
began at Midnight, because they did then give order to set things in a
readiness for the morning Sacrifice; and after this work was done, they had
many other things to set in order before they could offer the morning
Sacrifice, and the usual time of killing the morning Sacrifice was before
Sunrising, but on Expiation-day it was killed at daybreak. See Ains. in Number.
28. 4. and Lev. 16. 4.

By these Records of the Hebrew Doctors, we may see the true Reason why they
feared it might be a Transgression to continue the burning any longer than till
Midnight, and why they feared it might be a Transgression to continue their
Festival Suppers any longer than till Midnight; it was because they held the
root of the morning to begin at Midnight; And Maymony says, Grateful is a
Commandment that is done in the hour of the same. See Ains. in Lev. 6. 10.

And hence my Answer is to this Objection, it is the safest way to expound the
word Morning, in Lev. 7. 15. and in Lev. 22. 30. etc. to signify, that the
root or the first beginning of the morning is at Midnight, for fear of
Transgression.

After this Treatise was ready for the Press, I met with a passage in Dr. See
his third part of his Harmony. p 194.
Leightfoot on Mark 1. 35. worth the inserting into this place.

Although (says he) the Jews did precisely begin their day from Sunsetting;
yet did they also make the Midnight a distinctive period to part between day
and day, so as to determine Rem Diei, in Diem suum.

Talmud in Beracoth, Per. 1. From what time do they say over their Phylacteries
at Even? From the time that the Priests go in to eat their portion of the
Sacrifices, till the end of their first Watch; But says R. Eliezer, The Wise
men said until M^dnight.

Ibid. in Pesach in Per. 10. The Passover after Midnight defiles the hands.

Jona Per. 1. and Maym. in Tamid. in Per. 2. The cleansing of the
Burnt-offering Altar on the day of Expiation began from Midnight.

Talm. in Zeuach in Per. 5. Trespasse-offerings might be eaten till midnight.

Ibid. Lesser holy Offerings may be eaten till Midnight.

Ibid. The Passover is not eaten but in the night; and it is not eaten but
till Midnight.

The meaning of these Passages is, That whereas these things were to be done to
day, and might not be put off till to morrow: If they were done any time before
Midnight, it was reputed current, as done to day.

Their Phylacteries were to be said over every day at Even: If they were said
over before Midnight, it served the turn for the day before.

And the parts of the Offerings that were to be eaten in the same day that the
Offering was offered (and might not be kept till the morrow) if they were eaten
before Midnight, it did serve the turn for the day before.

The Altar of Burnt-offering was to be cleansed every day; but on the day of
Expiation it began to be cleansed from the Midnight before, and that was taken
as done on the day of Expiation. (And so they observed to feast on the
Passover, but until Midnight.)

These things I have produced the rather, because of this passage in Mark 1.
35. which calls it the Morning; and yet it was (...), much of the Night yet
remaining: for as they reckoned up till Midnight for the day that was past; So
they reckoned the morning to begin at Midnight to the day following.

Were I to discuss the Question about the beginning and ending of our
Christian Sabbath, I should think this matter worth consideration to that
purpose.

And something parallel to this are those Texts in Exodus 12. 22. None of you
shall go out of the door of his house until the morning; yet verse 29. at
Midnight the Lord smote the Firstborn, etc. verse 33. And the Egyptians were
urgent upon the people that they might send them out, Deuteronomy. 16. 1. and God
brought thee forth of Egypt by Night.

Now this Morning in Mar. 1. 35. in which Christ rose so very early, and went
out to pray, was on the morrow after the Sabbath; the day on which the
Christian Sabbath was fixed ere long, which may not be unobserved, since so
special* a matter is mentioned of that day.

Thus far out of Doctor Leightfoot, which does illustrate and strengthen that
which I have said in sundry places, about the beginning of the morning at
midnight.

Secondly, I come now to speak of the second Part of the Passover Evening,
which was for the use of their Religious Feasting from Sunset to midnight.

After my long digression to answer several Objections about the Jews customs,
I come now to speak of the second part of the Passover Evening, appointed for
the time of their religious Feasting on their Passeovers, and that was from
Sunset to Midnight, and this space of time was all the latter evening.

And this is evident,

1 By the appointment of Moses. 2 By the practice of our Savior.
1 Moses appointed all Israel to eat the flesh of the Paschal Lamb [In that
Night] Exodus 12. 8, 42. namely in that part of the night that belonged to the
fourteenth day by Creation.

2 It is evident that Christ did not sit down to eat the Passover with his
twelve Apostles, until the latter evening was come; for Christ himself was in
the fore-noon, or in the beginning of the afternoon at Bethany, when he sent
two of his Disciples to Jerusalem to prepare the Passover, and to present it
to the Priests to be killed for them all between the two evenings, Mar. 14. 3.
12. 13. then after it was sacrificed he bad them carry it to such a house, and
make it ready against his coming, and in thus doing he did according to the
Jews custom, for their custom was, that if thirteen or twenty did join together
for one Passover, they did send one or two of their company to present it to
the Priest, and so to make it ready for the rest. See Ains. in Numb. 9. 12.
then at Sunset they all met together, and began the feast at the hour
appointed. This custom our Savior observed, for he came not in person to
Jerusalem til the latter evening was come, Mat. 26 20. Mar. 14. 17. and when he
was come he did not sit down to eat until the appointed hour was come, Luke 22.
14. this hour in general was the latter evening at Sunset, but the particular
hour of their feasting was not by the Hebrew Doctors Canons until three Stars
did appear after Sunset. See Ains. in Lev. 22. 9.

^ It is evident that our Savior did not begin to Feast on his Passover
until the said evening was come, and it is evident also, that he finished all
his religious exercises and solemnities within the space of this latter
evening, from sunset till midnight, as I have opened the matter more in my
answer to the sixteenth objection.

Object. 17. How can you prove that the Passeover-Supper was celebrated in the
night of the fourteenth day, seeing you confess that the fifteenth day began
that night at Sunset; and the Hebrew Doctors affirm, that the flesh of the
Paschal Lamb was eaten in the fifteenth night; how then can that night
appertain both to the fourteenth, and to the fifteenth day?

Ans. It was the fifteenth night, according to the date of the person purified,
as I have opened the matter in chap. 4. and otherwhere, but in regard of the
Feast it did still properly appertain to the fourteenth day. As for example, if
a Jew were defiled on the Passover day by any of the lighter sorts of
uncleanesses, what course must he take that he might not be deprived of the
Passover Feast? the answer is, he must bathe or baptize himself in Water, at
the looking forth of the evening, that is to say, in the afternoon; And what
then? might he then carry his Lamb to the Temple to be sacrificed? No, he
might not yet go himself to the Temple, because his clensing was not fully
complete; but yet he might join with others, and cause others to kill the
Passover for him, because he was now in his first degree of cleansing, and
then as soon as the Sun was fully gone down upon him he was fully clean, and
then he began the date of his day of cleanenesse, and then as soon as three
Stars appeared after Sunset, he might sit down with the rest of that Society to
eat the Passover. See Ains. in Number. 9. 10.

And thus the Sunset evening was the fifteenth day to the Person purified, and
yet it was properly the fourteenth day still, in respect of feasting on the
Sacrifices; and thus these two actions of Feasting and Purifying may well bear
the date of two several days thus enter-woven together, without any confusion
or disorder.

1. It was necessary that the Person purified should begin the date of his new
day as soon as his Ceremonial cleanenesse was perfected by the setting of the
Sun upon him after his Baptising, as I have opened the matter in chap. 4.

2 It was also as necessary that the solemn act of feasting upon the flesh of
their Sacrifices should bear the date of the same day with the said Sacrifices;
1 Because the act of Feasting received no new degree of cleanenesse at Sunset,
as the person purified did. 2. Because the act of feasting in the latter
evening after Sunset had a necessary dependence upon the act of Sacrificing in
the former evening, for the act of feasting on the Holy flesh in the latter
evening was but to help on the Spiritual application of that document that was
typified and exhibited by the sacrifice in the former evening; therefore seeing
the act of feasting had such a necessary dependence upon the act of
sacrificing, I see no reason why this continued Sacramental Passover should
bear the date of two several proper Natural days; I see no reason why the act
of feasting should bear the date of the fifteenth day, except it be only in
relation to the date of the person purified, and thus Maymony above cited must
be understood, that the flesh of the Paschal Lamb was eaten on the fifteenth
night, namely, according to the date of the person purified, though in regard
of the Feast it self it was but the fourteenth night still, as in my next
answer at fifthly I have cited his words.

Obj. 18. I desire to see yet further, how you can prove that the latter
evening at Sunset was a true part of the fourteenth day in the case of their
religious Feasting upon the Passover.

Ans. 1. I prove it by Exodus 12. 6, 8, and 14. verses compared together; the
sixth verse commanded them to kill all their Passeovers between the two
evenings; this was the allowed season for the sacrificing of all their
Passeovers in Egypt. 2. The eighth verse sets out the allowed season for the
time of feasting; they shall eat the flesh in that Night, namely, in that night
that does properly belong to the fourteenth day; and then 3. In ^^ose fourteen,
he does unite these two solemn: actions togethe^ in these words; This day shall
be to you for a memorial, ye shall festivally keep it for a feast unto
Jehovah; mark this phrase, This day, and ye^ shall festivally keep it; what day
does he mean olse, but the fourteenth day before spoken of ^ and ye shall
festivally keep it, and yet the Feast was kept after Sunset. Hence it follows,
that the time of feasting on the Paschal Lamb after Sunset was a ^rue part of
the fourteenth day by Creation, though it was the beginning of the fifteenth
day to the person purified.

2 It is evident, that the Sunset evening is a true part of the same
fourteenth day by Creation, by Numb. 9. 11. In the second Month, in the
fourteenth day of the Month, between the two evenings they shall do it, with
unleavened Cakes, and bitter Herbs shall they eat it.

In this text Moses does speak of a Twofold action to be done in the evening
of the fourteenth day of the month; He speaks of doing it, namely according to
the Command, that is to say, of sacrificing it between the two evenings;
Secondly, He speaks of the act of feasting with unleavened Cakes, and bitter
Herbs.

Moses does not distribute these two Sacramental actions unto two several
Natural days, but commands them both to be done in the same fourteenth day of
the month.

3 It is evident by Jos. 10. 3. that they kept the Feast of the Paschal Lamb on
the fourteenth day of the Month at Even; Joshuae names only the time of
Feasting (though the time of Sacrificing must be understood) he says plainly,
that it must be feasted on in the fourteenth day of the Month at even, I cannot
see how any man that loves plain truth can deny the Sunset evening to be a
true part of the former day.

4 It is evident that the latter evening was a true part of the fourteenth day,
because the seven days of unleavened Bread have seven latter evenings belonging
to them, besides the latter evening of the fourteenth day, so that they
observed eight festival Evenings together, and so Josephus does number them, in
Antiq. lib. 2. chapter 5. and hence it follows, that the Festival Supper which
belonged to the last day of unleavened Bread, which was the one and twentieth
day of the Month, did also bear the date of the two and twentieth day to the
person purified, and this latter evening was the allowed season for all their
Holy Festival Suppers, and oftentimes it was little enough, for they must boil
and roast all the flesh of their Peace Offerings, which were of the greater
kind, as sheep and Oxen, (for no Fowls were allowed for Peace Offerings. See
Ains. in Bev. 3. 6.) this did much increase the quantity of their Provisions,
and therefore it required the longer time both to Cook it, and to feast on it;
and all these days of Feasting were commanded to be done with great solemnity,
especially the first and the last. and with many relations of Gods goodness
for their deliverance out of Egypt, and with Songs and Psalms of praise, Deuteronomy.
16. 15. Exodus 23. 15. Deuteronomy. 27. 7. See Ains. in Exodus 12. 8. and in this
respect the latter evening was a competent time for these religious
Solemnities, and to continue the time of feasting longer, was a transgression:
for it is expressly commanded in Lev. 7. 15. that the holy flesh must be eaten
in the same day in which it was sacrificed; But if the Sunset evening had been
the true beginning of the Natural day, then this Holy flesh could not have been
eaten the same day, as I have noted the reason thereof formerly, and then God
by Moses had commanded us to do that which is not possible to be done;
therefore the Sunset evening is a true part of the same Natural day wherein
the flesh was sacrificed.

Maymony says (as I noted in objection sixteen) that the Priests did eat the
two Loaves which were presented to the Lord with the Meat Offering of the
Congregation on the day of Penticost, in the same day, and in half the night,
as the flesh of the most holy things were. See Ains. in Levit. 23. 20. so then,
in the judgment of the ancient Hebrew Doctors (for Maymony does but record
their judgment) the latter evening till midnight was a true part of the same
Natural day, in which the Sacrifices were offered, though yet notwithstanding
the purified person began the date of his new day at the Sunset before.

5 Thus (says Maymony) after he had related diverse circumstances about the
Passover, then is brought in a Table furnished with bitter Herbs, unleavened
Bread, and the Body of the Paschal Lamb, and the flesh Chagigah, which is
(says he) for the fourteenth day of the Month, he does not say which is for
the fifteenth day of the Month (though otherwise he does call this time the
fifteenth day of the Month) both are true in a right sense, namely in the sense
formerly given) and in another place Maymony says thus, The evening of the
fourteenth of N^shan is not like the evening of other Festival days, because in
it are the Feast, and the killing of Sacrifices. See Ains. in Lev. 23. 5. He
makes the time of feasting to belong to the fourteenth day; and secondly, he
preferres this evening to the evening of the Festival Sabbaths, and therefore
prescribes a greater punishment for servile work done on this evening, than for
working in the evening before the Festival Sabbaths, for so is the comparison
to be made, as I have noted it elsewhere, because in this evening was
solemnized the proper Feast of the fourteenth day; but the evening before was
but in way of preparation to the Sabbath it self. Thirdly, Maymony says thus,
They searched out Leaven in the beginning of the night of the fourteenth day;
Maymony calls the night before the Feast of the unleavened Bread the fourteenth
night, and yet in another place he calls it the fifteenth day.

Thus have I proved, not only by Scripture, but also by the consent of the
Hebrew Doctors, that the Sunset evening is a true part of the former day,
though it be also the beginning of a new day to the person purified, by a
Ceremonial institution.

CHAP. VI.
Proving that the Day of Reconciliation was an extraordinary long Sabbath, and
an extraordinary long Fasting-day, and therefore the beginning of this day
ought not to be alleged as an exemplary Pattern, neither for the beginning of
any other Fasting day, nor yet for the beginning of the Lords Day.

THe Law says thus, in Lev. 23. 32. ye shall afflict your Souls in the ninth
day of the Month, in the evening, from evening to evening you shall rest your
Sabbath.

This Sabbath was singular from other Sabbaths in two regards.

1 No other Sabbath was like it, for the services of it. 2 No other Sabbath was
like it, for the length of it.
1 No other Sabbath was like it, for the services of it.

For 1. All the Sacrifices of this day were commanded to be done by the High
Priest only, but on other Sabbaths they might be done by any other Priest as
well as by the High Priest.

2 There were more Burnt-offerings commanded to be offered for the public on
this Sabbath, than on any other Sabbath.

3 More Incense must be offered on this day, than on any other day.

4 There was more often sprinkling of blood on this day, than on any other day.

5 The High Priest did oftener wash on this day, than on any other day.

6 He used more sorts of Priestly garments on this day, than on any other day.

7 He did more often change his Garments on this day, than on any other day.

8 The High Priest did enter into the Holy of Holies on this day, and on no day
else all the year long; and thus no day was like this Sabbath in the services
of it.

2 No day was like this day for the length of it, neither in respect of the
fast, nor in respect of holy Rest of it.

For though it was commanded to b^ observed in the tenth day of the seventh
month, Lev. 23. 27. yet it was also commanded to begin in the Evening of the
ninth day, Lev. 23. 32.

This Evening of the ninth day has a double interpretation.

1 Some understand it of the sacrifice-Evening of the ninth day.

2 Some understand it of the Evening at the end of the ninth day where the
tenth day begins

1 In the first sense, Maymony says, They began to afflict their souls in the
Evening of the ninth day, next before the tenth day, and so they tarried in
their affliction a little in the night after the tenth day.

In these words you see that Maymony does not hold this fast to begin with the
tenth day at the Sunset Evening, according to the date of the new day of the
person purified; but in the evening of the ninth day, next before the tenth
day: And Maymony says moreover, That they must abide in their affliction a
little in the night after the tenth day.

This early beginning, and this late ending of this fasting-day does increase
the length of this day, beyond the length of any other fasting-day, or of any
other Sabbath day.

2 This clause [In] the ninth day of the month, in the Evening, is thus read by
the Greek Interpreters, From the ninth of the month, from the Evening; and thus
they vary the Dreposition from [In] to [From] and their Translation agrees
fitly to the next clause from Even unto Even you shall Rest your Sabbath; and
by this reading, we may see that the Seventy do make the latter Evening of the
ninth day, to be a true part of the ninth day, though it were also the
beginning of the tenth day according to the date of the person purified.

3 Hence it is also evident, that Moses did not hold the natural beginning of
the tenth day to begin at the Sunset evening of the ninth day, for then Moses
words should have run thus, From the tenth of the month from the Evening; but
Moses does not say so, but from the ninth of the month from the Evening, either
he must mean it to begin from the Sacrifice-Evening of the ninth day, as
Maymony expounds it; or secondly, from the latter Evening of the ninth day (as
a true part of the ninth day) as the Seventy understand it; or thirdly, from
the Ceremonial beginning of the ninth day, which begins at the Sunset Evening
before the ninth day. But then,

4 If you will take this phrase from Even to Even to be from the Evening of the
ninth day, according to the date of the person purified, then all the ninth day
must be a fasting day as well as the tenth day, for the Evening of the ninth
day is the beginning of the ninth day according to the date of the person
purified; but if you desire to avoid this gross absurdity, then you must grant
that the natural Evening of the ninth day did not begin, but end the ninth day,
as the Seventy Interpreters do carry it.

5 They that do place the natural Evening at the beginning of the ninth day,
and yet do allow the Sacrifice Evening to be placed at the end of the ninth
day, they do thereby place the natural morning of the ninth day between the two
Evenings of the ninth day, and so they do make the morning Sacrifice to be
killed between the two Evenings; but when men will not receive the truth in the
love of it, it is just with God to let them run into such absurd consequences
as these.

6 This fasting-day was longer than any other fasting-day; for all other
public fasting days were left to the Elders of the No fastingday among the
Jews was so long as the Fast on the day of Atonement was.
San^edrim to be appointed whenever they were in any distress, which were
proclaimed to be observed in all the Synagogues of the Land, as well as at the
Temple: But they did not enjoin them to begin those fasting days in the
Evening before, with such a strict abstinence as they did the day of
Reconciliation; for the Hebrew Doctors say, That it was lawful for them to eat
in the night, when the feast was on the morrow. See Ains. in Nu. 9. 10. By this
testimony of Maymony, it is evident that they began all their other solemn
fasting-dayes in the morning, and not in the evening before, except the day of
Reconciliation only; therefore no other public fasting-day was of such a length
as this yearly fasting-day was.

7 Neither was any other Sabbath of such a length for strict Rest as this
fasting-Sabbath was, for they must begin the strict Rest of this day, either in
the Sacrifice Evening of the ninth day, or at the beginning of the latter
Evening of the ninth: But they did not begin the strict Rest neither of their
festival Sabbaths, nor of the Sabbath or seventh day in the Evening before, as
they did this yearly fasting-Sabbath; For Maymony says, Such works as may be
done on the Evening of a Feast Day, they do not upon a Feast Day, etc. See Ain.
in 23. 7. By this testimony it is evident, that they did not hold the Evening
before their festival-Sabbaths to be as holy as the day it self.

2 Maymony says, It is unlawful to do works in the Evening of the festival
Sabbaths, from the time of the Evening Sacrifice, and forwards, Even as on the
Evenings of the Sabbaths; and who so does work in them shall never see a sign
of a Bessing, and he is to be rebuked, and to be made to leave off by force,
though he is not for it to be scourged or excommunicated, except in the Evening
of the Passover after Midday whosoever does work therein after Midday, is to be
scourged, or excommunicated with the Niddui; for the Evening of the fourteenth
day of Nishan, is not like the Evening of other festival days, because in it
are the Feast, and the killing of Sacrifices. See Ains. in Lev. 23. 5.

Two things are observable from this Record of Maymony.

1 That the Jews did make some kind of preparation, both to their
festival-Sabbaths, and to their Sabbath or seventh day, from the time of the
Evening Sacrifice, and forwards.

2 Hence it is evident, that the Hebrew Doctors did not esteem any part of the
Evening before their Sabbaths, to be as holy as the day following, because they
did neither scourge, nor excommunicate any man, for working in the Evening
before their Sabbaths, as they did for working in the Passover Evening; and
the reason is plain, because they esteemed both the parts of the
Passeover-Evening to be the very day of the Passover it self; but it seems
they did not esteem the Evening before the Sabbath to be any true part of the
Sabbath it self, for doubtless, if they had esteemed it as a true part of the
Sabbath it self, they would not only have scourged and excommunicated such
persons, that did presume to work in the Evening, before the Sabbath, but also
they would have stoned them to death, if they had presumptuously broken the
rest of the holy Sabbath, Numb. 15. 35. And as Maymony makes the Evening of the
Passover, not like the Evening that went before their festival Sabbaths, nor
like the Evening that went before their weekly Sabbath; So I may say of the
Evening that went before the day of Atonement, that it was more strict for
holy rest than the Evening that went before any of the other Sabbaths.

From all the Premises, I conclude, that no day in all the year was commanded
to be of such a length for strict Rest as this day was, for the strict Rest of
this day, and the strict Fast of this day began in the Sacrifice Evening, or
else at the beginning of the latter Evening of the ninth day, and it continued
not only till a little after the Sunset Evening of the tenth day, as Maymony
says, But also it continued longer, for some of the holy duties of the tenth
day, could not be finished till Midnight after; for

1 The Priests must eat their part of the public Sin-offering, Number. 29. 11.
which must be eaten in the same day in which it was offered, Lev. 6. 26. (as
other Sacrifices were, Lev. 7. 15, 18.) and yet the Priests could not eat the
holy flesh of this public Sin-offering till after Sunset; for the fast of
this day was not fully ended till after Sunset, and therefore also they might
not begin to Cook that holy flesh until the Fast was fully ended. Hence it
follows, that the same day did still continue till after Sunset, yea until it
was Midnight.

2 The Priests had another work to do within the limits of this tenth day,
namely, they must burn all the fats and pieces of all the public
Evening-sacrifices of this day (which were many) and some of their
Evening-sacrifices were also offered near unto Sunset, and therefore this work
and duty of burning would require not only the more diligence, but also the
more time, to finish this (...) ^ay of Atonement was.
sweet savor upon the Lords Altar in its own proper day, as I have noted the
commanded season thereof more at large in Lev. 6. 9.

3 It appears, that some of the works which appertained to the
morning-sacrifice of this tenth day, must begin at Midnight, and that some of
the works which must be done about the Evening-sacrifice were such as could not
be ended until the Midnight after.

For the first work that must be done on this day in preparation to the
Morning-sacrifice was the taking away the ashes from the Altar, and these ashes
they must begin to take away at Midnight, as Maymony says. See Ains. in Lev.
6. 10. And in another place he says, they took away the ashes at Midnight,
and ordered the wood, etc. and at the break of day they began to kill the daily
Morning-sacrifice. See Ains. in Lev. 16. 4.

In like sort they could not finish the burning of all the Evening-sacrifices
of this day till Midnight, as I have showed above from Lev. 6. 9. and yet over
and above this full day from Midnight to Midnight, they began their strict
Fast, and their strict Rest, in the Evening of the ninth day, which did
increase the length of this day to be an extraordinary long Fasting-Sabbath.

Hence I conclude, That the beginning of this day cannot be alleged as an
exemplary pattern, neither for the beginning of any other Fasting-day, nor yet
for the beginning of our Lords day, as it is intended by those that allege it
for the beginning and ending of the Jews weekly Sabbath from Even to Even.

CHAP. VII.
Answering their Opinion more particularly that hold the Lords day to begin at
Evening; And four Objections are Answered.

Object. 1. IT is objected, that our Lords day is come in the place of the
Jewish Sabbath which began at Evening; and for the proof of this they allege
the Example of Nehemiah, he is said to shut up the Gates of Jerusalem when it
began to be dark before the Sabbath, Neh. 13. 19. they expound the word Before,
and the word Dark, in favor of their opinion thus; 1 The word Before the
Sabbath, they say, does mean just before the face or present beginning of the
Sabbath. 2. The word Dark they say does mean when it was full Twilight, namely
when the darkness in the Sky was somewhat more than the light in the Sky;
for as long as the light in the Sky is more than darkness, they say the Sun
is the cause of it; and hence they conclude that the Sun cannot be said to be
set till the darkness in the Sky be more in quantity than the light in the
Sky, and this they make to be the punctual time of the Sunset evening, when
the Jews Sabbath began, namely, when a Man could not see to read, or a Woman to
s^w.

Ans. This exposition of the beginning of the Sunset evening, and of the
beginning of the Sabbath, is a newfound devise, I have already showed the
vanity of it in Chapter 4. in my answer to Obj. 3. That the Sunset evening is
truly come as soon as ever the Body of the Sun is gone out of sight, and that
Darkness is then begun, because the shining of the Sun is gone from off the
face of the earth, and Darkness is said to begin at the going down of the Sun,
in Genesis 15. 17. and then the Jews began to set their Night-watches, and then
the purified person began the date of the day of his cleanenesse, and therefore
if the Sabbath it self did begin in the evening at all, it began then, namely
according to the date of the day of the purified person, which began as soon as
ever the Body of the Sun was gone out of sight, as I have showed in chap. 4.
and then if Nehemiah did not set a Watch at the Gates of Jerusalem till the
darkness in the Sky was more than the light in the Sky, he did not that
which was sufficient to preserve the Holy rest of the Holy Sabbath, especially
seeing they began to make some preparation to the observation of the Sabbath,
from the time of the Evening Sacrifice before, as I have observed from the
Hebrew Doctors.

But I perceive that such as hold the Sabbath it self to begin in Such as hold
the Sabbath to begin ^t the Sun set evening can never prove that Christ lay
three days in hi^ Grave.
the evening, are necessitated to seek out such odd expositions as this of the
time of the Sunset evening, because else they see that they can never prove
that Christ lay three days enclosed in the heart of the earth, Mat. 12. 40. and
they know that Christ rose from the Dead on the first day of the Week, Joh. 20.
19. Hence it follows, that he must be enclosed in the heart of the earth, in
the very self-same Friday in which he was Crucified; for the first day of the
Week in which he arose from the Dead, is called the third Day after, 1 Cor. 15.
4. and in these respects it is of necessary consequence to describe the precise
time both of his Burial, and also of his Resurrection, or else a doubting
Conscience cannot be rightly established in the truth of his three days lying
in the Grave.

But such as hold the Sabbath to begin at the Sunset evening can never prove
it, unless they can prove that Christ was enclosed in the heart of the earth
some distinct time before Sunset; but Luke says, that the time of Christ's
Burial was, when it began to be Starlight, Luke 23. 54.
that is not possible to be done, for Luke says, that the Sabbath began to
lighten (with Starlight) when he was enclosed in his Grave, Luke 23. 54.

Master Broughton, Mr. Weames, and the Syriac do render the Translation so, and
the Seventy use the same Greek word in Job 25. 5. for the light of the Moon,
and it may as well be used for the light of the Stars, for they are called
Stars of light, Genesis 1. 14, 16. Psalm. 148. 3.

Let all the circumstances of time about the burial of Christ be cast up, and
laid together, and then it will put the matter out of doubt, that the burial of
Christ could not be finished till it was Sar-light.

1 Consider the time when Joseph went to Pilate to beg the Body, and that was
not till the Sunset evening was come, Mat. 27. 57. Mar. 15. 42. This evening
that was now come cannot be understood of the first evening, for that was come
at Midday, and Christ was then alive, therefore it must be understood of the
latter evening which was not come till Sunset.

Obj. 2. But Mr. Norton objecteth against this Translation, and In his Treatise
of Christ's Sufferings.
says, that it is not true that Joseph came not to beg the Body of Christ
until Sunset; but Joseph (says he) came as the evening was coming, as the
Greek has it, therefore before it was actually come; and besides, (says he)
he could not otherwise have taken down the Body, and buried it the same day
according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 21. 23. which John testifies they were careful
and mindful of, Joh. 19. 31.

Ans. As touching the translation of the Greek in Matthew and Mark, I have
searched into sundry Translations, and all that I can yet meet withal have it,
When the evening was come; I have also conferred with some that are learned in
the Tongues, and they say it is but a harsh translation to render it, When the
evening was coming; and Tindall does both translate and expound Mar 15. 42
thus, When night was come (because it was the evening that goes before the
Sabbath) But what if the Greek does signify no more but as Master Norton
says, when the evening was coming? yet that translation makes the difference
of time so small that it is not worth the speaking of, for in the like case
Mark says, That at the evening, when the Sun was set, the Jews brought their
diseased persons to Christ to be cured, Mark 1. 32. but Luke says, It was when
the Sun was setting, Luke 4. 40. that is to say, when the evening was coming,
for in proper speech, the latter evening cannot be said to be coming till the
Sun be setting.

And secondly, It seems to me that Joseph of Arimathea durst not go to Pilate
to beg the dead Body before Sunset, for fear of the displeasure of the High
Priests, and therefore he delayed his going to Pilate until the High Priests
had first gone and besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that
they might be taken down, because it was the time of their preparation to
their High Festival Sabbath-Supper, for Joseph knew that the High Priests were
desirous that Christ should hang upon the Cross for his greater ignominy, as
long as other cursed Malefactors used to do, and that was until the Sun was
set, and in this sense Joshua did understand the Law to mean, namely, that they
might Deuteronomy. 21. 23.
hang upon the Tree after the night was begun (which was begun at Sunset) and
therefore he did not command the dead Bodies of the cursed Kings to be taken
down from the Tree until the Sun was down, Jos 8. 29.

I grant that formerly I have expounded this clause in Deuteronomy. 21. 23. Thou shall
not let his Carcass hang all night upon the tree, to mean (not at all in the
night) but since then I find upon better examination that I was in an error,
though Master Norton takes it for a truth, and so in like sort he takes some
plain truths for great errors; but this sentence, they shall not hang all night,
implies, that they may hang some part of the night upon the tree, provided they
were buried the same day, namely in the same Natural day, which lasted after
Sunset until Midnight, as I have showed in chap. 5. in my answer to Object.
16.

And in this respect Joshua let the dead Bodies of the Kings hang still upon
the Tree until the Sun was set; that is to say, until the night was begun;
but if this command of burying them in the same day had meant in the same
Ceremonial day, then the dead Bodies might not continue hanging on the Tree
until the Sun was set, except they had been buried some distinct time before
Sunset; this clause therefore [in the same day] must be understood not of the
same Ceremonial day which ended at Sunset, but of the same Natural day which
continued after Sunset till midnight, as I have showed more at large in
Chapter five, in my answer to Objection sixteen, and in chap. 4. ult. and in
other places also.

The chief Priests were first in their request to Pilate, because it was the
time of their preparation to their solemn High Sabbath-Supper, for it was the
first day of unleavened bread, which was a high Sabbath, and their
Festival-Supper was to begin at Starlight, therefore they besought Pilate that
their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away, Joh. 19. 31.
thus you see that the Priests in regard of their preparation to their
Sabbath-Supper were first in their request unto Pilate, presently upon this
Pilate commanded that their legs should be broken, and Joseph perceiving their
request, first did wisely espy the advantage of time, and without delay he went
boldly unto Pilate, and besought him, that he might take away the Body of
Jesus, and Pilate gave him leave; he came therefore and took the Body of Jesus,
Joh. 19. 38. this was all done in the neck of one another, and this time is
recorded by Matthew and Mark, to be when the Sunset evening was done.

From the Premises I reason thus; If the Sunset evening was come before Joseph
went to Pilate to beg the Body of Christ, then the Sabbath Star might well be
risen before the Body of Christ could be enclosed in the heart of the earth,
for Joseph had many things to do after he had the grant of the dead Body,
before it could be enclosed in his Grave; First, he went to the Shops to buy
several pieces of Linen to wrap the dead Body in, according to the Jews
manner, Ioh. 20. 6, 7. (as we may see the manner in Lazarus burial, Ioh. 11.
44.) and Nicodemus also did take up some time to imbalm his Body, which also
was done with many circumstances according to the Jews custom* Ioh. 19. 40.
(as it is set down by Mr. Ainsworth in Genesis 46. 4. and in Genesis 50. 2.) and then
(though the place of burial were near, yet) it would require both hands and
time to carry him thither, and to roll the stone upon the mouth of his Grave,
before he could be said to be enclosed in the heart of the earth; I grant also
that all this was done with as much haste as might be, because of the I^ws
preparation to their Festival Supper, and yet as soon as this was done, or
could be done, their High Festival-Sabbath began to lighten, namely, with the
Evening Star at least, if not with more Stars, for it was a Canon among them,
not to begin their Festival-Suppers till three Stars did appear, and doubtless
Lukes phrase does allude to that custom. This Sabbath that did now begin to
lighten was not the Sabbath it self, for if the Sabbath it self had been begun
at the rising of the Evening Star, then doubtless the holy Women had broken
the holy rest of the Sabbath d^y, because after all this they went to the shops
and bought Odors, and Ointments, Luke 23. 56. compared with M^rk 16. 1. yea and
after they had bought these Odors and Ointments they went home and prepared
them in a readiness to per^ume the Body of Christ with them as soon as ever
the Sabbath was past, Mat. 28. 1. If they had bought them before his burial
they would have persumed his Body before his burial, ^s Nicod^mus did.

Therefore seeing these holy Women did all this work after the burial and after
the Sabbath began to lighten, it is an evident proof that the Sabbath it self
did not begin neither at the Sunset evening, when the person purified began
the date of his new day, nor yet at the rising of the evening star, for if
the Sabbath it self had been begun at either of these times, then the holy
Women had most grossly broken the holy rest of the Sabbath; But the Holy Text
does witness on their side that they rested the Sabbath, according to the
Commandment, Luke 23. 56.

Henc^ I conclude from this practice of the holy Women, that though the evening
before the Sabbath does bear the date of the day following to the person
purified, yet in proper speaking it is no part of the Sabbath it self, it is
only to be esteemed the Sabbath but by way of preparation, and no more.

Secondly I answer, That your exposi^ion of the word before may better carry
this sense, namely that this latter evening was indeed before the Sabbath it
self, and I have showed in chap. 5. that the evening of the Sabbath is put by
the Hebrew Doctors, sometimes for the evening before the Sabbath, and sometimes
for the last half of the Sabbath it self; but see more in this Chapter in the
answer to the next objection.

Objct. 2. It seems to me that the Sabbath it self did begin and end at the Sun
set Evening by the Jews practice, for they held it unlawful before the Sunset
Evening was come for our Savior to heal diseased persons; But after the
Sunset Evening was come, all manner of diseased persons came flocking to him
for cure, Mar. 1. 32. Hence it appears that the Jews held the Sabbath to be
fully ended as soon as the Sunset Evening was come.

Ans. It is but the bare conjecture that they forbore to bring their sick
persons till the Sabbath was ended: I deny it to be the very reason, I believe
the only reason why they came no sooner, was because they had no sooner
intelligence of his miraculous power to heal; you do barely affirm that the
Jews in general held it unlawful for our Savior to heal diseased persons upon
the Sabbath day, but you are deceived. Tremelius does testify from the ancient
Hebrew Doctors that they held the contrary: They held that the peril of life
did drive away the Sabbath; that is to say, they held it lawful to use any
means to prevent the danger of death upon the Sabbath day. See Tremelius his
Annot. in Mat. 12. 8. in the Syriack Testament; Mr. Ainsworth also does affirm
from the Hebrew Doctors, that they held it to be a Sabbath days work to visit
the sick; for they held that peril of life did drive away the Sabbath. See
Ains. in Exodus 20. 10. See also my former Treatise.

2 I do also apprehend by the circumstances of the story, that the Jews of
Capernaum were not offended with our Savior for his miraculous cure, which he
did upon that Sabbath day (as the malignant Scribes and Pharisees sometimes
were) in healing one in the Synagogue that had an unclean spirit, Mark. 1. 27.

3 They took no offense at him for the curing of Peter's wives mother of her
Feavor, presently after he had left the said Synagogue, v 31. Therefore seeing
they found no fault with Christ for neither of these miraculous cures before
the Sabbath was ended, doubtless they did not forbear to bring their diseased
persons in respect of the Sabbath (for they admired the power of God in these
miracles) and therefore as soon as the public exercise was ended, they spread
his fame, verse 28. and thereupon a multitude of the diseased persons of
Capernaum came to him for cure with all the possible speed they could, as it
appears by their earnest pressing after so short a warning, for I conceive by
the circumstances of the story, that it was but a little before Sunset when
Christ left the Synagogue, and then as soon as he had left the Synagogue he
healed Peter's wives mother, which was another procuring cause that made the
greater flocking to him; but if his miraculous cures had been done sooner,
doubtless the fame thereof would have made the sick persons to have flocked
sooner after him.

I grant that some of the malignant Scribes and Pharisees did sometimes take
offense at Christ for his miraculous healing upon the Sabbath day; But the
people in general rejoiced at all the excellent things that were done by him
upon the Sabbath day, Luke 13. 17. for Christ did now heal a poor crooked woman
upon that Sabbath day, verse 11. And when the Ruler of the Synagogue took
offense at it, Christ (by reasons) put him to silence; and the people rejoiced
that Christ had put him to silence.

Therefore though some of the malignant Jews held erroniously that Christ ought
not to heal upon the Sabbath day, yet that is no good argument to prove that
these Jews of Capernaum did purposely detain their sick persons till the
Sabbath was ended, I deny it to be the Reason; I do apprehend rather that they
did hastily flock to him, rather than deliberately forbear till the Sabbath
might be ended.

4 Mr. Pemble on this place says, That this Evening was the Evening of the
same day wherein Christ had done so much before, as the inference shows plainly.

5 It is evident to me from several testimonies of the Hebrew Doctors, that
they held the Sunset Evening after the Sabbath to be a true part of the
Sabbath it self, because they held it lawful to The Hebrew Doctors held the
Sunset Evening after the Sabbath, to be a true part of the Sabbath it self.
do many things in the Sunset Evening before the Sabbath, which they did not
hold lawful to be done in the Sunset Evening after the Sabbath.

1 Maymony says thus, The two Loaves of New Corn for the Wave-offering (on the
day of Penticost) were not Baked on the day of Pentecost, because it was a
Sabbath; nor in the Evening before, if it were a Sabbath. See Ains. in Lev. 23.
17.

Two things are evident from this Testimony.

1 That in the judgment of the Hebrew Doctors the Sunset Evening after the
Sabbath, was a true part of the Sabbath it self, because they held it unlawful
to bake the said two Loaves of new corn in the Evening before the day of
Penticost, if it were a Sabbath: But they might with out scruple have baked the
said two Loaves in the said Evening before Penticost, as well as on any other
Evening, if they had held that the Sabbath had then been fully ended. See Ains.
in Lev. 23. 6, 7.

2 Hence it is evident, that the Hebrew Doctors did not hold the Evening before
the Sabbath to be a true part of the Sabbath it self, no otherwise than by way
of preparation.

3 Mamony gives another instance from the time of baking the twelve Loaves of
Shewbread; he says, That the twelve Loaves of the Shewbread might not be
baked on the Sabbath, nor on a Feast Day, but in the Evening of the Sabbath
they baked it, and set it in order on the morrow. See Ains. in Lev. 24. 5.

Hence this is remarable in this Hebrew Record; That he makes a manifest
difference between the Evening that goes before the Sabbath, and the Sabbath it
self, he calls the Evening before, [the Evening of the Sabbath] by custom
peculiar to the Jews, from the date of the new day to the person purified (as I
have formerly showed) he allows these twelve Loaves to be baked in the Evening
of the Sabbath all the year long, except it fell out to be in the latter
Evening of a Festival-Sabbath; and therefore it does hence follow, that not the
Evening before, but the Evening after their Festival-Sabbaths, was a true part
of their Festival-Sabbaths; And so likewise Tremelius a Christian Jew, does
make the Evening after the Sabbath to be true part of the Sabbath it self, in
his Translation and note on the Syriak Testament in Matthew. 28. 1.

Therefore by the judgment of the Hebrew Doctors, the Festival-Sabbath was not
ended at Sunset; and thence it follows, that if their festival-Sabbaths were
not ended at Sunset, then their weekly Sabbaths were not ended at Sunset.

4 Maymony says thus, Who so labors in the Evening of the Sabbath, he shall
eat in the Sabbath, See Ains. in Exodus 16. 26.

Hence it follows, that in the judgment of the Hebrew Canons, the Evening
before the Sabbath was no part of the Sabbath no otherwise but by way of
preparation to the Sabbath; for they say, That he that will eat in the Sabbath,
must labor in the Evening of the Sabbath, namely in the Evening before the
Sabbath; This they speak, as I conceive, of their laborious preparing of their
Manna (according to every ones pal^t) in a readiness against the Sabbath; for
though the Manna was a ready food of it self, without preparing to some
stomachs, yet not to al, til it were cooked to their palate; and it could not be
prepared in this sort without great labor, for it was ground in Mills, and
beaten in Mortars, Number. 1 1. 8 And in that respect the Hebrew Doctors say, Who
so labors in the Evening of the Sabbath, shall eat in the Sabbath; but in
case they neglected this work in the Evening of the Sabbath, they might not do
it on the Sabbath day, but they must rather fast and endure hunger for their
negligence sake.

Hence it follows, that the Evening before, was called the Evening of the
Sabbath, no otherwise but by way of preparation, and it is called the Evening
of the Sabbath from their new date to the person purified; his new day did ever
begin at the Sunset Evenning.

5 Maymony says thus, Such works as may be done in the Evening before a
Feast Day they do not upon a Feast Day; they may not reap, nor thresh, nor
winnow, nor grind corn, nor the like upon a Sabbath day, for all these things
may be done in the Evening of a Sabbath, killing of Beasts, baking of bread,
kneading of dough, and the like, may be done in the Evening of a Sabbath. See
Ains. in Lev. 23. 7. in like sort their laborious preparation of their Manna
must be done in the Evening of the weekly Sabbath.

Object. 4. By the Evening of the Sabbath the Jews do not mean only the
Sunset Evening, but they accounted the Sabbath Evening to begin at three a
clock in the afternoon before; and in this respect Maymony says thus, It is
unlawful to do works in the Evenings of the Festival-Sabbaths from the time of
the Evening sacrifice, and forward (even as upon the Evening of the weekly
Sabbaths) and who so does work in them shall never see a sign of blessing, and
he is to be rebuked, and to be made to leave off by force, Though he is not for
it to be scourged or excommunicated, except in the Evening of the Passover
after Midday; who so does work therein after Midday, he is to be scourged or
excommunicated with the Niddui, for the fourteenth of Nishan is not like the
Evening of other Festival days, because in it are the Feast, and the killing
of Sacrifices. See Ains. in Lev. 23. 5.

Ans. I grant that the Jews did make some kind of preparation both to their
Festival-Sabbaths, and to their weekly Sabbaths also, from the time of the
Evening-sacrifice, and forwards, till Bedtime; for though they did not begin
their day of cleanness till Sunset, yet in regard of the many works that were
to be done against their Feast-dayes (which I have immediately named) and in
regard of preparing their Manna, etc. against the Sabbath, their wise men held
it convenient to forbear, and leave off the ordinary works of their calling
from the time of the Evening-sacrifice, and forwards, till bedtime; and in
that respect the Magistrates themselves did forbear to sit in their Courts of
Judicature after the time of the Evening-sacrifice. See Ains. in Exodus 18. 22.
But this degree of preparation had no other command from God, but the general
rule of convenience.

2 It is evident from the said Testimony, that they did not esteem any part of
the Evening, neither before, nor after Sunset, to be as a true part of the
Sabbath it self, because they did neither scourge nor excommunicate any man
that did any servile work in this Evening, as they did for working in any part
of the Passover Evening from Midday till Midnight; but if they had in their
judgment esteemed any part of the Evening before the Sabbath to be a true part
of the Sabbath it self, doubtless they would have punished such Transgressors
more severely than for working upon the Passover Evening, for by Moses Law,
such persons ought to be stoned to death, Numb. 15. 34, 35.

Hence it follows first, That the Evening before the Sabbath (though it be
called the Evening of the Sabbath according to their ceremonial custom, yet
it) was no true part of the Sabbath it self, but in way of preparation only.

Secondly, That the Sunset Evening after the Sabbath was indeed a true part of
the Sabbath it self.

5 It is evident that the Evening after the Sabbath was esteemed to be a true
part of the Sabbath it self, by the testimony of the Evangelist John, in Chap.
20. 19. the Text runs thus, The same day at Evening, being the f^rst day of the
week; John calls this Evening not the second, but the first day of the week,
and yet it must needs be now a good space after Sunset, for there were two
Disciples now present that came from Emaus, and it was toward Evening before
they came from Emaus, and they could not well come from thence to Jerusalem in
less than three hours space, for it was sixty Furlongs from Emaus to
Jerusalem, Luke 24. 13. 29. 36.

Mr. Goodwin, and others, allow eight Furlongs to an English or Italian mile;
but the Hebrew Doctors allow but seven Furlongs and a half to an English mile.
See Ains. in Lev. 16. 21. The New Testament does not follow the Italian
Furlong, but the Greek Furlong (or stadium Olympicum) which contains six
thousand feet; and the Hebrew Doctors say that two thousand Cubits make a mile.
See A^ns. in Exodus 16. 29. The New Testament does follow the Greek Customs as
frequently as they followed the Greek Tongue; Therefore in reason as the New
Testament was written in Greek so it should follow the Greek stadium rather
than the Italian; besides, I conceive that the Italian stadium came not into
common use until after the New Testament was written. So then by the Hebrew
Doctors account, it was eight miles from Emaus to Jerusalem; that is to say, it
was Eight English miles: Now if you will allow but three hours time for the
going of these eight miles, it must needs be after Sunset when they came to
the Apostles; and after they were come, they spent some time in relating unto
the Apostles what had happened to them the same day as they went to Emaus, and
as they were making this Relation Jesus came and stood in the midst of them,
Luke 24. 36.

These circumstances considered, it must needs be after the date of the Jews
Ceremonial day before Christ came in among them, and yet the Evangelist calls
this time of the Evening, the same day in which Christ rose from the dead; and
secondly, he calls it the first day of the week. So then, by these two
expressions the Evangelist puts the matter out of doubt to such as will be
satisfied by plain consequences of Scripture, that this latter Evening when
Christ came into the house to the Apostles, was a true part of the former day,
and yet it was after Sunset, and therefore it was after their Ceremonial day
was begun.

6 And lastly, I may well bring hither all those five Arguments which I alleged
in Chap. 5. to prove the latter Evening of the fourteenth day of Nishan to be a
true part of the fourteenth day, and therefore it follows by good consequence,
that the latter Evening of the Sabbath was a true part of the Sabbath it self.

Obj. It appears to me that the Natural day begins at the Sunset evening, for
the Lord tells Ezekiel in the ninth year of Jeconiahs captivity, that he
should be dumb until the day that Jerusalem should be destroyed, and until a
Messenger should come to Ezekiel to tell the news thereof, Ezekiel. 24. 26, 27.
this is the Prediction, now the accomplishment of this Prophecy is set down in
Eze. 33. 21, 22. In the twelfth year of our captivity, in the tenth Month, and
in the fifth day of the Month, then one that had escaped out of Jerusalem came
unto Ezekiel, and said, The City is smitten; now says Ezekiel, The hand of the
Lord had been upon me in the evening before he that had escaped came, and had
opened my mouth until he came to me in the morning, and when he had opened my
mouth I was no more dumb. From these two Scriptures compared it is evident,
that the evening before the Messenger came, and the morning after he was come,
are termed the same day; therefore it follows by good consequence that the same
day began in the evening.

Ans. This is a strange collection to prove the evening to be the beginning of
the Natural day; the vanity of this collection will appear by the opening of
two words in this Prophecy, which must not be taken as you do, in strict
propriety of speech, but in a figurative sense, I mean the word Day, and the
word Dumb.

1 I say the word Day must not be taken in a strict sense for a proper Natural
day of twenty four hours, but it must be taken Figuratively for a time to come,
as it appears by the computation of time; for Ezekiel is said to be dumb in the
ninth year of Jeconiahs captivity, in the tenth Month, and in the tenth day of
the Month, Eze. 24. 1, 2. in which day Ezekiels wife dyed, verse. 18. which was
the pleasure of his eyes, verse. 16. and her death was for a sign unto the Jews,
that the Temple which was the pleasure of their eyes, verse. 21. should be
destroyed) and then in that day (namely when the Temple should be destroyed, he
that escapes in that day should come to Ezekiel and tell him; And in [that
day] viz. in time to come, Ezekiels mouth should be opened unto him which
escaped to tell him, and then he should speak and be no more dumb, ver. 26, 27.

This is the Prediction; now compare the story of events, and that lies thus,
The Temple was burnt on the tenth day of the fifth Month, in the eleventh year
of Zedekiah, Jer. 52. 12, 13. and there is no record to be found that any
Messenger came to Ezekiel to tell him in the same day, neither is it possible
for any man to come from Jerusalem to Chaldea in one Natural day of twenty four
hours, therefore the Messenger that came to him in (that day) came to him in
that day which is Figuratively put for the time to come, for the Messenger came
not to Ezekiel until seventeen Months after that the Temple was destroyed, for
he came not till the fifth day of the tenth Month, and in the twelfth year of
Jeconias captivity, Ezekiel. 33. 21. therefore this phrase the same day must not
be understood of the same Natural day, but of day at large, for the term day is
often put for a large time to come, as in Ezekiel. 23. 38, 39. and Ezekiel. 33. 12.
and in Deuteronomy. 27. 2 See Ains.

2 Ezekiel is said to be dumb in the ninth year, Ezekiel. 24. 12. 27. till the
Messenger came to him in the twelfth year of Ieconiahs captivity, in all which
space Ez^kiel was not dumb from ordinary speech (as Zachary was, Luke 1. 20.)
neither yet was he dumb from Prophesying against other Nations, as it appears
by Eze. 26. 1. and Eze. 29. 1. and Eze. 31. but he was dumb or silent from
Prophesying any more against the unbeleeving Jews, as chap. 3. 26. until this
Messenger came with special tidings, to certify him how all things were
accomplished as he had foretold, and now at the coming of this special
Messenger Ezekiels mouth was opened again, to utter another Prophecy of the
utter ruin of the remnant of the Jews that were left, Ezekiel. 33. 2, 3. and from
this time forth he was no more dumb; that is to say, he was no more restrained
from Prophesying to them of their utter ruin: So then, this Messenger was sent
to Ezekiel on purpose, to tell him the present state of things, and to inquire
of him what should be the future event of the remnant that were left.

Ezekiel could not choose but hear of the burning of the Temple long before this
Messenger came to him, partly by the poor Captives, and partly by the
Soldiers, and also he could not choose but hear of the death of Gedaliah before
this special Messenger came; but such accidental tidings did not answer to the
sign that was given for the time of his new Prophesying, for the sign was this,
That a special Messenger should be sent unto him from Jerusalem to Chaldea (in
a day) that is to say in a time to come, and then Ezekiels mouth should be
opened unto him, to utter some new Prophecy to him, though it was not according
to their expectation; for he fore-tels, that the remnant that were left should
likewise come to destruction.

Besides ^he hand of Prophecy that came upon Ezekiel in the Evening before the
Messenger came, may be taken as well for the first, as for the latter Evening;
for God did often give Visions to his Prophets in the first Evening, at the
time of the Evening Sacrifice, Act. 3. 1. Dan. 9. 21. Act. 10. 3, 9. Therefore
unless it can be proved that this Evening was the Sunset Evening, no
concluding argument can be drawn from this Text to prove the Natural day to
begin at the Sunset Evening; no, though the term Day, and the term Dumb had
been spoken properly.

So then from all the premises, I conclude, that not the Evening before, but
the Evening after the Sabbath was a true part of the Sabbath it self, and
therefore they that take liberty to busy themselves about worldly matters in
the Sunset Evening after the Sabbath, do profane that holy time that God has
sanctified to his own use.

CHAP. VIII.
Proving that the punctual time of Christ's Resurrection was in the morning,
just at Sunrising.

Doubtless it is a matter of necessary consequence, not only to prove clearly
the punctual time of Christ's burial, but of his Resurrection also; for if the
time of his Resurrection be uncertain, how can a doubting conscience be
satisfied that Christ lay three days in the heart of the earth, according to
the Prediction? Therefore as I have proved the time of Christ's burial to be
finished when their Festival-Sabbath began to lighten by the Evening-star, so I
say also that the time of his Resurrection was just about the time of
Sunrising on the first day of the week.

Christ did not rise from his grave before daybreak, as some would have it,
nor at daybreak, as others would have it, by uncertain guesses. Matthew says,
that Mary Magdalen went out of the door of her house in the first day of the
week when it began to dawn, intending to perfume his burial with the sweet
Odors that she had prepared in the Evening before the Sabbath, Matthew. 28. 1.
But Mark says, That the Sun was just risen when she came to the Sepulcher,
Mark. 16. 1. she spent all that space of time between daybreak and Sunrising,
partly in calling upon other holy women to go with her, Luke 24. 10. and partly
in going so much ground as was from her lodging to the Sepulcher, and then when
she was come to the Sepulcher, there was a mighty Earthquake, Mat. 28. 2. and
then his grave was opened; such a like Earthquake there was a^ ^he death of
Christ, which opened diverse of the graves of the Saints, and after the
Resurrection of Christ, they did rise also out of their graves, and came into
the holy City, and appeared unto many, Mat. 27. 52, 53. By this Earthquake at
Sunrising when Mary Magdalen came to the Sepulcher, it is evident that Christ
did not rise out of his grave until these holy women came to be witnesses of
the time of his Resucrection. I confess that many Interpreters do think that
Christ was risen before these holy Witnesses came to the Sepulcher, but such
conjectures may not be admitted, for it is a point of necessary consequence to
be proved, That Christ lay three days in the heart of the Earth; but if you
say, That Christ was risen before these holy Witnesses came, then you cannot
clearly prove that Christ lay three days in the heart of earth; for it may be
demanded how long was he risen before they came? If you say it was but one hour
before, I may as well say it was seven or eight hours before, and then how can
you satisfy a doubting conscience that Christ lay three days, and three
nights in the heart of the earth? I cannot think that Christ would suffer his
own Prediction to remain so obscure without manifest proof of the full
accomplishment of it: Therefore I conclude, that Christ rose not out of his
grave till the holy women came to be Witnesses of the same, which was also
evidently declared unto them by this Earthquake at their coming to the
Sepulcher, just at Sunrising, though they could not make that use of it till
afterward.

Object. 1. This Earthquake might be past before the holy women came to the
Sepulcher, and they might know it afterward only by the Soldiers relation.

Ans. Christ did never show himself to any wicked man after his Resurrection,
Joh. 14. 19. Joh. 16. 20, 22. Act. 10. 41. Therefore it is not like that he
would make the Roman Soldiers to be the only Witnesses of this Earthquake
which did evidence the time of his Resurrection. I conceive the holy women
would not give much credit to the testimony of the Roman Soldiers, except this
Earthquake had been general to all the parts of the City, as well as to that
particular place, but it seems to me that this Earthquake was not generally
spread over the City, but it was limited only to that particular place where
Christ's Sepulcher ^s, as a special testimony of the time of his Resurrection:
In like ^t that place only where the Apostles were (when they were thr^atned by
the Hgh Priests) was shaken as a testimony of encouragement to them, not to be
afraid of Tyrants, Act. 4. 31. Act. 2. 2. Act. 12. 7. and so there was an
Earthquake that opened the particular place where Paul was imprisoned, Act. 16.
26. the bare testimony of the Soldiers would have been but of small credit to
prove so weighty a matter as the time of Christ's Resurrection was: Therefore I
conclude, that Christ arose not from his Grave till these holy women came to
testify the time of his Resurrection by an Earthquake, which happened at their
first coming to his Sepulcher, and that was just at Sunrising: I conceive that
the holy women at first were amazed, and did not know what use to make of this
Earthquake, Joh. 20. 9. but afterward they did plainly perceive that it was a
manifest demonstration of the time of his Resurrection; and after this
Earthquake, Mary Magdalen went to the Apostles, and told them that Christ was
risen from the dead, and she followed the Apostles back again to the Sepulcher;
And 3. when they saw no body in the Sepulcher, they returned home. 4 But Mary
Magdalen staid still behind; and then Christ himself did appear unto her as
John does testify.

From all the premises it is evident, that Christ lay in the heart of the earth
about four hours of the sixth day, and the whole Sabbath, and about five hours
of the first day of the week, namely, from Midnight till Sunrising; and after
this sort Christ lay three days, and three nights, in the heart of the Earth.

But those that begin the Sabbath at the Sun-set-Evening can never prove that
Christ lay three days in the heart of the Earth: Therefore that opinion must
needs be of evil consequence: First, Because it falsifies the said Prediction.
And secondly, Because it leads men to do servile works in the latter Evening of
the Lords day, as manyfold experience of men's worldly practices does testify
in New England as soon as the Sunset Evening of the Lords day is come.

If this Treatise may be of any use to satisfy a doubting conscience touching
the time of Christ's Burial and Resurrection, and touching the limits of the
Lords day, Give glory to God, who gi^^ gifts to men for that purpose. Even so
AMEN.

FINIS.

